

Centennial International Coition,
ME3IiBOXJI?.2SrE, 1888.
CATALOG-TJE
OF THE
ECONOMIC PLANTS
IN THE
Queensland Court
(Cxeoutive (Commissioner# in Melbourne:
JOHN FENWICK, Esq., J.P.
The Honourable THOMAS MACDONALD-PATERSON, M.L.C.
FRANCIS REID MURPHY, Esq., M.L.A.
toentive (Commissioner# in (sueen#land:
Hon. A. C. GREGORY, C.M.G.
F. M. BAILEY, Esq., F.L.S.
C. W. De YIS, Esq., M.A.
JOHN FENWICK, Esq., J.P.
P. R. GORDON, Esq., J.P.
M.L.C.
GEORGE GRIMES, Esq., J.P
JOHN LITTLE, Esq., J.P.
JAMES TOLSON, Esq., J.P,
£ eeretarrj:
H. COURTENAY LUCK, F.R.G.S.
BRISBANE:
WARWICK AND SAPSPOBD, PRINTERS, BOOKBINDERS, ETC., ADELAIDE STREET
MDCCCLXXXVIII.


1


QUEENSLAND COMMISSION.
Centennial International lExjjifcition, Melbourne, XBBB.
A. SKETCH
OF THE
ECONOMIC PLANTS OF QUEENSLAND.
EEEDK. MANSON BAILEY, E.L.S.,
COLONIAL BOTANIST.
BRISBANE:
AUTHORITY: JAMES C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1888.




P E E F ACE.
The Commissioners for the Centennial Exhibition, being desirous of
exhibiting live specimens of as many as possible of the economic plants
of the colony, considered it would be further useful if a descriptive
catalogue accompanied them, in which could be enumerated, not only
such plants as were sent, but all the plants of an economic character
at present in the colony.
In accordance with the above I have compiled such a catalogue,
giving a brief sketch of the plants, their uses, and mode of propagation.
The information given may be relied upon as trustworthy, as in all
cases it has been gathered from the highest authorities.
It may be fairly hoped that, besides the present Exhibition
purpose, this little pamphlet will prove useful to cultivators of the
soil throughout the colony. Our numerous pasture grasses and timber
trees are not included, as these form separate works.
E. M. B.
March, 1888.


.
*
.


ECONOMIC PLANTS.
ABEEIA, HocJist Order Bixinea— Tribe Flacourtiea.
A. caefea, Hook, The Kai Apple of Natal and Caffraria. A
large shrub or small tree, furnished with strong, straight, long spines
and rather small obovate leaves. The fruit is round, 1 inch or
more in diameter, lemon-coloured, of an agreeable subacid flavour,
considered by some a desirable fruit for preserves; in an unripe state
it is used for pickling. Eor preserves the ripe fruit is recommended
to be used in combination with pumpkin or pie-melon. The plant is
one of the best known for hedge-making, for which purpose it must
be raised from seed, as it does not strike readily from cuttings.
ABEOMA, Jacq— Order Steeculiaceje— Tribe Buettneriea.
A. AUGUSTA, Linn. A tall plant; has been introduced and may
be seen now and again in our gardens, but it has not yet been giovvii
in Queensland for its fibre, which is said to be strong and easily
obtained. In India it is known as “Devil’s Cotton.” Our indigenous
species, so abundant on the tropical coast — A. fastuosa, E. Br.—-also
yields a good fibre. It may be here remarked that in growing plants
for fibre "they should be sown thickly, that the plants may grow erect
and with few branches, that a long clean fibre may be obtained.
Propagated by seed.
Absinthium vulgaee, Lam. (See “ Artemisia”)
ACACIA, Willcl. —Order Leouminosae— Tribe Acacieee.
A. ara.bica, Willd. (The Mimosa arabica of Lamarck and
Eoxburgh.) A small tree of India and Africa; in India known
under the name of “Babul.” Branches slender, bearing stipulary
thorns and bipinnate leaves of about 5 pairs of pinna?, baling glands
between the first and last pairs; leaflets glabrous, from 15 to 20 to
each pinna; flowers in globular heads; pods compressed, thickish.
This is one of the plants producing the article known as “ gum
arabic.” The bark, which is used for dyeing and tanning, is power-
fully astringent and used as a tonic internally ; externally a strong
decoction of it is a useful astringent application to ulcers. The wood
is very durable if well seasoned, and in. India is used extensively for
wheels, well-curbs, sugar and oil presses, and boat-building. Sapwood
large, whitish ; heartwood pinkish white, turning reddish brown on
exposure, hard, mottled with dark streaks; weight per cubic foot about
51 lbs. Propagated by seed. With acacia and similar hard seeds it
is better to steep them a short time in boiling water before sowing, to
■crack the hard enamel-like coat of the seed.


A. decitreee'S, Willd. Called in Queensland Green "Wattle ; is
the one of which the bark is principally used by Queensland tanners.
A. Parnesiana, Willd., and the Dooryboom of South Africa {A.
horrida, Willd.), are utilised in hedge-making. Propagated by seed. *
ACER, Linn. —Order Sapindaceas— Suborder Acerineae.
K. s A.CCHARTNUM, Wangenheim. The Sugar or Bird’s-eye Maple.
A medium-sized tree, with 8 to 5-lobed leaves, remotely toothed and
slightly hairy beneath, deciduous, the flowers appearing with the
leaves; wings of fruit nearly erect. This useful North American
tree furnishes a handsome cabinet-wood, and is also used for axle-
trees and spokes. It yields an abundant supply of a saccharine
fluid, which is converted in its native country into maple sugar.
According to some writers, as much as 33 lbs. of sugar have been
obtained from a single tree in one season. A tree of ordinary size is
said to yield from 15 to 30 gallon* of sap, from which are made from
2to 4 lbs. of sugar. The tree is not injured by the operation, but
continues to flourish after having been annually tapped for forty
years. The bird’s-eye maple wood is obtained from old knotted trees.
The tree is not suitable for planting in Queensland, except in the
southern parts. Propagated by seed.
ACHRAS, Linn. —Order Sabotaged.
A. sapota, Linn. The Sapodilla Plum or Nispero of the West
Indies and neighbouring continent. A large tree, abounding in thick,,
wdiite, tenacious milk. Leaves oblong, acute at each end, coriaceous’
about 4 or 5 in. long; flowers whitish, axillary; fruit variable in
size and form, globose, oval, or ovate ; the rind rough, brittle, dull-
brown; flesh dirty-white, soft, and sweet: seeds dark, shining, very
bitter. The fruit is only eatable when it begins to blett (like the
common Medlar) ; in that state it is considered to equal the pine-
apple in flavour. The bark is a powerful astringent, and has been
used with success as a substitute for cinchona. The seeds, stripped of
their skins, are said to be considered by the people of Martinique
powerfully diuretic : six seeds pounded in a mortar, with a glass of
wine or water, form a draught which is given daily at a single dose in
dysury, strangury, and similar disorders. If the dose, however, is
much increased, severe pains, and even danger, are brought on.
Propagated by seed.
ADHATODA, Nees. —Order Acantuacea: —Tribe JusHciece.
A. yasica, Nees. The Juslicia Adhafoda of Linnaeus. A robust
and showy shrub of our gardens, which has considerable reputation
all over India as an expectorant and antispasmodic, and is largely
prescribed in consumption and other chest affections attended with
cough and hectic fever. Propagated by cuttings.


1 JEGLE, Correa— Order Rutaceje —Tribe Aurantiea.
M. Maemelos, Corr. (Feronia pellucida, Roth.; Cratcsvn
Marmelos, Linn.) The Bael or Bela tree. A common East Indian
tree o£ small size, with a thick, soft, grey bark and yellowish hard
wood weighing about 57 lbs. to the cubic foot. usually ot 3
oblong-lanceolate leaflets ; flowers white, in terminal panicles; fruit
somewhat ovoid or pear-shaped, the shell hard, pulp mucilaginous,
seeds woolly. This is a sacred tree amongst , the Hindus,'its leaves
being used in the worship of Siva. In ancient Sanskrit poems it is
frequently alluded to as an emblem of increase and fertility. Hindu
physicians regard the unripe or half-ripe fruit as astringent, digestive,
and stomachic, and prescribe it in diarrhoea and dysentery. The ripe
fruit is considered aromatic, cooling, and laxative. A thick sherbet of
the ripe fruit has a reputation amongst Europeans as an agreeable
laxative; the dose is a tumbler-full. The root-bark is used as a
remedy in hypochondriasis, melancholia, and palpitation of the heart.
A perfume is distilled from the flowers, and a yellow dye may_ be
obtained from the rind of the fruit. The tree fruits in Tropical
Queensland, but so far has not borne fruit in our Southern gardens.
The best mode of propagation is by seed.
M. sepiaeia, DC. (See “Citrus”)
HISCHYNOMEISTE, Linn. —Order Leguminos.® —Tribe Hedysarecs.
HU. aspeea, Linn. The Solah or Shola plant of India. A large
erect, or floating, or trailing plant with pinnate leaves of numerous
linear obtuse leaflets, and axillary racemes of a few brownish flowers
succeeded by pods composed of from 4to 7 prickly articles. A few
years ago a quantity of this plant was grown at Bow r en Park, and the
seed as usual distributed. In India the pith is much used for the
manufacture of hats, bottle-cases, and similar articles. Iropagated
by seed.
Afeican Bowstetng Hemp. (See “Sansevieria cylindrica, Boj.”)
Afeican Rubber. (See “ LandoJphia jlorida , Benth.,” and
“L.Kirkii, Dyer.”)
African Sheep-foddee Bush. (See “ Pentzia virgata, Less.”)
AGAVE, Linn. —Order AmaetllidejE —Tribe Agavece.
A. Americana, Linn. The American Aloe. This and other species
of the genus furnish the strong Pita fibre used in rope-making. The
sap can be converted into alcohol, and thus the “ I ulque” beverage
is prepared from the young flower-stem. All the species thrive in
Queensland. Propagated by seed or suckers.
ATLANTHUS, Dcsf.— Order Simaeubeje,
A. glandulosus, Ztes/. The Tree of the Gods, Does not succeed
well on the coast lands so far as observed, but on the South-western
Downs in places it has run from garden culture and become naturalised.


The tree is deserving of notice, from the foliage being the food of a
silkworm ( Attacus Cynthia). The wood is also hard and durable.
Propagated by seed or cuttings of the roots.
ALEURITES, Forst.— Order Euphoebiace^: —Tribe Crotonece.
A. cordata, Muell. Ary. (Flceococca vernicia, Spreng.) A tall
tree of Japan. In general appearance this tree resembles the Candle-
nut, and it bears also a somewhat similar fruit. The leaves, however,
are larger than that tree, are more cordate or heart-shaped, and have
not the mealy pubescence. The wood is said to be of some beauty,
and durable ; from the seeds also an oil is obtained which serves as a
varnish. In Queensland this tree is planted for shade, and thrives
well. Propagated by seed.
A. moluccana, TVilld. (Jatropha moluccana, Linn.; A. triloba ,
Eorst.) This tree, which is well known by the name of Candle-nut,
attains a large size in many of the coast scrubs of Tropical Queensland;
it is also widely spread over the Eastern Archipelago, the islands of the
South Pacific, and New Guinea. The wood is soft and light; leaves and
young branchlets clothed with a more or less dense mealy substance,
which gives to the foliage of the tree, when viewed from a little dis-
tance, a remarkable silvery appearance. Leaves ovate-lanceolate on
old trees, 3 to 7-lobed on young plants; flowers in broad terminal
panicles ; fruit 2 to 4 in. diameter, containing from 1 to 3 or even
more round seeds. These seeds, when dried, are stuck on a reed and
used by Polynesians as a substitute for candles. They may also be
eaten, but, if not quite ripe, are apt to make one very ill; in taste
they resemble somewhat the walnut. They yield a large proportion
of pure palatable oil, used as a drying oil for paint —in Ceylon called
kekuni oil—which in England is considered worth about £2O per
imperial tun. The cake, after the oil has been expressed, is esteemed
as a food for cattle. The root of the tree affords a brown dye. The
tree is very hardy, and commonly planted as a shade tree in Queensland ;
no use, however, is made of the fruit which it produces in great
abundance. Propagated by seed.
Alligator Apple. (See “Anonapalustris, Linn.”)
Alligator Pear. (See “Persea gratissima , Gaertn.”)
ALLIUM, Linn. —Order Liliacea: —Tribe Allies.
A. cepa, Linn. The Onion. This plant crops well in many parts
of Southern Queensland. The same may be said of A. porrum , Linn,
(the Leek), A. Ascalonicum, Linn, (the Shallot), and A. sativum,
Bauh. (the Garlic). Propagated by seed.
Allspice. (See “ Pimenta communis, Lindl.”)
Almond. (See “ PrmusP)


ALOE, Linn. —Order Liltace^: —Tribe Aloinea.
A. tulgaris, Bauhin. (The A. vera of Linnaeus, and A. Barba-
densis of Miller.) Is in many gardens, whfcre, with other medicinal
kinds, it is grown for ornament. Plants of this genus thrive well in
the colony. Propagated by seed or suckers.
ALSTONIA, B. Br. —Order Apoctnace.e— Tribe Plumeriea.
A. constricta, F. v. M. Bitter-bark or Eever-bark. This is a
tall slender tree, with glossy leaves (or, in the form mollis , hairy
leaves), which are borne on long stalks; they are opposite or in
threes, and of a narrow lanceolate form, 3 to 5 in. long ; flowers
terminal in the forks of the branchlets, white ; seed-pods or follicles
4to 10 in. long, very narrow; seeds pubescent with long hairs at the
upper end. A tincture made with 8 ounces of the bark of this tree to
a pint of proof spirit is in use by medical men in Queensland in the
earlier stages of typhoid fever, with considerable success ; the dose 5
to 10 drops. The powder in grain dose, made up with extract of
liquorice, is also said to form a convenient pill. The tree is most
conveniently propagated by seed. The wood is of a pale-yellow colour,
close in the grain, but warps in drying; the variety or species A. mollis
is the better wood of the two and might be used in cabinet-work.
A. scholabis, B. Br. Dita-bark tree. Pound in India, Burmah,
and Tropical Africa; also in New r Guinea and Australia. Ibis tree
attains a large size in the Queensland tropical scrubs. The bark is
often thick and spongy and of a greyish colour; the branches, like
the leaves, are often in whorls ; leaves 5 to 7 in each whorl, whitish
on the under side, and 4 to 6 in. long; flowers rather small, white,
in large spreading terminal panicles; fruit 2 long horn-like follicles
often a foot long; seeds hairy at each end, the hair longer than the
seeds. The wood is soft, close in the grain, light-coloured, and from
our sample does not seem to warp or be attacked by insects; in
Burmah it is used for school-boards, on which the children trace their
letters in sand, as in the Lancastrian system. In India the bark is
considered astringent, tonic, anthelmintic, and antiperiodic. Indian
physicians report that equal doses of ditain and. of standard quinine
sulphate have had the same medicinal effect, but that the ditain leaves
none of the disagreeable secondary symptoms, such as deafness,
sleeplessness, and feverish excitement, which are the usual concomi-
tants of large quinine doses ; the ditain is said to attain its effect
swiftly, surely, and infallibly. Although a large tree, it flowers w r ell
as a large shrub in the South Queensland gardens, but has not yet
fruited. Propagated by seed.
Amatungula Plum. (See “ Carissa .”)
AMORPHOPIIALLUS, Blume— Order Aeolde^: —Tribe Pytboniea .
A. campanulatus, 81. (Tacca phallifera , Bl.; Arum campanula-
turn, Eoxb.; Candarum Boxburghii, Schott.) A.n East Indian plant,


known under the name of Talinga potato. ’Rootstock large, flattened
on the upper surface; leaf decompound, the petiole rough with warts
or scales, appearing and developing after the bloom ; the spathe
spreading so as fully to expose the thick fleshy spadix; the male
flowers placed above the female ones. One of the most foetid flowers
known, so perfectly resembling carrion as to induce flies to cover the
club of the spadix with their eggs. In India the rootstocks are
peeled and cut into segments, and sold under the name of “ madan-
mast.” These have a mucilaginous taste, and are supposed to have
restorative powers, and thus are in great request. The plant is largely
cultivated, and used as a vegetable ; under cultivation much of its
acridity is said to be lost. Propagated by rootstock.
American Sumach. (See “Ccesalpinia coriaria, Willd.”)
Amtgdalus. (See “ Prunus.")
ANANAS, Adans. —Order Promeltace.e —Tribe Bromeliece.
A. satita, Mill. The cultivated Pineapple. This well-known
fruit is supposed to have been originally found in Peru, and from
thence has been taken and cultivated in most countries, either in the
open ground, as in Queensland, or under glass, as in Europe. The
varieties are numerous. Leaves long, thin, numerous from the base,
their edges prickly or smooth; flowers in a dense spike, the axis
growing out into a leafy crown, the spike becoming a fleshy fruit by
the cohesions, into a single cone-like mass, of the ovaria and floral
envelopes. The Jack-fruit, Bread-fruit, and Mulberry have similar
fruits. Besides producing one of the most delicious of fruits, from
the foliage excellent fibre may be ootained. Really the most important
use of this plant, its fibre, is lost sight of in the colony. It is soft,
silky, and pliant, and much used in Japan, China, and India in the
manufacture of the most delicate fabrics, as well as fishing-lines and
ropes. Propagated by divisions and from the crowns.
ANONA, Linn. —Order ANONACEiE —Tribe Xylopiece.
A. cherimolta, AT ill. ( A. tripefala , Bot. Mag. 2011.) Cherimoyer.
Th is is a fruit of tropical and sub-tropical South America. A rather
straggling small tree, the leaves rather large, ovate, not dotted, finely
silky on the under side; fruit somewhat heart-shaped and scaly on the
exterior, but containing a delicious pulp. Grown for the sake of its
fruit in Queensland gardens. Propagated by seed.
A. palusteis, Linn. Alligator Apple. A West Indian marsh
or seashore small tree, with oblong, pointed, glabrous leaves ; flowers
yellow with red at the centre; truit about 2 in. diameter, yellowish ;
pulp golden-yellow, seeds yellowu The fruit has a grateful smell but
a very disagreeable flavour, and is considered narcotic and poisonous.
The w r ood, which is very light, is used by the negroes as a substitute for
cork, for stopping up the mouths of their calabashes. This tree fruits
freely in South Queensland gardens. Propagated by seed.


A. squamosa, Linn. The Custard Apple or Sweetsop. A small
tree of the Malay Islands, with an erect short trunk and thin grey
hark ; the wood soft, close-grained, of about 46 lbs. to the cubic foot;
leaves lanceolate, smooth, with pellucid dots ; fruit ovate, covered
with projecting scales ; rind thick, enclosing a luscious pulp ; the
seeds are dark-brown, polished, with two lateral ridges ; these, with
the leaves and immature fruit, contain an acrid principle which is
destructive to insect life. Grown in the Queensland gardens for its
fruit. Propagated by seed.
ANTHEMIS, Linn. —Order Composite —Tribe Anthemidea.
A. nobilts, Linn. The Chamomile. This plant thrives in the
cooler districts, where it may be utilised for edging for garden walks.
Propagated by division.
ANTI ARTS, Lesch. —Order URTiCACEiE —Tribe Artocarpece.
A. toxtcarta, Lesch. The Upas-tree. This is a large tree of the
islands of the Indian Archipelago, particularly Java and Celebes.
The leaves are deciduous, oblong-oval, more or less rough, with a
shortly acuminate apex and obliquely cordate base ; flowers monoecious;
male receptacle flattish, peltate; peduncles from Ito 4 together,
axillary; peduncles of the female flowers solitary in the axils below
the males ; fruit an oval purple drupe, enclosing a sweet greenish-
yellow pulp and a single nut with a thin fragile shell, the kernel of
which is said to be given in colic, dysentery, and diarrhoea, the dose
being the third or fourth part of a kernel once or twice a day. The
inner bark is sometimes used in making coarse stuff for clothing, but
persons clad in it are said if exposed to rain to be affected with an
intolerable itching. The deleterous quality of this tree is said to
reside in the gum. Doubtless the products of this tree, in proper
hands, will sooner or later prove of medicinal value, but most
exaggerated accounts have been published of its properties. Pro-
pagated by seed or cuttings.
ANTIDESMA, L inn. —Order EupiioebiacEjE —Tribe Phyllanthece.
A. Dallaciitanum, JBaill. Herbert River Cherry. A small tree
with pubescent ovate-lanceolate leaves, 2 to 6 in. long, on stalks of
about i-in. long; flowers inconspicuous, the males often paniculate,
the females in long racemes ; fruit nearly globular, mottled, rosy, or
nearly white, | to 1 in. diameter, of a fine sharp acid flavour. Jelly
made from this fruit is equal to that from the European red currant.
Trees of this desirable f uit produce abundantly in the South Queens-
land gardens. Propagated by seed.
APIUM, Linn. —Order Umbellifer.e —Tribe Amminece.
A. graveolexs. Linn. The When wild, growing in wet
meadows and in ditches, it is acrid and poisonous; when cultivated in


dry ground, and partially blanched, it is the Celery so well known as
a salad. This culinary vegetable is grown to as great perfection in
Queensland as in Europe. Propagated by seed.
A. Petroselinum, Linn. (See “Carum Petroselinum , Benth.”)
Apple, English. (See “ Pyrus .”)
Apricot. (See “ Prunus.")
AEACHIS, Linn. —Order Leguminosjb —Tribe Hedysarece.
A. hxpoojea, Linn. Earth-nut, Pea-nut, or Ground-nut. An
annual papilionaceous plant of Brazil ; has at times been grown both
for its seeds and as a fodder. It yields a good crop, and has so taken
to our soil as to have in a few localities become naturalised.
This curious plant after flowering forces its young pods underground,
where they ripen. It is extensively grown in many warm climates
as an article of food, and for the sake of its oil, which is largely used
by perfumers in the preparation of pomades and cold cream, also for
soap-making, burning, &c. Propagated by seed.
Arduina grandielora, F. Meyer. (See “ Larissa.'")
AEGIEMONE, Linn. —Order Papaverace.® —Tribe Fupapaverece.
A, mexicana, Linn. Devil’s Eig or Prickly Poppy. This is a
plant of American origin, but now naturalised in most warm countries.
It may readily be known by its glaucous, prickly, thistle-like foliage
and bright poppy-like yellow flowers, the buds of which are erect,
and the sepals mounted by 8 horn-like processes; petals 6; capsules
prickly, oblong, containing numerous pitted dark-brown seeds; sap of
plant yellow. It is one of the plants spoken of as poisonous to stock
in New South Wales. In the Concan, the juice with milk is given in
leprosy. The oil of the seeds, in doses of from 30 to 60 minims, is a
valuable aperient in dysentery and other affections of the intestinal
canal, and it is thought that the smallness of the dose required to pro-
duce an aperient action, and the absence of any disagreeable taste, may
cause it to take the place of castor oil for that purpose. Propagated
by seed.
Alalia paptrifera, HooJc. (See “ Fatsia .”)
AEGANIA, Bcem. and ScJmlt. —Order Sapotace.®.
A. stderoxtlon, Boem. and Schulf. Argan-tree of North Africa;
was introduced a few years ago, but found not to thrive. There are at
present but an isolated plant or so to be seen.' Propagated by seed.
Arnotto. (See “Bixa Orellana, Linn.”)
Arrowhead. (See “ Sayittaria sinensis, Linn.”)
Arrowroot, Purple (See ( ‘Canna edulis, Ker.”)
Arrowroot, White. (See “Maranta arundxnacea, Linn.”)


AETEMISIA, Linn .—Order Composite— Tribe Antlemidea.
A. Absinthium, Linn. (Absinthium vulgare, Earn.) The Worm-
wood. This European herb is grown in Queensland and used in
domestic medicine as elsewhere. Also A. Abrotanum, Linn, (the
Southernwood), and A. Dracunculus, Linn, (the Tarragon), but this
latter is rare. Propagated by cuttings and seed.
Artichoke, Common. (See “ Cymra Scolymus, Linn.”)
Artichoke, Jerusalem. (See “Helianthus iuberosus, Linn.”)
AETOCAEPIJS, Forst. —Order Urticace^— Tribe Artocarpea.
A. incisa, Linn. The Breadfruit-tree of South Sea Islands. A
tree of moderate size, the branchlets ringed by the marks from where
the stipules were attached; leaves large, rough, divided into lobes;
fruit round, about 6 in. diameter, the exterior marked with hexagonal
knobs, or smooth. There are several varieties of this fruit; the
best are said to contain no seeds. The islanders peel the fruit,
extract the centre,' and dry the remainder, which they pack singly in
leaves for future use. The viscid milky sap of the tree is used for
caulking canoes. The bark is fabricated into a coarse cloth. The
tree is too tender to stand the climate of Southern Queensland, but
succeeds well in the tropics. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
A. integrieolta, Linn. The Jackfruit-tree. A large East
Indian tree with a thick, blackish, cracked bark ; wood yellow, but
darkening by age and exposure; leaves ovate-oblong, rough, 4to
6 in. long, usually entire, but on the young plants often lobed, on
short stalks ; stipules broad; the male inflorescence usually on the
young branches, cylindric, 3 or 4 in. long; the female on the same
branches or more often on the thicker branches or stem, or ultimately
on the roots. There are several varieties of this tree, the fruit of some
being very much superior to others. It is of an oval or oblong form
and muricated on the rind, often growing to an enormous size; the
inner pulp very sweet and a favourite fruit of some persons. The seeds
can be roasted and eaten like chestnuts. The tree ripens fruit well in
South Queensland gardens. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
ASPAEAOUS, Linn. —Order LiLiACEiE —Tribe Asparagece.
A. officinalis, Linn. The well-known Asparagus. This excellent
vegetable is seldom grown for market, on account of its requiring more
attention than some other culinary vegetables, but it is to be seen in
many private gardens, where it thrives well. Propagated by seed.
Asthma Plant. (See “Euphorbia pilulifera, Linn.”)
Attacus Cynthia. (See u Ailanthus.' > ')
AVENA, Linn. —Order On amines—Tribe Avenece.
A. sativa, Linn. The cultivated Oat; is largely cultivated for hay
and green fodder, and also for the com, on the Downs, where large
crops are often obtained. Propagated by seed.


AYEERHOA, Linn. —Order Geeaniacea: —Tribe Oxalidece.
A. caeambola, Linn. Tamara-tonga of the Malays. A small
•densely branched tree, largely grown in Indian gardens, but of which
the native country is unknown ; leaves alternate, pinnate, with 2
to 5 pairs and an odd terminal leaflet, pubescent, acute, lanceolate,
and glaucous on the under side; flowers axillary, variegated white and
purple ; fruit about 3 in. long, with 5 almost winglike angles. The
fruit contain an acid watery pulp, and are good when candied or made
into syrup. They also make good pickles, and the juice is of use to
remove iron-moulds from linen. The leaves are also said to be used
for dyeing. The plant fruits well as a shrub in the Southern Queens-
land gardens. Propagated by seed or cuttings in sand under glass.
Ayocada or Alligator Peae. (See “ Fersea gratissima ,
Gaertn.”)
BACKHOIJSIA, Hook, et Harv. — Order Mvetacea:—Tribe
Leptospermece.
B. citriodoea, F. v. M. This is a small tree of the South
Queensland scrubs. The \vood is close in grain and of a light-pink
colour. The foliage is very rich in essential oil, having a fragrance
closely resembling that of the Sweet Verbena ( Lippia citriodora ,
Kunth.) It may here be pointed out that besides the FackJiousia
there are many others of our indigenous trees which would pay for
cultivating with a view to obtaining the essential oil from their foliage ;
for instance, several Melaleucas and Eucalypts, these will all bear
pruning back, and thus produce a larger quantity of leaves, flowers,
and seed annually. Propagated by seed.
Bael or Bela Tree. (See “ JEgle Marmelos, Corr.”)
Balm. (See “Melissa.”)
Balsam of Peel. (See “ Myrospermum Fereirce, Klotz.”)
BAMBUSA, Schreb. —Order Graminea: —Tribe Bambuseoe.
B. vulgaris, JVendl. This and other species of Bamboo thrive
well in Queensland, but are only grown for ornament. Propagated
by division of the rootstock or cuttings.
Banana. (See “ Musa.”)
Banyan Tree. (See “ Ficus bengalensis, Linn.”)
Barbauoes Flower Fence. (See “Ccesalpiniapulcherrima, Sw.”)
BAEBAREA, B. Br. —Order Crucifers— Tribe Arabidece.
B. vulgaris, B. Br. (Erysimum Barbarea , Linn.) Belleisle or
Land Cress. This little wholesome salad herb thrives in Queensland,
but is not often grown for market on account of Water Cress being
much more productive. Propagated by seed.


BAUHINIA, Linn. — Order Leguminosje— Tribe Bauftiniea.
B. yariegata, Linn. Oxhoof-tree This is a moderate-sized
deciduous tree, of the East Indies, Burmah, and China. It has a grey
bark which often opens in vertical cracks; the wood is of a grey
colour and mode, ately hard ; leaves rather broader than iong, deeply
cordate, the obtuse lobes reaching a quarter or moredown flcwers
variegated with red and yellow (one form, iC v. Candida) 'd . H
about G in. long. The bark is described as astringent attenuant,
and tonic, and useful to check diarrhoea; it is also used for tanning
and dyeino-. The buds of the flowers are eaten as vegetables when
prepared with animal food. Wood used for agricultural implements ;
weight per cubic foot about 42 lbs. Ihrives m Queensland, but only
grown for ornament. Propagated by seed.
Batberey or Wax Myrtle. (See “Myrica cerifera , Linn.”)
Belleisle Cress. (See “ Barbarea. )
Benthamia feagifera, Lindl. (See “Gornus capitata , Wall. )
BERTHOLLETIA, Humb. et Bonpl. —Order Myrtaceje Tribe
Lecythidece.
B. excelsa, H. et B. Brazil-nuts A tall tree of Tropical
America. Leaves alternate without pellucid dots, bright-green, often
2 ft lono- and 6 in. wide; the flowers have a 2-parted deciduous
calyx, G unequal cream-coloured petals, and numerous stamens united
into a broad hood-shaped mass, those at the base being fertile-and
the upper ones sterile ; the fruit is nearly round and about 6 in.
diameter, having an extremely hard shell about 2 -in. thick, and con-
taining from 18 to 24 triangular wrinkled seeds. Ihese are what are
known as Brazil-nuts ; they are sometimes called Para-nuts. An oi
used by watchmakers is obtained by pressure from these seeds and the
bark is used as a substitute for oakum for caulking ships. Ihe plant
will doubtless thrive in Queensland, but as yet there are no estab-
lished trees. Propagated by seed.
BETA, Linn. —Order Chenopodiaceje —Tribe Chenopodiea.
B. yuLGARis, Linn, Both the Common Beet and Mangolds thrive
well in Queensland. The first is grown as a culinary vegetable, and
the latter by a few persons for cattle fodder. 1 ropagated by see .
Bevilaqua. (See “ Hydrocotyle aniafica, Linn.”)
Bitter Bark. (See “Jhtonia constricta, E. v. M.”)
Bitter Cassava. (See “ManiTiot utilissima, Pohl. )
BIXA, Linn. —Order Bixixeas— Tribe Bixea.
B. Orellana, Linn. Arnotto or Anatto. A tall shrub or small
tree of Tropical America, with somewhat heart-shaped leaves which
taper into points; leafstalk long; flowers of a pinkish colour, m


terminal panicles; fruit a heart-shaped, bristly, 2-valyed capsule;
seeds angular, covered with an orange-red pulp or pellicle, which is
the substance called arnotto in commerce, chiefly used for staining
cheese and in the preparation of chocolate. A simple method of
obtaining the colouring matter is said to be by removing the pulp with
the seeds and soaking this mass in cold or warm water, which should be
constantly stirred. After a while the water and separated seeds are
strained off, and the precipitate or arnotto dried in the shade. This
colouring matter is considered astringent and slightly purgative.
When an alcoholic extract is treated with sodium carbonate, a sodium
compound of bixin is formed, crystallising in leaflets having a coppery
lustre, and from this salt the colouring matter (bixin) may be^ obtained
in a crystalline form. The seeds are cordial, astringent, and febrifuge.
Propagated by seed, which it produces abundantly in most parts of
Queensland.
Black Pepper. (See u Piper nigrum , Linn.”)
Black Walnut. (See “Juglans nigra , Linn.”)
Blackberry. (See “Bub us .”)
BCEIIMERLA, Jacq. —Order Urticaceaj —Tribe Urticece.
B. niyea, SooJc. et Am. China-grass, or Rheea-fibre plant. This
is found in China, India, and the Indian Islands. It is an herbaceous
perennial 3 or 4 ft. in height, with ovate serrate leaves, rough above,
snowy-white beneath. The flowers are produced in slender drooping
spikes, the sexes distinct. The fibre of the bark is that known as
Rheea fibre. This plant is said in India to produce three cuttings
a year. The fibre is of different degrees of fineness, according to the
age of the plant and the part of the bark from which it is taken;
the inner bark of young quickly grown stems yields the beautifully
fine delicate fibre from which the best fabrics are manufactured, while
the outer portion affords a coarse fibre for rope and canvas. Prom
experiments which have been made it seems to possess nearly double
the strength of Russian hemp. Thrives well in most parts of
Queensland. Propagated by division.
BOMBAX, Linn. —Order Maltaceje —Tribe Bomlacece.
B. malabaricum, I)C. Cotton-tree. A large Indian tree, also
indigenous in Northern Queensland. The trunk is covered with short
conical prickles ; the leaves, which are deciduous, are composed of
from 5 to 7 leaflets placed at the end of a rather lung stalk ; flowers
large, red, on short stalks at the ends of the branches when the tree is
destitute of leaves; capsule large, oblong, containing obovoid seeds
enveloped in silky wool or cotton. This latter is in India employed to
stuff pillows and in making quilts, and the wood is used for planking,
packing-cases, tea-boxes, and although not very durable is said to last
tolerably well under water, so is employed in lining wells. Mahometan


writers state that the young roots have restorative, astringent, and
alterative properties. r .fhe gum is also considered astringent, and used
in diarrhoea, dysentery, and menorrhagia. Propagated by seed
Bowstring Hemp, African. (See “ Sansevieria eylindrica, Boj.”)
Bowwood or Osage Orange. (See “Madura aurantinca, Nutt.”)
BRASSICA, Linn. —Order Crucifers— -Tribe Brassicea\
B. alba, Visiani. (The Sinapsis alba of Linnaeus.) White
Mustard. B. oleracea, Linn.— under which is included the many
kinds of Cabbage, Broccoli, Cauliflower, Brussels Sprouts, Kail, and
Kohlrabi —is grown in as great variety and perfection in all parts of
Queensland as these culinary vegetables are elsewhere. Propagated
by seed.
Brazilian Cherry. (See “ Fur/enia unijlora , Linn.”)
Brazil Nuts. (See “Bertholletia excelsa, H. and B.”)
Breadfruit Tree. (See “Artocarpus incisa, Linn.”)
Bringals. (See “ Solanum Melongena, Linn. ’)
Broad Beans. (See “ Vida Fuba, Linn.”)
BROMELIA, Linn. — Order Bromeliace.® —Tribe Bromelieee.
B. STLYESTRis, Willd. The Brazilian Wild Pine. This plant
somewhat resembles the Pineapple, only the leaves are longer and more
rigid and the marginal prickles are stronger. The inflorescence is
much more lax than in the Pine. The principal use of this plant is the
supply of valuable fibre which is obtained from its leaves. Propagated
by offshoots.
BROHSSONETIA, —Order Urticace^: —Tribe Morece.
B. paptrifera, Vent. Paper Mulberry. This is a small tree
resembling the smaller-leaved Mulberries. The young branches are
clothed with short soft hairs ; the leaves are ovate in outline, entire
or variously lobed, edges toothed ; fruit like a mulberry, insipid. In
Japan this plant is cultivated for the sake of the young shoots, which
are used in the manufacture of paper. The South Sea Islanders also
make their tapa cloth from this tree. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Buckwheat. (See “ Fagopyrum eticaJentum, Moench.”)
Bullrush. (See “ Typha angustifelia.”)
Cabbage. (See “Brassica.”)
CJESALPINIA, Linn. —Order Legumtnos® —Tribe Buccesalpiniece .
C. coriaria, Willd. Divi-divi, Dibi-diba, or American Sumach.
A small tree of the sea-shores of Central America. Leaves small,
bipinnate; pinnae 6to 7 pairs; leaflets 15 to 20 pairs, dotted with rows
of black dots, linear, obtuse; flowers small; pods flattened, about


2 in. long, f-in. wide. The chief value of this plant is the pods, which
are employed for tanning purposes. They are stated to contain as
much as 50 per cent, of tannin, and they are exported from the West
Indies into Great Britain for tanning purposes. It is regarded as the
most powerful and quickly acting tanning material in India, and is
therefore largely cultivated there. Mercantile price of the pods is
from £8 to £lB per ton. Trees flower freely every year in South
Queensland, but for profit should be planted in the ijiore northern
parts of the colony. Two other species of this genus — C. G/lliesii,
Wall., <f the La Plata States, and C. pulcherrima, Sw. (the Barbadoes
Mower Pence), which adorn our gardens —are useful for forming live
fences. Propagated by seed.
Caffee Thoen. (See “ Ly'cium afrum, Linn.”)
CAJANUS, DC— Order Leguminos.® —Tribe BJiaseolecc.
C. indicts, Sprenq. The Pigeon Pea of India. A shrub often
seen in Queensland, the seed of which are much esteemed by the
natives in India. The green plant is a good cattle fodder, and tne
stalks are used for making charcoal for gunpowder manufacture.
Propagated by seed.
Cajf.put Oil. (See “Melaleuca leucadendron, Linn.”)
Calabash Tbee. (See “Crescentia Cujete , Linn.”)
CALODEN'DRON', Thuni Order Rutaceas— Tribe Diosmece.
C. capfnse, Thuni. (Ballosia capen sis, Houtt ; Dictamnus
capensis, Linn, f.) Cape Chestnut. A large handsome tree of the
eastern districts of South Africa and Caffreland. Branches opposite
or in threes ; leaves 4 or 5 m. long, with prominent parallel nerves;
flowers very showy, in terminal panicles; petals white, sprinkled with
purplish glands, reflexed, and about in. long ; capsule hard, con-
taining black, shiny, nut-like seeds, which are said to have somewhat
the flavour of chestnuts, and are used for necklaces and other orna-
ments. The tree succeeds well in the South Queensland gardens, and
is highly prized for its beauty and the shade it affords. Propagated
by seed or cuttings.
CALOTROPIS, B. Dr— Order Ascleptadeas— Tribe Cynnnchece.
C. gigantea, B. Br. The Indian Madar-fibre plant. The
Yercum of Southern India. This is a large shrub, with broad oval
leaves of a silvery-grey colour, 6 or more inches long ; the flowers
are of a rosy-purple colour, and somewhat bell-shaped. Ihe shrub is
one of beauty as well as utility, and therefore commonly met with in
gardens. Its inner bark gives a valuable fibre of a silky texture, which
is strong, and is used in India for bowstrings, fishing lines and nets, on
account of its being durable in water. This fibre has been found to bear
552 lbs. against 407 lbs. borne by Sunn hemp (the fibre of Crof daria
juncea) and 224 lbs. borne by coir. The silky hair of the seeds is


made into thread in Borneo, but it is difficult to spin ; but mixed with
one-fifth of cotton in Madras it has been made into a good wearing
cloth. A kind of gutta-percha has been obtained from the milky juice.
The milky juice is applied to carious teeth for relief of pain. The bark
in powder is used in cases of lepra, syphilis, and hectic fever. The
drug is emetic and a substitute for ipecacuanha. Propagated by seed
or cuttings.
CAMELLIA, Linn.—Order Ternstrcemiaceje —Tribe Gordoniece.
C. Thea, Link. (Then chinensis, Sims.) The Chinese and Assam
Tea shrub.\ This is a shrubby plant with ovate or lanceolate leaves,
the edges of which are serrated ; flowers white, of sor 6 sepals and
6to 9 petals, borne in the axils of the leaves; capsule 3-lobed All
the kinds of tea are produced from varieties of this species. The
tea of commerce consists of the young leaves, heated, curled, and
sweated. The plant to be productive requires a rich alluvial soil,
plenty of water, but good drainage. Declivities are best adapted and
mostly chosen for Congo, Pekoe, and Souchong, while Bohea is often
grown in flat countries. Propagated by i-eed.
Camphor. (See “ Cinnamomum campJiora , Nees.”)
Candlenut. (See “Aleurites mohtccana, Willd.”)
CANISTA. —Order Scitamine^i — Tribe Cnnneoß.
C. edults, Krr. Purple Arrowroot. An herbaceous plant with
a globose knotty rhizome ; stems 5 or 7 feet high ; leaves large, ovate-
lanceolate, stem-clasping ; flowers red; capsule thin, 3-celled, contain-
ing many round black seeds, which are said to germinate alter being
kept for many years. This plant is largely grown for the manufacture
of arrowroot, for which there is a large export. Propagated by
divisions.
CAN’N’ABIS, Linn. —Order TJ rticace.® —Tribe Onnnahinem.
C. sativa, Linn. The Hemp-plant. May be seen growing now
and again as a garden plant, and it thrives well, but up to the present
has not been planted for profit. Propagated by seed.
Cape Chestnut. (See “ Galodendron capense, Thunb.”)
CAPPARIS, Linn. — Order Capparide^e.
C. sptnosa, I Ann. The Caper-shrub. A few years ago fine
thriving plants of Caper might be si en in the Brisbane Botanic
Gardens Propagated by seed, or by the very young shoots when
about 1 in. long in sand and charcoal.
CAPSICUM, Linn. —Order Solanace.® —Tribe Solanea.
C. frutescens, Linn. The Bed Pepper or Chilly shrub has
become naturalised in the Queensland scrubs. C. baccntum , Linn,
(the Bird’s-eye Pepper), C. grossum, Willd. (the. Bell Pepper), and


many other species or varieties, are abundant in our gardens, and
from the quantity of fruit they bear one would think that it should
pay to manufacture Cayenne pepper in the colony, or dry the fruit
for exporting lo Europe as is done both in the East and West Indies.
Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Cakawat Seed. (See Carum carui, Linn.”)
CAEICA, Linn. —Order Passiflorace.e —Tribe Papayacece.
C. Papaya, Linn. ( Papaya vulgaris, Lam.; Papaya carica,
Qaertn.) The Papaw-tree. A soft-wooded tree of 20 or 30 ft., of
South America, but cultivated in most countries where the climate
suits. Leaves on long stalks, palmately divided into 7 or more acute
sinuate lobes; flowers very fragrant, white, on the male trees in long
raceme-like panicles, often with a few female flowers which produce
fruit at the ends of the branches; flowers of female tree close to the
stem in the axils of the leaves; fruit large, succulent, resembling a
melon in flavour, somewhat pear-shaped; seed pungent. The young
fruit are an excellent substitute for vegetable marrow. The tree is
supposed to have the power of rendering meat which is suspended
under it tender. A. large number of medicinal virtues are ascribed to
the tree. Propagated by seed.
CAETSSA, Linn. —Order ApocYNACEiE —Tribe Carissece.
C. orandiflora, A. DC. ( Arduina grandifiora , E. Meyer.)
Amatungula or Natal Plum; is both cultivated as a fruit and hedge
plant. Propagated by seed.
C. Carandas, Linn., is also in cultivation, and serves the same
purposes. Propagation by seed.
CAETJM, Linn. —Order Umbelltfer^e —Tribe Amminece.
C. Petroselinum, Benth. (Apium Petroselinum , Linn.; Petro-
selinum sativum, Hoffm.) The Garden Parsley. Commonly grown
for domestic use. The fruit or seeds are said to be a deadly poison
to parrots. Propagated by seed.
C. carui, Linn. The Caraway plant. This also thrives, but is
seldom cultivated. Propagated by seed.
Carob. (See “Ceratonia siliqua, Linn.”)
Carolina Jasmine. (See “ Gelsemium nitidum, Mich.”)
Carolinea alba, Lodd. (See “Pachira alba, Walp.”)
Cassava, Bitter. (See “ Manihot utilissima, Pohh”)
Cassava, Sweet. (See “ Manihot Aipi, Pohh”)
CASSIA, Linn. —Order Leguminos^: —Tribe Cassieve.
C. acutifolia, Delile., C. angustifolia, Vahl , and C. obovata,
Colla., have been grown in Queensland, but no plants are available


for this exhibit. Their adaptability for the climate was amply proved
by Mr. Walter Hill twenty years ago, when he had plots of sennas
and numerous other plants of economic value grown in the Brisbane
Botanic Gardens. Propagated by seed.
C. fistula, Linn. ( Catharfocarpus fistula, Pers.) Pudding-
pipe tree. Indian Laburnum. This is a tree of moderate size, the
bark smooth on the young trees, rough on the older ones ; leaves
pinnate, of about 5 pairs of ovate leaflets ; flowers yellow, very showy,
in long drooping racemes; pods cylindric, to 2 ft. long and fto
1 in. diameter; seeds numerous, each in a separate cell, immersed
in a dark sweetish pulp. This pulp is considered a valuable laxative.
The root is said to possess purgative properties. The bark is used for
dyeing and tanning; the wood is said to be very durable. In
Queensland the plant thrives well, but is only planted for ornament.
Propagated by seed.
CASTANEA, Garin— Order Cupuliferje —Tribe Quercinece.
C. SATiVA, Mill. ( 0. vesca, Gaertn.) The Sweet or Spanish
Chestnut; fruits well on the Downs, but does not mature very good
fruit on coast land. Propagated by seed.
CASTILLO A, Cervant. —Order URTiCACEiE —Tribe Artocarpece.
C. elastica, Cerv. The Guatemala and West Indian Rubber
plant. This is a lofty tree, with a trunk often more than 3 ft. diameter.
Branchlets pubescent; leaves oblong, lanceolate, often cordate at the
base, attaining 18 in. length and 7 in. width on some trees; stipules
large, deciduous. A tree with a trunk of 20 to 30 ft. to its branches,
and about 4 ft. diameter of stem, is expected to yield 20 gallons of
milk, each gallon of which is said to give 2 lbs. of rubber, and to be,
when carefully and judiciously tapped, the most remunerative of
rubbers. The tree requires a rich soil and good drainage, with plenty
of water. Propagated by seed or cuttings. A cutting is found to root
more readily if a shield of old wood is left at its base.
Castor Oil Plant. (See “ Ricinus communis , Linn.”)
Cathartocarpus fistula, JPers. (See “Cassia.”)
Cats-tail. (See “ Typha anqustifolia."')
Caustic Creeper. (See “Euphorbia Drummondii, Bois.”)
Cauliflower. (See “ Brassica.")
Ceara Rubber. (See “Manihot Glaziovii, Muell. Arg.”)
Cedar, Red. (See “ Cedrela Toona, Roxb.”)
CEDRELA, Linn. —Order Meliace.® —Tribe Cedrelea.
C. odorata, Linn. Honduras or Jamaica Cedar. A tall tree;
leaves pinnate ; leaflets variable, broad or narrow, on long or short
stalks, 11 to 17; panicle drooping, about 1 ft. long ; flowers pale-


yellow ; petals pubescent; capsule ovoid, somewhat ribbed. This tree
produces a useful reddish fragrant wood, always in request in Europe
for furniture and indoor work. Propagated by seed.
C. Toona, Eoxb. Eed Cedar of Australia. The Toon-tree of
India. A very large and valuable deciduous tree. The leaves are
pinnate, composed of from 11 to 17 leaflets. The flowers are white,
small, and borne on drooping panicles ; seed capsules about 1 in. long!
The wood is highly prized both here and in Europe, and is the principal
wood used in the colonies for furniture. The flowers may be used for
dyeing red or yellow. The bark is astringent and has been used as a
febrifuge. Propagated by seed.
Celery. (See “ Apium graveolens, Linn.”)
Ceeasus. (See “ Frunus.”)
CEEATOXIA, Linn. —Order Leguminos.®— Tribe Cnssiece.
C. siliqua, Linn. St. John’s Bread, Carob-beans, or Locust-
pods. Ihis is a small tree found on the borders of the Mediterranean.
It has pinnate leaves composed of a few pairs of blunt leaflets. The
flowers are inconspicuous in short racemes. Pods about 6 in. long,
1 in. broad, thick and curved; they contain a large amount of
saccharine matter, and are employed in the south of Europe for feeding
horses, pigs, &c. AV ood hard, of a pinkish colour. Propagated by
seed. J
Ciialta. (See “ Dillenia indica, Linn.”)
Chamomile. (See “Anthemis nobilis, Linn.”)
Chestnut, Sweet or Spanish. (See “ Castanea.”)
Chkkimotee. (See “ Anona cherimolia, Mill,”)
Cheery. (See “ Erunus .”)
Cherry, Brazilian. (See 11 Eugenia unijlora , Linn.”)
Cherry, Herbert Elver. (See “Anfidesma Dallachyana, Bail!.”)
Chicory. (See “ Cichorium Lntybus, Linn.”)
China or Japan Eaisins. (See “ Hovenia dulcis, Thunb.”)
Chinese Sugar Cane. (See “ Sorghum saccharatum, Pers.”)
Chinese Tallow Tree. (See “Exccecaria sebifera, Muell. Arg.”)
Chinese Varnish Tree. (See “Aleurites cordata, Muell. Arg.”)
CHLOEOXYLON, DC. —Order Meliacea: —Tribe Cedrelece.
C. swietenia, Linn. East Indian Satinwood. A fine tree of
Ceylon and the Coromandel coast and other parts of India. The
leaves are pinnate, and the leaflets of a pale colour, ovate in form, with
pellucid dots or oil-cells ; flowers white, in large panicles. This tree
produces the handsome Indian satinwood and also a resin valuable for
varnishes. Propagated by seed.


CHBYSOPHYLLUM.—Order Sapotaoee.
C Cainito Linn. The Star-apple of the West Indies. A small
tree with oval’or oblong leaves, golden-silky or silvery on the
under side, the veins numerous, the transverse ones parallel, on snort,
stalks ; flowers axillary, calyx rusty, 5 or 4-parted ; corolla yellowish,
5 or 4-parted; fruit large, globose; seeds compressed. The fruit
of this tree is much liked in the West Indies, and the tree wnl likely
fruit in Queensland in tropical localities, but so far is not a success
near Brisbane. Propagated by seed.
Cicca disticiia, Linn. (See “ Phyllanthus. )
CICHOBIUM, Linn. —Order Composite— 7 dbe Cichoriacea.
c. Intybub, Linn. Chicory or Succory. A European waste
lands and roadside plant, with rough branching stems of 2 to 3 ft. high,
the leaves pinnatifid and coarsely toothed ; flower-heads blue. The
thick fleshy roots are cultivated in Europe as a substitute tor or tor
mixing with coffee, the flavour of which it is said to improve, ihe
plant has not been grown commercially in Queensland, but it haa
been noticed in a few gardens and appears to suit the climate.
Propagated by seed.
C Endivia, Linn. The Garden Endive; used from very early
times as a culinary vegetable. Is grown by a few market-gardeners,
but one seldom sees it nicely blanched, except in private gardens.
Propagated by seed.
CICEB, Linn.— Order Leotmihose— Tribe Vide®.
C abietinum, Linn. The Gram. This annual pulse has been
found‘to thrive in the colony, but has not been cultivated to any
extent It is, however, a valuable stable-food, and in India it is also
extensively used for human food. Propagated by seed.
CINCHONA, Linn. —Order Rubiacee—Tribe Cinchnnecß.
C. Calisata, Wedd. Yellow-bark. A lofty tree of Curabaya,
Peru, with a thick bark, longitudinal and transversely fissured;
leaves oblong to obovate-lanceolate,_ shining above pale beneath,
stalk short, variable as to size; stipules oblong, "btnse; panic es
large* peduncles tomentose. square; flowers numerous, rosy-red;
corolla-tube about *-in. long, tomentose; capsule ovoid. > This
species is said to be one of the richest yielders of qumin and
produces, besides, cinchonidin. It furnishes the yellow bark and also
partly the crown bark of commerce. Propagated by seed.
C sucdEUBEA, Pan. Bed-bark. A small erect tree with ovate
i.a ,q m i nnfr and 2i to 0 in. broad, on stalks of about 1 in.;
flowers rosy in terminal panicles; corolla-tube about i-in. long, the 5
lobes of limb with hairy margins ; capsule oblong gaping at the base
This produces what is known as Cascanlla colorada, or Btd-baik


of English commerce. This is the species generally cultiyated on the
mountains of Bengal, and has been found hardy in Lower Gipps-
land, Victoria. Many localities in Tropical Queensland are well suited
for the growth of Cinchona-trees. They require deep rich soil with
plenty of rainfall, and above all good drainage. Much of the hilly
country about Cairns is admirably adapted for their growth. Propa-
gated by seed.
CINNAMOMUM, Blame. — Order L^urineje—Tribe Lcrseaceae.
C. campuora, Nees. (Oamphora officinalis , Nees; Laurus
carnphora, Linn.; Laurus camphorijera , Koeinph.) Camphor-tree of
China and Japan. A beautiful compact evergreen tree; leaves
glossy, ovate, 2 or 3 in. long; flowers minute ; fruit like a glossy
black berry, about the size of a pea. The wood is pervaded by
camphor, hence resists the attack of insects. The camphor is
obtained by means of dry distillation. For ornamental planting no
tree is better than this in Brisbane; always clean in its growth and
affording a fine shade, and will thrive in almost any situation.
Propagated by seed.
C. zetlantcum, Nees. (Laurus Cinnamomum, Linn.) The Cinna-
mon of Ceylon. Branches angular ; leaves ovate-oblong, tapering to
an obtuse point, 3-nerved and reticulate; Hewers hoary; fruit
like a blackberry. The bark of this tree furnishes the best cinnamon
of commerce. The tree thrives pretty well in some localities near
Brisbane, but, to be grown for profit, should have a tropical climate,
say about the Barron Liver. Propagated by seed.
Cite on"- scented Gum Tree. (See “ Eucalyptus maculata var.
citriodoru .”)
CITEUS, Linn. —Order Eutacete —Tribe Aurantieee.
Plants of this genus, as the Orange, Lime, Lemon, Shaddock,
and Citron, crop very heavily and the fruits are of good flavour in all
parts of Queensland.
C. trteoliata, Linn, (C. trifolia, Thanh.; JEgle sepiaria, DC.)
Is in use by some nurserymen as a stock for the other kinds to be
grafted upon. It also forms an excellent hedge. Propagated by
layers, cuttings, and seed.
CLAUSENA, Lurm. —Order EuTACEiE —Tribe Aurantieee.
C. Wampi, Oliver. (Cookia punctata , Eetz.) The Whampee of
the Chinese. A small tree having the branches, leaf-stalks, and
inflorescence covered by minute asperities. The leaves are composed
of from 7 to 9 obliquely ovate leaflets about 3 or 4 in. long ; flowers
in broad spreading panicles; fruit a berry of a brownish colour and
grape-like flavour, globular and over 1 in. diameter when well grown.
Fruits abundantly about Brisbane. Propagated by seed.


CLEOME, Linn.— Order Cape abided —Tribe Cleomece.
C. pcnqens, Willd. Spider-flower. This plant, which is highly
spoken of by bee-keepers, has been sown for bees, and in some parts
it has become naturalised. Propagated by seed.
Clover, White or Dutch. (See “ Trifolium repens , Linn.”)
Coca, (See “ Bxjib.ro xylon coca , Lam.”)
Cocculus. (See “ Jafeorhiza.”)
COCHLEAE!A, L inn. —Order Crucifers. —Tribe Alyssinece.
C. Arm oracia, Linn. The Horse-radish; produces good roots.
Propagated by seed or division of root.
Cocoa Plant. (See “Theobroma cacao, Linn.”)
COCOS, Linn.— Order P^LMiE —Tribe Cocoineas.
C. nucifeea, Linn. Cocoa-nut. A graceful pinnate-leaved
palm of tropical sea-coasts, with a trunk attaining 100 feet in height
and 2 feet in diameter. The leaves will often measure 18 feet in length,
and are usually curved. These leaves are used for thatching, and the
net of fibres at their base is made into bags and paper, and in Ceylon
for toddy-straining. The wood of the outer part of the stem is that
known as “ porcupine-wood,” and used for walking-sticks and fancy
work. The fibre surrounding the nut is “ coir” fibre, and used in rope
and mat making; and from the kernels is obtained a large quantity of
the well-known cocoa-nut oil which is used in the manufacture of soap,
candles, &c. This useful tree has been met with in a wild state in a
few localities along the Queensland tropical coast, and plantations have
also been formed, and are thriving, and producing good crops of fruit.
Propagated by planting the nuts.
COFEEA, Linn. —Order Eubiaceje —Tribe Ixorece.
G. arabica, Linn. Coffee-shrub. A small tree or large shrub of
Tropical Africa, of erect growth. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, wavy,
shining on the upper surface, pale on the under side; stipules
subulate; flowers 5-merous, sweet-scented, white, tubular, with a
6-cleft limb; berries oval, reddish-purple, containing 2 seeds. No
part of the world is better adapted for the cultivation of coffee ; and
doubtless before very Jong there will be plantations formed in North
Queensland. The hills about Cairns, which have a deep rich soil, are
admirably suited for this plant. Propagated by seed.
C. liberica, Bull, et Iliern. Liberian Coffee. This species has
•a much more robust habit than C. arabica, produces larger beans,
and is said to thrive at a lower elevation. The leaves vary from 5
to 12 in. long and from 2to 4 in. wide The flowers differ from
C. arabica in being G or 7-merous. The coffee is considered by some
of inferior quality. Propagated by seed.


COIX, Linn Order Ghamine.® —Tribe Mayclece.
C. Lachrtma, Linn. Job’s-tears. This is a tall leafy grass,
with monoecious flowers, of the East Indies, Japan. It produces a
large quantity of coarse fodder. The seeds of the common knd are
very hard, resembling small cowrie shells, and often used as orna-
ments; but Dr. Hooker says that a kind cultivated in the Khasia
Hills has a soft shell and sweet kernel. These seeds are used for food
als® in other parts. Propagated by seeds and division.
COLOCASIA, Schott.— Order Aroideje.
C. antiquorum, Schott. The Taro of the South Sea Islands.
Often grown for ornament, and the islanders on some plantations in
Northern Queensland cultivate it for food. Propagated by division.
Cookia punctata, Retz. (See “Clausena Wampi , Oliver.”)
COECHORUS. —Order Tiliage^e —Tribe Tiliece.
C. capsulaets, Linn ., of India and Japan, and C. olitorius, Linn.,
of South Asia and North Australia. Annual erect-growing plants,
which in India are cultivated for their fibre, known as jute, and used
in making rice and sugar bags in India. The fibre is alsp largely used
in Europe in the manufacture of carpets and other fabrics. Both
plants thrive admirably in Queensland, and some excellent fibre has
been made and exhibited at various exhibitions. Propagated by seed.
COEDIA, Linn. —Order Borachneas— Tribe Cordiece.
C. Mtxa, Linn., var. latifolia. The broad-leaved Sepistan or
Sebesten. The word “Sepistan” is an abbreviation of “ sag-pestan,”
which means in Persian “dog’s dugs.” This is a small tree, with round-
ish or somewhat heart-shaped repand leaves, 3-nerved. The flowers
are borne in terminal panicles, and succeeded by pale straw-coloured
plum-like fruit; when ripe they contain a largo quantity of clear,
very clammy pulp. In India the natives pickle the fruit. Medicinally,
the dried fruit is valued on account of its mucilaginous nature and
demulcent properties. It is much used in coughs and chest affections,
also in irritation of the urinary passages ; in larger quantities it is
given in bilious affections as a laxative. The wood, although soft, is
strong, and useful for many purposes. Propagated by seed.
Cork Oak. (See “ Quercus suher, Linn.”)
CORNUS, Linn. —Order Corkages.
C. capttata, Wall. (Bcnthamia fraqifera, Lindl.) A small
deciduous tree of Northern India, with thin greyish bark; leaves
opposite, lanceolate; fruits small, growing together, and forming a
large berry resembling those of the Sirawberry-tree Arbutus ; red w T hen
ripe. The tree when in bloom is handsome, from the large cream-
coloured involucres. The fruit is eaten, and made into preserves.
Propagated by seed or cuttings.


COEYLIJS, Linn. —Order Cupulifee.e —Tribe Corylea.
C. A yell a>t a, Linn. The Hazel and Filbert fruit well on the
Darling Downs and similar places. Propagated by seed, and the
superior kinds by grafting upon the seedlings.
Cotton Plant. (See “ Gossypium .”)
Cotton Teee, Queensland. (See “ Hibiscus tiliacevs, Linn.”)
Cotton Teee, Silk. (See “ JBombax malabaricum, DC;,” and
“ JEriodendron anfractuosum , DC.”)
CEATJSGHS, Linn.— Order Eosaceje— Tribe Pomece.
C. Oxyacantiia, Linn. The Hawthorn or Wlvtethorn. This
suits for hedges in the cooler parts of the colony, but is not suited for
such purposes near Brisbane or in the North. The same may he said
of G. pyracantba, Pers. (Fiery Thorn), an evergreen species. Propa-
gated by seed.
Ceatasya Maemelos, Linn. (See “ JEgle Marmelos, Gorr.”)
CEESCENTIA, Linn. —Order Bignoniaceje— Tribe Crescentiece.
C. Cujete, Linn. Calabash-tree of West Indies. . This is a
small tree, the leaves in clusters of 5, lanceolate, expanding more or
less at the base, 4 to 6 in. long ; flowers large, variegated with green,
purple, red, and yellow ; fruit globular or oval, with a very hard
woody shell. This is utilised by the natives of the parts of South
America where the plant grows wild, in forming into many articles of
domestic economy, as for cups, water-bottles, &c. Ihe pulp is con-
sidered purgative, and thought beneficial in diseases of the chest. Ihe
wood is light, tough, and pliable. The tree stands the Brisbane
climate, and has fruited in one or more places, but is better suited for
the tropical parts of the colony. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Ceess, Common Gaeden. (See “ Lepidium sativum, Linn.”)
Ceess, Land. (See “ Barbarea.”)
Ceess, Watee. (See “ Nasturtium officinale, E. Br.”)
CEOTALAEIA, Linn. —Order Leguminos^e —Tribe Genisteoe.
C. juncea, Linn. The Sunn-hemp. This plant has been grown,
and excellent fibre made from its stalks, but as yet no one has gone in
for fibre cultivation. This and many more species are indigenous to
Queensland; all give a good fibre. Propagated by seed.
CEOTON, Linn Order EuPHOEBiACEiE —Tribe Crotonecs .
C. Tiglium, Linn. The Purging Croton. This is a small tree of
India and Burmah. Leaves ovate, acute, and 3to 5-nerved at the
base, with glandular serratures ; 2 glands at the base, the surface
with minute stellate hairs; racemes terminal, erect; flowers downy j


capsules oblong, obtusely triangular ; testa of seed dark. These seeds
are considered one of the most drastic purgaiives known. Ten to
twenty seeds are said to be enough to kill a horse. Propagated by
seed.
Croton Oil Shrub. (See “Croton Tiglium, Linn.”)
CRYPTOSTEGIA, B. Br. —Order AscuEPiADEiE— -Tribe Periplocece.
C. grandiflora, B. Br. ( Nerium grandijlorum, Roxb.) India-
rubber vine. This is a tall climbing plant with opposite elliptic leaves,
brownish on the under side; flowers showy-white inside, purplish
outside, funnel-shaped, with a corona of 5 bipartite scales; fruit
divaricate follicles, which are acutely triquetrous, I in. wide at the
base and tapering to a point, often the two spreading to 6 or 8 in.
wide. The milky sap of this climber contains caoutchouc, and has in
India been converted into good rubber. Propagated by seed.
Cuba-bast, (See 11 Hibiscus elafus, Sw.”)
Cucumber. (See “ Cucumis.”)
CUCUMIS, Linn.; CITRULLUS, Sclrad.; CUCURBITA, Linn.—
Order CucurbitacEjE.
Cucumis, Citrullus, and Cucurbita, the genera in which are
placed the Cucumber, Melon, Water-melon, and Pumpkin, are largely
represented in Queensland, and produce crops equal to those of any
other part of the world. Propagated by seed.
Cumfret, Prickly. (See 11 Symphytum asperrimum, Sims.”)
CURCUMA, Linn. —Order Scitamine^e —Tribe Zingiberece.
C. longa, Boxb. (Amomum Curcuma, Murr.) This plant, the
Turmeric of commerce, requires the same cultivation as Ginger, and
has been successfully grown in Queensland. The juice of the fresh
rootstock is considered anthelmintic. In India, turmeric, which is
prepared from the old rootstock, is regarded as an important biiter
aromatic stimulant and tonic, and is employed in debditated states
of the stomach, intermittent fevers, and dropsy. Turmeric paper is
unsized paper steeped in tincture of turmeric and dried by exposure
to the air. It is employed as a test for alkalies, which render it
reddish or brownish. Propagated by division of rhizome.
Currant, English. (See “ Bibes .”)
Custard Apple. (See “ Anona squamosa, Linn.”)
Ci’DONiA. (See “ Pyrus .”)
CYNARA, Linn. —Order Composite —Tribe Cynaroideae.
C. Scolymus, Linn. The Common Artichoke, grown mostly
in private gardens. It thrives well, but is not ready of sale in
Queensland,


CYPERUS, Linn. —Order Cypeeacr^!— Tribe Scirpece.
C. esculentus, Linn. Chufa or Ground Almond. This is a
sedge somewhat resembling tbe pest known by the name of Nutgrass.
The knotty rhizomes are edible, and are said to contain 27 per cent,
of starch, 17 per cent, of oil, and 12 per cent, of saccharine substance.
They are eaten either raw or cooked. The oil is said to surpass in
excellence of taste all others used for culinary purposes. Propagated
by the tubers.
C. Papyrus, Linn. ( Papyrus antiquorum.') This was used by
the ancients for making a substitute for our writing-paper; but at
the present time it is used for ornamental more than useful purposes.
Propagated by division.
CYPHOMANDRA, Sendln. — Order Solanacee:,
(This genus oniy differs from Solanum in the form of anther and
connectivum.)
C. retacea, Sendtn. (Rionandra hetacea , Hook.; Solanum beta-
ceum, Cav.) This Beet-leaved Nightshade forms a large soft-wooded
shrub, often quickly attaining the height of from 6 to 10 feet, and
spreading in proportion. The leaves are ovate in form, 6 to 9 in. long
and 3to 5 in. in width, on spotted petioles of about 1 or 2 in. The
flowers are borne in racemes or raceme-like panicles, and are somewhat
rosy in colour; fruit egg-like, 1 to 2 in. long. In Lima and Buenos
Ayres they are used as tomatoes. This shrub has only just begun to
fruit in our gardens, but most probably in a very few years it will be
found naturalised in our scrubs, for birds and animals eating the fruit
of the shrubs in cultivation will carry and deposit the seed far and
wide, the same as they have done with other Solanums. Propagated
by seed.
DALBERGTA, Linn.f. —Order Legumtnose: —Tribe Balbergiece.
D. Sissoo, Roxb. The Sissoo of East India. This is a large
deciduous tree, with pinnate leaves ; leaflets 3to 5, alternate, orbicular,
or obcordate, with a short sudden acumination, slightly wavy on
the margin, when young pubescent; panicles of flowers axillary, com-
posed of several short second spikes or racemes, the flowers nearly or
quite sessile, yellowish-white; pod linear, lanceolate, 2-seeded. A
valuable timber tree ; the wood is very durable, and does not warp or
split; is used in India for felloes and naves of wheels, for which it is
said to be unsurpassed by any other wood. This tree is largely planted
in India for timber. It thrives well in Queensland, Propagated by
seed.
Dandelion. (See “ Taraxacum dens-leonis, Hall.”)
Date Palm. (See “ Phoenix dactylifera, Linn.”)
Date Plum. (See “Biospyros Kaki , Linn.”)


DATJCTJS, Linn. —Order TTmbellifer;e —Tribe Cmicnlinece.
D. Carota, Linn. The Carrot. Crops well in Queensland.
Davidson’s Plum. (See “ Lavidsonia pruriens, Y. v. M.”)
DATIDSONIA, F.v.M. —Order Saxifrages —Tribe Fscalloniece.
D. pruriens, F. v. M. Davidson’s Plum. This is a very graceful
■erect tree of Tropical Queensland. All parts more or less hairy ; the
large irregularly pinnate leaves very beautiful; flower in a long
pendulent rnceme-like panicle; fruit oval, size of a goose-egg, clothed
with short stiff hairs, which are easily rubbed off the ripe fruit; pulp
abundant, of a rich purple colour, and sharp. One of the best culinary
fruits of the colony. Wood dark-coloured, close-grained, and tough.
Propagated by seed.
Devil’s Cotton - . (See “ Abroma augusta, Linn.”)
Devil’s Pig. (See “ Argemone .”)
Dill, (See “ Peucedanum.”)
DILLENIA, Linn. —Order Dillentace.e —Tribe Dilleniecs.
D. indtcA, Linn. (D. speciosa, Thunb.) The Chalta-tree. A
large evergreen East Indian tree, with a red bark and oblong, serrated,
rough leaves; flowers large, solitary, very showy, white; fruit
globose, with the enclosing fleshy calyx 4 to 6 in. diameter; the
enclosing calyx, as well as the fruit, edible, acid. The wood is said to
be durable under water in India. The tree grows and fruits fairly well
in the Brisbane gardens, but seems to require a more tropical climate.
Propagated by seed.
DTOSCOREA, Linn. —Order Dioscoreace.®.
D. alata, Linn. The Uvi Tam, Pound in cultivation in India
and the South Sea Islands. The climbing stems are more or less
winged, of 4 angles, but not prickly as in the one called the China
Tam. The tubers grow to a large size, and are eaten baked or boiled.
Propagated by crowns.
DIOSPTEOS, Linn. —Order Ebenaceje.
D. Kaki, Linn. Date Plum. A deciduous tree of China and
Japan, wbh ovate, oblong, rather downy leaves varying much in size.
Many varieties of this delicious fruit are now grown in Queensland;
the best are considered those that are seedless. In shape the fruit is
round but flattish, several inches in diameter, of a brownish colour,
outside the semi-transparent pulp yellowish, varying in flavour accord-
ing to variety. The superior varieties are propagated by grafting
upon seedlings of the inferior kind or on roots.
DIPLOGLOTTIS, HooJc.f —Order Sapindace.®.
D. Cunninghamii, Hook, f, Queensland Tamarind. A large
tree with a brownish smooth bark; wood light-coloured, close-grained,


Tery tough; leaves and young growth densely clothed with rusty
hairs ; leaves pinnate, very large, the leaflets oblong, 6 to 8 in. and
often nearly 1 ft. long; flower in a straggling panicle; capsule of
2 or 3 round lobes, enclosing round seeds, each surrounded by a fleshy
amber-coloured sweet aril, which latter is often collected and made
into a preserve. Propagated by seed.
DIPLOTHEMIUM, Mart. —Order Palma:— Tribe Gocoineas.
D. maritimum, Mart. Wine Palm. Foliage pinnate, somewhat
glaucous, the leaves gracefully curved; panicles of fruit large; fruit
globular, about 1 in. diameter of a sharp acid flavour. The tree bears
an abundance of fruit, of which little use is made. Propagated by
seed.
DIPSACUS, Linn. —Order Dipsacea:.
D. pullontjm, Linn. The Fuller’s Teazel. May be seen growing
in gardens now and again, and certainly thrives well ; but it is not
cultivated for use, although the use of it has not yet been superseded
by machinery. Propagated by seed.
Dita Bark. (See “Alsfonia scholaris, E. Br.”)
Divi Divi. (See “ Ccssalpinia coriaria, Willd.”)
DOLICHOS, Linn. —Order Leguwinosjs —Tribe Phasroleee.
D. Lablab, Linn. Grown for ornament but seldom used for
culinary purposes. Propagated by seed.
D. sinexsis, Linn. (See “ Vigna.")
Doornuoom. (See “Acacia horrida, Willd.”)
DUBOISIA, Ji. Br.— Order Solanace.e — Tribe Salpiglossida.
D. myoporotdes, B. Br. A small tree, the bark corky ; leaves
narrow oblong, light-grey, 2 to 4 in. long; flowers small, white, in
loose spreading panicles ; fruit a juicy black berry. The juice of the
leaves and fruit acts rapidly on the iris and accommodation of the eye,
producing a widely dilated pupil in twenty minutes. This was intro-
duced into practice some years ago by Dr. Bancroft, of Brisbane, and
is at present largely used. Propagated by seed.
D. llopwoodii, F. v. M. The Pituri of the natives of Cooper’s
Creek. This shrub contains an alkaloid analogous to nicotine, and
hence forms an article of commerce amongst the natives of the
interior, who use dried portions of it as a masticatory. Propagated
by seed.
DIJEAN TA, Linn. —Order Verbena-Ce^e.
D. Plumper!, Linn. A tall, sharp-thorned shrub of South
America. It has opposite serrated ovate leaves, and pretty lilac flowers
borne in racemes in the upper axils of the shoots, thus forming terminal


panicles; fruit yellow, said to be poisonous. This shrub, which grows
very quickly, is the one most generally used in hedge-making. Propa-
gated by cuttings or seed; in planting a hedge, cuttings are more
generally used than rooted plants.
Eaetii Nut. (See “AracTiis hypogcea, Linn.”)
Eq-q- Plant. (See “Solarium Melongena, Linn.”)
Eldee Beeey. (See “ Sambucus”)
veenicia, Spreng. (See “ Aleurites cor data, Muell.
Arg”)
Emblica. (See “ Phyllanthus”)
Endive. (See “Cichorium Endivia, Linn.”)
Erioboteva Japonica, Lindl. (See “ Fhotinia”)
EEIODENDRON. —Order Malvaceae —Tribe Bomhacece.
E. anfeactuosum, DC. {Bombax pentandra, Linn.) The White
Cotton tree of India. An erect deciduous tree with prickly stem
resembling a Bombax but differing in staminal column, being 5-cleft,
each branch bearing 2 or 3 anthers, that of Bombax being divided at
top into an indefinite number of filaments bearing anthers ; branches
spreading horizontally; leaves digitate, of 5 to 8 leaflets, glaucous
beneath and sometimes serrulate towards the point; flowers white,
anthers anfractuose (spirally twisted), whence the name; capsule
oblong with the seeds embedded in silky cotton. The cotton of the
capsules is the “ kapok ” of commerce, and is used for stuffing
pillows, &c. Propagated by seed.
Eevum Lens, Linn. (See “Lens esculenta, Mcench.”)
EEYTHEOXYLON, Linn. —Order Line^: —Tribe Erythroxylece.
E. coca, Lam. The Coca or Spadic plant of Peru. This is a
tall graceful shrub with virgate branches. The leaves are oval, lor 2 in.
long, of a pale-green and thin texture; the axillary flowers small,
whitish ; fruit a small drupe. The leaves of this shrub are universally
chewed by the Indians. It is said that after partaking of their morning
meal they stuff a loose handful of leaves into their mouths with a little
calcined lime, adding a few fresh leaves during the day. The effect is
said to be stimulating, enabling them to work hard on little food. This
Coca-bush is extensively cultivated by them; the annual produce is
estimated at about 30,000,000 lbs. The leaves are also infused and
used as tea. The active principle has been brought into use in Europe
as an amethetic in superficial surgical operations. The shrub thrives
and fruits well in the Brisbane district, and will likely soon be largely
cultivated, especially in the more northern parts of the colony. Pro-
pagated by seed or cuttings.


EUCALYPTUS, H Her.— Order MyrtacetE— Tribe Leptospermecs.
E. macul vta, var. citriodora, Hook. The Citron-scented Spotted
Gum-tree. This tree only differs from the Spotted Gum-tree in the
foliage being strongly citron-scented; it has the same white, clean,
dimpled bark which has got for it the name of spotted gum; is also a
tall tree with usually a scanty amount of foliage, and the flowers and
fruit, were it not for the peculiar fragrance, could not be distinguished
one from the other. The timber is likewise excellent for wheelwright’s
work. The foliage is rich in essential oil of quile a citron scent. The
tree would likely pay if planted for distillation; the trees could be
kept well cut back, by which a far greater amount of foliage would
be produced and a continual supply obtained. hor this purpose,
H. Baileyana, E. v, M., which produces a strong pungent essential oil,
well adapted for medicinal purposes; E. hcemastoma, Sm., which pro-
duces a peppermint-scented oil; and E. microcorys, E. v. M., are well
worthy of attention. Propagated best in all cases by seed.
E. Staigertana, F. v. M.; Bail, in Syn. Ql. FI. Lemon-scented
Ironbark of the Palmer. This is a small tree of irregular growth, the
wood hard, of a red colour, but the logs often pipy; bark dark,
rugged. Leaves vary like others of the Gums, but differ from them in the
delightful fragrance of their essential oil, which closely resembles that
of lemons. One ton of the dry leaves will yield about 1,300 oz. of oil.
The tree thrives in the southern parts of Queensland, flowering well
as a tall shrub, and would likely pay if planted for the sake of its
foliage for distillation. Propagated by seed.
EUCHL.ENA, Schrad.—Orde" Craminey: —Tribe May decs.
E. luxurians, Ascherson. (lleeana luxurious, Durien.) The
Teosinte. This is a very tall branching fodder grass; numerous stems
spring from the same root, attaining a height of 12 or more feet, from
the knots of which spring numerous shoots, thus producing a largo
amount of fodder. The plant should have a good soil, and is better
suited for the tropical than the southern parts of Queensland, although
it thrives fairly well about Brisbane. Propagated by seed.
EUGENIA, Lindl. —Order Myrtacejs —Tribe Myrtece.
E. Jambos, Linn. ( Jambosa vulgaris , DC., Myrtus Jambos, Kunth.)
The Eose Apple. A tree of moderate size, in garden culture generally-
forming a wide-spreading shrub; the leaves 4to 8 in. long, narrow-
lanceolate ; flowers white, in terminal racemes, very large and
showy ; berry white, globose, crowned by the 4 persistent calyx-
lobes, often H to 2 in. diameter, of a nice flavour, and with a scent
of roses, but not much used as a fruit. Propagated by seed.
E. Pimenta, DC. (See “ Pimento communis, Lindl.”)


E. uxiflora, Linn. {L. MicTielli, Lam.) Brazilian Cherry. A
tall glabrous shrub, with bluntish, ovate-lanceolate, glossy leaves ; the
flowers small, on long slender stalks; fruit a flatfish lobed berry, of
about 1 in. diameter, bright-red, very juicy, used as a fruit, and by
some considered to possess medicinal virtues. Propagated by seed.
EUPHORBIA, Linn. —Order Euphorbiace^e —Tribe ILupborbieae.
E. pilulifera, Linn. Asthma-plant. A small hairy herb, from
3 to 18 in. high, often of a reddish colour, with opposite ovate-lanceo-
late leaves of lor 2 in. in length ; stipules small; flowers in dense
globular heads in the axils of the leaves. This common tropical weed
is constantly used in the form of a tea by persons suffering from
asthma, and is said to give instant relief. Eor this purpose the whole
plant is gathered while in flower and fruit and most carefully dried,
for if allowed to mould it is apt to do more harm than good. The tea
should be of the same strength as ordinary tea, and a wineglassful
for a dose. Propagated by seed.
E. Drummonbii, Lois., has also lately been said to possess medicinal
virtues. This is the Caustic Creeper so poisonous to sheep. Propagated
by seed.
EUPHORIA, Juss. —Order Sapindace^: —Tribe Sapindcce.
E. Long ana, Lam. (Nephelium Lon gam, Camp. ; Scytalia
Longana , Roxb.) The Longan of the East Indies, China, and Burmah.
This is a pinnate-leaved tree of small size; leaflets 4 to 10, oblong,
rather prominently veined and wavy ; fruit reddish-purple, globose,
Ito f in, diameter, rough or at length smooth. The fruit, which
consists of a fleshy aril, is wholesome, but far inferior to the Lichi.
Propagated by seed.
EXCiECARIA, Linn. —Order Eupiiorbiacea: —Tribe Crotonece.
E. sebifera, Muell. Arg. (Stillingia selifera, Mich.; Sapium
sebiferum, Roxb.; Carumhium sebiferum, Kurz. ; Sapium sinensis, Baill.)
The Chinese Tallow-tree. A moderate-sized tree with grey bark, the
leaves on long stalks, roundish ovate, with 2 glands at the base, and
taper-pointed, of a grey colour; flowers yellow, very small in erect
spikes ; fruit globose, ellipsoid ; seeds coated with a fatty substance,
which yields the tallow used by the Chinese. The combustion of
candles made from this material is said to yield a thicker smoke and a
dimmer light, and to consume much more rapidly, than those made
from animal tallow. The wood of the Tallow-tree is white and close-
grained, and well fitted for printing-blocks ; and the leaves give a dye.
Propagated by seed or portions of the root.
EAGIOPYRUM, Gaertn. —Order Poltgonace^.
E. escuxentum, Moench. The Buckwheat. This is grown as a
fodder plant, but not to any extent, although it thrives very well.
Propagated by seed.


FATSIA, Dene. —Order ARALiACEiE —Series Panaceas.
F. papyrifera, Benth. (Aralia papyrifera, Hook.) The Rice-
paper plant of the island of Formosa. A tall soft-wooded shrub
sending up numerous young plants from the roots; leases on long
stalks, cordate, with 5 to 7 acute serrated lobes, when young covered
with a dense down, the upper surface glabrous when fully grown ;
flowers small in numerous capitate umbels, forming a very large
terminal panicle. In Queensland often planted for ornamental
purposes. The Chinese rice-paper is made from the pith of this
plant. Propagated by suckers.
Fennel. (See “ Foeniculatum.”)
Ferosia pellucid a, Roth. (See “AEyle Marmelos , Corr.”)
Fever Bark. (See “Alsfonia constricta, F. v. M.”)
FICUS, Linn. —Order Urticace^e. —Tribe Artocarpece.
F. ben galen sis, Linn. (F. iudica, RoxbJ The Banyan. This
is a large evergreen East Indian tree with wide-spreading horizontal
branches from which descend roots which, reaching the ground, form
additional stems to the tree, thus'forming an extensive shade. The
leaves are large, thick, bluntly ovate, downy when young. The fruit
is about 1 in. diameter, borne in pairs, on very short stalks, or
stalkless. The seeds of the fruit are considered cooling and tonic.
The white glutinous juice is applied as a remedy for toothache, and
to the soles’ of the feet when cracked and inflamed. The bark is given
as a tonic. The leaves, after they have turned yellow, are given with
roasted rice in decoction as a diaphoretic. The wood, which is grey
and moderately hard, is of little value, but being durable under water
is used in India for well-curbs. In Queensland the tree thrives well,
and is planted for shade. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
F. stcamorus, Linn. The Mulberry Fig or Sycamore Fig. This
forms an excellent shade tree, and produces a large quantity of fruit,
which is used as food by the Arabs. The wood although light is
said to be almost imperishable. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
F. Carica, Linn. The ordinary Fig. Produces good crops in the
cooler parts of Queensland, but the fruit is often destroyed by the fly.
The Bay-leaves found with imported figs are placed there as a
preventive of the ravages of the grub which so often destroys this
fruit. The Fig is said to be the Teenah, the first tree mentioned in
the Scriptures. Propagated by cuttings.
F. elastica, Blume. The India-rubber Fig or Caoutchouc tree.
A large East Indian tree, wdiere, like the Banyan, it throws down
aerial roots from its branches. The bark is grey or reddish-brown;
the leaves oblong, pointed, glossy, and with numerous parallel fine
lateral veins; stipules long, purplish-red; fruit in pairs, oblong,
xto nearly 1 in. long, purple when ripe. The tree is tapped by
means of slanting notches made in the stem, aerial roots, and roots*


about 12 in. apart. The milk is allowed to collect and coagulate in
these notches for two or three days, alter which time the hard india-
rubber in each notch is easily collected by being pulled out in a strip.
The milky juice is estimated to contain one-third its weight of caout-
chouc. The tree will not bear yearly tapping; once in three years is as
much as it will stand ; if tapped yearly it is liable to die off. There
are but few plants of this beautiful tree in Queensland, but these are
thriving. Propagated by seed, or cuttings.
F. religiosa, Linn. The Peepul or Poplar-leaved Fig. A large
East Indian tree with grey bark ; the leaves on long stalks, ovate,
cordate, with very long points ; fruit in pairs, stalkless, small, de-
pressed-globular ; wood greyish white, moderately hard. The tree is
sacred in India, and therefore seldom cut for the wood. One writer
says that the dried fruits, pulverised aud taken in water for fourteen
days together, removes asthma ; another, that the leaves and young
shoots are purgative. The tree is largely planted in Queensland for
ornament, and thrives admirably. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Fig. (See “Ficus Carica, Linn.”)
Filbert. (Sec “ Corylus .”)
FLACOURTIA, Comm. —Order BixiNEiE —Tribe Flacourtiece.
F. cataphracta, Roxh. A small tree of India and Burmah, armed
with large multiple thorns; leaves oval-oblong, acuminate, and
serrate; flowers small, of separate sexes ; fruit about 1 in. diameter,
globose, purplish, and pleasant-flavoured. The plant forms a very
strong hedge. Medicinally the fruit is recommended as useful in
bilious conditions. This tree thrives excellently in Queensland. Pro-
pagated by seed.
F. sepiaria, Roxh. A very thorny shrub of India. Leaves
obovate, coriaceous, serrated ; flowers axillary, solitary ; berry small,
globular, with from 4 to 8 seeds. These berries are eatable, and the
plant is useful for forming hedges ; but as yet not used for that pm-
pose in Queensland. Propagated by seed.
Flax or Linseed. (See “Linum usifatissimum, Linn.”)
FCEXICULUM, Adans. —Order UiiBELLiFERiE —Tribe Seselinece.
F. officinale, Allioni. The Fennel. Is not uncommon in gardens.
Propagated by seed.
Fourcuota. (See “ Furcrcea.”)
FRAGARIA, Linn. —Order Rosacea —Tribe Potentillecß.
F. yesca, Linn. Strawberry. The market is well supplied with
this favourite fruit, of which many excellent kinds are grown.
Propagated by the runners.


Franchipanier or Pagoda Tree. (See 11 Plumeria acuminata ,
Ait.”)
French Bean. (See “ Phaseolus .”)
French Honeysuckle. (See “Hcdysarum coronarium, Linn.”)
FIJECEiEA, Fentf. (Fourcrota). —Order Amaryllide^:— Tribe
Agavece.
F. gigantea, Pent. (Agave foetida , Linn.) A large Aloe-like
plant with long, green, lanceolate leaves, often with prickles near the
middle; flowering but once; flower-stem 20 to 30 ft. high, ox very
quick growth ; flower yellowish, succeeded by bulbills, not seed-pods.
An excellent strong fibre may be obtained from this South American
plant; it thrives well on any soil in Queensland. Propagated by the
bulbills from flower-stem.
G-AECINIA, Linn. —Order Guttieerae— Tribe Oarciniece.
G. Liyingstonei, T. Andr. A small tree of Tropical Africa,
with a thick trunk, opposite or ternate oblong, slightly emarginate,
coriaceous leaves of a dark green, 2 to 4 in. long ; flowers on the old
•wood often densely clustered ; fruit a somewhat flattened pear-shaped
or oval berry about 1 to 1\ in. diameter, the scanty flesh of a pleasant
flavour; outer skin orange-coloured; seeds 2. So far as proved m
Brisbane gardens, scarcely worth cultivating as a fruit; but the dark-
green foliage, bright-coloured fruit, and compact growth make it a
favourite tree for ornamental planting. Propagated by seed.
Garlic. (See “Allium sativum, Bauh.”)
GELSEMHJM, Juss. —Order Logantaceas —Tribe Oelsemice.
G. nitidum, Mich. Carolina Jasmine. An evergreen climber of
the Southern States of America, with opposite, lanceolate, shining
leaves ; flowers in the axils, sweet-scented, with a funnel-shaped 5-
cleft corolla. This beautiful plant is considered to possess valuable
medicinal properties, and to be especially useful in cases of neuralgia,
rheumatics, and fever. Propagated by seed, layers, or cuttings.
German Millet. (See “ Setaria italica, Beauv.”)
Gingelly Oil Plant. (See “ Sesamvm indicum , Linn.”)
Ginger. (See “Zingiber officinalis , Eoxb ”)
GLYCYEEHIZA, Linn.— Order Legumtnosal— Tribe Oalegea;.
G. glarra, Linn. The Liquorice-plant. In some localities
this plant produces good root, but it is very little grow r n. Propagated
by divisions of the roots.
Gooseberry, Cape. (See “Physalis.”)
Gooseberry, English. (See “Pibes.”)


GOSSYPIUM, Linn. —Order Maly agile. —Tribe Hihiscece-.
G. eeligiosum, Linn. (G. peruvtanum, Cay.) Kidney Cottou_-
Pernvian or Brazilian Cotton A South American plant, said to be-
the tallest of cottons. The leaves are more deeply lobed than others,,
the petals yellow, and the seeds closely connected in oblong masses.
The cotton is of a very long staple, white, silky, and easily separated from
the seeds. Other species grown in the colony are: — G. Barhndense,
Linn, (the Sea Island cotton), which has also long lobed leaves and
yellow petals, but the seeds of which are black and disconnected.
The cotton of this is very long, and of a silky lustre. G. herbaceum ,
Linn., of tropical and subtropical Asia, with short lobed leaves,
yellow petals, and disconnected grey-velvety seeds; staple long. A
variety of this furnishes that known as Nankin cotton. And GC
hirsutum , Linn, (the Upland or Short-staple cotton), the seeds of which
are disconnected and of a brownish-green colour. Cotton-root bark is
used medicinally in similar cases to those in which ergot is employed.
The seed is made into a tea for dysentery in America. The seed also
yields a useful oil, obtained by pressure. The oil-cake can be used
like most substances of similar kinds for stock-feeding Propagated
by seed.
Guam. (See “ Cicer arietinum , Linn.”)
Geanadilla. (See “Bassijlora quadrangular is, Linn.”)
Geape Vine. (See “ Vitis .”)
Geass-clotii. (See “ Boehmeria nivea, H. et Arn.”)
Geease Nut. (See “ Hernandia bivalvis, Benth.”)
GIIEVILLEA, JR. Br. —Order Peoteace.®. —Tribe Grevilleece.
G. eobttsta, A. Gunn. Silky Oak, or Tuggan-tuggan of the
natives in some localities. This is a tall erect tree, semi-deciduous, with
a rugged dark bark and much divided fern-like foliage ; flowers, which
appear just about as the old leaves are falling and the young ones
coming on, are of a rich orange colour. The tree is a great favourite
for ornamental planting. The wood is also highly prized for cooper’s
and cabinet-maker’s work. Besides this, the tree is an excellent one ta
plant for bees. Propagated by seed.
G3IEWIA, Linn. —Order Tillage.®. —Tribe Greiviece.
G. astatica, Linn. (G. suhincequalis, DC.) A small tree with
rounded coarsely and irregularly toothed leaves, obliquely cordate,
5-nerved; flowers about f-in. diameter with yellow linear petals;
drupe globose, lor 2-lobed, pilose, of a pleasant acid flavour. These
fruits are commonly used in India for flavouring sherbets. The fruit
of G. polygama, Eoxb., a wide-spread species very common in Queens-
land, is used by the natives for food, and the bark for making into twine.
Most species produce good fibre. Propagated by seed.


Geound Almond. (See “ Gyperus esculentus, Linn.”)
Geound Nut. (See “Arachis hypogaa, Linn.”)
Guava. (See “ Psidium .”)
GUAZUMA, Flum. —Order Steeculiacea: —Tribe Pueltneriea;.
G. tomentosa, JL. F. et A. A AYest Indian tree, but commonly
planted in the East Indies for its beauty and use. A moderate-sized
tree, the leaves alternate, ovate or oblong, unequal at the base,
toothed, acuminate at the apex, stellately puberuious on the upper
side, tomentose beneath ; petals yellow, with 2 purple awns at the
apex. The fruit is filled with mucilage, which is agreeable to the taste.
Wood used in India for making furniture, and by coachmakers for
panels. The fibre from the young shoots is ‘said to be strong. A
decoction of the inner bark is very glutinous, and has been employed
to clarify sugar. Propagated by seed and cuttings.
HiEMATOXYLON, Linn. —Order Leguminosa:— Tribe
Euccesalpiniece.
H. campeachianum, Linn. The Logwood-tree. This is a tree of
medium size belonging to Central America, common about the Bay of
Campeachy, hence its name. It has pinnate leaves, the small leaflets
being very blunt; flowers yellow, small, in short racemes ; pod flat,
tapering to each end and containing 2 seeds. This well-known dye-
wood is largely used by calico-printers and cloth-dyers. The tree
thrives well in Queensland and affords an excellent shade, and is often
planted for that purpose. Propagated by seed.
Haeicot Bean. (See “ Phaseolus”)
HARPULLIA, Foxb. — Order Sapindace^:— Tribe Sapindece.
H. PENDULA, Planch. Queensland Tulipwood. A moderately
large tree with wide-spreading branches ; leaves pinnate, of from 3
to 6 oval leaflets, usually pale-green; flowers in drooping panicles
succeeded by orange-coloured membranous capsules of 2 or 3 lobes,
each containing a round black seed. This is an excellent shade tree,
very hardy, adapting itself to various soils. It produces also a
beautifully figured wood, much prized by cabinet-makers. Propagated
by seed, which must be sown as soon as ripe.
Hawthoen or Whitethoen. (See “ Cratccgm.")
Hazel Nut. (See “ Corylus .”)
HEDYSARUM, Linn. —Order Leouminosjs —Tribe Hcdysarece.
H. coeonaeium, Linn. French Honeysuckle or Soola Clover.
This South Europe fodder plant has been tried, but only found to
thrive in the cooler parts of the colony, and even there is not a
favourite fodder plant. Propagated by seed.


HELEOCHAEIS, E. Br.—Order Cyberages —Tribe Scirpece.
H. tuberosa Mam. et Schulf. (Mated or Petsi.) A Chinese
Kush or Sedge found in ponds, which produces wholesome edible
tubers. Propagated by tubers.
HELIANTHUS, Linn.— Order Composite— Tribe Heliantboidea.
, e annuus, Linn, (the Sunflower), is in cultivation for the
a r T ds - f ° r f ° W S ’ and H - TTJBEl *osus, Linn, (the Jerusalem
Artichoke), for its tubers, but to no great extent. Propagated, the
first by seed, the other by tubers.
Helicia ternifolia, P. y. M. (See “Macadamia.” )
Hemp. (See “Cannabis sativa, Linn.”)
Hemp, Queensland. (See “Stda rhombifolia, Linn.”)
Henna. (See “Lawsonia alba, Lam.”)
Herbert Eiter Cherry. (See “Antidesma Ballachyana, Baill.”)
HERNANDIA, Linn.— Order Laurine^e—Tribe Hernandiea.
Br y^ E urs, Penth. The Cudgerie or G-rease Nut. This is a
tail tree with a smooth bark, common in South Queensland scrubs.
he leaves are glossy-green, ovate, and on young plants slightly peltate •
flowers white, in loose terminal panicles, very fragrant , fruit a
bhick ribbed nut enclosed in 2 red valves, thus appearing like large
'P£PP ers - Ihe kernels of the nuts contain over G4 per cent, of
oil. Ihe wood is light and soft. Propagated by seed.
HEYEA, Aubl. Order Euphorbiace^— Tribe Croionea.
H. BBAziLiENSis (Siphonia), Muell. Arg. The Para Eubber.
1 his is a large tree with alternate 3-foliolate leaves ; leaflets lanceolate,
petioluJate; capsule large, with a somewhat fleshy exocarp The
rubber, which is supposed to be the best exported from Para, in Brazil
is there obtained during the dry season by making deep horizontal
incisions near the base of the trunk, and then a vertical one extending
up the trunk, with others at short distances in an oblique direction*
Ihe milky sap is caught in clay cups placed below the incisions. To
grow these trees for the caoutchouc, a situation should be chosen within
the tropics where the land is rich. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
HIBISCUS, Linn.— Order Malyace^— Tribe Llibisceee.
11. elatcs, Sw. (Paritium datum.) The Mountain Mahoe or
Cuba-bast tree. This forms a fine shade-giving tree. The leaves are
cordate with rather long points, a good deal like those of JL. tiliaceus.
ihe flowers are large and in the morning of a pale primrose colour,
and become orange-coloured and deep-red as the day advances. The
timber is said to be of a greenish blue and to be useful for cabinet-
work. Ihe lace-hke inner bark furnishes the well-known Cuba bast,
bine specimens of this tree are in our public gardens. Propagated by
seed and cuttings. J


H. esculentus, Linn. The Ochro, Bandakai, or Gobbo. Com-
monly grown as a culinary vegetable, the mucilaginous capsules and
seeds being used. Propagated by seed.
H. sabdarifea, Linn. The Eosella. This is an annual plant of
from Bto (3 ft. high and spreading. The leaves are of various forms,
some undivided, others palmately divided into 3 or 5 lanceolate serrated
lobes ; flowers pale with centre dark, involucre fleshy, usually red
and of a sharp pleasant acid flavour; this latter part is separated and
made into jam. From the stems excellent fibre may be obtained.
Propagated by seed.
H. tilt ace i’s, Linn. (Paritium iiHaceum, St. Hil.) The Queens-
land Coast Cotton-tree. A small tree of the coast. Leaves orbicular-
cordate, white on the under side; flowers large, yellow with dark
centre. From the bark of this tree a useful strong fibre is obtained
which in Bengal is largely used in the manufacture of ropes. It also
furnishes a pretty wood for cabinet-work. Propagated by seed or
cuttings.
Hog Plum. (See “Spondias dulcis, Forst.”)
Honduras or Jamaica Cedar. (See “ CedreJa odorata, Linn.”)
Hop Plant. (See “Stimulus Lupulus .”)
HOED HIM, Linn.— Order Or amines —Tribe Hordeeae.
H, disticiion, Linn. The English Barley produces heavy crops
on the Downs, and H. vulgare is often grown for fodder in other
parts of the colony. Propagated by seed.
Horehound. (See “Marrubium vulgare , Linn.”)
Hobseradisii, Common. (See “Cochlearia Armoracia , Linn.”)
Horseradish Tree. (See 11 Moving a pterygosperma, Giertn.”)
HOYENIA, Thunb. —Order Ehamneje.
H. dulcis, Thunb. China or Japan Eaisin-tree. A tree of
medium size with alternate, cordate, serrated leaves; the flowers in
terminal forked panicles, small, but the stalks under the pea-like fruit
become enlarged and pulpy, with somewhat the flavour of dates.
Propagated by seed.
HUMHLUS, Linn. —Order Tribe Cannabinece.
H. Lupulus, Linn. European Hop-plant. This well-known
climbing perennial has been proved to thrive in Queensland about
Brisbane, so it is not improbable that before long persons may turn
their attention to its profitable cultivation. Propagated by division of
roots.
Hungarian Grass. (See “Setaria italica, Beauv.”)


HYDROCOTYLE, Linn. — Order Hmbellifer.e —Tribe Ilydrocotylece.
H. asiatica, Linn. Asiatic Pennywort; Bevilaqua of the Drench.
A creeping-stemmed herbaceous plant often met with in damp spots.
Leaves reniform, crenated, with about 7 nerves, on long stalks; the
umbels of flowers on usually much shorter stalks than the leaves.
The medicinal virtues of this plant have been highly spoken of by many
medical men. Propagated by division and seed.
HYMENODICTYOX, Wall. —Order Rubiace^. —Tribe Cinchonece,
H. excelsum, Wall. {Cinchona Roxb.) A large deciduous
East Indian tree with oblong pubescent leaves and cordate stipules ;
the floral leaves coloured, bullate; panicles of flowers terminal
and axillary; flowers greenish, small, funnel-shaped, 5-parted. The
inner bark is bitter and astringent, and is used as a febrifuge, and for
tanning, and the wood is also used in India in the manufacture of
toys,- grain-measures, and other articles. Propagated by seed.
ILEX, Linn —Order Ilicine^:.
I. paraguayensis, St. HU. The Paraguay Tea-plant or Mate.
A small evergreen tree or large shrub, with dark-green, ovate, serrated
leaves 3or 4 in. long; flowers small, fruit a small berry. The leaves
of this plant occupy the same important position in South America
as the Chinese tea does with us. It is said to have an agreeable,
slightly aromatic odour, and slightly bitter taste, and to be refreshing
and restorative. The plant thrives admirably in Queensland. Propa-
gated by seed, cuttings, or layers.
ILLICIUM, Linn . —Order Magnoltace^: —Tribe Winterece.
I. anisatum, Linn. Star or Chinese Anise. This is a glabrous
evergreen shrub of China and Japan. The leaves are obovate, obtuse,
smooth, firm, and fleshy; flowers usually lateral, nodding; fruit
consisting usually of a number of follicles arranged in the form of a
star. The whole plant has a pleasant aromatic flavour of anise. The
starry fruits are used in medicine and as a condiment. Propagated by
seed, which is produced in abundance by the plants in Queensland.
Indian Cress or Xasturtion. (See “ Tropceolum.”)
Indian Rubber, (See “Licus elastica, Blume.”)
Indian Satinwood. (See u Chloroxylon sicietenia, Linn.’’)
Indian Tulip Tree. (See “ Thespesia populnea , Corr.”)
Indigo. (See u Lndigofera tinctoria , Linn.”)
INDIGOEERA, Linn. —Order Lequminos^:— -Tribe Galeyece.
I. tinctoria, Linn. The Common Indigo-plant. This is a
spreading bush of 2 or 3 ft. in height, common in the warmest parts of
Asia. Branches pubescent, leaves pinnate; leaflets oblong, cuueate at


the base ; racemes of flowers shorter than the leaves ; flowers small, of
a dull colour; pod straight, cylindrical, many-seeded. When planted
on rich soil this plant does well in Queensland ; indeed, in some parts
it has strayed from cultivation and become naturalised. Besides pro-
ducing a valuable dye, indigo has some reputation as a medicine. The
Hindus prescribe it in whooping-cough and affections of the lungs and
kidneys. Indigo is applied to the bites and stings of venomous insects
and reptiles to relieve the pain; also to burns and scalds. Propagated
by seed.
IPOMCEA, Linn. —Order Convolvhlace^! —Tribe Convolvulece.
I. Batatas, Loir. {Batatas edulis, Choisy.) Sweet Potato. The
well-known trailing plant, with more or less lobed leaves, flowers
usually of a pale colour. The rootstock is one of the most valuable pro-
ducts grown in Queensland. The vine makes excellent fodder for
stock, and the tubers are a most nutritious food both for man and
beast. Propagated by cuttings of the vine.
I. heueeacea, Jacg. {I. Nil , Both.; Pharbitis Nil and P.
hederacea, Chois.) A lobe-leaved Morning Glory; is often seen in
our gardens. The seeds of this twining annual, called in India “Kala-
danah,” are a safe and effectual cathartic, according to most writers
on Indian plants. The plant is also found indigenous in Northern
Queensland. Propagated by seed.
Jack Pettit. (See “ Arfocarpus integrifolia , Linn.”)
Jamaica or Hondueas Cedae. (See u Cedrela odorata, Linn.”)
Janipha Manihot, Kunth. (See “ Manihot utilissima, Pohl.”)
Japan Wax Plant. (See “ Ithus succedanea, Linn,”)
Jasmine, Caeolina. (See “ Qelsemium nitidum, Mich.”)
JATEOBHIZA, Miers. —Order Menispeemaceas —Tribe Tinosporece.
J. palmata , Miers. {Cocculus palmatus.) Kalumb or Calumba.
This is a palmate-leaved climber of Mozambique, which sends up its
annual stems like the Hop-plant, which die back to the rootstock
again. Flower minute, in straggling panicles. The drug, which
consists of round or oval transverse slices of the root, is considered
stimulating', and employed in cases of indigestion dependent upon
languor and want of tone in the stomach, and attended by nausea
and flatulence. It has likewise the effect of alleviating vomiting.
Propagated by divisions of the root.
JATEOPHA, Linn. —Order EitphoebiacEjU —Tribe Crotonice.
J. Cuecas, Linn. Angular-leaved Physic-nut. This is a large
shrub or small tree, with broadly cordate, 5-angled, smooth leaves ;
the flowers are usually in terminal panicles, the male at the ends of
the ramification, the female ones in their divisions ; fruit globular,
ato 1 in. diameter, 3-seeded. The seeds are collected in the Philippine


Inlands for the purpose of expressing the oil. It is said the Chinese
form a varnish by boiling the oil with oxide of iron. A number of
cases of poisoning have occurred from persons eating the seeds entire,
but it is said that if the embryo is wholly removed, four or five of the
seeds may be used as a purgative without producing either vomiting or
griping. Propagated by seed.
Jatropiia. (See “ Aleurites and/ Manihot.")
Jatropiia Manihot, Linn. (See “Manihot utilissima, Pohl.”)
Jatropha moluccana, Linn. (See 11 Aleurites moluccana, Willd.”)
Job’s Tears. (See “ Goix lachrjma, Linn.”)
Jonesia Asoca, Roxb. (See “Samoa indica , Miq.”)
JUGLANS, Linn. —Order Juglande^:
J. nigra, TAnn. Black Walnut. This is a tall-growing erect
tree of the Western States of North America It has more numerous
toothed leaflets than the Common Walnut, and a more persistent
bark; nut spherical, corrugated, edible, but not equal to the Common
Walnut; wood purplish-brown, turning dark with age, strong, tough,
not liable to warp or split, and said not to be attacked by insects ;
seed contain more oil than other kinds. Propagated by seed, which
the tree at Bowen Park bears in abundance.
Juglans regia, Linn. The European Walnut; fruits well on
the Darling Downs, Propagated by seed.
Jujube. (See “ Zizyphus jujuba, Lam.”)
Justicia Adhatoda, Linn. (See “Adhatoda Vasica, Nees.”)
Jute. (See “ Gorchorus.")
Kai Apple. (See “Aheria cajfra, Hook.”)
Kala-danah. (See “ Lpomcea Jiederacea, Jacq.”)
Kalumb Hoot. (See “Jateorhiza palmata, Miers.”)
Kamala Tree. (See “Mallotm philippinensis, Muell. Arg.”)
Kl CELIA, DC. — Order Bignoniace.e.—Tribe Crescentiece.
K. pinnata, DC. Sacred tree of Nubia. A large pinnate-leaved
tree of Abyssinia. The flower-panicles very long, hanging down from
the branches; flowers large, lobed, of a dull-purple colour; fruit
oblong, over 1 ft. long and 4 or 5 in. thick, filled inside with a hard
fleshy pulp, and traversed by woody fibres; seeds roundish. The
fruits, cut in half and slightly roasted, are employed as an outward
application in rheumatic and other complaints. Propagated by seed.
KYDIA, Roxh. —Order Malyace.®.—Tribe Malvece.
K. caltcina, Roxb. A small tree with palmately nerved entire
■or lobed leaves, covered with a close short stellate tomentum; flowers


in panicles, pale-yellow; bracteoles 4, persistent and enlarging under
the fruit. The hark is mucilaginous, and used in parts ot India to
clarify sugar. A strong fibre is also prepared from it. Propagated
by seed or cuttings.
LACTUCA, Linn. —Order CoMPOSiTiE —Tribe Cichoriacece.
L. saliva, Linn. The Garden Lettuce. Grown to perfection
in Queensland. Propagated by seed.
LANDOLPHIA, Be*uv Order Apocynace^— Tribe Carisseat.
L. elohida, Benth. (L. comorensis , Benth. ; Vahea comorensis ;
Boi. • Willuqhbeia cor data, Klotz.) A large woody climber of Tropical
Africa, bearing tendrils and ovate-oblong obtuse or acute leaves with
prominent lateral nerves ; flowers in pedunculate cymes, white and
fragrant; corolla-tube slender, about 1 in. long, hairy inside; segments
of limb linear-oblong. The fruit has a sweet acidulous pulp. In some
districts it is said that the natives, in collecting the juice, make a cut
into the bark and collect the juice upon their arm, going from stem to
stem until the arm is covered, when, beginning at the elbow, they roll
the caoutchouc back towards the hand till it comes off in the form ot a
ring. Should be planted in Tropical Queensland, the winter cold ot
the southern parts of the colony being too great for it. Propagated
by seed or cuttings.
LAUEUS, Linn. —Order Laueinejc— Tribe Litseacea.
L. nobilts, Linn. The Sweet Bay, or the "Warrior s Laurel of the
ancients. This is a small tree of Asia Minor. Its leaves are lanceo-
late, with an agreeable aromatic slightly bitter taste; its flowers
yellowish, and its fruit succulent and about the size of a small cherry.
The leaves are in much request for flavouring by cooks, and for this
purpose they have an advantage over many others, being perfectly sate.
They are also placed in boxes of dried figs to prevent the fruit from
being destroyed by grubs ; but this seems useless, as one often finds
the fruit so packed destroyed. From the fruit is expressed a butter-
like substance known as “ oil of bays,” which has been used as an
external stimulant. This tree thrives well in the cooler parts ox
Queensland, as on the Darling Downs, but makes a very poor growth
near Brisbane. Propagated by layers or seed.
L. campiioba and L. cinnamomum. (See “Cinnamomum. I
LAVANDULA, Linn. —Order Labiate— Tribe Ocimoidece.
L vera, JDC. (A. Sqnca, Linn.; L. angustifolia , M tench,
L. officinalis, Vill.) The Common Lavender, from which oil of
lavender is obtained by distillation, and also spirit of lavender, which
is prepared by distilling lavender flowers with rectified spmt, a
sufficient quantity of water being added to prevent empyreuma.


® prcA > DO. (the L. Spica (B.) of Linn.; L. latijhlia, Yill.)
Ihe French Lavender. This yields the oil of spike used by painters
on jjorcelain, and in the preparation of varnishes for artists.
L. S'keciias, Linn. The Topped Lavender. A South Europe
and North African undershrub. This has long been employed by the
A.rabs as a medicinal plant. It is said to be the best known plant for
binding loose sand. It is also one of the best bee plants; a writer
estimates that annually, from an acre of this, 1 ton of the finest
flavoured honey can be obtained.
All these Lavenders thrive better in the cooler parts of Queens-
land, and are propagated by seed or cuttings.
LAWSONIA, Linn. —Order Lttheaeie.®— Tribe Lythrece.
L. alba, Lam. (Z. spinosa, Linn. ;L. inermis, Roxb.) The
Henna shrub, also called Egyptian Privet. This forms a shrub of
5 to 10 ft., with opposite ovate-lanceolate leaves about 1 in. long;
flowers small, in terminal panicles ; fruit the size of peppercorns,
4-grooved. The whole plant of a light colour. The decoction of
the leaves is of a deep-orange colour. The use of Henna for dyeing
the hands and feet is common among Mahometans in Asia and Africa.
An ointment made from the leaves is spoken of as having valuable
healing properties, and a decoction of them is used as an astringent
gargle. When old the plants become more thorny, whence Linnaeus’
name of “L. spinosa .” It may be utilised in hedge-making. Propa-
gated by seed or cuttings.
Leek. (See “ Allium porrum, Linn.”)
Leng, Ling, or Links of China. (See “Trapa hicornis, Linn, f.”)
LENS, Oreu. and Qodr. —Order Leguminosje —Tribe Videos.
L. esculenta, Moench. (Ervum Lens, Linn.) The Lentil.
This plant is grown for fodder by a few farmers. Propagated by seed,
and should have a calcareous soil.
Lentil. (See “Lens.”)
LEPLDITTM, Linn. —Order Ceucifee.® —Tribe Lepidineoe.
L. sativum, Linn. The Garden Cress. Often grown in private
gardens, but seldom for sale. Propagated by seed.
E JL leonbaek. (See “ Eucalyptus Staiyeriana ,
Lettuce. (See “ Lactuca .”)
Linseed. (See “ Linum .”)
LINUM, Linn. —Order Line.®,
L. usitatissimum, Linn. Elax or Linseed. Crops well, but is
little cultivated. Propagated by seed.


Litchi. (See “Nephelium LiicJii, Camb.”)
Logwood. (See “Hcematoxylon campeachianum, Linn.”)
Loquat. (See “Fhotinia japonica, Lindl.”)
Longan. (See “Euphoria Longana, Lam.”)
Lucerne. (See “ Medicago sativa, Linn. )
LIJPPA, Cav. —Order CucURBiTACEiE —Tribe Cucumerinem
L. .asGTPTiACA, hlill., and L. acutangula, Foxh., are olten grown
in our gardens, but the fruits are seldom utilised. AV hen very young
they are used in India as a vegetable, but more often the vascular
network of the ripe or nearly ripe fruit is used as a bath-brush or
sponge, also for common scrubbing-brushes, and numerous other
useful purposes. Samples of these vegetable sponges may be seen in
all chemists’ shops. Propagated by seed.
LYCIUM, Linn. —Order Solanace^:— Tribe Atropece.
L. aerum, Linn. The Caffre-thorn. This has not been found to
succeed as a hedge except in the cooler parts of the colony. Propa-
gated by seed.
LYCOPEESICTJM, Mill— Order Solanaceje.
L. esculentum, Mill. The Tomato. Largely grown for the
market, and in great variety. A small variety is naturalised in the
scrubs, and springs up in plenty at every clearing. Propagated by
seed.
MACADAMIA, F. v. M. —Order Proteace^: —Tribe Qrevilleea.
M. ternifolia, F. v. M. (Ilelicia ternifolia, P. v. M.) Queens-
land Nut. A tall tree of South Queensland and New South Wales,
The leaves usually in threes, about 4 to 0 in. long, and on young trees
bordered by sharp teeth, entire on old trees; flowers white, in Jong
racemes; fruit globose, often over 1 in. diameter, containing 1
smooth globose or 2 half-round nuts. Besides the nuts, which are
fine-flavoured, the wood of this tree is valuable for cabinet-work, being
close in the grain and very prettily marked. The tree readily adapts
itself to a variety of soils, and therefore should be planted for timber.
Propagated by seed.
MACLUEA, Nutt.— Order Urticace^— Tribe Morea.
M. aurantiaca, Nutt. Osage Orange or Bow-wood. Is
utilised as a hedge plant, and thrives remarkably well. Propagated
by seed.
Mahogany. (See “Swietenia Mahagoni, Linn.”)
Maize or Corn. (See “Zea Mags, Linn.”)


MALLOTUS, Lour. —Order Euphorbiaceje —Tribe Crotonece.
M. philibpinensis, Muell. Arg. (Roltlera tinctoria , Eoxb.) The
Kamala-tree. A tree of medium size, with, when old, a rugged bark ;
the leaves on long stalks, various as to form, 3 to 6 in. long, with 3
prominent nerves, oval, and pale-coloured on the under side; the
fruit-capsules 3-lobed, about i to i in. diameter, covered with a red
mealy substance which is the kamala used for obtaining an orange-
coloured dye, and as an anthelmintic remedy. The Hindu silk-dyers
obtain the dye by boiling the kamala with carbonate of soda. Like
lycopodium, kamala is inflammable, and resists admixture with water.
The tree is very plentiful in Queensland. Propagated by seed.
MANGIFERA, Linn. —Order Anacardiace^:— Tribe Anacardieoe.
M. indica, Linn. Mango. An evergreen Indian tree of medium
height. The leaves are harsh, alternate, lanceolate, often 1 ft. long
when fully grown, but often delicately tinted when young;
flowers in terminal panicles; drupe very various in shape and size,
also in flavour. The mango is considered the most delicious fruit of
India, and is of a more or less kidney form and yellowish colour, and
very wholesome. They may be used when unripe for pickling. The
kernels of the seeds are said to contain much nourishment, and may
be used boiled for food. Unripe mangoes, peeled and cut from the
stones and dried in the sun, form the well-known amchur or ambok,
so largely used in India as an article of diet. Several excellent
varieties are cultivated in the colony. Propagated by seed, upon
which the better sorts are often grafted.
Mango. (See “Mangifera indica, Linn.”)
MANIHOT, Adans. —Order Euphorbiaceas— Tribe Crotonece.
M. Glaziont, Muell. Arg. —The Ceara Rubber-tree, This is
said to form a good-sized tree in its native country, and to be found
on rocky granite soil. The root is thick and tuber-like, somewhat like
Tapioca-plant; leaves on longish footstalks, 3-lobed ; fruit hard. One
of the most valuable of rubbers on account of its thriving on dry poor
soil. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
M. utiltssima, Fold. (Jatropha Manihot, Linn.; Janipha
Manihot , Kunth.) The Bitter Cassava, Mandioc-plant, or Tapioca-
plant of Tropical South America. A woody shrub of Gor 8 ft. high,
with spreading branches ; leaves stalked, palmate, divided nearly to
the base into about 5 lanceolate attenuate lobes, glaucous on the under
side, with often coloured midribs; panicles axillary or terminal;
flowers small, reddish, 5-parted ; capsule ovate, triangular, tre-coccous;
seeds elliptical, blackish. The tubers attain a length ot 2 or 3 ft.
without the central fibres of the sweet cassava, and can be converted
into bread or cakes, the volatile poison of the milky sap being destroyed
through pressing of the grated root in the first instance, and the


remaining acridity is expelled by the heating process. The starch
heated in a moist state furnishes the tapioca. Has been successfully
cultivated in Queensland, and good tapioca and cassava bread made.
Propagated by seed or strong cuttings of the woody stems.
M. Aipi, Pohl. Sweet Cassava is a somewhat similar plant. The
roots, however, are reddish and harmless, so can be used without the
above preparation ; in fact, they only require the boiling of other
culinary esculents. Ligneous tough fibres are found through the
whole axis of the tubers; this is wanting in the tubers of Bitter
Cassava. Propagated by cuttings of the woody stems.
Maple. (See “Acer.”)
MAEANTA, Linn— Order Scitamineje— Tribe Marantea.
M. arundinacea, Linn. (JL indica, Tussac.) A Barbadoes
herbaceous plant of 2 or 3 ft. in height; leaves with long sheaths,
hairy, blade ovate-lanceolate; panicle terminal, with long sheathing
bracts at the ramifications ; corolla white, fruit globular. It is from
the tubers of this plant that the white arrowroot is obtained, but, not
being so productive as the purple, it is seldom grown in Queensland
for manufacture. These tubers were supposed to be powerfully
alexipharmic, and reputed to possess the property of counteracting the
effects of poisoned arrows, whence it is said the name of “ Arrowroot
was given. Propagated by division of the roots.
Marjoram. (See “ Origanum .”)
Marking Nut. (See “ Semecarpus A.nacardium, Linn.”)
MAEEIJBIIJM, Linn. —Order Lari at a:— Tribe Stachydex.
M. vulgare, Linn. The White Horehound, once a popular
remedy for asthmatic complaints, is a naturalised weed in Southern
Queensland. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Matai or Petsi. (See “Heleocharis tuherosa, E. and S.”)
MEDICAGO, Linn. —Order Leguminosa —Tribe Trifoliea.
M. sativa, Linn. The Lucerne. Largely cultivated for fodder.
Propagated by seed.
Medlar. (See “Pyrus germanica, B. and H.”)
MELALEUCA, Linn. —Order Mtrtacea —Tribe Leptospermead.
M. leucadendron, Linn. Broad-leaved Tea-tree or Paper-
barked Tea-tree. There are several varieties of this tree; some attain
to a large size, aud others have very broad leaves. They are mostly
found growing on wet land. The foliage abounds in essential oil,
similar if not identical with that known in commerce as “ Cajeput.”
Propagated by seed.


MELISSA, Linn. —Order Labiatje —Tribe Satureinere.
M. officinalis, Linn. The Balm-herb. This perennial herb may
now and again be seen in market gardens growing luxuriantly, but,
although a good bee plant, is not largely cultivated. Propagated by
seed or division.
Melon, Sweet or Rock. (See “ Oucumis .”)
Melon, Water. (See “ Citrullus .”)
MENTHA, Linn. —Order Labiate —Tribe Satureineco.
M. piperita, Linn. This perennial herb, from which is obtained by
distillation the well-know r n peppermint oil of commerce, grows well
and may often be seen in our gardens, but as yet no attempt has
been made at cultivating this and similar plants for distillation,
M. viridis , Linn, (the Spear-Mint) is grown with the other domestic
herbs by market gardeners, and at one time Mr. W. Hill had the
common Pennyroyal (M. Pulegium, Linn.) growing well at the
Botanic Gardens. This plant requires a damp soil. Propagated
by division.
M. satureioides, B. JBr. Prod.; Flora Ausfr. v. 84. (Micro-
tneria satureioides, Benth.) The Brisbane Pennyroyal. This is a very
common plant in Queensland; on hard stony spots it may often be
seen to form a dense turf. * This herb has long been used as a medicine
by bushmen. It yields by distillation a good-flavoured oil, which may
be found to possess medicinal properties. A small sample tried, yielded
about 7 oz. from 1 cwt. of the fresh plant. Propagated by seed or
division.
Mespilits germanica, Linn. (See “ Pyrus germanica , Hook.”)
Mimosa. (See “ Acacia."')
Mint. (See “ Mentha .”)
MOEINGA, Juss. — Order Moht]s t ge2E.
M. PTERTGOSPERMA, Qcertn. (Guilandina AToringa,Jj\r\n.; ILyper-
anthera Moringa , Yahl.) Horseradish-tree. A medium-sized tree,
with a corky thick bark; the leaves 2 to 3-pinnato; flowers white,
in loose panicles, of 5 nearly equal petals; pods long, 1 ft. or more ;
these are eaten as a vegetable and also pickled. The root has a strong
flavour of horseradish, and is used in medicine as a vesicant. A decoc-
tion of the rootbark is used as a fomentation to relieve spasm. The
seeds are rich in oil; they were formerly known as “ Ben-nuts,” from
which the oil of ben was extracted. Propagated by seed.
MORTIS, Linn. —Order XIRTiCACEiE —Tribe Morece.
All the species of Mulberry thrive in Queensland, and silkworm
culture has often been started, but little progress made, owing to the
high price of labour. Propagated by cuttings.


MONSTER A, Adans.— Order Aeoide® —Tribe Callece.
M. deltciosa, Leih. A short stout climbing plant of South
America, with very large perforated leaves; spatha of flower light-
buff, large; fruit cylindrical, very sweet when fully ripe, and by
some considered of delicious flavour. Requires a sheltered locality and
rich soil. Propagated by cuttings or seed.
Mulbeeev. (See “Morns' ’)
Mulbeeet, Papeb. (See “Broussonetia papyrifera, Vent.")
Mueeat Down. (See “ Typha angustifolia .”)
Mundae Pibee. (See “ Galotropis gigantea , R. Br.”)
MIJS A, Linn. —Order Sen amine.® —Tribe Musece.
M. sapientum, Linn, (the Tall Banana), of which there are
several varieties, and M. Cavendisiiii, Lamb, (the Dwarf Banana), are
largely and profitably grown for home consumption and export.
Propagation by offshoots.
MTRTCA, Linn. —Order Myetcace®.
M. ceeteeea, Linn. Wax Myrtle or Bayberry of North America.
A small shrub with lanceolate often serrated leaves; male flowers
in short catkins; female flowers on different shrubs from the male,
the flowers also smaller, and are succeeded by clusters or aggregations
of small globular fruits resembling berries, which at first are green
but finally become nearly white. They consist of a hard stone studded
on the outside with small black grains over which is a crust of dry
white wax. This gives to the fruit a granulated appearance. This
wax may be collected and used as beeswax. Propagated by suckers ;
only male plants are in Queensland.
MYRISTTCA, Linn. —Order Mtetstace®.
M. eeageans, Soutt. ( M. moschata, Thunb.; M. officinalis,
Linn.) The Nutmeg-tree belonging to the Indian Archipelago.
] weaves ovate, elliptical, acute at the base, acuminate at the apex, with
about 8 or 9 lateral nerves on each side ; peduncles above the axils,
the males few-flowered, female flowers solitary, pedicels nearly as long
as peduncle; bracteole under the flower broadly ovate, flowers nodding ;
fruit ovoid-globose,drooping; aril laciniated, red,aromatic, covering the
seed. This tree is said to begin to bear at about eight years of age,
and to be productive until sixty or more. The mace is the aril of the
nut, and prepared by only just sun-drying, but the nuts have to be
smoked by slow wood fires for some months before they are ready for
exporting. Propagated by seed.
MTROSPERMUM, Jacg.— Order Leguminos® —Tribe Sopborece.
M. Peeeie®, Klotz. Balsam of Peru. A tree of South America
with pinnate leaves; the leaflets ovate-lanceolate, 2 or 3 in. long, the
number various, the pellucid dots linear; flowers white in axillary


racemes, the stamens free or nearly so and falling off with the petals;
pod about 2 in. long (samaroid), containing seed at the apex, the
rest flattened and wing-like. From this tree is obtained the fragrant
hitter aromatic balsam, called Balsam of Peru, having stimulant, tonic,
expectorant properties, and at one time employed in chronic asthma,
&c. Propagated by seed.
Mtrtus Pimenta, Linn. (See “ Pimento, communis , Lindl.”)
Nastubtion. (See “ Tropceolum .”)
NASTURTIUM, B. Br. —Order Crucifer.® —Tribe Arahideas.
N. officinale, B. Br. The well-known Water Cress ; grown
by market gardeners for sale; but in many mountain streams of
Southern Queensland this excellent aquatic salad plant has become
naturalised. Propagated by division and seed.
Nectarine. (See “ Prunus .”)
NEPIIELIUM, Linn. —Order Sapindace®.
N. Litchi, Camb. The Litchi, Litschi, Lichi, Leechee, or Litji
is a Chinese fruit, often imported in a dry state. The tree is of medium
size, with pinnate leaves; the leaflets pale-coloured on the under side,
oblong or lanceolate in shape, and 2 or 3 in. long; flowers small, in
panicles; the fruit globose, 1 to 1| in. diameter, the thin brittle shell
reddish and rough with wart-like protuberances ; the part eaten is the
aril which surrounds the seed, which is white and nearly transparent and
very sweet when fully ripe ; seeds globose. The whole fruit is dried,
although only the sweet aril is eaten. This tree is largely cultivated
in India for its fruit. It thrives well in Queensland, even about Bris-
bane, but is better suited to the North. Propagated by seed, and
the better kinds by grafting upon the seedlings.
N. Longana, Camp. (See “ Buphoria''')
New Zealand Elax. (See “Phormium tenax, Eorst.”)
New Zealand Spinach. (See “Tetragonia expansn, Murray.”)
NICOTIANA, Linn. —Order Solanace® —Tribe Cestrinece.
N. Tabacum, Linn. The ordinary Tobacco-plant. Profitably
cultivated in many parts of Queensland, and a ready market found for
the leaf at the several manufactories. Propagated by seed.
Nispero. (See u Achras sapota, Linn.”)
Nutmeg. (See “Ifyristica fragrans, Houtt.”)
Nux-vomica. (See li Stryehnos nux-vomica, Linn.”)
NYCTANTIIES, Linn. —Order Oleace® —Tribe Jasminece.
N. arbor-tristis, Linn. Tree of Sadness. A small Indian tree,
the shoots 4-angular, leaves opposite on short stalks, ovate-acuminate;
flowers in terminal panicles, very fragrant, white Avith orange-coloured


eve and tube; they expand in the evening, and fall to the ground in the
early morning, when they are collected and used as a perfume or tor
obtaining a dye. Propagated by seed and cuttings.
Oak, English. (See “ Quercus .”)
Oat. (See “ Avena .”)
OLEA, Linn. —Order O leaped—Tribe Oleinea.
O. EHEOPiEA ,Linn. The European Olive. This is a well-known
small tree with opposite, lanceolate, usually stiff leaves, and axillary
racemes of small white flowers, which are succeeded by oval or round
drupes. As yet it has not been planted for profit in Queensland;
however, it might be planted with advantage in the cooler districts.
Propagated by seed; the superior by grafting on seedlings or by
truncheons.
Olive. (See “ Olea europcea , Linn.”)
Onion. (See “ Allium cepa, Linn.”)
ORIGANUM, Linn. —Order Labiate— Tribe Satureinea.
O Majorana, Linn, (the Knotted or Sweet Marjoram), and
O. vulgare, Linn, (the Common or Pot Marjoram), are grown with
other herbs by market gardeners. Propagated by division.
ORYZA, Linn. —Order Gramine^— Tribe Oryzea.
O. sattva, Linn. The Common Rice-plant. An annual or
perennial grass, with long rough leaves; panicles terminal, drooping
from the weight of corn, but erect at first; glumes awned or
awnless. Found indigenous in Northern Queensland, with dark gram,
and very long awns. Many varieties of rice have been introduced into
Queensland, and excellent crops have been obtained, both in the JNort
and South. Propagated by seed.
Osage Orange. (See “Madura”)
Otaheitean Apple. (See “ Spondias dulcis, Forst.”)
PACHIRA, Aubl— Order Malvaceje— Tribe Bombaoea.
A. alba, Walp. (Carolinea alba, Lodd.) Brazilian Silk Cotton
tree. A small branching deciduous tree, with unarmed stem ; bark
grey ; leaves on long footstalks, of 7 petiolulate, elliptical-lanceolate,
glabrous leaflets; peduncles stout; flowers large and showy; the
petals strap-like, of a cream colour on the inside, and glabrous, the
outside clothed with a dense felt of brown hairs; the filaments forked,
very numerous. This is spoken of as the most useful tree of New
Grenada; the inner bark furnishing the whole country with cordage,
which is both strong amd durable. The tree thrives well in Queensland.
Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Pagoda Tree. (See “ Plumeria acuminata , Ait.”)


PANDANUS, Linn. —Order PANDAyKiE,
P. utilts, Lory. A Madagascar tree, said to attain the height
of 60 ft. Its leaves are long, erect, with sharp red prickles on the
edges ; the fruit-heads are globular, about 1 ft. in diameter, borne on
long stalks ; each head will contain about 100 drupes of from 3 to
8 cells. The plant is cultivated at the Mauritius for the sake of its
leaves, from which material is obtained for making suuar-baus, &c
Propagated by seed.
Panicuif. (See “ Setaria
PAPAYEE, Linn. —Order Papayeeace2e.
P. somniferum, Linn. The Opium Poppy. Has only as yet
been grown in a few gardens. It, hoAvever, when given an opportunity,
thrives, and will likely sooner or later be cultivated for profit. Propa-
gated by seed.
Papaw Tree. (See “ Carica papaya, Linn.”)
Paper Mulberry. (See “Proussonetia papyrifera, Yent.”)
Papyrus. (See “Cyperus papyrus, Linn.”)
Paraguay Tea. (See “Ilex paraguayensis, St. Hil.”)
Para Ecjbbee. (See “ Hevea braziliensis, Muell. Arg.”)
Paritium elaxum. (See “ Hibiscus. ”)
PAEKINSONIA, Linn. — Order Leguminos^: —Tribe
JSuccesalpiniecß.
P. aculeata, Linn. This tall, thorny, leguminous shrub of
America, called in Jamaica “ Jerusalem Thorn,” and in the French
West Indian Islands “ Genet epineux,” grows strongly, and is utilised
in hedge-making. Propagated by seed.
Parsley, (See “ Carum Petroselinum, Benth.”)
Parsnip. (See “ Peucedanum .”)
PASSIFLOEA, Linn. —Order Passiflore.®.
P. edulis, Sims (the Small Passion-fruit), P. quadeangulaeis,
Linn, (the Granadilla), and the larger form of this species, P. macro-
CAEPA, Masters, are all cultivated for their fruits. This latter has
attained the weight of 8 lbs.
P. laueifolia, Linn. ( P. tinifolia, Jussieu.) The Water
Lemon of the West Indies. This plant is grown in some gardens,
but requires the warmth of the tropics to fruit well. Propagated by
seed and cuttings.


Passion Pruit. (See “ Passijiora .”)
Pastinaca, (See “ Peucedanum .”)
Patchouli. (See “Pogostemon Patchouli.")
Pea, Common Garden. (See “Pimm sativum, Linn.”)
Peach. (See “ Prunus .”)
Pea Nut. (See “Arachis hypogcea , Linn.”)
Pear, Alligator. (See “Persea gratissima, Gsertn.”)
Pear, Common. (See “Pyrns communis , Linn.”)
Peepul. (See “Ficus religiosa, Linn.”)
PENNISETUM, Pers. —Order Gramine^} —Tribe Paniacece ,
P. thtphoideum, Rich. (The Penicillaria spicata of Willdenow.)
Has been frequently introduced as a fodder-plant, but it is not equal
to others, so is but little grown. Propagated by seed.
PENTZIA, Thunb. —Order COiMPOSiTiE —Tribe Anthemidece.
P. yiroata, Less. South African Fodder-bush, This is a much-
branched, rigid little bush, more or less hoary, spreading, and of
about lor 2 feet high; the flower-heads are yellow, about i-in.
diameter. It has been introduced as a sheep fodder, but, like most
South African plants, does not take kindly to the Queensland climate.
Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Pepper, Black. (See “Piper nigrum , Linn.”)
PERESKIA, Mill— Order Cacte^: —Tribe Opuntiece.
P. aculeata, Mill. The Barbadoes Gooseberry ; often mixed
with other plants to form live fences. Produces flowers in abundance,
and has been highly praised as a bee plant. P. Bleo ps equally
valuable for the same purpose. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
PERSEA, Ocertn— Order Laurine^i —Tribe Perseacece.
P. gratissima, Gcevtn. (Laurus Persea, Linn.) The Alligator
or Avocado Pear, also called Vegetable Marrow and Midshipman’s
Butter. Tree of medium size, found in Brazil, Mexico, and Peru.
The branches and inflorescence are pubescent; the leaves alternate,
elliptical-oblong, 4to 7 in. long, of a pale colour ; fruit pear-shaped,
with a smooth brownish-green or purplish skin, the_ pulp firm and
considered delicious by some. Will only thrive in the tropics.
Propagated by seed.
Persica. (See “Prunus.")
Peruvian Bark. (See “Cinchona.")
Peruvian Pepper Tree. (See “Schinus molle, Linn.”)


PEIJCEDANTJM, Linn.— Order Umbellieer*:— Tribe Peucedanea.
P. grayeolens, Benth. (Anethum yraveolens, Linn.) The Dill
a plant much resembling the Fennel, may be met with now and again
in garden culture, the fruits of which were at one time much used in
domestic medicine.
P. sativum, Benth. (.Pastinaca sativa, Linn.) The Parsnip
(drown hy market-gardeners as a culinary vegetable, but not by farmers
for fodder. It is said to be excellent fodder for dairy cows, increasing
the supply of milk, and as the plant gives a good crop in Queensland
it ought to be grown by dairymen. Propagated by seed.
PHALARIS, Linn.— Order Gr am ihe*:— 'Tribe Phalarideee.
**• dana.rien sis, Linn. The Canary-grass. Yields good crops on
the Downs, and forms a good fodder on the coast lands.
Pharbitis. (See “IpomceaP)
PHASEOLUS, Linn. —Order Leguminos*:— Tribe Phaseoleae,
P. coccineu B, Kniphof ( P. multifiorus. Willd.), the well-known
Scarlet Runner, and P. vulgaris, Linn. (Haricot or French Bean)
are largely grown for culinary purposes. Propagated by seed.
PHOENIX, Linn. —Order Palm*:—Tribe Phoenicece.
.P-,IT)A l T)A ? T f LI f E^ A \ nn - The Date Palm. This tree is said to
attain the height of bO ft., and to live and bear its fruit for over 200
years. Ihe graceful pinnate foliage causes it always to be a favourite
in the garden. In Queensland it is planted for its fruit, and is likely
to prove one of the most profitable to grow. P. sylvestris, Roxß,
also thrives well, and may at some future date be cultivated for both
sugar and fibre. Propagated by seed.
PHORMIUM, Forst. —Order Liliace*:—Tribe Hemerocallece.
P. teya x, Forst. The New Zealand Flax. This swamp plant has
long sword-shaped leaves, which shortly clasp the stem at the base
The flower stern attains a height of 10 to 14 ft., bearing brownish
flowers, rich in honey. Although a most useful plant in its own and
other cool climates, it is not likely to be much planted in Queensland •
for as a rule New Zealand plants do but poorly here, and the present
is no exception. Propagated by seed and division.
PHOTINIA, Linn. —Order Rosace*:— Tribe Pomece.
P. japonica (Eriobotrta), Lindl. (Cratceyus Bibas, Lour.)
The Loquat. This tree is said to attain a large size in its native
country, Japan; the leaves are large, oblong, rugose, and with tho
young shoots often covered by a woolly tomentum. The oval fruit is


used in a raw or cooked state, and when the trees are attended to the
fruit is large and juicy, but when neglected, as so many are in Queens-
land, it is worthless. Propagated by seed, or the best varieties by
grafting on seedling plants.
pjjYLLANTIIUS, Linn. —Order Euphorbiacea: —Tribe Phyllantlecß.
P. msTiciiA, Jl Luell, Arg. ( Cicca disticha , Linn.) Country
Gooseberry of India. A small tree with long slender branchlets,
resembling pinnate leaves, oval; stipules minute ; flowers in axils of
the leaves; fruit round, about the size of a gooseberry, green, and
About 5-furrowed. In India they are used in various ways. The
Europeans make of them pickles and preserves. The fruit .is very
acid. The seeds are said to be cathartic, and a decoction of the leaves
sudorific and diaphoretic. Propagated by sped.
P, Emblica, Linn. {Emblica officinalis, Gsertn.) Another useful
Indian tree; also growing in Queensland gardens, but the fruit is
not used. In India a sherbet of the fruit, sweetened with sugar or
honey, is a favourite cooling drink for sick people; it is said to be
diuretic. Propagated by seed.
PHYSALIS, Linn.— Order Solanaceas.
P. peruviana, Linn. Well known as the Cape Gooseberry.
Springs up at almost every clearing, and from these places rather than
from cultivated plants the fruit is gathered for sale. Propagated by
seed.
Physic Nut. (See “Latropha curcas, Linn.”)
PIMENTA, Lindl. —Order My rtacea:— Tribe Myrtecs.
P. communis, Lindl. {P. vulgaris, . and A. ; ALyrtus Pimenta,
Linn.; Eugenia Pimenta, DC.) The Allspice-tree or Jamaica Pepper.
A tree'; the branchlets compressed, somewhat 4-angled ; leaves oblong
or oblong-lanceolate ; flowers in cymes, calyx 4-lobed, petals 4 or 5 ;
fruit globose. For commerce the fruit is gathered when nearly ripe,
as it is found at that period to contain the best essential oil. Will
thrive in Northern Queensland. Propagated by seed.
Pine Apple. (See “ Ananas sativa, Mill.) #
Pionandra Betacea, HooJc. (See “ Cyphomandra .”)
PIPEE, Linn: —Order Piperacks.
P. nigrum, Linn. Black Pepper. A climbing plant of the
Malabar forests, somewhat resembling Ivy. Leaves somewhat cordate,
pale on the under side, 7to 9-nerved ; flowers in spikes shorter than
the leaves; berries red when ripe. “ Black pepper” consists of the
dried unripe berries ; “ white pepper” is the ripe fruit deprived of its
rind by macerating. This useful plant thrives well in Queensland.
Propagated by seed or cuttings.


PISUM, Linn. —Order Legumtnos.® —Tribe Viciece.
P. sativum, Linn, The Common Pea. One of the most common
culinary vegetables of Queensland. Propagated by seed.
PPIHECOLOBIUM, Mart. —Order Leguminos.e— Tribe Ingece.
I. dulcp, Health. {lnga dulcis , Willd.; Mimosa dulcis, Koxb.) A
small tree with straggling thorny branches; the leaves consist of
Z pinnae each with 2 leaflets; flowers in globular heads, very pale
nearly white; pods twisted and swollen over the seeds ; seeds en-
closed in a white pellucid aril, which is edible but far from being
agreeable. This plant may be utilised in hedge-making. Propagated
Pita Fibre. (See “Agave americana, Linn.”)
Plum. (See “ Prun'us .”)
PLUMERIA, Linn. — Order Apocynacea;— Tribe Plumeriea.
P. acuminata, Ait. (P. acutifolia, Poir.; P. obtusifolia, Lour.;
Flos convolutus , Rumph.) The Franchipanier or Pagoda tree. A small
tree with thick obtuse branches, leafy at the ends; leaves oblong
acute at both ends; flower white, very showy and fragrant; follicles
cylindne, about 5 in. long. The trivial name is said to be from
the french, Franchipane,” coagulated milk, alluding to the milky
sap._ I lowers useful to the perfumer. Propagated by seeds or
cuttings. J
POGOSTEMON, L)esf.— Order Labiate —Tribe Satureinece.
P. Patchouli, Pellet. The Patchouly or Pucha-pat. An under-
shrub of 2 or 3 feet, pubescent; leaves stalked, rhomboid-ovate,
crenate; flowers in terminal and axillary spikes, white with red
stamens, the calyx hairy as well as the filaments The volatile oil is
obtained bv distillation.- The “ Sachets de Patchouli ” consist of the
herb coarsely powdered, mixed with cotton-root and folded in paper.
These are placed in drawers to drive away insects. Propagated by
seed or cuttings. J
POLYGALA, Linn. —Order Polygale.®.
• a SENEQA ’. Linn. The Senega or Snake Root. This plant is found
in North Carolina and Kentucky in dry rocky woods. The roots are
thick and woody, stems about G in. high, the base clothed with small,
oval, scale-like leaves ; the other leaves 1 or 2 in long and about
i-in. wide; spikes of flowers dense, about 1 or 2 in. long; flowers
freenish-white. The roots are supposed to possess medicinal virtues,
ropagated by seed or cuttings.
Pomegranate. (See “Punica granatum, Linn.”)
Poplar-leaved Fig. (See “Ficus religiosa, Linn.”)
Prickly Poppv. (See “ Argemone.")


PEOSOPIS, Linn. —Order Leguminosje— Tribe Adenanthereee.
P julteloea, DC., and others of this genus, are growing in our
gardens, having been introduced as fodders; but while we can grow so
many plants of superior merit, they are not likely to be used, iropa-
gated by seed.
PSUDIUM, Linn. —Order Myetaceas— Tribe Myrleai.
P. guava, It a deli. The Large A pple or Pear Guava thrives so
well that in several localities it has become naturalised. P. Gattle-
Yanum, Saline (the Purple or Strawberry Guava), also bears prolihcally,
and there are several other varieties of this fruit grown in Queensland.
All make excellent preserves. Propagated by seed.
Pudding-pipe Teee. (See “Cassiafistula, Linn.”)
Pulque. (See “Agave americana, Linn.”)
PTJNICA, Linn— Order Lythearie.e.
P. oeanatum, Linn. Pomegranate. JHeilum punicum; Finimon of
the Hebrews. A tall shrub or small tree, with opposite oblong-lanceo-
late leaves; the flowers large, nearly stalkless, scarlet; fruit globose,
crowned by the thick calyx lobes ; seed covered with a pellucid pulp,
of an agreeable acid flavour. The rind of the fruit is a strong astrin-
gent, and was at one time employed in dyeing; it was also used by
the Romans in tanning leather and in forming gargles Ihe young
plants are cut down and sent from Algeria to England for making
into walking-sticks. The plant is sometimes utilised m forming live
fences. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
PEUNUS, Linn. —Order Rosacea— Tribe Fruneec.
P. amygdalus, Hook. (The Amygdahos communis of Linnseus.y
The Almond ; crops well on the Downs.
P. ceeasifkea, FhrJiart. (The F. myrohalanus of Desf.) The
Cherry-Plum. In favourable seasons this tree will bear a few fruit in
the Brisbane district, but on the Darling Downs it crops as well as in
the southern colonies. Propagated by seed, or root-cuttings upon
which approved kinds are worked by budding or grafting.
P. Peesica, Hook, (the Amygdalus Fersica of Linnaeus, Ihe Peach
and Nectarine), P. dombstcca, Linn, (the Plum), P Ceeasus, Linn.
(the Cherry), and P. Aemeniaca, Linn, (the Apricot), fruit well on
the Downs, and many varieties succeed well on the coast lands,,
especially some varieties of American plums and China peaches. Pro-
pagated by seed, or root-cuttings upon which are budded or grafted
the approved kinds.
Pumpkin. (See “Cwurbtta.")


PTRUS, Linn. —Order Rosaceje —Tribe JPomece.
P. Maltjs, Linn, (the Apple), P. communis, Linn, (the Pear),
P. Ctdonia, Linn, (the Quince), and P. germanica, Hook, (the
Medlar), all thrive well on the Downs, and a few kinds are found to
fruit fairly on the eoast lands. Propagated by seed, or cuttings of the
roots upon which the better varieties are grafted.
Queensland Cotton Tree. (See “ Hibiscus liliaceus, Linn.”)
Queensland Hemp. (See “Sida rhombifolia , Linn.”)
Queensland Nut. (See “ Macadamia ternifolia, P. v. M.”)
QHEECHS, Linn. —Order Cupuliferje— Tribe Quercinece.
Q. pedunculata, Willd. The English Oak. Thrives and fruits
well in the Brisbane district, and all parts of Southern Queensland.
Hie plant exhibited in the collection is one raised from acorns ripened in
Brisbane. Many other oaks are doing well in the colony, and amongst
them Q. suber , Linn, (the Cork Oak). Propagated by seed.
Quince. (See “Pyrus Cydonia, Linn.”)
Eamee. (See “ Boehmeria nivea , H. and Arm”)
EAPHANUS, Linn. —Order Crucifers —Tribe Eaphanece.
E. satiyus, Linn. The Eadish. Very plentiful.
Easprerrt, (See “ Eubus Idceus, Linn.”)
Eed Cedar. (See “ Cedrela Toona, Eoxb.”)
Eeeana luxurians, Puri. (See “Euchlcena:')
Eeedmace. (See u Typha anqustifolia .”)
Eheea. (See “ Boehmeria nivea, H. and Arm”)
EHEIJM, Linn. —Order Poltgonacea: —Tribe Eumiceas.
E. Ehaponticum, Linn. The Garden Ehubarb. Grown to
perfection in Queensland, the stalks being very tender and juicy.
Propagated by seed.
EHINACANTHUS, Nees. —Order Acanthacea: —Tribe Justiciece.
E. communis, Nees. (Justicia nasuta, Linn.) The Naga-mulli
or Jasmine of the Cobra-di-capello of India; so called, Eoxburgh
says, on account of the roots being used for the bite of poisonous
snakes. This shrub is common in our gardens, where it is a favourite
for its pretty white flowers and general neat appearance. It is
generally used in India as a remedy for ringworm ; but latterly, Dr.
Dymock says, under the name of “ Tong-pang-chong,” it has found
considerable favour in Europe as a remedy for chronic eczema and
some other skin affections of a similar character, an extract of the
plant being considered the best preparation. Propagated by seed or
cuttings.


EHUS, Linn. —Order Anacaediaceje —Tribe Anacardiea.
R. SEMTALATA, Murray. ( B. luc/ciamela , Eoxb.; B. javanvca,
Linn.) A China, Japan, and East Indian tree of moderate size, ihe
bark rough, with vertical furrows; leaves pinnate, the petiole
usually winged above ; leaflets 4 to 6 pairs, sessile, toothed, pubescent
beneath; panicle long as leaves ; drupe i-in. diameter, orbicular, com-
pressed, red, shining, acid. This tree produces a kind of nutgalls.
The wood is tough and durable. Propagated by seed or suckers.
E. succedanea, Linn. ( B. acuminata, DC.) Japan Wax-tree.
An East Indian deciduous small tree with a thin bark ; leaves pinnate,
of 3 to 6 pairs of oblong-elliptic or ovate-lanceolate leaflets, with
tail-like apex ; flowers in slender panicles ; drupes i-in. diameter,
gibbous, stone compressed. The crushed drupes, steamed and pressed,
furnish about 15 per cent, of wax, which consists mainly of palmatm
and palmitic acid. Propagated by seed.
EHODOMYETUS, DC.—Order Myetaceje— Tribe Myrtecs.
This is a moderate-sized Tropical Queensland tree, with large, oyal-
oblong, thin-textured leaves 6 to 10 inches long, with prominent veins ;
flowers’ rather large, about 3 together. The fruit is about 1 in. long,
juicy, and useful for jara-makiug. The wood is of a light-grey colour,
hard and tough. Propagated by seed.
EIBES, Linn. — Order Saxifeageje— Tribe Bibesiea;.
E. geossularia, Linn, (the Gooseberry), E. nigrum, Linn.
(Black Currant), and E. eubeum, Linn, (the Eed Currant), will all
succeed on the Downs, but not on the coast lands. Propagated by
cuttings.
Eice. (See “Oryza saliva , Linn.”)
Eice Paper Plant. (See “Batsia papyrifera , Dene.”)
EICINUS, Linn.— Order Euphoebiace^:— Tribe Crotonea).
E. communis, Linn. The Castor Oil plant has become naturalised
in many parts of Queensland; and large quantities of seed might be
collected from wild plants ; amongst these may be seen many varieties
differing in colour of foliage and size of fruit. Propagated by seed.
Rose Apple. (See “Eugenia Jambos, Linn.”)
Eosella. (See “Hibiscus sabdariffia , Linn.”)
Rosemary. (See “Bosmarinus officinalis , Linn.”)
ROSMARINUS, Linn— Order Labiate— Tribe Monardece.
E. officinalis, Linn. The Rosemary. This forms a pretty
edging for garden walks in the cooler parts of the colony, and may
at some future time be grown for its essential oil, which is used in
perfumery. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Eottleea tinctoeia, Boxb. (See “ Mallotus .”)


ETJBIA, Linn. —Order Eustaces—Tribe Qalieoe.
E. cordifolta, Linn. {lt. Mungista, Eoxb. ; It. javana, DC. ;
It. alata, Wall.; It. secimda, Moore Cat.) A climbing perennial with
leaves in whorls of 4, ovgle-cordate, acute, 8 to 7-nerved; the whole
plant very rough ; flowers in terminal cymes, white, minute. This plant
in India produces a kind of madder. It. tinctoria, Linn., the Common
Madder, was grown by Mr. W. Hill some years ago in the Brisbane
Botanic G-ardens, but it did not thrive so well as It. cordifolia is
present doing at Bowen Park. Propagated by seed and cuttings.
ETJBUS, Linn.— Order Rosacea —Tribe Bnhece.
E. Linn. The Easpberry fruits on the Downs, but has
not been a success on the coast lands ; but if hybridised with our
native species {lt. rosafolias , Sm.), a hardy fruitful kind might pro-
bably be obtained ; the wild one fruits well but is wanting in flavour.
A few American Blackberries bear abundance of rich juicy fruit
around Brisbane; one of the most prolific is that known as Lawton’s
Blackberry. Propagated by suckers or layers.
Eue. (See “Bata graveolens, Linn.”)
EHTA, Linn. —Order Eutace^e —Tribe Butecs.
E. graveolens, Linn. The Eue-plant, which at one time was
much used in domestic medicine. It is an active irritant whether
applied externally or taken internally. Propagated by cuttings.
Eye. (See “Secale cereals, Linn.”)
SACCIIAEUM, Linn. —Order Gramine^e —Tribe Andropogonece.
S. officinaruw, Linn. The Common Sugar-cane. Largely
cultivated in the colony, and sugar forms one of the chief exports.
Propagated by cuttings.
Sage. (See “Salvia officinalis, Linn.”)
SAGITTAEIA, Linn. —Order Alismace^!.
S. sinensis, Sims. {S. sagittifolia, Lour., or the Chinese Arrow-
head.) Porms edible rhizomes, which are used for food in China. This
plant may probably sooner or later become naturalised in the swamps.
Propagated by divisions.
SALIX, Linn. — Order Salicine^l
Willows grow well, and on wet land in the more southern
parts of the colony might profitably be planted for basket-work.
SALVIA, Linn. —Order Labiate —Tribe Monardece.
S. officinalis, Linn. The Garden Sage. Grown with other
herbs by market gardeners.


SAMBHCTJS, Linn. —Order CAPRiFOLiACEiE —Tribe Samlucece.
8. nigra, Linn. The Elder grows and fruits well on the downs
of Southern Queensland.
Sandalwood. (See “ Santalum album, Linn.”)
SANSEYIEEIA, Thunl.— Order lIiBMODORACE.E —Tribe
Opbiopogoneae.
S. ctlindrica, Boj. (S. angolensis, AYellw.) Ife; Terete-leaved
Bowstring Hemp. This plant has long, erect, stout, terete leaves,
which arise in tufts from a creeping rhizome ; scape below the flowers
about 1 ft. long, flower-racemes also about 1 ft. long; flowers white
and pink, stamens much exserted. At Angola excellent fibre is produced
from this plant. S. zeylanica , Willd., and several other species are in
our gardens and grow very rapidly; thus are well adapted for cultivating
for fibre. Propagated by division.
SANTALTJM, Linn. —Order Santalace.®.
S. album, Linn. Indian Sandalwood. This forms a round-headed
small tree. Leaves opposite, foot-stalks short, oblong, entire, of a
glaucous colour on the under side; flowers in axillary or terminal
panicles, yellowish at first; berry round, black when ripe. This
furnishes the fragrant wood of commerce. The sandal oil is obtained
by slow distillation from the heartwood and roots. Propagated by
seed.
Sapodilla Plum. (See “Achras sapota, Linn.”)
SAEACA, Linn. —Order Leguminosje —Tribe AmTierstiece.
S. indica, Miq. ( Jonesia Asoca, Eoxb.) An East Indian small
tree of great beauty. Leaves drooping, pinnate; leaflets lanceolate,
about 6 pairs ; flowers in dense large clusters, scarlet; ripe pods
cimeter-shaped. The bark is used medicinally by the Hindu
physicians. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Sarsaparilla. (See “ Smilax .”)
Scarlet Eunners. (See “ Phaseolus .”)
SCHINUS, Linn. —Order Anacardiacea:— Tribe Anarcardiece.
S. Molle, Linn. Peruvian Pepper or Mastic tree. Molli or
Molle of the Peruvians, An evergreen small tree with pinnate leaves,
the leaflets entire or serrated, lanceolate; flowers small in terminal
or axillary panicles; berries pink, somewhat pungent, and used as a
condiment. The tree thrives well in Queensland, and is often used in
ornamental planting. Propagated by seed.
Sebestan Eruit. (See “Cordia Myxa, var. latifolia .”)


SECALE, Linn. — Order Geamine^e —Tribe Hordeece.
S. ceeeale, Linn, The Rye. On the coast lands this is
sometimes grown for fodder, but on the Downs it is cultivated for both
fodder and grain. Propagated by seed.
SEMECARPUS, Linn f —Order Anacaediace.e— Tribe Anacardiece.
S. Anacaedium, Linn, f Marking-nut of India. Tree of
medium size with rugged bark; the leaves oblong to ovate-lanceolate,
the veins prominent and pale on the under side, 4 to 8 in. long;
flowers small, in pyramidal terminal panicles ; fruit somewhat reniform’
seated upon a yellowish or red succulent base. This latter part is edible
either raw or roasted, but the nut contains a corrosive juice which is
poisonous. _ The root-bark is very thick and contains a large quantity
of acrid juice similar to that found in the pericarp ; this dries into a
black varnish. The tree is not uncommon on the coast of Tropical
Queensland, and grows and fruits well about Brisbane. Propagated
by seed. °
Senegal or Snake Root. (See “Polygala senega, Linn.”)
Senna Plant. (See “Cassia obovata , Coll.”)
SESAMUM, Linn. —Order Pedaltne^e— Tribe Sesamecs.
S. indicum, Linn. Til or Gingelly Oilplant. This plant is culti-
vated in India for the oil which is obtained from its seeds. Since its
introduction about twenty years ago the plant has become naturalised.
Propagated by seed.
SESBANIA, Pers. —Order Leguminos^: —Tribe Galegece.
S. actjleata, Pers. A tall rapid-growing annual, often found
as a weed in cultivation on rich damp land, and indigenous about
the margins of rivers and swamps in Queensland. It haslong, narrow,
pinnate leaves, ai— drooping racemes of yellowish flowers, which are
succeeded by long narrow pods containing oblong beans ; these, in the
interior, are used as food by the natives. This plant yields an excel-
lent fibre, and in India is grown for that purpose. Propagated by
seed.
SETARIA, Beauv. — Order Geamine.e—Tribe Panicece.
S. italica, Beauv. (Panicum italicum, Linn.; P. germanicum
Roth.) Italian Millet, Hungarian Grass, or German Millet, known
as Panicum in Queensland. A tall, leafy, annual Indian grass of
very quick growth. The panicles are often nodding by the weight
of grain. In India this grass is held in high esteem for its grain,
which is used especially by the Brahmins for cakes and porridge;
boiled with milk it makes a pleasant light diet for invalids. As a
green fodder it is equal to any, and the grain is one of the best for


poultry. In America it is cut when in flower for forage. On good
soil if the ground be moist, it will be ready for mowing 60 days from
being sown, and produce from 2to 4 tons of hay per acre. Propagated
by seed.
Shallot. (See “Allium Ascalonica, Linn.”)
SIDA, Linn. —Order MALYACEiE —Tribe Malvece.
S. ehombipolia, Linn. Sida return or Sida-weed. A tall
quick-growing undershrub, attaining on rich land the height of 8 to
12 ft. in a season. Leaves very various when on healthy plants,
ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, cuneate towards the base; flovyers on
pedicels often as long as the leaves, yellow, opening in the middle of
the day; fruit-carpels about 10. This is a pest in cultivation; but
from its stems a very fine fibre is obtainable in Queensland. Largo
quantities of this fibre are obtained in India for the European market.
Propagated by seed.
Sida Weed or Queensland Hemp. (See “ Sida rhombifolia,
Linn.”)
Silk Cotton Teees. (See “ Bombax ” and “JE lriodendron.”')
Silky Oak. (See “ Qrevillea rohusta, A. Cunn.”)
Sissoo. (See “Dalbergia Sissoo, Linn, f.”)
SMILAX, Linn. —Order Liliacejb —Tribe Smilacece.
Saesapaeillas. Many of the medicinal species of this genus
are in our gardens in a most neglected state. Propagated by division
or seed.
Snake Hoot. (See “ Polygala senega , Linn.”)
SOLANUM, Linn. —Order Solanace.®.
S. Maglia, Schlecbf. Has been grown in the Botanic Gardens,
and found to crop well, but no further experiments have been made.
Propagated by tubers.
S. Melongena, Linn. The Egg-plant, called also Aubergines,
Bringals, or Begoons. These grow like weeds, but are not in much
demand as culinary vegetables. S. tubeeosum, Linn., the well-known
Potato, crops well at two periods of the year in all parts of Southern
Queensland. Propagated by seed.
SORGHUM, Pers. —Order G-eaminea; —Tribe Andropogonem.
Soeghums of several kinds are largely grown for fodder. Great
Honduras, Johnstone-grass, Imphee, and Black Sorghum are some
of the names under which they are known by farmers. Propagated by
seed.


Spadic Plant op Peeu. (See “Frythroxylon Coca , Lam.”)
Spinach. (See “Spinacia oleracea, Linn.”)
SPINACIA, Linn. — Order Cuenopodiaceve— Tribe Atriplicece.
S. oleeacea, Linn. The Garden Spinach or Spinage. A
vegetable very seldom grown for sale, although it thrives very well.
Propagated by seed.
SPONDIAS, Linn. —Order Anacaediace.® —Tribe Spondiece.
S. dulcis, Forst. Hog Plum, Otaheitean Apple, Yi Apple,
Wi Apple. A tall tree with a smooth whitish bark and pinnate
leaves, glabrous, with dark-green ovate leaflets, serrated on the edge;
fruit oval, sometimes large and weighing over 2 lbs. These have a
nice fragrance and flavour, and in Yiti are said to be used as food.
Propagated by seed.
Stae Anise. (See “Lllicium anisatum, Linn.”)
Stae Apple. (See “Chrysophyllum Cainito , Linn.”)
Stillingia sebipeea, Mich. (See “ Fxccccaria .”)
STEOPHANTHTJS, DO. —Order Apocynace.® —Tribe Fchitidece.
S. Kombe, Oliver. A woody climber of Tropical Africa; shoots
hairy, compressed at the nodes ; leaves about 3 in. long, 2 in. broad,
scabrous, hairy above but more densely so beneath; pedicels hairy,
about as long as calyx; calyx-lobes f-in. long; corolla puberulous,
lobes of corolla elongated to 2 in. ; follicles 1 ft. or more long,
terminating in a subpeltate disk of about -|-in. diameter. A new and
valuable medicine has lately been obtained from this plant, which has
been useful in pulmonary oedema, pneumonia, &c. Propagated by
seed.
STEYCHNOS, Linn. —Order Loganiaceje —Tribe Fuloganiece.
S. nux-vomica, Linn. (S. ligustrina„ Blume ;S. coluhrina, W.
and Wight.) Nux-vomica. A small Indian tree, with a close-grained
light-coloured wood; the leaves ovate, 5-nerved, glabrous, about 3 in.
long, 2 in. wide; cymes of flowers terminal; flowers small; fruit
globose, about 1 in. diameter. The fruit of this tree is highly
poisonous; the seeds contain the two poisons, strychnia and brucia.
The pulp of the fruit is said by some to be innocuous, while others
consider it poisonous. Propagated by seed.
Sugae Cane. (See “ Saccharv/ni ojjicinaru n, Linn.”)
Sugae Maple. (See “Acer saccharinum , Wang.”)
Sunplowee. (See “ JEEelianthus .”)
Sunn Hemp, (See “ Grotalaria .”)
Sweet Potato. (See “Lpomoea Batatas, Poir.”)
Sweet Sop. (See “Anona sguamosa, Linn.”)


SWIETENIA, Linn. —Order Meltace®— Tribe Cedrelea.
S. Mahagoni, Linn. Mabogany-tree. A large West Indian
timber tree, with pinnate glabrous leaves ; the leaflets about from 6 to
10, ovate-lanceolate ; panicles of flowers axillary; petals twisted;
capsule woolly, seeds with a terminal oblong wing. This valuable
tree is largely planted in the East Indies. It thrives well in
Queensland, and should be planted for its wood. Propagated by seed.
SYMPHYTUM, Linn— Order Boragine.e— Tribe Boragea.
S. asperrimum, Sims. Prickly Cumfrey. This large, leafy,
herbaceous plant was introduced some years ago as a fodder, tor
which, however, it has not proved a success. Where the soil is good
enough to grow Cumfrey, far more profitable fodders can be grown in
Queensland. Propagated by seed or division.
TACCA, Forst. — Order Taccacejb.
T, pn aerie era, Blume. (See u ALniorphophallus campanulatus ,
B1 ”)
T. pinnatifida, Forst. This plant, which is plentiful on sandy
land in Tropical Queensland, is the one from which the mam supply ot
the Eiii arrowroot is prepared. This arrowroot is particularly recom-
mended in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea. Propagated by seed or
roots.
Talinga Potato. (See “ Amorphophallus campanulatus, Bl.”)
Tamarind, Indian. (See “ Tamarindus indica, Linn.”)
Tamarind, Queensland. (See “ Diploglottis Gunninghamii,
Hook.”)
TAMAEINDUS, Linn.— Order Leguminosje— Tribe Amherstiecs.
T. indica, Linn. Tamarind-tree. This is a large evergreen
Indian tree. The bark is rough, and the wood hard and durable ; the
leaves are glabrous and pale-coloured, composed ot from 10 to 20
pairs of oblong-linear leaflets about *-in. long; the stipules are small
and deciduous; flowers yellow, in loose short racemes; bracts
deciduous ; pod thick, about 3to 6 in. long and lin broad. The pulp
of the pods is used in medicine as a laxative, and also made into
preserves. The leaves are used in curries ; and the seeds, ground into
powder and mixed with gum, give a strong cement. The tree thrives
both North and South in Queensland. Propagated by seed.
TANACETUM, Linn.— Order Composite— Tribe Anthemidea;.
T. vulgare, Linn. The Common Tansy grows well in Queens-
land, and is cultivated with other domestic herbs. Propagated by seed
or division.
Tansy. (See “ Tanacetum."')
Tapioca Plant. (See “ Manihot utilissima, Pohl.”)


TARAXACUM, Hall. —Order Composite— Tribe Cichoriacece.
T. dens-leonis, Hall. The Dandelion is grown now and again
for medicinal purposes, but on the coast land does not thrive very well.
Propagated by seed or roots.
Taro. (See “Colocasia .”)
Tea Plant, China. (See “Camellia Then, Link.”)
Tea Plant, Paraquat, (See “Ilex paraguayensis, St Hil.”)
Teak. (See “Tectona grandis, Linn.”)
Teazel. (See “ Dipsacus fullonum, Linn.”)
TECTONA, Linn. f. —Order Yerbenacejb —Tribe Viticece.
T. grandis, Linn. f. Teak-tree of India. A large deciduous
tree, with a thick grey bark; the young shoots 4-angled j leaves
opposite, oval, very large, rough above, downy beneath ; panicle
terminal, flowers white, fruit 4-celled. The wood is one of the
best in India; it does not split, crack, or alter its shape when once'
seasoned, and is said not to be attacked by the white ant. Prom the
leaves is obtained a red dye. The wood gives an oil which is used
medicinally, and as a substitute for linseed oil, and as a varnish. The
tree thrives well in Queensland. Propagated by seed.
Teosinte. (See “Uuchlcena luxurious, Achers.”)
TETRAGONA, Linn. —Order Eicoidejs.
T. expansa, Murray. The New Zealand Spinach. This is met with
on the Queensland coast and around swamps in a wild state, and, aa in
other countries, used as a culinary vegetable. Propagated by seed.
Thea chinensis, Sims. The Tea-plant. (See “Camellia”)
THEOBROMA, Linn. —Order Stercultace^. —Tribe Buettneriece.
T. cacao, Linn. The Cocoa or Chocolate tree. A small tree of
Tropical America, with oblong acuminate entire leaves, with about 10
pairs of lateral nerves ; flowers on the branches and stems; the
calyx somewhat rosy, the petals yellowish; fruit 10-ribbed, 5-celled,
3to 6 in. long, containing numerous rather large seeds. From these
the well-known cocoa is prepared. Has fruited in Queensland, and
should be planted for its commercial produce in Tropical Queensland.
The hills about Cairns are recommended. Propagated by seed.
THESPESIA, Correa. —Order Malvaceje —Tribe Hihiscece.
T. populnea, Corr. The Tulip-tree of India; has a very wide
range, being found in Western Africa, South America, and the islands
of the Pacific, besides Tropical Queensland and New Guinea. It
forms a lofty tree and affords excellent shade. The large hibiscus-like
flowers are yellow with purple centre. The bark yields a strong fibre,


and is used in Demerara for making coffee-bags and cordage. The
wood has a pretty grain and is useful for cabinet-work, gunstocks,
&c. The capsules yield a yellow dye, and the seeds a thick deep-red
coloured oil. Propagated by seed or cuttings.
Thtme. (See “ Thymus vulgaris , Linn.”)
THYMUS, Linn. —Order Labiate —Tribe Satureinece.
T. vulgaris, Linn. The Common Garden Thyme is grown with
other herbs by market gardeners. The Lemon Thyme is often used in
the cooler parts of the colony for an edging for garden-walks.
Propagated by cuttings.
Tomato. (See “ Lycopersicum esculenfum, Mill.”)
TRAPA, Linn. —Order Onagraeie.®.
T. btcoenjs, Linn. f. The Leng, Ling, or Links of China have
been grown in waterholes near Brisbane, but as yet do not seem likely
to become naturalised. Probably the plant is kept back by water
animals eating the nuts. Propagated by seed.
Tees of the Gods (See “ Ailanthus."^)
Tree of Sadness. (See “Nyctanthes arbor-tristis, Linn.”)
Trek, Tomato. (See “ Oyphomandra tebacea, Sendt.”)
TEI FOLIUM, Linn, —Order Leguminos.® —Tribe Trifoliece.
T repenb, Linn The White or Dutch Clover has become
naturalised in the cooler parts of the colony, and is also commonly
grown for fodder This is also an excellent bee-plant. Propagated
by seed.
TEITICUM, Linn. —Order Geamine^; —Tribe Hordeece.
T. vulgare, Villars, which is considered to include all the
cultivated wheats, has proved, under proper cultivation, to be well
suited for the Downs, and several Indian varieties have proved suitable
for coast lands. Wheat has been known to produce a crop even far
into Tropical Queensland. Propagated by seed.
TEOPiEOLUM, Linn. —Order Qeraniaceje —Tribe Felargoniece.
T. majus, Linn. The Indian Cress or Nasturtion, so frequently
pickled as a substitute for Capers, does remarkably well in Queensland,
and may frequently be seen in our flower-gardens, where the rich
colouring of their blooms makes them especial favourites. Propagated
by seed.
Tulip Tree, Indian. (See “ Thespesia populnea, Gorr.”)
Tulip-wood, Queensland. (See “j ßarpullia pendula, Planch.”)


TTPHA, Linn. —Order TrpnACEiE.
T. angustieolia, Linn. The Bullrush, Eeedmace, or Cats-tail
is plentiful in most of the still waters in Southern Queensland, hut
has not been utilised, although a few years ago a trade was carried on
in the southern colonies, collecting the spikes of inflorescence, which
were used in stuffing pillows, &c., under the name of “ Murray down.”
The rootstocks contain much starch, and can be used for food. The
leaves, both in Europe and India, are employed in making mats and
baskets. Propagated by division of rhizome and seed.
Upas Teeb. (See “ Antiaris toxicaria .”)
VANILLA, Plum. — Order Oechide.® — Tribe Neottieae.
V. aeomatica, Sw., and V. planieolia, Andr . The Vanilla of
commerce is the dried capsules of these climbing plants. They
thrive well in Queensland, but only in the tropical parts. Propagated
by cuttings.
Vi Apple. (See “ Spondias dulcis, Eorst.”)
VICIA, Linn .—Order Leguminos.® —Tribe Viciece.
V. Eaba, Linn. The Broad Bean. Grown by the market gardeners
for culinary purposes, but the variety known as the Horse Bean is
seldom grown as a field crop. Our farmers perhaps overlook the value
of this plant for a rotation crop. V. satiya, Linn., is grown for fodder.
Propagated by seed.
VIGNA, Savi. —Order Leguminos^e —Tribe Phaseolece.
V. sinensis, Lndl. (Linnseus’ Lolichos sinensis ,) Represented
by the varieties V. sesquipedalis and V. melanophthalma. The first of
these, which has been called German Bean, may be known by its long
pods and (when ripe) red seeds. The pods of the latter are shorter,
and the ripe seeds white with a black or dark eye. When boiled,
these are of a much softer nature than the common Erench beans.
Propagated by seed.
VITIS, Linn. —Order Ampelide.®.
V. ylnipeea, Linn. The Common Grape. Largely grown
both for the table and wine. There are also many varieties of the
American V. Labrusca , Linn., and V. vulpina, Linn., in cultivation,
which are favourites with some on account of their not being so liable
to the oidium disease. Propagated by cuttings.
Walnut. (See “ Juglans .”)
Watee Ceess. (See “ Nasturtium officinale , R. Br,”)
Watee Lemon. (See u PassiJlora laurifolia, Linn.”)
Watee Melon. (S ee “ Oitrullus.”)


Wax, Japan. (See “J Rhus succedanea, Linn.”)
Wax Mtetle, or Batbeeey. (See “Myrica cerifera, Linn.”)
West Indian and Guatemala Rub-bee. (See “Castelloa elastica,
Cerv.”)
Whampeb. (See “Glausena Wampi , Oliver.”)
Wheat. (See “Triticum .”)
White Thoen. (See “ Crataegus .”)
Wi Apple. (See “Spondias dulcis, Forst.”)
Willow. (See “ Salix .”)
Willhqhbeia coedata, Klotz. (See “ Landolphia .”)
Wine Palm. (See “Diplothemum maritimum , Mart.”)
WITHANIA, Fauq.—Ovdev Solanace^ —Tribe Solanea.
W. somnipeea, Dun. (DTiysalis somnifera .) A soft- wooded
shrub o£ 2or 3 ft.; the stems flexuose ; leaves ovate, entire, in pairs,
pubescent like the stems; flowers axillary, yellowish; berry red,
about the size of a pea, covered with the somewhat angular inflated
calyx. The fruit are employed in the coagulation of milk in making
butter. The root is said to act medicinally much like that of
Podophyllum. Propagated by seed.
Tams. (See “ Dioscorea .”)
Yeecum Fibee. (See “Calotropis gigantea, B. Br.”)
YUCCA, Linn.— Order Liliaceje— Tribe Drachma.
T. aloieolia, Linn., Y. gloeiosa, Linn., and several other kinds
are common plants of our gardens; they will grow on any rocky poor
soil. Some day they may be planted for their fibre, which is similar to
that obtained from the Agaves and Furcraas. Propagated by seed or
divisions of the roots.
ZEA, Willd. —Order Geamineje —Tribe Maydece.
Z. Mats, Linn. The Maize or Corn. Largely and profitably
grown. Besides the many uses as food, &c., to which the grain is put,
and the green plant as fodder, the silky tassel (the stigmata) is used,
it is said, with good effect in decoction in diseases of the bladder. The
drug is called Stigmata Maidis ,” and is said to be of undoubted value
in pystitis and cystitis. Propagated by seed.
ZINGrIBER, Adans. —Order Scitaminejs —Tribe Zingiberea.
Z. officinalis, Rose. The Ginger of commerce. Stems from
creeping rhizome 1 to 3 ft. high, clothed by the sheathing bases of the
grass-like leaves ; flowers in a somewhat cone-like spike arising from


the rhizome, the flowers closely protected by bracts ; filaments pro-
longed beyond the anther in the form of a long beak. There are
several varieties of Ginger in the colony which, with very little care,
yield a good crop. Propagated by division of rhizomes.
ZIZTPHUS, Juss. —Order Rhamne^e —Tribe Zizyphece.
Z. jubjuba , Lam. Jujube. A small deciduous tree with short
stipular prickles, sometimes wanting ; lea ves ovate or nearly orbicular,
obtuse, 1 to 3 in. long, entire or toothed, 3-nerved, glabrous above, 5 *
covered underneath, as well as the petioles and branchlets, with a close
white orrusty tomentum j cymes small, flowers small; drupe globular,
a ame^er - Eruit eatable; the bark may be used in tanning
and the plant forms a strong hedge. Propagated by seeds or cuttings
of the roots.
ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS TO ECONOMIC PLANTS.
Aleppo Senna. (See “ Cassia ohovata , Colla.”)
Babul. (See “Acacia”)
Carrot. (See “Daiicus”)
Endeavour River Pear. (See “ Eugenia eucaluptoides
E. v. M”)
EUGENIA, Lindl.
E. eucaltptoides, F. v. M., Eragm. iv. 55; Elora Austr. lii.
285. (Jambosa eucalyptoides, E. v. M., Eragm. i. 226.) The Endeavour
River Pear. A tall shrub or small tree, the branches drooping; leaves
long, narrow. Elowers rather large and showy, borne in cymes at the
ends of the branches. I ruit usually pear-shaped, about in. long,
rosy-red and white, very beautiful and of agreeable flavour. This tree,
apart from its usefulness as a fruit, is well worthy of cultivation for
its beauty, and when better known will be in great demand for
ornamental planting. At present the only tree in cultivation is at
Hockings’s Nursery, South Brisbane. The tree is found on the
borders of rivers from the Victoria River in North Australia to the
Endeavour River in Queensland. Propagated by seed.
EUNARIA, Linn. — Order Pap averages— Sub-order Funarieat.
E. officinalis, Linn. The Common Eumitory. This is a delicate
annual weed, of a pale-green colour, of weak trailing habit, the leaves
much divided and the segments generally 3-lobed. Elowers in racemes
of 1 to 2 in. long, the petals oblong, closed so as to form a tubular


INDIQOEEEA.
corolla, with dark-colonred tips ; the nuts
duced weed of some of medica fwriters as possessing laxative
tance, as we find it mentione _ J , p een f oun d useful in cases of
and diuretic properties, andsaid h and in scro fulous skin
£sl2SsS!fefesav 1 ‘
indiqopeea. ,
X. Amt, Linn. The West
in height, more or less clothed h bome in dense rather
from Bto 7 pairs of Jeaflete. T sicUe . shape d, bearing from Bto
fs"S yield excellent indigo. It thrives well
parts Queensland. Propagated by seed.
Mangold or Mangol Wubzel. (See “ BOa. )
Mecca Senna. (See “ Cassia angustifoha, M ahi. )
Paeititjm. (See “Hibiscus.")
Potato. (See “ nameaddß . MAC eocaepa,
EHonoMTETirSjpageßl. tioa g
fienth. „ _ M \
SnonA on Sonin. (See “JEulynoment. )
Stiomata MAIDIS. (See “Zea Mays. )
Tennetellv Senna. (See »to «(#»,» )
Tree Tomato, page 69.-I?or tebacea read W««-
ATest Indian Indigo. (See “ Lmn. )
B, Authority. James 0. Bead, GoTerumont Printer, Brisbane.


■
,
I f
1
.
I
I
1
■


.
.
-
■
I
.
S ■ ■ ■
| .. ~ ' : . ■
• j J . ■
'
■
. ■■■' -•,'" 7 V, , V- . - - --
's ■ >
V • • . ■’ .. ' ■ . '


A
K* I
>
- , ■ _"■■■ - ' * . > . ' - - \ r‘-:\ ' ■ V'
■ ' / ‘ ' r V- . - ;
/ - R . v £ ■' . /. // • . • ' ' 1 '• . \ ■ ‘> r
-- ■ . ; ■ • -
, v - : f
'■V.■
