

sn
WjiUin
r I.
LECTURE
CATHOLIC EDUCATION & CIVILIZATION,
1 '
PRESENT.
PAST'AND
BY WILLIAM HENRY ARCHER
First delivered at the request and in the presence of His Lordship the Catholic
Bishop of Melbourne, in the Study Hall of St. Patrick's College, Eastern
Hill, Melbourne, on the 1 7th Jan. 1856 ; and lie-delivered at the
Catholic Association, St. Francis’ Hall, Melbourne, on
the 2ith Feb. 1856, on behalf of the erection of
St. Patrick’s Cathedral.
MELBOURNE:
MICHAEL T. GAS ON, ELIZABETH STREET.
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1856.


♦


Intnrkdwn.
There was an old Roman, in days gone by, —some-
where about seventeen hundred years ago, —who found
himself at Athens. And he tells us that during some
long winter nights, he passed the time away by setting
himself to work putting together for the instruction of
youth, many things which he had deemed worthy of
note, in the course of his extensive reading of good
books, and various conversations with wise and learned
men. His name was Aulus Gellius, and he called
his collection of odds and ends, in allusion to his time
and place of writing, “ Hoctes Attics.”
It is not my intention for one moment to compare
myself with this worthy ancient j or to suppose that
seventeen hundred years hence anybody will think it
worth their while to quote me, even if they have the
chance ; but as I recently had occasion, on behalf of
Catholicity, to work at night for the benefit of youtli
as he did, it struck me that I would call my lucubra-
tions “ Hoctes OatholkleA
The following was delivered first to the Students of
St. Patrick’s College, Eastern Hill, Melbourne ; and
again at a Meeting of the Catholic Association, in St.


Francis’s Hall, in the same city ; and I cannot but
gratefully acknowledge, that never was Lecturer heard
with more patient attention, or his efforts rewarded
with a kinder approval. The first audience was of a
clerical, literary, and scholastic type ; hut the second
consisted of a dense thronging mass of the laity of all
conditions, whose very presence and demeanour proved
their love for Education.
The words then uttered by me, are now echoed by
the Press to a larger audience still. And though they
are specially addressed to Catholics, and above all to
Catholic youth, in order to assist them in their search
for Historic truth in regard to the Church in its rela-
tions with the Scholar and the World ; I hope the few
facts I have here grouped together, will not be without
their use and blessing, to those even who have not as
yet the happiness of holding the Ancient Faith.
WILLIAM HENRY ARCHER.


|Ea]ottm §ei gloriam ft pto-etmontm atititaiem.”
LECTURE I.
CATHOLIC EDUCATION AND CIVILIZATION, PAST AND PRESENT.
It is a very common practice, with those who are apart from
us, to speak of the Church as an enemy to education, and to
the progress of knowledge and civilization; and the calumny is
so often repeated, and in such a variety of forms, by those
interested in spreading it, as to become, in the eyes of even
honest non-Catholics, important enough to assume the rank of
a great fact—a fixed principle,—of which in their minds there
is, nor can be, no shadow of doubt whatsoever.
' Now if this statement, which I have termed a calumny, were
true, it would be a very sad thing indeed for the colony of
Yictoria. For, in the first place, we are numerically strong
here; and have equal civil, political, and religious rights with
our fellow-colonists, of every shade of creed and opinion; and
I believe I am right in saying that there is a very firm deter-
mination among us to preserve those rights. And, in the secoud
place, while we do not wish to exercise any offensive domi-
nation ourselves; we also do not want, and may not allow, as
far as in us lies, its exercise in others; yet at the same time we
do want, expect, and intend in the ordinary course of things,
simply, naturally, and equally with all brother Yictorians, to
take, as time, occasion, and personal capacity may offer, our


right and proper places in Municipalities, in the Legislative
Assembly, in the Legislative and Executive Councils, and in
any or every department of the State. * And therefore, I
repeat, it would be a sad thing indeed for this young country,
at this present and in all time to come, if the prejudice of
our non-Catholic friends were something better than a pre-
judice—that is to say, if it were a truth. But it is not a
truth, and to shoAv that it is not so I am here to-night.
My proposition is this: The Church is NOT, as is commonly
said by those apart from us, an enemy to education, and to the
progress of civilization.
But, to prevent misunderstanding, permit me to explain what
I mean by the words Church, Education, and Civilization.
By the Church, I mean the Holy Catholic Apostolic Church
in communion with the See of Rome. Yon and I, dear friends,
are of her, blessed be God, and know her, and cannot mistake
her; and those who are not of us, I cannot say know her, but
they see her, and cannot mistake her likewise, —for she is no
dream or abstraction, but a visible, palpable reality that shows its
stately, beauteous presence in every clime. Some say her day
is well nigh done; but where is the sign ? They read not
history, or will not profit by it, who talk so. A cloudy sky is
no proof of a setting sun; and old chronicles will teach you
that she has seen far worse days than ours, and smiled brightly
through them all. In truth there is no danger—whether from
external foes, or those of her own household—that she has not
encountered in times past; and, believe me, she is trained and
prepared for all that can be done against her now. She was
hunted to the catacombs in the very first ages; and, since her
emergence to the light of day, there has been no generation
when sword-power, and pen-power, and tongue-power have not
been lifted against her ; and they do but bruise and maim their
puny hands in vain, who spend their little day in smiting her,
till the waves of eternity shall have washed them away.
Of Education there are two sorts, secular and religious. By
secular education, I mean the development, or drawing out, and
fixing the physical, mental, and moral faculties of youth in such
* I have seen it stated in broad print, in a local religious periodical, and heard
it whispered with an air of concern and mystery, that Catholics are striving with
all their might to obtain more than their due share of influence in the Legislature,
and interest in the patronage of Government! It is not difficult for ns to under-
stand the object of these reports ; hut those who spread them will hardly gain
then’ end with honest men, who cannot shut their eyes to the fact that so far
from Catholics troubling themselves about the State, they have been hitherto, as
Citizens, too negligent on this point. Eor example, in the present Legislative
Council, consisting of 44 representatives and 20 nominees, there are only three
Catholics; and as to the Government, although there are nearly 80 heads of de-
partments in Melbourne alone, there is not a single Catholic amongst them !


a way as to fit them for the every-day duties of their probable
calling and state of life. Secular education is, and has been,
practised in all time with great success, by Jew and Gentile,
Pagan and Christian; and I mention this,by the way, to bring
to your remembrance that the love and practice of physical and
mental cultivation did not originate with, and are not, nor ever
were, the exclusive results of Protestantism.
By religious education I mean the teaching of supernatural-
revealed truth; and the conveying of sacramental grace to the
pilgrim human soul; and the correcting, conducting, and con-
soling that soul on its perilous way to the city of God. This,
be it borne in mind, the Church claims, and always has claimed,
as her true and rightful mission. Her vocation she declares to
be, simply to preach the Gospel to all peoples; to convert
sinners; and, when converted, to keep them in her bosom till
her Divine Lord shall take them from her to their heavenly
home.
Civilization, in the sense of the Church, I understand to be
the development ip a people of the Christian character in all the
public and private relations of life, in accordance with the teach-
ing and practice of her Divine Pounder; and this form of
development was her great work in Italy, Spain, Africa, France,
Belgium, Germany, England, Ireland, Scotland, and other
nations, when her time was come to chase their pagan dark-
ness with beams of Gospel light. But what the world deems
civilization is a prodigious development of the sciences and fine
arts, and the multiplication of all that goes to make up a life
of refined physical and mental enjoyment. Now the Church
looks on all this as merely secondary and accidental; and to be
used only in so far as the eternal soul may be benefited, or at
most shall not suffer. At the same time it will be found that,
even with regard to the training of refined, ingenious, and ma-
terially and intellectually great peoples, she has been the most
marvellous civilizer the world ever saw ; and to prove this I
would appeal to the histories of the nations just named, and to
the memories of their illustrious dead. And further than this,
I would appeal to the present condition of the whole Catholic
world, and frankly ask, whether a fair, clear, cool, and thorough
examination of Catholic men. Catholic manners, and Catholic
literature, would not bear me out in saying that the Church is
now in this our day, as in time past, the faithful and zealous
lover and promoter of sound education and pure civilization.
First, let us look at Victoria. I suppose no one will accuse
the sons of St. Augustine and St. Francis, and the secular
clergy, in this colony, of neglecting the education of the people.
Their schools in town, and bush, and gold field; the academy


at Lucerne House ; the Collegiate School at Geelong ; and the
Diocesan College and Grammar School, within, whose walls we
now are, —all show that our beloved Bishop and his Clergy are
making plentiful provision for the great want of our times. It
is for us to take care that they do not labour in vain.
I said at the first we are numerically strong here ; I would
also remind you that, thanks be to God, not only is our bread
for the most part certain, and our water sure, but it is a
gladsome truth that Catholics generally, throughout the land,
are very well to do in the world, and able, by their own means,
to give their children such an education as may fit them for any
station in colonial life. And further, I would remind you that
not only is it your right, as Victorians, to desire they should
occupy positions of private and public trust, but that it is your
duty, to animate and guide them to be good, and learned, and
gentle-mannered, so that they may become worthy of the high
name of Catholic, and able to mix with their fellow colonists of
every grade without any sense of inferiority, and show all how
beautiful the true catholic spirit is—making the man more
manly, the woman more womanly, and both more wise, and
generous, and just. In this way those who are apart from us
would come to know us, and learn to smile at the prejudices
which they now have against us. For really a great deal of the
unkind thought that exists with regard to us, is the result of
nothing but prejudice, which shrouds, like a thick mist, many a
warm and generous heart and intelligent mind. And the notion
with regard to the Church being an enemy to education is an
instance in point.
But I was saying that the inhabitants of this colony would
not accuse the brethren of St. Augustine and of St. Francis,
and the secular clergy, of attempting to keep the laity in igno-
rance ; nor would I suppose the good people of New South
Wales assail their Benedictine Archbishop on that score either.
But some good, prejudiced, cautious, free-and-enlightened non-
Catholic might say, C£ Oh, of course, the priests, for very de-
cency’s sake, are obliged to let the people get some knowledge
here, in the colonies; but how is it in the old Catholic countries ?
Just ask them what they have always done, and still do, in
Italy, and Spain, and Belgium, and France, and Austria, and
everywhere else where they can ? Why they know very well
their object is to make men ignorant, and to keep them so!
Everybody knows it! Certainly I have never been in those
countries, or at most only for a short while, and could not
speak their languages, or at best not much; and then I only
went to see the sights, and did not mix with the people so as to
learn their thoughts and ways in their common everyday life.


But still you know there can be no mistake about it, anybody
will tell you they are a benighted lot; there’s no denying that,”
and so our honest non-Catholic goes on, till he fairly stops for
want of breath, looking and feeling as if he had settled the
question. Let us see whether he has or no. Suppose we take
a trip to our antipodes, to the birth-place of Christian Civiliza-
tion, to the classic and sainted shores of Italy.*
With the swiftness of thought we are there. See that famous
land, which forms as it were the leg of Europe, bearing in a
kneeling posture the weight of the nations it saved and civilized;
or you may look at it as the emblem of the messenger of good
tidings to men of good will among all peoples, which the
Church has ever been, from the days of St. Peter to those of
Pius the Ninth.
Where shall we land? Over the bright blue Mediterranean
waves let us go, leaving the Napoleon-famous Corsica behind us,
and we shall get ere long to the gulf of Genoa —Genoa the proud.
Columbus when a boy, played on her shores.! It was there
in the fifteenth century, that he received a sound and useful
education in reading, writing, arithmetic, drawing, and painting ;
in all of which he excelled. But even as English boys, dwelling
on the sea coast, glory in boats, and think the life of Robinson
Crusoe the most witching in the world, so did the Genoese
youth four hundred years ago, long to bound over the mighty
deep, and the little Columbus was not an exception, for fond as
he was of his books, he was if possible, more fond of the sea.
And the spirit is not extinct in Genoa even now, for though she
no longer holds the rank she once held as a maritime state; yet,
hath she still her naval schools, and yields her tens of thousands
of skilful mariners, t And her shrewd, frugal, commerce-loving
sons, however poor, have still the opportunity of learning secular
and religious knowledge, as befits the fellow-countrymen of the
pious, catholic, scholar sailor-boy, who, though he went to sea
as early as fourteen, loved wisdom ever after, and pursued it,
and increased in knowledge, as he grew in years; and who,
fired with the thought, that he was destined by God to discover
a new world, and to hasten the conversion of the whole earth,
dauntlessly put forth his fragile bark, when verging on three score
years, and piloted posterity to the uttermost parts of the earth.
* In the course of the lecture a large map of Italy, made for the purpose, was
very frequently referred to by the lecturer ; and he advised every student who
wished to acquire clear notions of geography and history, to keep a good atlas at
hand when reading, for constant and ready reference.
f He was horn in Genoa about the year 1435. The best biography that I know of
in the English language of this illustrious and magnanimous man is that by
Washington Irving. It is a book for young and old to read with profit and
delight.
{ The Sardinian Navy is for the most part manned by Genoese.


The province of Genoa has a naval school for forming officers
of the royal navy, and three schools for instructing masters in
the Mercantile Navy. In every little town in the Genoese ter-
ritories there are commercial schools; in which poor children
are taught reading, writing, arithmetic, and the catechism. There
are ten colleges under religious orders, such as the Scolopii,
or pious schools, in which are taught grammar, humanities, rhe-
toric, and philosophy including mathematics. There are like-
wise, professors of calligraphy and mercantile arithmetic; and
in the town schools, there are numerous very able teachers, who
beyond the ordinary subjects of education, instruct in the oper-
ations of exchanges and other matters essential to the mercantile
and trading classes. In the University, containing about five
hundred students, there are four faculties; theology; law; medi-
cine, and surgery; philosophy and arts. There are thirty-six
professors, and the library contains 45,000 volumes.* This is
not bad, you will say, for a town not much more populous than
Melbourne.
I could tell you much more of interest respecting Genoa; of
her ancient free and always Catholic Institutions for example;
and of the modern public and social life, of the good Genoese.
But if I were to attempt to do so, the night would pass aw r ay
ere I should have done. And the same is true of almost every
town of note in Italy; for there is no place in Europe, where
cities and towns, of historical interest and considerable population,
are so thickly studded as here; and for every one of them there
is a most formidable catalogue of authors, who have attempted
to exhaust the history, biography, antiquities, botany, geology,
and topography of the districts to which they were attached.
Sismondi f, a witness above suspicion, speaking of the Pontifical
States alone, says, the names only of the local historians of
seventy-one cities still existing, in the States of the Church, and
of sixteen which have perished, would fill a thick quarto
volume; and that many centuries of assiduous reading would
not get through the whole of their productions.
So I think we had better hasten on with all speed to the
capital of the Sardinian States, Torino, or Turin.
And yet, there is an Institution at Genoa worth knowing
* “ Quarterly Journal of Education,” vol. viii., page 195.
+ This Protestant author, after a chequered, political, and literary life, died in
1843. He has produced several important works, among which his “ Histoire
des Eraiifais,” and “ Eepubliques Italiennes,” take the first rank. There is an
abridgment of the latter published by Sismondi himself in “ Lardner’s Cabinet
Cyclopaedia ” (1830); but I would warn the student that in all matters connected
with Catholicity, Sismondi is no safe guide, and this he will find out for himself,
by reading the gentle Christian criticism of Count Alexander Manzoni on a portion
of the History of the Italian Republics. See his “ Vindication of Catholic Morality,”
London, Keating and Brown, 1836.


about, and we will talk of it as we go along, I mean the deaf
and dumb Asylum.
The first glimpse that history gives us of an Educator of the
deaf and dumb, is in a monastery. A certain Benedictine monk,
named Pedro de Ponce, born at Vallodolid, in 1520, finds a lay
brother deprived of the two senses hearing and speaking, and
capable only of servile offices. The good Pedro, touched by
the sight, sets to work, and not only enables brother Gaspard to
go to confession, but to become an accomplished scholar, and
the author of several books. By and bye he instructs two
brothers, and a sister of the constable, and another person, all
born deaf and dumb ; and whom he taught to read and write,
and to talk by signs. Unfortunately, however, the good Pedro
did not commit his method of teaching to paper; and the next
peep we get of any prominent followers in his footsteps, is at
two French priests, Abbes de I’Epee and Sicard. The attention
of the Abbe de I’Epee was accidentally turned to the subject by
the circumstance of two orphan girls, being left without instruc-
tion, on the death of their teacher. From feelings of benevo-
lence, and a desire to teach them the principles of religion, he
undertook their education, with no previous knowledge of the
habits, ideas, or capabilities of the unfortunate class to which
they belonged. He gave himself up to the pursuit, and devoted
to it his time, his money, and his energies. He collected around
him other deaf and dumb children, and continued the good work
until his death in 1789. He tendered his services to any
country which should think proper to employ him, in forming
institutions and instructors; stipulating, that no remuneration
should ever be offered. He disclosed his method to all who
wmdd learn it; and many celebrated teachers (one of whom was
Sicard) were among his pupils.* The Abbe Sicard established
a printing press in 1800, which was worked by the deaf and
dumb, with great effect; and thus the name of this illustrious
priest was soon known all over Europe, so that when the allied
sovereigns were in Paris, they attended his lectures there.
Before the time of Abbe Sicard, the instruction of the deaf and
dumb was nothing more than a pure mechanism. He was the
first who raised their minds to intellectual objects, and made
them comprehend the abstractions of philosophy. He died on
the 10th of May, 1822, in the 80th year of his age. The
Genoese philanthropic imitator of Sicard, was Ottavio Assarotti,
also an ecclesiastic, who, in 1801, with his own private
means, commenced the system which is now patronized by
Government. Many of the interesting children, in the institu-
* “ Quarterly Journal of Education,” yol. iii., p. 306.


tioh of this city, are intimately acquainted with the Italian,
French, English, Spanish, and German languages; and are
able not only to read, but even to write in them, with care and
correctness. The boys who are found deficient in literary talent,
are instructed in those arts or trades, for which they may mani-
fest a disposition; and thus painters, engravers on wood and
copper, scriveners, and draughtsmen, of very considerable merit,
have had their education in this institution. Four of the prin-
cipal engineers, and designers, in the employment of the govern-
ment, were among the pupils of the pious Assarotti. Each of
the trades, too, has its representative among them, as printers,
bookbinders, shoemakers, carpenters, and tailors; and the fe-
males are instructed in needlework, embroidery, and the manu-
facture of artificial flowers, in which Genoa is so distinguished.*
But here we are at Turin. This city, about the middle
of last century, had the honor to produce one of the most
transcendent geniuses the world ever saw ; I mean Lagrange,
who produced that masterpiece of mathematical analytical gene-
ralization, the “ Mecanique Analytique.” The site of the city
is in the well-cultivated plain of Piedmont, sheltered on the
north and west by the Alps. Its population is over 120,000, or
what Melbourne and its suburbs were supposed to contain a
year or so ago. Its university consists of five faculties, divinity,
law, medicine, surgery, and arts, f The faculty of arts has the
following courses : —philosophy, including experimental physics,
five professors; mathematics, including hydraulics and mechanics,
four; chemistry, including pharmaceutics, four; belles lettres
and philology, three; natural history, two; fine arts, four.
Among the most celebrated professors of this university are the
orientalist Peyron; the astronomer Plana; Boucheron, professor
of Greek and Latin eloquence; and Gilbert, professor of che-
mistry applied to the arts. The accessory establishments are, a
library with 112,000 printed volumes and a rich collection of
manuscripts, which is open to the public every day except fes-
tivals ; a museum of antiquities and the Egyptian museum ; the
museum of natural history; the anatomical and pathological mu-
seum ; a fine botanical garden, | particularly rich in plants of the
Alps; a collection for the purpose of experimental philosophy ;
two chemical laboratories, and, lastly, an hydraulic establishment,
in which a course of experiments is made every year in the
* “ Dublin Review,” vol. xiv., p, 114.
+ These and other statistical details have been taken from the “ Bolletino Sta-
tistico ed Economieo” of Milan; Count Serristoii’s Saggio Statistico dell’ Italia,”
&c. &c. See “ Quarterly Journal of Education.”
| The first botanic garden of modem times was formed at Pisa in 1543, and
within twenty-five years after there followed in rapid succession the gardens of
Padua, Florence, Bologna and Rome.


months of May and June, at which the students of hydraulics
are obliged to attend. The students of the university number
about 1200 annually. The Royal Academy of Sciences, begun
as a private society at Turin in 1759, by the great Lagrange, is
divided into two classes, mathematical and physical sciences, and
moral, philological, and historical sciences, and bears on its roll
an illustrious list of great literary names. The academy has
published about thirty volumes of memoirs, which are known
and referred to by all the first scientific men throughout the
world. There are twenty-seven royal colleges in the chief towns,
and fifty-four commercial colleges in the smaller towns, besides
about 150 grammar schools, without counting episcopal semina-
ries ; and there are also schools for drawing applied to the me-
chanical arts, and schools for the deaf and dumb and blind. *
And now let us post to Lombardy. This portion of Italy,
extending as you see across from Milan to Venice, is under
Austrian rule. I have nothing to say of the political relations
existing between the Italians and their rulers; this is not the
place ; but it is my duty to point out to you one bright star of
glory in the imperial diadem, whose lustre must be admired by
all, though it adorns the brow of despotism,—l allude to the
educational system, that, with a bountiful plenteousness, pours
streams of healthful knowledge through castle and cottage, over
hill and dale, from end to end of the young emperor’s vast do-
minions.
Let us hear what a high authority on education said on this
point a long time ago. " All children from the age of six to
that of twelve are obliged to attend the elementary schools ; and
for this purpose, in every commune or parish, a register is made
out, previous to the beginning of the scholastic year, of all the
children of both sexes that have attained the former age; and
not only in the village is the register made, but it comprehends
also the insulated houses and cottages, mills, and barns, and
other dependencies. Poverty is no excuse, as the children of
the indigent are supplied gratis with the necessary books from
the scholastic fund. The master is particularly enjoined to im-
press on children, by words as well as by his example, the habits
of sincerity and candour; of civility and tolerance, towards one
another; and of good manners and propriety towards all. The
system of rewards consists in praising those who distinguish
* It Avas at Turin also that the great Joseph cle Maistre pursued his studies. His
work on “ Political Constitutions,” on “ The Pope,” “ The Soirees of St. Peters-
burg,’’ “ The Examination of the Philosophy of Bacon,” “ The Letters on the In-
quisition,” and “ Public Education,” are some of the most remarkable that have
appeared in the present age. Good translations have been made into English of
some of these, but it is worth the while of all Catholic students to learn French,
if only to read in the original them alone.


themselves,, advancing them to seats of honor, delivering them
testimonials marked hene or optime, registering their names in
the book of honor, and, lastly, giving them at the examination
useful books and prints, representing the events of the life of
our Saviour.
Great attention is paid to pronunciation, and provincial accent
is particularly guarded against. The practice of mental precedes
that of written arithmetic, and the latter is made practical by
being applied to calculations of domestic and rural economy,
familiar to most of the pupils. Four species of writing are prac-
tised, round, running, English, and French hands. Religious
instruction is imparted by the catechist, and also by the master
of the school. It is founded on the little catechisms and on the
Gospels and the life of our Saviour. Passages of the Gospel
must be explained once every week to the children, who are
afterwards to relate the passage and explain it in their own
words. There are several classes, and as a sample may be cited
the third class, in which during the week are given six hours’
religious instruction, including explanations of the Bible, —
two hours reading, three writing, three arithmetic, three writing
under dictation, and two introduction to written composition.
In the fourth class, the course of which lasts two years, are
taught, besides what I have just enumerated, geometry .applied
to the arts, civil architecture as an introduction to drawing,
stereometry, or measuring of solids, mechanics, natural history,
physics, and elocution. “ Upon the whole,” says the English
Quarterly Journal of Education, more than twenty years ago,
“ we consider this system of elementary, gratuitous, and obliga-
tory education as a great blessing imparted to the people of
Upper Italy; and we are rather surprised that of so many
tourists who have visited that country during the last ten years,
and many of whom have eloquently descanted on the wants and
■woes of Italy, no one has noticed this essential improvement
until a French traveller (Valery)* made it known last year.”
Again; “ The gymnasial course of studies lasts six years, and
consists of four classes of Latin Grammar and two classes of hu-
manities and rhetoric. But in each of these classes other
branches of useful knowledge are taught at the same time, and
here is the essential improvement upon the old system of college
education. Mathematics, natural history, geography, and history,
and the Greek language, form an essential part of the daily in-
struction. The German language is also taught at extra hours.
The study of the Italian language is made to keep pace with
* “Voyage Historiques et Litteraires en Italie,” par M. Valery. 2 vols. Bvo.
Paris, 1831.


that of the Latin Grammar, one being auxiliary to the other.
Languages are not to be taught as a mere exercise of mechanical
memory, but so that the students may learn the general princi-
ples of universal grammar, the nature and use of the parts of
speech, and the manner of giving a more forcible expression to
thought by transposition or change of words. The text books
are printed expressly for the use of the gymnasium. To every
gymnasium there is a catechist, who gives two hours instruction
every week on the Old and New Testaments, on the constitu-
tion of the primitive church, on the hierarchy, on the mutual
relation between the origin of the sects which have separated
and the points on which they differ from the Catholics.
Besides the extensive infant and regular day schools for older
scholars, there are Sunday, or rather holiday schools ; for in
Catholic countries, as you know, the people have more holidays
than Sundays. Boys about twelve years of age, who have left
the elementary schools and have become apprentices or journey-
men, receive instruction for two or three hours every holiday,
and thus not only retain what they have learned before, but im-
prove themselves still further; for example, they are taught
drawing applied to the mechanical arts, the principles of archi-
tecture, &c.; and these holiday schools are also frequented by
grown-up artisans who have not had the advantage of elementary
education in their youth ; and thus these institutions answer
the purpose of schools for adults, a most important part in every
complete system of universal education.
“ Of this system,” continues the Quarterly Journal of Edu-
cation, “ and more especially of the elementary part of it, we
cannot but speak with praise. Indeed it is not a little singular
that the absolute government of Austria is imparting to its
Italian subjects a much more essential and lasting benefit
than any other government they ever had. Under the
reign of Napoleon the Great popular education both in
France and Italy was shamefully neglected. He only wanted
soldiers from the people, and he had his polytechnic and other
superior institutions as nurseries of practical and professional
men, but they were few. Here, on the contrary, is a system
which is designed to make all men rational and useful members
of society, and from whatever quarter the boon proceeds, it
ought to be received with thankfulness.” So far this English
scholastic journal, and for proof that since this was written there
has been no hilling off in the energetic enlightened perseverance
of the Austrian government in regard to the education of its
people, I would refer to Kay’s Social Condition of England and
Europe, in which comparisons are made between Great Britain,


Austria, and other continental states, of a character anything
but favorable to the mother country of the English people.*
Now let us go to Milan; but first there is Bergamo, a little
north of that city, the birth place of the Jesuit Tiraboschi,
librarian to the Duke of Modena, who has produced in twelve
volumes quarto, his ■“ Storia della Letteratura Italiana ” (Rome,
1785), a work imitated and used over and over again by our
own English Hallam, and declared by him to be unique as a
complete history of national literature. It was another Jesuit
(Possevin) who founded a school of writers on the universal
history of literature; and this Hallam acknowledges, and cites
for his proof the “ Bibliotheca Selecta ” published at Rome in
1593. Morhof in his “ Polyhistor ” followed Possevin, but as
Hallam says, “ the honour of first accomplishing a comprehen-
sive synopsis of literary history in a more regular form than
Morhof, was the reward of Andres, a Spanish Jesuit, who pub-
lished in Parma from 1772 to 1779, his Origin, Progress, and
Actual State of Universal Literature (“ Origine Progresso e
Stato attuale d’ogni Letteratura ”), in twenty volumes. “ This
work,” says Hallam, “ is an extraordinary performance, em-
bracing both ancient and modern literature in its full extent,
.and in many parts with little assistance from any other publica-
tion of the kind.”
Now let us pass through Milan. It was this city that produced
the first printed treatise on algebra. The author was a Fran-
ciscan, Pacioli di Borgo, Professor of Mathematics in the Uni-
versity there. This was in 1494. At an earlier date than this,
(1476), Milan had the honor of giving the first Greek book to the
world, although Greek types had been used in Rome a few years
earlier; first in a treatise of Jerome in 1468. It was in Milan
also where the first work was published containing coloured
anatomical figures; this was in 1627. The author was Aselli,
who discovered the lacteals. The arteries and veins are repre-
sented in red, and the lacteals in black.
It was in Milan also, that that there were wont to be numerous
convents for educational and other purposes; but according to a
Protestant clergyman, the Rev. Hobart Seymour (1852), who
says he travelled there in 1851, all these have disappeared !
“ Milan,” says he, “is in a country where the whole population
* “ Alas!” lie exclaims, “ Catholic countries have far outstripped us in the eager-
ness with which they are promoting the education of their people. They under-
stand the signs of the times, hut we have yet to learn them.” Yol. ii., page 511,
There is one blemish I have noticed in this otherwise praiseworthy hook, and that
is the constant recurrence of the nickname “ Romanist.”
+ Tiraboschi succeeded the Ahhate Muratori as librarian, and caught the mantle
of that extraordinary antiquary, who has left a huge monument of learned histo-
rical research in nearly fifty volumes folio.


is Roman Catholic, where the established church is Roman
Catholic; and yet in Milan, they have a law absolutely for-
bidding the existence of nunneries ! Some years since they
suppressed every nunnery within their frontier; and last autumn
I visited the lingering relics of the last of them. In what had
been once a most magnificent establishment, there were now
only two old nuns; they were regarded as too old to be removed,
and they are allowed to remain and die there, but are absolutely
prohibited from receiving any new or younger sister; and per-
haps at the time I am speaking, those two old women are gone.
With this exception,” he continues, “ there is not a nun or a
nunnery permitted within the walls of Milan .” Now! would you
believe that there are actually twelve convents in Milan itself,
besides several others in the diocese? But such is the fact, and
this is a striking instance of that extraordinary misrepresentation
of Catholic things, that you will find almost everywhere in
Protestant literature. In the cloistered convent of the Visitation,
at the bridge of the Roman gate, which has existed for two
hundred years, and was spared from suppression by Napoleon in
1810, there is a school for young ladies of rank; and the three
other cloistered convents of the Augustinians and Ursulines
have boarding schools and poor schools. Besides, there are the
non-cloistered convents, established not only for young ladies,
but for the poor; and for the deaf and dumb; and for the edu-
cation of school mistresses from country villages; and for other
works of charity; and to crown all these there are three houses
of the dear Sisters of Charity.* But it is not my object to-night,
to expose the mistakes and misstatements of individual Protestant
authors, whether clerical or lay; I must leave that task for
another occasion, and now hasten on to Pavia.
Yet, before we turn our backs on. Milan, let us give one glance
at the magnificent cathedral, which with its hundred spires and
three thousand statues of various sizes, looks like a forest of
marble. As we gaze on the beauty and glory of this House of
God, there steal upon our minds the majestic memories of those
dear and honoured servants of the most high, St. Ambrose and
St. Augustine. For it was in this city, towards the end of the
fourth century, that St. Ambrose preached the Faith, and that
Augustine, then a teacher of rhetoric, went to hear him and was
converted.f Great and imperishable are the glories of this
wondrous doctor of the church, and perfect model of all true
penitents; and great have been the services to humanity of those
who have worn his habit and borne his name. Nearly fourteen
hundred years have rolled away, but the rule of St. Augustine
* “ Dublin Review.” Vol. xxxiii., p. 515.
f See the beautiful description given by St. Augustine himself in his Confessions.
Book v., chapter 13.


is still in force, and if that great saint were permitted to visit
these shores in mortal guise, and to wend his way to this hill to-
night,* he would find, not only those who in common with
the universal church hold his name in benediction, but in our
Pastor and Bishop himself, he would find an Augustinian.
Time prevents me. from going back to the famous Ambrosian
Library, founded by the great Cardinal Frederick Borro-
meo, or from more than barely mentioning the marvellous
Saint Charles of the same name who established Sunday
schools here three hundred years ago.f But as we journey
along to Pavia I must let you know that, about sixteen
years since, a famous statist died in the city we have
left,| of the name of Grioja. You know lam fond of
statistics, and I should not like so good a mathematician, and
such a first class political economist, to escape without notice.
He, in common with others of his countrymen, was a free-trader
in corn and provisions, before Cobden was born, and published
a work on the subject in Milan, at the commencement of the
present century. He produced likewise, with indefatigable
labour and vast research, his great . work on “ Economical
Science ” and the “ Philosophy of Statistics.” He also started
a novel and valuable principle in regard to the treatment of
criminals; and in his work on “ Rewards and Punishments”
accuses our English Bentham .of using the writings of an early
Italian economist named Hragonetti, imperfectly, erroneously,
and without acknowledgment! As I have mentioned political
economy let me (by way of parenthesis) also mention that Italy
has the honour of founding the first professor’s chair for its study.
This was done at Naples by the Abbe Intiere, and his friend
Grenovesi was the first professor. The first class was opened on
the sth November, 1754.
Now we arrive at Pavia, formerly the city of the hundred
towers. The University of Pavia dates from Charlemagne, and
* This lecture was first delivered, as now printed, at St. Patrick’s College,
Eastern Hill, Melbourne.
+ Eustace, more than fifty years ago, mentions the vast area of Milan Cathe-
dral filled with children, who were grouped into classes, having two or more in-
structors to each -—such as clergymen and lay persons of both sexes, oftentimes of
the first distinction. This beneficial practice obtained everywhere throughout
the immense diocese of the sainted Archbishop. See Eustace’s “ Classical Tour,
vol. iii., page 123. Tegg, London. 1841.
+ The celebrated economist, Count Verri, was a native of Milan. He wrote in
1769 one of the ablest essays ever published on the unlimited freedom of the
corn trade. This, and his other economical works, are to be found in the admi-
rable collection published at Milan (1803 —1810), in fifty volumes, of the works
of the Italian economists. “ Scrittori, Classica Italiani di Economia Politica.”
Edited by Baron Custodi. This series has been followed by Count Pecchio’s
“ Storia della Economia Puhlica, in Italia, ossia Epilogia Critico degli Economisti
Italiani (1 vol., 8vo), which has been translated into French and published at
Paris (1830). It is a clever, spirited, and very readable book.


though the city on which it stands is not much more populous
than Geelong, it has thirteen colleges, and the studies are
divided into three faculties:—lst. Law and Political Science.
2nd. Medicine, Surgery, and Pharmacy. 3rd. Philosophy and
Belles Lettres. There are 1400 students, and about 120 of
these are supported gratuitously. The course of law extends
over four years, and is very comprehensive, including general
statistics.* The medical faculty has the following chairs :
First year ; mineralogy, botany, zoology, introduction to the
study of medicine and surgery, and human anatomy. Second
year; anatomy, physiology, general chemistry, and animal
chemistry. Third year; introduction to the study of surgery,
theoretical surgery, dietetics, materia medica, general pathology,
semiotic pathology, clinical lectures, special therapeutics for
internal chronical diseases, clinical lectures and practice, forensic
medicine, diseases of the eye, and public hygiene or medical
police. Students of surgery follow the same routine of studies
with few modifications. To be surgeons of the first class a
course of four years is required; for the second class three
years are sufficient. In order to practise as oculists a special
course on the eye js required.
Pharmacists, or apothecaries, study mineralogy and zoology,
botany, general chemistry, animal chemistry, and pharmaceutical
chemistry,- all in one year. But to these studies they
must have had five years’ practice in a laboratory. The faculty
of philosophy has the following courses, which are obligatory:—
First year religious instruction, theoretical philosophy, pure
elementary mathematics, and Latin literature. Second year
religious instruction, ethics, physics (both theoretical and ex-
perimental), and Latin literature. The free or optional lectures,
which general students may or may not attend, are universal
history, Austrian history, natural history, rujal economy,
archaeology or antiquities, numismatics or coins, examinations in
pedagogy or the art of teaching. The course on universal
history and Austrian history are obligatory on those who wish
to take doctors’ degrees, either in law or philosophy.
Again, Austrian history, classical literature, Greek philo-
sophy, and {esthetics or the science of the beautiful, are obli-
gatory on those who aspire to be teachers of humanities. Land
surveyors must study physics, architecture, geodesy (or the art
of measuring surfaces), hydrometry (or the art of measuring
the extent of waters), and rural economy. The preparatory
* Among the text books is that of Domat. The excellent commentaries on
“ Universal Public Law,” by G-eorg-e Bowyer, D. C. L. (1854, London), are based
chiefly on Domat’s “ Traite des Loix.” Dr. Bowyer’s book merits the thoughtful
perusal of every student in Victoria.


course for civil engineers and architects, after they have studied
drawing in the normal schools, lasts three years, and consists of
physics, natural history, fluxions, theoretical and practical archi-
tecture, treatises on the appraising of buildings, mixed mathe-
matics, rural economy, hydrometry, and geodesy.
Astronomy also is taught at the Milan Observatory. The
establishments accessory to the University are the library of
50,000 volumes, which is open ten months of the year, the
Botanical Garden, the Agricultural Garden, the Cabinets of
Natural History and Anatomy, and the Meteorological Obser-
vatory.
A host of eminent professors might be named who have con-
ferred celebrity on this interesting city, and in the front rank of
all, in modern days, stands Scarpa, the Italian Cuvier, director
of the Medical Faculty of Pavia, who holds such an honoured
place in the annals of medical discovery. He died here in 1832.
It is to a professor of natural philosophy in Pavia also that
we owe the discovery of the development of electricity in
metallic bodies by means of the voltaic pile. “ The voltaic
battery,” says Sir Humphrey Davy, “ was an alarm bell to ex-
perimenters in every part of Europe ; and it served no less for
demonstrating new properties in electricity, and for establishing
the laws of this science, than as an instrument of discovery in
other branches of knowledge; exhibiting relations between sub-
jects apparently before without connexion, and serving as a bond
of unity between chemical and physical philosophy.” Yolta, who
has thus immortalized his name, and produced such important
consequences in our own day as the electric telegraph for in-
stance, and many other beautiful applications of electro-chemical
action in the chemical arts and medicine, was born at Como in
1745. At eighteen he corresponded with the Abbe Nollet,
the distinguished French electrician, on the subject of electrical
phenomena, and at twenty-four addressed a dissertation to him
in Latin on his favouritn subject. After a long life of philo-
sophic research and invention,* and, above all, of uniform
Catholic piety, he died in 1826, full of years and honor.| Be-
sides the University there is also in Pavia, a college founded by
Pope Pius Y., and another called the College Borromeo.
The other university of the kingdom is that of Padua.J The
population of Padua is about 50,000 only. Its university was
founded early in the thirteenth century, and was at one time
* Volta also invented the electrophorus and electrical condenser.
+ Galvani, his predecessor in electrical observations, and after whom the gal-
vanic battery is named, studied at Bologna, and he too was deeply religious. He
died in 1798.
+ It was a physician named Santorio, in this city, who invented the ther-
mometer.


the most celebrated in Europe, and is still highly distinguished.
In addition to the faculties that exist at Pavia there is another
for theology. Eight years of attendance are required to obtain
diplomas in law or medicine. There are about 1000 students,
61 professors and assistants, and a rector. The faculty of
theology has the following chairs :—“ Teologia pastorale,” or
theology for the use of curates; biblical archseology,* or anti-
quities ; biblical hermeneutics, or criticism of the Bible; moral
theology; introduction to the books of the Old Testament;
Hebrew and Oriental languages; introduction to the New
Testament; dogmatic theology and ecclesiastical history. The
library of the University contains 70,000 vols. The Botanic
Garden, begun by the Venetian Senate, in 1545, is one of the
oldest in Europe, and contains about 6000 plants. In reference
to medicine, though the father of modern anatomy is held to be
Mondino, who dissected as well as taught at Bologna, in 1315,
and to him has been traced the teaching of the rudiments of
the circulation of the blood, yet it was Bealdus Columbus, the
pupil and successor of the great Vesalius at Padua, who claims,
in his “ De re Anatomica,” the first establishment as an induc-
tive truth the fact of pulmonary circulation. But the even more
illustrious Fabricius of Acquapendente taught also..at Padua,
and this for the long space of fifty years. After Sylvius had
discovered the existence of the valves of the veins, Fabricus re-
marked that they are all turned to the heart, and it is marvellous
he did not follow this fact out. It was under him, however,
that William Harvey studied for two years; and, indeed,
Harvey, took his medical degree at Padua, and it was not till
many years after that he taught in London the discovery of
the circulation of the blood (1619).f Padua has not, without
reason been called the mother of medical science.|
* The father of Biblical archaeology was the Benedictine Augustin Calmet, who,
when Benedict XIII. wished to make him a bishop, humbly declined that high
responsibility. The Concordances, or Biblical Dictionaries, of Protestants, are
mostly taken from Calmet.
+ The Italians ha,ve always strenuously disputed Harvey’s right to the honour of
the discovery. The fact is, a great number of thoughtful scientific men, about the
end of the sixteenth century, had occasional glimpses of portions of the truth.
Among the first of these was the unhappy Servetus, who published his famous
Chiistianismi Restitutio in 1553, and who was pursued to the stake by John
Calvin, “ not so much” says Hallam “ for his heresies as for some personal offence
he had several years before given ” to that gentle reformer! —“ History of Litera-
ture,” vol. i., p. 553. Eealdus Columbus came next, and then that extraordinary
genius Cesalpin, on whose behalf both Tiraboschi and Corniani stoutly contend.
Hallam in the work just quoted, treats the whole question fully.
J It was on the mountains of Padua also that Arduino, in 1759, deduced from
original observations the distinction of rocks into primary, secondary, and tertiary.
Whewell acknowledges that the study of organic fossils was first pursued with
connexion and system in Italy. “ History of Inductive Sciences,” vol. hi., p. 493.
Brocchi, in his preliminary discourse to his “ Conchologia Fossile Sub-apeninna”


And now we come to Venice, once the mistress of the seas,
whose republic was destroyed by Bonaparte in the present age,
after an existence of more than a thousand years. This city is
shaped like a hat fish, and lies like it in the water. Its streets
are canals, and on those silent highways, where carriages and
horses are useless, glides the graceful gondola. The library of
St. Mark contains 65,000 volumes and about 5000 manuscripts.
Its churches are truly magnificent, and that not only in archi-
tecture but in sculpture and painting. Their description, with
that of the splendid family marble mansions which adorn the
city, would fill volumes. There is a naval college established
and the usual schools, and besides these there is also in the
neighbourhood an Armenian convent, as well worthy a visit and
a description as is the Chinese College at Naples, which re-
markable institution it would be well worth our while to imitate
in Victoria.* It was in Venice in 1536 that the first gazette or
newspaper was published. It was here also the famous Aldine
editionsf of the Classics were produced by the learned Aldus
Manuzio, who invented the type now known as italic. Here
also Benedetti, in his “ Speculationem Liber,” showed, in 1585,
the way to the first law of motion; and here, also, Galileo, in
his “ Nuncius Sidereus,” published, in 1610, his discoveries of
Jupiter’s satellites, which he saw with the telescope he had made
the year before. It was here, too, that the first printed Euclid
was produced. Ratdolt, of this city, in 1482, said that he had
then overcome the printing of diagrams for the first time. And
very beautiful they were ; far superior to the generality of those
produced now a days. Here, also, the first treatise on book-
keeping was printed, namely, the “ Summa de Arithmetica,” by
Lucas Pacioli, a learned ecclesiastic, in 14944 You know that
the system of bookkeeping most in repute in the present day is
that of the Italian method or double entry, and I think it would
be well if some of our citizens who occasionally figure in our
Bankruptcy and Insolvent Courts were made aware of that too,
and would straightway put themselves in a position to be grate-
ful to the old Franciscan priest of Venice, by learning how to
keep their accounts in future on a just and scientific system.
Banks, too, the present pride of commerce, were founded in
has done ample justice to his country by describing a series of geological writers
such as no other country can produce. See Cardinal Wiseman on “ Science and
Revealed Religion,” vol. 1, p. 278 ; Dolman, London.
* See “ Dublin Review,” vol. xviii., p. 112.
f It will be useful for the student to remember that the invention of the art of
printing took place about 1450. The first known planted work is a Latin bible,
completed in binding and illuminating at Metz (as it is supposed in 1455), on the
feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
j; “ Dublin Review,” vol. six., p. 447,


this city. Scherer (in his Allgemeine Geschichte des Welt-
handels, yol. 1., p. 326-9), says, “the constitution of the bank
of Venice in the twelfth century was based upon such sound
principles that it has served as a pattern for the establishment
of banks in other countries, and the administration of its affairs
was conducted with such conscientiousness that its credit was
never shaken.” I may ‘slso mention that Innocent IV. was one
of its early depositors; and thus you see that in actively patron-
izing the Colonial Bank of Australasia, onr representative, John
O’Shanassy, is only imitating what a good Pope did six hundred
years ago.
Now let us trace our way back to the western shores of Italy,
and turn a little south. We have to pass, you will observe,
through the little duchies of Parma* and Modena (and even these
have their universities, and hundreds of students and numerous
celebrated men of learning), and then we arrive at Tuscany.
Tuscany, according to Scherer, was during the middle ages
the first industrial country in Europe; but nations, like indi-
viduals, have their times of brightest fame, till some rival object
comes to eclipse their glory ; and so it was with Tuscany, and,
I doubt not, so it will be with many a power that now lords it
grandly over the little peoples of the earth. Tuscany, however,
still manufactures nearly every article she requires for herself,
and her excellent productions in the shape of china, earthen-
ware, carpets, hats, and the yield of her extensive copper mines,
attest the industry of her graceful-mannered and ingenious popu-
lation. Her valleys are garden-like, and yield the richest and
sweetest of wines and oils. Laing, the Scotch traveller,* attri-
butes the great superiority of this beautifully cultivated region,
Avith regard to agriculture, over the other states, to the system
of small farms, and the fact that forty-eight families out of every
100 have land of their own to live on; but be that as it may,
he says, from his oavh observation, “ that Scotland or England
can produce no one tract of land to be compared to the Vale of
Arno, not to say for productiveness, as that depends upon soil
and climate, which Great Britain has not of similar quality to
compare, but for industry and intelligence applied to husbandry,
for perfect drainage, for irrigation, for garden-like culture, for
clean state of crops, for absence of all waste in land, in labour,
or in manure, for good cultivation, and, in short, the good con-
dition of the labouring cultivator.” f
* “ Notes of a Traveller,” part ii., p. 255.—Murray’s Traveller’s Library,
t Italy was the first country in modern times to revive this beautiful art. Cres-
cenzio of Bologna wrote a work called “ In Commodum Ruralium,”in 1300, which
on being printed in Florence, in 1478, was soon followed by a long line of excellent
writers on the subject. The monks of Chiarevalle had become celebrated as hy-
draulic engineers in the thirteenth century, and were consulted and employed as


jS ow let us talk again of modern education. Every city and
considerable town in Tuscany has its academy of science and
literature, under the patronage of the state, besides new institu-
tions which are frequently springing up in private society.
At all the seminaries and colleges the sum demanded of the
students is so low that it may be considered as only an equiva-
lent for board. Instruction is uniformly gratuitous. At both
the universities of Pisa and Sienna scholarships have been
founded, to the benefits of which students are admitted by ex-
amination. At Sienna are exhibitions enabling students after
taking degrees to prosecute their studies for six or even ten
years at foreign universities.
Servants and the rest of the people in the large towns can
generally read and write, and it is the fault of parents if they
do not learn to do so in the country likewise, as the provision
for gratuitous education is universal.
Besides the schools for elementary instruction (including
Latin) which every communita is obliged to maintain, there are
Lancasterian schools,* patronized by the monks of the pious
schools. In every one of the six sections of Florence, and in the
corresponding divisions of other towns, there are likewise gra-
tuitous schools, well conducted as the consequence of their
being under the immediate influence of public opinion. And
there is a noble institution where 800 girls are boarded and
taught and provided for in future. The very Casa-di-Lavoro,
or house of correction, now has a respectable school attached to
it. Wherever the nuns have a conservatorio for young ladies
they are obliged likewise to keep an open school for reading,
writing, and work for the lower classes, the nuns of Florence
being alone excepted from this obligation, in consequence of the
abundant provision otherwise made here for gratuitous female
instruction.
Now let us come to the top of Fiesole,
Where Galileo’s glass by night observed
The phases of the moon. Look ! round below,
On Arno’s Yale, where the dove-coloured steer
Is ploughing up and down among the vines.
While many a careless note is sung aloud,
Filling the air with sweetness; and on thee,
Beautiful Florence ! all within thy walls,
Thy groves and gardens, pinnacles and towers,
Drawn to our feet.f
such by Emperor Frederick the First. See “ Loudon’s Encyclopaedia of Agricul-
ture.” Longman.
* It should he remarked that the system of educating children in graduated
hands, taught and instructed by one of themselves, for which Lancaster and Bell
enjoy so much rival fame, was in universal use among the Jesuits before the seven-
teenth century. See “ Charles Butler’s Memoirs of the English, Scotch, and
Irish Catholics,” vol. iii., p. 241.
+ “Roger’s Italy,” a work of exquisite elegance, which, illustrated as it is by
Turner, forms a beautiful union of genius in poetry and art.


Here in the thirteenth century was the melancholy Dante
born. He, on whom people used to gaze while he passed along,
and whisper to each other as his sad face disappeared, “ It is he
who has seen hell.” * Here also dwelt in the same age the friends
Petrarch and Boccaccio; the latter of whom, notwithstand-
ing the excesses of his early Tom Moore-like writings, thanks
be to God, died as a Christian penitent. Here Cimabue, the
father of modern Christian painting, taught the poor little shep-
herd boy Giotto, whom he found in a valley near Florence
tending sheep, and sketching one of his flock on a slate with a
pointed stone.f Here Giotto eclipsed his master, and gave the
grace and life to canvas which were afterwards so prodigally de-
veloped in the wonderful masterpieces of Raffaelle. Here, too,
Lorenzo Ghiberti, the great modeller and caster in metal
laboured £f con grandissima diligenza e grandissimo amore,”
“ with infinite diligence and infinite love,” and produced such
works that Michael Angelo even, speaking of the great Scripture
gates of San Giavanni, declared them worthy to be the gates of
Paradise ! To the study of Lorenzo there repaired often the
great talent of Florence, and among his visitors was Paolo
tJccelli, the first who applied geometry to the study of perspec-
tive, for whom Manetti (one of the earliest Greek scholars and
mathematicians) translated the elements of Euclid. Here came,
also, b iniguerra, who invented the art of engraving on copper;
Pollajulo, the first painter who studied anatomy by dissection,
and taught Michael Angelo and the marvellous artist Masaccio
or Slovenly Tom, who studied under Masolino, the best colourist
of his time. Masaccio was the first who successfully fore-
shortened the extremities, and in his fresco of St. Peter baptiz-
ing the converts, there is a youth who has just thrown off his
garment, and stands in the attitude of one shivering with sudden
cold. This figure, says his Jesuit biographer, Lanzi, formed an
epoch in art. He seemed to paint souls as well as bodies. In
the chapel of the Brancacci, wherein are the master pieces of
Masecchio, “ stood oft and long, oft till the day was gone,”
Raphael and his mighty rival Michael Angelo. It was there,
they and kindred minds drank in their fill of beauty and force in
art. Here, too, in Florence, lived the Dominican Fra Angelico,
* Those who cannot read the beautiful original of Dante’s wondrous “ Vision ”
should procure the translation of Cary, published by Bohn, London.
+ Nicola Pisano, who first sculptured marble from life, was perhaps the most
extraordinary genius as an artist in the thirteenth century, and who may be con-
sidered to have given the greatest impulse to modern art. He who would know
middle age art should read Vasari, who is the very Plutarch of artists; and
also Lanzy Both are published in Bohn’s library edition. Also Bather Mar-
chese’s “Lives of the Painters, Sculptors, and Architects of the Order of St. Do,
minic,” translated by the Kev. C. P. Meehan. Duffy, Dublin.


the founder of the mystic and spiritual school of painting, with
whom the practice of a beautiful art was a hymn of praise, and
every creation of his pencil an act of piety and charity, and who
in seeking only the glory of God earned an immortal glory
among men. “To Angelico the art of painting a picture devoted
to religious purposes was an act of religion, for which he pre-
pared himself by fasting and prayer, imploring on bended knees
the benediction of Heaven on his work; he then, under the im-
pression that he had obtained the blessing he sought, and glowing
with what might be truly called inspiration, took up his pencil,
and, mingling with his earnest and pious humility a singular
enthusiasm, he could never be persuaded to alter his first draft
or composition, believing that which he had done was according
to the will of God, and could not be changed, for the better
by any afterthought of his own or suggestion from others.”
The beauty of holiness is the essential characteristic of all his
works. *
Here Raffaelle, at the age of twenty-one visited the great
Dominican Friar, Fra Bartolomeo, and cultivated a friendship that
has shed a benificent influence on art. Fra Bartoloiueo’s paintings,
like those of Angelico, were eminently imbued with a' spirit of
sanctity, and Sir David Wilkie, speaking of the merits of the
Friar’s Picture of our Lady, declares it to combine the merits
of Raphael, of Titian, of Rembrandt, and of Reubens. “ Here,”
he says, “ a monk in the retirement of his cloister, shut out
from the taunts and criticisms of the world, seems to have an-
ticipated in his early time, all that his art could arrive at in its
most advanced maturity.” f
Here too dwelt old Andrea Verrocchio, the goldsmith and
sculptor, in marble and bronze, who first took casts in plaster
from life; and to him came the miracle of his age, Leonardo
da Vinci, who, like bis contemporary Alberti, was one of the
greatest mathematicians and mechanics of his time, as well as
* But the most wonderful work of this holy painter, next to his “ Final Judg-
ment,” is the “ Deposition from the Cross.” The beauty therein depicted of the
elect and of the angels is said to he indescribable. Montalembert exclaims with
a devout enthusiasm: “What a superabundance of love of God, of immense and
burning contrition must that dear Angelico have had the day that he painted this !
How he must have wept and meditated that day in the retirement of his cell on
the sufferings of our Divine Master ! Every stroke of his pencil, every tint, seems
to have had so many acts of love and sorrow springing from the depths of his
soul. What a touching sermon is not the sight of such a picture ! Oh ! delicious
masterpiece ! Oh ! what a happiness, what a grace to be able to contemplate this
marvellous representation of the Passion of our Lord! . . . Others look on
it merely as a work of art. I have derived consolations and profound lessons from
it.” Vandalisms et Catholicisms dans I’Art. See also “ Vasari,” and Mrs. Jamie-
son’s pleasing little work, “ Memoirs of the Early Italian Painters.” Knight,
London.
f Life of Sir David Wilkie, vol. ii., p. 451.


architect, chemist, engineer, musician, poet, and painter. “ The
fragments,” says Hallam, “of his writings which have been
published, strike us with something like the awe of preter-
natural knowledge ; for in the compass of a few pages, he an-
ticipates the discoveries of Galileo, Kepler, and Castelli; the
system of Copernicus, and the very theories of recent geologists;
and he laid down the grand principle of Bacon, that experiment
and observation must be the guides to just theory in the investi-
gation of Nature.”
But I must not linger on the prodigies of genius that have
displayed themselves in Florence; even the wonderful Savona-
rola I must pass by, and Michael Angelo too, who as an architect
was and is the wonder of the world; and Raffaelle also, the
greatest of painters, who (though not born in Florence, lived
there for a long -time) we must leave for another night, when I
hope we shall get to Rome.
I must mention, however, that it was in Florence where
Galileo and Castelli,* Torricelli (who discovered the barometer)
and Yiviani (the great geometer, who when a lad of seventeen,
became a pupil of. Galileo, and at the height of his fame liked
to b» called the -old man’s disciple) pursued their investigations,
and made their calculations relative to filling bodies, inclined
planes, pendulums, projectiles, spouting fluids, and the laws of
motion; and produced a class of writers.on these subjects, the
benefit of which the world then felt, and will feel in all time to
come. Although the discovery of the satellites of Jupiter and
the phases of Venus were sufficient to make Galileo world-
famous, yet his discovery of the true principles of mechanics, is
looked upon by philosophers as his highest claim to glory.
Castelli was the astronomical assistant of Galileo at Florence,
and his “ Treatise on Running Waters” is the first on this
subject. “Montucla,” says Whewell, “with justice calls him
the creator of a new branch of hydraulics.” Indeed, the
Italians have always been zealous cultivators of the doctrines of
motions of fluids, and have applied their discoveries to great
practical purposes in respect to their beautiful rivers.
I have mentioned projectiles, and this puts me in mind that
the great siege operations that have recently excited the atten-
tion of the whole world, and riveted it on Sebastopol, were
conducted on the experiments of Yauban, the Military En-
gineer, who owed all the learning he ever got in reading,
writing, arithmetic, and geometry, to a Prior of St. John’s, and
who followed the principles of the Italian engineers.
* Castelli, bom in 1577, was a Benedictine, and taught mathematics at Pisa and
Rome. It was he who was successful in carrying off the stagnant waters of the
Arno. He died in 1644.


The first telescope, that of Galileo, is still at Florence, and
you may see it in the Museum of Natural History there.* On
it are inscribed the words of Lanzi, that “ with this Galileo
discovered the spots of the Sun, the Lunar Mountains, the
satellites of Jupiter, and as it were a new universe.” f
One of these nights I hope to talk to you about Galileo and
the famous persecution which is so often flung in the face of the
Catholic Church, and you will then see how careful you must
be in giving credence to the things that are urged against her,
and how little there is to fear from a thorough exposure of all
the circumstances connected with this and every other cause of
accusation against our most Holy Mother, the Spouse of
Jesus.
The names telescope and microscope were given to those
instruments by Frederico Ctesi,| the founder of the Lynx
Academy at Lome, whose services to science have been com-
memorated by the botanist Brown, who has given the name of
Ccesia to a class of Australian botany, in commemoration of the
fact that Cassi was one of the first to make accurate observation
on fossil woods, and to discover the system of propagation of
ferns.§
Recurring again to the moderns, I may mention that the
Marquis Tempi, some years ago, founded a school at Florence,
in order that artizans might receive instruction in geometry,
mechanics, and dynamics. The Abate Lambraschini also
established a holiday school at I iligni, in the Val d’Arno, in
which linear drawing, and perspective, and the elements of
geometry and mechanics are taught, as well as reading and
writing. And similar schools exist all over Tuscany. The
most admirable of all, however, are the pious schools of Florence,
and their peculiar excellence consists, says the journal I have
before quoted, in their mode of teaching, which is this, that
instead of adhering to the beaten track of their predecessors,
they have their eyes and ears perpetually open to every kind of
improvement in education; and they study new systems of
metaphysics, morals, &c., with the view of making their pupils
acquainted with them.
* This remarkable museum merits much more than a passing glance, hut it is
impossible in a single lecture even to name all that is admirable in relation to
science and art in a city like Florence. For example, there is the surprising col-
lection of wax anatomical models, which alone occupies fifteen chambers.
+ “ Dublin lie view,” vol. xviii., p. 1.
J Torricelli is said to have been the first to construct microscopes with globules
of glass melted in the flame of a lamp. He died in Florence in 1647, at the early
age of thirty-nine. He was taught mathematics in a school of the Jesuits; a
body of men whose success in mental and moral training, has extorted even the
eulogy of a D’Alembert and a Voltaire.
§ Cardinal Wiseman on “Early Italian Academies” Essays, vol. iii., p. 581.


In fact, the schools at Florence and Sienna are in the greatest
repute, owing principally to the distinguished talents of the
Padre Ricca, in natural philosophy and natural history, at the
latter place; and the still greater fame of the Padre Inghirami,
who is director of the observatory, and may be called astronomer-
royal, at the former, both of whom have published several works
connected with their respective branches of science. The pro-
fessors of these two celebrated establishments proceed from the
humblest elementary teaching to the highest branches of know-
ledge.
There is also no lack of books in Florence, for that city is
indebted to the Count D’Elci for the gift of a magnificent
library, estimated at the value of £lOO,OOO sterling, collected
by himself, comprising a vast number of rare works in various
languages. This princely gift, for the reception of which the
Grand Duke has erected additional apartments to the celebrated
Lorenzo- Mae d ice a n Library, forms the fifth of those noble
institutions which are now open to the public. The charming
library of the Accademia delle Belle Arti, may indeed be said
to make the number six, as permission is granted to any respect-
able person to read there.
Again, another precious bequest to Tuscany by one of her
nobles, was the foundation of an Academy of Mutual Instruc-
tion, in the arts, sciences, and languages, by the Count Luigi
Bardi, and a variety of other instances might be cited of the
enlightenment of the polished Florentines. Can you wonder,
then with all these appliances for the development of the mind
in a population of less than 100,000, that a great proportion of
eminent statesmen and public officers in Tuscany have arisen
from the lowest rank of life ?
But so it is, and the like was known in days gone by, and
with the testimony of Scherer* on this point, I will for this
evening conclude.
He says, “ the noblest families in Florence originally sprang
from trade and industry. The Pazzi, the Capponi, the Buondel-
monti, the Corsini, the Falconieri, the Portinari, were bankers,
cloth manufacturers, and exporters. But the Medici in par-
ticular, having by successful commercial operations in wool,
cloths, and spices, risen from an obscure origin, to be the
wealthiest house in Europe; seized on the helm of the state,
and entered with dignity into the line of legitimate and heri-
ditary princes. In actions of public magnanimity, as well as
private beneficence, in the fostering protection of art and science,
no monarch of their times can compare with Cosmo and Lorenzo
di Medici. Florence holds so eminent a place in the history of
* Allgemeine Geschichte des Welt-liandels. By H. Scherer, Leipsig, 1853.


commerce, precisely, because mercantile knowledge was there
based, not on experience and custom merely, but on theoretic
instruction. Two of her merchants, Pegolotti and Antonio da
Uzzano, who lived in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, are
the authors of the first manuals for the commercial sciences. In
these, they furnish information as to the emporiums of trades,
wares, coins, weights, measures, merchants usages, bookkeeping,
bills of exchange, insurances, land and sea freightage, and many
other subjects, which show, that in all these, new auxiliary aids
and institutions of commercial dealing, Florence was particu-
larly well versed and skilled ; that she possessed not mercantile
routine merely, but mercantile intelligence; and looked on trade
as a matter of higher science and earnest investigation.
“ Even at the present day, mercantile business in its various
departments shows by the number of technical Italian words it
has adopted, and which are current in every country, the stamp
of its Italian origin and early cultivation. To modern times,
doubtless belongs, the merit of astonishing progress and im-
provement in this department; but we must not forget the debt
of gratitude we owe to the past; and it is the especial duty of
the historian to reanimate and ensure the remembrance of
ancient deserts.”
With this ends my first lecture on Catholic Civilization and
Education. I have taken you purposely among what are
vulgarly thought to be a very benighted people, and have
looked at them in a mere worldly light. And although we have
scarcely crossed the threshold of Christendom as yet, and have
left unnoticed thousands of bright golden facts to reward the
toil of those who may tread in our footsteps; still I trust you
have seen enough in one night to convince you that the Church
is not, as she is so often represented to be, an enemy to Secular
Education—or to the progress, among her children, of human
knowledge and high civilization ; but that, on the contrary, she
has been, and is, notwithstanding that this is not the first and
greatest object of her existence, the faithful Promoter of Art,
Science, and Commerce, and of all Liberal learning.
Jphl&e UTaQtta |jams.
Goodhugh & Hough, Printers, Flinders Lane East.
26
CATHOLIC EDUCATION, ETC,




