

Reuftioufe PAna
RECOVER THEIR OWN LAND.
ISAAC MERMELSTEIN,
“ Alas! the battling reformer, too, is from time to time a needful and
inevitable phenomenon. Obstructions are never wanting. The very
things that were once indispensable furtherances become obstructions,
and need to be shaken off and left behind us—a business often of
enormous difficulty. ” — Cablyle.
PUBLISHED BY H. T. DWIGHT
(NEAR PARLIAMENT HOUSES).
AND MAY BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.
PRICE ONTB SHILLING. 18
' & 9
■\ls I X
I ' * ' bwi




APPEAL TO THE JEWS
RECOVER THEIR OWN LAND.
ISAAC MEEMELSTEIN.
“ Alas! the battling reformer, too, is from time to time a needful and
inevitable phenomenon. Obstructions are never wanting. The very
things that were once indispensable furtherances become obstructions,
and need to be shaken off and left behind us—a business often of
enormous difficulty.”— Carlyle.
HUlbouriu :
PUBLISHED BY H. T. DWIGHT
(NEAR PARLIAMENT HOUSES).
AND MAY BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS,
iPIRICE 03STE SHILLING.


■
•
*
•
• *
•
4 : *
, •
f
•
• t
•
. •
§
.
• v • ? m
§
* •
f
•
■ •
• , ♦
■
•
♦ »
‘ •
•
*
%
•
•
•
• •
' t
. 1 4
■
• • . ’ ■ • •
♦
* *
■
S • ;■ ,
•
t
•
• ' . *
* .
.
•
•
•
•
**
%


TO THE READER.
'The history of the following letters is a short one. When
■Garibaldi was triumphant in Italy, I addressed these letters to
my brethren the Jews. Mr. Milner, of Melbourne, came and
requested me to confide- them to him, to send them to Iris
brother in Scotland, as a contribution to the periodical edited
by the latter. I gave them to him with the understanding
that they would be published or returned. His brother, whose
periodical is devoted to deep-water baptism, under which
Christians are manufactured, not finding these letters dipped
in the element he breathes, could not, with a clear conscience,
admit them into his pagfcs, and perhaps devoted them to the
opposite element. Hot being bound by the promise of his
brother and agent, he would not surpass his national liberality
to send them back and pay postage. His brother’s fire, in
demanding them, the waterman had no difficulty in quenching.
As I had no copy, I was obliged to leave them. A few days
ago I met amongst my papers a pencil-marked scrap of the last
letter. This revived my desire to publish them ; and I sat
down and w r rote from memory as well as I could. The matter
is the same as in the former; the words are not likely to be the
same, seeing that full three years have passed since the others
were written. I now send them to the press dry, without any


iv
p
other water-baptism than is found in this page; but I trust
that the reader will not regret the scarcity of the unstable
waters, when he finds something more solid and more warming.
Of the contents, I can only say that I fear no refutation.
Prejudiced minds may not profit, but cannot gainsay ; and of
unprejudiced minds I sincerely request that whe*e I have
failed-they might in brotherly love point it out to me, having
first comprehended what I advance; then they will have the
acknowledgment and thanks o£
ISAAC MERMELSTEIN.


AN APPEAL TO THE JEWS
RECOVER THEIR OWN LAND.
LETTERING. I.
To my Brethren and Sisters, Sons and Daughters of
Abraham after the Flesh.—Dear Fellow Exiles, The stirring
tidings that reach our ears of the shaking of nations, falling
of dynasties and changing of thrones, encourage me to address
you on the subject that has been long graven on my heart by
a pen not of human make. Hitherto it found no vent except
in the silent tears of my eyes and the suppressed groans of
my distressed soul; for no hearts but yours could compre-
hend so well the grief of a soul weighed down by the sorrows
of a people and the woes of a great and beloved nation—of
other ears I may say with our prophet, “ They have heard
that I sigh, but none does comfort me.” But now that tyrants
are made to fly, dungeons open their iron gates, and their
inmates are again permitted to breathe the pure breath of
Heaven, the common gift to man and beast; when I hear
that one noble but distressed nation has found deliverance, I
■can no more keep the devouring flame in my own bosom ; I
will speak in your ears, and when you muse on the words,
perhaps your hearts too will be warmed within you. A sacred
duty calls me, and I will not be disobedient; with a full
reliance on Heavenly support, my task cannot be too heavy ;
it is that of a remembrancer, to remind my brethren of the
honor and happiness of our ancestors. This ought to cheer
your hearts, and if I must likewise recall to mind the fatal
disasters that overtook them, the bitter consequences of which
are now before us, it will be in order that we may seek for the
proper remedy when the nature of the disease is known. In


the clouded sky and frowning heavens over our heads, what
do we read but the telling questions, “ Are there brave hearts
amongst the swarthy sons of Italy, but none amongst the
exiles from Canaan V’ “Is it from the bosom of Jacob’s pro-
geny only that generosity jhas fled V ’ “Do they upturn a deaf
ear to the call of duty V’— Try them, speak to them, and judge
not my people beforehand. \ es, my God, my heart replieth,
make me as a wall of brass for lam frail; put thy words
into my mouth; and I will declare it unto them ; and, though
they should forbear to hear it, and count me as their enemy,
“ For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace”;—her sons shall
hear the voice of one of themselves calling them to liberty,
that precious thing to which for centuries we were strarfgers
shall now again be sounded in your ears, whence it may find a
■way to the heart; some cords touched will then respond
<l Liberty the Caves of Carmel and Mountains of Lebanon
shall re-echo “ Liberty;” again shall it be asked “What
aileth you mountains that ye skip like rams, and ye little
hills like lambs I”—the captives are delivered, the prisoners
are free, shall be the response —the ransomed of the Lord have
returned. Some of you knowing that we are dispersed under
the whole heavens, and by consequence very feeble, and
remembering the enervated state and crushed spirits of our
people, will tell me that the recovery of our fatherland by us,
so long unaccustomed to wield the sword, is an impossibility,
and he that proposeth such a thing will only “ make our
savour to be abhorred” in the eyes of the nations where we
dwell: others will shake their heads at the contemplation of
the cost of blood and treasure which such an undertaking
would involve. I therefore, at once, hasten to disabuse you
from the idea, that I mean you to spend any of your trea-
sures, though it would be worth to exchange the gold of
Korah for the heritage of Jacob; nor have I forgotten that
enough of our blood was spilt by the nations, and not one
drop "more would I recommend to be sprinkled on the altar of
Mars. Tli ere is a way to shake off our fetters without
carnage, loose our chains without being infuriated against the
usurpers of our estates. We may once more and for ever lift
up our heads, recover the gift of the Most High to our fathers,
and resume possession of it, without arousing the ire of the
nations amongst w'hom we are dispersed.'


Some will say, this is a dreamer, and even for a dream it is
too good to be true. Oh, dearly beloved, this is ruin—shame
should cover the coward lips that utter such words ! What,
has hope too fled ? has expectation also vanished 1 Alas ! it
is not cowardice, it is the extent of our misery that I see
before me ; their'hearts are broken, their heads bowed down,
their minds desponding, and the ray of light sent to cheer
them is too weak to penetrate the generous soul, the feeble
voice raised to animate them is lost in the abyss of their woes.
Great is their calamity, and heavy the load of their oppres-
sion ; for this, let our hearts be poured out like water, let the
streams descend abruptly from our eyes ; our broken sobs
shall reach the Holy One of Heaven. He that addresseth you
is no stranger to sorrow, he has long fed upon grief, he is not
unacquainted with the bitterness of his own heart, or that of
others ; the misery of his people, or rather of God’s ancient
people, has long been like lead weighing down his breast; as
the dew in the morning did the rising sun discover his tears,
and as the pavilion of God did the night hide his watered
pillow; yet, though troubled, he is not hopelessly distressed ;
though perplexed and cast down, he does not despair.
Brethren and sisters, sons and daughters of Patriarchs,"
Kings and Prophets—what I declare unto you is neither dream
nor mania. I have a strong and living hope of the recovery
of the land whence w r e were driven out; what our fathers
dearly prized, and our hearts ardently long for, shall, and
must be ‘ours again—exclusively ours—no alien shall dwell
within our enlarged borders; the usurper shall hear a voice
and flee from there in horror, though none pursue him.
Heaven’s native, joy shall be written on Israel’s brow. Will
you join me in this bloodl#ss war and glorious victory 1 ? Will
you immortalise your names by this stainless conquest ? or,
will you add to my afflictions by showing that, to the voice of
honor you are deaf, to fame, indifferent; of future joys, negli-
gent ; and to a brother’s tears you reply in cruel mockings ?
Oh, how my heart would expand and my vision brighten, to
behold all of you, small and great, rich and poor, male and
female, learned and unlearned, give your hearts to this noble
work of wresting Canaan front* the grasp of the stranger. The
joy of seeing a nation rising from the dust, born and grown to
maturity in a day, requires an angel’s breast to contain it; but


alas, many of us, like children, seek their happiness in pebbles,
which, could our fathers see, they would mourn like doves
that solid happiness should not be the desire of their children.
But enough for the present, let my glowing thoughts find a
grave in my own breast, and, till I write again, believe me to
be your afflicted brother, IsaacPMeemelstein.
LETTER NO. IT.
Brethren and Sisters in Abraham our common Father. —If
I have succeeded in any measure to kindle the holy flame of
liberty in your hearts, and have raised any sanctified passion
within you ; if my former letter made some of you think with
greater affection on Zion, the City of our God ; and, if a ray
of hope for its recovery has passed before your vision, I shall
not implore but in part the grief I caused you by awakening
your sensibilities, to see and fcfel your present state. I shall
also feel more confident of your forbearance with me on- what
I shall lay before you —though I am but dust and ashes, my
sufficiency is in the Lord; should ray heart’s poetry not touch
you, it will at least unburden itself, and be prepared to carry
’ a new load. In the unfathomable counsels of Divine Wisdom,
it was written that, the land flowing with milk and honey
should .not be possessed by its rightful heirs till after they
shall have passed through great and many trials; hence,
the Very promise of it to the friend of God was not made
till “An horror of great darkness fell upon him.” The
Egyptian bondage was predicted at the same time, and in its
fulfilment the life of our progenitors was embittered by hard
servitude exacted by cruel taskmasters, but He who made the
ear heard their cries. Starnmering»Moses was reared in the lap
of Bathya ; the tyrant’s daughter became the foster-mother of
the avenger of Israel’s wrongs ; the older ho*gre\v, the deeper
did the hardships of his brethren sink into Ins feeling heart.
Neither the caresses of the princess, nor the riches of her
father’s court, nor the honours of her people,* could detract his
attention from the double misery of his flesh and blood ; their
oppression from without and debasement within, touched4iim
to the very core. “No pleasures shall lull me 911 the bed of
ease,” said the valiant man, “ the palaces of Nof and Tahpanhas
shall not resound with the song of Amram’s son whilst his


brethren groan at the brick-yard : Memphis and Thebes, your
scientific schools have not instructed Amonuthoph the Second
who Jehovah is, therefore you have no charms for me; Horeb
shall be my academy, the sands of the desert my bed, the
vault of heaven with its spangled diamonds will cover me, but
out of Egyptian soil my cry shall be louder than theirs that
kifid the clay, all heaven shall hear my meanings; I will invite
the Seraphim to bewail our lot, the Cherubim to join in our
lamentations. The distress is not that of an individual, nor is
it a tribe or family that are under the rod, but a whole nation
are ground down physically, and demoralised in their noblest
parts. I will seek, and must obtain the goodwill of Him who
dwelleth in the bush; I shall not let Him go till He blesseth
us, or He will have to blot out my name from the Book of
Life, for how can I live and know of the miseries of my
people 1 ” He spoke those flanui% words, and speaking he
fled to execute his resolution : he went in weakness, but
returned from his new college in power. Egypt was blasted by
the word of his mouth; Thebes opened her hundred gates;
Ramses, the city of the sun, built by his captive brethren, gave
up her prisoners ; the taskmasters had to look for new objects
of their cruelty, because Israel were urged and driven to glory.
From henceforward we became not only a great and free
nation, but the first among nations ; not only did heaven and
earth and all the elements contribute to our fame, but the very
finger of God wrote our annals—past, present, and to come.
Then victory followed victory, conquest succeeded conquest;
the acquisition of moveable and immoveable property was
nothing when compared to the higher conquests of civilisation
and morality. Our laws are the first that were published and
imitated; our halls of judgment became the model to the
Areopagos; the Girano-Sophists of Brahma attempted to imitate
our prophets and •Nazarites in the sanctity of their lives, con-
tempt for things that cannot be enjoyed in the grave, and bold-
ness in reproving the wicked. The elective franchise, to which
the world is at last awakening, was first shown by our tribes,
each of whom sent six of their best men to the National
Assembly; trial by jury was practised in our cities before
Europe put off her swaddling clothes ; our very edifices were
the admiration and imitation of other nations. In spite of
the ravages of time, the records of other countries testify that


kings, legislators, mighty men, wise men, rich and enterprising
men came of our nation and were the benefactors of the human
race ; who could stretch the roll that might record the names
of renown that sprung from Jacob’s loins 1 where can that
document be spread in which their mighty deeds may be
penned I—not1 —not on earth, and in heaven they are already pre-
served. It matters not whether it was as a consolation that
“Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of
her miseries all her pleasing things that she had in the days
of old,” or whether it was to enhance her misery that she
called them up to mind ; those cruel phantoms of past glory
—only dazzle my sight with their fair pictures, but elude the
least touch of my eager hand; I see them as they were, but my
heart is only racked up at the presence of those shadows, lovely
even as they are. Who now possesseth the soil that nourished
and brought up those pioneers of the world’s civilisation ? for
whom does the olive grow and the vine flourish \ who moweth
down the golden ears 1 say Carmel, speak Lebanon, your wool,
silk, and flax,_ your spices, honey and raisins, are they gathered
and enjoyed by your own daughters 1 why answer ye not 1 Ah,
like me, you mourn for your oyn and are neglected, yet you
remain faithful, for the alien has to wrench the fruit out of you
which you willingly gave to your offsprings, as the milk-giving
mother you secrete the abundance of your bosoms for those you
gave birth to. Now, you descendants of Judah, say, shall your
habitation mourn your long absence, and you love the stranger's
land ? shall the grape, fig, and pomegranate of your fathers’
planting remain covered with briers, and you lend no hand to re-
claim it 1 shall Sharon’s rose be counted vile, the gardens of
spices be turned into coal-yards, and you look on, or not even
cast a look of regret on them 1 was it the delight of our fathers to
follow the plough, dress the fig, and tread the wine, and shall
you prefer to deal in old clothes, old furniture, or the bitter
weed 1 Ah me ! the sore of my people layeth deeper than it
is suspected; by hpnour they are not stimulated ; from wis-
dom’s voice they turn aside, tears move them not, and from
pity they are far; but, to. fill up my cup of sorrow, I hear the
lepers of Israel say that the land of promise and wonder, where
the ashes of their fathers repose, is not worth the having—like
Abana and Pharfar, any river is better than the waters of
Israel; poor men, your disease is deeper than the skin, else


you might know, that apart from the rich soil, heaven’s bless-
ings are bound up with the prior possession of the land blessed
by the Lord. But now a live coal has touched my lips, lam
reminded that my people do not so lightly esteem the gift of
their God and the heritage of their fathers ; the lands of their
dispersion contain, indeed, the tabernacles of their clay, but
their noble spirits are where David’s lyre was strung, Solomon’s
wisdom uttered, and Jeremiah’s tears flowed, thither they will
hasten to.receive the patents of eternal emancipation from the
hands of their Great Deliverer, to which they are invited by
their affectionate brother,
Isaac Mermelstein.
LETTER NO. 111.
Beloved Children of my ruined Country.—You will greatly
wrong me if you suppose that my first two letters were intended
to torment you by recalling to mind our past greatness and
present fall. Consider them at least as the faint transcript of
the nursings in which my mind freely indulgeth, and shall con-
tinue to do so, as long as the seat of the Cherubim is occupied
by Omar’s mosque, and there remaineth breath in this clay of
mine; but though to me my plaints are a bitter sweet and
heart’s ease, I must suppress them, and hasten to inquire—
What were the causes that brought down our nation from the
heights of glory to the depths of dishonour 1 what changed
their felicity to wretchedness! how came the conquerors to be
conquered! why did the mere voice of Esau paralyse the hands
of Jacob! None can doubt the importance of the inquiry.
Wiry, then, were our cities left desolate, and instead of having
a fire on the.altar of our God, a fire devoured the whole of our
commonwealth ! It cannot be that at the time of our final
disaster our nation was wanting in men of courage and valour,
such as were our conquering fathers, for in spite of Roman
pride and the ravages of time with its changing fortunes, the
debris of history unanimously declare that at the very time
when Jacob’s lambs bled on the altars of Roman fury, our
nation was by no means destitute of men of herculean hearts
and minds. Since the Father of the Faithful, with a few of
his domestics, chased and defeated the five kings, every
generation produced either a David, or a Samson, or a Judah


Maccabee; there were men that taught the nations how to
respect u.s, and if they were dull of hearing they were made to
feel it; Roman blood was mingled with our own, their eagles
led captive and their generals defeated before the fiery arrow
consumed our temple. Besides, our political decline cannot
be owing to the want of able men, because it was not by might
but by the sound of the horn that strong holds were levelled
to the ground before us, it was not »an arm of flesh that smote
the invading fqe before oUr gates in the silence of the night,
closed their eyes in an eternal sleep, and sent their proud monarch
to complain of Jehovah before dumb Nisroch; now, as we owed
not our rise to the skill of men, how can our fall be ascribed
to it 1 Nor would it be true to affirm of us what is true of
other nations, that the defective laws of their ever-changing
constitutions prostrated the nation, and left them an easy
prey to the first comer. No, this was not our case, for the
laws of our constitution, originated in the mind of the
Eternal, were framed by unerring wisdom, were born in
heaven, and sent down to bless the earth by showing the
standard of purity, justice, and love ; to this very day the
minutest regulations therein contained are found to be perfection
itself, hence the prosperity of an empire, monarchy, or
republic, are found to be in proportion to their approach to,
or departure from, the policy of Israel ' even the incidental
records of their architecture, marching’orders, camps, or stra-
tagems, are full of unsurpassed wisdom, and are only neglected
as diamonds, for want of appreciation. What, then, precipi-
tated us into this abyss where we now are 1 With one voice
you all reply, that it was because we have departed from our
heaven-given constitution. This is true. The next enquiry
is, in what particular of it did the departure act sotinjuriously ?
The answer is, that it must have been the fundamental part,
for though it be true that the God of heaven be zealous for
every one of his precepts to be obeyed, hence, to have delivered
a run-away servant to his cruel master, would have been a
violation of our humane, constitution, or to have sent away a
servant after the expiration of his time*with his mere wages,
without loading him with abundance of provisions above and
beyond his due, would have equaly been a breach of the con-
stitution j yet neither of the above compassionate laws are the
fundament on which the constitution is based, and the trans-


gression of which could be alleged as the cause of our present
misery. To find out what the fundament of our constitution
is, I will lead you back to the rock whence we were hewn
out. When God chose us in Abraham to be his people, ho
did it out of his mere pleasure ; no better reason can be given
why God loved our father and his seed, than that it so pleased
him to love. When it is asked, why does the great Creator
cast the lot of one of his creatures in pleasant places, and that
of another in great straits ? why one is born under a royal
canopy, and another in a roofless hovel ? the only rational
reply is, that it so pleased the potter ; unless we resort to the
figment of Pithagoras, and believe in the transmigration of souls ;
or, in the more recent doctrine of progressive development,
which can scarcely be called an improvement on Pithagoras r
tSe modern savans, holding that man is a transmigration of a
monkey, can that the royal prince/ after his mon-
teyship, was developed into a nigger, from which he, in the
course of progression, rose to his present eminence, to be suc-
ceeded by the next monkey development. This, you perceive,
is a retrogression rather from our own Rabbi, Isaac Luria and
his disciple Lizato; they, we are told, heard the souls that
were confined in the vegetables, and birds, asking their help to
release them, which shows that they knew their identity.
But the moderns confound the identity ; but you know better
than those philosophers; if yon ask, why is one plain fertile,
producing abundance, and another, barren and sterile? The
same and only rational reply is, that it pleased the great Pro-
prietor thus to dispose of his property; to a certain extent we
can trace how the condition of each came to be as we find
them; but why they are so, will ever be hid from those who
renounce their rationality. We reply to tlijs “ why,” that it
so pleased their Maker ; so was it with Abraham, whilst yet
in his iniquity God was pleased to love him.
The laws given by the Sovereign Ruler are binding for the
same reason, namely, because they are the dictates of his
pleasure. It is true that those laws, when scrutinized and
understood, are found to be “ fittingbut it is not for their
fitness and adaptation that they are binding, but because they
are the declarations of the pleasure of God, who exercisetk.
His right to regulate His property after His own will, which
is, nevertheless, found to be holy, just, and good, and there-


fore “ fit”, for his creatures. The laws given on Sinai to be
our Constitution, though designed to make us happy, if we
fulfilled the salutary regulations it contained, was intended,
< primarily , to give a declaration of the will of the Absolute
Ruler of ’the Universe; all other objects_ were secondary to
this. A thorough comprehension of this single point, would
dispel the mist in which many are enveloped. It was, then,
by the holy will of our benefactor that we were chosen from
among all other creatures of like demerit, and were brought
under 0 a theocracy, which means, that we submitted to be
ruled by the blessed God, not only to worship Jehovah to the
exclusion of Serapis, Isis, and Osiris, but also in all other
affairs, not appertaining to the worship of God, we were to
consult his pleasure, or, to speak more correctly, all our affairs
being regulated by the divine will, every ordinary act, wouM
be an act of worship to God ; for reason He was pleased
to promulgate some general orders, whilst, at the same time,
the presence of His glory dwelt in our midst, that, should
occasion require, His pleasure might be ascertained One
Article of the Constitution provided that every individual
member belonging to the nation should be made acquainted
with the laws of their king and the regulations of their
country, on which they should constantly meditate, and invio-
lably transmit them to posterity : for this purpose, public
teachers were appointed to instruct the nation in the pfomul-
gated laws of their king. In matters of dispute between
citizens, they declared who was in the right, for,.you perceive
that a magistrate, governor, or judge, is nothing another
name for u teetche)'” instructing the parties what is light.
Now', as 'the teachers (or judges) had the care of the public
instruction, so w<ye they themselves under the surveillance of
those over whom they were set; for what else were the people
to be instructed in the laws ? Why not ask their teachers,
who were always at hand, the information they desired on any
point ? But it was to enable them to watch their governors
or teachers, that their actions be in strict conformity to the
Divine-known pleasure. lor the first time the woild was
shown a system of government, adapted to the rise and pro-
gress of humanity? the elevation of the mind, and develop-
ment of the faculties ; but though this stood for thousands of
years in our Constitution, the world, by sheer neglect, are yet


ignorant and deprived of its beneficial results. Universal
education was necessary to the mutual surveillance of the go-
vernors and governed, their necessity arose from the passion
inherent in every human breast, to act arbitrarily and do as he
pleaseth, whilst the very foundation of the theocracy consisted
in doing according to the pleasure of the great ruler • hence,
the governors, judges, and rulers, or better called, teachers of
our nation, had nothing else to do, but declare the will of the
adorable Creator. If they mistook that will, and unwillingly
departed from his prescribed laws, any citizen, by virtue of
his acquaintance with the same laws, might set his teacher
right ; but if it was a willing departure through the corruption
natural to man, the national assembly at Jerusalem was to be
appealed to; should they, too, deviate from the path of
truth, there was the bulwark of the educated nation, to rectify
their error; should they defy them, the people would know
that it was under a theocracy they lived, and their duty is to
obey God rather than men. Oh, the depth of the wisdom and
goodness of God as manifested in such benevolent laws !
Who is like unto thee, 0 Israel, a people governed by
heaven’s maker 1 In short, our teachers were to have been,
in reality, what we now see in pretence, viz., for the sake of
good order, they were chosen to guard against the infringement
of the divine laws, and in return, they were to be watched by
the people, who had all to be equally enlightened in the
declared will of God contained in the Constitution; the foun-
dation, then, of that Constitution is to be under the dictation
of God exclusively. —I remain, Brethren and Sisters, yours
for ever,
Isaac Mermelstein.
LETTER NO. IV.
Dear Brethren and Sisters in the afflictions of Joseph.—
You all, very properly, consider those as deranged, who
deny that we were the recipients of such supernatural favours
as are recorded in the oracles of God to have been bestowed
upon us. To persons blessed with healthful brains, we can
demonstrate, from facts admitted by all, that our nation must
have been favoured by the God of nature in a manner beyond
the powers of human comprehension; this is a proof that God,


who showeth mercy to whom he wisheth to show it, did guard
us with His eye. Thus, for instance, it is admitted that
Israel dwelt in Egypt, and it is not denied that they after-
wards inhabited the mountains of Judea ; how, then, did they
transport themselves from the land of Ham to their own habi-
tations ? Was it on the wings of griffins that they alighted
in the city, where their mother Sarah was the first to breathe
her last breath? Ho. What then? Were they mighty
navigators ? * Did they construct a floating island with wooden
walls and iron teeth, lade it with their living freight, their
kind Egyptian masters providing them with all kinds of pro-
visions and ammunitions of war, and thus they sailed over the
Mediterranean Sea, directed by the magnetic needle to the
Philistian land, came, saw, and conquered ? The brainless
adversary will scarcely force on us this honour. How, then,
did they come there ? It must be admitted that they came
through the desert. The Red Sea they, of course, passed on
the backs of either the* crocodile or hippopotamus ; as they
required such food that needs no fuel, of which the desert
was destitute, they could not feed on sheep, oxen, or camels,
even if those herds could have followed them j they could not
march in small detachments, for that would have been certain
ruin, as the savage tribes they had to encounter, taking them
for enemies, would have annihilated their divided forces ; they
were, then, necessitated to concentrate their forces. Now, if
the windows of heaven did not pour down angels bread on
them, on what did they feed ? And as to water ; unless they
could drag the Nile through the burning sands, whence did
they get the cooling liquid to quench their parched tongues,
if the rock did not follow them ? To reach a habitable land,
without any miraculous interposition, would have been the
greatest of miracles; and to make a sane man believe it,
requires a new miracle ; but when some supernatural events
are conceded to have overtaken us, we can well scorn the arbi-
trary denial of the rest. Now, whereas rich favours were
bestowed on us, it could not be unreasonable to demand an
implicit submission to the law and will of the great benefactor,
hence, any evasion to submit to that authority was an un-
grateful violation of the whole of the Theocratic Constitution
with which we were favoured. The choice of our first king was
regarded in this light, properly speaking, a king is


one who is arbitrary, absolute, and autocrat, whose will is the
law of his subjects, else he is either a phantom or a misnomer ;
to administer the laws of others he ought to bear the name of
administrator, which would correspond to his office. The
causes that operated to make our ancestors desire an earthly
sovereign (besides the wish to imitate the pomp of their
neighbours) were two incessant forces that were working in their
midst ; on the one hand there was, on the part of the people,
a love of ease; they were tired of meditating on the laws of
their heavenly king, and of watching the conduct of those
that administered them ; on the other hand there was, on the
part of the governors, the natural desire of being arbitrary, and
the still greater aspirations of being above the commonality
in attainments as well as in power j these were the main
causes, the love of gain and other causes were subordinated to
those. It is easy to perceive that by these two forces, the
Constitution was stabbed irf its vital functions, the abnegation
of the rest became a mere question of time, the progress of
the two fatal principles kept pace together, though in opposite
directions. As the people grew negligent and, by consequence,
ignorant, their teachers became more arbitrary and absolute,
the one scale rose, as the other fell, whereas knowledge begets
admiration and love towards the wise and good, ignorance
substituted a blind veneration for those who claimed to be so,
knowledge rendered due homage to talents and virtue,
ignorance prostrated itself before those who ought to have
possessed them. The priests, who were the teachers instituted
to guard the integrity of the Constitution, at a very early time,
succeeded in making their office, and not their actions, to be
recognised as sacred, thus the children of Eli held the people
in subjection to them, in virtue of their office, in spite of their
outrage to the Constitution and to humanity; a king was
therefore necessary, to whom the duty of the people to watch
their teachers might be delegated. Jehovah gave to his
people a king in his anger, for such a king was an anomaly;
on the one hand, he was the delegate of the nation to see that
the laws and will of God be properly administered and
executed ; and on the other hand, as a king, he had the right
to be absolute and arbitrary, and fettered by the pleasure of
none but his own. From that time the Church was in a
manner severed from the State, the civil power became


distinct from the sacerdotal, but as the education of the-
people remained in the hands of the priests, who alone pos-
sessed the keys of knowledge, the civil administration remained
in their hands by necessity. They took good care to plunge
the nation into still deeper ignorance ; the people, by their love
of ease, abandoned the word of life entirely to them; in the
course of time, it became a crime to interfere with anything
claimed to belong to those teachers exclusively; the kings,
too, who were to watch them, knowing that their very exist-
ence is a violation of the Theocratic Constitution, had no
other safety than in the eradication of it from the minds of
the people; the tools were at hand, for pride and avarice were
sufficient stimulants to those sons of Levi, to lend themselves
for the execution of this infernal deed. The means used were
to turn the hearts of the people yet more from their invisible
King and His written word, to the visible teacher. Formerly,
the support of the latter was by the alms of the people, for, as
they had no division of land allotted to them, the compassion
of the people supplied their frugal wants, the sanctity of their
calling requiring them to be living lessons to their pupils;
but, afterwards, nothing was thought of but their rights.
Before the owner gathered his harvest, flocks of teachers in-
vaded his field, demanding their share in cash, if not in kind.
The heart that does not throb at the contemplation of such
downward progress must be of adamant; the eye that has no
tear for it, is fit to be food for the raven. What the upward
progress would have been, had they adhered to the Theocracy,
is beyond human ken. We know, only, that it would have been
such happiness as an Almighty power can bestow, but that
was lost by the criminal relaxation of the people to watch over
the administrators of their Constitution; then their woes
became commensurate with their own neglect. The miseries
the nation suffered from the arrogant domineering of their
priestly governors, and the outrages they committed on life
and property, were nothing when compared with the injury
done to them by letting them fall into abject ignorance and
by substituting base coin for the word of God that is purer
than gold. Could a veil be thrown on what followed
this perfidy, humanity might have less to blush for, but
our history can no more be effaced than the sun can
be robbed of his light. Oui> desolated cities proclaim it,


our wasted fields record it, our burnt woods testify of it,
our mourning roads are the pages of our history, and every
one of us, wherever we are found, carries on his forehead the
dismal history of bygone days, and informs the beholder,
saying - “I am the descendant of those that rejected God to
reign over them, for which he gave them over to reprobate
teachers and rulers, who worked all uncleanness with
greediness.” Apart from the unchanging decrees of the
Sovereign Ruler, the relation that exists between a strict
submission to the Eternal King, and happiness, may be traced
in the constitution of human nature; for when the mind is
conscious of the presence of the worthy Master, and is confident
of his protection, guidance, and help, an undivided stream of
gratitude floweth from the heart, melted by infinite goodness,
all the affections feel the powerful sense of present safety and
future welfare; they are dignified in this exalted lowly sub-
mission, this is happiness —but when God is not the
immediate dictator and director, but the priest or teacher
stands as an iron wall between the soul and God, gratitude
must be divided, duty becometh doubtful, and devotion, formal
and lifeless. Can we imagine that the worship rendered to
God by our fathers, and accepted by him, was as cold and
heartless as the one you now present in the Synagogues ? Is
not the very idea, that the Father of all spirits would accept
such worship, derogatory to His honour ? \ et, those who
replaced our heavenly director, tell you—that the mere
repetition of certain words are a sweet smelling savour to our
God. Now, if I am correct, that the fundament of our glorious
constitution was violated when the honour of God was given
or allowed to be taken by our teachers, the question is—
whether the long dark night of trials and tribulations that
passed over our heads, and the sorrows and pains that we
endured on account of that violation, do not admonish us to
discontinue that course? We have preferred evil to good, and
chose contempt rather than honour; shall we abide by our
choice ?or shall we look to daylight ? Mine eyes have seen
boys of nine years of age, dragged from school in irons ; my
ears have listened to their shrieks for the mother’s help ; my
heart was pierced by the lamentations of the widows for those
their only sons, but the brazen heavens hurled back to earth,
their cries—l beheld the shorn lambs driven in troops like the


swine they were destined to feed in the cold regions of
Moscow. These are some of the horrors that are going on now,
they have not ceased, yet few of yon lay it to heart ; with the
grief, agony, privations, and destitutions of others, but few are
touched, just as they are unmindful of their own degradation,
what mourning, what lamentations should be raised for such
heartlessness 1 Were I to unbosom my grief to those that
sleep in the grave, and in their ears pour out the agonies of
my soul, could they afford me less consolation than the living
on whose behalf lam afflicted 1 Yet, silent I cannot remain,
I feel something of what the sage saith —“ Strong souls rise
from age to age to rouse the priests to their duty, and priests
ever hate such men; but when the word of the Lord burns in
the heart of such person it is too mighty to be restrained, he
cannot hold his words back ; others can neither understand
nor make allowance for it, to him, however, it is agony till the
word be spoken ; ask him not to speak, you might as well ask
the sea not to roar, the lightning not to gleam.” I testify to
the truth of it, though I am not a strong soul, but especially
do I speak, knowing that a time will come when my brethren
shall flock to Zion, and be the streams of the river that shall
make glad the City of our God; who knows but this is the
time, hid in the Eternal bosom '? It may be the acceptable
year of our God, and the time of Israel’s redemption prayed
for by your brother, Isaac Meemelstein.
LETTER NO. V.
Beloved Brethren and Sisters —As past history is the in-
structor of present conduct and future duties, warning us to
beware here of rocks, and there of shoals, so may present
events be made illustrative of things long past. A most
striking resemblance to our own history is presented to us in
the Christian Church, where the same causes have and are
producing similar results. The constitution of that Church is
based on the very same foundation that ours was, for a careful
examination showeth, that, whilst the inhabitants of this
world indulged in all kinds of wickedness, pride, selfishness,
and avarice reigned to an extraordinary degree, and this
universally; to cure them of it, the author of Christianity, full
of compassion, came from the abodes of bliss, more splendid


than the palaces forsaken by Moses. He not only instructed
them verbally and by mighty works, as did our man of the
waters, but He promised them a monitor, who would abide
with them for ever, and when they are prepared by that
teacher, He would himself be in their midst. This, though
quite as mysterious as the dwelling of the Highest between the
Cherubim, was powerfully demonstrated in the nuptial days of
the Church. After that, this bridegroom, with his own blood,
expatiated the sins of those he came to save—an unparalleled
act of self-denial —He broke the tomb, and resumed His seat
in the glory of His Father. The laws comprising his con-
stitution were levelled first against pride, therefore humility
was enforced by their great law-giver and exemplar, who
humbled himself to death on the Cross. As a safeguard against
pride, equality of the brotherhood was instituted, than which
nothing more would be required, and nothing less suffice—
against selfishness, was placed the heavenly law of complete
resignation, amounting to non-resisting of injuries; this was
calculated to loosen their hold on things with which they may
have to part at any moment, and at the same time keep them
constantly dependent on their heavenly friend for protection ;
and against avarice, the law of contentment w T as enforced ;
each of those laws lending a mutual help to the other in their
operations, but those, and the rest of the constitution have for
their basis, the motto —“ One is your master, in the midst
of you, who so loved you, as to give himself for you,
and he knoweth your need.” The Church made giant
strides; pagan fury could not arrest its progress; their
persecution, instead of staying its march, only accelerated
it and hastened on their own doom ; their temples were
forsaken, their sacrifices found no purchasers, their idols
■were laid prostrate before the cross ; heaven resounded with
glory to God, and earth with good-will to men. A calm
resided in every breast; their anxiety was, onty, how to
exhibit their gratitude to the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and
how they could prevail on others to become partakers of their
own joy. In the things of this life, each one lent a helping
hand to his fellow pilgrim, the poor brother was welcomed
with hearty good cheer, the rich laid up their treasures in
heaven, making the poor the medium of their deposits, the
strong box was their Redeemer’s bosom ; their strength


talents, bodies, souls, and estates were consecrated to holy
use; the hearts of the less instructed glowed with love and
admiration towards those who were more endowed by heaven;
the others, on their part, with humility, patience, love, and
holy zeal, poured out grace from their lips that fell as balm on
those that heard them. Was the teacher rich in this world’s
goods he, as a father, laid up for his spiritual children j was
he poor—if his trade did not suffice for himself and those
dependent on him, or he had the care of many, and therefore
unable to work at his trade, the frugality of his life made him
no burden to any one, if he did not carry his basket to where
the food for the poor was distributed, there were many that
vied with each other to supply his need ] to be cross-bearers
was not a mere theological expression, nor was it even
the standard of hope only, though certainly they had no
other hope but through the death of Christ. But with the early
Christians it was the standard of life and action, lust and
unholy desires had to be nailed to it, pride be buried under it,
and avarice crucified on it j a holy emulation animated them
all who shall more resemble heaven in giving to others, but
taking from none. How could a society regulated by such
divine laws be otherwise but prosperous 1 it would have been
the greatest wonder in the universe if it had failed. That was
a happy era, a blessed period for those who thus lived and so
died. This philosophical constitution provided that all should
be instructed in its laws, as did our constitution, and for the
same reasons, namely—that they may be able to discern and
beware of false prophets and try every spirit; at the same
time, all being living stones, they would be cemented together
and form one building, standing on the rock, and each looking
up to the Chief Corner Stone. Under another figure, of still
more endearing union, they were to be as members united in
a living body, guided by one head, being sustained by the
same blood that flowed through the all veins, giving joy to each
according to its capacity, and making all partakers in the pain
of each. As to sever, repulse, and scatter mankind, is the
object of the great power of darkness, to gather, bind, and
unite, was the design of the Great Light which came into the
world to institute this constitution. To blind men, by ignorance,
being the aim of the former; to have all men know what is
right, good, and true, was the command of the latter. The first


inciting men to take from others ; the last bid them to give to
others ; to take and give offence being the habit of the world ;
to do neither, was the regulation for the church. But alas, the
golden age of the church did not last long, those who were to
try the spirits abandoned the paths of knowledge, the teachers,
of necessity, became scarce ; this raised their native pride, for
the multitudes, eager to possess an instructor, enticed him by
rich offers, and “when religion begat wealth the daughter
devoured her mother.” The teachers began to set a price for
what they imparted ; by degrees the price increased till nothing
less than the souls, bodies, and estates of the hearers were
claimed to be at the disposal of the teacher; gross darkness
covered the people, and sordid avarice filled their teachers,
they were wiser than Simon Magos, who offered to pay for the
office ; scarcely was any reward enough to pay them for the
office. They soon became a separate class, severed themselves
from the union and equality of the brotherhood ; their office
and not their virtues became venerated ; he that had a fresh
cheek, quick eye, round tongue, agile hand, and was expert in
invention, no matter how brutish he might be, he was sacred ;
the poverty of the people did not prevent the priest from
increasing his pomp. Lucius, the priest, was no more turned
into a golden ass, but stupid asses became golden priests ; the
silver moon that cured the former, only deranged the latter.
As each generation advances on the proceeding one, so have
the Christian priests exceeded the wickedness of our own.
Our kings desired to usurp the priesthood; their priests
usurped royalty. Every crime of which the human race is
capable of, the priests openly led the van. Why the sun
withdraweth not his cheering rays, and the moon her genial
light; Chy the curtain of the sky is not turned into sackcloth,
and every foot of the solid earth does not become a new pit to
swallow up those sons of Korah, are questions which the
compassionate breast of the Eternal alone can answer. The
golden age had but a short duration, but nearly a double
millenium of horror and crime has passed since ; the progress
of its wheels were dyed, not by the priests of Moloch, but
those who profess to teach the benevolent constitution of
Christ. Faint efforts have been made by a few to stay the
centrifugal motion; feeble voices have been raised to redress
the wrongs of the oppressed. Luther made several holes in


the thick veil that hid the Sun of Righteousness ; others
moulded a form of godliness ; all honor to those men for the
little they have done, but the constitution of Christ none even
desired to see restored. With a lie in their mouth, many say—
<! The Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible is the
religion of Protestants,” whilst pride, selfishness, and avarice are
legalised in the name of the very constitution that was instituted
to condemn it. For their own justification they raise those
three furies so high that even A 1 Borak could not reach, and
whosoever has not ascended to the top is guiltless ; the
presence of their heavenly teacher is recognised as a theory
only ; the equality of the brotherhood is ignored in toto ; the
office of the priest is still the guarantee for his talents and
virtues ; the greatest in virtue is he who can extract the most
money from the flock, and make them hold his person in ad-
miration ; to hoard up treasures has become a duty, and to
get and keep an honor. To speak to the poor is a condescen-
tion, and an alliance with them a degradation. They are as vain
of their honorary titles as they are greedy of gain, requiring
Phaeton's car for the transport of their possessions ; they are,
nevertheless, decent pilgrims, they are divided in heart, senti-
ment, and interests, and yet, claim to be the indivisible body
of Christ. But enough, dear brethren —you can fill up the bill
of priestly deformity yourselves from the ample materials at
your command, you need no candle to search for the darkness,
you can feel it. Now, as you showed them the downward road
to corruption and misery, so lead the way to the upward path
of honor and happiness by returning to the constitution of our
God ; be the first to seek the Lord your God, and David your
king. Israel, as the first-born, ought to have the pre-eminence
in repentance and reformation, as well as in glory ; yfiu have
been degraded longer than they, let your elevation precede
them too ; show the nations how to mourn and how to rejoice ;
be the healing of the nations, as the leaves from the tree of
life ; hasten to fulfil your mission foretold by the prophets, and
desired by your brother, Isaac Meemelstein.
LETTER NO. VI.
Dear Children of Grief. —The catastrophe of the Christen
Church ought to be our mirror, as our disaster should have


■been their warning ; if they neglected the solemn admonition,,
it is no reason for us to turn from the reflection their dismal
state throweth on us. Were we the inhabitants of another
sphere, visiting the globe for the first time, we would certainly
deny that the Christian Church as we find it in our enlightened
day, is the same with the one prescribed and described in their
charter. Leaving the Greek and Roman churches, as well as
the traitors of the Protestant denominations, such as preach
a Christ who had not been with the Father in Heaven before
he came to the earth, whose blood made no ransom for others,
and when he died he rose not again, leaving, I say, all the crew
of such shameless treachery and hypocrisy out of the question,
and taking the purest of the Protestant existing churches, -who
could identify the thousand schemes to milk out money from
the poor with the child-like faith enjoined in the New Tes-
ment 1 Who could recognise the command to call no man
master, lord, or father, in the names of rev., very rev., right
rev., lord, right rev. father in God, his grace, &c. 1 What
similarity is there between the humble Christ and the proud
priest 1 or, what is there in common between the voluptuous
life of the latter to the frugal and sanctified one of the former'?
He gave himself a sacrifice for all: they now would sacrifice all
for themselves. Their past history is summed up in one word—
“ Infamy ” —and their present conduct proves, that with their
sting, they still follow the heels of the seed of the free woman,
tormenting them with concealed and refined cruelties. Now
when you reflect on these visible corruptions which you meet
every where, change their dress and name, and you have our
old teachers before you—iniquity walking the streets and
shouting in the pulpit, is the priest of Jerusalem mauger his
phylactery. The analogy is gaining strength by the similarity
of the exceptions. Of yore, God has not left Himself without
witnesses ; repeatedly the prophets warned, prayed, cried and
wept, but in vain ; the people, instead of being convinced, were
provoked against them ; the record that informs us of the
crimes of the priests, does not hide the villainy of the people
who insulted the messengers of the Most High, when they
raised their voices to stay the current that hurled the nation
into ruin; insults were succeeded by violence, for those bold
men were poor and few, their adversaries rich and many.
Honor and flattery followed the train of the teachers, deadly


persecution was the lot of the few who protested against their
wickedness ; a blind fatality covered the eyes of the people ;
the darker the deeds of their priests were, the more beautiful
did their deformities appear to them. It is quite certain that
the people were moved to stone the prophets, because they
considered them to have been the maligners and slanderers of
their beloved teachers; the martyrs of our nation bore no
greater proportion to their persecutors, and were in no better
position, than they who at this very time declaim against the
ambition, avarice, gluttony, drunkenness, selfishness and
worldliness of the priests of the different sects that claim the
Christian name. But as now, they who prove the opposition of
the bright page of Scripture to the dark deeds of the priests,
are but a few poor and obscure individuals, who are counted
as the slanderers of the dignified priests, so it was then, for
the present is but the second act of our own tragedy, the
scene is changed from the confined mountains of Judea to the
extensive area of Christendom; the actors closely and ably imitate
our crimes; noble were our prophets, who signed the protestations
with their own blood; noble though uninspired, are the few that
at all costs, hazards and privations, cease not to bear testimony to
the holiness of God, and the impurity of those that sit in his
temple. It was not for his own glory only that God per-
mitted evil to exist, but also for the glory of his servants to
exhibit their faithful boldness in rebuking those that despise
God and corrupt men. Alas, alas ! our people, as if actually
created for perdition, did what you see our contemporaries
now do—rush after impostors, who feed on their vitals and
reject the counsel of God! Now, dear brethren, do you
expect ever to be made happy, though you count those to be
holy men who tell you that, “ The words of the scribes
are better than the words of the law V ’ Nay, you deem this
very sentence to have been inspired by the God whose Word
it tramples beneath the feet of your teachers ; in what respects
are the Christian priests more arrogant than your own
teachers; as you justly despise the former, why do you up-
hold the latter ? Is it not high time to shake off their heavy
yoke ] Our fathers first chose men to rule over them instead
of God, then exchanged his Living Word for the numberless
ponderous volumes filled with fables, falsehood, and impurity,
is it a wonder that they should be left by God to reap the


fruits of their own follies ? It was not in the defence of our
civil and religious liberties that our land was dyed with our
best and holiest blood ; no, it was poured out like water in
defence of those that destroyed our civil, moral and religious
liberties; the prophets did bleed because they brought to
light the dark deeds of the priests, therefore was the land of
the stranger also fattened with our life-blood —princes, nobles,
and plebeians vied with each other in insulting, robbing, and
tormenting us. Diadems, and sceptres, are stained with the
blood of our men, women, and children of all ages and con-
ditions. At this very day, we are the objects of scorn and
derision everywhere—the meanest, as well as the highest
despise us, at the very time they bestow honors on us; we sit
on daggers in our own land, and are eye-sores in that of
others; had this been our condition, if we had not elevated
men to the throne of our God? You will ask me why the
Christians are not reduced to our abject condition, seeing that
their priests are guilty of at least the same enormities as our
own, and are equally venerated by the people whom they have
corrupted? Why are they not brought to the same low
extremities as ourselves ? I answer, 1. That if all the evils
endured by the people from the lords of their own making
were known and collected, they would bear a fair proportion
to our own black roll. 2. Our cup was soon filled to the
brim, because the space was confined within narrow boun-
daries, whilst the Christian Church has a large extension, and
their cruelties being more refined, sharpened by the inven-
tions of the age, its existence is prolonged; but, when the
time of its dissolution shall arrive, the sevenfold plague of
their calamity will as far exceed our own, as ours exceeded
the woes of every other nation. 3. The Ruler of the Universe
giveth no account of his long-suffering actions; if He is
pleased to give them more time for repentance, He does us
no injury thereby; and, if it should so please Him, that they
should receive life when we are quickened, this should be
our joy, to repay rich blessings, to those from whom we have
received great injuries. Let us look upon their present
apostacy with the deepest sympathy and compassion, which
they only who were similarly afflicted can feel; meanwhile,
let us press on to recover our beloved land, dignity, and hap-
piness. This we can achieve only by being restored to the


favor of our God whom we have provoked. We were sold for
nought, and none can restrain our restoration except our
great King. Our first abuse of his authority was, we did not do
as he commanded us, to learn for ourselves out of his Word
what his will and pleasure is, but left it to others to learn
it for us. This must at once be rectified, we must all become
the taught of God ; then, let talents and virtue, which last
is conformity to the Divine Will, be duly honored as the gift
of our Heavenly Father, but let a holy indignation fill every
bosom against those that occupy the office but are void of its
requirements; treat the gambling priests of this city, and
wherever you meet them, with the contempt they deserve.
These are the first steps we must take to open the windows
of Heaven and attract the dew from on high. To this you are
affectionately urged by your brother, in the hope of glory,
Isaac Meemelstein.
LETTEE NO. VII.
Beloved Children of the Beloved Fathers.—The unerring
Word of Truth giveth the lack of knowledge as the cause of
our destruction, “ My people are destroyed for lack of know-
ledge,” and none but ranting fools make a virtue of their
ignorance, and count knowledge a crime, and the wise crimi-
nals. Our first step must be to be instructed what the Will of
God is ; his will concerning such as are in our position, is re-
vealed in his Word to be, that deep sorrow of heart for having
offended and forsaken Him, the fountain of all goodness, be
manifested by them that desire a reconciliation. How else,
but with grief, should the subjects of a great monarch
approach him, after they had violated his laws, cast off his
authority, joined his open enemies, maltreated his ambas-
sadors, and elevated a villain to his throne 1 What contrition
of heart is due from such unthinking subjects 1 As to his
unerring eye the innermost parts of "the soul are open, the
hurried confession of sin twice a day, and the unfeeling
smiting with the fist on the breast, to knock the evil genius
that resides there on the head, is not sufficient. It will not
mislead the Holy God to take it as a broken heart which He
despiseth not. Kepentance towards God is a work with
which the whole being of the man—his body, soul, and


spirit, mind and affections—are filled and pervaded. It is a
leaving all the alluring sins of the world, because they dis-
please our sovereign, and pressing towards God, the Chief
Good, from whom only good does emanate. But, as earthly
potentates take hostages from their rebellious subjects, to in-
sure their future tranquillity and consequent happiness, so the
Heavenly King took the Messiah, foretold by all our prophets,
to be our hostage, that we henceforth remain loyal. On Him
likewise fell the penalty of the rebellion. He was stripped of
his dignity and underwent great privations. The heavens He
created sheltered Him not. The earth He formed gave Him
no asylum. The men He framed recognised not his
claim, and the people He came to save but
meanly recompensed Him for his troubles. The
recipients of his bounty derided Him ; amongst
the enemies that sought his life were found those that
experienced the might of his arm. He was forgotten by many
and forsaken by all; yet no reproach proceeded out of his
celestial lips, no anger kindled his breast. What our prophets
before predicted, this Jesus of Nazareth, our Messiah, accom-
plished in the fulness of time; on the cross he died, stricken,
because we have sinned. His body was as the cloud on Sinai,
in which the Eternal resided; hence, in the midst of the
raging storm around him, he trod upon the billows with
heavenly dignity and calm, pure amongst the unclean, and
devoted amongst the profane.
As death could not hold the Prince of Life, the tomb
remained empty, and he went up to be our surety, approved
of by the Monarch of the skies for the service he had rendered
at the great cost to himself. Though our hostage and
surety, he became our Prince and Saviour ; and all that confide
in him receive of the abundance of his riches. It is true
that the riches he bestows are not always those of gold,
silver, or things prized by the world ; his subjects require no
palaces to dwell in, and no Persian carpets to tread upon, they
need no silver plate to eat from, nor golden ornaments to be
adorned with, they are quite indifferent even to honorary
appellations. Our father Jacob’s prayer—bread to eat and
raiment for cover —is what they ask and obtain ; the repository
of their riches is the heart and the mind, and the blessings


themselves must be possessed, to be understood and valued ;
described they cannot be, unless to heavenly ears.
We have then, besides repentance towards God, to believe
in our Messiah, Jesus Christ, by whose stripes we are healed;
as the Son of God, his offering made on the cross for our sins
reconciles us to the Father ; our past sins are forgiven as soon
as we thus believe and confide in him, and our future blessings
are secured by the same surety who rose from the grave to raise
us up. Have you not seen, my brethren, as well as I, how many
oven of our own nation, who have made this good confession,
that they rely on Jesus, his cross, blood, death, and resurrec-
tion, for the pardon of their sins, heavenly wisdom, guidance,
and support, and for eternal life, that they have all been
elevated in their moral condition from what they formerly
were—as high as heaven is above the earth 1 you cannot deny
the visible change ; their passions have been tamed, their
bitterness sweetened, their pride humbled, their minds en-
lightened, and their formality changed to fervent prayer and
gratitude ; they are constantly tried and persecuted by you
sons of Sarah, and by Christian, such Christians as are
sons of Hagar, yet they bear the dying of their Lord in
them. What, or who wrought that change in them 1 Who
begat those children of light ] The reply is, they were
made really new creatures in Christ Jesus, when they
believed him to be their Messiah, the beloved Lamb of
God who took away their sins. On the other hand, you
perhaps saw as many pi’oselytes to Judeaism as I did,
not one of the many hundreds I saw was a sober man or
woman, and the children were in many cases as beastly drunk
as their parents ; some I saw did beat their fathers with the
fist of wickedness. Which religion is from God, the one that
elevates, or that degrades humanity'? How great is the
blindness that can see no beauty in this Divine Redeemer
that opened and revealed an ocean of love in the Eternal
bosom 1 Oh misery ! men with eyes, hearts, and affections,
and yet not touched with the sublimity of his life, love of his
death, or power of his resurrection ; rational souls, yet all their
labour is for what they can touch, taste, or handle, but fox-
eternal happiness they ask not, nor are afraid of never-ending
wretchedness —can this be rationality 1 Believe it, xny brethren,


or not: as our calamities came when our fathers imbrued their
hands in the blood of the spotless Jesus, so will our happiness
be restored only when we recognise him as our Messiah, and
submit to his lawful authority. The plough has passed over
our city; Zion mourns for her children that are outraged
everywhere; yet they look not to him whom they have pierced;
the restoration to our beloved land must be preceded by a
restoration to the favour of our God. This we can only obtain
when we entirely submit to be ruled again by him, and do his
pleasure, as declared in his own word. That word requires
that we repent toward God, and believe in his son Jesus
Christ; then all will become new indeed; your hearts will
long for things that please God and are beneficial to men ;
your minds will be renewed, comprehending things not under-
stood by the lovers of sin and haters of righteousness ; your
treasures will be new, for they will consist of things that are
of great value in heaven ; your actions and pursuits will be
new; so will your companions and conversations be changed ;
your prayers, praises, griefs and joys will all savour of heaven;
thus purified by the Spirit of our God, you will be fitted to
be citizens of Zion, whereto no unclean person shall enter any
more. With anguish of heart do the fountains of my head
now pour out their silent streams for my ruined country and
■worse than mined people; the crimson waves agitate my
troubled breast for Judah that is low, and Ephraim who is far.
This pleasant grief I will not part with; to forget my right
hand might be painful, but not criminal; but to forget a land
renowned, and a people beloved by God, is a crime and a shame.
Would to God that you as much thought of your eternal
happiness as my afflicted heart thinks for you; then God
would dwell again in our midst, and the Redeemer would
come to Zion and turn away ungodliness from Jacob; then
amidst my people saved by the Lord I would rejoice for the
great things the Lord had done for us. Lord, hasten the time
when those whom thou hast afflicted shall behold thy Glory,
and worship thee in the beauty of holiness ; this is the ardent
prayer of your brother in tribulation,
Isaac Mermelstein.
MASON AND EIRTH, PRINTERS, PLINDERS-LANE WEST.




■ /


8
n
y
The Thorn in the Flesh of the Jew, Is.
Sound Words, 6d.
c Truth versus Fables, 6d.
Sophistry of the Sabbatarian Lectures, 6d.
A Jew Silenced, 6d.
The Weeping Jew, 6d.
A Letter on Baptism, 6d.
IN PREPARATION.
The Jewish Talmud; Its Fictions and Maxims.
is
IS
I
II
