

THE DOWLING STREET REPAIRS.
THE SYDNEY CITY COUNCIL AND THE REDFERN COUNCIL.
T»H OFFICIAL »OCtTMEIffTS riff TH E CASE
At the proceedings connected with
the ( ity Town Hall inquiry on Mon-
day last the question of the expen-
diture of money on Dowling-street
was brought forward. The general
trend of Aid Norton’s remarks being
calculated to convey the impression
that through laxness on the pait of the
council or its surveyor the City Coun-
cil had improperly expended a portion
of its funcs on work, the cost of which
ought to have been defrayed by the
Redfern Council alone. Supposing
that such an impression existed, a
perusal of the correspondence which
passed between the City Council and
the Redfern Council will clearly show
that the impression is an erroneous
one. The City Council, it will be
seen, have not spent one penny that
they were not legally compellable to
spend, and it would further appear
that it was solely owing to what might
be termed a final ultimatum from the
Redfern Council, that if the City
Council did not satisfactorily discharge ■
municipal obligations, the work would j
be done by the Redfern Council, and ;
legal action taken for the recovery of
the city portion of the cost incurred.
Several letters had been wiitten to
the City Council drawing attention to
the necessity for re-metalling, &c.,
Dow ling-street, and as the City Coun-
cil did not appear to recognise their
liability, the Redfern Council there-
fore decided that they would, after
due notice, in accordance with Sec-
tions 120-1-2 of Municipalities Act of
1867, perform the work and take
legal action for the recovery of a
moiety of the cost. Having written
to this effect a meeting was arranged.
On the 16th of July, 1890, the Red
fern Council wrete to Air Pigott, soli-
citor, stating that a meeting between
the Mayors of Sydney and Redfern,
Mr Cardew, C.E., the city solicitor,
and the city surveyor had been ar-
ranged for the following day, and at
this meeting Mr Pigott, as solicitor
lor the Redfern Council, was present.
On the 26th July, IB6o,the Redfern
Council forwarded the following
ktter :
Redfern, July 26, D9O.
Sir, —I have the honor by direction to ask
what decision has been arrived at by the
City Council with regard to Dowling street,
after examination of the plans and reports
which have been specially prepared and sub-
mitted with a view of shewing the correct
easter n boundary of this borough, and the
liability of the City Council to contribute
towards the maintenance of Dowling street,
between Cleveland street and the southern
boundary of this borough.
I have the honor, &e.,
R. W. GRIERSON, Council Clerk.
Tire Town Clerk, Sydney.
Two days afterwards the following
reply was received from the City
Council:
Town Clerk’s Office,
Sydney, July 28, 1890.
Sir, —I have the honor to acknowledge re*
ceipt of your letter of the 26th instant upon the
matter hereunder mentioned, and to inform
you that the matter is receiving consideration.
Subject-—Dowling-street metalling, &c.
Yours obediently,
JNO. R. PALMER,
Assist. Town Clerk.
To the Council Clerk,
Borough of Redfern.
On the 30th July the City Council
were again written to as follows :
Redfern, July 30, 1890.
Sir, — I have the honor to acknowledge
receipt of your letter of 28th. ultimo, stating
that the plan and reports submitted ii re
Dowling street are being considered. I am
directed to request that you will favour me
with a reply as to the decision arrived at by
the City Council at an early date, as the
Mayor wishes to give definite instructions to
the borough solicitor with as little delay as
possible.
I have the honor to be*
R W. GRIERSON, Council Clerk.
No reply was received from the City
Council until the 29th Oct, when the
following letter reached the Redfern
Council ;
Town Clerk’s Office,
Sydney, Oct. 29, 1890.
Sir, —I have the honor to inform you that
at a meeting of the City Council held on the
23rd instant it was decided that Dowling-
street be metalled at a cost not exceeding
£lO5O, and that the work be carried out by
the City Council upon payment by your
council of half the amount of the accepted
tender into the office of the City Treasury.
Upon this understanding a notification will be
addressed to you as to the time of the recep-
tion of tenders, in order'that his Worship the
Mayor of Redfern may be present at the meet-
ing and assent on behalf of your council.
Yours obediently,
HENRY J. DANIELS,
Town Clerk.
To the Council Clerk,
Borough of Redfern.
To the foregoing the Redfern Council
replied as follows:
Redfern, November 1, 1890. ™
! Sir, —I have the honor by direction of the e
Mayor to acknowlege receipt of your letter of qu
29th instant in reference to metalling of
Dowling street, and am instructed to suggest acc
that tenders be called for hand broken blue the
metal for this purpose, as there is consider-
able traffic on the street, and machine broken
metal is not as serviceable. With reference S
to the moiety of cost to he paid by this conn- spec
oil it is thought that instead of depo-itingthe Cou
amount before the work is commenced the be
more equitable plan would be to pay for the and
work as it progresses, although when the last of t
work was carried out in Dowling street by sect
this council the moiety of the cost was not Dov
refunded by the City Council until a conside- und
rable time tiad elapsed after the work was exis
completed. This decision of the City Council Red
viz., to bear half the c >st of the work here- hole
inbefure alluded to, after due examination of strei
the plans and reports which were submitted the
with a view of proving the responsibility of in p
the City Council as far as its liability for a Red
moiety of the c< st of maintenance of Dowling the
street (from Cleveland street to the southern wate
boundary of this borough) is concerned, helm? tion,
uccep ed by this council as a final settlement port
of this boundary question, and an aeknow- bricl
lodgment of the liabil ty of each, the City expe
Council and the Redfern Council, (0 bear a Dow
moiety of the cost of the maintenance of the brev
portion of Dowling street referred to. I am g u lh
directed to suggest that the cost of legal on tl
advice and sur veyor’ s plans and report,
amounting in all to £42 Os yd, should be
borne in equal proportions by the Redfern
and City Councils. The Mayor would like
the assent of the City Council to the fore- Ti
going in order that the whole matter may be
dealt with by this council at its next meeting. rr
I have the honor, &c,,
R. AY. GRIERSON, Council Clerk. Con
The third paragraph in the letter is , for
worthy of particular attention, as it ln £
clearly establishes the fact that the
City Council recognised its legal liabi-
lity for a portion of the expenditure sii
involved. ceipt
On the 18th November the City
Council replied,specially agreeing that
the work should be carried out by
the Eedfern Council, and undertaking
that payments should be made as the
work progressed. In accordance with
the agreement made the work was
subsequently carried out by Hedfern,
and the City Council paid the pro-
portion agreed upon as will be seen
from the following :
Town Clerk’s Office,
Sydney, Nov. 18, 1890.
Sir, —Referring to your letter of the Ist in-
stant, I am directed by the Right Worshipful
the Mayor to state that the City Council
agrees to the work of metalling Dowling-
street to the amount of cost mentioned in my
letter of the 29th ultimo being carried out by
your council, this council paying half the cost
as the work progresses* as suggested in your
letter. Regarding the latter portion of yoiir
communication, relating to legal expenses;
etc., this council is not prepared to entertain
the proposition.
Tours obediently;
HENRY J. DANIELS,
Town Clerk:
To the Countil Clerk,
Borough of Redferm
Coming down to a late* date the
Redfern Council drew the attention
of the city authorities to the neccessity
of repairing the street in question, for
on the 26th June, of last year, the
following letter was sent:
Redfern, 26th June, 189;.
Sir, — lam instructed to ask whether your
council will join with this council in the
expense of repairing the southern end of
Cowling street, in front of and near the pre-
mises recently ereeted by the Lager Bier 1
Company. The roadway in this vicinity is
at present Very much out of repair, princi-
pally caused by heavy traffic to the city tips
and sandhills, and the necessity has also
arisen for kerhing and guttering on the city
side in order to prevent the water flowing
across the street.
I have the honor, &c.,
R. W. GRIERSON, Council Clerk.
The Town Clerk, Sydney.
To this letter no reply was received,
and a further communication was
therefore sent on the 14th September.
Redfern, Sept. 14, 1897.
Bir, —I have the honor, by direction, to re-
spectfully request the attention of the City
Council to the following works necessary to
be done in Cleveland and Dowling streets,
and which have been brought under the notice
of the City Surveyor I. Repairs to that
section of Cleveland-street, between Pitt and
Dowling streets, which the City Council has
undertaken to maintain in accordance with an
existing arrangement between the City and
Redfern Councils. 2. Construction of man-
holes over existing 24m pipes in Cleveland-
street, near High Holborn-street, to facilitate
the cleaning of these pipes and thereby assist
in preventing the damage done to property on
Redfern side by overflow of floodwaters from
the city side._ 3. A more satisfactory street-
watering service in Cleveland-street, city sec-
tion. 4. Repairs in Dowling-street to that
portion of the street where the arch of the
brick sewer is exposed, 5. Repairs (at joint
expense) to roadway at southern end of
Dowling street, in the vicinity of the new
brewery. 6, Kerhing and guttering and
gully shaft at southern end of Dowling-street
on the eastern side.
Vours obediently,
R. W. GRIERSON,
Council Clerk.
To the Town Clerk,
Sydney.
This was acknowledged by the City
Council without further loss of time,
for on the 16 th September the follow-
ing reply was received
Town Clerk’s Office,
Sydney, Sept. 15, 1893 c.
Sir,—l have the honor to acknowledge re-
ceipt of your letter of the 14th instant upon
the matter hereunder mentioned, and to in-
form you that it will receive consideration, aa
soon as possible. Subject—Repairing
land-street and Bowling-street.
Yours obediently,
JNO. R; PALMER,
Assist. Town Clerk.
To the Council Clerk,
Borough of Redfern.
After this the City Council made
some repairs about the end of last
year—probably at a cost of about
£lOO, on the city side of the street,
and the Eedfern Council then repaired
the portion of the street falling within
its own jurisdiction, and also had
kerbing and guttering laid on the
Western side of the street.
Re printed from the “ Suburban Times ”
of March jp, rSgS.
