

THE ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.
FOUNDED 1868.
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER 1882.
MOTTO-“UITITE]D IE IVL IP I IRIS.”
fi*?l bit ojl
m Pjr'kfa
(ibjects.
To provide a place of meeting for all gentlemen connected
with the Colonies and British India, and others taking an interest
in Colonial and Indian affairs; to establish a Reading Room and
Library, in which recent .and authentic intelligence upon Colonial
and Indian subjects may be constantly available, and a Museum
for the collection and exhibition of Colonial and Indian productions;
to facilitate interchange of experiences amongst persons representing
all the Dependencies of Great Britain ; to afford opportunities for
the reading of Papers, and for holding Discussions upon Colonial
and Indian subjects generally ; and to undertake scientific, literary,
and statistical investigations in connection with the British Empire.
But no Paper shall be read, or any Discussion be permitted to take
place, tending to give to the Institute a party character. —(Rule I.)
lUmkrsjjip.
There are two classes of Fellows (who must be British Subjects),
Resident and Non-Resident, both elected by the Council on the
nomination of Two Fellows, one of whom at least must sign on
personal knowledge. The former pay an entrance fee of £B, and
an annual subscription of £2 ; the latter an entrance fee of £l. Is.
(which is increased to £3 when taking up permanent residence in the
United Kingdom) and an annual subscription of £l. Is. (which is
increased to £2 when in the United Kingdom for more than three
months). Resident Fellows can compound for the annual subscrip-
tion by the payment of £2O, or after five years’ annual subscriptions
of £2 on payment of Jl5 ; and Non-Resident Fellows can compound
for the Non-Besident annual subscription on payment of £lO.


stibtkstn of Jfellofas infrase are not in §imar.
The privileges of Fellows, whose subscriptions are not in arrear,
include the use of the Institute building, which comprises Reading,
Writing, and Smoking Rooms; a Library containing over 25,000
volumes and pamphlets relating to the history, government, trade,
resources and development of the British Colonies and India; and
a Newspaper Room in which the principal Journals, Magazines,
and Reviews —both Home, Colonial, and Indian—are regularly re-
ceived and filed.
The Journal and the Annual Volume of Proceedings are forwarded
to all Fellows, whether residing in England or the Colonies.
Every Fellow is entitled to be present at the Ordinary Meetings,
and to introduce one visitor; to be present at the Annual Conver-
sazione, and to introduce a lady.
The support of all British Subjects, whether residing in the
United Kingdom or the Colonies—for the Institute is intended for
both—is earnestly desired in promoting the great objects of extend-
ing knowledge respecting the various portions of the Empire, and in
promoting the cause of its permanent unity.
Contributions to the Library will be thankfully received.
J. S. O’HALLORAN,
Secretary*
3 1508
00074221


ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE,
Northumberland Avenue,
London,
3 IS * 1 899-
Dear Sir,
The Session of 1898-9 having now closed, I am
desired by the Council to transmit Volume XXX. of the
“ Proceedings,” to which you are entitled as a Fellow of
the Royal Colonial Institute.
As this Institute is entirely self-supporting, and its
expansion is largely dependent on the influence of its
Fellows and Honorary Corresponding Secretaries, I venture
at the same time to express a hope that, as opportunity
offers, you will invite the attention of your friends to the
importance of the great national work in which it has been
engaged for upwards of thirty years, and acquaint them
with the advantages which accrue from membership.
With this view I beg to enclose a printed paper which
explains the aims and objects of this Institute, and also
some forms which it is hoped you may be enabled to utilise
by proposing eligible candidates for election.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
J. S. O’HALLORAN,
Secretary.


CERTIFICATE OF CANDIDATE FOR ELECTION.
Name
Title or
Profession
Residence
Dated this
day of
F.R.C.I.
Proposed
Elected
The Description and Residence of Candidates must he clearly stated.
a British Subject, being desirous of admission into the Royal Colonial
Institute, We, the undersigned, recommend him as eligible for Member-
F.R.C.I. |
> from personal knowledge.


ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE,
Northumberland Avenue,
London,
31st July, 1900-
DEAR Sir,
The Session of 1899-1900 having now closed, I am
desired by the Council to transmit Volume XXXI, of the
“ Proceedings,” to which you are entitled as a Fellow of
the Royal Colonial Institute. An alteration has been
made in the binding, in the hope that the colour and
materials now used will be found more durable, especially
in tropical climates.
As this Institute is entirely self-supporting, and its
expansion is largely dependent on the influence of its
Fellows and Honorary Corresponding Secretaries, I venture
to express a hope that, as opportunity offers, you will
invite the attention of your friends to the importance of
the great national work in which it has been engaged for
upwards of thirty years, and acquaint them with the
advantages that accrue from membership.
With this view I beg to enclose a printed paper which
explains the aims and objects of this Institute, and also
some forms which it is hoped you may be enabled to utilise
by proposing eligible candidates for election.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
J. S. O’HALLORAN,
Secretary


CERTIFICATE OF CANDIDATE FOR ELECTION.
Name
Title or 1
Profession j
Residence
British Subject, being desirous of admission into the Royal Colonial
Institute, We, the undersigned, recommend him as eligible for Member-
The Description and of Candidates must be clearly stated*
