

1
NLpf 994.33 M 655
fKUOrwmjv^ , Q
£oJt/jjG cMu
7ii/Jnx£h CartLj fatty ■


EARLY .HISTORY OP THE MILLMERRAH DISTRICT
. _ Being Centenary Year, I wonder how many of ns have paused to
hink what may have been taking place in this locality one hundred years
ago, J J
Pell, I should say from what I know of the country, and from what
1 have heard from my grandparents, that this was open forest country
with majestic gum and box trees - patches of ironbark, and here and
neie clumps of brigalow scrub. There were wild lemon and orange trees,
and along the creeks the apple trees. All these with their sweet
smelling blossom gave a sweet aroma to the country-side. The little
native bees gathered honey from the flowers and built their tiny nests
in a very small bough or hollow. Their honey had a rather peculiar
lavour and^ many people did not like it. Blue Bells, daisies, buttercups
and other wild flowers grew among the natural grasses. The birds were
he same as those we have today, though possibly there were more of them
belore che white man came with his gun. Can you picture the native
animals roaming just where they pleased —no fences of course, further
out in the^ scrub country the oak and brigalow, ti-tree, the wattle with
its profusion of yellow blooms, the hop-bush and many other shrubs gave
u xGlter co wallabies, bandicoots, wombats etc., and here the scrub turkey
would make its mound of earth and lay its eggs in the mound. High in the
gum trees the koala bears, sometimes with their young on their backs,
would be seen sleeping all day. They would wake at night to feast on the
gum The possum and the kangaroo rat also slept by day, and there
was the native cat that worried the early settler because it raided his
fov.'l house ac night, killing the fowls by sucking the blood through the
head or neck. Also anyone who settled near a creek was troubled with the
water rat.
( As lar as 1 know, there was no settlement here 100 years ago, but
-chere was at Yandilla. This part of the district was known as Back Creek
because it was at the back of Yandilla, In TB4l, 118 years ago, Messrs,
St. George R. Gore, and Ralph T. Gore came from Sydney to the Darling
Downs with the intention of buying property, and I am told they squatted
at Yandilla, (By the way, a squatter is a person who settles on the land
without a title or deeds), five years later Mr. Robert Gore bought land
at Yandilla and brought his wife and two children from Sydney. On a
visit to Sydney in 1847 they lost their lives when the n Sovereign 5 * on
which they were travelling, was wrecked in the south passage of Moreton
Bay, Mr, St. George Gore later lived at Lyndhurst, near Warwick, and
was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland for some years*
Yandilla Station was one of the oldest in Queensland and had an
area of about 90,000 acres of freehold and the same of leasetold. It
comprised the area from the Branch, where you cross the bridge on the •
other side of Pampas down to Kurrowah boundary - out across West Ridve,
now owned by Mrs, G, Perry, to the rabbit fence. It extended out beyond
Mt. Domville and Mt. Brnlyn (which was named after Mrs. Prank Gore) and
over cowards Leyburn taking in Tummaville, What we now call Pampas" was
in those days known as T.Y. being on the boundaries of Tummaville and
xandilla. In flood time the Grass Tree creek would rise up to the
homestead, as it was almost flat on the ground. The Gores and their
employees would all go to one of the sheds the sweating shed till
the flood passed, In 1893 the flood was so high that Gerard Gore had to
leave tcniton (which was then part of Yandilla;, and he spent three days
at Moyness with the Clarks.
You have heard of Owen’s Scrub. This is the story of how it got
that name. In 1860 Mr. Gore went trip to England, and Mr. Owen was
managing at Yandilla, A man named Ritchie did some building work on the
kitchen of the homestead, nd Owen condemned the job and with—held payment,
Ritchie sued for payment in the Leyburn court, which in those days had a
resident magistrate, and was the nearest court to Yandilla.


Or* £, 2 HS 7
£2 • - 7o
EARLY HISTORY OF THE MILLMERRAN DISTRICT
(2)
Owen won the cose, cind he, together with a Bishop Thaokery ?;ere
driving hack to Yandilla with a buggy and pair when Ritchie appeared
irom behind and shot Owen, This happened along the fringe of the scrub'
which took its name from this tragedy. On the discharge of the firearm,
the horses got out of control, breaking the harness and buggy pole,
got free and raced for home. The Bishop was left sitting in the buggy
with the dead man throughout the night, until assistance arrived from
Yandilla the next morning. The arrival of the horses with the pieces
of oroken harness was the first indie ation that anything was wrong,
Ritchie was afterwards tried and hung in Toowoomba. I understand he
was the only person to be hanged in Toowoomba.
The Gore extensive improvements on Yandilla. They were
interested in mechanics and a steam launch was built and engined on the
station. This proved very useful in times of flood, and was a source
of pleasure as well. The Gores were responsible for building the
wier across the creek as we know it today.
Over 2,000 acres of land was farmed on the black soil between
Yandilla & Tummaville, and reports say that wheat grown there
yielded as much as 12 bags to the acre - four bushell bags being
used in those days. I am not quite sure, but I think Mr. J.H,
Anderson of_ Inveraryand the Uebergangs are on part of the old Yandilla
farm. Machinery was imported from England. Ploughs were drawn across
the paddocks by long cables attached to steam engines at each side of
the paddock.
The pretty little Church which you pass on the way to Toowoomba
w/as builc by the Gores so that the folk "working on their property
could have a to worship. Mr, Gerard Gore made a pipe organ for
the Church - everything, even the pipes themselves - being made by
him in his workshop, On it was carved in Old English Si Gore made me -
Gore played me.” The organ is now in St. Mary’s Church of England
at Kangaroo Point.
Yandilla had the local post and telegraph office - all calls and
mail went through Leyburn, and then on to Toowoomba etc. In those
days it was not unusual to see wild horses, or brumbies, coming to
graze on what is now the township area of Millmerran, and watering at
the local creek. And we must not forget the prickly pear. Some areas
became entirely over-run with it, but some settlors tried to keep their
places c±ear of the pest. This meant cutting it out with a shovel and
carting the plants into heaps to be burned. In times of drought the
pear was used to keep the stock alive. The settlers would scorch the
prickles off the pear, and then boil it and feed it chopped up and
mixed with chaff. About 35 years ago the cactoblastus insect was
imported and did a wonderful job in clearing the country of the pest.
Some folk made jam with the fruit of the pear but it did not seem to
become generally used.
As the years passed the Government resumed more and more of
Yandilla. There were oyer 100 men employed on the station and many
of them acquired selections and became prosperous farmers. But these
early settlers worked very hard for all they got both the men and
the women. Can you imagine as you drive along in your cars on a
bitumen road today, how the settler of 90 years ago in wet weather
would be ploughing along with the wheels of his waggon or dray cutting
inches deep into the mud - the horses plodding and floundering, and in
placed the knave of the wheel rolling along on the ground. At times
it would be too much for the horses and they would be let go to wait till
till the ground dried out a bit, or a neighbour would come with some
more horses to give an extra pull. There were miles of logging between


Brookstoad and Yandilla - that is, round logs long enough to go across
che roadway, were put down side try side, and over those folk could drive
in cases of emergency. You can imagine how rough that would he for both
horse and vehicle. In the early days, if a woman wished to visit her
neighbour, she would go by dray - or perhaps she would ride, on a side-
saddle, of course sometimes with her baby on her knee. Later came the
vvaggonetie and spring cart, and still later the buggy and sulky. The
larmcrs then were os proud of their fine horses and traps as the men of
today arc of their new cars; - perhaps more so, they certainly took
greater care of them. The Railway came to Millmerran in 1911,
Beacons were put on Mt. Lornville and Mt. Mallard (that is the hill
ee go over just this side of Pittsworth), and fires were lit on these
Deacons, I understand to give warning when blacks were about. Gores
used 10 go to Mt. Lornville and camp there every winter shooting scrub
uirmeys, on arrival would flash mirror signals to Yandilla to show
/ la /_ dad safely. They also communicated by mirror with
landilia every few days while there.
I think I am right in saying that the shearing shed at Yandilla had
cwo sneanng boards with 20 stands on each, making 40 stands, so there
were a lot of men employed at shearing time. It was blade shearing at
mrsb, with a tally of 40, 50 or maybe 60 sheep per day. Later machines
, jj' rc I'Vv A wash pool was built in the Grass Tree Creek near Peniton
where the sheep were washed to clean the wool before shearing. This was
very hard work for the men who had to stand in the water and hold the
sheep to wash them.
A Government Instructor came to Yandilla in 1890 to teach cheese—
making to anyone who cared to learn. Georgina Clark learned the process
and ior some years after she was married she and her husband (Dir. Trott)
had a good herd oi cows. She made the cheese and her husband would put it
r- ’° waggonette with four horses attached and go out as far as St/
George selling it to the settlers.
All the early settlers dug, or made their waterholes with a pick and
snovel, and took the soil or clay away in a wheel-barrow, often a home
made one - no scoops or bull dozers in those days - no post hole diners
eiohor, when a man wished to fence his land he would split the posts/and
palings with wedges and maul, and dig the post holes with bar and shovel,
sometimes he would carry the posts some distance on his shoulder. The
homes were usually bark humpies of one or two rooms. The bark was taken
noni the box trees at a certain time of the year, when the sap was on the
move. There would^of ten be a galley a few yards where the cooking was don
done over an open fire or in a camp over; the women could cook anything,
roast meac and vegetables, or bake bread, cakes or scones in the camp
and sometimes a damper in the ashes. And there was no water laid
oonetimes the women carried all their water from a nearby creek in
buckets, and sometimes it would be carted in a small tank on the dray and
-dos- .e house, in which case the woman had to climb up on the dray
/• iC /l snd dip the water from the tank. Have any of you seen the tvpo of
light used^ by che early settlers? The light by which our mothers or
grandmothers sewed (by hand of course - no sewing machines then), or by
which they did -cheir re ding or tended their family. It was a jam tin
nail lined with sand and then clean fat. A wick of a piece of moleskin
a ! ad dlt at OX } Q end « As it Burned away it was pulled up
cissoib and the burned piece cut off. Some wives had a candle frame
c.na made choir own fat candles to use in candle sticks.
ri t J a ° lats , 60 ‘? or early 70’ s a number of settlors took up land on
'' v xGG k> on what is now the lower side of the town. Among these were


? * Paterson, Albert Sopp, John Hain, Robert and John Murphy and James-
On the upper si e of the town were Dan and John Bougoure
-eorge and Alf Elborne, Bill Conway and Tom Smith, others settled in
soon after. In 1881 Mr. Ed. Walpole came from Prairie near Jondaryan
cjid selected what is known as Walpole’s paddock, portion of which is
now owned by Thomas. Lovell and the Caldicott Estate. Mr. Walpole had
80 acres surveyed into township allotments.
When Mr. Gerard Gore came to Yandilla as overseer, he was very
upset when the men only said ,! Good Morning” and did not touch their
hats to him. He complained to Mr. P. Gore who said, ”You will find in
ustralia that Jack is as good as his master, and you need not expect
it any different.” 1
Pampas v ' ? ? s s ? ca H G( 3- owing to the tall wild oats that grew in that
parb of the district # These oats being very thick and as high or
higher than the average man on horseback.
About the middle 80’s Mr # Walpole decided to open a store. Up to
that cime the nearest store was either at Pittsworth or Leyburn. In
conjunction with the store Mr. Walpole also conducted a butcher’s shop
c.nd pose office. These buildings were situated directly acorss the
road from the present Shirgfcesidence.
the first school was known as the Yandilla Provisional School and
was opened in 1882, It was built on the bank of the Back Creek
in what is now called the Pound paddock. It was built of slabs with
a shingle rooi, The house now occupied by Mrs. C, Carstens was the
first house to be built of sawn timber in Millmerran. It was built
by che lane Mr, Albert Evans father of Mr, Pred Evans, for his moth ..
Before chat all the dwellings were made of bark, Beds would possibly
have oeen bags with a sapling in each side fastened to posts in the
ground and all earth floors in the of the very early settlers.
v/hen you cross the bridge over the Condamine R.ivcr, some of you
will remember the old one about 150 yards down on your left - an old
low level wooden bridge with chains along the sides to prevent horses
and cattle from jumping off* For many years folk used to say the next
flood will take the old bridge, but it didn’t, After the new high
level bridge was built the old one was demolished in 1948,
Among the early settlers in the Grass Tree area you. will recognise
some names that are still in the district - J* Wright, G. Perry, G.
Simmons, G, B. Piller, D, Crocker, P, Leonard, J. Cronin, J,
Baillie, T.W, Caldicott, and others. Down St. Ronans way, a portion of
landilla known as the Dry paddock were T, Radcliffe, W. McDonald and
Wheatley, while out West Ridge were Peter McDonald, P. Dowling and H,
Thompson,
This is the very early history of the district and brings us to
tne beginning of Millmerran in 1881, You will find a history of
Millmerran in a brochure entitled ’’Millmerran, 75th Anniversary”, vjhich
was published a few years ago #
The name Millmerran is of aboriginal origin from ”Mcel” the eye
and 1 Merran” to look out, it being a lookout place of the blacks in
the early days.
If our grandmothers or great grandmothers could take a peep into
some of the homes of today, they would think a fairy god-mother had
waved her wand - it would all look like a fairy story to them. When
you burn the hot water bap over your think how the pioneer women


carried the water from the creek, heated it over an open fire, and
then bathed in a tub in the kitchen or gaily and carried the water
out afterwards, When you press a switch to light your home, or to
get the news or entertainment on the radio - think of those women with
their fat lamps or home made candles - and the news; sometimes weeks
or months old when they heard or read it; as for entertainment they
had to make their own. Think of those who came from overseas, taking
three months or more on the trip - waiting at least six months for
answers to the letters they sent to their loved ones left behind - I
have had Air Mail letters six DAYS after they were written. When you
speed along the bitumen road to spend a day in Toowoomba, or when your
child is ill and you reach to your telephone and call the doctor who
will come to help you in a matter of minutes - think of this story whic
is told in the 75th anniversary book which I just mentioned - A baby
became seriously ill and it was decided to seek medical attention, the
nearest doctor being at Toowoomba. As the folk had neither buggy nor
sulky the trip of 60 miles had to be on horseback, the mother riding
side saddle, as was the fashion in those days. As light rain was
falling to add to their diff icailtics, the mother carried that baby
the father rode alongside holding an umbrella over both of them. At
intervals the father would take the baby while the mother Yv'ould hold
the umbrella. This nightmare journey lasted 12 hours, but as medical
attention saved the child the parents made light of the matter, I
don’t know who this baby was but some of the old hands may know.
Mrs. Walpole, Mrs. Smith (Tom Smith’s mother) and Mrs.■McDonald
(my grandmother), Mrs, R, Wright and Mrs. Sandilands senior, hero are
considered to be the ’’Nurses” of the District, Anyone sick or in
trouble could look to them for help and Mrs. Walpole has walked as far
as Kooroongarra to help a sick person.
When you feel discontented with lot, think of what you owe
to those who pioneered the district. Would you be content with their
lot? How would you like to have lived in "The Good Old Days?"
000000


EARLY HISTORY OF THE MILLMERRAN DISTRICT - ROCKY CREEK/MT. EMLYN
This was originally part of Yandilla Station which had boon in
the possession of the Gore family for many years, Mt. Emlyn, in fact
was called after the wife of Mr, Francis A. Gore, whose Christian
names were Emlyn Augusta I
This area, the Gores used for the pasturage of sheep under the
control of shepherds; the sheep grazing on the naturally clear patches
amidst the brigalow and bclah scrub. One part in this area and the
creek which runs through it received its name from the shepherd who
had been camped there - his name was Marny and the euphonious name of
Mingirnarny points to an obvious flaw in his character.
In the year 1911, this area having been resumed by the
Government, was thrown open for selection mainly in three hundred ar
twenty acre blocks. The land was quickly taken up and the work of
clearing was commenced. This rich land was covered by dense and
scrub and these settlers with little or no capital bar the labour of
their own hands attacked this, what would appear to us today, a
heartbreaking proposition. The two great problems for the first
settlers were water and the prickly pear infestation. As this area
is high and constitutes the watershed, little or no surface water with
the exception of a few quickly drying waterholes after storms existo'.,
Several of the settlers camped for a time by the side of a soak
in a part of the area which was called the Five Mile Creek - presumably
because it was Five Miles from the previously settled and small town
of Kooroongarra. Many arc the tales of the community camped by this
hole - the menfolk in the morning tramping along paths through the
forest to their respective selections to work falling the scrub in
the hopes that they might soon fire it and plant pumpkins and corn aim
the blackened stumps and thus bring in some slight return to enable
them to carry on.
There are stories of a kangaroo dog poisoned and dying in the
precious water hole - of snakes appearing in unexpected places - of
the hunting of wallabies and other small animals which are now extinct
owing to the ravages of the fox pest. There are stories of the native
bears, which abounded in some of the more open parts and of their
crying sounds when hurt. A colourful and fascinating talc - full of
hardship, poverty, and humour - such as are most of the stories of the
pioneering days in our native land.
Among one of the first settlers was Robert McCullough and his
family, recently arrived in this country from Northern Ireland, There
is the story of the eldest boy Bob, driving ten miles with a horse, and
dray to fill a tank of water at a waterhole for their few cows, and of
a sudden torrential downpour with water surging everywhere and Bob
exultingly tipping the water from the tank he had filled and then far*-’’
on his return to the selection that no rain whatever had fallen there.
The slow drive back to fill the tank again over ground made boggy mus'i;
have been bitter indeed* Another early settler of the area was that
Grand Old Man of the scrub Jack Commons, He arrived with his wife ark
family and all his worldly possessions from Guyra in New South Wales,
in a buggy, or was it a buckboard. A street in Millmerran perpetual
his name which will always be revered wherever scrub folk are
gathered together.
Possibly, because of the virgin richness of the soil, the prickly
pear infestation siczed on this area with all enveloping ferocity.
Every square foot of ground which was not occupied by a tree trunk
was covered with the pest. The Cactoblastus is of course now an old
story but without its introduction the Rocky Creek/Mt. Emlyn area
would doubtless still be a wilderness*


EARLY HISTORY OP THE MILLMERRAH DISTRICT - ROCKY CREEK/MT, EMLYN
(2)
As soon as the settlors had sufficient country cleared and
plan tod with Rhodes Grass, dairying "became the main farming occupation
with maize and a little wheat growing thrown in, and it was from this
start that the progressive and prosperous farms which now cover the
area evolved.
The Cnoose factory was built by co-operative effort
a xew years afuer tnc area was selected and for many years was the
Cun ore of farming production. However, as in other districts which
commenced as centres of dairying the industry has now practically
given over to grain growing and the raising of vealers. The markets
favoured this change and a few years ago the cheese factory closed
down after having served useful purpose in the advancement of the
district.
Rocky Creek/Mt. Emlyn area is one of the most suitable areas
for uhe^ growing of linseed and many quite outstanding yields of this
profitapie crop have^ come from paddocks which for years had known only
tne lowing of the dairy herd, for the future this area seems well
established and is certainly one oi the most beautiful and prosperous
parts of the Millrnerran Shire.
(Told by K. Macqueen)
ooQOoo
NLj>J|
flflioSS
HiJUmmcuy / .(Wwi
