

PAMPHLET,
As partly read by R. Harnett , Junr <2/ <2 Meeting held at Mosrnans
Bay , AW. /c?, (without prejudice).
Gentlemen, —With all respect to this meeting, I may
say that I do not know whether I am expected or ought to
speak on this question of water frontages to-night, as the
whole of these matters in reference to Mossman’s Bay are
in the hands of the Council of St. Leonards, who are the
body authorised by law to govern this district.
Without referring to the Whaling grants- —Bells and
Mossman’s four acres—but with reference to the other old
grants about which there appears to have been so many
conflicting opinions, I can say that the full price of the day
was paid for the land described in them, and the descrip-
tions in those grants stated that the land was bounded by
tne waters of Great or Little Sirius Cove.
When Harnett Senior bought Hillison’s and Gilbert’s
Jones’ and Mossman’s ten acres and Bell’s and Mossman’s
four acres they, including other portions of the Mossman’s
Bay Estate, were all fenced in by a boundary fence and
kept as a private Estate, and up to that time trespassers
were warned off by Stuart Russell, the previous owner, and
others.
In 1870 Harnett Senior bought the Mossman Bay
Estate and other lands at Mossman’s Bay, and about 1872
employed a surveyor who laid it out for sale. A Govern-
ment surveyor about that date laid out the main road,
Raglan-street, and marked it as aligned at present.
Harnett’s surveyor took this road as laid out by the Go-
vernment surveyor as correctly located, which it may or
may not have been, as old grants frequently overlap and
cut up the land for sale ; for Harnett Senior, accordingly
with allotments fronting such surveyed road, called Raglan
street, now Curraghbeena-road, as fixed by the Government
surveyor. Portions of these lands were then sold in allot-
ments or blocks fronting such road ; this road as then sur-
veyed was on the east boundary of the old Mossman’s Bay
boundary fence that had then been many years standing
and was then in good condition, and existed from
Musgrave-street all along the western alignment of Cur-
raghbeena-road right up to the Military-road, &c. The old
post holes are to be seen yet, and the position of road sur-
veyed by Government surveyor was the best, as the old
alleged road ran through two very rocky hills. Shortly
after another Government surveyor surveyed the Govern-
ment land at Mossman’s Point, and I believe alleged per-
haps incorrectly that the first Government surveyor had
located Raglan-street in the wrong position. The pur-
chasers from Harnett were informed of it, and they could
not get proper titles then on account of the old alleged
roads running through their allotments, though some of
them had fenced and built upon their land, in fact the
houses are on the old alleged Government road. En-
deavours were then made by Harnett to get the Corpora-
tion to ask the Government to align the road and cross
roads as laid out by the first Government surveyor, but the
Corporation would not consent to ask Government unless
Harnett agreed to take all the responsibility of any damages
arising out of the alleged alteration of position of the
roads. To do this Harnett and Stuart had to spend about
£lOOO in buying more land and settling with other adjoin-
ing owners, and so became owners or had control of all the
land adjoining the roads, and thereby could agree to accept
the responsibility of the alleged alterations.
They, Harnett and Stuart, wrote the Council requesting
them again to have the roads aligned as Harnett required,
conditionally accepting the responsibility of the alleged
alteration of position of the roads ; and the Corporation
then wrote the Government asking them to align the roads
as Harnett required them, which the Government then
promised to do.
R. Harnett was then resident owner, and had established
the ferry at great cost and trouble, advertising and subsi-
dising it, building wharves round Mossman’s and round
Neutral Bay, &c. Previously he and Harnett Junior had
to row themselves to and from Circular Quay daily for some
years, there being no ferry then.
Re water frontage.—-As shown in Mr. Abigail’s printed
papers—copy of which has been shown at last meeting—
Harnett applied for recission of reservation of alleged 100
feet reservation, Manson’s, Jones’, Mossman’s ten acres,
Hillison and Gilbert’s grants at Mossman’s Bay and Little
Sirius Cove, and the usual Gazette notice appeared (see Mr.
Abigail’s papers), fees were paid, and usual time for objec-
tions lapsed (here read Parliamentary papers No. 26, 2nd
March, 1883), but a few days after such lapse a deputation
(for dates please refer to Mr. Abigail’s and Government
printed papers, and Parliamentary papers), waited on the
Minister for Lands, and asked him to stop proceeding with
Harnett’s application till they, the dissatisfied inhabitants,
got a wharf and a road to it. Harnett kept the ferry
wharves private up to this date. Harnett offered to give
Bay View-street and Musgrave-street to within about 150
feet of the water, if the Government would grant the
recission of reservations applied for, and titles for the old
alleged roads and Government land which were to revert to
Harnett. This the Government would not do unless a
wharf was given also. Eventually a plan and letter were
sent in by Stephen Lawrence and Jaques to the Minister
for Mines, in whose department the matter then was, which
letter, dated 9th June, 1883, and plan. (Here read said
letter and show plan as printed hereafter ; I have already
distributed copies.)
Mr. Bullock, the Government Surveyor, was then sent
over by Government to align the roads per said plan and
letter, in fact, with it in his hands to guide him, and Govern-
ment aligned the roads as they stand at present through
Harnett’s private land and other land, and took about 80
feet deep water frontage at foot of Bay A 7 iew Street, part of
Whaling Grant, and about 100 feet deep water frontage,
Torrens title land, at foot of Musgrave Street, which street
cost Harnett about £2OOO, to make retaining walls for, and
to form and make up to Military Road, thus also in taking
these roads, taking control of Ferry established by Harnett.
The Government roads being inaccessible, and these roads
were gazetted and confirmed then on that letter and plan,
and Harnett, thinking that the matters were all settled, as
the Government had taken the new roads, &c., per Stephen
Lawrence and Jaques letter, commenced to sell land again,
after his sales had been stopped for about five or six years.
Such stoppage of sales caused Harnett great loss.
The first Township Subdivision sale was then held for
Harnett, through Messrs. Richardson and Wrench. The
North Shore Ferry Company then had just commenced
running, and Corporation commenced spending money on
the aligned roads ; further, allotments were sold fronting
Raglan-street or Curraghbeeua-road, and titles were granted
to purchasers and accepted by them, and undertakings given
by Harnett that as soon as he got the Crown grants of the
old alleged roads from Government he would give same to
his purchasers for their portions. Purchasers and their
solicitors were satisfied, as some of them called at the Lands
Office and were informed that everything was all right.
Harnett then pressed Government for the grants of the old
alleged roads that had reverted to him in lieu of the other
roads, and asked for the recission of reservations, &c., to be
completed per Stephen Lawrence and Jaques’ said letter,
but the Land Act of 1884 having just been passed by
Government, all the arrangements at Lands Office were
upset, and Harnett could not get much progress made,
though the Government had meantime surveyed the 100 ft.
alleged reservations and valued them, ready to complete
with Harnett, and valued the price of Crown Land men-
tioned in Stephen Lawrence and Jaques’ said letter at
Mosman’s Point.


Time elapsed, and several residents commenced to agitate
about Harnett’s private track, called by them Avenue-road,
and the private papers, &c., already mentioned, were called
for by Mr. Abigail in Parliament. Letters w T ere written to
Lands Office by various residents, and various persons
waited on the Minister, urging him not to complete with
Harnett unless the private track was given, though the said
residents, prior to 1884, never, to Harnett’s knowledge,
asked the Government for it, only for a wharf and road to
it, as stated already, and which wharf and road to it was
already taken from Harnett per Stephen Lawrence and
Jaques’ said letter, as already stated. Further delays were
then made at Lands Office.
As regards the alleged right of way over Harnett’s private
fifteen feet track from north end of the Mossman’s Bay
wharf, made at his and his preceding owner’s expense, a
great deal can be said pro and con.
Harnett has abstained of late from putting up notices and
obstructions, in the hope of bringing about a spirit of con-
ciliation, and as the new proposal includes the alleged
Avenue track.
As regards No. 30 Letter in Mr. Abigail’s papers, so often
mentioned by Mr. Macalpine, it is so long ago since it was
written that I am not quite certain at present what street
it refers to, but know positively that it does not refer to
the private track and believe it must have been intended to
refer to Fitzroy-street or to the Avenue-road from Military-
road to Bloxsome’s gate, which latter road had before that
date been made by Harnett and maintained in repair at a
cost of about £5OO, it having been rough bush land pre-
viously, and it was never used as a public road previously
and was on part of the land enclosed in the old Mossman’s
Bay fence, which fence was originally erected from head of
creek at Ranger’s Estate boundary, and thence along creek
to Mr. Charles Cowles’ fence, thence easterly to Military-
road, and south-easterly along Military-road to Cui’raghbeena-
road, and from thence south-westerly to south junction of
Musgrave-street and Curraghbeena-road, and from thence
westerly to Mossman’s Bay at south end of Mr. Bros’ resi-
dence. Mr. Stuart Russell erected the fence about 1858
and enclosed in it the Ranger’s Estate and Hillison’s and
Gilbert’s grants, as well as Bell’s, Jones’ and Mossman’s—
various grants, then his property—so that the whole
Mossman’s Bay Estate was then thus enclosed and kept as
a private estate prior to 1870, and up to date of Harnett
subdividing the land, Harnett can shew plan to prove this.
Harnett, junior, can remember the old fence well, and so do
many of the old residents, and Harnett used some of the
fencing, when taken down, to fence off part of the wharf at
south side of present wine shop, and Harnett erected a gate,
a double fence and slip panel across the alleged right of way
claimed by some of the residents, the position of which
Harnett can point out on plan and on the ground, and he
kept the gate and slip panel shut almost constantly, while
about twenty ’bus horses were shut in the paddock, through
which the alleged right of way is said to be claimed ; the
paddock was also fenced on north side near the cottages, the
store, wine shop and cottages were inside these gates and
slip panel.
For evidence of Harnett’s expenditure on Point-road,
Musgrave-street, I can refer to Harnett’s old books, and Sir
A. Stuart’s books, letters, and prospectus he prepared.
Re alleged position of old Government road, Government
Surveyor Bullock cannot state positively that roads as he
located them, are cori’ectly placed. He shows them on his
plan as in appToximate position.
Harnett is not responsible if he cannot get people their
titles for old roads, as he only agreed to give them when he
got them from Government.
Purchasers are bound by plans per contracts, as well as
vendors, and if roads are not shewn on plan by vendor,
purchasers cannot claim them, as they are bound by sale
contracts signed by them. Harnett reserved the right to
close subdivision roads in his early sale contracts.
The alleged right of way over private track (called
Avenue) is only fifteen feet wide in most places on the land
from kerb to kerb, and cannot be made sixty-six feet wide
without cutting down a lot of Harnett’s trees, and never
was sixty-six feet wide ; and requires to be dedicated by
Harnett before Corporation will spend money on it.
Harnett recently made a further proposal to the St.
Leonards Council, who he thinks are the proper gentlemen
to approach.
Here read and examine new proposal, plan and letter,
and note that eleven aldermen went on the ground and went
over the new proposed road and water frontage, and they
agreed to Harnett’s proposal per letter and plan, and to.
make the road when the matter is completed.
Harnett wants this meeting to uphold the action of the
Council, who has given the matter very careful con-
sideration.
Harnett has given over fifty acres of land away in
Mossman’s Bay vicinity in roads already, which the public
get the benefit of, and has spent over ,£20,000 in buildings,
opening quarry, making wharves, starting, subsidising, and
advertising Mossman’s Bay and Neutral Bay Ferrys, adver-
tising the district, making roads, running ’buses, entertaining
visitors and in other ways in the district, and has lived
there as a pioneer since 1873.
Council of St. Leonards are justified in accepting Harnett’s
proposals for following reasons, on account of—
1. Harnett’s rights as regards Bell’s and Mossman’s four-
acre Whaling grants, as acknowledged by Government.
2. Doubt as to alleged right of way over private Avenue
track, which is now proposed to be given.
3. Harnett’s alleged contract with Government per
Stephen Lawrence and Jaques’ letter, of 9th June, 1883.
4. To get purchasers their titles for old alleged Govern-
ment roads.
5. Also, considering that Harnett established the Ferry,
which he has virtually handed over to the Council, and con-
sidering what Harnett has done for the district, and what
Harnett spent in budding and on roads and other improve-
ments, &c. Here read extracts from Mr. Abigail’s printed
papers, specially No. 46 letter, and new proposal made by
Harnett as shewn hereafter.
6. In order that the Council may make the new road
proposed to be given by Harnett and to open up the district..
The Council will not make any road till it is properhy
dedicated.
Messrs. Harnett and Stuart to the Secretary for
Lands.
Sydney, 7th Feb., 1882.
Sir, —We have the honour to enclose herewith applica-
tion for recission of reservation of water frontage, Hilli-
son’s 5-acre and Gilbert’s 16-acre grants, Mossman’s Bay,,
per plan herewith. The improvements consist of a quarry,
tramway, and drain, also a wharf, cranes for loading stone,
which have cost us £5,000 or more to present date. We
have the honour to beg your favourable consideration to
our application.—We have, &c.,
R Harnett,
Alex. Stuart.
The Under-Secretary for Lands to Messrs. Stuart and
Harnett.
Department of Lands,
Sydney, 2nd August, 1882.
Gentlemen, —With reference to your application of the
7th February last, for the recission of the reservation of
100 feet above high water mark contained in Hillison’s fi-
acre and Gilbert’s 16-acre grants at Mossman’s Bay, parish
of Willoughby, county of Cumberland, I am directed to.
inform you that, under a report which has been received
from the Engineer-in-Chief for Harbours and Rivers and
the Surveyor-General, the Secretary for Lands has.
approved of your being allowed to purchase the recission in
question, provided that, at the expiration of four weeks
from the date of a notice to be published in the Govern-
ment Gazette inviting the public to lodge any objections,
they may have to a compliance with your application, no.
valid objections have been lodged.
You must clearly understand that this approval extends,
only so far as this Department is concerned, and further,,
that any work undertaken by you in connection with the
proposed recission will, until such time as final approval
shall have been given by the Governor and Executive-
Council, be regarded as at your own risk.—l have, &c.,
Charles Oliver,
Under Secretary.
Messrs. Stuart and Harnett to the Secretary for
Lands.
Sydney, 7th Feb., 1882.
Sir, —We beg to hand you herewith application for the
recission of the reservation of the water frontage at Little
Sirius Cove, of Manson’s 30-acre grant, now our property,
and on which a number of improvements have been made.
Four residences are now on the block, and several more will
be erected shortly. We have expended a large amount of
money in improving the Government road on the western


boundary of this land, and have spent a considerable
amount in improvements in this locality generally.—We
have, <fec., R. H arnett.
Alex. Stuart.
The Under Secretary for Lands to Messrs. Stuart and
Harnett.
Department of Lands,
Sydney, 2nd August, 1882.
Gentlemen, —With reference to your application of the
7th Feb. last, for the rescission of the reservation of 100 ft.
above high water mark, contained in Manson’s grant of 30
acres, at Little Sirius Cove, parish of Willoughby, county
of Cumberland, I am directed to inform you that, under a
report which has been received from the Engineer-in-Chief
for Harbours and Rivers, and the Surveyor-General, the
Secretary for Lands has approved of your being allowed to
purchase the recission in question, provided that, at the
expiration of four weeks from the date of a notice to be
published in the Government Gazette , inviting the public to
lodge any objections they may have to a compliance with
your application, no valid objections shall have been lodged.
2. You must clearly understand that this approval
-extends only so far as this Department is concerned, and,
further, that any work undertaken by you in connection
with the proposed recision will, until such time as a final
approval shall have been given by the Governor and
Executive Council, be regarded as at your own risk.—l
have the honor, tfec., Charles Oliver.
U nder-Secretary.
Messrs. Stuart and Harnett to the Secretary for
Lands.
Sydney, 7th Feb., 1882.
Sir, —We have the honour to enclose herewith applica-
tion for the recision of reservation of water frontage (x)
Mossman’s 30 acre grant, Mossman’s 10 acre grant, Jones’
30 acre grant, at head of Mossman’s Bay, St. Leonards.
The improvements are a chain road through the centre of
the blocks, made by ourselves and given to the public,
fencing, and an old dam where a fine-washing and fell-
mongering establishment was carried on some years since ;
also improvements on the Government-road making same
■on eastern boundary, costing us £2,000 and upwards from
Mossman’s Point to the Military-road ; also wharf-houses
and a store worth £3,000 to £4,000. —We have, (fee.,
R. Harnett.
Alex. Stuart.
[x Mossman’s 30 acre grant partly fronts a fresh-water creek.—
A. S., R. H.]
The Under-Secretary for Lands to Messrs. Stuart
and Harnett.
Department of Lands,
Sydney, 2nd August, 1882.
Gentlemen, —With reference to your application of the
7th February last, for the recission of the reservation of
100 feet above high-water mark, contained in Mossman’s
30-acre and Jones’ 10-acre grants, at Mossman’s Bay, parish
■of Willoughby, county of Cumberland, I am directed to
inform you that, under a report that has been received from
the Engineer-in-Chief for Harbours and Rivers and the
Surveyor-General, the Secretary for Lands has approved of
your being allowed to purchase the recission in question,
provided that, at the expiration of four weeks from the
date of a notice to be published in the Government Gazette
inviting the public to lodge any objections they may have
to a compliance with your application, no valid objections
shall have been lodged.
2. You must clearly understand that this approval ex-
tends only so far as this Department is concerned, and
further, that any work undertaken by you in connection
with the proposed recission will, until such time as final
approval shall have been given by the Governor and
Executive Council, be regarded as at your own risk.—l
have, &c., Charles Oliver,
Under-Secretary.
The Colonial Secretary to the Surveyor-General.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, Ist January, 1831.
Sir, —I am directed by His Excellency the Governor to
apprise you that Mr. John Bell, or in his absence, Mr.
J ames King, his agent, has received permission to take pos-
session of the four acres, more or less, of land, described as
No. 30-344 in your abstract of lands selected between the
Ist and the 15th of December, 1830, to be held agreeably
to the existing regulations, as a special reserve for the pur-
pose of erecting stores and other buildings necessary to the
formation of a whaling or other mercantile establishment,
the reservation of 100 feet from high-water mark and the
conditions as to personal residence on the land being
omitted.—l have, &c., T. C. Harrington
(For the Colonial Secretary.)
The Colonial Secretary to the Surveyor-General.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, Ist January, 1831.
Sir, —I am directed by His Excellency the Governor to
apprise you that Mr. Archibald Mossman has received per-
mission to take possession of the four acres, more or less, of
land, described as No. 30-345 in your abstract of lands
selected between the Ist and 15th December, 1830, to be
held agreeably to the existing regulations, as a special
reserve for the purpose of erecting stores and other build-
ings necessary for the formation of a whaling or other
mercantile establishment, the reservation of 100 feet from
high-water mark and the condition as to personal residence
on the land being omitted.—l have, &c.,
T. C. Harrington
(For the Colonial Secretary.)
Mr. A. Mossman to the Colonial Secretary.
Sydney, 24th July, 1843.
Sir, —I have the honour to apply for the issue of a deed
of grant in my favour of four acres, more or less, of land
situated in the County of Cumberland, parish of Wil-
loughby, being allotment No. 7 (seven) between Great and
Little Sirius Coves, granted to John Bell, Esquire, by
virtue of a letter of possession, signed by the Honorable
the Colonial Secretary, upon the Ist of January, 1831,
marked special, and conveyed to me by Mr. Bell by deeds
of lease and release, bearing date the 9th and 10th of
December, 1836, herewith exhibited, and upon which land
have been erected stores and other buildings necessary for
the formation of a whaling or other mercantile establish-
ment.—l have, &c., Archibald Mossman.
Mr. A. Mossman to the Colonial Secretary.
Sydney, 24th July, 1843.
Sir, —I beg to apply for the issue in my favour of a deed
of grant of four acres, more or less, of land situated in the
County of Cumberland, parish of Willoughby, being allot-
ment No. 6, between Great and Little Sirius Coves, which
was granted to me by virtue of a letter of possession,
signed by the Honourable the Colonial Secretary, upon the
Ist January, 1831, marked special, and upon which I have
erected stores and other buildings necessary for the forma-
tion of a whaling or other mercantile establishment.—l
have, &c., Archibald Mossman.
REPORT
Of the Commissioners of the Court of Claims, on Case
No. 1208.
New South Wales.
Report of the Commissioners, appointed under the Act of
Council of sth William IY., No. 21, for hearing and
examining claims to grants of land.
Case No. 1208.
Proposed grantees’ name and address—Henry Roxburgh
and Henry Smyth.
Claimant’s name and address—Archibald Mossman.
Opponents’ name and address—Messrs. Hughes and
Hosking.
Name of promisee, first possessor, lessee or purchaser—
John Bell.
Date of promise, lease or purchase—26th July, 1830.
By whom promised, leased, or of whom purchased—
Governor Darling.
Description of the land—Four acres, County of Cumber-
land, Parish of Willoughby, at Great Sirius Cove, allotment
No. 7 : commencing at the south-west corner of allotment
No. 6, and bounded on the north by the southern boundary
of allotment No. 6, bearing east 6 degrees 30minules, south
8 chains ; on the east by a road 1 chain wide ; oh tljejsouth.
by a road 1 chain wide, bearing west 11 chains to Great
Sirius Cove; and on the west by Great Sirius Cove to the
south-west corner of No. 6 allotment, as aforesaid.
Date of determination—3lst March, 1845.


Report.
The Commissioners have the honour to report for the
information of His Excellency the Governor ;
That the allotment of land, No. 7, included in this case,
was under an order made by His Excellency Governor
Darling, and dated 26th July, 1830, selected by John Bell,
on condition that the necessary wharfs and stores should
be erected for carrying on a whaling establishment.
That by certain indentures of lease and release, dated the
9th and 10th of December, 1836, the said John Bell, in
consideration of £3OO, released and conveyed the allotment
of land included in this case to Archibald Mossman.
That by indenture of lease and release, bearing date the
11th and 12th days of August, 1843, and made between the
said Archibald Mossman of the one part, and John Terry
Hughes and John Hosking of the other part, in considera-
of an annuity of £2OOO per annum, the said Archibald
Mossman released and conveyed (amongst other lands) the
allotment of land included in this case to the said John
Terry Hughes and John Hosking and their heirs.
That by certain indentures of lease and release, the latter
dated 15th August, 1843, and made between John Terry
Hughes and Esther, his wife, of the first part, J ohn Hosking
and Martha Foxlowe, his wife, of the second part, the said
Archibald Mossman, of the third part, and Thomas Brown
and Robert Thomson, of the fourth part. The said parties
of the first and second part did direct, appoint, release, and
convey (amongst other lands) the allotment of land included
in this case to the said Thomas Brown and Robert Thomson,
and their heirs upon trust, in the event of the said annuity
of £2OOO being in arrear and unpaid, to sell the said lands.
That the said Archibald Mossman became insolvent, and
the said Thomas Brown and Thomas Ware Smart were
appointed trustees of his estate and effects.
That by a certain indenture of the sth June, 1844, John
Campbell Lyall was appointed a trustee under the said
annuity deed, in the place of the said Robert Jhomson.
That the said annuity being in arrear, the said Thomas
Brown and John Campbell Lyall, in pursuance of the power
vested in them, sold the land included in this case to Andrew
Roxburgh and Henry Smyth.
That by a certain indenture of release, dated 22nd
February, 1845, and made between the said Thomas Brown
and John Campbell Lyall, of the one part, and Andrew
Roxburgh and Henry Smyth, of the other part, in considera-
tion of the sum of £lO9O, the said Thomas Brown and John
Campbell Lyall released and conveyed (amongst other lands)
the lands and hereditaments included in this case to the
said Andrew Roxburgh and Henry Smyth, and their heirs
and assigns absolutely.
That by the deposition of Gother Kerr Mann, surveyor,
sworn before the Commissioner, on the 31st March, 1845,
it appears that a wharf has been erected upon the land
included in this case, of the value of £lOOO or thereabout.
That the transfers and deeds above alluded to and abstract
of title containing the particulars of the annuity deed, were
exhibited to the Commissioners and verified.
The Commissioners therefore respectfully recommend that
a deed of grant of the allotment included in this case be
made to Andrew Roxburgh, of Surry Hills, in the City of
Sydney, builder, and Henry Smyth, also of Surry Hills,
Esquire, late a Major in the 39th Regiment of Foot, and to
their heirs as joint tenants.
Dated the 10th day of May, 1845.
William Carter.
Charles Windeyer.
Thomas Callaghan.
REPORT.
Of the Commissioners of the Court of Claims on Case
No. 1226.
New South Wales.
Report of the Commissioners appointed under the Act of
Council of sth William IV., No. 21, for hearing and
examining claims to grants of land.
Case No. 1226.
Proposed grantees’ name and address—Andrew Roxburgh
Henry Smpth.
Claimant’s name and address—Archibald Mossman.
Opponent’s name—Messrs. Hughes and Hosking.
■//j Name of promisee, first possessor, lessee or purchaser—
ArcMbsdtT Mossman.
Date of promise, lease or purchase—l9th October, 1830.
By whom promised, leased, or of whom purchased—
Governor Darling.
Description of the land—Four acres’ County of Cumber-
land, Parish of Willoughby, at Great Sirius Cove, allotment
No. 6 : commencimg at the north-west corner of allotment
No. 7, and bounded on the south by the northern boundary
of allotment No. 7, bearing east 6 degrees 30 minutes, south
8 chains, on the east by a road 1 chain wide, bearing north
24 degrees east; on tha north by a road 1 chain wide, bear-
ing north 65 degrees west, 7 chains 50 links to Great Sirius
Cove ; and on the west by Great Sirius Cove to the north-
west corner of allotment No, 7 aforesaid.
Date of determination—3lst March, 1845.
Report.
The Commissioners have the honor to report for the
information of His Excellency the Governor ;
That the allotment of land, No. 6, included in this case,
was located under an order, made by His Excellency
Governor Darling, dated the 19th October, 1830, in favour
of Archibald Mossman, on condition of forming a whaling
establishment.
That by the deposition of Gother Kerr Mann, surveyor,
sworn before the Commissioner, on the 31st March, 1845
(and enclosed with report and papers in case No. 1208,
relating to the conterminous allotment No. 7) it appears
that wharfs and buildings have been erected upon the
allotment of land included in this case of the value of £5OOO
or thereabout.
That by certain indentures of lease and release, the latter
dated 12th August, 1843, and made between the said
Archibald Mossman, of the one part, and John Terry Hughes
and John Hosking, of the other part, in consideration of an
annuity of £2OOO per annum, the said Archibald Mossman
released and conveyed the allotment of land included in this
case (amongst other lands) to the said John Terry Hughes
and John Hosking and their heirs.
That by certain indentures of lease and release, the latter
dated 15th August, 1843, and made between John Terry
Hughes and Esther, his wife, of the first part, and John
Hosking and Martha Foxlowe, his wife, of the second part,
the said Archibald Mossman, of the third part, and Thomas.
Brown and Robert Thomson, of the fourth part. The said
parties of the first and second parts did direct, appoint,
release und convey (amongst other lands) the lands included
in this case to the said Thomas Brown and Robert Thomson
and their heirs upon trust in the event of the said annuity
being in arrear and unpaid, as therein mentioned to sell the
said lands.
That the said Archibald Mossman became insolvent and
the said Thomas Brown and Thomas Ware Smart were
appointed trustees of his estate and effects.
That by certain indenture of the sth June, 1844, John
Campbell Lyall was appointed a trustee under the said
annuity deed in the place of the said Robert Thomson.
That the said annuity being in arrear, the said Thomas
Brown and J ohn Campbell Lyall, in pursuance of the power
vested in them, sold the land included in this case to Andrew
Roxburgh and Henry Smyth.
That by a certain indenture of release, dated 22nd
February, 1845, and made between the said Thomas Brown
and John Campbell Lyall, of the one part, and Andrew
Roxburgh and Henry Smyth, of the other part, in considera-
tion of the sum of £lO9O, the said Thomas Brown and John
Campbell Lyall released and conveyed (amongst other lands),
the lands and hereditaments included in this case to the said
Andrew Roxburgh and Henry Smyth and their heirs and
assigns absolutely.
That the several deeds above alluded to and an abstract
of title containing the particulars of the annuity deed, were
exhibited to the Commissioners and verified.
The Commissioners therefore respectfully recommend that
the deed of grant of the allotment of land included in this
case be made to Andrew Roxburgh, of Surry Hills, in the
City of Sydney, builder, and Henry Smyth, also of Surry
Hills, Esquire, late a Major in the 39th Regiment of Foot,,
and to their heirs and joint tenants.
Dated this 10th day of May, 1845.
William Carter.
Charles Windeyer.
Thomas Callaghan.
Cases No. 1,208 and 1,226.
William Carr, of Sydney, Solicitor, being sworn, saith
That he is a solicitor for Messrs. Thomas Brown and John
Campbell Lyall, trustees under deeds dated on the 15th
August, 1843, and sth June, 1844, made for the purpose of
receiving an annuity from Messrs. Hughes and Hosking to.
Archibald Mossman, of £2OOO per annum, that Mr..


Solomon, the Auctioneer, was authorised by the said
trustees, in consequence of default of payment of the said
annuity to sell (amongst other lands) the allotments in
question under the power contained in the said deeds, and
that these allotments, with other lands, were sold to John
Stirling, Esq., who represented himself to have purchased
as agent for Andrew Roxburgh and Henry Smyth.
William Carr.
William Carter.
Chas. Windeyer.
(Enclosure B to No. 29.)
Cases No. 1,226 and 1,208.
March 31st, 1845.
Gother Kerr Mann, of Sydney, Surveyor, being sworn
saith : lam acquainted with the allotments No’s. 6 and 7
at Great Sirius Cove, promised to Archibald Mossman and
John Bell respectively, on certain conditions of erecting
buildings for whaling purposes. I have inspected the
premises, and have seen that on No. 6 valuable buildings
and a wharf have been erected to a value of about £5,000,
and on No. 7 there is a wharf that cost at least <£looo, the
buildings and premises are devoted to shipping purposes.
Gother Kerr Mann.
William Carter.
Thomas Callaghan.
The tenancy of above buildings, &c., is as under.
Note: Harnett has a tenant in one of the above build-
ings used as a refreshment shop. The large store built by
Mossman is used by Church of England as a bazaar at
present by permission of Harnett, and the cottages are
vacant, part of the wharf is leased to North Shore Ferry
Co. by Harnett, and part of wharf near foot of Bay Yiew-
street is leased to a boatman.
Messrs. Stuart and Harnett to the Secretary for
Lands.
Sydney, November, 1882.
Sir, —We have the honour to address you on the subject
of the application we have made for the rescission of the
reservation of water frontages to certain lands on the
North Shore, in Mossman’s Bay and its vicinity, to which
we understand that objections have been made by the
inhabitants of North Shore.
To enable the matter to be understood more clearly, we
have prepared a sketch of the coast line, showing approx-
imately the land which belongs to us, and the frontage
reservations for which we have applied.
It will be observed that certain portions of land marked
“ A,” were granted without any reservations. The others
form two classes, those marked “ B ” were originally what
were known as “ whaling grants,” and those marked “ C ”
were grants by purchase in the ordinary manner. The
whaling grants were given to encourage that pursuit, which
at that time, and for many years afterwards, formed a most
important industry for this port. The grants were pro-
mised under letters of license from the Government for the
purpose of making wharfs, and building stores close to the
water’s edge, on the frontages which form the subject of
these applications, and, as one would naturally expect, the
printers words “ The Crown reserves to itself all lands
within 100 feet of high-water mark on the sea coast, creeks,
harbours, and inlets,” were ruled out.
The applications were approved by Governor Darling, on
26th July and 10th October, 1830, and the letters of
license are dated Ist January, 1831, “For the purpose of
erecting stores and other buildings necessary for the forma-
tion of a whaling or other mercantile establishment,” and
provide that a Crown grant will issue on fulfilment of the
conditions. The conditions were fulfilled, a large sum of
money expended, and a whaling establishment of great
extent was carried on for many years, while it formed the
only place for careening vessels prior to the making of dry
docks.
On 24th July, 1843, Mr. A. Mossman applied for the
grants for his own lands, and for that of Mr. Bell, which
he had purchased.
These applications were referred by Sir George Gipps,
the Governor, to the Court of Claims for investigation, and
on 10th May, 1845, reports were sent in by William Carter
Charles Windeyer, and Thomas Callaghan, the Commis-
sioners, that £5,000 had been expended on wharfs and
buildings, and all other conditions had been fulfilled, and
recommending that a deed of grant should be issued.
The deeds were issued accordingly on 29th May, 1845,
and in them the parcels of land are identified as those
authorised under the letters of Ist January, 1831, and
approved by the Commissioners of Court of Claims, but by
some oversight the printed words “ reserving within 100
feet of high water ” have been left in the deeds, and the
omission to delete them and bring them into accord with
the original letters of occupation, and the very object for
which that occupation was given, was unnoticed until
recently, the various dealings with these lands, however,
have always been in the knowledge that as whaling grants
there was no reservation, the grant, from the nature of the
object having been purposely given of the very land usually
reserved.
In asking for the recission of the reservation on these
grants, we are therefore merely asking for the removal of a
blot upon the title deeds, which had inadvertently crept in
and been allowed to remain there undiscovered ; we ask for
no concession, but merely that the intentions of the two
parties to the original contract be carried out, the Crown
on the one hand, and Messrs. Mossman and Bell, through
whom we derive our title, on the other.
The reservations of 100 feet in the other grants stand in
the same position as hundreds of other cases which have
been granted, and we see no reason why they should be
withhold from us.
On Hillson’s and Gilbert’s grants the reservations would
be practically of no use to anyone except the owners of the
land, as it is an extremely steep rock, down the face of
which on a part of the reservation, we have, at great ex-
pense, erected a steep gradient railroad to convey the stone
from the quarries on the upper portion to the wharf which
we have made for shipping it, and part of the remainder
of the reservation will be required for road to lands. On
the other grants we have given, or are willing to give up,
an equal or larger area in roads of greater practical use and
benefit to the public.
The main object, we understand, of the North Shore
deputations which have waited on you, was to obtain for
the public benefit the wharf or a portion of it, on which
we, or those through whom we derive our title, expended
so large a sum of money.
We have no desire to monopolise the Bay to the exclusion
of other parties, on the contrary, several thousand persons
land weekly upon our wharf and land, some for pursuing
their vocations, but the majority for recreation and enjoy-
ment of the Bay and surrounding scenery ; but we feel
sure that you would never sanction such injustice as to take
away without full compensation that to which we have
shown we have an equitable title, and have a right to
obtain a legal one.
We would point out that there have been reserved by
the Government of former days, several points of access to
the water, marked in the plan with an *x*, and although
these may appear very steep and inaccessible, yet they are
in reality not more so than our land was before we in-
curred the necessary expenditure.
Any or all of these points could be made available and
convenient for the accommodation of the residents, but if
our wharf be considered more desirable for a public wharf,
then let it be valued and resumed for that purpose.
We do not desire to rest upon mere technical points
when we have a strong, just, and equitable claim, but we
would merely point out that the gazetted time for lodging
objections to the issue of these recissions had expired
before the objections were made to you.
Resting assured that you will decide this matter in ac-
cordance with its equities, we have, &c.,
Alex. Stuart,
R. Harnett.
Memorandum by Mr. Peyton.
The Borough Council of St. Leonards and others object-
ing to the recission in favour of Messrs. Stuart and
Harnett of reservation of water frontage at Mossman’s
Bay, also, an application by residents of Mossman’s Bay
asking for wharf and road of access.
The wharf now sought to be obtained by certain resi-
dents of Mossman’s Bay is situated on whaling lots, one of
the conditions in connection with which was, as pointed
out by Messrs. Stuart and Harnett, that such improve-
ments should be erected.
Further, a letter by Messrs. Stuart and Harnett is now
under consideration proposing conditionally on the closing
of certain roads to dedicate others, one of which would


provide the access herein sought to be obtained, and marked
“2”on the enclosed lithograph.
I have attached copies of the original letters of pos-
session, from which it will be seen that the 100 feet reser-
vation clause has been struck out, though included in the
deed subsequently issued, on the report of the Court of
Claims (also attached) that improvements, including a
wharf, had been erected to the value of £6OOO.
It appears that the quit-rent has been redeemed by pay-
ment of twenty years’ purchase.
S. L. Peyton.
28th December, 1882.
Minutes on No. 42.
Although the objections of the Municipal Council and
individuals were not made until after the time for making
such objections had lapsed, it may be well to consider them.
Reference to the facts herein stated shows that with respect
to J. Bell’s four acres and Mossman’s four acres the pre-
decessors of Messrs. Stuart and Harnett have fulfilled all
the conditions imposed, and to the extent of £6OOO on the
eight acres, and it is now sought to deprive them of the
benefit thereof. We would specially point to the fact that
the 100 feet reservation was struck out of the order to
select, and naturally so, because it is not to de bxpected
that they would have laid out the amount on anything but
an indefeasible title (vide case 1208 Court of Claims here-
with). There is nothing to show that the subsequent in-
sertion of the conditions of 100 feet reservation was by
authority, but having been put there, we see no other open-
ing for a title than by purchase, which is recommended.
It will, however, be advisable to leave out from reserving (?)
the road of approach offered by Messrs. Stuart and Harnett,
which the public are no doubt entitled to by usor.
P. F. Adams, 2nd January, 1883.
E. O. Moriarty, 17th January, 1883
The above minute was written by the direction of the
Engineer in Chief and the Surveyor General, but cannot be
signed by the former to-day as he is out of town.
S. L. P., 2nd January, 1882.
Submitted.—This case would have been dealt with
before had not the Surveyor-General been away from the
colony. C. O. 2-1-83. Approved. J. R. 2-1-83. Blank
Cover, Under-Secretary Public Works. Forward to Lands.
—H. C. 25-1-83. The Under-Secretary for Lands. Blank
Cover—J. R. 25-1-83.
The Under-Secretary for Lands to Messrs Stuart
and Harnett.
Department of Lands,
Sydney, 3rd February, 1883.
Gentlemen,—With reference to the objections from the
Borough Council of St. Leonards and others to your appli-
cation for the recision of reservation of certain water
frontages at Mossman’s Bay, I have the honour to inform
you that as the Crown grant of the land containing the
reservation mentioned was only issued on fulfilment of
certain conditions contained in the original letters of pos-
session, which conditions were fulfilled by your predecessors
by the erection of a wharf at a cost of £6OOO, and as the
100 feet reservation clause was struck out in the letters
referred to, and there is nothing to show that its insertion
afterwards in the grant was by authority, the Secretary for
Lands has decided to uphold your application, provided
that you first convey to the Crown the road of approach to
the wharf from the southerly direction extension of Lucan-
street proposed by you.
2. I am to add that the parties objecting have been in-
formed of the decision arrived at.—l have, &c,,
Charles Oliver.
U nder-Secretary.
QUESTIONS.
Friday, March 2nd, 1883.— Parliamentary Papers.
Mossman’s Bay wharf—Mr. Abigail asked the Secretary
for Lands—
1. Is it true that Mr. Tunks, representing the Borough
Council of Victoria, St. Leonards, formally protested to the
late Government against the alienating any of the 100 feet
reserve which fringes nearly the whole of the northern
shores of Port J ackson ?
2. Did a deputation at a late date, consisting of Aid.
Langley, Stevenson and Jenkins, together with several
freeholders from Mossmans Bay, wait upon Sir John
Robertson, late Secretary for Lands, and urge that the
Government should refuse the request of Messrs. Stuart
and Harnett, to rescind that portion of the reservation
upon which the Mossman’s Bay wharf was built, together
with the foreshores of the 122 acres they had been endeav-
ouring to obtain ?
3. Is it true that Mossman’s Bay Wharf was built by
Mr. Mossman over twenty years ago upon public land at
his own expense, and that he never received any legal right
or title from the Crown to such land, nor any money con-
sideration from the Government for the said wharf ?
4. Did the late Secretary for Lands, Sir John Robertson,
give a promise to the deputation that no steps towards
alienating any of the reserved lands should be taken before
first communicating with the Council of St. Leonards ?
5. Is it true that the Mossman’s Bay Wharf has passed
into the possession of Messrs. Stuart and Harnett, if so,
upon what terms, and was the Council of St. Leonards
informed before the final arrangements were made 1
6. Has any portion of the people’s reserve at North
Shore passed into the possession of Messrs. Stuart and
Harnett, if so, will the Minister state how much, and the
particulars under which such alienations took place 1
Mr. Parnell answered—
1. He may hav r e done so, but no record of any such
protest can be traced in the Department of Lands.
2. Such a deputation did wait upon Sir Jonn Robertson,
but so far as the freeholders of Mossman’s Bay are con-
cerned, all they asked for was access to and the use of a
public wharf.
3. The wharf known as Mossman’s was built in 1831 by
Messrs. Bell and Mossman upon the frontage, two blocks of
land promised to them as what was popularly known as
whaling grants, whereby they were authorised to extend
the frontage to deep water under certain conditions of
expenditure in buildings, and from the very nature of the
occupation the 100 feet reservation usually contained in
letters of occupation was struck out by the Colonial
Secretary of the day. In 1837 the claim of these parties to
the grant in fee was referred to the Court of Claims, which
Court decided that the expenditure had exceeded the
requirement, and that the applicants were entitled to a
grant in accordance with the original letter of occupation.
4. Sir John Robertson is reported to have made such
statement, but explained that Messrs. Stuart and Harnett
held the grant, and that the Government merely had a
legal right to resume if there was an equitable right. Sub
sequently Sir John Robertson found on examining the case
that the Government had in the early days parted with
right, as stated in answer to No. 3 and that the Govern-
ment could not legally rescind the reservation merely by
reason of a clerical error in the deed of grant.
5. The Mossman’s Bay Wharf, I am informed, passed
into che possession of Mr. Harnett in 1872, through
purchase from Dr. Boyd, who had derived it through
various parties from the original grantees, Messrs. Bell and
Mossman. The terms of purchase I am not acquainted
with, nor am I able to say whether the Council of St.
Leonards was first communicated with, but I should
imagine not, as it happened probably before the existence
of such Council.
6. There is no people’s reserve at the place referred to.
Certain portions of reservations, chiefly at Little Sirius
Cove, have passed, or ai’e entitled to pass into the hands of
Messrs. Harnett and Stuart, or purchasers from them, the
same having been duly gazetted in the ordinary way, and
the time required by law expired without any person rais-
ing objection thereto. The particulars of the purchase of
such reservations shall be laid on the table in the form of a
return.
Messrs. Stephen Lawrence and Jaques to Hon. J. K.
Abbott, Minister for Mines.
81 Pitt Street,
Sydney, June 9th, 1883.
Sir, —With reference to your letter of 3rd of February
to Messrs. Harnett & Stuart, we are instructed to inform
you that they are willing to give a road in continuation of
Lucan-street down to the Wharf in consideration of the
Government granting the recision of water frontages
reserved out of their various blocks in Mossman’s Bay and
Little Sirius Cove. They recognise the argument put forward
by the inhabitants of the district that it would be a great
convenience to the public if the wharf were made a public
one. It is equally true that it would be very valuable as a
means of communication with the Great Military-road, but
inasmuch as the wharf has been erected at great expense


and as a large quantity of land has been appropriated by
them as roads, in consideration of the latter being so aligned
and the Government granting them in lieu thereof. The
other roads, the plan already referred to in Mr. Stopps’
report, shows on it in brown the road proposed to be dedi-
cated by Messrs. Harnett and Stuart; and in purple, the
roads which are to be, so to speak, resumed by them. The
small portion of Crown Land on their side of the new road
must also become their property (plan annexed)- We have
the honour to be, Sir, your obedient servants,
(Signed) Stephen Lawrence and Jaques.
Richard Hayes Harnett to the Mayor and Aldermen
of the Borough of St. Leonards.
Sydney, 28th September, 1889.
Gentlemen, —With reference to matters re Mossman’s
Bay roads, water frontages, &c., I have now the honour to
submit the following proposals for a settlement of the ques-
tion, in the hope that they may lead to an amicable
arrangement:—
I am willing to dedicate to the public a street, the width
of 66 feet, commencing at Bloxsome’s gate, on the Avenue-
road. which has been already dedicated, and terminating at
the Wharf at Mossman’s Bay, which is shown on the annexed
plan and tinted pink, and also to dedicate to the public a
portion of the water frontage or wharf at the foot of that
street, as shown on the plan and tinted purple, also to
dedicate a street 66 feet wide in continuation of Boyle-
street to the waters of Mossman’s Bay, as approximately
shown on the plan and tinted green.
If, on the other hand, the Council will agree to withdraw
any opposition, directly or indirectly, to the granting by the
Government to me of the old roads at Mossman’s Bay, as
already applied for, and to the recision of the reservation
of 100 feet water frontages in the grants of Bell’s and
Mosman’s 4 acres, Jones, Mosman’s 10 acres, Hillison’s and
Gilbert’s, Manse’s and to the granting of such reservations
to me; also to my obtaining the grant of the small piece of
Government land at Mosman’s Point, and to my obtaining
a grant from the Government of the land reclaimed at
Quarry Wharf, near the foot of Boyle-street, tinted yellow
on the plan, and that it will so far as it reasonably can
countenance and assist my application for such roads,
reservations, &c.
Of course, completion on my part of this offer, is to be
subject to the Government approving and carrying out the
arrangement as, above stated.
It will be seen that these proposals really mean the re-
linquishment for public purposes of about four and a-half
acres of perhaps the most valuable part of my property in
addition to what I have already given to the public, and I
am much influenced in making them by the prospect of the
Council constructing the roads so as to make them a con-
venience to all the inhabitants of the district.
I shall be pleased to leave this matter open for your con-
sideration for say one month (plan annexed). —Your
obedient servant,
Richard Hayes Harnett.
By his attorneys, R. Harnett, Junr., J. L. Ballantyne.
From the Council Clerk, St. Leonards,
To R. Harnett, Esq., 267 George-street, Sydney.
Council Chambers, October 28th, 1889.
Sir, Enclosed please And copy of report of the Com-
mittee of the whole Council re Avenue Road and water
frontages Mossman’s Bay, which is to be submitted to
Council to morrow night.—-Yours faithfully,
(Signed), W. Barnett Smith,
Council Clerk.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE
Of the whole Council on proposals of Mr. R. Harnett
for settlement of the matter known as “ Avenue Road and
Mossman’s Bay water frontages,” as contained in his letter,
dated 28th September, 1889, No. 89-4358.
Your Committee has the honour to report that having
met at Mossman’s Bay on the 18th inst. and inspected road
known as Avenue Road, and the portion of water frontage
or wharf at the foot of that street, both of which, along
with Boyle-street, Mr. Harnett proposes to dedicate, sub-
ject to certain conditions mentioned in his letter; and your
committee begs to recommend that the Council accepts
those conditions, and the dedication of proposed roads and
portions of water frontage, provided :
1. That the western boundary of the proposed Avenue
Road be shifted westerly from point marked “x ” on trac-
ing accompanying Mr. Harnett’s letter to points marked
“ A ” and “ B ” 18 feet and 20 feet 6 inches respectively from
present proposed western boundary, as shown on tracing
and tinted green, and that, from point marked “B” the
western boundary of the road shall run 86 feet 6 inches
northerly to a peg marked “C” on tracing and situated
near the present gateway, thence, by a line northerly, 132
feet, until it strikes the western edge of the present
retaining wall of the old Avenue Road, as likewise shown
on tracing and tinted green, and thence by the said
western edge of the said road until it intersects the
western boundary of the dedicated portion of said Avenue
Road at point marked “ D” on tracing referred to.
2. That western boundary of proposed road at its south-
ern termination at entrance to proposed wharf be shifted
westerly 6 feet at point marked “ E ” on tracing and tinted
green, and from thence to line parallel with eastern boun-
dary where it junctions with Bay View-street, until it inter-
sects the present line.
3. That the proposed north-eastern boundary of Boyle-
street, ai its termination at Mossman’s Bay, be shifted
further north-easterly 20 feet, as shown on tracing and
tinted pink. Your committee also begs to recommend that
the resolution adopting report of Special Committee passed
by the Council on August 26th be rescinded together with
all prerious resolutions having reference to these ques-
tions.
W. Barnett Smith, Council Clerk, Borough of St.
Leonards to Messrs. R. Harnett and J. L Ballantynb,
Sydney.
Borough of St. Leonards
Council Chambers
30th October, 1889.
Sir, —In reference to your letter dated 28th September,
1889, with tracing annexed, submitting proposals for a
settlement of the question of “ roads and water frontages ”
at Mossman’s Bay, I am directed by His Worship the
Mayor, to inform you that the Council has adopted a report
agreeing to accept your proposals and the dedication of
roads and portion of water frontage, provided you agree to
the alteration to boundaries of proposed roads, &c., as
recommended by Committee of the whole Council and set
forth in report referred to, a copy of which was forwarded
to you on the 28th inst.—l have the honour to be, Sir,
your obedient servant,
W. Barnett Smith,
Council Clerk.
267 George-street, Sydney, sth November, 1889.
The Mayor and Aldermen, Borough op St. Leonards.
Gentlemen, —I have the honour to acknowledge receipt
of your letter of 30th ult. concerning the report of the
Committee of the whole Council re Mossman’s Bay matters,
and (have to thank your Council for their attention to the
matter.
I am willing to adopt the alterations suggested by your
Council in their report with reference to the roads, &c.,
and shall be pleased to carry out my part of the arrange-
ment upon the Government giving effect to it on their side
without unreasonable delay.—l have the honour to be, Sir,
your most obedient servant, R. H. Harnett.
(Signed), R. Harnett, Junr.
Since sth of November (date of Harnett’s acceptance of
St. Leonards Council’s amendments) certain gentlemen,
friends of or interested in an adjoining estate, have con-
tinued to agitate and convened this meeting.
Harnett now begs to mention that the above-mentioned
meeting resulted in the motion proposed by the conveners
being lost by them, Harnett’s supporters having gained a
majority.
Harnett wishes to draw attention to the fact that though
he has been so liberal in giving roads and allowing access
over the Harnett Estate, this adjoining estate has been
kept fenced and notices and gates up, and no road given to
the public through it, though such road would be an im-
mense boon to the Mossman’s Bay residents, and a great
short cut into the town of St. Leonards.
W. Brooks, Printer, Brighton Place, Geo.-st., near Park-st.


\
i
\
