



\; r
YYl ■:
• ■ •' I ■
ieitf ~ ' .
j ditfiSOH ■" ’■
S i i' ' ;
1 : ,riobv£H x ■ •
.M
farts t'Jris!'
I jMcriir:'


National? Testimonial?
MRS. KEVIN IZOO (TBOHERTY
(“Eva” of “ THE NATION.’ 5 )
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
Under the distinguished patronage of
His Eminence Cardinal Moran,
Archbishop of Sydney.
EXEGdTIVE.
President:
CHAS. W. MACCARTHY, M.D.
Hon. Treasurers:
Rt. Rev. Monsignor O’Haran, D.D., Dean of St. Mary’s.
John f. Hennessy, j.p. John Woods, J.P.
Hon. Secs.:
L. Cotter. G. P. Fitzgibbon. E. MacSweeny,
LADIES ’ COMMITTEE :
President:
Mrs. t. Brown.
Vice-President:
Mrs. M. Maloney.
Hon. Sec. :
Miss m. Lynch.
Artists assisting at first Benefit Entertainment at the Palace Theatre ,
Saturday, 2nd November, igoy
Messrs. Andrew Mack, M. J. Hyndes, Arthur Noble, Fred Leston, Miss
Marie Narelle, Mrs. Truman, the Misses Maggie Ryan, Alicia Nolan, Rosalie
Coutts Duvalli, and the Pupils’ Orchestra of the Convent of Mercy, Parramatta,
including Violins: The Misses M. Gallagher, A. Egan, M. Andrews, M. Haydon,
K. Long, C. Smith, A. Ferguson, A. Stanley, M. Burgess, V. Coughlin, M. Grant,
K. Smith, M. Lyons, A. Laycock, M. Nagle, M. Jeffrey, U. Blank, and
Master S. Ryan. Viola: Miss M. Lyons. Double Bass : Mr. F. Havenhand.
Piano : Miss A. Dellow. Conductor of Orchestra: Dr. C. W. MacCarthy.


SHADOWS.
(FROM THE IRISH)
Where is the blackbird singing
The live-long day ?
Where is the clear stream ringing,
This golden May?
Ah I I know where the bird is singing.
And I know where the stream is ringing.
For my heart to that spot is clinging.
Far, far away I
Lightly the silver rushes.
Wave to and fro ;
Thick are the hazel bushes.
Black the sloe ;
Sweet are the winds that whistle.
Green are the boughs that rustle.
There, where the wild birds nestle.
In Glenmaloe!
Faint are the murmurs humming
Through the breeze and stream*
Dim are the shadows coming—
A fairy dream 1
Harp notes are heard to tinkle.
Voices of spirits mingle,.
Deep in each hollow dingle.
Where violets gleam I
Ah ! but the years are dreary
Since long ago —
Ah 1 but this heart is weary.
Sweet Glenmaloe !
Thinking of visions faded,
Lightsome and glad that made it—r.
Hopes that for aye are shaded.
So well I know I
Still is the blackbird singing
The live-long day;
Still are the waters ringing
This golden May—
But, ah ! not for me that singing,
Nor the stream with its silver ringing,
Tho’ my heart to that spot is clinging.
Far, far away!
4


SIR CAHIR O’DOHERTY.
[Sir Cahir 0 'Doherty, Chief of Innishowen, held Ulster for five months
armies of England. He was killed by a random shot in 1608 .]
against
By the Spanish plum’d hat, and the eostly attire,
And the dark eye that’s blended of midnight and fire,
And the bearing and stature so princely and tall,
Sir Cahir you’ll know in the midst of them, all.
Like an oak on the land, like a ship on the sea,
Like the eagle above, strong and haughty is he.,
In the greenness of youth —yet he’s crowned as his, due,,
With the fear of the false, and the, love of the true.
Right fiercely he swoops on their'phindering hordes,
Right proudly he dares them, the proud English lords !
And darkly you’ll trace him by many a trail,
From the hills of the North to the heart of the Pale.
By red field, ruined keep, and fire-shrouded hall,
By the tramp of the charger o’er buttress and wall
By the courage that springs in the breach of despair,
Like the bound of the lion erect from his lair !
O’Neil and O’Donnel, Macguire, and the rest,
Have sheathed the sabre, and lowered the crest;
O’Cahan is crushed, and McMahon is bound,
And Magennis slinks after the foe like his hound.
But high and untrimm’d, o’er the valley and height,
Soars the proud sweeping pinion so young in its flight;
The toil and the danger are brav’d all alone,
By the fierce-taloned falcon of old Innishowen!
And thus runs his story —he fought and he fell,
Young, honour’d, and brave—as the seanachies tell;
The foremost of those who have guarded “ the green,”
When men wrote their names with the sword and the skian!
5


GONE, GONE FROM ME.
(FROM THE IRISH.)
Gone, gone from me and from the earth, and from the Summer sky,
And all the bright wild hope and love that swelled so proud and high;
And all this heart had stored for thee within its endless deep—
With me —with me, oh 1 never more thou’ll smile, or joy, or weep 1
There are gold nails on your coffin; there are snowy plumes above ;
They pour their pomp and honours there, but I this woe and love—
The hopeless woe, the longing love, that turn from earth away.
And pray for refuge and a home within the silent clay 1
Come, wild-deer of the mountain-side ! come, sweet bird of the plain!
To cheer the cold and trembling heart that beats for you in vain !
Oh ! come from woe, and cold and gloom, to her that’s warm and true,
And has no hope or throb for aught within this world but you!
To the sad winds I have scattered the treasures of my soul—
The sorrow that no tongue could speak, or mortal power control—
And wept the weary night and day until my heart was sore,
And every gem of peace and joy was withered at its core.
In vain, in vain, this yearning cry —this dark and deep despair I
I droop alone and trembling here, and thou art lying there.
But though thy smile upon the earth I never more may see,
And thou wilt never come to me —yet, I may fly to thee!
I never stood within your home —I do not bear your name —-
Life parted us for many a day, but Death now seals my claim;
In darkness, silence, and decay, and here at last alone,
You’re but more truly bound to me, my darling and my own I
6


TIPPERARY.
Were you ever in sweet Tipperary, where_the fields are so sunny and green,..
And the heath-brown Slieve-bloom and the Galtees look down with so proud
a mien ?
’Tis there you would see more beauty then is on all Irish ground—-
God bless you, my sweet Tipperary, for where could your match be found ?
They say that your hand is fearful, that darkness is in your eye,
But I’ll not let them dare to talk so black and bitter a lie.
Oh ! no, ma cushla storin ! bright, bright, and warm are you,
With hearts as bold as the men of old, to yourselves and your country true.
And when there is gloom upon you, bid them think who has brought it there —
Sure a frown or a word of hatred was not made for your face so fair;
You’ve a hand for the grasp of friendship—another to make them quake,
And they’re welcome to whichsoever it pleases them most to take.
Shall our homes, like the huts of Connaught, be crumbled before our eyes ?
Shall we fly, like a flock of wild geese, from all that we love and prize ?
No ! by those who were here before us, no churl shall our tyrant be;
Our land, it is theirs by plunder, but, by Brigid ! ourselves are free.
No ! we do not forget the greatness did once to sweet Eire belong;
No treason or craven spirit was ever our race among;
And no frown or no word of hatred we give—but to pay them back;
In evil we only follow our enemies’ darksome track.
Oh ! come for awhile among us, and give us the friendly hand,
And you’ll see that old Tipperary is a loving and gladsome land ;
From Upper to Lower Ormond bright welcomes and smiles will spring—■
On the plains of Tipperary the stranger is like a king.
7


WELCOME.
Welcome again, as the May’s scented blossom,
Welcome again to your home in this bosom.
Oh ! for the sweet, blessed hour that has brought you
Back to the arms that so long, long have sought you.
Welcome, oh ! welcome, with wild ringing laughter,
Tears than the evening-dew sweeter and softer,
Music and light in my soul’s depth o’erflowing,
Pulses that throb —colour coming and going—
Whispers that none but my lov’d one shall listen,
Glances where every fond secret shall glisten,
Clasping of hands that have long been asunder,
Hearts brimming over with rapture and wonder,
Thoughts like the green leaves so joyously dancing,
When warm sun and sweet winds around them are glancing,
Joy for me ! —joy ! for you never will leave me,
And now there is naught on the wide earth to grieve me.
Glad as the bird, up the Summer vault singing—
Light as the bough, with its gay blossoms springing—-
Bright as the gold sparks, that glisten and quiver.
At morning or eve, on the breast of the river ;
Calm as the child in its soft slumber lying—
Blest as the saint to his home above flying,
Fill’d with a love ever thrilling and burning—-
So am I now at my darling’s returning !
Finn Brothers, Printers, 381 Pitt Street, Sydney.




