

SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
AN ACCOUNT OF
Its History, Progress, Resources,
AND
PRESENT POSITION.
REPRINTED FROM
"The South Australian Register,"
OF
SEPTEMBER 6, 1879.
PREPARED SPECIALLY FOR THE SYDNEY EXHIBITION.
Adelaide:
PRINTED BY E. K. THOMAS, GRENFELL STREET.
1879.




SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
AN ACCOUNT OF
Its History, Progress, Resources,
AND
PRESENT POSITION.
REPRINTED FROM
“ ilte J'outlt JUsiMiatt
OF
SEPTEMBER 6/1879.
PREPARED SPECIALLY FOR THE SYDNEY EXHIBITION.
PRINTED BY R. K. THOMAS, GRENFELL STREET.
1879.




CONTENTS.
Introduction— page
Early Explorations 8
Colonization ... ... 9
Physical Features ... 10
Flora and Fauna ... 11
The Aborigines 11
Adelaide, Port Adelaide, and Suburbs... 12
Progress of Settlement 13
Climate, &c. ..* 13
Population 14
Government and Legislation 14
Real Property Act 16
The Land and its Occupation—
History of Land Legislation ... ... 16
The Present Land Alienation Laws ... 18
Agricultural Settlement 19
Wine-Growing 21
Pastoral Settlement ... ... ... 21
Horticultural 23
The Botanic Garden ...' 23
Royal Agricultural Society ... ... 24
Immigration and Labour ... ... ... 25
Nomination and the Land Order Warrant
System 25
Mining 26
Manufactures 28
Trade and Commerce—
Imports and Exports 29
Shipping ... 30
The River Trade 30
Financial 30
Public Works 32
Railways ... ... ... ... ... 32
Roads and Bridges 33
Bridges 34
Water Supply and Drainage 34
Waterworks ... .34
Harbours, Jetties, and Lighthouses ... 35
Public Edifices ... ... ... ... 35
Post-Offices and Telegraphs ... ... 36
The Trans-Australian Telegraph . ... 36
The Line to Western Australia 37
Telegraphs in General 38
Postal Arrangements 38
Meteorological 38
PAGE
Local Government 39
Municipal Corporations 39
District Councils ... ... 39
Boards of Health ... ... ... ... 40
Local Defences 40
Judicature 41
Education—
The Common School System 42
St. Peter’s Collegiate School 44
Prince Alfred College ... 44
The University ... 44
The South Australian Institute 45
Religion ... ... 45
Public and Private Charitable Insti-
tutions 47
The Relief of the Aborigines ... ... 48
Bushmen’s Club 48
Blind and Deaf and Dumb Asylum ... 49
Adelaide Benevolent and Strangers’
Friend Society ... ... ... ... 49
Adelaide Female Refuge 49
Belair Inebriates’ Retreat ... ... 49
Home for Incurables 50
Adelaide City Mission 50
Young Men’s Christian Association ... 50
Other Institutions 50
Newspapers 50
The Northern Territory 50
Appendix—
Statist’cs of Sou*h Australia .. 55
Population ... ... ... 55
Area ... ... ... 55
Land Sales 55
Cultivation... 56
Live Stock-Pasturage ... 56
Imports and Exports 56
Shipping 57
Revenue and Expenditure 58
Railways ... 58
Banking ...
Savings Bank 58
Resum6 59
Addenda „. ... 59




PREFACE.
In the following pages are published, in compliment to the International Exhibition to
be shortly held in the metropolis of the parent colony of Australia, an account of the
history, progress, and present position of South Australia. In the facts therein
recorded will be found abundant cause for satisfaction's to the past and hopefulness
with regard to the future. Commenced on a broad and liberal basis, without some
of the adventitious advantages enjoyed by other British provinces, this colony, under
the stimulus of true Anglo-Saxon energy, has so far pursued a prosperous career.
Its early history was chequered, and at times the difficulties which the pioneer
settlers had to contend with threatened to become overwhelming. At a later period
the attractions of the gold discoveries produced a temporary depopulation,
especially of the industrial element, and for atime the progress of the province was
seriously retarded. These and other embarrassments were eventually overcome
through the abundant natural resources of the land and the steady perseverance which
has largely characterized its occupants. Although no such rich and permanent
gold-fields have been proved to exist as those which have made the colony of
Victoria famous, our copper mines have given employment to tens of thousands
and earned a world-wide renown. At present this industry is depressed all the
world over, but those who are well acquainted with the localities where
cupriferous deposits abound do not hesitate to predict for our mining a brilliant
future. The capabilities of the country for the production of pastoral wealth have
been recognized from the first, and as regards agriculture South Australia not
only holds the premier position in the Australian group, but bears satisfactory
comparison with any other part of the world.
The three sources of wealth referred to above—mineral, pastoral, and
agricultural—have necessarily developed tradeand commerce to an extent that
appears surprising when the statistics of population are taken into account. Re-
membering that the entire number of inhabitants barely exceeds a quarter of a
million,the fact that the total import and export trade of 1878 amounted to
upwards of £11,000,000 sterling speaks well for the general prosperity. Of the
staple exports of the colony, wool, copper, and wheat hold by far the most promi-
nent position. Notwithstanding the falling-off in copper, the combined value of these
exports amounted last year to close upon £4,000,000 sterling. Year by year


he figures grow larger. Comparing the returns for last year with those for 1868, it
is found that the exports of wheat and flour have increased more than a million,
and of wool more than half a million sterling. Nor is there the slightes
ground for apprehension that the limit has been reached. Of late years, through more
liberal land legislation, vast areas have .been brought under cultivation which
only a short time ago were believed unfit for the plough. As lines. of railway are
being constructed the produce of the interior is more quickly and economically
conveyed to ports of shipment, and the boundary of agricultural settlement is
receding still further from the seaboard. The colony has an extensive coastline,
and the land which will ultimately prove available for cultivation is practically
unlimited. Some of the foregoing remarks apply to mining pursuits. Rich
and valuable mineral properties in the interior have hitherto proved compara-
tively valueless on account of the cost of conveying the ore to a market, but the
lines of railway that are being pushed on with vigour will materially lessen this draw-
back. With regard to pastoral pursuits, the opening of the vast interior by
the construction of the telegraph line to Port Darwin, the results of the
researches of various exploring parties, and the construction of a transcontinental
railway—the first link of which is in progress—are destined to facilitate their
expansion to an extent which it is at present impossible to estimate. When it
is borne in mind that the area of the colony (including the Northern Territory)
is upwards of 900,000 square miles, of which only about 1 per cent, is alienated
from the Crown, and less than one-third held under pastoral leases, the unde-
veloped resources of the colony will beseen to justify very sanguine anticipations.
When regarding the progress of South Australia the initial difficulties it had to
contend with and its slow growth for the first twenty years should not be for-
gotten. Twenty years ago the interior was comparatively unknown. What were then
scattered sheep-runs are now immense stretches of waving com. The trackless
wilderness of those days is occupied by the squatter with his countless flocks and
herds; it is traversed by the electric wire, and will soon be startled by the shriek of
the locomotive. Then the shipping trade of the colony was confined to vessels of
small capacity and for the most part limited to Port Adelaide; but now
the lines of magnificent ocean steamers take us in their way, while up the
Gulf and along the coastline outports are opened to which traffic converges,
and which are being continually improved. Twenty years ago there were
only 264,462 acres of land under cultivation ; now there are over two millions.
At that time the population was 113,340 ; now it exceeds a quarter of a million.
The revenue of the colony in 1858 was £469,637; in 1878 it was £1,592,635.
Other statistics of a similar nature might easily be grouped to illustrate the same
fact, but these will suffice to show the steadiness and solidity of our
material progress. In other respects there is much cause for felicitation. From the
first there has been no alliance between State and Church, and all denomination a
are agreed that the voluntary principle has proved a success. A great impetus
has been given to primary education during the last few years, and although


no true patriot would deny that there is still room for improvement, there is a
general desire to make -our educational system as perfect as possible. The found-
ing of the Adelaide University and the liberal endowments it has received attest
the value set on higher education. In polities we have happily escaped any such
complication as that which has prevailed in an adjacent colony. Our fiscal respon-
sibilities are increasing, and a further augmentation may be expected if the
public works which are so urgently required be carried out; but the re-
sources of the colony are equal to a much greater strain than has so far been imposed
upon them. We do not in the least envy our neighbours on the Australian Con-
tinent who have thought fit to emulate older nations in organizing Exhibitions at
which the resources and the producing power of the world are to be represented.
On the contrary, we cordially congratulate them upon the courage and enter-
prise they have shown, and sincerely trust that it may be amply rewarded.
South Australia can afford to wait a few years before following the ambitious
example of New South Wales and Yictoria; but there is no reason why the
time should be greatly prolonged. New South Wale's is holding her Exhibition
in celebration of her century; this colony may very appropriately make her
jubilee in 1886 the occasion for a like grand commemorative gathering.


INTRODUCTION.
Early Explorations.
Although South Australia cannot be said to
be the direct offspring of New South Wales in
the same way that Victoria and Queensland are,
its early history—not perhaps as a colony, but
as a part of the great Australian land—is to a
considerable extent identified with the names
of men who already had done good work for the
premier province of New Holland. Among
these names the chief are those of Flinders and
Sturt, the former being the first to explore with
any care the coastline of South Australia, and
the latter the first to sail down the River
Murray into what is now South Australian terri-
tory. As early as the year 1800 Lieutenant
Grant, in charge of His Majesty’s ship the Lady
Nelson, sighted a part of South Australia,
placed Cape Northumberland, Mount Schanck,
and Mount Gambier upon his maps; but beyond
this his examination of the coastline does not
interest us. It is not until Captain Flinders comes
upon the scene that any really valuable know-
ledge of this colony is acquired. In 1795 and
following years, when holding the rank of a
midshipman in the Reliance, he had shown a
remarkable taste for exploration, and had ex-
amined a large part of the coast of New South
Wales, besides having in company with Mr.
Bass proved that'Tasmania was an island. In
1800 he returned to. England, and the
publication of his charts led to his being
entrusted with the command of the Investi-
gator a 340-ton ship—and to his receiving a
commission to continue the work of exploration
along the Australian coast. In 1801 the expe-
dition started, and after a voyage of five months
Cape Leuwin was reached. Sailing slowly east-
wards along the barren coast which is now
teaversed by the electric wire connecting South
and Western Australia, Captain Flinders
reached and duly named the Great Australian
Bight, Fowler’s Bay, Smoky Bay, Streaky
Bay, Anxious Bay, Coffin’s Bay, and other '
physical features which he came across, a
of which are still beyond the principal sett
ments of South Australia. His first imports
discovery was that of the magnificent harbo
of Port Lincoln, which, to use the words of c
of the French navigators who subsequent
visited it, is “ worthy to rival Port Jackson, anc
js one of the finest harbours of the worlc
Unfortunately, owing to the nature of the lane
around it, the founders of South Australia we
unable to fix upon Port Lincoln as the principa
port of the colony. Proceeding northwarc
up what proved to be Spencer’s Guif, Flinde
was extremely disappointed at the appearance o
the land forming the western boundary of th
inlet at the head of which now stanc
Port Augusta the sea terminus of
railway line 200 miles in length nov
in course oi rapid construction, anc
looked upon as the first link in an iron roac
to span the continent from north to south
ComiDg back towards the ocean along the low
lying coast of Yorke’s Peninsula—which is th
site of the famous Wallaroo and Moonta anc
other rich copper mines, and which beside
skirts a most important agricultural territory—
the appearance of the country was still barren
and forbidding. Having got safely out ol
Spencer’s Gulf, the corner of Yorke’s Peninsuh
was turned, and, being then overtaken by a
storm, he found Nepean Bay a harbour of
ref age, and the island of which it is a promi-
nent feature was named Kangaroo Island,
after the numerous and extremely confiding
kangaroos or wallabys which were discovered in
great numbers upon it. From this place Mount
Lofty, the highest eminence in the charming
range which forms so lovely a background to the
Adelaide plains, was sighted; and a visit to the
mainland disclosed the richness and beauty of
the country that surrounds what is now the
capital of South Australia. Passing out through
Backstairs Passage, lying between the main
coast line and Kangaroo Island, the Investigator
sailed into Encounter Bay, so named because of


the meeting with the French vessel of discovery
(the G6ographe), under Captain Baudin, with
whom, notwithstanding the hostile terms on
which the English and French nations then
stood, Flinders exchanged friendly greetings.
Proceeding onwards, he noted that remarkable
saltwater channel which runs a short distance
inland along a large part of our south-eastern
coast the Coorong and, passing Lacepede
Bay, Guichen Bay, and other inlets now
well known, sighted the mountains already
referred to as having been discovered by
Grant. Thence he continued his voyage along
the coastline that bounds the adjoining colony
of Victoria.
Thus far we have hastily traced the history
of South Australian exploration as far as its
sea boundary is concerned. The information
acquired was useful, but the examinations thus
made necessarily failed to give any real idea of
the value of this part of Australia. So mistaken,
indeed, was the opinion held of it that in 1822
we find it gravely stated by a Captain of His
Majesty’s Navy, who read a paper before the
Philosophical Society of New South V ales,
that “The south coast of Australia is barren,
and in every respect useless and unfavourable
for colonization.” For Captain Sturt an officer
of the other branch of His Majesty’s service—
was reserved the discovery that the character
of this part of the continent was not by any
means so bad as had been made out. Captain
Sturt was an ardent believer in the theory,
which was largely held in the early days of
New South Wales, that the rivers of
Australia terminated in a vast inland lake.
Determined to put his theory to the test, and
having already discovered the great Darling
River, he made up his mind to trace it to the
point where its waters were emptied. In
1830, with a small party in two boats,
Sturt found his way from the Murrumbidgee
into the Murray, and traced the latter
river to its mouth in Encounter Bay.
The journey was made under difficulties
that would have appalled men of ordinary
mettle 1 ; but this brave man and his trusty
followers proceeded undaunted, suffering
from want of food, in constant danger from
natives, and wearied with work until the dis-
covery was complete, and then gradually made
their way back up-stream, arriving in Sydney
after an absence of six months. There is no
doubt that Sturt was disappointed with the
country through which he passed, and par-
ticularly with the discovery that the mouth of
the Murray was not easily navigable. But
that he was not altogether unfavourably
impressed is shown by these few words which
we quote from his own records: —“ Hurried as
my view of it was, my eye never fell on a country
of more promising aspect or of more favourable
position than that which occupies the space
between the Lake (Alexandrina) and the Ranges
of St. Vincent’s Gulf, and continuing northerly
stretches away without any visible boundary.”
General Ralph Darling, Governor of New South
"Wales, who had dispatched Sturt upon his
expedition, afterwards sent Captain Barker by
sea to St. Vincent’s Gulf; and one who accom-
panied that party writes—“ The soil was rich,
there was abundance of the finest pasturage,
no lack of fresh water;” and then, becoming
poetical in his enthusiasm, he remarks that “it
was a spot in whose valleys the exile might
hope to build for himself and for his family a
peaceful and prosperous retreat.”
Colonisation.
Although South Australia was not actually
established until 1836, it was only a year after
Captain Sturt’s explorations—namely, in 1831
—that the first attempt to found a colony on
the southern shores of South Australia was
made. In that year an influential committee
was formed, and application was made to the
Imperial authorities for a charter giving per-
mission to occupy and colonize the land that
is now comprised within our boundaries. The
application was not, however, received with
favour, and the scheme remained in abeyance
until 1834, when it was taken up again, and
this time with success. At a meeting
held at Exeter Hall the details of
the project were explained. Profiting by
the experience gained in other attempts at
colonization, this new undertaking was to be
carried out upon a basis that would secure a due
proportion of labour and capital, and thus
ensure success from the beginning. In the case
of Western Australia large grants of land had
been made to persons willing to emigrate, but
these vast estates had proved a burden rather
than a blessing to their proprietors. The
size of the blocks had had the effect of
isolating the settlers at great distances, and the
land having been parted with without any sub-
stantial consideration the colonial authorities
had no revenue to import the labour without
which the ground could not be turned to
account. To obviate these fatal disadvantages
to the settlement of a new country Mr.
Edward Gibbon Wakefield had propounded a
new scheme, of which the features were that
the land should be sold at a somewhat high
price, and that the revenue so derived should be
devoted to the importation of labour. The price
of the land was at first to be twelve shillings an
acre, and was afterwards to be raised to a pound.
Thus, the blocks that would be purchased would
not be larger than the buyers could easily
cultivate, and as the land was to be sold in
districts the colonists would be able to
unite in various organizations for the common
good, without which no country can flourish.
These were the principles laid down on the
platform of Exeter Hall, and which formed
the basis upon which the promoters applied to the
Imperial Parliament for an Act to authorize
their scheme. In August, 1834, the necessary
legislative sanction was received, and in a sub-
sequent session an amending Act was passed.
Taking the two measures together, their leading
principles were, first, that South Australia
should not be a charge upon the financial re-
sources of Great Britain, that she should be free
from any State Church, and that no convicts
i should he transported to her territory. South


Australians are justly proud that theoiigina
terms of this charter have not been altered, anc
that they havB been able to raise their adoptee
country to its present pitch of prosperity withou
the adventitious aids either of Imperial money
or of convict labour ; while the absence of State
aid to religion has, by encouraging self-reliance
given strength to religious efforts somewhai
remarkable in a new country. An attempt was
made while the colony was young to violate
this last principle, and grants were actually
made to religious bodies; but at the earliest
possible opportunity the colonists repudiated
this attempt to associate Church and State, and
for many years the voluntary principle in re-
ligion has-been in full operation.
The authorizing Act having been passed,
Commissioners were appointed to give effect to
it, of whom Colonel Torrens was Chairman and
Mr. (afterwards Sir; Kowland Hill, the origina-
tor of the penny-postage system, whose death
has just been recorded, was the Secretary. The
passing of the Act was one step—and a very
important one—in the work, but before the
colony could be actually established a certain
quantity of land had to be sold, and great
difficulty was found in finding purchasers for it.
There was now great danger of the whole
scheme falling through; but at this critical
juncture Mr. George Fife Angas—who recently
died in the colony at the advanced age of
ninety years—promoted the South Australian
Company —an Association still enjoying a
profitable existence—which purchased sufficient
land at twelve shillings an acre to relieve the
Commissioners of their difficulty. The way was
now clear for the real work that was to be done ;
a survey party, under Colonel Light, of the
Royal Engineers, was dispatched; several vessels
with colonists were laid on ; and on December
28,1836, the first Governor (Captain Hindmarsh)
landed on the shores of Holdfast Bay, and in
the presence of the little knot of people
who had already arrived proclaimed in the
name of the King the foundation of
the colony of South Australia. The boundaries
of the colony at this time were comprised
between the 132nd and 141st degrees of east
longitude, and between the Southern Ocean and
26th degree of south latitude. Her territory
amounted to nearly 300,000 square miles, or
192,000,000 acres, including Kangaroo Island,
which contains 2,500,000 acres. In 1861 80,000
square miles of laud between the western
boundary of South Australia and the eastern
boundary of Western Australia—a tract of
country then known as No Man’s Land—
added, and the western boundary is now the
129th degree of east longitude. In 1863 her
boundaries were further extended by the addi-
tien of what is known as “ The Northern Terri-
tory,” which consists of the country stretching
northward from the 26th degree of south lati-
tude to the Indian Ocean, and lying between the
129th and the 138th degrees of east longitude.
South Australia therefore now extends from the
Southern to the Indian Ocean, and contains an
area of 903,6 n 0 square miles, or 578,361,600
acres.
Physical Featubes.
This colony has a very extensive coastline
and has a great advantage over the other pro
viuces of the group in the possession of th
two large gulfs to which we have referred a
having been discovered by Flinders in hi
voyage in the Investigator. These are namec
St. Vincent and Spencer, and, reaching as the
do to a considerable extent into the interior
they give means of water carriage to a very larg
part of the colony. It was upon the eastern
shore of Gulf St. Vincent that the first settle
ment took place, and within a few miles of th
landing-place are the capital of the colony anc
its principal port. Separating the two gulfs i
Yorke’s Peninsula, to which we have already
alluded as being the site of the celebratec
Wallaroo' and Moonta Mines. Besides Por
Adelaide there are several important anc
many minor harbours along the shores o
the two gulfs, the most noted being Ports
Augusta, Pirie, and Wallaroo in Spencer’s
Gulf, and Port Wakefield in St. Vincent’s
Gulf, all of which are termini cf important rail-
way systems. Both gulfs are indented by
numerous bays, in many of which jetties
h*ve been erected for the shipment of produce
The coastline between the eastern entrance to
St. Vincent’s Gulf and the boundary of Victoria
is rich in bays, none of them of any great
natural suitability for harbours except Lace-
pede Bay, which is a splendid reach of water
kept in a state of almost permanent smoothness
by some invisible bar. FYom this port a railway
extends inland towards the Victorian border ;
and from a port further to the eastward—Rivoli
Bay—the iron road also runs for a distance of
over 50 miles, terminating at Mount Gam-
bier, the principal centre of population
in what is known as the South-Eastern
District of South Australia. Although
the Murray runs through our territory, and
finds its way to the sea in Encounter Bay,
South Australia has not extensive means of
river communication. With this exception
there is no navigable stream, and of the Murray
we have only partial possession. It has its rise
in the Australian Alps, in New South Wales,
and afterwards forms, for a considerable part of
its course, the boundary-line between that colony
and Victoria. Before entering the • South
Australian territory, it receives the waters of
the Murrumbidgee and the Darling, its chief
tributaries, and continues its course until when
neiring its mouth it expands into two lakes of
wide expanse but shallow depth, again narrow-
ing as it flows into the sea near Goolwa. The
mouth of the river is not actually unnavigable,
for a .regular tradB is carried on through it by at
least one steamer ; but it is exposed to the full
force of the Southern Ocean, and is obstructed
by a sand bar, the position of which is
constantly shifting. Port Victor, a harbour
in Encounter Bay, distant a few miles
from the mouth, has therefore been chosen
as the sea terminus of the Murray. It is con-
nected with Goolwa by a light railway, and
very large harbour works are now going on,
which it is hoped will give an immense stimulus


to the river trade, and result in a large part of
the produce from the interior which now goes
to the ports of Victoria and New South Wales
by railway coming down the river, so that it can
be shipped for the markets of the world almost
direct from the Murray boats. To facilitate this
trade a railway communicating with Adelaide
has recently been carried to a point on the
Murray, some 180 miles from the mouth, known
as the North-West Bend, and judging from the
experience of the past year it is likely to serve
its purpose admirably.
From Cape Jervis, the southern point of Gulf
St. Vincent, there extends for several hundred
miles, with more or less definiteness, a chain of
hills, of which the Mount Lofty Range forms
the principal and most striking part. This
range runs for a considerable distance
within a few miles of the sea, and
forms the eastern limit of the Adelaide plains.
Its highest point is Mount Lofty, which
rises to an altitude of 2,334 feet above the
sea-level. “ The hills,” as they are commonly
called, are constantly resorted to by the people
of Adelaide, and afford within a distance of five
or six miles a delightfully cool climate, with
scenery of the utmost beauty. The railway
which is now in course of construction to Nairne
will render them more accessible and therefore
more popular. In the valleys alluvial soil of
the richest description exists, and the advan-
tages of prolific land and equable temperature
permit the Cultivation of the most delicate
fruits and vegetables at times when they would
be parched and withered by the heat on the
plains below.
Flora and Fauna.
The fauna of the Province of South Aus-
tralia does not differ in any important particu-
lar from that of the remainder of the continent.
The mammalia number somewhere about seventy
species, of which over forty belong to a section
of the animal kingdom that has become extinct
in almost every other part of the world, namely,
the marsupialia. The birds number nearly 700
species, remarkable in very many genera —such,
for instance, as the parrots —for the beauty of
their plumage, but destitute with few excep-
tions of that power of song which is so charming
a characteristic of many of the birds of Europe
and America. The fish of our coastline and rivers
are as yet but imperfectly known. From many
causes, arising principally from the physical
configuration of this province, the flora is
not so diversified as that of other portions of
Australia, where the conditions for the increase of
vegetation are more favourable; consequently
the genera and species are less numerous. The
preponderance of the two most extensive
genera, the Eucalyptus or gum-tree, and the
Acacia or wattle, gives a peculiar monotony to
the arboreal features of the landscape generally,
although many beautiful shrubs and flowering-
plants and ferns reward the searcher after the
beauties of nature. The almost entire absence
of edible fruits in the vegetation of South Aus-
tralia is a remarkable feature, but at the same
time few poisonous plants are known, the one
; most dangerous in the country, and the most
generally distributed, being the Lotus australis .
The Aborigines.
The aborigines of South Australia were
never, it appears, numerous in proportion to the
vast area they roamed over, and since the white
men have settled here they have gradually
dwindled away until some tribes have become
wholly extinct, and others have been reduced
to mere handfuls of natives. They were never
remarkable for warlike dispositions, although
cunning and treacherous, and their average
intelligence is not of a high order. They live
by hunting the kangaroo, emu, and other
indigenous creatures, and lead a nomadic life,,
neither cultivating the soil nor erecting fixed
abodes. They are divided into tribes,'which
have become decimated by internal quarrels,
barbarous customs, disease, and the irresistible
march of civilization. Attempts have been
made, and are beißg continued, to ameliorate
the condition of the aborigines by the
establishment of'training-schools and missions,
A census of the native population was taken in
1876, and gave the number in the province as
8.953 ot all ages and both sexes. Of these
about 1,000 only are said to he found in the
settled districts. The South Australian natives
have been charged with practising cannibalism
and infanticide, and conclusive proofs that both
horrible customs were once followed have been
received. The best-known tribes are the Nar-
rinyerie, the Adelaides (extinct), the Encounter
Bays, the Port Lincolns, the Dieyeries, and the
Woolnahs (Northern Territory), all speaking
different dialects. The language in musical,
abounding in vowels and liquids, and several
vocabularies of the best-known dialects have
been published. The Australian natives are
believed to be more nearly allied to the
Papuan race than any other, but have so
many peculiar characteristics that the period
when they and the Oceanic Papuans were
one people must have been very remote.
They have nothing of the type of the negro
about them, although their skins are black;,
their hair is not woolly, though curly, and they
have abundance of hair upon the face.- They
display small intelligence in the construction of
their weapons and articles of defence, which are
limited to spears, throwing-sticks, and shields
of bark. One weapon they have, however—the-
boomerang—is very remarkable, being cut in
a peculiar curved form, which gives it
the extraordinary power of returning upon
its course when thrown. They show
some cleverness in making nets and baskets
of grass or fibre, but their accomplishments
are few as compared to other races of savages.
Some of the South Australian aboriginals who
have been civilized, however, have exhibited
considerable intelligence, but the majority of
the men are so imbued with the wild principles
of the savage that they can rarely if ever be
depended upon to remain at any settled em-
ployment. The aboriginal men have, as a rule,,
well-formed shoulders and chests, broad fore-
heads and noses, large mouths and magnificent


teeth, but their lower limbs are, as a rule
weak and small in proportion to their frames.
The physical development of the women is poor,
and the life of complete drudgery they undergo
at the hands of their lords and masters soon
ages them. Although persevering attempts on
the part of benevolent persons are made to arrest
the decay of the native tribes of the province
there seems to be little hope of their eventually
escaping the inevitable fate of inferior races
when opposed to the progress of civilization —
it is merely a question of time.
Adelaide, Port Adelaide, and Suburbs.
Adelaide, the capital of the province, is beauti-
fully situated on the plain which lies between
Mount Lofty and the eastern shore of St.
Vincent’s Gulf. The site was fixed by Colonel
Light, and although in the early days of the
colony great difference of opinion was expressed
as to whether his choice was a wise one, all now
agree that no better or more suitable place could
have been selected. Not only has Adelaide all
the advantages to be gained by proximity to the
seacoast, but it is surrounded by land of the
most fertile description both in the hills and on
the plains, and it is easy of access from all parts
of the country. The city is divided into two
parts—North and South —by the River Torrens,
which is spanned by a number of fine bridges.
The Torrens is not a noble stream, but de-
scending from the ranges it serves a good pur-
pose in supplying Adelaide and its suburbs
with a splendid supply of water, stored in two
large reservoirs in the neighbourhood of the
hills. North Adelaide is not so much used
for business purposes as. for residences.
It rises somewhat abruptly from the banks
of the river, and its eminence not
only makes it for sanitary reasons an excel-
lent site for dwellings, but affords charming
views of hill and plain and sea, which
makes it a favourite site for villas. South
Adelaide is the centre of trade, but also contains
numerous residences. Here are situated all
the principal Government offices, banks, and
business and mercantile buildings, many of
which are of great size and of undoubted
architectural beauty. King William-street in
particular is a magnificent thoroughfare. It is
two chains in breadth, and is thus one of the
widest streets, not only in the Australian capitals,
but in the world. Moreover, it is ornamented
by many of the finest erections in the city,
including the Post Office and Town Hall (white
freestone structures), the Government Offices,
the Law Offices, seven out of theeightbanks doing
business in the colony, and other important
edifices. On North-terrace are the Railway
Station, Parliament Houses, Government House,
the Institute and Public Reading-room,
the Hospital, and the new University
buildings are now in course of erection there.
At the north-east corner of the city are located
the Botanic Gardens, and beyond these again
one of two asylums provided for the accommo-
dation of the insane. The wholesale houses
are mostly situated in Grenfell and Currie
streets; and in Rundle and Hindley streets
the bulk of the retail business is done. We
have a large theatre, which is acknowledged to
be one of the handsomest in the colonies, two
private concert-rooms of great capacity, in
addition to the Town Hall, which is largely
used for public entertainments, several Olubs,
and churches in great number, many of them
being large and of considerable architectural
excellence. The city is surrounded by belts of
“ Park Lands,” reserved for the use of the
citizens, the total area amounting to no less
than 1,850 acres. There are also six squares in the
heart of the town, some of which are tastefully
planted, and all of them favourite resorts.
South Adelaide is a mile wide by about a mile
and a' half in length, and the streets here
and in the northern part of the city
are broad and laid out at right angles,
many of them being planted with trees and
shrubs, which- afford a very welcome shade
in summer, besides being pleasant to the eye.
It is some years since a census was taken, but
the population of the city proper is now esti-
mated at 38,000. Adelaide contains 8,500 build-
ings and 77 miles of made streets, the annual
rateable value of the property, excluding Govern-
ment offices, churches, charitable institutions,
and schools, which are not assessed, being
£350,000. The total value of the property in
the city, at a low computation, may be put down
at not less than eight millions sterling. Adelaide
is under the control of a Mayor, elected annually
by the citizens, and twelve Councillors, chosen
by six wards, one Councillor for each division
being appointed yearly. Water is supplied from
the two reservoirs we have already alluded to,
gas is laid on by a private Company, and an
efficient system of deep drainage is now being
provided under a scheme approved by Mr. W.
Clark, C.E.
In almost all directions the city is surrounded
by populous and, in most cases, well-built
suburbs, and new townships are constantly
being laid out. To the east are Kensington,
Norwood, Kent Town, Stepney, Magill, Glen
Osmond, and other places; to the south,
Unley, Mitcham, Fullarton, Goodwood, Park-
side, and lesser townships; to the west, Hind-
marsh, Bowden, Thebarton, and BromptoD,
which are largely occupied for manufacturing
purposes; and to the north, amongst others,
Prospect, Medindie, and Ovingham. To several
of the suburbs tramways have recently been
laid down, and others are in course of construc-
tion. It is worthy of remark that, except for an
abortive attempt made in Sydney some years
ago, Adelaide is the first city in Australia
proper in which the tramway has been intro-
duced, and this means of travelling has become
highly popular. There are also numerous sea-
side resorts, chief among which are Gleneig,
—the calling-place of the P. & O. steamers—a
largely peopled and handsome town containing
many fine residences; and the Semaphore, at
which the Orient and other Ocean steamers
call. There are also Marino, Brighton, Henley
Beach, the Grange, and other places which
are more or less rapidly increasing in
popularity and importance. Gleneig is con-


nected with the city by a private railway,
and another "line is being constructed by
a Company. Brighton and Marino are joined to
Glenelg by a branch line, and the Semaphore is
reached by a continuation of the railway which
connects Adelaide and its chief port.
Port Adelaide is about eight miles from the
capital, and is built upon an arm of the sea,
being thus sheltered from all the prevailing
winds. A large expenditure in dredging is
continually going od, and the wharf accommo-
dation is constantly being increased. As a safe
harbour it cannot be surpassed, but a scheme
originated several years ago for establishing an
outer harbour, principally as a calling-place for
the large steamers which visit Australia, is still
under consideration, and if it is carried out
great advantages will accrue to the colony from
the additional facilities afforded. Port Ade-
laide, like the city, is surrounded by suburbs,
with some of which it is connected by railway,
and with others by tramway. It contains many
important public and mercantile buildings, and
gives good evidence of the prosperity of the
colony, of which it is tfie chief harbour. "W e
must not omit a reference to the numerous
country towns, which are well laid out, contain
many large and handsome buildings, and are
the centres of trade for extensive areas of
country which surround them. Many of these
towns are under municipal government.
Progress of Settlement.
Considering the limited population of South
Australia, only amounting to 257,000 persons,
about a third of whom reside in the city and
suburbs, the extent of country that is profitably
occupied in farming, pastoral pursuits, wine
and fruit growing, and manufactures is credit-
able to the enterprise of the people. The area
of land sold and selected to the end of June
last was 8,279,028 acres, being an average of
over 33 acres for every soul in the community.
Of this about one-fourth, or 2,011,319 acres, is
under cultivation. Ten years ago, with a popu-
lation of 178,722, we cultivated 850,570 acres,
or 4§ acres per head; now the rate of cultivation
has advanced to 8J acres per head of the popula-
tion. In addition, however, to this eight and a
quarter million acres which have been alienated
from the Crown, principally for agricultural and
horticultural settlement, immense tracts of
country are leased or otherwise held from
the Government for pastoral purposes. A
quarter of a century ago these tracts
did not exceed 5,000 or 8,000 square
miles; in 1875 they had increased to 80,000
square miles; on June 30, 1879, the area
reached the enormous quantity of 213,700
square miles, or 136,768,000 acres of land.
These figures will serve to show what marvel-
lous progress is being made in the direction of
pastoral and agricultural settlement in .the
province. But, after all, if we exclude
the runs in the interior taken up by some
of the more adventurous of our squatters, the
settlements are a mere fringe along the coast,
and there is yet room for indefinite expansion
and progress. The work oi exploration— to
which South Australia Jjos-J
session of such a large terHtgrj— .going
on, and year by year fresh discoveries are-bgkig
made which add largely to the capabilities of
the colony. South Australia, indeed, owes a
great debt of gratitude to those men who,
regardless of personal peril, have penetiated
into the unknown parts of the continent
and proved that vast tracts of country
which were thought to be worthless can be
turned to profitable account. Captain Sturt,
as we have pointed out, was the first to
dissipate the idea that “ the south
coast of Australia is barren and in
every respect unfavourable for coloni-
zation.” By him other valuable explorations
were made when in later times he held the post
of Surveyor-General of South Australia. Ten
years after Sturt’s journey down the Murray
Eyre travelled through what are now some of
our most fertile agricultural districts in begin-
ning that memorable journey to King George’s
Sound which will ever be remembered as a
triumph of persevering heroism. Since that
day the work has been carried on by numbers of
intrepid men, among whom must be numbered
John McDouall Stuart, who, after two unsuc-
cessful attempts, was the first to cross the aon-
tinent at its greatest breadth from north to
south, and over whose track the overland tele-
graph now runs ; John McKinlay, who also
traversed Australia and opened up large tracts
of good country; Peter Egerton Warburton,
who, not content with the efforts of his
earlier days, recently at an advanced age
succeeded, after enduring great privations, in
crossing to the coast of Western Australia;
Ernest Giles, whose explorations have been
conducted with equal success in the same direc-
tion,andothers, such as Frome, Horrocks,Goyder,
Babbage, Gosse, Freeling, Boss, Swinden, and
Hack, who, although their journeys have not
become so celebrated as those of others whom
we have mentioned, have done much in pre-
paring the way for the successful occupation of
the country. South Australian territory has
also been to a large extent traversed by ex-
plorers from other colonies, who have added
considerably, to the knowledge of our territory.
But although so much has been done great
interest is still felt in the subject of explora-
tion. Parties equipped by the Government are
constantly in the field examining in detail
country that has been but cursorily examined,
and arrangements are now being made by Sir
Thomas Elder—whose name is largely indenti-
fied with recent explorations—to send a party
under Mr. Jesse Young for further examinations
to the westward.
Climatb, &c.
The climate of South Australia, though liable
to frequent changes of temperature, is one of
the healthiest and most delightful in the world.
In the height of summer the heat is frequently
excessive, the thermometer having on a few
occasions registered 115° (Fahrenheit) in the
shade, but a week rarely passes without two or
three days of cool breezes, and even at Jthe


greatest heat the air is so dry that there is none
of the oppression felt in moister climates. Rain
falls in every month of the year, but the greatest
quantity, of course, comes in the winter, which
is at its height in the months of June, July, and
August. The average rainfall for the year in the
neighbourhood of Adelaide is about 21i inches.
Rain is rarely continuous, and even at the
wettest season bright sunny days are the rule
rather than the exception. The temperature in
the daytime in the depth of winter is very
seldom below 50°; but in the hilly districts ice
is frequently seen, and snow occasionally falls
there. Besides being admirably suited to innu-
merable vegetable productions, of which we
shall speak hereafter, the climate of South Aus-
tralia has been found very beneficial to persons
suffering from weak chests.
The brief sketch that we have given of the
history and progress of South Australia, shows
that from small beginnings the colony has been
raised to a very satisfactory position. Her
advancement has been upon the firm base laid
by the prudencp, sagacity, and industry of her
founders, and as a natural result it has been sure
and constant. The last few years have been
years of more rapid development—a fact that
is amply shown by the detailed articles and
tabular statements which follow—but there is
every likelihood that in the future progress will
be still more marked, and that the province will
attain to a yet higher rank among the colonies,
which will one day be united in a great Aus-
tralian federation.
As might be expected, the colony has not so
far made much advancement in literature and
art. The people have been too closely engaged in
practical work to turn their attention to such
pursuits. Of newspapers there is a full share,
but the fruits of more matured literary effort
have so far not been copious. A few South
Australian authors have given books to the
world, bat they have not been generally of a
class to ensure immortality to the writers. In
arts, too, we are far behind; but surely, if
slowly, higher tastes and a more general appre-
ciation for refined studies are being developed
amongst us. What we can fairly boast of is
that, as regards natural unrestrained social
intercourse, and the ready attention to the
claims of needy or suffering humanity, the
community stands unsurpassed, if not un-
rivalled, in Australia.
POPULATION.
The population of the colony has not multi-
plied at such a rapid rate as could have been
wished, but the advance has been steady and
continuous. Natural increase has been the chief
source of supply, but immigration at the public
expense has also contributed somewhat to the
enlargement of the population. During the last
two or three years a considerable number of
persons have come here from the neighbouring
colonies, and principally from Victoria, whioh
at one time offered attractions irresistible to a
certain proportion of South Australians. The
total population of the province is, as we
have before mentioned, estimated at 257,000.
During 1878 the births numbered 9,282, mar-
riages 2,229, and deaths 3,749, the excess of
births over deaths being thus 5,533. The pro-
portion to each thousand of the population was—
births, 38.22; marriages, 9.47; and deaths,
15.44. During the last ten years the marriage
rate has been steadily increasing, the proportion
in 1809 being only 6'68.
GOVERNMENT AND LEGISLATION.
The privilege of Constitutional Government
was not conferred upon South Australia until
many years after the foundation of the colony.
Its affairs were originally under the control of
a Board of Commissioners resident in London,
represented in the colony by a Commissioner of
Public Lands. The powers given to the Board
by Act of Parliament in 1834 were to
borrow money to carry on the Govern-
ment of the colony, and to defray the
cost of transporting emigrants. The Board
had but a brief existence. The Act provided
that a form of . local Government should be
granted to the province as soon as its popula-
tion reached 50,000 persons, but it was some
years before this had been effected. The Commis-
sioners did not at first find their task one easy of
accomplishment. In order to assist them in
their endeavour to found the colony the South
Australian Company was formed mainly
through the exertions of the late Mr. George
Fife Angas, who relinquished his post of
Commissioner and became Chairman of the
Company. Under the operations of this
Association the work of colonization proceeded,
and from the appointment of Captain John
Hindmarsh as Governor in 1836 until the
year 1851 the work of local legislation was
carried on by the Governor and a Legislative
Council, consisting of four non-official members,
all appointed by the Governor. In 1851 the
first Constitution was granted to the province.
A new Legislative Council was authorized,
which was to consist of twenty-four members,
one-third to b 9 nominated by the Crown, and
two-thirds to be elected by the people every five
years. Members of this Council were required
to possess freehold property of not less than
£2OO annual or £2,000 total value. Voting was
based upon a small property or household quali-
fication, and persons bolding property in more
than one district were allowed to vote for
members in each district in which their property
was situated. This Council, however, had no
control over the land revenue, which was ex-
pended by authority of the Governor alone.
The new Council was no sooner fairly formed
than the colonists began to agitate for Respon-
sible Government in its entirety, and in 1856
the present Constitution Act was passed, and
having received the Royal sanction was pro-
claimed in the colony in October of that
year. By this Act the Government is vested
in a Governor and two Houses of Parliament.
The Parliament is triennial, and the sessions
are generally held annually. The two Houses
are called respectively the Legislative Council


and the House of Assembly. For electing
members to the former the whole province
is one electoral district. A member must
be thirty years of age, and have resided in
the colony for three years. Electors for the
Legislative Council must be twenty-one years of
age, and have a freehold estate of £5O value, or
a leasehold of £2O annual value with three
years unexpired, or must occupy a dwelling-
house of £2O annual value. There are eighteen
members of the Legislative Council, one-third
of whom retire at the end of every fourth year.
This House cannot be dissolved by the Governor.
The House of Assembly at first consisted of 36
members, elected by 17 districts, two of which
returned only one member, while Adelaide
returned six. In 1861 a redistribution of seats
was made, based upon population. The colony
was then divided into 18 districts, each electing
two members. In the session of 1874 a further
alteration was made, by which the colony was
divided into 22 electoral districts, three return-
ing three members each, one returning one, and
the remainder two each, so that the Parlia-
ment now consists of 46 members. The
division of the electoral districts, owing
to the increase of the population and the
progress of settlement, stands once more in need
of alteration. A Bill been has introduced this
session by the Government for this purpose,
and has been referred 'to a Select Committee,
A further agitation is also proceeding for an
alteration of the Constitution of the Legislative
Council, which is felt not to be sufficiently
amenable to its constituency, owing to the
long period for which members can retain
their seats. Several reform Bills have
been introduced by Government and private
members, but none have as yet proved
acceptable. A measure is now before the
Assembly which proposes to give power
to the Governor to dissolve the Council
by proclamation in certain cases. A Bill which
consolidates and amends the Electoral Laws has
been passed by both Chambers this session, but
certain amendments made by the Legislative
Council have yet to be considered by the House
of Assembly. The principal changes effected in
the existing law relate to the management of
elections, and provide for punishing persons
guilty of offences against the Act. To guard
against the evil of dummy candidates
being brought forward merely for the
sake of creating a contest, a clause
has been introduced which provides that
every candidate for the Council shall, on
being nominated, deposit with the Returning
Officer the sum of £lOO, and every candidate for
the Assembly the sum of £5O. In the event of
their not obtaining a certain proportion of votes
the deposits will be forfeited. With a view,
too, of lessening the cost of elections, it is
provided that if a certain number of electors
do not vote at any polling-place, it shall be
abolished until such time as it may be
found necessary to re-establish it. Under
the present Constitution Act all persons
qualified to vote are eligible to become
members of the Assembly, which is elected by
manhood suffrage, the only requirements being
that the voter shall be twenty-one years of
age, that his name shall have been on the
electoral-roll six months, and that he be un-
tainted with felony. Aliens not naturalized
are incapable of voting; but all that is required
to become a naturalized subject is to take an
oath of allegiance and to pay a fee of 10s. 6d.
All elections are conducted by ballot. Judges,
ministers of religion, and aliens who have not
lived five years in the colony are ineligible for
election to either House.
The Executive Government is, as in England,
dependent ppon Parliamentary majorities. It
is called the Executive Council, and is formed
of the members of the Ministry for the time
being. The Governor, who is appointed by
the Queen,and is her accredited representative,
is the President of the Executive Council.
Members accepting office in the Administration
are not required to go to their constituencies
for re-election. The Government first appointed
under the present Constitution Act consisted of
five Ministers, who were all required to be
members of the Legislature. Recently a
sixth Minister has been added, and the Ministry
is now composed of the Chief Secretary,
Attorney-General, Treasurer, Commissioner of
Crown Lands and Immigration, Commis-
sioner of Public Works, and Minister of
Education, each with a salary of £l,OOO
per annum. Any member of the Legislature
renders his seat vacant by accepting any
office of emolument under the Crown excepting
those abovementioned ; and all are required to
take an oath or make affirmat ion of allegiance to
the Sovereign of Great Britain. All the affairs
of the colony, including the management of the
Crown lands, the proceeds of which have been
placed entirely at the disposal of the colonists,
are under the control of the two Houses of
the Legislature. Each House is vested with
equal powers, with the exception that the
Legislative Council cannot originate any
measure for appropriating any part of the
revenue, or for imposing, altering, or repealing
any rate, tax, duty, or impost. The whole
of the financial affairs of the colony, how-
ever, are dealt with by the Assembly, and
the only part taken in the matter by
the Council is the consideration of such
measures as are described above after they
have been passed by the Assembly. Several
taxation Bills have been vetoed by the Council
in the exercise of this power. The public ex-
penditure is entirely regulated by the House of
Assembly, in whose hands consequently rests the
power of making and unmaking Ministries. The
present Governor is Sir William Francis Drum-
mond Jervois,K.G.C.M.G.,C.B.,and the Ministry
of the day is composed as follows:—Hon.
William Morgan, Chief Secretary and Premier;
Hon. Charles Mann, Q. 0., Treasurer and Leader
of the House of Assembly: Hon. W. H.
Bundey, Q.C., Attorney-General; Hon. T. Play-
lord, Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immi-
gration ; Hon. G. C. Hawker, M.A., Commis-
sioner of Public Works; and the Hon. T. King,
Minister of Education.


The colony possesses complete self-governmen
all but in name. The Crown retains power 1
disallow measures opposed to the principle
of Imperial legislation, and Bills affectin
the Constitution as well as some other*
have to be reserved for the Royal assen
which is, however, in most cases a forma
proceeding, and hence the Government may b
said to be a pure form of democracy. The tw
Houses'model their proceedings in accordauc
with the practice of the House of Commons, anc
similar forms are observed in both Houses
The Legislative Council is presided ove
by a President, and the Assembly by
Speaker, and but one member of th
Ministry—generally the Chief Secretary—ha
a seat in the Council. There is no distinc
tion between the classes of members of the tw
Houses, and neither House can be said to
be representative of a class, both Chamber
being returned solely in the interest
of the whole community. The members
of the Council are dignified by the title
of “Honourable.” The majority of the
members of both Houses are engager
in commercial pursuits. Owing to there
being no broadly defined politics
parties, the tenure of office of Ministers is
very precarious, and very frequent changes oi
Administrations occur. This is not altogether an
unmitigated evil, as it guards against corrup-
tion in the distribution of official patronage,
but it operates detrimentally in many ways to
public business. The evil is one, however, which
it may be hoped will be remedied in course of
time. Notwithstanding the frequent struggles
for office that occur, the proceedings of
the South Australian Parliament have
always been of an orderly character,
and have fortunately not been marked
by any of the discreditable scenes and
disturbances which have become so common in
other colonial Legislative Assemblies. More-
over the legislation has generally speaking
been of a practical and progressive character.
Indeed, in several respects, as in the enactment
of the Real Property Act, and the Act authorizing
the marriage of a man with his deceased wife’s
sister, the colony has taken the lead in important
reforms. None of the members are paid except
the Ministers, the President of the Council, the
Speaker, and the Chairman of Committees; and
the expenses of Parliament are consequently not
very great averaging between £lO,OOO and
£ll,OOO per annum.
REAL PROPERTY ACT.
This measure, of which South Australia may
justly feel proud, inaugurated a new and simple
mode of conveyancing which swept away the
heavy expenses and evils attendant upon the
old system of transferring real property. The
author of the measure, which came into force in
1858, was Mr. R. R. Torrens, afterwards Regis-
trar-General of South Australia, and now Sir R.
R. Torrens, and lately a member of the House of
Commons for Cambridge. The principles of the
Act are thus set forth by a Commission
appointed to enquire into its provisions and
working:—“The objects of the Real Property
Act are to give security and simplicity to
all dealings with land, by providing that
the title shall depend upon registration,
that all interests shall be capable of
appearing or being protected upon the face of
the registry, and that a registered title or
interest shall never be affected by any claim
or charge which is not registered. By this
system every one who acquires any estate or
interest in land, upon being registered as
owner thereof, obtains a title absolutely
secure as against every one whose claim does
not appear upon the registry; and the two
elements of simplicity and security as regards
the acquisition of land appear to be
effectually attained.” All land alienated
from the Crown in this province since 1858
is declared to be under the Real Property
Act; and land acquired before that date may
be brought under its operation upon applica-
tion after certain precautionary public notices
have been given. Several amendments, found
necessary by experience, have been made in the
Act, and a certain amount of protection is now
definitely given to equities arising in connection
with properties ; but the mo in prin-
ciple has always been successfully main-
tained, and the value of property now brought
under the Act amounts to several millions
• sterling. The fees upon transfers are small,
and transactions under the Act are so simple as
rarely to call for the intervention of a solicitor.
Where a block of land is subdivided separate
certificates of title are issued by the depart-
ment for each allotment, and the greatest care
is taken in defining the measurements and boun-
daries. Thus sources of error or opDortunities
for fraud seldom occur, and costly “ abstracts
of title” are unknown. In fact, the title em-
bodied in the certificate issued from the Lands
Titles Office is to all intents and purposes in-
defeasible. The South Australian Act, slightly
altered, has been adopted by all the Australian
Colonies.
THE LAND AND ITS OCCUPATION.
History of Land Legislation.
The labours of the first settlers id South Aus-
tralia were without a moment’s delay devoted
to the task of subduiDg the wilderness. Their
attention was first directed to the fertile plain
lying between the sea and the Mount Lofty
Ranges The progress of settlement outwards
from Adelaide was for years exceedingly slow.
The statistics of these infantile times in South
Australian history are very imperfect, but we
find that as late as 1841 the total area of land
under cultivation was no more than 6,722 acres,
of which 4,154 acres was devoted to wheat-
growing; that there were but 890 houses, some-
thing like 20,000 cattle, and no more than a
quarter of a million sheep. The difficulty of
obtaining labour was a serious drawback.
It is true that the system under which
the colony had been founded provided that
the proceeds of the sale of waste lands


were to be devoted to the bringing out of immi-
grants, but at this time the quantity of land
alienated did not greatly exceed 300,000 acres,
and much of the money thus raised found other
employment than in introducing man-power.
A terribly hard struggle these pioneers had, and
more than once heart and hope were on the
point of failing them. Step by step, however,
difficulties were overcome. The cultivation of
wheat, begun with fear and trembling as a
hazardous experiment, proved to be a most
remunerative undertaking. By-and-by cou-
rageous colonists pushed their way into the
ranges, and from the rich hill-sides and richer
bottom lands great store of grain and vegetables
found its way to the young metropolis. The
hopes of the settlers for the future success of
South Australia as an agricultural country were
long bounded by an exceedingly limited horizon.
The districts south and east and north-east
of Adelaide were thought to offer induce-
ments to the farmer, but people looked
askance at the vast tracts of country, much of
it scrubby, some of it heavily timbered, ex-
tending away to the northwards, and the san-
guine souls .who dreamed of the time when these
territories would be brought under the plough
were pitied as unreasonable enthusiasts. The
plains extending northward to Gawler, a distance
of some twenty-five miles, were doubtless fertile,
but beyond that stretched vast regions doomed
to no better fate than a perpetual occupancy by
cattle and sheep. How unfounded these fore-
bodings have proved to be the present genera-
tion of colonists know full well.
The law under which settlement was entered
upon contemplated the cutting-up of the land
into eighty-acre blocks and the sale of it at £1
an acre. Owing to the difficulty experienced in
London in disposing of the quantity which it
was thought necessary to alienate before inaugu-
rating the work of colonization ths area pur-
chasable for £BO was increased to 134 acres,
and thus a number of persons came to
hold what are known as preliminary
sections. With each of these sections the
buyer received a town acre in payment of
an additional one pound; and it is significant
of the enormous increase in the value of city
property that a few days ago an allotment in
Adelaide. which cost the original purchaser a
few shillings an acre was sold at £260 a foot
frontage. After the colony had been formally
established the upset price of country land was
kept at £1 an acre, and that rate has been main-
tained ever since. As a meins of deciding be-
tween competing claimants for the same land
the auction test was introduced; but for many
years the competition, except for choice blocks,
was not brisk. The population being small, the
requirements for legitimate purposes of cultiva-
tion were small also. As time progressed it did
not suit the convenience of the Government that
alienation should go on at so tardy a rate as
would have been the case had sales been kept
down to the actual needs of settlement. The land
furnished a facile source of revenue, and hun-
dreds of thousands of acres were forced into the
market. Persons who had taken up country for
pastoral purposes, finding that they had no alter-
native between purchasing their runs and being
driven off them by other purchasers, exhausted
every effort to raise funds to pay the price de-
manded by the Government, and thus it came
to pass that immense estates were amassed under
pressure which now are worth almost fabulous
sums. But the pastoral tenants and the agri-
cultural settlers combined could not absorb all
the land offered for sale, and so encouragement
was given to a class of middlemen who bought
for speculative purposes. In process of time
the existence of this class led to terrible abuse.
Holding as they came to do vast tracts of land,
it was necessary for some of them to resort to
peculiar shifts to dispose of it. Had things gone
on in a natural course they would speedily have
been surfeited, and the ordinary buyer would have
been still able to obtain his eighty acres or more,
as the case might be, in the Government auction
mart for a trifle over £1 an acre. To prevent
this a system of levying blackmail was initiated
which grew to scandalous proportions. Numbers
of the middlemen attended the auctions for no
other purpose than to be bought-off, and it
frequently happened that the bona fide
purchaser had to pay a commission to
several of these cormorants to prevent their
bidcing against him, and running-up the
price to an unreasonable limit. The natural
consequence of this was that it became cheaper
to buy from an agent land previously alienated.
So outrageous at last did this evil become that
legislative action had to be taken against the
blackmailers, and severe penalties were enacted
to put a stop to their nefarious practices. To
some extent this had the desired effect; but it
required the complete alteration in the land
laws which was adopted in after years to put
an end to the doings of the so-called “land
sharks.”
Between the years 1841 and 1852 the progress
made in the alienation of land and its appli-
cation to farming purposes was comparatively
slow. These were the days before the process
of forcing land into the market, to which we
have referred, began. The financial wants of
the Government were comparatively small,
the revenue during the last-mentioned year
being under a quarter of a million sterling,
and the expenditure much less than that.
The total alienation of land for the twelve
months was but 86,672 acres, and the area
of land under cultivation, at the outside com-
putation, 80,000 acres. The opening-up of the
gold-fields in Victoria marked an entirely
new departure in the history of settlement.
Hundreds of South Australian colonists who
had done well at the diggings returned to
settle on the lands, bringing with them scores of
other persons, who, finding the land laws more
liberal, and the prospects of reward for steady
plodding work brighter here than in the
neighbouring colonies, took up farms and
prospered upon them. Up to this time the
land-sharking had not developed to any extent,
and for £1 Os. 6d. an acre many a good holding
was obtained. It was not long before the falla-
cious notion was exploded that wheat would


not grow beyond Gawler, and north, south, and |
east spread the stream of agricultural settlement.
In 1853 213,321 acres were sold, and although
in some subsequent years the area disposed of
fell below this, the acreage cultivated exhibited
a regular and even a rapid advance. In
1854 it reached 129,692 acres; five years
later it had increased to 361,884 acres; and
by 1867 it had gone up to 810,734 acres. From
this time forward for some years there came a
marked decrease in the rate of progress. To
this result several causes contributed. Farmers
who had purchased or leased eighty-acre sections
some years before began to find that the area
was insufficient to provide them with a sus-
tenance. Continuous cropping,, chiefly with
wheat, had diminished greatly the producing
capacity of their small holdings, .and at the
same time their families had grown up and
required a wider field fer their operations. The
system of land-sharking already referred to had.
now reached its height, and fresh farms could
only be obtained upon extravagant terms. Thus
cramped in their old homesteads and heavily
handicapped in their efforts to get new ones,
farmers began to turn their eyes longingly t» other
colonies, and especially to Victoria, where the
land laws had been greatly liberalized and where
there seemed a prospect of shaking-off the
malign influence of the blackmailer. Hundreds
of farmers, and among them scores of Germans
who had come to South Australia in early days,
and had by their industry and thrift made a
little money, which they were fearful of losing,
set off in search of fresh fields and pastures new.
It was not long before the exodus across the
Border became so alarming as to excite the
attention of Parliament, and session after session
Bills were introduced to amend the land laws.
It was not until 1869, however, that the refor-
matory action took practical shape. In that year
an Act was passed providing for free selection
after survey in certain declared areas, the selector
being allowed a certain number of years to pay
his purchase-money, but being compelled in the
meanwhile to pay interest at a moderate rate
and to comply with certain conditions of resi-
dence and improvement. The thin end of the
wedge of a liberal system being thus inserted, it
was not long before it was driven home. Year
after year further reforms were introduced,
until at last the method now in force of dis-
posing of the lands was instituted. In this
there are no doubt still grave defects, but in
many respects it is far more liberal than that of
any other Australian colony. The effect of the
new legislation was almost magical. The migra-
tion of South Australian farmers elsewhere
was checked, and if the terms offered failed to
attract any very great number of settlers from
abroad, they at all events led to an expansion of
settlement and of cultivation, which completely
throws into the shade the progress made in the
same direction in other provinces of the Aus-
tralian'group. The demand for land for agri-
cultural purposes grew with such astonishing
rapidity that it was difficult for the surveyors
to keep pace with the requirements of pur-
chasers. Buns held for pastoral purposes, par-
ticularly in the North, were resumed by
wholesale, and vast tracts of country which not
long before had been declared uncultivable
were seized upon by selectors, and at the cost of
comparatively little outlay in clearing aDd
ploughing were made to yield abundant har-
vests. As a consequence of the stimulus given
by legislation to agriculture the yearly increase
in land brought under crop has been enormous.
In 1870 it sprung from 850,576 to 959,009 acres,
and each twelvemonth since has witnessed a
like advance, until, as shown by the returns for
last season, we can boast of a cultivated area of
2,011,319 acres. As we have before pointed
out, ten years ago, with a population of 178,722
souls, the land under cultivation was at the rate
of 4§ acres per head ; now, with a population
of 257,000, it amounts to eight acres a head.
The Peesent Land Alienation Laws.
The great aim of the Land Laws now in force
is to promote agricultural settlement as contra-
distinguished from other forms of occupation.
In former times the farmer, the stock-breeder,
the person desirous of founding a large estate,
and the speculator all met together in the
auction-room and paid cash for the blocks of
land that fell to their share as the result of
bidding. We have already explained how by
this arrangement the boDa fide agriculturist was
often pushed to the wall or made the victim of
extortion. The fundamental aim of the Acts
now in force is not only to free him from this
harassing and unfair competition, but to give
him the first pick of all the country offered for
sale. The modus operandi is as follows : —To
begin with, notice is given to a certain number
of pastoral tenants occupying waste lands of the
Crown upon lease that their runs are to be
resumed within a certain period, it may.be six
or it may be twelve months, according as the law
directs. This done, the lands are surveyed into
sections not exceeding 320 acres in extent, and
the whole of them are advertised for sale on a
certain day. The intending buyers having
assembled are divided into two classes—those
who contemplate residing personally upon the
land they take up and make a declaration to that
effect, and those who intend to reside vicariously,
or, in other words, to farm by deputy. The
policy of the law is to give especial encourage-
ment to the former class, and accordingly in the
first place it devolves upon them to bid for the
right of choice of the sections comprised in the
area or hundred offered. The highest bidder is
empowered to selecrt a sufficient quantity to make
his holding up to 1,000 acres, and then the right
to second choice is submitted, and so on until
there are no furiher biddings. The like course
is then followed in regard to the second class of
purchasers, and when the auction is over the
remaining sections become available for selec-
tion at £1 an acre, which is the upset price in
the case of all-ordinary country lands. The
blocks having been selected, the purchaser is
required to pay down 10 per cent, of the
amount he has agreed to give, and for three
years this is the only payment he is required to
make. It is not reckoned as part of the purchase-


money, but as interest or rent for the period !
named. He has futher to enter into an agree-
ment with the Government (1) to make sub-
stantial improvements, in the shape of buildings,
fencing, well-sinking, reservoir-making, drain-
ing, or clearing and grubbing, to the value of ss.
an acre during the first two years, of 7s. 6d. .an
acre during three years, and 10s. an acre during
four years ; (2) to plough and have under culti-
vation not less than one-tenth of the land
during the first year, and at least one-fifth during
subsequent years; and (3) to reside on the
land personally or by substitute as the case may
be. At the end of the third year he has to pay
a second instalment of 10 per cent, interest to
carry him on for other three years. At the
end of the sixth year he must pay a fourth of the
purchase-money and interest on the balance
at 10 per cent., which will meet all his
obligations up to the close of the .ninth year;
when he is expected to complete bis purchase
and. obtain possession of his deeds. It is
further provided that the selector may
from time to time, as he is able, pay off por-
tions of the purchase-money, and in the case
of personal residents the right is given to pay
for the land outright at any time after five years
from the date of selection. From this abstract
it will be seen that the principles of the Act are:
—First, purchase after survey; second, deferred
payments; third, limitation of area held upon
credit to 1,000 acres ; fourth, conditions of. im-
provement and cultivation ; fifth, as far as
possible compulsory personal residence.
There are some other features in our land
system which deserve notice. Thus, although
ordinarily the upset price of land is £1 an acre,
there are exceptions, as in the instance of town-
ship allotments and suburban sections, where
the upset price is invariably higher, where sale
is by open auction, and where the terms are
cash. Again, in the case of what are known as
reclaimed lands—that is, lands which have
been rendered available for cultivation by
drainage—the cost of reclamation is added to the
upset price, and the largest area that any
selector can take up is 640 acres. Then
there are special provisions in the case of
poorer or scrub lands, persons being allowed to
take up a large area on a twenty-one years’ lease
with right of purchase, the rental being fixed
very low conditionally upon money being. ex-
pended in clearing the land. Furthermore, it is
provided that any country land which has been
open for selection during two years may be put
up to auction and sold for cash to the highest
bidder, the upset price being, however, still
kept at 20s. an- acre. Finally, there are lands
which have failed to attract purchasers either
by private contract or at auction, which
are let in large blocks at a moderate rental,
no conditions of improvement being imposed,
although a right of purchase is granted. It is
worthy of note that, notwithstanding the intro-
duction of so many modes of occupancy and
alienation, the State has remained faithful to
the principle established in early times of
demanding at least £1 an acre for all
territory which it parts with. That it has not
suffered by its firmness in this particular is
manifest, for the demand for land has been
steadily maintained, and each year hundreds of
thousands of acres pass into private hands, much
of it to be immediately brought under cultiva-
tion. Altogether the purchase of 5,114,108
acres had been completed at the end of 1878,
and there were besides at that date 2,931,430
acres held upon credit, the greater proportion of
which will in due course' pass absolutely to the
purchasers.
Agkicultubal Settlement.
The general character of the land in South
Australia, so far as it has been taken up
for farming purposes, is in a high degree
favourable for advantageous settlement. It
may be divided into three classes — the
plains, which for the most part are at once
available for the plough, the hilly country,
where more or less clearing is necessary to be
dpne to fit it for cultivation, and scrub lands,
which in some cases are of inferior quality,
but in others are only kept from being culti-
vated owing to the expense and labour that
would be involved in removing the timber. A
fourth class might be added, consisting of com-
paratively level oountry, sprinkled with sheaoak
and other small timber, which can be removed
at a comparatively slight cost. Notwithstand-
ing the comparative dryness of the climate, the
rainfall being about 21§ inches, the soil proves
very productive. Not only do English fruits
and cereals of all kinds grow to perfection, but
many semi-tropical fruits dnd vegetables do
equally well, the earth yielding a bountiful
return for a very moderate expenditure of
labour. The system of farming resorted
to' in South Australia is unfortunately,
as a rule, still very primitive. There
is no Sufficient care taken to return to
the soil the ingredients which are taken from
it by the process of vegetable growth. The land
is cropped year after year for the most part
with wheat until it becomes thoroughly
exhausted. This wasteful system has no doubt
been greatly encourged by the extent of new
country available for occupation, and of course,
as settlement' spreads, and the quantity of
cultivable virgin soil diminishes, a change will
take place in this respect. As we have before
mentioned, the area of land tilled in South
Australia is, as compared with the population,
enormous, far surpassing anything known in the
other colonies. Besides wheat, the staple growth
of the colony, attention is bestowed upon the
production of hay, barley, oats, potatoes, field
peas, lucerne, and to a small extent, flax and
hops, but the whole of these articles combined
do hot occupy much more than one-half the
area devoted to wheat. The total yield of
barley during last season was 142,933 bushels,
gathered from 12,089 acres; of oats, 35,202
bushels, from 2,931 acres, of peas, 48,191
bushels, from 4,233 acres ; of hay, 210,974 tons,
from 2118,359 acres; and of potatoes, 14,378 tons,
from 5,398 acres. It should be stated that a
number of Associations exist throughout the
colony which give attention to agricultural mat-


ters. The Central Association the Royal
Agricultural and Horticultural Society carries
on operations upon a very large scale, and is
doing useful work in promoting the interests of
the farmers. . . ,
The system of wheat-growing in the colony
is extremely simple. The selector merely
ploughs the ground to thp depth of a few
inches, seldom more than six; the seed
is usually sown broad-cast, and generally,
if it is not put in after the proper
season, and if there is no visitation of
red rust or other destructive plague, a crop of
from ten to twenty bushels an acre is obtained,
according to the quality of the land. In the
older agricultural districts the yield is often
very small, as there are difficulties to be coped
with in :he shape of weeds and exhaustion
of the soil, resulting from continual cropping
without manure for the past ten, twenty, or
thirty years. The commonest plan in such cases
is to allow the land to lie fallow and depasture
cattle upon it for a year or. two, after
which it will often again yield a re-
munerative crop of wheat. The keeping of
sheep has of late years become a favourite
expedient for recruiting the soil. Red rust,
locusts, a disease known as takeall, from the
fact of its entirely destroying patches of the
crop, and hot winds, are among the chief ills
with which farmers have to cope. Of late years
many of the farms in the old districts have gone
into pastoral occupation, the small holders
having sold out and obtained land from the
Government in one or other of the new areas.
The land now being occupied is thus from sixty
to 280 miles, from Adelaide, and situate from
five to seventy miles from shipping places on the
coast. The extent of land under culivation with
wheat is increasing with amazing rapidity, the
figures for last season being 1,305,851 acres. The
production of wheat at the last harvest gathered
in December, 1878, was 9.332,049 bushels, but
the season was a very unfavourable one. The
increase on the .totals of the preceding year
was in area 142,205 acres; in quantity only
297,357 bushels. The ability to gather in the
largely extending areas of corn is explained by
the fact that harvesting in South Australia is
done by means of Ridley’s reaper, or stripper,
which at the most requires only two persons to
attend to it, and is frequently worked, owing to
the dearth of labour, by one man, who drives
the horses and steers the machine himselr.
One of these machines will reap from eight to
ten acres of crop per day, after which the pro-
duce has merely to be passed once or twice
through the winnower to be ready for market.
Although the average yield per acre is not so
high as in some other countries* the quality of
South Australian wheat, probably owing to the
climate, is superior to any other. This is
demonstrated not only by the prizes obtained
at European Exhibitions, but by the fact that
Victoria and New Zealand and other colonies,
although producing more than enough for their
home consumption, annually import South
Australian wheat to mix with their own in the
manufacture of flour. The skin is much
thinner, and the quality of the flour superior
to that of other wheat. It is, moreover, very
greatly to the advantage of this colony as a com-
petitor with other breadstuffs-producing coun-
tries that the cost of preparing the soil for
ploughing is, generally speaking, insignificant,
and that the conformation of the coast is
such that produce has not to be taken very far
in order to reach the seaboard. Of course, as
settlement expands the distance which grain
will have to be carried will increase, but the
bulk of the lands now cultivated are near to
ports. Moreover, the wise course is being
adopted of pushing railways out in all direc-
tions, thus facilitating greatly the conveyance of
produce, and securing for the farmer a better
price for his wheat. Owing to the circumstances
we have thus pointed out, South Australian
farming stands on an excellent footing, and
agriculturists can thrive here on au average per
acre that would be looked upon elsewhere as a
starvation yield. This colony is not only the
granery of Australia, but she expoits consider-
able quantities of breadstuffs to the Mauritius,
Cape, Great Britain, and other countries.
The olive thrives luxuriantly in South Aus-
tralian soil. Many of the best varieties. were
introduced soon after the colony was established,
and for years small quantities of oil of very
excellent quality, have been made It is only
during the last three or four years, however,
that systematic attempts at its manufacture
have been made. These attempts are owing
largely to the advocacy of the interest by Mr.
Samuel Davenport. There are now several
persons engaged in the business, and some
thousands of gallons of olive oil will be made
during the present season. The oil when made
commands a ready sale at 10s- per gallon, being
equal to the best ever imported. Several
attempts have been made to establish seri-
culture as a colonial industry, but hitherto with
no very substantial results. Some of the
cocoons 'produced here, which were sent to
Marseilles, have been pronounced by the firm
of silk merchants to whom they were consigned
to be “ equal to any ever wound by them.” The
climate of South Australia appears to be
admirably suited to the silkworm, while the
mulberry trees required for its food
grow rapidly and luxuriantly. The colony
has also been proved experimentally to be
well adapted for the growth of many other
products. Hops are successfully and systemati-
cally grown in the South-Eastern District;
tobacco thrives with very little attention in the
Botanic Gardens and many other places, although
it has not been systematically cultivated; the
castor oil plant (Ricinus) grows with the greatest
freedom ; and the sunflower is quite at home in
our warm sunny plains. Besides these mustard,
rape, canary seed, grain, lupin, maize, lentils,
chicory, osier, broom, millet, esparto grass,
opium, cochineal, and many plants used in dis-
tilling various perfumes, have also been grown
here, and are therefore recommended not upon
mere speculative grounds, but from actual know-
ledge of the suitability of the climate for their
production. The greatest hindrance, as in most


other matters, is the scarcity of labour, which
will always be more or less a difficulty to be
encountered. The list we have thus given must
not be understood as exhausting the agricul-
tural and horticultural capabilities of the colony,
as it only includes those which are, or may
become, important sources of wealth. We may
add, therefore, that almost every description of
garden plant and forest tree, from the violet and
the oak of the cold northern climes to the ferns,
cacti, and gorgeous flowering shrubs of semi-
tropical countries, may be seen in the gardens
in and around the City of Adelaide.
Wine-Geowing
has from the early days of the colony been pro-
perly regarded as an industry for which our
soil and climate are particularly suitable, and
although originally carried on with all the draw-
backs of inexperience and consequent risk of
failures, there is abundant evidence that wine
of the finest quality can be produced in South
Australia. The rich chocolate loam and the
ferruginous clays of eur hillsides and plains
are admirably adapted for the production of
wine grapes of excellence. Indeed, it is mar-
vellous over what a stretch of territory in the
province the vine flourishes. Nearly all the
best kinds of grapes from France, Spain, and
elsewhere have been introduced, and our vig-
nerons have during the last few years both
discovered those best suited for our climate and
learned the proper way of treating the musts so
as to bring them to perfection. The wines pro-
duced vary from those of the lightest and most
delicate character to the full-bodied and gene-
rous wines such as are produced in Spain and
.Portugal. The extent of land planted with vines
i 54,207 acres, and the produce of wine in 1877-8
was 453,303 gallons. These figures exhibit a
satisfactory increase in the returns for the pre-
vious twelvemonths. The greater part of the
wine grown here is consumed in the colony,
where a taste for the good and pure article is
gradually but steadily growing. A moderate
trade has been established with the neighbouring
colonies and other parts of the world, one or two
growers shipping their produce regularly to Eng-
land, where a remunerative market is obtained
for them. Our wines have also secured prizes
and honourable mentions or honourable men-
tions at all the International Exhibitions. The
value of the wine exported during the last year
was £25,256. Spirit manufacture is also carried
on to a considerable extent.
Pastohal Settlement.
The pastoral lessees, more commonly called
squatters, have been from the earliest days
the pioneers of settlement. The enterprising
squatters, who are now among our wealthiest
colonists, have gone out into the distant bush
with one or two men, a year’s stock of rations, a
few horses for riding, and a few thousand, or
perhaps only a few hundred sheep, and, selecting
some spot where water was obtainable, they have
had so many square miles roughly surveyed or
delineated for them, thus constituting what are
known in the colonies as their runs. Here they
have made their abode, far remote from the
confines of civilization, not seldom enduring
severe physical privations, besides being divorced
from association with refined society. Gene-
rally speaking, in the course of years these men
have reaped the reward of their enterprise and
self-denial by finding themselves in a position
of independence if not of wealth. Occasionally,
however, they have met with a very different
experience. The greatest difficulty against
which outside settlers have to contend is the
scarcity of water, and this drawback is especially
felt in the Far North, where there are no rivers,
where the watercourses are for the most part
mere winter torrents, and where the under-
ground supplies are not only precarious but
often so salt as to be unfit for consumption. In
good ordinary seasons the rainfall furnishes a
reasonable store of water, but there are times of
drought when the country becomes uninhabi-
table. Sheep die by the thousand, and the
unfortunate proprietors are put to the greatest
shifts to preserve alive a sufficient proportion of
their flocks to resume the struggle for a com-
petency. As may be supposed, the difficulties
of occupation increase according to the distance
of the runs from th§ settled districts ; and inas-
much as the pressure of agriculturists,
to whom the land has to bo given up
when they require it, and the multiplication
of applicants for country are driving the
squatters further and further out, it will be
seen that the spice of adventure connected with
pastoral occupation is being well maintained.
Of late years the plan most in vogue has been
for young men to associate themselves with
wealthy colonists, and push out into the inte-
rior, trusting to the results of their enterprise
for a return for their labour. The ad-
vantage of such an arrangement is that
persons with little capital but plenty of spirit
and determination are enabled to obtain a
footing as squatters which they could not have
secured as the result of their own unaided
efforts. Capital is required to dig the wells, to
construct dams or reservoirs, and to tide over
times of drought, when the income from stock
is reduced to vanishing point. To these hardy
pioneers necessity has been the mother of
invention, and the contrivances that have
been introduced to facilitate the work of
providing and storing water and distributing it
among the flocks and herds are as varied as they
are ingenious. Formerly when no permanent
surface water could be had dependence was
chiefly placed upon wells, and fortunes have
been sunk in the tantalizing work of procuring
supplies by this expensive and precarious pro-
cess. More recently the plan of storing Water
in dams and reservoirs has come into general
use, and thousands of pounds are often spent
upon one waterhole. Three or four years ago
one energetic squatter (Mr. Peter Waite) —a
partner of Sir Thomas Elder, whose liberality
towards the work of exploration has already
been alluded to—devoted himself to the per-
fecting of a combined steam plough and scoop
for excavating reservoirs. His labours have


been crowned with complete success, and the
echoes of the far distant bush are now stirred
by the whistle of the steam-engines engaged in
the task of making artificial lakes capable of
holding scores of millions of gallons-a suffi-
cient supply, in fact, to make the proprietors,
if not independent: of the seasons, at all events
able to tide over a two years’ drought. Even
where these appliances are not resorted to, dams
have been, or are being, formed large enough to
store water for many months.
As in other places, there has always been in
South Australia less or more of antagonism
between the public at large and the squatters.
The latter have been accused—and often with
good reason—of striving to keep possession of
the people’s grass upon terms absurdly
favourable to themselves. There were times
when the pastoral tenants, by absolute mis-
representation and by dint of the influence of
their wealth and position in the country, kept
back the tide of agricultural settlement. Their
conduct in this respect reacted fatally upon
themselves in stirring up against them popu-
lar animosities which developed into the
demands for higher payments from them
than the justice of the case warranted.
However, a modus vivendi seems at last to
have been established between the two sections
of the community. The squatter has been
driven frem the good farming lands within an
easy distance of Adelaide and of the seacoast,
and even jealousy and envy cannot find argument
against allowing him to hold at a moderate
rate territory in the remote North, consist-
ing chiefly of arid plains, which cannot be occu-
pied until water is found at great expense, and
are so scantily supplied with vegetation that
runs carrying from twenty to fifty sheep
and from six to ten head of cattle to the
square mile are reckoned fully stocked. One
great source of satisfaction to the stockholder is
that the climate of the Far North is singularly
favourable to sheep, such diseases as scab, fluke,
and footrot being unknown. Moreover, it is
only fair to the colony to repeat, that while
numbers do fail to make anything out of squat-
ting, and even lose their all in the attempt to
make money, the majority are well recompensed
for their toils, privations, and risks. The
increase in good seasons, especially in sheep,
is so great, and the clip of wool so satisfac-
tory, that the returns are most gratifying.
Legislation, too, of late years has been of a
character to encourage, settlement. Absolute
fixity of tenure is not guaranteed, leases, accord-
ing to the situation of the runs, being resumable
in some cases upon twelve months’, in others
upon three years’ notice. Where resumption
takes place, an allowance is made for permanent
improvements, such as wells, dams, reservoirs,
and fencing, and in certain cases tor buildings
of a substantial character. In the more remote
territory to which the three years’ notice applies,
the lessee is also entitled, upon resumption, to
compensation for the loss sustained through his
having been deprived of the opportunity of
obtaining a reasonable return for his expendi-
ture. To prevent persons monopolizing immense I
tracts of country, and turning it to no account,
provision is made that runs taken up on lease
shall be stocked within three years to the extent
of ten head of sheep and three head of greq,t cattle
per square mile. In the case of the most distant
territory the duration of the lease is fourteen
| years, with a right of renewal for a like period,
and the terms of occupation are as follows:
[ For the first fourteen years an annual rent of
I 2s. fid. per square mile, with an assessment at
I the rate of Id. a head upon sheep and fid. upon
great cattle ; and for the second fourteen years,
a rental of 55., and an assessment of 2d. and Is.
per head respectively. For the nearer runs
there is no right of renewal, the rent is not less
than 2s. 6d. per square mile, and the assessment
is 2d. a head for sheep, and Is. a head for great
cattle. There are many other conditions and
qualifications to which it is not necessary to
allude, but it may be mentioned that special
encouragement is given in the way of remission
of rent to the fencing-in of runs. This provi-
sion has led to a great revolution in the mode of
managing sheep runs. Formerly all flocks were
shepherded, now in the great majority of in-
stances they are paddocked, and it is found that
the latter course conduces greatly to the increase
of the carrying capabilities of the country.
Notwithstanding the enormous areas that have
been withdrawn from pastoral occupancy of
late years there are now held under lease from
the Crown for stock-raising purposes no less than
177,000 square miles, besides 36,700 square
miles held under preferential-right claims..
During the past twelvemonth the area taken up
upon lease amounted to 19,000 square miles,
and under preferential-right claims to 28,000
square miles, much of the last-mentioned area
being in the very remote interior. • There are,
however, still some 145,000 square miles in
South Australia proper altogether unutilized.
These figures brought up to the latest stage
have been supplied to us by Mr. G. W. Goyder,
who for many years has discharged the onerous
and varied duties of Surveyor-General with dis-
tinguished ability. The development of stock-
breeding in South Australia has not been so
great as in some of the other colonies, but the
latest returns show that there are in the province
121,553 horses, 251,802 horned cattle, 6,377,812
sheep, 13,858 goats, and 103/22 pigs. Ten
years ago the numbers were—Horses, 73,828;
cattle, 119,697 ; sheep, 4,436,955: goats, 13,977;
and pigs, 63,826; so that in every depart-
ment of stock-breeding there has been an
enormous increase during the decade. The
production of wool has advanced during the
same period from 27,022,671 lb. to 56,710,851
lb., or more than 100 per cent. At the same time
the value of all wool either used in or exported
from the colony, including the produce coming
down the Murray from New South Wales, has
increased from £1,127,568 to £2,417,397- The
favourite description of sheep here is the
Merino, which has proved itself to be admirably
suited to the climate of South Australia, but
the longwools thrive in some parts of the colony.
In cattle the great majority are of a mixed
breed, but several of our wealthy breeders are


laying themselves out for the establishment
of high-class herds, and pedigree stock,
both of the Shorthorn and Hereford
breeds, is being introduced at great expense.
There are one or two flocks of Angora goats in
the colony, but no great progress has been made
in the rearing of this class of animal. In the
opening-up of the Far North the camel is being
found extremely useful, its services being of
especial value in connection with the work qf
exploration. In the breeding of horses South
Australia does not, perhaps, stand in the fore-
front of the colonies, but that is .not owing to
any climatic or physical reasons. There are a
few gentlemen who are applying themselves to
this industry, and among the names of those
who are possessors of pedigree stock qf first-class
quality may be named Mr. Gerrard, the owner
of Talk-o’-the Hill, Tregeagle, and other noted
thoroughbreds ; and Sir Thomas Elder, the pro-
prietor of the famous Gang Forward. Many of
the horses reared in South Australia have
distinguished themselves upon the turf both
here and in other parts of Australia.. As a
matter of fact, horse-racing has not hitherto
taken so high a position here as in Victoria and
New South Wales ; but South Australians in-
herit from their ancestors the love of this sport,
and of late more systematic attention has been
given to the affairs of the turf. There are
several meetings during the year, including Hunt
Club races,, and recently an enterprising lover
of the sport has instituted Newmarket races,
which are held every few weeks.
Horticultural.
The varied climate of the colony is remark-
ably favourable to the cultivation of fruit. In
good seasons many kinds grow in such abun-
dance, and the price is so low, that it does. not
pay to bring the produce to market, and it is
consequently left to rot where it falls. The
earliest of the spring fruits is the loquat, which
ripens before the end of September. Gherries
and strawberries follow in October and Novem-
ber, and then gooseberries, currants, and rasp-
berries make their appearance. At Christmas
time the first of the apricots and figs are ready
for eating, and soon after peaches, plums, and
grapes in abundance are ready not only for home
consumption but export, considerable quantities
being sent to the other colonies. Apples, pears,
melons, and a variety of other fruits carry the
supply on till the orange season, which begins
about June and lasts until November. In
former years almost our entire stock of
oranges was obtained from Sydney; but
now, although the trees require artificial
watering, they are very prolific, and we
are now able at particular periods to supply
some of our intercolonial neighbours. The
Sultana, Muscatel, and other vines are largely
grown in the vineyards which are established
all over the country. The produce from them
is made into raisins by a few growers, but the
extent to which this industry is carried on is
surprisingly limited. During the summer season
an immense quantity of jam is made, much of
which is exported.
The Botanic Garden.
The Botanic Garden is justly regarded as
the pride of Adelaide. With a site far in-
ferior in natural advantages to the sites of the
public gardens of Melbourne, Sydney, and
Hobart Town, it has yet been admittedly ren-
dered one of the most if not the most beautiful
place of the kind in any of. the Australian
Colonies. This distinction is chiefly due to its
having been for many years under the super-
intendence of the present talented Director,
Dr. Richard Schomburgk, who besides being one
of the Inost learned botanists of tne day pos-
sesses special skill in ornamental gardening, and
aided by the liberality of the Legislature is
ever extending not only the attractions of the
grounds as a popular resort, but also the useful-
ness of the institution as a means of scientific,
agricultural, and horticultural education. The
Garden proper, which immediately joins the
eastern corner-of the city, consists of. forty-five
acres of land, and the several portions of it
are laid - out with all the skill and
diversity which an elegant and cultivated
taste can devise. Some portions are planted so
as to present as much as possible the appearance
of natural landscapes, whilst others are arranged
with the elaboration which is associated with
the French and Italian styles of gardening. In
one place a grand avenue of pines affords
shelter from the sun and relief to the eye on
the hottest day; and in another stands a rosary,
where a surprising array of different species of
the queen of flowers meets the view; here are
beds which form masses of colour of one kind
of bloom ; and there stretch ribbon borders, ex-
hibiting fine lines of rainbow hues. A creek,
whose banks are skirted by weeping-willows,
runs through the Garden; and winding about
amid rare, graceful, and curious shrubs
and trees—the products of all quarters
of the globe innumerable walks pass
between lawns which are evergreen, flower-beds,
conservatories, ferneries, and fountains. A few
pieces of statuary are scattered about the
grounds, and under trees in all directions com-
fortable seats are to be found. A large hot-
house has been erected for the reception of the
grand water lily—the Victoria Regia--which
annually unfolds its gigantic leaves and deli-
cate flowers, while a beautiful collection of
orchids is also here accommodated. A very
handsome palmhouse of iron and glass is the
chief ornament of the Garden. It has a length,
of 100 feet by a width of 35 feet, and a
rotunda 40 feet high. Standing on a terrace
raised six feet above the natural surface
of the ground, approached by two flights
of steps flanked with statues, and surrounded
by a grass margin adorned with quaintly laid-
out flower-beds, it presents an artistic and im-
posing appearance. The building was erected
at a cost of about £3,000, and contains a fine
variety of palms and other rare plants. Here
are also several aviaries filled with colonial and
other birds of brilliant plumage; and a large
aviary has recently been constructed for. the
Acclimatization Society, which is the abode


of some English songsters. The collection of
birds at present in the Garden numbers 403.
There is also a collection of native and foreign
quadrupeds and reptiles, which include 133
specimens. A small museum has for some time
been in existence, but a much larger one, 100
feet by 36J, is shortly to be commenced, for
which £l,OOO has already been voted. It will
receive amongst other things the extensive
herbarium that Dr. Schomburgk has been for
years arranging. There are now 8,500 rare
plants and flowers in the Garden, in addition to
the ordinary varieties. Adjoining the Garden
is an area of eighty-four acres, which Has more
recently been set aside as a park. It is plantec
with many thousands of trees, and laid-out in
walks, avenues, and carriage drives, and it is
intended when the last-mentioned are completed
that the place shall form the Hyde Park oi
Adelaide. An experimental garden is main-
tained, wherein grasses and other fodder-plants
&c., which it is considered would be useful to be
cultivated in the colony are grown, and Dr
Schomburgk is always ready to supply plants
and seeds to any persons who wish' to try
and acclimatize on their own account. From
the Garden trees are also furnished to the
Government, to Corporations. District Councils,
the Forest Board, and cemeteries, and to private
persons in exchange for others. The Director
in his annual report, besides giving an account
of the progress of the Garden, adds a vast amount
of information on subjects of agricultural, horti-
cultural, and arboricultural interest. The
amount voted for the maintenance of the Garden
and Park last year was £5,785, exclusive of’the
Director’s salary. The Garden is open on
weekdays from sunrise to sunset, and on Sun-
day afternoons, when there is usually a very
large crowd of visitors.
Royal Agricultural Society.
The Royal Agricultural and Horticultural
Society, which is the chief of several Agricul-
tural Societies in existence in the colony, was
established in 1848. For a long time its in-
fluence on colonial affairs was limited and
its sphere of usefulness contracted; but for
some years, dating it may be said from the first
visit of the Duke of Edinburgh to South Aus-
tralia, in 1867, when unusual efforts were put
forward to secure a fine Exhibition, its progress,
under a much more vigorous system of manage-
ment, has been markedly rapid. Originally con-
fining its operations to the offering of prizes for
those classes of objects which naturally come
under the cognizance of an Association of the
kind, it has gradually extended its aims and
taken under its auspices the pastoral, viticul-
tural, and, in conjunction with the Chamber
of Manufactures, the manufacturing interests,
besides devoting attention to the consideration
of subjects appertaining to agriculture, such
as the cause and cure of diseases in wheat.
The Society holds periodical exhibitions of
sheep and cattle, colonial produce, and manu-
factures. The Exhibition Building, which is
situated on the North Park Lands adjoining the
Botanic Garden, is 100 feet in length by 90 feet
in breadth, and surrounded on three sides by a
spacious verandah. It stands in the midst of a
large enclosure, in which are pens and boxes for
sheep, horses, and cattle, and a circle for the
showing of horses in action. All this accom-
modation, both of building and grounds, already
proves inadequate to the requirements of the
Society, and a movement is on foot to obtain
another and more extensive site. The affairs
of the Society are managed by a President
(at present Mr. R. D. Ross), four Vice-
Presidents (of whom Mr. S. Davenport,
who represents South Australia at the Sydney
Exhibition, is one), and a committee of
about sixty members, controlling the fol-
lowing departments : —Agriculture, pastoral
and wool, horticulture and floriculture, wine,
manufactures and miscellaneous, finance and
library. Mr. O. J. Coates is the Secre-
tary. During the year ending March 31,1879,
three Shows took place—one in September, 1878,
for live stock, dogs, poultry, birds, and game;
the second, in January, 1879, for wine; and the
third in February, for agricultural produce,
wool, implements, horticulture, floriculture,
and industries and manufactures. In the last
two departments the Chamber of Manufactures
lent their co-operation. The Society also held a
trial of reapers, mowers, and winnowers, and at
the request of the Government- two trials of
machines specially adapted for grubbing mallee
and peppermint woods. Grants-in-aid were
made to two country ploughing matches, and the
total amount awarded in prizes during the year
was £1,094 Is. 6d. The grant-in-aid made by
the Government for the year was £5OO, and the
total receipts amounted to £3,103 4s. Bd. The
sum of £l,OOO was also promised by the
Government for improving the grounds
The Association have had a pair of dies for
prize medals engraved at a cost of £2lO.
The Society lately suggested to the Govern-
ment that, with the object of advancing the
agricultural interests of the colony, a map of
the colony divided into agricultural sections on
a climatic basis should be prepared, and that
there should be established in Adelaide an
ample chemical laboratory, well furnished with
appliances for the analysis of soils, manures,
waters, &c., and appointed to the charge of this
the most able agricultural chemist procurable.
Further, that at least three Inspectors of Agri-
culture should be appointed, the common
qualification of whom should be the possession
of sufficient knowledge of vegetable physiology,
composition of soils, and organic chemistry and
rural mechanics as would qualify them to give
instruction on those subjects by lectures in
various parts of the colony, they to send in
periodical reports and recommendations to the
Government of all that affected agriculture. A
definite reply has not yet been sent to these
suggestions. The subject of red rust in wheat
and how to mitigate its disastrous effects is now
receiving the attention of the Association, and
a large amount of valuable information has been
collected. The Society now numbers 397 sub-


IMMIGRATION AND LABOUR.
We have already explained that one of the
fundamental principles of the establishment of
the colony was that the money derived from the
sale of land should be devoted to the introduc-
tion of labour. This system was carried into
effect to a limited extent, but in the course o
years, when the proceeds of land became larg
and the requirements of the settlers in the' way
of roads, bridges, public buildings, and so forth
correspondingly great, it was thought well t
divert a portion of the Land Fund to the execu
tion of public works. By-and-by, as the labour
ing population increased, the prejudice agains
spending public money in bringing out immi
grants grew apace, and for many years there wa
an entire cessation of immigration. Money se
apart year by year for this service accumu
lated to such an extent that at lengt]
felonious eyes were directed to it b;
needy Treasurers, apd although at first the
form of borrowing the money was gone through
in the end the bonds were destroyed, and the
process of absorption was made complete. Four
or five years ago the demand for labour so vastly
exceeded the supply that the advocate for briDg
ing out population at the public cost bore down
all opposition, and an amount of something like
£lOO,OOO has since been annually appropriated
for and spent upon immigration. By this means
thousands of persons have been introduced
from Great Britain and Germany, to the greaf
mutual advantage of the community and of the
young colonists themselves. Latterly, owing
to the depression in copper and to a succession of
indifferent wheat harvests, the supply of labour
has become rather larger than could be con-
veniently absorbed, and the old demand for the
discontinuance of immigration has made itself
felt. A sum of £50,000 is down on'the Estimates
for the current year, but that will probably be
reduced. The control of emigration matters in
the old country is entrusted to the Agent-
General for the colony, Sir Arthur Blyth, who
has the assistance of a staff of clerks, Inspectors,
and local agents. While emigrants were being
sent out at the rate of several hundreds a month
there were two travelling Inspectors at work—
Mr. Henry Taylor, whose duties were confined
to England, and Dr. Robertson, who was em-
ployed in Scotland. Special representation of
this sort in Ireland has never been necessary,
as it has always been easy to obtain a contingent
of eligible Irish emigrants. Latterly the services
of the gentlemen named have not been required,
and there seems a probability that the organiza-
tion for dispatching emigrants will be tempo-
rarily broken-up. Such a result would be very
much to be deplored, as the work of reconstruct-
ing it would necessarily be extremely difficult.
Nomination and the Land-Order Warrant
System.
In the system of immigration now in force
provision is made for enabling colonists to nomi-
nate their friends for passages. These friends
have to undergo examination as to their suit-
ability for colonists before they are seut out, but
the obvious advantage of the plan is that such of
the nominees as are declared eligible have on
their arrival in the colony some one to take an
interest in them. The system has become ex-
ceedingly popular, and there are now some
thousands of nomination certificates outstanding.
One feature in our immigration system deserving
of special notice is what is known as the Land-
Order Warrant system. Persons who. wish to
pay their own passages from the mother country
and to settle in South Australia are enabled,
upon being pronounced eligible by the Emigra-
tion Agent, to receive a warrant payable to the
Treasurer on arrival in the colony as the part
purchase-money of land. The value of the
warrant is £2O for each adult immigrant, and
£lO for each child, between the ages-
of one and twelve -years. Thus, a family
consisting say of a father, mother, and five
children over the age of one year, would be
able to claim orders worth at the lowest com-
putation £9O. This amount would be sufficient
to meet the first payment of interest upon 900
acres of land if taken up at £1 an acre, or upon
rather more than 640 acres if taken up at 275.
or 28s. an acre, the average rate which land sold
upon credit has realized of late. This in many
parts of the colony would be a holding quite
large enough to give profitable employment to a
family of seven. To enable the emigrant to set
to work with a reasonable prospect of success, he
should have money enough to purchase four or
five horses, a couple of ploughs, a -pair or two
of harrows, and a few other of the more
primitive articles of husbandry. He should
also be able to spend a few pounds in providing
a small residence for himself and his family,
and to have enough to keep him and those
dependent on him during the months spent in
putting in the crop and obtaining a harvest. As
we have before explained it is only here and
there, so far as the inferior lands are concerned,
that any large amount has to be devoted to
clearing the lands, and supposing the selection
is taken up not later than March there is every
liklihood of the selector being able to obtain a
crop the same year. The cost of harvesting is
comparatively small. There is no need to buy a
reaping machine the first year, as it is easy to
obtain the loan of one, but it is no doubt the
part of wisdom for the farmer to provide
himself with all these labour-saving appli-
ances as soon as possible. With a capital
of four or five hundred pounds a selector
who is otherwise able to pay his first instalment
of interest might with safety start farming in
South Australia. Indeed, there are innumerable
instances in which a beginning has been made
upon a much smaller amount. The second in-
stalment of interest, also 10 per cent., falls due
in three years, and of course it is necessary for
the farmer to observe the conditions as to im-
provements and cultivation referred to under
the head of “Agriculture.” It must be evident,
however, that the land-order warrant system
affords to persons in the mother country, who
having a little money are anxious to obtain a
home for themselves in the colonies, a ready
means of economizing their funds and getting a
start in life as tillers of the soil in South Aus-


tralia. This colony is so admirably adapted to
agricultural pursuits, and particularly to wheat-
grewing, that it offers peculiar inducements to
intending settlers.
MINING.
The mineral resources of South Australia are
vast and rich. Gold, silver, copper, iron, and
lead exist in many parts of the colony, and have
materially promoted its prosperity. The first
mineral discovery was made shortly after the
site of the City of Adelaide, had been laid out,
when a lode of silver-lead was found within
four miles of the city, on the side of a hill at
Glen Osmond. The find was not a valuable one.
Years have passed sinc(s the explorers of this
deposit discontinued their efforts, and it is only
worthy of record as the first indication of the
mineral wealth which has done so much towards
the development of South Australia. Other
discoveries of silver-lead have since been
made, but none have proved of a perma-
nently remunerative character. The ores
have yielded as much as from 55 to 75 per
cent, of lead, and from 55 to 65 oz. of silver
to the ton, but thev have not been found
profitable to smelt, and the industry has been
abandoned for many years. There is little
doubt that many other such deposits exist m
the hills which surround Adelaide and in other
parts of the colony. Within the past month a
silver-lead vein has been struck at Kangaroo
Island, which is reported to be rich. Several
gold-fields have also been discovered and
worked, but although gold is to be found
in nearly every part of South Aus-
tralia, none of the deposits of the precious
metals have so far proved of great extent.
The bed of the River Torrens has yielded
a small quantity, but none of the finds
have proved of an enduring character. Tne
Echunga gold-fields, which were discovered, in
1852, were the only ones of any value which
had been worked up to that time, but they only
gave employment to a comparatively small
number of diggers. The same may be said of
the Jupiter Creek Diggings in the same
locality. The Barossa gold-fields, distant
about thirty-five miles from Adelaide in a
north-easterly direction, were the next dis-
covered ; but these did not prove, very rich as
compared with the deposits in the . sister
colonies. Alluvial gold-digging was carried on
for years at Barossa, and something has been
done there in the way of mining. About two
years ago, however, operations at the Lady
Alice Mine, which had been profitably worked
for some years and had yielded very rich quartz,
were discontinued. Gold has also been found
in the Waukaringa District, in the North, where
for some years several reefs were worked, with
fairly satisfactory results. Here also the works
have been at a standstill for some years.
The colony is rich in iron ores. It has been
stated that there is scarcely an acre of ground
which does not contain a slight proportion of
this valuable metal. Some very large veins of
iron ore—several as much as 40 feet in width —
have been discovered. The ores are entirely free
from arsenic or sulphur, and yield excellent
iron. Unfortunately the enterprise of smelting
has not been very vigorously prosecuted.
Various causes have contributed to this. .In
the first place there are no local coal supplies,
for although it has often been rumoured that
coal exists in the colony no satisfactory traces
of it have yet come to light. The Government,
however, have not given up all hope in the
matter, and are now offering a bonus of i4,OUU
for the discovery of a payable coal-field. It
is true that wood abounds in the colony,
which is at least as well suited as coal
for the smelting of iron, but no systematic
attempt to smelt the ores with wood has been
made. One or two experiments have been tried,
and a few tons of pig-iron have been turned out,
but the furnaces were spoiled through the want
of skill on the part of the workmen, and the
undertaking was discontinued. The depression
in the iron trade has also doubtless deterred
capitalists from undertaking the manufacture.
These deposits, however, are too valuable
always to remain neglected, and there is little
doubt that in course of time they will be worked
to the advancement of the commerce of the
colony. There are other mineral productions
found in South Australia, viz., silver, cinnabar,
bismuth, mercury, nickel, ochre, platinum, salt,
schorl, slate, tellurium, cobalt, antimony,
arsenic, lignite, magnesia, marble, strontium,
asbestos, manganese, baryta, dolomite, fireclay,
fluorspar, fuller’s earth, gypsum, kaolin clay,
sulphur, bitumen, calcspar, soapstone, and native
sulphur. Precious stones have also been dis-
covered in various parts, and there sterns little
doubt that diamond-fields exist within thirty
miles of Adelaide at the Echunga gold-fields.
Several of these valuable stones have been
found there, and some which were forwarded
to the Paris Exhibition were most favourably
reported on by a leading London diamond
merchant. The report has excited con-
siderable attention here, and the Government
have caused the ground to be inspected
by a gentleman possessed of considerable
experience, whose opinions confirm the general
belief that diamonds exist in payable quan-
tities at Echunga. The difficulty that presents
itself is the cost of working the ground and the
lack of skilled diamond-diggers. It is, however,
probable that something will be done by the
Government towards testing the resources of
the ground. Two of the diamonds already
discovered have been forwarded in a
rough state to the Sydney Exhibition,
as also a rich collection representative
of the mineral wealth of the colony.. Other
stones have been found in small quantities, viz.,
the amethyst, agate, beryl, bloodstone, camelian,
cairngorm, calcedony, emerald, garnet, lapis-
lazuli, onyx, opal, spinal ruby, and sapphire,
sardonyx, and topas. .
It is, however, in copper that South Australia
is principally rich. In more than one season of
agricultural depression the copper - mining
industry has come to the rescue of the colony
and tided it over its temporary troubles. The


first discovery was made in 1842 by a son of
■Captain Bagot, a very old and valued colonist,
at Kapunda, forty-five miles due north of
Adelaide, In the following year operations
were commenced, and from the first proved to be
very profitable, although many obstacles had
to be overcome. All the ores raised had to
be carted to Port Adelaide, a distance by road
of nearly sixty miles, and stores and machinery
had also to be conveyed to the spot by means of
bullock-drays. In spite of these and many other
difficulties, the Kapunda Mine developed into
a very rich property, and has since yielded
vast quantities of copper ore of all varieties.
At present, however, it is not being worked.
Fifty miles to the north of Kapunda is the
celebrated Burra Burra mine, which has enjoyed
world-wide fame. This mine was discovered
two years after that at Kapunda, and during
the palmy days of copper-mining paid in divi-
dends a sum of no less than £782 320, having
yielded copper to the value of £4,000,000. The
English and Australian Copper Company, which
has been long associated with this mine, owns
fine smelting works at Port Adelaide and also
in New South Wales. Of late the yield of the
Burra has diminished, and although some four
or five years ago an attempt was made to utilize
the low-class ores that had formerly been re-
jected, and expensive machinery was procured
for the purpose, the mine has succumbed to the
blow struck at the copper trade by the deprecia-
tion of prices, and at present exists only in
name. These two valuable discoveries were but
the forerunnersof stillrioher ones. Sixteen years
after the Burra Burra had been discovered a for-
tunate shepherd nicked up on a sheep-run within
100 miles of Adelaide, on Yorke’s Peninsula, a
piece of copper. Within a year a mine richer
than any previously known in South Australia—
the famous W'allaroo mine—was being worked,
and although for two years success seemed
doubtful, the proprietors were amply rewarded
at the end of that period for their enterprise.
For the first five years the average outturn was-
somewhat under 8,000 tons, but it increased
rapidly, and in 1869 had risen to 23,000 tons per
annum, at which it remained for over five years.
During the last year or two the low price of
copper has rendered it necessary to reduce the
output, and last year the proprietors desisted
from bringing ore to the surface, and contented
themselves with merely developing the mine.
Ultimately they found it expedient to leave
this work off partially, and now the operations
are principally confined to keeping the levels
free of water. In the neighbourhood of the
mine is a flourishing township which it has
called into'existence, but which is not entirely
dependent upon the mining industry, as it
is in close proximity to a rich agricultural
district. Some seven miles from the property,
and connected with it by tramway at Port
Wallaroo, are the smelting works established by
the proprietors of the Wallaroo Mines, which
are the largest and most complete in Australia.
The works include no less than thirty-six fur-
naces and twenty-one calcining kilns, where
in former times over 200 men were constantly
employed. The proprietors also possess smelting
works in New South Wales, on the Hunter
River. A fleet of vessels carry coals from
Newcastle to Wallaroo, and take back from the
last-named port to the New South Wales
Smelting Works ores from the Wallaroo Mines
and others in their neighbourhood, thus
diminishing the cost of freight of coal mate-
rially. In the immediate neighbourhood of the
Wallaroo Mine are several others of more or less
value, the most noticeable being the Kurilla
and the Devon Consols, both of which are still
being worked, but on a small scale. The Doora
was also worked for many years with profitable
results, but operations there are now sus-
pended.
In' 1861 a still more valuable discovery than
even the Wallaroo Mines was made by another
shepherd to the south-west of the Wallaroo
Mines and distant some eleven miles from them.
This property is situated about two miles from
the coast, and i* known all over the world as
the Moonta. • As an evidence of the richness of
the mine* it is worthy of mention that at the
expiration of twenty months from its opening
8,000 tons of ore had been raised, and dividends
paid amounting to £64,000. The average yearly
return of the mine until the depreciation of the
copper market checked the outturn has been
tons of ore, of the average value of
£197,270. The total quantity of ore raised since
the opening up to March, 1879, has been 328,123
tons; and there has been paid in dividends a
sum of £1,024,000. A great number of shafts
have been sunk on this extensive property, of
which twenty-seven were worked until recently.
The mine has given employment for many years
to over 1,500 persons. The MooDta continues to
be worked, although operations have been dis-
continued at.nearly all the other mines; but
the production of ore has been very much re-
duced, and as a consequence comparatively few
men are now employed. The latest reports on
the condition of the property are extremely
favourable, and there is little doubt that when
copper-mining revives the Moonta will yield as
large profits to its shareholders as it has done in
the past. There are several other mines in its
neighbourhood, one or two of which have been
worked very successfully. Among those are the
Hamley, Parramatta, the Yelta, and the North
Yelta. At the Hamley and the Parramatta
operations are still being carried on, but only on
a small scale. Nearly all the ore from these
mines is conveyed by tramway to the smelting
works at Wallaroo for treatment.
The mineral resources of the Far North, as
yet scarcely touched, are believed to be in-
credibly great. Lodes of copper ore can be
traced for miles across the country. There are
a great number of mines in the country
to the north, north-east, and east of
Port Augusta, from which a quantity
of ore has been raised. The difficulty of
cartage and its immense cost, as well as the
high price of labour, has, however, checked
enterprise in this part of the colony. Sooner or
later it will be opened out by railway, and the
rich deposits will no doubt be worked to great


advantage if any improvement takes place in the
copper market. Some idea of. the value of the
mineral industry in South Australia in the
past may be gathered from the fact that since
the first mine was discovered the total Value of
the copper, copper ore, and regulus exported up
to the end of 1878 has been £15,754,680, and of
other minerals £293,185.
MANUFACTURES.
Although manufacturing industries have not
developed to so great an extent among us as in
■ some of the other colonies, the progress that is
being made in this department is steady and
encouraging. A few years ago several of’ the
leading manufacturers in Adelaide formed
themselves into an Association, having for its
object the development of industries adapted
to the climate and condition of the colony, and
so far their efforts have had very beneficial
results. They have now a Chamber of their
own, where novel or interesting mechanical
contrivances, inventions, or manufactured
goods of unusual merit are exhibited to the
public free of charge. Some time ago the
Chamber published an approximate return of
manufactures in South Australia. Though this
statement is by no means complete, only 300
persons out of 500 having returned the circulars
sent out, the figures given are interesting as
showing the relative importance of several ot
our leading industries. They deal with the year
1876, and they show that the aggregate _ wages
paid to the 6,127 persons employed in the
various factories during the twelve months
amounted to £586.000. Miners and smelters
got- by far the largest proportion of this
amount, though the mining industry was
even then in a very depressed condition. The
aggregate wages paid to the 1,045 men
were £139,248. The amount received
by engineers, machinists, &c., was the
next highest, and exceeded £BB,OOO. Then
come the timber merchants, builders, &c., with
a Wages fund for the year of £54,000; brewers,
distillers, wine-makers, and cordial-makers,
with £42,660; clothing manufacturers, with
£35,856, divided among the women and men
employed by them ; boot and shoe makers, with
£35,500; tanners and fellmongers. with
£22,730; brickmakers and potters, £22,000;
cabinetmakers, £16,300; printers, £16,200; iron
and tin workers, £14,000; shipbuilders, &c.,
£13,000; and coachbuilders, £11,700. The
return from which these figures are taken shows
that of the 6,127 persons employed 853 were
females, 600 of' whom are engaged in the
clothing factories, which have now to
a great extent reduced the importation
of ready-made goods. The boot factories
in the city have also been developed
considerably of late years, and the importation
of many kinds of boots has now almost ceased.
At one” or two of the boot factories over 100
hands are employed, and the proprietors have
gone to considerable expense in introducing
steam riveters and other labour-saving
machinery. In the boot and clothing factories
together over 1,200 men and girls are employed.
The Government returns, based on the
census of 1876, show that there are twenty-
four boot factories in the colony, employ-
ing 520 men and 155 women; and thirteen
establishments where clothing is made up, and
where seventy-five men and 458 girls • are
engaged. These numbers, although they do not
represent the exact totals' at the present time,
are still approximately correct. Over' 1,100
persons are employed in the production of agri-
cultural implements, engines, and machinery.
Most of the agricultural implements used
in the colony are made here—all the reapers
or strippers”—there being no less than
forty-three implement yards, many of
which are in the country towps, par-
ticularly lo the north of Adelaide, in which
direction settlement has lately been rapidly
extending. No locomotive engines have yet
been made in the colony, and most of the
stationary engines are also imported ; but the
erection of these, and the necessary repairs, give
employment to a large number of hands. There
were at the last census 814 workers in metals,
including 291 iron, brass, and copper founders ;
276 engaged in smelting copper, 154 iron and
tin smiths, and 85 manufacturing goldsmiths
and jewellers. This latter branch of industry
has lately been extended, and Adelaide-made
jewellery has secured very high commendation
at the Paris Exhibition and elsewhere beyond
the limits of Australia. Indeed the show-case
of two of our local jewellers were generally spoken
of as amongst the most attractive exhibits at
Paris. Carriage-building is extensively carried
on in Adelaide, and all kinds of vehicles are
turned out, from the railway carriage and tram-
car to the humblest trap that runs on wheels.
The carriage and wagon factories give employ-
ment to 236 men, including a large number
engaged by the Government in connection
with the railway system which is in their
hands. Brickmaking has lately received a
stimulus by the city drainage works, the forts,
and other undertakings being carried out by the
Government, and there are now twenty-five
yards, principally at Hindmarsh, where also are
most of the sixteen limekilns to be found in
the colony. The tanneries and fellmongers’
establishments give employment" to over 500
persons, and there are a few soap and candle
factories that have been in existence many
years and have made a sound reputation for
themselves.
Though English ale is a popular beverage
in the colony, and wines and spirits contri-
bute not a little to the public revenue through
the Customs, the local brewers, winemakers, and
manufacturers of spirits, cordials, and aerated
waters chiefly minister to the wants of the
thirsty public, and in all they employ
some hundreds of persons. In 1876 207 were
engaged by the brewers or in malthouses,
and 139 in preparing aerated waters, liqueurs,
and other mysterious fluids that are so
freely used in a hot climate r but in addition
to these a large number of adults and children


are engaged in the production of colonial wine
Fruit-drying is now carried on somewhat ex
tensively, and the strong prejudice in favour o
the imported raisins and currants is graduall;
diminishing. About 120 persons are engagec
in this industry. Adelaide jams are appreciatec
beyond the borders of the province, though the
demand in the colony is almost as great as can
be met, despite the extension of many orchards
and the erection of new factory premises. The
cultivation of the olive is becoming more
popular, and there are at present over 50,000 ol
these trees planted in the coloDy. Sericulture
has been taken up at intervals, but the high
price of labour retards this industry, which
otherwise might be made a source of profit. The
same cause, added to a somewhat small capital,
proved fatal to a Glass-bottle Company recently
established at Brompton. An attempt has for
a few years past been made to carry on a tweed
factory at Lobethal, but after several spurts and
in spite of a Government bonus, the task has
at length been given up, and all our woollen gcods
are now again imported. Two or three tobacco
factories have lately been started in Ade-
laide, and they and the small establishments
in the same lioe appear to be prospering. There
are sawmills in tbe colony employing3l6 hands;
of flourmills there are no less a number than
113 scattered throughout the length and
breadth of the laud. These give employment
to 800 hands, and have in them 376 pairs of
stones, and engines having an aggregate horse-
power beyond 2,000. A considerable portion of
the flour is exported. ' The official returns give
the numher of manufactories aDd works in the
colony at 397 ; the amount of power, supplied by
steam, gas, or wind, as equal to that of 145
horses; and the number of persons employed,
6,313, including 760 females.
TRADE AND COMMERCE.
Imports and Exports.
The remark has been made, and is capable of
proof, that no colony in the British Dominions
can boast of a higher rate of individual pro-
gress than South Australia. Our tabies of
imports and exports and our Banking statistics
show far more convincingly than words can do
the marvellous strides which have been made in
the trade and commerce of the colony in the
comparatively short interval that has elapsed
since 1836. We have already referred to the
enormous expansion of agricultural and pastoral
settlement, and the figures relating to inter-
change afford evidence little less striking as to
the vast strides that the colony has made and is
malting. Our tables of exports and imports
reveal the rapid development of our commer-
cial relations. In 1838 the value of our ex-
ports did not exceed £5,000; in 1869 it amounted
to £2,993,035; by 1878 it had advanced to
£5,355,021, or £22 os. 3d, per head of the popu-
lation. The imports, which in 1869 were
£2,754,770, reached £5,719,611 last year, or £23
10s, 3d. per head of the population. The total
value of the import and export trade has in-
creased from £5,747,805 in 1869 to £11,074,632
in 1878, the average rate per head having gone
up from £32 3s. 2d. to £45 10s. 6d.
Our chief staple exports are'breadstuffs, wool,
and copper, though we now ship away a con-
siderable quantity of wine, braD, pollard, hay,
fruit, tallow, bones, hides, wax, gum, honey,
bark, &c. In 1838 little or no wheat was grown
in the colony, our supplies for the purpose of
consumption coming from Tasmania ; and up to
1842 inclusive, the exports only comprised wool,
whalebone and oil, lead, timber, slates, butter,
cheese, and tallow. In 1843 breadstuffs were
added, and from that date we have continued to
supply customers outside the limits of our own
province. In 1843 the value of the exports of
wheat and flour amounted to £10,032, and
quinquennially since that it has been as
follow .—ln 1848, £34,815; in 1853, £208,647;
in 1858, £474,612; in 1863 (bad harvest), £698,994;
in 1868, £554,585: 1873, £1,692,738; 1878 (poor
harvest), £1,646,434. _The increase in the pro-
duction and export of wool has been correspond-
ingly rapid and striking. In 1843 wool was
exported to the value of £45,569, and taking
every fifth year from that point the
rate of progress has been marked, as
will be seen from the following figures:—
1853, £236,020; 1858, £420,833; 1863, £715,935;
1868, £1,305,280; 1873, £1,617,589; and in 1878,
£2,417,397, Cooper and copper-ore exports
stand thus: —lBl3, £2O; 1848, £310,387 ; 1853,
£176,347; 1858, £359,182; 1863, £532,861;
1868, £608,423; 1873, £768,522; and in 1878,
£387,587. The decline indicated by the last
figures is accounted for by the serious fall in the
value of copper which has taken place in the
home markets. This has restricted prpduction,
but it in no way implies that our mines are
exhausted. Those on Yorke’s Peninsula, for
instance, are practically as rich as ever, and the
output could be as great as at any previous time
in the history of the colony were the price of
copper to rise a few pounds per ton. Wine is
beginning to form an important item of export.
In 1869 we shipped away £5,825 worth ; in 1878
we exported £25,256. Jam, butter, eggs, gum,
fruit, &c„ also swell our list of exports, and are
yearly increasing.
Our imports, which in measure represent the
payipent for the produce we have sent away and
show the extent of our business with other
countries, have aeumented concurrently with
our exports. In 1838 they stood at the moderate
sum of £158,582; in 1856 they had increased to
£1,366,529; in 1869 they were £2,754,770; in
1873 they were £3,841,101; and in 1878 they
reached the enormous amount of £5,719,611.
The total imports for the whole term embraced
within the 40 years from 1858 to 1878 amounted
to no less a sum than £74,545,940. Our chief
import trade is carried on with Great Britain,
but frequent shipments of goods are received
from the other colonies, from the Baltic, Singa-
pore, Java, China, India, Mauritius, the United
States, and Canada. There is a Chamber of
Commerce, which serves as a rallying point for
the mercantile community, and sees to the
representation of its interests.


Shipping.
In 1844 70 ships from various parts of the
world arrived at Port Adelaide, representing
a tonnage of ’ 9,530 tons; in 1854 the
arrivals reached 476 ships, with a tonnage
of 146,666 tons ; in 1864 617 vessels arrived,
with a tonnage of 160,095 tons; in 1873
the figures are 799 and 265,437 respectively ;
and in 1878 they were 943 and 406,325.
Direct steam communication has been estab-
lished between Adelaide and the United
Kingdom ; and steamers with a capacity of
from 2,000 to 4,000 tons, owned by the P. & O.
Company, the Orient Steam Navigation Com-
pany, and other Associations, visit St. Vincent’s
Gulf monthly. At the same time there are
three lines of fipe clipper ships, ranging from
800 to 1,700 tons register each, which are partly
owned by merchants and capitalists residing in
the colony, and which trade regularly between
London and Adelaide. Steamers run regularly
between Port Adelaide and Melbourne, and
there is now one steamer which trades
direct with Sydney. In addition to these we
have a large number of barques, schooners, and
other craft, which run between our own parts
and the other colonies.
The River Trade.
What is brown as the riter trade forms an
essential pait of the commerce of the colony.
The Murray, into which the Darling and Mur-
rumbidgee flow, runs through and empties itself
in South Australia, which thus possesses all the
advantage of the down stream. This circum-
stance has been of great benefit to the province,
as it has enabled our merchants to maintain
business relations with the settlers of Riverina,
despite the prodigious efforts which both Vic-
toria and New South Wales have been making
to monopolize the trade. South Australians
were the first to practically recognise the im-
portance of the river traffic and the necessity
of securing’ it, or as much as possible of it, to
the colony. Sir Henry Young (a former
Governor), the late Mr. Younghusbapd, Messrs.
Acraman, Main, & Co, Captains Cadell, Ran-
dell, Johnston, KiDg, and others took consider-
able interest in the navigation of the Murray
and its upper streams ; and principally through
their exertions we commanded for some years
the bulk of the trade. At that time the traffic
was very limited, but the development that has
taken place in it since then is something won-
derful. In 1853. there was but one vessel on
the Murray; in August,. 1878, there were 152
steamers and barges engaged in the trade. Of
these by far the larger number belong to this
colony, the total tonnage being, for South Aus-
tralia 8,040 tons, and for Victoria and New
South Wales together 8,648 tons. The number
of steamers and birges owned in South Aus-
tralia is respectively 32 and 84; in Victoria,
15 and 31; and in New South Wales, 24
and 16. It would thus appear that in
the important essential of shipping accom-
modation for the rivers South Australia
stands ahead of either of her competitors. For
several years Victoria, by means of a railway
to Echuca and concessions on the freight charged
for inland carriage, managed to divert a large
portion of the Darling traffic which legitimately
belonged to South Australia, and it was some
time before our legislators became alive to the
necessity of keeping pace with the sister colony
in the competition. In July, 1876, an Act was
passed for the construction of a line of railway
from Kapunda to the North-West Bend. In
March, 1877, the work was commenced, and in
September of the following year it was com-
pleted. The line was formally opened on October
18, 1878, by His Excellency the Governor,
and the benefit of the railway has already been
experienced in the quicker transit of goods both
to ana from the river. At Victor Harbour, too,
important works are being erected with a view
of still further aiding the development of the
traffic. A breakwater is in course of construc-
tion, and when this is completed vessels of the
largest tonnage will be able to load with the
greatest facility. The very announcement of
the efforts which are being made has directed
attention to the position which South Australia
occupies naturally with regard to the great
waterway of the continent, and the statistics
of the past two or three years show
that a steadily increasing traffic is following
the downflow of the stream, much to the benefit
of our traders. From official statistics we
gather that the exports via River Murray were
as follows:—1869, to New South Wales,
£81,309; to Victoria, £216; .1872, to New
South Wales, £98,163; to Victoria, nil ; 1878, to
New South Wales, £303,669 ; to Victoria, nil.
It should be borne in mind that from 1873 to
1876 inclusive the returns show but a small por-
tion of our exports via the Murray. As the trade
in duty-paid goods was free from any Customs re-
strictions—South Australia paying to the neigh-
bouring colony a lump Sum in commutation of
duty—no return of them could be furnished.
Our imports by way of the River Murray have
been chiefly from New South Wales, but
Victoria has contributed a little. In 1869 we
received £209,953 worth of produce from New
South Wales, but nothing from Victoria; in
1874 the figures were'£2s3,os4 from New South
Wales, ahd £42,390 from Victoiia; and in 1878
£714,199 from New South Wales, and £15,095
from Victoria. Our imports from both colonies
consist principally of wool; but in addition to
that staple we get sheep, hides, copper, tallow,
and wood. In 1878 we received no less than
37,971 bales of wool from New South Wales,
valued at £634,032, or one-third of our total
export of wool tor that year. In the same year
we got 625 bales of wool, valued at £10,275, via
the Murray from Victoria. The producing
power of the Riverina country is capable of
•oosiderable expansion, and our traders look
forward to a yearly increasing business with
the settlers of that important district.
FINANCIAL.
As must of necessity be the case with all
young communities, a considerable portion of
the supplies flowing into the Treasury consists


of the proceeds of loans. Hence the sums r
ceived by the Government may be ranked und
two distinct heads, the General Revenue an
amounts raised in the English money mark
by the sale of - South Australian bone
Dealing first of all with the General Revenu
it may be classed under three or four distinc
subdivisions. This can be most readily illu
trated by a reference to the figures for the yea
1878 appearing in the appendix. It should
noted that the financial year closes on June 3
but for the sake of uniformity the return
relating to finances, as well as the other stati
tics, are made up for the natural year. Fo
1878 the total General Revenue was £1,592,635
Of this amount £434,919 was derived from
the sale of Crown lands. The system
of disposing of these lands, which ha
been in force for several years, is else
where fully explained ; and it will be sufii
cient here to state that of the sum just namec
£160,209 was paid into the Treasury for interes
on credit sales, £274,710 on account of sales fo
cash and first and subsequent instalments o
purchase-money of credit selections. Th
amount raised by taxation was £519,254, o
which £7,79S was received on account of Pro
bate and Succession Duties, and the balanc
from Customs and Excise. The very triflin
return yielded by Probate and Succession Dutie
is explained by the fact that the Act imposin
them was only passed towards the end o:
1876, and it had not been sufficiently long i
operation to admit of the probable averag
receipts from this source being reached. Ano
tlxer division of the revenue consists of th
Sums received for services rendered. Thus
Railways and Tramways yielded £274,766, th
Postal and Telegraph Departments producec
£1.16,097, the Waterworks £41,738, and Marin
£12,159. Under another division the rent
of Crown lands leased to the squatter
brought in £73,733. The other source
of revenue consist of rents of lane
set -apart for educational purposes, business
licences, reimbursements-in-aid, and miscel
laneous. The expenditure of the Genera
Revenue is authorized in the usual way by an
appropriation Bill. The total outlay for 1878
was £1,620,310. It is understood that the Land
Fund should be appropriated to public works
immigration, and the redemption of the national
debt. For public works the outlay was
£279,943, for immigration £70,610, for redemp-
tion of bonds £34,600, and for survey, &c., of
Crown lands £66.198. • The interest on
the bonded debt absorbed £244,950, railways
and tramways, that is for working expenses
and maintenance, £198,581; the Postal and
Telegraph services, £146,796; and Education,
f 92,969. The other particulars of expenditure
do not call for any special remark, as they
consist of the ordinary items of outlay required
for the maintenance of Government in a
civilized community.
The tariff now in force was passed in the
year 1876. A short titne back South Aus-
tralia could claim to be the most lightly
taxed per head of any of the Australian
colonies, though at the present time we believe
this is not the case. As, however, nearly the
whole of the taxation is raised by means of
Customs duties, and the existing tariff is cal-
culated to bring in, upon the whole, a slightly
lower revenue than the one which it super-
seded, the higher rate of taxation per head may
be accepted as an indication of the growing
prosperity of the country rather than the
reverse. Thus, in 1873 the population wa
198,075, and the Customs revenue £362,24'
or nearly £1 16s. 7d. per head. In 1878
the population was 248,795, and the Custom
revenue, £511,456, or about £2 Is. Id. per head.
Including Probate and Succession Duties the
total taxation per head last year was not quite
£2 Is. 9d. Thus the increase in the rate of con-
tribution during the last five years is owing
almost entirely to the large consumption ol 1
dutiable goods, and not to the importation o :
additional burdens. The tariff has been passet
for the purpose of raising a revenue and not with
a view to protection. -A number of articles are
placed on the fixed list. Most articles of drapery
furniture, 'carriages, drugs, earthenware, jewel-
lery, certain kinds of leather and leather goods
stationery and fancy goods, and fish and meat in
pickle or brine, are placed on the 10 per cent
ad valorem list, and engines not exceeding sixty
horsepower and agricultural implements are
placed on the 5 per emit, ad valorem list. The
present list was in some respects the re-
sult of a compromise, and there is little
doubt that at the next revision the duties will
be very much simplified still further in the
direction of free trade. The highest duties have
for the most part been placed on articles which
can be manufactured in the colony; but that
even these are in no sense prohibitive is proved
by the fact that the imports, and consequently
the duties receivable by the Government, have
so largely increased. For a long time past the
feeling has been growing that the incidence of
taxation needs to be readjusted. The necessity
for additional revenue in consequence of the
growing requirements of the colony owing to
the rapid expansion of settlement that
has taken place furnishes a fit'ing oppor-
tunity for undertaking this task. The Govern-
ment are proposing this year to seek the
authority of Parliament for the imposition of a
small property and income tax; and it is
intended to employ the extra sum thus raised
partly as an aid to revenue and partly for the
purpose of making good any remissions or
reductions in the Customs.
A word or two now as to the national debt.
The money thus borrowed is employed in
carrying out large public works such as railways
and telegraphs. Many of these will, no doubt,
ultimately not only pay for maintenance,
working expenses, and interest on outlay, but
will also yield a profit. At first it is impossible
they can do so. In the meantime, however,
they are a very direct advantage to the country.
The remoter districts are opened and developed,
the value of property is increased, and facilities
are afforded for bringing the produce of the
soil to a market or port of shipment. Within


the last five years the public debt has
advanced very rapidly. On December 31,
1873, it stood at £2,174,900. On December 31,
1878, it had grown to £6,640,400. It should be
explained, however, that this amount included
bonds to the value of over a million and a
quarter forwarded to London before December
31, but not actually fold until after that date.
At one time the bonds issued bore interest at
6 per cent.; subsequently the rate was reduced
to 5 per cent., and for the last six years all the
debentures have been made to bear 4 per cent,
interest. The total debt on December 31, 1878,
after deducting the value of bonds redeemed,
stood as follows:
•Bearing interest at 6 per cent. ... £1,498,300
Do. do. do. 5 per cent. ... 390,000
Do. do. do. 4 per cent. ... 4,752,100
Total ... £6,640,400
In explanation of the rapid increase in the
public debt during the last few years, it should
be stated that what is commonly known as the
Boucaut policy included plans for opening up
the more distant lands by the carrying out of
railways and other public works to be paid
for by means of borrowed capital. In
the main the money raised has been
wisely expended, and there can be no doubt
that an impetus has been given to the progress
of the colony by the spirited aud compre-
hensive policy initiated by the present Mr.
Justice Boucaut when he was Premier in 1875. In
addition to the bonds already issued Parliament
has given authority for the raising of further
loans amounting together to £3,294,600. The
question may. naturally be asked—What is there
to show for this indebtedness? In the first place,
the amount due at the close of 1878 by credit
selectors was £4,219,405. The value of the
public works of the colony is estimated at
upwards of £7,000,000. Hence the country
can show a security of more than £11,000,000
for the £6,640,400 owing. This, however, is only
one view of the case. Within judicious limits,
which have certainly not yet been exceeded, the
outlay of borrowed capital in the directions indi-
cated affords direct help to the development of the
country, as is shown by the growth in the
revenue to which we have referred. Altogether
it may without boasting be said that in its fiscal
policy, and in the nature of the security it can
offer to the British capitalist, South Australia
stands second to none of the Australian pro-
vinces.
This article would not be complete with-
out a reference to the Banks established
in the colony and the trade done by
them. We have now some eight Banks
established here, two of them being essentially
local institutions. In 1861 the deposits, bearing
and not bearing interest, lodged at the several
Banks reached a total of £743,738 ; in 1874 they
were £2,237,524; in 1878 they were £3,378,863.
The total average assets have always shown an
ample margin over the liabilities. In 1869 the
liabilities of the various Banks were £1,696,861,
and the a55et5£3,478,165; in 1874 thefigures were
respectively £2,714,212 and £4,736,675; and in
1878 £3,984,595 and £7,058,738. The Savings
Bank returns give ample evidence of the pru-
dence and thriftiness of the community. The
institution was founded in 1847 and is managed
by a Board of Trustees appointed by the
Governor. In 1848, with a population of 38,000,
the deposits amounted to £5,313; in 1853 the
amount . had increased to £54,355; and the
figures for every fifth year subsequently are as
follows 1858, £63,881; 1863, £189,144; 1868,
£312,728; 1873, £709,343; and in 1878, £993,721.
The number of depositors has increased from
214 in 1848 to 29,088 in 1878, and the average
amount at the credit of each depositor has
augmented from £24 16s. 7d. in 1848 to £34 3s.
3d. in 1878. The rate of interest declared has
varied from 1 per cent, to 6 per cent. For the
year just closed the rate was 5§ per cent. The
Bank has £483,732 lent on mortgage and £295,396
invested in Government and Corporation
securities.
PUBLIC WORKS.
The public works ot any country, when fairly
tested by proper standards as regards character
of design, suitability for the purposes for which
intended, cost, and revenue directly or in-
directly derived therefrom, furnish one of the
best possible gauges by which to measure the
material? prosperity of the people by whom they
were carried out. Viewed from this standpoint
the colony of South Australia may proudly
challenge comparison with any other country of
equal population and resources. That her
public works have in every instance realized in
their financial returns the sanguine expectations
of those who were responsible for their initiation
no one will contend; but, on the other hand,
their construction has. undeniably conduced to
the settlement of large tracts of country which
were either previously inaccessible, or so situated
that the cost of conveying goods to the seaboard
left no margin of profit to the producer.
Up to the date of the latest official returns
the sum of £5,741,097 16s. Bd. had been ex-
pended on public works out of loans specially
raised for the purpose. Of this sum £2,917,071
has gone for railways ; £366,297 for harbour im-
provements ; £634,063, waterworks; £537,683,
telegraphs; £455,173, main roads; schoolhouses,
£158,488; jetties and lighthouses, £86,000; and
the balance for sundry other works. Beyond
this, however, millions of money taken out of
the Land Fund and out of general revenue have
been disbursed upon roads, bridges, buildings,
jetties, lighthouses, and other undertakings of a
public nature.
Railways.
Iu this age of steam and iron, the iron horse
and the road on which he runs must take prece-
dence of any other means of communication in
a colony like ours, where the coastline, although
very extensive, bears but a small proportion to
the total territory, and the inland navigation is
practically confined to the Murray—a river
which, though assuming noble proportions
during the winter season, has too shallow and
narrow a mouth at its point of discharge into


the sea to be of much service as a route for the
forwarding of sea-borne goods. The standard
gauge of the colony for the main trunk
lines starting from Adelaide is 5 feet. 3 in.
—the same as that adopted by Victoria. This
gauge, including lines constructed and autho-
rized, extends from Port Adelaide in the south
to a point near Terowie in the north; also
from Adelaide to Nairue in the south-east. The
extensions outside those limits have been pro-
jected and constructed on the 3 feet 6 in. gauge.
llt cannot be doubted that this break of gauge,
having regard alike to internal communication
and future junctions with the lines of sister
colonies, is an unmitigated evil, and the matter
is further complicated by the unfortunate
circumstance that three different gauges have
been adopted in the colonies of Victoria, New
South Wales, and Queensland. It appears
probable that extensions into Victorian
territory will have to be made on the broad
gauge, aud junctions with Queensland and New
South Wales on the 3 ft. 6 in. gauge, ttieugh
many reformers are of opinion that if the
narrower gauge be found to answer the purpose,
economy of working will necessitate the reduc-
tion of the broader gauges to the lower, or the
adoption of a double gauge, such as has been
laid down on the Great Western Railway in
England. The railways depend chiefly fgr their
earnings upon the wheat traffic, although the
passenger traffic is increasing rapidly. The
whole of the lines are under the management of
Mr. A. G. Pendleton. The income for the last
financial year was £312.527, and the expenditure
£213,688, leaving a balance to the good sufficient
to pay interest at the rate of about 2£ per cent,
upon the money spent in constructing the lines.
The average cost of the South Australian
lines as regards construction has greatly
diminished of late years. The first few miles of
the broad gauge averaged complete over £lO,OOO
per mile across easy country. The extensions
on the same gauge have not exceeded £7,000,
whilst the narrow-gauge lines do not now
average above £5,000 a mile complete, and some
extensions are not expected to cost more than
£4,000 a mile. There are now 516 J miles of
railway open to the public, made up as
follows: —Adelaide and Semaphore, 9j ; Dry
Creek and Port, 5; Adelaide and Hallett,
127|; Strathalbyn and Victor Harbour, 32;
Pore Wakefield and Hoyleton, 28; Hoyleton
and Blyth, 14; Port Pirie and Gladstone,
Gladstone and Oaltowie, llg; Caltowie
and Jamestown, 8; Port Broughton and Ba-
runga, 10 ; Kingston and Narracoorte, 53;
Kadina, Wallaroo, and Moonta, 16J; Kapunda
and North-West Bend, 57 ; Port Wakefield and
Kadina, 35; Kadina and Barunga Gap, 26;
Rivoli Bay and Mount Gambier, 50|.
The following lines are under construction :
Hamley Bridge and Balaklava, 21J; Barunga
Clap Extension, 6g ; Port Augusta and Govern-
ment Gums, 199; Adelaide and Nairne, 33§
miles. Of these the first two are on the point
of completion. The first section of the Port
Augusta line will probably shortly be opened
for traffic by arrangement with the contractors,
Messrs. Barry, Brookes, & Fraser. The Adelaid
aud Nairne Kailway works are being at presen
carried out by the Government, and it is ex
pected that the first portion of the line as far a
the romantic hill station at Belair, a distance o
about thirteen miles from town, will be openec
by June or July, 1880, if no unforeseen difficu
ties are encountered in the very heavy works
tunnels, viaducts, and deep cuttings—which hav
to be made. The estimated cost of this line i
£672,378, being an average of about £20,375 pe
mile, the earthworks and tunnels alone amount
ing to nearly £8,500 per mile, although the firs'
few miles till the foot of the hills is reachec
run over easy country. The average gradiem
ascending the raDge will be 1 in 51, the rulinj
gradient being 1 in 40. Surveys have beei
undertaken for the Hallett and Terowie line
20§ miles ; Terowie to Pichiricbi, with brand
from Yongala to Jamestown, Moonta to
Moonta Bay, 2J, for which the assent of the
Legislature has been obtained, besides numerous
other lines for which Bills were thrown out
Tenders are now being invited for about twenty
one miles of the Yongala line.
There are now only three lines of railway in
private hands, viz, the Adelaide end Glenelg
the Brighton and South Coast, and the Holdfast
Bay Railway, making in all about seventeen
miles. They are built on the 5 ft. 3 in. gauge. The
Holdfast Bay line is not yet completed, but it is
anticipated that this will be one of the cheapest
lines in the colony. This Company will have
running powers over the first portion of the
Adelaide and Nairne Railway, now under con-
struction by the Government.
Roads and Beidges.
The main-road system of South Australia is
justly acknowledged to be the most efficient in
the Australian Colonies. From the earliest days
large sums have been spent upon the construc-
tion and maintenance of macadamized
thoroughfares, and the roads through the
Mount Lofty Ranges especially are acknowledged
to be unequalled. The main arteries are con-
structed and maintained at the public exptnse,
the merely local roads being under the charge
of the District Councils; but their expenditure,
derived from local rating upon the highways,
is supplemented pound for pound by the
Government. There are now 3,331 miles 35
chains of main roads in the colony, on which
in the financial year 1878-9 £85,000 was ex-
pended in maintenance. It is proposed to spend
£lOO,OOO this year. The majority of the
main roads are under the care of “ Local Boards
of Main Roads,” of which there are eight.
The Central Board, which meets in Adelaide,
has 1,031 miles 40 chains of main line under
its charge; the Northern Board, 359 miles; the
Flinders Board, 129 miles; the Victoria Board,
162 miles 48 chains; the Albert Board, 356
miles 14 chains; the Peninsula Board, 295
miles; the North Midland, 168 miles 40
chains; and the Midland, 372 miles. In parts
to which the jurisdiction of Boards, Corpo-
rations, and District Councils do not extend
the Commissioner of Crown Lands exercises


direct control over the making and maintaining
of the roads.
Bridges.
y The colony can boast of several fine bridges,
the most notable being that at Edwards’s Cross-
ing over the River Murray. This is the largest
bridge in the Australasian Colonies, and cost
£124,000 in construction. Its total length is
1,905 feet, and 4,125 tons of iron have been
employed upon it. There are five spans
of 114 feet each over the river, and twenty-
three spans over the swampy approach on
either side. The cylinders are sunk from
forty to eighty feet below high-water mark,
and have a headway of, thirty feet. The
next most important bridge is the one over
the river at Port Adelaide, and known as
the Jervois Bridge. This consists of four
fixed spans of forty feel each, and a ceutral
swing portion, having a clear opening of fifty
feet on either side. The central pier is com-
posed of castiron cylinders, upon which the
bridge swings by hydraulic power on frames and
rollers. The forty-feet sidespars are carried, by
ordinary plate-girders resting on cylindrical
piers, and provision is made for carrying a six-
inch main to convey water from Port Adelaide
to the Semaphore. The bridge is so constructed
as to be adapted to the large vehicular and foot-
passenger traffic of the Port, and also carries
over it the railway traffic of the Adelaide and
Port Extension on the 5 ft. 3 in. gauge. There
are also several handsome bridges over the
Torrens in Adelaide; and many substantial
structures have been erected across the rivers
and creeks in country districts.
Water Supply and Drainage.
This department of the Public Works was
until recently under the professional charge of
Mr. H. C. Mais, C E., Engineer-in-Chief; but
when the drainage of the City of Adelaide and
the extension of the water supply to many of
the outlying suburbs and country districts was
decided upon, it was deemed advisable to create
a distinct department, and with this view Mr.
Oswald Brown, C.E., was engaged as the pro-
fessional head of that branch of the Public
Works. The water supply to the City, Port,
Semaphore, Glenelg, and immediate suburbs is
taken from the River Torrens at a point nine
miles from Adelaide, at which point a weir is
thrown across the river, and the water led by a
42-inch main and an open channel to a reservoir
atThorndon Park, capable of storing 138,000,000
gallons. This was the only source of supply
for many years, but the rapid growth of the
city and suburbs demanded additional storage
accommodation, and a storage reservoir was con-
structed at Hope Valley, which, with a depth of
30 ft. 3 in. of water, contains 216,500,000
gallons; and it is proposed by additional
puddling to increase the capacity to 401,500,000
gallons, or more than double the amount stored
during 1878. It is supplied from the Weir
through a continuation of the channel which
supplies the Thorndon Park Reservoir. The
supply to the city leaves the reservoir in an 18-
ißch main, which is carried into the reservoir
and rises in a water tower, seventy feet in
height, consisting of an external casing
of iron, lined with brick in cement.
The main is carried up inside this tower and
fitted with branch pipes at various levels com-
municating with the outside, and furnished
with straining cages. Each branch pipe is
opened or closed, as the case may be, by a sluice-
valve, which is worked from au internal stage.
There is an external gallery running all round
the tower. The straining cages are drawn up by
suitable gear to the level of this gallery for
examination, cleaning, he. Even since the
additional storage accommodation afforded by
the Hope Valley Reservoir has been supplied
great inconvenience has been experienced during
the summer months by the intermittent-supply
system necessarily occasioned by the low pres-
sure and the rapidly growing and spreading
suburbs. With a view to obviating this incon-
venience a storage reservoir or tank lor the
supply of the Port, of a capacity of 1,01)0,000
gallons, has been constructed on the Park Lands
at North Adelaide. This reservoir, which cost
£10,156, is filled at night by the main from
Hope Valley, thus affording increased pressure
during the day to the highlying portions of the
city and suburbs. The suburbs of Burnside and
Mitcham being at too great an elevation
to ba supplied from the main, reservoirs
are being furnished with independent sources
of supply, that at Burnside being derived from
Second Creek and that at Mitcham from Brown-
hill Creek. In both cases the water is stored
in a circular tank or reservoir of brick, that at
Burnside having a capacity of 360,000 gallons,
and that at Mitcham 275,000 gallons. Both
these reservoirs are now in course of construc-
tion. Apart from works of this nature apper-
taining to the city there are very large and im-
portant works of a similar nature in existence,
in course of construction, and in contemplation.
A considerable sum of money has been expended
in the recent construction of a dam and reservoir
at Nelshaby for the supply of the rising town
of Port Pirie, one of the principal outlets for
our wheat-producing areas. A large reservoir
and dam are now in course of construction near
Kapunda for the supply of that town. The
progress of this work has been greatly retarded
by the recent drought, and the conservation of
an ample supply of good water must prove of
immense benefit to Kapunda and the immediate
neighbourhood. Schemes for the supply of
Mount Gambier, Port Augusta, Gawler, Glenclg,
Brighton, and the Semaphore are also receiving
attention.
Waterworks.
The sanitary condition of the city has of late
occupied much public attention. Various
systems have been advocated,surface-scavenging
and the use of earth closets among the number.
Deep drainage, however, is the system most
generally acknowledged the best in this
particular instance. During the recent
visit to the colonies of Mr. W. Clark,
0.E., the eminent engineer, he was en-
gaged to report upon the subject, ani he


decided in favour of deep drainage. The subjec
was first taken up by the Corporation, bu
ultimately it was thought it would be better i
the Government took the whole question unde
their control, as the city system of drainage migh
have at some future time to be connected wit
the suburban townships, and complication
might arise if the Government had not th
control, seeing that they had the waterwork
under their management. The plan generall;
adopted is that suggested by Mr. Clark, thoug
the site for the sewage farm at the Reed
beds recommended by him has not been
definitely decided upon. Mr. Brown (the
Government Engineer) having reported more
favourably upon a site more to the north of the
City, known as Tam O’Shanter Belt, the subjec
has been referred to a special Committee for
report. A portion of the work, viz., the main
sewer from Frome Bridge to the Cattle Market
has been let to Messrs. Waddington & Wright
who are now proceeding with the work. Sc
soon as the outlet site is fixed the remainder oi
the work will be proceeded with. Mr. Clark’s
estimate is about £222,000.
Harbours, Jetties, and Liohthoushs.
The superintendenceof this department, which
used to be included in the multifarious duties
of the Engineer-in-Chief, is now handed over to
Mr. Robert Hickson, M.I.C.E. A very large
number of small jetties are in course of con-
struction at various points on the coast. These
works, though not in most cases of an ambitious
character, are of incalculable service as aids
in the cheap transport of our staple pro-
ducts. Two large piers which were under
construction at Rivoli Bay and Kingston
have been taken out of the contractors’
hands in consequence of dispute, and the
Government proposes to carry them to comple-
tion by their own officers. The largest work
undertaken by this department is the break-
water at Victor Harbour, for the construction of
which a contract was let in July, 1878, at
£107,457 12s. 10d. It is believed that this work
will be completed by July, 1880. Quarrying on
a large scale is an important feature in the
carrying out of the contract. Charges of as
much as five tons of gunpowder at a blast are
employed, and on one occasion 30,000 cubic
yards of rock—some blocks weighing over 100
tons—were blown out at one shot. The object
which this breakwater is designed to attain is
the development of the River Murray shipping
trade.
For some time past the subject of suitable
accommodation of the many large vessels of
from 2,000 to 4,000 tons which make regular
visits to Port Adelaide has been under con-
sideration. The approach to the Port itself is
by a winding stream, which, though navigable
for vessels of a large size, is not made use of by
the P. & O. steamers or the larger vessels of the
Orient line, which seek a safe anchorage in the
roadstead outside the Port. Various schemes
have been propounded, and have attracted a
large share of public attention, but though all
parties are agreed as to the desirability of
further accommodation, the greatest divergenc
of opinion exists among professional men as t
the best means of attaining the object in view
The four most practicable schemes before th
public are: —l. A pierre-perdue breakwater a
Largs Bay (near the Semaphore), for steamers t
anchor inside, together with jetty at Semaphor
to accommodate lighters and tugs in all weathers
estimated cost, £273,725. 2. A jetty at Larg
Bay, giving depth of 27 feet at low water
and starting from the end of the Semaphor
Kailway; estimated cost, £372,000. 3. Harbon
at Marino about ten miles south of the Serna
phore, and utilizing breakwater for approach
to wharf. The official estimated cost i
£560,000. (4.) Harbour and pier at Glenelg
estimated cost, £975,600. A Board o
Advice appointed to enquire into the
whole subject is now sitting; but public
attention has within the last few week
been invited to a modification of the thirc
scheme mentioned above, which its promoters
state can be made for £154,700. Which oi
these proposals will be ultimately carried out i
is difficult to predict; but there can be no
doubt that an effort will shortly be made to
provide adequate accommodation to meet the
growing requirements of shipping to and from
the colony.
The lighthouses are thirteen in number, and
are situated at Semaphore, Glenelg, Port Ade-
laide, Cape Jervis. Cape Willoughby,Cape Borda,
Port Mac Donnell, Troubridge Shoals, Port
Wakefield, Rivoli Bay, Althorpe Island, Tipara
Reef, and Cape Bridgewater. The latter is on
the boundary line between South Australia and
Victoria, the cost being divided between the
two colonies. The Port Adelaide light is
visible for fourteen miles, and the Cape Jaffa
light for twenty miles. The Tipara light is of
the same order as that at Port Adelaide. That
at Althorpe Island, which is the most recently,
erected, is a first-order dioptric light, on a tower
forty feet high. The light was first exhibited
on February 14, 1879, and the lighthouse is
the best finished of any in the colony.
The works were carried out under great diffi-
culties, having been constructed on an island
which has almost perpendicular sides, and rises
some 300 feet above the sea level. The light
will be of great service to vessels navigating
Investigator Straits. As South Australia pos-
sesses a safe coastline, and a complete system of
marine survey, the shipping disasters strictly
within the provincial limits have been but few.
Public Edifices.
The principal public buildings are situated in
Adelaide and Port Adelaide. Many of them
possess considerable merit from an architectural
point of view, and all of them are constructed in
a substantial manner, and are well adapted for
the purposes for which they were designed.
Increased accommodation is required for
Government. offices, and this is being afforded
by the erection of new premises in Victoria-
square. The foundations are already com-
pleted, and tenders have been called for the
superstructure. The style is Italian, and the


estimated cost about £60,000. The greater
portion of this building will be occupied by the
Public Works Departments. A new Institute
is now in course of erection on North-terrace,
the contract being let for about £36,000.. The
basement contains strongrooms and suitable
cellarage for the stowage of books, papers, &c.
On the floors above are the reading-room,
library, newsroom, lecture-room, museums,
offices for Secretary, Curator, and assistants,
ladies’ reading-room, cloakroom, and the usual
offices. The University building now in course
of erection will be a fine building, Gothic in
style. The existing public offices in King
William-street are all Italian in style. The
external face, unlike the new offices, is of cement
stucco. The Post-Office is also of the Italian
style, the frontages to King William and
Franklin streets being of freestone. There is a
tower at the south-east angle of the building,
about 150 feet in height; this is furnished with
a clock which chimes the quarters. The dials
are eight feet in diameter, of white opaque
glass, and are illuminated at night. On the
summit of the tower there is a lookout and
flagstaff, whence the arrival and departure of
the English mails are signalled. The Supreme
Court, situated in Victoria-square, a handsome
building of Italian style, and executed in free-
stone. The new Houses of Parliament will
be of the Italian style of architecture,
and are estimated to cost when com-
pleted £120,000. At present only the House
of Assembly chamber is proposed to be
built, but this has not yet been authorized.
The Marine Board Offices and the Institute and
Library are the chief public buildings of note
at Port Adelaide. They are built of freestone,
and are, both as regards design and the accom-
modation afforded, well suited to their re-
spective requirements. Public edifices outside
Adelaide and the Port are not generally of a
very extensive or imposing nature. The only
up-country building of any size at present in
course of erection is the Gladstone Gaol, the
contract for which has been let for £21,600.
POST-OFFICES AND TELEGRAPHS.
These two branches of the public service have
for some years been amalgamated, and form one
department, The rapid advance. of settle-
ment in the Northern districts entails an ever-
increasing demand for postal and telegraphic
facilities —a demand far in excess of _ what the
population of the colony, if less widely dis-
tributed, would require. Consequently the
expenditure of the State in this direction shows
a heavy increase every year without a corre-
sponding addition to the revenue. The ad vance,
however, having regard to the peculiar circum-
stances of the province, is fairly proportionate
to the expense incurred. The department is
under the energetic and able management of
Mr. 0. Todd, C.M.G., who was formerly
one of the astronomers at the Cambridge
Observatory, and in 1855 he was appointed
by Lord John Russell Superintendent of Tele-
graphs and Government Astronomer for South
Australia, the Imperial Government having
been asked by the authorities here to select a
competent scientific man for the purpose. He
arrived in November of that year, and in 1870,
when the Post and Telegraph Offices were amal-
gamated, he was entrusted with the charge of
the twin department, which has now extended
its ramifications to very wide limits.
Thb Trans-Australian Telegraph.
The principal feature of and the greatest
achievement in South Australian telegraphy
is the construction of the line across the
centre of the continent to Port Darwin,
a distance of about 2,200 miles. This
line is the means of bringing the Austra-
lian Colonies into continuous communication
with England and the rest of the civilized
world. Nothing could exhibit with greater
force the enterprise which characterizes
the people of this province than their
undertaking on their sole responsibility, and in
the face of almost insuperable difficulties, the
task of bridging over this vast and almost un-
known territory. As long ago as 1857 Mr. Todd
brought under the notice of the Government
the desirability of connecting Australia with
ihe Old World by means of telegraphic com-
munication ; but nothing was done in the
matter. On the return of John McDouall
Stuart, the explorer, to Adelaide, in December,
1862, from the expedition in which he had
penetrated right across the continent and
through the portion which up to that
time had been considered an impass-
able desert, the subject was again considered,
but the undertaking was regarded as too
gigantic for South Australia to engage in, and
the question was allowed to remain in abeyance.
The matter once more cropped up in 1869, when it
was prominently brought under the notice of the
Government, and various schemes were suggested
for carrying out the work. Amongst these was
one by the British Australian Telegraph
Company, who offered to lay a cable to Port
Darwin if the South Australian Government
would construct a land line to meet it there,
and the result of the negotiations which took
place was that an agreement to that effect was
entered into, the Government pledging them-
selves to have the line completed and open
for traffic on January 1, 1872, or within a
period of twenty months. The greater portion
of the distance to be traversed was unknown,
and for 1,350 miles of it was unexplored. It
was true that Stuart by crossing it had shown
that its passage could be effected in certain
seasons by a party lightly equipped, but the
country for the most part was barren; for
hundreds of miles there was no timber, and the
posts for the line, which for a great portion had
to be of iron to escape the ravages of white ants,
had consequently to be carted over the entire
distance, where, of course, no roads existed. The
wire and insulators had to be imported from
Europe, and the materials were landed at Port
Augusta and Port Darwin, so that the construc-
j tion might be commenced simultaneously at
| each end. A practical route for the line had to


be selected, and this was expeditiously effected
by Mr. John Ross.
The line was divided into three sections,
the northern and southern being let to
contractors, and the Government undertaking
the central and most difficult, which stretched
over a distance of 600 miles, and subse-
quently extended to nearly 800. Water
was known to be scarce, roads, bridges, and
wells had to be made, precipitous ranges to be
surmounted, and sandy deserts to be crossed,
besides which every morsel of food had to be
carried by the parties themselves. The cost of
the work was originally estimated at £120,000,
an amount which, even under the most favour-
able circumstances, would have been very small,
but in the face of the unforeseen obstacles
which presented themselves turned out to be
absurdly low. The Government expeditions
started from Adelaide in August, 1870, and the
first pole was planted at Port Darwin in the
middle of September, and at Port Augusta on
October 1. All the necessary arrangements had
been made, and everything was progressing
satisfactorily, the middle section being nearly
completed, when the contractors at both ends
fell behind in their work. Assistance was
immediately rendered to the southern contrac-
tor, and he had got over his difficulties,
when the expedition of the northern contractor,
after putting-up about 120 miles of poles, utterly
collapsed, principally owing to most of his
draught stock, which was required for transit
purposes, having died, and the contract was
terminated by the Government Overseer. At
this period only six months remained of the
time by which the line was covenanted to be
completed, and the public anxiety was extreme.
The Government at once dispatched to Port
Darwin Mr. R. C. Patterson, the Assistant-
Engineer of the colony, in charge of a large
and very powerfully equipped party, to
finish the work, offering Mr. Patterson a
bonus of £1,500 it he ceuld effect it in time ;
but this expedition also encountered unexpected
difficulties, which rendered its task impossible.
Mr. Todd was consequently himself sent
round with reinforcements, the steamer in which
he embarked sailing 100 miles up the Roper
River, which runs into the Gulf of Carpentaria.
He made the spot which he reached the basis of
operations, and thus saved 300 miles of cartage
that going to Port Darwin would have entailed.
Notwithstanding that the wet season set in
almost as soon as he arrived, rendering the
country next to impassable for teams for some
weeks, the work was prosecuted with so much
energy and activity that the two ends of the
wire were joined on August 22,1872, or a little
over eight months beyond the specified time.
Thus this grand undertaking was success-
fully finished within a period of two
years. The line up to this time had cost
£370,000. Mr. Todd returned to Adelaide over-
land, and with his party were entertained at a
grand banquet in the Adelaide Town Hall, at
which messages were exchanged with London
aDd Washington. Since that time iron poles
have been erected throughout the length of the
line, and the expenditure has brought up the
outlay upon it to £453,711.
It was thought probable that the blacks
would interfere with the wire, but electric
shocks which were given to some of them
during the progress of the work appears to
have given them a wholesome dread of
the “ white man’s devil,” as they call it;
and though they have attacked the stations,
and in one or two instances with loss of life to
the operators, they have never touched the wire.
The total distance from Adelaide to Falmouth
is 12,500 miles, of which 9,146 are laid with
cable. Reckoning the interest on the cost of
the land line, it is worked at an annual loss of
£30,000, but the returns from the line itself
nearly eovbr the working expenses. Fourteen
stations have been established between Port
Augusta and Port Darwin, and the Adelaide
daily papers report in each issue the state of the
weather at each. Messages pass between London
and Adelaide in ten hours. The benefits which
have been derived by the whole of the Austra-
lian Colonies fro&i the carrying out of this work,
which might fairly be considered a national
undertaking by one of the group, has met
with the most warm acknowledgments,
not only from those principally interested
in the existence of so extremely valuable a
mode of intercourse with Europe, but also from
the mother-country and other nations of the
world. So far, however, the whole cost of
maintaining the telegraph has fallen upon
South Australia. The construction of the line,
amongst other indirect advantages, has tended
in an eminent degree to the opening-up of the
previously supposed worthless interior of Aus-
tralia ; and there is no doubt that in the not
very remote future the whole of the continent
will be utilized and probably settled.
Thk Lime to Western Australia.
The geographical position of South Australia
rendered it, prior to the construction of the line
to Eucla, practically the most westerly of the
Australian group; and, being the first port of
arrival and the last of departure for the mail
steamers running between them and the
mother country by way of the Suez Canal
and the Cape of Good Hope, the
necessity for telegraphic communication
between Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane
was many years ago recognised. The latest
move of South Australia, which proves how
much alive she is to the importance of the
position she holds, is the construction of the
telegraph line to Eucla, on the boundary of
Western Australia, so that the earliest intelli-
gence may be received of the news brought to
King George’s Sound by the mail steamers and
the latest transmitted there on the departure
of the vessels. ,The undertaking and the
difficulties to be encountered were only
second in magnitude to the construction of the
line across the continent. The length is nearly
1,000 miles, of which only 220—the section to
Port Augusta—had previously been erected.
The country traversed was mostly sandy desert,
and all the material, fodder, and water had to


be carried by the teams, in some cases the
distances within which the last could be pro-
cured being over 100 miles, and the work was
prosecuted during an extra dry season. The
cost was £75,214.
Telegraphs in General.
The first line of telegraph in the colony was
erected in December 1855. It extended from
Adelaide to the Semaphore at Port Adelaide, a
distance of about nine and a half miles. In
1870 there were 75 telegraph offices, 1,183
miles of line, and 1,718 of wire. The messages
numbered 128,485, and the revenue reached
£10,649. At the end of 1878 there were 4,217
miles of lines and 5,686 of wire, the length of
lines authorized or in progress being 686 miles.
There are 135 telegraph offices and 237 operators
connected with them. Last year the number of
telegrams (local and intercolonial) was 478,196,
and of international telegrams 17.364. The
receipts were for local and intercolonial mes-
sages £31,907, and for international £16,403,
The business, therefore, of thiS department has
more than tripled itself since 1870, and the
revenue has within a few pounds been qua-
drupled. The total expenditure on telegraph
lines and stations, excepting the Port Darwin
line, to June, 1879, was £342,072. Communica-
tion is established with the colonies of Victoria,
New South Wales, Queensland, Western
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand.
The telegraphic tariff of the colony is as
follows: —From Adelaide to London, 10s. 6d.
per word, inclusive of names and addresses.
Between Adelaide and its shipping-place, Port
Adelaide, 6d. is charged for ten words, exclusive
of addresses, &c., and Id. for every additional
word. The inland rate is Is. for ten words, and
for intercolonial messages 2s. to Victoria, New
South Wales, and Western Australia for ten
words, 3s. to Queensland, 7s. to Tasmania, and
10s. 6d. to New Zealand, the additional amounts
in the last two instances being rendered neces-
sary in consequence of the cable charges.
Postal Arrangements,
We have next to notice the postal arrange-
ments. The head - quarters of the Post
and Telegraph Offices are the Adelaide Post-
Office, a very handsome building of fine
white freestone, the foundation-stone of which
was laid by the Duke of Edinburgh during
hiis visit to the colony in 1867. Its chief
feature is a spacious public hall, around which
are placed the various departments. The
roof is coved, and partly of glass, which gives
a very fine effect. The Albert clock tower is
149 feet in height. By railway, coach, and ship,
the average number of mails dispatched from
Adelaide daily is 326. As showing the great pro-
gress which has been made in the postal business,
the following figures may be interesting :—ln
1870 there were 274 post-offices throughout the
colony; the letters carried during the year
numbered 3,049,818, and the newspapers
2,198,477, and the revenue amounted to £30,398.
On June 30, 1879, there were 428 post-offices.
During the year 1878 the number of letters and
packets which passed through them had in-
creased to 8,849,743, and of newspapers to
4,657,524. The revenue of the Post-Office in
1878 was £66,456. Money-order offices are
established in connection with many of the
post-offices; in 1878 there were 95 of the
former, and the number of orders issued by
them was 30,890, covering an amount of £98,689,
the net revenue derived therefrom being £1,067.
Money-orders are allowed to be sent by telegraph.
Regular communication with the adjoining
colonies is maintained by steamers, and also
daily by an overland mail to Melbourne, which
travels 500 miles in sixty-four and a half hours.
The inland and intercolonial rate charged is two-
pence per half-ounce for letters, and newspapers
not more than seven days old are forwarded free
to any place beyond the town in which they are
published.
A direct four-weekly mail communication
with Europe and the East is carried on by the
P. & O. Company, who have a contract with the
Victorian Government, to whom South Aus-
tralia pays a yearly sum in proportion to the
amount of mails carried. The service is punc-
tually performed, on an average in about forty
days. The mail steamers, whose outward ter-
minus is Melbourne, now call at Adelaide ; but
prior to their doing this, so anxious was South
Australia not to lose the advantage of her
geographical position that at great expense she
regularly dispatched a steamer to King George’s
Sound to meet the ocean vessels and tran-
ship the mails. Under the new postal
contract with the P. & O. Company
there will be a fortnightly mail, and the
final port of call outwards will be Sydney.
On letters via Southampton sixpence per
half-ounce is charged, and via Brindisi—a
saving of about seven days in time—eightpence
per half-ounce. American mails are brought by
a line of steamers run between San Francisco
and Sydney.
The total revenue of the Postal and Telegraph
Departments during the financial year 1878-9
was £122,424, and the expenditure £153,463.
The estimated revenue for 1879-80 is £134,400,
and the expenditure £162,153. This is irrespec-
tive of the amount of outlay on new lines and
offices. There are employed in the Adelaide
post and telegraph offices 162 persons; in
country post and telegraph offices, 248; in
small country post-offices, 317; on railway
stations, 40; and on the overland line, including
repair parties, 139; making a total of 906.
Meteorological.
In addition to these departments Mr. Todd
has control over the meteorological and astrono-
mical observations of the colony. The Obser-
vatory at present only possesses a small transit
instrument, which is the property of the
Victorian Government, who are likely shortly
to require its return, it haviDg been lent to
determine the boundary-line in 1887. The sum
of £I,OOO is, however, down on the Estimates
for the purchase of a transit-circle. The insti-
tution possesses a very fine equatorial telescope,
having an object-glass eight inches in diameter


and ten feet focus. With it valuable observa-
tions have been made of the transit of Venus,
Jupiter and his satellites, Mars (for the delinea-
tion of its parallax), Encke’s comet, &c.
Meteorological observations are noted on a very
extensive scale, there being 140 rain stations, a
greater number than is possessed by any of the
other colonies.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Local self-government in South Australia
extends back to a very early period in the
history of the province, but the first attempts
to introduce a system by which centres of
population and their various requirements
could be m:t were not eminently successful,
partly from general causes and partly on account
of defects in administration. Local self-govern-
ment presents itself under two systems—Munici-
pal Corporations, managed by members elected
at stated periods by public vote and invested
with extensive powers under a special Act; and
bodies styled District Councils, elected by rate-
payers living within the limits of a proclaimed
district. To the operations of both these bodies
within the sphere of their authority the colony
has become largely indebted for much that has
enhanced its prosperity and developed its
natural resources. By their aid, and that of
Boards entrusted with the expenditure of
public money uponj the main arteries of
traffic, streets and roads extending their
ramifications in every direction have been
constructed and for the most part maintained
in a manner calculated to win for South Aus-
tralia the credit of having highways second to
none in the colonies. The first and most im-
portant substantial system of local self-govern-
ment introduced in South Australia was that
of
Municipal Corporations.
The first Municipal Council in Adelaide con-
sisted of a Mayor, Councillors, and Aldermen r
It was created under an ordinance promul-
gated by Governor Gawler in 1840. The
English Statute of 1835 formed the basis of
this, but after a trial of the new sy stem it was
found necessary to resort to the plan of govern-
ing young Adelaide by a City Commission.
This not answering, on account of its cumber-
some character and expense, a new Corporation
was formed in 1852, under which the affairs of
the city were conducted,’till it became necessary
to passa measure whereby municipal institutions
could be extended to other localities. This Act
gave power to establish a Corporation on the
petition of not less thaD two-thirds of the
ratepayers “ in any town or placp,” and specifi-
cally brought within its scope all adults in the
province who on October 1 in any year occupied
or owned any “ land, house, warehouse, country
house, or shop within the municipality, either
as owner or tenant,” thus making them citizens.
In the first city assessment the annual value of
rateable property was estimated at £BO,OO0 —it
now stands at £350,000. A new Act was passed
in 1861, since which time the number of Cor-
porations has increased t© twently-one, all
having similar rights to the municipality of
Adelaide. The Municipal Corporations now
existing in South Australia are, besides Ade-
laide, Kensington and Norwood, Hindmarsh,
Glenelg, Brighton, Unley, Gawler, Burra,
Kapunda, Glare, Kadina, Moonta, Wallaroo,
Mount Gambier, Port Pirie, Port Augusta,
Strathalbyn, Goolwa, Jamestown, and Yorke-
town. The population of Adelaide has ad-
vanced to 38,000 souls ; the number of houses is
8,500. The total rates levied on assessments of
property in one year are not allowed to go
beyond Is. in the pound, unless by the
consent of a public meeting of ratepayers,
and then the utmost that can be levied is 2s 6d.
in the pound. The city is divided into six
wards, viz , Mac Donnell, Young, Gawler, Grey,
Kobe, and Hindmarsh Wards, each returning
two Councillors, and the elections for Mayor
and half the number of Councillors are annual.
There are no Aldermen at present, and in all the
municipalities the Mayor is elected, not from
the Council, but from the_general body of rate-
payers. There are eighty miles of streets
within the city boundaries, including the small
streets, and seventy-seven and a quarter miles
have been made. The houses, public buildings
&c., are supplied with water laid on by the
Waterworks Department under Government
control; and with gas from the South Austra-
lian Gas Company’s works as far as the private
houses and shops are concerned, but owing to a
disagreement between the City Council and the
Gas Company respecting the charge for light-
ing, the streets formerly illuminated by
gas lamps are now lighted with kerosine.
Within the city are public swimming, tepid,
hot-water, and vapour baths, under the control
of the Corporation, and leased to a private
individual. The public squares are kept in
order by a staff of gardeners under tbe Council.
There are three markets in the city, two for
produce, one of which (East End) is managed
by a private Company, and the third is a sheep
and cattle market. 'There are seven miles of
tramway within tbe corporate boundary, and
another line (making in all three distinct lines)
is in course of construction.
In the country districts circumstances make
it necessary to adopt a different form of local
self-government, and the people find it better to
organize themselves under
District Councils.
These now number 110, and are formed under a
special Act. For their mutual advantage the
Chairmen of these Councils have an Associa-
tion which meets periodically to dis-
cuss matters of general interest. The
extent of the districts under the juris-
diction of the Councils varies from a few
hundred acres to 253 square miles. The rate-
payers can obtain authority for the proclamation
of a District Council by petitioning, and the
Council, when formed, has the power to levy
and collect rates for road maintenance, the
Government subsidizing pound for pound
such of these rates up to Is. in the
pound as are spent upon works. The


sum voted for District Councils for 1878-9 was
£50,000, and for 1879-80 it is proposed to make
it £60,000. The total assessment for Districi
Councils last year was £774,221 12s. 4<i., anc
this year it is £849,754. This form of locai
government was introduced in 1852, and has
been found to promote not only the advance-
ment of the districts themselves, but the in-
terests of the colony generally, by the facilities
offered for the transport of produce, the opening-
up of the country, and the encouragement ot
settlement through the medium of the numerous
roads maintained by the Councils as feeders to
the trunk lines.
Boards of Health.
For the improvement of the sanitary con-
dition of the city and the country generally a
Central Board of Health was appointed under an
Act which came into effect in January, 1874. For
the purposes of this Act the various Corporations
and District Councils are created Local Boards
of Health, and are required to 00-operate with
the central body. There is no doubt that much
benefit has accrued from the action of these
organizations ; but the value of their services is
not so great as it might be made were the
Central Board invested with larger powers.
That Board consists of a salaried Chairman (Dr.
Gosse), a paid Secretary (Mr. R. G. Thomas),
and five members. Powers are given to
collect rates and make such regulations as are
deemed best calculated to improve the sanitary
condition of the country within their jurisdic-
tion, also to take steps for checking existing
disease and for mitigating nuisances. The
Central Board is empowered by the Public
Health Act to have special supervision over
districts not included within the jurisdiction of
any Local Board, and its inspector pays periodical
visits for the purpose of reporting upon the
sanitary state of such localities. He has to re-
port upon slaughterhouses, piggeries, manufac-
tories, schools, houses, dairies, cowyards, po'lu-
tion of streams, and general nuisances where
the interests of pnblic health are concerned.
During the year ending March 31, 1879, he paid
1,441 visits, travelled 3,930 miles, and served
665 notices for abatement of nuisances. The
extension of the area of the Board’s operations
has been considerable during the past twelve
months, owing to the growth of settlement in
the colony. Attention to notices for abatement
of nuisances has been much more prompt than
previously, and in two cases only has it been
necessary to take legal proceedings to enforce
peremptory orders.
LOCAL DEFENCES.
The colony has, strictly speaking, only within
recent years entered upon anything like a
thorough system of military defences suited to
its condition. Beyond the temporary stay of a
detachment of one of Her Majesty’s regiments
2nd the formation of a volunteer force, which
was disbanded after a short time, the colony
during the first twenty-nine years of its exis-
tence was destitute of any trustworthy means
of defence. In 1865 a very promising volunteer
force, composed of men who enrolled for a period
of three years, was raised, and was maintained
for some time; but it did not receive that
amount of encouragement in high quarters that
it should have done, and eventually it fell
pieces. A Hide Association, mainly composec
of old volunteers, were all that remained fo
some time to represent the defensive elemen
of the colony, but early in 1877 public attention
was forcibly directed to our defenceless state
and pressure was brought to bear upon the
Government to take the matter in hand
In consequence of the feeling of insecurity it
the colonies. Sir W. P. D. Jervois, now Governo:
of South Australia, and Colonel Scratchley were
appointed by the Home Government to visit the
Australian Colonies and report upon the mean:
of defence best suited to their circumstances
On May 31, 1877, an enrolment of volunteer*
took place, the artillery being the first arm o:
the servioe formed. It was proposed to have
two batteries of artillery and eleven companies
of infantry. The British Government, at the
instance of the local authorities, recommendec
Colonel Downes, R.A., as commander, anc
Major Godwin, of the 103rd Regiment Royal
Bombay Fusiliers, as adjutant of the Local
Forces. Those officers arrived in the colony
towards the end of 1877 and at once took
charge of the volunteers, who had pre-
viously been commanded by Colonel Biggs.
Martini-Henry rifles, which were pronounced to
be the simplest and most effective military
weapons existing, were procured from England
by the Government, and the work of getting
the new Local Military Force in a thorough
state of discipline was begun. In addition to
the cannons already in the colony, two 10-inch
18-ton guns, with carriages and dwarf platforme;
two 9-inch 12-ton guns ; two 64-pounder guns of
64 cwt.; two 16-pounders, with all the carriages,
limbers, &c, complete, were procured from
England, and other measures were adopted to
give effect to the recommendations of the able
military authorities who reported upon our
defence requirements. The Local Military
Force is a paid one, and consists of two batteries
of artillery, one troop of cavalry, and eleven
companies of infantry, numbering at present
something short of 1,000 men.
After the establishment of this force the South
Australian National Rifle Association offered to
raise a body of men who, if provided with
Martini-Henry rifles and ammunition, and
allowed certain privileges, would find their own
uniforms, engage to perfect themselves in com-
pany and skirmishing drill, and bind themselves
to serve as auxiliaries to the L.M.F. in case of
invasion. This proposal met with such favour
and the movemeut became so popular that the
Government passed a short Act authorizing the
enrolment of rifle companies, and appointed
Colonel Downes Inspecting Officer. Under that
Act every member of a rifle company has,
among other things, to drill at least ten times a
year, turn out for military service under the
officer commanding the forces in cases of inva-
sion, but they cannot be ordered for service out-


side theprovince. They are not paid, and find their
own uniforms. They are governed by a Council
elected annually at a meeting of delegates from
rifle companies, and the South Australian
National Rifle Association, as it is now called,
numbers about 700 men. In accordance with the
advice of Sir Wm. Jervois, forts are now being
erected on Lefevre’s Peninsula to serve as a pro-
tection to the shipping at Port Adelaide, and a
military road is being constructed, although not
at a very rapid rate, at the rear of the sandhills
skirting the coastline of St. Vincent’s Gulf.
Preliminary steps are being taken towards the
formation of a small Permanent Force, but the
work of making good our defences is proceeding
very slowly.
JUDICATURE.
Ample provision is made for the administra
tion of the law in the colony. There is
Supreme Court, Insolvency Court, and in all the
principal towns and townships in the province
Local and Police or Magistrates’ Courts. Unti
very recently the Supreme Court was modeller
on the same basis as the English Law Courts
before the reformation which swept away the
tedious distinctions between the separate juris-
dictions of law and equity. The Supreme Court
enjoys all the powers of the Courts of Queen’s
Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer. Besides
this it fulfils the functions of the Courts of
Chancery and Vice-Admiralty, It also grants
probates and letters of administration, and hears
appeals from all the tribunals of inferior juris-
diction. This Court was first established by
Act in 1855-6, but its constitution and pro-
cedure have been materially altered since
then. Until 1867 the Judges in Banco
together exercised the two branches of
the jurisdiction of the Court, but this
was found unworkable and productive of
inconvenience; the two branches of the Court
were separated, and one of the Judges was
appointed Primary Judge, upon whom until
lately has devolved the task of determining all
suits coming within the equitable jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court. This reform materially
facilitated the administration of justice, but
it left untouched the still larger reform
so greatly needed, and which, after occupying
the attention of the Legislature for several
years, has also at length been effected. By an
Act passed last session, modelled upon the
English Judicature Act, but containing several
emendations on that measure, law and equity
have been fused, and this year regulations pre-
pared by the Judges of the Supreme Court, who
have taken a most active and creditable part in
the work of reform, received the sanction of Par-
liament, and have been for some months in
operation. In addition to the radical change
involved in the abolition of the old cumber-
some and tedious technical forms of pleading,
the proceedings of the Court have been
simplified in several other ways, and as a
natural consequence litigation has been ren-
dered less expensive, and the administration
of justice in future will be speedier. One of
the present occupants of the Bench—the Hon.
Mr. Justice Boucaut—was the Premier of the
Ministry under whose auspices the Bill was
carried through Parliament. The eld procedure
is now only followed in suits instituted before
the new regulations were approved, but these
will speedily be cleared off, and the old system
will ere long be a thing of the past. The Admi
ralty Court is presided over by the Chief Justice
There are eleven Civil Sittings of the Supreme
Court in each year, and under an Act passed in
1868-9 power is given to the Governor to form
Circuit Districts in the colony and issue Com-
missions to hold Circuit Courts. These tribunals
are Courts of Record, of Oyer and Terminer anc
general gaol delivery, and stand in the same
relation to the Supreme Court as such Courts in
England do to Her Majesty’s Courts at West-
minster. But one Circuit District has been
proclaimed under this Act—in the South-Easi;
—where Courts are at present held twice a
year. A Bill is now before the House of
Assembly for the formation of District Courts in
various parts of the province, by which is in-
tended to abolish the circuits. Such Courts are
to be given unlimited jurisdiction, and the pro-
cedure will be the same as that of the Supreme
Court. It is, however, doubtful whether this
measure will be passed this session. In the
Supreme Court actions are heard either before a
Judge or Judges, or before a Judge sitting with
Assessors, or before a Judge and Jury, or in
certain cases before the Master, or a special
referee or referees. An appeal lies to the Full
Court from a judgment or order of a single
Judge, and when the amount at 'stake is over
£5OO the judgment of the Snpreme Court may
be appealed against, but when the action in-
volves a lesser sum leave to appeal has to be
obtained. Appeals lie to the Judicial Com-
mittee of the Privy Council, and to a
Local Court of Appeal, consisting of the
Governor and Executive Council, with the excep-
tion of the Attorney-General. The constitution
of this Court is regarded as being far from
satisfactory, and efforts have been several times
made in the Assembly to secure its abolition.
These, however, have all proved abortive. The
latest attempt was during the current session,
when the Government undertook to consider the
question and bring in a Bill to amend the con-
stitution of the Court. The new Supreme
Court Act does not alter the criminal proce-
dure, but it does increase the number of sessions.
At these sessions a Judge of the Supreme Court
deals with all prisoners committed for trial in
any part of the colony except those whose cases
are determined by the South-Eastern Circuit
Court.
When the Supreme Court was first established
it was presided over by only one Judge, Sir
John Jeffcott, who was drowned by the upset-
ting of a boat in the surf at the Murray-mouth.
Mr. (afterwards Sir) Charles Cooper succeeded
Justice Jeffcott, and in his time a second Judge
was appointed. In 1856 the title of Chief
Justice was conferred upon Sir Charles Cooper,
and in 1858 the number of Judges was increased
to three. In 1861 Sir Charles Cooper letired


and was succeeded by Mr. (afterwards Sir) R. D.
Hanson, who died in 1876, and was succeeded
by Mr. Samuel Way in the same year. Mr.
Justice Gwynne, who was appointed in 1858, is
now the Second Judge, and the third seat on
the Bench was filled by the appointment in
1867 of the late Mr. Justice Wearing, who, in
the beginning of 1875, on his return from Jhe
Northern Territory, whither he had been to hold
a Court, was drowned with all his suite through
the stranding of the Gothenburg on a reef on the
east coast. He was succeeded by Mr. R. I.
Stow, Q.C., who died in September, 1878, when
the present Third Judge, the Hon. Mr. Justice
Boucaut, at that time Treasurer and Premier of
the Ministry, was elevated to the vacancy thus
created.
The Local Courts of Full Jurisdiction can
adjudicate in all personal actions in amounts
up to £lOO, ana in actions of ejectment where
the land is under the Real Property Act and
does not exceed £lOO in value. A Special Magis-
trate and two Justices of the Peace, or a Special
Magistrate and a Jury of four constitute this
Court,whileone Special Magistrate or two Justices
form a Court of Limited Jurisdiction for the
hearing of suits involving claims under £2O in
value. The Insolvency Court is a distinct
institution, and is presided over by a Com-
missioner, who has power to grant first, second,
and third class certificates, the last of which
does not operate as a discharge from debt, and
to order imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years in cases of fraudulent insolvency.
The system in vogue here is extremely an-
tiquated and unsatisfactory, although its ad-
ministration by the present Commissioner (Mr.
H. E. Downer) has been unexceptionable.
In Adelaide and at Port Adelaide Police
Courts are established, where offences against
the peace are dealt with, and persons charged
with serious offences are committed for trial at
the Supreme Court. Authority is also given to
deal summarily with certain larcenies and other
minor criminal offences. Throughout the colony
there are numerous Magistrates’ Courts, consist-
ing of a Special Magistrate or two Justices, who
have analogous powers to the Police Magistrates.
There is a Coroner, who presides over all inquests
held in the city and suburbs, and in important
cases attends inquests in country districts. In-
quests in the country are usually conducted by
the Magistrates or Justices of the Peace. The
police force is as yet limited in num-
bers, but is very efficient. It is managed
by Mr. Commissioner Hamilton and comprises
277 constables for the whole colony, of whom
120 are mounted. The Metropolitan Police
Force consists of 88 men, eight detectives,
and a guard of four men at Government
House. In the country districts there are
34 foot police, who are assisted in the principal
towns by the mounted troopers. At Port Ade-
laide there is a force of eleven men, some of
whom are water police ; and in the Northern
Territory there are twelve constables It is
probable that ere long the force will need to be
materially increased, as owing to the rapid
spread of settlement there are many new town-
ships and districts almost without protection.
The troopers, who are a fine body of men, do
excellent service, and are dispatched on
duty to all parts of the colony. Owing
to the orderly character of the community the
inadequacy of the force is not greatly felt.
EDUCATION.
The Common Schools System.
Within the last few years educational affairs
in South Australia have been completely revo-
lutionized, and our public school system, which
previously was the worst in the colonies, is now
undoubtedly one of the best. The object now
kspt steadily in view is the education up to a
certain standard of every child in the colony.
The standard is a low one, the only compulsory
subjects being reading, writing, and arithmetic,
but instruction is also given in other branches.
The ages during which children are obliged to
attend school are from seven to thirteen, and
the rule is made imperative except as regards
those who are able to show that they are being
otherwise educated or have attained the stan-
dard. The Act establishing the present system
was passed in 1875. Under it the public schools
were placed under the charge of a Council
with a permanent President, the Council
being subject to the Minister of Education,
who, however, rarely interfered except on
matters of policy. This plan of administration
had a three years’ trial, and under it a great
impetus was given to the erection of new schools,
the appointment and classification of competent
teachers, and the weeding-out of those who
might have been considered competent
under the old regime, but were now no
longer regarded as suitable instructors for the
youth of the colony. But the Council did not
do as much as had been expected of it, and the
system of divided responsibility was condemned.
In 1878 an Act was passed abolishing the
Council, and entrusting the entire management
of the schools to the Minister, who alone is re-
sponsible to Parliament. The executive head
of the department is Mr. J. A. Hartley, 8.A.,
B.Sc., formerly President of the Council, who
now has the title ot Inspector-General of Schools.
The Secretary of the Council has been made the
accountant under the new arrangement, and
the office staff consists of four clerks and two
cadets. The central department is assisted by
Local Boards of Advice, who are appointed in
all parts of the colony, and perform their duties
without fee or reward. There are five school
inspectors, each of whom has a certain district
apportioned to him. About a year and a half
ago the compulsory powers of the Act were
brought formally into operation, and school
visitors were appointed to wait on the parents
and try and induce them to send their children
to school. There are now a superintendent and
seven school visitors. The compulsory clauses
are being enforced in twenty-three districts,
but so far there have been exceedingly
few prosecutions, the moral suasion exercised by
the visitors and the threat of legal proceedings
having been enough to induce nearly all parents


to send their children to school during th
seventy days in each half-year which the law
requires them to attend. Uniform fees of 4c
per week for children under seven years of ag
and 6d. for older children are charged in a!
schools ; but in cases where the parents are too
poor to pay for the education of their children
that duty is taken upon itself by the State
During 1878 the fees of 2,415 children werethu
paid out of 34,491, the total number attending
school. This aggregate was 491 in excess of tha
of the previous year, the increase being main!;
due to the depression in the copper mining dis
tricts. During 1878 the fees paid by parent
amounted to £16,717 and by the State to £77C
The education given is entirely secular, though
the teacher is allowed to read the Bible before
school hours if the parents of his scholars wish
him to do so. He is not, however, permitted to
take part in other religious instruction in the
school buildings, though they are let for Sunday
school purposes or for divine worship in countr
districts where there are no more suitable rooms
available. In such cases a small charge is in
variably made.
There are now 194 school buildings the pro-
perty of the department. Of these 77 have
been erected since January 1, 1876. Most of
them are of stone with brick dressings, but
recently contracts have been let for the erection
of wooden schools for districts where the popu-
lation is fluctuating. Some of the stone build-
ings are very handsome, and those in the large
centres of population have cost from £B,OOO to
£lO,OOO each, including the land. There are
three of such schools in the City of Adelaide,
and a proposal is now being made to establish
an advanced school. During the years 1876-7-8
the expenditure on new schools has varied from
£50,000 to £70,000 per annum, and last year
alone 55 old buildings were repaired or en-
larged at an outlay of £6,797. The cost per
head of the accommodation provided during
1878 was £ll 45.; in previous years it was a trifle
under £lO per head. The number of children in
attendance at the public schools during last
year was 31,230, while 3,261 attended pro-
visional schools small schools in country
districts where a grant-in-aid is given to the
teacher, but not in the form of a fixed stipend.
Of the 34,491 children on the school rolls in
the province there was an average daily at-
tendance during 1878 of 16,753. The former
aggregate showed an increase of 7,186 on the
previous year. The total number of public and
provisional schools under the department at
the close of 1878 was 310, as against
268 in the year 1875. But the increase in the
accommodation during the three years has been
much greater than these figures indicate, as
many small schools have been closed when
larger ones have been built. The staff of
teachers consists of 699 persons, 399 of whom
are females, The increase from 1877 to 1878
was 46. The teachers of the schools in large
centres of population—Model Schools as they
are termed—receive fixed salaries, the fees going
to the State. Other teachers, besides receiving a
certain fixed stipend, are allowed a bonus
according to the percentage of scholars who
pass a prescribed examination, and another for
instructing pupil teachers. They also obtain
the fees paid by the children and one or two
more small allowances. The result examinations
have year by year shown a steady improvement
in the teaching, the average percentage of
passes in the public schools during 1878 being
73.83 against 70.09 in the previous year, and in
the provisional schools 60 as compared with
52.21. Besides the schools named there are
81 evening schools in operation. A class for
imparting instruction in mechanical drawing
has also been established, and during 1878 it
was attended by from 20 to 27 pupils, most of
whom are journeymen mechanics or apprentices.
In the city there is a Training College, the
principal of which is Mr. L. G. Madley. There
are now 26 students in training for the position
of teachers. Twenty of these are females.
Under the Act of 1875 the department grants
scholarships and exhibitions annually as a
stimulus to the scholars in the State and private
schools. The most valuable is the South
Australian Scholarship, which is worth £2OO
a year, and is tenable for four years, the
holder being entitled to become a student
at one of the European Universities. This is
to be competed for at the end of the present
year by students who have been at least five
years resident in the colony. Then there are
five University Scholarships, worth £SO a year
each, tenable for three years, and open to all
schools; besides six exhibitions, worth £3O a
year each for three years, and open only to
State school children The way is thus opened
up for the poorest child to gain access to the
best seats of learning if only he be clever and
diligent enough to gain one of the scholarships
offered by the State. The Act of 1875 gave
power to the Government to set apart 20,000
acres of land per annum as an endowment fund,
out of which the increasing demands of the
educational system would have to be met.
Besides this there has been a yearly grant of
money made by Parliament. The revenue
from the education lands was formerly
managed by the Council of Education,
but it is now added to the general
revenue of the country, and a vote large enough
to cover all the requirements of the year is
made by Parliament, who thus have direct con-
trol over the education lands. At the end of
1878 160,097 acres of these lands were leased,
and the revenue derived therefrom was £13,086.
The total cost of instruction during the year, in-
cluding the expenditure for the erection and
improvement of school buildings, was £152,718.
The revenue derived from rents of lands, model
school fees, &c., amounted to £20,423. The
vote asked for on the Estimates this year is
£87,471 145., exclusive of the cost of buildings,
which is defrayed out of loan. Including
all expenses, the cost to the State of
each child instructed during last year was
£1 13s. 5d., and of each child in average
attendance £3 Bs. lOd.
In addition to the State schools there are in
the colony several private schools of the


grammar-school type, which are well managed
and are entirely self-supporting. Some of these
deserve to be placed on an equal rank, as regards
the curriculum of studies and general manage-
ment, with the two large Colleges alluded to
below.
St. Peter’s Collegiate School.
This is a Church of England school, situated in
grounds of thirty-six aores in one of the suburbs
on the north-east of Adelaide. The Bishop of
Adelaide is ex officio Visitor, and the affairs of
the school are managed by a Council of fifteen
Governors incorporated in 1849, of which the
Bishop, the Dean, and the Archdeacon of Ade-
laide are ex officio members. The school was
originated chietiy through the exertions of the
late Ven. Archdeacon Woodcock and Mr.
Marshall MacDermott, and was first opened as a
proprietary school in Trinity Church School-
room in 1847. It has since been endowed,
partly by private munificence and partly by the
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
A large number of scholarships and exhibitions
are attached to it, three of which are
for the encouragement of natural science.
The foundation-stone of the present handsome
buildings was laid by the Bishop in 1849. Since
then they have been extended at various times,
and, besides accommodation for boarders and a
Head Master’s house, consist of a large school-
room, classroom, and chapel. The latest addi-
tions opened this year are a lecture-room for
natural science, with laboratories attached, five
courts, and a gymnasium ninety feet long, and
provided with complete apparatus. The school
and class rooms are about to be refurnished, and
a room built for the use of dayboys out of school
hours. The school is open to all boys not under
seven years of age who can read and write and
will conform to the rules. The course of in-
struction, as determined by the Governors, is
that of the public schools of England. Greek
is not compulsory, and attention is paid to
modern languages and natural science. The
religious worship and teaching, as dictated by
the Act of Incorporation, is in accordance
with the formularies and liturgy of the Church
of England under such regulations that the
advantages of the school may be participated in
by thechildrenof other Christian bodies without
interfering with their peculiar religious prin-
ciples. The number of boys at present is 155,
of whom twenty-seven are boarders. There are
seven masters, of whom four are resident, one is
lecturer in natural seience, and one teacher of
modern languages, besides visiting masters of
drawing, music, and gymnastics. Elementary
drawing and singing are, however, taught to
junior boys as a part of the ordinary school
work. Many old pnpils have taken high posi-
tions in the English Universities, Woolwich
Military Academy, and elsewhere. The Head
Master (the Rev. W. Bedell Stanford, M.A.,
Ball. Coll., Oxford, was appointed at the
beginning of the present year.
Prince Alfred College.
This is a collegiate school whiih was founded
by members of the Wesleyan Methodist denomi-
nation, whose governing body is a committee,
and whose Chairman is a Wesleyan minister ap-
pointed by the South Australian Conference. It
was established to secure the benefits of a sound
education for the sons of Wesleyan Methodists,
but the school is open to all other denomina-
tions. The foundation-stone was laid in 1867
by the Duke of Edinburgh, after whom the insti-
tution has been named. The building is of the
Elizabethan style of architecture. The central
portion was opened for the admission of boarders
and day-pupils in July, 1869. The prosperity
that attended the College induced the Committee
to erect a new wing to the building. This addi-
tion, comprising large schoolroom, classrooms,
dormitories, lavatories, laboratory, &c., was
opened early in 1878. The present Head Master
is Mr. F. Chappie, 8.A., B.Sc. (London), who
resides at the College, and in whom is vested its
entire control. There are on the staff two
other graduates of London University—the
second master, Mr. S. Churchward, 8.A., and
Mr. R. Wainwright, B.Sc., third master. Besides
those already mentioned there are six resident
assistant masters, and German, drawing, and
music masters. There are at present in atten-
dance at the College 180 day scholars and fifty
boarders. Five scholarships are annually com-
peted for at Christmas, the two highest being of
the value of £ls 15s. each. Many students
from this College have secured high University
honours since the establishment of the Uni-
versity of Adelaide. Three University scholar-
ships of the value of £l5O have been won by
them since 1876.
The University.
The University of Adelaide was founded
under an Act passed by the Legislature in 1872;
a handsome new building to cost £25,000 is now
being erected; two munificent donations of
£20,000 each have been given by wealthy
colonists; four professors have been appointed,
and are regularly conducting classes; and Her
Majesty the Queen has been petitioned to grant
letters patent to the University. The issue of
the charter has been delayed, because the
Imperial authorities object to the claim of
the Adelaide University to grant degrees of
Bachelor and Doctor of Science. There is a
strong feeling in the colony that the power to
grant these degrees should be obtained; but
the University authorities have decided to
concede the point for the present, and then
when they have got the letters patent
they will seek additional powers to grant
the degree in science, and also degrees to
females. A Bill is now before Parliament to
alter the original Act in the direction indicated
by the Secretary of State for the Colonies, but
the Government have given the assurance that
after the charter is obtained—so that students
who have taken degrees may get the full honour
of them without delay—an effort will be made
to obtain the necessary sanction to confer the
other degrees. The establishment of the Ade-
laide University was largely due to the gene-
rosity of Mr. W. W. Hughes, a wealthy South
Australian, who offered to give £20,000 towards


the foundation of Union College—an institution
chiefly supported by the Presbyterians, Con-
gregationalists, and Baptists—with a view
to providing a means of higher education,
especially to young men desirous of entering
the Christian ministry. With commendable
wisdom and liberality the gentlemen who took
a prominent part in this movement, and in
whose hands the £20,000 was to be placed, de-
cided that it would be better to devote the
money to the founding of a University, in order
that its benefits might have a wider application
than would have been possible in connection
with a Theological College. 1 Thereupon Mr.
Hughes agreed to apply his donation of £20,000
in founding two Chairs in the proposed Uni-
versity. An appeal was made to the public, and
a University Association was formed in Septem-
ber, 1872, which set before itself two objects—to
procure an Act for the incorporation and endow-
ment of a strictly unsectarian University, and
to collect the necessary funds. After some
delay an Act carrying out the views of the
Association and founding the University
of Adelaide was passed by the Legisla-
ture in the session of 1874, and assented
to in November of that year. It provided that
no religious test should be administered to
persons becoming students or officers of the
University, and it granted an endowment of
50,000 acres of land, a building site of five acres
(which was afterwards somewhat reduced) on
North-terrace, Adelaide, and an annual grant
from the general revenue of £5 per cent, on all
moneys contributed to the University, providing
that such grant should not exceed £IO,OOO in
any one year. The annual grant for the last
few years has been about £2,000, exclusive, of
course, of the revenue from the handsome land
endowment. As soon as the Bill became law,
the Hon. (now Sir) Thomas Elder imitated the
noble example set by Mr. Hughes, and placed
£20,000 at the disposal of the University
authorities. The management of the University
is vested in a Council of twenty members.
To this Council the Association surrendered
its trust on November 11, 1874. The first
Chancellor was the late Chief Justice
Sir Richard D. Hanson, who was succeeded
in April, 1876, by the Vice-Chancellor, the
Lord Bishop of Adelaide (Dr. Short). The
present Vice-Chancellor is Chief Justice Way
(the Hon. S. J. Way). The four professors are
—Mr. David Frederick Kelly, M.A.., Hughes
Professor of Classics; Rev. John Davidson,
Hughes Professor of English Literature; Mr.
Horace Lamb, M A., Elder Professor of Mathe-
matics; and Mr. Ralph Tate, F.GS., Elder
Professor of Natural Science. A large number
of gentlemen who had matriculated at other Uni-
versities have had ad eundem degrees conferred
upon them ; but only one matriculated student
has yet earned an original degree at the Ade-
laide University, namely, Mr. Thomas Ainslie
Caterer, who took his B. A. degree in April, 1879.
There are at present twenty young per-
sons, male and female, studying for de-
grees ; and other non-matriculated students are
attending the University classes as follows: —
Physics, 20; Chemistry, 21; Latin, 4; Ele-
mentary Greek, 4; Mathematics, 1; and Lite-
rature, 5. The classes are held in temporary
rooms. The new University building, the
foundation-stone of which was laid by His
Excellency Sir William Jervois on July 30,
1879, is to be completed on July 1,1881. A
portion of it, however, is to be ready for occu-
pation by December 1, 1880. The architect is
Mr. W. McMinn, who took the prize for the
best design. The total income of the University
during 1878 was £7,942. Three of the pro-
fessors receive £I,OOO per annum each, and the
fourth £BOO.
The South Australian Institute.
The South Australian Institute, for the pro-
motion of the study of the arts, sciences,
literature, and philosophy, was incorporated by
Act of Parliament in i 855. It is managed by a
Board of seven Governors, and has a Secretary,
Librarian, and three Assistant-Librarians, and a
Curator of the Museum connected with the in-
stitution. It contains a circulating library, a
reference library, a museum of natural history
which unfortunately is very much cramped
for room—and a free reading-room, which is
stocked with all the leading newspapers and
periodicals of England, America, and all the
Australian Colonies, and in which any books
from the library may be read free of charge.
The circulating library contains 22,286 volumes,
and there are over 700 subscribing members. The
free reference library contains 1,862 volumes,
but this has only been established recently.
The Society of Arts and the Adelaide Philoso-
phical Society are incorporated with the Insti-
tute and share its advantages, while separately
promoting their several objects. Classes are held
at the Institute, and annual examinations have
taken place for six years past, the successful
students being rewarded by certificates of merit.
The subjects taken up are drawing, painting,
modelling, French, German, and phonetic
shorthand. Lectures are also delivered on
scientific subjects. Besides the South Aus-
tralian Institute in Adelaide there are ninety
country and suburban Institutes affiliated to it,
all of which are subsidized by Government. A
resolution was carried this session in the House
of Parliament authorizing the opening of Insti-
tutes at certain hours on Sunday afternoons,
and in conformity with this expression of
opinion the South Australian Institute has been
opened since then on Sunday, so far with satis-
factory results. A new Institute is now being
built in Adelaide close to the site of the present
establishment, which will afford far greater ad-
vantages to the public, and will give greater
accommodation for the display of the valuable
collection comprising the Museum of Natural
History,
RELIGIOUS.
It has contributed not a little to the social
and religious well-being of the community and
to the harmony which has existed among the


various sects that the foundations of the pro-
vince were laid upon principles entirely opposed
to any connection between Church and State.
There was, it is true, a temporary departure
from these principles between 1846 and 1851,
when the Legislative Council—then a nominee
Chamber—at the dictation of Governor Kobe,
who held strong views on the subject, placed
sums of money on the Estimates for division
among the different sects of professing Chris-
tians in proportion to their numbers. In 1851,
however, the colonists, led by the late Rev. T.
Q. Stow and others, determined that this recog-
nition of religion by the State should cease,
and they returned a sufficient number of
representatives to the Legislature to
carry their point. The endowment of
religious bodies was abolished, and since
then the various Churches have gone on their
way prosecuting their work, supporting their
ministers, and extending their operations upon
the purely voluntary system. It is gratifying
to note that the utmost harmony prevails among
different religious bodies, and there is more
healthy and general association in good works
than in perhaps any other colony. At the present
time there is an average of one place of worship
to every 280 of the population. There are in
the colony 902 churches and other buildings
used for public worship, and the total number
of sittings is 142,530, thus providing accommo-
dation for more than one-half of the entire
population. There are 571 Sunday-schools in
the province, having a staff of 5,180 teachers
and 39,670 children.
The Church of England, spread over the entire
colony, constitutes the Diocese of Adelaide, and
numerically stands at the head of all the de-
nominations. The Right Rev. Augustus Short,
D.D. (Oxon.), was appointed Bishop by Her
Majesty’s letters patent in 1847, and His Lord-
ship still holds the position. The diocese has
been endowed by Lady Burdett Coutts, and by
legacies left by Mr. Leigh and Captain Allen.
The affairs of the Church are managed by a
Diocesan Synod, composed of the clergy and lay
representatives, who are elected by the indi-
vidual Churches. There are several organiza-
tions and benevolent institutions established in
connection with the Church. The Clergy
Widow and Orphan Fund for the ten months
ending April 30,1879, shows an income amount-
ing to £1,713, and it has a capital and guarantee
fund of £6,298; the Society for the Propa-
gation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts
had an income during 1878 of £3,603;
the General Synodal Endowment of
Churches Fund has a capital of £15,650; the
Incorporated Church of England Endowment
Society shows the receipt from its foundation
of no less a sum than £25,419. The Bishop has
under him the Dean and Archdeacon of Ade-
laide, the Archdeacon of Flinders, two Canons,
a staff of forty-five clergy, and 125 lay readers.
A handsome Cathedral has been partially
finished on a site between North and South
Adelaide, and services are regularly held in it,
albeit it will be many years before the full
design is completed. There are seventy-nine
churches and a number of unconsecrated plac
where divine service is held.
The Roman Catholic Church stands high
the religious statistics of the province. It :
presided over by a Bishop (the Right Rev. D
Reynolds), who was consecrated in Novembe
1873, but who is now absent on a visit to Rom
In his absence the See is under the supervisio
of the Vicar-General, the Very Rev. Frederic
Byrne. There are thirty-seven priests, and ov
sixty churches, chapels, and other buildin
which serve for religious and school purpose
There are three religious orders for men, viz.:
The Jesuits, the Benedictines, and the Christia
Brothers, with the Dominican nuns and Siste
of St. Joseph for ladies. The principal schoo
are the College of St. Aloysius, Sevenhills, con
ducted by the Jesuit Fathers; and the Christia
Brothers’ schools in Wakefield-street, Adelaid
The Dominican nuns have a convent for youn
ladies in Franklin-street, while the Sisters o
St. Joseph conduct schools in Pirie and Russe
streets, and in many places throughout th
colony. There are likewise an Orphanage (ove
which the Very Rev. F. Byrne, V.G., presides]
and a Home for Unfortunates under th'
management of the Sisters of St. Joseph.
The Wesleyan Methodist Church is governed
by its own Annual Conference, which is com
posed of an equal number of ministers anc
laymen. The President of the Conference thi
year is the Rev. C. H. Goldsmith. The Churche
are united first in circuits, under the charge o
a minister, and the circuits are also formec
into the following districts:—The Southern,
Middle, Northern, and Yorke’s Peninsula
Over each district a Chairman presides. The
following statistical returns were given at the
last Conference Circuits, 38; churches, 202
other preaching places, 61; ministers, 46
local preachers, 300; Sunday-school teachers,
1,932; church members, including communi-
cants, &c., 5,538; Sunday-schools, 172; Sunday
scholars, 14,335; attendants on public
worship, including members and others, 36,582.
The South Australian Church is connected with
the entire Wesleyan body of Australia and New
Zealand, and once in three years a General Con-
ference is held, when representatives from each
Conference and colony take the whole affairs of
the Connexion into review. The General Con-
ference alone has legislative power ; the annual
Conferences can only be administrative. The
next General Conference will be held in Ade-
laide in May, 1881.
The Congregationalists owe the origin of their
first church in South Australia to the exertions
of the late Rev. T. Q. Stow, who was sent out
from England in 1837 by the Colonial Mis-
sionary Society. This eminent minister laboured
vigorously in the colony for five-and-twenty
years, and at his death a very handsome
Memorial Church was erected in Flinders-
street, Adelaide, as a tribute to his memory.
The Congregationalists have thirty-nine churches
erected by them (of which six are not used by
them for public worship), twelve rooms for
preaching, between thirty and forty ministers,
and a staff of lay preachers. They have formed


a Congregational Union and Home Mission of
ministers and laymen. The Chairman for the
current year is the Rev. John McEwin, of
Hindmarsh.
The Baptists had representatives among the
earliest settlers of South Australia. Their first
place of worship, which was in Hindley-street,
Adelaide, was established in 1839. The Baptist
Association, of which the Rev. W. Clare, of
Angaston, is Chairman for this year, meets
twice a year, but, like the Congregational Union,
it exercises no jurisdiction over individual con-
gregations, its object being to promote Christian
fellowship and to carry out various objects in
which the Churches have a common interest.
The Baptists have 37 churches, with a personal
membership of 2,264 ; 17 ministers are in charge
of churches; there are 7 preaching stations
and a staff of lay preachers. There are 3,047
Sunday-school scholars, with 317 teachers. The
total revenue last year was £9,159, and the
amount of debt £9,223 Last year 118 baptisms
were reported.
The Presbyterians have fifteen churches,
fifteen other buildings, and eleven ordained
ministers. The Presbytery meets usually four
times a year, the Rev. J. H. Angus being
Moderator for the present year ; the Rev. D.
Paton, M.A., B D., Clerk of the Presbytery.
The Free Presbyterians have six churches
and three ministers. They are governed by
their own Presbytery, which meets half-yearly.
The Rev. Jno. Sinclair is the Moderator, and the
Rev. James Benny is Presbytery Clerk.
The Lutheran Church holds a prominent
position here. German immigration into South
Australia was in the first instance mainly due
to religious persecution in certain parts of Ger-
many. The late Rev. A. Kavel, who brought a
baud of his fellow-countrymen with him, was
one of the pioneers of the colony. The German
Evangelical Lutheran Church at the present
time has 50 chapels. 20 rooms used for worship,
and 20 ministers. The Lutherans have
established mission stations at the Finke, Mac-
Donnell Ranges, and at Bookaltaninna, near
Cooper’s Creek.
The Primitive Methodists divide the colony
into 18 circuits, within which are active
religious organizations connected with their
denomination. They have 107 chapels, 27 other
preaching places, 24 ministers, and 172 local
preachers.
The Bible Christians have 23 circuits, within
which are 102 chapels, 25 preaching-rooms, 31
ministers, and 131 local preachers.
The “Church of Christ” has twenty-two places
of worship, the pulpits of which are supplied by
evangelists and by members of the different
congregations.
The “ Christian” denomination has seven
chapels, six pastors, and several assistants.
The Methodist New Connexion has one
church, a fine building, in Franklin-street,
Adelaide, which was established by the late
Rev. James Maughan, who was a man distin-
guished not only as a minister but also in the
ranks of literature and science. The Rev. M. J.
Birks is the present minister of the Church.
The New (Jerusalem) Church has one build-
ing for public worship in Adelaide, of which the
officiating minister is Mr. E. G. Day.
The Society of Friends hss two meeting-
houses, one in North Adelaide and the other
at Mount Barker. Mr. H. W. Phillips is the
Registering Officer.
The Unitarians have a neat church in Wake-
field-street, Adelaide. The Rev. J. C. Woods,
B A., is the minister. Services in connection
with this denomination are also held at Woodside
and Mount Barker.
The Jews have a handsome Synagogue in
Rundle-street, Adelaide, of which the Rev. A
T. Boas is the minister.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CHARI-
TABLE INSTITUTIONS.
South Australia is well supplied with public,
semi-private, and private charitable and benevo-
lent institutions. We have "Hospitals for the
sick, Asylums for orphans and neglected
children, for the poor and infirm, for the deaf
and dumb and blind, for the insane, and for
dipsomaniacs ; a Retreat for sailors, a Club for
bushmen, a Children’s Hospital, a Home for
inebriates, and Mission Staiions for the natives.
There are here as elsewhere a certain proportion
of the population who from age or infirmity
cannot earn their own living, and these are
cared for at a Destitute Asylum on North- terrace,
which is managed by a salaried Chairman (Mr.
J. M. SolomoD, J.P.) and a Board. The
Asylum affords a home for the aged and
decrepit, and there is also a lying -in
department where destitute women can
receive medical attention and comforts. The
Board, which has branches in the country dis-
tricts and is supported out of State funds,
affords relief to persons outside the institution,
the number varying with the circumstances
of the colony. The boarding-out system for
children, an effort to establish which in Sydney is
just now being made, ha 3 long been adopted here
with satisfactory results. An Industrial School
for such destitute children as are not thus cared
for is in existence at M«gill, a few miles east-
ward of Adelaide, and there is a staff of nurses
to attend to the wants of the inmates, and of
teachers to educate them. There are two
Lunatic Asylums—one in Adelaide and the
other at Parkside, a suburb lying eastward of the
city. Both are under the able superintendence
of Dr. Paterson. There are two State hospitals,
one in Adelaide and the other at Mount
Gambier, in the South-East. The Ade-
laide Hospital is managed by a Board, the
members of which are nominated by the
Government, the private subscriptions not
having reached the amount which entitles the
subscribers to exercise their power of electing
any members of the Board. There are two
Resident Surgeons and a large staff of nurses
and attendants. The Mount Gambier Hospital
is under the management of Dr. Jackson.
Recently a fine Hospital has been erected at
Kapunda, a township about fifty miles north of


Adelaide. Mr F.H. Dutton, a wealthy absentee
holder of land in the district, contributed £2 000
towards the cost of the building, a block of land
was given, and with the addition of other dona-
tions, subsidized pound for pound by the
Government, a sufficient sum of money was
raised to erect a commodious building. Smaller
Hospitals have been established at the Burra,
Port Augusta, Port Lincoln, Port Wallaroo, and
elsewhere. The amount voted in 1878-9 for
public charitable institutions was £72,517-
The Relief of the Aborigines.
A sum is voted every year by Parliament for
providing the natives of the colony with
clothing, blankets, stores, and medical at-
tendance. Last year the amount so voted was
£3,790, and upon officials called Protectors of
Aborigines devolve the duty of apportioning
the various articles which may be bought for
distribution. An institution known as the
Aborigines’ Friends’ Association, partially sup-
ported by Government, has done useful work in
connection with the educational and moral
and religion-' training of the natives. It has a
farm and mission station at Point Macleay, Lake
Alexandrine. The contribution of the Govern-
ment does not amount to more than £I,OOO a
year, and this with private subscriptions and
the profits of the farm make up the income. A
large number of natives have availed themselves
of the advantages of the institution, have been
taught to read and write, and fill situations on
sheeepstations and farms. Some have been
comfortably married and settled on land which
the Government have handed over to them.
There is an unsectarian Church on the station,
and it comprises fifty members, thirty of whom
are blacks. There are two deacons, both of
them aboriginals. In June last the Rev.
George Taplin, who had held the posi-
tion of Superintendent of the station for
twenty years, died, his death producing pro-
found grief among the aboriginals, by whom he
was greatly beloved. Mr. Taplin was peculiarly
well qualified for the post he so long occupied.
He had a good knowledge of medicine, and
acted as doctor and surgeon in cases of sickness
and accident; he was an excellent mechanic,
and was able to superintend all the departments
©f the farm aßd station; and he was a philolo-
gist of no mean repute, his works bearing upon
the language and habits of the native tribes
being greatly appreciated by the learned So-
cieties of London.
The Poonindie Mission, on the western shore
of Spencer’s Gulf, a few miles from Port
Lincoln, was the first institution where any
effort on a large scale was made to civilize the
native tribes of the colony. It was founded by
Archdeacon Hale (now Bishop of Queensland)
in the year 1850. He bought a run at
Poonindie with 5,000 sheep upon it, and pro-
ceeded thither with five married couples and a
single man all aborigines who had been
educated in the Government school for natives
in Adelaide. To this run the Government
added an aboriginal run and a yearly grant of
£3OO, and the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel contributed sufficient money to pur-
chase 160 acres of land. Under the Arch-
deacon’s supervision the mission prospered,
attracting a large number of natives. A chapel was
built, a day school for women and children was
started, and the station was well looked after.
In 1856 Archdeacon Hale left to become Bishop
of Perth, Western Australia, and he was
succeeded by the late Rev. O. Hammond. Un-
fortunately, however, the mission now became
disorganized. Parliament withdrew its annual
allowance, and the number of natives decreased.
The sbeepstation was still worked, but the
efforts to civilize the aborigines fell into abey-
ance. These efforts were, however, renewed in
1866, when Mr. G. W. Hawkes was appointed
co-trustee with the Bishop of Adelaide and Mr.
Samuel Davenport. A system of regular daily
work was brought into operation ; the natives
were not only taught how to do things, but were
paid for their labour; the school was kept open
day and night, and everything was done by
means of music and rational amusements to
promote the comfort and happiness of the
inmates. This mode of management has con-
tinued, and the result has been satisfactory.
At the present time there are over 80
natives resident at the Mission Station, many of
them having lived at Poonindie from ten to
twenty years. Two families have been there
over twenty-five years. Last season 10,520
sheep were shorn, 200 acres of wheat were
reaped, and a crop of hay -was cut. All the
work of the station and farm is done by the
natives, only one white man and an experienced
boundaryrider being employed in connection
with the farming operations and management of
the stock. There are 130 head of cattle, 26
horses, and a good breed of Berkshire pigs, &c.
The last report of the Acting-Trustee at the close
of 1878 was satisfactory, there being no sickness
and the conduct of the aborigines being good.
Since the year 1866 no Government aid in money
has been given to the institution, which has
been self-supporting, the natives maintaining
themselves and families by their own labours.
We may add that at a ploughing match which
took place last month at Port Lincoln three of
the Poonindie natives won the first and two
other prizes for ploughing with horse teams.
According to a Parliamentary return prepared
in May, 1878, the quantity of land held by the
various Aboriginal Mission Stations in the
colony is as follows Point Macleay, 4,113
acres; Point Pierce, situated on Yorke’s
Peninsula, 17,920 acres; Poonindie, 15,617
acres ; Lutheran Mission Association, 452,480
acres. The operations of the last-mentioned
Association are carried on at Kopperamanna,
east of Lake Eyre, and at the Finke, south
of Mac Donnell Ranges, and reports speak
well of their praiseworthy efforts to civilize the
blacks of the Far North.
Bushmen’s Club.
For many years a Bush Missionary, of whom
nothing whatever was known save that he was
engaged in evangelistic work, travelled from
station to station all over the colonies of Aus-


tralasia, depending for food entirely upon the
hospitality of those he visited, declining all
pecuniary aid, and doing many kindly acts of
charity for the lonely shepherds with whom he
came in contact. He called himself “ William,”
and was known by no other name. In 1866,
while in South Australia, this philanthropic
maD, viewing with pain the debaucheries of
bushmen when making their short visits to the
city after shearing-time, conceived the idea of
establishing a retreat for them similar to the
Sailors’ Homes. He accordingly opened the
project to Mr. J. H. Angas, J.P., who, with his
father, the late Mr. George Fife Angas, and
several other friends, took the matter up
warmly, and became large contributors to a
fund for the establishment of a Club. The
house and grounds formerly occupied by Sir
Charles Cooper (one of the early Judges of the
colony), in Whitmore-square, were secured, and
on the 20th of May, 1870, the Home for Bush-
men, with “ William” as Hon. Superintendent,
was formally opened by Sir James Fergusson, who
was Governor at the time. Since then the original
premises have been extended by the addition
of two wings, a large central building and four
baths, and the grounds have been greatly im-
proved. The rules of the Club provide that
“ no intoxicating liquors are allowed within the
buildings or grounds; and any person infringing
this regulation is liable to expulsion.” In spite
of this strict rule the Home has been and still
is largely resorted to by the class for whom it
was established, and the success of which is in
great measure due to the labours of “ William,”
now known as William M. Hugo (a relative of
Victor Hugo), who has continued to hold the
position of Hon. Resident Superintending
Manager. The institution is now incorporated,
and is self-supporting, the bushmen paying mem-
bers’subscriptions and moderate charges for board
and lodging when in town. The newspapers
of the day and various periodicals are supplied,
and a number of amusements are provided.
The following facts and figures in relation to
the operations of the Club will be of interest: —
From May 20, 1870, to December 9, 1878, over
13,000 weekly and casual boarders have been
entertained. 1,547 tickets of membership have
been issued, and 355 distressed persons have re-
ceived relief. The balance-sheet issued in
December, 1878, showed the receipts for the
year to have been £96 ss. over the working ex-
penses, and the total assets, consisting mainly
of buildings and land, leave no less a sum than
£7,298 over the liabilities. Since the balance-
sheet was made out the new centre building has
been completed and paid for ; but this necessi-
tated an overdraft from the Bank of South
Australia of about £SOO, which, it is hoped, will
soon be paid-off. Great credit is due to the
various Boards of Management, and to the Trus-
tees. for their loDg and faithful services to the
institution.
Blind and Deaf and Dumb Asylum.
This institution, which was originated through
the philanthropic exertions of Mr. W. Townsend,
M.P., is now successfully established at Brighton,
a marine township near Glenelg. A very hand-
some edifice has been erected at a cost of about
£5,000, jointly contributed by private in-
dividuals and the Government. At the present
time there are thirty inmates, of whom 17 are
blind and the rest deaf and dumb.
Adelaide and Benevolent and Strangers’
Friend Socibty.
This purely unsectarian Society was esta-
blished in the year 1839, and claims to be about
the oldest institution of a benevolent character
in the colony. It was started for the purpose of
assisting strangers who might arrive here sick
or in distress, widows who might be left with
large families, and persons overtaken by mis-
fortune to whom timely aid would be of the
utmost consequence. It receives no aid from
the State, being entirely supported by voluntary
contributions. It seeks to help those who are
honestly striving to help themselves, and lends
no encouragement to idleness -and pauperism.
The Hon. John Colton, who has taken an
interest in the Society for very many years,
holds the position of President. The number of
cases relieved range from 200 to 300 a year.
Adelaide Female Refuge.
This institution is also supported by volun-
tary contributions, and is managed by a General
Committee, a Ladies’ Committee, and an Hon.
Secretary (the Rev. W. B. Andrews). It was
founded in the year 1857 with the object of
ameliorating the condition of victims of pro-
fligacy and checking the spread of vice by
affording a home and protection to those who
desire to turn from their evil courses. Means
are taken to seek out fallen girls and induce
them to enter the Refuge, where, by kindness
and the ministrations of various clergymen and
friends, they are encouraged to reform and
helped into situations. The work for the east
year is shown by the following figures:—On
March 31, 1878, there were—lnmates, including
two children, 11; admissions and readmission,
73 ; total, 84. Gone to situations, 38 ; gone to
friends, 10; gone to Destitute Asylum, 8; gone
to Hospital, 3; absconded, 3; left of their own
accord, 7; in the house, March 31, 1879, 15;
total, 84.
Belair Inebriates’ Retreat.
A few years ago a number of philanthropic
colonists met together and decided to establish
a retreat to which habitual drunkards might
retire with the object of getting the better of
their pernicious habits. Subscriptions and
donations to the extent of over £3,000 were col-
lected, and the Government subsidized that by
an equal amouot. A convenient house and
grounds were purchased at Belair, about eight
miles south of Adelaide, and the late Mr. George
Fife Angas added to the property of the institu-
tion by a large gift of land in the same neigh-
bourhood. Up to August. 1879, there have been
seventy-two admissions, and the Committee feel
satisfied that the influence of the residence at
the Retreat has been very beneficial. From the
last report of the Committee we quote the f®l-


lowing extract: —“ The Committee feel it neces
sary to remind their supporters that no remed;
has been discovered by which the inebriate can
be cured. The work of restoration is to b
sought in seclusion, under healthy conditions, o
the subject of this mania, and while the body i
regaining its vigour there is the opportunity o
presenting moral and religious consideration
which will help the formation of sober anc
manly resolutions.” Mr. Thomas Osborne is th
present Superintendent.
Home fob Incurables.
Through the active exertions of a few citizens
a Home for Incurables was established last year
Subscriptions to the amount of about £1,90(
were collected, and the Government has supple
mented that by an equal amount. This has
enabled the Committee to purchase a block o
nine acres of land, together with a house a'
Fullarton, and the premises are now being reno
vated and furnished. It is expected that the
quarters will be ready for occupation in the
course of a few days.
Adelaide City Mission.
This is an unsectarian Society started
for the purpose of relieving the distress
°f _ people living in the city and ot
giving them spiritual help and consolation. A
large Mission Hall has been erected in the
west part of Adelaide; three missionaries are
employed, and a Mothers’ Mission and a Visiting
Committee have been established. A series of
lectures, concerts, and literary entertainments
are provided in the winter months, and have
proved very attractive to the class for whom
they were instituted. Mr. Berry, the senior
City Missionary, has initiated a house scheme,
by which he is enabled to let cottages to poor
people at a much smaller rent than they
would have to pay to ordinary landlords. He
has at the present time thirty-one houses
under his care, and he states that during the
past year he has been able to save about £l5O
in rent to the persons who tenanted his cottages.
Young Men’s Christian Association.
Within the past few months a Young Men’s
Christian Association has been established in
Adelaide under the most favourable auspices.
Commodious premises have been taken in
Gawler-place, and the Board of Management
have provided reading, recreation, smoking, and
lecture rooms. There is also a capital gymna-
sium. At the present time there are 450
members, and the number is expected shortly to
reach 000. Mr. Richard Searle is President of
the Association.
Other Institutions.
In addition to the foregoing there are a
numher of private benevolent institutions •
The Convalescent Home, the Sailors’ Home at
Port Adelaide, St. Vincent de Paul’s Orphan-
age, the Orphan Home, and the Cottage
Homes, which are carrying on their work in an
unostentatious but effective way.
NEWSPAPERS.
The following newspapers are published in
South Australia:—
Daily— Register (morning), Journal (even-
ing), Advertiser (morning), and Express
(evening).
Bi- Weekly —Border Watch, Wallaroo Times,
Kapunda Herald, Yorka’s Peninsula Advertiser,
and Northern Argus.
Weekly —Adelaide Observer, South Aus-
tralian Chronicle, Government Gazette, Bunyip,
Gawler Standard, Jamestown Review, Port
Pirie Gazette, Southern Argus, Australische
Zeitung, Methodist Journal, Licensed Vic-
tuallers’ Gazette, Roman Catholic Record,
Narracoorte Herald, South-Eastern Star,
Christian Colonist, Australian Star, Port Ade-
laide News, Burra Record, Areas Express, Port
Augusta Dispatch. Satirical and Pictorial,
Weekly—Adelaide Punch, The Lantern, and
Frearson’s Illustrated Weekly.
Monthly— The Comet, Illustrated Adelaide
News, Adelaide Prices Current, Presbyterian
and Independent, Truth and Progress (Baptist),
Christian Pioneer, Australian Sketcher (Ade-
laide edition), Garden and Field.
Quarterly Primitive Methodist Record,
Bible Christian Magazine, Free Presbyterian
Magazine, and the Australian Quarterly Journal
of Prophecy.
The oldest South Australian newspaper is the
Beyiater, the first number of which was printed
in London in 1836.
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
As has already been stated, South Australia
proper extends from the Southern Ocean north-
wards as far as the 26th parallel of south
latitude. Between this and the Indian Ocean
is what is known as the Northern Territory of
the province. The successful crossing of the
centre of Australia from south to north by the
intrepid explorer, John MacDouall Stuart, in
1862, led in due course to the annexation to South
Australia of this extensive region, containing,
as it does, an area of 531,000 square miles.
Settlement in the first instance took place at
Escape Cliffs, Adam Bay, at the mouth of the
Adelaide River, the site of the township having
been decided upon by Lieutenant-Colonel
Finniss, the first-appointed Government Resi-
dent. These early attempts at colonizing the
newly-acquired possession proved a failure, the
position of the spot on which it had been
decided to build the chief town being found
unsuitable. Mr. G. W. Goyder, the Surveyor-
General, was next sent to the North Coast with
a thoroughly efficient party, and before very long
determined upon making the elevated land on the
eastern shore of the harbour of Port Darwin
the site of the chief town of the settlement.
The choice was an eminently felicitious one.
Indeed, it is doubtful if a more eligible locality
for the purpose could be obtained throughout


the length of the Northern coast. Palmerston
was the name given to the town, which is
healthily situated on the summit of very pic-
turesque cliffs, some 80 feet high, covered with
tropical vegetation, which reaches to the
water’s edge. The advantages of the elevated
position are very apparent. The inhabitants
get the full benefit of the cooling breezes that
come off the sea in the evening almost con-
stantly throughout the year, and the land is
alse effectually drained. In the wet season, no
matter how heavy the fall of rain may be, the
water in a few hours disappears, leaving the
ground as dry as ever. The risk to health
from stagnant water is consequently small. The
cliffs somewhat suddenly slope to the shore, and
leave a small valley between them and the ter-
minating headland—Fort Hill. In this hollow
the Government camp was first pitched, and
here also on either side of the hill is to be found
all the wharfage accommodation that the settle-
ment yet boasts of. This is the site of the port
of Darwin as distinguished from the town of
Palmerston on the hill top.
Port Darwin Harbour itself is one of the
finest in the whole of Australia. It covers a
very large area, and affords a perfectly safe
anchorage to vessels of any size. The entrance,
which is two miles wide, with a depth of about
fifteen fathoms, can be approached without
danger, King’s Table, the only hill of any
height in the neighbourhood of the harbour,
being au excellent guide to shipmasters. At
Palmerston the offices of the Overland Telegraph
Department and the establishment of the
British and Australian Telegraph Company
stand side by side, and from the latter proceeds
the cable which—when not out of order—places
all Australia in direct communication with the
remainder of the civilized world. A duplicate
cable of improved pattern will be laid before
the end of the present year.
The climate of the Northern Territory is
tropical in every sense of the word, and there
are but two seasons. The wet season begins about
the end of October, and lasts about five months.
During the months of January and February
the rainfall is something tremendous, and it is
during this period that the settlers suffer most
from the heat. The maximum temperature in
the shade during the day at this time of the year
as recorded by Mr. J. A. G. Little, senior officer
of the Telegraph Department, is 96°, and the
minimum during the night 65°. The tempera-
ture during the remainder of the year is equable
and not extremely hot, except perhaps just prior
to the setting in of the rainy season. Day after
day there is a clear bright sky, the sun never
being shadowed by the semblance of a cloud.
Mr. Little’s observations during the months of
June and July show the maximum temperature
during the day to he 84°, and the minimum
during the night 50°. The annual rainfall
registered at Port Darwin during the last nine
years varies from 51820 inches to 80050
inches, while the wet season rainfall for the
same period ranges from 47*590 to 77*873.
The sickness most prevalent amongst the settlers
is a kind of intermittent fever, accompanied by
ague, or, as it is commonly called, “ the shakes.”
The time at which this very trying, though not
really dangerous, complaint makes its appearance
is just after the wet season, when the south-
east moonsoon sets in. The swamps in the
low-lying lands rapidly evaporate under the
fierce heat of a scorching tropical sun, exhale
malaria, which is not only injurious to the
health of the new-comers but also most per-
nicious to the aboriginals themselves. It has
been noticed that the wetter the season the
more virulent and general are the attacks of
the fever. They were particularly severe in
1873, and again during 1878-9.
The character of the soil in the Northern
Territory is somewhat variable, but its fertility
generally is unquestionable. No difficulty is
experienced in finding large blocks of rich land
capable of growing tropical products in luxu-
riance. This is especially true of the lands in
the neighbourhood of the rivers and water-
courses which thread the country in all direc-
tions. Maize grows profusely, and the ex-
periments made justify the belief that
such articles as sugar, cotton, and indigo
would also prosper in certain situations.
Mr. J. G. Knight at the time of writing the
following remarks (1875) was Secretary to the
then Government Resident, and had every
opportunity of arriving at a correct j udgment
as to the agricultural capabilities of the Nor-
thern Territory. He says Nearly all the
kinds of tropical fruits and vegetables which
have been fairly tried are found to thrive and
flourish in these latitudes. The plantain and
banana grow wherever they are stuck in the
ground and produce excellent fruit. A number
of cocoanut-trees planted three or four years
ago look in splendid condition. Pineapples of
delicious flavour reach maturity with great
rapidity in the Government Botanic Garden.
The ‘custard apple,’ also known as the ‘sour-
sop,’ and the ‘ papaya’ yield most delicious
fruit. The tamarind-tree grows well. The
guava thrives also, as likewise the rosella.
Splendid specimens of the mango are obtained
at Port Essington. The lemon and orange trees
in the Government Garden are growing rapidly,
and appear to take kindly to the soil and climate.
In vegetables the melon tribe succeeds admir-
ably, and will soon grow as weeds in certain
favourable localities. The yam and sweet
potato are being cultivated with great success.
Arrowroot has been tried on a small scale, and
thrives exceedingly well. Excellent ‘ sugar-
cane’ is grown at the Government Garden. It
is believed that the tea-plant would thrive well
in certain districts, and the same may be said
of spices, but none have yet been planted. One
or two cotton-trees in the grounds of the Go-
vernment Resident have yielded excellent-
looking staple. Indian corn has been sown in
several portions of the Territory, and from the
success which has attended the experiment in
cultivation will soon' be greatly extended. _ In
provender for cattle the couch-grass thrives in a
wonderful manner, and is eaten with avidity.
The buffalo-grass also promises to grov/ both
rapidly and well.”


I Special regulations were framed under the
Northern Territory Land Act in 1873 in order to
induce the occupation of land as plantations for
the cultivation of “ rice, sugar, coffee, tea, indigo,
tobacco, or cotton, or for special purposes.”
They provide that the intending planter should
be entitled to select a block of country land not
less than 320 acres in area nor more than 1,280,
at an annual rental of sixpence per acre, which
land should become his own absolute property
if he complied with the following conditions:
That within thirty days after the expiration'of
five years from the date of application he
show to the satisfaction of the Government that
he had at the end of two years cultivated in a
proper manner one-fifth of the extent of his
holding with any of the above-mentioned pro-
ductions ; that after such second year he had
annually cultivated in like satisfactory manner
an additional one-tenth of the entire area
of his land; and “that at the expiration
of the full term of the five years he
tiad one-half of the land cultivated, and
the whole of it enclosed with a fence, wall,
>r permanent hedge. The same regulations also
provided that two or more selectors might
imalgamate their selections and cultivate the
and, either in copartnership or as a registered
-company.. This special provision for inducing
he selection of land in the Territory for planta-
lon purposes expired on January 1, 1876, but
ts application was further extended for a
urther period of four years, namely, until
anuary 1, 1880. Unfortunately up to the
present time no one has taken advantage of the
erms offered by the South Australian Govern-
ment for plantation purposes, and consequently
i® yet a matter of conjecture what products
ill take most kindly to the soil. No doubt,
owever, a further extension of the time would
e granted by Parliament if it had reason to
elieve that by taking this step it would pro-
mote cultivation. The Government has for
aars offered a bonus of £5,000 for the first 500
•ns of sugar produced and manufactured in
le Territory, but the offer, which expires on
ie 30th of the present month, has not had the
feet of inducing any sugar-grower to test
te capability of the soil for growing “ the
me.”
As to the pastoral capabilities of the Terri-
ry there can be no doubt, and within the past
ro years 160,000 square miles of country
■ve been taken up by squatters, who are
ocking it as quickly as possible. Mr. W. J.
•owne, of Adelaide, has during the last three
onths formed both sheep and cattle stations
the River Katherine, and Mr. Roderick
avers, of Sydney, has started a cattle station
the Fountain Head Reef, situated about
e centre of the gold-fields. The existing
julations, specially framed for inducing pas-
■al settlement, provide that the person who
ill describe any country not previously ap-
ed for within the Territory and without the
tied districts for pastoral Darposes shall be
titled to a preferential right to a lease for any
:iod not exceeding twenty-five years, of any
rtion in one block of not less than twenty-five
I nor more than 400 square miles in extent, at
annual rental of sixpence per square mile fi
the first seven years and ten shillings per squa
mile for the remainder of the term, on co
dition that the run is declared stocked with
a period of three years at the rate of two heat
of great cattle or ten head of small cattle fo
every square mile of country. No lease will I
granted until the run has been thus stockec
There are still 360,000 square miles available fo
occupation, and as the accounts given by tho
who have lately examined the country in near!
every direction are favourable it is not impr
bable it will soon be taken up.
In the latter part of 1877 Mr. A. W. Sergiso
explored a great deal of the country to the wes
ward between the Daly and Victoria River
and from that gentleman’s report we learn tha
for soil, grass, and climate he is of opinion tl
country in the vicinity of the Victoria River
second to none. Some very steep ranges wer
crossed between the Daly and the Fitzmaurice
and the report says—“ Everywhere amongs
these ranges extensive valleys were met with
all beautifully grassed and with running creeks
These valleys fenced would make excellent pad
docks and homesteads.” Mr. G. R. McMinn
who examined the country to the south of th
Daly in the early part of the same year, was nol
I however, so prepossessed, the only really gooc
patch seen by him being “ a block of splendic
basalt and limestone country, containing from
600 to 700 square miles, principally rich black
soil, and well watered with springs.”
North Australia, as before indicated, is re
markable for the number and size of its rivers
and some of the principal of these run their
course within the boundaries of the Territory
There is the Adelaide, which empties itself into
Adam Bay, and is navigable for a distance of
fifty miles ; the Roper, which flows easterly
and finds its way into the Gulf of Carpentaria,
and navigable for nearly a hundred miles ; the’
Victoria, in the western portion of the Territory
which can be navigated by small craft at least
100 miles, and forty by large ones ; the Liver-
pool, the South and East Alligators, the Daly
whicn discharges itself into Anson Bay ; and
many others, into all of which rivers of less mag-
nitude, but nevertheless fine watercourses, find
their way. The Daly was traced by Mr. McMinn
for 240 miles. It may fairly be said that no
portion of Australia is better watered than the
Northern Territory, and the advantages of such
iplendid means of communication when the
;ountry becomes settled cannot fail to have a
vonderful influence in the rapid development
>f its riches.
Hitherto the only industry carried on to any
ixtent has been that of gold-mining, but that
itself is insufficient to 3.dvB.nce the prosperity
'f the settlement. Gold there is in abundance
? may be judged by the trophy to be seen in
he Sydney Exhibition. Some splendid nuggets
ave occasionally been obtained from the alluvial
iggings, and the quartz-crushing returns have
a many cases shown as much as four, five and
ix ounces to the ton. Of course it often
appens that the stone only yields a few penny-


weights ; but in one case a few tons of quartz,
possibly picked stone, gave the enormous amount
of 31 ounces of gold to the ton. However, from
a report of Mr. J. A. Plunkett, formerly Warden,
we learn that “the average of thirty-three
crushings was 1 oz. 12 dwt. for every ton.”
The principal reefs at present opened
are the Stapleton Creek, the Howley,
John Bull, Yam Creek, Union, Extended
Union, and Pine Creek. The gold-bearing
country is mostly situated to the south of the
Adelaide Plains, and these plains constitute one
of the mostserious difficulties with which the
mining population have to contend. They
extend from the Adelaide River a distance of
about twenty miles, and during the rainy
season are transformed into one vast sheet of
water, which for weeks together puts an end to
the transport of all provisions and material to
the miners, thus enormously increasing the cost
of cartage and consequent price of goods—
dear enough in the first instance, seeing that
everything is imported from the southern
colonies. For the past three years the settlers
have continually agitated for the construction of
a railway from Southport to Pine Creek, in order
that regular communication between the reefs
and Port Darwin may be ensured at all seasons
of the year and the cost of carriage and time
occupied in transit lessened. In the session of
1877 a resolution was carried in the House of
Assembly that a survey of a line should be
made from Port Darwin to Pine Creek, and the
work was completed towards the end of 1878;
but the estimate deduced from the report of
the officer entrusted with the survey showed
that the undertaking would be so costly that
the Government have decided that they cannot
carry it out. It is rumoured, however, that some
English capitalists have had their eyes upon the
Territory for the last year or two waiting a
favourable opportunity to develop its resources,
and negotiations have been opened up by their
agents with the South Australian Government,
with a view to the construction of th 9 Pine
Creek line, and the taking up of large blocks of
land for plantation and other purposes, but the
details and result of the negotiations have not
transpired.
During 1875 Port Darwin was made a free port,
in the hope that the trade of the place would be
appreciably affected for the better. The antici-
pations of the settlers in this respect have not,
however, as yet been so fully answered as they
desire. Nevertheless the enactment has con-
siderably lightened the burdens which under
exceptional circumstances weigh heavily on the
population, and has also been the means of in-
ducing a greater number of vessels to make
Darwin a port of call. During the last session
au attempt was made to reimpose the duties,
but it proved abortive. There is a felling,
however, that the imposition of duties on some
articles, especially those used by Chinese, who
have settled in the Territory in great numbers
and contribute but very little to the revenue—
such as tea, rice, fish, and especially opium—
would prove beneficial; and a duty on beer and
spirits would not be generally objected to as a
means of increasing the limited revenue of the
settlement.
Port Darwin is the point on the north coast
which is now chosen by all explorers as their
goal. Small parties frequently make their way
from Queensland across the Border to the
overland telegraph line, which they travel
down to the seaboard. These parties are gene-
rally in charge of stock for the Port Darwin
market, or are travelling in the expectation of
discovering new grazing country. The most
important expedition of late, however, was the
Queenslander Transcontinental Railway Expedi-
tion, under the command of Mr. Ernest Favenc,
and fitted out by the enterprise of Mr.
Gresley Lukey, the spirited proprietor of the
Queenslander newspaper, the object being the
construction of a line of railway to the western
boundary of Queensland, and thence north-
westward to Port Darwin. The exploration was
successfully made by Mr. Favenc, who found
that there were no insuperable engineering
difficulties in the way of the project. But
there were other impediments to its fulfilment,
not the least being the improbability of South
Australia sanctioning the scheme, for reasons
which it is scarcely necessary to narrate, the
colony naturally having a preference for a line
of railway having its terminus in her own
country. Mr. J. Forrest, the well-known Western
Australian explorer, has successfully made his
way from the De Grey River, on the north-west
coast, to a spot some 50 miles to the south-east
of the Katherine Station, having explored a
large extent of country but little of which has
yet been traversed. Mr. Forrest expected to
reach the Katherine on September 23, and
would then continue his journey northwards
along the telegraph line to Port Darwin.
The distance of the settled portion of the
Territory from the seat of government has had
a very depressing influence on the development
of the possession, and unfortunately many
causes, which perhaps it has been impossible to
avoid, have tended to make it a very expensive
incubus on the parent State, splendid possession
though it be. The Government have at times
endeavoured to make the country more self-
supporting, but success has not attended their
efforts. Making Darwin a free port had a
slightly beneficial influence; the contract entered
into with the Netherlands India Steamship
Company has done good service, Port Darwin
being as a consequence brought into direct com-
munication with the Indian Archipelago; and
the liberal provisions which have been made in
regard to the pastoral settlement of the interior
havealsobeen instrumental in largely opening up
the country. But the true cause of the settlement
not progressing is the want of capital and the
absence of a population engaged in cultivating
the products of the soil—not one devoted solely
to exhausting the treasure of the mine. A
mining population of itself will never place
the country on a prosperous basis. The settlers
themselves are of opinion that by regulating the
introduction of the Chinese element, which has
lately become overpowering, the construction of
a line of railway to the reefs, and direct repre-


sentation in Parliament, the disabilities with
which they have so long been familiar will
pass away; but something further than this will
be required to be done. The occupation of the
interior by pastoral lessees will in all proba-
bility ere long lead to a better state of things;
but those portions suitable for agriculture must
also be turned to account before the onward Dro-
gress of the Territory can be said to have begun
in real earnest. The population of the settle-
ment is now increasing, and an estimate
obtained from an authentic source states that
there are now in the Territory about 1,000
whites and 3,000 Chinese.


APPENDIX.
STATISTICS OF SOUTH AUS-
TRALIA.
In compiling the following tables we have
endeavoured to compress within the limited
space at our disposal as much useful informa-
tion as possible relative to the progress and
present condition of the colony. We have had
recourse to various official returns and such other
reliable documents as we could command, and
have endeavoured to secure perfect accuracy in
every particular. It will be observed that as a
general rule we have chosen quinquennial
periods, the term of five years being sufficiently
long for purposes of comparison, as well as for
securing brevity in the results :
POPULATION.
South Australia was 'proclaimed as a British
colony, by Captain Hindmarsh, the first Gover-
nor of the province, December 28,1836.
Table I.
Showing the population of the colony at the
end of 1836,1837, 1838, and of each succeeding
fifth year, with the increase for each interme-
diate period:—
Years Pof>U ’ In '
xears. lation- cre aBe.
1836 .. 546
1837 .. 3,000 2,454
1838 .. 6,000 3,000
1843 .. 17,366 11,366
1848 .. 38,666 21,300
1853 .. 78,944 40,278
Years Popu- In ‘
xe ' lation. crease.
1858 .. 118,340 39,396
1863 .. 140,416 22,076
1868 ..176,298 35,882
1873 ..198,075 21,777
1878 ..248,795 50,720
The Registrar-General of Births and Deaths
estimated the population July 1 at 255,148
showing an increase of 6,353 during the first six
months of the present year.
AREA.
With the exception of Western Australia this
colony is the most extensive of all the Austra-
lian group, being equal in area to a fourth of
that of Europe.
Table 11.
Statement of the entire area of the colony,
including the Northern Territory, expressed in
square miles and a ares: —
Square Miles. Acres.
Thirty-six counties ... 58,946 37,725,440
Eastern pastoral district 4,840 3,097,600
Western do. do. ... 164,306 105,155,200
Northern do. do. ... 123,853 79,265,920
North-eastern do. ... 28,120* 18,090,640
Total S. Aus. proper ... 380,070 243,244,800
Northern Territory ... 523,620 335,116,800
Grand total area ... 903,690 578,361,600
LAND SALES.
The country Crown lands were originally sold
at a uniform price of £1 per acre, with the ex-
ception of “ preliminary sections,” which were
disposed of at 12s. per acre, each section con-
taining 134 acres. Subsequently the land was
sold by auction to the highest bidder at the
upset price of £L per acre. In 1868 an Act was
passed providing for the sale of agricultural
lands upon credit, the object being to encourage
the occupation and cultivation of the land within
the hundreds. Our next table refers to lands
purchased and paid for, namely, for cash and
sections taken up on credit and subsequently
paid for.
Table 111.
Statement of the quantity of land alienated
to the end of 1838 and to the end of each sub-
sequent five years, showing also the total sales
during each such five years, and the amounts
paid in each case.
Total Sales.
Interval Sales.
Years.
Acres.
Amounts
Acres.
Amounts.
1838
112,666
£91,399
112,666
£91,399
1843
325,691
304,439
213,025
213,040
1848
503,976
530,872
178,285
226,433
1853
1,008,119
1,158,935
504,143
628,083
1858
1,916,720
2,421,795
908,601
1,262,860
874,461
1863
2,671,102
3,296,256
754,382
1868
3,769,892
4,782,639
1,098,790
1,486,383
1873
4,395,188
5,530,835
625,296
748,196
1878
5,11^,108
6,568,975
718.920
1,038,140
From this table it will be seen that to the end
®f 1873 more than five millions of acres had
been alienated, the general average price per
acre having been £1 ss. Bd. Our next table
refers to lands taken up on deferred payments.


Table IV.
Showing the extent of Crown lands purchased
on credit from 1873 to 1878 inclusive, with the
amount of “ interest deposits” paid thereon.
Sales. Acres. Deposits.
By auction ... • ... 20,355 £5,272 2 9
Private contract ... 208,219 23,205 12 0
Selections, agricl. areas 593,111 90,071 2 6
D ".«° e^l,n°r ed }2.rai.o7o 405,619 12 0
Forfeited selections ... 86,376 15,167 4 0
Total 3,699,131 539,335 13 3
The gross amount of the purchase - money
agreed to be paid by the selectors of these
3,699,131 acres, in addition to the interest depo-
sits, was £5,215,377 Bs. From this sum, how-
ever must be deducted £995,972 9s. on account
of 767,701 acres either forfeited or @f which the
purchases were completed at the end of 1878.
This leaves £4,219,404 19s. due to the Govern-
ment upon 2,931,430 acres then held on credit.
This sum will fall due at various periods ex-
tending to the year 1887.
CULTIVATION.
The following table shows that the agricul-
tural lands are very extensively used for growing
wheat. m
Table V.
Statement of the number of acres under culti-
vation in 1838 and each subsequent fifth year:—
Years.
Wheat.
Hay.
Other
Crops.
Total.
1838
20
66
86
1843
23,000
—
5,690
28,690
1848
29,737
—
19,174
48,911
1854*
89,945
23,402
16,345
129,692
1858
188,703
45,919
29,840
264,462
1863
335,758
75,590
144.620
555,968
1868
533,035
106,644
168,555
808,234
1873
784,784
142,167
298,122
1,225,073
1878
1,305,851
218,359
487,109
2,011,319
* In consequence of the disturbing effects of
the gold discoveries in Victoria in 1851 the
agricultural statistics were not collected during
that and the two succeeding years. We have,
therefore, substituted those for 1854 in place of
1853 in the above and in table VII.
The official records of the quantities of grain
and other crops annually produced in the colony
do not extend further back than to the season
1858-9. The following table has been compiled
from these later returns:—
Table VI.
Showing the total produce of wheat, barley
and oats, hay, and wine for the years 1858-9 and
each successive fifth season.
Wheat - and Oats. Wioe -
Seasons. Bushels. Bushels. Tods. Gallons.
1858-9 ... 2,109,544 315,654 52.896 140,970
1863-4 ... 4,691,919 328,965 102,293 606,365
1868-9 ... 5,173,970 368,355 113,167 812,118
1873-4 ... 6,178,816 147,735 145,389 733,478
1878-9 ... 9,332,049 178,135 210,974
LIVE STOCK—PASTURAGE.
The pastoral lands of the colony contain
321,124 square miles, as shown in Table 11. The
returns for the year ended March 31, 1879, show
that the number of living animals, including
horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and poultry,
within the counties was 6,023,755, and within
the pastoral districts 1,477,390, making a total
of 7,501,145, being an increase of 363,827 upon
the previous year.
Table VII.
Quinquennial statement of the number of
horses, horned cattle, and sheep (including
lambs) in the counties and hundreds :
Years. Horses. Cattle. Sheep.
1838 ... 480 2,500 28,000
1843 ... 1,576 20,000 331,000
1848 ... 55,083 838,394
1854 ... 10,184 74,220 1,768,724
1858 ... 34,629 _
1863 ... 59,088 226,166 3,891,642
1868 ... 75,409 123 213 4,987,024
1873 ... 87,455 174,381 5,617,419
1878 ... 121,553 251802 6,377,812
Table VIII.
Showing the number of annual and pastoral
leases granted within the hundreds, and in the
outlying districts, with the area in each case,
and the aggregate annual rental, in 1853, and
each succeding fifth year:—
Yrs.
A. ill
No.
Lses.
Sqr.
Mis.
Past
No.
rl Leases
Square
Miles.
Total
Square
Miles.
Total
Kental.
£
1853
1858
1863
1868
1873
1878
48
49
107
69
116
144
1125
1548
4074
1353
3265
5470
77
96
1100
761
950
1328
2,873
5,638
44,207
51,498
74,566
168,716
3,968
7.186
48,281
52.851
77,831
174,186
2,562
18,710
26.767
65,300
45,000
48,943
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS.
The first recorded exports of staple Droduce
took place in 1338, and consisted of wool valued
at £770, and of whalebone and oil valued at
£4,270. In 1839 the exports of these articles
amounted to £9,165, and in 1840 to £15,650. In
1841 slates, lead, timber, and a few other articles
were included among the staple exports. In
1842 butter, cheese, tallow, and bark were
added. Tne first exportation of flour, wheat, and
copper ore was in 1843, whet? barley, oats, vege-
tables, salted beef, hides, barilla, and salt were
also included; after which year the exports were
still more numerous. The quarterly returns of
the Collector of Customs are very voluminous
and show that more than 120 different kinds
of staple articles are now annually exported.
We have classified the whole under the several
headings indicated in the following:
Table IX.
Quinquennial statement of exports the pro-
duce of South Australia, imports re-exported,


total imports, and of imports retained for con-
sumption within the colony :
1838
1843. )
1848.
1853.
1858.
1863.
1868.
1873.
1878.
Staple Expoets, viz.: —
I. Wheat and flour
II. Other agricultural produce...
III. Horticultural produce
IV. Dairy produce
V. Wool
VI. Other animal productions...
VII. Copper, ore, and regulus ...
VIII. Other minerals
IX. Colonial manufactures
X. Natural products, &c
XI. Unenumerated
£
770
4,270
£
10,032
477
249
2,220
45,569
6,430
23
104
109
948
£
34,815
2,394
21
176
98,583
5,558
310,387
11.556
539
1,642
207
£
208,647
86,579
2.153
11,808
236,020
1,289
176,347
397
5.153
2,910
293
£
474,612
56,136
4,316
9,091
420,833
8,589
359,182
16,548
2,682
3,032
20
£
698,994
60,148
13,334
17,608
715,935
26,845
532,861
9,532
11,466
7,754
879
£
554,585
16,374
11,785
8,928
1,305,280
52,045
608,423
11,181
16,042
17,847
1,336
£
1,692,738
9,675
15,898
10,263
1,617,589
123,824
768,522
2,089
15,832
21,133
7,629
£
1,646,435
35,922
33,610
14,839
1,834,071
129,061
407,587
2,162
23,796
63,020
7,531
Total value staple exports...
Imports— Re-exported
5,040
1,402
66,161
14,698
465,878
38,189
731,596
1,510,218
1,355,041
157,144
2,095,356
263,461
2,603,826
215,474
4,285,192
313,938
4,198,034
1,156,986
Total exports
Total imports
Do. retained for consumption...
6,442
158,582
157,180
80,859
109,137
94,439
504,067
384,326
346,137
2,241,814
2,336,290
826,072
1,512,185
1,769,351
1,612,207
2.358.817
2,028,279
1.764.818
2,819,300
2,238,510
2,023,036
4,599,130
3,841,100
3,527,162
5,355,020
5,707,887
4,550,901
It will be observed that the combined import
and export trade amounted last year to more
than eleven million pounds sterling, being an
increase in ten years of £6,005,097, as shown in
the subjoined statement.
Table X.
Showing the increase in the export and im-
port trade of the colony during 1878 as com-
pared with 1868:
Staple exports, viz.—
Wheat and flour £1,091,850
Other agricultural produce ... ... 19,548
Horticultural produce ... ... 21,825
Dairy produce ... ... ... ... 5,911
Wool 528.791
Other animal productions ... ... 77,016
Copper, ore, and regulus ... ... *200,836
Other minerals ... ... ... *9,019
Colonial manufactures ... ... 7,754
Natural products, &c.... ... ... 45,173
Unenumerated ... ... ... 6,195
Total increase staple products ... £1,594,208
Increase re-exported goods ... ... 941,512
Total increase all exports ... - ... £2,535,720
Increase imported goods ... ... 3,469,377
Increase combined imports and ex-
ports ... ... ... ... £6,005,097
* These amounts are negative, the exportation
of minerals having fallen off very considerably
during the last three or four years, on account
of the fall in the price of copper.
SHIPPING.
The earliest official records of arrivals and
departures of vessels at Port Adelaide are those
for the year 1840. The following table has been
compiled from the “ Statistical Register.”
Table XI.
Statement of the arrivals and departures of
vessels at Port Adelaide in 1840,1841,1842, and
1843, also for each subsequent period of five
years, including the shipping at the outports:—
Periods.
Inwards—,
No. Tonnage.
r~0
No.
utwards—v
Tonnage.
1840
206
35,791
219
47,996
1841
96
17,799
101
19,237
1842
73
12,499
77
12,855
1843
51
7,532
53
8,001
1844-1848
692
127,313
663
120,840
1849-1853
1,623
475,623
1,631
473,178
1854-1858
2,127
614,484
2,109
607,122
1859-1863
1,941
548,211
1,953
548,298
1864-1868
2,761
816,234
2.773
824,006
1869-1873
2,948
938,690
2,882
919,421
1874-1878
4,335
1,722,473
4,278
1,734,837
The number of vessels that arrived last year
was 1,026, of an aggregate tonnage of 452,738
tons. Of these 109 were from Great Britain,
347 from New South Wales, 292 from Victoria,
83 from Tasmania, 41 from Western Aus-
tralia, 106 from other British possessions, and
48 from foreign Stites. The departures, 1,035
vessels, of 453,535 tons, namely, 106 for Great
Britain, 332 for New South Wales, 277 for
Victoria, 72 for Tasmania, 43 for Western Aus-
tralia, 176 for other British possessions, and 29
for foreign States.


REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.
The “General Revenue,” so-called, includes
the “ Land Fund,” Customs duties, and various
other receipts, but the “ Loans for public works”
account is kept separate in the official records.
Table XII.
Showing the Revenue and Expenditure of the
Government during 1840, 1843, and each suc-
ceeding fifth year:—
Year. Revenue. Expenditure.
1840 £30,199 £169,966
1843 24,142 » 29,842
1848 82,911 80,129
1853 539,754 239,783
1858 469,637 528,772
1863 631,700 635,205
1868 716,004 852,689
1873 937,648 839,152
1878 1,592,635 1,620,310
These sums do not of course include the inter-
mediate years. On the contrary, the aggregate
general revenue during the five years ended
December 31, 1878, amounted to £6,501,373, and
the expenditure to £6,615,334. It is necessary
to explain also that the expenditure includes
the amounts paid on account of interest on and
redemption of loans for public works.
Table XIII.
In the statement as to Bonds issued to date
are included Bonds sent home before the end of
1878, but not sold until 1879.
Bonde issued to date £7,491,100
Redeemed 850,700
Bonds in circulation £6,640,400
Interest paid ... ... ... ... 1,948,123
Unexpended revenue, provision for
interest, and redemption of loans... 142,025
The amount of the Loan Fund expended in
1878 on waterworks, railways, and other public
works was £1,575,572.
RAILWAYS.
The Government Railways extend over a
distance of 516 j miles. The weekly traffic
returns give the following totals for the present
year to August 23 (omitting shillings and
pence):—
Railways.
Passengers.
Goc
ds.
Total
Rcpts.
No.
Rcpts.
Tons.
Rcpts.
City and Port
Northern ...
PortPirie ...
Kingston ...
Strathalbyn
Pt. Wakefield
Pt.Broughton
Kadina
Mt. Gambier*
1,405,113
174,475
24,668
3,536
26,639
7,982
323
40,376
3,410
£
25,820
40,365
3,612
1,540
1,892
2,263
35
1,237
1,018
67,943
141,909
71,648
3,648
4,440
16.325
6,690
42,175
1,710
£
8,492
72,870
30,426
2,378
1,252
5,558
947
6,636
611
£
34,312
113,235
34,038
3,918
3,144
7,821
982
7,873
1,629
Totals
1,686,522
77,782
356,488
129,170
206,952
Miscellaneous receipts, wharfage, &c. ... £2,395
Gross total receipts £209,347
May 19,1879.
BANKING.
There are eight banking establishments in
the colony, two of which have been opened
within the last two years. By an Act of Par
liament passed in 1863 the Banks are required
to prepare periodical abstracts of their liabi
lities and assets, upon a uniform plan and for
fixed periods. The following tables have been
compiled from these returns :
Table XV.
Statement of the average liabilities anc
assets of the Banks, made up to the end of 1861
and each subsequent fifth year.
Liabilities.
Voaru Notes in Tot al
circulation. eposits. Xjiabilities.
1863 ... £232,482 £787,104 £1,052,328
1868 ... 225,709 1,293,420 1,549,195
1873 ... 372,101 2,183,754 2,633,194
1878 ... 483,390 3,378,863 3,984,595
Assets.
Years Coin and Bilbfdbf Total
Years. Bulli Bills dis- A
counted, &c. c '
1863 ... £326,876 £1,603,565 £2,079,957
1868 ... 333.224 2,669,886 3,234,210
1873 ... 593,364 3,503,829 4,325,320
1878 ... 610,027 6,126,501 7,058,738
The “ total liabilities” set forth above include
the amounts in the other two columns, and the
“bills in circulation” and “balances due to
other Banks.” So also the “ total assets” con-
tained in the right-hand column include, not
only the amounts given in the other two
columns, but “Government securities,”“landed
property and Bank premises,” “ Notes and bills
of other Banks,” and “ balances due from other
Banks,” the particulars of which are contained
in the official returns.
SAVINGS BANK.
This is one of the most flourishing institutions
of the colony. It was established in 1847, and
the annual deposits now amount to over
£580,000, or over £ll,OOO per week; and the
amount standing to the credit of depositors at
the end of 1878 was nearly £1,000,000, being at
the rate of £397 for every hundred of the popula-
tion. The following table shows the progress
made by the Bank since its establishment:—
Table XVI.
Comparative statement of the number of
depositors in the Savings Bank at the end of
1848 and of each subsequent fifth year, showing
also the amounts deposited and withdrawn
each year, and the amount of depositors’
balances (including interest) at the close of
each year:—


.Years.
No.of de-
positors.
Amt. de-
posited.
Amt. with-
drawn.
Depositors’
balances.
1848
214
£6,474
£1,181
£5,313
1853
1,263
53,053
30,312
54,355
1858
1,929
35,139
39,033
63,881
1863
4,711
91,784
63,394
189,144
1868
9,659
170,567
147,661
312,728
1873
18,604
380,241
272,621
709,343
1878
30,392
588,756
619,099
975,316
RESUME.
Population, end of 1878 248,795
Area of colony—Acres 578,361,600
Land alienated, do 5,114,108
Land unsold, do 573,247,492
Land held on credit, do 2,931,430
D ue to Government on credit sales... £4,219,405
Under cultivation—Wheat—Acres 1,305,851
Hay do. 218,359
Other crops do. 487,109
Total do. 2,011,319
Produce—Wheat, bushels ... 9,332,049
Barley and oats, do 178,135
Hay, tons 210,974
Pastoral leases —Square miles ... 174,186
Live stock, 1878—Horses 121,553
Cattle 251,802
Sheep and Lambs ... ... 6,377,812
Value of Imports, 1878 £5,707.887
Re-exported 1,156,986
Staple exports 4,198,034
Total value of exports 5,355,020
Shipping, 1878—Arrivals, No. ... 1,026
Tonnage 452,738
Departures—No. 1,035
Tonnage 453,535
General revenue, 1878 £1,592,635
General expenditure 1,620,310
Bonds issued to December 31, 1878 7,491,100
Bonds redeemed 850,700
Bonds in circulation 6,640,400
Bonds interest paid 1,948,123
Loan expenditure on public works,
„ 18 ?8 1,575,572
Banks—Total liabilities 3,984,595
Assets 7,058,738
Balance in favour of assets 3,074,143
Savings Bank—Deposited 1878 ... 588,756
Withdrawn 619,099
Depositors’ balances 975,316
ADDENDA.
Government Railways opened to
December 31,1878—miles ... 449
Do., cost, including rolling-stock,
machinery, plant, &c £3,564,186
Number of passengers, 1878 ... 2,202,951
Tons of goods 533,270
Passenger receipts £96,899
Goods receipts 162,342
Telegraph lines open—miles ... 4^217
Telegraph messages, 1878—inland... 478,196
Do. do. 1878 inter-
national 17,364
Number of post-offices 429
Letters transmitted, 1878 8,849,743
Newspapers, 1878 4,657,254
Money-orders issued in 1878 ... 30,890
Do. do., amount £98,689
B. K. THOMAS, PEINTEB, ADELAIDE.






