





Appeal for the Persecuted Wesleyan Church
in Tonga.
To the Ministers and Members of the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist Church.
Fathers and Brethren, —
A report has been laid before the New South Wales
and Queensland Conference from the Tonga District Meet-
ing, which will be found at the end hereof; and on hearing
and after discussing that report, it was resolved by the
Conference that—
“ The Rev. A. J. Webb, with the Revs. R. Sellers and
“ E. E. Crosby, and Mr. S. E. Lees, be a Committee to draw
“up and put in circulation a short appeal setting forth the
“ claims which our suffering people in Tonga at this peculiar
“crisis have for support from the Australasian Wesleyan
“ Methodist Church. The above Committee is also directed
“ to append to this printed appeal the report read by the
“ Rev. E. E. Crosby, together with the additional informa-
tion supplied to the Conference.”
A large amount was raised last year, the whole of
which has been spent, and a deficiency now exists as against
the demands made by the exigencies of the situation. Some
£l6OO in all is required.
We therefore approach you with this appeal on behalf
of our Church in Tonga and for our suffering and persecuted
fellow-members and Wesleyan adherents in that sadly dis-
tracted country.
We ask you to consider the sad case of numbers of
them, and the peculiarly trying position in which some of
them are placed, as set forth in the touching relation for-
warded to Conference by the resolution of the Tonga Dis-
trict. It has been objected in some quarters, and by those
whose views are worthy of every respect, that there have
been exaggerations and unconsciously pai'tial statements in
some of the representations made of persecutions and oppres-
sive acts in Tonga. But it is respectfully submitted that,


after making the most liberal deduction for possible over-
statement or too entirely ex pat te representations, there
evidently remains a solid mass of facts; and that it must
be a matter of conviction that there are cases of real and
cruel persecution and of disgracefully oppressive official acts,
under which numbers of those who faithfully and deter-
minedly adhere to our and their old Church, lie in disability
and groan in suffering. And, again, it is well-known that
there are intelligent men of independent minds who dis-
approve of the administration of Church matters in the past
in Tonga; but without touching on that debated point we
plead for a consideration of things as they now are; —that
is to say, the unhappy condition of our people, and especially
of our best men. For those native Tongans who have been
most distinguished for their adherence to our Church, and
most prominent in their standing on our side, are nearly all,
if not all, either in gaol or under some form of disability or
serious annoyance. The position is this: Funds are
•exigently wanted for the relief of our people. Money is
necessary to maintain in existence our historic Church in
Tonga, the mere remnant now of that splendid Mission
•Church which God caused to rise and flourish large and
fair.
To preserve this Church the present appeal is made,
and various grounds are urged for it. For instance, that
after all the labour spent on the past, and the hard toil of the
fathers of the Tongan Mission, many of our Church are
loath to abandon what remains of the result of so much
expenditure of money and of men and of Church effort
generally.
Then, the sustentation of our Missions may be regarded
■ns of equal importance with the extension of them; and it
would be a questionable policy to desert the gardens we
have won from the wilderness with patient toil, and simply
pass on to make new clearings. There is a duty to that
which we have once taken up as well as to that which lies
waiting our attention; and it is held that it would not be
justifiable on our part to abandon even what remains to us
of our Tongan Church. For the sake of that remnant, for
our own credit and honour as the Mother Church, let us
not give up those who belong to us in Tonga. And yet,
without funds, how are we to sustain our operations there,
or avoid abandoning what belongs to us in that land ? It


as further advisable that we hold fast that which has
remained to us, and still keep up our position in the
Friendly Islands, in order that those who may be wishful
to return to us may find something to come back to. We
have reason to believe that there are many who have but
seceded in name; to use an expression of their own, “their
bodies are with the Free Church, but their hearts are with
the old Church.” We expect that when the undue pressure
is withdrawn, numbers will join us again, and that the
larger part of the people of Tonga who have been pressed
to forsake us will gladly come back to the Church of their
fathers and of their own first love. But we should remain
there to receive them when they return; and, to thus hold
our own, money at the present time is very much required.
Will our Methodist people in these colonies desert our
•Church in Tonga by withholding supplies 1 Will they with-
draw from the scene of holy triumphs, and leave no trace of
the true Church of Tonga, by declining to furnish the neces-
sary sustentation funds at this hour of need 1 We are bold
to think they will not, and so venture to appeal on behalf
of the quivering strained form of our Church, holding on
with every grasp as the rush of the wave of oppression
passes over her. Then as the policy of abandonment or
sustentation is involved in the giving or withholding of
supplies, let us urge another consideration upon the
Methodist public. If we abandon Tonga and yield up the
outcome of years of persistent toil and enthusiastic effort to
those who would wrest it from us, the same thing may
occur again in other and newer fields of our Mission work.
Someone may perchance rise up and exert an unworthy
influence, and so draw away from the fold a large majority
of those whom we first cared for and provided continuously
with a religious home. Such a leader or leaders might be
even emboldened to such a course by observing the unwill-
ingness of our people to sustain what had once been an
extension of their Church, and our readiness to withdraw
from occupation in the occurrence of a vigorously conducted
secession. But to even a greater degree would the damping,
chilling effect of such an indifference be felt upon our pre-
sent and unaffected Mission fields. It would greatly
dispirit our Missionaries, now labouring cheerfully to build
up native Churches on the lines of our excellent organisa-
tion, to think that they might be setting up a house of


sand to be knocked down at the tread of a • strong-willed'
unscrupulous opponent, who wished to destroy what they
had done, to build up something more after his own heart..
It would take some of the spirit and zeal out of Missionaries
were they to believe that on an adversary becoming largely
successful our colonial Churches would withdraw their sup-
port and leave the Mission Churches at his feet. That
whole ranks of native ministers, preachers, school-teachers,
and office-bearers raised up by the Lord and trained with
care and patience by our Missionaries, together with
ecclesiastical properties and church lands, may go into other
hands, and the work so far as Methodism’s proprietary "in
and direction of it be concerned pass away, and
Like an insubstantial pageant, faded,
Leave not a wreck behind.
Yet unless we are prepared as a Church to stand by that
which we have once acquired, as well as to go on to fresh
fields of acquisition, to extend generously our sympathy and
giving to maintain, as we once did to possess; to endure a
strain and make sacrifice in order to conserve, as well as to
obtain; we shall certainly find ourselves weakened in in-
fluence and diminished in credit, and we shall stultify out-
work. Yet unless we give of sympathy and money, such
must be the case : and to avoid such a lamentable result this
appeal is sent forth to all the colonies under our Austra-
lasian General Conference. Nay, we desire to hold our
own in Tonga, for we are not satisfied that the children
which God has given us there will be equally well cared for,
or as wisely provided for by the stepmother who is forced
upon their unwilling allegiance. We cannot yield up the
sheep from our fold to shepherds who do not command our
confidence. We do not feel that we should be true to our
trust from God in doing this, or faithful to the faithful few
who endure so much to be still connected with the Church
they love and believe in ; or just to the numbers who have
proceeded from us, or been forced away from us by a move-
ment not of their initiation, and, in a large majority of cases,
contrary to their own volition. Some we believe have gone-
from us by mistake, some in ignorance, many through undue
influence and actual persecution or fear of persecution. In
their interest we should hold to Tonga ; in the interest of
those who have not gone from us ; in the interests of other
of our Missions in the great Polynesian field ; in the interests


of our own Church, we should stand by the work that we
have begun ; the work that remains to us, the work that
we hope yet to do even in poor distracted Tonga itself.
Tor this money is required as well as deep sympathy, and
fervent prayers : and to this end we make by direction of
the N.S.W. and Queensland Conference this earnest appeal
for help to all Ministers and Circuits comprised in our Aus-
tralasian Wesleyan Methodist Church.
RICHARD SELLORS
ARTHUR J. WERE
ERNEST E. CROSBY
S. E. LEES.
The Rev. E. E. Crosby, 8.A., representative of the
Tonga District, submitted to the Conference the following
report in reference to the persecution now going on in that
group
The following is the report for the Conference of 1887,
prepared in accordance with the resolution of the Tonga
"-district meeting:—
“ This second year of persecution has been marked
off in one important particular from its predecessor. There
is' no difficulty in directly connecting the Government
with many of the worst cases that have happened this
year, for they have been police court cases. Not only
so, but the Premier has chosen to make conspicuous
his own interest in some of them. He takes a police
magistrate about with him, who displaces the resident
magistrate as long as he is in a court town. It is by this
official that the great majority of the cases to be detailed in
this report were tried.
In December, 1885, the Haabai Wesleyans were at
length released and allowed to return to their homes, but
they were distinctly warned that it was only a temporary
release. This threat damped their joy, and the state of
•affairs at their homes depressed them still more. They had
not been allowed to plant, and the consequence was that
they had to face famine, which has continued, more or less,
during the year. Tongatabu has done its best to help them,


but they have passed through great privations. The help
from Tonga would have been greater, but the officer whose
duty it is to grant sailing, permits- has always refused to let
any Wesleyans go to Haabai until they have got the king’s,
consent, which is not required in other cases; so that it has,
been very difficult for our people to pass to and fi’o between
the groups, and the majority of the' Free Church boats and
vessels will not convey any of our people.
Towards the end of 1885 one of the two young girls
who had been taken to Kao died. Her family has suffered
severely for the “ lotu,” one brother having been sentenced
to three years and six months’ labour, with £25 fine, and
another to two years, and £ll. She was not even allowed
to die in peace, but was, told that if she did not join the
‘ Free Church ’ her body would be thrown into the sea : the
land was not to be polluted by the corpse of a ‘ Fakaogo ’
(i.e., a Wesleyan). But the threat was lost on her, and soon
she passed the ‘waves, of this troublesome world,’ and the
wearied spirit found eternal rest in the Father’s bosom.
Happily the threat was not carried out, but it was with the
utmost difficulty that permission to bury the body on
Tongan soil was obtained. A little later the threat was
made in another case, and the friends of the dead were so
frightened that they begged tile Free Church minister to
conduct the funeral.
In Tongatabu the year closed stormily. There was
trouble brewing in connection with the College children.
One of our most valuable churches was broken open and
then nailed against us. And cases of arson—a species of
persecution that there had already been instances of in
Haabai—began to cause us serious alarm. On three occa-
sions dynamite was used. Appeal was at once made to the
acting Premier, Tuuhetoka, and though he did as little as
possible, yet his interference immediately ended the thing.
That shows how completely the Goverment has the country
in hand. It also shows upon whom the responsibility rests
for the outrages that we have had to endure. Tuuhetoka
denied in most insulting terms some of the alleged cases of
arson, though he made in writing the damaging admission
that he had found out the culprit in two of the dynamite
cases. Will it be believed that nothing was done to the*
man % The policeman residing in the town, however,.,
advised the people publicly to be more discriminating, for


in one of the cases a Free Church man had suffered as well as
the Wesleyan. Three of the houses were quite destroyed.
In reference to one of them a Government town-ruler advised
the Wesleyans not to grieve -it was only what they must
expect.
About the middle of January, 1886, after a letter from,
Mr. Baker, the Minister of Police went round to the various,
encampments in Nukualofa and told our people that they
were free to return to their homes. They had been here-
some six months in all. This step also shows who was,
responsible for the banishment and detention of the people.
If it had been the chiefs, Mr. Baker would have left it with
them to recall their people, and this is still more conclusively
proved by the fact that there was no message for the people
of Kolovai ; the Government regarding their banishment as
a matter between themselves and their chief. Many of
them are still in Nukualofa.
It was soon evident that the new laws were to be put
in force. The school law forbids school children to ‘ enter *
college without a permit. Had it read £ attend ’ the meaning
would have been clear. As it was, we thought the law did
not apply to the children who had entered the college before
it was passed. The consequence was we had to pay some
£l5 in fines before we realised that the law was to be so
worked as to make it impossible for any school children to
attend our college, though no interference was offered to the
Roman Catholics, much less to the Free Church. We tried,,
as a final means, an application for permits, and were
informed that there were none ! The result is, that the
Girls’ College, for which Mr. Baker, while chairman, erected
an immense buildings is nearly crushed for the present.
In the law of the ‘six’ there are two ambiguities that
have been constantly worked by the magistrates in their
determination to stop every Wesleyan service throughout
Tonga. And though the law as applied to us would stop
most of the Roman Catholic and Free Church services, it is
not put in force against them. On the contrary, in one or
two places the Free Church had actually ceased its services,
its not having the ‘six’ there being so patent, but Mr.
Baker appeared on the scene, and their services were at
once resumed. The ambiguities are—-(I), ‘ Fai ha malaga,’
i «., ‘ preach a sermon.’ The law seemed plainly to touch
the preacher only. In the first case, that of Haakame, in.


February, the defendants pleaded among other points that
they had only listened to a sermon, and that the church being
theirs they had a right to be in it. The magistrate always
acts as crown prosecutor against Wesleyans, and he replied
that if they had not been present a service could not have
been held ; and inasmuch as they had helped to form a
congregation, they had, as their summonses declared, each
of them ‘preached a sermon.’ (2.) The other ambiguous
phrase is ‘Kakai totonu,’ i «., ‘rightful inhabitant.’ The
magistrate told the people they had counted wrongly.
Their standard had been the residing in a place, having land
and paying taxes there, and being enrolled in the Govern-
ment books as of that town. He remarked this was wrong,
and talked a great deal about ‘descent,’ but though pressed
to define ‘rightful inhabitant,’ he declined to do so. It was
sufficient for him to say there were not six Wesleyans
‘rightful inhabitants’ of Haakame. Twelve persons were
therefore‘convicted. Three elected to pay the tine, £4 15s.
each. The others had not the means, and were obliged to
work as prisoners for four months, and no distinction was
made between them and the worst criminals.
The next case was that of Talafoou, in May. Here
we felt quite certain we had the ‘six,’ let the magistrate
interpret the law as he would. But we were wrong. It
turned out that, although for ecclesiastical and ordinary
purposes the town was regarded as one, yet in municipal
matters it is divided into two parts, each having its own
town-ruler. By thus regarding the town as two places, and
only counting the ‘ six’ in that one where the church stands,
the magistrate was again able to find us guilty; and eight
more Wesleyans were fined £4 13s. each, or four months’
prison labour. Meanwhile, we had been appealing to the
Minister of Police to give us the exact limits of the law,
that we might know where we had the ‘six,’ but he posi-
tively refused to do so. The magistrate had declared that
his duty was merely to administer the law, not to expound
it. Under these circumstances, appeal was made to the
Consul to use his good offices to get for us an interpretation
of the law, but he courteously declined to interfere. Later
on Mr. Baker was in Tonga, and he was asked to give us
its measure, but he referred us to the Minister of Police,
who had absolutely refused to tell us ! And so we have
had to walk with fear and trembling, and though we think


we now know what the law includes, yet we can never feel
certain. Moreover, the knowledge of to-day comes from
two other cases yet to be detailed.
Concurrently with the Talafoou case, the Govern-
ment officials and Government-paid ‘nobles’ began to in-
clude prayer-meetings, class-meetings, &c., under the term
‘preach a sermon.’ In some of the towns family worship,
even, was stopped. Again the Minister of Police was asked
to say whether this was a right application of the law, and
the only answer was an insult.
In the Niuas, the first part of the year was laden with
suffering for the few who dared still to adhere to us. They
were gathered into one town on each island, and there
passed the days in a state resembling a siege. They wex*e
not allowed to leave the premises for food, or even for a
wash, without a permit. Open sympathy with them was
sure to be punished, axxd to take them food was reckoned
rebellion. We are assured oxx independent authority that
things could not have been worse ; that cruel tyranny has
been the portioxx of our people ; and that, were it not for the
persecutions, ‘there would not be 50 people remaixxing in the
new persuasion, ’ as one of our informants ironically called
the Free Church. At Niua Foou our church was taken pos-
session of axxd used for the Free Church missionary meeting,
when there were dances in the church, firixxg guns, &c. In
fact, evexy now and then throughout Tonga, soxxxe church or
other has been seized and used or fastened against us by
Government officials acting for the Free Church.
In March three Wesleyans were convicted of libel.
Oxxe is a catechist who represented the Haakame people at
their tidal. Dui’ing that case he asserted that the prose-
cutor, Mr. Baker’s magistrate, was not a ‘rightful in-
habitant’ of Haakame. This remark was decided to be
libellous, and he was sentenced to two years’ work, or £3O,
and £ls damages and costs. The other two had said that
Mr. Watkin had taken Free Church money to Auckland to
buy books. The magistrate said this was equivalent to say-
ing Mr. Watkin had stolen the money and run away to New
Zealand with it. So one of them was sentenced to two
years’ impidsonment, and fined £l3, costs included. The
other, for repeating it, was let off with one year’s imprison-
ment and had £9 to pay. Of the money £l6 goes to Mr.
Watkin as compensation for defamation of chai’acter.


In April the Minister of Police, replying for the King,
wrote that the people of the western part of Tonga must
stop in their own towns on Sundays, and not go to other-
places to attend service. Thus, whilst prevented by the law
of the ‘six’ from having any preaching service in their own
towns, they were now prohibited from going elsewhere on
the Sabbath to attend a religious service. There is no need
to dwell on the wickedness and iniustice of such an order.
It is left to speak for itself.
In that same month a child of Wesleyan parents died
in a town where we had not the ‘six.’ The question was
actually raised as to whether the burial service could be read,
and the Minister of Police was appealed to. He decided in
the negative; but his decision was too late—the child had
been buried and the service read before his answer, which
had been delayed, arrived.
Towards the end of the same month our ministers and
caretakers in the island circuit of Haabai were removed
from their homes and compelled to live at Lifuka. No
Justification was offered for this interference with the ‘liberty
of the subject.’ The law of the ‘thirty’ does not apply in
most of the cases. In the one where it might do, we have
double that number of adults, and the law simply requires
‘adults.’ not ‘rightful inhabitants.’ Though thus detained
in Lifuka, the Government has insisted on their hoeing and
sweeping the Church lands weekly. The impossibility of the
task has resulted in the trial and conviction of them all.
The same has happened in Vavau.
Last year our leading chiefs and supporters had been
degraded ; but there was still among us a number who had
smaller dignities and titles. The Government has been at
these this year. In one town a Government official rejoined
us. He was soon sent about his business, and another man
appointed in his place.
Towards the close of May another town was tried
under the law of the ‘ six.’ The town is Matahau. The
case seemed to us to resemble Talafoou, as it consisted of two
municipalities ; but even so we felt confident we could count
the ‘ six,’ although we could only guess at the interpretation
to be put upon ‘ rightful inhabitant.’ And we did manage
five. But the magistrate was equal to the occasion. He
found that our sixth and last was a man of 45 or so, who
had lived in the town all his life, and so had his father.


The magistrate had him on his grandfather. And so twelve
more Wesleyans were convicted under this iniquitous law.
But this case had forced the magistrate to declare his
method of counting. A ‘ rightful inhabitant ’ can only
count through the father and grandfather; mothers and
grandmothers are no use. Moreover the grandfather must
have been born in the village, whereas our man’s grandfather
had only removed to Matahau. No wonder one of them
remarked that if the magistrate had only gone back another
generation or so, he would have found all Tonga to be
foreigners. Actual residence is also required, or the £ right-
ful inhabitant ’ will not be counted. One need not point
out what the effect would be if the Tongans were to attempt
to carry out the law in order to become ‘ rightful inhabi-
tants ’ of their small villages.
About the middle of the year we heard a good deal
about the King’s letter to Queen Victoria having been
answered. Everywhere threatenings abounded ; the old cry
of hanging was raised with such vehemence and persistency
that many quite believed it, yet held fast to their Church.
Mr. Baker’s return from Fiji was followed by increased
persecutions. The few remaining plantations were taken
from us, though some had been held 40 years ; and all the
College men were called out to military service for seven
years.
An Order in Council has also been issued during the
year giving the Lord of the Manor, the Minister of Police,
or the Town Ruler, the right to appoint the hours of all
services wherever the different Churches have their places of
worship within 600 yards of each other. Though our
churches stand on the old sites leased to us, and our hours
for holding service were the same as -had obtained for years,
the Free Church now conducts its religious worship in build-
ings close to ours, and has fixed upon the same hours as we
had. In every case but that of Zion, Nukualofa, this Order
in Council has been worked against us. Consequently the
Free Church takes the hours we have used for years, and
now on the Sabbath and the week-day we have either to hold
our services some hour or two before the Free Church begins
its worship, or we have to wait until their services are over
before we dare venture to hold ours.
A catechist was sent to work for two years, with £7
oosts and £2O damages to Mr. Baker for saying that he


went to New Zealand and was a Wesleyan there. The remark
was not quite true. He should have said that Mr. Baker,
when he went to New Zealand, tried to hail as a Wesleyan;
but was virtually ostracised by the Methodists of Auckland.
In July, Mr. Watkin publicly told the people of Niuas that
there were to be no more Wesleyans there, and that the
Free Church was to have all the churches, houses, lands, &c.
In that same month one of our best catechists died in
Niua Tobutabu. His name was John Taula. He was
known as the ‘ Hopeful ’ of our Tongan Pilgrim’s Progress—
from Trouble, through Persecution to Peace. Hopeful to
the end, he has gone before us and has reached the peace of
Home. In July, also, dear old JohnFaubula entered by
death into rest, £ for so He giveth His beloved sleep.’
Four days later Mr. Calvert arrived in Tonga and
stayed a month. But his visit, so far from bringing about
an improved state of things, was followed by some of the
most unjust trials that have yet taken place, as well as by
the deportation of all our ministers and people from both
Niuas and from Yavau.
Before Mr. Calvert left, Mr. Baker went away to Niuas
and Yavau with his police magistrate and the chief judge.
It was for us nothing more nor less than a voyage of
persecution, which he continued to Haabai, and, so far as
we can see, has not yet ended in Tongatabu.
In Niua Tobutabu our ordained minister, John Latu,
was charged with libelling Mr. Baker. It appears that in
1884, before the Free Church was started, our minister and
a European were discussing the proposition then made that
Tonga should be transferred to the New Zealand Conference.
The European remarking on it and alluding to, though with-
out naming, those who advocated it, said ‘What can be the
meaning of this wishing to sever yourselves from the root to
be grafted on the branch 1 I suppose they are making pre-
parations for their children.’ This our man repeated as a
joke to the then steward, who highly approved of it; but in
’BS the Free Church was set up. The steward joined, and
became most bitterly opposed to our minister, and in the
middle of that year brought this conversation up against
him, and declared it was a libel upon Mr. Baker. Of course
our minister was found guilty, and fined £3O, and costs £lO.
At Niua Foou Joel Nau is our ordained minister.
Both Mr. Watkin and Mr. Baker had done their utmost to


.get him to join the Free Church, Mr. Watkin having written
him a long letter pressing him to go over to that Church.
As. they failed in this, he was indicted for libelling Mr.
Watkin, and two cases of libelling the King were also
brought against him. Without going into details it may be
sufficient to say that Mr. Baker sent a message to J oel that
if he turned over all would be forgiven; if not, he would be
very severely punished. Yet he declined to escape at the
price of his Church, though he must have known that Mr.
Baker’s promise of a heavy penalty was sure to be fulfilled.
And so it was, the total sentence on the three charges being
12 years’ labour and £B4 to pay. After the trials Mr.
Baker sent for J oel, and tried to arrange with him and the
Europeans a plan by which he could runaway to Fiji. But
he refused to have anything to do with such a dishonourable
scheme, and he is now serving his 12 years in Tongatabu.
It was while Mr. Baker was in Niua having Joel cenvicted
that there occurred the first premonition of the volcanic
'eruption so soon to follow.
The Premier and his magistrate then passed to Yavau.
There he first seized our site on the beach, and then gave us
notice to quit, though it is leased to us. We appealed to
the Consul, but at present have had no answer. In Yavau
our minister is David Finau. He has had three catechists as
caretakers with him. The Government has persistently
deported any additional help we have sent him ; it will not
allow them to live in central places, by which their work
would be considerably lightened; none of the people may
help us for hire even, much less for love ; and our difficulties
are further increased by the fact that all our plantations
have been taken from us. Under these circumstances it
has been simply impossible for our little band to observe
the laws touching the weekly sweeping and monthly hoeing
our Yavau lands. They have done their best, and they
have done right nobly; but all is lost on the Premier. He
had wanted a handle against them ; he had got it. In the
first cases brought against David Finau, the fines only
amounted to £7. This we paid. But the following week
Mr. Baker was plainly resolved to get £ a good haul,’ for the
fines would have amounted to £SO. We saw that by bring-
ing every case he would get over £2OO. To save the Church
from such monstrous extortion David Finau cheerfully went
to work as a prisoner instead of our paying the fines. Pro-


tests had been made in vain against the prosecuting him in
these ca es. It was pointed out that Mr. Crosby was the
superintendent of Yavau, and that therefore he was the
person to have been prosecuted. But the Government
refused to see it, and a letter to the consul was, as usual,
treated with silence. Mr. Baker’s vindictiveness still fol-
lowed David. Though, of course, it was utterly impossible
for him to look after the Church property while working as
a prisoner, he was actually again summonsed for not hoeing
and sweeping, and was sentenced to over three months’
more, so that he is in for 16 months in all. It speaks
volumes for him that he was not charged with libelling
anyone. The Government has also attacked his associates.
They, too, readily went to work on the roads. One is in
for a year, the other two for five months each.
Shortly afterwards the King went to the Niuas and
Yavau, and brought all our people away from those islands.
He would not allow them to bring any of their property,
papers, &c., not even a change of clothing, but made them
go on board just as they were. In Yavau some Europeans
very kindly gave them provisions, and did what they could
for them ; and the Tongatabu Wesleyans have been most
generous to them.
The Government party next proceeded to Haabai. There
everyone of our ministers, catechists, and caretakers has been
punished by the Government. Former missionaries in Tonga
will know how utterly impossible it is to go every week to
every place in Haabai, starting from Lifuka; yet this is what
the Government requires at our hands, and our noble Haabai
Wesleyans are trying to do it. The Government refuses to
let our men live in the different islands, and has forcibly
assembled and detained them in Lifuka. The consequence
is that a probationer is a prisoner for nearly three months.
Other sentences are 15 months and 12 months. One
catechist is in for a ridiculous case of forgery, for which he
is undergoing 12 months; he is also in for two more years,
with a fine of £lO damagss and 20s. costs, for libelling Mr.
Baker by saying that the Wesleyans in Kew Zealand would
have nothing to do with him. Two others have been in
gaol since October 7. Their crime was the failing to do the
impossible, viz., the observing the laws touching the Church
lands in the islands that had once been committed to their
charge. The Premier’s magistrate found them guilty, and


then asked whether they would pay a fine or go to work.
They replied it was not their matter at all, as Mr. Moulton
had, under the circumstances, instructed them not to make
an attempt to look after the sites, the Government having
compelled them to leave the islands and reside at Lifuka.
They therefore left the matter to the magistrate and Mr.
Moulton. The magistrate forthwith ordered them to be
handcuffed and thrown into gaol—a small wooden building
without either fresh air or windows. They were kept in
strictest confinement, and a policeman who ventured to show
them some little kindness was himself put into gaol. Yet
they are very happy, as the following letter from one of
them will show:—“Lifuka Gaol, November 11, 1886.
Dear Mr. Moulton, —I am sending you this short account
of our prison life, as also to tell you of my love to yourself,
Mrs. Moulton, and the children. Please also give my love
to Mr. Crosby and his sister. I have been very happy ever
since I was put into this prison; that happened October 7 th,
so that this is the forty-third day since. But lam happy
and well, thanks to God’s mercy and your prayers. Por
twelve days the handcuffs were never taken ofi* not even
for eating ; nor was I allowed to wash during that period.
But God moved the hearts of the jailers to be kind to me,
so that, though I am having a hard time of it, yet I sing
with Christian—
“ Better, though difficult, the right way to go,
Than wrong, though easy, where the end is woe.”
And I send my love to the ministers and my fellow-pilgrims,
great and small. I feel like saying with the Spartans—
“ Gro tell the Spartans, thou that passest by,
That here obedient to their laws we lie.”
For 1 am lying in prison on account of my love for the
Wesleyan Church of Tonga, and I gladly leave myself in
the Lord’s hands.—Yours affectionately, Julius Tanga-
TAOLEAO.”
The fidelity of our ministers and catechists is all the
more remarkable because it has been severely tried both by
allurements and by threats, and these, failing, have been
succeeded by most cruel persecution. The first inducement
held out to them was that the Free Church was the Church
of the king, chiefs, and people—a nation’s choice, to with-
stand which was to be opposed to the national sentiment
and side. But a more substantial argument was also


presented to them, viz., the doubling of their stipends.
Instead of £4O with us, the Free Church would give its
ministers £BO ; and the catechists, instead of £ls or £l6
in the Wesleyan Church were to receive £4O in the Free
Church. Moreover, it seemed highly probable that we
should not be able to give our men even their usual
stipends. Under these circumstances, Mr. Moulton
assembled them and told them plainly that he could no
longer guarantee their stipends ; and that therefore, if
they decided to remain by the old ship, they must be
content to get what the Church could afford to give
them. One of them promptly said that he liked
money, as did the rest; for they had become accus-
tomed to European clothing, and liked tea and bread
occasionally. He would therefore make no secret of his
liking to get as much money as he could, but he loved his
Church far beyond money ; and, under the circumstances,
his unhesitating choice was to stop where he was, and take
what the Church could afford, rather than betray his trust
or be disloyal to his Church for the pounds, shillings, and
pence. And so said they all. Yet though our agents were
not to be enticed, they might perhaps be driven by fear ?
So they soon found themselves branded as traitors to the
king and threatened with persecutions and death. How
these threats were converted into realities is seen in this
report. And still they are standing firm, and their motto
is, ‘ Fear of God and love for His Church.’ They clung to
you when the air was full of reports that you would abandon
them. And to-day they are fully purposed by God’s help
to remain in and uphold the Church of their fathers, the
Church that has given to their land every blessing and
privilege it possesses, the Church whose only aims have been
to glorify God and raise and bless mankind.
The Premier has taken the Church site on the beach at
Lifuka, Haabai, just as he did at Yavau. In October
threats abounded that the King really would do something
now; but our people are beginning to pay little heed to
menacing language, however emphatically it may be uttered.
We are just finishing off' our Home Missionary meet-
ings. The result has far exceeded our expectations. In
spite of the deep waters we are passing through, the Tongan
Wesleyan Church, in addition to class-money, has raised
over £7OO. Of course this must be appropriated according


to the resolution of the General Conference, viz., one-third
to the trustees for the reduction of church debts, one-third
for Home Mission purposes, and the remaining third for the
Financial District Meeting. But such noble generosity will
surely beget generosity, just as last year their courage
evoked munificence. In Haabai, Princess Charlotte, the
King’s daughter, took the chair at three meetings, and
greatly encouraged the people. In Tongatabu efforts were
made to rob our meetings of all success, and the Govern-
ment gave orders to sell up every Wesleyan who was behind
hand at all with his taxes. Moreover Government officials
forbade the Free Church people to help us, and threatened
prosecution to those who did. At one town, where the
Wesleyans had made most strenuous efforts, the chief in-
terfered, and actually deprived some of them of their
nuts.
Another trial under the law of the ‘six’ has taken
place, and in this instance twenty-nine Wesleyans have
gone to work on the roads and wharf as prisoners because
there were not six. The magistrate ‘bullied’ the people
dreadfully ; in fact, it is the worst case yet. We counted 12
‘rightful inhabitants ’ going by the ruling in the previous
case. On the present occasion the magistrate simply went
by the statement of the chief of the town, Foui : and lie'll ad
had the hardihood to swear there were not the six. When
one of the defendents began to name our 12, the magistrate
stopped him, saying they belonged to a town Milomilo,
that never was a town, or else to a town Lolobaogo,
that was incorporated with Foui generations back.
And now, looking back over the two years of
persecution that have been so patiently borne by the
Tongan Wesleyans, we are constrained to acknowledge
that their fidelity is of the Lord, and is as marvellous in
the eyes of those who sought to crush us as in our own.
Death would have been far more easy to endure, perhaps
even more welcome, than life as it has been for them these
two years. But they have learnt to lay help upon One that
is mighty, and they are waiting patiently till He shall deliver
them.


The following additional information has been received
since the Report was drawn up. It shows that the position
of affairs has not yet changed for the better, and that we
must be prepared still to hear of trouble and persecution ;
and consequently of need of pecuniary aid :
“ The two catechists are still in prison in Haabai, and
are kept in as close confinement as possible. The twenty-
nine Talafoou people are of course undergoing their four
months’ prison labour for attending a Wesleyan service.
“It seems as if a vigorous and unscrupulous effort were
about to be made to starve the Wesleyans into surrender.
In two or three towns, plantations—the one source ot
food—are again being taken away from our people. This
means the expenditure of money ; it is simply our duty
to keep alive those who have been so loyal to God and our
Church. In one town, the King sent word to the Wesley-
ans that their plantations would be taken away and
themselves banished. He would begin, he said, with the
plantations : they might have a few days for consideration.
They immediately replied that they required no time for
consideration : “ There is the plantation, we won’t turn
over.” That answer echoes the feeling and resolve of all
the Tongan Wesleyans.
“ The Wesleyan men from the island or Eua have
been removed to Tonga, to serve in the army for seven
years ; but their families were left behind ! None of the
men flinched ; and how can we flinch from the duty so
plainly thrust upon us by this noble conduct ? We must
see to it that their families suffer as little as possible
through their Christian heroism.
“Last year all the Wesleyan College men, and many
of our most self-sacrificing supporters were called out for
military service. We felt at the time that this, though a
severe blow in itself, was but a preliminary step. Our
men cheerfully accepted this unwelcome and inevitable
reward for their adherence to their Church, and strove
right earnestly to make themselves thoroughly efficient
soldiers. Last December, the I’remier assembled the
army and took them on the Church question : the Free
Church men and Roman Catholics were, I believe, all
discharged, so that it is no wonder that when the military
oath was administered a fortnight later, ‘not one solitary
Free Churchman or Roman Catholic refused to take the


oath of allegiance.’ But we are told that Mr. Moulton’s
College men and some other Wesleyans did decline to take
that oath. How was that ? What was the meaning of
such ‘ rebellion F’ The following is the explanation :
“ The magistrate selected to swear them in was the one
whom the Premier constantly employs whenever Wesleyans
are concerned. It is quite true the men asked for
explanations, but it was not the oath that was troubling
them : it was the length and rules of the service that they
wished to know about. On these points, however, all
information was refused them. Under these circumstances
•some thirty refused to take the oath, dreading that there
might be some regulation requiring them to give up their
Church, or in some other way interfering with their
religious liberty and their loyalty to their Church and
conscience. They were forthwith marched off to prison,
where they were kept for nearly a week at starving point.
Moreover, they were not even allowed mats and pillows, but
were required to sleep on the floor. Half of them were in
the dark cell and half in the light alternately. They pre-
ferred the dark cell because it was cooler. The first even-
ing they sang and had prayers, and a crowd gathered out-
side to listen. The consequence was they were not again
allowed to pray together. The Eev. J. E. Moulton asked
permission from the Premier for a minister to visit and
pray with them, or at any rate to pass them in a Testa-
ment, but was refused ! Their friends wished to take
them food and native cloth, but the gaoler said he had
orders that nothing was to be given to the prisoners, and
all communication with them was refused. The Tongan
Government represents their refusal to take the oath as
rebellion, but no one doubts that their being Wesleyans
is the real reason ; especially as they were continually told
that it they would turn over they would be set at liberty
without punishment.
“The magistrate who tried them after their week’s close
confinement was at first very fair to them ; some he
acquitted, to others he gave short sentences. When the
court adjourned, the Premier sent for him, and the result
was that all who were tried after that interview were sen-
tenced to two years and a fine. Moreover, those who had
received light sentences were taken back to prison to be
tried by Court-martial 1 What happened at this second


trial is not known, but the result was that all of them
were kept in prison for a fortnight, and then put on board
the Government schooner, the Sandfly. By her some of
them were taken to lonely stations in the Haabai group,
the rest were taken to Yavau. Of those in Haabai we
have heard on reliable information that they are required
to work with their feet in irons, and that were anyone of
them ill, or even to die, he could not be freed from the
irons. The gaoler, who has the key, lives in an island
forty miles away, and could not be communicated with.
“ As for those in Yavau, the following extract from a
letter to the Fiji Times will show what barbarities have
been inflicted upon them :
“The Tongan Government has just distinguished itself
by another gross act of cruelty and injustice. Here in
Yavau we are not acquainted with the full facts of the
case, but we have seen more than enough here fully tO'
justify the strong expression just used. The Government
vessel, the Sandfly, brought twenty-four so-called prisoners'
from Tonga, twelve of whom were left on the way, in the
Haabai group. The remainder, with four others, were
shut up on their arrival here in a lock-up calculated for
three or four, or, at most, half-a-dozen persons. Into
this —ironed—to the number of sixteen, with the ther-
mometer at from 85 to 90 degrees, were they cast for the
night.
“In the morning they were thus addressed by the
officials : ‘We, all of us here in Yavau, belong to the Free
Church ; you are, all of you, Fakaogos—(a term of reproach
applied to all members of the Wesleyan Church here in
Tonga)—but we will soon knock all that nonsense out of you ;
to commence with, jou will, all of you, be thrashed at once
with the cat, and then have all your hair cut off; yon will
then quarry and carry stones for the new wharf, and you
will be kept at this labour for three years, and every month
during that time you will have a great flogging.’ We do
not know yet for what myposed crime they have been con-
demned to this inhuman, brutal treatment. There are
rumours that they declined to take some oath which the
Premier desired to impose upon them, but the truth of these
reports we shall learn in a few hours, on arrival of the Suva
from Tonga. After the above speech from the gaoler the
victims were most brutally flogged, one of the gaolers calling


out, ‘ Why do you flog them thus ? Why on the back
only 1 Flog them across the face, scratch their eyes out with
the whip and then the poor lad whom they were thrashing
at the time had his hands nearly cut to pieces in the endea-
vour to save his face. After undergoing this barbarous
flagellation their hair was cut off, and this in a manner to
inflict the greatest amount of torture ; only about two-thirds
of the tuft of hair nipped by the shears each time was cut
through, the rest of the tuft was torn out by the roots to
the untold agony of the prisoners. In this state they were
sent to their day’s work, a task being set them three times
as great as that usually set to the ordinary prisoners here,
with the warning that if their imposition were not com-
pleted they would be flogged at night. There are other
details of filthy treatment with which I must not disgust
your readers. I must add, however, that in some cases they
snipped off even the eyelashes, and sometimes a portion of
the skin with them.
“ Your readers will be prepared to hear, by this time, that
the whole ot these men are from the Wesleyan College in
Tonga. Many of the Europeans here are willing to corrobo-
rate these statements : and your readers must certainly have
learnt by this time, that I make no statements which I can-
not fully substantiate.”
Such is the state of affairs. As the appeal has informed
you, we need money to support these suffering Wesleyans
and their persecuted Church, Will you not respond, as far
as you are able, to this just appeal?
Subscriptions will be gladly received by Rev. R.
Selloes, Cleveland Street ; S. E. Lees, Esq., M.L.A., Lees
Court, King Street; or at the Wesleyan Book Depot
George Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
S 15. LEES, PRINTER, LEES COURT, KINU STREET SYDNEY.


