

61 o
\ sa
J'esfinjonia/s
of Services of
Traderic!{ J)avisson
' U> N




From Mr. Alexander Sinclair, Manager, “ Glasgow Herald .”
Herald Office,
Glasgow, 7lh July, 1871.
Mr. R. Davidson.
Dear Sir,
On the occasion of your leaving the Herald Office,
I have to express my high opinion of the ability, steadiness,
attention and willingness with which you performed all the
duties entrusted to you, whether in our counting house, or as a
news correspondent during the past year. You leave much to
our regret.
Yours very truly,
(Signed), ALEXANDER SINCLAIR,
Manager.
[The above letter was written on the occasion of the recipient
having accepted a position in Ceylon.l


From Mr. Saumarez Le Cocq, Superintendent Craven Coffee
Estate, Ceylon.
Craven,
25th October, 1872.
Mr. E. Davidson.
Dear Sir, *
On the eve of your departure and the occasion of
your promotion, I think it hut right to tell you how highly
satisfied I have always been with your work and conduct at
Abbey Rock, and I thank you for having so ably assisted me in
the working of that estate. I have also to thank you for much
kind help and advice afforded me on Craven. Believe me that I
will always take a warm interest in your welfare and career.
Yours truly,
(Signed), SAUMAREZ LE COCQ.


From Mr. Arnold White, Morawa Cork, Ceylon.
Closenbekg,
sth February, 1874.
My Dear Davidson,
In writing this farewell letter I have to thank you for
the interest you have shewn in your work while we have been
associated, and to express a hope that in your new sphere you
will have happiness, health and prosperity. With kind regards
and best wishes.
Yours very truly,
(Signed), AENOLD WHITE.


From Me. A. S. Burnett, Estate Manager , Colombo Commercial
Company.
The Spring Valley Coffee Company, Ltd.,
Colombo, 15th July, 1876.
My Dear Davidson,
I have no doubt you have considered well the step you
purpose taking, and that only leaves me the duty of thanking
you most sincerely for the intelligent attention you have ever
given to this company’s interests, and of expressing the regret I
feel in losing a faithful officer and a personal friend. With best
wishes for your future success.
Believe me, yours faithfully,
(Signed), A. S. BURNETT.
[The coffee leaf disease was at this time disastrously influenc-
ing all interests in Ceylon.]


From Messrs. Vause, Newcomb & Co., Proprietors Times of
Fatal,” Pietermaritzburg , South Africa.
‘ Times of Natal,”
7th November, 1877.
Mr. R. Davidson,
Dear Sir,
On the occasion of your leaving our service we
take the opportunity of expressing our satisfaction at the way in
which you have served us as an accountant and reporter, and of
stating that your character is unimpeachable. Wishing you
success in whatever you may undertake in the futu
We are, yours sincerely,
(Signed), VAUSE, NEWCOMB & Co.


From Sir John Robinson, of the “ Natal Mercury,'] Durban,
Natal.
Legislative Council, Natal,
Maritzburg, 11th November, 1878.
My Dear Sir,
In reply to your proposal to act as our correspondent
at Pretoria, I am glad to accept your offer on behalf of my firm.
You know the line generally taken by the Mercury in Transvaal
matters. I don’t take up an extreme view of the situation.
Please send us short telegrams of any important intelligence.
Your letters as sent are quite satisfactory.
I am, very truly yours,
(Signed), JOHN ROBINSON.
[ln the siege of Pretoria by the Boers, 1880-81, R. David-
son (who was sub-editor of the Argus, the press organ of the
British in the Transvaal) served on the British side as a
civilian volunteer. The retrocession led to the retirement to
British territory of the majority of British people resident in the
Transvaal.]


From Mr. John E. Radford, Proprietor “ Diamond Fields Ad-
vertiser,” Kimberley, South Ajrica.
Kimberley,
Bth March, 1883.
Mr. Davidson has been engaged on the staff of the
Diamond Fields Advertiser for about 18 months, and during
the whole of that period has had almost the entire control of the
paper. He is a thoroughly conscientious writer, and has given
me every satisfaction. It gives me great pleasure to give him
this unsolicited testimonial.
(Signed), JOHN E. RADFORD.
[Kimberley being then in a very depressed condition owing to
the transition from the system of working by individual diggers
to the consolidation of interests in the De Beer’s Mining Comp-
any, R. Davidson paid a visit to England.]


From The Proprietors, “ Newcastle Morning Herald," New-
castle, New South Wales.
Newcastle,
19th June, 1901.
Mr. R. Davidson was employed by us as editor of the
Newcastle Morning Herald for about 12 years, and resigned
owing to ill health. We have very much pleasure in stating
that we always found him a most painstaking, reliable, energetic
and w T ell-informed journalist, with a wide experience of Austral-
asian and international affairs. He is a capable, all-round man,
and would be thoroughly at home in any literary post of a daily
newspaper.
He had been connected with the Newcastle Herald for
several years before w r e became proprietors of it, and leaves us
with our best wishes for his future welfare.
(Signed), BERKELEY & JOHNSON,




