

The League of Nations
and
Freedom of the Seas
BY
SIR JULIAN CORBETT
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPE TOWN BOMBAY
HUMPHREY MILFORD
1918
Threepence Net




The League of Nations
and
Freedom of the Seas
BY
SIR JULIAN CORBETT
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPETOWN BOMBAY
HUMPHREY MILFORD
1938




THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
AND FREEDOM OF THE SEAS
riIHE conception of a League of Nations in the
shape it has taken during the past few years is
marked by a feature which distinguishes it from all
its predecessors. For the first time it appears to be
assumed that Freedom of the Seas, or, in other words,
the abolition of belligerent rights afloat, is an essential
condition of such a League, and that the two ideas
are inseparable, an assumption which carries the
scope of recent proposals distinctly beyond the limits
of those to which the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries gave birth.
None of those schemes ever gathered strength to
rise from the ground, yet none of them ever burdened
itself with such a load as those of the present day are
expected to carry. Indeed Freedom of the Seas in
the ordinary acceptance of the term is more than
a load. A frank examination of what it connotes
will show that it must be a spoke in the wheels which
in all probability would prevent any conceivable
machinery of a League from acting with effect. Once
formed, a League of Nations may be charged with the
definition of belligerent rights at sea and with control


of their exercise, but without them it cannot be an
effective instrument for peace.
Striking as the new development is it has received
too little attention. It has been allowed to slip in
almost without comment, and few, if any, of those
who of late have been publicly discussing the subject
have stopped to inquire why the new feature has
intruded itself at this particular juncture. Its cre-
dentials are not asked for. Yet obviously its sudden
appearance needs explanation if we are to obtain
a clear understanding of the trend of opinion as it
exists to-day.
The explanation is not far to seek. A glance at
the history of the whole movement reveals it at once.
It is that the more recent development of the old
idea of a League of Nations is the result of a fusion
of two schools of thought. The older one, whose
object was a league to prevent war, culminated in the
Holy Alliance. The newer one is that which grew
up after the failure of the Holy Alliance had led men
to despair of finding a means for the prevention of
war. The new school, whose harvest was the Declara-
tion of Paris and the Geneva and Hague Conventions,
sought the more modest goal of mitigating the horrors
of war. It is to this school of thought and not to the
older one that the idea of Freedom of the Seas belongs.
It indeed represents the high-water mark of what
may be called the Hague school. It is the creed
of its most advanced and enthusiastic advocates.


Naturally these men were also among the most
earnest and convinced advocates of the revived move-
ment for a League of Nations. Their support was
needed to give it life. The price of their support
was the incorporation of their special policy in the
new programme. The price was gladly paid; but, at
first, it certainly was not measured. The failure to
diagnose the full meaning of Freedom of the Seas,
and the even deeper failure to penetrate the Actualities
of Naval Warfare, prevented men observing how far
the two conceptions were incompatible, if not mutually
destructive.
As every one knows, Freedom of the Seas is an
expression very loosely used, and with many shades
of meaning, but for practical purposes it is enough to
fix its content, as conceived by those who imported it
into the programme for a League of Nations. The
moment we endeavour to do this we are confronted
by a paradox. It is obvious that Freedom of the
Seas can only relate to a state of war. In time of
peace all seas are free. Since the middle of the
nineteenth century, when the Baltic and Black Seas
were finally thrown open to commerce, there has been
no mare clausum, and except for such international
regulations as have been agreed upon for the safety and
facility of navigation, all men are free to pass the seas
at their pleasure. It is only in relation to a state of
war that there are any restrictions. If then a League
of Nations can attain its object in preventing war the


question of Freedom of the Seas does not arise. As
an article in the programme it is redundant and
paradoxical.
The truth is that even the most devoted and
sanguine advocates of a League of Peace realize that
a complete extinction of war by that means is not
to be expected. It is more than can be believed —
at least until human nature has mellowed much
farther —that all the nations of the earth will bind
themselves never to go to war for any cause whatever,
or entirely to abandon force as a means of defending
themselves against attack. There must arise cases in
which a League of Nations could not prevent war,
and would not deem it just to prevent it; and it is
presumably to meet such exceptional cases that Free-
dom of the Seas has become attached to the League
of Nations. The intention doubtless is at once to
mitigate the severity of the struggle as between the
intractable belligerents and prevent the contest inter-
fering with those who are no party to it. If this
were the end of the proposed restriction nothing but
good could come of it, and it would in no way be
incompatible with the active existence of a League
of Nations; but we have only to examine the actuali-
ties of Naval Warfare and the effect which Freedom of
the Seas would have upon them to see that it is very
far from the end. Its effect would reach much
farther.
As used by its most pronounced advocates, Freedom


of the Seas denotes the abolition of the right of
capturing private property afloat. They would deny
to belligerents not only the admitted right to capture
neutral property under the law of blockade and con-
traband, but would also make the trade of the
belligerents equally immune, either altogether or in
so far as it was not contraband—that is to say, that
no matter how fiercely navies contend peaceful
merchants and fishermen shall be free to go about
their business as though no war were in progress.
What such a revolution would mean to Naval
Warfare is clearly not recognized, presumably because
of the obscurity which for landsmen has always
surrounded it. No such curtailment of belligerent
rights has ever been suggested for the land. It is
obvious to every one that if in time of war peaceful
merchants and husbandmen were allowed to go their
way unmolested by requisitions and free to pass
where they would, armies could obtain no results.
Even if battles could be fought at all, they could lead
to nothing. Battles are fought not for their own
sake or merely to destroy the enemy’s forces. Their
ultimate object is the power which the destruction of
the enemy’s means of resistance gives for so paralysing
his national life that he has no choice but to submit.
If non-combatants and private property were immune
from interference the nation could not be coerced nor
the fruits of victory garnered.
With the less familiar contests on the sea, this has


never been so self-evident. To the great majority of
landsmen, Naval Warfare seems a far-off struggle in
which fleets contend in defence of their coasts and
cruisers prowl for booty. It is not generally under-
stood that fleets exist mainly to give those cruisers
liberty of action against the enemy’s commerce, nor
that, unless the cruisers can push their operations so
far as actually to choke the enemy’s national life at
sea, no amount of booty they may get will avail to
bring the war to an end. It is only by the prevention
of enemy’s commerce that fleets can exercise the
pressure which armies seek, in theory or practice, to
exercise through victories ashore; and it is only by
the capture and ability to capture private property
at sea that prevention of commerce can be brought
about. Without the right to capture private property,
Naval battles become meaningless as a method of
forcing the enemy to submit. Without that right
a Naval victory can give nothing but security at
home and the power of harrying the enemy’s un-
defended coasts—a form of pressure which no one
would care to sanction in these latter days.
It comes then to this—that if Freedom of the Seas
is pushed to its logical conclusion of forbidding alto-
gether the capture and destruction of private property
at sea, it will in practice go far to rob fleets of all
power of exerting pressure on an enemy, while armies
would be left in full enjoyment of that power. The
balance of Naval and Military power, which has


meant so much for the liberties of the world, would
be upset, and the voice of the Naval Powers would
sink to a whisper beside that of the Military Powers.
If this is the forbidding situation to which a League
of Nations is to lead—and there is no avoiding it if
it is to be clogged with full Freedom of the Seas—
how can it be expected that the Great Naval Powers
will consent to become parties to it 1 Yet it is amongst
those Powers that are found the most weighty and
convinced advocates of a League of Nations. Without
their cordial support such a League can never be
formed, and that is one reason why, if we persist in
coupling the League with Freedom of the Seas, we
lay upon it a load it can never lift.
But it is not the only reason. For even if we
assume that the League could be formed with this
difficult condition attached to it, it would still find
itself deprived of the most effective means of attaining
its end. All schemes for a League of Nations contem-
plate some form of sanction by which recalcitrant
Powers can be coerced, and of all these sanctions the
one that is at once the most readily applied and the
most immediate and humane in its action is to deny
to the offender the Freedom of the Seas, to pronounce
against him a sea interdict. To kill, or even seriously
to hamper, a nation’s commercial activity at sea has
always been a potent means of bringing it to reason,
even when national life was far less dependent on
sea-borne trade than it is now. At the present time,


when the whole world has become to so large an
extent possessed of a common vitality, when the life
of every nation has become more or less linked by its
trade arteries with that of every other, the force of
an oecumenical sea interdict has become perhaps the
most potent of all sanctions. It is, moreover, one
that can be applied without inflicting the inhumanities
which other forms of coercion entail. For a League,
therefore, whose object is to make an end of the
inhuman practice of war it is a sanction which it
would be folly to deny itself. Yet if absolute Free-
dom of the Seas is to be a fundamental article of its
constitution that sanction cannot be applied. There
would still, of course, remain the sanction of non-
intercourse, but without the full sea interdict it would
lose more than half its force, and often be too slow
and weak in its action to be effective. In too many
cases the only trustworthy sanction would still be
open war, in which armies alone could bring vital
pressure to bear.
To bring the truth of this view home to those who
are unfamiliar with the mystery of sea-power is no
easy task. To many it will seem to be no more than
an obscurant clinging to the past with which they are
resolved to break; and naturally enough, when we
remember how often opposition to human progress is
little else. But in this case the charge of mere
obscurantism will not hold. The latest expressions
of considered opinion are too weighty and too


sagacious to be so easily dismissed. The reality ot
the objection to fettering a League of Nations with
absolute Freedom of the Seas has recently been
recognized by a high authority whom no one can
suspect of obscurantism. President Wilson, in his
original pronouncement for a League of Nations,
described his aim as ‘ a universal association of nations
to maintain inviolate the security of the highway of
the seas for the common unhindered use of all the
nations of the world ’. The high seas were to be open
to all, in war as in peace, at all times and under all
conditions. But that was in the early days of the
war, when men had not yet had driven home to them
what sea-power actually meant for the cause of peace
and freedom and for the punishment of international
criminality. In his message to Congress delivered on
January 8, 1918, his attitude was profoundly modified.
He then took occasion to utter an implicit warning
that the original position of the promoters of a League
of Nations which he had voiced on the previous
occasion w T as incompatible with their aim. The
substance of the message was a Peace programme,
and its second article provided for ‘ absolute freedom
of navigation upon the seas outside territorial waters
alike in peace and in war, except as the seas may he
closed in whole or in part by international action for
the enforcement of international covenants'. The
declaration is perfectly clear. The official policy of
the United States is that the old belligerent rights at


sea must be retained as essential to the executive
ability ot* the League.
Obviously it must be so. For if those rights were
abolished the Sea Powers as such could do nothing to
enforce the will of the League. The executive force
would lie almost entirely with the Military Powers,
and the result of such unequal executive capacity
cannot be contemplated with equanimity. It is too
well known that the weight of a voice in the council
chamber is not determined by reason alone, but in
a much higher degree by the force behind it. The
Naval Powers, bound hand and foot with the Freedom
of the Seas, could speak, but they could not act, and
inevitably the councils of the League would be domi-
nated by the Military Powers. Is it credible that in
the existing state of human progress a League of
Nations under such conditions could make for the
sanctity of covenants, the rights of small nations, and
the peace of the world 1 Clearly it is not, and no less
clear is it that if we are in earnest for a League of
Peace we must concentrate on that end, and not dis-
sipate energy in trying to achieve a wholly distinct
aim at the same time. To strive for a League of
Peace is to strive to prevent war; to strive for Free-
dom of the Seas is to admit war and strive to mitigate
its terrors. Let us cease to contuse the two ends.
Let us determine which line of endeavour we mean to
follow, and pursue it with singleness of purpose and
undivided effort. It will not be easy. It is to the


interest of the Military Powers to confuse the two
tracks. They will, undoubtedly, use every device to
keep them confused, for only by fostering the unhappy
confusion which well-meaning men have hastily intro-
duced can they destroy the balance between Naval
and Military Powers, and so become the arbiters of
the destinies of their weaker neighbours.
Above all should these smaller nations beware of
putting themselves in line on this question with the
Military Powers. The temptation is great. Their
sufferings as neutrals during the present war have
been so severe that their tendency is to snatch at the
first means that seems to promise relief in the future.
Their troubles are directly traced to the extension of
belligerent interference upon the sea to which new
developments in war conditions have inevitably led,
and it is naturally in Freedom of the Seas they see
the only remedy. But in truth their sufferings at sea
are only a symptom of the underlying cause. The
fundamental difficulty is that the vitality of nations
has become so much a common vitality that no nation
can fully enjoy a state of peace while other nations
are at war. Neutrality as it formerly existed has
ceased to be possible, and Freedom of the Seas would
be only an alleviation, not a cure. The only real
remedy is a League of Nations which would prevent
war, but a League of Nations could not permit
neutrality as a right—any more than by the English
common law a citizen had the right to stand aside when


a criminal was being pursued. Except in case of special
dispensation all would have to join in enforcing the sea
interdict, and all would be in a state of war with the
recalcitrant Power.
Whether, then, a League of Nations were formed or
not small nations would not see the end of suffering
or sacrifice, even if it were possible by a stroke of the
pen to abolish so old and well-established a practice
as capture at sea. On the other hand, if no League
could be formed, or, being formed, could not be made
effective, their condition would be more precarious
than ever. For without belligerent rights at sea the
Naval Powers would be without means to protect
them, and they would be at the mercy of the Military
Powers with no one to whom they could turn in time
of trouble.
For the Minor Powers there is only one escape from
the miseries of war, and that is an effective League of
Nations. The policy which, in common with all men of
goodwill, they must pursue is to see it accomplished, to
remove everything that is likely to prove a stumbling-
block, and to permit nothing which may cripple its
vigour when it comes to life. The seas our ship will
have to pass are stormy and full of shoals, and of this
we may be sure, there is little hope of her avoiding
wreck if she is made to labour with this perilous deck-
load of Freedom of Seas. If it is our real desire to
bring her safely to port it must be jettisoned—and
the sooner and more completely it is done the better.


Only in this way can we cease to confuse the
issue. The all-important end is to get a League into
being. Until it is a living fact we cannot tell what
form it will take or how much of humanity it will
embrace, and until we know these things we cannot
tell how far the preservation of belligerent rights at
sea, or to what extent their control by the League,
will make for the success of the'Great Cause.


The League of Nations Series
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS. By Viscount
Grey of Fallodon, K.G. 3d. net.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS AND THE
COMING RULE OF LAW. By Sir Frederick
Pollock. 3d. net
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS AND THE
DEMOCRATIC IDEA. By Professor Gilbert
Murray. 6d. net.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS IN HISTORY.
By Professor A. F, Pollard. 3d. net.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS AND LABOUR.
By the Rt. Hon. Arthur Henderson, P.C., M.P.
3d. net.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS AND FREE-
DOM OF THE SEAS. By Sir Julian Corbett.
3d. net.
IN THE PRESS.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS AND PRIME
TIVE PEOPLES. By Sir Sydney Olivier. 3d. net.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
HUMPHREY MILFORD
