

F'AMS,
&0* io
REPORT OF A MISSION
TO THE
COLONIES OF AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA,
PRESENTED TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE
DECEMBER 15, 1856
THE REV. M. H s BECHER, M. A.,
RECTOR OF BARNOLDBY-LE-BECK.
British and Foreign Bible Society, 10, Earl-street Blackfriars,
London, February 2nd, 1857.
The Rev. F. Miller.
My Dear Sir, —The Rev. M. H. Becher and Mr Charles, the Deputation
appointed to visit the Australian Colonies on behalf of this Society, having
returned to England, an interesting and carefully prepared Report has been
presented by them to the Committee, combining all the information that was
deemed desirable as to the nature, extent, and result of their operations. The
committee much regretted that Mr Charles through f iling health was
compelled somewhat abruptly, to relinquish the duties in which he was engaged,
and returned to this country before the visitation proposed had beeneomplered,
but they cherish the hope that the objects of the Mission were not materially
impaired by this unavoidable circumstance, as they find that Mr Becher, aided
by the co-operation of valued friends, was enabled to advocate the claims of the
Society in all the most important Districts of your Colonies.
The Committee thankfully acknowledged the good Providence of God
which has watched over and preserved the Depntationamidstlengthened journey
attended with no small amount of difficulty and fatigue.
They beg also to express the peculiar gratification they have experienced
on learning that the Deputation were received in every place, and by members
of various Religious Communities, with such eoi dial welcome, and generous
hospitality. Nor can the Committee fail to acknowledge the approving sym-
pathy and zealous co-operation everywhere manifested in reference to this
great Society, proving that in your distant part of the world, there is a due
appreciation of its simple object, and that its Constitution, so comprehensive
and Catholic, secures for it a place in your confidence and aff- ction.
The results arising from the visit of the Deputation have proved highly
encouraging, and lai i abasis for future action which may have a most important,
bearing on the interests of the Society. It appears that 107 Public Meetings
were held, in conjunction with which 88 new Auxiliaries Associations or Bran-
ches were formed, diffusing the system of the Bible Society over a very large
extent of country previously beyond the range of its influence. The Collet -
tions made on these occasions and after Sermons preached by the Rev. M. p.
Becher, amounted to £2,153 8s 3d, evincing a readiness to share in the


labours and responsibility of the Parent Society. The decrease of Societies
from eleven to ninety-nine is full of promise for the future, and this result
gratifying as it is, may not exhibit ail that might have been effected had it
been practicable for the Deputation to have spent more time in the Colonies.
You need not be informed that the Mission confided to our friends was sanc-
tioned with the view of establishing enlarged and permanent operations in
Australia. It appeared to the Committee that a colony of such vast magni-
tude, attracting to its shores a mighty population, and having such resources
of wealth and prosperity, afforded ample scope for the labours of this society.
While Auxiliaries have existed for many years, making considerable efforts
for the circulation of the Scriptures, it was thought by friends at Lome and
amongst yourselves, that our Jubilee afforded a suitable occasion to bring
the objects of the Society more prominently uiderthe notice of the inhabi-
tants of Australia, to take measures for a more general diffusion of its system
of Agency, and by creating Societies wherever practicable to connect the most
remote localities with some central Auxiliary, and bind all the Auxiliaries by
fresh ties of sympathy and support to the Parent Society.
The Committee have had their thoughts much occupied with the question,
how may the visit of the Deputation be turned to the best account, both as it
respects the circulation of the Scriptures in your own Districts, and the gene-
ral object which the Society aims at accomplishing. For while they are anx-
ious that every means the ease requires should be vigorously adopted to supply
the wants of your Colonies, yet they cannot forget that the whole world is
their care, and that they have to provide for those of ali countries who perish
for lack of knowledge. It is their wish therefore to secure as large an amount
of your aid as possible, and they think that what has been effected by tho
labours of tho Deputation may become eventually productive in swelling
the free Income of the Society, if the good beginnings are followed up by
measures calculated to stimulate the interests and sympathy that have
been so widely excited.
The various plans suggested for permanent action have been most
carefully and anxiously considered.
It has been suggested that an A.gent should be sent to Australia from
the Parent Society, paid by, and responsible to this Committee, and superin-
tending as far as desirable, the operations of the different Societies, and by
periodical visitation for conferring with Committees, and holding Public Meet-
ings, helping to maintain the interests of the several localities in the work of
the Parent Society. This plan was indeed recommended very earnestly by
some of your own Auxiliaries as calculated to give vigour and permanence to
your operations, as well as to secure at all times conformity to the principles
recognised by the Parent Society. But the Committee have not deemed it ex-
pedient to act on this suggestion. They do not doubt that any gentleman
proceeding directly from this Committee would be received with cordiality and
respect, but they think the Auxiliaries should take the initiative in such mea-
sures as they deem best adapted to the peculiar condition of the colonies, and
Ss upon that kind of Agency most likely to promote the effective working
of the several Societies, and which shall be directly responsible to them-
selves.
The Committee are apprehensive that in sending out an appointed Agent
from this country there might be at least an appearance of a wish on their part
to interfere with the free action of the Auxiliaries. They greatly prefer leaving
the affiliated Societies to take an independent position, provided always there
be an agreement with the. principles of the Parent Society. They do not ask
to exercise any undue oontroul, and it might possibly lead to complications and
misunderstandings, if any Agent directly responsible to them, should seem to
bo charged with the supervision of Auxiliaries in so remote a part of the
world.


Relinquishing, therefore, this plan, is there any other mode of action by
which the same results could be as effectually promoted P There can be no
doubt that, apart from some superintendence and cultivation, the Societies
recently formed will droop and languish, perhaps soon become extinct. In
our own country we should fail to keep our various Associations in
vigorous working order, without the invaluable asistance we r eceive from our
Domestic Agents, who arrange for the Annual visitation of every affiliated
Society. By this means information is communicated, zeal is stimulated, and
interest re-kindled in the great work of the Society.
It has appeared to the Committee that you might accomplish all that is
necessary for the effective visitation of the Branches connected with your
Auxiliary by following the course adopted by our friends in Tasmania who have
engag ed a gentleman as their Agent devoting part of his time to the work of t ha
Auxiliary and remunerated accordingly. We understand the plan works
advantageously and does not entail a very heavy expense. If you could happily
select some one of known energy, warm attachment to the Society, and pos-
of ability to interest a Public Meeting, it might prove the best method
of giving permanence and strength to the organization, now established in
ycur colony. 'lhe whole responsibility of selection and superintendence
will rest with yourselves. And we trust the impulse given to the work would
place it in your power to defray the expense of such an Agency from your own
Free Contributions. The Committee will be glad to hear that you have taken
this proposal into your serious consideration, and that your judgment accords
with their own.
In your future operations you will not probably he disposed to incur
large outlay for Colportage. The colonies being of such vast extent and so
thinly populated, must make that mode of Agency very costly. If the newlv
created Branch Societies are kept in existence and furnished with small Depots
this arrngement might be found to supersede to a great extent the necessity for
permanent Colportage. If, in addition, benevolent individuals could be induced,
as in this country, to canvass a given district, to ascertain whether there are
persons desiitute of the Scriptures and wishing to purchase copies, much more
would be done towards realizing the great object at which we aim.
If colportage however commends itself to your judgment as a mode of
Agency demanded by the state of the colonies, may we venture to suggest the
desirableness of providing for it by some special efforts instead of making it
a burden on the ordinary Free Income of the Auxiliaries.
. The Committee offer these suggestions with much respect, assured of your
entire readiness to co-operate in every way most calculated to aid the
widest diffusion of the Inspired Volume ; and you will not judge them unduly
importunate when they invite you to afford some additional help towards the
general work in which they are engaged, and which requires for its develone-
ment an enlarged free Income. The Annual Report will inform you how
wide and extended is the sphere over which the operations of the Society
spread and hovy limited is the amount of Free Contributions at our disposal
as compared with the aggregate of our Receipts. The Committee do not wish
to dwell upon any sacrifices that have been made on behalf of Australia.
Still, as you are aware, some sacrifices have been made in free grants, extended
credit, and the large supply of those particular Editions of the Scriptures on
which a heavy loss is sustained. At the same time the amount of Free
Contributions from most of the Australian Auxiliaries has been somewhat
smalL You will pardon the expression of our'most earnest wish that vour
colonies should do something more to strengthen the hands of (he Parent
(society. _ We desire that you should take the high position in our great work
which will be reasonably expected. The Australian colonies are rising into
great Empires, their reeourcts are immense, their Merchants are k cumin


■wealthy as princes, their soil yields its millions of gold, and it is not unna-
tural that, looking to them as an integral part of the British Empire, we
should wish them to sba e with us the blessed privi'ege and honour 01 p;ovi-
sing the Scriptures of Thxithfor the whole world.
We are aware that the expenses of working your Auxiliaries must be
very considerable, but yon will not be forgetful that there are regions beyond
you where no vision is, and where the people perish, and all we say to you in
much attention is, impart to us of that ample store which providence has
placed at j our disposal,—join hands with us in the noble enterp.ise which is
designed to diffuse amongst all men the knowledge of that truth and grace
which came by Jesus Christ.
I remain,
Yours very truly,
S. B. BERGNE, Sen.
British and Foreign Bible Society.
London, 10, Earl Street, Blackfriars, February 23rd, 1857.
The Rev. F. Miller.—
My Dear Sir— Will you kindly do us the favour of placing the
accompanying letter before the Committee of your Bible Auxiliary and request-
ing their attention to its contents. A similar letter has been addressed to
the other Auxiliaries, and in sending a copy to you I have not it
necessary to omit the reference made to the practice adopted in connexion with
your labours.
You will perceive that the communication relates to the visit of our
Deputation and the plans by which that visit can be rendered most subser-
vient to the great object of the Parent Society. We feel assured that you
are as desirous as we can be to take advantage of the interest which has
been so extensively awakened by the labours of Messrs. Bech r and Charles.
We also rely on your readiness to afford us your continued valuable co-opera-
tion. We solicit from your Committee the full and free expression of their
views as to any measures that may he needful to maintain the efficient working
of the numerous Societies that have been formed, and which must inevitably
languish apart from some visitation and supervision.
You will, no doubt, be of opinion that some sort of Agency is in dispensable.
Feelings of delicacy in part, led the Committee to forego the idea of sending
an Agent hence for permanent residence in Australia. They shrunk from
seeming to interfere with the free action of the Auxiliaries. If, however, the
concutrent opinion of friends in different parts of the colony should urge on
the Parent Committee the adoption of such a plan there will be no indisposition
on our part to look once more at the whole question. But we trust you will
give us the benefit of your deliberations, and be assured whatever you sug-
gest will receive the best and most respecful attention of this Committee.
We are anxious that your distant colonies should hold a distinguished position
in our Great Bible Work for the world. Believe me, Yours truly
S. B. BERGNE,
REPORT BY THE REV. M. H. BECHER, M. A.
KECTOE Of BAENOLDBY-LE-BECK.
In presenting a joint Report of the recent Mission to the colonies of Australia
and Tasmania, your Agents felt some difficulty, from the fact of one member
o the Deputation, Mr. Thomas Charles, having been compelled, by the failure


The population contained in this vast territory is,
as yet, comparatively
small, according to tlie most recent Government statistics.
In 1851, New South Wales contained
. 189,000
1853, Tasmania
. 65,000
1*64, Victoria
. 236,789
1856, South Australia
. 85,*21
„ Western Australia about . .
. 12,000
5h8,610
The influx of population is, however, so rapid that their population*
might now be computed respectively at—
New South Wales
250,000
Tasmania
80,000
Victoria .
340,000
South Australia
90,000
Western Australia
13,000
—773,000
of his health, to relinquish the Mission in December last, after the Island of Tas-
mania and the greater part o 'New Sou Wales had been visit .d. The visita-
tion of the remaining pouion of New Somh Wales, together with the whole
of the Colonies of Victoria and South Australia, having been completed by
Mr. Beoher alone, they have conferred together since their return to .England,
and the following Keport was drawn up by Mr. Beoher, as a jo : it Deport from
your Agents, with the intention that, as far as practiable, it should present
the result of their experience of the past, and recommendations for the future.
Mr. Charles, however, while agreeing with it as presenting a rough outline of
their proceedings, cannot adopt it, and thinks separate Deports from your
Agents would be more desirable. Mr. Becher accordingly presents the De-
port with a few verbal alterations as his own.
It is, from the nature of it, concise. In order, therefore, to supply further
information to the Committee, Mr. Becher will furnish the Secretaries with his
journals, together with a fuller Deport of those Colonies he visited by himself
alone.
PHYSICAL FEATURES.
The coast line of the settled districts of Australia, from Port Curtis on the east
to Perth on the west, extends over a space of about 4000 miles, containing
the Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria (the most southern), South Austra-
lia, and Western Australia; besides which, at the southern extremity of the
continent lies the Island of Tasmania, about 200 miles in length by 130 in
breadth, the whole lying between the tropic of Capricorn and latitude 44 °
South, and between the parallels of 112° and 154° East longitude, iu
which you have every variety of climate, from tropical heat to the more tempo-
rate and delightful climate of Tasmania.
The Colonies abound with lolty and precipitous tiers of mountains, a vast
portion of w'hich are more more or less auriferous, and must, for years to
come, present a field of attraction to the gold digger : fertile valleys, and
plains of almost boundless extent, prevail; the major part of the country
covered with dense evergreen forests, in which are to be found trees of
gigantic size- It is not well watered, compared with Europe or America,
but there a e some magnificieut rivers, one of which, the Murray is now navi-
gated by steamers for 2000 miles.
POPULATION.
DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION.
Of this population, probably about 200,000 are concentrated at the principal
sea-ports, such as Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, Adelaide, and in Tasmania, at
Hobart Town and Launceston. It has been found very difficult to estimate
the population at the gold-fields, as it is ever increasing and fluctuating a»


to its locality ; but it has been computed that in \ ictor a alone, at the lowest
estimate, there are over 100,000 persons on the gold-fields. laking, then, m
round numbers, the sea-ports population at 200,000, and the gold-fields at
150.000, the rural population, strictly speaking, would not be much above
400.000, dispersed over the small country towns, villages, and squatting
stations of the four Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
and Tasmania, in which are about 280 small towns and villages, with popula-
tions varying from 25 to 2000 persons.
RELIGIOUS CONDITION.
On taking a general view of the religious condition of the Colonies of
Australasia, while, as at home, there is much to deplore and some causes for
apprehension, there is still much to be thankful for, and many bright points or
hope for the future : the general aspect of society and tone of morality are
much better than could have been expected, considering the heterogeneous
nature of the population, and the many influences, in a new country, which
tend to throw the interests of religion into the back ground.
There is a considerable proportion of prolessors of evangelical iciigion,
and, amongst these many earnest and devoted servants of God, much inter-
ested in the spread of the Bible and every good work. The external obser-
vance of the Sabbath is quite as good in the chief cities of Australia as in
our English cities, and their supply of Ministers of the Gospel is, in some
instances, greater in proportion than in English towns of tne same popula-
tion In the bush, however, where the population is small and very scattered,
spiritual destitution prevails to a fearful
mon where there is only one Minister to a district larger in extent tnan
Ireland; the visits received, therefore, by settlers from a Minister would be
few and far between ; and, as might he expected, in many instances religion
is altogether lost sight of, and, in some instances, even the external observance
of the°Lord’s-day wholly neglected.
STATE OF EXISTING AUXILIARIES.
The first object mentioned in your instructions to your Australian Depu-
tation was, the state of existing Auxiliaries, and their greater efficiency
where attainable. To this my attention has been directed. The Societies I
found in existence were — , ,
In New South Wales-One Auxiliary at Sydney, thirty-eight years estab-
lished; no Branch, &c.
In Tasmania—At Hoharton, one Auxiliary, thirty-four years established;
no Branches, &o.
At Launceston, one Auxiliary, with one Branch.
In Victoria —At Melbourne, one Auxiliary, thirteen years established; one
Branch. .
At Geelong, one Auxiliary, nine years established.
In South Australia—At Adelaide, one Auxiliary, ten years established ;
three Branches. . . „ _
Total—Eleven Societies, viz.: —six Auxiliaries and five Branches.
I have been unable to discover exactly the number of copies issued by
these Societies, some of them not giving the total issue in their Annual Reports;
but, as nearly as I can estimate, they have jointly put into circulation a total
of over 100,000 copies of the Holy Scriptures. It should be added, that
though most of the Societies had no regular Branches connected with them,
several had, in different country districts, individuals, interested in the work,
corresponding with the Secretaries, and collecting Free Subscriptions.
In seekingto promote the greaterefficicncy of these Auxiliaries,it seemed to
is that in no way could the object be effected so well as by getting them to
carry out and adhere to those principles and mode of operations which have
so long characterized the Parent Institution, and her associated Societies at


In Tasmania
0
0
New South Wales . .
... 700 10
6
South Australia . . .
... 228
6
11
Victoria
10
10
c
home. Circumstanced as the Australian Auxiliaries were, at such a distance
from England, and never favoured with those periodical visits from Agents
of the Parent Society, which so much contribute to the eTiciency of our Home
Societies, it was to be expected that some ignorance of our distinctive prin-
ciples would exist, and perhaps errors : n management occur. In Sydney, for
exavnple, a sort of pivtnership existed between our Auxiliary and the
Sydney Religious Tract Society, both as respects the Depot and the Colpor-
teurs employed, presenting to the public the appearance of amalgamation. This
was done by the Sydney friends, I have no doubt, with the best intentions,
viz. that of saving money to both Societies; but it was not desirable, for several
reasons, that there should be even' the appearance of amalgamation ; and,
after much delay, an entire separation was effected between the two Societies,
and their business is now carried on separately. The other Auxiliaries seemed
imbued with the principles of the Parent Society, and, as far as their opera-
tions went, to have worked constitutionally and effectively. I might particu-
larize the Societies at Hobarton and Adelaide, which have been conducted
most economically, and perhaps have done as much, in proportion to circum-
stances, as any Auxiliary in connexion with the Parent Society.
FORMATION OF NEW SOCIETIES.
Extension, through the system of Branches, next called for attention. In
order to promote the effectual spread of the Scriptures throughout the Colo-
nies, it would be desirable to have a Branch Society in every township ; it
would, however, have been impossible to visit each of them in my limited
time, neither would it have been possible, in many of them, to find the
elements wherewith to construct a Society. I made, however, several long
voyages and extensive land tours, penetrating up the country, in some
instances, as far as 260 miles into the interior, in the bush, choosing for the
scene of operation those places which were of most importance, either from
population or position, including all the chief towns, the principal gold-fields of
Hew South Wales and Victoria, the great Burra-Burra copper-mines in South
Australia, and both extremities of the navigation of the river Murray, viz. Porß
Elliott, on the sea-coast of South Australia,and Albury, 2000 miles up the river
on the border of Hew South Wales and Victoria.
. I have been permitted to attend 107 Public Meetings, and form 88 New
Societies in places not previously occupied. Of these Meetings, 60 were held
by your Agents conjointly in Tasmania and part of New South Wales, from
February to December 1855; and 47 were attended by me alone, from January
to August 1856, in the remaining portion of New South Wales, in Victoria,
and South Australia, after Mr. Charles was compelled by his health to
retire from the mission.
I have great pleasure in bearing testimony to the friendly and cordial
reception I met with in the Colonies. Wherever I went on my mission I
was welcomed in the name of the Lord, and great readiness manifested to co-
operate in the work, and, in many instances, contributions of the most liberal
nature were forthcoming: the Collections made at the different Meetings
and after Sermons, were as follows—■ D ’
. , , 2153 83-
a large proportion of which was in the shape of Annual Subscriptions.
I cannot say that I remarked, in the course of my mission, that destitution
of the Soiiptures, which many might expect, would “be found to prevail. The
Colonists had a considerable number of Bibles and Testaments in-their posses-
sion, but this, in many instances, was owing to their having brought them


■with them from home ; there was no possibility, in many places, of nay farther
supply. I found, however, a great and general demand for the larger and
better description of Libies, for which they were quite willing to pav a high
COinoKTAGE.
The extension of the system of Colportage came next in your Agents’
instructions. The subject was and is, fraught with the greatest difficulties
in Australia ; first, Tom the great esnense a. te.idi ig it; next, from the diffi-
culty of procuring and retaining Suitable Agents. The first arises from the
nature of the country : the vast distances which have to be travelled render
it a physical impossibility for the Colporteur to pursue his emnloyment on
foot, as in England and on the Continent : he must, therefore, have a horse,
and as he has to make a tour of perhaps some months, and to penetrate to
places where there is no kind of public conveyance, it is necessary for him to
take with him a spring-cart to convey a large stock of books. The experi-
ment has been tried more than once, and to some extent, but the expenses are
enormous: in New South Walr* about £2OO per annum for each Colporteur.
In Meibom ne it was t. ed for a short eriod. but finding it was sustained at an
expense of about £4OO per annum, it was abandoned.
At Geelong, and in Sou.h Australia, men had been engaged to give a por~
tion of their time in going a:out the cities and their suburbs : this was much
less expensive, and very effective, but did not meet the case of settlers in the
bash.
In Tasmania, since my departure, a Colporteur has been engaged to
prosecute his work through the island at much less expense. I heard, while
at Melbourne, most gratifying accounts of the success which followed his
labours, and of “ the extraordinary number of Bibles sold.”
A grant °f £4yo., inclui ng the £3OO voted by you, was made to the New
South Wales Auxiliary in aid of Bib'e Colportage; and a grant of £lOO to
the new Auxiliary formed at Moreton Bay (600 miles north of Sydney),
promised for the same purpose, provided they would raise a fund to meet it.
Further grants of money in aid of Colportage were gratefully declined by
the other Auxiliaries. J
On the whole, well calculated as the system of Colportage is to meet the
wants of a scattered population, I regret that I could not advise, at present,
that it should be employed otherwise than cautiously and sparingly.
It is, however, cheering to remember that there are now 88 additional spots
scattered over these vast territories, at each of which the Holy Scriptures
can be procured, and at whose Anniversary Meetings, and iu canvassing for
Subscribers among the setters in the district, the claims of the Bible Society,
and the facilities it affords for the supply of the word of life, will be brought
to the notice of many a remote settler, who otherwise mightremain in ignorance
that the Scriptures were within h s reach. This in some measure may supply the
want of a system of Colportage.
SCHOOLS.
The Schools next claimed notice in your instructions. I found the atten-
tention of the Auxiliaries had been directed to them, and large supplies issued.
In Victoria, however, the stock in hand of School Bibles and Testaments was
utterly inadequate to meet the demand.
BENEVOLENT INSTITUTIONS.
Benevolent Institutions I also visited, as far as time permitted. In some
cases they were inadequately supplied. To this, where needful, attention was
directed.
CRIMINALS.
Transportation now only taking place in Western Australia, there are no
convict depots except that remaining at Port Artthur, in Tasmania : many con-


victs still remain, but are out on ticket-of-leave. I made enquiries as to the
supply of Scriptures at the Government stations, and found they were sup-
plied through the Chaplains to those who were willing to receive them.
FOREIGNERS.
The case of foreigners was one to which you also directed attention.
There are in the Colonies representatives of almost every nation under heaven,
hut of foreign nations the most numerous are Chinese, Germans, French, and
Italian: the last are not numerous. Germans prevail most of all the conti-
nental nations, and particularly in South Australia, where there are over
7000; hut the Chinese outnumber all, being at the lowest computation 40,000
chiefly congregated at the Victoria gold-fields of Ballarat, Bendigo, Castle-
maine, and the Ovens, and, strange to say, they are exclusively males; and
here, perhaps, is one of the most interesting fields of labour, in connection
with China, which it is impossible to conceive. “A great and effectual door”
is here opened for the exertions of the Church of Christ and her good servant
the Bible Society. These Chinese have come unaccompanied by any of their
women ; they have left, in many instances, wives and families at home ; and
their idea is_ to acquire some of the gold to he found in Australia, and soon
return to their native land. They are now, in Australia,under the most favour-
able circumstances for evangelization: they are accompanied by neither priest
for mandarins to hinder, no despotic Government to interpose, and are pecu-
liarly gratified by the slightest notice from a European who is well dressed, and
most accessible to the Christian Missionary. The Christian Church in Victoria
is rising to meet her responsibilities towards them. It is a beautiful feature,
that all evangelical denominations have combined to sink their minor differen-
ces, and bear jointly the expense of a Victoria Chinese Mission to these heathen
dwelling in their midst, upon the principle of the London Missionary Society.
The excellent Bishop of Melbourne has thrown all the weight of his influence
and exertions into the Mission. Just before I left for England, I had the
gratification of hearing theßeport of the Mission’s labours read at their first
Anniversary in Melbourne. The Rev. Mr. Young an able Missionary for many
years in China, and three native Christians, were engaged in preaohino- among
them. The Chinese Scriptures and tracts were in great demand ; and, before
long, the 4500 New Testaments sent to your Australian Auxiliaries will be in
the hands of as many Chinese ; and still the cry w ill be for more. Multi-
tudes of these poor Chinese will soon be returning to China, but impeifectly
instructed, it is true, in the way of salvation, but bearing with them that
perfect Book “ which is able to make wise unto salvation,” with at least some
idea of its contents. Who can estimate the effect which may be
produced in China, ere long, by these Bible possessors, many of whom have
come from the far interior of the empire.
I directed much attenton to the Chinese during my visits to the gold-fields
and am only deterred by the length of this Report from giving details of most
interesting facts, which came under my own personal observation.
I have to ask your induigence for the length this Report has grown to.
My object has been to put you in possession of a brief statement of the state
oi things as I lound them in Australia, and as they are present ; and, in en-
deavouring to do so, my difficulty has been to condense ; the topics I have
had to refer to are so numerous and so momentous, volumes might have been
written upon the subject.
FUTURE OPERATIONS.
One point yet remains to be adverted to—the future. The Committee
will naturally w ish to be informed what course of proceeding their Deputa-
tion would recommend to the Parent Society with respect to° the Australian
Colonies,


I beg, then, very respectfully to state my own impressions of what might
be desirable for the future.
The object to be wished is, to secure permanency to the Societies which
have been formed, together with constitutional and harmonious working witn
each other, and with the Parent Society ; and the extension M their opera-
tions through the formation of new Branches, for which a considerable held
yet remains. . n , .
Permanency in any thing is a difficult matter to secure in the Colonies :
fluctuations are great and frequent ; men’s minds and time are so taken up with
business, that it is very hard to secure anything like punctual attendance at
Committees, and this particularly in Victoria. That class of Christian men
who have time at their own disposal does not there exist. It cannot be ex-
pected that the newly-formed Societies will continue to work long without some
system of periodical visitation, like what prevails in England. Instances are
numerous in Australia where Branch Bible Societies have been formed by indi-
viduals, but have disappeared, solely, w T e believe, for want of visitation.
The question, therefore, seems to be, How can this best be effected.
whether by an Agent sent out, employed and maintained by the Parent Society,
to take the general visitation and superintendence of all these Colonies, or by
each of the Colonial Auxiliaries having their own local Agent, directly paid
and employed by them. ~.
This latter system has been adopted by the Hobarton Auxiliary, and
they have been enabled to secure the services of Mr. R. E. Dear, a gentleman
admirably suited to the post; and I have since heard from the Secretary,
the Rev. Frederick Miller, most gratifying accounts of the result.
In Victoria, the business of the Auxiliary has so increased by the formation
of new Branches as to make it quite impossible^for the clerical Secretaries to
attend to it, -without neglecting their ministerial charges. A P a secretary
was found, therefore, an immediate want ; and, when I left Melbourne, the
Committee there were endeavouring to find a gentleman who might unite with
the office of Secretary that of visiting the Branches annually.
A question then arises as to whether this system would secure as great
efficiency to the local Societies, and as large a Free Income to the Parent
Society, as a direct Agent from home would ? An Agent of the Parent Soc i et y
would doubtless secure greater efficiency, and more constitutional and nar-
monious working. The agency, also, would be more _ permanent, as e
Auxiliaries cannot count for any long period on the services of their Agems,
so many are the openings for advancement presenting themselves to men of
character and ability ; but inasmuch as there must now, under any circum-
stances, be some local paid agency in connexion with each ot our great Auxi-
liaries, and as the salary and expense of a Home Agent would probab y
from £BOO to £ 1000 a-year, it may be doubted whether the nett gam in Tree In-
come to the Parent Society would be as great for some few years as it would
be under local agency. It is this consideration alone which prevents me from
recommending the immediate appointment of a permanent Agent tor Austra-
lasia as unhesitatingly as I should have done a year ago. _ ,
The Society has a large claim upon the colonists for Scriptures, supplied
at prime cost, and at reduced prices. This is beginning to be understood and
iVir, and a desire manifested to send Free Subscriptions home. Iheir expenses
however, are heavy, and the chief objection to a local agency is the temptation,
which would exist to spend in the Colony the money raised m the Colony,
in the absence of the claims of the Parent Society being urged year by year
Vhculd the Commttee think it desirable to send out a permanent Agent, I
have no doubt of his hearty reception generally amoog the vamns Denomi-
nations, and receiving the warmest support from the Bishops of Sydne,,,
Melbourne, and Adelaide.


CONCLUSION.
I hasten to conclude. I have to acknowledge, with thankfulness to
Almighty God, the way in which the hearts of all Protestant Denominations
were opened to receive me, and with gratitude to many dear Christian friends,
both Ministers and Laymen, the warm hospitality, hearty co-operation, and
valuable assistance they afforded me in prosecuting the mission. Their
names will all appear in my journals, but the list is too numerous to insert here.
Above all, to the Father of mercies and God of all grace I would ascribe
the praise and the glory for all that has been effected, and for His merciful
providence, preserving and sustaining me in so arduous a mission, and in many
perils by land and by sea.
The mission has in many instances been performed in “ weakness, in
fear, and in much trembling.’’ With, every desire to act for the glory of
God, and the best interests of the Society, I have been, on some occasions,
much “ perplexed” as to what ought to be the right course; still, thanks be
to God! “ not in despair.” Doubtless mistakes may have been committed,
and had Ito go over the ground again, I might be led to pursue a different
course on some points, or any new experiments ; for the mission, like every
human work, has been mingled with imperfection and infirmity. I can only
pray the good Lord pardon all that has been sinful or imperfect, and accept
and bless what has been accomplished to the praise of the glory of His grace !
M. H. BECHBR.
3 1508 01897967 9


