





VOT£
By SIDNEY CARTON.
SECOND EDITION.
1* K. ICE, 3 <l.
* !^?o^
*4
HHjy,
T. Dimmock, General Machine Printer, Maitland.




INTRODUCTION.
Happily we are no longer obliged to discuss the question as
to whether women should have a vote, for a liberal and
enlightened Parliament has now decided that matter by
extending the franchise to all adults, male and female alike.
The next step is to direct the attention of women generally
to their new responsibilities as electors, and to induce them
to avail themselves of the privileges of the franchise. There
are many reasons why all women should vote, some of which
may be given briefly as follows:
Women should vote to show that they want the franchise,
and to disprove the statement that they, as a majority, are
indifferent or opposed to the privilege. Argued from the
standpoint of common justice, women, as intelligent and
responsible beings, are as much entitled to vote as men.
They should help to make the laws under which they have
to live. It is simply the custom of centuries which has
given all the power of voting to men. Women, as a mat-
ter of right and justice, should have had the vole all through.
Among men, only criminal and insane persons are disfran-
chised, and no woman, by rejecting the right to vote, need
place herself politically on the level of either of these
classes.
They should vote also to see that all laws relating to
women, children, and domestic matters generally, are put
on sounder and firmer bases than at present. Later on
when women have given other subjects more thought, when
their political education has advanced, they will be just as
interested as men in all subjects brought forward. At pre-
sent two matters urgently calling for reform —the higher
education of women, and the payment to them of equal
wages for equal work done—should occupy the serious at-
tention of women, and be insisted on.
In homes where the women’s vote is exercised the in-
fluence will at any rate be double that of homes where it
is not used, or in which only single men live. It appears
only right that respectable parents, carefully training chil-
dren to become an honour and credit to the State, should,
by virtue of the mother’s vote, have more power in the mak-
ing of the laws than the tramp, or the irresponsible
larrikin in the street, who has no aims or interests beyond


his own self gratification. Every woman who hesitates to
vote should remember that the vote of one good woman will
nullify that of one bad man.
Women should vote as the most sincere mode of ex-
pressing the thanks due to the band of untiring workers
who have at last succeeded in gaining the privilege for them.
Long have they laboured ungrudgingly and incessantly in
the good cause, and at times have suffered almost a martyr-
dom of sneers, reproaches, and disappointments. They
have won for the women of this State a privilege that many
of the best and noblest women of England sigh for as yet
in vain, and it would be more than ungracious not to take
up such a gift and use it. Years have passed over the heads
of those earnest toilers in the vineyards of humanity, and
many of them cannot hope to behold the fruits of their
labour. But women can at least show them the blossom
and the promise of it.
The eyes of all the world will watch critically the re-
sults of this innovation, and every woman who votes con-
scientiously and judiciously adds her share to the success
of a great forward movement: every woman, too indifferent
or too prejudiced to vote, acts as a drag upon the wheel of
reform. If every good woman will rouse herself and
throw the weight of her vote into the scale of political re-
form, all pernicious voting would be more than counterbal-
anced.
It may be safely predicted, too, that should some dead-
ly or insidious foe threaten the welfare of the State, should
there come a time of grave national peril, then, even the
men who have opposed the enfranchisement of women, will
in their necessity, gladly and gratefully seek the votes of
despised womankind. Let women then be ready to volun-
tarily give their aid to a good cause.
We would therefore urge all women who have the
welfare of women, of children, or of the future of their
country at heart, to obtain their electors’ rights, and to use
them when opportunity offers. It is the simplest thing in
the world to obtain an electors’ right. It involves less time
and trouble than going into a shop to buy a yard of calico,
A woman has simply to go to the courthouse between the
hours of ten in the morning and four in the afternoon, ask
the clerk of petty sessions for her elector’s right, and she


will receive it, provided, of course, she is over twenty-one
years of age and a resident of the district. It is better not
to delay in the matter ; many a dissolution of Parliament
has come about in a manner and at a time most unexpected
and it is well to be prepared for such emergency.
And until such an emergency arises, some of women’s
leisure—scant though it be—may be profitably spent in
studying the beet methods of voting, in learning the way
in which our state is governed, and in mastering various
other details of political life. With such objects in view
the indefatigable workers in the woman’s suffrage move-
ment in Sydney have formed themselves into the Women’s
Political-Educational League. Branches of this League
are being rapidly formed in many country towns of the
State, and are working energetically. All who desire to be
in the van of reform should make similar efforts, and we
would instil into their minds, as one of the first and sound-
est of political maxims, that united and organised effort is
always the most economical and effective.


The History of a Vote.
(BY S. C.)
’Srfepjli S until very recently, women have not had the
|M privilege of voting, many of them have taken
but little interest in politics: they have at most
but a hazy idea of the methods by which their
country is governed, or of what is implied by
the power to vote.
It is proposed, therefore, in the course of a few short
articles, to give a brief sketch of the way in which the
British Parliament has evolved, and to explain as shortly
and simply as possible the constitution under which we live.
The subject is approached with the utmost diffidence, for
all that is here set down, badly and disjointedly, is told most
ably and eloquently in the many standard historical works
which are among the glories of our great literature. But
these notes may be of some service to those persons who
have not time nor opportunity to study history.
Carlyle in his ‘French Revolution’ draws for us a pic-
ture of men in primitive times raising their mightiest, the
‘ Kon-ning ’ or King, the man who was ‘ able,’ on a rude
buckler throne, and proclaiming him as their ruler. Look-
ing back to the early dawn of history, we find it was ever
so. In those bygone ages when humanity was but in its
childhood and incapable of self-government, we find no re-
cord of institutions at all resembling our modern Parlia-
ments. Men in those times were ever ruled by some great
overshadowing personality. Some mighty chief, some
‘ Kon-ning’ or ablest one, whose force of will or might of
arms gave him supremacy over his fellows. But as civili-
zation has advanced, as humanity in the mass has become
more enlightened, the inevitable tendency has been for men
to take the power into their own hands. This is what
occurs in the growth of individuals, and the law holds good
in the life of nations. There are about us significant and
abundant tokens that humanity has attained its majority,
that it will henceforth take its destiny into its own hands,
and that the divine right of kings has become a legendary
myth.


The old Greek and Roman civilisations have left records
of almost perfect democracies, and of the most liberal con-
stitutions conceivable, but in the scope of these short
papers it is not possible to discuss them, nor to inquire to
what extent they have influenced and modified our existing
constitution of laws. We must confine ourselves strictly
to English soil.
Surveying, then, Britain just before the Christian era,
we see a country covered for the most part by dense forests
and extensive swamps, and peopled by various barbarous
tribes of Celtic origin. In these rude people the germs of
patriotism were as yet latent; they had but little idea of
banding together either for government or defence. They
were conquered by the Romans about fifty years before the
birth of Christ, and for four hundred years, speaking
roughly, they remained in subjection to that nation.
Britain became a colony of the Romans, the natives became
their slaves, and it may not be too much to say that their
condition was not much better than that of the aboriginal
inhabitants of Australia. The Celts, however, were a
sturdier and better developed race ; they were not extermi-
nated ; the more warlike tribes were never thoroughly sub-
dued, though they were driven back to the fastnesses of
Cornwall and Wales. Those who came completely under
the Roman yoke learnt many of the arts of peace and war,
but, as generation after generation passed into serfdom,
they lost, as was inevitable, all independence and self-reli-
ance During the Roman occupancy, the country was har-
rassed at intervals by the raids of the Piets and Scots, wild
tribes from the north—from the country still called Scot-
land ; but there was always the strong arm of the Roman
to protect, the might of the Roman legions to redress every
wrong. When, however, owing 10 troubles at home, the
Romans abandoned the colony in Britain, the Celts were
indeed left naked to their enemies.
Traditions of King Arthur, and the legends of his
knights, imply that among the more independent tribes of
the West, some organization for a time existed with the
object of opposing the invading hordes and redressing
human wrongs ; but King Arthur’s famous ‘ Order of the
Table Round,’ so glorified in song and story, cannot in any
way be regarded as a Parliament in the ordinary meaning
of the word. In their extremity the Celts asked help from


the Angles and Saxons, people who lived on the mainland
across the Northern Sea; they came ostensibly to help, but
ended by taking possession of the whole land. With their
advent the history of Angle-land or England properly
begins The Britons were driven back into Wales and
Cornwall, and to the opposite coast of France, still called
Britany.
The centuries rolling by found the Anglo-Saxons firmly
established on the island, which was divided into kingdoms.
The love of liberty seems to have been inherent in the race,
for despite much war between the kingdoms, much fighting
against the Britons still left in the land, and against the
invading Danes, we find in times of peace much good gov-
ernment prevailing. There was a method of trial which
somewhat resembled our modern system of trial by jury,
and there was a periodic gathering of king, nobles, bishops
and representatives of the people, the Witena-gemotj or
* meeting of wise men,’ to discuss the laws before they
were enforced This Witena-gemot is considered by some
historians to be the germ from which the modern parlia-
ment has sprung, and therefore we may say that for up-
wards of a thousand years the English people have had a
share in governing themselves. But it is extremely im-
probable that any but freeholders were admitted to the
council, and the lowest orders of the people were entirely
unrepresented.
The Anglo-Saxon kingdoms—commonly called the
Heptarchy, though they were never (according to Hume)
exactly seven existing at one and the same time—were
united early in the ninth century under King Egbert, and
thus presented a more formidable front to the ever-increasing
hosts of invading Danes.
For upwards of 50 years the Danish Vikings continued
their ravages, often penetrating to the very heart of the
country. During the reign of the illustrious King Alfred,
whose millenary or thousandth anniversary was celebrated
two years ago, the Danes were successfully repelled, and the
harassed country for many years found peace. During this
reign the young nation made great strides towards higher
civilisation. Besides establishing a regular militia for de-
fence, and greatly increasing and improving the naval for-
ces, the King established schools everywhere throughout
the land, and a system of compulsory education among


freeholders ; he improved and encouraged manufactures
and useful arts, and set aside a seventh part of his own in-
come to repair the ravages of war upon cities, castles,
palaces and monasteries. Because of his excellent division
of his day into three equal portions of eight hours each,
he has been cited in some recent notices of his millenary
as the first advocate of the eight-hours’ system. He care-
fully revised old laws, inserted fresh ones in the code, and
saw that all were vigorously administered. Though dead
for a thousand years, his influence comes down to us, he
has set the seal of greatness for all time upon the nation.
The stories and traditions of King Alfred, so justly
styled ‘ The Great,’ are numerous and entertaining ; there
is no romance more interesting than his life and times, but
the reader must turn to the history book for them.
The Danes, during the reigns of weaker monarchs,
who succeeded Alfred, eventually established themselves in
England, and held sway there for nearly half a century.
But they were, in turn succeeded by other Anglo-Saxon
Kings, and their temporary usurpation of the throne was
but an incident in the life of the nation and has left no en-
during marks upon either the language or the government.
Under the Anglo-Saxon Kings the government, though
always tending to equity and liberty, was comparatively
primitive and patriarchal in character, and only with the
Norman conquest do we begin the real political history of
the nation, a record of struggle for rights, beginning with
the wrestling of Magna Charta from a reluctant monarch,
and culminating to-day in adult suffrage.
While the last Danish King reigned in England, the
Anglo-Saxon heir to the throne, Edward the Confessor,
was exiled in Normandy, where he lived for 27 years.
Naturally, or unnaturally, his affections were in that time,
weaned from his native land. All his tastes were Norman.
The French language and French fashions were introduced
at court, when at last he came into his kingdom, and the
chief offices of State were filled by the Norman friends of
his youth. His culminating act of favour was to leave the
crown to William, Duke of Normandy.


Though the English did not allow a foreigner to usurp
the throne entirely without a struggle, they were beaten by
the Normans at the famous battle of Hastings, and Harold,
their chosen King and leader, was killed. Thus, once again,
but now, however, for the last time, the English became a
conquered nation.
Their subjugation was most complete. The Normans
were at this time the dominant race of Christendom,
renowned in chivalry, literature, in government, and oratory,
but most of all in valour and ferocity. For the century
and a half during which six Norman monarchs of courage
and strong personality successively reigned in England,
there is practically no English history, save a grievous tale
of cruelty and oppression on the part of the conquerors,
and hatred and stealthy revenge on the part of the
oppressed.
The Normans introduced the feudal system of govern-
ment into England, and there was, under the rule of their
early kings little or no legislation. The supreme authority
was vested in the King, who took all the land from the
Anglo-Saxon nobles and divided it among his Norman
barons. In return for their estates they pledged themselves
to bring so many knights and warriors into the field in the
event of war. The estates were again divided and sub-
divided on similar conditions among persons of less and
less importance or rank, the great mass of the common
people being held as serfs and slaves. This lowest class
had absolutely no rights or freedom ; they belonged entirely
to the lords of the estates, and could be sold in the open
market, as negroes were in America before the Emancipa-
tion. Their condition is thus ably summed up by
Macaulay:—
“ Strong military institutions, closly connected with
the institution of property, enabled the foreign conquerors
to oppress the children of the soil. A cruel penal code,
cruelly enforced, guarded the privileges and even the sports
of the alien tyrants. Yet the subject race, though beaten
down and trodden under-foot, still made its sting felt.
Some bold men, the favourite heroes of our oldest ballads,
betook themselves to the woods, and there, in defiance of
curfew laws and forest laws, waged a predatory war against
their oppressors. Assassination was an event of daily


occurrence. Many Normans suddenly disappeared, leaving
no trace. The corpses of many were found bearing the
marks of violence.”
Sir Walter Scott’s historical romance, “Ivanhoe,”
gives a striking and vivid picture of these times.
Macaulay astutely points out as more than probable
that, had the line of capable Norman rulers remained
unbroken, England would have been until to-day a depend-
ency of France. He says : “ Her princes, her lords, her
prelates, would have been men differing in race and language
from the artisans and the tillers of the earth. The
revenues of her great proprietors would have been spent in
festivities and diversions on the banks of the Seine. The
noble language of Milton and Burke would have remained
a rustic dialect, without a literature, a fixed grammar, or a
fixed orthography, and would have been contemptuously
abandoned to the use of boors. No man of English ex-
traction would have risen to eminence, except by becoming
in speech and habits a Frenchman.”
But at the same time that John, the seventh Norman
ruler—stigmatised by Macaulay as “ irifler and coward ”
ascended the throne, France was ruled by a wise and
valorous monarch. As a consequence, John was driven
from his dukedom in Normandy, His Norman followers
then, isolated and pent up in their sea-girt home with the
English, gradually grew to look upon the island as their
land and the Englishmen as their countrymen. The
tyrannous rule of John pressed heavily on Norman and
English alike, they made common cause in their common
misfortunes, and according to the eloquent historian already
quoted : “ The greatgrandsons of those who had fought
under William, and the greatgrandsons of those who had
fought under Harold, began to draw near to each other in
friendship; and the first pledge of their reconciliation was
the Great Charter, won by their united exertions, and
framed for their common benefit.”
In such manner was born a new national spirit, a
larger patriotism, binding together all who were born on
English soil.
This Great Charter—Magna Charta—-which we are
told has been well summarised as “ a solemn protest
against the evil of arbitrary arrest and arbitrary taxation.”
John, to his great humiliation, was forced to sign at Bunny-


mede in 1215. The pen of an Englishman, Langton,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the sword of the Norman
Baron Fitzwalter contributed equally to its consummation.
Comprehensive, far-seeing, beneficent, and judicious, it se-
cures rights to all classes. The wrongs of the Barons were
redressed, the privileges of the clergy confirmed, but its
most stiking features were the provision it made for the
mass of the people, Not one class was overlooked or for-
gotten. Even the “villain” or serf in rude dress of coarse
leather was protected ; among other rights, he was not to
be deprived of his carts, ploughs, and implements of
husbandry.
Women may judge of the thaldom in which their sex,
in those days, was held, as they read by the enactments of
Magna Charta, “ Widows were secured from compulsory
marriage.” Freetraders may be interested to know that, by
the same great privilege nearly eight hundred years ago,
“freedom of commerce was granted to alien merchants.”
But the essential clauses of Magna Charta, iJallam
observes, are those “ which protect the personal liberty and
property of all freemen, by giving security from arbitrary
imprisonment and arbitrary spoliation : ‘ No freeman shall
be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any
otherwise destroyed ; nor will we pass upon him, nor send
upon him, but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the
law of the land. We will sell to no man, we will not deny
or delay to any man, justice or right.’ ”
The words quoted above are from the existing law,
and differ only slightly from the original Charter of John.
The name of Langton should be reverenced by every
Englishman, for to his genius chiefly we owe the far reach-
ing benefits cf the great charter. It must be borne in
mind that the masses of the people did not themselves, as
in these modern days, agitate and combine to win such
privileges for themselves. They were won for them by the
best men among those they reckoned as tyrants and
oppressors. As serfdom gradually disappeared through the
centuries, the benefits of Magna Charta were extended to
an ever-widening class. But at the time, the bulk of the
people probably did not ask or desire such liberty, because
they had no conception of all that it implied. Many of
them perhaps lived and died without learning or realising


their fresh privileges. Not for generations, doubtless, did
they fully appreciate their emancipation, not till as time
went on, and various despots so nearly wrested it from
from them again, did they value it at its true worth.
Perhaps, reflecting on this, those people who are opposed
to the emancipation of women, will pause before again
using the argument that women in the mass do not desire it.
It would be tedious and unnecessary for the present
purpose of these papers to trace the gradual emergence of
the “ villain” of feudal times into the free and independ-
ent supporter of the Labour party of to-day. Many slaves
at first aided themselves by escaping to distant parts of the
country where they took service as free men under new
masters ; others hid for a year in towns, after which period
they were declared free by law. It is gratifying to learn
also that the church used its influence always on their be-
half, and the courts of law ever sided with this weak and
oppressed class.
We are told by Hume that no fewer than thirty-eight
times was it found necessary to confirm the great Charter,
six times in the reign of Henry 111. alone. The moral
weakness of that King, and his constant desire to evade the
conditions of the Charter, brought about the revolt of the
Barons under Simon de Montfort, and led to the establish-
ment of a parliament more closely resembling its modern
form, for besides the assemblage of barons, who with the
spiritual peers—archbishops, bishops and abbots—consti-
tuted the House of Lords, two knights from each shire and
two citizens or burgesses from each city and borough were
summoned. “ This,” says our historian, “is the true epoch
of the House of Commons.” At first these knights and
burgesses were only assembled for the purpose of obtaining
money ; they had no voice in making the laws. But their
control of the supplies gradually gave them more power,
and Hallam points out that thus the liberties of English-
men were to a great extent purchased with the money of
our forefathers.
The next step gained in the progress of the Commons
was the right to petition for the redress of grievances, and
gradually their assent became necessary to all enactments.


But they still laboured under disabilities, inasmuch as their
petitions were open to alteration or modification by the
King, and therefore did not always voice the wishes of the
people. In the reign of Henry YL, however, they obtained
the right to introduce bills, to which the King gave his
assent, but which he was not at liberty to alter. It was
also decreed that henceforth the Commons should enjoy
liberty of speech, a privilege of which they avail them-
selves most fully at the present day
It will thus be seen that the Commons attained to very
considerable power under the Lancastrian Kings. Then
followed the long and disastrous wars of the Roses, in which
great numbers of the nobles were slain, and which brought
the Tudors to the throne. More than one factor helped the
Tudors in the tyrannous exercise of their kingly power.
After the long civil war there were no great nobles left alive
—men such as Simon de Montfort—to oppose it; the lower
people had not yet fully grown into that great middle class
which to-day exists as a mighty bulwark against oppression ;
and the Constitution was not defined nor observed with the
same exactness as in the present day. Henry YIII. was an
almost absolute monarch, but his natural discretion re-
strained him from attempting to oppress the masses as he
oppressed individuals. The cruelty and injustice dealt out
to Roman Catholics and Puritans alike by “ that wise and
glorious” Queen, Elizabeth, would not to-day be tolerated.
Even in those days, when the whole country began to groan
under the disabilities of the monopolies granted by royalty,
when such things as iron, oil, vinegar, coal, starch, yarn,
glass, skins, and leather could only be bought at exorbitant
prices, the Queen was speedily forced to redress the wrong.
This she did with admirable tact, placing herself at the
head of the reforming party, and thanking the Commons
for their care of the people.
During the middle ages most of the nations of Western
Europe, sprung from the same great race, alike subjected
in early times to Roman influence, engaging together in the
wars of the Cross, and members of the same great Chris-
tian Church, were alike governed by limited monarchies,
which in the main points strongly resembled that exist-
ing at the same time in England. But in the march
of civilisation the time came when the prestige of a nation
could only be maintained by means of a standing army.


Men called in haste from their ploughing and weaving, as
was the usage in more primitive times, could not prevail
against disciplined troops. In those earlier times the power
of the sword had been vested in the King, while the nation
held the purse. The standing armies increased the power
of the monarch, but at the same time made him more de-
pendent on the people for the money necessary to maintain
the armies. A system of taxation became necessary, and
most of the European nations were short sighted enough
to establish it, and allow that great military power to pass
into the hands of the King, without sufficient guarantee
against his despotism. They should have resolutely refused
supplies until they were thus safeguarded. But they ne-
glected this, so we have the spectacle of one limited mon-
archy after another, upon the Continent, becoming an ab-
solute monarchy.
In England the crisis was delayed until two or three
centuries later. Owing chiefly to its isolated position,
England had not the same imminent need of a standing
army, and the beginning of the seventeenth century indeed
found her still without one. During all this time the peo-
ple were becoming more enlightened, and the power of the
House of Commons was increasing.
Macaulay has pointed out that just as we owe the pri-
vileges of the Great Charter very largely to the follies and
vices of John, so do we chiefly owe our present form of
Government to the meanness and weakness of James I.
There is little doubt that had he been a wise and valorous
ruler (pursuing continental conquests at the head of a large
army devoted to him personally) the English Parliament
would have shared the fate of its European predecessors,
and have become a mere formal institution with only nom-
inal powers. But, fortunately for England, James shunned
war with a caution which his enemies called by a harsher
name, and neither the insults of foes nor the persuasions
of friends induced him to alter his pacific policy; therefore
no regular troops were needed. But while this king neglec-
ted the means which might have made him absolute, he
insisted on his right to reign absolutely by the doctrine of
Divine Authority. While peace was maintained, this atti-
tude, although it brought contempt upon the throne, was
productive of no great result. His successor, Charles 1.,
made the same so-called Divine Right the pretext for still


greater tyranny, as with repeated perfidy, evasion, and con-
tempt, he ignored the laws and insulted parliaments which
were called only to be at once dissolved when they thwarted
him.
Then began that long struggle between the Crown and
the Commons, leading to civil war, and culminating in the
execution of one king and the dethronement of another.
The Commons finally emerged triumphant, when they placed
William of Orange upon the throne. The Constitution was
thus settled and a limited monarchy firmly established.
Among the many Acts passed by the famous Long
Parliament during this stormy time is the Triennial Act,
which ordered that more than three years should not elapse
without a Parliament being summoned. The King was also
forced to assent to a bill that declared Parliament should
not be adjourned or dissolved without its own consent.
These two important measures, one the complement of the
other, infinitely increased the power of the Commons.
Further reforms bearing on the rights and liberties of the
people were also secured, but nothing at this critical period
equalled in importance the accession of power by the Com-
mons.
Since this time up to the present day political history
is largely the growth of the power of the people of Govern-
ment by Parliament. A great advance was made by passing
the Reform Bill of 1832. By its means rotten boroughs—
those with small population whose votes were influenced by
landlords and other magnates—were swept away, and their
members given to supply larger representation to the great
centres of population. It also introduced a uniform fran-
chise, which had never before existed. Voting by ballot was
established in England in 1872. The Second and Third
Reform Bills of 1867 and 1884 enfranchised all household-
ers of towns and counties ; by the former a million addi-
tional voters were created and two millions by the latter.
In our own land to-day, adult suffrage has just com-
pleted the enfranchisement of the masses, women as well
as men. In political life there has always been a party op-
posed to reform, to experimental legislation. No less a
person than the Duke of Wellington predicted the ruin of
England at the passing of tbe Reform Bill, but no dire con-
sequences ensued. We feel assured that in years to come
those who now predict ruin as the result of female suffrage
will be equally at fault.


This historical review has necessarily been somewhat
long and tedious, but only the points concerning the devel-
opment of the Constitution have been touched upon. In
the following paper it is proposed to deal with the con-
struction and machinery of that Constitution as it at present
exists.
It is generally acknowledged that the existing British
Constitution is as perfect a form of Government as it is
possible to conceive for humanity at the stage to which it
has at present attained. It is a happy combination of the
rule of the monarch, the aristocracy and the masses; and
while embracing all that is wisest and best of each of these
forms of government, by the balance of these powers, keeps
in check the peculiar evils to which each by itself is liable.
As we are British colonists, scarcely even yet emerged
from the protecting wing of the mother country, our Con-
stitution has naturally been modelled upon the same lines,
and differs only in minor points where it has been modified
and adapted to local needs and conditions.
When in 1783 England lost her American colonies,
she looked about her for what would, in a measure, repair
the loss. It was then proposed to found a colony in the
almost unknown land of New South Wales, and a scheme
was further put forth for settling the American loyalists in
the new colony. Unfortunately the matter of an oversea
depot for the convicts who had hitherto been transported
to America, became such a pressing question that our State
commenced its history as a penal settlement. Still we are
glad to learn that, according to the commission and in-
structions issued to Governor Phillip, the prime intention
of the Home authorities was to found a colony, not to
establish a mere convict depot. But as a consequence of
this unhappy beginning, bitter class distinctions were
observed for many years, and bitter class contests raged
between the emancipists, or freed convicts, and the exclu-
sives, or free colonists. These dissensions need not now
be more than touched upon, as happily many modifying
influences in the march of time have pacifically obliterated
all such undesirable distinctions.
But it must be understood that a colony established
under such mixed conditions was not at first capable of


self-government; for many years it was under the rule of
a governor whose control was supreme, who himself made
all the orders and regulations, and who was answerable
only to the English Government. He had no council to
advise, and his authority was maintained by the military
forces at his command.
In 1821 the Home Government saw that the growing
colony could not be any longer governed conveniently as a mere
military station, and Acts were accordingly passed to bring
about the necessary changes. What has been termed “ The
Charter of Justice ” gave effect to these Acts by establishihg
a Legislative Council to advise the Governor and assist
him in making laws for the colony. The members of this
Council were nominated, however, by the English authori-
ties, not elected by the colonists.
The English, learning an important lesson from the
resistance of their American colonists, had in 1778 passed
a law which has come to be known as the Magna Charta
of the British Colonies. It decreed that no taxes would
henceforth be imposed on any North American or West
Indian colony, except to regulate trade, and that such tax-
ation would be used for the good of the colony where it
was raised, and not go to swell the revenue of Great Britian.
These privileges were extended to our own colony by the
Acts of 1823 and 1828.
These acts indeed largely reformed the whole adminis-
tration, and brought matters nearer to the established order
of things in England. The Supreme Court \yas first opened
in 1824, and trial by jury in certain civil cases was estab-
lished. About the same time also the freedom of the press
was declared, and immediately became a formidable weapon
in the hands of Wentworth and those patriotic followers of
him who were so untiring in the struggle for liberty. It is
indeed, to the giant intellect and ceaseless endeavour of
Wentworth, Australia’s first great statesman and patriot,
that we largely owe such privileges as trial by jury, the
freedom of the press, representative institutions and re-
sponsible Government. He fought for each in turn, and
to his exertions is owing the fact that they were obtained
thus early.
In 1838 during “good old Governor Bourke’s ” rule,
trial by jury was extended to criminal cases, and finally, in
1839, the old military juries, so necessary in the early days,
were abolished for ever.


Though these were all forward steps, so long as the
colony remained a convict settlement, the people were not
deemed by the Home authorities capable of governing
themselves. As early as 1826, however Wentworth and
his following, backed by the press—which consisted of two
newspapers, the “ Australian ” and the “ Monitor ” had
agitated for political representation. He had organised a
patriotic association, but they worked in vain until 1840,
when with the abolition of transporation and the arrival
of an ever-increasing number of free colonists, the country
was matured for such a change of administration.
The change was made cautiously, no extreme steps
being taken. The first Parliament, which met in 1843,
consisted of thirty-six members, twenty-four of whom were
elected by the people, and twelve nominated by the Govern-
or. In these early Parliaments, consisting of but one
House, many names illustrious in the history of this young
nation, stand out, such names as Wentworth, Windeyer,
Cowper, Forster, Lang, Nicholson, Lowe, and later on,
James Martin, and Henry Parkes.
It took over fifty years to obtain this amount of
representation, but those who had fought for it were by no
means yet satisfied. The power of the Governor was still
greater than that of the Parliament. He controlled in a
large measure, public expenditure, he could veto any meas-
ure passed by the council, of which he did not approve, and
his power of nomination also enabled him to sway the
council to a great extent. And further there were griev-
ances connected with the disposal of Crown lands and
with the control of the Customs, grievances of much the
same nature as led to the loss of the American colonies.
But the crisis came unexpectedly in the shape of a new
grievance, the attempt to re-establish convict settlement
upon our shores.
The people would have none of it. The arrival of the
first ship load of prisoners caused intense excitement, and
a great “Australian Anti-Transporation League” which
included associations from all the colonies, steadily and
successfully resisted this revival of undersirable conditions.
The English Government gave way in the matter, and
transporation was henceforth confined to Western Australia,
Then the patriots had time to return to their former
grievances. An Act passed in 1860, making Victoria a


separate colony, and increasing the legislative powers of
the Sydney Council, still, to their disappointment, left un-
touched the old lands and Customs troubles. Whereupon
Wentworth moved “ a declaration and remonstrance” ex-
pressive of dissatisfaction and disappointment with this new
constitution. He was ably supported by the league, whose
victory in the transporation question had roused much public
spirit in a population whose numbers and wealth had been so
much increased by the discovery of gold, that its success
was certain.
The Home Government met the remonstrance with a
commendable spirit of liberality and conciliation. They
were prepared to make all the concessions requested, and
suggested that the Colonial Council should draft a con-
stitution and submit it for their approval.
Wentworth was at the head of the committee appoin-
ted to draft the constitution, modelled of course, as closely
as possible on the lines of that of Great Britian. ' Too
closely followed, indeed, some parts of it appeared to be,
for those clauses endowing the Upper House with certain
hereditary privileges met with the strong disapproval of a
young and vigorous democracy. Public feeling was so
strong that even Wentworth’s great and deserved popularity
could not combat it, and those clauses which apparently
aimed at establishing an hereditary nobility had finally to
be omitted.
England at this time was on the verge of w 7 ar in the
Crimea, and in consequence the passage of this Bill, so all
important to Australians, was greatly delayed in the Brit-
ish Parliament, but its course was at length accomplished,
and in 1856 the first Parliament, under the new constitu-
tion met. It consisted as it now does, of two Houses, the
Upper, or Legislative Council, composed of nominated
members, and the Lower, or Legislative Assembly whose
members are elected by the people This Parliament had
now the management of the Crown lands, and control of
the Customs, so that the long-standing grievances were at
last removed. The following twenty years or more proved
a somewhat uneventful time, chiefly spent by the politicans
of New South Wales in learning to use their new powers
in opening up the natural resources of the country, devising
a system of national education, and generally promoting
the social and moral welfare of the colony.


During this time, and in all these matters, they appear
to have been left very much to themselves. After granting so
much liberty, England interfered very little in the affairs of
the colony, and foreign nations had not as jet invaded the
Eastern seas. There seemed to some men’s minds a danger
that this long sought independence, combined with time
and distance, would weaken the ties which should ever bind
us to the Mother-land. But subsequent events have proved
how groundless were all such fears.
We are greatly indebted to “ The History of the
Australian Colonies,” by Joseph Finney, B.A. The fore-
going facts have been largely culled from that excellent
compilation, which is a valuable addition to our historical
literature. His concluding chapter on citizenship, com-
prising as it does the whole duty of man (and woman)
politically, is so good that we lament that it was not placed
at the beginning instead of at the end of the book —so
many unfortunate circumstances conspire to cause children
and “grown-up” alike to leave a book unfinished. In this
instance readers would do well to begin on the last chapter.
The beginning of most new studies is difficult and
distasteful, and to many persons it may seem very dry,
tiresome work to learn all the details of how Parliament
is conducted. But as these are mastered, and we begin to
understand the Parliamentary reports in the newspapers,
a fresh and ever-widening field of interest will be opened
up to those of us who wish to do our duty and vote properly.
To quote from Mr Finney’s chapter on “Citizenship,” to
which we alluded in our last article—first understanding
that a citizen is “every member of a community subjected
to a regular Government”—“the first and worthiest right
which can be conferred upon a free man is that of sharing
in the government of his country. There is not in these
colonies any class privileged to interfere with the exercise
of this freedom. The power of the humblest to select those
who shall make the laws, and administer the Government
is co-equal with that of the mightiest. Every citizen is a
power for good or evil, and helps to make or mar the future
of the land, because thelaws are made by the representatives
whom the people elect. It is, therefore of the first im-


portance that each should take an earnest interest in public
questions, form an intelligent opinion upon their merits,
and by every proper means endeavour to carry that opinion
into effect.”
We have attempted in the previous historical articles
to show how the splendid accumulation of those rights and
privileges which have been so hardly won during the ages,
have built up our national freedom ; how the great stream
of liberty ever broadening and deepening on its way has
rolled down to us through the centuries. England has
handed on her free institutions to these colonies, and per-
haps because we have never had to fight for our privileges,
some of us may be inclined to hold them too cheaply, and
to forget or ignore the responsibilities which they entail.
We should ever bear in mind, as we boast of our free and
glorious Constitution, that, as ours is government by the
people for the people, its success depends not on the King,
or Governor, or Ministry, but on ourselves, on tire people
who vote, who elect and send to Parliament those who
make the laws. If we, the people, neglect our share of the
work, by either not voting at all, or voting ignorantly or
carelessly, or for personal and private ends, we are helping
to make representative government a failure. New South
Wales is a Crown colony, one of the Federated States of
Australia. Nominally it is under the control of England,
enjoying all the privileges—for defence, &c. —and the pres-
tige of forming part of that mighty Empire, and yet really
self-governing, making and repealing its own laws, levying
and controlling its own taxation. The head of the State,
the State Governor, has but little power, actually or ab-
solutely, but his office is valuable rather as a social institution
forming the visible connection with the mother land.
Leaving Federal Government for future consideration, we
find the State governed by two Houses of Parliament, the
Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly. The
members of the former, often spoken of as the Upper House,
are not elected by the people, but nominated by the Ministry
in power, and take their seats for life. They correspond
to the House of Lords in the English Parliament, but have
not the hereditary privileges of the English nobility. That
is to say, when an English nobleman dies his heir takes his
seat in the House of Lords, that being a privilege of the
title he inherits. But when a member of our Upper House


dies, his place is not taken by his son, but a fresh member
is appointed in his stead. It may be remembered that
Wentworth when helping to frame our present Constitution
attempted to establish an order of nobility by introducing
such hereditary privileges into the Upper House, but he
failed.
The members of the Legislative Assembly, or Lower
House, in which the real power of the Parliament lies, are
elected by the people, but not for life. The State is divided
into 125 electorates, each of which has the power to send
one member to Parliament. The 125 members form the
Lower House. This Assembly is dissolved once, at least,
every thres years, by proclamation of the Governor. So
that every member is re elected every three years or oftener,
or some one else elected in his place.
While the House is carrying on its work the members
usuallydivide into two parties, the Government party and the
Opposition. The leader of the Government party is the
Prime Minister ; it is, of course, his party whose power is in
the ascendancy, and who carry on the active business of
the State. To conduct this business the Prime Minister
chooses a number of prominent men of his party to assist
him ; they are his colleagues, and are called Ministers, be-
cause they serve their country by supervising the various
departments of Government work. Thus we have a
Minister over the Lands Department, another over the
Works Department, a Minister for Public Instruction, a
Postmaster-General, and so on. The leader of the Op-
position party does not require formally-appointed collea-
gues, as they have no offices to fill. But as both parties
desire power, the leader of the Opposition party carefully
watches all busiuess, all motions and Bills, for his side.
If he succeeds at any time in getting a majority, that is,
getting the greater number of members to vote against the
Government on some motion, the Government usually re-
signs. The leader of the Opposition is then sent for by the
Governor, who requests him to form a Ministry. If he
succeeds in doing so, his party comes into power, he is now
the Prime Minister with colleagues to support him, chosen
from his own following; the former Government party is
now called the Opposition, and its Prime Minister generally
becomes leader. In certain cases when the Government is
thus defeated, an appeal is made to the country, that is the


Governor is asked to dissolve Parliament, and a new Par-
liament is elected. By such means the people can more
directly intimate whether they approve of the measures by
which the Government were turned out of power.
The general business of an election is conducted by
the still existing Government. Writs are issued by them,
and local returning officers are appointed who receive the
nominations in each electorate. If only one candidate is
nominated he is duly elected ; if more than one, then the
voting must be gone through. All members are elected on
the same day throughout the state. Voting by ballot takes
place on that date from eight in .the morning until about
five in the afternoon.
Under the present electoral law, an “elector’s right”
is given to every man
I. “ Twenty-one years old :
11. “ Who is a natural born subject, and has resided in New
South Wales for one year, ora naturalised subject who
has resided in the colony for one year subsequent to
naturalisation.
111. “ Who has resided in the district for which he claims
to vote for three months prior to the date of his claim.
IV. “Who is not disqualified by reason of his being a mem-
ber, on full pay, of the naval or military service ; or
by reason of being of unsound mind, or in receipt of
aid from some charitable institution, except a hospital;
or by reason of being in prison, or having been con-
victed of certain offences within a certain time previous
to voting.”
These electors’ rights, we understand, will shortly be
issued to every woman possessing the necessary qualificat-
ions and enrolled in her district. Everyone holding such an
elector’s right being duly qualified and enrolled, may exer-
cise the franchise.
The voting is done by ballot so that a man may vote
without letting anyone else know for whom he is voting.
Before an election takes place polling places are appointed
in convenient centres by the Government. An electoral
officer presides at each, who examines, and, if deemed ne-
cessary, checks every elector’s right presented, initial and
stamps it with the date of voting. Then a stamped ballot-
paper is handed to the voter, and sufficient privacy is secur-
ed to him in which to cross out the names of those he does


not wish to see elected, and leave the name of the candidate
he wishes to see returned. He then folds up the paper and
places it in the ballot box in front of the electoral officer.
To quote from Mr. Finney’s “Citizenship ” once more ;
“ It is both a right and a duty on the part of every
citizen to see that he is possessed of an elector’s right, and
that he is properly enrolled. He should then exercise the
privilege of voting, this being a responsibility he owes to
the future well-being of the State. At general elections
questions are submitted to him, the decision of which, one
way or the other, may bring happiness or misery to many
of his fellow-subjects. He, who having the right to influ-
ence the Legislature and the Government of his country,
refuses or neglects in the highest sense to do so, is wanting
in that patriotism which lies at the foundation of all good
citizenship.”
“ By reading, study, and discussion every man has an
opportunity of forming his own opinion and of contributing
to an enlightened public opinion.”
A few days ago, when discussing with some friends
the matter of educating women politically, a young lady
in the company expressed the opinion that the political
education of many men was quite as defective as that of
the average woman. In support of her statement she told
the following story, and she told it much better than I can
repeat it: —
Some time ago, when the question of Federation was
being busily discussed before the referendum was taken,
she met a young man out in the back-blocks who was very
much opposed to the idea. He had acquired the very
erroneous notion that Federation meant forming the colonies
into an independent republic and cutting off all connection
with the motherland; that, in fact, were Federation
accomplished, England would be no more to us than
France or Russia. She went to great trouble to explain
the whole matter to him most thoroughly, to show him the
broad principles on which it was based, and to point out
the great benefits, which she believed, would be derived
from such a union. His brow cleared, he expressed him-
self as very grateful to her, and in return promised to vote
for Federation when the time came.


She met him again shortly after the event, and in-
quired anxiously if he had kept his promise. “ Well, I
went to vote,” he drawled, “and when I got there 1 met
cousin George. He was voting against Federation, and I
thought I might as well vote the way Cousin George was
voting, so I voted against it, too.
Such a story contains our apology for introducing so
much of a very elementary character into these papeis.
Many old colonists will doubtless remember that when
the separation of Victoria took place in 1850, the English
Government was exceedingly anxious to see a closer union
between these self-governing colonies. It appeared absurd
to everyone outside Australia that these countries all
within the British Empire, all peopled by the British
nation, should exist side by side without any political con-
nection. It was proposed, therefore, to make a Federal
Assembly part of the Constitution, and the Act of 1850
created the Governor of New South Wales, Governor-
General of Australia.
But provincial jealousies and prejudices proved too
strong. Victoria, just emancipated from the leading strings
of her elder sister, was naturally averse to bind herself
afresh ; the land system of South Australia was a stumbling
block, and Tasmania was hardly yet regarded as an equal,
for the taint of her penal settlements still hung about her.
So the idea of a Federal Assembly came to nought, the
title of Governor-General was only a formality, and was,
in 1861, finally abandoned as useless and meaningless.
But in those early days there were such men as
Wentworth and Parkes, men who were not merely politicians,
but statesmen, who recognised that Federation ought to be
accomplished, and who, whenever they could emerge for a
little while from intercolonial strife, and the routine work
of their own government, ever recurred to the subject.
As we have resolved to abstain in these papers from
any discussion of party politics, no opinion can be expressed,
either on the merits of Federation or on the complaints
made by a part of the community, that, what with State
and Federal Parliaments, we are a very much oppressed
and over-governed people. These are questions open to
debate, and the arguments of both sides should be studied
by those who wish to become educated politically. The
principle of Federation, we would, however, venture to say,


appears to be right in the abstract. Most of us have seen
an advertisement, belonging to some insurance society we
believe, in which is represented a figure vainly endeavouring
to break through a whole bundle of faggots at once, illustra-
tive of the axiom that “ Union is strength.” Federation
indeed may be regarded as a law of nature at a certain
stage of growth. Whether we have yet reached the stage
in our national growth when it is desirable and advantageous,
it is not our province at present to discuss. But having
got it—prematurely or not as the case may be—we have
acquired a great power, to the stature and importance of which
we must aspire to adapt ourselves.
Sir Edmund Barton, in his recent speech at West
Maitland, told us that it was the question of naval defence
which had really brought about Federation, and that
statement is borne out on examination of the history of
the movement.
In times of peace the different colonies occupied them-
selves with their own internal affairs or amused themselves
with boundary and other intercolonial disputes. But with
each war cloud that gathered, threatening to break over
Europe, they roused themselves and talked of some union
for common defence. It was so at the time of the Crimean
war, and again at the Franco-Prussian war. We have had
an almost uninterrupted series of such warnings since 1888.
France and England have been in disagreement concerning
Egypt, Siam, and West Africa successively; Russia has
shown her covert hostility in the matter of Afghanistan
and over Turkish and Chinese questions; war even threatened
with the United States in the Venezuelan boundary dispute;
and we have had the Transvaal war, which at one time
seemed likely to embroil Germany. On each occasion the
question has arisen of how these colonies would fare if
attacked by the enemy.
Most of all, however, the invasion of the Pacific by
foreign powers, each eager to snatch territory for colonisa-
tion, or to establish protectorates for purposes of trade,
roused Australia to the desirability of uniting for defence.
Later still, when the lethargic colonies had again allowed
the agitation, consequent upon the efforts of Sir Henry
Parkes, to subside without tangible result, other inter-
national questions, such as the laying of a Pacific cable
and the arrangement of Customs duties, pointed to the
necessity for some united action.


The history of the Commonwealth Bill of 1899, is too
recent to need recapitulation here. Let it suffice to say
that the work begun by Sir Henry Parkes, and which he
did not live to see completed, was brought to a successful
issue by Sir Edmund Barton, and the new century saw
the birth of the new nation.
The Federal Parliament, like those of the States,
consists of two Houses, the Upper House or Senate, and
the Lower or House of Representatives. The Senators, as
well as the members of the House of Representatives, are
elected by the people, so that the Constitution of the
Federation is more liberal even than that of the States.
It is to be borne in mind, therefore, that there are three
Parliamentary elections at which, in future, men and
women will alike be entitled to vote, for the Federal
Parliament included the extension of the franchise to
women among its measures from the first. These elections
are for both Houses in the Federal Parliament and fof the
Lower House of the State Parliament.
The Federal Government has for its first leader or
Prime Minister, Sir Edmund Barton, and includes among
his colleagues some additional Ministers whose offices are
not necessary in State government, such as the Minister
for Defence and the Minister for Customs.
The work of the Federal Parliament is, of course, of
a national character, dealing with the larger affairs of the
Commonwealth, the matters which concern the States as
a whole. The question of naval defence, before mentioned,
is an example of the work which belongs to Federal
government; the arrangement of a uniform tariff and
navigation laws are other duties also devolving on it. It
has also lately taken over control of all the postal and
telegraphic departments of the various states, and in both
departments the rates are now uniform throughout the
Commonwealth. Such action, it was hoped, would also
promote legislation to prohibit the carriage of letters con-
taining money for consultations, and thus assist to suppress
gambling. Some such legislation was accomplished in
this first session of the Federal Parliament just concluded,
a long and arduous one, in which Sir Edmund Barton
claims that a record amount of work has been accomplished.
The work of the State Parliament is more provincial,
dealing with matters which concern the State alone. Such


legislation as the bill for Neglected Children which has
just run its course in the Legislative Council of the State,
the new Liquor Bill, the Water and Drainage Bill, and the
University and University Colleges (Amendment) Bill, are
fair examples of the kind of work which falls within the
province of the State Parliaments.
It remains further to explain the proceedings of
Parliament, the matter in which bills, the raw material, so
to speak, are introduced into the political machinery, and
the methods by which they are converted into the finished
article, the statutes or laws of the land.
When the 125 members of our Legislative Assemby
have been duly elected, they meet at Parliament House on
an arranged date, but there are several formalities to be
observed before they proceed to the routine business of
making laws or regulating State expenditure. The Speaker,
who is really the Chairman of the Assembly, has to be
elected, and while such choice is being made, the members
are presided over by an officer of the House, called the Clerk
of the Assembly, who is appointed by the Crown. Then
the freshly elected members are required to take the oath
of allegiance, or to be “sworn in,” to use the popular
phrase. Three members of the Government are usually
sworn in first, and the other members take the oath before
these three commissioners.
The Governor’s speech also, in which is forecast the
business and legislation proposed to be dealt with in the
coming session, is delivered before both Houses in the
Chamber of the Legislative Council. It must be under-
stood here that this speech is not intended or supposed to
express the personal views and opinions of his Excellency,
but has been prepared and put into his hands by the
Government still holding power, and is practically a decla-
ration of the Government policy. Sometimes, if the
Governor is unable to be present, Parliament is opened by
commission.
After the delivery of the Governor’s speech, an address
in reply is moved in both Houses ; the mover and seconder
are usually new members and Ministerial supporters. If
the Opposition disapproves of this address, their leader may
move a vote of censure. A long debate then ensues, which


may lead to the downfall of the Ministry, and the coming
into power of the Opposition. When the Adddress-in-
Reply is, however, passed, the Speaker presents it to the
Governor, and then the regular work of the session may
be commenced.
One of the first duties to be performed is the appoint-
ment of a Chairman of Committees, whose business it is to
preside when the House resolves itself into a committee to
discuss a bill after the second reading, as will be explained
later on. At this early stage it is also considered expedient
to elect various committees which deal with many side
issues and details which would otherwise take up too much
time from the regular business of Parliament. For instance
there is the committee of elections and qualifications, the
library committee, the committee of standing orders, and
that highly necessary and popular body, the refreshment
committee. Each of these consists of a few members only,
and attends to the businees indicated by its name. 'lt must
not be understood or imagined that the Chairman of Com-
mittees has anything to do with these minor executive
bodies. His office is quite distinct and apart from them all:
he is chairman of the whole Assembly when it goes into
committee for purposes of legislation.
The House usually meets three days in each week at
4 p.m. Tuesday is usually termed private member’s night,
as on that evening business introduced by private members
is dealt with. Wednesday and Thursday evenings are de-
voted to Government business, and when towards the end
of the session private business flags a portion of Tuesday
also is given up to Government work. Time never seems
long enough to clear up the whole business of a session, so
that as the end draws near and the prorogation looms in
sight, Friday likewise is often occupied with the business
of the State.
Each House of Parliament may adjourn its meetings
from day to day. It is the Governor, however, advised
by the Ministry, who prorogues it from session to session,
or dissolves it when a new Parliament is to be elected
It will be observed by anyone who reads the Parlia-
mentry reports in the newspapers that each daily meeting
opens with questions, addressed by members to Ministers
concerning affairs connected with the particular departments
they control. Due notice is sometimes given of these


questions about to be asked ; sometimes questions are asked
without notice. When these questions have been answered
the regular business programme is commenced.
Before Bills become laws they must be passed by both
Houses, and receive the assent of the Governor, as repre-
senting the King. A Bill may be introduced first into
either House, but all the most important measures are
initiated in the Lower House, and generally by the Govern-
ment. All money Bills, or measures dealing with taxation
must originate in the Lower House. With regard to pri-
vate Bills, a petition for leave to introduce it is first
necessary; in public matters the Bill is introduced upon a
motion, without any petition.
A Bill must be read three times in each House. The
first reading is formal, and then the Bill is printed and
distributed to members in order that they may study it.
After a convenient interval, the proposal that “The Bill be
now read a second time,” is made, and it is at this stage
that its principles are discussed and the Bill is either accep-
ted or rejected. After this second reading the House
resolves itself into committee, the Speaker leaves the chair,
and may now sit and debate as a private member, his place
being taken by the Chairman of Committees.
In committee each clause of the Bill under consider-
ation is discussed separately, and is liable to be amended
or cut out altogether. During such discussion in Committee
the strict rules of debate and forms of procedure observed
in the House, are relaxed to the extent of allowing any
member to speak more than once on the same clause ;
at any other stage of the Bill, when the House is not in
committee, a member can only speak once upon it.
When the committee has finished with it, the Bill, as
amended, is reported to the House, and is usually approved
of. Still, any member may at this stage move its re-com-
mittal for the re-consideration of any clause or clauses.
When this crisis is passed the Bill is considered ready for
the third reading. This, like the first reading, is somewhat
formal, and it is unusual for a Bill to be further amended or
altered at the third reading. When this third reading is over
the Bill is sent on to Upper House, where exactly the same
process is gone through all over again—three readings, with
a careful investigation in committee between the second
and third. If the Upper House alter or amend the Bill it must


be sent back to the House in which it originated, and that
House either agrees to the amendments or not. In cases
of disagreement a conference of members, appointed from
both House, is usually held, and their recommendation
adopted. If neither House, however, will give way, a
measure is sometimes lost in consequence.
When the Bill finally emerges from this long, two-fold
ordeal, re-modelled perhaps, and at any rate carefully
pruned and polished, it receives the assent of the Governor,
and is then a law.
The members of the Governmeut receive large salaries
to control the affairs of their various departments, for their
work is responsible and arduous. So also is that of the
Speaker, and in a less degree that of the Chairman of
Committees, who are also liberally paid for work demand-
ing boundless tact, intelligence and discrimination among
other high qualifications. Those interested enough to
look, may learn the exact amount received by each from
the pages of the Blue Book.
In this State all the members of Legislative Assem-
bly are paid £3OO a year, and the members of both Houses
of the Federal Parliament £4OO a year. This payment of
members in a new country, in which there may not be a
sufficiently large intellectual and leisured class from which
to draw capable members, was instituted to give poor, but
otherwise competent men the opportunity of entering
Parliament. It is contended by many, however, that it has
led to some abuses, that it is responsible for class legislation—
instanced chiefly by “ labour ” members —and has led to
the development of the mercenary or professional politician.
This, however, is another matter for debate, and on which
it is not desirable here to express any opinion.
There are but two things at most that it is hoped these
articles can do for the women who have not before con-
sidered political questions at all. It is hoped first that as
they learn from history of the antiquity of those free in-
stitutions and privileges which they inherit, of how hardly
and laboriously they have been acquired, of the price which
has been paid for them, a price sealed time and again with
the best blood of our nation—that as they learn these
things they will also learn to value such privileges accord-
ingly, and do their share towards handing them on, con-
firmed and consolidated, to the coming generations.


And it is also hoped that the brief outline of the
Parliamentary routine given may enable women to under-
stand better those political lessons which, after all, everyone
must learn for herself, chiefly from the daily newspapers.
We have abstained from any discussion of party politics;
the country, however is continuously dominated by one
party or another, and when an election next approaches,
all will inevitably be forced to one side or the other. Before
that time arrives each woman has seriously to consider
which party seems to her most likely to work most good
for the community or the nation. She must be careful to
hear both sides before coming to a decision, striving to use
her own calm judgment, not allowing herself to be be-
guiled by the bewildering floods of eloquence with which
she is sure to be deluged from both sides. Then, having
made up her mind, she must be prepared occasionally to
give up her own opinions on minor points'to the majorit
of her party. On grave and important questions, however,
involving the serious interests of the people, she must take
her stand on high principles, even if such an attitude cause
her to vote against the candidate of her party.
In short, no better advice can be given to any earnest
woman desirous of doing the right than those immortal
words of Shakespeare—
“ This above all—to thine own self be true,
And it must follow as the night the day;
Thou canst not then be false to any man.”
T» Dimmock, General Machine Printer, Maitland






