

RECOMMENDATIONS
Union of Methodist Churches,
A MEETING of
APPOINTED REPRESENTATIVES
METHODIST CHURCH
VICTORIA AND TASMANIA,
WESLEY CHURCH, MELBOURNE,
July 20th, 1883.
Iplfontm:
MASON, FIETH & M‘CUTCHEON, GENEEAL PEINTEES,
51 & 53 Fundees Lane West.




UNION OF METHODIST CHUHCHES.
TTEGOTIATIONS for the above object were commenced by
ll a meeting of Representatives of the several Methodist
Churches in Victoria and Tasmania, held at Wesley Church,
Melbourne, 20th July, 1883.
The Representatives had been appointed by the Victoria and
Tasmania Wesleyan Methodist Conference, the District Com-
mittee of the Primitive Methodist Church, the District Meet-
ing of the Bible Christian Church, and the District Meeting
of the United Methodist Free Chutch.
There were present:—
Wesleyan Methodist. —Revs. E. I. Watkin, J. Watsford, J.
C. Symons, G. Daniel, W. P. Wells, J. B. Smith, and Messrs.
James Jamison, Edward John, S. G. King, and E. Hodgson.
Primitive Methodist. —Eevs. Thomas Copeland, Henry
Heathershaw, and Messrs. W. Phelan and T. Peters.
Bible Christian.— Eevs. W. H. Hosken, J. Orchard, E.
Warren, George Netherway, Joseph Teague, F. Lockwood, and
Mr. Sampson May.
.United Methodist. —Eevs. T. A. Bayley, J. Barton, H.
Wallace, and Messrs. W. Ellingworth and J. Beatty.
The following Representatives were unavoidably absent
Hon. J. Campbell, M.L.0., and Mr. D. Ham.
The Eev. E. I. Watkin, President of the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Conference, was unanimously elected to the' chair.
The Revs. G; Daniel and H. Wallace were appointed secre-
taries.
After devotional exercises and lengthened conversation, it
was resolved unanimously :
That considering (1) the doctrinal unity and the substantial
resemblance of the discipline of the Australian Methodist
churches; (2) the unnecessary competition and waste of
labour and money caused by our separate church operations ;
and (3) that a united church could much more effectively
provide the country districts with religious ordinances and
perform evangelistic mission work in our city populations :
This meeting is of opinion that the various branches
of the Methodist family in Victoria and Tasmania
should be united.
That we recommend the following Constitution as the basis
of union, viz.:—
1. That the united church shall be called the Australasian
Methodist Church.


KB.—Remembering that we only represent the churches
of Victoria and Tasmania, but in the hope that the same
desire for union exists in the other colonies, and while dis-
claiming any desire to dictate to them, we venture to recom-
mend the name as above.
(2) That the church shall be governed by General and
Annual Conferences.
.General Conference.
I.— Constitution.
The General Conference shall consist of—
1. The Presidents and Secretaries of the Annual Confer-
for the time being.
2. One General Secretary of the Australasian Methodist
Missionary Society..
3. One General Clerical Treasurer of each of the Connexional
Funds.
4. One General Lay Treasurer of the Australasian Methodist
Missionary Society.
5. One General Lay Treasurer of each Connexional Fund.
All the above shall be members ex officio.
6. Ministerial representatives from each Annual Con-
ference in the proportion for the present of one minister
to every ten ministerial members of such Conference,
provided that no Conference shall have less than two
ministerial representatives in addition to its President and
Secretary.
7. Lay representatives from each Annual Conference, equal
to the number of ministerial representatives, including the
President and Secretary.
Representatives, whether ministers or laymen, shall be
elected by ballot by and from among the members of each
Annual Conference respectively.
ll. —The General Conference shall have no power—
1. To revoke, alter, or change any of the doctrines as con-
tained in Mr. Wesley’s first four volumes of sermons, and notes
on the New Testament, nor to establish any new doctrine con-
trary thereto.
2. To revoke the “Rules of the Societies of the people
called Methodists.”
3. To make such change in the discipline as to do away
with the itinerancy of the ministry.
4. To abolish the privilege of trial and appeal of members
pr ministers.


5. To abolish the right of the ministers to admit of
expel members, subject to such guards and regulations as the
rules of the church shall provide.
6. To abolish the right of the ministers to receive and
ordain ministers in the church.
lll. —Powers of the General Conference.
The General Conference shall have power—
1. To elect by ballot on its Assembling, from its members, a
minister of, not less than fifteen years’ standing to pre-
side over its proceedings, and in the intervals of the sessions
of the General Conference to perform such duties as the
General Conference may direct. Provided, nevertheless, he
shall not exercise a general superintendency or any powers
which are conferred upon other officers of the church.
2. To divide the Annual Conferences, or alter their
boundaries.
3. To create new Conferences.
4. To alter the proportion in which the Annual Conferences
shall from time to time elect representatives to the General
Conference.
5. To make, or direct the Annual Conferences to make, all
necessary changes and interchanges of ministers between the
several Annual Conferences.
6. To control the Australasian Methodist Missionary Society,
the several connexional funds, and to appoint their committees
and officers.
7. To review the proceedings of such committees, and
sanction or disallow the same.
8. To arrange the order in which the several Annual Con-
ferences shall make provision for returned missionaries.
9. To direct any Annual Conference to re-appoint to the
full work any minister who may have been made a super-
numerary since the last General Conference.
10. To disallow any of the regulations of the Annual
Conferences which in its judgment infringe constitutional
principles.
11. And generally to legislate for the Australasian
Methodist Church.
IY.— What number shall form a Quorum,
The General Conference, on the first day of its session,
shall determine the number that shall constitute a quorum.


V.— When and where the General Conference shall
Assemble.
The General Conference shall meet once in three years, or
at such other intervals more or less as it may deem expedient,
and shall have power to fix the date, place, and duration of its
Annual Conferences.
I.— Constitution.
1. The Annual Conferences shall comprise all the ministers
within their respective boundaries who have been admitted
into full connexion with the said Conference.,
2. The Quarterly Meeting of each circuit shall be entitled
to elect one lay representative, who shall be elected by ballot
at the Quarterly Meeting next preceding the session of the
Conference to which such circuit pertains.
3. The committee of each Institution of the connexion, to
which a minister is or may be set apart by an Annual
Conference, shall have the right to elect from among the
members of such committee, by ballot, one lay representative.
4. Should the number of laymen thus provided for, be less
than the number of ministers pertaining to any Annual Con-
ference, additional laymen shall be elected by the Quarterly
Meeting of the circuit or circuits which, according to the
returns published by such Conference at its last session, con-
tained the largest number of members. The Presidents of the
several Annual Conferences shall give notice to the circuit or
circuits which may be entitled to elect more than one lay
representative.
5. The laymen eligible for election as representatives must
be church members of four years’ continuous standing, and at
the time of their election must be members in the circuit by
which they are or may be elected.
11.-— Powers of the Annual Conference.
(1.) The election of its own President and Secretary.
(2.) The division of circuits and districts, or alteration of
their boundaries.
(3.) The appointment of chairmen of districts.
(4.) The exercise of discipline upon its ministerial
members and preachers on trial.
(5.) The making of any of its ministerial members super-
(6.) The reception of candidates for the ministry.


(7.) The appointment of ministers and preachers on trial
to the several circuits and churches.
(8.) The carrying out of all directions of the General
Conference relative to the changes and interchanges of
ministers. In the intervals of the General Conference,
the Annual Conferences shall effect changes and inter-
changes by negotiation.
(9.) The receiving and finally deciding upon appeals from
the subordinate courts of the Conference.
(10.) The direction and control of those funds which have
been known as district funds.
(11.) And all other powers necessary for the administra-
tion of the affairs of the Meihodist Church, except the
powers of general legislation, set forth as pertaining to
the General Conference.
2. Each Annual Conference shall also have the power to
recommend to the General Conference any measure which may
be deemed conducive to the welfare of the connexion.
3. In the exercise of the aforesaid powers by the Annual
Conferences, the ministers alone shall—
(I.) Dispose of all matters comprised in the subjoined
questions ;
Question I.—Who are now admitted as ministers
into full connexion with the Conference ?
Question ll.—What preachers remain on trial ?
Question lll,—What preachers are now received on
trial 1
Question IV.—What students are to continue to
have theological training?
Question V.—What candidates are now received for
theological training 2
Question Vl.—Who are now admitted as native
ministers 2
Question Vll.—Who remain as nhtive preachers on
trial?
Question VIII.—Who are received as native
preachers on trial 1
Question IX.—What ministers become supernumer-
aries ?
Question X.—What supernumeraries return to the
regular work t
Question XL—What ministers have died since the
last Conference 2


Question Xll.—Are there any objections to any of
our ministers or preachers on trial 1
Question Xlll.—What persons who were in full
connexion with the Conference have now ceased to
be recognised as ministers among us 1
(2.) Elect chairmen of districts.
(3.) Determine all appeals affecting the status of ministers
and members.
4. For the purposes enumerated in the foregoing section the
dnisterial members of each Annual Conference shall meet
alone, if necessary, during the forenoons of the first four days
of the sessions of such Conference, and also at such other
times as will not interfere with the general business of such
Conference.
5. In the election of ministers and laymen as representatives
to the General Conference, all the members of each Annual
Conference who may be present in their respective Annual
Conferences, shall be entitled to vote. The voting shall be by
ballot.
6. Who may attend, and what number shall form a quorum.
—The chairmen of districts, ex officio, a representative elected
by ballot at the Annual District Meeting, and s,uoh other minis-
ters as may be appointed by, or obtain the permission of, their
Annual District Meetings to attend the Conference ; together
with the laymen elected as provided for in the foregoing section
headed Constitution. The number of ministers and lay repre-
sentatives who may actually attend the Conference shall be
deemed competent for the transaction of business ; but the
Conference shall have power, whenever it may deem it expe-
dient, to determine how many of its number shall constitute a
quorum.
7. When and where the Conference shall assemble. —Each
Conference shall assemble annually, and shall have power
to fix the time and place, and to limit the duration of its ses-
8. President and Secretary, and whomay vote in their election.
—The President shall be a minister of not less than fifteen
years’ standing, and the Secretary shall be a minister of not
less than ten years’ standing. All ministers in full con-
nexion who may be present at their respective Annual Confer-
ences and lay representatives shall be entitled to vote in the
election of the President and Secretary. The voting shall be
by ballot.
9. Re-election to Presidency. —Each Annual Conference shall
determine for itself the time which shall elapse before a minis-


ter shall be eligible for re-election to the office of President,
provided always that no minister shall be eligible for- election
two successive years.
10. Stationing Ministers. —(l) The Stationing Committee
shall consist of the President and Secretary of the Conference,
the general secretary or secretaries of missions, the chairmen of
districts, and one minister for each district, elected by the
united votes of the ministers and laymen who are members of
the Financial District Meeting.
(2.) This committee shall prepare a list of stations to be
presented to the Mixed Conference for consideration and dis-
(3.) The Mixed Conference shall have power to add to the
Stationing Committee a number of its members not exceeding
one-half of those contained in the said committee. The ex-
President and ex-Secretary continue members of the com-
mittee.
(4.) The enlarged committee shall revise the station-sheet,
and submit it to the Mixed Conference for final adoption with-
out discussion.
11. Funds of the Australasian Methodist Church. —The
funds hitherto known as district or Conference funds shall be
under the management of the Annual Conferences. The
funds known as the connexional funds shall be under the
direction of the General Conference, and the Presidents of the
Annual Conferences shall see that all the regulations relating
to these funds are faithfully carried out by and within the
bounds of their respective Conferences.
District Meeting.
The District Meeting is a committee of the Conference, com-
posed of all the Ministers, including Supernumeraries and Pro-
bationers, who are appointed to circuits within the boundaries
of the districts.
At this meeting the character of the ministers is inquired
into; candidates for the ministry and probationers are ex-
amined, and, if approved, recommended to the Conference;
and numerous other matters pertaining to the pastoral office
are considered.
Financial District Meeting.
This meeting is composed of the Ministers, Supernume-
raries, and Circuit Stewards, of the various circuits in the dis-
trict, who deal with all the financial and temporal affairs of
the district.
N.B.—ln this meeting Probationers in charge of circuits
have the right to speak and vote.


Quarterly Meeting of Circuits.
The Quarterly Meeting is to consist of
1. All the Ministers and Preachers on trial in the circuit,
and the Supernumeraries whose names appear in the printed
minutes of the Conference.
2. The Circuit Stewards, the Society Stewards, and the Poor
Stewards.
3. All the Class Leaders in the circuit.
4. All the Local Preachers in full standing, they being resi-
dent members of society in the circuit.
5. All the Trustees of chapels situate in places named on
the circuit plan, such trustees being resident members of
society in .the circuit.
6. A Superintendent of each Sunday-school which is con-
ducted under the Conference rules, such superintendent being
a member of the church in the circuit. Where there are two
or more superintendents in one school, the senior superinten-
dent shall be the member ®f the Quarterly Meeting.
7. Representatives elected by the several societies by ballot,
without debate, it being provided that these representatives do
not outnumber the stewards of any given society. The elec-
tion to be annual, and to take place before the September
Quarterly Meeting. In a church of less than fifty members
only one representative shall be elected.
Membership of the Church.
It was agreed that no mode of facilitating and promoting
fellowship among Christians approaches so nearly to the
requirements of the New Testament as the class-meeting,
which under God has so greatly contributed' to the spiritual
vitality and success of Methodism, and we resolve to adhere
to it as a test of membership in the United Church.
N.B.—No persons can be removed from membership with-
out the privilege of a trial by a leaders’ meeting, and appeal
to the higher courts of the church, should such be demanded.
Status of Ministers.
Resolved—That all ministers in full connexion with their
own churches shall be regarded as entitled to the same status
in the United Church.
Ministers’ Superannuation Fund.
From information presented to the meeting it was believed
that, should the several Conferences in England consent to
this union, there would be no insuperable difficulty in the way
of the ministers of the minor bodies becoming members of


the Supernumerary Ministers and Ministers’ Widows’ Fund
now existing in connection with the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist Church.
The following statistics of the different churches were fur-
nished :
I*l |1 II 111 l Total.
II ll "I
Ministers ... 117 35 23 25 200*
Adherents ...
Churches ... 533 114 80 63 790-
Members ... 14,975 2,929 1,520 1,000 20,424
Church debts £103,340 £17,519 £14,400 £7,500 £142,759
Sums received
from England £9OO £3OO £6OO £l,BOO
It was considered upon a survey of the colonies of Victoria
and Tasmania, after going through each circuit, that not more
than about twenty ministers could be liberated from circuits
without impairing the efficiency of the work, and it was
believed that these could all be employed either in the cities
as evangelists or throughout the country.
The Representatives of the several churches would specially
emphasise the following:—
I. —The principal points in the proposed polity.
(1.) The members’ privilege of trial and appeal.
(2.) The representation of each society in the Circuit
Quarterly Meeting by election.
(3.) Every circuit having at least one layman in the
Annual Conference.
(4.) The Mixed Annual Conference having a voice in the
stationing of ministers.
(5.) The legislation of the church is in the hands of the
General Conference, composed of an equal number of
ministers and laymen, who meet on equal terms.
2. —The fairness of the proposed settlement.
Every one of the uniting churches is asked to make some
The Representatives believe that the suggested basis of
union is at once equitable and wise. All the essential features
of Methodism are secured, and while in no case will any of
the churches be deprived of any privilege, the majority of the
societies and circuits will have a larger share than ever in all
matters affecting their respective interests.


' i.—The spirit in which the negotiations have been conducted.
Nothing could exceed the high Christian tone of the dis-
cussions. The various resolutions were passed in every
instance without any dissenting voice, and the meeting
throughout was characterised by the most fraternal cordiality.
The one desire was to adopt such a course with regard to the
union movement as would commend itself to the enlightened
reason and conscience, not only of the representatives, but of
the ministers and members of the several Methodist Churches.
In the hope that the brethren throughout Victoria and Tas-
mania will prayerfully consider the foregoing suggested basis
of union, we subscribe ourselves,
On behalf of the yours in the bonds of the
common Gospel,
Edwin I. Watkin, Chairman.
George Daniel 1 „ , .
Henry Wallace/ Secretaries.
24th July, 1883,
P.S.—lt was directed that the foregoing basis of union
should be printed, and recommended that it be duly submitted
to the various church courts concerned in the'several churches
represented.
Mason, Firth & M‘Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.
