

SANDS’
SYDNEY DIRECTORY
For 1870.
In announcing the forthcoming issue of the Sydney Directory for 1870, being the tenth year of its
publication, the publisher desires to thank his constituents for the large amount of support bestowed on the
former editions, and to assure them that every care will be taken to render the Directory for 1870 even
more complete and perfect than its predecessors.
As a medium for advertising, it is most desirable, from its large circulation throughout the whole of
the Australian Colonies, in addition to which a further advantage is afforded, by a copy being placed for
the use of passengers on board every sea-going steamer trading to Sydney. Copies are also forwarded to
the Chambers of Commerce of all the large Mercantile Cities of England and the Continents of Europe and
America, and to the principal Hotels on the Overland Route.
The attention of intending advertisers is requested to the annexed List of Acknowledgements of
Copies from various business Institutions, &c., in
various parts of the world.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
TERMS FOR
One Page
Half Page
200
Quarter Page,
Eighth Page .
100
o 10 o
Chambre de Commerce de Paris, 2 Place de la Bourse,
Paris, n Mai, 1869.
/ 2 1 ' (£> '
Monsieur,
J’ai bien retail I’exemplaire du Sydney Directory for 1869 que
Messieurs R. Sands &= Son vous ontprie de transmettre a la Chambre du
Commerce de Paris. Suivant votre desir, je viens vous eti accuser reception-
Venillez vous charger, Monsieur, des remerciments de la Chambre
pour Messieurs R\ Sands Son et recevoir en memo temps, Fassurance
dc nta consideration distinguee.
E. COTTENET,
Messieurs R. Sands Cr Son, Secretaire.
119 a, Bunhill Row, London.
Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York,
New York, May 18, 1869.
Gentlemen,
Your favor of the sth inst., together with a copy of Sands’
Sydney Directory for 1869, were received this morning, and I beg to tender
you our thanks for the kitidness in forwarding the volume to us.
Very respectfully, your obedient Servant,
JNO. WILSON,
To Messrs. Robert Sands Son,
Secretary.
London.
Chamber of Comtnerce of San Francisco, California,
San Francisco, May 29, 1869.
Messrs. Robert Sands & Son, London.
Gentlemen,
Your favor of April 10th, 1869, came to hand the 2qth May,
advising the forwarding of a copy of Mr. John Sands’ Sydney Directory
for 1869, and I am instructed by our Chamber to own receipt of said book ;
also to tender to Mr. John Sands through you the thanks of the members
for the sdme.
Yours faithfully,
WM. R. WADSWORTH,
Secretary.
P. S. —Iforward two copies of the last Annual Report of our Chamber,
one for yourselves, and pleaseforward the other to Mr. John Sands, Sydney.
Chamber of Commerce, Liverpool, Aprils, 1869.
Dear Sirs,
I beg to thank you for the copy of the Sydney Directory, 1869,
transmitted by desire of Mr. John Sands, Sydney, for the me of the
Chamber.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM BLOOD,
Messrs. Robert Sands & Son.
119 a Bunhill Row, E.C., London
Secretary .


I beg to acknowledge with the thanks of the Chamber, receipt
of a copy of the Sydney Directory for 1869 for the use of the Members.
I am, Gentlemen,
Yours very faithfully,
THOS. BROWNING,
Messrs. Robert Sands Son, Secretary.
119 a Bunhill Row, London, E.C.
Chamber of Commerce, Edinburgh, 11 Melbourne Place,
April 30, 1869.
Gentlemen .
I have to acknowledge and to thank you for the copy of the
Sydney Directory for the use of this Chamber. I shall communicate your
letter and the gif t to the Members at their meeting on Thursday next.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,
JAMES GREIG,
Messrs. Robert Sands &•' Son. Secretary.
Chamber of Commerce and Manufactures,
Glasgow, May 4, 1869.
Gentlemen,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of Sands' Sydney Directory for
1869, and to return you the thanks of the Directors of this Chamber for
the gift.
I am, Gentlemen,
] ’our obedient Servant,
GEORGE STEWART.
Messrs. Robert Sands Sr Son, for Secretary.
London.
Port of Plymouth Chamber of Commerce,
Plymouth, April 30, 1869.
Messrs. R obert Sands Sr Son,
119 a Bunhill Row, London, E.C.
Gentlemen,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of Sands' Sydney Directory
for 1869 for the use of the Members of the Plymouth Chamber of Commerce,
and for which I am much obliged.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS JONES STEVENS.
Bristol Chamber of Commerce, Liverpool Chambers,
Corn Street, Bristol, April 30, 1869.
Gentlemen ,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of yourfavor of the 28th inst.;
also copy of the Sydney Directory for 1869 for the use of the Members of
this Chamber, on whose behalf I beg to thank you for the same, and remain,
Gentlemen, your obedient Servant
LEONARD BRUTON.
Messrs. R. Sands Son, Pro Secretary.
119 a Bunhill Row, Lotidon.
P.S.—I have the pleasure to send you by book post a copy of the last
Report of this Chamber.
Chamber of Commerce and Shipping,
Hull, April 30, 1869.
1 beg to acknowledge receipt of the Sydney Directory for 1869
for the use of the Members of this Institution.
I am, Sirs,
Yours very obediently,
P. BRUCE,
Messrs. Robert Sands Son, London. Secretary.
R. Sands & Son, Esqs.
Gentlemen,
I beg leave to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 28 th
inst., advising having forwarded, by the order of Mr. Sands of Sydney,
a copy of the Directory for 1869. lam instructed to say the volume has
arrived, and the Council of this Chamber feel much obliged for this kind
attention.
I am Gentlemen,
Yours very faithfully,
SAMUEL VANCE,
Secretary.
Chamber of Commerce, Dublin, April 3, 1869.
I am directed to acknowledge with thanks the copy of the
Sydney Directory for 1869, forwarded by you by desire of Mr. John Sands,
Sydney, for the use of the Members of this Chamber.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN ARMSTRONG,
Wm. Wardley, Esq. Assistant Secretary.
Chamber of Commerce, Dundee, May 7, 1869.
T/ie Directors of the Chamber of Commerce beg to thank you
for your kindness in transmitting a copy of the Sydney Directory for 1869,
which has been placed in the Reading Room for the information of the
Members.
Yours respectfully,
ROBT. STURRICK,
John Sands, Esq., London. Secretary.
Grenville House, Cork, April 30.
Messrs. Robert Sands <sr= Son, London.
In absence of Secretary —/ beg to acknowledge receipt of your
favor, 28th, and at same time the copy of the Sydney Directory, 1869, for the
Chamber of Commerce.
THOMAS HA YES,
T rcasurer,
Chamber of Commerce,
Chamber of Commerce, Southampton, May 3, 1869.
Messrs. R. Sands &* Son.
Gentlemen,
lam m receipt of your letter of the 28th ult., intimating that
by the desire of Mr. J. Sands of Sydney, you had forwarded for the use of
the Members of this Chamber, a copy of the Sydney Directory for 1869; the
book in question has arrived, and I have to request you will be good enough
to tender to Mr. Sands our thanks for the presentation.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
GEORGE DUNLOP,
President.
Lloyd’s (E.C.), Mays, 1869.
Gentlemen ,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the d&th tilt.,
presentuig a copy of the Sydney Directory for 1869, at the request of Mr.
John Sands of Sydney, and I am to request that you will be good enough
to express the Committee's thanks to that gentleman for the presentation of
the same.
I am, Ge>itlemen,
Your obedient Serz’ant,
B. CHARLES STEPHENSON,
Messrs. Robert Sands <sr= Son, Secretary,
xig a Bunhill Row.


20 Prince’s Gardens, South Kensington,
April 30, 1869.
Sir Daniel Cooper presents his compliments to Messrs. Robert
Sands Son, and begs to thank them for the Sydney Directory,
London Hotel, Albany, Ring George's Sound,
March 12, 1869.
Sir,
I have the honor to ackno-wledge by this Mail the receiving a
copy of the Sydney Directory forwarded by you, for which I am truly
obliged.
Yours truly,
HENRY PRIOR.
Office, Board of Trade, Montreal, June 4, 1869.
Messrs. Robert Sands cf Son,
119 a Bunhill Row, London, E.C.
Gentlemen,
1 have much pleasure in informing you that the copy of Sands’
Sydney Directory for 1869, referred to in your letter of 28th April, came
safely to hand.
lam to convey to you the thanks of the Council of the Boardfor your
kindness, and to request that you will inform Mr. Sands of Sydney that
the Council appreciate the same.
I have the honor to be, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
WM. J. PA TTERSON, Secreta>y,
per T. McNA B, A ssistant Secretary.
The Jerusalem, Cornhill, London, E.C., April 29, 1869.
To John Sands, Esq.
Sir,
Upon the receipt of your Sydney Directory for 1869 I beg leave.
on the part of the Proprietors, to tender you their best thanks for the same.
Yours obediently,
ALEXANDER MILLER,
Secretary.
Bank of New South Wales, Old Broad Street,
London, E.C., May 6, 1869.
Messrs. Robert Sands & Son,
7 a Falcon Square.
Dear Sirs,
Mr. Lamach desires me to thank you for the copy of the Sydney
Directory, accompanying your note of yesterday’s date.
Yours faithfully,
JOHN MILLER,
Pro Secretary.
Australasian Steam Navigation Company,
Sydney, Jebruary 20, 1869.
John Sands, Esq.
I beg you to accept my thanks for your attention in forwarding
eighteen copies of the Sydney Directory of this year for the use of this
Company's Steamers. It may be satisfactory to you to know that they are
constantly appliedfor by the travelling public.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
FRED. 11. TROD TON,
Manager.
llunter River New Steam Navigation Company,
Sydney, February 17, 1869.
John Sands, Esq., George Street.
Dear Sir,
I have to thank you for your presentation of three copies of
the Sydney Directory, 1869, for the use of passengers travelling by this
Company's Steamships,
The Sydney Directory, which you publish annually, is in constant
request, and is regarded as the only reliable authority by persons seeking
information of the kind usually contained in such publications.
I remain, yours sincerely,
F. J. THOMAS,
Manager.
Illawarra Steam Navigation Company,
Sydney, January 20, 1869.
I have to thank you for four copies of your Sydney Directory
for this year for use on board the Steamers of this Company. They are of
great use to our passengers who come up to Sydney on business, and not
without amusement and information to all.
Yours very faithfully,
Mr. John Sands. E. MANNING.
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company,
Sydney, February 17, 1869.
Your note reminds me that I should have acknowledged the
receiptfrom you of three copies of your Directory for this year, addressed
to the Steamships on the Australian Line, and a fourth copy for the use of
this office, which I now beg to do with many thanks.
Yours faithfully,
H. MOORE,
Mr. John Sands, George Street. Agent.
S truth’s Wharf, Sydney, February 18, 1869,
John Sands, Esq.
Dear Sir,
We beg to acknowledge the receipt of your two (2) Sydney
Directories for the year 1869, which were placed on board each of the
Steamers, “You Yangs” and“ Dandenong,” for the use of the passengers.
Feeling greatly obliged.
I remain, yours respectfully,
Pro C. E. SMITH,
11. YANLON.
Sydney, Jebruary 18, 1869.
Mr. John Sands, George Street.
Sir,
We beg to thank you for having presented one copy of the
Sydney Directory, iS6g,for the use of passengers by the “ City of Ilobart.”
We are, Sir,
Yours obediently,
WILLIS, MERRY, & LLOYD,
Agents of the ’Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company.
C. IF N. E. S. N. Co,. Sydney, F'ebruary xB, 1869.
To John Sands, Esq.
Sir,
We have to acknowledge the receipt of two copies of the Sydney
Directory, and to inform you that the same have been placed on board our
Steamers,
I am, Sir, yours truly,
pro Manager,
P. S. BUYERS.
Clarence and Richmond Rivers Steam Navigation Company ,
Sydney, February 17, 1869.
John Sands, Esq., Sydney.
Sir,
I beg to own receipt of three copies of the Sydney Directory,
1869, for use of passengers on board our Steamers. With thanks.
I remain, Sir, yours truly,
WM. WILLIAMS.


BI6UIO
F154~38e,
FC,
1508
00010990
