

.for the IiMBII IKeb Cross
Stories Grave and Gay
TAKEN from the LETTERS of STACY WADDY
ter liis- Children ,■ And < published - (without Ms permission)'
in aid of the Red Cross Fund,
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Please Order som# Copies, from.-Mrs. STAGY WADDY, "‘Happy Haven.
Baulkham Hills, N.S.'W. .


■
■
IZfZ-
i U
Geoi
Howe
tteJ>r
i*
i m
mm
smmat
I
J< EHGIJSON COLEECT IO
XynoxAi, Library"
Canberra
Families w;
B IJ
m
\ Y"' :
JHKr* -
the Secretary
TD.> 16, SPRING !
ildxen by STACY : WAI
'■' ; . ■ ■••
m
- —— ■
■'
om Mrs. STA GY W ADDY, TTrtppy
m
. : .
M'iv;
V JiA a! HO J-i., H.S. ’’ ’* i
i
■ .. - .. ■
cue prc
CDS FOR


Stories Grave and Gay
by
STACY WADDY
C.F., A.I.F.
Author of “Come for Strength,” “The Great Moghul,”
“John the Jack,” etc.
DAYLIGHT SAVING
and BURIED TREASURE
came from a Dug-out in France,.
THE END OF THE WORLD
from a Hut on Salisbury Plain.
THE STORY OF ALBAN
and GUY FAWKES
from Hospital in England,
CHERRIES OF DAMASCUS
from Moascar Camp, Egypt.
Parramatta:
The Cumberland Argus Ltd., Printers and Publisher*..
1918.


Daylight Saving.
Dedicated to a Family of Seven.
Lucky old Dad is at the War,
.Sleeps in the mud on a dug-out floor,
And every day his mind goes through
All the things that his family do.
'Some day, with such a grin on his mug,
He’ll he the centre of a seven-people hug.
.From the wriggly mass his head he’ll raise—-
“ What mean you, ’ ’ says he,
“Talking to me
Of only twenty-four hour long days t
When everybody shares everyone’s fun
Each has seven full days in one;
And seven times glorious twenty-four
Is glorious One-Six-Eight.”
■ n.; ; 'Uproar
Encore,
Q. E. I).


The Buried Treasure.
Here is .a real tale of buried treasure, very exciting and
true. It happened yesterday.
At the beginning of the War, near here, there stood a
fine farm. They had some cattle and seventy sheep, and
good barns and hayricks, and milking machines, and they
lived very happily and comfortably. There was old Dad
and old Mum, and the men that worked on the farm. They
had beautiful white tablecloths and sheets and napkins—
Mum was very proud of them, and when they were washed
.and dried in the sun she put them carefully away with
lavender and sweet herbs; and the neighbours used to
.say,,:—
“You should see the fine linen,they have up at the big
farm’ k—for it was the chief house of the neighbourhood.
And Mum had a good deal of jewellery too; she liked
the red glow of the gold and the glint of the silver and the,
.sparkling flash of the glittering stones. And old Dad was: a
fellow who did not much believe in banks; he rather liked
to have his money in his. own hands and look at it and
eount it, and tie up the sovereigns in little, leather bags,
.and the bank notes in bundles with elastic, bands round
them.
Down came the troops of the Hun soldiers like mad
wolves. The farm was bombarded-; the house and barns
burnt, the poor sheep burnt to death in a stable. Shell
holes all over the rich, quiet fields; and the Huns marching
in, greedy and savage.
£ ‘ What are we to do ? ” said Mum.
Dad took a spade and went out to the orchard where the
poor trees were splintered and drooping. He dug a hole
and put in it 100,000 francs, and the jewellery, and the
beautiful white linen. He covered it up and carefully
noticed exactly where it was.
The Huns came. They took old Dad as a hostage; that
is, they .carried him with them, and said, “If any of your
neighbours shoot at us, we will shoot you, anyhow.” But
Dad was brave -and smart, and he escaped from them.
And brave old Mnm gathered up a few bones of the
burnt sheep (she was very fond of them), and she went off;
; and the farm was left, a wilderness and a waste.
Then things changed. Over the seas from the very other


side of the world came some brave big men with slouehy
hats. They jumped over parapets out of trenches; their,
guns blared and blazed; they rushed at the Huns with mad
savage faces, and prickly gleaming bayonets, and once they
made the Germans run away they held on, no matter how
the German guns spat and snarled and bombarded. So the
Germans went back and back, and at last this farm of old
Dad’s belonged to him again; the enemy were away for-
ever and eVer.
Dad and Mum came back. They said to the General of
the Australians, “Can you lend me some men to dig?”
The men came, with picks and shovels. Dad walked over
heaps of bricks and rubbish, among round deep shell holes,,
looking carefully round. Could he find the place again?'
It was all so changed. The Germans had made a big dug-
out in the ground, and put in all that was left of Mum’s
best drawing-room furniture; had they happened to dig
up the buried treasure ?
Dad walked to a spot and said ‘ ‘Please dig here. ’ ’ They
did; and in a few minutes they found the hole, and out
came the; money, and the jewels, and the white, soft linen.
And Dad counted the money—it was all right! And Mum
looked over the linen —it was dry and sweet and soft as the
day she had last laundered it. And Dad gave each of the
diggers fifty francs.'
There are two other little points in the story. Mum said
to the Australian General, ‘‘Can I look in your dug-out?”
He said, “Yes, we have quite a drawing-room, we are very
comfortable. ”
“So you ought to be,” said Mum, “it is my best furni-
ture you have here.”
And the digging men went to the officer and said, “We
like this job, sir; are there any more buried treasures to
dig up ? ”
And that night, in the dark, many a soldier of the Aus-
tralian army did a little digging on his own account!'


The End of the World.
A Story of Salisbury Plain.
I came across such an interesting place, right away out
in the wilds of Salisbury Plain; such a lot of different
kinds of people had lived there, and felt all the sort of
things you and I have to feel to-day. And Fathers and
Mothers and children played there, and said good-byes’and
welcome-homes. Thinking about a iff those old days, I
..seemed to see them, and I wondered if I could make you
seem to see them too.
The first thing is, a fight. (This story is mostly fighting:
I wonder why men are such donkeys as to start a war when
they have homes to stay in?) The two peoples who were
in the fight were a big man with a shaven chin and a long
moustache, and a little man with hair all over his face.
The moustache man is very contemptuous of the other fel-
low ; he said “ Fancy people that can only make axes out
of flint, stones, and don’t wear big gold bracelets like we
ho, and don’t love riding horses and driving in chariots!
Why, they are hardly better than monkeys ! When you see
one of. these hairy little squibs, or a wolf or a bear, kill
It.’ And so they did; and the mothers and children too.
They killed them all off, and said, “Now a new age is
beginning'—real civilisation.” But the hairy sort said,
“Alas, it is the end of the world.”
Now comes, fight number two. Word came across the
sea that a new people, terrible fighters, were actually kill-
ing off all their cousins who lived, in France, and that some
of them had got on board big ships with square sails, and
banks of oars, and these fighters were coming to England
to kill them too. So the moustachy people made up an
army to go down to the seashore and stop them from land-
ing; also they said, “Let us make a strong place here, so
that if they 'get ashore we can fight them. ’ ’
They chose a place on the top of a hill, where they could
see a long way, so as to know if the enemy were coming.
They marked out a circle and dug a ditch, and piled up
the earth to make a wall, and put soldiers as sentries to be
ready. I saw the very place, just as it was 2000 years ago.
The people who came over the sea were great fighters
called Romans. They fought mostly on foot; and had


strong armour. The great thing about them was. they
were splendidly drilled; while the Britons were brave, but
not drilled—each man made a wild dash and fought on his
own. And the Romans felt about the Britons much the
same that the Britons used to feel about the hairy people;
they said, “We are the civilised people, these others are
really savages; Why, look at their moustaches!” (The
Romans were clean shaved.)
One day there was a great fleet off the coast and a great
fight. Ask your learned elder brother to read it to you out
of Caesar, Book I. And later on, a Roman army marched
over those hills. The Britons used to dodge all round them,
and try to make a sudden dash at them while they were
tangled up in narrow roads through the forests. But when
the Romans came to this fort with its earth walls, although
the Britons fought bravely, the Romans climbed the walls,
and killed most of them. And the Romans said,
“Now a new age is beginning—real civilisation.” But
the Britons said, “Alas, it is the end of the world.”
As I stood there I could almost imagine the fight. The
fierce Britons —the women shrieked and yelled too, to help
their soldiers; the steady welhdrilled Romans, listening to
the word of command; and at last the Britons, running
away.
The Romans laid, “These Britons chose a good place for
their fort; but they do not know how to make a fort; we
will make a better one in the same place.” So they dug
and planned; and to-day it is just the same as the Romans
made it —at least the walls are • the buildings they put up
are gone long ago.
They took a round piece of ground, about 400 yards
across. In the very centre they put a stone pillar, and
marked out four gates at opposite sides. Then they dug
two great ditches all round, the outside one about ten feet
deep, then an earth wall, then a great ditch nearly fifty
feet, then another earth wall; Then the flat camp inside.
“Now,” said Johnny Roman, “we’ll see who can get over
that. Let them try! ’ 5
And all the while the Romans lived in England, no one
ever got over that wall. And if you want to see what sort
of men the Romans were, and what sort of iron suits they
wore to fight in, read “Puck of Pook’s Hill” about “The
Centurion of the Wall” ; it is a fine story.
Then one day the word went round England, “The
Romans have to go home to their own country. They are
actually being beaten at last —fancy that! We thought no


3>
one could ever beat them.” And 1 the Britons were sad,
for the Romans had not killed them all; in fact they ruled
them well; and the Britons said, “We hear terrible tales
of new enemies coming over the sea • and if the Romans go,
who is going to defend us from these ? ”
However, one day all the Roman soldiers in this fort fell
in for parade. Every man had his pack on his back. The
Britons stood round, very sad. And the Centurion said,
“Put your own soldiers in here now ;we have to go. Our
own country is being beaten. It is the end of the world.”
The trumpets blew; the legions tramped off, got on ships,
and went home. And tire Britons went into the fort.
Now for the next fight on the same spot.
The Romans had gone; but the Britons who were left
were different from that handsome fellow" with the flowing
hair on his upper lip that I told you about. There were
two big differences; for now they had knights in splendid
armour, and now they were Christians, instead of meeting
to worship with the Druids in Stonehenge, which is close
by, and cutting mistletoe from the oaks with a silver or
golden sickle, and offering human sacrifices to keep the
cruel gods in a good temper (for that is what they believed
they had to do). Now they knew the kind of God we have;
the Romans had told them about the Lord Jesus.
Some people say it was St. Paul himself Who came and
told them; and some say it was Joseph of Arimathea who
came away after our Lord was crucified, and brought a
piece of the Crown of Thorns, and planted it where he
built a church at Glastonbury; and there is the Holy Thorn
growing there to-day. But I believe it was just quite
ordinary Christian people, who knew how" happy it made
them to know the loving kind of God we have; and so they
said to the Britons, “You need not be afraid of the gods,
and kill your own people to please them; why, there is only
one God, and He is absolutely loving ; and all round you
are throngs of loving angels.” Anyhow, the Britons be-
came Christians.
Now about the Knights; you can see plenty of pictures
of them, vdth armour and long spears.
One day the sentry was on the earth wall of the fort,
looking and looking to watch for the fierce enemy, when
suddenly he called out, “I see a company coming.” All
the soldiers fell into line, and the leader was very anxious,
for the fierce enemy used to kill everyone, and especially
loved to burn the churches. They came closer; then the
leader of the men in the fort cried out,


“They are Knights ;,; they must ■be our own people.”
The sun flashed on their armour, the trumpet blew loud-
ly, and over the green turf came a splendid band of
Knights, and at the head of them a noble prince with a
flashing gem in the front of his helmet. It was King
Arthur; and with him were brave knights, whose names
are famous now although they lived 1400 years .ago. Sir
Launcelot, the bravest of all; Sir (hi wain ; Sir Pereival;
and one, the youngest, but the most absolutely pure; and
manly and stainless of all, young Sir Galahad.
How glad the people were in the fort! for they said,
'“King Arthur is our great hope. He can get all the
Britons to unite and fight the foe. He has beaten them in
twelve great battles already. His Knights of the Hound
Table ride about everywhere, saving people and stopping
the cruel foe. ’ ’
Then King Arthur spoke words that put heart into them
all. And on the springy grass the Knights held a, tourna-
ment, and practised fighting; and then they rode away to
the strong city of Winchester.
But, alas, in a few years all the hope went from the
Britons. The savage foes kept pouring over the sea in
their Viking ships; but it Was not that which beat the
Britons'. One day the men in that fort saw a strange sight.
It was a most lovely lady, King Arthur’s queen, called
Guinevere. But she rode by that fort in haste, with only
a few companions; and she seemed ashamed and sad. She,
rode on about seven miles, and came to a great Abbey at
Amesbury, and said. “Let me hide myself. I have been a
bad woman; and all through me the King’s knights- are
quarrelling ; and the foeman will beat us now.”
A little while after King Arthur rode by, and lie went to
Amesbury too, very sad; and he said good-bye to the
Queen., Then he rode away and fought a great last battle,
and he was killed. If you want to know the wonderful
words he said to the Queen get someone to read them to
you from Tennyson’s poem.
Now comes the last scene. The enemy was called the-
Anglo-Saxons. They wore chain armour, and had wdngs
on their helmets, and they fought with great double-
headed battle axes. They despised the Britons. They said,
“These wretches are soft and useless; they live in cities
and fight behind walls, the cowards; and they worship a
god whom they call the Prince of Peace—instead of fierce
fighting gods like Woden and Thor. Let us kill them all
off, and especially let us burn their churches.”
So one time a lot of shiploads of them landed at South


amp ton. The poor Britons there tied to the forests and
made their way to Winchester and other strong cities. If
you want to read a sad account of what happened you will
find it in the beginning of a book called '’ hi her and
Igraine.”
Some of the people came to our fort. They were nuns
and priests and peasants, all sorts of people, and a few
knights ; but they were terrified. The soldiers on the fort
could see the smoke of fires coining nearer and nearer as
the fierce Saxons came on, burning houses and churches;
and more frightened people kept coming in.
At last one day the sentry said, £ ‘ I see soldiers; they
have wings on their helmets.” On they came. There was
shouting and fierce cries; desperate attacks and desperate
defence; but it was no good—-the Norsemen flocked over
the wall, and when they marched on they left a fort full
of dead bodies.
They said, “It is the beginning of a new era for Eng-
land; we will settle here..”
But the Britons said, ‘fit is the end of the world.”
Well, there was lots more fighting about here; Danes
killing Saxons, Normans killing both; civil war, English-
men against Englishmen, in the times of Stephen and Maud,
of Cromwell and Charles., and Jack Cade, and James 11.
But they did not use the old fort any more ; they built stone
castles. There the old earth walls stood, silent and lonely,
till an Australian soldier came along and said, “I must
write home all about this.”


The Story of St. Alban.
(It was just about 1600 years ago that this story hap-
pened. And it is true; just as true as that a meringue is
egg and sugar—only a bit whipped up.)
It was not the Romans who first built a town on the hill
where St. Albans now stands. Long before they came
those early Britons that I told you about lived here, and
made a great fight against the Romans. They had a fine
brave chief called Cassiwellaunus. He lost the fight, and
the Romans ruled the country. Then a fierce British Queen
called Boadieea tore things up terribly. , The Romans had
treated her badly, and one day she swooped down with a
lot of followers and killed every man, woman, and child
she could. How would you have liked to have lived in
those days?
Now to let you understand the life of those people, I
must tell you something about two points; the Roman
temples and the great Roman roads.
One fine bright morning all the,people gathered into the
market place or Forum in front of the Temple of Jupiter.
They were mostly Britons (the Romans did not bring a lot
of Romans to live in England; it was like the English in
India). They wore their Sunday clothes. They crowded
the open square ; and the soldiers were drawn up on guard,
and an officer named Alban was in command. In the
square was a,new statue with a covering, over it. You
could see everyone was excited.
Suddenly everyone stirred and said, “Here he comes!”
And the Roman Governor came out of his palace. "Guard,
present arms,” said Alban, and the Governor walked up
and stood between the two centre pillars of the Temple.
He was well above the crowd, and he spoke:
“Citizens and soldiers, living in the city of Yerulamium,
capital of the Province of Britain, a new Emperor rules
now over the world-wide Roman Empire. He is a god
upon earth. And to-day I set up his statue here. Now I
call upon yon all to show that yon are not rebellions, but
loyal to him. I will unveil the statue, then yon will all
bow, down before it. And if any man refuses, 1 will inflict
on him such horrible tortures that it will teach you all to
defy the power of the Empire of Rome. You can worship
any other gods you like; we don’t care about that. But


worship the Emperor you shall and must. Unveil the
statue. Long live the Emperor Diocletian. Bow down and
worship! ”
Then there was a great shout and they all worshipped;
and Alban led them. The Governor gave a great feast;
there were fountains of wine flowing in the streets, and a
number of animals were sacrificed. (If you want to see the
best possible account of the kind of day it was, look at the
story in the Book of Daniel of the golden image that
Nebuchadnezzar set up; change his name to “the Roman
Governor”).
As the people went home, they talked. One said, “I don’t
believe much in Jupiter or Diana.”
“All very well,’ said another, “but anyone who isn’t a
fool knows there is an invisible world.”
“Yes,” said another, “and if you don’t pay homage to
it, you’ll get trouble.”
“All humbug,” said another, “I don’t mean to worship
any more.”
This made the rest angry; they said, “You’ll annoy the
gods—whatever gods there are, and they will hit you with
a thunderbolt, and they might not aim too carefully and so
hit us too, so we’ll see that you worship, you blighter.”
“Report him to Alban,” another said. “The soldiers
will deal with him”; and 1 they all agreed that if you did
not worship Jupiter you might get trouble, but if you did
not worship the Emperor you certainly would, without the
shadow of a doubt.
There was a little group gathered in a house, watching
the people go home. They had taken the risk of staying
away from the Forum. Their faces were anxious. They
said one to another, “What are we to do? We believe in
the one true God; we can only worship Him. and Jesus
Christ. Will the Governor seize us and torture us ?’ ’
“Couldn’t we just pretend to worship the Emperor and
the gods,” said one who was timid. “It would not really
mean anything.” But the others said, “No. If we ack-
nowledge other gods we are false to our Saviour. What-
ever it costs us, we must not deny Christ.”
Some of them even seemed glad that they might have
to suffer for Christ. They said, “Jesus had to die on the
cross. Peter and Paul had to die. So did Polycarp; even
women and little children have faced terrible deaths for
Jesus, and the Lord made them able to bear it all, even to
smile and sing glad hymns while they were being killed.
Are we to have everything easy? Shall we be cowards?”
But most of them were anxious, and prayed to God, “0


Lord, do not let Alban and his' soldiers come for us. But
if they do, help us to be brave and faithful.’
. Now about the Roman roads. Four of them met at
Yerulamium • each came through a gate in the great stone
wall, and they met at the Forum. The Romans put splen-
did roads into the country, so that their soldiers need not
live all over Britain, but could march quickly anywhere if
there was trouble. And all the roads in the wide Empire
ended in the Forum at Rome.
Along these roads travelled all sorts of things; not only
what the Britons grew and brought to market, but also
things came to them from France and Italy and even from
Asia and Egypt —things they had never heard of before.
And the peojile of Britain began to say, “After all, it was
a good thing for us that we were joined on to the Roman
Empire.”
But do you know the most important things that travelled
along the roads? Not silver or gold or cattle or wool; but
something you could not see —invisible things, but they
mattered more than all the rest put together. It was ideas
and news. If a man travelled to Rome from Yerulamium,
he did not only bring back Roman stuff to make a dress for
his wife, and Roman presents for his girls and boys.
Imagine him coming home like an Australian father might
come from India. He unpacks his bag and deals out the
presents.
“I bought this in France, and this I saw in Switzerland.
This dinky little thing I bought from a sailor who had been
in Egypt. And here is a book, it has picture's painted in
Persia. ’ ’
Then, after they had done hugging him, he would sit
down and tell them the new ideas he had heard of ) and
perhaps the neighbours would ask him to give a lecture,
and everyone would say, 1 “Have you heard what the fellow
who went to Rome saw there ? and about the news he heard
there of a new religion ? ’ ’
Now the bracelets and the dresses would wear out, but
the ideas would get stronger and stronger the more they
spread. And the more roads there were, the more people
would travel, till all the ideas from everywhere would
spread to everywhere else.
It was like this. Suppose there was only one child in the
family. He would have plenty of ideas of his own, but he
would only have what he could dig out of his own head.
But if the elder ones go to school they will bring back
whole sets of new ideas—quite a new world. So the whole
family has a sort of joint stock in ideas. Before the
Britons had roads, they were like one child alone; but the


roads made the Britons, and. the Gauls, and the Italians,
and the Greeks, and the Jews, and the Egyptians, and the
Romans, and the Carthaginians, like children in one big
family; all that one set learnt travelled along those great
roads to ail the rest. Yon could not see them, hut they did
count for a lot.
Now everyone of you stop at this point, put his head
down on his hands and think about this. Think till you
nearly get a headache. Say to yourself, “I will under-
stand.” There was one wise man who knew this well. He
wanted to tell people all over the world a piece of good
news. He could not travel all over the world, so he said,
“I’ll travel to cities that stand on the big roads. If the
people there know my news, it will travel for itself along
the roads.” That was St. Paul.
Soon after the day when the Emperor ’s statue was to be
worshipped, word came to the Governor from the Em-
peror, “There is"a set of people who are giving me trouble.
They are called Christians. They worship a man who was
put to death like a thief, a Jew too. It is nearly 300- years
ago, but they go on worshipping him. In fact they are
mad; they say he is still alive. Now I cannot have people
obeying a living king; they must have no king but Caesar.
And these obstinate people actually say that if I tell them
to do one thing and this Jesus tells them to do another,
they will obey Him, not me. Now we cannot-have this.
Besides they stir np trouble everywhere. They won’t
admit that one religion is as good as another. I don’t
mind them worshipping their God; it doesn’t matter how
many gods the people have. But they say theirs is the only
God; and they try to stop people worshipping any other.
There was a big riot about it at Ephesus; and there have
been riots at a lot of other, cities between them and the
Jews.”
“So I give you the following order. Catch all the
Christians you can. Bring them up publicly to the Forum,
put them in front of the statues of the gods. Say to them,
‘Now put some incense on these altars as a public sign that
you worship the gods like anyone else, ’ and if they will not
do it, give them such horrible pains that the rest will be
frightened. Surely we can frighten them. We will show
them whether their Jesus is as strong as the Emperor of
Rome.”
When the Governor got this order, he called Alban and
told him about it. He said, “It is a horrible task; I don’t
like it. We have to obey, but lam not going to trouble
much about searching for Christians. If any of them show
publicly, I must punish them,. If they will stay quiet, I


will let them alone. Only we must catch their priests and
bishops who travel round urging them on and getting more
people to be Christians.”
Alban went home. He did not like the prospect cither ;
he was a kind brave man. He looked round his beautiful
home, and said to himself. “Well, anyhow, I have not to
make the choice whether I will give up all this and face
'death for my religion. lam glad of Unit.”
It was late that night. Alban was reading. The house
was all quiet and shut up. Suddenly a man stood before
Alban, on the verandah. He wore a wide hat and a long
cloak that partly covered Ms face. He was very tired and
panting for breath; but his face was hraVe.
He said, “I ask you for shelter, sir.”
“Who are you?” said Alban.
“lam a Christian priest,” said the man boldly. “I was
chased bv the soldiers just no we If I go out again they will
. catch me. lam not afraid of death, but I want to save my
life as long as I can and go on with my work. I saw your
light, here I am, shelter me or give me up.”
Alban never knew why he did it —but at once lie called
the man in, and drew the curtains. He was not a Christian,
but he was a brave man. and he knew another brave man
■when he saw one 1 and his spirit went out to his visitoi.
They had a long talk. Alban said, “What is this wonder-
ful religion that you value above your life? How can it
be true that a man who was killed 200 years ago (our sol-
diers killed him and we know how to kill) is still alive and
with you?” .. ,_r
Long and earnestly they talked. Then Alban said, We
will talk more about this; now’ I must hide you.”
Night after night they talked. The priest, whose name
was Amnhibolus. told him the Christians were the happiest
people in the world. They knew that God loved us and lie
meant this world to he like a glorious and happy school
life, to get us ready to go home to a much more glorious
plahe. And Christians could not be anxious; God had all
the power,' and Tic watched over them all the time. He
cared for- each one as much as if there wa| not another
single person in all the world except that one.
Alban was very thoughtful. Very closely he watched
the priest; for he said, “May be this is only fine talk; I
will see how he lives as well as how he talks. If he believes
in a God like that he will not be anxious or cowardly.”
He found that the priest was calm and brave; and he
spent a lot of time in very happy prayer to God. talking to
him like a son to a father, and Alban began tonay to him-
self, “I have houses and lands and horses and jewels and


this poor fellow lias nothing. Yet I really believe he is
richer and happier than I ami It is wonderful.’ ’
Then Alban asked him two questions,
u After all, how do yon know that God is so loving? Can
yon be absolutely sure?' If you can, it would be the most
glorious news a man ever heard. But can you prove it?
The priest said, “Indeed I can/’ And he told him how
God came into His own world to live as a man; how He
went about doing good; and how He fought against our
great enemy the Devil, and suffered the terrible death upon
the Cross. Was ever love like that?
‘ ‘ Here, ’ said the priest, ‘ ‘ is the answer to your question
—the proof that you ask.” And he held up what he was
wearing round his neck. It was a little cross, with the
figure of the Lord Jesus on it.
One more question Alban asked,
“Suppose a Christian is brought up before the Governor
and told to sacrifice or die;—will Jesus save him from
being killed?”
“No,” said the priest, “He does not promise that. Some-
times He does it—He easily can if He likes. He saved
Peter once; but then, when it was time for Peter to go
home, Jesus let him be killed. But what He does promise
is this—-that He will give us strength for anything we have
to face. God is faithful, and will not suffer you to betried
above what yon can bear, and then, when the suffering is
over. He will reward us with joy and peace for ever ana
ever! I reckon that the sufferings of this present world are .
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
shown ns.” _
“Isn’t it wonderful to think of?” said the priest, and his
whole face seemed to light up with joy. “One moment a
man may be in pain and suffering, cruel men doing all.
they can to hurt his body. And the next with the loving
Lord —in the blaze of the light of glory—and Jesus was
there all'the time! Surely it is the happiest thing in the
world to be a Christian!”
Alban knelt down.
“I am sure of it now,” said he. “I see all it is going to
cost me. The Governor will be terribly angry, and will
surely kill me. But I believe m Jesus Christ. , Lord, 1
know yon are here and listening to me. Let me be made
child of God in Holy Baptism . ”
I' ft :-*:
Now the soldiers were looking all over the city for the
priest, and although Alban was careful, yet somehow word
went round that there was a man hidden in his house. Such


denly came a knocking at the gate; they saw it was a band
of soldiers. .
“I cannot escape now,’ ’ said the priest. “It is the
Lord’s will that I should be taken.”
“No,” said Alban. “You can help more people. You
must escape.”
1 ‘ But how ? ’ ’ said the priest.
“Quick,” said Alban, “put on my clothes. Walk out at
the back and escape.”
“But they will see me and follow,” said the priest.
“No,” said Alban, “I have a plan. Quick —go off.”
“My brave son,” said the priest, “I think I see your
plan. It will be very hard on you. But you serve a gener-
ous Master. May the God of Love send all the power of
His Spirit to strengthen and bless you. And may w T e meet
in Paradise.”
So he went off, and for many years he went on with his
work, though at last he too was caught and killed. But
Alban put on the priest’s wide hat, and wrapped his cloak
round his face; and the soldiers rushed in and caught him,
they did not look for the real priest, for they thought they
had him. They took him straight to the Governor in the
Forum, and took off his cloak, and behold —it was Alban.
The Governor was savage with anger.
“ What did you do it for?” he shouted. “Are you a
Christian too?’
“Indeed I am,” said Alban. “It is the best news I ever
heard.”
The Governor was amazed.
“Do you mean to say you will give up your money and
your life to worship a dead criminal?” he cried.
But Alban said, “He is not dead. He was dead, but He
did not stay dead. He is here with me now as truly as you
are. He was God living as a man.”
The Governor foamed with rage.
“Worship those gods there,” he cried, pointing to the
statues. “I meant to let the Christians off lightly; but if
you dare to defy me He could not finish speaking
for rage.
But Alban was calm and happy, like Daniel; and of
course he would not. The,Governor said, “Thrash him,”
And they tied him up and thrashed his poor body till it
bled; but the Lord Jesus was there and made him able to
beer it. Then the Governor said, “Take him out on the
hill and cut off his head.”
Now all the people of the city heard about it; and they
wondered. They crowded together, out of the gate, and
filled up the road and the bridge. The hill was on the; other


side of the river where Alban was to be killed, but the
soldiers could not get over the bridge with him for the
..crowd.
But Alban was full of joy at the prospect of going to be
with Jesus. So he prayed, and behold the riyer stopped
flowing, and they went over,on dry land! They went up
the hill, Alban was faint and thirsty, and behold a spring
of water sprang up at his feet! So the story goes; for
people went on talking of this story for hundred! of years
after.
They: came up the hill. The officer said to the execu-
tioner, “Cut off his head.” But the executioner had been
watching Alban; he saw how bravely and calmly he be-
haved; and suddenly he threw down his sword and said,
“If this is what.it means to be a Christian, let me be a
Christian too!” (You see, the way we behave is the best
sermon we can preach.)
The officer was furious. He called upon another soldier
to cut off Alban’s head, and the executioner’s head too.
The soldier took up the sword and swung it and cut off
Alban’s head; and what do you think happened! (This is
the story people told about it afterwards) Alban’s head
rolled off.; but the soldier never saw it, for his eyes rolled
out of his head.
# # * *
And now on the hill where Alban died stands a mag-
nificent church. People said, “We must never forget such
a man. We must help others to know about Jesus; if that
is what it means to be a Christian, let us help everyone to
be Christian. And perhaps if people hear about Christ on
the very spot where Alban died some of his spirit will go
into them.”
Inside the church was a rich and glorious shrine, where
the body of Alban was buried. And near by was a shrine
where they buried the priest Amphibolies. Men came from
all England to see it and pray. And it is said that miracles
took place there; sick people were healed, as, if the Lord
Jesus met them there. '
Ido not know if sick bodies were healed. But this lam
sure of—sick hearts and spirits were made happy and
strong there, and that is the best miracle. If we take
Trouble to get near the heart of St. Alban—a pilgrimage of
imagination and. admiration—we too shall find a double
-portion of his spirit entering into us.
And the world always needs Albans; to-day more than
-ever.


Guy Fawkes
Once upon a time a lean, fierce, tall man walked up and
down a beautiful garden. It was long ag v o, in tlie days-
when people wore silks and velvets all sewn over with
jewels, and said “Gadzooks,” and threw buckets of water
over a man if he smoked.
The house was a delightful homely looking place, all-
windows and sunny warm; and the garden had beautiful-
flowers, and fine trees sloping down to a Jake: just the
place for a man to be lazy and drowsy and happy. But this-
man—he strode up and down quickly, and he clenched his-
fists and cried out, “He must do it, or we will kill him!”
which showed either that he was very fierce about some-
thing, or that his dinner had not agreed with him.
Now “he” was King of the country. And there had been
fierce disputes in that country about religion. The Popes-
of Rome had helped it a lot, but then they had become,
bossy and tyrannical, and tried to treat it like the Germans*
treated Alsace and impose their “kultur” on it. So the
people refused and there was a kind of revolution; and-
some bad things were done on both sides, as generally
happens in revolutions; but the people threw off the claims
of the Popes; and the Popes were savage and said, “You:
are savages and heathens, and we will have no more to do>
with you.”
Some of the people still clung to the Popes; and secret
messengers were sent, and all sorts of plots were hatched;
and this fierce lean man, fist-wagging in his sunny garden,
was just the kind of man who tried to carry them out. And
now T a new king had just come to that country; and the
Roman Catholic fanatics said, “'He must make the people
of the land obey the Pope, or we kill him.”
Well, the new king seemed to wobble a bit at first, but
soon he showed that he did not meant to do it. So the fist-
shaker and some others like him said, “He shall be killed
then.”
So he whispered round to some others like himself and
they used to hold meetings at his place. I saw the very
place where they used to meet, last week. It was near the-
stable of the house and the people who came to meet him-
could come down the main road, turn off a little side road,
sneak through a little village, and climb up a dark, twisty ■
stair to this room.
Now, how were they to kill the King? Stick a knife in
Mm? or put ippecac in his coffee (that would poison me-
anyhow), or what? At last they decided to blow him and
all his parliament sky high with gunpowder. And all in'
the,name of true religion, and with a beautiful church just
outside the very room where they plotted.
The Parliament met at Westminster. Not in the big'


buildings that you see now, but in the chapel of an oicC
palace that used to stand there. The Kings up to about
Henry YII used to live there; then they built a new one
close by in Whitehall; and both the Palaces are gone now,,
and the King to-day lives in Buckingham Palace. So said,
this sweet, mild-tempered villain (named Caxesfcy), “We
will take a lodging and dig a tunnel, and cram it with
powder, and put a match to it some day when the King
visits Parliament, and that will show ours is the true reli-
gion!”
Next they wanted to find a man who would light the
powder, 1 and they found just the man to suit them; a
soldier, as fierce as themselves, and his name was Guy
Fawkes. He had a wicked eye and went about muffled in
a cloak, and could strike fire out of a flint and steel.
The plot went on. Everyone who knew of it swore they
would not say a word ! They got a cellar right under the
room the King would be in, instead of having to dig their
tunnel. (I saw the very cellar.) They put in the powder,
the day was fixed. Guy spent his time practising striking
lights, and wandered about with a lantern in the cellar.
Here is a really beautiful picture of the inside of the cellar
when his lantern was nothere.
BUT-—one of the conspirators had a relation who was
to go to Parliament that day. And although he had sworn
that he would not say a word, this fellow actually did not
like to think of his relation being blown to little bits —
which seems funny, doesn’t it? So- he wrote him a letter
with real good spelling in it, and said “BEWARE!” The
relation bewore; and they searched the cellar, and found
Guy with his lantern. He said, “I’m only the dustman
come todiave a little talk with the housemaid.”
“What are these barrels?” they said.
“Oh, just to sit on.” he said.
“’What is this lantern ? ”
“The better to see her with.”
‘ ‘ Have you got toothache, or why do you muffle your
face?” ,
“I’m ugly,” said Guy, “ and I don’t let her look at
more than my eye.” But they collared him and said,
‘ ‘ That was a near go.”
Meantime Catesby and the others all met at a place called
Dunchurcli, near his home. They pretended there was a
hunt toward. They met at a smithy. How they listened
and fidgeted! At last—-clacketty, clicketty—galloping
hoofs—a messenger from London: “It’s all found out.
Guy is caught. ’ ’
Off went the man a different way, and that was the end.
But the people of England never forgot Guy Fawkes Day,.


Cherries of Damascus.
Once upon a long time ago there was a Sultan, and he
lived in Egypt, but he was also King of Palestine, Syria,
and Damascus, and even of far-off Bagdad. He had such
power that if he said “I want this,” he expected the thing
to be put right down in'front of him the next moment; and
if he got angry with even the greatest of his Pachas dr
■Governors, he could ;say “Off with his head” and off it
flew that minute. Everyone who came near him knelt
down and knocked their foreheads on the ground and said
to-themselves, “Now I wonder what sort of temper he is
in to-day.” (In fact he was a sort bf headmaster.)
But all the same he was very much like other people. He
liked to have' the things to eat that he was most fond of;
.and he got very angry if he asked for bloater paste and
there wasn’t any. And he didn’t like sitting on a throne
all the time and being very stately and wearing a crown
and being called “Your Majesty.” He had favourites, and
he liked to put on his slippers and his old red smoking cap
and have a yarn, and let people tell stories to him. and'he
•would often listen to the advice of his favourites more than
to the solemn talk of his Grand Vizier. Oh he was a, very
human old king, like Old King Cole.
And people knew this. So if they wanted to get the
Sultan to do anything, they would go to one of his favour-
ites and say, “Look, sometime when the old fellow —I
mean His Sacred Majesty—is in a good humour, just men-
tion this to him and get him to agree to it.” And one
favourite pulled against another favourite, and they
watched one another very closely and were very jealous
of one another.
Now the Sultan had one beautiful slave girl whom he
liked very much • she could dance for him, and her little
feet twinkled and her gold bracelets tinkled; and she could
sing sweet little songs, playing on a zither; and she said
funny and amusing things that made the jovial old fellow
laugh heartily; then he would give her almost anything she
asked for. Her name was Fatima.
Also the King had a clever old man who was Grand
Vizier, and very clever and cunning; and mostly the Sul-
tan let him manage things. But the Vizier said to himself,,
“I must keep an eye on that young hussy Fatima; she’ll be
asking the King to do something opposite to what I want


some of these times, and the isilly old Mlowwdll give in to-
iler. ’ ’
And that is: just what happened. lam going to tell you
the story, and the clever trick by which the cunning old
Yizier got out of it.
There was a Governor in Damascus, and he liked being
Governor, but he did not govern at all well. And there
was another man who wanted: to get him out of it and be
Governor himself. And he thought. “If only 1 could get
the Sultan to go to Damascus, he would see how badly that'
other fellow governs, and put him out and put me ink 7
But how was he to do this? For the old Sultan was fat
and rather lazy, and to tell you the truth he. had never in
all his life travelled out'of Egypt to go and see the other
places of which he was King ; and he was very comfortable
at home and did not at all want to go bumping and jolting:
across the desert on a long journey.
So this man went to Fatima and said, “Look what I’ll
give you if you can get the Sultan to go on a trip to
Damascus. ”
There were beautiful jewels in his hand, and .Fatima said,.
“FUdoit.’
One day, soon after, when the king was eating fruit, she
said, “Oh dear.”
“What’s up? ’ said the King. (Fancy a mighty monarch
saying “ What’s up?” But he did. He liked fruit) and he
was nice and cool and comfy; and he just said “What’s
up?”> ■ i o'/,- ’V ' nj I
■ “1 want some good fruit,” said Fatima, ■
“And isn't this good fruit?” said the mighty monarch.
“That!” said the beauteous Fatima, with great scorn,
turning up her pretty little nose; “that dry, tasteless stuff’
—you call that fruit? Ah, if only you could taste the
cherhies- of Damascus.”
The Sultan clapped his hands, and a black slave appeared'
and bowed before him.
“'Send at once to Damascus, and bring me a camel-load
of cherries.” ordered the Sultan. Fatima laughed.
“Why, old dear,” she said (she really did! Fancy—to
the mighty monarch!) “Yon can’t bring the. cherries of
Damascus to you; you must go to them. They won’t travel.
They are so soft and. sweet and pulpy and luscious-that tligy
could not be carried here. Oh, how glorious they are!’
They just melt in your mouth.”
The Sultan began to long to taste the glorious fruit. But
he felt ashamed to say that he was going all that way only'
to eat cherries. So he thought to himself, “It really is my
duty as Sultan to go and see this great and important city.-


lam King of it. Yes, it is my duty to go and inspect it.”
So lie called his Vizier and said, “Ah, Mustapha, I have
.decided to go and inspect the great city of Damascus.
.Make all arrangements for me; I will start this day week.
I will travel in royal state; and I will inspect all my pro-
vinces of Palestine and Syria. See to it, Mustapha.”
Mustapha bobbed his head till his forehead touched the
: ground, and backed out from the royal presence. But once
he was outside he just bristled with rage.
“Bimbashi Muldoon, Splatterandamen, Nillokantara” —■
(Oh, it nearly set his venerable beard on fire, the awful
■words he used.) ‘‘ By the whiskers of the sacred crocodile,
what am I to do!” said he. “There’s Mohammed, Gov-
ernor of Palestine —if the Sultan once sees how he rules,
it’s all up with him; and he pays me a lot of money every
year to keep the Sultan away. As for Ahmed, Governor of
Damascus—-if the old boy sees how things are there—phew!
And I’ve always told him things up there are splendidly
managed. Arrakhartoum! But I begin to feel an ache in
my own neck already where the sword will hit me when
the Sultan finds out things.”
“And what is it all about! What bee has stung him!
I believe it is that sly hussy Fatima egging him on. She
has made him want something that he will have to go to
Damascus to get; and this is only an excuse. What does he
want. The only way for me to do will be to find out, and
then bring it here for him. Oh, my young lady, I’d like to
•spank you! But 111 be even with you yet. ’ ’
There was no. time to be lost. Damascus was hundreds
of miles away; and there were no quick aeroplanes in those
■days, to fly there and firing things back. Said the old
Vizier, ‘ £ I must get a move' on, or it is a place in the family
bomb for me.”
Well, how he did it Ido not know; except that I know his
•wife helped him, by going and talking to the girls in the
■Sultan’s palace. Anyhow, next day the Vizier was saying
;to himself, “Cherries from Damascus —that’s it, is it! The
greedy old guzzler. And how on earth am I going to get
him a good feed of fresh ripe cherries from Damascus
before six days are over?”
He walked up and down; he sat and put his head in his
hands ; he boxed the ears of his children —he did all the
■sort of things that-help a man to think hard and quickly.
At last he jumped up into the air, danced a fandango, and
cried, '
“I’ve got it ! By the beard of the Prophet, I’ll beat that
writhy slave girl yet. ” '
He went out and called all the trumpeters he could find.


He gave them their orders. Out they marched into Cairo
..and blew till the houses rattled. Up ran all the people ’
“What the matter!;” they asked. “Is it a fire.’ or
.Skuthorpe’s Buck-jumping Show?”
Then the heralds proclaimed that every man in Cairo
was, next morning, to bring to the Vizier’s palace the verv
best pigeons he had. And the trumpeters went home.
What a talk there was about it. The people of Eo-ypt
love pigeons; every little village has its pigeon-cote, °and
. die beautiful birds fly - and whirl about, their sheeny
leathers flashing in the bright sunny,air. And there is one
wonderful thing about pigeons; they fly very swiftly—as
mst as an aeroplane,- and often they go long distances
Trom home; but they can always find their way back no
matter how far they go ; home they come, straight and
cote I;ke a bull6t from a gun ’ and land at the old pigeon
(Over in France I have seen them, when the soldiers are
going forward against the enemy. They take pigeons in
baskets; and when they want to send a message back to the
-Oeneral, who stays a long way behind, instead of sending
a man to carry it through all the shot and shell, they tie it
under the wing of a pigeon and this pigeon has a home
-■close to where the General is—like a little house—and it
flies back, and they take the message off from under its
wmg. Sometimes the poor bird gets shot, but it is harder
to hit a bird than a man.)
T A mo ™mg crowds and crowds of men came to the
Vizier’s house, for no one dared to disobey the order and
■each man brought his best pigeon, in his long robes In the
courtyard was a great pile of wicker cages; and at the
door, ready saddled, was a group of the swiftest camels.
Most camels are slow, but some are racers, just as there are
draught horses and race horses. Into the cages they packed
tle pigeons; up on the camels’ backs they packed the
cages. Night came; all was quiet and starlit; the- camel's
«oit pad makes no sound on the soft sand; and over the
desert, swift and silent, hurried the racers off to Damascus
racing for the life of the Vizier. And no one knew
where they were going except the Vizier and the head man
of the camel riders.
Now came an anxious time for the Vizier. All dav long
he had to be making preparations for the Sultan’s trip •
and hatima kept saying to the Sultan, “Oh, those eher-
■nes. And the old man would rub the place under his
waistband and his mouth would water at the idea, and he
said to Fatima, “Don’t forget to pack the castor oil for me
T J know I 11 eat too many of them!”
A lot he cared for inspecting the Provinces; if only he


could have the cherries without going to Damascus, lie
would have been delighted. And at early dawn each day
the Vizier would put his nightcap out of the window and
look out anxiously. If only he could see what he hoped,
for! How the days sped by.
At last it was Friday—and the Sultan was to start on
Saturday morning! But that morning the poor Vizier,,
feeling as if his neck was already under the sword, climbed
to the very top of the house, like Sister Anne in the Blue-
beard story, and 10, far off, he saw what looked like a little
cloud in the sky! On it came, and soon the whole air over
Cairo was aflutter with wings, and tired glad pigeons were
alighting on the steps of every, dove-cote in Cairo. Then
each man brought his pigeon to the Vizier’s house; and
under the wing of each was a ripe, red, soft, fresh; delicious
cherry from Damascus ! i
Ail day long the Vizier’s slaves piled the lovely fruit on
round trays of beaten brass; the Vizier watching them him-
self, and woe to the man who crushed a cherry! And at
sunset, a gorgeous procession went up to the royal palace;
and the Vizier went in and said,
“I have a present for your glorious Majesty.”
‘‘What is it?” said the King. “You know lam starting
for Damascus to-morrow.” And Fatima was standing by
and thought “I have won the jewels.”
The Vizier clapped his hands, and slave after slave filed
in, each with a large round tray of the luscious red
cherries.
“They are cherries from Damascus, sire. I thought you
would like to taste them before you went there. Why,
what’s the matter with Fatima? Has she swallowed a hair-
pin? Pat her on the back, someone, pat her hard! ”
The old Sultan’s eyes nearly bulged out of his head.
“Carry them in,” he said. “0 Vizier, I shall love you
forever.”
And the Vizier went home and waited.
Late that night a messenger came to him from the Sultan.
“I am not too well,” said the letter. “I think I will give
up that trip to Damascus. It will he enough for me if you
tell me how things are going on.”
And so this story ends. The Vizier is dancing a double
fandango. Fatima is crying. The man that wanted to be
Governor of Damascus is,, saying “Billhartzial” (and that
is pretty bad). The man who was Governor of Damascus
is saying, “ Cinders, but that was a close shave !” The head
of the camel drivers has retired on a fortune. The pieople
who owned the pigeons are feeding them up and petting
them. And the Sultan is taking castor oil.


CLIMBING THE SUCCESS LADDER:
is easy.. wh£n".- you use
rangers Self ßaising Flour
rises upmng after mng till it reaches the highest pinnacle of satisfae-
ion. For your Scones, Cakes, Pastry, Puddings, etc., try GRANGER'S
iF-RAISJNG FLOUR and you'll bo delighted with the light, -whole-
some confections that will result.
'O%: Bags,
f/3
. GRA NG ER and S ON, Paframati
TIIONE O’ 8027,
'fee Store
cl
'
If the stoppers, had not found this to Be.' a desirable
, shopping centre, wc should have had to close these
doors.long ago. But as it is, the entrances are open
each business' day and crowds come and go, finding
great satisfacti on in the Serviee ,and the Prices.
W. MORPHETT
crapes,' milliner, &' ■ clothier, , .
180 ana 182 CHURCH STREET, PARRAMATTA
ts?,
BHRP-e
mmMßm
£ : - ■ '
—
y ' 1-' \ : - -;~l~'~\ : ; *j s * \
ill
fi%! I^^B6SPBraSB®B


Go Srst to ERBY’S
f . ■■ ■' ! : ■!
MILLINERY
\9
:
i si: -■ -r;.; --.s
worthy*, One -of ih Hats from 11 ,= impor-
tant showing is described here ; you will see
many others in our showroom at
ERBY’S
For Dress Materials, Manchester
Goods, Hosieiy. Ribbons, Laces and
':■ Me'riL ar s Y Stoss,
■. ■. ■ v. , ■ ■ '■■■
m
m
Sv
Ik
r Jt
/ Jt.
mm
1873—A smart shape jn BLACK
GLACL, wtrh t o'd*d Crouni
trimmed with piping
■ ' S ■i ' Um ....
SMS : ; m I :
A WCED TO THE WISE!
WKm
Ncvor forget Mi s l
Mi
|J Wm gHnjj Sp|| | BBh|l jj
OFI'LT? r r T:' VU.UF^
ix ariLi)Li:x-> m uoori
roo'.n. i:.\ r .
. ■ .
■
“SAKDALLV’ FCE GIRLS
