





Life and
JOURNEYINGS IN
Central
Australia
J. C. Finlayson


Copyright
ARBUCKLE, WADDELL PTY. LTD.
Printers
20-22 McKillop Street, Melbourne


Foreword
A>fUCH is being said at the
present time for and against
the construction of an overland
railway, the possibility of large
tracts of so-called desert country
carrying stock and providing a
supply of water from under-
ground, and climatic conditions
for the settlement of white people
in the interior.
This little book merely
deals with what was my own
experience during a sojourn of
two and a half years in the
centre of Australia.
J.C.F.




J. C. FINLAYSON




Chapter I
A PEEP AT OODNADATTA
SIX hundred and eighty-eight miles north of
Adelaide, in the State of South Australia, and
at the terminus of the Great Northern Railway, is
the village of Oodnadatta.
At the time of which I write, 1914-1916, it is a
quiet, well-conducted little village—police station,
railway station and residence, public school, doctor’s
residence, hotel, butcher, baker, three general stores,
a boarding house. These, with twenty-three private
houses, including the home of the nursing sister,
known as The Hostel, make up this little village of
white people.
The men live and work and rest and look out for
the latest news, as do men in all places.
The women do their home duties, with the help
of native women, visit each other in the afternoons,
and attend to the needs of their husbands and chil-
dren in the evening.
Stockmen and drovers sit about on the boarding-
house and hotel verandahs, and in their quiet,
thoughtful way tell bush stories and discuss the
weather. Others are quite done up with weeks of
travel with stock, working in the saddle day and
night. These go off quietly to rest. Others again




are letter writing, for as they go to their distant
stations it may be months before they are in touch
with a mail again.
The children attend their school, and when a
clergyman pays a visit to the village the people
attend Sabbath service in the schoolroom.
Almost every home has a piano, and everybody
plays and sings. Altogether it is about the most
intelligent, well-conducted little village it were pos-
sible to find.
Water is laid on all over the village from an
artesian bore, and some few have tanks for rain
water. The bore water is mineral, and is at times
almost boiling.
Once a fortnight the passenger train comes North,
arriving at Oodnadatta on Friday night, and depart-
ing again for the South on Tuesday morning. For
about eight months of the year this is supplemented
by stock trains, which carry mails, and upon which
one may travel on urgent business by special permit.
Supplies are easily brought from Adelaide.
Although the medical man has the right of a
private practice, the railway employees from Oodna-
datta to Hergott Springs, inclusive, have the first
claim upon his time.
In addition to the white population, there are also
a number of natives, the women being employed as
domestic helps and the men and boys as messengers,
wood-cutters and yardmen. All of these, although
employed in the village during the day, go to their


own camp, about a mile distant, at sundown, and
after the night’s rest return at sunrise to their various
duties.
Also, there is a settlement of Afghans about half-
a-mile distant in another direction, of which one
hears very little except that it is a busy centre for
the loading and unloading of camels. The Afghan
is the expert camel man, and he has his own camels.
So that when the train from the South brings up
goods and provisions to Oodnadatta for them,
they take them to their own settlement, and with
experienced hands do their loading. Also they are
employed by the storekeepers to carry their goods:
these they load at the different stores.
These strings of camels set out in all directions to
the interior beyond the railway for hundreds of miles
carrying flour, tea. sugar and all that is needed by
those brave white settlers. The Afghan is a generous,
thrifty, sober person.


Chapter II
JOURNEYING NORTH
IN February of the year 1914 I left my home city
of Melbourne for that distant outpost, knowing
nothing of the country to which I was going,
knowing nothing of the people, knowing nothing
of the conditions. But as I said farewell to friends
at Spencer Street station, when the Adelaide express
steamed out, hope was high in me —hope some-
times is.
After an all-night journey of five hundred and
sixty miles to Adelaide, the first stage was passed.
At Adelaide I met with friends and stayed for the
night, the next day boarding the Great Northern
train for the further journey of six hundred and
eighty-eight miles to the Interior.
South Australia is a beautiful country, and I have
not seen anything in any of the other States to
come up to their railways and refreshment rooms as
far as Quorn.
Arrived at Quorn, we went to the hotel, where
all guests were received by a kindly, genial host and
his happy, smiling wife, who took me to my room.
I was very hot, very dusty, and very tired after that
long journey, and to arrive at a well-managed, well-


NATIVES


Conducted, comfortable hotel was a great pleasure.
Everything was cool and clean and fresh.
After dressing for dinner we entered a large dining
room, and were supplied with one of the best dinners
one could wish for, our host and his wife per-
sonally superintending to see that their guests received
of their best.
Although Quorn is coast country, there was an
air, or a new kind of atmosphere, which I had not
previously known. During the meal I listened to
cheerful chatter, and witnessed the happy, free way
in which old friends met. One going North and
another South, one going East and another West.
But whatever point of the compass they come
from, or are going to, they are all happy and
friendly. Nobody w r aits for an introduction before
speaking in this friendly country. A stranger is
recognised at once, and is given a friendly nod and
“ Good day.” Others will extend a hand and ask
if one is not a stranger in these parts, and offer useful
information.
Before retiring we spent the evening on the hotel
balcony, listening to a band and viewing the beau-
tiful hills which are on the North and West of
Quorn.
Having spent a quiet and restful night, we set out
on the North-going train on our second day’s
journey, the early part of which takes us through
the graceful curves which wind in and out skirting
the Flinders Range. This is very picturesque and
pleasant.


Later, as one goes on from one small settlement
to another, one comes out into open, sandy country.
The stopping places vary in size and importance. At
some few there is quite a fine village and station
building. At others just a siding with a few scat-
tered houses. At others, again, there is no house to
be seen, and a step-ladder is placed beside the train
to allow some family to alight and carry off their
luggage.
But at one and all the interest in the fortnightly
train is just the same. Hotelkeepers, storekeepers,
station men, drovers, women and children, Afghans
in black, white and red turbans, groups of natives
in varied costumes, appear. All are alike curious to
see who is on the train. We peep out to see this
new country and its people.
The day is growing very hot .as we grind on
weary mile after weary mile, with limbs and back
aching, and nothing but hard wooden seats to give
rest. We welcome lunch time, when there is a stop.
There is no refreshment room, but a kindly
stationmaster’s wife spares us some boiling water for
our tea. It is a short rest, and on we go again to
grind through more sand and to battle with dust
and heat and flies.
Through it all we are happy and interested. Every-
body looks happy, and each fresh person we meet
gives us a friendly bush greeting and welcoming
smile. Little dusky children peep from behind the
hiding place of their mother’s skirts. I smile and
try to get them out into the open, but it is no use,
they are timid, shy creatures. They recognise a


penny, however, and know that it will buy sweets,
for which they have a fancy. Seeing their dark
eyes fixed on the penny, I toss a few on the ground,
when immediately little black and brown naked
forms dart out and pounce upon them, then rush
back to their laughing mothers. Those who get
the pennies do not keep them to themselves, but share
with the others.
As we bump onward we are very hot and very
thirsty, sand in our eyes and grating between our
teeth, so that we need frequently to make tea, which
is the favourite and apparently the best drink.
A fellow-traveller—himself parched with the
heat—appears at our open carriage door and asks,
“ Would you like tea? ” We would indeed. So we
put tea in our pots and hand them to him, and
almost before the train draws up he has jumped to
the ground and is seen speeding along to the engine
for boiling water. Back he comes again, and hur-
riedly giving us our tea, he races off again to the
little wayside hotel for a drink of cool ale, or some
tea, or perhaps he will stay and share our tea and
hamper.
The train does not need to wait for us to finish
our meal, for we have with us all that we need
of our own things, and we take our time, so in a
few minutes we have passed on again.
As the day advances into late afternoon, a strong
wind is rising, and by the time we are approaching
Hergott Springs we are overtaken by the beginning
of a dust-storm.


THE TELEGRAPH STATION.


Onward the driver races his train in an endeavour
to beat the gale. He knows this country, and knows
that if the worst of the storm overtakes us before we
get to Hergott Springs he cannot take his train
through it.
We arrive, and our valiant driver has won. Ready
hands are there to help as we tumble out on to the
little platform, and quickly grasp such luggage as
we may need for the one night. Then we put down
our heads and run for the hotel, dodging as we go
flying tins and sticks and scampering goats.
Our kind host is all concern for us as he shuts
up doors and windows in a futile effort to keep out
the flying sand. However, the storm is here, and
there is nothing to do but to put up with it, so we
get off some of our hot clothes and get into some-
thing light and cool, then go down stairs to a good
dinner—yes, it is a good dinner, in spite of its bits
of sand.
We are told that we are “ in for a bad night,” and
we hurry through with our meal and return to our
rooms. There is dust everywhere: my hair is full
of it, my clothes are full of it, and the doors and
windows are powerless to keep out the flying sand.
It is only nine o'clock, but I settle into bed and
cover up my head and try to breathe with some
degree of comfort and get a little rest. All night
long the storm blows and rages, and rattles, carrying
everything before it, till towards dawn it calmed
down, and we got a little rest.
After such a night it was surprising to find the
new day dawn bright and calm and clear.


After breakfast and many apologies from our host
on account of the weather, we stepped out briskly
for the railway station, where our train engine had
already got up steam and was puffing loudly in im-
patience to be off on the last stage of that journey.
It is no easy task, the taking of a train over a line
just swept by a dust-storm, so we were told that
there was need of haste, and with waving of hands,
exchanging of parcels and giving and taking of mes-
sages, we drew, out from Hergott Springs.
It was not long before I found out why we had
needed to make an early start. Sections of the line
ahead of us were completely covered up by drifting
sand. Gangs of men were already out working hard
with shovels to clear a way for the train to pass.
And on and still further on gangs were at work.
Sometimes they had it clear before the train came on,
at others our train had just to wait till a way was
cleared—and we had several such waits, which we
occupied in an endeavour to keep reasonably cool.
The country all along this stage is flat, and
appears barren till one comes upon a spring sur-
rounded by date palms—just one solitary oasis. Here
and there grow clusters of that beautiful bright red
and black bloom, the Sturt Pea. All else looks flat,
with sand ridges covered with salt bush and shrubs.
At each little wayside place the loading and un-
loading of camels and donkey teams is going on.
And as we grind along on wheels we pass strings
of camels making their way to the North, their
Afghan masters in the lead and native boy behind.


As we pass by isolated cottages clusters of a few
white or black children stand about. Or perhaps one
gets a glimpse of some lonely white woman at her
work. If we have any books or papers, we throw
them out in passing, in the hope of bringing her a
little cheer.
On the whole journey from Hergott Springs to
Oodnadatta there is no place where one might pur-
chase a meal, so we go through the same process of
tea-making with water from the engine, as on the
previous day, and the hamper meal.
There is such a thirsty company that our cups
are soon used up, and men approach the teapot with
empty tins, billy lids—anything so that they might
ease that thirst. Quench it? No! This is the last
meal before we reach our destination, so we care-
fully pack away all our cups, knives, etc., into a
basket, and once more settle down to being ground
and bumped along to the end of the journey, which
we reached late at night, after having been fifteen
hours in the train.
On arriving at Oodnadatta the train was met by
the whole village. I put out my head from a win-
dow and peer along the half-dark station platform.
Is there anybody to meet me? But already the young
agent had jumped on to the train and was offering
me a welcome and gathering up my luggage.
On the platform I am met by the nursing sister
whom I have come to relieve at the hospital.
We are soon on our way walking over to the
boarding house where, in spite of the lateness of the
hour, a good dinner is provided.


All around seemed fragrant with bush kindliness;
drovers from the North met stockmen from the
South, parents met their children, and women re-
joined their husbands, each one bringing news from
distant friends, or having some new experience to
relate.
It was a happy gathering, but it was with a
feeling of relief that I stepped over the street to the
Hostel, which was to be my home for eighteen
months.


Chapter 111
PATIENTS
A FTER a night of perfect rest I awakened late,
to find that the village had been astir for
several hours. The Sister came in with my letters
and breakfast, and showed anxiety to hand over
the responsibility of things to me, so that she
might have time to pack and bid farewell to her
many friends before starting on her journey South in
three days’ time.
Looking out of my window, I see already the
camel mail setting out for the silent North, whence
it journeys three hundred and fifty miles beyond the
railway, delivering its mails for East and West as it
goes steadily North.
For three days Oodnadatta is a very busy place;
the train has come in on Friday night and will be
leaving for the South again early on Tuesday
morning.
In a very short time I have made myself acquainted
with the few people of the village and written to
friends at home and in Adelaide.
The Hostel is a corrugated iron bungalow of six
rooms, dispensary and one large ward, surrounded
on its four sides by a wide verandah. It stands on
a good block of land, and has a lawn of grass kept


green all the year by a plentiful supply of bore water
and a hose.
As Sister-in-charge I lived quite alone, and was
free to have daily use of a native woman as help.
It was my business to attend any sick in the village
and to have entire care of any in the Hostel. If a
case required a doctor I called him in. But it often
happened that on such occasions the doctor would be
many miles away on railway business; indeed, some
of the worst accidents happened when I could not
get the doctor for some days.
During the intense heat of February, as I sat one
day beneath the shelter of my verandah writing
letters and doing battle with flies, a native boy
opened the gate and handed me a telegram. On
opening it I found that it had been sent from a tele-
graph station three hundred and fifty miles to the
North. “ Please send lotion for sore eyes, infected
from flies. Urgent.” I looked at my watch; yes,
I had missed the North mail by just two hours, and
there would not be another for two weeks, and then
it would take eleven days more to get there—in all,
twenty-five days.
Going at once to the telegraph station, I wired to
the man that his message had come too late, and
gave instructions regarding treatment of the eye—
there being no doctor in the village at that time.
Returning to the dispensary, I made up a parcel
of the necessary lotion and dressings, and kept them
ready to hand to the first man that I could find going
North who might overtake the mail.


On receiving my reply, the man had decided to
at once set out on the journey South as fast as horses
could bring him over all those miles of dry country,
troubled all the way by the intense heat, flies and
dust. This took him eleven days to accomplish, and
when he at last arrived it was found that the eye
had burst, and there was little to do beyond sending
him on the further six hundred and eighty-eight
miles to Adelaide, for operation, by the first cattle
train going South.
Another case I recall which impressed me with the
need for medical help further North was that of a
little child who had met with an accident. The
little sufferer came to us over hundreds of miles.
This also we were unable to deal with, not having
an X-ray, and owing to the lapse of time since the
accident.
We took it into the hospital, however, and did
all that we could to relieve it. A few days later 1
went with the child to Hergott Springs, where I sat
with it in my arms all night, and the next day placed
it in the South-going train in the care of its parents,
I myself returning to Oodnadatta on a cattle train.
Again I recall the case of another little child, just
a mite a few days old; with but slight warning its
newly-given life passed out. And being an only son,
its life had been very precious.
The sick and troubled mother asked me to bury
her babe. Now, it had never occurred to me that i
might ever be called upon to perform such a service.
The smith and carpenter prepared a tiny white
casket, in which we placed the sleeping babe. The


old grandmother plucked from her little cottage
garden such flowers that she had.
Covered by a rug, the little casket was conveyed in
a spring cart. I, accompanied by two other women,
followed in a buggy to some little distance from the
village to the burial ground, marked only by broken
fences and a few mounds of earth.
At the graveside we were met by a young man,
hat in hand, leaning upon a shovel.
Using the reins from the horse, this man, with the
help of the driver, lowered the little casket into its
resting place.
Out in that desert place, with the wind howling
through the oaks, we five, half-blinded by the flying
sand, stood around while I read from “ The Bush-
man’s Companion ” the service.
What days, weeks and months of anxiety do men
and women of the Inland endure wondering will all
be well for the mother and her helpless babe.
Even here at the gateway one wonders at the
splendid courage with which they face danger to
themselves and their children—what of those who
have penetrated hundreds of miles beyond the head
of the railway?
The tooth extractions of most of the white people
I found long overdue, and their health suffering in
consequence. The natives have strong teeth, difficult
to extract. Those of the Afghan, on the other hand,
being very simple to extract. That was my experi-
ence, but it may not be general. I did nearly one
hundred extractions in two years.


Oodnadatta, like other places, has its winter as
well as its summer. And so we find ourselves, during
four months of the year, with long cool evenings,
and most perfect days of warm sunshine. So it
happened that having these long evenings, and at
times no Sabbath evening service, and no place of
amusement, I sent an invitation one evening to a lot
of young drovers and stockmen to come to the Hostel
and have a little singing. And if they had not an
organist amongst them, I would play.
They accepted with alacrity, and in a short time
all trooped along in their shirt sleeves and riding
attire, modest, shy boys all. Still, a lady had
invited them, so they came.
One loves these brave boys, with their sunburnt,
smiling faces, fine physique and courteous manner,
each one the boy of some mother far away.
The hymns which they chose are interesting:
“ Tell Mother I’ll Be There.”
“ Where is My Wandering Boy,”
“ Eternal Father, Strong to Save.”
All with one voice they agreed upon “ Our Blest
Redeemer ere He Breathed.” Such are the men who
are penetrating to the interior of our great continent.
During the eighteen months which I lived at
Oodnadatta I had opportunity of judging something
of the need of help for sick people farther North
beyond reasonable reach of the railway. So was
willing to agree to go to Alice Springs when arrange-
ments could be made to relieve me, and for the
journey North and accommodation when I would
get there.


The possibility of a nursing sister living at Alice
Springs had long been spoken of, and a definite
request came to me from the superintendent: “Would
I go to Alice Springs and just live there for one year,
then report as to conditions and advisableness of
building a nursing home in this little settlement in
the heart of the Macdonnell Ranges?
After much correspondence it was decided that I
should go. And in due time arrangements were made
for my stay there —very inadequate arrangements,
but the best that could be done. I would go in the
interests of the sick. Those in the North urged me
to go, while many others about me urged me —in
my own interest—not to go. However, there was
only one way of finding out what we wished to
know, and I held to my original decision to make
the attempt.


Chapter IV
FARTHER NORTH
THE opportunity for travelling came at last. A
lady from Adelaide would be going North
in a couple of weeks to join her husband, and
would I like to travel with her? I would be glad to
do so, for urgent calls were coming from sick people
in the North, and I was assured of a warm welcome.
So I hurried on with arrangements for handing over
the Hostel as it had been handed over to me eighteen
months before. At length the day for departure
arrived.
The lady with whom I was to travel had come
up from Adelaide, bringing on the train with her a
new buggy and new harness. A stockman who had
come down to truck cattle at the railway had deli-
vered his stock and was now ready for his return
journey into the Interior again, and had undertaken
to drive us.
When a bushman undertakes to convey ladies on
a journey of this kind, he does things properly,
so we could safely leave all arrangements in his
hands.
After much excitement of packing clothes and
food and saying of farewells, the hour arrived for
us to start.


As we two city women stood at the Hostel gate,
up drove the cavalcade of pack horses, attended by a
native boy, and headed by the buggy with its four
horses, two in the pole and two in the lead.
My companion climbed up to the seat beside the
driver, while I clambered up behind and perched side-
TROUGHS FOR WATERING STOCK,
ways, high on top of the luggage and bedding. There
I sat feeling like a barrel organ monkey.
Half the village was out to see us start off, and
amidst shouts of farewell and warnings that I should
be “ back in three weeks,” we plunged forward,
rattling over the stones, and in a short time were
leaving the village behind us, while our lively horses
carried us forward into the—to us —unknown.


On and on we raced, till after travelling twenty-
miles we drew up, made a fire, and had a hurried
lunch, put fresh horses in, and on we went again for
another long stretch till we drew up beside a solitary
tree for the night camp, having left Oodnadatta forty
miles behind us.
Our driver was one of the best, and throughout
the whole of that long journey to the centre he did
all in his power for our comfort.
The native boys, after attending to the horses
with food, drink and hobbles, at once set about put-
ting up our tent.
The night was very cold, and after a meal we
talked by the fire for a little time, then filling our
rubber hot water bags from the kettle on the camp
fire, we retired to our tent and were soon tucked up
into our camp beds. But we were not warm: the
cold air seemed to go through everything.
The native boys were camped some distance away,
and our driver, rolled up in blankets and rug beside
the camp fire, between our tent and the natives.
We were too cold to sleep—it was the month of
August—so we tried to cheer each other with jokes
and stories of home. As the night wore on wild
dogs could be heard in the distance, howling. We
sprang up alarmed, and had some idea of calling to
the driver; but peaceful snores from a bundle rolled
up somewhere about the dying camp fire gave us no
encouragement to do this, so we crept back to our
cold bunks.


The next alarm was caused by a camel with a
dull bell on plunging around our tent in hobbles.
This creature had come from a neighbouring camp
to explore, and was part of an Afghan’s outfit.
We were afraid—afraid of the great silence—but
tried hard to get to sleep, till some slight sound
brought us with one flying leap to the tent door
together, each one asking “ What was it? ” Noth-
ing to be seen except space, and nothing to hear
but a great silence. We each silently had visions of
armed warriors making a night attack, but crept
back again and lay and listened alert for any emer-
gency.
Through weary nights of watching the sick I have
often longed for the dawn; but never before, nor
since, have I welcomed that pale streak in the East
as I did after that first night in a bush camp.
Early as we came forth from our tent, our driver
had already got a fire and prepared breakfast, the
native boys being out after the horses.
There was need for haste, as the time for heavy
rains was at hand, and if it came before we passed
over the many dry creek beds they would be roaring
streams of water, and, for the present, our further
progress impossible.
So that our anxious guide urged us to greater
haste—he had a great responsibility to deliver us
safely.
We were quickly ready, and our tent was taken
down by the native boys and rolled up to continue


it I
Mm
f f, -y
r •
1/
\t J fm m.
mmmxhw „ __ fm m, —
|f T TP „ •*
'
fe%iu i
|j| |Jj
V- - -w
Ipilliil
N ....
"AFTER THAT FIRST NIGHT IN A BUSH CAMP,”


the journey. Our breakfast of boiled eggs was soon
over, and all was ready to start on the second stage.
After going a little distance we overtook an
Afghan, with his outfit of camels laden with sup-
plies, resting by a bore, he having his breakfast and
the camels drinking the refreshing water: they may
have a long way to go before they reach the next
watering place.
The next night brought us to the Hamilton Bore
station, and we were more than thankful for the
comfort of a home, for we were very tired after being
bumped over miles and miles of stones till we felt
that all our joints had worked loose, and we might
fall in pieces at any moment.
However, we were so kindly received that we
soon forgot our shaking.
The next day brought us to Blood’s Creek store,
where we spent a very happy evening and comfort-
able night. Here, too, I recall I was given great
encouragement to go forward.
Early the next morning, after a breakfast of ham
and eggs and steak, we continued our journey to
Charlotte Waters, crossing over the boundary of
South Australia and the Northern Territory.
There were no women at Charlotte Waters, but
we were received with great kindness by the bachelor
officers at the telegraph station. We had lunch and
posted letters for the South mail, and sent telegrams.
After resting for a few hours we continued on a
few miles, till we reached our camping ground,


where we were joined by a party of stockmen re-
turning from Oodnadatta after trucking horses.
Here also a fresh batch of horses arrived from Alice
Well, sent by the constable in charge, to help us.
So now our combined party had two women,
three white men, eight native boys, and thirty-six
horses. All travelled as one party till we reached
Horseshoe Bend, where the stockmen parted from
us to go West to Eldunda.
We crossed the dry bed of the Finke five times,
following a winding track. The scenery here is very
beautiful, particularly the majestic white gums which
grow in the creek bed.
We arrived at Horseshoe Bend very tired and
dusty, and 1 recall with what pleasure we accepted
the very hospitable welcome from our host and his
wife. How we enjoyed the delicious food, and after
an evening of music and friendly talk, how we rested
in that comfortable room, with its spotless white
linen and curtains.
All must admire the courage of these men and
women who build such homes in these remote places.
Although there were a number of drovers and
stockmen about the hotel, we did not see or hear
one indication of drinking. The whole night was
perfectly quiet except for the occasional barking of
dogs at the natives’ camp, and at dawn the faint
sound of a distant fowl-yard.
The new day was to be the most trying for our
horses and driver, for we were to pass over unusual
country —twenty miles of nothing but sand-hills.


For the whole day long, from morning till night,
nothing to be seen but one sand ridge after another,
up and down, again up and again down. When
down nothing could be seen but the skyline above
the next ridge, and when up the eye reached over
many miles of barren sand-hills in every direction.
After toiling over ten miles, we rested a while for
lunch and a change of horses, in sight of some grand
desert oaks.
When we had passed over another five miles with
our fresh team, we had an experience which, in a
measure, relieved the monotony of sand-hills.
On the North side of a hill there lies a narrow
creek bed, the crossing of which, with our load,
needed the setting off from the top of the hill at a
hand gallop, which our driver did—the native boy,
for some reason, being sent on in front.
Gathering up the reins for the descent and sending
on his team in good style, we were almost at the
bottom of the incline when the horses in the lead
stopped dead, and the speed of the pole horses and
weight of the buggy sent the pole in amongst the
leaders’ legs. The leaders jumped out of the traces
and went back up the hill, taking the pole horses
around with them, they being controlled by nothing
but the tangled reins, the driver having been thrown
out on to his head at the first bump.
The native boy, seeing what had happened, came
racing back on his horse in time to meet our driver
righting his team —I, still perched up on the bedding,
wondering what I should do in such an emergency.


However, the pole horses behaved well, and all
was soon put right, and we were well on our way
again, our driver making light of his hurt.
We soon reached the bachelor home of the con-
stable at Alice Well, and were made welcome to the
best that he had, and were shown the working of
the well by a team of donkeys, and a very fine vege-
table garden.
Early the next day we began a long drive to our
next open camp, where once again our tent was put
up and the fire lighted. Here we tasted for the first
time camp-oven bread. It is made in this way: A
hole is dug in the ground and filled with hot coals.
When the earth is quite hot, the hot oven is placed
in, the dough is put in, and the lid replaced. The
oven is then covered with coals on top and around
its sides, the whole then being made airtight with
earth. This mound is carefully watched to see that
no faint streak of smoke should appear. Should this
happen, however, more earth is at once patted on to
the mound where the smoke appears, to prevent the
bread burning at that place.
The bread was good, and we spent a very pleasant
evening around the camp fire.
The next day’s journey brought us to Deep Well
by noon. Here we were made welcome by the
owner and his wife and their charming children,
and we spent some hours of very pleasant fellow-
ship. We then passed on our way, after thanking
these kind, hospitable bush people, and made camp
a few miles further on. The next two days were


very pleasant travelling, and we found those plains
all that we had been led to expect. Also we could
see the Macdonnell Range in the distance. We had
come to our last camp. The next day we would
be at the end of our journey.
Although in the heart of the Continent, this was
the most pleasant part of the journey; perhaps be-
cause of the sight of those majestic ranges, their
height and ruggedness was very refreshing after hav-
ing left the last hills seven hundred miles behind
us —Flinders Range.
This is the day on which we are to arrive at
Alice Springs; we have been on the road for nine
days. We are full of expectation.
The “ Gap ” in the range through which we pass
is certainly beautiful, as are the hills all around when
one has passed through on to the North side. About
two miles farther on there lies the little settlement of
Alice Springs.
This time, however, is not favourable for a first
sight of this place, as the country is in the midst
of a drought, with all the ugliness and discomfort
that a drought can bring—dust, flies, and dying
stock.
I had been told much about the beauty of this
place, and felt a keen disappointment. Nor was 1
ever to see those Ranges and country at their best,
as the drought lasted till after my departure eleven
months later, with only one good rain, which quickly
soaked into the parched ground.
What met my eye on passing through the beau-
tiful gap was a dirty sandy flat about two miles


' '
| ■;
- *0
Vl 1 | *J 4 a- « 1.
g^M
W :
SHEDS FOR THE HALF-CASTE CHILDREN.


North and South, and a little more East and West,
surrounded by the main range on the South and
West and broken stony hills on the North and East.
On the left one passes a well and troughs for
watering stock: a natives’ camp with a few stray
natives about, and their starving dogs. On the North
side is another natives’ camp. And in the midst of
all lies the little white settlement, made up of seven
houses, including two private houses, two stores, a
hotel, policeman's houses, Chinese and Afghans’
houses; also two corrugated iron sheds for the half-
caste children.
Our buggy and accompanying cavalcade at last
drew up to the house where I was to board for five
months.
During these months I tried to understand the
needs of the people, both white and black. I had
seen a little of life in the country in Victoria, but this
is not Victorian bush, but an entirely new Australia
—quite different from anything that I had known.
And although I had been on the fringe of it at
Oodnadatta for one and a half years, I was yet to
experience what it means to be utterly alone, without
any means of escape from an isolated position—
isolated in every sense.
Men went North and South with camels, but it
was eight months after I reached Alice Springs before
the next horses and buggy passed over that drought-
stricken country.
I had come here for a definite purpose—just to
live here for one year as best I could, in order to


discover the conditions and needs, from the point
of view of a nurse. And at the end of the year to
report as to the usefulness of putting a nursing home
here similar to the Hostel in Oodnadatta.
Something, obviously, was needed to make things
more safe for these brave men and women who had
settled in distant parts far out on stations off the
overland route. But just how much could be done
by a nurse unaided was the question; and could her
own nerves stand the strain of the isolation and lack
of proper food?


ALICE SPRINGS.


Chapter V
NATIVES, DUST-STORM, AND
BURIAL PLACE
A FTER the first few weeks I began to see why I
had been advised not to come by so many
people further South. However, I had under-
taken to stay for one year, and for one year I would
stay if it were humanly possible.
In my many lonely wanderings I visited the local
burial place, where I found evidence of the many
who had passed by that way and had fallen —the
story of their suffering and endurance for ever
untold.
Going often to the top of a high hill which over-
looks the settlement, I followed with my eye the
course of the creek bed, and pictured all those brave
men and women who had passed over this creek
during the past fifty years, or had followed its course
in their, more or less, successful quest for home and
treasure.
I waylaid native women and tried to know them
better.
Sometimes they were sad, but more often they
responded with a gay laugh. They are childlike and
cheerful. They are lifted up or cast down according
to the measure of their food supply.


I wandered about the hills enjoying the solitude,
at times being accompanied by newly-made friends.
My most frequent walk took me to the telegraph
station, to a class of white children on Sundays, and
to post letters and send wires on other days. The
mother of these children was a brave little English
OVER A STONY RISE BESIDE THE CREEK."
woman, who had come from England and gone
forth with her husband into wild and unknown
country where no other white woman had previously
dared to go, and had taken her three little children
with her. This walk takes one along a track skirt-
ing the creek bed, and passing over small stony rises
all the way. At one part it passes through the midst
of the natives’ camp at the edge of the creek bed.


They get their water supply from a soakage which
they make in the creek bed.
To one not accustomed to the place and people
it gave, at first, an eerie feeling to meet on some
lonely spot, and hidden from view till one was close
upon them, a company of natives, scantily clad and
having their hands filled with spears. But in time
one grows accustomed to such sights, and when
passing give them a friendly nod or good-day.
I had had to deal with a few natives in Oodna-
datta, but the close proximity of these camps was
something new, and I was somewhat afraid of
meeting with them in their more native state.
One day, when close to the natives’ camp, I met
with a strange and, to me, fearsome looking cow.
Now, I never care to meet with a strange cow in any
part of the country unless there is also a fence
handy—there is no fence in Central Australia.
This cow looked at me with suspicion, turned
around and pranced, turned again and again
pranced, put down her head and watched me. 1
stood like a statue and watched the cow, which
shook its head and again pranced—this was quite
enough; I gathered together my skirt and made one
wild, terrified rush right into the midst of the natives’
camp, for once forgetting my fear of them.
They had been watching, and had seen what hap-
pened, and stood about their humpies with their
miserable dogs walking around, waiting to see how
I would deal with the situation.


So that when I fled into their midst in that wild
way, they waved their arms above their heads and
rocked and rolled with laughter.
I was indignant at such untimely mirth, and
said: “ I have been frightened by that cow.” When
they could control their mirth sufficiently to be able
to speak they gasped out: “ That cow been frighten
longa you.”
Then one dusky girl came to my aid, and said
with a most sympathetic air: ‘‘You frighten? Me
go longa you.” She proceeded to accompany me
on my way. When I reached the telegraph station,
and was parting with my escort, I handed her some
pennies.
On the return journey, a couple of hours later,
half the female portion of the camp was out waiting
to accompany me home again. There were no more
pennies, but a few sweets did just as well.
Ever after this I never went out without a supply
of sweets. For never after this did I lack an escort
whatever direction I might take. And those simple
women saw to it that some harmless little calf, or
half-starved cow, was somewhere in my path, as an
excuse for their offer to accompany me. However,
I was grateful for their simple act of friendliness.
After boarding for a little over six months I was
able, by the thoughtful and generous act of a gentle-
man at Arltunga, to take my few belongings and
make a home in a small cottage of three rooms, where
for part of the time I had the help and companion-
ship of a half-caste native woman named Maudie.


5
3
<
S


My new home might look, to southern' eyes, a
very poor little cabin, but I was glad to have it.
As the year advances and no rain has come, the
dust storms grow worse. Towards the close of one
very hot day we heard a roaring sound and other
indications of the approach of a dust storm. So we
hurry on with the evening meal and get all crockery
and food tightly under cover before the dust is upon
us. Then we listen and watch, and, as the time
passes, we see to the South, swirling high above the
mountain range, one huge wall of brown sand—
miles of it—the whole length of the range as far as
one could see. On and on it comes, gaining force
as it advances, roaring and raging. Dogs go into
hiding, horses and camels tremble and become rest-
less. We shut doors and windows, and go into the
stifling heat of the house.
It is upon us at last, and in spite of doors and
windows—or because of them—the dust pours in.
I cover up my head in a pillow case and wait, feel-
ing that the house must be swept away. Hour after
hour through the night it rages. I beat with my
hands on the partition dividing our room, and beg
Maudie not to go to sleep, for I feel that I shall
not be able to breathe much longer. But the sound
of even breathing tells me that the storm is not
keeping Maudie awake.
In time it has spent its fury, and subsides. Then
follows flashes of lightning and peals of thunder,
which seem to come from every direction. As this,
in turn, subsides, a few drops of rain fall, not enough
to damp the ground. The remainder of the night


' ** Jr jjy-*#
7 Wfl | T
' m I.
", | | 1
IPW4 i «*> r P f a* M
THE BURIAL PLACE, ALICE SPRINGS.


is quiet, and the morning dawns bright and clear,
with a warm, pleasant sunshine.
But how the poor cattle did need the rain to make
the grass spring up. It was pitiful to see their starved
condition.
Fine vegetable gardens are drooping because of the
storm. Cabbages, tomatoes, onions, silver beet and
grape vines all flat and wilted. At dawn, native
boys have begun to carry water in the hope of yet
saving them.
The burial place lay half a mile to the west of
the settlement, and is marked by two old iron-bark
trees, through the leaves of which the wind utters a
mournful sighing.
Some of the graves have walls built of stone hewn
out of the mountain side. Others have a post and
rail fence, with rough crosses formed from a broken
bedstead, with no word to indicate who lies there.
Others have very fine stones.
One I note bears this inscription; “ F.R.G. This
is the grave of a man who was a geological and min-
ing surveyor in the Mines Department, who had been
sent out as a leader of a prospecting expedition. Start-
ing west from Oodnadatta to the Peterman Ranges,
they met with trouble from wild natives, two of
the party being badly speared. The leader then made
in for Alice Springs, but unfortunately took ill,
dying a few days later from heart failure. He had
with him a white man as cook.”
Then follow stones indicating the resting-places
of a man aged sixty-eight and of a woman aged
thirty years.


The next is in memory of J.C.K. A beautiful
stone and an iron railing almost buried by sand-
drift. This was a young stockman, quite a boy,
employed by the Pastoral company. At the time of
his death he was working at Temple Bar well, which
had been lying idle about holiday time. When work
TEMPLE BAR GAP
began again this young, inexperienced boy was sent
down in a bucket. At the bottom he met with
foul air, and fell out and died before he could be
rescued by his brother, who went down after him.
Lying on the ground in the wooden box which
encased it years ago, but which is now crumbling
away from it, and placed over no grave, is a roughly
hewn stone bearing this inscription; “ In memory


of J.C. T his stone was erected by public subscrip-
tion in recognition of his sportsmanlike qualities and
general good fellowship.” The body, lam told, is
buried one hundred miles out West.
It took so long to get the stone up from the South
that those responsible for raising the subscription
had left the district and others had lost interest.
After being carried the various stages from the head
of the railway by friendly people coming that way,
a team had finally drawn in and dumped it down
at this burial place, in the hope that other sympa-
thetic people would do the rest.
The object of all this kindly thought was an old
man of sixty years, the owner of Granite Downs
station, sixty miles west of Alice Springs. He died
in his camp, after suffering for a long time. He was
an Irishman who had arrived in this country in the
early seventies. Being full of kindness and wit, he
had many friends.


Chapter VI
THE BREAKING OF THE DROUGHT
MUCH care is taken by the Government to
protect and care for little half-caste children.
Two of these little girls were brought into the chil-
dren’s sheds in Alice Springs from a distant tribe, but
being strangers, and not understanding the children
with whom they were placed, they ran away before
daylight one morning.
The police trackers were sent after them, and they
were found twelve miles away, and five miles from
the nearest water, exhausted.
They had taken off their clothes and buried their
little bodies in the sand to protect them from the
burning sun and scorching wind.
For all of these unfortunate little children, both
boys and girls, a Christmas treat is provided, and the
men of the settlement get up sports for them at the
New Year season. In 1916 there were thirty-five of
these children in the sheds.
Central Australia is a land of beautiful sunsets,
and the restfulness of seeing them towards evening
seems to compensate for the discomfort of a scorch-
ing day of dust and flies. In the evening the air is
cool, and beautiful lizards scamper about the rocks
on the hills.


" BURIED THEIR BODIES IN THE SAND.”


It was about the middle of the month of June.
After a day spent in attending to some minor ail-
ments, and the doing of some tooth extractions, I
sat in the front of my little cottage in a deck-chair—
the gift of a bushman—and watched the sun set.
The whole Western sky was lit up with gold of a
rich shade. There were sheets of blue-grey clouds
bordered with pale gold and flecked with all shades
of blue, and a background of neutral green-blue.
Far on the outer edge were dark grey clouds, their
borders touched with dark pink. As its beauty
quickly passed from view, a gloom spread over the
whole sky, till the pale moon appeared and was from
time to time hidden behind dark and broken clouds.
Sitting on a boulder on the hillside one evening
in the month of February, and watching daylight
fade, I noticed that the natives already had their
fires burning, for although the days were hot, the
evenings were sharp. These thin, ill-fed people must
have fires to keep themselves warm and to cook their
evening meal for themselves and their dogs.
I see both camps quite clearly, the little humpies,
the groups of frisking, laughing men. women and
children, and the dogs foraging around.
As dusk sets in I see from each home come those
who have been employed during the day, bearing
with them any scraps of food which otherwise would
go into the waste bucket. A few bones, a goat’s
trotters, inside organs—anything. What the natives
do not eat the dogs will have. Flour, tea, sugar, fat,
stale bread; however little it is, it goes into the
general meal for this dark community.




As they wend their way to the camp they call
happily to each other and talk at a distance by signs.
They are on familiar ground, and understand each
other. They also have a subtle way of knowing all
that is going on in the white people’s world, either
for good or ill.
As I sat alone an old woman came out of her
course to speak to me. On she came, carrying a jam
tin of flour and the head of a goat. Leaping with
bare feet from one rock to another, ignoring the
pathway, at last she stood before me and said,
“ Good-day.” I replied: " Good-day, Triff, you
look happy: sit down.” Down she curled on the
stone beside me. She obviously had something on
her mind, and I kept silent. Presently she put her
hand gently on my shoulder and said: ” Poor Nussa
all alone; that no good. One fella all alone: that
no good.”
This simple old native touched on part of the
problem of a nurse in the Centre- —“ One fella all
alone, no good.”
On the evening of sth March, 1916, we expe-
rienced another dust-storm, but this time it was
followed by a good rain. When the dust had gone
down came the rain, and plenty of it—the first
rain for many months. Down it poured hour after
hour. It came down the chimney and splashed
across the floor from the big, open fire-place.
The morning came bright and fine, with signs
and sounds of life everywhere. The long-looked-for
day had come for the natives to go out into the
bush to catch food, and to fish in the creek for


snakes and other live creatures which accompany a
flooded creek.
The white population is expectant of grass for
the stock, which may mean that we shall get a little
mutton or beef, and perhaps a little butter, a luxury
which I had not had for many months.
However, there is no meat yet, not even goat, so
we have our breakfast of porridge with goats’ milk,
tea and bread and jam.
As the dinner hour approached I sent Maudie to
the store for a tin of meat, and she returned waving
a leg of goat in her hand and a look of pure delight
on her face. Our neighbour at the store, with his
usual kindness, sent us of the best that he had. Poor
Maudie, she had begun to believe that she would
never see a bit of meat again,
The next day found the creek still running, and
as the goats were on the opposite side from us, we
could not get any milk to-day. However, two days
later saw the creek clear of water again, and an
abundance of milk to be had. Also, there was indi-
cation of more rain. At four o’clock in the after-
noon the rain came down in a torrent.
Our two slab rooms are about twenty feet from
the kitchen, with no shelter between.
On came the rain, with lightning and crashes of
thunder, and higher and higher rose the lake of
water about our cabin. The table for my evening
meal was set ready, and Maudie had a fire in the
kitchen. But the rain became heavier and the storm
more fierce. Faking off my shoes, I dashed through


the water which separated us, in the vain hope of
being able to get on with the cooking of the meal,
for we were very hungry.
Maudie had the supper prepared for cooking, but
what was happening to our fire? The rain coming
down the wide chimney was putting it all out. And
the water had risen over the doorstep and was racing
' DECIDED TO SEE THE CREEK IN FLOOD.”
over the earthen floor and swamping our little pile
of firewood. The soot was splashing over every-
thing.
As there seemed no sign of the storm and rain
subsiding, I took off my shoes again and waded
out to find planks to bridge the distance between our
kitchen and dining room. After a lot of wading
about I had managed to construct a fairly reliable


bridge—reliable, provided that Maudie did not put
her weight too suddenly upon the weak parts.
A few days later one of the village men remarked:
“ I suppose you got a hit of wet around your way.”
Well, at all events, we got our supper, and before
dark decided to see the creek in flood—it had over-
flowed its banks.
With the aid of a few boxes and planks we were
able to bridge the distance to the gate—and to firm
ground. From this we dodged around small lakes
till we reached the creek.
What joy to see the rushing torrent racing and
roaring by, and carrying along with it all that came
in its way.
Everybody is happy and hopeful now, for the
present the drought is forgotten, but by no means
passed. Still the flies are with us. As I sit in my
doorway and listen to the stream roaring by and
splashing against the trees, I am obliged to get under
a fly net.
The ground is thoroughly soaked, and in a few
days the green blades of grass will appear above the
earth. All the natives who can get away are going
into the bush to get native food.
The nights feel quite close in the house though
cool in the open, so we carry out our camp beds
every night.
I have been warned to keep watch for snakes since
the rain. So every night as we prepare to rest 1
ask Maudie, “ Do you think there are any snakes
about? ” She laughs, then in sympathy becomes


serious. “ No, no snake; don’t you be frighten,
Nussa. I not let anytings hurt you; I got big
stick—kill ’em.”
The grass which so quickly sprang up after the
rain is just as quickly dying off again with the
heat of the sun. And the surface of the ground,
where the grass is dry, is covered with brown cater-
pillars, which are being scraped up into vessels by
the natives. They roast them on coals and eat them.
These caterpillars do not appear where the grass is
green and soft, but only where it has become dry.
Yesterday we used up our last bone, and to-day
hear that there is no goat in the local market. Some-
thing must be done, for there is a cool change, and
we are ready to eat anything that looks like meat.
A neighbour’s hen has visited us and made a nest
amongst some shavings which came up wrapped
around some bottles of lotion, and we have one egg
which we can share for supper; but what about
dinner first?
Even while we consider, the native boy of a neigh-
bour came up with a basket of fresh green beans, also
a little pat of butter, the first that we have seen for
months, with this simple message: “Jim been send
’em.’’ Exactly like the thoughtful thing Jim would
do, we thought.
Now we are right, hot salmon and beans.
But we must, in this climate, have some of the
latest supply of salmon that came by the last camel
team.


Away went Maudie for the fish while I prepared
the beans. She was a long time gone, and I went
out to watch for her. Presently she appeared with
not only the fish, but carrying something on a dish.
What could it be? The huge leg of a wild turkey,
steaming hot and nicely cooked, sent by our good
friend at the store, and with the North countryman's
simple message; “ George been send ’em/' said
Maudie.


Chapter VII
RETURNING SOUTH
TTOW we live for the coming of the mail-man
from the South, and how, since early morn-
ing, all eyes have been turned to the South where
the mail-man must pass through the gap in the
range. “ What is this ? ” some watcher calls, and
we shade our eyes and peer towards the gap once
more. Yes, at last we see five dark specks moving
through the gap. We strain our eyes and look again
to be sure that we are not deceived. No, we are not,
for soon we recognise the tired stride of the laden
camels swinging along with their creaking burdens
over that last mile to the settlement.
When they reach the general store the mail-man
and his native boy throw off the heavy goods and
their own personal belongings, and give any mes-
sages picked up between this and the head of the
railway. They then hasten on with His Majesty’s
mail to the post office two miles further on. There
they wait for the mail to be sorted and stamped and
bring it back to the store.
At the store several hands help in sorting out the
papers and parcels, and our trusty storekeeper takes
charge of the letter bag. Not till all the papers and
parcels are distributed does he open the letter bag.


i/3
0
z
01
a.
tu
u
<


The moment for which we have lived for the last
two weeks has arrived. The few white people stand
along the counter in a row, while our letters are
dealt out like a pack of cards. We grasp at each
one as it comes flying over the counter towards us,
till all are finished.
I have my letters, and so hurry off home to be
quietly with them for a few hours, passing through
a row of natives, who lean up against the shop
verandah posts getting all the news of the journey
from the mail-man’s native boy.
The week is then spent in talking over news from
the South and preparing our next mail to send away.
When it has gone South we just wait again, till once
more we strain our eyes to see those specks appearing
through the gap.
Two hundred and fifty miles South the drought
has quite broken, and it is now possible for horses
to pass over to get to Oodnadatta. My good friend,
Mrs. R. and her husband, are preparing to go to
Adelaide, and lam preparing to go with them, it
does not take us long, for we must take as little as
possible. The horses are to be considered in every
way. It is easy to part with some things, but I look
long at my precious books—must I part with them?
Yes, they are heavy. Well, plenty of people will
value them, and so I pass them on to others.
Eleven months since I came up on that track, and
now I am about to return.
The day for departure has arrived, and all is
ready. Three of us in the seat and luggage piled
high up behind.


Waving good-bye to those men who had proved
such friends to me, our lively horses were soon
speeding with us towards the gap in the range,
through which we must pass to go South.
During that first day I took mental note that
Mr. R. was being cramped for room, and hindered
GAP IN THE RANGE THROUGH WHICH WE PASS
in his management of the horses, so made up my
mind to think out some way of getting myself placed
in some other part of the buggy, and so leave him
more room.
After our first camp supper an idea came to me,
and I asked in a casual way: “ What about my riding
one of the horses to-morrow? ” “ Can you ride?


asked my friends. It is fifteen years since 1 tried,
but I suppose I can.”
It being settled that I should ride, the next thing
was to choose a horse from the outfit. ‘‘Winkie”
was my choice, and Winkie I was promised the next
day.
Now Winkie was a splendid mount, but I must
remember that he had been trained as a stockman's
horse, and I must not waste too much time in
mounting, but be prepared for him to go off at the
slightest touch of the stirrup.
The next morning 1 began by ignoring the offered
help of the native boy and put on the saddle myself,
just to show everybody that they need have no
anxiety about me. My friends were busy getting
their buggy team ready, and that being completed,
Mr. R. turned his attention to helping me into the
saddle. ” She is up,” I heard him exclaim. Good
old Winkie had entered into the proper spirit of the
occasion, and stood perfectly still while I mounted
from a fallen tree. However, there were a few final
touches needed. The saddle was a man’s, and the
stirrups had to be shortened. I was then given a
switch, which I was duly warned not to allow
Winkie to know about.
Now all was ready, and away swept the buggy in
the lead, I following next, and behind came the
native boy with the pack horses and remainder of
the outfit. Away we cantered. The weather was
perfect. We had our backs to the North and were
facing the South, and all seemed well.




And all was well for the first few miles, till we
overtook a herd of cattle being rounded up by
drovers. Winkie 'thought this little bit of cattle
chasing was too good to be missed, so he just tossed
his head and carried me wherever he liked. I grasped
the reins in one hand and the saddle in the other,
but forgot to keep the shadow of the switch out of
Winkie’s line of vision. Over the soft ground we
raced, till the drovers, taking in the situation,
quietened down their own horses.
Of course, they had no idea that a woman was
behind them riding, or they would have prepared
for it and taken their herd a little off the track.
It was a relief to get to the end of the first twenty
miles, so that we might rest and camp for the night.
The third day we reached Deep Well, eighty miles
on the way we had come, and so on over the country
I had travelled through on the journey North.
After another camp we were well on the way to
Marysville station. At this home we spent half an
hour talking with these kind, hospitable people, who
urged us to come in and rest and take tea. But tired
as we were, the day was passing, and we must press
on to where there is feed and water for the horses
before nightfall. We camped that night, and the
end of the next day found us once again in
the midst of the twenty miles of sand-hills. The
weather was very cold, but we were prepared for
cold weather, Mr. and Mrs. R. in their tent, and I
on the floor of the buggy, with a sheet of water-
proof material thrown over to keep off the heavy
dew.


The next evening at Horseshoe Bend we had a
little rain, but the sky cleared before we set off on
the twenty-one miles’ ride, which took us just five
hours.
It was becoming more urgent that we should
press on, as rain might come at any time and flood
the creeks, and so prevent our crossing. Towards
nightfall we drew up at Old Crown Point station,
a very pretty spot close to the crown point of the
mount.
We were startled in the night by hearing a few
drops of heavy rain, and strange sounds as. going bis
weary way, the North mail-man passed us with his
five camels.
d he slight rain had passed off in the morning,
and after a hasty breakfast we passed on by the old
deserted homestead, waving as we passed to a com-
pany of native women carrying buckets of water on
their heads from a well.
After camping at the Goyder crossing, we set out
at sunrise, and had the delightful experience of can-
tering over beautiful green fields all the way to the
new Crown Point homestead. No further need for
anxiety over grass for the horses now, for good rain
had fallen, and there was abundance of green. The
weather also was perfect, warm sunshine and keen
fresh air.
After resting for two days at the homestead we
set off again on another day’s journey of thirty
miles, passing by Charlotte Waters telegraph station.
Here we met again our old friends of the North


journey, and although we could not spare time to
go in, we were glad to accept the kindly offer of tea,
while I remained in the saddle and my friends in
their buggy. Passing on over stony ground, we
reached a nice fertile spot beside a creek, which was
a very pleasant camp, and to the joy of our native
boy there were plenty of lizards.
Passing on to the Blood’s Creek store for dinner,
we were warned that the creek we wished to cross
was full of water.
However, we pressed on over the last seven miles
which would bring us to Blood’s Creek station.
T wenty-seven miles my horse had carried me that
day, and at evening we found ourselves faced with
a swollen creek from the recent rain.
First the buggy passed over the stream, the horses
plunging through with water up to their backs. I
made haste to follow, tucking up my feet on the
saddle. I followed instructions, allowing Winkie to
choose his own way and get over without any direc-
tions from me. I was glad when he plunged up the
bank on the other side of the stream.
Here, however, I was confronted with another
difficulty—wild pigs. Winkie dreads wild pigs.
However, I managed to prevent his seeing them and
all passed off well.
Arrived at the homestead, we were given a warm
welcome. This is a perfectly delightful country
home, with many comforts inside and outside.
Flower garden, vegetable garden, and always an
abundance of water.




After staying here for two days our further
journey took us through beautiful country —a most
pleasant journey. Next night we camped six miles
north of Hamilton Bore station. Passing by the
homestead next day, we got a supply of meat and
fresh bread.
Our horses had now taken us three hundred
miles, and we must get them over this stony country
to where there is grass and water.
On Friday night, as we were in camp, it was a
pleasure to see the faithful animals eating up the
delicious fresh grass.
Saturday found us passing slowly over country
which had miles and miles of nothing but one stony
ridge after another, till we came within a few miles
of Oodnadatta, where we came upon a good road.
Cantering easily along on the faithful animal
which had brought me over so many miles,
which was, no doubt, as tired as 1 was, the faithful
Winkie stumbled and fell.
As the buggy, with two fresh horses in, had passed
over a rise, my plight was not known till Mr. R.,
looking back, saw my riderless steed with dangling
reins following the buggy. Jumping from the buggy
and catching the horse, he led him back to look for
me, and was relieved to find me running after my
mount and quite unhurt.
My friends wanted me to come into the buggy,
but I had no mind to make my entry into Oodna-
datta other than seated upon Winkie.


There is nothing more to tell of this journey,
except our meeting just outside the village the camel
mail carrying mails which had arrived at the rail
head on the previous night from the South; drovers
with cattle to be trucked on Monday, and other
THE CAMEL MAR
drovers with sheep and goats, strings of camels,
teams of donkeys with white men, native men and
Afghans.
A turn in the road brought us in sight of Oodna-
datta and in direct touch with—home.




