

THE SEARCH FOR 8 R
M r I ,■ m/m ¥ M £ ; B - K ' : I *, \* A fMm i I


■
*


X.'.
i :^l
■ •• % - J »_
THE
SEARCH FOR THE GOLDEN BOOMERANG
Dear Boys and Girls
This is your Golden Boomerang Book all about
Australia and Australians. I think we Australians
know onlv too little about this wonderful country of
ours. My staff and I have had a great deal of
pleasure in searching through libraries and old rec-
ords, gathering information about the Aboriginal
Legends and Customs, and we have enjoyed every
minute of our work in preparing "The Search for the
Golden Boomerang" both as a radio serial and 3$ a
book. We do hope that you have many hours of
enjoyment from the stories and pictures in the pages
that follow. Yours sincerely,
"The Search for the Golden
Boomerang " both as a
radio serial and in the form
presented in this boolc, is
the work of Miss Lorna
Bingham of the
George Edwards Production
Company.
LORNA BINGHAM
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney, for
transmission through the post as a Book.
Printed and Published by
WINN & C 0.,. Printers,
Balfour Street, Sydney.


CHAPTER I
uckonic; and The Golden Boomerang
Long, long ago there lived in the Great South Land a mighty spirit. He
ruled over the simple people of the land, and those who were good, he rewarded,
and made their tribes flourish, but those who disobeyed his laws he punished
by droughts and fires, floods and pestilence.
As time went on, some of the people came to believe in other spirits,
and so the voice of the great ruling spirit was heard less often in the land,
and the hardships grew greater, and food became more scarce. And then, at
last, came the Great Drought, wherein many tribes all but perished. f
To such a tribe belonged the lad Tuckonie. It grieved Tuckonie very much to see his tribe unhappy
and in want, and so one evening he went to his father and asked if he might go in search of the Golden
Boomerang, and so end their tribe's troubles forever.
His father was proud that Tuckonie should come and make this request of him, but many perils lay
in the path of those who would go on this hazardous search, and so he bade his son consider carefully. The
lad was brave, and would not be denied, and so eventually, Narkunda, his father, sought the aid of
Maroubra, the Medicine Man of the tribe...
When he heard of Tuckonie's request, Maroubra decided to consult his spirit ancestors. He drew
a magic circle in the sand at his feet and cast into it magic bones and hair from the heads of dead warriors,
then, lifting his voice in a mighty chant, he called upon his ancestor Bingara.
Soon a great silence descended upon the camp and out of this silence came a voice saying, "Send
forth the boy, Tuckonie, 0 men of the Arunta Tribe, and he shall succeed, because he is pure and brave of
heart, and sound of limb! He shall go forth alone, but a companion shall be sent to him and together
they shall travel to the strange land which lies beyond the Sacred Hills. Many dangers lie in wait, and
when the boy shall have passed safely through the first danger, he shall return to his tribe that he may
be initiated into the ranks of the warriors, then shall he set out once more, and will not return until he
has found the Golden Boomerang. I have spoken."
When the warriors heard this mighty voice there was much rejoicing, and they whirled their magic
bull-roarers round their heads until the air rang with the sound of them.
The next day, Tuckonie set out on his journey but when he had gone some miles through the bush,
he discovered waggon tracks in the sand, and he eventually came upon a white man and his wife, who
were very much distressed as they had run out of water. They told Tuckonie that they had left their
little daughter, Peggy, sleeping beneath the shade of a tree, while they had gone in search of water, but
they had been unsuccessful.
Tuckonie, however, was not dismayed by this, and he led them to a place in the sand and asked
them to help him dig. After a little while, clear water came seeping through into the hole. John Harvey
and his wife were very grateful and asked Tuckonie to accompany them back to the waggon.
On the way back, they stopped to awaken little Peggy, but to their horror, close to her was curled
a deadly black snake. John Harvey looked quickly around for a heavy stick with which to kill the
snake, but before he had found one, Tuckonie leapt fonvard like a swift, dark shadow, and seizing the deadly
snake by the tail, lifted it quickly and cracked it in the air like a whip...and the snake was dead in a
moment.
When they awakened Peggy and told her what had happened, she was very impressed and grateful,
and decided to make the young black boy, Tuckonie, her special friend.
Later, when they were all back in the waggon, Mr. Harvey found out from Tuckonie all about the
quest for the Golden Boomerang, and he, in his turn, told Tuckonie that he was looking for gold.
That night, Tuckonie said goodbye to his newly found white friends, and went back to this tribe,
telling them that he had killed a monstrous black snake, and Maroubra decided that this was the first danger
safely passed, so he asked Chief Narkunda to let the boy's initiation take place upon the following day.
That night at sun-down, all the warriors of the great Arunta Tribe arrayed themselves in their
feathers and tribal fineries, and with their bodies gaily painted, formed a circle in which Tuckonie stood
ready to undergo the t n st of of pain.
When the chants of the warriors and the whirring of the bull-roarers rose to its height. . .Maroubra
stood up and faced the young lad. Tuckonie opened his mouth, and with one blow from his Nulla-nulla.
Maroubra knocked out one of Tuckonie's teeth. Tuckonie then closed his mouth without shedding a
tear or making one cry of pain and all the warriors shouted with joy and hailed him as a brave.
When this ceremony was over, Narkunda, the chief, gave orders that a feast should be prepared
immediately, to which Tuckonie's new white friends must be invited. Gladly the warriors brought forward
the day's catch; there was a young kangaroo, and two young wallabies, some snakes and a wild duck, and soon
the smell of roasting meat and yams was making everyone present feel remarkably hungry, and all sat round
to enjoy this feast.
Suddenly, there was a swishing sound, and a brightly polished spear shot through the air and
buried itself in the ground at the feet of little Peggy Harvey, where she sat with her parents enjoying the
unusual sight.. .Angrily John Harvey pulled the spear from the ground, and then he discovered, on the


blade, a carved figure of a horrible monster.. .half wild-cat, half man...it was the figure of Ng rui Moch
...an ancient spirit monster of the aboriginals.
When the warriors saw the figure of Ng'rui Moch carved upon the blade of the spear the.v all fell
silent for they were very much afraid. Peggy's father stood up and told Narkunda that he must send
his warriors out immediately to search for the person who had thrown the spear so near his little daughter.
The warriors strode out into the bush, but, presently, they returned saying that there were no footprints
upon the ground.
"Then how did the spear fall?" asked John Harvey.
Narkunda fixed his great brown eyes upon him and said. "White Man, there are things which we
believe, that you do not. I think the spear was thrown by the power of the ancient spirit, Ng rui Moch.
"And who is this Ng'rui Moch, Narkunda?" said Peggy's mother.
Then Maroubra, the Medicine Man, stepped forward and said. "I will tell you his history, N\ hite
people, so that in future you may take care that you do not anger him '
And this is the story that Maroubra, the Medicine Man told the Harveys.
"Lonf lono- when the world was a young place and the tribes of the dark people were great
and powerful, there "lived a strange being.. .half man, and half wild-cat, and he was named Ng'rui Moch.
He was much' bigger than the man of today, and because he was evil, the tribes stood much m fear 'of
him But try as"they might, they were never able to overcome him in battle. However, as time went on,
and more of their people were stolen away to be his slaves, the tribes decided that if they couldn't conquer
him by fair means, then, they must do so by treachery. So, a council of the Elders was called, and these
wise ones hit upon a plan which was this. That, when dusk was falling they should hide among the
trees and bushes that grew by the drinking pool and wait for Ng'rui Moch to come that way to quench
his thirst. Then, as he lay flat upon the ground and pressed his face to the cool waters to drink, they
would fali upon him and kill him by plunging their spears into his back. Accordingly, when Yhi, the Sun,
crept to rest beyond the blue hills, Ng'rui Moch came down to drink and the warriors leapt upon him
and plunged their spears into him. Then they returned to their camp. However, two hours before
sunrise, the dark people went again to the drinking pool but to their surprise he had vanished. But
a voice in the wind whispered, 'Look up,' and, on looking towards the heavens, they saw a bright red
star glowing fiercely in the sky It was his spirit set forever more amongst the stars. Then, a young
member of the tribe saw strange footprints in the sand. They followed these footprints and they led them
to a dim cave, wherein crouched a fierce, wild cat, the first of its kind that had set foot in this lovely land.
By the power of his magic, Ng'rui Moch, as he died, had changed his bodj into this animal.
"And in time," continued Maroubra, "this wild cat had many children and they were all known as the
sons and daughters of Ng'rui Modi."
"But if he's dead," said Mrs. Harvey, "where is the need to fear him?"
"Because he is now a spirit," said Maroubra, "and partakes of the power of a spirit, and we believe
that one night in the year, when the moon shines full, Ng rui Moch walks once moie through the land.
John"Harvey smiled, "And I suppose you're going to tell me, Maroubra, that Ng'rui Moch has
thrown that spear."
Maroubra looked at him gravely. "Not so, White Man. 1 believe that the spear was thrown by
one of his people.*^-"*
"W T hat people are these?" said Mrs. Harvey.
Then the great Chief Narkunda spoke up.. ."Strange stories have been heard in this land over the
last few years, White Woman. They say that far to the North-west, between the Land of Spirits and the
Sacred Hills of Byamee, there dwells a strange tribe, whose people have taken the name of Ng'rui Moch,
and it is said that Ng'rui Moch himself walks among them as their Chief."
"I see," said Mr. Harvey, "then you think it is one of these people who threw that spear?"
"Yes, White Man, that is what I think," said Narkunda.
"But," said Mrs. Harvey. "Why would they wish to harm my little daughter?"
Narkunda looked grave. "I do not think they wish to harm her, White Woman. I think it is a sign
that the spirit of Ng'rui Moch wishes to pay her special honour.
"Or else it is a sign that he wishes to claim her as one of his own people," said Maroubra breaking in.
"I think also that our young lad, Tuckonie here, may see the face of Ng'rui Moch before he is very much older!
He goes te seek the Golden Boomerang and it is said that the Golden Boomerang is hidden somewhere
amongst the Sacred Hills of Byamee, where there is much gold in its natural state.
"Oh," said Mr. Harvey, "Are you sure of this, because that's what I'm looking for."
"All people who have been there say that there is gold in plenty, White Man."
"Well in that case," said Mr. Harvey, "I think we will travel with little Tuckonie towards the
Sacred Hills."
"Then you must be prepared for great hardships," said Narkunda, "for many perils lie in the
way of those who travel towards the Sacred Hills. It is said that the great Spirit Byamee himself dwells
in the clouds, and that no man may approach his dwelling place who is not brave and true."
"Well I think I'm as brave as any other man," said John Harvey, "and I'm sure your son, Tuckonie,
has a brave and noble heart. So perhaps we shall reach that land in spite of its dangers."
"First let us have our feast," said Narkunda, "and then a great corroboree in honour of the spirits
whom we wish to guard you on your way."


CHAPTER II
hitcj Magic and Blacky
Now, after the feast and the corroboree were over, John Harvey and
his wife and their little daughter, Peggy, went back to their waggon to put
everything in readiness for the journey which they would make the next day.
Then Maroubra, the Medicine Man, called Tuckonie to him.
"Tuckonie, my boy," said the old man, "I have three precious gifts
for you, and, before I give them, I will tell you something of their uses.
Here are three magic berries. He who eats the first may enter through the
Gates of Sleep into the Land of Visions, and strange and wonderful dreams
will be his. In them he will see the faces of his enemies, and the faces of his friends, and from that he will
recognise them when he meets them again in the world of men."
Then he drew forth the second berry. "This, my boy," he said, "is an even greater gift, for he
who eats this berry will hear the voices of the spirits of the bush. He will understand the sound of the
winds and the rippling of the waters will have a meaning for him, and no secret of the bush shall remain
unknown to him! And here is the most powerful gift of all. But it is not to be eaten until the time is ripe.
When the berry turns a bright red then you may eat it. And then you will hear, in music like thunder,
the greatest voice in the world...the voice of the all powerful Byamee."
Tuckonie thanked the old man joyfully for these three wonderful gifts, and, tucking them carefully
into a little pouch, he said goodnight and went quietly to his sleeping place.
Next morning Tuckonie went to his Father to say farewell. But he saw that his Father looked
troubled and questioned him as to what had happened. Narkunda put his hand fondly upon the boy's
shoulder, and gazed into his eyes.
"My son," he said, "the scouts of our tribe have brought me very bad news which concerns you.
Moodgee, the evil one, the wandering Medicine Man, has heard that you are going in search of the Golden
Boomerang, and because he knows that if you found it, our tribe would be the most powerful in the land,
he has made bad magic to kill you, my son, so that you will never complete your search."
When he heard these terrible words, poor little Tuckonie felt very distressed indeed, but gave no
sign of fear, for this is the way a young warrior of the Arunta Tribe should behave, especially the son
of a Chief.
"I have asked Maroubra if he can make magic strong enough to save you from the magic of the wicked
Moodgee," said Narkunda, "but Moodgee's magic is greater than Maroubra's magic and so he can do
nothing.''
"Very well then, Father," said Tuckonie, as he folded his strong little arms across his breast. "But
if I must die, I promise you I will die bravely so that I may honour my Father and my tribe even in death."
"Well spoken, my son," said Narkunda, "and I am proud of you. My love shall follow you into
the other world, where, one day, I will join you."
At this moment, the young lad was seized with a very bad pain, and it was all he could do to prevent
himself from cowering to the ground. As his little white teeth bit into his lips and his eyes grew wide
with pain the rumble of waggon wheels was heard, soon the Harveys came striding into the camp.
"Well Tuckonie, are you ready?" said Mr. Harvey. Then he saw that the lad was in pain and
asked the Chief what was the matter with him, and he was told of the bad magic of Moodgee.
"There's no magic that can make a boy die,"he said. "Let him rest a while and he'll be better presently."
"White Man, you speak of things you do not understand," said Narkunda. "We know that the magic
of Moodgee is powerful and that it will kill my son, for Moodgee is the greatest Medicine Man in the Land."
"Oh John," said Mrs. Harvey, looking very worried, "the boy does seem to be in great pain."
John Harvey turned to her and said quietly, "He's in pain, but it isn't any magic that's causing
it. It's simply indigestion. But we must do something about it, for these natives believe in curses and
magic, and, once a boy or a man has it firmly fixed in his mind that he is enchanted and will die, well
then he will die, unless we can make him think differently."
"Then we must set to work at once and make him think differently," said Mrs. Harvey.
"That's just what I'm going to do," said John. Then, John Harvey put up his hand and addressed
the tribe, saying;
"Warriors of the Arunta! Great sorrow has descended upon you because you believe that death
by magic will be the fate of the young chieftain, Tuckonie. But take heart, all of you, for I also am a
Medicine Man and my magic is more powerful than Moodgee's magic and I will not allow this thing to
happen."
And so saying, Harvey drew a small camera from his pocket.
"Behold, this is the small black box where the White Medicine Man keeps his magic," he said.
The warriors' eyes glittered with interest, and they watched eagerly as Mr. Harvey led young
Tuckonie to a place in the sun and then stood off a few paces and levelled the camera.


"Now warriors," he said, "I am going to draw the spirit of Tuckonie here into the black box, where
it will he healed and made well again. Then my wife and I will go to our waggon and prepare the magic
water. From the box I will draw forth the enchanted paper and dip it in the magic waters. After this 1
will place it in a small frame and put it in the sun and I will call upon Yhi the Sun-god to help me with
my magic. At a given time I will take the magic paper from the frame and, if the image of your son
appears upon it then you will know that my magic is the greatest in the land and Tuckonie will be saved."
And, saying this, Mr. Harvey, looking very solemn all the time, proceeded to take a snap shot of Tuckonie,
while Peggy and her Mother had to hide their faces so that the warriors wouldn't see them laughing.
After the photograph was taken they went to the waggon and in due time, the photograph was
exposed to the sun. When Mr. Harvey thought that enough time had passed, he raised his hands and stopped
them, commanding them to be silent. Then, amidst the hush, he pulled the funniest faces and murmured
solemnly. "Abra Cadabra, Oh By Jingo."
Then Maroubra, the Medicine Man, called out in a loud voice to his ancestor, Bingara. "I call
upon you, Bingara, my mighty ancestor, to help this magic."
Not to he outdone, John Harvey twisted up his eyes and said..."l call upon you, my mighty an-
cestor, Santa Claus, to help this magic! Abra Cadabra, it is done!" And so saying, he took the paper
from the frame and held it before the astonished eyes of Narkunda, saying, "Look, Great Chief, the image
of your son appears upon the paper. He is saved!"
Now, when Narkunda saw this, he was quite overcome, and he knelt with one knee upon the
ground, and placed John Harvey's hand upon his head, saying.. ."White Man, I am your friend for life. If
ever you are in trouble call upon me, and I and my warriors will fight with you to the death."
Meantime, little Tuckonie, who had quite recovered by now from his indigestion, was feeling very
well, and so he knelt beside Peggy and placed her hand on his head and said that he would be her
friend for life, and that no matter what dangers she might pass through, he would go with her and protect
her. And Peggy thanked him nicely, for she liked Tuckonie very much.
After all this was over, the Harveys told Narkunda that they really must start upon their journey.
And so, Narkunda, in his gratitude, ordered his warriors to bring them gifts of possum skin rugs, and
snake skin bags and pouches, and some fine steaks of Kangaroo meat. The goodbyes were said, and Nar-
kunda gave his blessing to his son, Tuckonie, and off the little party started on their journey.
By mid-day they were well on their way, but, as the sun streamed down from the middle of the sky,
it became very hot indeed, and, when they passed by a lovely river where shady Kurragong and Bumble
trees grew, Peggy asked if they might stop a little while and swim in the river. To this Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey willingly agreed, so Peggy put on her trim little costume of scarlet wool, and, with Tuckonie,
plunged into the cool waters.
Mrs. Harvey started to make a billy of tea, and Mr. Harvey decided to take a photograph, and with
this intention, he went to the shelf in the waggon, where he had placed the camera, but, to his surprise, it
had gone. This was a very strange thing, as John Harvey knew it had been there a minute ago.
His wife told him that she had not taken the camera. So Mr. Harvey called the children out of the river
and asked if they had seen it, and again the answer was no.
"Then there's only one thing for it, Mary," said Mr. Harvey to his wife, "the camera has been stolen,
and what's more, it has been stolen right under our very eyes."
"But this is ridiculous, John," said Mary, "if anyone had come near here we would have seen them."
Then they noticed that Tuckonie was peering closely at the rock upon which they stood. He ex-
plained that he was looking for tracks. There were none on the rock, of course, but in the soft ground
nearby, he found them and followed them a short distance into the bush, where they stopped, and there,
thrown roughly in the sand, was a little image of Ng'rui Moch.
"It is one of the Ng'rui Moch tribe who has stolen the magic box, my White Friends," said Tuck-
onie, "and I believe that it is Moodgee."
"Well just wait until I come face to face with Moodgee," said John Harvey angrily, "I'll let him
know what it's all about."
"But you do not know him, White Man. You have never seen his face and neither have I. He
comes and goes noiselessly, like Ooloobalooey, the Snake."
"Well if I see anyone with my camera," said Mr. Harvey, "I'll want to know all about him."
Meantime, Peggy and her Mother were looking very mystified.
"How is it that the tracks stop here?" said Mrs. Harvey. "Anyone would think that the
thief had vanished into the air."
"I don't believe that," said Mr. Harvey, "and I intend to solve this mystery some day. But for the
present the camera is gone and there's no use worrying about it."
So the little party had their tea and a swim, and then went on their way, and at night they camped
many miles from the place where Tuckonie had lived with his tribe.
It was a warm drowsy night and, after they had had a good meal of grilled Kangaroo with some lovely
pancakes, they all felt very happy, and so, off they went to bed.
While Mr. and Mrs. Harvey were preparing the bunks in the waggon, Tuckonie showed Peggy the
magic berries which Maroubra had given him, and, because she was his friend, Tuckonie promised to
share the berries with her. And so, just to put them to the test, they decided to eat the first berry there
and then and soon afterwards they were sleeping soundly. '
Now, while the night hours were dancing by on their soft feet, a little breeze approached Tuckonie,


and ruffled his hair, waking him. Then the breeze went round the waggon, crept under the canvas, and
ruffled Peggy's curls waking her, and both children found that they couldn t go to sleep again. So
Peer cry got up and put on her pretty little wrap, and went out and, when she saw that Tuckonie was also
awake she was very pleased. Now as the children were talking, Tuckonie saw a thin wisp of silvery smoke
arising from the bushes some distance away. So, taking Peggy by the hand, he went to investigate As
they approached the spot from which the smoke came, they were surprised to see an old. old man sitting
before a fire, on which he was cooking a strange mixture.
"Why, there is an ancient warrior of my people,"' said Tuckonie.
"No," said Peggy, "he is a dear old man belonging to my people."
"But he's black," said Tuckonie.
"He's white," said Peggy.
"You are both ri"ht mv children," said the old man, smiling kindly, "for I am the Maker of Dreams."
"But how is it that you seem to me to be white like Daddy and yet to Tuckonie you seem to be one
of his people?" asked Peggy. «< j
"Because lam made of that stuff of which dreams are made, said the old man, and everyone sees
me according to his dreams." ~
0 ... 1 » J IOH , .A DAcnrt
"And did you make all the dreams we've ever dreamt? said Peggy.
"Yes." replied the Maker of Dreams, "and all the dreams that ever will be dreamt. But follow me
Children and I will take you through the Silver Gate into the Land of Visions."
And so saving the Old Man got up and led the way through the Silver Gate. For a little while they
went on. then suddenly a misty cloud appeared before them which gradually grew more dense and soon the
Children' saw that something strange was forming inside the cloud. As they watched, the mist fell away
and where it had been, appeared the figure of a giant rat with his eye blazing.
Tuckonie gasped. "Why, I know that figure," he said, "it is Biggoon the giant water rat, who lived
on earth long ago and of whom our people tell many stories."
Just as Tuckonie finished saying this, Biggoon. who had been standing upright upon his two hind ieet,
started to rush quickly towards the children. Tuckonie and Peggy were both terrified and taking each
other's hand they started to run as quickly as they could. But the Maker of Dreams placed himself in their
path and help up his hand. , , ~
"Don't be afraid Children," he said, "here everything is a dream and dreams cannot hurt you.
So Tuckonie and Peggy stood where they were, because they trusted the kind old Maker of Dreams
but they were still very frightened, as Biggoon the giant rat was approaching them "very quickly. It
was alfthey could do to stand still, but to their surprise, when Biggoon came up to them he passed right
through them, just as though he had been made of air. Then looking up Tuckonie and Peggy saw a huge
frog coming towards them.
"Who is that Tuckonie?" said Peggy, "do you know him too?"
"Yes," said Tuckonie, "that is Tiddalick, the Frog, the Maker of Droughts. Many, many years ago
he caused a great drought in the land by drinking up all the water and my people were veiy much at'iaid,
because they thought they would die from thirst.. 'Unless we can make Tiddalick give back the water he has
stolen,' they said, 'our race will perish.' But he refused at first and settled down to go to sleep. But
there was one amongst my people who was very wise indeed and he addressed the tribe, saving. Theie is
only one wav in which you can make Tiddalick give back the water, and that is to make him laugh. So all
the dark people and all the animals in the land went up to where Tiddalick was falling asleep and they
danced and danced and made such fanny faces that Tiddalick started to laugh and once he started lie
couldn't stop and soon a great stream of water poured forth from his mouth and rolled across the land into the
lakes and into the dry beds of the rivers, until there was water in plenty again and the great drought was
broken."
' "Oh well then," said Peggy, "we needn't be frightened of Tiddalick, if all he does is laugh."
"You need be afraid of nothing, my Child, not even of Ng rui Moch, and look, he is coming this vaj.
And then Peggy, with a little shiver of horror, saw the giant V ild Cat Man coming them.
He was indeed one of the most terrible looking monsters which you could ever have imagined. But the
old Maker of Dreams stood by the children and placed a hand on each of their shoulders and they took hold
of their courage and stood still while the terrible image passed through them.
After this came many more visions.. .there was Bralgah the Dancer, who was changed into the Native
Companion,— Koob-boor the Koala Bear Gayardaree the Platypus and many others all the strange
creatures of whom the Aboriginal People had ever dreamt and put into their legends. And then the
Maker of Dreams took the Children a little further into the Land of \ isions, and there, to their great surprise,
they saw their waggon standing near a river, just as it had stood the day the camera was stolen.
And then the Children saw the sinister figure of a Medicine Man creep silently up to the waggon.
He entered it and took Mr. Harvey's camera from the shelf —then silently crept away again, but not before
the Children had had a good look at his face.
"I have shown you this vision Children," said the Maker of Dreams, "so that you will be able to
recognise Moodgee, your enemy, when you meet him in real life.
Then the scene appeared to change. The country grew wild and in the distance were many moun-
tains, and into the dream came a host of strange people, and they were dressed and painted in the same way
as Moodgee.


"They look like Medicine Men," said Tnckonie, his eyes round with wonder, "but they are strange
ones.
The Maker of Dreams nodded his head. "Yes. my son, they are Medicine Men, and they are part of
a dream which belongs to a very old man, whom one day you will most likely meet. Yes, and you will take
part in his dream, too."
Peggy laughed. "That sounds funny," she said, "how can real, live people take part in a dream?"
"When the dreamer attempts to make his dream come true," said the Old Man, "many people must
take part in it, and sometimes against their will. That may happen to you, but I want you to remember,
never to be afraid, for you will escape all the perils which lie in your way."
Then Moodgee and his Medicine men vanished, in the same way as all the other dreams.
"I am afraid you must go now children," said the Maker of Dreams, "for Yhi, the sun, is rising from
his bed, beyond the mountains, and soon the world will be flooded with his light."
So saying, he led the kiddies back to the little silver gate, and after saying goodbye, and thanking
him, the children left him and crept quietly back to the waggon to sleep.
The next thing Peggy knew, was her mother shaking her by the shoulder.
"For goodness sake, darling, wake up," she was saying, "I've let you sleep in terribly late, and you
still seem sleepy."
"Oh yes Mummy," said Peggy, "because I've only been asleep for such a little while. Tuckonie and
I had the most wonderful adventures in the night. We met the Maker of Dreams, and he took us to the land
of Visions."
Mrs. Harvey laughed. "You've certainly been to the Land of Dreams, darling, but I don't see why
you should be so sleepy after it."
But although Peggy and Tuckonie insisted that they had really met the Maker of Dreams, and that he
was not just a dream himself, Mr. and Mrs. Harvey only laughed, and refused to believe them.
Shortly after breakfast, they started on their journey again, and by twilight, that day, they had gone
very many miles. While Mrs. Harvey prepared the meal that night, Peggy and Tuckonie took a walk
through the bush. Suddenly Tuckonie placed his hand upon Peggy's arm.
"S'sh, Peggy," he said, "do not go any further."
"Why, what is the matter?" asked Peggy.
"Look ahead there," said Tuckonie, "there is smoke rising from beyond those bushes. You stay
here, and I will creep up and look through the bush."
So saying, Tuckonie glided silently away, and when he came to the bush which was nearest the smoke,
ie knelt down and carefully parted some of the leaves. Soon he was creeping quickly and silently back to her.
"Peggy," he said, excitedly, "it is Moodgee!"
"Well, what are we going to do," said Peggy.
"We will go back to the waggon, and tell your father," said Tuckonie.
So the children hurried back to the waggon, and told Mr. and Mrs. Harvey what they had seen.
Now, when John Harvey learned that Moodgee was there, close by, he was very pleased indeed.
"I'm going to tackle that old rascal," he said.
"Oh John, be careful," said Mrs. Harvey, calling after him.
"Yes, yes White Man," said Tuckonie racing after him, "You must go carefully, for Moodgee is
wicked man, and might try to spear you."
"Yes," said Mr. Harvey, "Perhaps it would be "wiser to creep on him, silently."
"Then, do what I do," said Tuckonie, "and that way you will make no noise."
So, being careful to place his feet upon the ground very softly and quietly, Mr. Harvey followed
Tuckonie to the bush, then they both knelt and parted the leaves, and there was Moodgee. They were just
in time to see him place a horrible mask of a wild-cat right over his head.
Then from a little possum skin pouch, which he wore on a girdle around his waist, Modgee took a
handful of dried-up herbs and leaves and threw them on the fire. Then, waving his arms he chanted.
"Woe to the lad, Tuckonie, who would find the Golden Boomerang and take it from its hiding place!
May evil enter him. . .his eyes grow dim. . .may his heart grow heavy! May the sickness take him...
and may he die !''
"Oh White Man, White Man," said Tuckonie in anxious tones, "Moodgee had made bad magic
against me again. Soon I will grow very ill."
"Don't talk rubbish," whispered John Harvey, "I've told you before that my magic is greater than
Moodgee's magic, and didn't I promise you never to let you die on account of Moodgee's magic?"
"Yes, White Man," said Tuckonie, "but I feel the sickness descending upon me now. Mv eyes are
growing dim, just as Moodgee said they would.''
"You're just letting your imagination run away with you, my boy" said Mr. Harvey.
Then suddenly he placed his hand to his head. "Why, that's strange," he said, "a darkness seems to
be gathering before my eyes too, and my head is quite dizzy."
"It is the magic, White Man," said Tuckonie.
"Nothing of the kind," said Mr. Harvey, "it is those herbs he threw on to the fire. They must be
some sort of drug...we must get away from here quickly."
And so saying, he tried to rise, but to his horror, his legs gave wav under him and he fell to the
ground again.


uckonie.and
1 TheSeidlitz Powder
As the strange dizziness came over Mr. Harvey he saw Moodgee, the
Medicine Man, take the film from the camera and hold it over the fire. Making
a tremendous effort he rose to his feet and confronted Moodgee.
"Where did you get that camera?" he said.
But Moodgee only laughed. "You fool White Man. Do you think that
I did not know you were on the other side of the bush. I made the sleeping
magic for you. It will not hurt me because I wear this mask. Now you and Tuckonie will sleep until I
am a long way from here. You will never catch me, for I am Moodgee, the greatest Medicine Man of all!"
John Harvey became angry tried to lift his arm to grab Moodgee, but it was no use. The
CHAPTER 111
- '
John Harvey became angry and tried to lift his arm to grab Moodgee, but it was no use. The
effect of the sleeping magic was too great and he fell to the ground alongside Tuckonie, and, as Moodgee
made off, both were sleeping soundly.
Now all this time Mrs. Harvey and Peggy were waiting anxiously at the caravan for Mr. Harvey
and Tuckonie to return.
I wonder what could have happened to them," said Mrs. Harvey.
"I wonder what could have happened to them," said Mrs. Harvey.
"I think we ought to go into the bush and look for them," replied 1
think we ought to go into the bush and look for them," replied Peggy.
They decided to make a search and they set off from the caravan in the direction Mr. Harvey and
Tuckonie had taken. Soon they came upon the spot where Moodgee had put the sleeping herbs on the
fire and there they discovered Mr. Harvey and Tuckonie fast asleep.
"Wake up, John," said Mrs. Harvey, vigourouslv shaking her husband by the shoulder.
John Harvey opened his eyes slowly.
"Why what's the matter," he said drowsily. Then he realised that he had fallen asleep and that
the wicked Moodgee had escaped.
The little party staggered back to the camp, Mrs. Harvey supporting her husband, and Peggy
helping the sleepy Tuckonie.
WTien they reached the caravan, there to their great surprise, was the stolen camera on the
caravan steps.
"Look," said Peggy, "there's our camera!"
"Moodgee is working magic again," said Tuckonie. "He has made the camera come back by magic
and he is making me feel bad too. Oh! Oh!" And Tuckonie groaned and looked very miserable indeed.
M f \
"Nonsense," said Mr. Harvey, "if you feel sick it is probably the effects of the sleeping drug.
And Moodgee can't return the camera by magic. He must have been here himself. I'll wager we can find
his tracks round about here somewhere."
And with that they set about to find some trace of Moodgee.
Naturally it was Tuckonie with his keen eyesight who found the tracks.
"You are right, White Man," said Tuckonie. "Moodgee has been here. These are his tracks."
"Moodgee must have put the camera here while Mummy and I were looking for you and Tuckonie,"
said Peggy. y
* \ T ||>
"Well," said Mr. Harvey, "that's that. Moodgee was here. Now what about a cup of tea. I feel
I need it.'\
But Tuckonie refused the tea, he just lay down on the ground and cried. "Ooh, the pain.
It is Moodgee's magic. Tuckonie is dying."
"Good gracious me," said Mrs. Harvey to her husband, "the boy is looking really ill. Whatever
Moodgee put you to sleep with must be effecting his little stomach."
"Maybe he is a little off-colour," replied Mr. Harvey, "I don't feel the best myself, but I think
it is more fear of Moodgee's magic than anything else, that is upsetting the lad."
"Then you must do something for him," said Mrs. Harvey. '


' S W/f ■ - | ■ j
4N 4ft ®F YM ppT
riVjH^V
mffifflli ■ < a HV jJ mmnffir,
iv, 4g*m~ I j Nf i
Hipp' yjf k\l yVylvw
[See page 2}
The Initiation of Tuckonie.


Ki / Ci I - t
gMOfe --yftgfl. J K f | i . . W-^
;--• SL Mg' " « ' ,cr-?*~~ •
* \ V I ? •
8 i , X
|j||| . ' : '
yT ~ t. ■
■U/ \ w \,* / BBWBSi^Mrii^.
ffr L / —it sp / "*T _^^dw|
: : ~'. id J*^H5
m j J7
isSSF
ff* S: -
* _^^«-*.jr ; -" ff • 5. 5/ ' Vv» Ijfcr. >
[See page 10]
The Meeting with Mike.


"What about a little more camera magic?" said Mr. Harvey.
Then turning to Tuckonie he said.
"Tuckonie, you know that my magic is greater than Moodgee's. I am going to make you better
with the black box magic."
Mr. Harvey picked up the camera and inserted a roll of film.
"Here Tuckonie. You stand in front of the black box like you did once before. By my magic I will
make you image appear on the shiny paper, and then you will be better again. Only, this time your image
will be white instead of black."
Mr. Harvey intended to take a photo of Tuckonie. develop the film, and show Tuckonie the negative
which would, naturally, show black as white, and white as black.
"But. White Man, how can T be white on the shiny paper, if I am really black?" asked Tuckonie.
"Ah!" exclaimed Mr. Harvey, "that is because this is very special magic indeed."
But, alas, when the photo was taken and the film developed, it was a complete blank. Mr. Harvey
tried another film, and another, but with the same alarminsr result.
Poor Tuckonie was completely beside himself with woe.
"There must be something wronsr with the camerß." whispered Mrs. Harvev to her husband.
John Harvey examined the camera carefully and then he discovered why Moodgee had returned it.
The box of the camera had been pricked in many places with something- sharp like a pin and these little
holes had let in the light, spoilt the films, and ruined the White Man's magic.
Tuckonie rolled over on the ground crying "Oh. the pain. The pain in my inside. I am dying."
"What will we do?" whispered Mr. Harvey. "This is terrible."
"Haven't we got any other magic?" asked Peggy.
Mrs. Harvey had a bright idea. "I've got it," she said. "Give Tuckonie a Seidlitz powder."
"Well now, that's a grand idea," said Mr. Harvey. "A Seidlitz powder will look like very won-
derful magic indeed."
Mrs. Harvey searched in a little cupboard in the caravan, and produced a familiar tin of Seidlitz
powders. From the tin John Harvey took a white packet and a blue packet. Then he went outside and
spoke to Tuckonie.
"Tuckonie, it is the wrong moon for the black box magic. But I have some other magic here the
most wonderful magic you have ever seen. Part of my magic is in this little white packet and part is in
this little blue packet. I am going to put both in this glass of water and call upon some great spirits to
have a corroboree in the glass. Then you will drink the water while the corroboree is taking place, and
the great spirits will make you well, and Moodgee will not harm you."
Tuckonie stopped groaning and came over to the caravan steps. He looked hopefully at the glass
of water and the white and blue packets.
Then Mr. Harvey poured the contents of the blue packet in the glass of water and stirred it with a
teaspoon, murmuring mysteriously:
"Abra Cadabra, 0 by Jingo, Eenie Meenie Miney Mo Catch Tuckonie by the toe. Now for the
white magic here we go!"
Then with an impressive flourish, he poured the contents of the white packet into the mixture and
fizz —up bubbled the water as the Seidlitz powder had its effect.
"Here, drink all this quickly while the corroboree is on," said Mr. Harvey as he handed the
foaming glass to Tuckonie.
Tuckonie drank it down eagerly and gulped.
iiA.i in T : J
"Ooh!" he said.
"How's that now?" enquired Mr. Harvey.
"Ooh! It tickles my nose," said Tuckonie. "I feel the corroboree inside me," and he put his little
black hand over his middle.
uiaun. 11 aiiu. uvci 1110 uiiu.vaiv.
"Ah," exclaimed Mr. Harvey, "the magic has worked. Now the corroboree will stop. You will be
all right now, Tuckonie the great spirits of the corroboree will protect you.
Slowly a smile spread over Tuckonie's face until his gleaming white teeth were showing.
-A 1 White Man —that was wonderful magic. Tuckonie is better now. Tuckonie will live."


CHAPTER IY
he Meeting with
The waggon moved slowly down the road, while little clouds of white dust
rose up from the wheels. Suddenly Mrs. Harvey said: "John, look...some one
else on the road ahead."
Mr. Harvey peered through the haze of dust. "Why, so there is. It looks
like a swaggy. Let's catch him up."
, So saying, he gave a twitch of the reins and Dobbin moved forward at a
rough canter. Pretty soon they came abreast.
'Hi, you there. Want a lift?" Mr. Harvey called out?
The man turned his head. Mr. Harvey gave a surprised shout. "Well, Michael O'Rafferty," he said.
"Ross," said the man, "can it be yourself I'm striking out here in the middle of nowhere or is it
your ghost, or is it neither of them?"
"It s me all right," said Mr. Harvey. "Hop up."
Mike swung himself onto the waggon. "Faith, fancy meetin' you." He raised his battered hat to Mrs.
Marvey. You know, Ive been hearin' there was a bit of a job goin' out North West on one of those
Artesian bores, and I thought I'd go out after it."
"Well, we're going through that country, why not travel with us for a while," suggested Mr. Harvey.
"You bet your sweet life, I will," smiled Mike. "If it's one thing I can't do, it's use me le<*s for
too long. °
Mrs. Harvey laughed. "Lazy as ever, Mike," she said.
w S th ,t y nTi al °T? g ' Mr ' Har L e T ex P lained t0 Mike purpose of their journey, and told of Tuckonie's
search for the Golden Boomerang. Mike s eyes opened wide.
+v. TS ri th i^ t 3 S Ct now ' " said - they really make themselves the strongest tribe in the world
witn tne Golden Boomerang?
'Aes, they can," said Peggy.
"And do you know where to find these Sacred Hills?" asked Mike.
"North-west towards the interior," said Mr. Harvey, flicking the reins, "Once we get to the 800-Goo
country, we 11 be right."
Mike turned pale and gulped. "You're not going there, are you?" he asked.
Mr. Harvey smiled. "Yes, I suppose you've been hearing some of the superstitions about the forest
of ghosts, and all the rest?"
| 'Sure I have, and it's true," said Mike.
Oh Mike," laughed Peggy, "there aren't any ghosts or monsters."
"Yes there are," said Tuckonie. And then he sank his voice to a whisper. "There is Ng'rui Moch."
tL . . " N g'rui Moch," said Mike, trembling. "Don't mention him, or I'll be getting out of the
this instant. 00
W hat's the matter, Mike?" asked Mrs. Harvey.
"If you really want to know," Mike said, "there are three-legged men in the 800-Goo countrv
1 ve seen the tracks with my own eyes."
"It must have been some one walking behind, putting his foot behind the man in front " Mr
Harvey said. '
Mike wet his lips, trembling. "It wasn't," he said, "there were nine footprints altogether, and no
number ot men walking together could make nine footprints, with two feet to each person."
XT , el r - llar vey smiled. "I suppose you've seen the tracks of Biggoon, the giant water rat, and
Ng rui Moch, the wild-cat man, and all the rest?"
I haven't,' said Mike, "and I don't want to, thank you."
"What makes you think there is a Ng'rui Moch?" asked Mrs. Harvey.
•u Mike L turned round. "I met a black-tracker who had seen him. He had been out after a little girl
m 0 was lost in the bush. He went out into the 800-Goo country and got into the forest of ghosts, and it
as !eie he saw Lg rui Moch walking one night. He turned to run away, and a spear struck him in the
shoulder, and we had a hard time saving him."
1 , a^re^ df ] 11 sto , r y : " said Mrs. Harvey. "But if that little girl had been stolen and taken to the
n 0 - g rui Moch, doesn t it seem to link up with that time when the spear was thrown in front of
Peggy, with the image of Ng'rui Moch on the blade?"
rui Moch was a terrible creature." said Mike, "and sure it's his spirit that haunts the 800-Goo
rj. egorra, you d better be taking an Irishman with you if you're really going there."


On they went, over the plains and by and by the sun began to sink in the west, although it was still
very hot. Then Tuckonie suddenly told them he wanted to stay near Peggy, because the night before he had
an ugly dream that she was going to be in danger.
Peggy only laughed. "Daddy," she said, "do you think we could have a little swim here before tea
the river looks lovely."
Mr. Harvey reined in the horses and they stopped.
"Don't go too far out dear," he said.
Peggy skipped into the waggon to change into her costume.
Mr. Harvey and Mike got out the transmitting, treddle wireless set, which had refused to work and
they began to take it to pieces.
Tuckonie followed Peggy softly down to the river as the little girl ran down the slope in her
bathing costume.
Soon the sun dipped from sight behind the blue hills, and a little grey mist began to creep like a
blanket over the still bush. It was very silent when, suddenly, a violent shriek burst upon their ears, and
Mrs. Harvey came running over the slope.
"John, quickly.. .look.. .there's a horrible crocodile in the river, and it's making straight for Peggy."
Mr. Harvey's face whitened and he cried out "Peggy!"
They all peered forward, their hearts beating wildly. Tuckonie was rushing along the weedy bank,
waving his spear. He paused for a moment, and then, with a lightning flash, the spear flew through the air.
It struck! It lay quivering in the monster's mouth. Quick as thought, Peggy scrambled safely out onto the
bank. The angered crocodile, mad with pain, lashed out furiously with its huge tail. It caught Tuck-
onie's legs, and whirled the small black boy off his feet.
"You see to the boy, I'll finish off the creature," Mike yelled, as the two men scrambled down the
bank, breathlessly.
Mrs. Harvey took the little girl around to the side of the waggon, as a shot rang out in the distance.
A moment later Mike appeared with a gun, and behind him came Mr. Harvey, carrying Tuckonie.
Is the poor boy all right?" Mrs. Harvey asked her husband.
"I think so Mary. He had a bit of a knock, but he'll be all right in a moment. If it hadn't been
for him, I wouldn't like to think what might have happened."
"He was so quick," said Mrs. Harvey, admiringly. "Here, put him down gently."
They laid Tuckonie down gently on the soft grass. Presently his eyes opened.
"Crocodile," he murmured, and then smiled. "Peggy —all right now." He seemed quite proud of
what he had done. "Magic," he said, "White man make magic to get pain out of Tuckonie's head?"
Mr. Harvey smiled. "Yes," Tuckonie," he said, and reached for one of the seidlitz powders.
Next day as they were travelling along Mr. Harvey decided that it would be a good idea to sell
the horse and buy a motor truck to make travelling much easier. It was not long before they came to a town
and Mike and Mr. Harvey went in search of a truck. It was almost dark when they came back, and Pe°-gy
could hardly contain her excitement at the sight of a new motor truck, which was to be their home.
It was not very large, but was quite nice and roomy inside. Covered with a tin roof like a house, it
had little windows and beds inside. Besides a small platform at the back which almost served as a balconv,' it
was complete with a gay, canvas blind. Peggy shouted for joy.
"Oh Daddy isn't it lovely," she cried.
"Oh look Jofhn," Mrs. Harvey called, "we have a visitor."
Sure enough, a big cattle dog was stretching himself on the platform of the truck.
Peggy laughed delightedly. "Oh Daddy, isn't he sweet. I wonder who owns him? Come alone
boy boy boy." 5
The big dog came towards them wagging his tail. Peggy put her arms around his neck, and fondled
him. He licked her hands affectionately, and wagged his tail again.
u i Peggy, "I don't believe he has a home or anvone owns him. Don't you think I
could keep him?"
"Yell dear, if no one claims him. I suppose you can."
So by night-fall, as no one bad come to claim the new arrival, the familv set out on their iournev
with doggie as well.
"I'm going to call him Bonzo," said Peggy to Tuckonie.
Perhaps Bonzo will help us find the Golden Boomerang," smiled Tuckonie, as he bent down to pat
oonzo on the head. K
"You know, I think it's going to be pretty hard to find," said Mr. Harvey.
mi , a U< T°J ie + sn V led again- "White Man, you forget that we still have two of the magic berries of Mar-
hlli .lfn l i^ m 11 W ' U make me so that 1 will understand the voices of the spirits of the
bush, and perhaps they will tell me where to look for the Golden Boomerang."
off to sGlTsmmn- hIS Tuck ° nie that he went on smilin ? for a long time, and eventually he fell


CHAPTER V
ldol of Ng'rui Mock
Tuckonie woke to find that the truck was passing through strange
country. The trees grew in odd shapes that were like arms, stretching out,
the soil was dark and damp and no sun filtered through.
"Ooer," said Peggy, holding Tuckonie's hand. "I don't like this place.
It's spooky."
Mr. Harvey was silent, and his wife could tell by the expression of
%/
his face that the woods did not appeal to him either.
"Sure, and I don't like this place at all," broke in Mike, from his place near the window.
"It's no use Mary," said Mr. Harvey, "we can't push on any further tonight. The scrub is too thick
to see, and the sun is sinking."
The family then prepared their evening meal and everyone noticed how quickly night fell. By and
by, it was pitch dark and no moon rose over the twisted, black shapes of the giant trees, which lifted their
claw-like branches towards the stars.
Peggy sat still on the platform at the end of the caravan. Quite suddenly she gave a little cry of fear.
"Something touched my face," cried Peggy, "something soft and horrible."
Mr. Harvey glanced upwards. "There it goes," he called, "it was a bat."
"Messengers of evil," Tuckonie's voice came softly up to them from the silence.
Mr. Harvey broke in quickly: "Well no more talk like that tonight," he said, "Let's gather some
wood and make a cheerful fire."
r There was a general feeling of relief and they all set about busily picking up pieces of wood.
"Here's a good piece," called Peggy, "it's smooth and round. Why Daddy, Ido believe it's carved."
"Bring it into the headlights of the car," said her father.
Peggy ran over with the piece of wood. Five pairs of eyes peered anxiously forward, and there was
a horrible silence. There, in Peggy's hand, was a little wooden image of Ng'rui Moch.
Mrs. Harvey broke the astonished silence. "John," she said, "this doesn't look as though it's been
carved —it looks like a root that's just naturally grown into this shape."
Mr. Harvey took it in his hands. "I can't understand how a root could grow into a shape like this
...a man's body with the head of a cat. It's horrible."
*fuckonie spoke out. "Ng'rui Moch is now a spirit and has all powers. He can break up his spirit
into many pieces, and put them in many things, and all those things will see and hear and listen and at the
call of Ng'rui Moch will return to him and tell him all they have learned. And if he commands them to do
anything, they will do it."
"Throw the image away John, please," Mrs. Harvey spoke vehemently.
"Oh but Mary, we wouldn't find another curio like this in a thousand years. It would be beautiful
if it were polished."
"Oh yes Mummy, I'd like to take it back home and show all mv friends please." asked Peggy,
plaintively.
They had their meal in silence around the fire.. .even Mike did not have much to sav. It was by the
light of the headlamps that Mrs. Harvey made another discovery.
John, ' she said, "that image has changed! It's smiling at us now! The face on it has altered
look!"
ol lt the image in her hand. Certainly an unpleasant smile was on the face of the wooden
cat s head.
, "^ on ' t think any more about it," said her husband, "we probably didn't notice the smile before.
tonight 8 " S *° ima »^ ne things it's this eerie wood. Come along, we're going to get a sound sleep,
... - Mrs. Harvey could not sleep. Try as she might, she kept hearing whispering noises in the trees,
1 e arnm ? .pf coming danger. At last she sat up in her bunk, and shook Mr. Harvev bv the shoulder.
\\ ake up John, she whispered, "I can see a red glow at the end of the caravan."
( course you can, said Mr. Harvey, "it's a cigarette end...is that vou Mike?"
Yes Boss, Mike s voice came back in the darkness. "I couldn't sleep either."
lam awake too," came Tuckonie's voice. "I am on guard!"
'' T+ '<•« ill in 1. _L _ J I*lll . , * • .<• . .
It s this wretched little root thing that's on our minds." said Mr. Harvev. "Perhaps vou'd better
throw it away, Mike.
Mike stood He took down the image, opened the window and flung it far into the darkness.
. I s- +l f r% -y , Thank goodness," she said, "now it can't have that effect on us any longer."
•, f e i , gone, they all felt that they could settle down to sleep again, and soon complete
e e on e caravan. How long passed, she could not tell, but Mrs. Harvey awoke for the second


time. She had a terrible feeling of dread. She felt that she must move about until it was daylight. Mr.
Harvey turned over in his bunk, as he heard her groping on the floor for her slippers.
"What's the matter?" he asked.
"I'm going to sit up until it's daylight I won't be satisfied until we can get out of this horrible
place," she replied. "I keep thinking I can hear a voice calling from the bush.
Then she walked over to the end of the caravan, but in another second she gave a startled cry:
"John, John!" she called. "Peggy's disappeared!"
"Great Scott, so she has," said Mr. Harvey, "but where could she have gone!"
"Perhaps she has followed the voice into the bush," replied his wife.
"What is it you're talking about, Mrs. Harvey?" asked Mike.
"She fancied she heard a voice calling to her from the bush," Mr. Harvey replied. "We had better
take a lamp and go out and look for Peggy at once."
They all strode off into the bush, calling Peggy's name as they went, but there was no answer.
"It's that little wooden image that's responsible for this," said Mrs. Harvey.
"Oh nonsense, dear," replied her husband, "Mike threw the wretched little thing out into the bush."
"Yes," said Tuckonie, "and from the bush it called to Peggy. She has gone in answer to the call
of the Spirit of Ng'rui Moch."
"Oh don't talk such rubbish, Tuckonie," said Mr. Harvey.
Mrs. Harvey looked round her fearfully. "It may not be such rubbish as you think John."
"What!" said her husband, "don't tell me you have come to believe in this monster, and all the rest
of the nonsense?"
"It's not the monster itself I'm afraid of," said Mrs. Harvey, "It's the people who believe in the
monster!"
Just then they heard Bonzo, the dog, yapping a short distance away.
"There's the dog, White Man," said Tuckonie, "perhaps he has found Peggy! Let us go this way!"
Soon they saw something white glimmering amongst the black outlines of the trees.
"There is Peggy," cried Tuckonie, "see, with her white gown gleaming in the night."
"Peggy! Peggy darling," cried her mother, running towards her. But to their surprise, Peggy
didn't answer.
"Why, upon my soul!" said Mike, "the child is walking in her sleep."
When they awakened Peggy, she was surprised to find that she was in the bush. She told them that
she had had a very strange dream, but could not recall it the only thing that stood out firmly in her
mind, was that a soft voice seemed to be calling to her from away amongst the bushes.
Mr. Harvey still maintained that all this talk about voices was just so much imagination, and soon had
them all back in the caravan.
The next day dawned bright and clear, and, in the sunshine, all their fears of the night before, were
forgotten.
Twilight found them on the edge of another little patch of grotesque bushland, and Mrs. Harvey
refused to allow John to take the caravan any farther into it that night. Soon the meal was ready, but, as
it was a hot night, Peggy asked if she might have cordial to drink instead of tea. And so, Tuckonie was
sent to the caravan to get it. He had been gone only a moment, when they heard him give a cry of wonder
and fear, and, going after him to find what had alarmed him, they were horrified to see the hideous little
figure of Ng'rui Moch once more back in the caravan. When Mrs. Harvey saw this, all her gaiety left her.
Gripping her husband's arm, she said to him, anxiously: "John, there's something strange about this
...something that we can't understand. We left that idol out in the bush forty miles back How could
it possibly have got here?" s\
"I don't know, I'm sure, my dear. I can't understand it either. Maybe Moodgee is responsible in
some way or other."
"You mean he might have found the idol where we threw it in the bush, and brought it along and
planted it in the caravan again?" asked Mike.
"But he couldn't do that," said Mrs. Harvey, "he couldn't keep up with the speed we made in the
caravan."
"No, that's true, Mummy," said Peggy. "Then it must have come here by magic."
"There is an explanation for all magic, Peggy," said her father. "Most likely there are a number of
these funny looking little idols, and I'm inclined to think that Moodgee must have friends posted along our
way to slip an idol into the caravan whenever we stop."
Mike looked doubtful. "No, I can't see that," he said, "there wouldn't be too many of these idols
kicking about. As you know, it hasn't been carved., .it seems to have grown into that shape without any
help from anyone. It is quite a novelty. No, I don't think there would be more than one of them."


"But if that is the case," said Mrs. Harvey, "it must have got here by supernatural means."
"I still don't believe that," said Mr. Harvey. "However, we're going to settle this matter once
and for all. I'm going to take this idol out into the bush and bury it." And so saying, he and Mike went
out into the bush with a spade, and buried the little idol deep in the earth.
"Now Mary," said John Harvey, with a smile, "you can settle down to enjoy the rest of the trip
without any fear that you will ever strike that little image again.''
When everyone heard this, they felt very relieved, particularly Tuckonie, who, in his own mind, had
been very doubtful that the magic idol would allow itself to be buried.
Next day found them once more on the trek. They passed through the sinister little clump of bush-
land in the daytime, and everyone agreed that this was not nearly so bad as having to go through it at night.
When they came out on the other side, they found that a long stretch of very arid desert country
lay ahead of them.
"Begorra, sir," said Mike, "it's just as well we filled our water tank up to over-flowing, because it
looks to me as though we'll have precious little chance of finding any water round here."
"You are right, White Man," said Tuckonie, "I do not think that even my people could find water
in such a place as this."
Many miles further on, just as night was falling Peggy noticed Tuckonie peering anxiously into
the distance. Following his gaze, she saw some strange, dark object lying on the dusty earth far ahead.
"White Man, there is something over there," said Tuckonie, "and it looks to me like one of my people
who is ill or asleep."
"Indeed," said John Harvey, "then in that case, we'll pull up and go over to investigate.. .they may
be in need of help."
Y hen they reached the spot, they were surprised to see a young girl of the dark people, lying, as
if asleep. Her lips were very swollen, and she looked as though she had fallen, completely exhausted,
where she lay.
Gently, Mike and Mr. Harvey picked the girl up in their arms, and carried her back to the caravan
where they placed her on Peggy's bunk. Then Mr. Harvey raised her head, while his wife moistened her
lips with water.
"She is of the Kakadu Tribe," said Tuckonie. "I know by the markings upon her body."
At this moment, the girl slowly opened her eyes.
"Water," she said, weakly.. ."Water !"
Mrs. Harvey gave her a little to drink. The water revived her wonderfully, and, after a time, she
was able to sit up in the bunk. Suddenly, they noticed her fix her eyes with a look of terror, on some-
thing straight ahead. She stretched out her arm, trembling.
"Where did you get that thing?" she said.
Following the direction of her gaze they were all surprised to see that the little idol was once
baek in the caravan. For a moment they were so astounded that no one spoke, and then the violent
trembling of the dark girl attracted Mrs. Harvey's attention.
Ar u her face in her hands and cried bitterly. "I knew I could never escape Ng'rui
Moch, she said, "I knew it." F 8
Mrs. Harvey put her arms round the girl, and tried to comfort her, but it was no use.
Moodgee's responsible for this," said Mr. Harvey, angrily, "I'll bet you anything you like, he is."
"But he couldn't have got here in the time," said Mrs. Harvey.
"Yell then, one of his friends," said Mr. Harvey
"Oh* l 0?, Ver £ u doU u tf f 7 1 ' 8 the same ido1 ' john '" she said ' " rm practically sure of it »
Oh don tbe silly dear, her husband replied, "it couldn't possibly be. No, it is another idol and
me one else has put it there. Tell me, girl, have any of your people passed here lately? I don't'mean
your own tribe particularly, I mean any of the dark people." J ° nt mean
The girl shuddered. "I cannot tell. I cannot tell you anything, while that idol is listening "
"W Z7 ° Ve J and P lcked U P the little idol with a look of grim determination.
Here, Mike he said, handing the idol to him, "Take this thing outside the caravan light a -ood
fare and burn it until you have reduced it to ashes." caravan, lignt a good
talk 77\°? of the caravan , the girl, whose name was Narrabeen, seemed more inclined to
Se had the'lTttl^dS 6 W t aS / T ° f the 7 a i adu trib6 ' Wh ° further south ' and that one ai ght
she had found the little idol outside her mia-mia, which is a kind of little house, constructed of branches
to the <hS nf t S f Slgn , fr ° m N S rm Moch < White Man," she said, "and I was afraid, so I took the image
that niiht A T 'i 1 SOme of hls wan ' iors took it far out into the bush and left it But
that night, in my dreams, I seemed to hear a voice calling to me from the bush »
Why John, how strange," said Mrs. Harvey, "We had exactly the same experience."
Did you walk out into the bush when you heard the call?" asked Peggy, eagerly.
*es, said the girl, "I heard the voice call 'come Narrabeen' and so. I went in answer to the call.


When I awakened, I was standing in the bush a long way from the camping ground of my tribe and four
tall warriors of another tribe stood round about. They wore horrible masks of clay and leaves and painted
on eaeh mask was the face of a wild cat. They were not cruel. They offered me food, and let me rest
but they did not speak. And when I would have run away, back to my husband and tribe they held me
and would not let me go. I cried out, but they took no notice. Then they bound something round my eves
so that I could not see, and we travelled for many days, and when they took the binding from mv eyes I
was in a clearing, where there were many more of the same warriors, and some other girls°whom I think had
been taken away from their tribes."
"But how did we come to find you in the desert?" asked Mr. Harvey.
"That night, "White Man, there was a feast," said Narrabeen, "and during the Corroboree I escaped
I ran all through the night, and the next day, only stopping to gather a few berries, and so I went on and
011 until I came to the desert, but I had no water, and I could not find any, and at last as I could go no
further, I lay down to die. And I would have died onJy you found me."
Now, when the Harveys heard Narrabeen's story, they were very sympathetic and told her that she
was welcome to stay with them until they should happen to meet some people who could take her
back to her own tribe. On hearing this, the girl seemed very much comforted and was about to lean back
and rest when Mike rushed into the caravan, his eyes alight with superstitious fear.
"Why, whatever is the matter with you Mike?" said Mr. Harvey.
"You may well ask what's the matter Boss, this thing won't burn."
So saying, he held out his hand and disclosed the figure of the little idol.
"Oh, that's all nonsense," said Mr. Harvey, "it's wood, it must burn."
"it won't," said Mike. "I covered it with kerosene and put it in the thick of the blaze and vet there
isn t a mark on it anywhere."
But Mr. Harvey wasn't to be beaten. "I'll get rid of it some way," he said.
"But what are you going to do Sir?" asked Mike.
"I'm just trying to think," said Mr. Harvey thoughtfully. Then he added suddenly "By Jove I've
got it. I'll take the thing into the bush, prop it up against a tree and I'll shoot it to pieces."
So Mr. Harvey took the little idol out into the night and set it up against a tree, then stepped back to
take aim. Everyone else looked with superstitious interest at the idol, while Mr. Harvey levelled his The
next instant he fired, chipping a small piece off the idol, and at the same moment evervone was startled to
hear a faint cry of pain.
XT , ."The image cries out in pain," said Narrabeen, covering her eyes with her hands. "You have angered
Ng rui Moch he will never forgive you." °
I thought I heard a cry too," said Mr. Harvey, "but it must be imagination. Whatever else that little
idol can do, I'm sure it couldn't cry out. Anyway I'm going to have another shot at it and see if I can
destroy it completely."
So saying, he raised his gun and fired again, this time splitting the idol right in half But now there
was no mistake about it someone did cry out in great pain at the moment the bullet struck the idol.
"There's no imagination about that Sir," said Mike, "something, or someone has been hurt."
"Well, it couldn't be the idol," said Mr. Harvey, "so I'm going to have a look round until I find
whoever it was."
Then they heard Bonzo, the dog, growling from a short distance away.
"Begorra Sir," said Mike, "I believe Bonzo has found someone just listen to him."
They found Bonzo standing guard over the figure of a native who had been shot in the shoulder
, n ''Th at 's peculiar," said Mr. Harvey, "the bullet must have glanced off the idol and gone in this
tellow s direction, but it s only a surface wound, that is, as far as I can see. However we'd better tnrn WT
over and make sure." J
Mike and Mr. Harvey gently turned the man over on to his back, and it was then that they discovered
him to be none other than Moodgee, the wicked Medicine Man. covered
"So it's Moodgee," said Mr. Harvey, "he's at the bottom of all this. I suspected as much HOWCVP,-
rascal or no rascal, we can t leave him here like this. I'll have to get back to the caravan for some brandv
and bandages to doctor him up. You'd better stay and keep guard, Mike."
Not me, said the superstitious Irishman. "I wouldn't stay by myself with this old wizard "
"Oh well," said Mr. Harvey, "I don't suppose he could move very far anyhow, in his weak state."
.So they all went back and Mr. Harvey got what he thought the wounded man would need from the
medicme chest, then he and Mike went off again... But when they reached the little clearing in'the bush
what was their astomshment to find that Moodgee the Medicine Man had vanished completely


CHAPTER VI
he Kakadu Tribes
The Harveys lost no time in searching the ground round about for tracks
when they found that Moodgee had disappeared, but they were unable to find
any and even Tuckonie was forced to admit that there were no tracks there.
However, they did find a very interesting object a little bag made of fea-
thers, threaded through at the top with a thin piece of kangaroo hide.
"Why, whatever is that Mummy?" said Peggy. "It's a kind of little
bag."
"No Peggy," said Tuckonie, "it's a vengeance shoe. My people make these shoes out of feathers
when they wish to leave no tracks." . .
"Then Moodgee must have been wearing them, said Mike, "but I don t think he was m a condition
to walk." „
"Perhaps some of his friends were waiting for him, to carry him away to safety, if he should happen
to be injured," said Tuckonie, "and perhaps it was these men who wore the vengeance shoes."
"That is likely," said Narrabeen. "The warriors who carried me away from my tribe all wore
vengeance shoes." .
"Well, the mystery of the little idol is solved," said Mr. Harvey, "it was Moodgee and his friends
who put it into the caravan."
"Perhaps so," said Mrs. Harvey, "but it's still a mystery where that voice came from which
seemed to call out of the bush. Moodgee and his friends couldn't have been near enough to the caravan
to speak in that soft whisper otherwise we'd have seen them running away when we opened the caravan
door and looked out suddenly."
Just then they noticed Bonzo, the dog, looking up into a tree and growling. In his mouth he held a
piece of twine. When they examined the twine they found it to be plaited fibre and it was attached to
something in the tree.
"Here's your chance to do a bit of detective work, Tuckonie. Shinny up that tree, Youngster and see
what's at the other end of this string."
Tuckonie smiled and climbed up the tree like a little monkey. Soon he had reached the top. The
next minute he was down on the ground, holding in his hands what appeared to be a sort of wooden funnel.
"Let me have a look at that," said Mr. Harvey, "why it's sticky! It's covered all over
with resin and so is the twine. I know what it is—it's a mouth-piece."
All the party looked very mystified and asked Mr. Harvey to explain.
"It's a kind of a telephone idea," Mr. Harvey replied. "The string or fibre covered with resin, helps
the sound to carry from one speaker to the other. When we were kids we used to attach one jam tin to a
bed at one end of the dormitory and a second jam tin to a bed at the other end, with a string covered with
resin stretched tight in between. I had only to whisper into my jam tin and the boy at the other end of the
dormitory would be able to hear what I said quite plainly. That is where your spirit voice came fronq Mary. If
we were able to follow this fibre to the other end, I'd bet you would find another speaker there. That is where
old Moodgee stood and whispered into the speaker and you heard the voice from the little funnel in the
tree here."
"Fancy that old monkey doing a thing like that," said Mike.
"Well, anyway, now that everything has been explained we can settle down to a good night's rest,"
said Mr. Harvey.
To this they all agreed, and in another half hour, were sleeping peacefully.
♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
"Well," said Mr. Harvey, as they rattled along in the bright sunlight next day, "the country
seems to be improving a lot now. Mike and I should be able to get some shooting, this afternoon."
But Tuckonie was looking attentively at the ground.
"What are you looking at Tuckonie?" said Peggy.
"The dust and bracken over there has been disturbed, Peggy," replied the little Aboriginal Lad, "and
I think that many feet have passed over it. If you will stop the caravan, White Man, I will make sure."
So Mr. Harvey stopped the caravan, while Tuckonie went and had a look, and soon he returned with
the news that a big party of people had recently passed that way.
"I do not know who they were," said Tuckonie, "but unless they are outlaws or men of the Ng'rui
Moch tribe, they will not harm us."
"Well," said Mrs. Harvey, "I think it would be foolish to drive right into the heart of this party
before we know whether they're going to be friendly or not."
"It is too late to do anything else," said Narrabeen, "for look, in yonder cloud of dust the travel-
lers approach."
And sure enough, on looking towards the horizon, the party saw a large number of aboriginal people


1
§ ■ » ir WF
|B jf
■ \■
T» g i7 -/y Bjij
; ~ l j*~ f «w,_ —-i - — -W*"^
jjB )• -tt*- 5?®>*. ■ ■ -* i^^^iBBpr^;jij3P8Kp--:jJl s M - V|W
[ jB if
|\/ j i ~isl ~ >/ | b . -■■ / % ;
k ' V x — \ ? nr j&&
Rl 58*1 # "'" "^api&g.. r
B «I Vp- -< "Wk$,
[See page 21]
Professor Westbrook in bts Laboratory


ill i y W v * \ JL JF|
y l\ /r A I . l i
The Land of the Women Warriors


You
All the
. — .iie t
desperation ■
"Wan-
Then
coming in the direction of the caravan. As they came nearer, Narrabeen gave a cry of joy.
"It is the Kakadu Tribe," she said, "I have found my own people."
Then the Harveys saw a very handsome young warrior step out from the tribe and rush towards
the girl.
"Narrabeen!" he shouted gladly, "Narrabeen, my wife, I have found you."
After this there was much rejoicing and the Kakadu tribe were glad to make friends with the little
party of White People, because they were happy that Narrabeen had been restored to them.
However, the Warrior, Nulla, was anxious to find out who was responsible for stealing Narrabeen
away. He imagined that one man must have planned it all and that one man was his enemy.
"That is all very well Nulla," said the other warriors, "but how are you to find out who that one
man is?"
"By power of magic," replied Nulla.
When the White People heard this, they asked Nulla to explain.
He took them to a rocky piece of land and then addressed them:
"Many years ago, a man of the Kangaroo Totem, suffered with lumps upon the body which gave
him much pain. The Kangaroo man bore this for a long time, until, one day he grew very angry and took
all the lumps out of his body and placed them on the ground beside him. They changed into stones and there
they have remained. So that now we may use these stones to afflict our enemies. Look, here in my hands
I hold the small magic spears which 1 have made myself. Now I throw the spears at the stones and as
they touch the stones the evil magic enters the spear."
Then Nulla took up his spear-thrower and pointed it to the north-west, which was the direction that
be believed his enemies took. And then he gave a great wail and shouted. "Oh great spirits of my
ancestors, direct the magic towards the body of my enemy."
And after this, all the warriors and lubras started shouting and wailing and dancing about and making
a terrible dm. The Magic Corroboree had started!
Next day Nulla came to the Harveys' caravan to tell them that emus had been sighted and to invite
them to watch the emu hunt. To this the Harveys willingly agreed and by mid-day they had all hidden
themselves in the various little patches of scrub which were scattered about the plains. Tuckonie and
Nulla, who had become friendly, were hunting together. As the hunt was about to commence Peggy was
surprised to see Tuckonie pulling an emu skin right over himself.
"Goodness Tuckonie," she said, "what are you doing that for?"
Tuckonie explained patiently. "1 make the top part of my body look like an emu, Peggy. With the
top of my body, which is covered with the emu skin, I make funny movement and I make a cry like an
emu makes and Nulla, who is hiding in the bushes, will make the same cry. Then the curious emus, who are
round about, will be attracted by the cries and when one sees me he will draw near to see what is the
matter. Then Nulla and 1 will spear him."
r V* as tuckonie had said they would, an emu came up to investigate and before you could
say Jack Robinson, Nulla and Tuckonie had killed it.
, '^ravo," called the Chief of the Kakadu tribe, "well done Warriors. If everyone does as well as
you ve done, the tribe will have a great feast to-night."
hvr Th n e^ Varri( £ V he , boy dra^^ed the emu Awards the clump of bushes where the Harveys were
straight at Mike CoUld d ° anythmg about il > Nulla raised his s P ear and charged
"Good gracious," said Mr. Harvey, as he held Nulla back, "what's the matter with you."
arm trembled over with an g er » a® he answered. "He is my enemy! Look at the lump upon his
'Begorra," said Mike, "It's a boil! 1 was wondering what was hurting me so much."
\\ an WdS ±urious - d he magic that was directed against my enemy has entered your body, White
You are m y enemy, you stole my wife —now I will have my revenge, 1 will kill you."
snot, it 1 ! „ ho had gathered rouud t0 what the disturbance was, thought that Nulla
• Mr - Harvey was very hard P ut 10 way o£ saving Mike and at last he said .11
"hiu. way or saving miKe ana at last he
7
lors, you are wrong! This is not Nulla's magic, but mine. I gave Mike the boiL"
a mastlr o D Ima^'whitTMan"' UP Un° n ° ld Cllief St6Pped fo,Ward sayillg '
Yes, said Mr. Harvey, "1 can make very great magic. "
7 l hen „ Pr ° Ve lt,M Said the CMef ' " ot herwise Nulla's enemy must die according to our laws "
, pro\mg that it was my magie which entered Mike's body and not Nulla's."


To this the warriors all agreed and they marched off in a body, leaving the Harvey party to think
out what they could do.
"Well John," said Mary, "I suppose there's only one thing for it. You'll have to take another
photograph."
John Harvey looked thoughtful. "I think dear," he said, "that they expect a different kind of magic
they expect me to make some change in a man's body. Haven't you got amongst other things, a bottle
of peroxide and a bottle of ammonia in the medicine chest?"
"Well, yes dear," said Mrs. Harvey, "I have."
"Then I'll pick out a warrior of the tribe," said Mr. Harvey smiling, "and, while murmuring a
lot of magic words, I'll soak his hair with peroxide and ammonia and in a few hours that same warrior
will have, not black hair, but gold."
Mrs. Harvey leaned back and laughed. "Well that's a funny idea!"
"It doesn't matter whether it's funny or not, Mrs. Harvey," said Mike, "as long as it saves me
getting a spear in my chest."
Accordingly at sundown, when the warriors came back, Mr. Harvey asked that one of them should
step out from the ranks and promised him that by his magic, he would give him hair the colour of the sun.
When Nulla heard this, his eyes lit up and he said, "The quarrel was mine, White Man, therefore
let Nulla be the one to have hair the colour of the sun."
So Mr. Harvey got out the little basin in which the chemicals were mixed and, putting it on to
Nulla's curly black hair, he said, "Abra Cadabra, 0 by Jingo! Oh my mighty Ancestors, don't let me down
on this performance. If you do, it's goodbye to Mike."
When Nulla felt the chemicals on his hair, his eyes rolled round in his head and he murmured, "Oh
the White Man's magic, it sizzles, it burns."
"Yes," said Mr. Harvey, "it is the sunshine wrapping itself around each hair of your head and
making it golden. By to-morrow morning your hair will be yellow."
And sure enough, what Mr. Harvey had said came to pass —the next day Nulla's hair was gold.
The following day Mr. Harvey busied himself cleaning the engine of the caravan. While he was
so engaged, he was surprised to see Kaleeya, the Chief of the tribe, creeping furtively towards the caravan.
"Hullo there, Chief Kaleeya?" said Mr. Harvey.
Kaleeya stopped suddenly.
White Man, said the Chief, by your great magic, you have caused the hair of one of my warriors
to become as gold. This is a great thing for Nulla the warrior, but it is not good that he, a mere warrior
should be so honoured, while the Chief of the Tribe still has black hair. I beg that you perform more
magic and make my hair as the sun too."
It was all Mr. Harvey could do to keep himself from laughing, but he agreed to what the Chief asked.
He wasn t quite sure how much peroxide and ammonia he should tip into the basin, so he emptied both
bottles and hoped for the best. He returned to Chief Kaleeya and murmuring a few magic words emptied
the basin over his head.
Go, my friend, he said, "and by sundown the magic will have worked."
The old Chief thanked him and set off with a smile.
Shortly after this, Mrs. Harvey and Peggy returned and they were very amused to hear of what had
appened, but Mrs. Harvey wasn't so amused when she heard that her husband had emptied both bottles
ot chemicals into the basm.
"Oh My Goodness, John," she said, "you've made the mixture too strong, "Great Chief Kaleeya
will be quite bald." J
e a n^ce pickle then, said Mike, "Whatever will he do when he discovers you've sent
him bald.
I don t know what he 11 do, said Mr. Harvey, "but I think we'd better get everything packed
av ay and in readiness, in case we have to leave this tribe very suddenly."
Mrs. Harvey and Mike both agreed with him aud they set about packing everything away, and by
sundown, when Chief Kaleeya was due to make his appearance, the caravan was spick and span and Mr.
Harvey was sitting in the driver's seat, ready to make a sudden start.
Soon they saw Chief Kaleeya approaching, followed by his warriors and it was just as Mrs Harvey
said. His head was quite bald.
However, they were due for a great shock, for when Chief Kaleeya came to the caravan, he went
down on one knee. "White Man," he said, "your magic has surpassed anything that I have yet seen!
Not only did my hair become golden, like the sun, but it vanished completely from my head! There is no
warrior or chief in all the land that has a head like mine. Everywhere I go," said the Chief, "men will
point me out and they will say, 'he must be the Great Chief, because there is no other like him!' Henceforth
shall be known as the Chief whose head is like unto the emu's egg. For this great honour, I, Chief
llaleeya, thank you. I bow my head and touch your hand all that I have is yours!"


CHAPTER VII
r arrabeen->
Disappearance o
The next day a big Corroboree was given in honour of John Harvey,
whom the tribe hailed as the greatest Medicine Man who had ever lived.
After the Corroboree he received gifts of possum skin rugs and shields and
boomerangs and all manner of things. They were all stored away and the
Harveys settled down to have a quiet hour or two, after all the excitement
of the Corroboree.
As the day was hot and drowsy, Tuckonie soon dropped off to sleep. An hour after he awoke, trem-
bling with excitement, and finding Peggy, he told her that in his dream Maroubra, his Father's Medicine
Man, had appeared to him and warned him of coming danger.
"He was talking about the Golden Boomerang," said Tuckonie, "and he told me that we would not
find it until after we had passed safely through the Cave of Snakes."
"Oh, I'd hate to have to go through a cave full of snakes," said Peggy.
"So would I," said Tuckonie, "but now that Maroubra has warned us, we can take care and bind
our legs up with bark and skins when the time comes for us to enter that cave."
During the day Mr. Harvey and Mike joined the warriors in a wild buffalo hunt and at night all
were very tired and glad to be off to bed.
Round about midnight, Narrabeen woke up, and shook Nulla by the shoulder, saying that the
spirit voice was once more calling to her from the bush. But, after the excitement of the day, Nulla was
completely exhausted, and so did not waken. Narrabeen spoke to him, but in vain, and eventually, although
she did not want to, she went out into the bush in answer to the voice, for it seemed to her that there
was something about that strange voice which commanded her obedience. Softly and silently, she walked
from the camp, until she was lost in the darkness of the night.
The following morning, when Nulla awoke and found Narrabeen gone, he roused the tribe. They all
set out to follow her tracks, but, the tracks went a short distance into the bush and then finished. Now,
this stealing of the girl for the second time, aroused great anger amongst the warriors, and thinking
that the warriors of Ng'rui Moch had stolen her away, they decided to set out towards the land of Ng'rui
Moch. When they acquainted the Harveys of their decision, they said they would go with them, for their
journey lay in that direction also.
Accordingly, they were all once more on the trek. But, although they covered very many miles
they did not find any tracks. When night fell, they halted. Pe o gy and Tuckonie, glad of the opportunity
to stretch their legs, went for a short walk through the bush. Suddenly, Tuckonie's eyes fastened on
the ground.
"Look Peggy! Tracks!" said Tuckonie, "and such strange ones. Quickly, we must go back to the
others and tell them what we have discovered."
When they reached the camp fires, Tuckonie cried for silence. Then breathlessly he said, "War-
riors ! White Man! I have found tracks! These are no ordinary tracks, they are the tracks of the three
legged men of the 800-Goo country that we have sometimes been told about."
John Harvey threw back his head and laughed. "Oh Tuckonie, I think you're dreaming this time,"
he said. "In all the world, there's no such thing as a three-legged man."
"I wouldn't be too sure of that if I were you, sir," said Mike.
"Well, we'll go and have a look," said Mr. Harvey, still laughing, "but I'm willing to bet any money
you like that it's a trick."
By this time, the first of the warriors had reached the spot to which Tuckonie had directed them,
and there, before their astonished gaze, they saw quite plainly the tracks of the three-legged men.
"There is no doubt of this, White Man," they said, "the tracks are as the boy said."
"Then we can go no further," said Chief Kaleeya. "We are a brave tribe and fear no ordinary
man, but against monsters we cannot fight."
Then Nulla, the blond warrior, spoke up, saying, "Return if you will, my tribe, but I will not return
with you. I will go on and on until I find my enemies those who stole Narrabeen away from me,
and I will fight them until I kill them or else I myself am killed."
"Very well, Nulla," said Kaleeya. "Go if you will, but I think it is useless to try yourself against
monsters. However, the blessings of your tribe will go with you on your way."
So saying, the dark people took their leave of Nulla and of the Harveys, and went off back in the
direction in which they had come.
The following morning, Nulla took his leave of the white people. They told him he was weloome to
travel with them, but Nulla thought that he could go by strange rough byways, where the caravan could


ate
and when lie
liile Bob waited
eded in driving
nd, sure enough,
past.
not pass, and that they would have more chance of finding the warriors of Ng'rui Moch if they went
separate ways. That night found the Harveys once more in the sandy desert land.
"I think the desert will go on for some time," said Tuckonie, "and so, White Man, we would be
wise to build up our supply of water here."
"And how are you to get it," said Mr. Harvey.
"From the roots of the gums," said Tuckonie. "We cut the green roots, then stand them in a bowl
for some hours and the water will flow from them. A good root will give a pint of water."
"Well, that's worth knowing," said Mr. Harvey, as the youngster set out on his quest, followed
by Peggy.
"Don't go too far," said Mrs. Harvey, "I shouldn't be surprised if there's a storm."
"We will not go far," said Tuckonie, calling back to her. But in their eagerness to find good roots
the children went much further than they intended. And then the storm broke in all its fury. Great
clouds of dust and sand arose, and swept over the land, and soon, the children were unable to go anv
farther in the face of the rising wind.
Back at the caravan, Mr. and Mrs. Harvey were very worried, and eventually decided to set out in
search of the children, but, unfortunately they could make no progress against the* strength of the wind
Two hours passed, but still the anxious parents had not found the children.
Meanwhile, Peggy and Tuckonie were growing very frightened indeed, for Peggy felt a horrible
stinging all over her caused by the sand which whipped them with every gust of wind, and Tuckonie was
anxious for their safety.
As he was calling silently upon his tribal gods, and asking their protection, a sound fell on his ears.
'Listen Peggy,' he said, placing his hand upon her arm, "there is a sound which is not made by the wind."
"Why, it's a motor bike,'' said Peggy.
At this instant, a hazy shape appeared in the clouds of dust. "Stop!" shouted "StoD who-
ever you are!"
The noise came to an end, and, from out of the dust-cloud, appeared a white man, who was as-
tonished when he saw the two children out in the storm.
"Great Scott!" he said. "Where have you come from?"
The children soon explained their plight, and then the man, who told them that his name was Bob
Hennessy, took a waterproof cape which he had with him, and wrapped it around the children This made
things much better for them, for the stinging sand did not come within the shelter of the cape, and so they
could breathe much more easily. J
An hour passed in this way, and then, the storm dropped as suddenly as it had arisen and far in
die distance they were able to see the caravan. Bob placed them behind him on the bike, and made off in that
direction. Soon, the children were safely back witb the Harveys.
~ , Henness y told them that he was passing through that country in search of a wonderful horse,
which had been given him, but which had run away with the herd and gone wild.
Strangeh enough, at this self same moment, another cloud of dust appeared on the horizon, and soon
the mob of horses came mto view.
"Jove, what luck!" said Bob Hennessy. "The storm seems to have driven him right into my hands " as
he watched the magnificent animal chargmg forward at the head of all the others. "Can vou ride a motor
Dike? he said to Mr. Harvey.
"Yes," said Mr. Harvey in surprise. "What do you want me to do?"
"I want you to round up that herd as much as possible," said Hennessy, "and concentrate on the
ring-leader. Try and get him oyer near the caravan. I'll hop up on to the top with a rope, and when he
R> nm P C TIOQI* I 11 nn ri A n W +/\ 1 A L ) J '
comes near, I'll endeavour to lassoo him."
Quickly Mr. Harvey jumped on to Bob's bike and set about rounding up the herd
anxiously on the top of the caravan, his rope held ready in his hand. John Harvey sue
the horses very close to the caravan. Bob hurled the ring of rope out amongst the herd
round the leadmg horse's neck it went, holding him back while the rest of the herd charget
After this, there was much rejoicing in the caravan, for Bob had been very
of such a valuable horse.
(d about the loss
" Where do you intend to go from here?" Mr. Harvey asked him.
back again/' adxi 1 definite plans in mind," said Bob, "my main object was to get that horse
..^ w . e re Poking for gold, " said Mr. Harvey, "and I've heard from some of the aboriginal people
at it lies in plenty round about the Sacred Hills of Byamee. What about coming along with us and
trymg your luck?" s
And so it was decided, and the following day there was one more added to the little p&rtv of
travellers. *


v | ; Xv- it, / $•' i
\ f\ V Y "**x. 4 - / •ffl'ftW |
k % \ /SNJ k / JME^l
& *t W J 1*1
% ?f jaggym f, millllR:.- ■--- -OVXa ..:^Tg^Jp#;W
'a "% IBpiiik - r® «&<? \ ' ' ' «
ft * * N- • ' /
~ - - '" —5afc2* - - AIT <8fc :; - "- ' ' ■ i»"*
: • . ieSfc,' 1
W A
[See page 25]
The Landslide


/ -*. gisM jaBa
■F " - :■. - : ' tK, jg|
j|^£:; r 1»HL / p8|§i
Hr G± Ng|||k >i®L 5 \Bg§
F JiBBiiBr fk % JiifW tB 1
I MB jf *F IflM JHp WW -.,•*' wBi 1 \*
S( !WR JFEB | !
§f &jy Wm V "• * -SS' j?j - ■ : -- ''ir HE 1 ' i 1 J^P 4 §i |«| |Bf f JLJ J
P ■: ft' \ ? rJSf0RS\ i %sJjjl Jf f Ji
£ FT a \ !|||»; /
jjHff •'" / IS \ w &«■ j®OJ|
1 / ifl i [gS B
I r ifl H^MBM
/ I «V ai ., ,| |
The Claimin


ys
J
iA
ong
the
ok."
interviews to
le years. He
He was still
civilisation was
to humour
husband isl
far 1
e hac I I
see how they prove*
about a year, he made!
with g
years
place 4
of his t
I'm ng
ng ng
sain ever
be ie to
ag little
fi and
v e they
'bit Then.'
I 1
-loor Aiter
d
kir i
li I
-s.
lbt nil©
b
.d
ble
tell
eek."
3 the
off once
\
CHAPTER VIII
YProfessor in the Never-Never
A few days later Mike developed an attack of pleurisy and the Harneys
decided to halt at the nearest settlement to enable him to recover. Although Mr.
Harvey was doubtful about finding any habitation in such country, strangely
enough, on the afternoon of the following day they did come across a house. To
their° surprise, as they aproached, a woman came running towards them.
"Thank heavens you have come," she v gasped. "I need help desperately."
"Why," said Mrs. Harvey, "Whatever is the matter."
"I've been here practically alone for years," she replied, "My husband goes away for such long
periods and each time its longer. Now I haven't even my two sons or my little daughter—he's taken them
all away But come into the house and I'll tell you my story." And so saying, she led the way mto the
lounge room. "Perhaps I should introduce myself first. I am Mrs. Westbrook.. .Mrs. Joseph Westbrook.
"I seem to have heard that name before," said Mr. Harvey.
"Yes probably," said Mrs. Westbrook, "My husband, the Professor, frequently gave interviews to
the papers, but, of course, that was many years ago. We've been living here for about nine years. He
was quite famous then, but he met with an accident, and there was a strange change in him. He was still
interested in science, but he seemed to become very sad, and, after a time, he decided that civilisation was
evil and he wanted to get awav from it. In his nervous state, I thought it would be best to humour
him' and so I came out here, but I think now that I've done the wrong thing...l think my husband is
losintr his mind. He started to perform weird operations on animals, and insects. It may seem far fetched
to you when I tell you this, but I have seen spiders eighteen inches across after he had finished exper-
LU )UU "llCil J- tvii Jvu A #
imenting with them, and frogs two and a half feet high. _ ?
"Well they certainly seem to be strange experiments," said Bob, "but I don t see h
that a man is losing his mind."
"No, it's the way he behaves," said Mrs. Westbrook. "After he had been here
friends with a tribe of blacks, and, a short time after that, he sent my two sons aw a% with them, saj ing
that it would make them manly. I haven't seen them since. And more than that, two years ago, Eva
my little girl disappeared. My husband said it wasn't good for her to be here in this lonely place with us
so he made arrangements to send her to a boarding school, and took her with him on one of his trips, bui
« , i i -r 1 • 1 1 i* V T ' L ~ —I—
be would never tell me the name of the school, and, as I've never received word from her, I'm begmni
to get verv anxious. The last time he was here he said something which was, I think, the strangest thi
of all. When I told him that I was tired of being here and wanted to return to civilisation, he said, 'Ner\
\j j_ CM# 11 i H I i i TVLVL I ' 1 '* * LUU V x »• o
mind, my dear, you will some day come into a kingdom of your own, where you and I will be able t
make our own civilisation'."
"Well," said Bob Hennessy, "after hearing that, I'm beginning to think there is something a littl
odd about your husband." ... .
Now all this time, Peggy and Tuckonie had been sitting quietly, wondering about the fiogs and
spiders, and when Mrs. Westbrook finished speaking they asked her if they might see them.
"Certainly," she said. "Come with me," and led them into the Professor's laboratory, where they
were amazed to see frogs and spiders so large that they would never have thought it possible. Then,
suddenly, Tuckonie called them to the window, and pointed out. "Look," he said, a tribe.
* ' A # « • • . •• • i •* r TTT ll i_
"That means my husband has returned on one of his visits," said Mrs. Westbrook.
And, sure enough, in a few more minutes, Professor Westbrook came striding in the
greeting him, Mrs. Westbrook set about preparing a meal and she invited the Harvey party to stay, and
she promised that she would nurse Mike for a couple of days.
While she was busy preparing the meal, the Harveys had an interesting conversation with the Pro
V f iix X V nil \_y f» U O \J IXkJ T xv 2 X «." v/ #» - y —— ~ —• • w #
fessor, who told them that his wife had been ill for some time, and he had sent to the city, asking that
an aeroplane should be sent to take her back to civilisation.
After dinner, Mike was put to bed and it seemed to Mrs. Harvey that he was more iP than before,
and, after talking the matter over, they decided to send Mike back to civilisation with Mrs. West-
brook when the plane should arrive.
The following day, the plane arrived, and Mrs. Westbrook was delighted at the thought that she
would soon be able to see her little daughter, Eva, again. After all the luggage was packed into the plane,
Mike and Mrs. Westbrook got in. the goodbyes were said, and soon the plane took off, and rose higher and
higher into the sky, until it faded away in the blue distance. Then Professor Westbrook said a remarkable
thing. "I am so absent minded," he murmured. Really, it's becoming a positive illness. I forgot to tell
my wife that she won't be able to see Eva at the boarding school. . .she is no longer I gave orders a
few weeks ago that she was to be sent back to us out here. She will probably arrive within the next week.
Now, after he had said this, the Harveys felt surer than ever that there really was something the
matter with the poor old gentleman's mind but there was nothing else for them to do but set off once
more on their way. —«rr ■-
After three days' travelling, the little party entered upon some very rough and wild country. Very
little scrub grew up from the arid ground, and that little was stunted and twisted from lack of moisture


However, as the Harveys had a full tank on the back of their caravan, this did not worry them very much,
and, when they camped for the night, they were cheerful and confident that soon they would be approaching
the country where the Sacred Hills of Byamee lay.
But, they were due for a surprise, for, as they were preparing to rest for the night, Tuckonie came
to the caravan, saying that he had seen the tracks of the three-legged men once again.
"Well," said Mr. Harvey, "as long as they don't attempt to interfere with us, there's no need for
us to worry about them." And so saying, they all prepared to retire for the night.
But, during the night, they were awakened by the soft pad of footsteps, and, creeping out silently
io take whoever it was by surprise. Bob and John were just in time to see three natives rushing away from
the caravan. Running quickly, they succeeded in capturing one of them, and it was then that they found
out the secret of the three-legged men. The captured man carried with him a long stick, on the end of
which was a piece of wood carved in the shape of a foot which he used as a walking stick, consequently causing
a third impression to be made in the ground. The man they found was a friend of Moodgee's, who had
been to the caravan for the purpose of turning on the tap of the water tank and letting the water escape.
"Of course it's quite obvious," said Bob, "that there's a plan afoot to keep us away from the land
of Ng'rui Moch and the Sacred Hills of Byamee."
The face of the captured native, whose name was Bingi, grew sullen. "You are right, White People,"
he said. "We do not want you there and if you persist in coming this way, you will be in grave danger."
"We'll take a risk on that," said Mr. Harvey.
"You are fools then," said Bingi, "for we medicine men are masters of magic."
"That's all right," said Mr. Harvey, "I'm a master of magic too, in my own way."
Bingi sneered. "I have heard of your magic, White Man, but, although it is good, it is nothing
compared to the magic of our master, Nararka."
"And who is Nararka?" said Bob Hennessy. But, at this question, Bingi stopped talking, and,
although Bob and John tried to draw him out, and find out more about Nararka, he refused to say any
more. Then Bob and John fell to discussing what they should do with Bingi.. .they did not want to take
him with them.. .so they decided that they would have to let him go after giving him a warning.
"If we ever catch you hanging round this caravan again, and take you prisoner," said Mr. Harvey,
'we'll delay our jouraey long enough to take you to the nearest town and hand you over to the Police.'
Now go." And Bingi crept off into the bush.
After watching Bingi depart the little party in the caravan once more settled down for the night
hoping that this time they would be allowed to get a good night's sleep without further interruptions. But
in this they were doomed to be disappointed for Tuckonie, who was looking round the caravan to see if
any more of the three-legged men were prowling about, suddenly claimed the attention of everyone with
a shout. "Look," he said pointing into the darkness.
"Good gracious/' said Mrs. Harvey "two monstrous green eyes gleaming in the darkness. What-
ever can it be John? I couldn t say, her husband replied, "it's probably a dingo "
"Then Bonzo will have to sleep inside to-night" said Peggy, "I'm not going to leave him outside
when there's a dingo prowling about."
"I do not think it is a dingo, White Man," said Tuckonie, "the eyes are too large, and they are set
too far apart. I think such eyes must belong to a monster."
Oh, your woolly little head is full of monsters lately Tuckonie," said Mr. Harvev with a smile At
this moment Bob Hennessy s horse, which he called Black Majesty, gave a loud, frightened whinnv
Well, whatever animal it is." said Mr. Harvey, "it's frightened Black Majestv "
"Yes," said Bob "and I don't want him to break his tether and get loose again,'after the trouble I
h ® d , to recapture him last time. I think I'll fire a shot out in the direction of those eves just to schre
he beast away. So saying he picked up his gun and fired." The green eyes vanished, but as they van
ished a terrific roar was heard. J
Great Scott,' said Mr. Harvey, "if I didn't know that sach a thing was impossible I'd sav that was
thei roar of a lion or a tiger but whatever it is we've succeeded in frightening it away, and I doi't see ™
good purpose m sitting ur> discussing it all night." a 7
hoi The next d + a ' V ' befor . e they started off, Tuckonie searched the bush to see if he could find anv tracks
belonging to the strange animal which thpv had seen the night before. tracks
YTiite Man, he said, when he came back to the caravan "it troo 00 T +v>nnrrh+ A ■ I
diDgo 'H I ow foo '? rints are '/f. 6 t! . mea as and the scent on the ground is quife different™ ™ n °
However there was nothing to be earned by staying in that spot, so the earavan moved' on
You know, said John thoughtfully, as thev rolled along on their war "nnr nld friar,* Vr A
might have had something to do with that animal." g 7 ' ° llT ° ld friend " Mood gee.
"WJII'T /NT v° b ' :T;™ LLD he T a *v e th ° Se big eyes shine reen in the dark?"
Well I don t know that I d even put that past him " said Mr Harvpv f«n * + • ,
medicine mem" Jns, then Peggy noticed aA of ° f tnCkS ' theSC
something has been killed near here," said Tuckonie


CHAPTER IX
he~> Land of the Women Warriors
One day, when the caravan was travelling through country shaped strange-
ly like a basin 'the wireless receiving set, which had refused to function for some
time to splutter and crackle. There was great excitement and Bob Hen-
nessy immediately set to and tuned in to a station evidently some distance away.
From the wireless the party heard a warning to people in the North Western
Districts that a tiger had escaped from a travelling circus and was believed to
"Well fancy Bo? 6 ''' That explains the whole mystery of the strange animal. No wonder
Black Maiesty was scared." , ~ . , , ,
They were all discussing the news when suddenly Black Majesty, who was cantering along es^ e
the caravan on the end of his tether, gave a whinny of terror, and making a frantic effort, he broke the
rone and galloped headlong away from the caravan into the distance. „
"Something caused that horse to take fright," said Mr. Harvey. They were not long in fin ing
out what it was, for almost as they spoke the roar of a tiger rang out on the still night air.
"I hope to heaven Black Majesty escapes the beast, said Mr. Harvey.
Then they noticed that little Tuckonie was straining every nerve, listening. I hear faintly, in the
distance the chanting of warriors," he said. iL ,
Everyone listened as hard as they could, but, it was some time before they could all hear the chanting.
"Well," said Mr. Harvey, "it looks as though we are about to come across a tribe of some kind
pretty Tuckoniej << and j tk i nk they will be hostile. We are very near the Land of Ng'rui Moch
now and I think that tribe is the only one which would venture into this land."
"Then if it is the Warriors of Ng'rui Moch who are coming this way, we had better try and hide
the caravan as well as we can, because judging by Bingi and Moodgee's behaviour. I don t think ey re
going to be particularly friendly towards us, said Bob. _ .
Acting on these words, Mr. Harvey drove the caravan beneath some low. hanging branches, and be and
Bob searched and found some more branches, and placed them up against the side of the caravan, so that
it would be very hard indeed to see it.
Bv the time they had done this the approaching warriors were very near —but unexpectedly they
stopped and while some of them chanted, others busily started to dig a large hole in the ground M hen
this was done they took some boughs that were lying about and placed them over the hole, and then on
top of these they put bracken and fallen leaves. _ _
"By Jove," said Mr. Harvey, watching from the caravan, "They're making a tiger trap!
The actions of the warriors soon proved that John was risrht in his assumption. One warrior brought a
young wallaby onto the platform, which they had built over the pit. and there he tied it securely. Then
the warriors all vanished amongst the trees and for the next two hours there was nothing but silence.
Then the Harveys noticed a large, dim shape moving cat-like towards the bushes on the edge of the pit.
Then there was a mighty roar and the tiger sprang, from the shelter of the bushes, onto the plat-
form, intending to make a good meal of the little wallaby, but instead of this, both he and the wallaby,
crashed through the boughs into the pit beneath, and there he roared and roared, until they thought he
would never stop. "When he had tired himself out the Warriors of the Ng'rui Moch Tribe crept out from
their hiding places amongst the trees, removed the branches and bracken from the top of the pit and
throw a net down with the tiger. When the tiger saw the warriors up above, bending over the pit, he
became very angry, and jumped round in the pit so quickly that he was soon fast entangled in tene . en
the warriors pulled on the ropes, which were attached to the net, and up came the tiger, and the wallaby,
which Peggy was very pleased to see was still unharmed. The warriors sopn had the tiger lashed to a
little sledge, which they dragged off after them through the bush, in the direction from which they had
come. Further and further they went, until the sound of their proud chanting died right away, lhen the
Harveys knew they were safe, but before going to bed they all said they would be on the look-out for danger,
because even though the tiger was captured, the Warriors of Ng'rui Moch were not to be trusted.
The next dav, down came rain in torrents and for three days it continued until the bad visibility and
boggy ground made John Harvey decide to call a halt. When their camp was made, they were surprised to
see Nulla coming towards them, leading Bob Hennessy's horse, Black Majesty. It transpired that Nulla
had come upon Black Majesty and had succeeded in capturing him.
In the caravan Nulla told them they were very near the great lake which bordered the land of
the Women Warriors.
"But do you believe that there is a Land of Female Warriors," said Mr. Harvey to Nulla.
"Yes, White Man," said Nulla, "the female warriors guard the Hills of Byamee. It has always been
so, and no man may set foot in their land. In the olden days two warriors once defied the law and set
foot in the Land of the Women Warriors, and they were turned into black swans."


•e very <
And
a-ever, tl
"I h
any ran
"He
time before Jie can walk"again." " * """" u, ™" !u ,us WOUIIa Ior "»»• »« it will be some
us about''" j* thin? y# " eaD d ° said John Harvey, "is to tell us what you came to warn
"The Women Warriors say that you have defied their laws " said NarraWn
aboiTt,'therefore. you mustTeave a°t as°aufkT Th6 ' V Z" 8 4 ° Set '° the ZesTround
•"Then, in that case, we will said P<! '° P "" thr ° U8h 4he ,and "
with as much" Zy prt eeded Z'their wav
a a S g Z«
"but moit'ofthZZra r ®^a^o n uZchilS y « f nd n t, their i. t il > \. S ' "V'T time or said Narrabeen.
cruel, therefore. show yfu no mercy " taU8M fr ° m ChiIdhood ,0
arose beforeZ^m^'Th ( " themZt' "il h"", 8 grea * ?U8t of smoke
he saw the blazing timber ahead John Harvev h t f T fl , re *° the f ° rest - Now, "hen
he saw that the land behind him was ablaze as Well ♦£ a™ bac^. bll 1 t °Ji lo °kmg backwards,
again, and galloped away. d 7 ti>e flames - Black Majesty, broke loose
On The .Z iS „n 0 Ze.r;ent'bZing '«mter"crasWnT 7 ' 4 to I™ thr °^ h tb *
over the whole of the forest, and far°in the distarmefl' 1011 t^- tbe .^ ames hac * not y et spread
smoke seeped in through the cracks in the caravan an/ 7 c ? see timber standing safe and green. The
badly. John Harvey could hardly see where he wac w" ca J as ® their ®^ es , to r un, and made them cough
soon they saw, with* relief. that thev were over the w ! 01 ?'f ? eventually the flames became less fierce, and
They were just congratulating themselves on their nond hLl "1 , another half bour the y were through
the opposite direction, hundreds of the warriors of Ng'raf them froTn
TV ell, anyway said Mr. Harvey, "I'm willing to take the risk of being turned into a black
>wan. And so saying he started up the engine. In a couple of hours they had come to a lake which was
very strange, seeing that Mr. Harvey had always believed that there was no water in this countrv How
ever Bob accounted for it, by explaining that the land was in the form of a basin and the heawTains hTd
!° the ° ne 'Place and formed a lake, and he thought that, in this case, the lake would be shallow
enough to enable the caravan to pass through it. «ouia oe snailow
TnnV < ' Th^ t ' s ri^ t '" sai <? Mr. Harvey, "and that will save you and Nulla from being turned into swans
aw tzr;' a«s swas a s sz&sx,.
That s fine ' said .John, "then I think we will try and drive through the lake now "
. ne f. t mom ent the wheels of the caravan were splashing through the water but then to th^ir
surprise, such a dm arose that they were almost deafened, and charging through ihe tbem
then, to their surprise, the Harveys saw Narrabeen at the head of 'the warriors on, and
a I I brandishing her spear, "do not set foot in this land or you die "
gt s«:™ lik **
concerning the
were very disturbed and hurried back across the lake io their own" an™ 63 SBW ° f magic the - v
say any more, but threw her arms round his neck and cried bitterly' ™unded she forgot to
time before Te 1 can wa^ h ava'in S " id "* d "«d'M« ™™d for him. but it will be some
I i mi i . .
soon they saw,
They were just
the opposite di


■
The Statue of Ng'rui Moch in the Cave
[See page 29]


t
:^ ri 3-«"-'' r "'' " . "jr.
page 32]
Aeroplanes to the rescue of Professor Westbrook.


CHAPTER X
he JCandslidej
Mr. Harvey decided to drive the caravan around in a circle to avoid a
clash with the Warriors, and just when he thought he had safely evaded them,
clasn witn ine warnuis, anu , '
there was a terrific din from the rear, and there were the M amors again, chas-
ing after the caravan and shouting madly.
Mr Harvey drove on as fast as the engine would allow. The caravan rocked
and bumped from side to side, for the ground was very rough and soon the path
grew so narrow that it was difficult to keep the caravan on the road, especially
as steep banks arose from the side of the track, with pieces jutting out. As they lumbered along, Tuckonie
noticed that small heaps of rubble and stones kept slipping from the top of the bank and hitting the roof
°f the „ c^™ n ilan , he said „ we win have t0 g0 more slowly still, tor this is dangerous country, and it
mav be that the land will fall in on us." Almost as he spoke there was a loud rumble and down came a
great heap of earth and stones, burying the caravan beneath them. It was a land slide.
When the Warriors saw this they stopped still in their tracks, for they thought
White Man bv the power of his magic, had called upon the earth to cover him.
"Go on' Go on," shouted Moodgee, but the warriors were too frightened and although he did all he
could to make them go forward, Moodgee was at last obliged to give up, and the whole band of warriors
went in digging themselves clear of the wreckage, and
then thev were very relieved to find that the warriors had all gone.
The next night they camped in some very strange country, and everyone noticed that Narrabeen
was very silent, and kept looking over her shoulder, and every few minutes she trembled violently _
"What is the matter with you Narrabeen," questioned Peggy, what are you frightened
"Little White One," said the girl, "we are now in the Land of the bpints.
"I'm frightened of spirits," said Peggy. »»
"Well, I'm not," said Bob, "I'd rather meet a hundred spirits than a dozen of those warriors.
"Perhaps you will meet them, White Man," said Narrabeen.
"Well, anyway we are safe for the present," said Bob, ' so what about something to ea .
"Yes " said Mrs Harvey, "we've been in too much of a hurry to cook anything for
And so they all' got out of the caravan and set about making a fire, and Tuckome and Peggy wen
to a clear, little rocky pool nearby, and filled the kettle from it. Soon they wer,e al enjoy,,ng .^oodme^
and a nice hot cup of tea, and after this everyone felt much more cheerful. In fact they all became so
drowsy that they just leaned back on the grass where they were and almost went to sleep.
Suddenlv Narrabeen said in a voice filled with terror, Look! Look ahead. , .
Then to their astonishment, in the darkness of the night, they saw a host of spirits approaching
They could hardly believe their eyes, but there was no mistake about it. There was Tiddalick the g a
frog, and Biggoon, the giant water rat, and there was Bralgah. the lovely dancer, and last of all there
was the terrible figure of Ng'rui Moch, himself.
"Whv, we must be dreaming," said Bob. 4-v, a + +VIO
And then the spirits started dancing, and round and round they went, faster and sothat the
little party of travellers became quite dizzy watching them. Then a blackness descended on them
Harveys and their friends knew no more. j j : t oil hut
The following morning, when they awoke, they were inclined to think they had dreamed
then thev agreed that they could not all have dreamed the same dream.
"So," said "it must have been real." This made them all feel very nervous.
"I think we will'fill up our tank from the pool here, and get away from this place as quick y -
possible," said Mr. Harvey The water looked so nice that Bob decided to have a cool drink there and th .
but on sipping the water he found that it had an unpleasant taste.
"There is something funny about this water," he said. m . , , , . lnn v ftd
Tuckonie then, cupped his little hands, and tried some of the water When he
up into Bob's face and said, "White Man, you are right. This water has been drugged with pituri.
"What is pituri, Tuckonie," questioned Peggy? »
"It is a drug which my people use," said Tuckome, "and is made from the pituri plant
"Well, if you ask me, that explains everything," said Mr. Harvey, we were all g 0
"But I didn't taste anything peculiar in the water," said Mrs. Harvey.
"No " said her husband. "Because the taste of the tea would have disguised it. ~
"Yes " I think that's what it must have been." said Bob, "Ng'rui Moch s people knew we
be coming this way, so they put the pituri drug in the water Then when they knew- we
they must have dressed themselves up as spirits and paraded and danced be ore us. nrm iq h? sure
and Narrabeen and Nulla, still thought that they had really seen the spirits, and nobody could be sure
who was right. No one wanted to stay any longer in one place, and so ej s <>
their travels, until eventually they reached the land of Ng rui Moch.


CHAPTER XI
he Claiming of the Brides
■ A car f van P art y entered the Land of Ng'rui Moch they were sur-
prised to find that the warriors were not hostile but quite friendly *One of the
warriors, who was a half caste, explained:
Before they come here we must frighten* ttiem''away °but 'once
a.,owed to depart-they raZt Tere Tnd bfe^eTemWst/thftribe StraDgerS ECTer
outer ttdta J medi Ji^'men. **
I see, said Bob thoughtfully, "and who gives the orders to the Medicine Men'"
"Nararka, the high priest of Ng'rui Moch, and Ng'rui Moch himself," replied the warriors
Ho*." tbiS Nar3rka ' PerS ° n '" Said Mr ' Ha " ey - " but thara »»o such creature as Ng'rui
you z: u is *-«• *> **•» - M*
him iJ„ he ,h H e?r rV c e arava 0 n n ST? ™ 7 m " Ch ' and 80 they in ™ ed
out that the whole of the outer tribe were discontented and all'lo'nged to go ftdfown Jib
••wJ yo " rlse "P and def y Nararka?" asked Mr. Harvey.
high Priest of Ng a 'rurMoeh n and NgtiJ
!i Jen the °." sa >d Mr. Harvey, "why not choose another high priest?"
is very powerful. S TOJdJ'you' nma™' forJhe h T 'TT'' Wh ' t<? Man ' that yo " r ma B ic
your friends." S " K for the outer tr.he, and then they would all be
you may be able to make them over-throw^arJka and'his medicine men." 6 °" ter 0 " t0 your side '
"Oh yes U " h renli t dM ribe W ° UM towitness a ma ?ic Performance, to-night. Peter?" said Mr. Harvey
people are very unhappy The JfsTcustam"here'w^VY 0 '?!" 18 th 67 W ° U ' d Hke better ' ust now for our
beautiful of our girls Tchosen byft? x?"? 4 - ° nCe a yeay the »"»"
midnight, and chained to a ledge of rock near the Cave of W® J® ° g ?•' M ° eh ' She is taken at
circle, which is where we live, into the inner circle whfch 1 T® Whlch leads from the outa r
a cliff face and hard to find " ' blB where the medicine men live. It is high up in
-7 0U S T e ™ V 3. Bad "h"" 4 that - Peter?" said Peggy enquiringly.
the brideTf the monster 6 " 0116 '" S! " d Peter ' " P ° r my P r °mised bride, Beatrice, has been chosen to become
"°h that doesn't seem fair," said Peggy.
t^e^a ° na h^ig^ a l W n a meJ ,l1 s^i < f 0 MM a^Harv^ Coinman^S ° f Nararka *"
their tribes, or > M ° St . ° f have been away from
the laws. Beatrice is almost white.'' g ' 311 aVe been brou ?ht here and made to obey
"Jeertainljdo/ 6 Mr- 01^! Jey°renlied g " a An Ut J m"'" Said Bob ' " don,t you! "
we get on after that." " ' Xway, we 11 give a show of magic tonight, and see how
were githlled" Sound" the °la ravin' C el™ °ny > and when ni ? ht there they all
to use to make the magic. So he fixed a lw 3 m3gic lantern < and this he tended
find m ° St wonderful Pictures, at which the natives" werl x Carava ?' and then Proceeded
underneath one of the bunks, he got out someYarketf Z l 1 Uch im P ressed - Then, from a box
the rockets shot away up into the night and fell down in and fire - works and set them alight, so that
rejoicing rose up from the outer tribe ?f Ng"rui Moch Ind tW TY f Then a great shouti »e and
masters of magic who had ever lived. 7 led John Harve y as one of the greatest
White Man," said Peter "ttia +—cv,
admiration, now you have only to win thei^frlendship!" lmpressed; you have won their respect and


"I think I can do that easily enough," said John.
"In that case then," said Peter, "you may count the outer tribe as your friends, and if it should
happen that you should haye to fight Nararka, then I think the outer tribe would fight on your side."
"Well that's cheerful news, John," Mrs. Harvey whispered to her husband.
"Thp best we've had for weeks," he replied. .
Meanwhile in a rudely constructed house on the other side of the sacred circle, Nararka, the high
priest satXing' thoughtfully at his wife, Mallee. Mallee was taking him to task for having let the white
people enter the land of Ng'rui Moch.
"Thev will upset all your plans," she said, "you should have killed them at once.
Nar ark a looked at her scornfully. "You forget," he said, "that the laws of the land say that no
persons apart from witches, shall be killed between this time of the year, and the night of the claimmg
of the bride." . . „,, •.
"Well then." said Mallee, "I would keep my eye upon them and as soon as the claimmg of the bride
is over, kill them."
At this instant Nimitv, the old witch woman entered the room.
"You sent for me, Great One?" she said.
"Yes," said Nararka. "gaze into the eyes of my statue yonder, and tell the future for me."
The old woman hobbled across the room and gazing into the eyes of the statue said, m a shrill voice.
<( ttt • n v.vorirj, von are doomed! The white people will master you.. .you will capture them,
Yoe is upon o , . . h . people w in com e to their rescue, yes, and the black
against you Z. "eat tribes of the Irunta and Kakadu will heip to bring about your
sbouted Nararka. "1 don't believe you! You have always hated me and you are
saving this just to frighten me. Moodgee, to the tiger pit with this woman.
""No. Mercy!" shrieked the old witch, as Moodgee dragged her away.
But Nararka would not listen. "Let her die," he said, "she has caused me nothing but vexation.'
The news of her punishment spread quickly through the land, and soon the top of the Pit was
crowded with the people of the tribe. Bob and John attracted by the noise, came walking up to the place
and tre horrified P to P see the old woman being lowered down into the pit with the tiger.
"We won't stand for that." said Bob. as he drew his rifle and took aim at the savage beast below.
"If you dare harm the sacred beast." said Moodgee, the medicine man, "the vengeance of Nararka
will fall upon you." . .
"Let it fall " said Bob. And with these words, discharged the contents of his rifle into the tiger,
which rolled over on to its back, writhing in pain. Two more shots from John finished him off.
And then, like a flash. Bob lumped down into the pit and by means of the rope, which the medicine
men had used to lower Nimity into the pit. he hauled her up to the top again.
Moodgee and Bingi would have taken them prisoners there and then, but that they feared that the
gruns mmht be went down upon her knees and promised eternal friendship and grati-
tude t0 4 ( I^ r r ep e , s , Bob you want to help us. you can tell us how to get into the inner circle, because
we believe there is gold there. Also our young friend. Tuckonie here thinks that that is where he
Nimity agreed to show them the path which led up the side of the cliff to the cave of snakes, but she
warned them that they were taking a great risk in attempting to pass the inner circle.
""We know that," said Mr. Harvey, "but we are prepared to take it."
"Very well then," said old Nimity, "and if I can help you, I will, for I hate Nararka, and all his high
priests. Never fear, Nimity will be watching you, and when you are in danger, she will save you if she can.'
And so saving, the old woman slipped quietly out of the caravan and vanished amongst the bashes.
It was only after Nimity had gone, and all the excitement had died down that the Harveys discover d
Nulla and Narrabeen had vanished. , , , +v, n t Vi<»
The next dav, when thev confided in Peter that they were worried over this, he confessed that he
knew where thev were. He told them that Narrabeen had been compelled to work m the land i bel °^_th®
earth for disobeving the laws of the Women Warriors, and that Nulla had been taken to the place; for
sick on the other side of the sacred circle, so that he might get well and strong again and then become
member of the tribe. , _
"Where is this place in which Narrabeen is made to work? asked Mrs. Harvev.^
"That I cannot tell you, White Woman," said Peter, "for it is agamst the, la^ s - „ ~ M
"But we must find Narrabeen —we can't have her working below the earth all the time, said Mrs.
Harvey. "We must rescue her."
'"Yes," said Bob, "if you'll only tell us where she is, we 11 do the rest.


And soon from the blackness, the slim figure of Narrabeen appeared.
Oh White Man." she said, "yon have come for me."
•'Yes ""he said' " Qniek1y ' there is n0 time t0be Can von manage to climb this ropet"
bach she^as^a^erl^greeted l^uckonie 110
•'Tell me. NWteem" said Mrs. Harvev. "what sort o/w ork did do in tbe land below the earth r
tbev -•*>« *> -».♦ *««*.•» ™ to. N „ wondet
in the do™ war * "* , ™ * ** d °° r tte W8Tan ' and - han * «• opened. Ximity appeared
the cave f of Ses°"' Pe ° P,e " *« ~ »» d ' will show you the path which leads t<
about «ace then she tooh them a,one
the ,ed f e. These pieces, she explained, T£?
Much, Si y ? „VX t o^.^Pf de '' J > " 18 *• — of %'rui
"We are aware of that." said Bob,.%and will take the risk." > I
secret ™ found the
circle, Z°'^e^: t d^ifcrteJ^^d- 8 ? id T " ha ' "J?" We haTe passed fat o the inne,
„ m , , r Z discovered n n the ledee, the medicine men could quite easily push us over "
White Man, said Peter.jj'I trust you, and I know you will do the best you can "
but during' *°1 the d f 7 ° f the c,aiE ™r °f the bride
«? "Z"" dTotre^
***
blocked the entrance to the cave wnnliJ hJ Zt-h 5 £ 7 Zt 7Z- Said the gTeat slab of stone '
hand upon the bride's shoulder.'showing would"accept her S<!,f < ™ U,d C ° me ° U ' a ' ,d P ' aCe hii
Under
c V + T EII \I sai ! d Pet , Br ' ? would lose my life if Nararka found out that I had told YOU where this nlaoe
les, but I will make a bargain with you. I will tell you how to reach the land below the earth if YOU will
try and save Beatrice from becoming the bride of Ng'rui Moch." '
"Done,"' said John Harvey. And the two men shook hands.
''The place is guarded, though," said Peter," and the guards will not let you pass."
We will overcome that." said John, "just you show us where the place* is."
° Peter took them, there and then and pointed out the wav, then he left them
fo T iz p ;zzT e : s
Narrabeen," they called. "Narrabeen."
shown them 1 " and" henthe ° f UP the S6Cret path whicb Nlmit y had
wouldn't be seen in 1 A C f' crouched flat against the face of the cliff, that thev
with a grinding noTse the VE?* hUSh UP ° n the p6 ° ple below ' theu-
cession of medfcine nmn. garbed ° f ° Ut came 3 pro "
T Sha " See ether the "' B Ng'rai Moch, or not," whispered Bob to John.
walk through the' of the f e t the f hu « e arld f ro ' es q u e .figure of the wild-cat man
Of the bride. ' er t0 ™ led^e of rock ' and his hand upon the shoulder


som
<'
somewher
people fr
i- V~- r
feet high. Its
The mec
he idol and
who was
t his
Harveys .
"So, my
do yon? Well,
"What
"Your
great masi
people to g
ine men wi
Sd then Be
of the whit
for it... Gre
idol, and c
A.nd then
t one,
h WOT ida
Na a
drug was
CHAPTER XII
he~> Meeting with Ng'rui Moch
The Harveys were utterly confounded with wonder when they saw this and
after slipping unobserved into the cave they hid until the medicine men had
ClltCi rr G uuvwov/i * *J
passed out on the other side. Then the Harveys went forward slowly after them.
Now, Peggy and Tuckonie were wearing the little gaiters of bark and skin
which Tuckonie °had made, many weeks ago, when Maroubra warned him, in a
Y\ 111 X. —~ 7 "
dream, that they would have to pass through the cave of snakes. So Tuckonie
felt quite safe and would have gone ahead only Bob held him back.
"No, youngster," he said, "I'll go first."
Then suddenly he uttered a cry of pain. "Oh," he said, "there's a sudden pain in my leg! I believe
there are snakes in here, and I've been bitten by one."
Just then, however, they heard a tinkling sound on the floor of the cave, and Tuckonie's bright eyes
soon found the object which had made it. To their surprise they found it to be a hypodermic needle filled
with some kind of drug.
"So there are no snakes here at all," said Mr. Harvey, "one of the medicine men has been hiding
somewhere in the cave and has injected you with this needle. The cave of snakes is just a tale to frighten
■om sneaking through it into the inner circle."
But by this time Bob Hennessy was beginning to lose the power of his limbs, and had to be helped
through the cave by the others. However, the native who had used the needle in the cave, had given the
alarm and when the Harveys and Bob came out on the other side, they were surrounded by a host of
medicine men, who took them prisoner.
Soon they were taken to a very large cave, where the medicine men were gathered. The cave was
lit by flares, and at the other end of it, they saw a great idol of Ng'rui Moch, which must have stood twenty
mouth was open, and its eyes gleamed wickedly.
icine men then took Bob Hennessy, who was now quite helpless, and unable to move, down
[ laid him upon its base. Then, from the depths of the cave appeared a good-looking kalf-
to th
cast,
dressed in flowing white robes.
— _
At his approach, all the medicine men who were assembled in the cave, bowed down before him, and
arveys knew that they were in the presence of Nararka.
"So, my white friends," said the wicked high priest, "you think your magic is greater than Nararka s,
we shall see."
*—- 7 -
"What are you going to do with us?" said John, anxiously.
"Your friend is going to be sacrificed to Ng'rui Moch," said Nararka, smiling. "If you and he are
such great masters of magic," he said, "he will be able to save himself. Let him call upon the gods of the
> 11 i3aiU ) * A X
e power to stand up and walk from the idol, and if he can do this, then my
him."
"Very well Nararka, and you medicine men," he said, "I will call upon the
spirits of the white men to save me, but if they do not hear me, and you should kill me, believe me you will
suffer for it.. .Great Spirits of the white people, hear me, and see my plight! I lie helpless upon the base
of the idol, and only you can save me! Show your power then, and save me, I beg!"
the astonishment of all, including the Harveys, Bob Hennessy rose up from the idol
and walked to where his friends stood.
At this, confusion broke out in the cave, and the medicine men fled in fear. Nararka, and his wife,
Mallee, were forced to return to their house in grave disappointment.
"You and I know that there is some trickery," said Nararka to Mallee, "but how COULD the white
man have done such a thing? The effects of that drug do not wear off for hours."
i, the most trusted of his medicine men rushed into the room saying, "Nararka, 0
cered the secret of how the white man arose. Bingi and I found old Nimity, the
en in the base of the idol, and in her hand she had this hypodermic needle."
rarka examined it, and found that it contained an antidote to the drug. The meant, that when
injected the effects of the other drug would vanish.
"So, it was old Nimity again," he said. "I hope you've taken her prisoner? Take her out into the
bush, tie her to a post and smear her with honey. Nature will do the rest."
But Nimity had not given up hope, for many strange secrets were hers, and so, closing her eyes she
conjured up a vision of her grand-son, Tuckonie. Then she sent her dowie, or dream spirit towards the
vision, saying, "Tuckonie, my grand-son, lam here, and in danger ! Come quickly! Rescue me or I perish!"
Now, at this time, Tuckonie was talking to Peggy in their little hiding place in the bush. Mr. and
Mrs. Harvey, and Bob were with them. Suddenly they noticed Tuckonie's eyes half-closed.
"Is anything the matter with you, Tuckonie?" said Peggy. "Do you feel sick?"
"No, Peggy, no," said Tuckonie, "do not interrupt me, I feel as if a spirit is trying to talk to me."


Then his eyes closed altogether, and after a space of a minute or two, he looked as if he were asleep.
Then he opened his eyes again.
"My grand-mother, Nimity the witch woman is in danger, I must go to her at once."
And without waiting to explain he rushed away over the rough country, until at length he came to
the place where Nimity was tied to the post.
"Tuckonie, my boy, you have come," she said, when she saw him. "They left me here, so that the
ants might kill me, but now this will never happen. Quickly my boy, untie my bonds."
And losing no time, Tuckonie did as he was asked. Then Nimity went to a little pool close by and
bathed herself clean. '
' Come with me," said Nimity, "Yonder, through the bushes is a burial ground which belonged
to another tribe. This tribe left their departed ones high in the branches of a tree, so that their spirits might
hear the leaves whispering to one another, and might feel the sweet summer breeze as it swept by."
In the fork of a tree which she pointed out to him Tuckonie found the bones of one who had died
many years ago. These bones they took back to the place where Nimity had been tied up, and there they
left them. Then Tuckonie took Nimity to where his friends were hiding.
When she got there, Nimity spoke to them, saying, "My friends, you are in very grave danger that
I know, by power of my magic, so do not question me or disturb me until I have done that which I'have
to do." And so saying, she sat upon the ground, closed her eyes and became as still as a statue.
"What are you doing?" asked little Peggy.
Child, said the old woman, after a few minutes' silence, "I sent my spirit on a journey I sent it
to Mameela, my daughter, who is Tuckonie's mother, and I told her to tell'her husband. Chief Narkunda
that Tuckonie and his friends were in danger. I think they will come in answer to my message I only
hope they will arrive in time to save us all."
u don't forget," said John, "that we haven't yet carried out our promise to Peter, there is still
the bride to be rescued.
"I'll help you do that," said Nimity.
When that night came, Nimity led Tuckonie towards the house of Nararka, then choosing a tree
outside his window, she asked Tuckonie to climb the tree and fasten a rope, high in the branches. Then she
gave him a handful of crystals, which he placed upon the ground, under the tree, and she told him that at a
signal irom her he was to set fire to these crystals. Then Nimity climbed half way up the rope so that she
seemed to be floating in mid-air, for in the darkness, the rope could not be seen. Then Tuckonie saw her
signal, and lit the crystals, and green fire flooded the night.
, Now Nararka and Mallee were at their window, gazing out into the night, and when they saw this
horrible sight, which they believed to be Nimity's ghost, they were overcome with fear.
Set free the bride," cried old Nimity, the witch woman, "or my ghost will never leave this house."
In terror, isararka, lost no time in giving the order to Moodgee, and Beatrice was set free. Then
tuckonie went up to her and led her back to where the Harveys were hiding. However, at this moment
they were astounded to see, approaching them unevenly through the bushes, the hideous figure of Ng'rui
Moch, himself, closely followed by a small, white chili, of about Peggy's age.
~ hy John, said Bob, "that's not a monster! It's a man, wearing a disguise, and walking on
. • . so sa y m S> he lea Pf a t the figure of Ng'rui Moch, and dealt a hard blow at one of the legs,
at which, the monster, toppled over and they could see, that a man, was struggling to get free, from the
lsguise. io their _ surprise, when they disentangled the man from the robes, they discovered him to be
none other than, Professor Westbrook!
Professor "VVestbrook!' cried John and Bob together, in surprise. "What is the meaning of this
and who is this child you have with you?"
"That is my daughter, Eva," said the Professor.
"So this is where you had her hidden away," said Bob, "but what is the meaning of it all? Why are
>ou masquerading as a monster? Unless you can explain things satisfactorily Professor, I'm afraid you're
going to have a lot to answer for." J
"u V Ku°k 'V lg *5 S n t W ?frf° r ' friends, said the Professor, "what I have done, I did for the best."
Kubbish said Bob, If you re the brain behind all this, then you're little short of a criminal."
"M, 'J 1 Professor seemed rather surprised that the Harveys should take such a serious view of things.
1 < u ave een eccentric and far fetched," he said, "but I have done nothing really wrong."
,•«. U otim & wrong, said Mrs. Harvey, "why, every member of the tribe lives in constant fear of his
lite and your rule is one of absolute cruelty."
ou re wrong, said the Professor. "There's no cruelty in my laws. Certainly I've had to rule by
rear to a certain extent but that is necessary when one is trying to build up something great and when
as 011 f. une u ~ a f P eo ple to carry out one's plans. lam trying to build a new civilisation, I hoped
e vou ever nd me out until my plans had been completed. But since you've succeeded in doing so,
I may as well tell you the story:
f e ? rs ' J said, I was very famous in the world of science, and had great ideas for the future
tii > k t-+ m f U W Sa T w se^s h an( f greedy people were...how they schemed and cheated to get
m ioiifn 6r t j on . e her...how they fought and lied for gold and how they used their knowledge to build
ies o es ruction I decided that there was no hope for the world...that sooner or later the civilized
i F - e * J\° U j Ml ? e ea j^ e . r ? se f ? u f f° huild a new civilization of my own, whose people would
en y an simp e and kmd...where ambition, intolerance and other vices would not be allowed to


! + rw-p man as I had discovered a rich deposit of gold in this locality, I
stamp out the natural greatness of ma . » me who would help me work the mine, and I got from it,
enoug^^gold^To'h^lp^ of trying to make the old Aboriginal
'' But, said Mr. Harvey, whyma you go TTinn „ tpr „ ods and a ll the rest of it."
legends come to life —The Women Wa *3d'of wonders •• gaid'the'Professor. "We civilized people know
"Because man is at his best m a world of ™™ers, < { the things which has killed us. Give a
WIU makC Mm kQeel * SUperStiti ° US fear and h<! be °° meB
rCTital ;?Weli ileTyour point of view," said Bob, "and I dare say, it has it's merits, but there are many
clever Scientists, who no more than try to fulfil his own particular dream."
"But" said Mrs. Harvey, "why all the cruelty?
"There was no cruelty," said the Professor. with a tiger by the order of
"What!" said Bob. "This old wo ° ian ere 'which displeased him. Isn't that cruelty if
Nararka, your High Priest, just because she h be l ieve this. Nararka wouldn't do such thing.
"Why, Mr. Hermessy," said the £of«»o£ worse besides. And what about Beatrice
"He did do such a thing, said Mr. Mar ey, tribe . shortly before the wedding,
here. She was promised m ? ftVrui Moch Do you think that is fair play?" .
she is stolen ™ 6 ' that n ° gW Wh ° ' lad P ''°
in ma " i Weitt°e U n d NL«ra e L a sn't 1 'carried outpour' "'said Bob. "And in any case, seeing that you're
really Ng'rui Moch, who was the girl supposed to' ™ rr y' th wives and as yo u know it isn't
"One of my Medicine Men, said WestbrooE iney muse husbands they are always chosen
the custom amongst the Aboriginees for the gir so c 00se c)a i m i ng brides for my Medicine Men."
for th % b d y sacrifice g my friend, Mr. Hennessy at the
Altar Professor, "a human sacrifice ! But I lian't { belief« ci^!
was one of my most loyal supporters. I knew- him wjjnj; waQted to £ elp me carry out my plans."
He agreed with me that there vas no hp PTnlanation of everything now. Nararka has only pre-
"Well, Professor," said Bob, "I can see the explanation^ >t eveytnmg hen you ha d
tended to agree with you—-in re ality e was' JJ ™ become Ng'rui Moch himself."
served'up ''All that strangers have told you is true," she said, fixing her
"he must be banished from the tribe. Will
you come with me while I confront him with beUeved her dead and she thought that if the
hdP thCm ° Ut ' " y P ymg
with terror, as they expected at any moment to.see the gos m the bush , they were
For, as Moodgee had told them that she was dead and that he had tomm
qUitß dsudt^y^etor 1 Westbrook with his daughter Eva, followed by
the Utt Whert d he o |r a o d flsSceused Nararka of doing all those dreadful things of which he was guilty,
Nararka refused to admit them. But the evidence against him was oo s r . guilty of much cruelty
"You have twisted my commands to suit your own ends and you have y
and onnression " said the Professor. "Therefore I cart you out from thetnbe, you can no g
here and you may be thankful that your punishment is not more rootQj hidden behind some
Now, unknown to the Professor Nararka had a secret be Assemb iy Room of the Medicine Men.
hanging curtains, and when one pulled this cord, the bell r g minutes a host of Medicine Men
Unseen by the others, he managed to pull the cord »d with™jerj fewrmmntes a Westbrook .
were in the room, who quickly made prisoners of Ml Nararka a «emie s incluo g „
Malice, "and
let SfatorfStttt o% rU rukr°"' " *
land forever £utare„they mus ." You may even threaten to kill me if you choose, but
1 StiU "We S will see about that," said Nararka. Then turning to the Medicine Men, he said, "Take this


mail and dress him in the robes of Ng'rui Moch, then take him to the Sacred Ledge of Lock and wait for
me. And take with you his daughter, Eva."
Now r , when the Professor heard his little girl's name mentioned, he grew very much afraid, but before
he could ask Nararka what he meant, he was taken away by the Medicine Men. An hour later, dressed as
Ng'rui Moch, he stood on the Sacred Ledge of Rock, with Eva, his daughter, standing between him and
Nararka, while the Harveys, Tuckonie and Bob stood close by, under guard.
"Now," said Nararka to the Professor, "you will do what I say and address the tribe, otherwise
1 will call upon Moodgee to run a spear through the heart of your daughter."
When the Professor heard this, his face turned an ashy pale.
After a few moments he said sorrowfully, "You have won Nararka, I will do as you say," and he
held up his hand to address the people who were assembling on the flat country below.
"People of the Tribe of Ng'rui Moch," he said—and then he stopped suddenly, for his ears had
caught the sound of whirring machinery and looking up, he saw aeroplanes fast approaching the land!
Down they went, one after the other, to make a landing on the level ground beneath.
"Hurrah!" shouted Mr. Harvey, "White people to the rescue. They'll never dare to spear your little
daughter now, Professor. For if they did, they'd know what to expect from the men in those planes."
"But John," said Mrs. Harvey, "are there enough men in those planes to fight the whole tribe?"
"Don't forget dear," replied her husband, "that the outer tribe would fight with us against Nararka."
Now, all this time Nararka stood hesitating, not quite knowing what to do. Then suddenly there
was a great shouting sound and from behind every tree, came a strange warrior, brandishing his spear
and shield and singing his battle song.
Tuckonie pointed forward eagerly, his hand trembling with excitement. "Look," he said, "the
Arunta Tribe is coming! There is my Father at the head of his warriors. They must have received the
thought message, which Nimity sent to them!"
And then there appeared a second great host of warriors, with different markings upon their
bodies. They, also held their spears aloft and shouted a mighty battle cry.
"The Kakadu Tribe," said Mr. Harvey excitedly, "with Nulla, the blond warrior and Old Chief Bald
Head, leading the others. Nulla must have escaped, and gone to warn his tribe that we were in danger."
On came the warriors, shouting and dancing. Now, when Nararka saw this, he knew he was beaten
and his one plan was to escape.
"Quickly Medicine Men," he cried! "Through the opening of the cave!"
And leading the others, he made a dash for the cave. Next minute he drew back with a shriek of
horror, for there in the opening of the cave he saw what he believed to be the ghost of Nimitv, the
Witch Woman.
"Back traitor," she cried, "back, to await your punishment."
r lhe next instant the warriors of the Kakadu and Arunta Tribes were swarming up the face of the
cliffs, while at the same time, white men came running over from the aeroplanes.
Soon, Nararka and Mallee and all the wicked Medicine Men, were taken prisoner.
Then Peggy noticed that little Tuckonie was gazing sorrowfully at his Father, Chief Narkunda. Soon
his brown eyes filled with tears.
''Why Tuckonie," said Peggy, placing her arm around his shoulder, "what is making you so sad?"
"1 m sad, because you and your people have succeeded, Peggy, but I have failed. I have not found
the Golden Boomerang and soon my Father will come over and ask me and I cannot bear to disappoint him."
Ihen Peggy had an idea. "Why Tuckonie," she said, "you still have two of the magic berries that
Maroubra gave you. Eat one of them now and see if anything happens."
But Tuckonie had only one berry left, so he placed it to his mouth and ate.
"Oh Great Spirit, 0 Byamee," said the little black boy, casting his eyes up to the sky, "let me not
disappoint my Father! Show me where the Golden Boomerang lies."
And then suddenly in the air there was music. And it seemed that many sweet voices sang together,
but they used no words. Then, like a golden melody, separating itself from all the other harmony the
voice of the Great Spirit was heard.
ihe Golden Boomerang lies before your feet, Tuckonie," it said, "as it lies before the feet of
every man."
And looking down, Tuckonie saw, at his feet a large piece of white quartz and taking it up, he saw
within it, gold in the shape of a Boomerang.
My bather, he cried joyfully, "look! The Golden Boomerang! It is found."
As it will always be found by those who have the heart to look for it," said the voice.
Then in the hush which followed, Mrs. Harvey put her hand lightly on her husband's arm. "John,"
she said in an awed whisper, "I thought I heard a voice."
As all who listen will hear it," said the voice, "for I speak in the heart of every man."
"It is the voice of Achievement," said John.
"No," said Nararka the wicked one, "it is Power."
"It is Ambition," said the Professor.
xi/ io 1 11 ui tiuiiy odiu lug x roxGssor.
"Youth," said Mrs. Harvey.
"Contentment," said Bob.
.And the music rose to it's height as the sweet voice spoke again.
"I am all these and more," it said, "for I am Love!"


A ?23.2
Copy
1508
02230650


4 Km f
Sal nnf'i -jNi'< f' rr'TTmI iW ' --J/ii' 4
'Us Jj ) jf j i J
£ ;**<■ sr'M m *£0^
IsfSb "
(A I
K* ! * '—«- S Jk/Sfl
Peggy and Tuckonie find the greatest treasure of all in the Cave of Wonders.
HOW TO ENTER
for this interesting
COMPETITION
(1) Draw and colour any one
of the illustrations in this
Golden Boomerang book.
The drawing can be any
size in ink or pencil and
the colouring can be crayon
or paints, just as you fancy.
(2) Send your entry to Box
2928-NN, G.P.0., Sydney,
before 30th June, 1942,
with the date of your
birth, your name in full
and your address.
(3) The judges are the Manag-
. ing Director of Hoadley's
Chocolates, their Advertis-
ing Consultant and Artist
Lahm of Sun Newspapers.
The judges' decision is final
and binding on all entrants,
and this is an express con-
dition of entry. No cor-
respondence will be entered
into with respect to any
aspect of this competition.
CAN YOU SKETCH?
VALUABLE PRLZES
Trophy valued at £3'3'- and 12 other prizes of
GOLDEN BOOMERANG Tiepins and Brooches
In appreciation of the support Australian boys and girls are giving to their products,
Hoadley's Chocolates Ltd., of Melbourne, are offering prizes in this gTeat drawing
competition as given below.
In each of the Age groups following, an attractive Golden Boomerang brooch will be
given to the girl and a handsome Golden Boomerang tiepin will be given to the boy
who sends in the best entry.
In addition to these prizes (12 in all) a Golden Boomerang trophy valued at £3/3/0
will be given to the best of all entries —or the champion of champions. Don't delay
send your entry in early. Read the conditions carefully.
ACE CROUPS This great competition is being organised by
, A Z: ' 31 * Dec ' " 41 HOADLEYS
2. Over 7 and under 9. Chocolates Ltd.
3. Over 9 and under 11.
4 Over ll and under 13. Manufacturers of the famous
loZ » I?. VIOLET CRUMBLE BARS
★ EARN MONEY WRITING ABORIGINAL STORIES
Do you know a true Aboriginal story about Aboriginal life or custom ? It can
be sad or humorous —it can be educational, but it must be authentic. Each
month during the Hoadley's broadcasts of "The Search for the Golden Boomerang"
prizes totalling £6/6/0 are given that is, each month £l/1/0 will be given in
each State for the best story received of not more than 300 words. Address your
true Aboriginal story to Box 2928-NN, 0.r.0., Sydney.
