

English Hexameters
T. S. OM O N D




English Hexameter Verse
With a Specimen
BY
T. S. OMOND
M.A. EDIN. & OXON.
FORMERLY FELLOW OF ST JOHN’S COLLEGE, OXFORD
DAVID DOUGLAS
EDINBURGH
1897




NOTE
Students of English poetry, and they alone, can be
expected to find matter of interest in the following paper.
They are asked to regard it as an essay in every sense of
the term—an attempt which seeks to suggest even where
it explicitly and definitively asserts, and whose argument
is now submitted to the notice of more authoritative
judges, in the hope of calling attention to a subject on
which criticism would seem not yet to have said its final
word.
It may possibly be well to add that the word English
is used in these pages with strict accuracy as denoting the
language not the people, consequently without any. wish
to debar those who use that language, in whatever country,
from claiming their rightful share in the glories of our
" English ” literature.


ENGLISH HEXAMETERS.
The theory which this paper proposes to expound can be very briefly
stated. It amounts to no more and no less than this, that the
English hexameter yet remains to be written. English verse, there-
fore, is the subject of its discussion, which will be conducted
throughout with the aim of being intelligible to the non-classical
reader. Such technicalities as it is impossible to avoid introducing
can fortunately be explained in the language of ordinary life. Our
examination will begin from and end with the actual verses of
English poets; and if its progress compels us to give close attention
to the subtleties of their music, such study may be trusted to repay
its exertion. Hitherto, in this particular field, the natural order of
things would seem to have been inverted, the grammarian having
aspired to make laws by which the poet shall sing. One main object
of this paper is to recall the rightful relation of the two, and bid the
critic be content to summarise and formulate results achieved by our
poets, instead of laying down imaginary rules to control and check
the free flow of their inspiration.
To the English reader, it may be assumed, hexameters are simply
a curious form of somewhat lengthy verses, familiar to him in the
writings of Longfellow ( Evangeline ), Kingsley {Andromeda), Clough
{Bothie of Tobernavuolich), and others. Of the laws of their structure
he knows little and cares less. He probably notices in them a
peculiar “galloping” effect, unlike the sober tread of ordinary blank
; and is conscious of a certain rigidity, not to say artificiality,
of structure, and of a difficulty sometimes in knowing where the


accent is meant to fall. This is quite as much as the ordinary reader
either can or need know. We can enjoy blank verse or the heroic
couplet without discussing the laws of their metre. If we cannot do
the same with the hexameters of Evangeline and its fellows, we may
safely conclude that there is something amiss with either writer or
reader, and what that something may be it is the duty of the critic
to discover.
The unfamiliar effect produced by these verses is certainly not
due entirely to their length. Our poets have lately accustomed us
to metres which would have astonished the readers of an earlier
generation. The very longest line in English poetry, it may be safely
asserted, occurs in our late Laureate’s latest volume, in a poem
named Kapiolani —
“ Call’d on the Power adored by the Christian, and crying ‘ I dare her,
let Peele avenge herself.’ ”
This line is longer by one-fourth than the hexameter, yet do we
find the slightest difficulty in enjoying its music? And if this be the
record, it is run very close by lines of Mr Swinburne and others.
Indeed, the development of the long line is one of the most notice-
able features of contemporary English poetry, as must have occurred
to the least observant reader. Browning, Morris, all our creative
singers vie in showing us what can be done with long swinging lines,
and how consonant these are to the genius of our language. We
must find, therefore, some other cause for the effect of unfamiliarity
still produced by the hexameter alone of our longer metres.
There need be no mystery made about the matter. The
undoubted cause of this unfamiliarity is that hexameter verse has
been built up after alien models. And that the English reader may
understand precisely how this came about, we must deal shortly
with some questions of “ prosody.” It will not, however, be neces-
sary to go beyond the statements to be found in any elementary


text-book, some knowledge of which is essential to even a superficial
study of English poetry.
To begin, then. The value of a syllable depends on two causes,
which the grammarians call “quantity” and “accent.” Quantity is
the natural duration of a sound, long or short as the case may be;
accent is the temporary importance'given to it by the stress of the
voice in reading. These two factors obviously coexist in all poetry.
But in classical verse, in the Greek and Latin languages, quantity
played a larger part than it does with us. Roughly speaking, their
quantities were absolutely fixed and immutable. The Greeks had
even different letters for long O and short O ( omega and omicron),
long E and short E, etc. Accent, on the other hand, was so
subordinate and inferior that scholars are still disputing as to what
precisely it meant, and most people read Greek by quantity alone,
totally disregarding the accent-marks. In these respects Greek
poetry was very different indeed from English. And it will be seen
that therefore,' in analysing Greek verse, it is possible to lay down
with absolute certainty what “ feet ” went to make up the line. A
foot is, of course, a collocation of syllables—in the commonest cases
either two or three—which may be formed either by one single
word, or by parts of various words. The Hexameter, as its name
implies, consisted of six feet. These feet had but two varieties:
they must be either or spondees. The dactyl takes its name
from the Greek word ddktulos , a finger, because just as the finger
consists of one long and two short joints, so the dactyl consists of
one long syllable followed by two short ones. The Greek word
daktulos is itself an illustration ; in English such words as wanderer ,
eulogy , luminous , come sufficiently near it. The spondee again was
like the thumb with its two joints of equal length; it contained
invariably two long syllables. Words like byplay or side-light, with
compound adjectives like blood-stained, may pass for examples of
this foot, though, as we shall see later, the resemblance is by no


means complete. Of the six feet which make up the Hexameter, the
first four may be either dactyls or spondees indifferently, the fifth
and sixth are usually, though not invariably, a dactyl followed by a
spondee. To the arrangement of sound produced by this ending
much of the characteristic cadence of the hexameter line is un-
doubtedly due.
Such was the simple structure of the Greek and Latin Hexameter.
From these few elements was compounded the “ strong-wing’d music
of Homer,” and this metre filled in the Ancient world very much
the place that Blank Verse does in English literature. Another
favourite metre, however—the only other requiring our attention—
was the “ Elegiac ” couplet (the name is derived merely from the
circumstances of its first using), which may be similarly compared
to our “Heroic Verse,” the favourite metre of Pope and his school.
This Elegiac metre consisted of a hexameter precisely as before,
followed by a slightly shorter line, the “ pentameter ” or verse of
five feet. The structure of the pentameter was curious. The line
was divided into two halves, the fifth foot (a spondee) being, so to
speak, cut in two, and one syllable placed at the end of the first
half, the other of the second. An English approximation will show
this more clearly than further description:—
“ Stretches and j swings to the | slow ( passionate | pulse of the | sea.”
The first and second feet may be either dactyls or spondees in-
differently (in the above instance they are both supposed to be
dactyls); the third and fourth, as in the illustration, must always
be dactyls. The fifth foot is, as it were, divided, being represented
in the above instance by the two words slow and sea , which come
at the end of the first and the second halves of the line respectively.
Another English instance of this division, corresponding with con-
siderable accuracy to the peculiar effect of the pentameter, will be
found in the alternate lines of Browning’s Abt Vogler. The follow-
ing verses, translated by Coleridge from Schiller, illustrate not


inaptly both the structure and the effect of these two metres. In
the second example, however, a somewhat unnatural stress must
be laid on the word In , to convert it from a “ short ” into a “ long ”
syllable:—
The Homeric Hexameter.
Strongly it bears us along in swelling and limitless billows,
Nothing before and nothing behind but the sky and the ocean.
The Elegiac Couplet.
In the hexameter rises the fountain’s silvery column ;
In the pentameter aye falling in melody back.
These two metres, then, the “Hexameter” and the “Elegiac,”
are the only two with which we are now concerned. The only
“ feet ” that occur in them are dactyls and spondees. As, however,
there may be occasion later to refer to other kinds, let us name here
three other “feet,” to conclude our troublesome technicalities. A
dactyl inverted, two short syllables followed by a long, is called an
anapaest. One short syllable followed by a long is known as an
iambus; one long syllable followed by a short, as a trochee. Repre-
sented by the usual notation for indicating long and short syllables,
these five feet appear in the following symbols :
Dactyl
Anapaest . o
Spondee
lambus
Trochee
Equipped thus by the grammarians, we may now proceed on our
course without further delay. All this lumber of prosody, it may be
frankly confessed, is taken on board at the present stage only to be
jettisoned at a subsequent. Yet no apology is needed, for such
elementary knowledge (as already said) is absolutely necessary to
understanding the simplest book on the study of English verse.


Most readers, indeed, will be more likely to expect an apology for
being asked to peruse an exposition of such familiar terms. But
it is well to begin, in the present case, absolutely from the beginning.
The writer remembers a lady who, after some days or weeks of
elementary instruction in whist, electrified her instructor by enquir-
ing, “ But what is a trick ? ” He prefers, therefore, in this case to
leave nothing to the imagination, and to instruct his readers, with
all due apologies, in even the most elementary tricks of the gram-
marians.
Greek and Latin verse, then, we see, depended almost entirely
on quantity , treated accent apparently as altogether subordinate, and,
it may be added, knew little or nothing of rhyme , which plays now-
adays so important a part in our poetry. The structure of verse
above described remained unaltered through the whole “classical”
period of Greek and Roman literature. But after the fall in ruins
of the Old World, in the dark ages that succeeded the destruction
of the Roman Empire, when the masterpieces of ancient literature
were forgotten and monkish hymns and chronicles took their place,
poetry, beaten down but never dead, assumed new robes and orna-
ments. Discarding entirely the old laws of quantity, it began to
place its reliance wholly on accent and rhyme. The languages of
modern Europe came under this influence in their infancy. From
cells and cloisters the new forms of verse passed into the homes of
the people, taking on added grace and beauty in the hands of
troubadours and romancers. Our English language, like its sister-
tongues, adopted these measures, discarding the alliterative metre
of our remoter ancestors, which makes its last belated appearance in
the Vision of Piers Plowman. By the time of Chaucer, usually
considered the father of English poetry, the modern metres had
attained universal and unquestioned sway, and their supremacy has
since then never been shaken or impaired.
Once, however, in the great experimental age of English poetry,


the “ Elizabethan era ” of our history-books, a serious attempt was
made to challenge this supremacy. Some of our leading poets
themselves were concerned in this daring conspiracy, Edmund
Spenser and Sir Philip Sidney being among the ringleaders. Much
undeserved ridicule has been heaped on their attempt by critics who
did not understand its scope and aim. Reading their verses by our
ordinary accent, these critics make game of their obvious absurdity.
Here is a line of Spenser’s, intended as a hexameter —
“Wot ye why | his moo | ther with a | veale hath | covered | his face?”
The absurdity to our ears is patent. But it was no less obvious to
the great men who made this attempt. The accent, says Spenser
in a familiar letter,* discoursing of the progress of his experiments,
“ sometime gapeth, and as it were yawneth ill-favouredly, . . . some-
time seemeth like a lame gosling that draweth one leg after her,”
. . . or, again, “is like a lame dog that holds up one leg.” Fully
alive as they were to these difficulties, they yet persevered in trying
to overcome them, and it is not difficult to understand, and in some
measure to sympathise with, their aim and motive.
* “ Three proper, wittie, and familiar letters, lately passed between two
Universitie men” [viz. Spenser and Gabriel Harvey]. “Two other very com-
mendable letters, of the same men’s writing.” London 1580.
The authenticity of these letters has been impugned, but apparently without
sufficient reason.
Students will get further information about this curious little eddy of classicism
by consulting Sir Philip Sidney’s Arcadia; Ascham’s Schoolmaster , Webbe’s
Discourse of English Poetry, and Puttenham’s Art of English Poetry, all pub-
lished in Professor Arber’s reprints; Abraham Fraunce, Lamentations of
Amyntas, London 1587 ; Nash, Apologie of Pierce Penniless, London 1593 ;
Campion, Observations in the Art of English Poesie, London 1602; and other
contemporary references. Reprints in Sir Egerton Brydges’ Archaica, 2 vols.
London 1815, and Haslewood’s Ancient Critical Essays ttpon English Poets and
Poesy, 2 vols. London 1811-15. The second volume of the latter contains the
letters above cited, which are also quoted in Todd’s Spenser, Vol. I.


The two points to be carefully borne in mind are that these
writers had few or no working models in their own language, and that
they looked with intense and of course most laudable admiration on
the great literary products of antiquity. Revelling in the enjoy-
ment of Greek poetry, which had but lately been revealed to the
modern world by the revival of learning, what could be more natural
than an attempt to introduce the principles of classic metre. Quan-
tity and accent, they knew, were different things in Greek; why not
too in English ? Our language was still unsettled, our literature in
its infancy. What was the true direction in which to seek progress ?
Should they not follow the ancient models, and create quantity in
English, as they evidently thought Homer or some one else had
created it in Greek ? “ Our English tongue,” says Ascham, may
“ receive true quantity of syllables, as well as true order of versi-
fying.” * They were engaged in something tentative, experimental;
their verses are not to be published, only shown to each other as
specimens. Spenser asks his friend Harvey to send him the rules
on which he had worked, or to adopt those which Spenser himself
had received from Drant and Sidney. They are perfectly aware that
strict “ feet ” did not as yet exist in English; the question is
whether they can be created. It is quite beside the point, therefore,
to ridicule them for not complying with our ordinary rules of verse.
Nor did they contemplate merely adopting the classic rules whole-
sale ; their aim was to discover cognate principles, suiting the genius
of the English language. That their attempt failed may be proof
enough that it was ill-advised, for in such hands it had every possible
chance of success. But it was a natural enough attempt to make,
and nothing is gained by ignoring its true purport, and laughing at
its exponents for neglecting the very rules which the object of their
endeavour was to supersede.
* Scholemaster (1570), Arber’s reprint, p. 73.


For our purpose, however, it is enough to note that the attempt
was made, made too under most favourable auspices, and failed
utterly and hopelessly. Puttenham, in his Art of Poesie , sums the
matter up admirably. “ Which feet {i.e., those of classic metres) we
have not, nor as yet never went about to frame, the nature of our
language and words not permitting it.” The history of our literature
ratifies this verdict. Modern France and Italy, not ancient Greece
and Rome, are our direct literary ancestors, and from them our poets
derived their working rules and methods. The bold spirits who
inspired the classical revolt soon convinced themselves of its futility.
Spenser gave up his hexameters, and went off to write his Pastorals
and his Faery Queen. The attempt to write verses according to
quantity alone was definitely abandoned, and may be said never to
have been resumed. Only in our own day, sedulous in its search
for novelties, and ready to whitewash any damaged reputation, has
this ancient heresy found revivers and defenders. It would seem
to have been some such experiments, perhaps those of his friend
Clough,* which induced Tennyson to satirise the attempt in his
well-known lines, though one does not see why he coupled with these
the altogether differently constructed verses of Goethe and Schiller
(to be presently described), declaring that his own were “Hexa-
meters no worse than daring Germany gave us.”
But we are anticipating slightly. Through the next two
centuries of our poetry there is no trace of any attempt to emulate
* See Clough’s Poems, Essays in Classical Metre , also his Letters of Pare-
pidemus (Works Vol. L). Tennyson’s Experiments in Quantity will be found
among his poems. The question seems to have been seriously debated about this
time, see Matthew Arnold’s references in Lectures subsequently quoted. Com-
pare a later and more ambitious effort, The Iliad homometrically translated, by
C. B. Cayley, London 1877, with its seven lines of quaint preface.
The attempt of other writers to comply at once with the rules of accent and
of quantity will be noticed later.


the classic models. “ Pindaric Odes ” were written, but in purely
English metres. In the eighteenth century in particular, our poets
were eminently tame and conventional, not to say dull to a degree, in
respect of metre. A few stock measures exhausted their programme.
Poetry had almost come to be an affair of counting syllables;
novelty or subtlety of cadence seems to have been carefully
eschewed. But just as the century before ours was dying to
its close, English poetry, which had seemed either dead or dying
too, took as we all know a sudden access of vitality, and spread
its wings once more for flights surpassed only by those of its
Elizabethan predecessors. Among the pioneers of the new enter-
prise the poets of the “Lake School” hold a prominent place.
Coleridge—a name never to be mentioned without reverence by
any student of metre and melody—laid down in the preface to his
Christabel a “new principle” (so he calls it), which alone did much
to unfetter the motions of English verse. Not the syllables, he
maintains, but the accents in a line are to be counted; the syllables
may be many or few at the poet’s discretion, the number of accents
must be fixed and definite. Coleridge’s theory and practice both
had enormous influence. It is well known that Scott took inspir-
ation from a reading of Christabel, that Byron and Shelley, not to
speak of Wordsworth, owe much metrically to his example and
teaching. Into his own few’ but brilliant achievements in the field
of poetry proper we have at present no occasion to enter. But
some experiments of his, taken in connection with the work of his
friend and brother-in-law Southey, originated the whole English
school of accentual hexameters, and require therefore our special
attention.
The inspiration of these was apparently not of native growth.
Students, indeed, will remember the early attempts of Southey and
others in classical metre, ridiculed by Canning in his Needy Knife-
grinder. But when in mature life, these poets essayed the hexameter,


it was clearly enough under German influences. Goethe and Schiller
(not to mention Voss, Klopstock, and many more) had deliberately
essayed the task of reproducing the chief classic metres in their
own tongue. Standing to German literature very much in the
position the early Elizabethans did to ours, they made their attempt
on different principles, and with a much fairer prospect of success.
Accent, they saw, was the dominant principle of modern poetry.
Why not construct “feet” in accordance with accent alone, neglect-
ing quantity altogether ? Such an attempt was less revolutionary, and
less obviously predestined to failure, than that .of our own Spenser
and Sidney. It attained, in fact, a very considerable measure of
success in the country of its origin. Dealing with a fluid language,
and with ears—shall we say ?—that had not been trained to nicety
by generations of glorious music, Goethe and Schiller were able to
procure acceptance for their very frequently rough and lumbering
lines. Take a single instance :
“ Durch die | Schrecken des | feindlichen | Meers, durch die | Schrecken
des | Landes.”
Here, it will be noticed, not to speak of minor harshnesses, the
syllables Durch die are actually made long in the first half of the
verse, and short in the second, without any apparent reason. The
Classical poets occasionally took such a liberty, especially in proper
names, for the sake of metre; but verses built on such models
could never succeed in “reading themselves,” could never prove
acceptable to listeners accustomed to the delicate and subtle
minstrelsy of our own elder poets.
To Coleridge, however, the innovation seems to have appealed,
probably because of his own theories as to the supremacy of accent,
and he made the attempt to carry it out in English.
‘ Earth ! thou mother of numberless children, the nurse and the mother,
Hail! O Goddess, thrice hail ! Blest be thou ! and, blessing, I hymn thee.


Forth, ye sweet sounds ! from my harp, and my voice shall float on your
surges—
Soar thou aloft, O my soul, and bear up my song on thy pinions.” *
Of such lines it may be said, more accurately than of Tennyson’s,
that they are “ Hexameters no worse than daring Germany gave us; ”
but where is the fairy music of Kubla Khan or the Ancient Mariner ?
The curious may analyse these lines for themselves, and discover
what collocations of syllables are presented for dactyls, such as
“Goddess, thrice” and “Forth, ye sweet.” For the rest it is enough
to say that in this and his other attempts after classical metre con-
structed according to accent, Coleridge’s refined sense of sound
seems to fail him almost entirely, and he gives us lines which can
hardly be said either to “ scan ” in the technical sense or to sing
themselves to any but the most Boeotian ear.
Southey, friend and associate of Coleridge, worked at the same
experiment with greater perseverance, but not with very much greater
success. In the preface to his Vision of Judgement, indeed, he claims
to be the pioneer in an untrodden field.
“ I first adventure : follow me who list.” t
But both Southey and Coleridge had made many attempts after
classical metres, and it would be hard to say which was really the
first to follow in the footsteps of the great Germans. When he
wrote the Vision of fudgement , however, Southey was Poet Laureate,
and its publication caused a storm of controversy and excitement.
We have nothing to do with its matter and contents, its fulsome
glorification of George 111., and its denunciation of the “Satanic
* Hymn to the Earth ; compare Mahomet , and other pieces,
t This is quoted from Bishop Joseph Hall, Virgidemarium , 1597.
. . . “ follow me who list,
And be the second English satirist.”
Southey himself, however, refers to some earlier hexameters by his friend William
Taylor of Norwich, as well as to an interesting passage in Goldsmith’s Essays.


school ” of Byron, who promptly replied in his most stinging and
amusing verses. But the preface which Southey prefixed to his
poem is practically the Magna Charta of our modern hexametrists,
and should be carefully read. A better scholar than poet, his
theories deserve respectful treatment, and its criticisms are generally
sound. Excellent, for instance, are his remarks on the ordinary
objections to hexameter verse in English, and the reasons why our
language is less ductile to this metre than German. But when we
come to the verses themselves, our satisfaction is less complete. It
is indeed somewhat difficult to study them, dispassionately, so
grotesquely ridiculous is the subject-matter.
“ ‘ Ho! ’he exclaimed, ‘ King George of England standeth in judgement! ’ ”
“There was our late-lost Queen, the nation’s example of virtue.”
Lines like these so irresistibly suggest the comic element, that it is
hard to confine one’s attention to the metrical aspect of the verse.
But doing our best to be scientific, limiting our study to such
passages as the really pretty and often-quoted opening paragraph,
do we not recognise a certain general stiffness, as of an academical
composition rather than a burst of native inspiration? And in
particular, when we consider individual lines in detail, is there not
a continual tendency to accentuate non-accented words, which
weakens and impairs the whole effect of the poem ?
As these are faults which he shares with practically all his fol-
lowers, and on which much more will have to be said immediately,
we may pass on for the present without further comment. It only
remains to add, by way of completing our historical retrospect, that
Southey’s poem fairly started the subject of hexameters in modern
England. Pamphlet after pamphlet poured from the press; scholars
and versifiers took part for or against. The battle so begun con-
tinues to rage to our own day. Learned men still denounce this
verse as a pestilent heresy, or praise and cultivate it as a curious


exotic. Poets, though rarely any quite of the first rank, have used
it to a certain extent. Longfellow’s Evangeline is perhaps the most
widely known instance,* and lovers of Browning will not forget his
Ixion. But all, whether poets or merely scholars, have worked on
the lines that Southey, following his classic or German exemplars,
laid down. They have treated the hexameter as a verse which must
consist of six exact “feet,” these feet however being constituted by
accent and not by any unalterable rules of quantity.
In so doing, it is the contention of this paper, they have erred
against the canons of English poetry. They have foredoomed them-
selves to a failure as inevitable, if not so extensive and violent, as
that of Spenser and Sidney. They have forgotten Coleridge’s prin-
ciple—how came Southey not to apply it here ? —that English verse
is to be measured by accents rather than by syllables. Not only
have they so condemned themselves to an artificial and wearisome
uniformity, producing the stiff effect of an academical exercise, but
they have built their structure upon shifting sand. This is the con-
clusive and irresistible objection to the hexameters of this school.
“ Which feet we have not, nor as yet never went about to frame.”
Accent in English is too variable, too uncertain, to supply a basis for
any rigid system of longs and shorts. No two of us, it is safe to say,
read a line of poetry in quite the same way; hardly ever will two of
us, in any case of difficulty, agree as to the “ scansion ” of particular
syllables. The very first line of “ Paradise Lost ” supplies a case in
point. Shall we accent the dis in “ disobedience,” or does the whole
* The most successful serious experiment made by an English writer of this
school is probably the Andromeda of Charles Kingsley. Working on a better
model, its poetic feeling arid descriptive power would have attained still higher
success. But subject and structure are alike too narrowly classical to appeal pro-
foundly to the English reader. Some remarks on Clough’s Bothie and Long-
fellow’s Evangeline will be found in one of the concluding paragraphs of this
paper.


stress fall on the third syllable of the word ? The critics are divided,
each maintaining a theory of his own. On a foundation so unstable
no architecturally exact superstructure can with safety be raised.
This is admitted by the hexametrists themselves in the case of
spondees. Southey acutely remarks, in the Preface already cited,
that even words like twilight , which seem fairly good spondees when
sounded by themselves, become trochaic when compounded in a
sentence; compare sunset when pronounced separately, and the
same word in the phrase “At the sunset hour.” And this holds
good even of two monosyllables, or two parts of separate words; the
accent invariably throws more weight on one than the other, destroy-
ing the equality of balance. It seems therefore absolutely and entirely
true that we have no accurate spondees in English. But even con-
ceding this, conceding Southey’s claim to use trochees instead of
spondees, destructive as it is to our classic ideal, we find ourselves
but little nearer anything definite or precise. We still encounter
lines which can only be read with hesitation and uncertainty. Con-
tinually our ear is puzzled as to where the stress is meant to fall.
Now and again, through some fortunate coincidence of accent with
natural quantity, we meet a verse that “ sings itself; ” but as a rule
all is dubiety and bewilderment. Lines begin with In or Of or The,
and we find ourselves supposed to accent them for the sake of metre.
Matthew Arnold himself, to whose suggestive criticism this paper
owes much, begins what is-intended as a model hexameter* with the
words “To a mortal,” to and a being actually supposed to do duty
as long syllables. Even Mr Swinburne, in an early attempt at
another classic metre, begins
“ In the | month of the | long decline of roses,”
* Lectures On translating Homer (popular edition 1896). Full of interest
every way. But his criticisms should never be accepted without question, and his
own specimens vividly illustrate the characteristic defects of this school.


which the English ear would infallibly read “ In the month | of the
long,” to the time of
“ At the close j of the day, [ when the hamlet is still.”
He, as we shall see, has since then pointed the way to a better and
higher ideal. But our hexametrists according to rule remain where
he began. They are still striving to make up their pedantic tale
of precisely-measured feet, and in doing so have recourse to the
strangest expedients. Habitually they accent syllables in a way
these will not bear, or strain and twist their language to get the
accented syllables in the proper place. Only those familiar with
theories of metre can read their lines as verse, and even they are
often in doubt whether they read as the writers intended. The
one cause of this uncertainty is the shifting and fugitive nature of
our English accent, which refuses to be passively stretched on the
Procrustes-bed of any rigid metrical system. It would weary the
reader to heap up instances of this laxity and confusing uncertainty
of form, which is patent to every careful student, and is scarcely
denied by the experimentalists themselves. More important for
our purpose it is to notice that such theoretical exactness of
structure, quite apart from any defects in the execution, is a thing
itself altogether alien to English verse. The “accentual” school
of Southey and the rest, not less than the “ quantitative ” hexametrists
of the Elizabethan age, founded upon a false theory, which carries
with it its own condemnation. A line consisting necessarily of
“ from fourteen to seventeen ” syllables, quite apart from the
principle on which these are arranged, has no parallel in our poetry.
If this is the only possible model, by all means let the hexameter
be condemned as a pestilent heresy. Let the accentual line follow
the quantitative to the limbo of forgotten superstitions. Even Pope
could sneer at your “word-catcher that lives on syllables,” and
an English metre that exists only by counting of “feet” is an


anachronism and a delusion. If this is the last word to be said
on the question, victory must remain with the assailants of hexa-
meters. But it is not the last word, and there is another view of
the matter which seems to have been strangely overlooked both by
defenders and attackers in this prolonged controversy.
Before taking up this new position, however, a sentence in our
last paragraph suggests the question : Can this inherent instability
of English accent —so patent to every one that it has not been
thought necessary to multiply examples—not be remedied by a
closer attention to technical rules of quantity ? In other words, can
verses be written which, while never distorting the natural accent,
shall emphasise and reinforce that accent by a rigorous system of
quantity, so as to render the beat of the rhythm as obvious and
unmistakeable as it is in Greek poetry, and enable us to count our
“ feet ” with the same precision as the Ancients undoubtedly did ?
One might have been tempted to say that the task was impossible,
if one did not know that it had actually been performed. One of
the most accomplished of contemporary scholars, to take the most
crucial instance, has given us, in his translations of Catullus,*
specimens of the principal ancient metres, whose verses obey
with marvellous precision at once the dominance of accent and the
laws of classic quantity so far as these can be applied in English.
That his success is absolutely perfect it might be rash to assert.
A hypercritical ear may perhaps detect an occasional uncertainty,
an emphatic Look / shortened for the sake of metre, or a naturally
* Poems and Fragments of Catullus, by Robinson Ellis, Fellow of Trinity
College, Oxford: London 1871.
Another recent experimentalist on similar lines is Mr J. H. Hallard (Idylls
of Theocritus: Longmans, 1894). Some of this translator’s quatrains follow a
truer model, but in his hexameters, built after a rigorous pattern, the uncertainty
of accent not infrequently obtrudes itself— e.g.: “Plague upon Telephus, who
once uttered verses about it.” One’s ear rebels against the stress upon who.


short And or Not bearing an unnatural stress. But for practical
purposes the success may be taken as complete. Are we then
advanced any nearer to the goal of our present enquiry? The
answer must be emphatically in the negative. If these verses are
meant to point the road our poets shall travel, so far, and so far
only, they must be pronounced a “ failure.” Long before English
poetry could be written under these conditions, all life, and passion,
and force would have evaporated in an insipid correctness. Our native
Muse has never submitted to these swaddling bands. What do we
find in the lines whose metrical perfection has just been praised
so highly? A wonderful verbal mosaic, a triumph of dainty work-
manship, which bears hardly more relation to English poetry than
a Chinese puzzle does, and can often scarcely be understood without
reference to the original. It may be said that this is because it is
a translation; the threefold task, not the double one, constitutes
the difficulty. But the answer still remains that the result does not
justify the cramping means employed. The best verses in this
volume would have been equally musical at a vastly less expenditure
of laborious letter-counting. It is remarked in the preface of the
book, referring to Mr Swinburne, that he “neglects position as a
rule, though his nice sense of metre leads him at times to observe
it, and uniformly rejects any approach to the harsh combinations
indulged in by other writers.” This seems to describe with exact-
ness the true function of “ quantity ”in English. Its function, as
Mr Ellis himself has stated, is negative rather than positive. Neglect
of it makes verses harsh and unmusical; taken in and by itself it
has no absolute value. When we read such lines as
“ Borne o’er many a land, o’er many a level of ocean,
Here to the grave I come, brother, of holy repose,
Sadly the last poor gifts, death’s simple duty, to bring thee ;
Unto the silent dust vainly to murmur a cry”—
our satisfaction is precisely similar to that with which we read a


page of Tennyson or of Swinburne. But the same “musical” result
is attained by those writers without compliance with the rules of quan-
tity so carefully observed here. These verses will remain a model in
their own especial line. They note an immense advance on the
crudeness of our ordinary “ accentual ” metres. But the poet who
should take them for his exemplar would be following a false and
fictitious standard of excellence, and would devote himself to a
bondage which has never been tolerated by the masters of English
poetry.
Ouf historical survey is now complete. The reader has seen
passed in review the various attempts that have been made to
develop this metre. He can distinguish the quantitative hexameter
of the ancients, imitated by Spenser and Sidney, from the accentual
hexameter of our later poets, and from the combination of both
systems attempted in the example last quoted. He can analyse the
structure of each for himself, and decide whether the strictures which
have been made on them are just or unjust. In what remains of
this paper it is proposed to conduct him to a totally new stand-
point, to ask him to consider the hexameter in a light more familiar
to the customs and canons of our native English verse.
The course of enquiry to be followed henceforward may be
described as the inductive, in opposition to the deductive, method.
Instead of asking what our poets may or should do, let us learn
what they actually have done. It cannot be too often repeated that
this is the only legitimate form of enquiry. The poet must precede
the critic, not the critic point the way to the poet. Aristarchus does
not lay down rules for Homer to sing by ; he studies with his utmost
acumen the Homeric songs, and tries to formulate and define the
natural laws of their composition. And in speaking of our poets,
we must of course place aside those who have consciously worked
under rules imposed from without. The laws we wish to discover
are those which govern the poet, when he sings to please himself,


without an eye to critic or schoolmaster. No doubt our great poets
nowadays are learned, but their learning does not necessarily fetter
their inspiration. All great work transcends the limitations which
conditioned its beginning; they are fused and absorbed in the glow
of its progress. Yet its development is not lawless, but obeys
inborn rules of its own; “it is all triumphant art, but art in
obedience to laws.” To discover the laws on which genius has
perhaps unconsciously worked is the true function of the critic.
Let us apply this here, and content ourselves with the more modest
task this restriction implies. Let our aim be merely to enquire
what work has been done by our native and natural poets in this
field. Assuredly this is the only trustworthy means of getting light
on the past or guidance for the future.
It has been often pointed out that there is nothing absolutely
alien to the genius of the English language in the march and swing
of the hexameter. Lines which approximate not remotely to it occur
spontaneously in our best writings. We turn to the Bible, that
storehouse of English undefiled, and find verses like
“ Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken.”
“ God is gone up with a shout—the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.”
Without pressing the point too closely, or attempting to claim such
lines as actual hexameters, it will be quite apparent to those who
have followed the foregoing metrical exposition that there is quite
sufficient analogy to warrant us in expecting that some such form of
structure may find favour with our poets. Those interested in such
matters may refer to a list of some forty Biblical verses, all corre-
sponding with more or less exactness to the structure of the above.*
For us it will be sufficient to note the fact, and pass on to enquire
what use, if any, our poets have made of the metrical cadence sug-
gested by such passages.
* Journal of Education, August 1893 : compiled by C. A. Ford.


Here, however, it will be convenient to define accurately what
English verse-structure really is. It is proposed to go a step further
even than Coleridge, and lay down—it is believed for the first time
in these exact terms —that the true unit of English verse is not the
foot , not even the accent, but simply a period of time* Different
metres are distinguished by the prevailing character of their music.
Thus the ordinary “ heroic ” line is one of five periods, the prevailing
character of whose cadence is what we call “iambic.” But the
variations on this rudimental cadence are simply endless, and admit
of no arbiter but the poet’s ear. Such a theory, may be regarded as
too lax, as amounting almost to the abnegation of rule. Yet it is
submitted that nothing short of this way of stating the case will
account for the actual facts of English prosody. Take blank verse
in its most cultivated form. Let us go, not to the dramatists, where
one naturally expects, and assuredly finds, every imaginable form of
metrical licence. But let us go rather to the most introspective and
learned of English poets, in whose deeply studied music we may
be quite sure there is nothing careless or accidental, no cadence
that did not commend itself to his ear, however unaccountable and
erratic it may sound to ours. Let us take Milton as our model,
in the great poem to which he gave his most mature and earnest
workmanship. We have seen already that the very first line of the
Paradise Lost is a stumbling-block to critics of metre. But this is
nothing to what occurs as* we advance in the poem. Can any one
* The statement in the text of course lays no claim to originality. Rather it
is a summation of what is believed to be the view of most competent critics. But
no direct authority can be quoted for the statement. The author’s obligations to
previous writers are large, but they are general rather than specific, and the terms
above used are not consciously borrowed from any source. The nearest approxi-
mation to it which he has encountered is in Mr Symonds’ study quoted in next
footnote; and even this passage he does not remember to have read when he
formulated his own terms.


really pretend to reduce to five feet, or even five accents, the studied
irregularity of lines like these —
“ Curiosity, inquisitive, importune.”
“ Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.”
“In the bosom of bliss, a bower of light.”
“ Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait.”
“ And made him bow to the gods of his wives.”
“ Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep.”
(This last line might well be set as a crux to the pedant, asking him
to pronounce of what English metre it is an example.) These are
but a few instances culled from the unlikeliest of sources.* Had we
chosen to go further afield, our instances might have been immensely
multiplied and intensified. To take but one instance out of a
thousand, what shall we make of Browning’s
“ You are the Cardinal Acciauoli, and you
The Abate Panciatici—two good Tuscan names.”
Yet both these lines are intended for verses of ordinary length, and
the hurrying rush of the syllables is evidently meant to express the
eager alacrity with which Guido welcomes the visitors to his con-
demned cell.
Let us assume then, provisionally at least, that some such theory
of the structure of English verse is the true one, and let us accord-
ingly regard the hexameter simply as a verse of six periods, having a
prevailingly dactylic or trochaic character, as opposed to iambic or
anapaestic. These terms, which have been explained before, are
used merely as a sort of convenient shorthand, not with any admis-
sion of their actual or precise accuracy. Indeed, we have now parted
company finally with the grammarians; we have heaved overboard,
so far as actual use is concerned, all the lumber of prosody which we
* Cf. Prof. Masson’s edition of Milton, essay on the poet’s versification;
J. A. Symonds’ Blank Verse, London 1895 (reprinted from Appendix to
Renaissance in Italy); and many other sources.


carried with us at first, and retain these terms merely as a concise
and convenient way of avoiding prolonged description. It may well
be that there are no such actual “ feet ”at all in English; but the
reader now understands the sort of musical effect denoted by these
terms, and it saves time to use the familiar names, understanding
once for all that not an exact “foot,” but merely an approximate
intonation or cadence, is intended in each case.
The English hexameter, then, will be simply a line of six periods
—rhymed or rhymeless does not as yet appear—the prevailing
intonation of which is dactylic or trochaic. Trochaic, observe, not
spondaic. For, even having regard to “ intonations ” rather than
actual “ feet,” it may be doubted whether the spondaic cadence exists
in English; if at all, it occurs most rarely, and seems altogether
opposed to the genius of our language, which delights in rapidity of
movement and vivid emphasis of accent. Dactyls and trochees,
therefore, may be expected to predominate in the metre we seek;
and six of these, roughly speaking, may be taken as the normal basis
of the line. Now here we are met by a dictum of our most eminent
contemporary critic, who roundly asserts that all dactylic and
spondaic forms are “unnatural and abhorrent” to English verse.*
The spondaic we concede, but with regard to the other we must
make bold to appeal from Mr Swinburne the critic to Mr Swinburne
the poet. Whether or no this dictum be true when applied th the
past of English poetry, his own work with that of his great fellow-
singers prevents it from being true in the present, and forbids us to
think it will be true in the future. During the last thirty years
“dactylic” metres have come immensely more into favour, and Mr
Swinburne’s own example has had much to do with this. It almost
looks as if our poetry were entering on a dactylic era. Tennyson,
* A. C. Swinburne, Studies in Song , London 1880, see introductory note to
translation from Aristophanes.


after sowing the metrical wild oats of his juvenile poems, begins
steadily with iambic metres, progresses through the trochees of
Locksley Hall to the vigorous dactyls of Maud—
“ Peace in her vineyard, yes ! but a company forges the wine ”
adopts this as the favourite ballad metre of his old age, and extends
its sweep in the remarkable metres of Kapiolani and of Vastness —
“ What but a murmur of gnats in the gloom, or a moment’s anger of
bees in their hive.”
Morris begins similarly with the iambics of the Earthly Paradise ,
and goes on to the metre of Sigurd and the rest, to lines like
“ Love is enough ; have no thought for to-morrow.”
Rossetti, though more rarely, strikes the same note with unfailing
mastery —
“ Say, is it day, is it dusk in thy bower ? ”
Browning, with a wider range of music, and less studious attention
to niceties of metre, yet shows signs of the same influence, and
progresses from Evefyfi Hope and Master Hugues of Saxe Gotha to
the long exulting lines of Abt Vogler , and a ballad-measure much
resembling that adopted by Tennyson. While Mr Swinburne, in
the haunting melody of whose verse English metre has been exalted
to heights of perfection never previously attained, from the first
showed a marked fondness for the musical “ lilt ” which we have
agreed roughly to call dactylic—
“ Bind on thy sandals, O thou most fleet,
Over the splendour and speed of thy feet ”
and has carried his mastery of its magic, as we shall see, into regions
never explored before. The example of these contemporary masters,
as may be imagined, has not been lost upon younger singers, and a
very cursory examination of our minor poetry will show that their
influence in this direction has been fully felt and responded to. Is


it likely, then, that in this development of dactylic verse the hexa-
meter —the verse of six periods—should have been totally neglected ?
We open the pages of our recent singers with a confident expectation
that we shall find independent studies in this metre, and we are not
disappointed.
It will be best to confine our attention to one or two conspicuous
instances, and those from our chief poets. We must set aside, of
course, any poems consciously written after ancient models. Brown-
ing’s Ixion, for instance, is composed in regular “ elegiacs ” of the
school of Southey, and, though it has the vigour of genius, is not
much better or worse metrically than other examples of that school.
But the ringing lines of Abi Vogler , on the other hand, seem written
from free and native inspiration, though they approximate with con-
siderable closeness to the same elegiac type, only substituting a
monosyllabic ending for the dissyllabic termination of the hexa-
meter. A still more suggestive instance, however, because one still
further removed from strict obedience to foreign influences, will be
found in the Hesperia * of Mr Swinburne :
“ Out of the golden remote wild west, where the sea without shore is,
Full of the sunset, and sad, if at all, with the fulness of joy,
As a wind sets in with the autumn that blows from the region of stories,
Blows with a perfume of songs and of memories beloved from a boy,
Blows from the capes of the past oversea to the bays of the present,
Filled as with shadow of sound with the pulse of invisible feet.
Far out to the shallows and straits of the future, by rough ways or pleasant,
Is it thither the wind’s wings beat ? is it hither to me, O my sweet ?”
These lines are obviously not “ elegiacs.” Here, as in Abt Vogler ,
we are in a different region from that in which scholars and critics
construct neat verses to order. We are listening to an English poet,
singing after his own unfettered will, probably without any conscious
reference to, or recollection of, the forms of verse we have been
* Poems and Ballads (first series). London 1866.


considering. Yet the result approximates in many respects very
closely to these forms, and it will be worth while to study with
some minuteness the points of resemblance and difference.
(1) First, then, all these lines, but more particularly those with
the dissyllabic rhyme, are verses of six periods. They would be
“ scanned ” by grammarians as follows :
“ Out of the | golden re- | mote wild | west, where the | sea without |
shore is.”
And so far they correspond precisely to the metre of “Evangeline” :—
“ This is the j forest pri- | meval, the | murmuring j pines and the j hem-
locks.”
Only the third foot would be taken as a spondee in Mr Swinburne’s
line, and as a dactyl in Longfellow’s. But in Longfellow’s poem
lines of this type follow each other unbroken; in Mr Swinburne’s
they alternate with ones of a slightly different pattern, and every
set of four lines is joined together by alternate rhymes. Mr
Swinburne has never given us a poem in long lines of the one
pattern alone—hexameters, so to call them, instead of elegiacs.
This experiment he may yet have in store for us, and it would be
one of intense interest to students of poetry. It would teach
us more about the construction of true English hexameters than
all the pages of all the pedants. But in the meantime we must
take what we have got, and study our hexameter, not singly, but
in the metrical combination we venture to call “elegiac.”
(2) The additional feature of rhyme, present in Mr Swinburne’s
lines and absent in Longfellow’s, though it seems so important to
the English reader, is not of much moment to the metrical critic.
It is accidental so far, that the metre could exist without it, though
the effect produced would of course be very different. Mr
Swinburne’s musical ear and dexterous handicraft in the matter
of words enable him to use rhymes where another writer might


find them hampering and impracticable. The dissyllabic rhyme, in
particular, has hardly been handled by any one else with such
mastery as by Mr Swinburne. Browning uses it with equal facility,
but always with more or less of a sub-grotesque effect. In Mr
Swinburne it is compatible with perfect seriousness, though even
with him it may be doubted whether it is not more consonant with
the lighter than the loftier strains of serious thought. But any
succeeding singer will have to Judge for himself whether he shall
employ the dissyllabic rhyme; it is not involved necessarily as a
part of the problem.
(3) The preponderance of dactylic over trochaic cadences is
probably again a matter personal to the poet. It is as marked in
Evangeline as in Hesperia, though a very different measure of
satisfaction attends the result. Mr Swinburne’s fondness for the
dactylic “lilt” has been already referred to, and we need not be
surprised to find it so conspicuous here. But even here it is any-
thing but invariable; the line we contrasted with Longfellow’s
affords an immediate instance. And doubtless any succeeding
singer would claim his right to treat the metre as freely as Mr
Swinburne has done, to mould it after his own pattern, and produce
from it his own cadences and effects.
(4) More important, though applying only to the alternate lines,
the supposed “ pentameters ” of our parallel, is what grammarians
would call the “resolution-of the caesura.” The ccesura, or “cutting
in twain,” was that sharp division between the two halves of the
pentameter, which we described in dealing with the Classic metres.
And the English line which we took to exemplify it was one quoted
with a slight alteration from this very poem.
“ Stretches and swings to the slow ( passionate pulse of the sea ”
is, however, not the normal type of these alternate lines; it is an
exceptional effect, deliberately produced by the suppression of one


or more syllables, and the consequent break in the line. The
usual type, to which this is a solitary exception, runs thus:—
“ Filled as with shadow of sound with the pulse of invisible feet.”
Now does the English reader detect much difference in the structure
of, or rather the effect produced by, these two verses? The poet
has treated them as equally admissible: is he not justified? To
the English reader’s ear, are they not both equally permissible,
legitimate variations in either case on one fundamental type ?If so,
our theory of metre has received a most important and far-reaching
corroboration. For it is evident that this indicates that the “period
of time,” rather than either accent or syllables, is what both poet
and reader regard. And it follows that in this particular case the
English “pentameter” can be written in either way with perfect
propriety; which, to the classical student’s narrower view, will
seem almost like giving up the theoretical pentameter altogether.
(5) Similarly, and following closely on the heels of the last remark,
we find that, though the metre is mainly dactylic, the lines are far
from always beginning with an accented syllable. The use of
redundant syllables at the beginning of a line is one of the commonest
licences of native English poetry, and there seems not the slightest
reason why it should not be found in this metre as in so many
others. A single instance will illustrate what is meant.
“ Thou who art bearing my buckler and bow,
Should the soldiers of Saul look away from the foe,
Stretch me that moment in blood at thy feet!
Mine be the doom, which they dared not to meet.”
It is obvious that in the second line the words Should the are extra
syllables, redundant as they are technically called, outside and
beyond the regular beat of the verse, but which our ear in reading
accepts naturally and almost without notice. Will it be believed
that this obvious and familiar method, practised by every English


writer and accepted as a matter of course by every English reader,
finds no place in the schemes of the hexameter-mongers? With
hardly an exception* they eschew it entirely. Hence comes that
uncertainty of initial accent, which we have noticed as one of the
chief stumbling-blocks to the casual reader. Southey indeed claimed
the liberty of substituting “any foot” for a dactyl at the beginning
of the line, thereby securing variety at the cost of effectiveness. He
seems never to have thought of this other most natural method of
avoiding his difficulty.! His followers either repeat his error, or
avoid it by unnatural inversions such as “ Ran he at once to the
shore,” and the like. In Androtneda and Evangeline it is believed
that not one single line begins with a redundant syllable. Even
Clough, in the wild metrical licence of the “ Bothie” and after much
careful study of verse-structures, hardly ever permits it. But the
example of Hesperia confirms what might have seemed a priori
probable, and enables us to claim for this variation its legitimate
place in the development of English hexameters.
(6) Lastly, in spite of all minor differences, the general effect of
Mr Swinburne’s lines is unmistakeably in accordance with what we
are looking for.
“ Straight from the sunset, across white waves whence rose as a daughter
Venus”
* The following instances have been noted, and no doubt the list might be
considerably extended. Owen- Meredith (Lord Lytton) in The IVanderer, see
a poem called The Shore: the preceding piece, Seaside Elegiacs, is of the con-
ventional type, whereas in The Shore the metre is handled with great freedom and
boldness. Iliad, 1.-111., translated by Fred H. J. Ritso, London 1861 : redun-
dant syllables used freely. Sir Lewis Morris, in Vox Clamantium (a compilation
by different writers), London 1894.
In lighter verse it seems to occur quite naturally, e.g., “ ’Pon my word, as I
live, said a younger, I really think he has done it. ” Landor, verses on Person
(Works, Vol. VIII., p. 346).
f Yet Coleridge himself, it is worth noting, had used it once in the Hymn to
the Earth quoted on a previous page.


is a hexameter as good as any the school of Southey and Coleridge
have produced.
“Sudden and steady the music, as eight hoofs trample and thunder”
not only conforms to hexameter structure, but recalls with no
unworthy reproduction the music of the Virgilian line of which it
seems a reminiscence. Take any of the best lines of Kingsley’s
Andromeda , such as
“ Deep in the wane of the night, as the moon sank low to the westward”—
or
“ Cool in the fierce still noon, where streams glance clear in the moss-beds,”
and say if these lines differ appreciably from Mr Swinburne’s quoted
above. Does the English reader’s ear detect any substantial differ-
ence in such a line as this—
“As the cross that a wild nun clasps till the edge of it bruises her bosom?”
If not, it is clear that in these lines of Mr Swinburne’s we have at
least the hint for a more free and truly English use of the metre,
that his redundant syllables and resolved caesuras and the rest must
all take their place as legitimate variations on the one fundamental
type of structure.
It is with deep interest, therefore, that we search the later
volumes of this poet to see if he has elsewhere employed or further
developed a metre of this kind. And in a piece called Evening on
the Broads * we find precisely what we are in search of;—
“ Over two shadowless waters, adrift as a pinnace in peril,
Hangs as in heavy suspense, charged with irresolute light,
Softly the soul of the sunset upholden awhile on the sterile
Waves and wastes of the land, half repossessed by the night.”
* Studies in Song. London 1880.


It will be seen that there is here, as in Browning’s Abt Vogler , a
closer approach to the classic pentameter than in Hesperia; the
caesural pause is this time the rule, not the exception. For the
rest, the reader can now study the music of this second poem for
himself. He will note in it the same easy mastery of metrical
form, the same transcending of mere prosodiacal counting of
syllables. The very first words of the poem, “ Over two,” could
hardly by the most careless listener be accounted a dactyl.
Another line begins with “A wall of turbid water,” where the
rigid metrist would demand some such phrase as. “Wall of a.”
The csesural pause, again, is “ resolved ” or not at the poet’s
pleasure, and he does not hesitate to substitute a trochee for a
dactyl in the most important place in the “ pentameter ” ;
“ Spirits of men that are eased when the wheels of the sun
Redundant syllables occur freely and frequently, even in so striking
an instance as this “ hexameter ” :
“ Discoloured, opaque, suspended in sign as of strength without pity.”
But always the reader’s ear is satisfied, always the victorious march
of the music carries him unquestioning and unresisting along. It
is only when in cold blood he returns afterwards to retrace his
steps, to analyse with sober exactness the mechanism and structure
of the strains that have carried him away captive, that he finds
how largely these are the wqrk simply of the poet’s ear. He finds
then that four or five syllables have been crowded into the normal
space of three, without in any way disturbing his sense of the beat
and movement of the line. And the thin partitions that in English
poetry divide the dactylic from the anapaestic cadence are exempli-
fied to him in the line, which might be set to our pedantic critic
to reconcile with his preconceived theories of the pentameter:—
“ The delight of the light she knows not, nor answers the sun or the stars.”
It may not be possible to cite many examples so apposite as


the foregoing. But enough has been surely done to prove that the
thesis of this paper is no mere hypothesis. While critics have
been disputing as to the legitimacy in English of their “ accentual
hexameters,” our poets have been quietly building up a form of
verse which, to all intents and purposes, is a reproduction of the
hexameter under the conditions of English metre. Whether it is
to be carried any further the poets alone can tell us. Let it be
repeated once more that the poet must precede the critic, not the
critic the poet. To habituate the ear of English readers, much
more than mere skill in metrification is necessary. It needs the
sweep and stress of a great poem, compelling the reader’s attention,
dominating him by the fervour of its thought or passion, fascinating
him by the charm of its style, and challenging his submission to the
witchery of its music. Not otherwise has any other metre won its
way to a place in our poetry ; not otherwise can the hexameter, in
turn, be introduced to English readers. Apart from all question of
metrical structure, can we say that the hexameter in any shape or
form has yet had this introduction? The nearest approach is in
the pages of Longfellow and Clough. Evangeline , we have said, is
probably the poem by which this metre is as yet best known to the
English public. Fluent and graceful, like all its writer’s work, this
poem, with its companion Miles Standish , has done much to accustom
our ears to a rhymeless, somewhat monotonous, steadily flowing six-
period line. But its nerveless dactyls, its sound as of cantering
rather than galloping, and the somewhat tepid interest with which
we follow its shadowy plot may be not unfairly held to have tended
toward a false ideal, and retarded rather than advanced the progress
of hexameter verse in our language. Clough’s poems in this metre,
again, are delightful reading in their way. The Bothie especially,
that quaint hotch-potch of Radicalism and Long Vacation love-
making, with its Oxford slang and Scotch Highland scenery, is
perennially amusing, and holds some fine poetry in solution, though


it is scarcely to be called a poem. It is a serio-comic burlesque, in
which the mock-heroic character of the metre admirably suits the
tone of the thought. Indeed it may be said that the “ accentual ”
hexameter has reached its highest attainment in this modest enter-
prise, and that Clough has carried it to the furthest development
of which its'artificial structure is capable, by showing how well its
humour can represent the various phases of a semi-serious, semi-
playful, rapidly changing, always self-conscious, and altogether
charming idyllic medley.
But this is not the way in which great poetry is written.
If any new writer, therefore, should turn his attention to this form
of verse—if he should feel, with Matthew Arnold,* that “ our poets
will not always be content to do without the music ” of this metre,
while recognising with Arnold, with Worsley,f and with the argument
of this paper, that the hexameter of the future still remains to be
written —he is advised to proceed on a different method. Let him
turn his back, definitely and conclusively, on the theories of the
“accentual” school, and the artificial verses of Kingsley, Lockhart,
Whewell, Hawtrey, Julius Hare, and the rest. Let him remain
equally firm against those, if there be any, who would set him to
the impossible task of framing his metre in accordance with un-
necessary and invariable rules of syllabic “quantity.” Let him
read Southey and Longfellow only to criticise, and while studying
both Clough’s theory and, his practice beware of following him
into the regions of the serio-comic and mock-heroic. Let him
turn for inspiration rather to such poems as Tennyson’s Parnassus ,
Maeldune , Lucknow , as well as to those previously mentioned; to
Browning’s Abt Vogler and Up at a Villa —
“ Beggars can scarcely be choosers, but still —ah, the pity, the pity ! ”
* Lectures On Translating Homer: see previous footnote.
f Preface to translation of Odyssey, Vol. 11. (published 1862).


to the strong war-like music of Sigurd , said to be Morris’s own
favourite among all his poems; and to any and every attempt
which Mr Swinburne may make to reap fresh laurels in the field
he has already occupied so victoriously. From each and all of
these makers he may catch “ hints of the proper craft, tricks of
the tool’s true play.” But he will probably be well advised to
lend a reluctant ear to the siren melody of the last-named writer’s
dactylics; it is not for every one to play on the string or strings
of a Paganini or a Sarasate. Rather let him study for himself the
arcana of his subject, the mysteries of natural quantity and pause—
considering, for example, whether Milton ever admits two weak
syllables without a lingering of the voice between, “Of Oxeb, or
of Sinai.” Let him thus string his harp his own way, and learn
to play on it to the best of his natural ability.
Equipped now \yith all the resources of his art, the future
hexametrist must next throw himself boldly on the wings of his
imagination. Unless they bear him off his feet in their triumphal
progress, he need never expect to carry his hearers captive, as
the true singer does with his audience. In an old familiar metre,
learning and elaboration go far to mask the absence of creative
faculty; in a new and strange one, its want is painfully felt at
once. It needs the plastic power and reverent love, the insight
and the sense for sound of a great original poet, to master the
secrets of any new form of melody or harmony, and compel it to
yield up its magic to the listening ear of his readers. Does the
discouraged experimenter incline to retort with Rasselas, “You
have shown how impossible it is to be a poet ” ? If his heart fail
him before the difficulties of the way, it is certainly wiser to turn
back while there is time. Yet difficulties present themselves as
opportunities to the strong; and if the labour be arduous, the
reward is great. To add a new engine to the mighty armoury of
English verse—to tune a new string to its harp, say rather a new


stop to the stately roll of its organ-music—is an ambition worth
cherishing, and worth spending one’s best strength on. We may
leave the subject, then, in the hands of the poets, confident that
they will not long be able to “do without the music” of this metre;
waiting with expectancy its next development, at the hand of some
competent master; recognising that such a development, for which
the time seems ripe, will proceed on laws of its own, and not
borrow its canons from models unsuited to the genius of our
language; and recognising, too, that such a development, while
adding to the riches of the great treasure-house of English poetry,
will incidentally solve a long-standing difficulty, by supplying us,
as many scholars have already perceived, with the only possible
instrument for a fit and adequate translation of the master-poems
of ancient Greece into their poetic equivalents in the English
language.
To conclude these remarks with another specimen of English hexa-
meters may seem both a bathos and a presumption. Undoubtedly,
till the master poet has shown the way, we can but speculate as to
the right course, and may even like Southey and Longfellow do more
harm than good by our endeavours. Yet, on the other hand, great
poets build on the blunders and shortcomings of their predecessors.
Shakspeare himself was not possible till the earlier Elizabethans had
experimented and made mistakes. So on the whole, though after
much hesitation, and on the principle that an ounce of practice is
sometimes worth a pound of theory, it has been decided to print
these verses. Tentative and experimental, they have purposely been
left rather in the rough. Some ears will doubtless be offended by
the liberal use of a trochaic cadence: others, it is hoped, will recog-
nise in this a natural and legitimate variation from the common
model. Redundant syllables have not been studiously introduced,
but they have been allowed to occur freely and naturally as they


came. The verses are intended primarily if not solely for the English
reader. He is asked to read them naturally and freely just as he
would read any other English verses, without the slightest thought of
doctrines or theories of metre. So reading, he is expected to find no
difficulty in recognising these as unrhymed six-period lines, differing
in regard of musical effect from the verses quoted in this paper, but
built substantially on the same model, however unworthy otherwise
to be placed beside them. The subject is taken from the old heroic
poem of the Greeks, and the narrative in places follows more or less
closely that of the Fifth Book of the Odyssey. But it does not
profess to be a translation from that poem, and must not in any way
be judged as such. Rather perhaps it is intended as a specimen to
show how an English singer might seek to reproduce the effect of that
poem to English readers, following for the most part the course of
the Homeric narrative, without in any way pledging himself faithfully
to reflect every line and movement of the original. In such a repro-
duction, —which would not interfere with the province of the actual
.translator, as it would start from a different conception, and aim at a
different ideal, —it is permissible to hope that the non-classical reader
might find presented to him some new features in those many-sided
poems which are as yet the despair and recognised impossibility of
poetical translators; that it might enable him to catch, in however
faint and feeble an echo, some hint of the imperishable music and
sea-like swell of the Homeric line; that not in these verses, but in
the more competent attempt of a more fortunate successor, he may
attain to hear some reverberation, though it be over league-long
distance, of the “ surge and thunder of the Odyssey.”


THE RETURN OF ODYSSEUS.
{A FRAGMENT.)
Troy, tall Troy, was down. Her bulwarks heavily builded
Low in the dust were laid ; her proud pre-eminent chieftains,
Hector, Paris, and all those sons of white-haired Priam,
All were slain or fled. And they, their doughty assailants,
They who ten loud years had waged fierce war round I lion,
Scourged long since by the anger of gods through wanderings woeful,
Now in their well-loved homes, but some in narrower chambers,
Rested, tired of fight, and heard —if surely in Hades
Memory of deeds immortal comfort the soul of heroes—
Minstrels thoro’ the land their deathless victory chanting,
And all the old ten years’ tale. He only, gallant Odysseus,
Far in an isle of the west, in a sea-cave home of a goddess,
Mourned and wept and sighed, remembering Ithaca always,
Wife and child long lost, and the island home of his empire.
Tell then the tale how, last and sole, and weary of roaming,
Friendless, wayworn, strange, in the twentieth year of exile,
Mighty Odysseus came to his Ithacan home, and conquered.
The gods held council sage ; in the wide Olympian chamber
High upon golden thrones the great gods sat and counselled.
Then to our father Zeus spake bright-eyed Pallas Athene.
“ Quite, is he quite forgot, that wise world-wandering hero,
He who in sea-girt isle yet abides through dolour and exile,
Longing to see but the smoke’s up-leap from an Ithacan homestead,
See it but once, or die ? Henceforth let no one of mortals


Reverence the Immortals duly, or sacrifice upon their altars,
Since he, the bravest, best, the doer of right to his people,
Pitiful, tender, wise, of the high gods reverent alway,
Languishes thus forlorn, by gods and men forsaken.”
Then in the midst of the gods spake Zeus, great sire of all things.
“ Daughter of mine, what word has escaped from lips unweeting ?
Not forgotten of gods or men is the brave Odysseus.
Nay, but his doom he drees, and the fateful term of his exile,
For that his daring hand wrought deadliest harm to the Cyclops,
Son of the Shaker of earth, the Lord of the Sea, Poseidon.
Wherefore still unappeased the great god drives him wand’ring,
Slaying him not, but harassing still, with an enmity tireless.
But —for the date draws nigh, and the destined goal of his anguish—
Hermes now let us send to the daughter of terrible Atlas,
Far over land and sea to the bourne of the western waters,
Bidding her speed on his way her captive wearily pining ;
So that, the fates fulfilled, by gods and men unholpen,
After wanderings manifold, toil and peril and shipwreck,
Mighty Odysseus come to his Ithacan home in safety.”
Hermes heard and sped ; to his feet his golden sandals,
Wind-winged, work of a god, he bound, and his wand of magic
Grasping shot from on high ; like a sea-bird eager of outlook
Flashed over land and sea, rich land and hungering ocean,
Yea, like a sea-bird flashed on the crests of the tumbling billows
Far o’er the western wave to an isle in the western waters,
Wood-clad, wild, remote. From the violet depth up-darting f
Swift to the shore he hied, and the wonderful home of the goddess,
Where in a vast sea-cave she dwelt, that daughter of Atlas,
Beautiful-haired Calypso. Alder, aspen, and cypress
Circled sheltering round, where birds of shadowy pinion


Nested, owls and hawks and sea-crows noisily chattering.
Meadows bright were there, with violet crowned and parsley,
Bright with sinuous rills, four founts of crystal water,
Each on its own way wending. Around the porch of the sea-cave
Pendulous bloomed a vine, with rich luxuriant clusters ;
While from its hid recess came odour of fragrant firewood,
Cedar and citron, burning. There the beautiful goddess
Worked at her loom, and sang, with a golden shuttle weaving ;
Shrill was her voice and sweet. And the high god, gazing, marvelled.
But when he had entered there to the wonderful .home of the goddess,
Swiftly she knew him, spake, and hailed with words of greeting.
“ Lord of the golden wand, most worshipful and beloved,
Long now a stranger here, what brings thee thus to my dwelling ?
Speak thy behest: be mine to fulfil, when thy mouth hath spoken,
All the decrees of fate. But first, a wayfarer’s welcome.”
Then on the table fair ambrosia and ruby nectar
Heaping, she bade him sit; and the Argus-slayer feasted.
Hunger and thirst appeased, he spake grave words of answer.
“ Verily Zeus himself hath sent me, little willing.
For who of gods or men this world of wandering water,
Homeless, hungering, void, would willingly seek to traverse ?
Yet the behest of Zeus nor men nor gods may gainsay.
Him whom thou boldest here he bids thee send rejoicing
Over the wide waste sea. Not here is he doomed to perish :
Nay, but his fate stands writ to behold his friends and kinsmen,
Back to his high-roofed home, to his Ithaca, safe returning.”
Hermes ended grave ; but Calypso paled and trembled,
And shuddering spake in haste wild words of wrathful chiding.


“Jealous are ye in your tyranny, gods ! No one of immortals
Suffer ye long to be wed to a mortal, loving him dearly.
Thus when the rosy Dawn had wooed and won Orion,
Thus when lasion Demeter loved and cherished,
Soon with an arrowy bolt their short-lived bliss was sundered.
Me too, me in your envious spite ye grudge this mortal,
Him that I found left lone, on the keel of his vessel riding,
Comrades cruelly lost, for his ship the dazzle of lightning
Struck, and it whelmed his bark, and left him desperate clinging
Fast to the keel in the wine-hued deep ; and billow and tempest
Carried him helpless here to the shore of my sea-girt dwelling.
Him then I loved and saved, and tenderly sought to cherish,
Yea, would have made immortal, knowing not these for ever,
Death nor eld. But enough ! small gain with Zeus to parley.
Over the sea once more let him go, if the god hath spoken,
O’er the unharvested deep, if Zeus have spoken it surely,
I will not make or mend ; no ships are mine, no rowers,
Over the sea’s broad back to bear him speedily onward.
Yet will I give, not hide, thy message, telling it truly,
So that in peace he may come to his Ithaca, safe returning.”
The goddess spake, and ceased : her answered messenger Hermes.
“Do as thou sayest, lady. The word of Zeus be stablished.”
Then over land and sea departed the Argus-slayer.
But fair Calypso sought the all-patient goodly Odysseus.
Him when she found, by the shore of the sea he sat lamenting,
Over the wide wave straining his eyes, whence tears perpetual
Flowed unstanched, deep-wrung, and his soul dissolved in yearning
Far on the sea to go to his well-loved Ithacan country.
And standing near to his side thus spake the beautiful goddess.


“ Now be an end of grief, fond soul, and of hopeless yearning !
Freely, and all unharmed, I send thee forth of the island.
Come now and cut tall trees, and shape with mastery cunning
Plank and beam and spar, that a raft may bear thee joyful
Over the dim wide sea. Myself will plentiful outfit,
Water and bread and wine and raiment needful furnish,
Yea, and a favouring wind in thy wake, to bear thee onward ;
So that unharmed and safe, if the great Olympian dwellers,
Who are stronger than I, to will and to do, desire it truly,
Thou to thy well-loved home mayest yet return rejoicing.”
Thus then the goddess spake ; but mighty Odysseus answered,
Doubting sorely, “ Lady, I dread thy secret purpose.
One thing thou sayest, another concealed in thy breast abideth,
Bidding me thus to embark in a raft on the waters endless,
Where even mightiest ships full oft are evilly handled.
Willingly never would I thus fare o’er perilous ocean,
Save with a mighty oath thou swear and truly assure me
Nothing of ill thou deem’st or of secret mischief to meward,
Sending me in such case o’er the wide unharvested waters.”
Sweetly the goddess smiled, and his sunburnt cheek
“Wiliest of men,” she said, “no babe art thou for counsel.
Nay, but by earth I swear, and the blue sky wide o’erarching,
And (mightiest oath of all, and dreadful even to immortals)
By the wave of Styx below, no secret guile I cherish.
Even as the need were mine, so straight is my rede and counsel.
For my heart, trust me, too is made not of stone nor iron,
But it loves the right, and can pity the need of a hapless mortal.”
She spake, and led the way, and quickly he followed after,
And came to the arched cave ; and there they sat together,


The man and the beautiful nymph, and meat and drink beside him,
Such as we mortals use, she placed, but near to the goddess
Swiftly her handmaids placed ambrosia and ruby nectar.
And when they had eaten and drunk, she spake once more—
“ Odysseus,
Master of cunning wiles, Zeus-born, thou longest sorely
Now to return and come to thy well-loved Ithacan country.
Go, and the fates be kind ! But an if thou knewest it rightly,
All that remains to endure, and the woes that still may await thee,
Better it yet might seem to abide in my island cavern,
Blest with immortal life, and the love of a deathless goddess,
Who surely in form and face is fair as the wife thou lovest,
Fairer than she, than Penelope’s self, since the seed of immortals
Neither in mould nor mind may yield to the daughters of women.”
And her thus answered there the resourceful son of Laertes :
“ Goddess and queen, be it mine to speak, be it thine to pardon.
Fairer art thou, I wis, than the wife I long for hourly,
Fairer by far than Penelope’s self, for the daughters of women
Never in face or form may match with the blessed immortals.
Yet —be not wroth with me saying it—night and morn unceasing
Ever my heart is fain to behold my day of returning.
Be it that toil and sorrow await me, these of a surety
Still can I bear as I bore them of old ; if peril and shipwreck
Even are mine, and a god once more in the wine-dark waters
Whelm me —yet would I go : for my heart is steadfast ever.
Much have I toiled and striven ; be strife and toil my portion.”
So with each other that night in the wonderful cave they communed,
Then in the gray of the dawn to the tallest woods they hied them,
He with his broad bright axe ; and the goddess brought him wedges,


Augurs too, and planes ; but then—for she brooked not seeing—
Back to the cave she went. And the hero toiled unceasing.
Four long days he wrought, four days of strenuous labour :
Till, at the last, when the work was done, and the beams were bolted,
Squared were the planks, and morticed home, and the bulwarks rounded,
Fenced from stem to stern, and the mast and yard set upright,
Sails and sheets well braced, and the helm fixed firm in its socket,
Lastly on rollers huge he pushed his raft to the ocean.
So on the fifth fair morn, when food and raiment needful,
Water and wine and bread, the immortal nymph had given him,
Sadly divine Calypso speeded him forth from the island.
A warm and favouring wind she made to follow him going,
And the hero’s heart rejoiced, as he trimmed his sail to the breezes,
And over the wine-hued sea fared forth to his Ithacan country.
All day long to the east he steered, nor at night did slumber
Visit his wakeful eyes, but he held his course in the darkness,
Guiding his helm by the stars, as divine Calypso taught him.
Eighteen days he sailed, till afar in the eastward distance
Shadowy loomed and large the Phaeacian land before him,
Like the boss of a giant shield on the wide dim misty waters,
’Twas then Poseidon saw him, lord of the dread sea-billows,
Gazing high from the Lyci*m hills—for a feast was made him
Far at the ends of the earth, where sinks the sun to the ocean.
There with the blameless tribes of the South he had staid and feasted,
But now returning spied the raft and the wanderer weary
Borne on the placid main. And the god’s heart swelled with fury,
And stormily shaking his head with himself in his wrath he communed.
“ So then —while I, secure, with the blameless Ethiop feasted—
The gods had other thoughts for the hated wretch, Odysseus.
He nears yon destined shore, the goal of his sorrow and labour.


Yet, even yet, if a god have might, and the wave a master,
Yet shall he taste and feel the weight of the Sea-god’s anger.”
Speaking, he called his storms, and his giant sceptre wielding
Stirred up the deep ; grim darkness fell over earth and heaven.
And the blasts of all the winds came rushing at once together,
Heavy with clouds, and rolling the might of their mountain-billows.
Then did Odysseus see, and his knees with fear were loosened,
And heavy at heart he spake—
“ Most miserable of mortals !
What last and worst of woes is destined here to befall me ?
Well did the goddess warn. For, see, heaven lowers in tempest.
The wild deep roars —waves foam —winds rage —my doom is certain.
Happy of men were they, who died in the Trojan leaguer,
Happy my comrades all! Would God I had died beside them,
There in the storm of fight, when around the fallen Achilles
Hurtled the Trojan shafts. For there I had died in glory,
Praised by the Danaans, honoured in death with a funeral splendid,
But now by a shameful fate I am doomed this day to perish.”
As he spake, a white wave swelled o’er head, and terribly rising
Hurled on the raft. And the stout mast snapped, and the sail and
yard-arm
Crashed in the deep, and the hero, swept from his seat at the rudder,
Fell, and the deep wave whelmed him, clogged and sunk by his clothing,
Whirling him far. Long time he laboured, mightily striving,
Watching the raft, till at length, as the wild wave drifted it near him,
Sudden he sprang, and clutched, and clung to it, tempest-battered,
Clung to it, climbed, and sat, out of imminent death delivered.
And the fierce wave seized it and swept, like a plaything, hither and
thither,
Light as at autumn-tide rude Boreas over the champaign


Tosses the thistle’s down, and its tufts cling tight together ;
So on the turbulent deep did the wild waves hurry their plaything
This way now, now that, and the North and the South wind tossed it,
And the East to the furious West would abandon it, helpless drifting.
But a sea-nymph marked him there, fair Ino the white sea-goddess,
Daughter of Cadmus once, and reared as a mortal maiden,
Now with the bright sea-deities sharing glory and honour.
Seeing she pitied, and shaped like a sea-gull fresh from diving
Perched on the raft, and spake.
“Ah hapless ! why without ceasing
Still doth Poseidon rage, dire evil against thee brooding ?
Yet shall he not thus end thee, for all his rage and frenzy.
Hearken—not witless thou —thy cumberous raiment doffing
Leave thou the raft to be borne at will by billow and tempest,
And boldly strike for the shore, to the might of thy strong arms trusting.
Bind thee around thy breast this scarf of heavenly texture,
Pain nor death can assault thee then. On the safe shore landed,
Loose it, and fling far forth from the land on the wine-dark waters,
Looking not back, but turning away,”
The scarf she left him ;
Then to the billowy deep once more like a sea-gull darting
Plunged, and the dark wave hid her. Odysseus gazed in wonder,
And thus with his dauntless mind in anxious thought he pondered.
“Ah me ! what wiles are these, what craft of another immortal,
Bidding me loose from the raft, to the treacherous wave confiding ?
Far is the shore, and the waters deep. Meseemeth it better
Here to abide, while the raft holds out, with a patience steadfast.
Then, if no better may be, when the planks ai*e riven asunder,
Then at the last to attempt the shore.”


He spake, and pondered.
But now a mightiest wave Poseidon hurled against him,
Hurled, and it crashed, and came, illimitable, ruining, endless,
High over-arched. Like a hillock of chaff that the wild winds scatter,
Swiftly the raft’s torn planks were dashed and shattered asunder
Wide on the wave ; but Odysseus, falling, grasped at a timber,
Straddled it swift, and rode ; and he stripped his raiment from him,
Binding around his breast the scarf, the gift of a goddess ;
Then on the sea-wave prone, to his hands’ strong oarage trusting,
Fell, and essayed to swim. And the grim Earth-shaker, watchful,
Nodded in fierce disdain, and thus reviled him struggling.
“ Go, after many woes, on the wave a wanderer helpless.
Thus is my vengeance wreaked : nor lightly, I think, thou ’scapest
Now to the shore, nor soon to forget Poseidon’s anger.”
Two long nights and days on the breast of the heaving billow
Gallant Odysseus rode, and his heart grew sore within him.
But when the third fair morn arose in perfected glory,
Still was the air and calm, and aloft on a tall crest mounting
Sudden he saw, full nigh, the Phaeacian land before him.
As when a father dear beneath the eyes of his children
Wakes to a strong new life, when the wasting fever is ended,
And all their hearts are glad, that the god hath ceased to vex him ;
So to Odysseus’ eyes seemed that fair landscape opening,
Field and hill and wood. With strong strokes eagerly forward
Pressed he, joyful at heart, to the welcome strand forth-reaching.
But when he had neared the shore, to as far as a voice might carry,
Nought but the thunderous main was heard, for terribly breaking
The loud wave crashed on the rocks, and the foam flew high to the
cliff-top.
Port was there none, nor creek, nor roads where a ship might anchor :


Nought but the jutting crags, and rocks, and the breaking billow.
And then Odysseus feared, and heavily spake within him.
“ Alas ! when Zeus, unhoped, deliverance out of danger
Has wrought, and brought me safe through the deep abysms of ocean,
Yet can I find no help, no landing-place before me.
For the smooth cliff rises sheer, and the grim wave bellows under ;
Sharp are the crags, and the waters deep. If I turn me seaward,
Coasting along the shore, till I reach some land-locked haven,
Haply a monstrous wave may hurry me far to the ocean,
Or yet more monstrous beast, of the many that Amphitritfe
Shepherds in deep sea-caves, may spring upon me and rend me,
For well I have learned the wrath of the Shaker of earth, Poseidon.”
As he spake, a great wave seized him, bearing him up to the rock-wall.
Then had his bones been crushed, and his fair skin terribly mangled,
Had not Athene, mindful, succoured the chief in his peril.
Swift to a crag with his hands he clung, and the wave, whirled past him,
Roared on the cliff; he clung ; but the surge of it, eddying backward,
Snatched him again from his hold, and dashed him mightily seaward.
As when a polypus clings in his den, and the strong wave refluent
Tears him struggling forth, and the pebbles stick to his suckers,
So was Odysseus torn, and the skin of his hands he left there,
Whelmed in the wave ; but Athene still gave strength to her hero,
Else had he found his fate, or in spite of fate had perished.
Diving under the breaker, as again it thundered shoreward,
He rose on the seaward side, and coasting, ever regardful,
Swam, till he came at the last to the mouth of a fair-flowing river,
Sheltered, smooth, stone-free. And thus he prayed to the river,
“ Lord of the stream, whosoever thou art, O hear my prayer.
Suppliant verily I, from the wrath of Poseidon fleeing.


Even the most high gods respect a suppliant’s title.
Hear and pity, O king ! ”
And the river heard him praying ;
Yea, and it stayed its stream, and smoothed its billowy waters,
Bringing him safe to shore. And down sank mighty Odysseus
There, for his knees and his strong hands failed, and his heart within him
Flagged, and the salt brine gushed from his swollen mouth and nostrils.
So without spirit or life for a while he lay, deep-weary.
Then when the breath came back, and his spirit revived within him,
Loosing the scarf, he rose, and into the flowing river
Cast it; the river caught, and carried it down to the ocean,
And Ino fair received it. But he, once more back-turning,
Fell in the reeds, and kissed with his lips the warm and kindly
Earth, the giver of food. And weary, he lay and pondered,
Whether were safer there by the river’s bed to couch him,
Prey to the dew and the frost and the bitter winds of morning,
Or the wooded upland seek, where, frost and fever avoided,
Haply might sullen beasts of the wood devour and rend him.
Yet at the last this pleased him ; a wide spot near to the river
Quickly he found, and crept where twin shrubs, olive and mastic,
Grew from one stem ; no wind might pierce through their leafy covert,
No, nor the sun’s fierce rays, nor the might of the driving shower.
In then he crept, and lay ; and his couch was made upon dead leaves
Fall’n, for a wealth of these lay deeply around and about him.
As when a careful hind, in a neighbourless out-field steading,
Sedulous haps a brand, in the deep dark ashes hiding,
Saving the spark of fire ; so deep in the leaves he laid him,
Happing them carefully round and about; and Athene o’er him
Slumber refreshing shed, that his limbs might rest from travail.
So in his woodland couch safe slept the mighty Odysseus.
F/NIS.




