

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF
MISS ANN E. LEAK
BORN WITHOUT ARMS.




THE
AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF
MISS ANN E. LEAK
BORN WITHOUT ARMS;
CONTAINING
AN INTERESTING ACCOUNT
OF
HER EARLY LIFE AND SUBSEQUENT TRAVELS
IN THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRALIA.
Melbourne:
PRINTED BY AZZOPPARDI, HILDRETH AND Co.,
POST OFFICE PLACE.
MDCCCLXVII.


PREFACE.
The subject of the following autobiography, confessedly, in the
endowments of her person, presents a rare and striking instance of
that liberty which nature sometimes takes in the production of the
varied pieces of her handiwork.
Miss Ann E. Leak was brought into being with neither hands nor
arms, the common avenues of self-help, and the dependence of man.
This marked deficit in her construction is wonderfully provided for,
and has its compensation in the additional use and singular dexterity
given to her feet and their little members, the toes, which do the office
of so many fingers, apparently with the same ease and facility, execut-
ing the will of the living soul, whose subjects they are.
Miss Leak, in presenting this, her autobiography, to the public, feels
no little delicacy at seeking, seemingly, to make the deprivation which
she suffers in the entire absence of arms at her birth, the occasion of
gain to her, by gratifying the eye, oftentimes, of a curious public;
though averse to it at first, and till circumstances, changing, necessitated
such a course. She can, in this way, nevertheless, best meet the
obligations which she owes to herself and to her aged parents, in a
measure dependent on her endeavors, and confidently trusts that the
motive which thus actuates her will stay any cold look of indifference,
and draw forth the sympathy and consideration of every heart that
witnesses her operations, or to whom this little volume may come.
The Publishers,
Philadelphia, 1871,
“ Meridian Sun Lodge, No. 26, F.A.M. 1
“ Griffin, Ga., June nth, a.d. 1867. i
“To the Fraternity of the F.A.M.; Greeting:
“ This is to certify that Miss Ann Eliza Leak (the bearer) was bom
in Zebulon, Pike County, Georgia, and was without arms at her birth.
* The original, bearing the seal of the lodge, is still in the possession of Miss Leak.




She was for fifteen years a resident of Griffin, Ga.; was educated at
the Griffin Female College, where she made rapid progress, and gradu-
ated with honor to herself. Her parents are worthy and respectable
people, and good citizens.
“Her father, Mr. Wesley Leak, is a R.A.M., and a member of
this Lodge. Miss Leak is a most excellent and amiable young lady,
and unfortunate, but unfortunately dependent and needy in the highest
degree,
“ We therefore most cordially commend her to the Fraternity as a
young lady worthy of in every respect of their aid and kind considera-
tion. We hope all true Masons will help, aid, and assist her to the
extent of their ability, wherever she may meet them.
“ Attest, “ A. C. NILES, TV.M.
“S. W. MANGHAM, Sec. “F. D. DISMUKE, S.W.
[ SEAE -] “H. C, BURR, y.W”
4


THE APPEAL.
To the friends of the unfortunate these few lines are dedicated :
I deem no apology necessary in appearing before you as a suppliant
of your bounty and favor. And, first of all, I beg you not to regard
me as an ordinary show character, or travelling medicant.
Although a stranger to most of you, this is my country, and I look
on you all as my friends. I was born in Pike County, Ga. When
quite young, my parents removed to Griffin, of that State, where I was
educated, and where we enjoyed the comforts, and many of the luxuries
of life. But the past few years have wrought sad changes to many a
joyous, happy fireside—to mine among others. Not only have my
parents seen their property, home and all, swept away by the cruel
fate of war, but the strong arms of my dear brothers, on whom they
hoped to lean for support in their declining days, have been palsied by
the hand of death, and their bodies lie reposing beneath the clods of
the valley, or bleaching on the battle fields of Virginia. With the
advanced age and feeble health of my father, young brothers and sister
to raise and educate, is it strange that the spirit of a fond and devoted
mother should droop—and she be led to exclaim, in the language of
Scripture, “ My days are in the shadow that declineth, and I am withered
like grass,” Feeling, as I did, the weight of the affliction resting
upon my parents, I saw their last and only hope of a home or com-
petency for the future rested upon their poor, armless daughter, who
now addresses you. In infancy, owing to my extreme helplessness and
bad health, my parents thought it would be a blessing not only to them
but to myself, if God should take me to Himself. But He ordered
otherwise. I’ve been spared to the present, for what purpose He alone
knows.
Imagine my own and a mother’s feelings when it was decided that 1
must leave the society of my friends, and cast myself upon the sympa-
thies and charities of a world, often cold and unfeeling. But, “ I know
in whom is my trust.” And now I present myself with no other claim


assure you that I shall feel grateful for your sympathy and that 7
ANN E. LEAK,
(Born without arms).


AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OP
MISS ANN E. LEAK.
CHAPTER I.
I WAS born in Zebulon, a little village of four hundred inhabitants,
situated in Pike County, Middle Georgia. At the time of my birth, my
father was a merchant ; but circumstances subsequently were much
changed,—the war, which brought sadness to so many households,
depriving him of what he had saved against the time of his old age.
It was fortunate for me that the night of adversity that thus rested
upon my father’s family was so long delayed, as my parents were
able to afford me thereby opportunities for education and self-improve-
ment, and more easily could meet the wants of my doubly dependent
condition in childhood. How little they dreamed that the daughter,
helpless beyond all hope, seemingly, should at last be a stay and sup-
port to them in their declining years, returning something of the ease
spent upon her in early infancy. Little they thought, too, of my
capabilities for ever caring for myself. When my father first saw me
he walked the room incessantly, completely overcame in his feelings
crying and sobbing like a child for his helpless offspring. My mother
was only consoled by the opinion of her physician, that I could not,
sick as I was, live but for a few days. But Providence had deter-
mined otherwise ; though I was not privileged to see a well day
during my early infancy. Later, the state of my health permanently
improved.
Of the twelve children my mother bore to my father, I was the only
one in any way deformed. My right limb is several inches shorter
than the other. On that account i never walked till I was five years
old, but crawled, sitting up, and in this way could glide over the floor
quite rapidly. At quite an early age I commenced using my feet as
a child would make use of the hands ; piling up blocks, then throw-
ing them down in great glee. My mother says the first small thing
she noticed my picking up was a pin , which crawling along, I gave to
her. This was regarded as a great feat for me to do, and was
spoken of by the family with much interest. Until I was ten years
of age, I never ventured to walk far at a time, owing to the many
falls which I would always suffer ; but now I can walk a mile without
fatigue, and it is a source of great pleasure to be able to do so.
My parents sent me to infant-schools at first. When eleven years
old, I entered the “ Griffin Female College,” Rev. H. B. Morrow
being the President. There I completed my education. To him and


his 'good wife I owe my lasting gratitude. How good they were to
me, and the scholars, too ! and especially my class-mates are grate-
fully remembered for their many little acts of kindness. In school, I
sat with my feet on the bench, holding my book with my toes, and
“ thumbing ” the leaves as deftly as my mates did with their fingers.
I joined the scholars readily iiroall their amusements, such as
jumping the rope, playing “ Graces” and hopscotch. My teacher
set me copies. Receiving instructions from him as to the formation of
the letters. I would study my convenience as to holding my pen and
psper. I have taken music lessons, and once understood the rudi-
ments very well, but finding I could not span an octavo with my
toes, I gave it up, as I have made it a rule that where I cannot do a
given thing as well as those with arms and fingers, I abandon its
pursuit altogether ; yet I try to do everything I see others doing,
and generally succeed, I have crocheted a great many large tidies and
a variety of mats. I sew, thread my needle, tie the knot, cut with
scissors, etc., with ready facility. I feed myself, using a knife and
fork in cutting and conveying my food ; hold a cup or tumbler to
drink from, making an inclination of my head and body forward
instead of raising of my feet. I also open, close, lock, or unlock a door;
wind my watch, write, etc., with ease.
CHAPTER II.
e In the year 1859, I left school to superintend the labor of house-
keeping at home for my mother, finding in this employment many
things to take up my time and attention. About a year afterwards I
took my first lesson in braiding hair. My own friends even had no
idea that I could succeed in doing such fine work ; but witnesses
a-plenty may be found in Griffin to testify to the proficiency soon
acquired in the art. Specimens of my work were sent to the Atlanta
and Montgomery Eairs.
In December, 1860, I carried specimens of hair-work to the Fair
holding at Macon, Georgia. The committee would have me show
them personally how I did the work. Through the efforts of Col.
Thomas, who presented my claims, I was awarded a premium of
twenty dollars. I had received so many kindnesses at his hands, that
afterwards I took the liberty to make him a watch chain, for which I
received a response that tended only to increase the sense of my
obligation to him, I gladly acknowledge the same by giving his reply
publicity here :
“ Flint Riveb, May 8,1862.
“ My Deab Miss Leak :
“ I received the beautiful hair-chain, for which I offer you many
thanks and my best wishes for your present and future happiness. I
shall have it handsomely mounted when I go to Milledgevdle, and
wear it with a constant remembrance of much love and good-will to
you. My dear child, I often think of you, and in the course of events
which happen to us all, if I can at any time serve you, it will give
me great pleasure to do so. I hope I shall have the pleasure of seeing
you here again some time when my daughter is staying with me.
She is, like yourself, a sweet child of misfortune.* lam sure you
* Her back had been broken when an infant.
8


would love her, if you were only acquainted with her, Eememher me
kindly to your parents, and accept much love and good-wul to
yourself. “ Yours, affectionately,
“J. L. THOMAS.”
In March, 1863, I left home to visit some relatives in Florida. On
the way thither I remained over a few days in Savannah at ap .
Jackson Bird’s, whose niece, “ Irene,” had been a school-mate of mine.
Here I passed the time pleasantly, till the Friday morning following,
she accompanied me to the depot, where I was to take the train tor
Quitman. Early the next day, while taking breakfast at the pub ic-
house, my Uncle Leak’s carriage, which had been sent for me, came to
take me to his place, a fine country residence about eighteen miles f rom
Quitman on the Georgia and Florida line. Here it seemed to me ttiat
nature never appeared half so lovely before. I feasted myselt on e
scene, enjoying the quietness and solitude, and felt it a privilege o e
so far away from the noise and strife of war ; to be awakened at me
morning’s dawn only by the warbling of the feathered songsters o 0
forest who—
“ Praise their Maker all they can,
And shame the silent tongue of man.
A few days afterwards, my aunt and I went to Madison, Florida, to
see my grandmother, whom I had not met for four years. Great was
my rejoicing as Ibeheld her, my dear good grandmother, tall and stately
in her form, with hair that was once black, but now tells what time has
done for her. I can see her now with those large, beaming eyes, with
more of beauty in them than time could touch. Her expression was
cheerful and pleasing ; her manners dignified and affable 5 as spriglit y
and industrious a soul as ever breathed. She was remarkable tor her
Christian charity, and her patience was, I may say, as beautiful as her
charity. Next to my mother, she fills the dearest place of au in my
heart’s affections. Neither longue nor pen expresses the love I teel tor
her blessed memory. ~
Returning to my aunt’s again, I there formed a class of young ladies
in hair-braiding, giving them instructions regularly for four weeks.
Then I taught in Madison. Subsequently I went to Cherry Lake and
had a class at Mr. Thomas Livingston’s, where I spent four weeks very
pleasantly. In August of the same year I visited my uncle, Mr. Haley
Blocker, who resided in Tallahassee. There I had a class of eleven
ladies, married and single. My uncle, as well as my cousin
were in the army at the time. How my heart really ached when
thought of the danger threatening them daily! and earnestly longed tor
the day to be not far distant when peace should be restored again to
our distracted country. I had already lost a dear brother at
Charlottesville, Ya., but a few months before, which had caused me to
feel most keenly the sad ravages of war. _ A
Visiting my uncle Leak’s again, I was soon joined by my sister Landa,
to teach school at Mr. John McMullen’s. At this time my acquaint-
ance with the neighbors and friends had become quite extended,
.adding much to my enjoyment of life in the country. How dearly i
loved its scenes ! With what interest and freedom I entered into all
the sports and pleasures of plantation-life ; eating the sugar cane ;
watching the boiling of the juice; drinking the hot foam of the syrup;
delighted to look upon the merry-making that was going on.


My parents also came with the entire family, intending to locate in
the vicinity. My father was in a feeble state, and desired much to go
nearer the coast, but that would have brought us nearer localities where
the war was raging, which would have Subjected us to many annoyances.
In January, 1864, he got comfortably located on a small place about
seven miles from Madison. Still it did not seem like our home in
Georgia, and sometimes I regretted my father’s disposing of it at all.
To the feeling of sadness felt on account of it, was added the sense
of loneliness that I realized in being separated from my sister, who
still remained away from home, engaged in teaching. Dr. Sessions want-
ing me at the time as governess in his family, I readily assented to the
proposition, entering upon my duties in February, finding in this
active employment some relief from my depressed feelings.
My school consisted of the Doctor's little son, his niece, somewhat
older, Willie Leslie, one of the neighbor’s children, my sister Susie,
and two brothers, Charlie and James. The labor of teaching them I
enjoyed much, which was made easier and pleasanter by the kindness
and consideration that I uniformly received at the hands of the entire
family, with whom I daily mingled for the remainder of the year.
CHAPTER III.
In January, 1865, I opened a school at home with eight pupils
attending regularly, besides those of my father’s family. With my
sister and other brothers, also came little “Jackie,” then only five years
old, who soon evinced what was passing in his mind, that there was no
need of Ms observing anything like order, as it was “ Sis ” who was
teaching; and the restraint placed upon him was quite at variance with
his preconceived notions of school-discipline under “ Sis’s ” manage-
ment. But teaching young ideas how to shoot is no play. The
duties to be discharged are oftentimes tedious, and are properly per-
formed only in a spirit of cheerfulness combined with great faithfulness.
In June, my school closed. My sister Linda also came home to
remain.
“It was a trying question with me at that time what I should do for
a livelihood. I had been accustomed to do fine needlework, and could
make hair necklaces, ear-rings, brooches, chains, or any little article of
which I had the pattern. But the people had become familiar with
privations such as the war had induced, and there was little call at the
time for anything above the actual necessaries of life. I might have
engaged again in teaching, but it afforded little inducement, as I was
obliged to have an attendant, which the salary received would not
justify. There was, then, only one way open for me to support myself
and assist the dear ones at home. I could in the various communities
through which I might pass, display the skill and ability residing in
my feet and toes, in the absence of arms, for enabling me to help myself,
receiving the patronage of the wondering beholder, and enlisting his
sympathies, as the pain felt on first witnessing such a deprivation
should give place to the admiration excited at beholding such exhibi-
tions of skill in originating with toes various pieces of work that
seemingly could be done only by the hand.
When my mind was made up to this, I was not slow to act, and
the remembrance of the following lines qrged me on s—.•


“ Never put off.
Whenever a duty awaits thee;
With sober judgment view it,
And never idly wish it done,
Begin at once and do it.
For sloth says falsely ‘by and by’
Is just as well to do it,
But present strength is surest strength,
Begin at once and do it.
And find not thorns in the way, _
Nor fear though thorns bestrew it,
But bravely try, and strength will come,
For Q-od will help thee do it.”
For travelling, I felt that I needed both a lady and a gentleman
attendant, yet was lacking the very means for securing the services
of either.
In my extremity, Captain James Tj. Mosely came to my relief,
advancing me money and engaging to accompany me on my first tour
of travelling, making no charge for time and services rendered. I also
succeeded in securing the services of Mrs. Margaret Bunker. These
preliminaries made, my mind was much relieved, though feeling still
somewhat concerned as to how I should arrange for my wardrobe,
which required several additions, as I had made but few purchases
during the war. .
With the assistance of Mr. Thomas Jenkins, of Madison, I had a
fine tidy raffled for, which brought me the sum of seventeen dollars.
This did not suffice however, obliging me to resort to credit in complet-
ing my arrangements.
CHAPTER IV.
My first place in view was Barnum’s Museum, New-York, I cannot
describe my feelings of aversion to it, as I thought of the undertaking.
Only the conviction that it seemed to be best, reconciled me to it. My
lot was not one of my own choosing, but such as Providence had
assigned me, and my feet seemed to be directed in the path that I was
about to tread. It is the doom of man that his sky should never be
altogether free from clouds.
“ Be thou as a little child;
Thy Father’s hand will guide thee home.”
I make extracts from my journal of date of
September 23, 1865.—My dear mother and brother Charlie went
with me to Madison, where I was to take the train. Our Heavenly
Father saw that disappointment and separation were necessary, and He
will make all things “work together for good.”
September 26.—Went aboard the steamer Fountain at Jacksonville,
Fla., for Savannah, Was sick crossing St. John’s bar.
September 27.—Arrived in S. at four o’clock p.m. Thought best to
remain a few days. _ . __ TT , _
October 4.—Went on board the Varima, for New-York, atter
having exhibited at different times to small groups. Found myself
much embarrassed*


October 8. —Arrived in New-York, having experienced a heavy
north-eastern gale on the passage, Captain Mosely and Mrs. Bunker,
as well as myself were sick. Am glad to set my feet on terra firma
again. Went to Metropolitan Hotel.
October 10.—Had some photographs of me taken while sitting using
my feet; the first time I ever eat for any in that posture. The noise
of the city is indeed wearisome. We take our way along crowded
streets, meeting nothing but strangers, who stare coldly as they pass —
no smiles, no welcome. It is not like wandering through green paths
with those that I love.
October 16. —Exhibited at Barnum’s Museum. I cannot begin to
describe the feelings of dread and aversion to it that filled my breast,
though friends say I did well. Some ladies pretended to faint, perhaps
to have a better chance to fall into the gentlemen’s arms.
October 17. —Shall never forget my first night spent in the Museum,
I was much afraid, so was Mrs. Bunker, as we thought of the possi-
bility of fire, wondering how we should escape from the third storey in
such an event.
November 9. —Bade adieu to the Museum, my health not permitting
me to remain longer.
November 14.—Arrived at Tarboro, N.C., on Saturday last. Went
to Mr. Bryant’s, Captain Mosely’s brother-in-law, where I was confined
to my room, quite indisposed. Exhibited to-day at the Courthouse.
Eeceived some fifty dollars.
atßnt lest I tire the reader with these extracts from my journal, suffice
it to say that I continued on my journey, stopping at various places on
the way to exhibit, arriving home on the 26th November, 1865. How
glad I was to see the old log cabin again, and once more behold its
inmates! The trip I had taken was not a remunerative one ; on the
contrary, I had sunk three hundred and eighty dollars, and knew not
where to go for means to replace it. But I was with the loved ones
at home, enjoying the quiet and seclusion of country life, which gave a
sweet sense of joy and peace far different from what I found in the
city.
Soon after my return home, my mother and myself went to Madison
to attend the sittings of the Conference then in As usual, we
found my grandmother’s house open to receive the ministers of her be-
loved church. There, I made the acquaintance of several clergymen,
and saw some whose countenances were familiar. Among them were
Bishop Pierce, and- the Rev. J. B. Jackson, who was formerly stationed
preacher in Griffin, Ga. He preached my brother Thomas’s funeral
sermon, on the occasion of his death, in June, 1853, and the sight of
his dear face brought to mind many recollections of the past. Hardly
a month went by before my sister Linda married. How lonely I felt
as again she was separated from me!
I soon began to make arrangements for another trip, in the hopes of
better results following. There are none whose sky is so bright as not
sometimes to be overcast with shadows of adversity. In the confidence
of a buoyant hope, I went on in my preparations, cheered with the
thought that a kind and loving Providence does not appoint unto us
one needless trial for our good. Visiting Mr. Joseph Tillman, a wealthy
and very charitable gentleman, I obtained a loan of forty dollars for
the furtherance of my object. Subsequently, not meeting with the
Success that X anticipated, he generously donated to me the entire sum,


CHAPTER V.
In January, 1866, Captain Mosely and myself started again, en route
for New York. I dispensed with the services of Mrs. Bunker, in order
to lessen expense as far as possible.
An accident occurring to the train on which we were traveling,
caused us to remain over at Lake City. Here I admitted several
visitors to see me at the public-house where we were staying. Among
them was a Mrs. Jones, who made a proposition to travel with me,
which, after some consideration, I finally accepted. She reimbursed
Captain Mosely for the sum which he had paid out on my account, and
after a few days delay, in order to allow her opportunity to arrange
her business, 1 proceeded on my way, in company with Mrs. J. and
her husband.
My first exhibition given, after the completion of this arrangement,
was at Jacksonville. Taking passage by the Lizzie Baker, for Fer-
nandina, I exhibited there also. Little interest was manifested, yet the
gift of a large Bible from a lady friend, with many attentions that I
received from various individuals, will never be forgotten. Miss Taylor
the donor of the Bible, gave me also a letter of introduction to Major
Burns of Savannah, to which we were going. There my levees were
well attended. I also had the good fortune to meet with my old friend
and schoolmate, Mrs. Wayde, formerly Miss Irene Bird. She was
changed only in name after all. A few days after, I had the pleasure
of meeting her husband also, while enjoying the hospitalities of her
home. Here, too, I received unexpected favor. My bill for printing
and advertising had been quite large. On sending tor the amount of
my indebtedness at the Herald office, I received the following :
“ Office, Daily Heeald, ■)
“ Savannah, March 26, 1866. )
“ Miss Ann E. Leak :
•« Bear Miss— I take great pleasure in informing you that the Herald
office has no charge against you.
‘•Hoping you may continue in the enjoyment of every blessing, I
subscribe myself.
“ Your obedient servant,
“W. T. THOMPSON`”
The next day I armed in Augusta, Ga., and was pleasantly domiciled
at the Globe Hotel. Who should call to see me but _ Eev. Aminius
Wright, then preaching in Augusta, but formerly stationed in Griffin,
where I had spent so many days in my childhood.
In Augusta, I made many new friends, the remembrance of which is
pleasant even to this day. The engagement proved quite a profitable
one, extending over a period of some two weeks. Mr. Hewitt, the pro-
prietor of the Globe Hotel, presented me with two fine handkerchiefs
and a beautiful collar. He was also very liberal in his charges with
Mr. and Mrs. Jones, taking nothing on my account. Mr. William
Pettigrew also sent me a gift of four interesting volumes, with the
accompanying note:
“ Miss Ann B. Leak :
“ Accept of this small package, and, at your leisure, peruse the con-
tents. The knowledge derived therefrom will help you on to that
13


better land where you, as well as I, will hare hands to strike the guided
harp. I, too, hare lost, everything ; but this may be to you better than
gold.”
“ S our obedient servant,
“WILLIAM PETTIGEEW.
“ Augusta, Ga., March 31, 1866.”
He was one of the friends whose acquaintance I had formed during
my stay here, and his thoughtful remembrance of me served to endear
my heart yet more to this place, and its kind, hospitable people.
I lost no time in acknowledging his unlooked-for favor, assuring him
that the valuable gift would be highly treasured by her who hopes to
meet in that happy land, not only those who heal the maladies of this
frail treatment of clay, but that Great Physician who can remove all
the diseases of sin, and present us pure before His Father’s throne.
On leaving Augusta, the engagements that immediately followed
were quite short. We passed through Washington in Wilkes county,
Ga., Greensboro, Madison, and Atlanta. At Madison, Rev. Mr Adams,
a Methodist minister, called to see me the day after my arrival, kindly
offering his services. He had preached in Griffin, my native place, and
when he saw one of my announcements, he recognized the name at
once. It was a pleasure to meet such a friend when so far away from
home.
On leaving Atlanta, we went direct to Nashville, Term., making a
more lengthy stay. My first levee was held in the East Room of
Brittingham Hall, the first of May. The editors of the city papers gave
me quite extended notices, and the results of the visit were encourag-
ing. Gallatin, Bowling Green, and Russelville were next visited. At
the latter place I met with the Rev. Dr. Sherwood of St. Louis, whom I
knew when in Griffin. The Baptist Convention was in session, and he kindly
used his influence to commend my claims upon the attention of his
brethren and the public generally. Here, again, I was favored. The
proprietor of the hotel, George W. Gray, Esq., made no charge what-
ever against me.
Little was done at Clarksville, Tenn., where we next visited. A
Grand Tournament for the benefit of an Orphan Asylum was to be
given at the grounds of the Fair then holding near by. Procuring a
canvas, I went out, in company with my agents, Mr. and Mrs. Jones,
but there was lack of energy in giving publicity to my levees under
canvas; and here, too, the results were far from being encouraging.
At Clarksville, we went on board of the Tennessee, en route for Paducah.
A complimentary ticket was given by Capt. Peterson, and our passage
was made pleasant for us by the kind attentions that we received from
the officers of the boat. On our arrival at our destination, we met kind
friends to aid us. My public receptions were given in Ashbrook Hall,
and some of them were well attended. The press gave quite extended
notices, which were the more gratifying as they were free and
unsolicited.
On leaving Paducah, we were fortunate enough to secure passage for
Cairo, on the Clifton, a fine boat ; the officers of which were very kind
and attentive, affording me the accommodations of the boat free of
charge. The morning after our arrival in Cairo opened fair and
pleasant as any morning in June, befitting the day of Sabbath rest. I
improved the opportunity by attending church, The next day several
14


gentlemen favored me with calls, whose influence, exerted in my behalf
was most favorable upon the attendance at my levees given publicly.
The next place of importance visited was St. Louis, where I made
many acquaintances, the memory of which is indeed pleasant. While
holding my first levee, a lady dressed in deep black approached, hand-
ing me her card. Who should it prove to be but my dear aunt, Mrs.
Henry Yan Bibber, of Hew Orleans. Afterwards we passed some
time together in recounting past events in our two histories. I also
met Eev. Dr. Sherwood, finding him still the same good man that I
had known years before. To the Masonic fraternity I was placed
under obligations for responding so readily to the appeal made to them
for their protection.
These little reminiscences, casually met with in my wanderings, are
like oases in the desert. They cheer and enliven the" heart among the
“ sea of upturned faces” that are strangers to us. Who has not had
his heart quicken with joy at beholding in a strange land even one face
that was familiar to the gaze ?
On leaving St. Louis, our next place of destination was Hannibal.
The morning after our arrival, we were awakened by the ringing of
bells and the booming of cannon, ushering in the anniversary day of
American Independence. The occasion was to be honored by a public
dinner with amusements in a grove near by.
I soon formed a few acquaintances in the city, yet I had opportunity
to exhibit only to small groups, till some young ladies offered their
assistance to help arrange for a musical entertainment for my benefit
at Brittingbam Hall. The free use of the hall was afforded me by the
proprietor, whose name it bears. Many young persons became inter-
ested in the object, selling tickets, distributing circulars, or aiding me
in other ways. A part of the programme, among other things, was
for me to perform a duet with Miss Sols. For this purpose, at the
time, I sat upon a small table so as to raise me above the keys of the
piano, kindly furnished by the father of Miss S., the young lady who
was to accompany me in the duet. One gentleman arose impromptu,
and, coming forward, handed me five dollars.
At one of these exhibitions, a Mr. Dunning watched with much
interest my operations. Asking for paper and pencil, he wrote me :
“ To Miss Ann E. Leak :
“To you, we might suppose the world would seem dark and
gloomy, nature having deprived you of the beautiful and graceful arm
to be in symmetry with the rest of your form. But with all the freaks
and vagaries of Dame Nature, she is not so churlish and changeable as
women in general j for even in your case she has given you an intelli-
gent mind and an aptitude and excellence in business ; and feats that
can rarely be equalled by the most accomplished ladies perfectly
formed, in connection with all the appliances of wealth, refinement,
and education.
“ In every trouble or sorrow, look aloft for hope and comfort, and
if you are sincere and true, you will be happy and perfect iu spiritual
beauty in those brighter realms beyond the tomb.”
I have often been asked if I was as happy and enjoyed life as well
as a person would with arms. Why should I not P If I were despond-
ing, I should be miserable myself, as well as making my friends un-
happy .abound me. Let me rather think that God has spared me for


some good end, and seek to meet with a cheerful, willing spirit, the
responsibilities of life, rather than by repining turn them into burdens
only to be endured because they must be.
But, bidding adieu to the kind friends found in Hannibal, we went
to Palmyra, Mo. Taking rooms at the National Hotel on our arrival,
we made our arrangements for the night in ample time to allow Mr.
and Mrs. Jones to attend church in the evening.
There they met the Presiding Elder, Rev. M. M. Newland ; also
Rev. H. A. Bourland, and T. C. Thompson, Esq., who called to see me
the next day, according to promise, offering very kindly to render any
assistance that they could.
My levees were held afternoon and evening at Concert Hall, and
much interest was manifested. The kindess and hospitality extended
to me excite no little regard, on my part, for the people of Palmyra.
During my stay, among other things I might name, was the invitation
of Rev. Mr. Bourland to take tea with his family. Sitting in the din-
ing-room on the floor, my plate resting before me, on a napkin. I
heard him ask God’s blessing upon them, as they were gathered around
the table, spread with life’s bounties, the first time my eyes had wit-
nessed such a scene since leaving my father’s roof. The tears came
quickly as I gazed upon them. How could I but become attached to
such a people ? „ . . ,
At Palmyra, also, I received a letter from Gen, Lee, in acknowledg-
ment of some little specimens of my work that I had sent him through
a friend: _ „ . _ ,
Lexington, Ya, Bth June, 18bb.
“ Miss Ann E. Leak :
“ Your note of the 12th ult., inclosing a book-mark, has been handed
by the Rev, J. W. Jones. The skill with which you use your pen is
indeed remarkable, and shows the wonderful provision, in your case,
of our merciful Creator.
“ Thanking you for your kind remembrance,
, I am,
Yery respectfully,
Your obedient servant,
“E. E. LEE.”
Quincy was next visited. Our stay was short, yet it proved to be
a very pleasant and profitable one. I received many little attentions
from different individuals, that were very gratifying. The Herald,
Whig, and Republican, made no charge for advertising ; besides, they
each gave me notices in their columns. A Mr. Black had me sit for
photographs at his expense. The parties engaged to send them to La
Grange, Mo, where we were to proceed next. Thursday following,
July 26th, we left in the Gray Ragle, en route for the above place.
The passage was a short one, and we arrived early in the afternoon,
making arrangements for holding a public levee the next evening.
The citizens of La Grange entered into our plans with a truly gene-
rous spirit. Rev. Mr. M. McMurray, the Methodist minister, called to
see me at an early day, and left, with his expressions of good-wDI,
a gold dollar. A Mr, Quisenberry also pilled, and pleasantly gave me
five dollars. Other acquaintances and friends I made, winning my
heart to La Grange and its hospitable people.
At Canton, Mo., I was also much favored. Mr. Palmetto, our
generous host, would receive nothing on my account for board. Perry


Nichols freely gave me the use of the hall. The press were very liberal
in their notices of my levees and advertised them gratis. We remained
hfere but a short time. The Andy Johnson, a fine large boat, coming
along, we took passage by her for Alexandria. Her officers were very
generous, refusing the offered passage money, not only for myself, but
for my agents Mr. and Mrs. Jones, as well. On our arrival at the place
of our destination, we secured rooms at a private house, our kind
hearted hostess, Mrs. Fitzpatrick, making no chairge. On leaving Alex-
andria, we passed through Warsaw, 111., Keokuk, lowa, and other
places. At Davenport, where we remained some time, my exhibitions
were quite well attended. Dubuque was afterwards visited, also
Prairie du Chien, Wis., where my agent, Mrs. Jones, had a brother
and other friends residing. Here our stay was prolonged to give Mrs.
Jones more time to pass among her friends, and I had a good oppor-
tunity for visiting the surrounding country, abounding in high hills
and bluff's, presenting to the eye of the beholder scenery that was truly
bold and picturesque.
I held a levee in the Congregational Church soon after our arrival,
and had a good audience. Our first Sabbath was improved by going
to church, and the Tuesday evening following I attended class meeting
for the first time since I had been travelling, reminding me so much of
past times spent in dear old Griffin.
Here, too, in company with a few other ladies, the degree of “True
Kindred ” (a side degree in Masonry) was conferred upon me.
We left Prairie du Chien in September, direct for Chicago, where I
was in hopes of filling an engagement at the Museum. On our arrival,
Mr. Jones made an arrangement with the superintendent to that effect,
extending over a period of four weeks.
The time now came for a settlement with Mrs. Jones, who was
really my agent. How amazed and confounded I was at the results I
have no words to tell. Ten dollars simply given me as my fair division
of the proceeds. Ten dollars! Can it be all? The books I was not
permitted to see ; the only satisfaction I could gain was the declara-
tion of Mrs. Jones that she had made calculation of all up to date, and
that was the result.
Leaving me in tears at this unlooked-for-turn of affairs, she returned
to me (with the remark, “ Here! put your name here,”) the following
paper, which, with my signature, was to release her from all obliga-
tions :
“ This certifies that we mutually agree to call all contracts and
agreements settled for the past, up to the present date.
(Signed) A. L. Jones.
“ Sept. 7th, 1866, Chicago.”
Hardly realizing what 1 was doing, I gave the required signature.
At 5 p.m. they left Again I gave myself to tears at the thought of
being left alone among strangers. When my supper was brought in
to me, some ladies stopping in the Same hotel were attracted into my
room also, and really tried to comfort and cheer me up by their sym-
pathy and assurances that I should be cared for.
The next day I went on exhibition at the Museum. Mr. Weather-
wax, the superintendent, had me go to his house to remain over
Sunday, which day 1 enjoyed much in the society of his wife and
family. The following week I did well, and was much pleased at the
prospect of having at least a four weeks’ engagement. But that how-
17


ever, was not to be a reality. Colonel Wood, the proprietor of tlie
Museum, would allow board and provide me with an attendant—
only, at my own expense; in which determination he remained firm,
and I did not think it to he best to accede to such an exaction, when
contrary to a previous arrangement with him.
_ Again I found friends, whose sympathy was excited in my behalf to
kindly open their doors and afford me shelter and protection. A free
ticket to Louisville was obtained for me. Mrs. Weatherwax accom-
panied me to the depot, placing me in care of the conductor. I can
never forget the kindness thus shown to me in that hour of my
extremity, when thrown upon the world weak, alone, and friendless.
Little I thought, on leaving home, that I should be thus placed before
my return again. The conductor saw a gentleman on the train who
was going to Indiana. He proved to be a E. A.M. I made myself known
to him as having taken the Master’s Daughter’s Degree, and received
every attention I could ask, while any little service that I needed was
most cheerfully rendered by the ladies in whose company I was
travelling. F
In the course of the journey I met with a lady from Georgia, who
was going to Louisville, so that I was provided for again when I should
be obliged to take leave of my Masonic friend and acquaintance, made
on the journey, in order that I might continue on to my destination.
On arriving in Louisville, I duly repaired, in company with my new
friend and her husband, to the Louisville Hotel, The landlord was
very kind to me when my circumstances were made known to him. In
the afternoon he had me occupy the parlour for exhibition, the guests
donating me seventeen dollars, and no charge was made for the time
that I remained.
CHAPTER VI.
I arrived in Eminence, Ky., with, nothing noteworthy occurring
after leaving Louisville, and repaired at once to the house of Dr. D. IS.
Porter, a Baptist divine, whose acquaintance I had made in Russellville,
while travelling in company with Mrs. Jones, and who then gave us a
pressing invitation to visit him. How cordially I was received when I
made known my object to him in visiting him, and explained my
situation!
He soon arranged for me to hold levees at tbs Masonic Hall, and
they were successful beyond any pre'iuus effort made; andlremember
with grateful love arid pleasure the kind people whose generosity con-
tributed so much to my comfort. During my three weeks’ stay in
Eminence, I visited small villas and surrounding places, and with equal
success, enabling me on leaving E., to send one hundred and fifty
dollars to my parents—so dear an object to my heart.
Among the places visited was New Castle, some four miles from E.,
where I held several levees—attended with no expense whatever,
through the kind hospitality of the good friends to whom Dr. Porter of
E., had kindly commended me.
On leaving Eminence, I went to Shelbyville. My first levee opened
well. The Masonic fraternity made me a handsome donation. I also
visited the Baptist and Methodist schools, with encouraging results.
A visit to the Female Academy—which, founded in 1825, had continued
in uninterrupted prosperity, under the a efficient management of its yen


eraMe principal, Mrs. Julia A. Tevis— -was' alike pleasant, profitable,
and ink tractive, her example and words of encouragement energizing
me to greater diligence.
The following nay—Sunday, October 21, 1866—1 attended cbureh,
and it being Communion-day, I remained to that service also ; a lady
sitting at my side waited upon me, holding the cup to my lips, A
tew days after 1 returned to Louisville. Mr. Kean, the proprietor of
the Louisville Hotel, was as bind as ever; when calling for my board-
bill, it was receipted for me gratis.
My next visit was made at Nashville, Tenn. A free pass was kindly
furnished me by the superintendent of the L. & N. R. R,, for myself
and servant—which I found necessary to have, travelling alone,
unattended by any other person.
T rom Nashville I went to Franklin, where I held several levees with
proht. bpring Hill was but a short distance from Franklin, and I
arranged to exhibit there also. My first levee was held in the Metho-
dist church; but I had been on exhibition not more than an hour
before I was taken suddenly ill, obliging me to retire at once to the
seclusion and quiet of my own room.
Gratefully 1 acknowledge the kind attentions that I received from
many friends that but an hour before were strangers to me. While
lying ill 1 was favored with many a little tidbit that would have been
tempting to the palate of an epicure. Rev. Mr. Lawrence, the Metho-
dist preacher in charge, visited me to cheer me with his counsels. The
Presbyterian clergyman, Rev, F, A. Thomson, also called. Dr. J. V.
Childers attended me gratuitously, exercising a benevolent interest in
mj we are, giving me letters of introduction to several gentlemen in
Pulaski, which place he advised me to visit.
On my recovery, I held one levee in Spring Hill, which was well
attended. _ It was indeed with a sad heart that I took leave of this
place and its kind people, for I had learned to love the very name.
My hotel-bill was nothing. Never can I forget the kind hands and
Spring Hill earts tiat bestowecl so many favors upon me while at
My next engagement was at Columbia, not far distant. Here I
remained a few days and then left for Pulaski, where I soon arrived,
taking rooms at the lenessee House. The gentlemen to whom I had
letters of introduction called upon me at an early hour, and soon
arranged for me to give an exhibition. The Mayor, Dr. J. A. Sump-
ter lent his aid m furthering the objects which, notwithstanding the
nclement season that prevailed, was quite successful. My stay was
prolonged some days, and I left well pleased with the place.
rnvecl at Decatur, Alabama, I took rooms at the McCartney
House. The people were very friendly and sociable, evincing consider-
able astonishment as they saw me use a pen and do other things for
which fingers are considered so indispensable. On account of a freshet
occurring, the bridges on the road to Chattanooga had been carried
ra ™. B frora running regularly. Capt. Johnson
0 eied me passage on his boat, which I accepted, anticipating an
uninterrupted journey through to my destination.
1 i/rf however, was prevented from going so far, and I
felt the boat at Bridgeport, Alabama, taking the train there for Chatta-
nooga. On my arrival I immediately took the cars again for Atlanta
en route for Griffin, Ga., my birthplace, *
19


GO AND SEE
MISS ANN E. LEAK,
Who will be glad to shake hands with her friends —
everybody, and their family. She was born
WITHOUT ARMS !
In Zebulon, Pike County, Georgia, and raised in
this place.
Now you have an opportunity of witnessing
TOE PERFORMANCES,
and all should avail themselves of it.
She crochets, braids hair, embroiders, writes,
sews, and uses scissors, knife, fork, tumbler, &c.,
with as much ease and comfort as though blessed
with hands.
Miss LEAK will exhibit for a few days, com-
mencing Christmas-day, at
woodruff’s hall,
From 9 to 12 o’clock a.m., 2 to 4 p.m., and 7
o’clock p.m.
Admission —50 cents.; Children, 25 cents.
At the latter place, my dear friend, Mrs. A. M. Nelms, met me at
the depot. I saw many faces that were familiar ; but how sad I felt
as I did not meet the eye of my father or mother in this, the very spot
where I had spent so many days in childhood, knowing neither want
nor care ! .
At a late hour I visited the “ old homestead,” in the possession ot
a Mr. Dean. The tears rose in my eyes as I strolled up one walk
and down another, first this familar object, and then that, meeting
my gaze. ,
My feet stopped before a bed of flowers, planted by my mother s
hand ; I looked still further on, and there was the orchard which
was my father’s care and delight. Here, we were all together once,
father and mother, brothers and sisters. Some now lie in the new
cemetary ; one dear brother reposes in Charlottesville. Sister Linda,
married, is established in a home of her own. My dear parents are
in Florida. I only am returned, and a wanderer even now, to visit
again the old hearth-stone. How pleasant to recall to mind the asso-
ciations, even though not unmixed with trials, that of old cluster
around it ; reminding me, even in my tears, that God’s hand has been
over us for good ! _
Sunday, December 23, 1866, I passed the anniversary of my birth.
Hear old Griffin! How sweet the place to me then !
Soon after I held a public levee, receiving much encouragement
from the economiums of so many friends, that were pronounced upon
my efforts. In the Southern Herald , published in Griffin, I made
the announcement following :
The next day, the Editor of the Herald spoke in his columns as
follows :


“We call special attention to the card of Miss Ann E. Leak, to he
found in another column. Her performances are indeed wonderful.
Her advertisement was written by herself, and is, to use the common
phrase, a very respectable hand, though written with her toes; it
can he seen at this office. It is a fact well known to this community
that her work has generally taken the prizes at the various fairs at
which it has been exhibited,
“ Miss Leak is alone in the world, without arms, and should be an
object of charity with those who are able to help her ; and while they
are thus doing a charitable act, they can gratify a laudable curiosity
in witnessing her wonderful performances. She does all kinds of
needlework, in the finest style, with her toes. We trust that her old
acquaintances will not fail to attend her performances because they
have so often seen her before.”
While in Griffin, also, at this time Mr. A. B. Niles and Judge Burr
called to see me, presenting me with a certificate of the Masonic
Lodge of which my father was a member—a memento of the past
that I prize above gold.
The day came at last for me to bid adieu to friends in G., and the
pleasant scenes that make the place dear to my memory; but let me
pass in silence over the emotions that filled my mind at the parting.
The deep, mute utterances of the soul have no adequate expression in
the language that falls from man’s lips. They are known only to its
own consciousness, save as they enter the ear of the great God himself.
CHAPTER VII.
My first engagement of any note on leaving Griffin was at Macon,
Ga., where, at the solicitation of my friends I remained some time,
meeting with a good degree of public patronage. The press with
much magnanimity made no charges for announcements, and I was
favored with the free use of the City Hall for my levees.
Passing through Savannah, I hastened on my way to Madison,
Florida, where resided my grandmother and an aunt. My father and
mother where also living in the country seven miles distant.
My arrival was unexpected, as I had given them no intimation of
my intention, yet great was their rejoicing It was pleasant to be
with them again; but my heart was saddened as I looked at my
father and mother and saw the traces of time visible in every feature,
and knew, as only the sight of the eye can tell, how much of privation
and toil they were undergoing.
To please friends who were desirous of witnessing one of my exhibi-
tions in public, I held a levee in Madison. It was very gratifying to
notice the favor that the effort met with among those that knew me
most. On leaving home, I visited Lake City, Baldwin, Gainsville, in
Florida, in quick succession, doing well. At the latter place especially,
I received many kind attentions from various individuals, making my
visit one of more than ordinary pleasure and interest. At Micanopy
I also met with a good degree of success.
Ocala was next visited. Here I remained some little time, giving
several exhibitions, some of which were well attended. Returning to
Gainsville, I received so many expressions of welcome that it seemed


THE CITY HOTEL,
OPPOSITE THE CAPITOL.
Tallahassee, Fla., April 20 th, 1867.
Miss Ann E. Leah,
To J. L. McG-UFFIN, Dr.
4| days’ board, self and servant 25 dol. 50
Paid.
{Signed), J. L. McGRJJFFIN,
No. 21. Ter a. M. W.
almost like going home. Subsequently, I revisited the several places
named, and also exhibited at Jacksonville. At St. Augustine, I met
with marked favor. The people were very liberal in their patronage;
and, though my stay was prolonged several days, suffering from severe
illness, it was attended with no expense to me, through the hospitality
of my kind-hearted host, Mr. John Buffington, of the Magnolia
House. My levees were accompanied with little or no charges, on
account of many little services being rendered gratuitously by parties
whose sympathies were interested in behalf of the helpless stranger
before them.
Leaving St. Augustine, I returned again to Madison to visit my
parents, near which place they resided; having occupied some two
months in the tour I had made. I remained home, however, but
a day or two. The demands upon me to be actively engaged were too
urgent to admit of any longer repose, even within the sacred precincts
of home.
Accordingly, April 13, 1867, I left to exhibit in Monticello, distant
by some three hours’ ride from Madison. I found here, as elsewhere,
friends whose assistance was most valuable in furthering my object.
The levees given were well attended, and no charge was made for the
two days’ stay by my good host, Mr. Godfrey.
Well pleased with the results of my visit to M., I hastened on to
Tallahassee in expectation of doing equally well. The day after my
arrival, Oapt, Oliver, editor of the Sentinel, who was known to me,
called to see me, offering his friendly suggestions. He also interested
the Mayor in my behalf, and no license was required of me. My too
sanguine hopes were not to be realised, however, and I was doomed to
as sad and bitter experience as ever befell my lot while travelling.
My levees were held at the Capitol, but, for causes unknown to me,
received even less patronage than was ordinarily accorded to them.
After several ineffectual efforts I made no further attempt to direct
the public patronage in my favor, and made arrangements to exhibit
elsewhere. On sending for my bill at the hotel, an inquiry was made
as to how much I had realised.
The entire receipts had been less than twenty dollars, and the ex-
hibitions were attended with some expense. On stating the facts, an
account was presented to me for settlement. Let it speak for itself; —


On receiving the bill, I sent word that I would be unable to pay it.
Tbe messenger returned with instructions for me topajall tbar, I could*
i banded the boy fifteen dollars, but on arriving at the depot, was
accosted by a bire.i attendant belonging to tbe hotel, with “ Miss Leak,
you have not paid your hotel bill.” I replied, “ Indeed, sir, 1 have,”
naming the sum 1 had given the boy. W hen it was denied, I had no
evidence of the fact, and to ail my protestations I was t old to go back.
Wishing to see myself vindicated, I had only that recourse left me,
and, so returned; but with, little satisfaction, as justice was not to be
done a weak, helpless woman, dependent on a double degree. Yet, in
this sore trial, I found friends whose sympathy and protection were
worth more than gold to me, as I communicated to them the ill-deserved
treatment that I had been subjected to.
Returning to Monticello, I repaired to the house of a friend. The
next day a note inclosing five dollars from Rev. Mr. Anderson the
Methodist minister in the place, was handed me, I gladly give it in-
sertion here, as it was like balm to my wounded spirit.
-n , r T “ Monticello, Fla., April 22,1867.
“ My Deab Miss Leak s
“ is to thank you for calling at my house. When ydu ivCfc
here last week, sickness prevented my going to your exhibition, as I
certainly should, had I been well. lam very sorry your visit to Talla-
hassee was not a pleasant one, and sorry to learn that you were nob
more generally patronized. Be not discouraged. A resolution and
perseverance like yours is moral heroism, and I regard you as one of
the heroines, true and noble, which your sex has contributed to
humanity. Lew, indeed, would have the courage to face the difficulties
ot your undertaking, and your work is worthy of all commendation,
Have faith, my sister, in the right and the true, for they must triumph.
True, there may be trials, crosses, agonies, bloody sweats, and cruci-
lixmn of hopes ; but there will be a resurrection of hope, a resurrection
of the just cause for the experience of the patient and believing. Have
faith in God, who is above all, and reigns everywhere. He is a Father
loving, and true, and powerful to bless and save. The discipline of the
school in which He has placed you may seem very severe, but the
lessons are all the more precious and valuable, and the instruction all
the more There is a silvery lining to every cloud, a rain-
bow ot beauty ana promise in every storm, and beyond the gloomy
present, there is a future of inconceivable glory. Here the light is ever
contending with the darkness, and the shadows fall upon hearts and
homes ; but there the light triumphs and the cloud never gathers.
Have faith in Jesus. He still lives and lives unchanged. The Jesus
of the Gospels, full of melting tenderness, and overflowing with gentle
love, and moved with ready and brotherly sympathy, is the Jesus of
the resurrection and the throne of worlds j just as accessible now as
when Mary sat at His feet, and just as loving now as when He wept at
the grave of Lazarus. I love to think of Him as our brother. Would
that I could be like him !
“ To you, Miss Leak, none of this is new ; but then it does me good
to hear it and read it from another, who, like myself, feels the coldness
oi a sinful world, and struggles along the path of duty and trial ; and,
perhaps it may act upon your heart as it does upon mine. If so I
have not said it m vain. ;
23


r u And now, please accept the enclosed bill. It is small, not what I
would like to do; but it is the expression of a willing heart. Oh,
how different, were the ability mine to do as I would! Then you
should have no more such trials as you lately met, but be able to spend
your days in the quiet of a home where plenty smiled upon you and
yours.
“May God bless you. Should it be in my power to assist you now,
or at any future period, please feel perfectly free to command my
services.
“ Yours truly
“JOSEPHUS ANDEBSON.”
An opportunity offering for me to go to Waukeenah, I availed my-
self of it, and gratefully noticed the contrast in the reception accorded
to me, and that which I had so lately received. Not only did I meet
with a good degree of public patronage, but many little attentions Were
shown to me by private individuals, whom I might call friends indeed.
I next visited Thomasville, and with equal success. The Methodist,
Baptist, and Presbyterian ministers announced my levees to their con-
gregations, exerting their influence personally to further the object of
them. I also received several donations from private individuals.
So near Quitman, where my sister was residing, I visited that place
also, remaining through the week for rest that was much needed. I
held no levees there, but, visiting G-roversville, I exhibited, doing quite
well for the short notice given. At the station, a gentleman sent me
word if I would come over and post up his books for the day, he would
give me a dollar. I did so, receiving in return several dollars’ worth
of things.
Returning to Quitman, I then gave several exhibitions at the Court-
house. Many friends that I personally knew came to see me, and much
favor was shown to me on every hand, among which was the follow-
ing:
“ Bannee Ofeice, May 15, 1867.
“ Miss Leak t
“ I make no charge for your advertisements, and express the hope
that you may be successful wherever you go, and encounter no more
Tallahassees.
“Very respectfully,
“P. R. Fildes
“ (Ed. Banner)"
Soon after, in connection with a letter that I sent him for publica-
tion, the following appeared in the Banner :
“Miss Ann E. Leak, the Georgia girl, born without arms, held
levees at Quitman on Monday and Tuesday, and, we are happy to learn,
met with considerable success. She is a worthy young lady, and
wherever she goes, we hope kindness and generosity will be extended
to her
We have received from her the following letter for publication, one
is severe on certain parties, but we presume not without cause:
‘ Quitman, Ga., May 15,1867.
‘ Mr. F. R. Filees : ,
‘ Sir I desire to tender my grateful thanks to the citizens ojlhomas-
villc, Groverville, and your pleasant and thriving town Quitman,
have found many warm friends in each place. I likewise oun many
24


friends and donors in Gainesville, Ocala, Jacksonville, Madison, and
especially St. Augustine, Monticello, and Waukeenah. Eager to visit
Tallahassee, Fla., I returned sooner than I desired from the eastern
portion of that State, but soon felt eager to get away from that capital.
There are honorable exceptions, and among them Mr. Oliver, editor of
the Sentinel, Mr. and Mrs. Lamb, and Mr. Galligher. If any of your
friends should visit Tallahassee, advise them not to put up at McGuffin’s
City Hotel, for they will be compelled to pay the most exorbitant
bills, &c.
‘Last Sunday, at Groverville, Rev Mr. Luckie actually gave me
publicity from the altar : he was endeavoring to raise fifty dollars for
the American Bible Society in that goodly village, but did not succeed
in raising the amount, whereupon he remarked, that “if the little girl
that worked with her toes were to come along, you could find five
dollars to give her.” I wish Brother Luckie success in his noble
undertaking—such a cause should never wane.
‘ I will again return many thanks to all the editors in the abovenamed
places, and likewise to the Mayors. Since travelling alone, I have
been favored in every way. I have never paid a tax, and the printer’s
fees have been nothing. I feel as though I cannot be thankful enough
for the many kind friends I met in travelling.
* You need not be surprised to occasionally receive short epistles
from me. And now I bid you all adieu.
Respectfully,
"ANN E. LEAK
‘ (Born without arms).”
CHAPTER VIII.
On leaving Quitman, I held small levees at Yaldosta, Blackshea
Hinesville, Taylor’s Creek and other places, and then hastened on to
Savannah. On my arrival I repaired to the Marshall House to remain
for the night. On inquiring for my bill the next morning, I found that
no charge was made. Proceeding on my way, I arrived at Sandersville,
making my arrangements to exhibit in the evening, with the assistance
of J. E. Weddon, Esq., Master of the Lodge in S. The Rev. A. D.
Anthony also gave me his influence and presence. The levees were
repeated several times. The editor of the Central Georgian also called,
and seemed much interested for the succets of my exhibitions, giving
them a notice in his columns as follows: —
“the geeatest natxjeae woneee oe the age.
“Without doubt, the greatest natural wonder of the age is Miss Ann
E. Leak, the young lady who was born without arms. She is highly
intellectual, a graduate of Griffin Female College, and better still, is a
Christian lady. She was, as we are creditably informed, surrounded
with all the luxuries of life 5 misfortune has thrown her upon her own
resources, penniless and armless; she must now contend with life’s
duties and earth’s cold charities. The proficiency she has made in
supplying the place of hands and arms with her feet and toes is almost
miraculous, certainly beyond anything any one could anticipate. She
writes a splendid hand, crochets well, does the finest kind of needle


wort, braids hair, uses scissors, knife and fork with her toes almost as
well as any person can with hands. It is a duty devolving upon
every one to assist the unfortunate. We recommend every one who
can, to witness her performances; you will thereby assist her to
live, and will be more than rewarded by witnessing her performances
and listening to her refined wit. Again we say to all, pay your
fifty cents, and go in and witness Miss Ann Eliza Leak’s extraordinary
performances.”
On leaving Sandersville, I came again to Griffin, the home of my
childhood, spending several days very pleasantly and profitably, visit-
ing friends and acquaintances. I remained a short time also at Atlanta,
for a like purpose, and then passed through Chattanooga en route for
Nashville, Tenn. Mr. George W. Brosins, conductor on the Western
and Atlantic Railroad, and T. B. House, Esq., conductor on the Nash-
ville and Central Railroad, were very obliging in all their deportment
towards me, both taking the responsibility to pass me over the road
free. Arriving at Nashville, I took rooms at the Commercial Hotel,
with a view of making arrangements to exhibit. Several gentlemen of
the Masonic fraternity were quite active in carrying forward my plans.
Through their influence the editors of the local papers called to see me.
Rooms were secured for holding my levees. The Mayor was also seen
in my behalf. The year before no license was charged, nor had I ever
paid one in my travels, but the new city recorder, Mr. Robert Foster,
rated the charges at seventeen dollars per day. Of course, all further
arrangements ceased at once, as I had no hope that my exhibitions
would justify such an outlay, and I made preparations to leave the place.
In my dilemma, Mr. W. P. Thompson called to see me, leaving with
the remark that it would not do for me to go away from Nashville
without making expenses. A few hour’s afterwards he returned with
a subscription for my benefit amounting to thirty-six dollars—an act on
his part, that I most gratefully acknowledge. This assistance, ren-
dered by the Masons, was most timely, as my hotel bill was over
twenty dollars.
On arriving at Murfreesboro belter success awaited me. The mem-
bers of the Masonic lodge were equally kind and attentive in arrang-
ing for my levees, which were held in the Spence House, where I had
taken rooms. No charge was made for announcements by the city
papers, and the Monitor kindly noticed the levees in its columns :
“ Miss Ann Eliza Leak, the Georgia girl, born without arms, has been
giving levees at the Spence House during the week. She is the most wonder-
ful and singularly accomplished specimen of humanity living, and those
visiting her cannot refrain from pitying her condition, while they ap-
plaud her accomplishments. She crochets, braids hair, embroiders,
writes, sews, knits, and uses the scissors, knife and fork, with as much
ease, dexterity, and comfort as those who are blessed with hands and
arms. She is educated, and possesses none of the lunatic traits which
are often visible in human deformity, conversing on subjects with the
ease and refinement of a lady, and performing feats with her toes which
are incredulous to believe, if not witnessed. Those visiting her cannot
fail to be pleased.
I was also much favored at the Spencer House. The charge was only
five dollars for th e time that I remained, appears in more favorable contrast
still with the sum paid in Nashville, when it is remembered that I had
the use of the parlors for holding my levees*


Sbelbyville was next visited. On the way thither I wa< much
indebted to the conductor of the train for his kind attentions, and
finally asked to know his name ; leaving me for a moment, he soon
returned with a folded paper, saying I would find the name within,
directing my servant girl to put it carefully in my pocket. On opening
it afterwards, I found it contained a five dollar bill, as well. In
Sbelbyville I gave several exhibitions. Though not so well attended
as some, yet the engagement as a whole was made the more remune-
rative by my not having any expenses connected with it.
From this point I also visited several villas and places adjacent,
with much interest and pleasures. While doing so, I met Mr. H. L.
Trescott of Sbelbyville, who offered to travel with me as my agent, a
proposition to which I acceded, engaging his services, however, for
one month only.
At this time, among other letters received was one from my mother,
recounting, though not in the language of complaint, the privations
that all were undergoing at home, and I could see that the worst was
not told. Though not expected, I was glad to be able to send them
fifty dollars.
Returning to Sbelbyville, I gave two more exhibitions, which were
well attended. In answer to a casual remark, while winding my
watch at one of the levees, that I should have my name engraved upon
it, a gentleman present offered to have it done at once, if I would trust
it with him. I know I could trust that open, frank countenance, and
giving it to him, it was soon returned to me with the words beautifully
inscribed upon it, “ Ann E. Leak, born without arms.”
Franklin, Mumfordville, Elizabethtown, and Bardstown, were next
visited, with varied success. Mr. Trescott, finding that the sympathies
of the people were less freely given me, while employing an agent to
act in my behalf, freely offered to withdraw from the engagement.
Reluctantly I accepted his proposition, knowing full well that he was
interested in my welfare. Yet the facts were too evident to the minds
of both of us to allow us to do otherwise While travelling in company
with him, I paid the first hotel bill that had ever been asked of me in
kind, hospitable Kentucky.
Returning again to Eminence and New Castle, places that are en-
deared to me by the kindness and hospitality of the people, on the way
thither, I met in Louisville, Mrs. Colonel L. A. Hawkins, from Ala-
bama, who gave a pressing invitation to visit Eufaula the succeeding
winter, assuring me of a cordial welcome during my stay at her house.
Sickness prevented me from fulfilling the engagement. With the intention
of exhibiting in Frankfort, I visited that place also- I learned that the
Masonic Hall had been burned, and the large public hall could be ob-
tained only by the payment of twenty dollars, which my receipts
usually would not justify. At the Capitol Hotel, where I had taken
rooms, I was favored, as no charge was made. Much pleased at this
unlooked for consideration, I left immediately for Georgetown.
On my arrival in GK, I met with friends to assi-t me in carrying
forward my plans. Several levees were given, with quite pleasing
results. I also succeeded in securing the services of another attendant
to travel with me, as “ Judy," who had accompanied me hitherto so
long and faithfully, was wanting, to accede to her mother’s request
that she should discontinue travelling, to remain with her.
Visiting Lexington, Ky., I held only one levee, as the receipts did


not cover the expenses of gas even. At Paris somewhat better, results
attended my efforts, and some pleasant acquaintances were made.
Among them was my hostess, Mrs. Tipton, who, to my inquiry, What
is my bill ? replied that I had none. Cynthiana and Falmouth were
next visited. Arriving at Covington, I found no hall could be pro-
cured for less than twenty dollars. Of course, I could not think of
remaining, and began to arrange, for holding a levee elsewhere.
Several gentlemen of the Masonic order had called during the day
to tender their services, if needed : and in the evening the Golden Eule
Lodge meeting voted me a donation of twenty-five dollars. A bare look
at my almost empty purse would have sufficed to know how timely
this gift came to my relief,
A few days were spent in Cincinnati to have photographs taken,
and arrange for future movements. Then taking passage on the
Potomac, I went to Lawrenceburg, where I gave two exhibitions.
The last one held was graced by the presence of L. F. Hornberger’s
Band, who dispensed some very lively music on the occasion ; and,
when retired to the seclusion of my own room for the night, gave me
a fine serenade.
Such an aid as their services proved to be, in making the levee
attractive and pleasant, I felt called for some acknowledgment. Hence
I wrote i
Laweencebubg, August 27,1867.
* Mb. J. F. Hoenbeegeb and Band :
“ Gentlemen —You will please accept my sincere thanks, the only
reward you can hope to receive from one so needy and dependant
as myself, for the beautiful music on Saturday night.
“ I have had such favors bestowed upon me before, but seldom have
met with music so fine.
“ Again, I thank you all.
“ Very respectfully, &c.,
“ANN E. LEAk.”
Petersburg and Warsaw were also visited. Arriving in Madison,
Ey. I purposed exhibiting there likewise. The Master of the lodge,
John Cochrane, Esq., intere ted himself to see the Mayor for me. The
latter, however, would charge me for license if I exhibited, and so I
desisted from the purpose. Mr. C. kindly gave me five dollars, on my
leaving for Vernon, Ind.
Very unsatisfactory arrangements on myarrival were made for hold-
ing a levee, which was repeated the following night. The editor of
the Vernon Banner attended, and spoke in his columns the succeed-
ing day, as follows:
“ NATUBAI CUEIOSITT.
“ On Monday evening last, we noticed some small boys distribut-
ing circulars around town, stating that there would be a levee that
night at the Court-house, given by Miss Ann E. Leak, a lady born
without arms. At the appointed time a good crowd had collected, and
the entertainment commenced. She writes, crochets, embroiders,
braids, threads a needle, carves meat, and everything, almost, that a
person can do with their hands she does with her feet. She is well
educated, and travels with the best of references. It is a laudable


effort, when a lady in her condition will start on a tour through the
United States, and showing herself for barely enough to sustain life.
The admission fee is small, only twenty-five cents. We would pro-
nounce her a perfect feetest, and any one visiting her levees will be
welhentertained.
“ Ihe Mayor of Madison, wo understand, wanted to charge her city
license. The brute!”
Seymour, Brownstown, and Medora, were visited successively; and
in the several places I found friends who were active in aiding me to
carry forward my plans, and my success was due in no small degree to
their efforts. At Bardstown, music was kindly furnished for the
occasion. At Medora, a Mr. Wright interested himself in my
behalf. I found him to he quite a rhymer for one that was an amateur,
and give my kind readers one of the productions of his pen, on witnessing
my exhibition:
In eighteen hundred sixty-sever,
September, the twelfth day,
Miss A. E. Leak, a strange lady,
Arrived at M edora.
She travels over the country.
In quite a strange condition f
To-night, at early candle-light,
Will give an exhibition.
Though she has neither hands nor arms.
We can truly say,
We saw her write, in splendid style.
In the town of Medoro.
All those who have a generous heart.
Should attend at church to night,
And pay a very small amount,
To see the lady write*
She will eat her supper in the church
Before every one tint goes.
And feed herself with knife and fork,
And use them with her toes.
Success to Miss Ann E. Leak,
Who truly acts polite —
We acknowledge our humble name.
They call us West Lee Wright.
CHAPTER IX.
Eepairing to Tunnelton, a few miles distant from Medora, I made a
profitable engagement for so short a one. I also held levees at Mitchell,
meeting with a fair degree of success. Bedford, Harrodsburg, and
Bloomington were visited with varied results. At the latter place, I
passed the anniversary of the day when I left home, two years before,
to travel. It had been with a checkered experience of good and ill j yet,
through it all, I can see a gracious Providence has been leading me.
The engagements that immediately followed were quite short. I
passed rapidly from place to place, nothing transpiring worthy of note
till my arrival at Yincennes, Ind., where I remained some time. There
I had occasion to dismiss my travelling maid, experiencing no little
trouble and disfavor on her account, much to my mortification and
29


grief. I afterwards held several small levees, meeting with much favor
from friends, who found that I was not to be regarded as a party to
such misconduct.
Detained for some time, I received a favorable response to an offer
made to the proprietor of the Museum at New Orleans to fill an en-
gagement with him, which was followed by a telegram requesting me
be in St. Louis on the Monday following to take the boat, Lizzie
Gill, for New Orleans. Making my arrangements to that end, I duly
arrived in New Orleans, having been quite ill on the passage.
The Museum opened November 16th, with much eclat. Many
people from my native State were present at my first levee. The en-
gagement extended very profitably over a period of some five months,
during which time I formed many acquaintances and friends, whose
kindness added much to my enjoyment during my stay in the Crescent
City. The press were also very liberal in noticing my levees at the
Museum, an acknowledgment that I gladly make. Of date of
December Bth, 1867, the Daily Picayune very kindly spoke as follows :
“ A Heeoine.— At the Crescent City Museum, in St. Charles-street,
there is an armless young lady, who, in default of hands, manages to
make her feet answer almost as well. She was born near Grifim, Ga.,
educated in the female college of that town, and was, before the war,
surrounded by the comforts and luxuries of life. Sherman’s army
brought disaster and ruin to her parents. Their property was swept
away, and with thousands of others they were left homeless and
destitute. In this emergency Ann Leak proved herself a heroine.
With the refined instincts and feelings of a lady, she naturally shrunk
from the gaze of the curious multitude, but the love she bore her
parents overcame these scruples, and she determined that she would
convert what some had deemed a sore affliction into a blessing for those
who were now dependent upon her : she would exhibit herself in order
that they might have at least the necessaries of life. Few can realize
the amount of moral courage which was evinced in this noble resolve.
This modest and retiring girl, starting out alone to buffet with the
world, may well excite our admiration, and her praisworthy action
should meet with the appreciation it deserves from all who honor self-
sacrificing devotion, but especially from the warm-hearted people of
the South.”
When our company left New Orleans, our first engagement was at
Amite, La., but the effort met with little success. The summer was
mostly spent in visiting, successively, various places in Mississippi,
Georgia, North and South Carolina, and Virginia. On arriving at
Washington, D. C., I closed this engagement with Mr. T. C. Ames, the
proprietor of the Crescent City Museum, and left his Travelling Troupe.
Some time was spent in making preparations for future movements,
which, when completed, I resumed traveling, giving my first exhibition
at Lexington, Ky., in company with another troupe. A part of
September following was spent in visiting the various Fairs then hold-
ing in Indiana and Illinois.
Arriving at Pittsburgh, Penn., I formed a contract with Major
Burnell, so well identified with the Museum that bears his name.
The first levee was given on Monday, September 26,1868, and augured


well for the future. The engagement continued without Interruption
for fifty-three weeks.
During that time, I made many acquaintances, passing the time
pleasantly and profitably. At this place, too, I was indebted to the
press for the notices given my levees, but submit a more general and
extended editorial from the Republican , speaking of the Museum as a
whole:
“ Burnell’s Museum. —This popular place of amusement and in-
struction is open every day and evening to the public. The immense
audience room is daily crowded with ladies, gentlemen and children
of all ages, who are not only highly edified, but instructed by the
various living curiosities on exhibition. Besides the large number of
monkeys, birds, and leviathan snakes, are many animals from every
clime, too numerous to mention. In fact, Major Burnell’s cages, as
they are now arranged, form a perfect parlor menagerie. Among the
most striking freaks of nature, is Miss Annie Leak, the intelligent
and highly educated young lady born without arms, who writes, sews
and executes sample crochet and fine lacework with her toes. Miss Leak
is very communicative, and takes pleasure in giving all the information
in her power to visitors. Next to Miss Leak we may enumerate the
pretty and perfect specimen of a man (and a gentleman) in the person
of our diminutive friend, General Green, who is thirty-one years old,
and is only thirty-one inches in height. The General desires us to
say that he is still unmarried. Ladies will please make a note of
this. Miss Annie Jones, three and a half years of age, who was born
‘ down in Dixie, ’ is a perfect and intelligent little ‘ Esau,’ being
covered with natural hair all over her body, having whiskers,
moustaches, etc Then there are the black and white twins (boy
and girl), intelligent and communicative. Among the most prominent
scientific and artistic parties who are ex parte to the general exhibi-
tion, is Professor Soden and his learned pig, which plays cards, tells
your age, the time of day by any person’s watch, and fortunes ; solves
difficult problems in arithmetic, gives the names of prominent heroes,
etc., etc.; and last, but not least, is that good-natured gentleman,
Professor Carling, the original Bohemian glass-blower, who will blow
for you glass birds, ships, bouquet holders, and a thousand other
articles, before your eyes, from a common gaslight. Prof. C. can
spin out glass as fine as silk, at the rate of three miles in a minute.
Ladies and children can attend the Museum at any time, unaccom-
panied by gentlemen. Go to Burnell’s Museum, Fifth Avenue, near
Wood, opposite the Old Theatre, if you wish to be amused. Major
Burnell has a number of gentlemanly assistants, who will explain the
nature, habits, etc., of every animal or curiosity at any time. Prof.
Geo. Ford will always be found at his post at the door, ready to do
the suaviter in modo to all visitors.
When the Museum was closed for a season, to allow for repairs, to
be made, the proprietor, Major Burnell, visited various places with a
small travelling troupe, myself among the number. Our first enter-
tainment was given in Erie, Penn., under canvas. Titusville, Oil
City, and Petroleum Centre were also visited, and with marked
success.
After a short tour we returned to Pittsburgh, and I resumed my
engagement at the Museum again, which extended to September,


1869. Major Burnell then made up a select company to visit tho
“^ to 3e T ield ‘ T l le exhibitions were to be given under canvas
and b was ch osen, among others, to accompany him.
was bL^„ n ° n W . ’- Wa ! fi T, St v i sitefl - Then Hartford, where a fair
Museum t'fi Heturnmg to Pittsburgh, T went on exhibition at the
Museum tiH occasion should require our Travelling Troupe to go out
wateb" ° f the e ? hib i tions 1 had the misfortune to lofe my
watch, a gift from my dear brother Thomas, who died in 1853, which
rrmueetm ? one ?. ( could not replace, with the sacred associations
U 7 113 my habit, usually, to take the watch out
“, W ! nd T Jt U P during the course of the exhibition, or, removing the
crystal, I would replace it. But I was not to see it again.
As a fair was to be hdd at Butler, late in September, it was
arranged for us to exhibit, under canvas, upon the grounds near by.
kor a similar purpose we also visited Altoona ; then Newark, Ohio
At each of these places, our compiiny w aS we!! patronised, and on
the return to Pittsburgh, my engagement with Major Burnell, ex-
through a period of fifty-three weeks, terminated, and with
Smdilr Sret 1 bade farewelllo the l )lace with which I had become so
CHAPTER X.
Soon I made an arrangement with other parties, and, under the
management of Edwards and Brother, visited Parker’s Landing, Oil
Pity, bhamburg, Warren, and other places, with a good degree of
success. Then, taking our way to Baltimore, we made our opening
at banderson s Opera-house, which resulted in failure, so far as
making any money by the operation. Afterwards, securing other
we remained some time in 8., making only one
other change, doing, on the whole, a fair business.
ihe health of Mr. Thomas Edwards preventing him from travelling
onger, the company disbanded, and I was again thrown upon my
own resources for doing any business. In company with Madam
Nora, a lady glass-blower, with whom 1 had been associated in
Burnell s Museum Pittsburgh, and in the combination lately broken
up, visited Washington, assuming the responsibility of the manage-
ment of the effort; for which purpose I secured Mr. William Allen
accustomed to travelling, to act as my agent, and met with a good
run of patronage. Visiting Alexandria, Va., and other places, our
levees generally were well attended.
Early in February, 1870, Mr. Allen, with Mr. Mitchell, assumed
tlie entire management, much to my relief, and under their direction
we visited Richmond, remaining there some time. Business proved
o e very fluctuating, yet, as a whole, we received a fair share of
patronage, while our visit to Petersburg was attended with more
gratifying success, and we felt well pleased with the results.
n Norfolk the city press noticed us very favorably, and our receipts
were beyond that of any previous effort. We afterwards visited
Portsmouth, Va, ■ and Weldon, Raleigh, Goldsbro’, and Wilming-


Generally, I met with consideration on account of my dependant
condition, and at some of the places we did well; yet at Goldsboro’,
where we expected to exhibit morning, afternoon, and evening, as
we found we should be required to pay a tax of ten dollars for each
separate exhibition, we continued on, in the afternoon, till the
evening exhibition closed, thus saving the payment of one of the
sums.
Leaving Wilmington, we went direct to Charleston, S. C., where
we remained one week. Madam Nora, the lady glass-blower, travel-
ing with me, I found, created quite a lively sensation in our travels
South by her novel works. Arriving in Savannah, we duly arranged
for our exhibitions, which opened well. While remaining here my
mother came to see me. It was a joyful meeting to us both ; but
her pleasure was much marred by what soon followed after her
arrival, as a charge was preferred against the exhibitions as a nuisance
by a party interested to secure their discontinuance in the locality ;
and our agent, Mr. Allen, was arrested therefor ; yet I had the
sympathies of all who were not too heartless to look with any con-
sideration upon my condition, or at least allow me the privilege of
assisting myself in this the only way that I could.
Of course such an act would be heralded by various comments in
the papers, which were interested to collect every little item of news
The Daily Advertiser, published in the city, availed itself of the
circumstance to speak as follows:
“ Complained of for Being a Common Nuisance.— For the past
few days, persons passing the corner of Congress and Whitaker Sts.
have had their ears saluted with the rasping notes of a hand organ,
while upon the front of the building huge side-show pictures
announced that Miss Ann E would “ exhibit her toe-work within.”
All day yesterday the dismal tones of the organ could be heard, while
a crowd of curious urchins, white and black, thronged about the
place. About four p.m,, however, the agent of the show was
arrested and taken before Justice Elsinger, a charge having been
preferred against the show by the occupant of the rooms overhead
that it was a common nuisance. The proprietress, the unfortunate
woman born without arms, and who has in the most wonderful
manner learned to use her feet for almost every function ordinarily
performed by the hands, soon appeared in person and expostulated
most earnestly against such an action; said she had travelled and
exhibited all through the north, and everywhere had been received
with much kindness and sympathy ; but to be arrested in her native
State as a common nuisance was a little too bad.”
In justice to myself, I made the following announcement in the
columns of the Republican :
“A CARD.
“Savannah, Ga ; , April 16, 1870.
‘ ‘ Col. J. R. Sneed, Editor Republican :
“ Sir—Feeling that the purposes which have impelled me to give
exhibitions in this city and elsewhere are misunderstood by some, and


Philadelphia. On our arrival, we learned that the corner-stone to a
fine large building, intended for a Museum, was to be laid at the
corner of Ninth and Arch-streets. We visited the locality, and had
air opportunity to see the proprietor, making arrangements at once
with him to fill an extended engagement at the Museum when
completed.
Leaving Philadelphia, we visited Altoona, Pa., where we passed
the Fourth of July, 1870. A balloon ascension was to take place;
but it proved a failure. Holding an exhibition under canvas, our
receipts were quite large, much to our relief. The next morning we
left direct for Louisville, Ky.; then proceeded to New Albany; thence
to Stanford, Ky., where a fair was holding. Subsequently, visiting
Richmond, Ky., we made several very successful exhibitions, the
result pleasing us much, as our receipts at the places we had lately
visited were very meagre. J
The subsequent six weeks were spent in like manner, visiting
State and county fairs with varying results, travelling at night, often-
times, in order to exhibit the next day in some adjoining county.
We thus visited in quick succession Georgetown, Danville, Lebanon,*
Bardstown in Ky., Lawrenceburg, Greensburg, North Madison in
Ind., Henderson and Paducah in Ky., again, and other places.
On completing our tour for the fairs holding, part of our number
left for the South, while Madame Nora, the lady glass-blower, left for
Philadelphia, to fill our engagement at the New American Museum.
The building was not yet ready to be occupied, and some time was lost
by this unexpected delay. Still, opening day, Wednesday, November
23, 1870, came at last, and with it were gathered a large number to
witness the beginning. On the morrow, Thanksgiving-day, the house
was filled to overflowing, when late in the afternoon, the alarm of fire
was given, followed by much excitement on the part of the inmates.
The damage done was trifling, and the Museum opened in the evening
as usual.
The holidays were passed very pleasantly at the Museum, and I
met with considerable favor in disposing of the products of my labor.
The new year opened successfully, auguring well for the future. The
engagement subsequently extended over a period of several months,
giving me opportunities of visiting Philadelphia, and become acquainted
with its people.*
Many reminiscences of a pleasant character will be ever cherished
in mind, and attentions were bestowed upon me, reminding me of the
times when, travelling alone and unprotected, I met with more con-
sideration, depending on the magnanimity of those whose sympathy
could but be interested in my behalf by a view of my helplessness
before them.
It was very gratifying, also, to find one evening, on entering the
Museum, a beautiful chair, made and designed for my special comfort
and convenience, placed before me for my use, with the compliments
of William R. Thomson, Esq.—a gift that I appreciate much, knowing
that it bespoke the kind interest in my welfare,• and many little
• The family of Mr. John Hampton, 2,035 Keeves street, I wish to sneak
of in particular, as I’ve visited frequently and been made so welcome and T
felt perfectly at home, *


attentions to my comfort, valued most for their constancy, which
subsequently I received at his hands.
The day at last came when I was to leave, in order to fill an engage-
ment elsewhere. With feelings of sadness and regret, I bade farewell
to the Museum. Messrs. Simpson and Dixey, the proprietors, were
gentlemanly in their conduct, meeting every obligation as stipulated.
Mr. Dubois, the manager, was equally kind and attentive. The treat-
ment received at the hands of all connected with the establishment was
uniformly courteous, while the liberality of the citizens of Philadelphia
in their patronage calls for a special acknowledgment, that I gladly
make.
On leaving Philadelphia, in the spring of 1871, I connected myself
with Barnum’s Travelling Museum and Menagerie ! and during the
season ensuing, visited the leading cities in the States of ISew England,
with much pleasure and satisfaction.
CHAPTER XI.
I must not omit mentioning that at this time, I had secured for my
aged parents a comfortable, if, not very luxuriant home, in Suwannee
Co., East Florida. Six hundred acres of good land, well improved,
and possessing a fruitful Orange grove and Peach Orchard. I had
already paid one thousand dollars upon the purchase, while the residue
of three thousand dollars had yet to be met. At the time I joined Mr.
Barnum the liquidation of this debt was my sole consideration,
notwithstanding, my creditors most generously allowed me my own
time to pay it in.
In October 1871, and just one month before the termination of my
engagement with Mr Barnum (the season of 29 weeks, closing on the
21th of the same month at Harlem, IST. York), I was enabled, with Ood’s
assistance and unflinching perseverence, to pay the remaining three
thousand dollars.
I was now out of debt and trusting- with a view to the completion
of the old adage — “out of danger. ”
I began now to look anxiously forward to the time when I should be
able to visit my dear parents. To see them in the tranquil possession of
their home procured for them by the labor of their armless daughter
(sweet labor in so good a cause) was all that I now desired to fill my
cup of happiness. It was mid-winter, and I did not much regret
a respite of two weeks, which was occasioned by the fitting up of the
Eink on 14th St, N. York city. This place of amusement was opened
by Mr. Barnum on the 13th December, 1871.
After eight weeks good business, I, as usual, making satisfactory
sales of the products of my industry, we closed January 6th 1872,
until the traveling season again set in.
I now visited Philadelphia where I again rested from labor for a
term. Col. Wood had the Museum in that city, but, unfortunately he


and I never did agree, an unpleasant fact of which I was convinced in
Sept. 1866 when I was with him a week in Chicago.
A gentleman in Phil, has taken quite an interest in me, having seen
me while on exhibition last winter at the Museum. He presented me
with a chair of which I have already made mention, and has now told
me that this attention was the result of a remarkable likeness that
existed between me and a Sister, Anna, many years dead. He has
again visited me accompanied by his Aunt and other relations, all of
whom testify to the existence of a striking likeness in me to his dead
sister. This gentleman is much concerned lest I may fall under the
jurisdiction of some uncouth show-man who may not be kind to me,
and declares his determination to prevent such misfortune, if in his
power. He is sober and industrious —by profession a Civil Engineer.
His Mother, a very old lady, and blind, is the owner of the house in
which they live. When he speaks of her it is always in the most
affectionate terms. He is her only child. I like him as a friend but
find it difficult to make up my mind to join him in the holy bands of
wedlock. I have, however, accepted from him an engagement ring—
Ah! Ann E. Leak, I begin to think your heart is just as susceptible as
other women whom it has pleased Clod to form more perfect than
yourself.
April Ist, 1872. Opened the Eink, on 14th St., N. York City, once
more. Here I remained for two weeks, the Exhibition doing splendid
business, while I found good sales for the products of my industry.
From N. York, we went, April 15th, to Jersey City, New Jersey,
where we remained for one night. We then visited the principal towns
of the State arriving in Philadelphia on the 22nd of the same month.
Here we stayed for a week to satisfactory business. lam again favored
with a visit from Mr. W. K. Thomson —my friend —who renews his
addresses. I try to put him off till the fall of the year, thinking that,
perhaps, his mind might undergo a change ere then. I find him,
however, irreconcilable, lest, as he says, anything serious might happen
me in the interim, when he would be sure to come to my relief, and,
it, unhappily, such emergency should arise, it would be much more
seemly in the eyes of the world if we were married. Nothing must
now thwart or further prolong the event. Time becoming more and
more an object we must at once go to the parsonage of a presbyterian
clergyman (Mr. Allen) and have the knot firmly tied. Well, lam but
woman after all, so, true to the instincts of my sex under such trying
circumstances, I gave way, and on the 28th April 1872, at 7 p.m., I
became a wife. I was accompanied by Mrs. Kahn, the mother of the
dwarf, and Mrs. Jones the mother of the bearded child, who acted as
witnesses to the solemnization of the marriage. I may here remark—
if the indulgent reader will pardon a joke upon a matter of such deep
and solemn moment —that the only ritual left out by the clergyman was
the joining together of hands ; in most cases, a requisite of the cere-
mony, but in mine, alas ! an impossibility. This one act of my life I
kept a profound secret for some time, always consoling myself with the
thought that I was not the only one who kept a secret of a similar
nature locked up in their heart.
Monday April 29th, the show left for Chester, Pa. Mr. Thomson
came to the train to see me off. We bade each other good-bye pro


raising to meet again very soon. Never, since I left the home of my
childhood in the sunny south, to become a wanderer, did I feel the same
womanly confidence that I now felt. I felt, and knew that I had a
protector who would watch over me and aid me in my efforts to
combat with the world. There was contentment in the thought that
he—although separated from me for a time —would think kindly of me
as I wandered an exile (happily, no more a friendless one) looking
forward to brighter—happier days.
This season—lß72 —We travelled through most of the Western
States, while the multitudes of people attracted, daily, by the show,
was truly marvellous. In the small country-towns it often excited my
wonder where they all came from.
I have had frequent complimentary notices from the newspapers
of the different towns we visited. I insert one below from the
“ Evansville Gazette”—lndiana paper, August 2, 1872.
BAENUM’S SHOW.
“The Great Show was spread out on Carpenter’s Field yesterday. At
8 o’clock in the morning the crowds attracted thither by the great pro-
cession, began to gather. The attendance in the morning was not
quite equal to those of the afternoon and evening, however the day’s
receipts fell but little short of 7,000 dolls.
“In reality the show commences at the ticket office, where Mr. Ben.
Lusby employs both hands, one to supply the required ticket, while,
the other makes the accurate change. This is a sight almost equal to
that of seeing the armless woman write with her toes.
“ The first tent is devoted to automaton figures, ancient armour,
curiosities, etc., all very beautiful in their way, and most tastefully
arranged. We take, for example, those of the Dying Zouave and
Sleeping Beauty, both entitled to particular notice.
“Admiral Dot is a great curiosity, even if he should prove to be but
seven instead of fourteen years old, but the armless lady is an attrac-
tion in herself. Evidently a refined lady, she converses with but little
embarrassment with visitors. Crochets “ tidies,” does fine embroidery
work and writes; and what seems a little additionally remarkable is,
she is left-footed. She makes change, eats and drinks, handling knife,
fork and cup with her feet with as much dexteritj as most persons
would with their hands. This lady is of herself worth the price of
admission to see j and with the Hairy Girl, Admiral Dot, and other
curiosities, form an exhibition well worth twice the price charged for
the whole show, animals and circus included.”
The long season of thirty weeks and three days closed at Detroit,
Michigan.
Mr, Thomson arrived on the 30th October with a view to conduct
ine to my new home. Thus I have worked and made one happy
home for my dear parents, the money all coming through my toes,
while I have married and got another home for myself j Providence
has, indeed, smiled on me.


We left Philadelphia November 21, our object being to visit my
beloved parents, as well as my brothers and sister, in their new home,
which, although secured by me, I had never seen.
Sunday, 24th November, we arrived at Suwannee Co., East Florida,
and upon reaching home found both parents in feeble health, father
fast declining. He was much overcome at seeing me. He liked the
idea of my marrying, and declared himself satisfied ; he also liked my
husband’s looks, and was pleased that I had married a man of his years
and not a “ giddy going man,” but my dear Mamma was not so easily
reconciled, and expressed fears that I would not now love her so well.
But a few short years ago and I would have been greeted upon my
return by the voices of eleven brothers and sisters, while now but
three find shelter under the parent roof, yet, there was happiness still
left for me. Did I not see my parents in the calm serenity of their
old age (the fond instructors of my fitful childhood) once more enjoying
the comforts of a home ? while I —their poor deformed daughter—with
the assistance of Him—without whose assistance nothing can be done—
gazing wistfully upon them, felt happy in the thought of being the
provider.
Surrounded as I was by all that I had so long pictured to myself as
the acme of happiness, there was still yet another cause for sorrow—
my poor dear father was growing daily more feeble, and could not for
long make one amongst us. His own seeming consciousness of his
condition made it still harder to bear, however, —farther than to
succumb to the dictates of nature—l did not repine, as I knew that a
better home—“A house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens”
awaited him.
How delicious oranges taste when pulled from the tree? Oh! I can-
not help thinking of the Providential care bestowed upon me, and only
hope to make myself worthy of it while I remain here on earth.
Nov. 25th. My Aunt, Mary Lea, from Madison county Florida,
together with my sister Linda—now married to a Mr McMullen and
residing in Brooks County, Q-eorgia—came to see me in my new home.
Imagine how rejoiced we all were at the happy re-union, although my
sister did not much relish my union with Mr. Thomson. However,
time, that healer of all disputes and contentions, assisted by my
husband’s natural disposition, came to the rescue, so that eyentually we
became more united and, consequently, more happy.
Several weeks spent in my Native South, were devoted to visiting
relations, some of whom I had never seen before, and—who can tell ?
may never see again.
Dec. 6th found me in the home of my dear sister, Linda, of whom
I had occasion to speak before. She is the mother of an interesting
little family, constituting a boy and girl, the latter six and the former
three years old. Her husband (Clinton McMullen) is a farmer in
comfortable circumstances. He seemed to be surrounded by every
tangible appurtenance required for the culture of the soil, as well as
many of the creature comforts, the latter he evidently enjoyed in his
own plain way. My husband and he became fast friends during our
stay.


CHAPTER XII.
New Year’s Day, 1873—Once more in Philadelphia, Pa.; but this
time, under what different auspices. How gladly do I hail the advent
of this New Year, lam at home; in my own—my husband’s home,
and at rest. How odd it seems not to be on exhibition ! Much of Mr.
Thomson’s time is now taken up in arranging his business so that he
can travel with me in the spring, while it is his intention that we shall
winter at home, thus giving him the opportunity of attending to his
own professional engagements.
Man proposes, etc., etc,
March Ist. 1873, I have just consented to travel with Mr. Geo.
Middleton’s side show which is attached to Cooper, Bailey, & Go’s
Great International Circus.
Bidding adieu for the present to the quaker city. March 28th, half
an hour after high noon, I arrived in Louisville, Kentucky, on Sunday
the 30th, where I readily found quarters at the U. S. hotel.
We found the town looking bright and cheerful with every pros-
pect of doing good business ; a fact afterwards verified much to the
satisfaction of myself as well as the management, as we, literally,
jammed the Exposition Building for a whole week.
This season we travelled through portions of Kentucky, Tennessee,
Illinois and lowa, bringing up Oct. 4th, at Dubuque in the latter
State. The shew shipped here to Cairo, III*, for the purpose of pro-
secuting a winter tour through Texas. I, however, fearing that a
winter, even in the South, under canvas, would be too much for my
health, returned with my husband to our home in Philadelphia.
Before my marriage I was necessitated to work in the winter as well as
summer, but now I am privileged beyond my most sanguine expecta-
tions ; my husband alternating with me, and working during the
winter, while I enjoy the recess at home. Yet, I am naturally of a
mercurial temperament, and must be doing something, therefore, I
find no difficulty in procuring work for busy feet to do both in and
about the house ; while my poor blind mother-in-law keeps my tongue
in constant requisition. I must not omit to mention one eccentricity
of hers, and one which she rigidly enforced —I, and I alone, must cut
her finger nails. During this winter’s sojourn with my kind mother-
in-law, I became so essential to her, almost existence, that she could
not bear me out of hearing for a moment. So passed the days away,
ealmly and peacefully until the spring of the following year, when I
was again called upon to be up and doing.
May 7th, 1874. I found myself located in Boston, Mass., under
engagement to Major Burnell, he having removed from Pittsburg Pa,
with a view to open the new Museum at that place. I remained there
thirty eight weeks, the business being such as to gratify the most
parsimonious manager. It continued good until after July 4th, when it
gradually began to decline, I, however, having no cause for complaint
as my sales continued to exceed my fairest hopes.
Sept. 1874, Major Burnell conceived the idea of organizing another
show his object being to attend the different fairs. This show com


ptised, with many other curiosities, Mr. Kirpen, whose peculiarity
existed in the possession of a beard measuring 9 feet, hence went he
under the appellation of the “ long bearded man.” Miss Pearl Foster,
an albino lady, and myself, were also numbered among the eccentricities
cr nature.
The first fair we visited was held at Rutland, Vermont, on Sept. Bth.
Our success was most pronounced, so much so that we deemed it
prudent to send the Major—who we knew to be in need of money
the receipts. Would that I could chronicle in these pages a conti-
nuation of such, success, but, alas ! for five consecutive weeks we knew
nothing but rain, together with every other conceivable misfortune to
mar our progress, as well as blight our hopes. Truly, ih our case, was
the old proverb fulfilled, “ a good beginning maketh a bad ending.”
Oct. 10th. After mature deliberation I concluded to reduce the
snow and carry it on at my own expense.
Notwithstanding that this was my first attempt at management I
felt inspired with a degree of confidence that bade me go on and fear
nofc ; now cbose fr° m number, Miss Foster, to whom, for her
amiability of temper and sweetness of disposition, I became warmly
attached, so that she, with myself and an educated Hog I had pur-
chased from the proprietor, constituted my first show.
My debut in the managerial world was attended with marked
success, and took place on Oct. 12th 1874, at Fryeburg fair, state of
Maine, this being the only three days fair of the season, the others
occupying but one day each. I returned to Boston, Mass, arriving there
Oct. 27th. Here I found that everything had undergone a change,
since my last visit. The Museum had fallen into the hands of Mr. J.
H. Freeland of Devonshire street, who furnished the capital, while
Major Burnell still retained the management. Altogether, the city
looked dull and gloomy, presenting no prospect for doing business ;
a fact which proved in the sequel the necessity for my leaving.
. Fl ’ i r da y 30th, found me all prepared to take my departure, when
the Major paid me a visit beseeching me to remain, and stating as a
reason that I might make sure of my winter salary. I thought the
matter over and concluded, that, as he had been always punctual in his
payments up to the five fair weeks already mentioned, to stay and help
him through his difficulties—l being the only human curiosity now
left.
Business continued dull and profitless until the holidays.
Dec. 26th. This was a black letter day for me, and one long and
sadly to be remembered. Although I had been expecting to hear of the
death of my dear father, the sad intelligence, as it reached me
in a letter from my remaining parent, gave me a severe
shock. I could not divest myself of a feeling of
sad sorrow for my poor mother’s now lonely condition.
As I read the letter to its close, I became more consoled, for
my dear mother depicted, in her own meek language, the death bed of
the righteous, reminding me, at the same time, of his dying injunction,
delivered with his last breath, “ live right and you will die right.” I
could not go see my bereaved mother, but wrote her a long letter
breathing an affectionate daughters love and condolence. That done I


felt relieved, as I found it almost difficult to dispossess myself of the
idea that I had seen and conversed with her.
About this time —Jany. 28th, 1875. I again began to find the
management dilatory in the payment of my salary. I made up my
mind to leave at once, and, as a preparatory step, wrote a letter to Mr,
Freeland informing that gentleman that I had only received ten dollars
for two weeks salary. He wrote me what I could not then consider a
polite note, stating, that he did not “hire Ann JE. Leak.’' Now, no
one in the business knows better than Mr. Freeland that we never
change our names while in the profession.
Soon after this came a letter from Mr. T. A. Edwards of
Pittsburg, Pa., offering me an engagement which I accepted, and left
on Feb. Ist for that city. Arriving there on the 3rd, I took my place
in the exhibition, when for three weeks and three days we continued to
do a flattering business, crowding the Museum at all hours with the
elite of the Anthracite regions.
It was now that the opportunity presented itself to me of becoming
the lona fide proprietrix of a living curiosity of rare value.
The educated Hog, “ Bismark,” was for sale, I bought him, and
engaged John Clark to perform him. Accompanying him to the Oil
regions, we first visited Parker City, but my health at the time being
much impaired, I found that travel produced feebleness accompanied
by lassitude, and at once determined to return home for recuperation.
Leaving the hog with Clark I set out, arriving at Philadelphia March
23rd, feeling prostrate from a long season of work and anxiety, together
with the journey. Returns from Mr Clark not being of a very satis-
factory nature, my first care was to secure a place for my hog, which
after some trouble I found on East Girard Avenue, and owned by J.
W. Powell. I then wrote Clark, ordering him to return forthwith
bringing the animal with him.
May sth.—Fonnd me bed-ridden, where I lay for three dismal weeks
under the care of Dr. Posey of Arch street. My medical adviser, upon
my convalescence, ordered me to some watering place. After due
deliberation, the prevailing passion being strong even in sickness, I
made up my mind to combine business with pleasure, and so chose
Long Branch for which place I set out, taking Clark and the hog
with me, and arriving at my destination, June 23rd. With care and
a fair modicum of work, I found my health improve rapidly, but
business being everything but satisfactory, I soon returned home.
Times now being dull everywhere, I told Mr. Clark to take the Hog
and do the best he could until the fairs opened, which would be about
Ist. Sept.
I visited a fair, Sept. 27th, which was being held at Lancaster, Pa.
but did not succeed in getting on the ground. I, however, held a levee,
solus cum sola , charging fifteen cents for admisson, and doing very
well.
About this period I heard of Clark ; he had a show of his own. I
made up my mind not to trouble him, but adhere to the well-worn
motto “ give him rope enough and he will soon hang himself how-
ever I could not help thinking that it would be judicious in him to
keep out of my reach, as he had, without tendering a quid pro quo, or
even dividing the receipts accruing from the use of the hog, actually,


appropriated him to hig own exclusive use. My health about this time
had improved beyond my expectations, hut I had frequent visitations
of ennui. There is a strange infatuation in the life of an itinerant
exhibitant, and it is never so keenly felt as when we are necessitated
from sickness, or any other cause, to remain long idle. Nov. 25th, the
Philomathean Fair was being held at Philadelphia, and thither I went,
a visit which I had little cause to regret, as I was well patronized, sell-
ing a great mumber of my books and photos, and receiving nothing but
kind treatment from the people assembled.
I now made up my mind to remain quietly at home during the
winter months, in the hope of being strong enough to travel in the
spring; and was not disappointed. Spring! genial, soft, mellifluous
Spring, was with us once again. All nature seemed struggling into
new life, and I, thank the Giver of all goodness, had once more strug-
gled into health.
I left Philadelphia, April 12, to join the Great International Circus,
Menagerie, &c., at St. Louis, having previously entered into an engage-
ment with Messrs. Gardner & Middleton to that effect. We opened
here, April 17, doing immense business for a week. I shall always,
where’er I travel, carry with me kind reminiscences of the “ Great
City of the West.”
Words would be inadequate to express the joy I felt at meeting my
dear friend, Pearl Poster, once more. She, accompanied by her brother
(also an Albino) were members of this great Company. Generous
reader, will you here pardon me if 1 again revert to this dear, good
girl, as the kindness I have experienced at her hands deserves more
than mere passing comment.
Endowed with a mind superior to most young ladies whom fortune
or fate have thrown into this sphere of life, and possessing qualifica-
tions rarely to be found even in those whose lines have fallen in
pleasanter places, she can never fail to secure the respect and esteem
of all with whom she comes in contact.
Leaving St. Louis with this Mammoth Entertainment, I travelled
through the other principal towns of Missouri, and from thence
through the States of Kansas, Nebraska, lowa, Illinois, Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Colorado, Wyoming and Utah Territories, Nevada and
California.
When California was first canvassed as to its being an eligible State
for our business, serious obstacles, which referred to me personally,
suddenly cropped up. It was mooted about that the laws of the State
prohibited persons afflicted as I was, from being placed on exhibition.
Notwithstanding this rock ahead, our managers with an eye to the old
maxim, “ nothing venture nothing win,” actually, not only pitched
their tents, but opened and showed in the town of Truckee. This
brought down upon me as well as my proprietors, the vengeance of Mr.
W. F. Edwards, the editor of the Truclcee Republican, who threatened
them with utter demolition because of their temerity in attempting to
show through the State. Our way, however, next day, lay through
Sacramento City, and, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Gardner. I called
npon Mr. Joseph Hamilton, the Attorney-General of the State. He
received us with the utmost urbanity, and said he saw no impropriety
in my exhibiting in that or any other State in the Union, while he
shook each of my friends warmly by the hand (he did not shake mine,
gentle reader,) and wished me every success, at the same time giving


a letter as a safeguard against future annoyances of a similar
nature.
We joined the show at San Francisco on the 6th Sept., remaining
there for ten days, performing to crowded houses.
- The proprietors now spoke of visiting the Australian colonies, and
expressed a wish that I should accompany them. Although I feared
the long sea voyage very much, I finally consented to go, and so closed
the engagement.
From San Francisco we went to Gilroy, Sept. 18th. Leaving Gilroy,
we travelled the entire State, remaining but a day in each place, with
the exception of Los Angolos, where we staid two days. My sales
during this tour amounted to those of a like term with Mr. Barnum.
The fruit throughout Califoi n'a is almost all tropical, and of the
finest flavour. I cannot pass by the hot sulphur springs of Calistogo
without giving them a notice. The water when taken from the spring
is boiling. Pearl Foster put some in a saucer which seasoned with
pepper and salt, tasted like good chicken broth. It was so palatable,
that I broke some biscuit in, thus making a meal of nature’s unsophis-
ticated cooking. Near the spring lay a pile of petrified wood, brought,
as a curiosity to visitors, from the Petrified Forest, distant from
Calistoga four miles.
We closed the season at San Francisco, Oct. 28th, after a successful
run of twenty-eight weeks.
I now received a letter from my mother, every line of which was
fraught with affection, mingled with sorrow at my leaving America,
but the one thought that 1 was leaving her provided for, solaced me.
I may say here, that did I not feel the protection of a kind husband I
never would have ventured so far from home.
CHAPTER XIII.
Nov, Bth The day of our departure for the antipodes, had at last
arrived. On arriving at the wharf we found a host of people, whom
friendship, business and curiosity had brought thither to see us off.
The steam-ship City of Sydney is large and commodious, accommoda-
ting our Menagerie and people, together with a large number of
passengers bound for Honolulu, Sandwich Islands, New Zealand and
Sydney.
On leaving the wharf—ll a.m.—l could not overcome the plethora of
tears that came to my relief. My heart was full—l was leaving my
native land for the first time. Sea-sickness, however, soon overtook
me, and sent me to my room, which I did not leave for several days.
44


Nov. 16th. Early this morning (the King’s birth day) we arrived
at Honolulu—Sandwich Islands—the capital of the kingdom, the seat
of Government, and the residence of the King.
The wharf is excellent. The Custom House and public store-houses-
built of coral, are located within a few hundred yards of the steamboat-
wharf, and connect with it by tramways. We strolled through the
city, visiting the “ Hawaiian,” a first-class hotel covering an acre of
ground well shaded by thickly foliaged trees. The hotel was opened
to the public in 1872. I was struck with the bright eyes, intelligent faces,
and singular, though cool, attire of the natives. The mixed crowd
whoso features and dress bespoke them denizens of almost every nation
under the sun; the peculiarity of the vehicles ; the coral, fruit and
shell.vendors, proved most conclusively, if naught else did, that we were
in a strange land. The women were most conspicuous in their gay dresses
and head wreathes of vines and flowers. They rode astride and managed
their horses with much ease and skill. This practice, if inelegant, has,
certainly, the charm of being picturesque. On our return to the ship,
we found the deck crowded with people, anxious to see the animals.
A fifty cents admission was given onboard the ship, which large numbers
availed themselves of. An idea now occurred to me that I too might
make hay, so, bringing a portion of my stock-in-trade on deck, I began to
write on my photographs; well, suffice it to say, that I would have been
content to remain longer. We left Honolulu early on the morning of
the 17th. I felt too much indisposed for breakfast, and once more seek-
ing my room, remained there till the 20th. The placid smoothness of
the ocean, which now lasted for eight consecutive days, brought me
again on deck. I enjoyed my meals, and revelled in the calmness of
the sea, having often felt more disconoerted when on the Mississippi or
Ohio river.
Nov. 28th. Arrived at Kandavau—Fiji Islands. There being no
wharf, we anchored alongside the steamship “ Zealandia,” bound for
New Zealand, and stopping but six hours to take in freight and
passengers. The natives came off to us in their canoes, bringing fruits,
shells, etc. It was amusing to see them dive for coins thrown them by
the passengers. They were ever ready for a dive as they were, at all
times, nearly in a nude state. At 12 a.m. we got fairly to sea again,
but the motion of the ship proving too much for me, I once more sought
my room, where I remained until we arrived at Sydney on Dec. 6th, at
4 a.m. Upon the whole we had a very pleasant voyage (27 days) never
having encountered a storm of any consequence, and receiving nothing
but the kindest attention from the officers, stewards and stewardess.
My husband and I, with Henry and Pearl Foster, were comfortably
quartered at 444 South Pitt St., within a very short distance of the
Hay Market reserve, where the work for opening was fast progressing.
Our instructions were to keep the house until we had had our first
exhibition.
Every thing here seemed old fashioned and out of date, the people
evidently not caring to keep up with the inevitable march of progress.
After a few days rest and quiet I wrote letters to my relatives and
friends in America which left by the “ City of Sydney” on Friday
Pec, 10th.


Dec. 18th. To-night the Show opened to an immense crowd, while
throughout the week, business continued very good.
Dec. 25th—Christmas Day. This day is observed with as much
punctilio as the sabbath, consequently we did not show.
We remained here four weeks doing a very satisfactory business,
while my individual sales increased visibly , each week. I found it
difficult to keep my books and photos autographed, so quick was the
sale. It has been my great good fortune to meet with many warm
friends in this city, of whom I take the liberty to name Mr. Charles
Stewart, of Redfern, who, together with his wife and daughters, I shall
remember with kindness, if I am spared, for years to come.
Our last exhibition took place on January 12th, 1877, many came to
say good-bye, with the hope of seeing us again some day not far
distant. (?)
Saturday, Jan. 13th. To-day we bade good-bye to our kind landlady
(Miss McAuley) as well as two young ladies (Misses Kate and Ellen
Kelly) who were fellow lodgers. I shall ever remember them with
pleasure.
We then visited Mr. Spenser’s Museum in Pitt-St., where we were
much entertained. The gentlemanly proprietor seemed never to tire
in his attentions, while his descriptions of the mechanical figures were
lucid in the extreme. One little mite of a bird he caused to sing,
mechanically, moving its beak and wings as though possessed of life.
At 6 p.m.the “Macedon” sailed. I begin to fear I shall never make
a sailor. One short hour and I became as sick as ever. I seem to feel
better when I lie down, so looking upon discretion as the better part
of valour, I did lie down and stayed there.
January 16th. Arrived at Melbourne, where we stopped at the
Flinders Hotel, Little Flinders street, and kept by Mr. Thomas.
There is a fair sprinkling of our people staying at this hotel, amongst
the number, my old friend Pearl Foster, with her brother. It is
pleasant to be able to chronicle that we are unanimous in acknow-
ledging the extreme kindness and attention to our comforts manifested
upon all occasions by our worthy host and hostess.
January 18th. This was a red letter day for amusement to the
people of Melbourne. The show turned out, en masse , making a grand
and imposing procession through all the principal streets of the city
and suburbs. The side-walks were lined on either side the streets, with
upturned anxious faces as cage after cage, occupied by wild animals,
and drawn by elephants and camels, wended its way slowly along. The
youth of Australia seemed to have taken leave of their senses, while
the old pronounced it a brilliant success.
We opened the same night to a very fair house, the impression being
that the rush would be too great for any degree of comfort, keeping,
no doubt, many away.
Saturday, 27th. Business continued good up to date, each succeed-
ing day and evening showing unmistakable signs of a generous and


appreciative people. For my own humble part I have simply to say
that I cannot be sufficiently lavish of my gratitude and thanks to my
patrons, whose urbanity and kindly recognition of my affliction, have
furnished me with a theme for an after production of a similar nature
to this.
In conclusion I will take the liberty, in the hope that in doing so I
may not leave myself open to contumely, of inserting a copy of a short
note with which I was honored during my stay in Melbourne, Victoria.
“ Government House, Melbourne, 23rd January, 1877.”
“ The Aide-de-Camp presents his compliments to Miss Leak and is
directed by Governor Sir George Bowen to thank her for the very
interesting sample of her work forwarded this day.”


AZZOPPARDI, HILDRETH & CO.,
COMMERCIAL AND GENERAL PRINTERS,
io, ti Sc 14 POST OFFICE PLACE,
MELBOURNE.




A? 1 ?,


z
‘ i:
'
