

Th e Grace of Di vine
Healing
And
The Secret of Miracles.
By
Dr. John G. Lake.


THE GRACE OF DIVINE HEALING.
By REV. JOHN G. LAKE,
CONVENTION OF PENTECOSTAL ASSEMBLIES,
Chicago, 111., July 26, 1920.
I want to use a familiar text: “The Grace of God
that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men.”
(Titus 2; 11.) There never was a bigger word than
the word “Grace.” If, we undertake to define and
analyse its operations, that beautiful term brings the
many-sided Gospel of Jesus Christ to the heart with
a wonderful clearness. Sometimes we see a beautiful
manifestation in the lives of men, a paroxysm of
gratuitous giving forth of divine loveliness. But the
Grace of Jesus Christ is not His demeanor, neither
His beautiful, gratuitous-giving. The Grace of Jesus
is the Divine Outflow of the Nature of God, heavenly,
healing loveliness and holy balm, and it comes to the
needy world, not only as a sin-saving action of God,
but as a healing virtue, stealing into the natures of
men, soothing away their pains, changing the very
chemicalisation of their being, making them whole, and
blessing them through salvation, healing and abiding
rest in God. Divine Healing is no mystery. It is
the definite action of the Spirit of God in the souls and
bodies of men.
There is a Grace of God that rests upon a community,
a Grace of God that rests upon a church, a Grace of
God that rests upon an individual. In South Africa
there used to be an old lady who visited our home once
in a while. She was one of the sweetest; most blessed
creatures I ever met; when she came into my office and
sat down for five minutes she brought the conscious-
ness of God, a restfulness and peace of mind. From
her whole person there seemed to radiate that blessed-
ness that can only be described as the Grace of God,
and the very atmosphere would become pregnant with
it. Sometimes when we had failed to pray down heal-
ing for a sick one the radiation of His holy healing
sweetness through that dear old saint of God would
make the sick one well. After I learned to appreciate


the wonder of her presence, and what she brought in
her soul, I used to make excuses to take her out into
the dining room 'and show her something, real or
imaginary. Then I would take her to the bedroom of
my sons to show her the paper on the wall, then to
the room where my daughters slept, and finally to the
kit'-hen. I wanted her to leave that beautiful emana-
tion of God all over the place, because, when she was
gone, it seemed as if the house settled down—the
noisy children ceased to disturb, and even the invisible
unrest disappeared, soothed into holy quiet by a
presence that perhaps few ever took time to understand
or realise. It was the Grace of God.
I was interested in our brother’s little story of the
young man with suicidal intention who was saved and
healed. Strangely, at Portland, we had an experience
with a young woman who was on the way to the river
with suicidal intention. Somehow she felt impelled to
come up to our healing rooms. She sat for a little
while, and we talked to her and soothed her heart and
tried to get her to God. I said to Mrs. G.: “I wish
there was someone who could take her and love her
for a little while.” She suggested Miss Cole, one of
our Holy Ghost-filled souls, but I was reminded that
she had no telephone. I said, “We will have to look
to heaven, and God will send her here.” Thirty
minutes later Miss Cole came in and said: “Mr. Lake,
you wanted me.” So I took her out and introduced her.
I said: “Just take this woman home with you. Take
her to bed with you, and put your arms around her,
and let her feel your love. Let her know what the-
Grace of God is, not by preaching, but by contact.”
So she took her home, and four days later the young
woman came back, after having given her heart to
God. In the meantime, God got to work on the other
end of the line, and her brother came from a distant
city and said: “Mother is just dying for you to come
home.” And she went to her home to be a blessing to
her brother, sister and dear old parents and the king-
dom of God. This is the same Grace of healing that
flowed from the loving hands and heavenly spirit of
Jesus- -the very same Grace of God that healed the
dumb boy last night as Sister Etter prayed, or that


baptised the man as Brother Gillespie prayed.
The Grace of God, in Jesus Christ, enriches man’s
heart and gives him loveliness that is unspeakable.
When I was leaving South Africa, a gentleman, Lord
North, came to me and said: “I want to give you a
letter to my old mother, eighty-nine years old, who
lives in London. When you get there, tell her this
is from her son. I want you to know my mother and,
if possible, pray with her.” I arrived at the old lady’s
home and made her acopiaintance—a most beautiful,
wonderful woman—the very finest type of English
aristocracy. There was a radiance from her mind
that would bless and keep on blessing you. In the
night time, to this hour, when I lie still in meditation
I think of that old mother, of the radiant loveliness
of her life, and can still feel that blessed aura of
Christ that enriched my heart. I did not pray for
her or lay my hands upon her. I only said: “Let the
light and glory of Christ from your soul have power
in your body.” She was healed right then.
I wonder when the Lord Jesus Christ passed down
the highway from Bethany to Jerusalem, if the
atmosphere was not alive—pregnant with the beautiful
light, beautiful life, divine presence and blessing. I
haven’t a bit of doubt that when someone walked down
that way after Jesus passed, and breathed the air that
Jesus breathed, they felt the life of God that was shed
from His person, and were healed by the virtue with
which the very atmosphere had become pregnant, be-
cause the Christ was there. That same healing Grace
permeated the atmosphere around dear old Peter, so
that the sick were healed as far from him as his even-
tide shadow reached.
That is my ideal of a Christian heart, a Christian
life, a Christian church or a Christian ministry. My
soul desires, by the Grace of God, that out through
these old brick walls there will flow that beautiful
emanation of the Christ throughout dirty Chicago that
will discover disease in every part of the city and heal
both soul and body. Let our faith vitalise the Spirit
and it is done. “The Grace of God that bringeth sal-
vation,” stealing into men’s hearts, bringing them into
that holy unity of life God meant the world to enjoy;


that Jesus Christ came to reveal, and in order to obtain
it, gave His precious blood as its tremendous price.
“The Grace of God that bringeth salvation,” the Grace
of God hath appeared, bringing to man a heart made
free from sin’s power and control; a soul set free, a
life joined to God, a consciousness of holy oneness with
our Father God, through Jesus Christ. Atonement
makes at-one-ment in body, soul and spirit with Christ,
both in salvation through Him and in ministry for Him.
How blessed it is when once in a while we walk
suddenly into the presence of one rich with the light
and life of God. As we emerge from the storms of
life, as we come out of the turmoil, passing into the
presence of the sunlit soul, the God-lit life, instantly
there comes to the heart that balm and sweetness and
presence and power, indicating the presence of God,
leaving upon our life a divine influence that gives us
restfulness of mind, and restfulness of heart, and quiet
in God, our pulse becomes normal under its power, and
God is recognised, and so when we preach the Gospel
of Christ we do not wait till the end of the meeting
to minister this healing, but out of our hearts we give
forth the heavenly love and power to whosoever will
receive.
(At the close of the service a lady, also two gentle-
men, announced that as these words were uttered they
were instantly healed.)
We lift our hearts to heaven that this blessed Grace
of God from on High may so rest over our soul that,
as we fulfil the duties of this day, God’s power and
blessing may rest upon every heart, and like a divine
benediction that Grace of God, ministered by Jesus
Christ, shall so impregnate our lives that we shall go
forth as sons of God to bless the hungry world, for
which our Lord has died.
There is the Grace of God that goes underneath the
soul of a man, that—by the blessed gift of the Spirit—
lifts from the life forever the shadows and darkness
that sin has brought, and takes away the corrosion that
has come upon the soul of man, and, by the Grace of
God, lets the heart of man understand the blessed touch
of the Son of God that imparts eternal life. Blessed
be His name.


“ Down in the human heart,
Crushed by the tempter,
Peelings lie buried
That Grace can restore.
Touched by a loving heart,
Wakened by kindness,
Chords that were broken
Will vibrate once more.”
Oh, yes, beloved, there is a Grace of God that goes
underneath the life and lifts the nature of man into
beautiful holiness and heavenly contact, into the con-
sciousness of purity, the realisation of power. Blessed
be His name forever!
“The healing of Christ’s seamless dress
Is by all beds of pain.
We touch Him in life’s throng and press,
And we are whole again.”
One morning in Spokane a distress call came from
a woman on behalf of her husband. Brother Andrews,
Dr. Mclnturtf and I responded. We found the man in
delirium tremens, begging his wife for just a little
more whiskey, and making the usual promises that an
insane man would make. We knelt by his bed, laid
our hands upon him, lifted our heart in love and faith
to God. “The Grace that bringeth salvation” appeared,
stole into that man’s soul, and in five minutes his pains
were gone, the curse had departed, and he never wanted
whiskey again. Later he called on me in Portland,
Oregon, took my hands and poured out his tears and
love for God, told of his success in life, and all the
rest of the beautiful story. The Lord was not in the
cyclone or the fire or the earthquake. He is now, as
then, in the still small voi-e and healing touch of divine
gentleness.
Brother, what will you trade for the Grace of God?
What else in life is worth while to him who knows the
blessed secret of its heavenly action in the lives of
men, by which they are delivered from sin and sickness
and brought fellowship and harmony with the
living Son of God Most High ? Bless His name forever
and forever!
Every soul has had its own contact with God. Everv
soul has its own touch with God. If that touch with


God has not been real to your heart yet, I want to tell
you, my brother, my sister, it may become just as real
in your soul as it is real in mine. It may become just
as real in your heart as it has in the heart of any man
in the whole world. Bless God! Mrs. Graham, our
secretary, was dying of pneumonia. As I entered her
home I was met by Rev. Fogwill coming out. He said:
“Brother Lake, you are too late. She is gone.” The
flames of God came over my heart, and though she
had not breathed for three minutes, the breath and
power of Christ came upon her and she is continuing
her ministry for God and man.
Beloved, the Christian life is a glorious doorway into
God, through Jesus Christ, into the divinest secrets that
the soul of man ever desired to attain. And, bless His
name, you and I to-night are privileged to enter that
doorway, and to know Him “Whom to know aright
is life eternal.”
Some days past, Dr. Mclnturff and I were called to
the bedside of a soul that was dying. She had gone
out of her mind. Had become unconscious, and was
then in the coma of death. Her nurse told us she had
not been able to speak, hear or see for a number of
days. We knelt and prayed and left, still with the
feeling that God was there. That subtle action of the
Spirit was not even manifested in the woman’s body so
far as we could tell. We could only feel the action
in our heart, but we went away with the consciousness
that our prayer was heard, and the work was done.
Weeks passed, and there was no sound from the
woman, no voice that came to report her condition,
until finally one day her mother-in-law came into the
office and told how wonderfully God had delivered
and healed that woman. Later the lady walked in
herself, and for half an hour told of the wonderful
inner action of the Spirit that went on in her life,
even while we prayed. She said: “Brother, as you
knelt by my bedside, I became conscious there was
someone there. All I knew was that the sound of the
voices was different from others. Then you proceeded
to put your hands on my head, and I could feel your
fingers in my hair. Something began to steal down
through my brain, the awful torture gradually sub


sided. After a while my person became still and quiet,
and I was quiet in my soul. Then I discerned that
that something was an Intelligence. It began to move.
It talked to me about my Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ. It bade me have faith in God, and said that
I should come out of this condition, and be a blessing
to my home and husband. And, brother, as it talked
to me day by day, I knew it was the voice of the Holy
Spirit. I have tried to be obedient to that voice,
brother, and I am here because that Voice told me to
come down and tell you your prayer was heard. The
Grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared
unto me, and I am now n child of God.”
We had not spoken of the Grace of God “that
bringeth salvation,” but that living presence of the
Holy Spirit that came into her heart, gave her the
very words of the blessed Holy Scriptures, indicating
the power in the Grace of God that not only brought
salvation to the world because Christ died, but that
brings salvation and healing to the hearts of men to-
day, because Jesus Christ lives. Bless God! For “If
we are saved through His death, much more are we
saved through His Life.”
The world is in need of a knowledge of Christ’s way
of salvation and healing. The whole subject of the real
truth of its actuality has become greatly dimmed in
the hearts of man. There is a great need of a
wondrous clarifying of the spiritual atmosphere, in
order that His power may be made effective to those
who turn their hearts thitherward.
This, then, is part of the mission of Pentecost. Not
only to declare our Christ as a Saviour and Healer,
and His benefits available, but to manifest them by
God’s grace in daily life, through God-anointed lives
and hands, and God-anointed hearts, and to carry that
Messed Grace of God, an 1 transmit it to whomsoever
will. Lay your hands on the sick believer, Jesus Christ
commanded it, “and they shall recover.”
So I am praying that upon your souls there will
come that presence of God, through Christ, that will
make you realise yourself as a minister of the Lord
and Saviour, Jesus Christ, with a mission from God,
and that in His name you, too, my brother, you too,


my sister, will go forth to cany this light and life and
power to whomsoever will.
In the back of the house is a brother who always
wants to apologise because he is a German, and does
not speak our language properly. In his community
a young man is dying of consumption. One day Mr.
P. called on him; told him of his Christ, his Saviour
and His power to heal. That man with his broken
English was God’s messenger to his neighbor.
The result was that the young man came to our
healing rooms, and, like a manly fellow, said: “I am
no Christian. I have not been interested in religion.
I have heard that people are healed here. lam dying
and have no hope. Tell me what you have to say in
the shortest words you can.”
I said: “Young man, God is able to deliver you. He
is able to heal you. He is ready to do it right now.”
He replied: “I haven’t a bit of faith.” I said: “But I
am a child of God, I am a son of God, and I have faith.”
And without more ado I proceeded to pray.
The man was healed. His sister was converted and
healed, and other members of the family were con-
verted. I received word telling of a movement of God
in the community, whereby a dozen people are seeking
God unto salvation. All because one man testified to
his neighbor of the truth of Christ to-day. Verily, the
old-time Gospel of salvation and healing brings old-
time results for God.
“For the Grace of God that bringeth salvation hath
appeared.” Not only in Christ, as I said before, as
a Saviour, when He gave His life for the world, but it
“hath appeared” in your heart, young man—in your
life, young woman—that your soul might come into
unity with God, your nature be made free from sin’s
power, your body made free from the control of dis-
ease, and in very truth you should feel and know your-
self to be a child of God in deed and in truth.
(The old hymn, “A sinner once came to Jesus by
night,” was sung, led by Brother Lake. The power of
God fell upon the audience.)
When the heart call of God comes to your soul, when
the blessed Spirit of God speaks to you as it does to-
night, and points to you, saying: “Son, daughter, give


Me thine heart,” beloved, that is the time to begin your
entrance into God. That is the time to call on God that
by His Grace, His wondious love and power may be
revealed in your heart, ai d in His blessed name you,
too, may be numbered among those who know Jesus
Christ, Saviour and Healer, forever.
I pray that upon the souls of this precious people
the blessed Spirit of God may oome afresh. Many a
heart has been longing for the day when they would
find the preserve of God sufficient to move their soul
with desire for God, sufficient to open the doors of their
nature, and break down the barriers in their life, when
God might have entrance and power in their soul, and
by His Grace they might truly know Him. That day
has come.
The Secret Miracles.
I want to read a few words from the second chapter
of Hebrews as a basis for my thought to-night. God
says of man:
“Thou hast put ALL things under his feet.”
Now, I am going to read what I believe to be the
most startling statement in the Word of God, and
doubly startling, because Jesus Himself said it. It is
in the tenth of John. You and I are ready to con-
ceive, no doubt, that by the marvellous processes re-
vealed in the Word of God, and by the Holy Spirit,
that God has an amazing purpose for man, and that
Jesus Christ in very truth has made provision for man’s
salvation and man’s exaltation to the very Throne of
God.
“1 said, Ye are Gods.”
Sometimes when I preach a funeral sermon I tell
the people that Jesus Christ marked the pathway of
man from the cradle to the Tin one of God; for “the
Throne of God,” as an heir and a joint-heir with Jesus
Christ our Lord, is Gcd's purpose for every man, and
so, exercising God dominion, “Ye shall reign on the
earth.”
In the tenth of John we find that Jesus was preach-
ing, and He got along nicely until He made this state-
ment;—
“I and my Father are one.”


“Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him;
Jesus answered them: Many good works have I showed
you from my Father; for which of these works do ye
stone me ? The Jews answered him, saying, ‘For thou,
being a man, makest thyself God.’ Jesus answered
them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are
gods? If he called them gods, unto whom the Word
of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken; say
ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent
into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am
the Son of God?”
That reveals the divine potentiality in man. If you
are going to quarrel with anyone about that statement,
you will have to quarrel with the Lord. Jesus said:
“Ye are gods.”
Paul, in Hebrews, said:—
“What is man, that thou are mindful of him ? or
the son of man, that thou visitest him ? Thou madest
him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him
with glory and honor, and didst set him over the work
of thy hands. Thou hast put all things in subjection
under his feet.” (Heb. 2: 6,7, 8.)
In the beginning of creation the Lord said: “Adam,
I give you dominion over the fish of the sea, over the
beasts of the field, and over the fowls of the air.” And
the original man, clothed in likeness of Christ, was a
Ruler in earth and sea and sky.
I never could imagine that when Adam wanted the
cows he went out with a club and a dog to get them.
There was a dominion in his spirit that the animal
kingdom recognised, that the birds knew, the fish under-
stood. Man was God’s king in the earth.
Man has fallen from his glorious position. Man has
lost his high dominion. Indeed, the ravages of sin
have been such that man in his spiritual capacity, in
his moral nature, in his capacity for the exercise of
power, has become weakened. Weakened to that de-
gree that, instead of ruling the animal world, the ani-
mal world rules him. The elements rule him—control
him. Sin chokes the virtue from his soul—Satan laughs
him to scorn. Because of the weakened state of our
physical being, through sin, we have become subject
to the varied laws of nature about us. We get in a
draught and catch cold. We develop pneumonia. The


waves toss us about. The terrors of life frighten us.
All of which—through Jesus Christ—was meant to be
reversed, and “in Christ” is reversed, when—through
Christ’s indwelling—man is restored to his former
estate.
Real salvation is not mere forgiveness of sins, or
the mere cleansing of the heart from sin’s power, or
the nominal baptism of the life in the Holy Ghost.
Christ’s salvation is intended to bring again into the
nature of man that was lost that which was lost
through sin; that once again, through the divine opera-
tion of the Spirit of God, ministered to our hearts by
Jesus Christ, His overcoming Son, the divine spirit and
holy dominion that rules in the soul of Jesus, should
rule in the nature of man. Thus, once more, by the
grace of God, man takes his place before God in the
state and status in which God created him in the be-
ginning—a son of God.
So my heart is longing these days, since God com-
menced to teach me of His wondrous purpose by the
Spirit, that you and I may in very truth begin to
lift our heads, knowing that “our redemption draweth
nigh.” Bless God!
Beloved, the eventual purpose of Christians and
Christianity is not that we be translated, and go off
floating into the heavens as the Bride. The Rapture,
at best, is a very short period, perhaps seven years.
That period will correspond in our experience with the
forty days in which Jesus took the disciples after the
resurrection into the mountains of Galilee, where He
had them alone, where He could teach them of the
higher things of God, that had been evolved in His
soul through His experience in the Regions of Death.
So that when He came forth from the grave the great
soul of the Son of God was waiting for the opportunity
to pour out His resurrection life—to give the balm to
His disciples—and the wery first time they came to-
gether He “breathed on them and said, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost.” He was breathing the new dominion,
born in His soul through His victory over death and
hell, into them.
Sin always has the same action in a man’s life. Sin
produces fear. Fear causes the spirit of man to lose
its sense of dominion. It causes the mind of man to


become subjective. It causes the person of man, the
body of man, to become subservient and absorbent.
When the Christ ceases to reign, and the consciousness
of dominion is gone from the spirit of a man, all his
nature changes; his whole attitude toward life is
changed. Instead of being God’s prince, ruling by the
dominion of Christ, his nature is made subjective and
subservient to the conditions about him.
If you could examine the very structure of the mind,
you would observe that when a man is filled with fear,
instead of being repellent and dominant, instantly he
is made subjective. His head drops, his face grows
pale, fear comes into his eyes—his whole demeanor is
changed. And if you could examine the pores of his
flesh during such a time you would discover that the
divine aura—the holy radiation of the Spirit of God,
that He purposed should radiate from the pores of the
whole body—had ceased, and, instead, there was a
reverse action. He is drawing to himself, taking to
himself, absorbing into himself, the spirit around him,
whether that spirit be disease or mental torment, or
whatever the condition, he is taking the curse to him-
self.
But the instant fear is banished and faith from God
comes, the whole nature is changed by the power of
its indwelling. Instantly his spirit is dominant'—his
mind positive. His person repels and rejects every
form of darkness and disease by the outflow and emana-
tion of the Spirit of God through the pores of the
flesh.
Beloved, it is my conviction that when Satan came
to the Lord Jesus Christ he talked to Him from a re-
spectful distance. In Satan’s complaint to God con-
cerning Job, he says: “Hast not thou made an hedge
about him, and about his house, and about all that
he hath on every side?” Why, God was not standing
out with a gun to keep the Serpent from stealing his
she-asses. But God had established in the soul of Job
the dominion of God. His very body radiated the divine
aura, or Holy Ghost power. He was God’s prince—
God’s king—and so long as that condition of dominion
remained in his soul, no power of darkness could touch
him —not even the things he possessed were in danger.
He was God’s king.


But right away, when that condition changed, and
Job commenced to scratch himself with an old piece
of pottery, and his spirit was drooping, his mind sub-
jective, and his body covered with boils in consequence,
his spirit could not rise into that high place in God,
until once again God came and comforted him by His
word, and strengthened him by the mightiest sermon
that ever was preached to a human soul. Under its
magic power his spirit lifted into God again—he was
master once more, forgot himself, realised the deficiency
in his friends, prayed for them, and his deliverance
came.
The objective of Christianity is the kingdom of the
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in this world. When
this world is changed by the power of God—when earth
becomes a part of heaven, and the same conditions that
now prevail in heaven are here in the world—will it
not be wonderful ? Will it not be splendid to go around
Chicago and have no bad smells coming up from the
alleys ?■—but it will be just as sweet as heaven.
But somebody will have to go out and clean them up.
Sure they will. There will be something told you to
do in the Kingdom. You will not always be floating
around in the air and singing “Hallelujah!” when we
return with Jesus to enjoy His Kingdom. Perhaps
the Lord will put me with some street-cleaning gang,
to get Chicago cleaned up. I do not know. Earth is
to become a part of heaven. There are to be “days
of heaven on the earth.”
Now, that explains why it is that Christianity is dif-
ferent from every other form of religion. Christianity
provides a resurrection, because Christianity has need
of a resurrection. With other forms of religion, exist-
ence is purely in the spirit. The individual has no body
—has no use for a body—because he has no place where
a body will be valuable. But, bless God! when earth
becomes a part of heaven, Christianity has need of a
body—a risen body, a resurrected body, a God-anointed
body! a glorified body!
Now someone is wondering what all this has to do
with The Secret of Miracles. Beloved, this is what it
has to do with it. God has to disabuse the mind of
man of that which the Devil has promulgated from


time immemorial, and particularly through the Church
—that man is a vile worm, without value, and that
hell was created for his particular reception, and it
is is the only place that he is fitted for. Don’t believe
it! It is the Devil’s lie. God never created hell for
man. Somebody says, “Brother, what did he create
it for?” To receive the dirt and filth of hell. That
is, the receptacle for your cancers and tumors, your
sins and diseases and sicknesses, and every other ac-
cursed thing that ever inhabited the nature of man.
Just the same as the old valley of Hinnom, outside of
Jerusalem, was used to dump their garbage in, and
they burned it up. But they did not carry the people
of Jerusalem to the old valley to burn them up. No!
They carried out the rottenness, filth and dirt.
But God has a purpose for you, and God has a
purpose for me. God’s exalted purpose for us is to
take us into fellowship with the Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ—to make us brothers of our Lord. He
is our elder brother. He is the one who strengthens
the younger brother. He pushes us forward, en-
courages our soul, savs to us when we are discouraged,
“Go on. You can win. I am at your back.”
Beloved, lift up your heads. My! if there are any
peonle on earth who ought to walk with uplifted heads,
and uplifted hearts, surely it is the man and woman
who claim to be anointed in the Holy Ghost, with the
Christ-conouering power of the Glorified Son of God
in blood and brain.
I am so anxious these days that, somehow, God will
help us, that the divine dignity, the moral strength,
the heavenly power and purity, the divine character
and holy nature f hat God revealed through Jesus
Christ as our inheritance, will be realised, and we will
walk with our Lord, and we will talk with our Lord, and
exercise God government over sin and sickness, know
and reveal His all-conauering grace.
Oh, that is my conception of Christ’s salvation. That
is what the Baptism of the Holy Ghost reveals to me.
That is the way my spirit interprets the precious Spirit
of Jesus Christ. That is the revelation that Jesus
brought from heaven for the world that was down—for
the world in sin. Oh. beloved, not confessing your sins
because somebody is behind you with the club of hell,


but because the Lord Jesus Christ is revealing in your
soul the God possibility and quality of your nature,
and that, instead of being in the likeness of Christ, as
He intended you to be, you have sold yourself out to
the world and the flesh and the Devil, and you are
covered with dirt and shame, and debased in your
nature. Rise, beloved, rise up to victory!
That wonderful strain runs all through the Word,
where God endeavors to encourage mankind to rise
out of his debased condition, and let the mighty action
of the heavenly Spirit in the soul of him, in the spirit
of him, in the body of him—make him God’s new man,
like the Christ the Son of God.
Once in my life I was very ill—ill unto death. Had
reasoned it out in my heart that, unless God came,
my time was short. Long before, I had put myself
into God’s hands, and committed my body and soul
and spirit to Him. When I gave mvself to God I gave
my body, as well as my soul and my spirit, to God, and
that meant for me that I would trust God, and God
only, and that I would die before I would violate my
covenant with God. My healing must come direct from
God. So I said, “If I have got to die, I will die like
a man and like a Christian.” And He lifted me.
You know there used to be beautiful Christian death
beds. That was before the days of narcotics and hypo-
dermic needles. There are no Christian death beds
these days. They cannot talk to their families, let
alone their God.
(Voices in audience: “That’s so!”)
Christian death beds are a thing of the past. The
glory of God came to the old saints, and they waited
with anticipation for that hour when their spirits were
liberated. When heaven was nearer, their spiritual
censes keener, their perceptive powers clarified—then
they told of God and heaven, of home and waiting
angels.
When T was a boy of about sixteen, T was invited to
ihe bedside of a young lady who was dying. When T
got there I found a group of young people there. We
knew nothing of praying for healing. We had just
come at her renuest. She wanted to tell us of the
glories of God that had come to her dying vision, and
she could not pass out until she had. She desired to


inspire our hearts to be true. And I think of that
little Parker girl to this day, as she talked to us of
the glory of God, and the impress it left on my heart
was life-lasting. And after I left that room I walked
with a soft tread for many a day. I was walking in
a new presence, a new realisation, a consciousness that
God was not so far away, and that heaven was just as
c’ose as Jesus Christ was to the Christian heart.
Beloved, it is that purpose of God, and that possi-
bility of heavenly union with Jesus Christ, that is the
whole key to the secret of miracles. Oh, it is because
your soul and the soul of the Son of God cease to be
two souls any longer, and you become one—His life
breathed into you. His nature burning in you, the fire
of His holy soul flaming in you and flashing through
you—His Dominion, not a word, but a fact in your
soul. 1 T
Jesus Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration is God’s
eternal pattern of how much man may become absorbed
in. reflect, and reveal God. Why. when Jesus was
transfigured before them, His clothes became white
and glistening—His face shone as the light. There is
a touch there that I have always blessed God for. The
Word savs it took place while He prayed. While He
was praying He was transfigured. It reveals the
power of prayer. It reveals the quality in the nature
of man to become identified in oneness with God, so
that the glories of God are not shining upon him from
heaven, but radiating out of him. God resident in
man, shining forth.
It reveals again that man is the divinest instrument
in all God’s creation for revelation of God—that the
living Spirit of God energises him, leaps from him as
the lightnings. Dear brother, dear sister let me en-
courage your heart. Everything in the Word of God
that ever was possible to the Lord Jesus Christ is
likewise possible to the Christian. God never meant to
establish Christians on one plane and Christ on an-
other. He purposed by God’s grace and by the Holv
Ghost to come into our heart to lift us up, to develop
ns, and bring us up into God. until we stand together
on Christ’s plane. Not Christ coming down to our de-
based state, but our debased condition giving way to
the divine operation of the Holy Ghost in our life,


until we stand exalted in the Lord Jesus Christ —Christ
conquerors, Christ revealers.
In 1909 I preached one day from this platform on
one of my return trips from Africa. I never will for-
get that day. While I was preaching the Spirit came
upon Brother Sinclair, until his face became radiant—
until all his spirit was flaming in God. And he arose
and gave a prophetic message in the Holy Ghost that
left an impress on my soul from that day to this.
When I think of Rev. John Sinclair- that is the vision
T try to keep in my heart—that God-exalted man, that
Spirit lifted up in God, that nature flaming with God’s
divine power and presence.
Yea, beloved, the Lord found us. We were in sick-
ness, in sin, and in shame, and, by the grace of God,
He healed us from our sickness, and He cleansed us
from our sin. Then He came and indwelt heart and
life, and lives in us and undertakes to transform our
nature and our character, our very persons and being,
that our spirit and our soul and our body and our
blood mav become spirit of His Spirit, soul of His soul,
flesh of His flesh, bone of His bone, and blood of His
blood. r
Oh, bless God, that is the Pentecost I read about in
the New Testament. It is this that came down from
heaven, and that is the life to which our Lord calls
you and me to-day. I am trying these days to cuddle
un close to the heart of God, where I can feel the pulse
of His soul, the pressure of His hands, and His en-
couragement, saying, “Come on, my boy, this is the
wav, this is the way!”
Dear ones, I want to say that it is because God sent
His blessed Holy Spirit from heaven, baptised and
ouickened and sensitised our hearts to understand God,
that you and I to-day possess this holy vision and this
heavenlv possibility. And I care not what the diffi-
culties h"ve been in the years that are past, I know that
Go l is sneaking from heaven anew, and the hearts of
the penifle never responded with more keenness than
our hearts respond to-dav to God’s highest call.
Reloved, T tell you the days of darkness and weari-
ness are passing, and God, by His gracious goodness, is
leading us out into the Highway of Holiness in the
Lord Jesus Christ.


TONGUES AND INTERPRETATION.
Unto Thee this night, our precious God and King, we
give forth from our souls the very richest—yea, God,
the very sweetest—that our nature possesses. We bless
Thee with the love of saipts, we bless Thee with the
love of brothers. Oh, Christ, we bless Thee with the
joy of the redeemed, and, blessed Lord, our hands are
given to Thee, our hearts are given to Thee, our lives
are given to Thee all anew for God’s high purpose.
Amen.
God is identifying us with Jesus Christ in all the
possibilities of His nature. One day the disciples were
discussing matters with Jesus, and Jesus turned to
them and said: “I have a baptism to be baptised with,”
and then he questioned them whether they were able
to receive it. And they answered, “Lord, we are able.”
So it went along until the night of His crucifixion,
when they were together. Presently Jesus took the
cup when He had drunk, saying: “My blood in the New
Testament.” Listen! Get the force of it. That was
Jesus’ pledge that His very blood was given for the
life of the world. And just as men have done from
time immemorial, so Jesus Christ Himself took that
cup, sanctified it unto the highest and holiest, raised it
to His lips, saying: “My blood in the New Testament.”
And when He had drunk to that pledge, He turned to
Peter and the others, and, giving it to them, He said:
“Drink ye, all of it.” And they drank with His
saying in their hearts, “My blood in the New Testa-
ment.”
What does it mean when a man drinks to another’s
pledge? It means that he has entered into oneness
and fellowship and understanding with him, accord-
ing to the words of the uttered pledge. And when
Peter took the cup, it meant for Peter, “My blood in
the New Testament.” And when John took it, it meant
for John, “My blood in the New Testament.”
And when Matthew took it, it meant, “My
blood in the New Testament.” They became
one with the Son of God in His redemptive
life, and pledged their faithfulness to Christ
forever; that, just as He gave His blood to redeem
mankind, so they would give their blood to rescue
mankind.


Beloved, that is what it should mean to every intelli-
gent Christian the world over. You may have par-
taken of it in ignorance, like thousands and tens of
thousands have done, but the quickened soul, the God-
anointed heart, sees the purpose of Jesus—to bring the
Church into divine identity with Himself for the sal-
vation of the world.
So, beloved, it means to my soul, “My blood in the
New Testament,” and it means to your soul—if you
have entered into that same fellowship with Him—
“My blood in the New Testament.” Once more, it
means that the words of Jesus are made a reality, “Be
thou faithful even unto death, and I will give thee the
crown of life.”
Beloved, that is the secret of miracles. The power
of God is in a consecration like that. The lightnings
of Jesus are there. The fellowship with the Son of
God is there. The anointing of God-power is there.
One Kingly One came from the Throne of God in
heaven to earth, to give us the everlasting pattern of a
Son of God. And, by His grace, my heart is reaching,
my soul is reaching and asking that His operation in
me may be with power and success, making me like
Himself in body and soul and spirit. Identifying my
nature with His own in life, in death, in resurrection
power and everlasting dominion, giving meaning to the
Word of God, “Thou hast put all things in subjection
under his feet.” “I said, Ye are gods.”
Reprinted tram “Good News,” an up-to-date religious maga-
slne. Price, Sd.: pasted, 4d. Send your subscription to-day to
Secretary, 104 Quesnsberry Street, North Melbourne.
