

SIX
NEW ADDRESSES
DELIVERES BY
MRS. BAEYERTZ
(Jewish Evangelist)
PR ICE SIXPENCE.
(Per Post, 7d.)
Can be obtained fron Mrs. Baeyertz, Post Office, Perth, W.A.
A lso Book containing
TWELVE OF MRS. RAEYERTZ’S ADDRESSES,
Price is.; per Post , 1s. 1d.
PERT H:
City Printing Company, Limited 221 Murray Street.
COPYRIGHT.] [ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




SIX
NEW ADDRESSES
DELIVERED BY
MRS. BAEYERTZ
(Jewish Evangelist)
PRICE SIXPENCE.
(Per Post, 7d.)
Can be obtained Com Mrs. Baeyertz, Post Office, A,
Also Book containing
TWELVE OF MRS. BAEYERTZ’S ADDRESSER
Pi ice is.; per Post, is. id.
PERTH;
City Printing Company, Limited 221 Murray .Street.
1984.




Tears.
i o speak on the word “ Tears,” this after-
, i 1 w ould like to begin with the Saviour’s
tsi- 1 i us, although God, was such a tender-
hearted, loving man, and could sympathise with
every one who was in sorrow and distress, and when we
read about Him in the 11th chap. John, where Lazarus had
died, and Mary was weeping, and Martha, and the Jews all
round weeping, we read “ Jesus wept.” What made Him
weep 1 Have you ever thought about it 1 He knew He
was going to raise Lazarus from the dead. He wanted
those people to know how sorry He was for them, and to
show them that He could sympathise with them; and He
has told us to weep with those that weep, and to rejoice
with those who rejoice. I remember when my husband
died I was terribly broken-hearted —people would come
and see me, and wanted to try to comfort and condole
with me, but it was something terrible to me. They would
come in and say they were sorry for me, and I would look
at them and say “ You have not lost your husband.” Your
hearts are not broken. I wish you would leave me alone.”
At last I said to one of the servants, “ You must not send
anyone else in to see me. I believe I shall go out of nay
mind if these people come and talk to me.” However one
lady called, the servant said no one should come in; she
said, “ Nothing shall keep me away ; I kmow my way up,
and it does not matter what anybody says, I will go up to
her.” She came up, sat beside me —did not talk like
the other people; she had lost the husband of her youth—
she took hold of my hand, and presently I felt a hot tear


fall right down on the back of my hand ; do you know
it came from her heart, and those tears comforted, helped,
and soothed me more than all the words the people
had spoken. O ! there is a wonderful power in going
to persons when they are broken-hearted, sad, and sor-
rowing, and weeping with them, and Jesus knew what
that was, for He wept, but there were other tears that
He shed on earth. Do you remember that time when
He was going into Jerusalem. The little children were
crying “ Hosanna to the Son of David !” and the people
were throwing down their coats for Him to walk upon,
and were cutting down branches of the palm trees ; do
you know what the palm tree means. It always means
victory, and Jesus had the palm under His feet, (which
was victory) before He had the crown of thorns upon His
head, and so, as he was going along and all the people
rejoicing, all of a sudden He comes to a bend of the
road, and sees Jerusalem lying at His feet, and as He
looked upon the city a very strange thing happened—
the sun is shining brightly, and everything is joyous and
glad because of His entry into Jerusalem; but Jesus
is not joyous and glad. As He sits there on the mule
He is riding. He stops suddenly, draws it in, and presently
the great big tears gather in His eyes and drop down
His cheeks. Ah ! what made Him weep 1 He knew
those Jerusalem sinners were going to reject Him, and
He knew what that meant, and He knew what He had
done for them, He had worked miracles for them. He
had opened their blind eyes, healed the sick, raised their
dead, and had taken their little children in His arms and
blessed and loved them, but after all He could do they
would not have Him. They had rejected Him. There
was nothing left for Him to do but to weep, and He
did weep, and I tell you those tears-sown in Jerusalem
will yet reap a rich harvest. As He wept He broke
out into that sad lament—“ How often would I have
gathered thy children as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wing and ye would not.” Is He saying the same
to you this afternoon ? Thank God for every man at this


Snnday afternoon meeting who has been converted during
the week, but ah ! there are so many left. There’s another
man ! You will remember Dr. Guthrie gave that touching
incident. He told of a shipwreck. When they got to the
ship, they found no one living upon it but one man, they
got him tenderly up and rescued him, when they got him
in safety into the boat, he made a tremendous effort to
speak, he was almost dying, for he had been days without
water and food, and they thought everybody was dead
but this man. Then he got himself on to his elbow
and tried again to speak. He said—“ There is ,
there is but could not get his breath. At last he
made one tremendous effort and cried out —“There’s
another man.” He wanted them to go back to the ship
and save his mate. Although they thought he was dead,
this man knew he was not. So, I have been telling God
to-day—“ There is another man.” Many are praying
for the young men, I want them for Jesus, but I have
been praying for the old men ; there are some men in
this meeting who are absolutely unmoved ; they come
week after week, perhaps you think that because you belong
totheP.S.A., it will give you a claim to entrance into
heaven ; God help you, God bless you. I am glad you
belong to the P.S.A., but I tell you that it will not make
you a child of God. Jesus wept over these Jerusalem
sinners because He knew that the rejecting of Himself
meant eternal death for them.
I was telling the people on Tuesday night an incident,
and was asked very specially to tell it again this Sunday
afternoon. The gentleman who related it was an eye-
witness of the scene, which happened in Manchester. The
assizes were on, and the court was densely packed; a
young man was going to be tried for the murder, of his
sweetheart, lie was known to be a very bad fellow, but
was very young, and there was a great deal of sympathy
and interest for him. Away at the door was a middle-
aged woman, in black, who was trying to make her way
through the crowd to get to the place where the young
man was standing, but they would not let her pass. At
TEARS.


last she said to the people, “Make way for me, I am his
mother.’’ I may tell you she was a Christian, and had been
praying for her boy all his life, and it seemed as though
the only answer she had got to her prayer was to see
him standing in the felon’s dock, to be tried for murder.
But that woman would not let go God’s promise for her
boy. She believed in God and in the answer to prayer,
and she came into court believing that God was going to
save her own son even in the eleventh hour. She came close
to where her son was, looked up in his face and said—
“ Jack, stoop down and let me kiss thee, lad, and I will
go home and pray for thy lost soul,’’ He drew himself up
and said —“No, Mother! I am a murderer.” And the
people began to hiss him for his unkindness to his mother.
'J he people wanted to drag her away, but she would not
stir, and got hold of a pillar. With the tears running down
her cheeks, she put up her hand and said —“ Give us thy
band, lad.’’ He put it up in a brazen way and said—
“ No, mother, no ! This hand murdered her." The people
in the court were so angry that they would have killed him
if they could have got at him. Their hatred was fearful.
But the mother loved him. She did not see the murderer,
but only her son. She would not stir, but would make
one last eftort, and so, amidst the hisses of the people, she
lifted up her voice, broken by sobs, and raid—“O 1 Jack,
my lad, my lad 1 There’s nobody loves thee now but the
Lord Jesus Chrht and thy mother, stoop down and let
me kiss thee, lad, and I will go home and pray for thy
lost soul.” He took his mother into his arms, and wept
upon her neck, there and then the first tears of penitence
he had ever shed in his life. They led her fainting from
the court. They took him later on from the court a con-
demned criminal—condemned to be hanged for murder, but
the evidence he gave in the cell, and to the ministers, and
all the workers, was so real, that the young fellow was
savingly converted, that not one single soul doubted that
he went right from the gallows to glory.
fShall I tell you something, young men and women, here.
There is a sin which God hates more than murder—the


rejection of Christ. During the thirty years I have been
preaching the Gospels, two murderers have been converted
through me. One confessed it to a friend after I had
gone away. Another told me in Canada he had com-
mitted murder in his youth, was condemned, but was let
off hanging. There is pardon for the greatest sin ever
committed, but there is no pardon, no mercy, for the man
who rejects Christ. Do not forget that , and the reason
Jesus wept over these Jerusalem sinners was, because He
knew they were going to reject Him, and the rejection of
the Lord Jesus Christ means the wrath of God abiding on
a man for ever and ever. There are other tears. There
was a woman when Jesus was on earth, heard him say,
“ Come unto Me all ye that are weary and heavy laden and
I will give you rest.” She was a wicked woman, but she
felt the burden of her sins. She had gone away to her
home and thought, ‘ 1 If J could only find that Christ, and
where He is, and find rest.” She heard He was a guest
with a man called Simon. She goes there, and as she
enters the house, and gets near Christ, His holiness was
such a contrast to her sinfulness that she weeps blessed
tears of repentance —blessed tears of sorrow for sin. There
must have bean more real oneness between that woman
who could weep for her sins and that Blessed One who
could weep for the sins of the whele world, than those
who could never weep for their sins. He forgave this
woman in the presence of Simon and all of them. Do
you know why He forgave her. He knew that when he
should cry out on the cross, “Mr God, My God, why
hast Thou forsaken Me!” —He would be bearing her sins ;
He could say to her, Go in peace.” My heart’s desire
for every man and woman here, is that they may have
tears —even if not shed by the outward eye, that they
may have tears on their hearts for sin. Peter had been
living with Jesus Christ for three years, and when He
was betrayed, followed Him afar off, he must have got
into the outer court; Jesus was in the inner court, and
could see and hear all that was going on. It was a
celd night, and Peter went to the fire to warm himself.


Presently, as Jesus stands there with His hands bound
together (He has been mocked, tried, forsaken, an un-
crowned king, in His own kingdom —His own world), he
hears a voice. “ Why, that is Peter’s voice. What is he
saying 1 Is he standing up for his Master and Lord ?”
He listens—O ! how terrible; He hears him say, 11 1 never
knew the Man,” then with oaths and curses he again
repeats : “ I say 1 never knew Him.” Three times over
he denies his Lord. What did Jesus do? Jesus turned
and looked at him. But what a look. It broke his
heart. 0 ! what sorrow must have been in that look ;
O what disappointment, what pity, what love, for Peter
was really a child of God, although be had fallen
so, and he went out and wept bitterly, and those tears
saved him. Before I refer to the tears of Esau, let me say
one little word to the backslider. Perhaps there is in this
meeting a man who is a real child of God. You know the
very time you were converted, and you know that life is in
your soul to-day, but you have been tempted and fallen.
You have gone in with the enemies of your Lord and
Master, and have denied Him, and your very friends do
not know you are a child of God. O ! backslider, I want
you to come back to Jesus this very afternoon ; I want you
to know that His love for you has never changed, He has
gone on loving you just the same, He heard the wicked
word, He has seen the life that has been so un-Christlike,
He knows all about the backsliding, and tells me to come
here and tell you that you are His child. Listen to me !
I come to say the real child of God who is a backslider
can never be lost. You may turn away from the Lord,
but cannot be lost like the unconverted. “ Return unto
Me, O ! backslider, for I am married to you.” Thera
is the union between your soul and Jesus, and I want
backsliders in the alter meeting this afternoon. You
are no use to the Lord while you are away from Him, and
Ido not want His loving heart broken over you, if you
will come witli me this afternoon and confess your sins—
that is what Jesus[says. *“Only confess your transgressions,”
*See Ist John, 1-9.


and Jesus will receive you and restore to you the joy of
His salvation, and you shall go out from this meeting just
as you were when first converted. Now, come. Don’t let
there be one backslider in this meeting who shall go away
without the love of Jesus filling his heart. The last tears
are very solemn. In the Old Testament you read about
Esau. When I was a Jewess and read about Jacob (I did
not believe in the New Testament) I used to say I liked
Esau the best. I believed he was a far nicer man than
Jacob; but when I came to the New Testament and saw
behind the scenes, and saw what God said about Esau, I
altered my mind. There may be many in this meeting far
nicer men than some Christians. We would say: ‘‘ So-and-
Iso is a very nice man,” but what would it help you if we
did 1 The great thing is, what does God think of me ? What
does God say of my personal character ? We read that
God said Esau was a fornicator and a profane person.
Ged looked into the man’s heart and knew what he was.
Do you think a fornicator and a profane man can go to
heaven unless he repent of sin ? What did this profane
person do? He sold his birthright. The birthright of an
eldest son was the greatest thing he had, and if he had not
.‘-old his birthright, it would have been Abraham, Isaac,
and Esau. But he despise I it. What for? For a good
dinner. You will say that was a very poor thing to sell his
birthright for—a good dinner ! How does that compare
with you? Every man and young man in this meeting
is a sinner. No one can say, “I have never sinned in my
life.” You know you are sinners, right at your birth you
a l , e sinners Your birthright is to accept the Lord Jesus
Christ and to be delivered from your sins. He Himself
says: “If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed ” I have known Jesus Christ take drunkards and
make them free from drink—have known Him to deliver
a man from gambling. A man told me in London : “ For
t-n years I never earned an honest penny.” He used to
se'l the shirt off his back to gamble. The Lord got hold
of that man and converted—changed him. He would not
accept money for a night’s lodging, but set to work to earn


his own livelihood, and showed very soon what a marvellous
change there was in him. Jesus Christ is free to you by
virtue of your birth as sinners. You cannot go to Him as
a good man and say, ‘‘ I claim you ” You can only go to
Christ and say, “ I am a desperate sinner.” an utterly bad
man, that is my birthright. “By right of my birth I can
take Thee as Deliverer and Saviour.” Jesus Christ wants
to deliver every man in this meeting. It is no use hearing
about Him. It will never save you. You may come to this
B.S.A. Sunday after Sundays and die in the week in your
sins and go down to hell, unless you personally appropriate
the Lord Jesus Christ. Esau despised his birthright, so
do you, I tell you honestly, this atternoon, God calls yon
“ A profane man ” if you are despising your birthright at d
rejecting the Lord Jesus Christ.
But, come, what is your morsel of meat ? Esau sold his
birthright for one morsel of meat; his was a good dinner.
At Chadwick Mount, God blessed this address to a man
(I think he and his wife are in the meeting now). He
came to me and said : “ I will tell you what my morsel of
meat is—a game of bowls.” Where he played there was
very often bad company, and he knew that if he accepted
the Lord Jesus he would have to give up his usual game (f
bowls and his associates. He said, “I am not going to give
up my game of bowls—that is my morsel of meat;” but
God worked upon him, and by-and-bye he came up and was
grandly converted. Another man came to me and said,
“ I cannot get away from that morsel of meat. I would
be a Christian but for that. I am just selling my birth-
right for a morsel of meat. It is my club. I cannot b ■
a Christian and go to my club, because there are wicked
men, gamblers and drunkards there, and I ha ve to associate
with all kinds of wicked men ; but I like them, and am
not prepared to take Christ and give up my club.” Thee
a woman came up and said, “ I know what is my morsel
of meat —what is keeping me from being a Christian—a
ball dress. I bought a ball dress and am going to a bah
next week. I have had the dress made.” Long before
the week en»l God wrought upon her, and she came to


me with the tears running down her cheeks, and said, “ I
have given up the ball-dress and have taken Christ.” ( n
the last night of the mission she said—“ You remember
me.” I said, “No ” “1 am the woman who told you that
a morsel of moat was a ball-dress. I and my husband
have been converted, and don’t you think now we can
say—“ ‘As for me and my house, we wid serve the
Lord V ”
No w, men, I want you to face the whole thing and fight
it out; it is best to come to a decision. Are you going to
lose your soul for a morsel of meat, like Esau % He lost
himself eternally for a morsel of meat. I want you to
come face to face with God and weigh the morsel of meat
with eternity. Do you know what eternity means 1 It
rmans as long as God lives. Weigh it and see is it worth
while for you to despise and sell your birthright for that
morsel of meat.
One moment and we will close. What happened to
Esau ? He was very sorry afterwards, and his conscience
was awakened. God help you. You will have such
remorse of conscience some day, you cannot kill it—you
may smother it for a time, but there it is, and it will wake
up some of these days ; remorse of conscience is not like
the strivings of the Holy Ghost. I have seen men in the
hospital weeping and saying—“ Keep hold of my hand ;
lam afraid to die.” They have had such remorse of
conscience my heart has ached for them, but it was too
late. Esau, we read, sought a place of repentance care-
fully, with tears. But, listen—God help you now. He was
rejected I Men, just think of it. If you, after this mis-
sion, have remorse of conscience too late, and the Holy
Ghost leaves you, and you are rejected, what will it mean ?
That you can never have the pardon of your sins. God
help you. I know He is helping you ; I know He will help
you. Men, precious souls, it is more than I can bear to
have any of you reject the Lord Jesus Christ, and to com-
mit the sin Esau committed; and despise your birthright
for one morsel of meat, and afterwards be sorry when it is
too late, and to seek a place of repentance with tears and


be rejected. I have seen men like that, and have had
their hands in mine, but could not save them. But, you
can be saved now—this afternoon. God help you and save
you. 'I he morsel of meat is not worth holding. If you
take your birthright this afternoon—Jesus Christ - you
will get the pardon of all your sins ; they will be blotted
out. and you will be as safe for heaven as if you were there
already. God help and save you for His dear name’s sake.


" Impossible to Renew them
again unto Repentance.”
Whom?
to Heb. vi. 4—6 : “For it is impossible for
V«\ those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made par-
takers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if
they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance;
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh,
and put him to an open shame.” Heb. x., 26—29 : “ For
if we sin wilfully after that we have received the know-
ledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for
>ins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He
that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two
or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, should he be thought worthy, who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified,
an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the
Spirit of grace?”—2 Peter ii. 20—22. “For if after they
have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is
worse with them than the beginning. For it had been
better for them not to have known the way of righteous-
ness than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened


unto them according to the true proverb : ‘ The dog is
turned to his own vomit again ; and the sow that was
washed, to her wallowing in,the mire.”
Now, we want to find out, by comparing Scripture with
Scripture, what class of people does it mean—that ‘ it is
impossible to renew them again unto repentance,” Before
I say anything further I would like to tell every one in this
meeting that it absolutely does not apply to the backslider.
If a man or woman be a backslider, they are children.of God.
A man cannot be a backslider unless he is a child of God,
and to say that verse applied to the child of God is a
contradiction of Scripture. No child of God, i.e., one
who has been made a partaker of the Divine nature, and
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, could have it said
of him at any time of his life that it is impossible to renew
that one again to repentance. Jesus says : “ I know my
sheep, I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never
perish ; and none shall pluck them out of my hand ; ’ and
He says to His children “I will never leave you and never
f rsake youand if a child of God has got away from the
! ord through sin, and has got into a backsliding state,
then God biings down the rod, and chastens him until
He brings him back to Himself. I cannot see from God’s
Word that a ical child of Cod can be ctc.ii.tlly lost; this
applies to quite a different class of people to the backsliders.
1 f there is a backslider in this meeting you are a child of
God. Wiuiiougu a bad child, I toll )ou liiae you must come
home to your loving Father. Do not get discouraged and
think, “ 1 must fall away and ba lest.” 1 believe that
doctrine causes more backsliders than anything else.
In Peter there is a passage which troubles Christians
greatly, and I want to explain it. I will speak to the un-
saved after. Read Peter ii. 20—22. Let me show you
something. Suppose you take a sow and wash it. Can
you change the sow ? No. You may wash it again and
again, but it will love the filth and dirt, and as soon as you
let it go aga’n it will go again into the mire. Do you think
that is like a child of God—a washed sow 1 No. The
child of God has got an entire change of heart. The whole


life and nature is changed. They become sheep. The
washed sow is simply reformation—turning over a new leaf.
Very often people make a profession, and it is merely
reformation; they never come under the power of God and
are converted. What is the result? The heart is not
changed. They go into sin again, and the latter end is
worse than the beginning. That passage does not apply
to the child of God, it applies to professors who have
simply turned over a new leaf ; and it is a marvellous thing
that they seem to get a lift, and seem happy and joyous,
and they look like converted people. A little time ago a
woman said to me —‘ lam very unhappy since I came to
this mission.” “I am very glad,” I said. She said : “But
lam a Christian 1 You have been converted.” “ Yes ;
it was at Mr. ’s Mission. 1 went into the enquiry room.
They sang, clapped their hands, and there was great happi-
ness, and I felt happy in my heart, was not that conver-
sion ?’ “ What did you rest upon ?” “ Best upon 1” she said,
looking at me as if she thought I was not quite right. “I do
not know what I rested upon, but I felt very happy, but it
has all gone.” I said, “Bless your heart, you no more
received life from God than that wood. To be converted,
you must rest on something. Come with me to the enquiry
room and I will show you what it means.” She eventually
rested on God’s Word, and the finished work of Christ, and
was savingly converted. Remember, once and for all I say
these passages do not apply to you if you are a child of
God. To whom do they apply? It is a very solemn and
important thing to find out. Before I tell you to whom
they apply, I want to look for a moment at “ Unto repent-
ance ” Wha: is repentance 1 It is not merely conviction
of sin. I know there are scores of people who think that
if they are under conviction of sin they are true penitents.
No such thing. There are thousands upon whose hearts
God s Holy Spirit has really done His work. The
Holy Ghost comes to you (as I venture to say, He is
coming to every one at this meeting. Ido not tliink one
could get up and tell me, “ The Holy Ghost has never at
any time of my life striven with me).” The Holy Ghost


comes to you—sometimes in a meeting, and sometimes
through sickness and death, and one thing or another—to
convict of sin. righteousness and judgment. He convicts
of sin ; and what is usually done ! A man will be under
conviction of sin, and will either get a racy novel, and bury
himself in this, cr go to a concert, drink, or go to some
place of amusement—something to drown the miserable
feeling ; whereas, if he only knew, he -would thank God on
his knees for the feelings of anguish awakened. I tell you
what is worse—to have no feelings of anguish—for a man
to go all his days in sin and be happy in it, and never be
awakened. The man or woman under conviction of sin
who resists the Spirit—throws Him from them —says “ No”
to all His strivings —hy-and-bye when this is done again
and again the Holy Ghost leaves that soul for ever. I tell
you that God is love, and God is light, and the devil has
been blackening God’s character to you. You look upon
God as an angry Judge ready to pounce upon you. God
will punish sin, but He loves the sinner, and the sinner
who goes to Jesus Christ and receives Him: —all his sins
shall be blotted out, God loves you ; hut He loves Jesus
Christ even better than you, sinner; and God will never
dishonour Christ, and will never cast a slur on the Atone-
ment of Christ, and though that atonement is sufficient to
save every soul in this meeting, no man or woman will be
saved unless they accept what Jesus Christ has done.
Beloved, you are either saved or lost . . I love that
description the Lord Jesus Christ gives of the true penitent,
the Prodigal Son. He was away in the far country—would
fain have eaten the husks the swine ate, and there he was
in all the filth of the swine trough. While in this low,
degraded, lost position, the conviction of sin began. Then
there comes the sorrow for sin. Suppose in spite of that
sorrow for sin he had stayed at the swine trough, what
good would it have been to be under conviction of sin,
and to be sorry ? That is the state of some of you. You
are convicted of sin, but do not go away from the swine
trough. What did the son say 1 “I will arise and go to
my Father.” When was it true repentance? When the


father’s arms were around his neck and the kiss of recon-
ciliation was on his cheek. I tell you, precious souls, in
this meeting, there is one who will repent, i.e , turn to
God with the will, but God will do to you what He did to
the Prodigal Son. He will put His arms of love around
your neck and make you His child; but I must be faithful
to God and tell you this : you cannot repent whenever you
like. You cannot say “Oil am going to live as I like and
it will be all right when I come to my death-bed, I have
simply to look and live, like the thief on the Cross.” I
have stood beside men on their death-beds, and these men
could not repent—could not believe—could not yield—
could not look to Christ, although we implored of them to
do so, and prayed for them. Why ? Because when God’s
Holy Spirit was striving with them and could have led
them to God, they turned away from God. If a man turns
and repents, it does not matter who he is, God will save
that man. The other day it came to me with wonderful
power, about King Ahab—God sent a message to him, “ I
am going to send judgment upon you.” What did that
wicked man do ? He put on sackcloth—the first thing a
Jew did when really sorry, and he humbled himself. What
did that loving God do, whom he had sinned against all
his days ? He said to His servant, “ Look at Ahab, he has
humbled himself. He has put sackcloth on, I will not
bring the evil in his days.” If you will humble yourselves,
and let God see you will really turn to Him, that is all He
wants, and He will save you. Whom does it mean that it
w r as impossible to renew again unto repentance ? What
dees it say about these people? It says: “They were
enlightened.” Has any man or woman come into this
meeting who has not been enlightened ? Can you say,
“ I have never been enlightened.” “ Tasted of the heavenly
gift.” You have tasted of the heavenly gift at these meet-
ings, “ And were made partakers of the Holy Ghost.” I
take it that sentence is not in the sense that we believers
are partakers of the Holy Ghost; but in this sense : par-
takers of the influence of the Holy Ghost pervading the
meeting or any other place where you are. You must have


been sometimes in your life, and even now you are made
partakers of the influence of the Holy Ghost. “ Tasted of
the good Word of God and the powers of the world to
come, if they shall fall away.” What does it mean ? If they,
in spite of all God has done in bringing power to bear upon
them to bring them to Himself, fall away from it all, and
persist in living in impenitence, there comes a time in their
history when God the Holy Ghost withdraws His striving
from them, and that is the reason it becomes impossible to
renew them again unto repentance I hope there is not a
soul in this meeting of whom it is going to be written, “ It
is impossible to renew them again unto repentance,” but I
must tell you the truth, and if you harden your heart and
resist the influence of the Holy Ghost, you must take care
lest He leave you in your sins and the power to repent is
taken away from you ; you have the power to-night. Jesus
Christ has died, He is on the Throne pleading for you, as
lam speaking, and striving by His Holy Spirit; but, O!
take care lest it be written of you, “It is impossible to
renew you again to repentance.”
When I was at Geelong, I witnessed some terrible scenes
in that hospital. One man I used to visit and plead with
had no sorrow for sin. Nothing but dependence on his
own good life. He would always say, “ I have been a good
man and done the best I could.” He came to the very
end of his life, I went in to see him. There was a lawyer
writing at the table; the man called, “Please do not go
away. I will be done with my lawyer in a minute.” I
visited some of the other beds. When the lawyer went
away I went to the man. He said, “ I am all right now.
(His face was radiant.) I have £3OO in the bank—all the
money I have in this world. I have sent for the lawyer,
and have left all the money to the hospital; that will be
another good work, and I shall be all right.” Do you
think any power could enlighten this man or awaken con-
viction. He died in his sins—not resting in the finished
work of Jesus Christ but in the consciousness of his own
righteousness. It is no use telling me that God never leaves
a soul. I tell you God does leave a soul, but He never


leaves a soul until it is a hopeless case : when God gives
up a soul it is because he will not turn to Him and live;
men and women, give heed to this solemn word to-night.
Turn to God while you may ; I know many of you are not
resting in your own righteousness, hut are putting it
off. Do you not see that procrastination will ruin you.
You want decision. If you come to decision, and say,
“ I am going to arise this very night and go to my Father.”
That is repentance. If you will do that you will be saved
to-night.
Just a word on Hebrews x. I want to help the dear
Christians here. This verse x. troubled me for years, I
read, “If we sin wilfully.” It does not apply to Christians.
It is all about the Atonement. This wilful sin, if you
study the passage on your knees, and ask God the Holy
Ghost to enlighten you— is the rejection of Jesus Christ
in His death for you on the Cross. There was only one
sacrifice for sin, which was made 1,800 years ago on
Calvary’s Cross by the Lord Jesus Christ ! if we wilfully
reject that sacrifice, there is no more sacrifice for sin. . . .
Once in the end of the world hath He appeared to put away
sin by the sacrifice of Himself. I want to tell you a grand
truth. God is reconciled to every sinner on the face of the
earth—but the sinner is not reconciled to Him ; so infinite
are the merits of that precious death and Atonement, it
has reconciled God to man, but a man cannot be saved until
he receives the reconciliadion —there is no more sacrifice if
that sacrifice is rejected. What is the result 1 Fiery
indignation. That fiery indignation is from God. You can
understand it when God has given His Son. The Bible
speaks a great deal of the sufferings of that Blessed Christ
on the Cross, but I tell you one thing it is silent about—
the sufferings of the Father ; but the very silence tells to
our hearts what it must have cost the Father to lay the
punishment upon that Blessed One. Injured love—the
love trampled on is the worst thing to meet, and the sinner
who rejects that Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ has
to face the wounded love of God. Think of that. It is
fiery indignation. We are safe when we come to Christ—


we are unsafe out of Christ, because as the wrath of God
abode on Christ so the wrath of God abides on the sinner,
God cannot forgive a man’s sins apart from the Atonement,
what are you going to do 1 It is you who must come to a
decision—who must repent and turn to God to-night Will
you do it 1 Oh ! God help you. The Lord in His great
grace and mercy meet with every one in this meeting and
give Christ to every doubting, unawakened soul. You
cannot go to heaven unless you are born again. You do
not complain because the Americans have certain laws, one
of which is this, that no one can be President of America
unless he is a born American. You say, “ The Americans
have a perfect right to make their own laws and keep them.”
I think the Lord Jesus has every right to make His own
laws about His Kingdom. There are many in this meeting
who are in His Kingdom—they have been translated from
the kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of God’s dear
Son, but I challenge any man or woman in this meeting
to tell me they have been translated from the kingdom of
darkness to God’s Kingdom in any other way than being
born again. When you have Christ it is only a preparation
for the glorious future in the next world His Kingdom, as
I say, has certain laws, and the one fixed law of entrance
into His Kingdom, which is heaven, is “ Ye must he born
again!’ What is it to be born again 1 There are many in
this meeting can tell you as well as 1 can. They have been
born again. To be born again is to have a new life within
—a life that we had not when we were born of our father
and mother. That old life every one of us has, but in
addition, many of us have received direct from God, His
own Divine Life into the soul, we have been made partakers
of the Divine Nature, and we have His life, and that is the
new birth. I: To as many as received Him, to them gave
He power (right or privilege) to become the children of
God.” No one is a child of God—it does not matter how
good, or moral, or respectable you are —but those who have
been born of God or born of the Spirit. That which is
born of the flesh is flesh, it may be respectable flesh,
religious, very moral, but Christ says, it is flesh , That


which is born of the Spirit is spirit, “Ye must be born
again.” Why does Jesus say “ must ?” Why is it impera-
tive ? Why does He not moderate it 1 No. There it is,
“Ye must be born again.”
I’ll tell you why, The unrenewed natural heart—what
is the natural heart 1 It is simply the unconverted person.
Whoever you are—you may not be disagreeable, but a nice
charming person —it does not alter the fact—the Lord who
knows the heart better than any living soul, says, the
natural heart is enmity against God. You say that is a
mistake, I have never been converted—born again—l have
a natural heart, but I have not enmity to God. /do not
say it, beloved, but God says it—God who knows all about
you, who tries the reins, says to you that your natural
heart is enmity to Him ; He says it is not subject to His
law, neither indeed can be.
0! that is the secret of the failure. You have been
trying, and are so disappointed that you thought “ I will
have to give it all up.” Yes, I would. That is my best
advice to you, to give it up. I tell you why. You are
trying to be good and please God with that old unrenewed
nature, and are trying to do what God cannot do; you are
trying to bring that unrenewed nature into subjection to
God, when God says He Himself cannot do it, you had
better give it up and do what Jesus tells you. O ! how I
have seen the hollowness and emptiness of everything but
Christ. May God bless you —precious souls who belong to
Jesus Christ—you for whom He died on Calvary’s Cross,
and you have never yielded yet. Let it be to-night. God
bless you, and save you, for His dear name’s sake. Receive
Christ He has the power to forgive the sins of all
who believe in Him ; come, I beseech you, to the great
Saviour, and leave this place a saved soul. God grant it.
Amen !


The Personality of the Holy
Spirit.
first passage we will turn to is Eph. iv. 30,
“ Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God.” Here
we have a plain command, and whenever the
Spirit is grieved, the child of God suffers
grevious loss When we grow cold in prayer, or love to
the Word, or lose God’s smile of approval and conscious
communion with Him, be sure it is because the Spirit has
been grieved. Many of God’s dear children are missing so
much because they do not recognise the personality of the
Holy Spirit in John xiv. 16, 17. The Lord desus in speak-
ing of His coming, says, ‘ The world seeth Him not, neither
knoweth Him, but He dwelleth with you.” and in the 26th
verse He says, “He shall teach you ” —an influence could
not teach, or be grieved, or vexed—and in the xvi. chap,
and 18th verse the Holy Spirit is spoken of as He six times.
Turn to Acts xiii., 2 and 4. Here we find the Holy Ghost
speaks, “Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto/have called them.” Many Christians seem to
think that He could speak in the early days of the Church,
but now He is silent. Ah ! its a poor day that passes when
God does not speak to His children. He is not changed,
and what is said of the Lord Jesus applies to the Blessed
Holy Spirit, the same yesterday, to-day , and for ever. It
is He who separates and calls to work, and it is He who
must send forth the workers. Where is the Holy Spirit
to-day 1 Turn to Ist Cor., hi. 16, “Ye are the temple of
God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you.” Oh ! but


some Child of God may say its an attainment to have the
Holy Spirit. No, beloved, on believing we received the
Holy Spirit, and if any man here have not the Spirit of
Christ he is none of His. See what kind of people these
were —babes in Christ; carnal, envying, strife, divisions
amongst them, and yet of these the Apostle writes, “ Ye
are the temple of God.” If you seek the indwelling of
the Holy Spirit when you already have Him you will grieve
Him. He dwells within us as a Personal Power with a
mind and will of His own, and we must yield an uncon-
ditional surrender to Him —obey Him ; acknowledge His
indwelling continually; welcome Him to your heart;
cherish Him ; delight in Him ; live in Him ; trust Him;
commune with Him, this blessed glorious holy God, who
condescends to dwell in us. Oh, to be pliable in His
hands, that He may make us holy and work in us that
which is well pleasing to God. What is the wo'k of the
Holy Spirit ? He is to bring forth fruit in our lives ;Ho
is to teach us, to guide us, to shew us things to come, to
give us access to God, to help our infirmities, to give joy,
to anoint. Does He do this work in you ? If not, then, I
beseech you receive Him now; but you say how can I
receive Him when the Dibit; tells me plainly He is dwelling
in me Receive Him as your teacher, as your guide;
receive Him for the work He is to carry on in your soul.
Do this definitely ;do it now. Have real dealings with
God, and confess how you have dishonored the blessed
Spirit in the past, and from this very hour seek to be
filled. Many are praying for more of the Holy Spirit,
and all the time, perhaps, He is wanting more of you.
How much of you does He possess 2 Does He go into all
your life, the books you read, the letters you write, the
friends you visit? Oh ! begin a new life from this meeting
by yielding and receiving , and you will find that your
spiritual life will be deepened, and the Spirit will lead you
to walk with God, not as our dear John McNeil, of
Melbourne, used to say, “go for a walk with God,” but
walk step by step, letting Him have all His own wav
with you. Many of God’s dear ones tell me they are


troubled because they have so little love to Christ, and
they set to work in order to make themselves love Him ;
and others think they have a reservoir of love somewhere
in their being, and if they could only pump it up they
would be all right, but I tell you as the Holy Spirit shed
the love abroad in our hearts first, so He alone can give
us more love to Christ. Leave off trying, and acknowledge
your utter dependence, get right with the Holy Spirit, see
that He is ungrieved within you, and as love is the fruit
of the Spirit, not only will He, if tmhindered. , shed
abroad the love in your heart, but so fill you with adoring,
worshipping love, that your heart shall thrill with love at
the very sound of the blessed name of Jesus, and He will
(again I say unhindered ) so strengthen the life that you
shall be filled with God, so that you will have the patient,
gentle love of God ruling your temper, words, and actions.
Dear children of God, so precious to Christ, yield now as
never before for the Holy Spirit to have you absolutely
at His disposal ; bow in quiet, and wait only upon God.—
Amen.


Is there a hell?
IS THE PUNISHMENT OF HELL ETERNAL?
IS THERE REPENTANCE AFTER DEATH ?
T/BfWURN with me to the 16th Luke; read from the
JJ I 17th verse to the end. In the 22nd verse we
i read “ the rich man died and was buried.”
Have you ever thought what it is to die ? Some
people say, “So-and-so is dead, and there’s an end of him,”
In one sense there’s no such thing as death if by that you
mean ceasing to exist. If I died I should go out of this
booy that holds me and go to be with the Lord. “ Absent
from the body ; present with the Lord.” If an unsaved
man dies he goes out of the body to the place where the
wicked are reserved unto the judgment of the great day—
Jude 6. But we read he died, was buried, and in hell.
Now you say I don’t believe in hell. No ; lam quite sure
you don’t; if you did you would not remain unsaved
another hour. I will give you my reasons for believing in
hell. As a Jewess, Jesus said to me: “He that believeth
on Me hath everlasting life.” I believed on Him, and I
received life, and ever since I’ve been proving His word to
be true, so I know He is a faithful and true witness. In
John xiv., speaking to His disciples, He says : “ I go to
prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for
you I will come again and receive you unto myself, that
where lam there ye way be also that certainly is a place,
and where Jesus is we call heaven. In John viii., 21st
verse, He says to the unbelievers: “If ye believe not that I


am, ye shall die in your sins ; whither I go ye cannot come.”
Now, that’s another place altogether, where those who die
in their sins must go, and that place we call hell. Then
we have those awful words, “ Flee the damnation of hell,”
■and in Mark ix. 43rd to the 49th verse, we have the solemn
words about hell, “ If thy hand offend thee, cut it off,” etc.,
etc. What does that mean? If you have a sin, as dear
to you as your hand, part with it. Oh ! dear sinner, if
your sins don’t bring you to Christ, then you will die in
your sins, and that will mean to go to the only place in
God’s universe where the lost can go. You may say you
are not such a dreadful sinner, but God says, “ Some men’s
sins are open going beforehand to judgment, and some
they follow after.” You are a sinner, and Christ alone can
separate you from your sins ; y T ou can’t throw them off as
tou do your clothes; they are burned into your very being
like a red-hot coal. A friend of mine, as surgeon of a
vessel, was taking the ship from one port to another, when
small-pox broke out among the steerage passengers. The
captain, being informed of the outbreak, reserved a par-
ticular part of the ship for the small-pox patients. Soon a
saloon passenger, a very rich man, took the disease, but
very mildly. The captain, when he was told of it, said he
must go io the place reserved for these patients. The man
stormed at such a suggestion; said he would not go in
among these bad cases, who were raving and delirious, and
said he had money and could pay for another part to be
reserved for him. “ Oh,” said the captain, “ that is the only
part of my ship set apart for small-pox patients, and into
that you must go.” And there’s no superior hell for superior
sinners. Neither your silver nor your gold can save you,
and if you reject the Lord Jesus and die in your sins there’s
no more sacrifice for sins but a fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation. Is there repentance after
death ? A great many people are teaching nowadays that
there’s a “ larger hope,” and that if a man does die in his
sins somehow he’ll come out all right in eternity. I don’t
see it from God’s Word. What is repentance? It is not
merely sorrow for sin. I venture to say there will be


many here who will be sorry for their sins, but how many
will be true penitents. Neither is repentance merely con-
viction of sin. Felix was canvicted of his sins, for he
trembled under the power of the Holy Spirit, but he would
not yield, and although we know he sent for the Apostle
Paul and heard him often, he could not bring back the
Holy Spirit. Agrippa was convicted, but he went no
further. So many of you may be under conviction of sin
as you sit here, but you go no further; you live this week
as you did last. “Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost.”
Ah ! there may be some here upon whose hearts and con-
sciences the floly Ghost has done His work ; He has made
you sorry ; He has convicted you, but if you go no further,
if there is no response, you will not be true penitents.
What, then, is repentance 1 It is a turning from sin to God;
a true, genuine renunciation of sin in the will, and I tell
you this is entirely the work of the Holy Spirit; it is He
who awakens dead souls to see their need, and when His
strivings are yielded to He leads the true penitent to the
Saviour, who is exalted to give repentance and remission of
sins to “ whosoever will.” Are you willing to-night to turn
from your sins, or will you resist the Holy Spirit once more
and go on living in your sins ? I see nothing in God’s
Word to warm..t me holding out the least hope to you that
as this is repentance, that there is repentance after death.
I’ll give you one illustration of true genuine repentance.
In a town in booth Australia, where I was holding a mis-
sion, there was an exceedingly wicked man; he used to come
into my meetings with the express intention of disturbing
them, which, however, he never did. I heard he had a pray-
ing wife, and it anyone ever tells me a man has a praying
wife or a praying mother, I plead more earnestly than ever
for them. One night at the close of the meeting, when
every one had gone away, this man walked into the church
and stood in the middle of the aisle ; 1 knew that it must
be that he was broken down about his sins, so I went to
him and said—“ You want to decide for Christ.’ He said,
“ Yes; I do, Mrs. Baeyertz, but I can’t feel.” I said
l ‘ Never mind about that; I’ll ask you two questions, and


then I’ll pray with you. Are yon willing to give up your
sins!” He said, in great anguish, “Indeed, I am.” I then
said • “If Christ saves you tonight, are you willing to go
out of this church and witness for Him in this town as you
have hitherto witnessed for the devil ?” He was a great
big man—l can see him before me now—and every muscle
of his face quivered, and then he brought his great big fist
down on my palm, and said, “ I will.” Religion resides in
the will, and when he yielded his will to God, . . God
took possession of the man and saved him. Dear sinner,
yield now to the blessed Christ; He is a living, bright
reality, and near to you now, waiting to receive you and
love you freely. This man was one of the most satisfactory
converts ot the whole mission, and is witnessing for Christ
to-day. So you see repentance is an act of the will and
not the feelings.
Is the punishment of hell eternal I You often hear people
say, its a very unfair thing of God to send a man to hell,
and punish him for ever and ever for the sins of the longest
lifetime down here on earth, but that’s what God does not
do. God lias done all He can to prevent men going into
eternal punishment, and I would ask you first of all, “ Is
sin itself eternal ? Is sin an infinite thing ?” See Rev.
xxii., 11—“ He that is unjust let him be unjust still; lie
that is unholy let him be unholy still ; and he that is filthy
let him be filthy still.” So you see sin is eternal, and if
an unsaved soul dies in his sins, his sins will remain
engraved into his very being for ever, as long as be exists,
and he will be as sinful and wicked in the next world as
he is in this, and as long as the sin remains the punishment
remains. So I beseech of you, may I implore of you, dear
sinner, come to Christ now, and He will separate you from
your sins, and by virtue of His atonement God will receive
you and give you His own divine life in your soul. Apart
from the death of Christ for sins, forgiveness is an utter
impossibility, but so great, so infinite is that atonement,
that through the death of Christ God can be just, and the
justifier of them that believe. “He that heareth My word
and believeth on Him that sent Me hath everlasting life,


acd shall not come into Judgment, bat is passed from death
into life.” “He that believeth on Me hath everlasting
life.” Accept Christ now as your Lord, as your Saviour,
and yield yourself to Him. “If thou shalt confess with
thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart
that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved.” Escape for thy life; look not behind thee. Re-
member Lot’s wife.


The Young Ruler and Bartimeus.
BEAD in Mark x., from the 17th to t' e 22nd verse;
also from the 46th to the end. We read of one
who came running and kneeled to Jesus- There
we have earnestness and reverence. Some
people say, what does it matter if a person is only in
earnest. Well earnestness is all very well, but it is
certainly not everything Note his question—“ Good
Master, what must Ido that I may inherit eternal life 1”
We can do nothing, and our only inheritance is eternal
death. Notice—the Lord takes him upon his own ground,
“Why callest thou 'NS.a good ? there is none good but one,
that is, God.” Did our Lord mean by this that He was
not God ? No, indeed. He knew what was in Man, and
reading that young man’s thoughts He knew that he
looked upon Him, that blessed One before whom he was
then kneeling, as a mere man —a teacher, who could,
perhaps, show him how he could develop some goodness in
himself by which he could inherit life, and as a mere man,
apart from His deity , He was not good. And you who
think you honor Christ by saying He was a good
man, and yet say He was not God, you may keep
your ascriptions of goodness to yourselves; He will
have none of them. What awful blaspheming for a
mere man to say, “I am the light of the world;” “He
that believeth on Me hath everlasting life;” “ Before
Abraham was lam “ Glorify thou Me with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was“ In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God ; all things were made by Him, and


without Him was not anything made that was made. In
Him was life," etc., and I tell you you will never have
eternal life unless you receive Christ, who is God over all
blessed for ever, for He alone has life to impart to dead
souls, and He says, “Ye will not come to Me that ye might
have life.” Notice : “He that believeth not God hath made
Him a liar , because he believeth not the record that God
gave of His Son, and this is the record God hath given to
us, eternal life, isnd this life is in His Son.”—John v. 10
Do you see that God has so ordained that this life, which
alone makes us His children, is in Christ, so the acceptance
of Christ as a mere man puts God's record of His Son on
one side makes God a liar , and deters all who do this
from ever receiving the life which fits us for heaven. W.<
who believe are “in Him even in His Son Jesus Christ:
this is the one true God and eternal life.” John v. 20.
To go back to the young ruler, Mark x. —“Jesus, behold-
ing him, loved him.” Why did He love Him, surely nob
for any goodness in himself. No, but for the same reason
that He loves you, sinner, because He is love, and because
He loved him He puts the test to Him—“ One thing
thou lackest.” What was the one thing ? Eternal
life. All his righteousness had failed to give him life.
He certainly come to the right source for life, but now
for the test —“Sell whatsoever thou hast and give iO'
the poor ; and come take up the Cross and follow Me.”
Why did Christ put such a test to him? Perhaps as He
read that young ruler’s heart he might have found such
thoughts as these there : The Master is poor; lam rich; He
will welcome me; I can give Him wealth, influence, and
social position; hut the Lord struck at the heart of it.
Come, follow Me! Follow Him; that would mean poverty’,
reproach, humility, social obscurity; it would mean to give
up his eloquent home in Jerusalem, and as he still kneels
at the feet of Jesus he counts the cost, and he makes his
decision. The price is ti o much to pay even for eternal
life, and he went away grieved, for he had great possessions.
The elegant house has passed away, the wealth has gone,
the social position—all gone; but he lives to regret, with.


unavailing remorse and anguish, the awful decision of that
hour. He came into contact with Christ, heard His words,
shared His love, but will never benefit by His precious
death. Take care, sinner, lest you sin away your day of
grace and reject the Saviour, for a time comes to each one
when the Holy Spirit brings a pressure to bear upon souls
and when God treats a sinner’s rejection of Christ as
final. Now look at the contrast, from verse 47. Blind
Bartimeus sits by the highway side begging, but he hears
that Jesus of Nazareth is passing by, so he lifts himself up,
and, with a great cry, calls out, ‘ Jesus, Son of David, have
mercy on mebut the crowd around told him to be
quiet, not to make such a noise. Oh, no ; I can’t be
quiet, thinks Bartimeus, Fm blind, I’m blind, and Jesus
can give me sight. Oh, I can’t go to Him; I can’t see
my way, but I’ll call louder ; perhaps He will hear me
although I’m only a poor blind beggar. So he cried out
again, “ Son of David, have mercy on me,” a d Jesus
stood still! ! (Of course He did. No needy one ever
cried to Him in vain when He was on earth, and He is
the same Jesus now) and commanded him to be called.
Then the crowd change, and they go to the blind man to
tell him the good news of comfort, “ Rise, He calleth
thee,” and he rose. There was just one thing to hinder
him obeying that call as quickly as he wanted to—the long
cloak that he used to wrap around him; every hindrance
must go, and as that was the only one, we read, “he
casting away his garment, rose and came to Jesus.” Now
he stands face to face with that blessed One; but, alas 1
alas ! he is blind; he can see nothing, but the loving
voice reaches his ear. “What wilt thou that I should do
unto thee V’ Now comes the supreme moment of his life.
“Lord, that I might receive my sight,” and Jesus said
“Go thy way, thy faith hath made • thee whole.” In
obedience to the Lord, he takes one step to go, when, lo '
a miracle ! —those blind eyes were opened and he saw
Jesus! That sight was enough. “Go!” Oh, no; “entreat
me not to leave Thee, nor to return from following after
Thee,” and he followed Jesus in the way. The young


was called to come and he went away sorrowful.
The blind man was told to go but he followed, satisfied
with the sight that had burst upon his vision, and he
followed and joined in the cry, “ Hosanna; Hosanna in
the highest V’ One saw no beauty in Him that he should
desire Him ; to the other He was the altogether lovely
one. Ah ! dear sinner, you have eyes in your heart, and
with these eyes we see Jesus. May He open your blind
eyes and lead you to receive Him as your Saviour, and
you shall then know the pardon and rest and peace with
God that has been purchased through the atoning death of
Christ.
“Nothing in my hand I bring,
Simply te Thy Cross I cling
Naked, come to Thee for dress ;
Helpless, look to Thee for grace ;
Foul, I to the fountain fly :
Wash me, Saviour, or I die.”


The Jewish Day of Atonement.
VILL you let us turn to the 16th of Leviticus.
Before I tell you of the first institution of
the Day of Atonement as it came direct from
the hands of God, let me tell you how it is
now kept up among the Jews. Every fast and feast
of the Jews begins at sundown. So in the evening,
“ Yamn Kippour ” is ushered in by the Jews going
down to their synagogue’s, where a very solemn service
is gone through. They return home after that and
early the next morning they return to the synagogue
again, where they spend the whole day, sometimes from
seven o’clock in tie morning, in fasting and prayer, and
by fasting I mean that not one morsel of bread, and not
one drop of water, is taken from sundown one evenirg to
sundown the next evening, and all through the day the
prayers are kept up —they confess their sins, they weep,
they smite upon their breasts. Then towards the end of
the day the “ shauphor'" (or ram’s horn of consecration)
is blown. The service closes with the intoning of the
additional prayers, and then, when it is all over, they go
away to their homes, believing that through their prayers,
their fasting, and their confession, theirsins are all forgiven.
For how long? Until the next Day of Atonement, when
the same thing has to be gone through again.
Now let us look at the Day of Atonement, as instituted
by God. The word “ atonement ”is not to be found in
the New Testament at all, but it is translated there
“ reconciliation, 1 ’ whereas it is mentioned thirty times in the
Book of Leviticus, and sixteen times in this chapter alone.
What is atonement ? Atonement necessitates a sacrifice.
First. It is God’s judgment upon, and death of the
sacrificed animal.


Secondly. It is the sprinkling of the blood in the holiest
by the priest.
Thirdly. It is the confession of the sins of the people,
and putting all the confessed sins upon the head of the
scapegoat.
All this was fulfilled in the death of Christ upon the
cross.
Now, will you picture to yourselves the Tabernacle in
the wilderness, made of easily moveable materials. In fact,
it was a tent, modelled according to the fashion which God
gave to iVI oses in the Mount. All round this was placed
a fence of fine white linen, supported by many pillars. The
space thus enclosed around the Tabernacle was called
l ' The Court of the Tabernacle,” the gate of which consisted
of hanging curtains, and corresponded to the door of the
Tabernacle, both of which faced the east.
All around, as far as the eye can reach, are to be s»en
the tents of the children of Israel, forming one huge camp,
and from each camp may be seen a standard or flag flying
in the air, upon which is the name of the tribe to which
they belong. Every man must declare his pedigree.
On this day no one was allowed inside the Court of the
Tabernacle (verse 17), nor was any manner of work done
by any of the people (verse 29). They are all at the doors
of their tents. They dare not do anything. If any one
did work he was to be cut off from the children of Israel.
Every eye is directed to one spot. Let us see what
this object of such intent interest is. Aaron, the high
priest, comes forth on this day, wearing his garments for
glory and for beauty (Ex. 28). First of all there is the
ephod, the foundation being blue, purple, scarlet, and fine
twined linen. It had two shoulder pieces composed of two
onyx stones, with six names of the twelve tribes of Israel
on one, and the remaining six on the other, and the high
priest was to bear these names before the Lord upon his
shoulders, for a memorial, continually, The shoulder is
the place of strength, and that is where Jesus bears His
people. The next thing was the breast-plate, suspended from
the ephod by a chain of gold. It consisted of twelve of


the most beautiful precious stones, in four rows—the
diamond, the ruby, the emerald, the topaz, the sapphire,
and so on ; and engraven on each stone was the name of
a tribe ; and as Aaron moved about on this Day of Atone-
ment the peop'e could look on and say, “My name is
written there.” The breast-plate was worn on the heart, the
place of the affections ; and that is where the Lord Jesus
carries us. Then there is the curious girdle, and the long
blue robe —the heavenly colour —and all around the hem
of the robe were pomegranates, embroidered by the women
of the congregation, of blue, of purple, and of scarlet, and
bells of gold between them; “a golden bell and a pome-
granate, a golden bell and a pomegranate.” The bell was
for sound, that Aaron might be heard when he went into
the Holy Place before the Lord. The pomegranate meant
fruit. And, as it is said, “ one bell and one pomegranate,”
it is to teach us that God expects as much fruit as sound.
How is it with our lives ?
r. Then there is the beautiful helmet of gold, with “Holiness
to the Lord ” engraven upon it.
Now, let ns see what next is done on this Great Day
of Atonement. Eleazar and Ithamar, the two sons of
Aaron, bring a bullock right opposite the gates of the outer
court, and slay it before all the congregation.
Remember that this is the Day of Atonement, and
there can be noatonement without sacrifice and substitution.
Then they hand some of the blood in a bowl to Aaron,
and he goes through the gate, and up that courtyard, all
alone, for there is to be no man in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation when he goeth to make atonement (verse 17).
Then he stops at the altar, which was in the Court of
the Tabernacle, and takes a censer full of burning coals
of fire from off the altar, and sweet incense, beaten small,
and he puts the incense upon the fire, before the Lord,
that the cloud of incense may cover the mercy seat, that
he die not, for he has to go into the Holiest, where
God himself dwells, into the immediate presence of God,
and this cloud from the incense will rise, and break some
of the glory of God’s presence, that he may be able to


bear it. He now goes into the Holy Place, and there he
strips himself of all his garments for glory and for beauty
(a type of Christ, who was rich, yet for our sakes He
became poor), and arrays himself in pure white linen.
He then takes the blood from the bowl, and sprinkles his
own garments. With the bowl of blood in one hand, and
the censer, he now goes on to the Holiest, and draws
aside the veil, and enters the very immediate presence of
God, where he has to make an atonement for himself and
his household. The first thing that he sees on entering
is the Ark. The Ark was a wooden box, covered with
gold, the wood and the gold typifying the divine and
human nature of Christ. Inside the Ark was the table of
the Law, which Law all the people had broken ; but on the
top of the Ark, and covering the Law altogether from sight,
was a lid called the mercy-seat. The mercy-seat was com-
posed of pure gold, typifying the divine nature of Christ.
Aaron makes the atonement by taking the blood of the
bullock and sprinkling it upon the mercy seat seven times,
for God had said, “ The life of the flesh is in the blood,
and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atone ■
ment for your souls, for it is the blood that maketh a?i atone-
ment for the soul.” Two goats are then brought, one for
the Lord and the other for the scapegoat, and Aaron shall
bring the goat upon which the Lord’s lot fell, and offer
him for a sin offering, and his blood is brought within
the veil. He does with that blood exactly as he did with
the blood of the bullock, sprinkling it seven times upon
the mercy-seat, to make an atonement for the people.
Aaron then comes forth and lays both hands upon
the head of the live goat, and “ confesses over him all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, all their transgressions
in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat
and by this act he transfers the sins from the people to the
scapegoat. Now what is to be done with the scapegoat?
He is to bo led away by the band of a fit man into the
wilderness, and the goat is to bear all their iniquities into
a land not inhabited, or a land of separation; so the fit
man goes, leading the goat away in the sight of all the


people, to find this place 'not inhabited ; on and on he
goes out of the sight of the camp of Israel, past every bit
of vegetation, on to the very heart of the desert. When
he has reached this vast solitude, the fit man disappears
quickly from the sight of the goat, and leaves him to die
in that land of separation, having borne the sins of the
people away where there is no one to bring them back
again. For how long? Until the next Day of Atonement,
when the same thing has t® be repeated.
Aaron then goes into the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
and puts off the linen garments, and washes his fiesh
with water in the Holy Place, and arrays himself once
more in his garments for glory and for beauty. Now the
people hear the tinkle of the golden bells as the blue robe
is put*on again, and they rejoice, for they know that soon
the high priest will come forth to bless them. And have
we nothing to correspond to the tinkle of the bells ? Yes,
indeed we have. Every time we get an answer to prayer,
every time the Holy Spirit brings Christ’s words to our
remembrance, or the love of God is shed abroad anew in
our hearts, it is a tinkle —tinkle from the golden bells on
the robe of our High Priest, and we know that He is
within the vail for us, and that soon, very soon, He" will
come forth to bless us. Have you heard the tinkle of the
bells to-day ?
And now will you let us look into the New Testament
for a fulfilment of this type. Jesus Christ came down from
Heaven to be the Scapegoat of His people, to bear their
sins into a “ place of separation ” —a K place not inhabited,”
He goes to the Cross, not, as some would tell us to die
a martyr’s death, but to “ bear our sins on His owr body
on the tree,” to “ die, the just for the unjust, that He
might bring us to God and on the Cress Jehovah laid
upon Him the iniquities of us all. For hours He hangs
there, bearing our sins, taking upon Himself all the punish-
ment due to us. What the wrath of God means Jesus
knows, for He cries out, “The pains of Hell gat hold on
me. I sink in the deep mire where there - is no standing
room; lover and friend hast Thou put far from me, and


mine acquaintance into darkness. “My God ! My God !
why hast Thou forsaken Me ? Has He found the “ land
of separation ” yet? No, He must go further down into
the darkness—down, down, dowp into the solitude of death.
The weary hours drag on, apd, at, last, there comes from
the Cross a cry that has thrilled the universe, and made
all hell stand back a cry ot a conqueror— <l It is
finished.” . . . “ Father, into Thy hands I commend
my spirit.” And the vail of the Temple was rent in twain
from the top to the bottom ; and our blessed Scapegoat
has found in death the “ land of separation,” the “ land not
inhabited,’ 1 and has borne His people’s sins when there is
no one to bring them back again. “He hath offered one
sacrifice for sin for everand to those who accept this
atonement God says, “ Their sins and their iniquities will
I remember no more.” But to those who commit the
wilful sin of rejecting this one sacrifice there remaineth no
more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for
judgment and fiery indignation; that sin is called by God,
“ treading under foot the Son of God, and counting the
blood of the covenant wherewith He was sacrificed an un-
holy thing.” Oh ! accept Christ and His atoning sacrifice ;
then you will never have the wrath of God abiding on you.
They take down the precious body and lay it
tomb, and after three days He rises again.” ‘ If Christ be
not risen we are yet in our sins, our faith is vain ; but now
is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits
of thorn that sleep.” "Very early on the first day of the
week, Mary Magdalene goes to the grave, but finds it
empty. Then Peter and John eome— they go to their own
homes, but Mary stands there weeping, and as she weeps
she looks into the sepulchre and sees two angels who speak
to her, saying “ Woman, why weepesl thou?” “Because
they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid Him ” She turns herself and sees Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus said to
her, “ Woman, why weepest thou ? Whom seekest thou ?”
She, thinking it was the gardener, said, “ Sir, if thou have
borne Hirn hence, tell me where thou hast laid Him, and I
w.ill take Him away.” How bjessed for- Jesus to see that
He so filled her heart, that there was only one object there- —


Himself—and now He speaks one word—“ Mary.” That
is enough. He calleth His own sheep by name. She falls
at his feet with one word, “Rabboni,” which is to say,
“My own dear Master.)’ Jesus says touch Me not, for
I am not yet ascended to My Father, but gotoMy Brethren
and say unto them, I ascend unto My Father and your
Father, and to My God and your God.” Why was she not
to touch him ? If you will turn to Leviticus, 16th chap.
17th verse, you will see —“There shall be no man in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation when the High Priest goeth
in to make an atonement in the Holy Place until he come
out. Under the Levitical Law it was defilement for the
priest to come into contact with anyone on the Day of
Atonement until the atonement was complete; and Jesus
wished to fulfil the whole Law ; until He had gone into
heaven “ with His own blood” the atonement was not
complete. No one saw that ascension ; but we have His
own word for it, when He said “I ascend.” We can
imagine something of that scene, when the hosts of Heaven
cry out. “ Lift up your heads, oh ! ye gates, even lift up,
ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. ”
And the gates of Heaven are thrown open to welcome the
Lord of Hosts, for He is the King of Glory. In He comes
past the shining host of Angels, past the Cherubim and
Seraphim, on, on to the very Throne of God, and there,
entering in by His own precious blood, presents Himself
as the Lamb that was slain. And now that blood (His
death on the Cross) has so atoned for sin, and made an
end of it, that we His redeemed ones, can go right into
the Holiest too. For centuries Israel had a sanctuary on
earth, and no one was to enter the Holiest except the high
priest, and then only once a year, but now the veil is rent,
the Holiest is open ; God wants you to live in His presence.
The blood of Jesus ! What does it mean to us 1 He has
put away sin by sacrifice of Himself, and through His
blood—and His blood alone—we can now draw nigh with
boldness, and hear God’s voice saying to us, “ Your sins
and your iniquities will I remember no more forever.”
Glory be to the Father ! Glory be to the Son ! and Glory
be to the Holy Ghost for such a salvation.


FROM DARKNESS TO LIGHT.
&bt safe aub 2filarh of |fTrs. acne rtf.
Bv SYDNEY WATSON.
Price Is. 6d.; per Past, Is. Bd.
(Can he obtained from Mrs. Bakyertz. )
