

[?] Lower [?]
- 31 7 -




thieves. When I first went to Barrendowen I tried kindness, I
showed them how they might have flocks, &c. of their own to feed
upon, and gave them presents, but all in vain. They are a restless
race, never remaining above a day or two in one place, except
when planning some expedition against a hostile tribe, or to rob the
white man. When they are bent on an act of murder and robbery
they assume towards their intended victims a manner of great kind-
ness ; two of my poor herdsmen were murdered by the very men
who had been associating with them and helping them only the very
day before in fishing, in all apparent simplicity and kindness. In
fact, I have now ascertained that when the natives are seemingly
the most friendly they are meditating some act of treachery. To
conclude, as far as experience yet goes, I should say the native
Australian is, like the brute, incapable of forethought; and in
no instance that I have heard, have they attempted to add to the
comfort of existence by building huts, or by rearing herds of
cattle or sheep, &c. They kill all within their reach, and thence
move to another ground. Whether they ever will be brought
into a state of civilization I have doubts: in my opinion, the only
hope there is must arise from some bold missionary who dares
venture to live amongst them, as Bracefelt and Davis did. Such
a sacrifice on the part of an educated man is almost beyond
hope.
X.— Extract of a Report of Mr. John Edward Eyre to Governor
Grey, dated Moorunde, 2 Oth January, 1844, containing a Notice
of the lower Course of the River Darling. Communicated by
Lord Stanley.
The European population settled upon the Murray River, though
at present somewhat limited in number, is, I am happy to say,
gradually increasing, and during the ensuing year I have hopes
that several new settlers may locate themselves in a district which
only requires to be better known to be more appreciated. One
very considerable cause of distrust on the part of those wishing to
settle upon the Murray arises from the ill success or losses that
have hitherto attended all agricultural attempts yet made th£re.
These have had two causes. In the year 1842 the fall of rain at
the Murray was so slight, compared with that which fell around
Adelaide, that an impression went generally abroad that no rain
ever fell in so level a region, or at least not sufficient for the
purpose of the husbandman. The past year of 1843 has fully
proved the error of so hasty an assumption, and an abundance of
rain fell during the usual seasons for wet; the crops prospered
and grew luxuriantly, when another evil appeared and again de


prived the farmer of his expected harvest. This arose from the
unusually high state to which the Murray rose during the months
of September, October, and November. From previous expe-
rience it had been apparent that the river rose periodically several
feet, and usually overflowed many of the alluvial flats lying be-
tween the bank of the river and the fossil cliffs. Considerable
labour and some expense were bestowed in damming up the
passages by which the water escaped from the river to the lower
levels, and in digging canals for the purpose of irrigation; these
were completely successful as long as the river did not attain a
greater height than it had risen to in 1841 and 1842; but upon
its rising several feet beyond this level, there were of course no
impediments to its progress: the dams and ditches were all
destroyed, and the whole expanse of alluvial flats were again laid
under water, in some places fully six feet deep, and of course all
cultivation was completely annihilated by the ravages of the flood.
So unfortunate a termination to a second year’s labour has cer-
tainly been disheartening, and I fear has led to the erroneous idea
that it is impossible to keep out these destructive inundations.
The ensuing year will, I trust, however, see these difficulties
fully conquered, and embankments thrown up at all the openings
through the river’s bank, so as effectually to block out the highest
flood, at the same time that a few shallow ditcher cut around those
lands intended for cultivation will afford the important, and in
Australia almost unknown, power of completely irrigating at
pleasure all such lands. Thus what has been inconsiderately
deemed an insuperable objection to the valley of the Murray,
will, I believe, eventually prove to be its highest recommendation.
In a future report (not having the documents now by me) I shall
have much pleasure in forwarding to his Excellency the Governor
some tables of the fall of rain at the Murray during the years
1842 and 1843, also of the rising and falling of the river, its
highest and lowest levels, and the periods at which such changes
appear usually to take place. I may here hojvever remark that,
during my residence at the Murray, I have never known any
sudden rise in its waters to occur, so that the flood never comes
unawares upon the settler: the change of level seldom exceeds
an inch or two in a day, unless very strong southerly winds have
driven the water back, and retarded the ordinary current; then,
perhaps, as much as six or seven inches rise may have taken place ;
but even in these cases the water again recedes as soon as the
wind changes or lulls. The falling of the river appears to be as
gradual as its rise.
With respect to the aborigines, I am happy to say that no dis-
turbances whatever have occurred in the district under my charge.
A few trifling petty thefts have sometimes taken place, but no


serious offences either against the persons or property of Euro-
peans. Among the natives themselves I have sometimes been
called upon to afford protection or redress to the helpless or the
injured.
During the past year I have been obliged to make some con-
siderable deviation from my former system of issuing flour at the
full of every moon to all natives indiscriminately who chose to
assemble to receive it. This change was rendered necessary in
consequence of the great number of natives that assembled (from
300 to 400, in the early part of 1843), and in order to prevent
the tribes of my neighbourhood from visiting Adelaide, where
they were very troublesome to Europeans, and greatly interfered
with the Adelaide natives.
In disregard, however, of all my requests and injunctions to
the contrary, several of the tribes still persisted in deserting their
own district and crowding into town. Upon their return again
to the Murray it became necessary to fulfil the threat I had held
out to them, and stop that monthly issue of flour which hitherto
they had regularly received. This punishment was principally
confined to the tribes very near Moorunde, or a little to the south
of it, as I still continued the usual issue to all those who had been
well behaved and had attended to my requests. During the ensuing
year I would still propose to adhere to my present arrangement.
It appears to me that, unless the Government can afford to supply
a sufficient quantity of flour for all natives who may come, and
which would amount at the least to six tons annually, that it will
be better to present it only to the more distant tribes when they
visit us, and to such of our own immediate families as may be
deserving of it for their good conduct, or for their quietly residing
in their own district.
It remains for me to give a slight outline to his Excellency of a
recent journey made by me up the Murray to the Darling, with
the fourfold object of cementing the good understanding existing
between the distant tribes and Europeans; of learning whether
any of the parties said to be on their route from Sydney overland,
with stock, were actually approaching the boundary of South
Australia; of determining, as far as might be, the cause of the
unusually high flood in the Murray this year, by ascertaining
whether it came down through the channel of the Murray or the
Darling; and, finally, of investigating the probability or other-
wise of a route to the interior by the ranges near Mount Lyall.
On the 4th December I left Moorunde with a party consisting
of Mr. Scott, one policeman, and a native of Moorunde : in all we
were three Europeans and a native, each mounted, and one pack-
horse carrying provisions. Proceeding up the right bank of the
Murray, w T e arrived at the Rufus on the Bth December, and
VOL. xv. z


delayed there a day, to enable me to get a Rufus native to accom-
pany the party, as I found my Moorunde black did not under-
stand the language of the Darling. Guided by our new con-
ductor, we struck across through the scrub to the Darling, crossing
a large anabranch of that river, running through the scrub half
way between Lake Victoria and the Darling, with a course of
fully 60 miles, nearly parallel to the latter river. In this we
obtained water where we struck it; hut farther north, as we after-
wards found, it was quite dry, owing to the rise that had taken
place this year in the waters of the Darling being so slight. To
the southward the quantity of water increased gradually until it
joined the Murray lagoons; and upon our return, when we struck
it lower down, we were obliged to swim our horses across it. This
singular watercourse forms in times of flood another connecting
channel between the Darling and the Murray, leaving an immense
desert island of low or scrubby lands between it and the Darling.
When the Darling is flooded this channel is filled, hut when
only the Murray has risen, as was now the case, the back waters
from that river do not reach so far up as where we first struck
the lagoon: a great part of its course is marked by lines of the
river gum-trees.
Early on the 12th December, we struck the Darling upwards
of 70 miles above its junction with the Murray, and now found
that it had been hut very slightly flooded this year: its waters,
though muddy, were fast receding, nor did there appear to have
been a greater rise than three feet this season. In many places
the river was shallow and easily fordable, presenting, from the
strong contrast of an apparently very small body of water with a
deep, wide, muddy channel, an idea of insignificancy not justly
due to a river having so long a course. In many places, however,
the actual width of the water could not be 15 yards, and fallen
trees frequently obstructed the channel nearly quite across. To
compensate however for this, the banks of the river were lined
with most beautiful gum-trees, gracefully overhanging, and with a
wide-spreading dense foliage to the very ground. I have nowhere
seen in Australia so pleasing or picturesque an effect produced
by the eucalypti as was the case along the whole course of the
Darling.
After travelling 55 miles up the Darling from the point where
we first struck it, we reached a clear deep channel on the west
bank, and which was evidently a very considerable anabranch of
the Darling in times of flood, its channel exactly resembling that
of the river itself in character, with deep muddy banks, and the
strata distinctly marked in narrow horizontal lines. This large
anabranch occurred at that bend of the Darling where the river
turns from a south-westerly to a nearly south course ; but I regret


I had no instrument with me to determine its exact latitude.
Proceeding four miles further north we had a fine view of the
ranges laid down by Major Mitchell to the west of the Darling.
From our position, the most southerly point of these ranges bore
N. 42° W., and the intervening country appeared low, and for the
most part subject to inundation. A very high distant peak, visible
only with the telescope, bore N. 14° W., and I thought it might
be Mount Lyall, but the day was too hazy to determine with
certainty. I was now almost within reach of the point I wished
to visit when unfortunately circumstances compelled me to return.
My health, which for three months previously had been very bad,
was now daily getting worse; a cold caught one wet night in the
beginning of the journey caused a relapse of my complaint, until
at last I could hardly keep my seat upon horseback at all. With
much pain, therefore, I was compelled to leave unaccomplished
one of the principal objects I had in view when I set out, and on
the 15th December I reluctantly turned back to make the best of
my way home again. Proceeding down the Darling on our
return until within a short distance of its junction with the Murray,
we went over all that part of the river’s course left unvisited
by Major Mitchell, and thus connected the two lines of that
traveller, only on the opposite side of the river to that on which
his track lies. I was anxious before I turned back, if possible,
to have determined our position more nearly by reaching the
creek laid down as ‘ Laidley’s chain of Ponds,’ but though within
so few miles of it, I was too ill to attempt to proceed further.
The natives described this creek as a chain of ponds or sheets of
water, connected by a running stream, and falling into the Darling
at a place called c Weel-yu-rarah:’ they said it came from the
hills I had seen, and told me that water was to be found all the
way from the Darling to Mount Bryan under these hills, by which
route the natives frequently crossed backwards and forwards,
though chiefly, I apprehend, in the winter season.
In the brief outline I have just given of my late interesting
excursion, his Excellency will at once notice the very beneficial
influence exercised among the natives by the Government esta-
blishment at Moorunde, and which extends in a greater or less
degree to the farthest point we reached, or about 330 miles
distant from Moorunde by our line of route. We continually
met with large bodies of natives along our whole course, espe-
cially on the Darling; we had them frequently encamped close to
us, and yet never felt it necessary to keep watch at night, nor did
the natives annoy or harass us in any way; in fact it would have
been impossible for us to pass through them on better terms, or
in a more friendly manner.
.In passing up the river I occasionally met with old acquaint


anccs, and sometimes with one or two individuals who had even
been down to Moorunde ; and at the very furthest point reached, I
heard of two natives having crossed thence from Mount Bryan,
after receiving blankets from me at Moorunde at the last May
issue.
In concluding my Report I would fain hope that if no other
good has been accomplished by our hurried and harassing journey,
at least the way has been opened for a future expedition to travel
with ease and safety and on friendly terms with the natives. The
fact of so small a party as three Europeans and a native passing
on such good terms among the very numerous tribes of the
Darling, once considered so hostile, may, I think, fairly warrant
my drawing such a conclusion; at all events, I shall be most
happy to make the attempt during the ensuing winter if no other
occupation interferes, and if His Excellency will provide me with
the equipment necessary to take the field for a couple of months.
That time would, I think, suffice for tracing up “ Laidley’s
Ponds,” and for examining the whole of the ranges near Mount
Lyall, in order to determine the probability or otherwise of a route
being found under them leading to a better tract of country in-
land. I confess my own impressions are unfavourable to such an
opinion; but still the exploration would be interesting, and would
decide the character of the only part of the southern portion of
this continent upon which even the slightest doubt remains. I
may remark that the ranges, as seen to the N.W. from the
Darling, struck me as bearing a strong resemblance in appear-
ance to those visible to the N.W. from the great south bend of the
Murray River, and I thought they looked more connected than I
expected to have found them. I omitted to state that, in tra-
velling up the Darling, we found the feed for our horses generally
very bad, and the deep muddy banks of the river rendered it very
important to select an eligible place for the horses to drink at, to
avoid their slipping in and getting drowned; whilst the strong
tenacious character of the soil in the alluvial flats bordering upon
the river caused it to open into deep holes and cracks, rendering
it both difficult and dangerous to ride over them.
XI. —Some Account of Peel River, N. America. By Mr. A. K.
Isbister, late H.H.B.C/s service. Addressed to the Secre-
tary of the Royal Geographical Society.
Sir, —The interest with which the members of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society view all attempts to extend our knowledge of
the new or unexplored regions of the earth, has induced me to lay
