

QUO.S3ISO4Z
“Daughter of the ancient Eve //f w
We know the gifts you gave and give — '*/ ' s —
We know the gifts you gave and give —
IFho knows the gifts which you shall give
Daughter of the newer Eve!”
Francis Thompson.
A National Collection
ot Photographs ar-
ranged by The Depart-
ment of Information on
behalf of The Council
for Women in War
Worlc.
CATALOGUE
Price I/-
March, 1945.
Full Proceeds to the
Australian Red Cross


wUl
Victory s*^A
to YOU...
Mrs, 'Newlywed x y*\/y
Mt will mean the end of the service wife’s loneliness
... the end of makeshift living conditions. It will mean —
if you start planning now—a home in which you your
husband can enjoy that happiness and contentment which
no ‘apartment house’ existence can ever provide ... a
modern, thoughtfully-planned all-electric home. * In your
plans for that home, the Sydney County Council js ready
and willing to help you, no matter how modest your budget
may be. Call in and discuss it next time you are near any
Sydney County Council showroom.
THE SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL
ELECTRICITY UNDERTAKING
Attach a "Duchess of Gloucester" RED CROSS Id. Seal
every letter you post.
Pennies quickly make Pounds.


The Prime Minister’s Message to
Australian Women
T COMMEND this Exhibition of Photographs showing Australian
Women at War. A study of the statistics will show that not only
have women participated in all phases of the war effort to an extent
which has no precedent in peace but in a way which bears comparison
with the women of other countries of the United Nations.
For its part, the Government has endeavoured to give recognition
to the place of women in the war effort. The establishment of the
Women’s Employment Board and, later, the attachment of the Chair-
man of the Board to the Arbitration Court are evidences of the Govern-
ment’s determination that, on the one hand, women should get a
proper return for their work and, on the other hand, the way would
not be open to their exploitation to the detriment of industrial*workers
generally.
I trust that the Exhibition will be largely attended and that the
Australian Red Cross will benefit.
Canberra,
February 6, 1945.


A Tribute from
Admiral Sir Guy Royle, K.C.8., C.M.G., First Naval Member, R.A.N.
"The Wrans have been serving as part of the Royal Australian Navy for
nearly four years and the R.A.N. Nursing Service for nearly three years. During
that time they have readily absorbed the customs and traditions of the Service
to which they belong and have clearly proven their ability to replace men who
are needed for service in forward areas.
"Their keenness, willingness, efficiency and devotion to duty are of the highest
order. They have become very real and important branches of the Service. In
doing so, they have made a most valuable contribution to the effort which this
country has made in the cause for which we fight."
Women’s Royal Australian Naval
Service
The Women's Royal Australian Naval Service was formed in April, 1941. Its
members were then enrolled (as opposed to enlisted). They were employed mainly
in the Communications Branch.
In October, 1942, its members became enlisted, and other categories were
opened to them. They are now employed mainly as Writers, Supply Assistants,
Cooks, Stewardesses, Coders, Telegraphists, Teleprinter Operators, Signallers, Sick
Berth Attendants, etc.
The W.R.A.N.S. are serving in all parts of Australia. They volunteer for
service outside Australia, but to date have not been called upon to serve outside
it.
Their rates of pay vary with the type of work in which they are engaged.
The Officers in the Service are chosen from serving W.R.A.N.S. All W.R.A.N.S.
who are 20 years of age and have the Intermediate Standard of Education are
considered for selection. They must pass through an Officers' Training Course.
Some of the Officers are appointed for duty in connection with the administra-
tion of W.R.A.N.S., and others perform duties in special Branches where they
replace Naval Officers.
Catalogue of Photographs
W.R.A.N.S. SERIES.
1. Telegraphists being paid at Depot.
2. On Parade—rudiments of Field Training.
3. Telegraphists Operating—concentration necessary.
4. Telegraphist adjusting Earphones.
5. Supply Assistant checking Stores.
6. Mechanic working on Car Engine at Northern Station.
7. Officer working on Hydrographic Chart.
8. Leisure game of Darts by Officers at Northern Station.
9. In Sick Bay. Naval Sister attending to W.R.A.N.S.
10. Teleorinter Operators—North Queensland.
11. Telegraphist concentrates on her work.
11. Inspection before going on leave.


Australian Army Nursing Service
The Australian Army Nursing Service, the senior of the three Army Women's
Services, was mobilised on September 4, 1939, and the first contingent of nurses
sailed for overseas in January, 1940.
Since then its members have served in every battle area where the Australian
Army has fought—in the Battle for Britain, in Palestine, Syria, Libya, Eritrea,
Greece, Crete, Ceylon, Malaya and New Guinea. They have served, too, in
hospital ships and transports and have also given Trojan and unpublicised service
in general, base and camp hospitals throughout Australia.
Since the outbreak of war In 1939, eleven members of the A.A.N.S. have
been awarded the Royal Red Cross, five the Associate Royal Red Cross, two the
George Medal, and one has received the M.B.E.
A number of A.A.N.S. Sisters are serving in training units where they assist
in the training of male nursing orderlies and instruct A.A.M.W.S. nursing order-
lies, while others are attached to the recently formed mobile teams of nutrition
experts which tour continuously among hospitals in all areas.
In all their fields of service members of the A.A.N.S. have maintained the
high traditions of the nursing Sisters who made the A.A.N.S. world famous during
the 1914-1918 war.
The origin of the A.A.N.S. goes even further back than those years, for
its forerunner was the Army Nursing Service of New South Wales, formed in
1898, and members of which served throughout the Boer War. It was after their
return to Australia that the Service became Australia-wide, and, modelled on the
original A.N.S. of New South Wales, was formed officially as the Australian Army
Nursing Reserve, on July I, 1902.
CATALOGUE (Continued).
AUSTRALIAN ARMY NURSES SERIES.
13. The King Inspecting Australian Army Nurses.
14. Some of the nursing staff—H.M.A.S. "Manunda."
15. Sisters supervising transport of patients—Operational Base,
16. Australian Sisters pass "Australia House," London.
17. Army Sisters feeding invalided Digger—Operational Base, N.T.
18. Australian Army Sisters arrive at Crete.
19. Australian Army Sisters meet Lord Gowrie in New Guinea.
20. The morning round—Army Hospital, Northern Territory.
21. Army Nurses wash up in their Mess—New Guinea.
22. On a Troopship—enjoying leisure moments.
23. Nine and a half hours makes their day—last duty is the report.
24. Lord and Lady Wakehurst on H.M.A.S. "Manunda."
25. Army Sister feeding patient—North Queensland.
26. The Sister writes down the treatment —Camp Hospital.
27. A commonplace task in operational areas—changing dressings.
28. Time off for Afternoon Tea—Army Hospital in N.T. .


Australian Women 9 s Army Service
Growth of the Australian Women's Army Service to 20,000 members is proof
of the eagerness of Australian girls and women to serve their country in any
capacity in which they are needed. Often their Army jobs are more useful than
spectacular, but they continue to do them with unfailing cheerfulness and reliability.
A.W.A.S. now serve in every Branch and service of the Army, some in
routine, and some in specialist jobs. More recruits are urgently needed for the
fifty odd categories in which there are vacancies.
Throughout Australia and the Northern Territory, A.W.A.S. are relieving men
for duties in front line areas, and in November, 1944, War Cabinet approved
of A.W.A.S. serving in New Guinea.
Members of the Service do a wide variety of jobs, as transport drivers, steno-
graphers, clerks, signalwomen, cooks, telephone operators, canteen attendants and
tailoresses. They also undertake all types of ordnance work, including equipment
repairing, stores work, vehicle maintenance, equipment checking and the driving
of electric cranes.
At one period large numbers of A.W.A.S. manned Searchlight and Anti-
Aircraft stations throughout Australia.
Formation of the Service was approved by War Cabinet on August 13, 1941.
A Controller, Col. Sybil H. Irving, M.8.E., was appointed in October of that year,
and after a nucleus of Officers had been selected and trained, recruits were called
up In January, 1942.
CATALOGUE (Continued)
A.W.A.S. SERIES
29. Cleaning Searchlight Equipment—advanced post.
30. Instruction in operation of Searchlight Projection.
31. Anti-aircraft Sergeant instructs A.W.A.S. in technicalities.
32. A.W.A.S. take positions at command post of A.A. Battery.
33. Searchlight manned by A.W.A.S. goes into action in Far North.
34. All instruments on this A.A. Command Battery are manned by
A.W.A.S.
35. Plane-spotting at Anti-Aircraft Station.
36. Uncovering Height-Finders ready for action.
37. Training A.W.A.S. to operate Searchlight Projectors.
38. Instruction in technicalities of searchlight operation.
39. Office duties among many tasks of A.W.A.S.
40. Testing Springs and Shackles of Staff Car.
41. A few hints to Signallers on Art of Carving.
42. Instruction in greasing a lorry—Operational Area.
43. Time off for a meal—Advanced Base.
44. These girls were cashiers—now dealing with massive tyres.
45. Cleaning a gun—a change for a home girl.
46. Spare time occupation—Signwriting.


47. Testing part of a Dial Sight at Ordnance Depot.
48. Chopping wood.
49. An ex-schoolgirl on guard—Northern Australia.
50. Preparing for guard duty—Advanced Base.
51. Operating Telescopic Identification Apparatus.
52. Teleprinter Practice.
53. Transport Drivers servicing cars.
54. Adjustment of brakes.
55. A day off at the Y.W.C.A. Hut—North Queensland.
375. A Specialist using a Drill.
Australian Army Medical Women 9 s
Service
The A.A.M.W.S., the youngest of the Army Services, includes many former
Voluntary Aids who served with the Army both in Australia and in the Middle East
long before the formation of the A.A.M.W.S. in December, 1942.
Members of the Service are posted for duty in medical and dental units of
the Australian Army, or in the administration of the Service itself, and are pro-
tected under the Geneva Convention. They wear khaki uniform identical with that
worn by the A.W.A.S., with the addition of the Geneva Cross, and are privileged
to volunteer for service overseas with the A.I.F. Many have already served, and
are serving, with hospitals in the Northern Territory and New Guinea, and com-
petition Is keen among those who are eligible for such service.
The A.A.M.W.S. function under the supervision of the Director General of
Medical Services, with a Controller, Assistant Controllers, and Officers in charge
of personnel in units. The duties performed by members are many and varied,
for they are posted as nursing, theatre or ward orderlies, clerks, cooks, messwomen,
laboratory assistants, dispensers, radiographers, telephonists, seamstresses, store-
keepers, dental clerk orderlies and laundry workers.
The present strength of the Service is approximately 5,000, but many more
are needed, as Army hospitals are sadly understaffed.
On enlistment, recruits are given basic Army training. In addition, there is
a special A.A.M.W.S. Training School at Darley, where intensive preliminary nursing
training is given to nursing orderlies and pupil nurses. A limited number of the
latter are being trained as nurses in base hospitals which have been recognised as
training schools.
CATALOGUE (Continued).
A.A.M.W.S. SERIES.
56. A.A.M.W.S. assists at Blood Donation.
57. Bottled blood for New Guinea.
58. Checking and- sealing bottled blood at Sydney.
59. Office work at Darwin.
60. Group at Darwin.
61. This lass is not afraid of a dead snake!
62. Hanging out bandages and dressings after washing—New
Guinea.
63. This A.A.M.W.S. is a qualified Pharmacist—Darwin.


R.A.A.F. Nursing Service
The Service was organised on similar lines to that of the Princess Mary's
Royal Air Force Nursing Service, adapted to local conditions, and with rates of
pay and conditions of .service similar to those of the Australian Army Nursing
Service.
Members are commissioned officers with ranks corresponding to those of
members of the R.A.A.F., of which the Nursing Service is now an integral part.
Liable for unconditional and continuous service either overseas, in tropical
stations or elsewhere in the Commonwealth and Territories, members are serving
in Hospitals, Station Sick Quarters, Medical Clearing and Receiving Stations,
Medical Rehabilitation Units and Medical Air Evacuation Transport Unit, wherever
the R.A.A.F. is established.
Tutor Sisters of the R.A.A.F. Nursing Service train members of the R.A.A.F.
and W.A.A.A.F. as Medical and Nursing Orderlies and Sick Quarter Attendants
to work with them.
Staff Masseuses (physiotherapists) in the Service work mainly in R.A.A.F.
Hospitals and Rehabilitation Depots.
Members of the R.A.A.F. Nursing Service wear outdoor dress of the same
pattern as R.A.A.F. Officers—blue in winter, drab in summer, with blue braid on
the sleeve or epaulette accordingly, to denote their rank.
TA/ometCs Auxiliary Australian
Air Force
Formed in March, 1941, the W.A.A.A.F. was the first of women's defence ser-
vices in Australia to be enrolled for duties previously done by men.
Permission was originally given for only a small number of women to be en-
rolled as telegraphists and teleprinter operators, with a small number of clerks
and messing staff to run the first W.A.A.A.F. training depot.
That the W.A.A.A.F., which to-day numbers approximately 18,500, is now
accepted as an integral part of the R.A.A.F., and that women have been permitted
to work with maintenance crews in the servicing and repair of aircraft, that they
have penetrated to the most secret and vitally-important "hush-hush" centres of
the Service, is due to the efficiency, adaptability and integrity of that first handful
of airwomen enrolled as signals personnel In March, 1941. A further tribute to
those pioneers Is the fact that to-day 95 per cent, of the signals staff in R.A.A.F.
signals stations and communications centres on the mainland are women—women
cypher officers and signals officers, telegraphists, teleprinter operators, signals
clerks, cypher assistants.
At Air Force stations throughout Australia, members of the W.A.A.A.F. work
in practically every section of Air Force activities. They work in the parachute
section, in the hangars, in the repair-workshops, in the meteorological, signals, and
administrative sections; they drive trucks, tenders and staff cars; they do sterling
work in kitchens and mess-rooms and hospitals and equipment stores.
Some W.A.A.A.F. Officers are specially trained to supervise the living and
working conditions of airwomen and to take responsibility for their discipline,
recreation and general well-being. Other W.A.A.A.F. Officers are trained to do
the same work as, i.e., substitute for, R.A.A.F. Officers in such duties as cypher,
accounting, equipment, meteorological, technical research, and other specialist
work.


CATALOGUE (Continued).
R.A.A.F. NURSING SERVICE and W.A.A.A.F. SERIES.
64. R.A.A.F. Sister gives drink to native boy
65. Pay Day.
66. This is "Zog."
67. Cockpit cover being attached to aircraft fuselage.
68. Attaching tailfin to aircraft—W.A.A.A.F. Fitters.
69. Wheel Changing.
70. Swinging along through Sydney streets.
71. Washing dishes—Operational Base.
72. Stores duties.
73. Kitchen routine at Far North Base.
74. Adjusting truck wheel in Far North.
75. Dismantling an aircraft—Operational Station.
76. Attaching cockpif cover.
77. Adjusting aircraft rudder.
78. W.A.A.A.F. Sergeant, a trained pharmacist, In R.A.A.F.
Dispensary.
79. Laboratory assistant in R.A.A.F. Hospital.
80. Penicillin to save Australian Airmen.
81. W.A.A.A.F. fitter instructs Member of Air Training Corps.
82. Stacking Engine Cylinders in R.A.A.F. Store.
83. A Parade in Melbourne.
84. Teleprinter Operators—R.A.A.F. Headquarters.
85. Sick Quarter Attendants.
86. Stringing the cover to a main plane
87. Attention to Parachutes.
Also 288 to 294 (inclusive).
The Hon. H. P. Lazzarini, as Acting Minister for Air,
stated (Dec., 1944):
"It is a source of pride and satisfaction to have this opportunity of paying
tribute to the Women's Services of the R.A.A.F.
"The R.A.A.F. Nursing Service and the W.A.A.A.F. are constituted as integral
parts of the R.A.A.F. and they have played a magnificent part in Australia's War
Effort.
"The services rendered by members of the R.A.A.F. Nursing Service, whether in
the air or on the ground, on the mainland or in most forward areas, have been
in true keeping with the finest traditions of their noble profession.
"Both Officers and women of the W.A.A.A.F. have taken their place in many
important phases of Air Force activities, and, to their loyal and efficient service,
the fine contribution to the Nation's War Effort made by the R.A.A.F. is in no
small measure due."


Australian Women in Industry
With very slight modification, National Security Regulations in regard to
employment apply equally to women in Australia as to men. Women may be
directed to any work, in any place, subject to payment of award rates and pro-
vision of suitable accommodation. It has been the policy of the Manpower Direc-
torate, however, to "invite" rather than to "direct," and Australian women have
responded to the national call magnificently. While hundreds of thousands of
women have undertaken work voluntarily, only 4,000 direction orders were found
necessary throughout the whole of Australia from January, 1943, to October, 1944.
Women in protected undertakings cannot leave their work and may not be
dismissed without permission of Manpower. Women can obtain employment only
through a National Service Office, but exemption from this provision Is given to
all women over 45, to nurses and midwives for engagements not exceeding 14
consecutive days, and to women in voluntary work for which no remuneration is
payable.
workers and domestic workers in private homes) 1,268,000 men and 636,000 women
were earning wages or salary in civilian employment. In other words, one woman
for every two men is a wage earner, whereas immediately before the war started
the proportion was one woman to every three men.
The number of women wage earners increased from 437,000 in July, 1939, to
636,000 in August, 1944. Naturally the greatest increase took place in the early
stages of the war, and apparently a point has now been reached where practically
all women whose age, domestic responsibilities and physical condition permit them
to undertake regular work have been absorbed in industry. The increase between
June, 1943, and August, 1944, was only 5,000.
An analysis of the nature of paid occupation filled by women as at August,
1944, shows that 26,000 are employed by Government Departments or private
firms engaged exclusively on munitions, aircraft and shipbuilding. (During the
last 12 months employment of women
Women who leave their employment
must report the fact and attend at a
National Service Office within 7 days.
The Hon. John Beasley, while Minister for Supply and Shipping said:
"The work of Australian women in Industry has been an inspiration to the
Commonwealth Government. In my own experience, particularly in the textile,
clothing and canvas industries which havu had to provide articles almost of equal
importance with munitions themselves lor our own Services and those of our
American Allies, the work of the women and girls has earned the highest admira-
tion and most glowing tributes. When I reflect on their willingness and even
eagerness to work long hours and their unhesitating response, especially In the
critical days, to appeals for still greater efforts, I feel humble before them. At
the same time I am filled with pride in tie knowledge that the future of Australia
must be secure in the hands of our wonen—ln industry, in the Services and in
voluntary war work—who have shown sich matchless qualities of initiative, skill
and devotion In the hour of their country's need."
In munition factories has been reduced
by 33 per cent.)
209,000 women are employed in other
factories and works, 96,000 in the retail
trade and 33,000 in the wholesale trade;
37,000 women are engaged in some
form of transport, 43,000 in govern-
mental undertakings, other than fac-
tories, and 19,000 in banks and insurance
offices. Over 172,000 women are in-
cluded in a group Including education,
health, professional, building, forestry
and mining.
In practice it is usual for the Man-
power authority to request women in
specified age groups and marital con-
dition to attend at a National Service
Office for interview. This is popularly
referred to as a "call-up," but actually
its purpose is to ascertain whether the
woman concerned is engaged in essen-
tial work and if not whether her physi-
cal capacity and her domestic respon-
sibilities permit her to undertake some
form of work. If so, she is offered e
choice of the occupations available.
Except in employment requiring great
physical strength, it can be claimed
id competently by women Including many
in pre-war days.
there are few occupations not being fill
occupations reserved exclusively for men
The extent to which Australian women have responded to the industrial call
is strikingly evident in employment statistics. In August, 1944 (excluding rural
CATALOGUE (Continued).
WOMEN IN INDUSTRY SERIES.
88. Skilled Technicians work on Aircraft Machine Gun.
89. Packing .303 Ammunition—Melbourne.
90. Inspecting .303 Ammunition.
91. Army Officials supervise Owen Gun inspection.
92. Using Metal Gauge on Rifle Butt inspection.
93. Mass production of Owen Gun.
94. Closing furnace after extraction of 250 lb. bomb.
95. Cardboard Shells for Signal Cartridges.
96. Stamping Identification Cyphers—2s-pounder anti-tank shot.
97. Brass Beads for Cardboard Cartridge Shells.
98. Feeding Brass Beads for machinery.
99. Operating Turning Machine for Solid Steel Shells.
100. Manufacturing 250 lb. Bombs.
STEEVES, AGNEW & CO. (AUST.) PTY. LTD.
(Representatives of Lloyds' Brokers] 5-7 O'Connell Street, Sydney
As a tribute to Australian Womens war work these pages have been
generously donated by


lo2*| a^'n 9 Owen Sun Bodies.
Working a Lathe in a Munitions Factory
Learning about the Owen Gun.
Filling cartridge cases.
Checking temperature of Cordite.
Chemist in a Munitions Plant.
Testing and adjusting Dial Sights.
Lens making at Hobart University.
Oxy-welding Belly Tank.
Fitting a Belly Tank.
At work on Fuselage of Training Plane.
Testing hood for Blind Flying in dummy cockpit.
Welding Aircraft.
A happy war worker.
Ship-building.
The heat does not deter her.
Testing Binoculars.
Testing a Prismatic Compass.
Rope Making.
Dental Mechanics.
Stamping Gas Respirators for Army.
Making Corsets for U.S. Army Nurses.
Making Army Tunics.
She has sewn for soldiers in two wars.
Machining brassieres for U.S. Army Nurses.
Operating a Spinning Machine.
129.)
130 C l ns P ec *' n 9 tents which have been made by women
Sewing a parachute.
Making military footwear.
Sewing Parachute Harness.
Examining flying, boots.
Dealing with sliced carrots at Dehydration Plant.
Filling cans with tropical butter fat spread.
Canning Peaches.
Separating Eggs for pulping
139.)
A mechanical pea-line (75 2-lb. tins per minute)
Egg Grading
Recording cow-testing machine
295 to 316 (inclusive) and 368.


Red Cross Women in Wartime
In wartime the task of the Red Cross Society is a great one, embracing the
care of all sick and wounded servicemen and prisoners of war.
In finding enough money to cover its expenses—which average nearly £6,000
a day, the Society is supported by hundreds of thousands of women in Red Cross
Branches throughout Australia. Branch workers, most of them busy housewives,
organise fetes, parties and other money-raising functions to aid Red Cross. They
also contribute stores—knitted and sewn garments, preserves, flowers, cakes—and
other comforts for service hospitals and convalescent homes.
In addition, the Society has an Emergency Service organised into Companies
of women who work as Transport Drivers, Red Cross Aids, and as helpers in Waste
Products and Papier Mache Departments. Members of the Transport Section work
in conjunction with the Red Cross National Blood Transfusion Service, transporting
blood from the Blood Bank in response to urgent calls from civilian or service
hospitals. In addition to this important work, their cars are at the service of all
convalescent men and women of the Forces. This work is voluntary, like that of the
Red Cross Aids, who have been particularly useful in these days of staff shortages
in hospitals and the Society's 40 Convalescent Homes.
Red Cross also maintains a staff of uniformed Hospital Visitors to visit the
serviceman when he is sick or wounded, and Social Workers to help him meet
problems which may arise from his re-entry into civilian life.
CATALOGUE (Continued)
RED CROSS SERIES.
143. Packing Red Cross Comforts.
144. Sorting mail for Prisoners of War.
145. Voluntary cooks serving for convalescent troops.
146. Starting their rounds in a Jeep (New Guinea).
147. Voluntary machinists at Red Cross Depot.
148. Loading supplies at Advanced Base.
149. A Voluntary Workers' March in Melbourne.
150. Red Cross drivers must do their own repairs.
151. Voluntary drivers line up for inspection.
152. Papier Mache work at Sydney Depot.-
153. Blood donor receives tea.
154. Grouping Blood Specimens for filing.
155. Blood being taken from donor (Sydney Hospital).
156. Putting finishing touches to Papier Mache.
157. Inspecting Papier Mache Articles.
158. Processing waste paper baskets.
159. Packing Red Cross parcels (Melbourne).
160. Depot for transmitting blood to combat areas.
161. Repairing books for New Guinea.
162. A.I.F. veteran receives instruction In metal work.
163. Packing Red Cross comforts.
164. Sorting letters for Australian P.O.W.
165. Testing blood of a prospective donor.
166. Distributing books and smokes to patients in a New Guinea
hospital.
167. 8-year-old Chinese refugee—Lae.


Australian Women 9 s Land Army
Over and over again during the last two years members of the Australian
Women's Land Army have saved crops of vital foodstuffs which without their aid
would not have been harvested. Equally effective, though less spectacular, is the
work of hundreds upon hundreds of individual Land Army Girls working on indivi-
dual farms week In and week out the whole year round, cheerfully undertaking
every farm task allotted to them and sharing with the farmer and his family the
lack of many amenities enjoyed by other industrial workers.
The A.W.L.A. has been placed officially on the same plane as members of
the Women's Auxiliaries—A.W.A.S., A.A.M.W.S., W.A.A.A.F.S. and W.R.A.N.S.,
and has a present strength of a little over 3,000. Of these 2,500 are permanent,
whilst 500 are in the Australian Women's Land Army Auxiliary.
Permanent members in the A.W.L.A. enrol either for the duration or for
periods of 12 months or more. They undertake to serve wherever they are sent.
To meet emergencies, Land Army girls have been sent from State to State, but in
general practice work Is restricted to the State in which the member resides.
The A.W.L.A. Auxiliary was formed to utilise the services of women who are
not able to join up for 12 months, but are prepared to work as and when required
for periods of not less than 4 weeks.
In addition to the A.W.L.A. and its Auxiliary, there is another body of women
farm workers known as the W.A.S.P.S., who are organised by District War Agri-
cultural Committees for seasonal work in the district in which they reside.
Practically every phase of primary production is undertaken by members of
the A.W.L.A. On pastoral properties—"they go a-droving," ride boundaries, mus-
ter, and during shearing carry out all the duties of shed-hands. Some A.W.L.A.
members have qualified as wool-classers, others as herd-testers. On farms they
drive tractors, ploughs, cultivators and harvesters. On orchards they prune and
bud. Hampered in its Initial stages by prejudice against the employment of
girls on farms; by lack of suitable accommodation; and by long but unavoidable
delays in obtaining uniforms and kits, the Australian Women's Land Army has
won through and is justly regarded as one of the most effective and efficient bodies
of women engaged in war work.
CATALOGUE (Continued).
WOMEN'S LAND ARMY SERIES.
179. Bean picking on Government Farm (North Queensland).
180.
169. Driving operating headers (Rice Harvest),
Harvesting at Leeton.
171. Driving a fertilizer tractor,


172. Driving a fertilizer tractor.
173. Splitting firewood.
174. Carting hay.
175. Operating a rotary hoe
176. Feeding swine.
177. Casing bananas.
178. Filling and sewing bags at chaff-cutting plant.
181. An outsize in cabbages.
IB3*| Looking after the horses.
184. Milking. .
185. Picking tomatoes.
186. Harvesting corn.
187. Tending sheep.
186. Cutting up a carcase for use at a homestead.
WOMEN'S AGRICULTURAL SECURITY
PASTORAL SERVICES.
190. Harvesting at Leeton
191. Cutting and carrying bananas.
192.1
197.
198. • Dealing with the potato crop.
207.
215.
193.1
210. L Pea picking.
211.
212. Australia's champion pea picker
202*| l ‘ og Ruling.
203.
204.
205. ► Handling sheep at shearing time
206.
214.
row ' n 9 swee * corn.
209. W.A.S.P.'s at Headquarters
216. Ascertaining butter fat content of milk.


National Defence League
FREE TRAINING: The N.D.L. voluntary war effort started early in 1939, with
free training classes in many subjects, including First Aid, A.R.P., and Bulk Cookery.
Thereafter, followed training in motor mechanics, convoy work, map reading,
signalling, etc. Girls so trained, later, join the Services.
CAMOUFLAGE NET-MAKING: In October, 1940, the N.D.L. was the first
organisation to take up camouflage net-making. At the request of Army, an
immense job was carried out, totalling the making of over 250,000 nets. Turnover
reached a peak 0f'4,200 per week during the emergency. Volunteers also garnished
a great number of nets, both at Centres and over the guns in the field.
RECONDITIONING: When net-making ceased, the National Defence League
was asked to organise groups to handle the reconditioning of vast quantities of
service equipment, from garments to service respirators. This work was carried
out to the greatest satisfaction of the authorities.
REHABILITATION; (From the social and family point of view.) This work
is to help the average woman, wife, mother, sister and sweetheart to plan success-
fully, for the peace, for the return of her serviceman and woman to civilian life:
not only to welcome them, but—after the glamour and excitement of the return
are over—to help smooth over the difficult problems of readjustment. Series of
classes have been organised which are free to close relatives of servicemen and
women. These are given by specialists having the highest possible qualifications.
A summary of the vital information given by Psychologists, Medical men, Army
nurses, Chaplains and University Professors is being published in book form.
NATIONAL DEFENCE LEAGUE SERIES.
229 to 233.
Air Raid Precautions Services
Women have played a big part in the work of A.R.P. With the exception of,
perhaps, the Rescue Service, which is essentially man's exclusive domain, women
have shared in most of the duties. They provided practically all the personnel
for the manning of Control Centres, were enrolled as Wardens and formed a
Women's Fire Auxiliary. Stretcher Parties, which render aid to injured persons at
the scene of the incident, Include quite a number of women within their ranks;
and messenger corps (some- on motor cycle and some on bicycles) were established
with many women in their ranks.
The main avenues of service in which women specialised, however, were the
staffing of First Aid Posts and in the provision of an Emergency Ambulance Corps,
and Mobile Canteens.
In one State alone, 14,000 women were enrolled and attested for duty with
the First Aid Services. These women were highly .trained in First Aid and Home
Nursing and most of them qualified for admission to St, John Ambulance Brigade.
Emergency Ambulance personnel totalled many thousands and apart from
technical training in driving and carrying out running repairs upon their vehicles,
these women were also trained in First Aid. Their primary operational function
was to provide ambulance transport for hospital cases, but in some circumstances
they were also required to treat injured persons.


It is a matter of interest that the Emergency Ambulance personnel actually
provided transport for removal of patients from the two hospital ships, first to
enter the Port of Sydney, and manned the R.A.N. Ambulances every day for two
years before the W.R.A.N.S. took over. The personnel of this service also have
helped to man the civil ambulances and have given valuable assistance in many
serious accident cases, as well as assisting at many births which have occurred in
ambulances on the way to hospital.
As a companion service to A.R.P. it was necessary to arrange for the establish-
ment of Rest Centres to which people, distraught, homeless and hungry, could be
taken until some other arrangements could be made for their accommodation.
These centres were staffed almost wholly by women.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY SERVICES SERIES.
369 to 373 inclusive.
CATALOGUE (Continued).
MOSMAN WAR DRESSINGS SERIES.
217 to 220.
COMBINED SERVICES.
221.
WOMEN'S EMERGENCY SIGNAL CORPS SERIES.
222, 223.
AUSTRALIAN COMFORTS FUND SERIES.
224 to 228; also 376.
WAR lOAN APPEALS SERIES.
• 234 to 236.
Australian Women’s Flying Club
This Club, in operation before the War, aimed to make aviation as acces-
sible to women as to men and to provide its members with a complete theoretical
and practical training. A Bursary system enabled girls with particular capabilities
to win the necessary fees for the flying tuition.
Before the outbreak of War the Women's Air Training Corps was formed in
all States and the A.W.F.C. re-directed its training facilities inta the war effort
by affiliating with the W.A.T.C. and becoming the N.S.W. Division.
The training undertaken, with a view to assisting the Women's Auxiliary Ser-
vices, included: Wireless Telegraphy, Cooking, Photography, all aircraft subjects,
and sick-bay work. Motor transport driving and running repairs, and Stores were
included, but have since been dropped, as the requirements of the Services vary
from time to time and training Is adjusted accordingly.
In addition, voluntary work done by the girls covers a big field. Many
present members are in reserved occupations but are able to help by Instructing
A.T.C. Cadets in W.T., driving for the R.A.A.F., Canteen and V.A.O.C. work,
Hospital work through our V.A. Detachment, clerical work for A.T.C. and work at
aerodromes. More than 80,000 voluntary hours have been completed by N.S.W.
Division alone.
It is a voluntary organisation, with a small fee for the training, which is on
disciplined lines with future citizenship, careers and physical fitness kept well in
view.
WOMEN'S AIR TRAINING CORPS SERIES,
237 to 241 inclusive, and 287.


fff*
qty'S3ts~o
tint
formed to meet
The WOMEN'S AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL SERVICES were
the great desire of women to take some active part in the War effort and to
co-ordinate and get recognition for smaller groups of women already training
themselves in anticipation.
In June, 1940, thousands of women voluntarily enlisted. The training covered
24 sections of war work, all of which proved of necessity later. The training was
undertaken by specialists and by women with last war Active Service experience.
Special intensified courses for Officers, including Camp-craft, were compulsory.
Discipline was based on military lines. The fact that this was willingly accepted
pointed to the enthusiasm and sincerity of the women.
When Active Service for women was established, the W.A.N.S. had over 5,000
partially trained women to offer and about 500 highly trained Officers, who were
qualified to fill the senior positions in those Services.
The Civil side, which included Land Army and Fire Brigade work, was also
started by the W.A.N.S., and carried on by them before being taken over officially
many months later.
Canteens, Mobile Hospital and Service have been carried on by W.A.N.S.
continuously from their inception in City and Country.
WOMEN'S AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL SERVICES SERIES.
245 to 285.
CATALOGUE (Continued).
GIRL GUIDES SERIES.
242, 243, 244, and 286.
MISCELLANEOUS.
317 to 320; also 374.
MILITARY HISTORY SERIES.
321 to 368.
THE COUNCIL FOR WOMEN IN WAR WORK
Stands for:
1. The fullest participation of women in war work in Australia.
2. To disseminate knowledge of women's war work.
3. To work for satisfactory conditions for women in the Services.
4. To facilitate the entry of married women into war work by
encouraging the provision of creches, nursery schools, canteens
and community feeding centres.
5. To support Trade Unions in their efforts to improve conditions
for women in war industries.
6. To assist in the co-ordination of organisations concerned in
women's war work.
7. To support the principle of equal pay, status and opportunity
for the sexes.
8. To work, during and after the war, for the equitable treatment
of women in the post-war world.
Subscription: 5/- per annum.
Hon. Secretary,
sth Floor, 61 Market Street,
Sydney.
fJ t ccL ,


J ★ Here — 5 quick aids to mouth
beauty: (1) cleans, (2) whitens^,
sweetens the breath. Rapid re-
7 DAYS
9l amorous . sparkling, white teeth — if
you change to-day to_ quick-cleansing
&*e youuety
IfeTrrere 1
,*nJ®|*MODERN
SsSSmlfSEED
MODERN LIGHTING
MODERN LIGHTING
— —— —“' When Victory comes . . . and you
start to plan that dream home of
yours . . . remember that modern
flutin'™ lighting plays an important part in
all interior decorating. And modern
lighting means Aladdin lamps . . .
ELECTRIC AND electric models for the city and
kerosene mantle models for the coun-
KEROSENE MANTLE fry .. . all designed with an eye to
I K lIInO beauty, lighting comfort, and econo-
LAnlrw my. Let us send you an illustrated
leaflet showing the present range.
»l«00l» INOUSTIIES PTI HI., 61-71 111111 SI I [ El, WATERLOO


3 1 Jl lljl
1508
00238060
,‘M ’• I 11
RMIO9MLUBRABT
Of AUSTRALIA


The Chiefs of the Army and Air Force pay tribute:
General Sir Thomas Blarney, G.8.E., K.C.8., C.M.G., D.5.0., E.D.,
Commander-In-Chief, Australian Military Forces.
"I an g!ad fo have this opportunity of congratulating the Council for Women
in Wor Work on this Photographic Exhibition, serving as it does as a splendid
tribute to the work of our Australian women in helping to bring the war to a
successful conclusion.
"Australian women have never flagged in their efforts and, particularly, is
this true of our Army Servicewomen whose work I know personally. There are
nearly 26,000 members of the three Army Women's Services—the Australian Army
Nursing Service, the Australian Army Women's Service and the Australian Army
Medical Women's Service —the majority of whom came into the Army to release
fit men for service in forward areas. They have succeeded splendidly. The Army
would have found it difficult to meet many of its commitments without their
willing and efficient service.
"Of this 26,000 only a very small percentage has seen overseas service. But
this is an added reason why their continued enthusiasm and determination to do
their work to the very best of their ability should be admired. The vast majority
has carried on day after day doing the same job with regularity and efficiency,
but without any opportunity of experiencing the excitement of service under
battle conditions or overseas.
"In addition fo the thousands of women in the A.A.N.S., A.W.A.S. and
A.A.M.W.S., there are more than 200 women serving in the Australian Army Medi-
cal Corps as medical officers, assistant pathologists, pharmacists, physiotherapists,
dietitians and occupational therapists.
"But, better than any words and figures of mine, the pictures of Army Service-
women and other women war workers in this exhibition tell you the story of the
grand work being done by our Australian women; work which we none of us can
admire too much."
Air Vice-Marshal G. Jones, Chief of Air Staff, R.A.A.F.
"The magnificent effort made by the women's branches (The Royal Australian
Air Force Nursing Service and the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force) has
contributed in no small measure towards the efficiency and success of the Royal
Australian Air Force as a whole. Great credit goes also to the women officers of
the medical and dental branches of the Royal Australian Air Force for their con-
tribution to the great work of keeping our men and women physically fit for
maximum war service.
"Members of the Royal Australian Air Force Nursing Service have served with
distinction in hospitals and medical receiving stations throughout Australia and
New Guinea, on ocean convoys, and in transport aircraft evacuating casualties
from forward areas.
"The work of the W.A.A.A.F. has extended since its formation in 1941, when
only a limited number of musterings or trade groups were open to women, until
to-day when airwomen and officers are employed in practically every section of the
Air Force except air-crew."
This page has been generously donated by
FELT and TEXTILES of AUSTRALIA LTD.
Manufacturers of
FELTEX
As a tribute to Australian Women's War Work
SCOTOW PRESS.
