

TH E Proprietors of a Patent for a new Method of copying Letters , cr
other Writings, , think proper, before any Machine for that
Purpofe is delivered, to advertife in the News-Papers fuch Circumftances
relating to this Art as may be neceffary to be publicly known, in Order to
prevent any Fraud or other injurious Praftice, which fome Perfons imagine
might be impofed by Means of this Method of copying • or in Order to de-
left fuch Praftices if attempted.
I. As the Impreffion which the copying Paper receives from the original
Writing is made to pafs through from one Side of the Paper to the other,
m Order that the Letters may appear in their proper Direction, the Paper
which receives the Copy muft be thin and unfzed; that is, not capable of being
written upon without the Ink’s fnking from one Side of the Paper to the other ;
and this Paper may, therefore, be thus eafily diftinguiflied from any Writing-
Paper : Or by the common Method of difcovering fized from unfized Pa-
per, by wetting it with the Tongue.
11. For the fame Reafon, the Impreffion, or Copy , muf appear on both Sides of
the copying Paper , and is fomewhat f ranger on the Back, , on which the Wri-
ting appears reverfed, than on the Side of the Paper where it is in the proper
Direffion. By obferving, therefore, the Back of the Paper, a Copy may
be readily diftinguiflied from the Original.
111. In Order to prevent a Writing from being copied, where the Writer
thinks fuch copying may be improper, feveral Methods may be ufed. The
firft Method by which a Perfon may prevent Others from copying his
Writing is, by taking a Copy himfelf before he lets the Writing go out of his
Pofleflion j for, as only one Imprefion can he taken, hy tills Method, any .Per-
fon, who ufes this Invention, will infallibly prevent Others from obtain-
ing a Copy.
IV. The


IV. The fecond Method by which a Perfon may prevent his Writing
from being copied is, to ufe an Ink , the Writings with which are incapable of
being copied by this Method: A good Ink of this Kind, black and durable, will
be fold publicly, at a reafonable Pmte, in London , and in the principal
Towns of Great-Britain and Ireland.
V, As all public Banks, Bankers, andmofl principal Traders, ufe Copper-
plate Blanks for their Bills of Exchange and Promi/ory-Notes, which they fill
up occafionally, and as Copper-plate Printing cannot be copied in this
Manner, the Ufe of fuch Copper-plate Blanks prevents fuch Bills and Notes
from being copied.
VI, As there are fo many Methods of preventing Writings from being
copied, and of deteding any Fraud that may be attempted, the Proprietors of
this Invention think that they would do an Injuftice to the Public if they had
fuppreffed a Difcovery of obvious and acknowledged Utility, merely becaufe
(like Printing, Writing, and every other ufeful Art) there is a Poffibihty
of applying It to bad Pui pules ; when It la evident, from the above, that
fuch Application may be rendered ineffedual by any Perfon who will be at
the Trouble of attending to the Circumftances above-mentioned. The
Proprietors are farther confirmed in this Opinion from two Confiderations:
F*rft. That, although they had fupprefied the Invention, Otueis might
have difeovered it, who might have applied it to bad Purpofes with worfe
Effect than it is now capable of; becaufe they might have kept the World
ignorant that fuch an Art did exift. Secondly. That the principal Security
againft Forgery does not anfe from the Difficulty of counterfeiting the Hand-
writing of Others, (feveral Methods of effecting which being well known,
and many Perfons being very dexterous at this Manoeuvre,) but from the
Dread of the Pimijlment, which.is almoft inevitably inflicted on Perfons con-
victed of this Crime; and from the Impoffibility of any Perfon’s exercifing
fuch Practices, during any confiderable Time, without Detection. But,
rs the fame inevitable Punifhment hangs over iraudulent Foigenes of eveiy
Kind, whether committed by Means of a Pen or other Inftrument, it will
produce the fame good Effe£l in one Cafe as in tne other.
VII. Gentlemen,


VII. Gentlemen, Merchants, and other Perfons in any Refpecl interefted
in Paper Credit or in copying of Writings, and who may delire to have a
farther Knowledge of this Subjedt, may fee the MACHINE, and the
Operation of Copying, at Mr. WOODMASONh, Stationer , in Leadenhall-
Street, London , on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, between the
Hours of Eleven in the Morning and Three in the Afternoon; where alfo
the Propofals for receiving Subfcriptions for the Machine , and for the Licence
ito ufe it, will be given.
—■— i


;i
,
i ‘ v: r
r - ■ , * ’* • ■>- .
S 5v * zi v
• / - - . W •• • '
N
„ - - • "
*
'
, - ' -- - - " Sf ? ''
. . .- ... . ■ -
f
I * * ’ ' * ‘ * - p* - -
... ■ —. * *-• ■
\
.-■ . - - ■•*' <*?'; .
H $
ill v
, * \
*
• il s,
national library
OK AUSTRALIA
