

FRAZER PRIZE ESSAY
SECULARISM !
I i ''
i (
IN RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY
I • , j |,
FIRMIAN
)
< - ' - ■ Y' t
i V
; i
TURNER AND HENDERSON
SYDNEY
' I








SECULARISM
IN RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY.
FIRMIAN.
Sjibnti):
TURNER AND HENDERSON




• It *
PREFACE.
The late Hon. John Frazer, M.L.C., of Quiraing, Woollahra,
bequeathed the sum of £ 2,000 to found an annual prize of
for an essay “in defence of the Christian Faith,” The judges
named in Mr. Frazer’s will are the Professor of Classics in the
University of Sydney, the Principal of St. Andrew’s College, and
the Minister of Palmer Street Presbyterian Church. As the present
Professor of Classics felt unable to accept the position, the Primate
of Australia, at the request of the trustees of the estate, kindly
agreed to act as assessor in the first adjudication of the prize.
On that occasion the judges and assessor were unanimously
of opinion that the two best essays on the subject proposed for
competition, viz., “Agnosticism, considered from a moral and
spiritual point of view,” were those of the Rev. James Milne, Bega,
N.S.W,, and the Rev. H. T. Burgess, Goodwood, South Australia.
These essays were published by George Robertson & Company,
Sydney, in 1888, in one volume, entitled “The Frazer Prize
Essays on Agnosticism.”
It was agreed by the trustees and judges that the subject for
the second competition (1887) should be “ Secularism in relation
to Christianity.” This was duly advertised in the leading Aus-
tralian newspapers, and the result was that a considerable number
of essays were forwarded to the trustees in competition for the
prize. These were submitted to the judges for adjudication, and
the Rev. Principal Fletcher, of Newington, and the Rev. James
Hill, M.A., of Bourke Street, acted as assessors.
After careful examination of these essays, the judges and
assessors were unanimously of opinion that the best was “ Firmian,”
Mm JflZtoU


the author of which was found to be the Rev. James Milne, Pres-
byterian Church Offices, Sydney. This is the essay now published
in this volume.
The following is a copy of the decision of the judges :
[copy.]
“Sydney, 17th April, 1888.
“To the Trustees
“Of the Late Honourable John Frazer, M.L.C.
“ Gentlemen,
“ The minister of Palmer Street Presbyterian Church,
Sydney, and the Principal of St. Andrew’s College, University of
Sydney (the judges named in the will of the late Honourable John
Frazer), having examined the essays on “ Secularism in relation
to Christianity,” submitted to them in competition for the Frazer
Prize of 1887 ; and the Rev, Joseph H. Fletcher, of Newington
College, Stanmore, and the Rev. James Hill, M.A., minister of
Bourke Street Congregational Church, Sydney (requested to act
as assessors by the trustees of that will), having read three of the
above essays submitted to them by the judges as being the best,
are unanimously of opinion that the best essay is the one whose
motto is “ Firmian,” and that the prize for 1887 should be awarded
to its author.
“Having opened the sealed letter bearing the motto “Firmian,”
they found the name of the author to be Rev. James Milne, Pres-
byterian Church Offices, Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
“John Kinross, n
“ Coll. S. And., Pres.; }
“J. Faulds Henderson,
“ Minister of Palmer St. Pres. Church, j •
“James Hill, M.A.,
“Joseph H. Fletcher, j Assessors.”


SECULARISM
IN RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY.
FIRM I AN.




CONTENTS.
I* What is Secularism ? ... ... ... ... ... i
11. Free-Thought and Freethinkers ... ... ... 12
111. Secularism and the Present Life ... ... ... 22
IV. Morality on a Secure Basis ... ... ... ... 34
V. Secularism and the Christian Revelation ... ... 50




WHAT IS SECULARISM?
The spread of Secularist principles; irreligious revolt Secularism as
defined by its advocates; the false contrast between the religious
and secular —The real nature of secularism as shown in its history;
professed “neutrality” towards religion has ended in extreme an-
tagonism—Atheism preferred to Agnosticism by Secularists.
In discussing the question of Secularism and its relation to
Christianity, we are met at the outset by the difficulty, that
there is no clearly defined and coherently developed sys-
tem, bearing that name, such as we find in Positivism and
Agnosticism. In the latter systems we have recognised
writers, as Comte, Spencer, and many of their followers,
who have carefully worked out their principles in detail,
and shown the bearings of them on the various aspects of
life; whereas Secularism is yet in such a crude, nebulous
condition, that at first sight it seems almost impossible to
outline clearly a definite system of belief from the mecha-
nical compound of affirmations and negations put forth on
its behalf. Yet, in spite of this, the leading principles of
Secularism may be clearly perceived, however diverse the
forms and various the methods in which they are pre-
sented. It would be a mistake to confine the term Secularist
or Free-thinker to members of societies bearing these names.
The principles which these men avow and carry out into
their practical issues are also adopted by writers with a far
greater claim to consideration, and in many cases without
being openly acknowledged or even perceived by those


who hold them, are unconsciously influencing the tone of
modern life and thought. The men who seek the solution
of the problems which life presents, from a secularist or
non-religious point of view, resolutely shutting their eyes
to all that pertains to God and another state of being, are
far from being limited to members of such organisations,
and may be found amongst reviewers, novelists, and leaders
of scientific thought. The influence of Secularism may be
discovered on every side, not only in the sphere of religion,
but in political and social life; and there is in a very large
class the tendency to banish religion altogether from the
practical affairs of men, to guide life individual and national
without the recognition of the Divine Ruler, to have edu-
cation freed from the influence of religious faith, and to
ignore, if not to deny, the beliefs that in the past have
dominated the minds of men, and welded themselves so
closely into the details of every branch of life and duty.
There can be no mistake as to the principles of Secularism,
poorly as they have been presented in literary form, —none
as to their effect on society, when they prevail; and, per-
haps, the very difficulty of finding a coherent system of
Free-thought lies in the fact that by nature it is not con-
structive but destructive, not a tree of life for the healing
of the nations, but a poisonous growth, a fatal blight, that
destroys wherever it touches.
The existence of numerous Free-thought societies would
seem to speak of a well-defined system of belief, of common
aims, which make it possible for men to unite; but it will
be found that in this case, the bond of union lies not in an
organic system of thought, but in a common antagonism to
existing religious and social beliefs, and that on the posi-


tive side Secularism still lies in a state of chaos, without
the promise of emerging into an ordered world of beauty.
The standard around which it rallies its forces is the
standard of revolt, not merely against the Christian faith,
but against existing governments, and the present con-
ditions of social life. An examination of their literature
will show that not only religion, but morality and political
order, are also the objects of their attack. Around their
standard has gathered the most motley array of men,
who have joined the ranks from various motives and with
diverse aims, believing, doubtless, many of them, in the
delusion that they are fighting for liberty and truth,
struggling towards a better order of things than that they
seek to destroy. Meanwhile, this better order of things
lies in the dreamland haze of the future, and one looks
in vain to discover from their writings what the Secularist
millennium will be like. The only thing they seem certain
of is that religious faith in God and immortality must be
destroyed; and when this result is attained, the elements
of society will re-form themselves into a new and more
beautiful order than the last. One of their writers declares
that “ Secularism proceeds in the path of Positive philo-
sophy, not seeking for errors but for truth; not busying
itself with negations, but with affirmationsbut when we
turn from profession like this, to the actual practices of
secularists both in speech and writing, it will be found that
their energy is devoted almost exclusively to destruction,
and not construction, which is left to take care of itself.
The very name of Secularism, which was at first adopted
evidently with the idea of giving a positive aspect to the
form of infidelity it covers, and thus misleading many of


its followers, only gains its significance in contrast with
the religious, or sacred. Similarly, the term Free-thought,
which is supposed to define the leading principle of this
form of scepticism, is contrasted with some kind of tyranny
or bondage, under which religious thinkers are supposed
to labour. A modern publication, the work of two leading
secularists, and professing to be the “Free-thinkers’ Text
Book,” and surely on that account to be regarded as a fair
exposition of their principles, so far from setting forth an
indedendent system of positive thought, is, from beginning
to end, nothing more than a violent assault upon religion,
the Bible, and the Christian faith.
G. J. Holyoake, one of the founders of Secularism, thus
defines his position : —* “ First,” he says, “ our secularist
friends undertake to teach Secularism as the philosophy of
the things of time. A secularist is one who gives primary
attention to those subjects, the issues of which can be tested
by the experience of this life. The secularist principle re-
quires that precedence should be given to the duties of this
life over those which pertain to another world. Second, to
teach that science is the Providence of man, and to warn
men that absolute spiritual dependency in human affairs may
involve material destruction. And third, to teach that there
exist, independently of scriptural authority, guarantees of
morality in human nature, intelligence, and utility.” Another
and more recent writer of the same school says: “ The
secular is defined as that which pertains to this life, and is
treated of as a thing apart: as independent of, rather than
as necessarily opposed to, any other mode of thought. . .”
“ Secularism takes the term Free-thought as expressing the
* “ Christianity and Secularism,” p. 8. By G. J. Holyoake.


central idea it inculcates.’' “It holds that scepticism is the
pathway to affirmative truth.” (But with singular incon-
sistency he declares, a few paragraphs further on, that
11 Secularism is not sceptical.”) “ The standard of Secu-
larism is utilitarian —not the utility which is sensual and
selfish, but which takes into account the highest attributes
and noblest aspirations of humanity.”
Without, at present, entering into a discussion of the
questions here raised, or exposure of several assumptions so
quietly and unconsciously made in these definitions, which
will be carefully dealt with in the course of our inquiry, it
may perhaps be as well to point out a broad fallacy, running
right through them, and one that has given rise to inter-
minable confusion in secularist writings. It is the fallacy, in
fact, that lies at the basis of the whole system, and is con-
tained in the one word “ secular,” the misunderstanding of
which begs the whole question at stake. It is assumed that
the secular and the religious or sacred are radically distinct;
that since the secular has to do with this life, with man’s
relation to the eternal world, and to his daily duty, religion,
therefore, lies outside of the practical region. Acting on
this assumption, the secularist very naturally claims superi-
ority for his system, which is supposed to deal with facts
and practical life ; as against a religion supposed to ignore
this life, and give sole attention to the duties of another
world. That distinction of “ sacred ” and “ secular,” com-
mon and useful as it is in a general way, is a provokingly
superficial one. To the truly religious man all is sacred—
the commonest duty of daily life, the humblest sphere of
toil; and religion is not a thing apart from life, but related to
it, as the sap, the life-blood of the vine, permeating every


stem to the most distant twig and leaf. Secularism and
Christianity are not to be contrasted by saying that the
former deals with “ the present life,” and the latter with “ the
next life.” They both deal with the present life, with the
same set of facts relating to man’s position in the world.
The real difference lies here, that whilst Secularism treats of
this life “ as a thing apart,” and of man’s destiny in this
world only, the Christian religion treats of life as overarched
by the eternal heavens, as brightened by the sun which gives
it life and beauty, bringing the gladness of spring from the
deadness of winter; and man’s destiny is elevated into the
most solemn import by the issues of life being regarded as
stretching into the eternal world. The Christian faith is
essentially the religion of the present life.
It is worthy of note, as showing the real tendencies of
Secularism, the different attitude which, at different times,
has been assumed by secularists in regard to religion gene-
rally, and the Christian religion in particular. To judge from
the statements made by some of their most prominent writers,
particularly in the early days of their history, it would seem
as if there were no intention to attack religious beliefs.
Holyoake, speaking of the relation of Secularism to religion,
thus speaks: “ The existence of God, the future condition
of man, are questions which five thousand years of contro-
versy have not settled : we leave them open to the solution
of intelligence and time; they shall not be with us barriers
which shall divide us from our brethren ; we will not em-
barrass human affairs with them. In the same spirit we main-
tain a general neutrality with regard to Christianity. In a
like strain writes another of their advocates : “ Secularism,
as regards opponents, claims that to ignore is not to deny ;


as the geometrician ignores chemistry or metaphysics with-
out a thought of denying them, so Secularism, which con-
cerns itself with this world, refuses to be held as conflicting
with that other worldliness, which, if demonstrable, must be
based on an experience to which Secularism makes no pre-
tension, and towards which it considers itself to incur no
responsibility.” There is a seeming candour and modera-
tion in all this ; but what has the actual history and develop-
ment of their principles shown ? Let anyone read over a
list of the publications issued by the “Free-thought Publish-
ing C 0.,” and he will search in vain for the “ general neutra-
lity ;” but will find, on the other hand, that nine-tenths of
their books and pamphlets are virulent attacks on sacred
beliefs, and so far from Christianity being ignored “ as the
geometrician ignores chemistry or metaphysics,” he will be
inclined to ask—“ But for Christianity to attack, what would
secularists find to do ?” and may find in that Dean Swift’s
ironical reason for the continuance of religion. In contrast
to the moderate expositions of Secularism already quoted,
read the following declaration of Dr. Aveling, as prominent
in the secular world as his father was esteemed in the reli-
gious world : “ It is our glory, not our condemnation, to
have politics without religion, science without faith, educa-
tion without Christianity, faith without God. The quartette
of terrors that have so long enslaved, debased, and crushed
the mind of man, growing in horror as we name them, for
these we have no sympathy ; these we reject as unclean,
marring, not making, history ; enfeebling, not enobling man.
Religion, faith, Christianity, God ! I, for one, rejecting these,
lay such strengh as is mine at the feet of politics, science,
education, man.” There is Secularism stripped of all its dis-


guises ! The term atheist, as applied to a secularist, was first
denied, and still not acknowledged by one or two, is now
gloried in by the vast majority of secularists. The “ Gospel
of Atheism” is the significant title of one of their pamphlets.
In that the writer, Mrs. Besant, declares that it is “ strange
that any free-thinker should be ashamed to be called an
atheist. Atheist is one of the grandest titles a man can wear.
It is the order of merit of the world’s heroes. The atheists
are the vanguard of the army of free-thought, on whom falls
the brunt of the battle, and are shivered the hardest of the
blows.”
This extreme antagonism to religious faith, as manifested
by the most thorough-going of the secularists, was only to
have been expected from the principles laid down as the basis
of their system. To mark out limits of profitable secular
inquiry was not only to include, but also exclude, ideas and
beliefs. If this life is to be made our all; if God, as the
Author of our being and Ruler of our destiny, is to be set
aside as having no concern in our secular world, no relation
to our moral life, then the chief tenets of the Christian faith
are not only ignored, but denied in the most vigorous and
practical way. The two systems of thought are not related
to each other as dealing with different subjects of inquiry,
as “ chemistry and mathematics.” And herein lies the mis-
take of some of the earlier secularists, who imagined they
could maintain “ neutrality ” as to religion. They are
different methods of viewing and dealing with the same sub-
jects, being as logical contradictories, one of which only can
be true, and must inevitably come into collision.
With reference to belief in God, a secularist, so far
as theory is concerned a secularist may be either an


agnostic or atheist, asserting that the Supreme Being is
unknown and unknowable, or denying His existence alto-
gether. The second of these names is the one most pre-
ferred by the present school of free-thinkers. In practice,
however, both stand pretty much on the same level, though
one of the terms is more daringly presumptuous than the
other. Both are opposed to the faith which regards Christ
as God manifest in the flesh. Whether God is held to be
unknowable, or His existence denied, life must be guided,
morality explained and enforced, and man’s destiny un-
folded, from a secularist point of view, as distinct from that
of religion or Theism. The secularists themselves very
clearly recognise this. Dr. Aveling, in his usual emphatic
way, charges the agnostics with cowardice in the adoption
of their name. * “ The body of scientific men to-day,”
he writes, “ are practically atheists. The chief men of the
scientific world are assuredly irreligious, i.e., do not believe
in a God of the Church or Bible, or do not accept as proven
either immortality or miracles. Their creed at most is
Agnosticism. It is difficult to have a splitting away without
schism of some sort, so we will be grateful for that; but in
very truth, I am inclined to think that Agnosticism is but
Atheism writ respectable.” Another secularist, G. W.
Foote, says : t “ The Atheist and the Agnostic in practice
stand in the same category; each confines morality within
natural limits, and bases it on natural sanctions; each
resents the intrusion of sanctions derived from theology.
Their difference is merely metaphysical. Practically, they
arie in the closest agreement. The Theistic moralist is
■opposed to both.”
* “Science and Secularism,” p. 14. t “Atheism and Morality,” p. 8.


In fine, then, Secularism may be spoken of as a
theoretical interpretation of life which dispenses with
religious beliefs, and gives sole attention to human affairs
and the things of the present state of being. It professes
to be a religion—if the word can be used in that sense —
minus immortality and God. In this it resembles Positivism,
which is also a secularist system, and to which, indeed, it is
closely akin. The well-defined beliefs of Comte’s social
and religious system would in many cases not be accepted
by the secularists, but the principles of the two systems are
in the main identical. The chief difference is that Positivism
has its standing amongst the educated and cultured, whilst
the scepticism of Secularism prevails amongst the masses,
who are not in a position to rise to the contemplation of the
worship of the grande etre of humanity. Whilst acknow-
ledging the use of the word “ religion ” in the positivist and
secularist phrases, “ religion of humanity,” “ religion of the
present life,” we wish it clearly to be understood that
throughout this essay the word is used in its older and truer
sense, as including belief in God and immortality. On its
negative side, Secularism opposes itself to religion in this
sense. On its positive side, the baldness and weakness of
the attempted system is most clearly seen, for when attacked,
instead of defending itself on its own ground, it takes refuge
wherever it is convenient, and science, Positivism, Utilita-
rianism, are in turn used to cover the helplessness of its
natural condition. It is impossible, however, to rest on
negations, and Secularism is compelled to seek a substitute
for the faith it denies, to offer some explanation of man’s
origin and destiny, to find a basis for morality, and give
authority to the dictates of conscience. The demand must


be made of Secularism : What positive advantages has it
over the faith it seeks to supplant ? Will it better satisfy
the cravings of man’s heart and the demands of his in-
tellect ? Does it better explain the world in which we live ?
Will it guide men more clearly in their perplexities than
the Christian faith ? Will it strengthen them better in the
hour of their sore need? Will it kindle in men nobler
aspirations, and awaken wider and deeper sympathies with
all that is good, and true, and worthy of reverence ? Or,
when it comes to the wants of human nature, does Secu-
larism stand helpless, a confession of failure and defeat,
leaving man hopeless, after destroying his holiest faith,
leaving the ghastly eye-socket, as Richter has said, where the
eye of the Eternal Father should be ? Questions like these
must arise, and the strength or weakness of Secularism will
be seen in the answer it gives.


FREE-THOUGHT AND FREETHINKERS.
Secularists claim Free-thought as their central principle—The claim examined
as to (i) Absolute freedom of thought, (2) Freedom without penalty
attaching to the exercise of thought, (3) Freedom unrestricted by
authority—The question at issue not one of “ free ” thought, but of
“ true ” thought—Proof from history that Christianity has been the
guarantee and inspiration of freedom.
The secularists, in claiming Free-thought as the central
principle which they adopt, have shown a considerable
amount of wisdom. The assertion of liberty is an appeal to
the nobler instincts of human nature, and men revolt against
tyranny and injustice that seek to fetter them, or encroach
in the slightest degree on what is regarded as their birthright.
Freedom is one of the prerogatives of man, not to be sup-
pressed by long centuries of oppression and persecution;
and the struggles waged by heroic peoples on its behalf form
the romance and poetry of history. Not to be a slave, crushed
and fettered, but to stand erect in independent manhood, to
think, to feel, to act, to hope and love as only nature, con-
science, and God direct, these are rights which men have
counted dearer than life itself. In calling themselves the
advocates of Free-thought, the secularists tacitly assume that
this feature distinguishes them from their antagonists, par-
ticularly those who believe in the authority of the Christian
revelation, and thus at once a prejudice in their favour is
created among the mass of the unthinking. The name very


naturally creates the supposition that these sceptics, in doing
battle against religion, are engaged in the same struggle as
the heroic men of the past, who have won for us our liberties,
as freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of re-
ligious faith and worship. It is, therefore, imperative on us
carefully to examine and estimate this claim of the secularists,
and see whether they can claim any rational freedom of
thought that is denied to those who are guided by faith in
Christ. A discussion of what is really involved in the term,
and the exact limits of'thought, will enable us to see more
clearly whether or not the secularists have a right thus to
monopolise the word, and whether they or Christions enjoy
the greater freedom. It often happens in political life, that the
very men who profess to be seeking liberty are submitting
to a tyranny greater than that against which they struggle.
In social life, the libertine, who refuses submission to the
moral law, is controlled by overpowering passion and lust, a
greater slavery than that of the body. So it is possible that
the sceptic, who claims to be a freethinker in regard to re-
ligion, may actually enjoy less spiritual freedom than the
servant of Jesus Christ.
It will be generally acknowledged that there is and can
be no such thing as absolute freedom of thought, i.e., thought
free from all law and all restriction. The moral law, on the
one hand, demands that we shall think in accordance with
truth, with what is right; natural law, on the other hand,
demands that our thought shall be in harmbny with actual
fact. We are not at liberty to deny such axiomatic truths
as that “a whole is greater than its part,” or.“things that
are equal to the same thing are equal to one another.”
Doubtless, so far as the abstract question is concerned, a


man has liberty in his thinking to deny every law, intel-
lectual, moral, physical; but should he in actual fact do this,
it is at the expense of his moral worth, and his fellows judge
him an unsafe member of society, committing him to prison,
where he may be taught to respect the authority of law, or a
lunatic asylum, the refuge of those whose thinking has no
law or coherence. Neither secularist nor religious thinker
will deem it a loss that such a liberty as that of the criminal
or lunatic is destroyed.
The claim for Free-thought is put forth in this manner by
one of the writers already quoted: “Secularism takes the term
Free-thought as expressing the central idea it inculcates. It
defines Free-thought as the unrestricted application of the
powers of the intellect to any subject —the absence of any
threat or penalty, legal or spiritual or social—for the exer-
cise of thought.” In harmony with this position the objec-
tion is raised against the New Testament that it fetters in-
quiry by attaching heavy penalties to unbelief. Looked at
in this light, it may at first seem harsh and unjust that liberty
should thus be fettered by penalty ; but, put in plain lan-
guage, the position of Secularism here amounts to the claim
that a man is not to be responsible for his thought, belief,
or action. The same writer, just mentioned, almost asserts
this : “ Secularism,” he says. “ which concerns itself with
this world, refuses to be held as conflicting with the other
worldliness, which, if demonstrable, must be based on ex-
perience, to which Secularism makes no pretension, and
towards which it considers itself to incur no responsibility
The opposite principle is asserted by the New Testament,
that a man is responsible for his attitude towards God and
Christ; and it requires but little consideration to see that


this is not a principle arbitrary and peculiar to religion, but
one inherent in the very nature of things, a great law run-
ning through all nature. In every sphere of inquiry, man
is under penalty, legal, social, physical, or spiritual, to think
or act in accordance with what is just and true and right.
Should a man choose to think the law of gravitation does
not hold, he is not on that account free to leap over a preci-
pice with impunity; or, should he fancy that fire does not
always burn, he will not be justified in trying the experiment
on his house, expecting the laws of the universe to be sus-
pended to suit his freedom of thought. Freethought will not
make water run uphill, nor fire cease to burn —it cannot alter
one of the laws of the physical world ; no more has it a
right to expect that the laws of the spiritual universe will be
suspended to suit its demands.
The real question at issue is not that of free thought,
but of true thought. The secularist is at liberty to deny the
facts on which the Christian faith is based, but he is not at
liberty to deny his responsibility in that connection. If
the Christian religion is true , then our simple duty is to
direct our thoughts and guide our lives by its precepts,
just as, in a similar way, we should adapt our habits of life
in accordance with the ascertained laws of bodily health,
knowing that violation or neglect of the truth must, in
religion as elsewhere, be attended with the most serious
consequences ; if it be not true , then of course the penalties
attaching to unbelief at once fall away, and the real penalty
is on the other side. But in both these logically supposed
cases there is responsibility. When the Scriptures speak
of the punishment that attends wilful unbelief and violation
of the moral law, they speak in a higher sphere, like the


wise physician who warns his patient of the consequences
that follow violation of the laws of health. The penalties
spoken of by Scripture against sin in thought, word, or
action, are not arbitrary but according to law, springing as
naturally from the thought or act, as the plant from the
seed, the flower from the bud. True freedom of thought
lies not in dashing ourselves against the iron bars of the
great facts of nature which shut in our life, but in finding
out what is the truth in science and in religion, and in
directing our life in harmony with the laws of the physical
and spiritual world, adapting ourselves both in thought and
act to the ascertained conditions of our life. All scientific
thought is directed towards this very end, the discovery of
the limits within which we may safely exercise our free-
dom, and this freedom is not destroyed but secured by the
discovery of such limits. Our liberty is gained by obedience
to law, not by revolt; and here is that aphorism of Bacon
true alike in the sphere of nature and of religion, “Natura
enim non nisi parendo vincitur;” or, as the Psalmist has
put it, “ I will walk at liberty, for I seek Thy precepts
The law of the Christian life is the “ perfect law of liberty/’
There can be no organised society, no political govern-
ment or institution, without law, and penalty attached to its
violation. The nation that enjoys the greatest liberty is
not that which has no laws and punishment to restrain the
wrongdoer, allowing every citizen to do as seems right in
his own eyes, but the nation which has fashioned and main-
tains just and equitable laws, to exercise a beneficial control
over the individual and social life, erecting barriers in the
way of the evildoer, while smoothing the pathway of the
law-abiding citizen. Remove such laws, and you have the


horrors of a French Revolution, which is to all time an
exemplification of whither unrestricted freedom will lead.
Where there are no laws, a man, instead of enjoying free-
dom, has, in continual dread of his life, to carry a weapon
in defence, uncertain whether the man he meets is a friend
or enemy.
The secularist, therefore, has no more right to object to
penalties being part of a religious system than he has to
object to penalties that Nature inflicts on the person who
violates her laws, or ta the punishment society inflicts on
the criminal. The question for the freethinker to consider in
this respect is whether Christianity is true or false. If true,
then its penalties are real and of solemn significance ; but
if false, as most secularists declare, then why should they
assail what can only be imaginary phantoms of penalties?
The mariner’s chart, on which is marked the true course the
sailor must steer, the rocky island shores, where the vessel
might be dashed to pieces, the treacherous shallows and
hidden reefs, in no way destroys freedom, but gives the sailor
confidence, by its guidance and warnings against the dangers
of the way. Thus are we grateful to the New Testament,
the chart of the Christian’s voyage over unknown seas—
grateful alike for its promise of guidance and protection,
and its warnings against neglect and sin.
A stronger position is apparently assumed by the secu-
larist when he contends for freedom of thought, unrestricted
by authority; but this claim when examined proves just as
fallacious and misleading as the other. It is true that the
Christian submits to the authority of the New Testament
revelation, but in doing this his freedom is not destroyed,
but assured in a higher sense. The facts of common life


prove that in other spheres besides those of religion, liberty
is not inconsistent with authority, however the two principles
seem to contradict when abstractly considered. The greater
part of our life is directed under the influence of authority.
We accept the authority of the physician in matters pertain-
ing to health; of the geologist as to the condition of the
earth in past ages; of the chemist as to the properties of
minerals and acids; of the captain of the vessel in which we
sail. It is impossible for us to reason and think out in detail
all the questions relating to the conduct of life; consequently
we accept the guidance of the wisest and best. We volun-
tarily give up our freedom and submit to authority, the only
consideration being that our authority must have proper cre-
dentials and be worthy of trust. When satisfied as to these,
we do not hesitate in accepting his direction. There is, how-
ever, for us the test of experience, even in matters we have
not had the means of verifying scientifically, as we find out
in actual life, whether or not the authority we accepted
gives true and safe guidance, or leads astray. It is thus we
estimate the worth of our physician, lawyer, chemist, or even
the gardener to whom we submit the care of our plants and
flowers; and we should not complain about our freedom of
thought being lost, did we submit to the authority of the
groom as to the proper treatment of our horses.
But, says the secularist, we accept the authority of
leading scientific men, because their statements can be veri-
fied and demonstrated by any of us who had the means and
leisure. It is thus that Bradlaugh raises the objection : * “ All
our scientific teachers say is, ‘We have learned such and
such things in such a fashion ; you may, if you have leisure
“ Christianity and Free-thought,” p. 20.


and means, verify our experiments; we show you the road
we have travelled ; we have mapped and scaled it for you.’
But in religion there is no such proof; the authority of the
Church dominates, denies, and annihilates experience with
a graveyard resurrection.” Falser words were never penned!
True enough, the truth of Christianity cannot be tested
like a question in physics or chemistry : from the nature of
the subject that is impossible, just as it would be impos-
sible thus to prove any historical facts. But we accept the
authority of Christ as to the present life, the character of
God, and His relation to us and our future destiny, because
the “credentials” He brings make Him worthy of our
absolute trust and devoutest reverence. These “ creden-
tials ” can be proved to all who investigate them. Above
all other proof of the reality and truth of the Christian
faith is the living verification of a life in Christ. The
majority of Christian believers may have never considered
the historical basis of their faith, and its evidences, but they
are none the less strong in their convictions, for their ex-
periences have proved to them the truth of what they
believe. Their faith has been to them like a living fountain
of waters, permeating and beautifying all their life; giving
them hope in darkness, strength in weakness, comfort in
grief and bereavement, stimulating them to lofty thought
and heroic action, leading them along a sunlit path, “ which
is as the shining light which shineth more and more unto
the perfect day.” Thousands of the noblest of men and the
saintliest of women have thus verified theirfaithby heroic lives
of self-abnegation and devotion to the service of humanity,
and myriads of martyrs have sacrificed their all in this life
to attest the reality of their Christian experience. The


Christian religion has been in the past history of the world
like a health and life-giving river. You may examine, if you
will, its waters with chemical nicety, to prove whether they
will have a beneficial effect; but that is more than proved
by the verdure and beauty of its banks, and the fertility of
the country through which it flows. It is well to remember
that the Christian religion has attained its present position,
not through superstition and ignorance, but through free
inquiry. It has stood the test of centuries of “experience”
and free inquiry, it has been assailed by every form of
scepticism, it has passed through the hottest fire of perse-
cution, and to-day, after being exposed to the fierce intel-
lectual light of the last three centuries, it stands erect,
wielding a wider and stronger influence, and being the
accepted faith of the foremost and most progressive nations.
It is also well to inquire what has been the actual in-
fluence of the Christian religion on individuals and nations
who have accepted its truth. Has it made men superstitious,
servile to authority, however unjust, or the reverse ? We
are aware that the Catholic Church asserts her right to dic-
tate to its followers with the authority of infallibility, and
claims unconditional submission ; but here we are dealing
with New Testament religion, which it was the purpose of
the Reformation to vindicate. Who, in actual fact, are the
men who have been foremost in the struggles for liberty—
social and political and religious freedom ? Who are the
men whose memory will for ever live in a nation’s history,
and whose deeds shed a fragrance which never dies ? Are
they secularists or Christians, men with or without religious
faith ? Germany recalls the life-history of Luther, whose
words were “ half-battles for freedom,” and whose work has


had an influence, direct or indirect, on every progressive
movement up to the present time. America points back with
pride to the founding of her nation by the “ Pilgrim Fathers
of New England/' men self-exiled from the land of their
birth, and determined on unknown shores to found a State,
with civil and religious freedom denied them in their old
country. Scotland has enshrined in her most sacred history
every record of the heroic Covenanters, men strong in faith
to resist cruel and unjust oppression. No more striking
example of the power of religion to develop the heroic part
of manhood can be found than in the history of the
Waldenses, a heroic band of mountaineers, who in the
Alpine fastnesses, preserving the faith in its unsullied purity,
successfully resisted for long centuries the whole Catholic
power of Europe. The story of their exile, and their almost
miraculous return to their mountain home, is one of the most
thrilling and heart-touching episodes in history. It is of the
very nature of faith to give men freedom. “Ye shall know
the truth,” says Christ, “ and the truth shall make you free.”
The surrender of the whole life and being to God brings
back to the believer a thousandfold : in contemplation of the
perfection in Christ he is led ever onwards ; in the guidance
of the Almighty he is kept in perfect peace; in the strength
of God, made perfect in weakness, he is able to triumph over
external difficulties, and in the midst of dangers enjoys the
liberty wherewith Christ makes His people free.


3HE3E.
SECULARISM AND THE PRESENT LIFE.
The claim of Secularists that life will gain by being de-religioned —The
claim examined in detail: (i) Influence of the belief in immortality
on the present life; (2) Influence of the belief in God on human
affairs ; the moral strength given by faith in God—The actual result
of the Christian religion on the present life—The false claim made
by Secularists upon science; the real contrast between Secularism
and Christianity.
A COMMON objection urged by sceptical writers in re-
cent times against belief in God and immortality is that it
diverts men’s attention from the realities of our present life,
and thus stands in the way of the world’s true progress.
It is assumed that since each man has only a limited amount
of vital force to expend, if he is devoted to the service of
God, he will have less power and less time to give to the
service of humanity; if his attention is directed to the future
world, the duties of the present will suffer. Thus secularists
claim superiority for their system, because, ignoring what
they regard as mere matters of speculation, they give ex-
clusive attention to our progress in this world. Thus Holy-
oake on their behalf declares: *“ Attention to temporal things
should take the precedence both in time and in importance
of considerations relating to a future existence. That which
pertains to this world, which relates to human life and wel-
fare, which can be tested in time, by facts of nature, expe-
* “ Secularism and Christianity,” p. 22.


rience, and consciousness, is what is meant by the term
‘ secular.’ We would go to the facts of this life for the
duties of this life. Christianity moulds human duties to
suit the prospects of another life. We consult simply the
requirements of our present state. Secularism would make
human duty independent of another state of existence.
Why we prefer the secular to the spiritual sphere is this :
That experience seems to us entitled to precede speculation ;
of the things of this life we know something personally; of
the things of the future we really know nothing, except by tes-
timony secondhand and disputable.” Another writer, whom
we also quote at length, because it is just here that secularists
claim superiority over Christians, and it is, therefore, im-
portant to know their exact position, thus writes : “ Secular
knowledge is manifestly that kind of knowledge which is
founded on this life, which relates to the conduct of this
life, conduces to the welfare of this life, and is capable of
being tested by the experience of this life. That which is
secular can be tested in time ; that which is theological is
only probable after death. If a sum in arithmetic is wrong
it can be proved by a new way of working it; if a medical
recipe is wrong, the effect is discoverable on the health ; if
a political law is wrong, it is sooner or later apparent in the
disaster it brings with it; if a theorem in navigation is erro-
neous, delay or shipwreck warns the mariner of the mistake;
if an insane moralist teaches that adherence to the truth is
wrong, men can try the effects of lying, when the disgrace
and distrust which ensue soon convince them of the fallacy;
but if a theological belief is wrong, we must die to find it
out.”


The false contrast here raised in favour of Secularism
is but another form of the fallacy already noticed as running
through the whole system, and arises from making the dis-
tinction between the “ secular ” and the “ spiritual ” or
“ religious ” an absolute and essential, instead of merely a
relative and formal, distinction. To any one having but the
most superficial acquaintance with the leading doctrines of
the Christian religion, it must seem strange that such objec-
tions as are raised in the above quotations should have been
made against it, and only those with a theory to maintain
could thus have framed such a distortion of the facts and
doctrines of our faith. Are not the duties of “ this life ”
precisely those which are enforced with such earnestness
and invested with such awful significance by Scripture ? On
the very face of the whole question, is it likely that men
will be less earnest in all that concerns the well-being of
their fellows because they believe in immortality ? Will a
man seek less earnestly to be pure, not merely in outward
act, but in inward thought and feeling, because he regards
himself as responsible, not only to his fellows, but the all-
seeing Judge of the earth, who “ looketh not on the outward
appearance, but on the heart,” and believes that “ we must
all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body"’ ? As regards
social life, which has the highest incentive to self-denying
labour, the Christian, who has ever before his eyes the self-
sacrifice of infinite love on man’s behalf, who in his every
effort towards righteousness believes himself a “ fellow-
worker with God,” and who sees an eternal destiny before
himself and his fellows ; or the secularist, with no such
reliance on Divine power, and with no certain future before


the individual or the race ? Will the Christian faith not en-
noble the home life, and will parents not have a deeper and
more tender interest in their children, when they look upon
them as immortal spirits committed to their keeping to be
trained not merely for this life, but also for the eternal world ?
Similarly, in business life, will men be less dilgent because
“ fervent in spirit, serving the Lord” ? Religion cannot be
separated from the present life, but permeates every sphere
of duty, as the life-blood permeates every part of the body;
and as the hand or foot will wither and die when the circu-
lation ceases, so will suffer every sphere of “ the present
life ” when severed from the influence of God and the
power of the world to come.
But in greater detail let us consider what worth or force
this secularist objection can have. We shall deal later on
with the secularist denial or professed ignorance as to the
existence of God and the reality of a future state; mean-
while the question we desire to consider is whether the
Christian who accepts these doctrines as true, or the secu-
larist who denies them, is most competent to deal with the
facts of the present life; whether such beliefs as these will
hinder or advance men. Dealing at the outset with the
a priori question, it may be laid down as an undeniable
principle, that every period of time which we call the pre-
sent, as the present minute, hour, or day, is only of import-
ance as it carries with it the results of the past and reaches
forward to the progress of the future. With reference only
to life on earth, aims which reach far into the future, either
of) the individual or the race, dignify and ennoble the present,
which, meaningless in itself, gains force and significance
when used towards the carrying out of some purpose. No


matter whether that future be realised or not, the grandeur
of man’s life consists, not in passively dreaming through the
present, but in active pursuit of some high ideal, through
difficulties that bar his way, and in resolute work, which uses
the present and makes each detail subservient to the one
grand purpose. Thus, the scholar is content to toil patiently
through long years of obscurity and neglect—to endure the
pangs of poverty, while storing up materials for future use-
fulness, and in attaining mental discipline which will fit him
to play his part nobly in the ideal future. Thus, the merchant
is willing to endure hardships in the present, to rise early
and toil late ; to deny himself luxury and amusement, and
give all his energies to his business, in the hope that in after
years he will enjoy competence and wealth. Thus, in a
higher sphere, the reformer fearlessly attacks existing evils
in Church and State and society, exposing falsehood, fraud,
and corruption wherever he finds them, with faith in the
future triumph of God’s kingdom of righteousness and truth,
knowing that though he perish with task uncompleted, others
will carry on the work to its ultimate triumph. If this prin-
ciple be true as to life on earth, will it cease to be true when
that life is extended infinitely in duration and intensified
infinitely insignificance? The solemnity of the present life
is vastly increased when our eternal destinies are regarded
as being wrought out on earth: each humble sphere of duty,
each incident, however trivial in the world’s eyes, becomes
of infinite importance when viewed in this light. Men in
whose minds a faith like this is rooted, will not be less but
more earnest in the pathway of duty than those who regard
life as closing for ever with the death of the body.


Nor will the belief in an ever-present, righteous, but
merciful God stand in the way of man’s duty; but, like the
hope of immortality, be a source of strength, a stimulus
towards, and, indeed, the only security for, human progress.
If the universe, and man’s little sphere within it, be at the
mercy of mechanical forces acting and reacting on each
other, and working towards an uncertain destiny, there is no
room for faith, no basis for hope. On the other hand, the
Christian who recognises a Divine Providence, ordering the
world of nature, guiding'human history, and ruling in the
life of each individual, has a faith which enables him to toil
on with the most perfect confidence that his life is safe in
God’s keeping —that the cause for which he labours, it may
be amid innumerable difficulties, must triumph at last. The
traveller who walks in the sunlight with the end of his
journey in view, will make greater progress than the man
who has to grope his way in midnight darkness ; so the
Christian, who lives by faith in God, in humble reliance on
His guidance and support, will be more useful to the world
than the secularist, who has no guiding certainties, and who
rejects that faith which alone can give moral heroism to life.
They who are “ nobly born should nobly live.” The Chris-
tian who is spoken of by New Testament writers as a
“ son of God,” a “ fellow-worker with God,” has thus a
higher incentive to self-denying work, to nobility of cha-
racter, than the secularist who believes himself only a child
of time, the creature of circumstances, governed by inflexible
mechanical laws. But the dreariness of the position is hid
from the secularist, for there is always some mirage to lead
the misguided wayfarer still further into the wilderness; and
there is in man a perennial hope, which can paint on his


“ strait prison walls beautiful far-stretching landscapes/' and
can give even to a barren desolate Secularism, without God,
in the eyes of some of its followers an appearance of life.
Thus, even Atheism can profess to be a gospel, and a promi-
nent secularist has recently declared that *“the soil of
Atheism bears the fairest flowers and the strongest trees;
that over it sweep the purest winds and shines the warmest
sun ; ” that the “ atheist's immortality is the immortality of
the stars. Fair and bright and beloved are all the jewels of
the sky, but some outshine the rest; and as the wave-tossed
mariner, astray and storm-driven, looks up to the heavens,
and guides himself thereby to his home, so do peoples
striving for freedom gaze upwards into Liberty’s heaven,
where shine the hero-souls, ‘ lighting the way to her shrine/
and, guided and inspired by the Immortals, they struggle
home to her breast.” Thus the nakedness of what Carlyle
calls the “Gospel of Dirt” is sought to be covered and
made attractive by flowers of rhetoric borrowed from the
language of a religion which is denied. So far from Atheism
giving guidance to the “ wave-tossed mariner,” a life without
God is like a voyage over unknown seas, with no guiding
star in the heaven above, no unerring compass by which to
steer, no peaceful haven in view; but, tossed hither and
thither at the mercy of winds and waves beyond his control,
the mariner has the awful certainty before him of being
dashed to pieces against the iron-bound rocks of an inflexible
fate, and being swallowed up for ever in darkness and
oblivion. To the Christian, on the other hand, the world is
full of light, order, and beauty. The forces that work in
nature around him, threatening to crush him in their resist-


less might, are not uncontrolled, but governed by a righteous
Providence who numbers the hairs of our head, and to whom
not a sparrow falls unnoticed. “ God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will we
not fear, though the earth do change, and though the moun-
tains be moved in the heart of the seas."
Or, turning from the abstract question as to the probable
result of religious faith on the practical life of men, let the
appeal be made to the question of fact as to what has been
the actual influence of religion on the sphere of duty defined
as “ secular." If we take the New Testament narratives
which give the history and teaching of our Lord, whose life
is for the Christian the one perfect ideal, we do not find that
the simple common duties of life are ignored in religious
fervour, as the secularist asserts, but rather ennobled—in-
vested with beauty and significance, transformed into sacred
duties by the vital power of religion. So wide and generous
were His sympathies, that we find Him accused by His enemies
of being the “ friend of publicans and sinners." In the
life of His apostles it is beautiful to see how the love of God
kindled in their hearts love to man, and, breaking the narrow
bonds of their natural exclusiveness, led them to leave the
land of their birth, to toil through hardship and suffering, to
travel from city to city, through remote villages and bar-
barous peoples, amid dangers of every kind, that they might
preach the Gospel—the power of God to salvation—to all
mankind; and to see how their words, often rudely expressed,
yet instinct with Divine power, formed, out of the ruins of
the past, the beginning of a new civitas Dei. It is quite true
that the teachings of the New Testament do not deal with
specific social and political questions, with external govern-


ment; Christianity deals with the heart and internal life of
the individual-. It is, however, of the Very nature of religion
jiot to lie dormant, but to expand through the whole life
from the centre to the circumference; and thus the power
of the Christian faith has expressed itself in the progressive
social and political life of the Christian era, especially in the
times following the Reformation. Secularism deals with men
in masses, and, regarding man’s character simply as the re-
sult of external conditions, aims primarily at changing these
conditions, expecting that all the ills of humanity will be re-
moved, when a perfect government shall make it “ impossible
for any man to be poor or depraved.” Christianity, on the
other hand, deals with men as individuals, and, as regards
the individual, lays chief emphasis on faith, the right atti-
tude of the heart and mind towards God, considering the
spiritual health of more vital consequence than the external
conditions. The history of the past will show whether this
method has been right. The nations in which the Christian
faith has prevailed have ever been the first in intellectual,
moral, and social progress. Where there are sorrows to be
alleviated, wrongs to be righted, evils to be subdued, there
Christian zeal and philanthropy will ever be found first in the
field. In the present day, while Secularism on the platform
and in the press wastes its energy in endless controversy,
in blasphemous diatribes against religion, and attacks on
existing forms of government, Christianity is proving its
power in unwearied labours to reclaim the fallen, to heal
sickness, to give homes to the orphan and destitute, and in
woman’s mission to the battlefield, where, under the symbol
of the Cross, ministering hands tend the wounded and dying.
It is the best reply to the secularist to point him to actual


facts, and show him how, in the light of the Christian faith,
all the duties of “the present life” are invested with a grace
and enforced with a power utterly unknown to any form of
secularist belief.
It is curious to observe how the secularist tries to ob-
viate the force of this appeal, and to answer the objection
against his system that it is negative and barren. Holyoake
says : * “ It was asked, What has Secularism done for man?
Now, Secularism is merely the general name by which we
represent those material agencies which work together for
human welfare, of which science is the chief. The proper
question, therefore, is ; ‘ What has science done for man’ ?
And civilization itself gives the answer.” Then he goes on
to argue that, though the Christian may also employ science,
its use is a “ contradiction to the spiritual theory of Provi-
dence.” Dr. Aveling, also, very coolly appropriates the
name and labours of science on behalf of Secularism. t“ These
noblest of men,” he writes, “ have been called by various
names : they have been called scientific thinkers and secu-
larists. The two names are given, but I shall attempt to
show that, in reality, the difference between the scientific
thinker and the secularist is mainly, if not wholly, resident
in this verbal distinction of name.” Here, again, is the old
fallacy contained in the word “secular”; the assumption
that what is not directly concerned with religion must be
opposed to religion. Most emphatically do we deny the right
of secularists to identify their system with science. They
must be hard driven for argument when compelled to such
a subterfuge. It is about the most conclusive proof they
could have given of the insecurity and worthlessness of their
*“ Christianity and Secularism,” p 223. f“ Science and Secularism,” p. 4,


own system, that they claim a monopoly of the labours and
achievements of men who would be the last, as a class, to
identify themselves with any Free-thought or secularist society
A scientific man, as such, may either be a Christian or a secu-
larist without his special province of research being inter-
fered with; he only becomes a secularist when, in the inter-
pretation and conduct of his whole life, he ignores or denies
all religious beliefs; and although it be true that some modern
scientific men do this, it is also true that there are others of
them devoted Christians. We are not here concerned to
discuss the side issue raised with reference to the much-
vexed question as to the relation of science and religion ; it
is sufficient to point out, as showing the absurdity of the
secularist claim, that many of the most illustrious scientists
have been distinguished not only for the extent of their
scientific attainments, but also for their devout piety. Even
Galileo, the victim of the Inquisition, taught that “ to despise
his science was to despise the Holy Scriptures, which teach
us that the glory and greatness of Almighty God are admir-
ably discerned in all His works, and divinely read in the
open book of heaven.”
The true contrast, then, between Secularism and
Christianity lies, not in their dealing with different spheres,
spoken of respectively as “ the present life ” and “ the next
life,” but in their being different methods of dealing with
this life, with its various duties and relationships. Secula-
rism treats of this life as a thing apart. Christianity treats
of it as a part of eternity. The former deals with man as
a creature of time ; the latter regards him as an immortal
being travelling through time to eternity. It is false to say
that Christianity ignores our present life and duty, or stands


in the way of this world’s progress, because it speaks of
another life. It takes nothing from man’s life, but gives
everything that makes life worth having. Contrast a land-
scape on a dull winter’s day, when the mountains are
shrouded in clouds, when mists hang over the valleys and
the sky is darkened, with the same landscape lit up by the
glory of the summer sun, the mountains with their outlines
clear and distinct stretching far into the blue distance ; the
splendour of the forest gold and green ; the river with joyous
music rolling down the valley'and flashing back the beauty
of sun and sky. That is the contrast between a life purely
secular and a life with the sunlight of religion upon it. “ I
am come,” says Christ, “ that ye might have life, and that
ye might have it more abundantlyand His teaching of the
Father’s love, of the Holy Spirit’s presence with the Chris-
tian, has brightened our life on earth and elevated the
commonest sphere of duty. Our religious faith weaves the
splendours of eternity around our work-a-day world.
Um die gemeine Wirklichkeit der Dinge,
Den goldnen Duft der Morgenrothe webend.


MORALITY ON A SECULAR BASIS.
Human nature is said by Holyoake to be sufficient guarantee of morality—
The Utilitarian theory as adopted by Secularists ; examined by itself
and as connected with evolution—The weakness of all non-religious
systems of morality shown with reference to: (i) Moral obligation
which they reduce or deny. (2) The motive power of a moral life ;
moral truth without religion is like a body without life—The appeal
to the comparative results of Secularism and Christianity on
morality.
ONE of the most important tests for the truth or falsehood
of Secularism, as indeed of any system that seeks to be a
complete theory of life, is to be found in its relation to
the question of morality. Hitherto morality and religion
have been regarded as inseparable by almost every class of
thinkers, the spring of virtue being found in man's relation
to God. Conscience, in popular religious language, is
spoken of as the voice of God. The authority of the moral
law, the sense of duty, are regarded as resting on the
unalterable will of a righteous God, the Ruler and Judge of
mankind. In modern times, however, there is in many
circles a strong tendency to separate the two, and secularists
in particular assert that morality is independent of religion
and religious beliefs; that if Christianity were overthrown
morality would not suffer, but rather gain by being sepa-
rated from what they regard either as mere speculation or
worn-out superstition, and by being restricted in its appli-


cation to the realities of life. The position of secularists
here is that which J. S. Mill tells us was assumed by his
father, who “ regarded religion as the greatest enemy of
morality, first by setting up fictitious excellencies, belief in
creeds, devotional feelings, and ceremonies not connected
with the good of humankind, and causing them to be
accepted as substitutes for genuine virtues.” But it is not
enough that secularists enjoy this negative position ; the
strength of their objection must lie, not in their denial of
religion, but in their positive'aspect towards morality. The
demand must be made of all who ignore or deny God's
living relation to mankind, as to what basis of morality they
accept, how they will enforce it on the individual and society,
what power can they bring to bear on the sinful and de-
praved to stimulate and lead them to a better life. How
Secularism attempts to deal with these questions is our
present consideration.
Holyoake, who has dealt with the question in a more
independent way than other secularists, says : *“ We
think that human nature is itself a guarantee of morality;
and we mean by human nature, broadly, the sum of those
passions and natural qualities manifested by men and
women, chiefly before, and often after, artificial treatmen
and demoralising circumstances have perverted their spon-
taneous impulses.” One cannot refrain from the retort that
if this be true, then the simple savage state, free from
“artificial treatment,” displaying “qualities” which are cer-
tainly “ natural,” and where “ spontaneous impulses ” are
certainly not “ perverted,” should display the highest type
of morality, and we should seek the noblest and most
“Secularism and Christianity,” p. 105.


virtuous men among the Australian aborigines or the natives
of New Guinea. It would have grealy assisted the reader
had Holyoake, instead of indulging in these high-sounding
but vague generalities, pointed to some particular era in the
world’s history, or specified any race or people in which
“ human nature,” apart from religion, proved itself “ the
guarantee of morality; ” but he could not do this for obvious
reasons. In the first place, he could not find any nation or
race, of any moral worth, who were without religion ; and,
in the second place, had he taken the comparative times in
a nation’s history, when religion had greater or lesser influ-
ence on the people, he would have found that the decay of
a nation’s political power and moral worth has ever been
co-incident with the decay of its religious life, and that, on
the other hand, as Goethe has said : “ The epochs in which
faith, in whatever form it may be, prevails, are the marked
epochs of human history, full of heart-stirring memories, and
of substantial gains for all after times.” It is, indeed, true,
that were human nature perfect and harmonious, all its mani-
festations in thought, word, and deed would be true and right,
the pure outcome of a pure life. But it is not with human
nature in an idealised, perfect form, we have to deal: we must
take human nature as it is, with its instincts inherited from
the past; its various passions struggling for gratification ;
its habits, that fetter a man as with chains ; its emotions, its
continual warfare, where good and evil battle for pre-emi-
nence. To tell a man in the midst of conflicting impulses
—each seeking gratification—that he must obey nature, is
only to add to his distraction, and not to guide him in what
is morally right. If the stronger passion must rule among
other passions equally natural, the question is ended, but at


the expense of morality itself; for whatever motive rules,
whatever passion is gratified, in whatever circumstances,
must be right, as it is natural, and “ in human nature,” the
secularist says, “ we are to find the guarantee of morality.”
In other words, according to this theory, whatever is is right.
Taking mankind generally, we find one man governed by a
restless ambition for power, to attain which all other desires
are subordinate ; avarice is the ruling passion of another
man’s life, making him toil early and late, and take advantage
of his fellows, that he may gain his own selfish ends; passion,
like a consuming fire, lays hold of another, and destroys many
of the best years of manhood ; benevolence, again, leads the
philanthropist to forego personal ambition, to deny pleasure,
that he may devote time, talents, and wealth to the well-
being of his fellows in need. These various passions, and
others that often rule men, are, according to nature, in the
only sense of the word, open to the secularist, who, of
course, does not recognise the corrupting power of sin, and
therefore must be of equal moral worth. The libertine, the
miser, and the philanthropist, governed by natural passions,
would be equally virtuous, had we no other guide than the
one mentioned by Holyoake.
This writer evidently feels the force of this reductio
ad absurdum, and qualifies his position in such a way that
he destroys its defence altogether, and takes refuge in the
borrowed standard of utility, which is used to cover the help-
lessness of secularists when dealing with morality, just as
the benefits conferred on mankind by science were put for-
ward as proof of the practical worth of Secularism. “We
do not,” says Holyoake, “ say to the young, without quali-
fication, ‘ Consult your aptitude ; follow your bias.’ We do


not assume human nature as being altogether a guide in that
full sense; for in this half-nurtured, half-trained, doubtfully-
conditioned state of society, if that language were used, the
generous might be excited to noble deeds, but the sordid
might lay their vulture claws on their neighbours, and the
immoral and unprincipled might victimise their fellows.” This
is rather an extraordinary statement to make, after finding
the “ guarantee of mortality in human nature” chiefly before
artificial treatment! He then writes further : “ But allow-
ing that some men and women are good by nature, and that
it is possible by the culture of the artistic sense to control
others usefully, what is to be done with those who are both
vicious and dull, whose nature excites to excess, and whose
capacity will never expand so as to correct it? In these in-
stances our appeal is to utility , to the sense of interest—an
appeal which the rudest are prompt to own, and which a
philosopher cannot wholly afford to disregard.” A drowning
man catches at straws or tangled sea-weed: so the secularist
must feel in great danger, when, to save the morality he has
divorced from religion, he is compelled to lay hold of no less
than three distinct standards of morality. The already per-
fect are to find the “guarantee of morality ” in human nature,
“ chiefly before artificial treatment” ; the educated must cul-
tivate the artistic sense by which “vice would be as a hideous
flaw in statuary, or as a deformity in a picture” ; while those
unhappy beings who are not thus endowed with a perfect
human nature, nor a fine artistic sense, must be shown that
“ if they will not live uprightly because of the intellectual
beauty and harmony of the thing, it is worth their while pur-
suing it as a matter of calculation,” by which exhaustive


treatment the wants of every class will be met, and the
millennium of Secularism be realised.
The utilitarian system of morals is that adopted by all
recent secularist writers, and connected as it has been with
the evolution theory by Herbert Spencer, Bain, and others,
has gained a wider acceptance than it would have done had
it been tested on its own merits. According to this system
those actions are right which tend to promote happiness;
those actions are wrong which tend to produce pain, or the
reverse of happiness. If it b§ objected to this that our moral
judgments are simple and immediate, and not based on a
nice calculation as to the probable results of a given action
in producing pleasure or pain, we are told, on the authority
of Spencer, that “ Experiences of utility, organised and
consolidated during all past generations of the human race,
have been producing nervous modifications, which, by
continued transmission and accumulation, have become in
us certain faculties of moral intuition, certain emotions
responding to right and wrong conduct, which have no
apparent basis in the individual experiences of utility.” If,
again, the objection be made to the system that it is one of
universal selfishness, evolution is again called in, and made
to show how the individual desires were gradually sub-
ordinated to the general welfare, how, in fact, selfishness
grew into benevolence. In the words of W. R. Clifford :
“ Unselfishness, self-devotion, self-denial for the benefit of
the tribe were the virtues that gave the tribe ascendancy.
The tribe which most successfully encouraged these virtues
prevailed in the struggle for existence. Natural selection
preserved the conscientious races, those in whom the tribal
conscience overpowered the selfish instincts ; and thus each


generation improving on the preceding, the habit strengthen-
ing by inheritance, conscience has come to be what it is, an
instinct whose natural direction, whose very reason to be, is
the welfare of the species through the suppression of all
individual desires hostile to the general interest.”
Plausible and attractive as this application of evolution
appears, and true it may be, as giving in a general way the
growth of moral habits in the race, it yet does not assist the
utilitarian system in the slightest. If it cannot be shown a
priori that utility is identical with virtue, or the pursuit of
pleasure identical with duty, if these principles present
themselves to the mind as essentially distinct, so that the
one is in no danger of being confused with the other, they
will never be identified by taking us into the dim vestas of
the past, where all distinctions are lost in a common haze.
It would be as reasonable to argue that the colours distin-
guished in the daylight grew out of each other, or out of the
darkness of the night preceding —that it was possible that in
the long course of ages red might be evolved out of green,
or yellow out of blue. Growth in the perception of moral
distinctions may be imagined, just as the eye may be trained
to distinguish finer shades of colour, or the ear to distinguish
a wider range of musical notes; but what we wish to insist
upon is that all such distinctions are real, that these eternal
differences are not evolved the one from the other, but that
the sense of perception is developed to take notice of them.
The distinctions perceived by the moral sense are likewise
real, whenever or wherever in the world’s history they made
themselves first felt in the human mind, and cannot be re-
solved into other and lower elements; just as the distinc-
tions of form and colour perceived in the daylight are real,


though they could not be traced in the darkness of the
preceding night.
It is thus we also reply to the secularist who objects to
the intuitive religious conception of conscience as being
connected with God, by pointing to the varying moral habits
and ideas of barbarous and semi-civilised races, and urging
that there can be no absolute moral law, since conscience is
said to speak in different ways to different peoples. With
as great reason they might point to the discord of the tom-
tom or other musical instrument of the barbarian as proof
that there were no laws of harmony in music. The ear of
the cultivated musician can detect notes and harmonies
unnoticed by the unpractised ear; to him these first barbarous
attempts at music, or, indeed, the first attempts of any
learner, are harsh and discordant; but the distinctions noted
by his skilled ear are real, and the savage ear may also be
trained to detect them. Thus, in Scripture we have the
history of the moral and religious development of the
Jewish race ; a development under a special Divine Provi-
dence, and showing a progressive growth in moral ideas.
The crude ideas of the early ages, contrasted with the per-
fect morality of the New Testament, are as starlike gleams
in the darkness of the night compared with the full-orbed
splendour of noonday; but the source of light is ever the
same : the source of inspiration is God, whether He speaks
in olden time to the fathers in the prophets, or in later times
by His Son. The' differences existing as to morality in
different races are but accidental; they are not differences
in morality itself, but differences in the perception of it, in
its application. Moral truth is ever the same, but it has to
struggle with prejudice, evil habits and impulses, selfish


instincts, and a nature alien from God. The light is ever
the same, but the windows of the soul have been darkened
with the weeds and obscured by the dust of centuries of
superstition, ignorance, and vice. Remove these, and the
splendour of moral truth shines into the mind and soul. It
is this truth that has given success to missionary work
among the various tribes and nations scattered over the face
of the earth.
When Utilitarianism is viewed in its own light, and
made to answer for itself, apart from any extraneous sup-
port it is supposed to gain from evolution, it presents a less
attractive aspect, and its advocates find their ingenuity
sorely taxed to resolve all moral decisions into the one
standard of utility. The consciousness of man emphatically
denies that in his pursuit of duty, his friendships, his
religious faith, his self-denial, he only seeks some form of
pleasure. As Cicero has said : “To sacrifice pleasure with
a view of obtaining any form or modification of pleasure in
return, no more answers to our ideas of virtue, than to lend
money at interest answers to our idea of charity. ” It may
readily be granted that pleasure is a concomitant of virtue—
that truer gladness belongs to the good man than to the
evildoer; but that is a different thing to saying that plea-
sure is the essential characteristic of virtue. All pleasure-
giving actions are not right actions, and the pleasure
attending the pursuit of duty is only gained when it is not
made the object to be attained. The common language of
daily life asserts that the “end does not justify the means,”
that “it is wrong to do evil that good may follow.” Our
estimate of the moral worth of actions is in direct pro-
portion to their disinterestedness ; they are approved when


self-denial was exercised for the wellbeing of others, re-
garded as heroic when done at the risk of life itself, but
treated with contempt when self-seeking was the motive of
the agent. This judgment of their moral truth is simple
and direct: approval or condemnation is given at once, and
not after an elaborate calculation as to the remote results
of the different actions.
Even the advocates of the theory seem dimly conscious
that utility of itself is not a sufficient moral guide. They
themselves give one of the jnost striking proofs of the
inadequacy of their system by the way in which they dis-
tinguish between different kinds of utility. Here are men
seeking to resolve rightness into utility, yet so deep-rooted
is the intuitive sense of right and wrong that utility itself is
judged—instead of being supreme and acting as judge, is
brought before the bar of judgment. A writer already
quoted tells us : “ The standard of Secularism is utilitarian
not the utility which is sensual and selfish, but that which
takes into account the highest attributes and noblest aspi-
rations of humanity. It is not the agent’s own happiness,
but the happiness of others, which the utilitarian is bound
to promote.” John Stuart Mill, who has presented the
system in its most attractive form, also makes these nice
distinctions between different kinds of utility. He says ;
“ Some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more
valuable than others.” “ The ultimate end, with reference
to and for the sake of which all things are desirable, is an
existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and as rich
as possible in enjoyments, both in point of quantity and
quality.” One cannot but be surprised at the naivete with
which able writers deny their whole system in their attempt


to defend it, acting like a man who deliberately saws off the
branch on which he is sitting. Here we have utility itself
estimated, some kinds being distinguished as sensual and
selfish, others as high and noble : the pleasure sought after
is to be valued not only as to quantity, but also as to quality.
We ask : By what standard shall we measure and estimate
the quality of an action ? The answer cannot be: By
utility, for this is the very thing to be estimated. Appeal
has thus to be made by utilitarians to some standard outside
of their system. If utility itself has to be judged, to be
hedged about with so many restrictions, and fettered with
so many distinctions and qualifications, like a criminal to
whom it is dangerous to allow liberty of action, it is quite
evident that it cannot be the supreme standard of judgment.
The contrast is very striking between this shifting, uncertain
basis, and the solid rock on which religion rests its moral
truth. Conscience speaks with no uncertain sound, when it
speaks as in the thunders of Sinai. Do the right, heedless
of consequences to self, fearless as to the result on the
world. There is no need here to say, as in the case of the
Utilitarian theory, “ some kinds of rightness are to be pre-
ferred to others,’’ rightness is be distinguished “ in point of
quantity and quality.” On the other hand, make utility the
standard of morality, ask the agent to calculate the probable
results of his action, to distinguish pleasure as high and
low, benevolent and selfish, to calculate “ the greatest happi-
ness of the greatest number,” and instead of pointing him
along the simple pathway of duty, you plunge him into a
labyrinth of confusion from which there is no escape.
The weakness of all non-religious systems of morality
appears in a still more striking light when they are con-


sidered in relation to two questions of practical morality ;
(i) moral obligation, (2) the motive power of morality.
With reference to the first of these, it is urged by many
that we have nothing to fear from analysis. The sunset
clouds do not lose their splendour when we know how they
are formed ; the beauty of the flowers does not depend on
any theory of light: so, it is argued, the moral law always
remains the same however its origin be explained. “ Con-
science,” says Leslie Stephen, “ acts none the less forcibly,
though we may not understand the source of its authority,
or the end at which it is aiming.” In this contention there
is only a partial truth. It may readily be admitted that
conscience, however analysed, to whatever source it may
be traced, will always give the same directions ; but the
further question remains, Will it speak with the same
authority when regarded as an instinct inherited from our
ancestors, as when listened to as the voice of God within
us ? The value of conscience lies not only in the fact that it
gives moral guidance, but in the supreme authority with
which it speaks, the supremacy it possesses over the whole
life and character. It was in the categorical imperative
of the moral law that Kant found the supreme certainty of
life, the proof of immortality and God’s existence. Two
things filled him, he said, with the same feeling of awe :
the starry heavens above, and the moral law within him.
Will that absolute supremacy of the moral law remain
when morality is severed away from religion, and sin
means simply the habits which the majority of men con-
demn ? Bentham escapes out of the difficulty by denying
obligation altogether. “ The talisman,” he says, “of arro-
gance, indolence, and ignorance, is to be found in a single


word, an authoritative imposture. It is the word ‘ ought,
or ‘ought not.’” Herbert Spencer, in his “Data of Ethics,”
says that “ moral obligation, hitherto deemed a cardinal
principle of ethics, becomes a mere accident of them.” The
result is unmistakeable. Separate morality from all refer-
ence to God, and there remains but a conditional obligation
to society. Morality then loses its infinite character and
significance, and descends to the level of Bain’s definition
as an “ institution of society, maintained by the authority
and punishments of society,” If society be the supreme
authority to maintain the moral law, the evildoer may laugh
it to scorn. Glaring crimes may indeed be punished by
society, but the nobler part of virtue, that which lies in
character, is utterly beyond this jurisdiction. Society the
maintainer of moral law! It more often happens that
society has in the name of morality to be condemned ; and
the noblest lives up to that of the Highest have been perse-
cuted and many of them sacrificed by the society which
is here asserted to be the supreme authority. To such a
miserable shred is obligation reduced when secularised.
Still more strongly marked is the failure of secularist
morality compared with that of religion, when we consider
the second question as to the motive power of morality.
There is the strange anomaly to be dealt with, between the
clear perception of moral truth and the lack of moral power
in the same individual. The world has had no lack of moral
teaching of the very highest kind; but what is wanted is
not so much moral teaching as moral power. Men gene-
rally have clear enough ideas as to what is right, but they
need a stimulating power towards .righteousness. The
ideal is present to the mind, but lower instincts and passions


have control and mar the actual character; the goal is
clearly enough seen, but how is it to be reached with so
many barriers between ? It is here that secularist morality
is put to the test and fails, and the need of religion is felt.
This need of religion has been clearly recognised even by
those who in modern times, after having rejected the
Christian faith, have attempted to satisfy the demands of
the heart and mind by the artificial religion of Positivism.
The words of the modern English apostle of this school*
are very striking, as the acknowledgment of a non-Christian
writer as to the need of morality having the stimulating
power of religion : “ Morality, if we mean by that the
science of duty, after all can supply us only with a know-
ledge of what we should do ; of itself it cannot touch the
imagination, nor satisfy the thirst of knowledge, nor order
the emotions. It prescribes to us our duties, but does not
kindle the feelings which are the impulse to duty. Morality
has nothing to tell us of a paramount power outside of us,
to struggle with which is confusion and annihilation, to
work with which is happiness and strength ; it has nothing
to teach us of a communion with a great goodness ; nor
does it touch the chords of veneration, sympathy, and love
within us. To do all this is the part of religion, not of
morality. Morality has to do with conduct, religion with
life. The first is the code of a part of human nature, the
second gives its harmony to the whole of human nature.”
The Christian religion brings to men the power of a living
faith, which will grow and blossom into the fruition of noble
character; it has in a myriad instances proved itself “ the
power of God unto salvation,” by changing the lives of men,
* F. Harrison.


and lifting them out of vice and leading them to holiness.
While giving to the moral law absolute authority, and
making conscience the expression of the will of the Highest,
it brings to helpless, erring men the power of obedience,
kindling love in the hearts of the sinful, and awaking grati-
tude by the revelation of Infinite Love in Jesus Christ,
bringing God near to man, and man near to God. Morality
without the vital power of religion is like a dead body.
There are the eyes to see, the ears to hear, all the wondrous
mechanism of nerve and muscle ; the limbs may be gal-
vanized into spasmodic movements, but the beauty, grace,
and power of wondrous life are gone.
Secularists sometimes appeal to actual facts as proof
that the spread of their principles will have no baneful
effect on the moral life. Religion they treat as an accretion,
an extra-growth, which can be cut away without any evil
effect on the health of mankind. They forget that religion
has influenced the whole length and breadth of our civiliza-
tion ; that it is inw'oven into the warp and woof of all our
life, and is not to be got rid of simply by “ condemning
creeds and abolishing prayers.” From infancy to old age
the influences that surround us are those of Christian
Theism. The words of the Bible, the moral and religious
truths of the New Testament, are inwrought into our
literature, and are part of the familiar language of common
life. It may be true that among those whose moral habits
are already formed under such influences there is little or
no change of conduct manifest after the change in intellec-
tual beliefs ; but will this be so among those trained under
influences purely secular? Secularism now comes into the
field after centuries of religious teaching; it finds moral


truth enforced, and moral habits formed under the influence
of the Christian faith. To estimate the actual result of
Secularism on the life of the race, we should require similar
centuries on which the sacred light of religion had never
shone—centuries without God and without the hope of
immortality. It is hardly reasonable to expect that the
vast change which Secularism makes on our view of life
and morality, would be unaccompanied by a corresponding
effect on the actual life of men. The only practical ex-
amples as to the effect of secularist principles must be
taken from those times in a nation’s history, or in the life of
an individual when religion has had least influence. As we
have seen, the Secularists dare not appeal to such times, for
the answer is conclusive against them. Even at the present
day there are not wanting strong indications, to be found
in their speech and writing, showing unmistakably the
tendency of their principles. Let any one who has the
curiosity visit any place where secularist literature is sold,
and he will probably find side by side with pamphlets advo-
cating Secularism, and denouncing the Christian faith in
terms of broadest ridicule, other publications dealing with
subjects of the basest character, whose very titles would be
sufficient to stamp them as unworthy of any pure-minded
man or woman. The connection may be accidental, but
there it is, and will ever favour the assumption that Secu-
larism tends not to elevate but degrade. To secularise
morality, is like taking a tree from the rich fertile soil where
it has grown, where its roots have been nourished by hidden
springs, and transplanting it to the barren sands, where the
leaves must fall and the branches wither for want of quicken-
ing power.


SECULARISM AND THE CHRISTIAN REVE-
LATION.
The favourable conditions at present surrounding Secularism; the material
side of life developed out of proportion to the spiritual—The pro-
fessed “ Atheism ” of modern Secularists : (i.) As a negative criticism
of Christianity and Theism generally: (a) God is said to be always
the equivalent of “ I do not know; ” (b) Argument from contradiction
in the terms used to define God. (2.) Atheism as a positive theory:
(a) A self-existent universe in place of a self-existent Creator; (b)
Materialism —Secularism as a system fails to meet the wants of both
mind and heart; religion natural to men; the confessions of modern
scepticism —The argument for the truth of the Christian revelation ;
it harmonises and brings into clearness all other conceptions of God
the moral miracle of Christianity.
Hitherto we have tried to estimate the positive worth of
Secularism, when, from being merely a form of negative
Scepticism, it is brought to bear on the interpretation and
conduct of life. Its claim for Freethought, as distinguished
from belief in revelation, we found to be no more than the
voice of anarchic revolt, and that religion, so far from de-
priving men of liberty, is the very foundation and guarantee
of rational freedom. Further, that Secularism, whilst claim-
ing to be more competent than religion to deal with the
present life, in reality belittles life, with its narrow vision,
want of faith, and uncertain hopes; whilst, on the other
hand, religion ennobles life by making us consider all its
details in relation to God and eternity. Again, we endea-
voured to prove that on secularist principles there is no
adequate basis for morality ; that in the attempt to accommo-


date morality to Secularism, to explain and enforce moral
truth apart from religion, many of its essential characteristics
are either denied or distorted past recognition. We might
fitly leave the question here, for the strength of Secularism
was supposed by its advocates to lie, not on its negative
criticism of Christianity, but in its being a positive system of
life, able to give men strength and guidance, ignoring religion
because resting on a greater reality, giving more to man
because ignoring God and immortality. For a time the
Secularists were so confident that they had found a satis-
factory system for the guidance of life, that they declared
“ belief in God and a future life shall not be made questions
to divide us from our brethren.” “ Secularism is not an argu-
ment against religion, but one independent of it.” The
inherent falseness of the position we have already noticed.
To ignore religion in the practical affairs of life is to deny
it, and the practical denial has now led to the most bigoted
contradiction to every form of religious faith. By so long
confining the view to the Secularist side of life, the men
who at first declared they had no intention of opposing
religion, have now come to believe most strongly that there
is no other life than the present. Nature has pursued them
with a striking Nemesis. As the moles that burrow in the
earth, or the fishes that are found in the Kentucky cave,
have lost the sense of sight from living so long away from
the light, so Secularists, by so long shutting their eyes to
the light of religion, have come at last to believe there is no
God, that the very term is an absurdity. It is only thus we
can explain some of the statements found in Free-thought
writings, e.g., that of Bradlaugh: *“ The Atheist says the


term God conveys no idea to his mind. I don’t deny the
word God, because I don’t know anything about its mean-
ing.” The blindness of the individual is, however, no proof
of the non-existence of the sun.
It is worthy of notice that this denial of God is not the
avowed starting-point of Secularism, is adopted not from
reasoned convictions, but from the necessities of a system
that begins with ignoring God. The position of Holyoake
and many of the earlier Secularists, was this: “ The present
life being first in certainty, we shall make it first in import-
ance; whether there is or is not a God, we can serve
humanity.” The position now reached is : “ This is the only
life; God is a meaningless term used to cover human igno-
rance.” The Secularists begin with a system which ignores
Christianity and all religion ; to defend that system they
must at last oppose every form of religious belief; the
practical denial gradually crystallizes into the most deter-
mined antagonism. It is just here, however, that they are
most vulnerable. The position they have assumed towards
religion is a universal negative; let one affirmation be
proved and Secularism is destroyed. Let a single doctrine
of natural or revealed religion be proved true, let it be
shown that there is one want in human nature that religion
alone can supply, and the whole system of Secularism, like
a card-castle topples to the ground.
Whatever strength Secularism may possess, whether
on its affirmative or negative side, is to be found not in
the system itself, but in the favourable conditions that at
present surround it. The Scepticism of to-day stands on
a very different footing to that of the past; it is no longer
a merely negative criticism of the Christian religion, but


has become constructive, and entrenched itself within a
citadel of its own, from which it sends forth defiance to all
its enemies. Evolution, a theory by which the world is
made to account for its own origin, is, however unreason-
ably, opposed by many to belief in God, as Creator. A
self-existing universe, without beginning or end, is believed
in, rather than an Eternal God. Secularists repudiate the
belief in a Divine Providence ruling amongst men, and tell
us that “Science is the Providence of a life/' that “Spiritual
dependence may lead to material .destruction.” The denial
of a future life is made easier to them by the splendour
of the present life in its purely material aspects. Wealth
to-day abounds in greater fulness, and is more widely
diffused than at any previous time. Science with its dis-
coveries, its inventions to increase and facilitate labour, its
wonderful mastery over the physical forces, has increased
the means of comfort, pleasure, and luxury. The spread
of education, and the facilities for printing, have brought
the finest works of genius within the reach of every class.
Railways and steamships have made the circuit of the
globe a summer holiday. The material side of life has been
developed out of all proportion to the rest of our nature.
Man is hardly yet conscious of having mastered the merely
physical conditions of his life, surrounded by the teeming
wealth of the present pouring in upon him from every side.
Contemplation of the future is rendered more difficult; the
material is so full and intense that the spiritual seems dim
and shadowy. Just as the sunlight, while making objects
around us clearer within its range of light, hides the stars
of heaven beyond, so it may be said that Science has flung
a light over the world, that while giving greater clearness


of material vision, has in many cases dimmed the spiritual
vision of other realities. It is this that has given a certain
plausibility to the extreme statements of Secularists, and
an appearance of fertility to a position which is naturally
barren as the wilderness. Living in the intense material
light of the present age, and claiming Science as an ally in
its irreligious methods, Secularism is no longer content with
“ general neutrality,” but boldly attacks the Christian reve-
lation.
The general religious position of the Secularists, so
far as their theory is concerned, might either be Agnostic
or Atheistic; they might say, “God is beyond the reach of
our knowledge,” or, “ there is no God.” With an instinctive
feeling that the former position still left the way open to a
religious faith of some kind, and therefore to the subverting
of a system whose very basis is irreligion, they have pre-
ferred to adopt the extreme position of Atheism. Brad-
laugh, writing in defence of this, says : * “ The distinction
between the Agnostic and the Atheist is that either the
Agnostic postulates an Unknowable, or makes a blank avowal
of general ignorance. The Atheist does not. There is,
of course, to him, much that is yet unknown ; every effort
of enquiry brings some of this within reach of knowing.
With the element of the Unknowable conceded, all scientific
teaching would be illusive. The God of the Theist, the
“ Unknowable ” of the Agnostic, are equally opposed to
the Atheistic affirmation. The Atheist affirms the true,
denies the untrue. The Agnostic knows not of any pro-
position, whether it be true or false.” In passing it is as
well to notice the extreme presumption of this declaration


of a leading freethinker, and the unscrupulous way in which
scientific teachers are used or abused to suit the exigencies
of the Secularist claims. As a matter of fact, our leading
modern scientists do concede the “ element of the Un-
knowable.” Tyndal has declared that “ the whole process
of Evolution is the manifestation of a Power absolutely
inscrutable to the intellect of man ; ” and the whole of
Spencer’s philosophy is founded on the assumption that
both science and religion rest on the acknowledgment of
the Unknowable. It follows, therefore, according to Brad-
laugh’s argument, that most of our modern scientific teach-
ing is illusive, because of this acknowledgment, and there-
fore that Secularism itself is untrustworthy, as resting for
its chief support on modern science.
The negative side of Atheism, as adopted by the leading
Freethinkers is thus stated in their “ Text Book ; ” * “ The
Atheist does not say, ‘ There is no God,’ but he says, * I
know not what you mean by God; I am without idea of
God ; the word 1 God ’ to me is a sound conveying no clear
or distinct affirmation. Ido not deny God, because I can-
not deny that of which I have no conception, and the con-
ception of which by its affirmer is so imperfect that he is
unable to define it to me.’” In thus qualifying the Atheism
adopted, the Freethinkers seem to have been conscious of
the extreme presumption of saying, “ There is no God ; we
have exhausted the Universe, and searched through the
realms of Being, and find no trace of Godthey therefore
prefer to declare total ignorance as to the meaning of the
word. The position assumed further enables them to deny
and attack Christianity, while making reply to them ex-
* p. xiB.


tremely difficult. It is hardly possible to deal with an
opponent who professes total ignorance as to the meaning
of the chief term used in the discussion; but the free-
thinkers have not been consistent in maintaining this pro-
fession of ignorance. The same writers who compiled the
Freethinker’s Text-Book have reversed their position, and
by some peculiar process are able to assert: “ God is
always the equivalent of ‘I do not know.’ Historically,
God has lessened as knowledge has increased. ,, “ I will
allege/’ says Bradlaugh, “that you cannot give me a defi-
nition of God that does not originate in the ignorance of
men as to the causes of phenomena, which are abnormal
to him and which he cannot explain. God is the equivalent
for all man observed, but did not comprehend, for all that
happened of which he knew not the meaning.” So that
the term, of which they had no conception, has come to
have a meaning, and is not only carefully defined from
their point of view, but its origin and history are traced.
It is contrary to fact and to history to assert, as is here
done, that God is always the equivalent of, “ I do not know,”
that “ ‘ God ’ has lessened as knowledge increased.” We
have in the Scriptures the history of a religious develop-
ment extending over some thousands of years. Knowledge
surely increased somewhat from the time of Abraham to
the time of Christ; yet will any one have the hardihood to
say that the patriarchs had a more vivid, clear, and full
conception of the meaning of the word “ God ” than that
to be found in the New Testament? The conception of
God by Augustine, Anselm, Luther, is infinitely fuller and
grander than that of the ignorant savage. Human progress
so far from “ lessening God,” has given truer, deeper, and


clearer conceptions of Him, of his relations to Nature and
Man. The widened conceptions of the Universe given by
modern science have but widened our conceptions of the
Eternal; the increased knowledge we have of the wondrous
laws that regulate Nature through all its realms have but
taught us to admire still more the wisdom and power of
Him who is the source and ruler of all. Even in the light
of modern science, “ The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament showeth his handiwork.”
Belief in God is still further criticised with reference
to the so-called contradictions in the terms used to define
God. “ I have never yet,” says Bradlaugh, “ heard a defi-
nition of God from any living man, nor have I read a
definition by dead or living men, that was not self-contra-
dictory.” The arguments used by this writer are simply
modifications and applications of those of Mansel, Hamilton,
Spencer, that the relativity of our knowledge prevents
from knowing the Absolute and Infinite, and that the terms
used to define or describe God contradict each other. It
is urged that because we cannot define God in scientific
or metaphysical terms without landing ourselves in some
seeming contradiction or difficulty, therefore the term is
a meaningless absurdity. This might indeed be so were
belief in God attained as the final result of some philo-
sophical argument; but this belief is a natural conception,
and will not be destroyed because the man who holds it is
unable to give a fully-satisfactory definition of it in scientific
phraseology. To argue from the difficulty of defining God
to his non-existence is about as reasonable as to argue that
because a man is unable to give a scientific definition of
light, therefore light has no existence ; or that because he


could not define truth, goodness, love, therefore these are
terms used to cover ignorance. The arguments used
amount simply to this, that the finite cannot set bounds
to the infinite, that human intelligence cannot comprehend
the Absolute ; but are these really objections to the possi-
bility of knowing God, far less to his existence ? God as
Absolute, i.e. } existing out of all relations, we cannot indeed
know, but that is no loss to the religious consciousness.
The God religion needs is not a God existing out of all
relation, but God as related to man. If we cannot compre-
hend God in His fullness, we may apprehend Him in some of
His attributes, we may know Him as He has been revealed
in some of His manifestations of Power, Righteousness, or
Grace. The words Infinite, Absolute, are barren terms of
relation of no vital importance till applied to something
positive. We speak of God as Love, and because we are
unable to set bounds to that attribute, speak of Infinite
love, “ the love of Christ which passeth knowledge.” We
cannot know Divine love in all its fullness, but we know
some of its manifestations, and its highest manifestation in
Jesus Christ. The term “ Infinite ” does not destroy the
essential quality of the term, but merely expresses that the
fullness and grandeur of Divine love is beyond human
comprehension. God as Absolute we have neither need
nor wish to know; but it is our supreme concern to know
what He is to man, to know Him in the essential attributes
of Power, Truth, Righteousness, Wisdom, and Love. The
dwellers by the sea in early ages, before science had bounded
the world with a chain of communication, knew something
of the ocean, though they had never explored its boundaries.
They were awed by its sublimity in storm, and touched with


admiration at its impressive beauty in calm. It would be
absurd to say that they could not know the sea, or that the
sea had no existence, because they had not explored it to
its furthest boundaries. It is no less absurd to say that we
cannot know God, because we cannot set bounds to the
Eternal. Man in his earthly life is surrounded by the
Eternal, as an island by the sea. On every side come
manifestations of the Divine; hence w T e find that religion
is natural to man, that among the lowest peoples there is
still some acknowledgment of God as fact. Even, however,
with the widest and fullest conceptions of God, it may still
be admitted —and the admission is not the denial, but the
confession of God —that we are but as “ children playing
by the shore,” with the great unexplored ocean before us.
The Atheism adopted by so many of the Secularists is not
merely a negative criticism of Theism, but is claimed to give a
positive conception of the world more rational than that of
religion. Bradlaugh, contrasting his own position with that
of the Christian, says: “The position of the Naturist is that
there is only one existence. I can only know that existence
as conditioned, as phenomenal. We only know the phe-
nomenal or the conditioned. We affirm one existence, and
that all we know is condition of that one existence.” What
then is this one existence ? The reply we can find in
another of his writings, where he says : “ Nature is with
me the same as ‘ universe,’ the same as ‘ existence ; ’ i.e., I
mean by it: The totality of all phenomena, and of all that
has been, is, or may be necessary for the happening of each
and every phenomenon. It is, from the very terms of the
definition, self-existent, eternal, infinite. I cannot think of
nature, commencement, discontinuity ,or creation.” These


definitions are strangely mixed and incongruous, and might
stand for Pantheistic and Agnostic, just as well as Atheistic
definitions. It is not easy to see how the “ phenomenal ”
or “ conditioned,” which Bradlaugh asserts is all that we
know, can by any transformation become “ self-existent,
eternal, infinite.” To say that we only know phenomena is
to assume an intelligence which knows them as such, and
presupposes the conception of a reality of which the pheno-
mena are manifestations, or with which they are contrasted.
It is, as Spencer has shown, “ rigorously impossible to con-
ceive that our knowledge is knowledge of appearances
only, without at the same time conceiving a reality of which
they are appearances.” Thus Bradlaugh himself has to
include in his definition of nature, or universe, not only
phenomena, but “ all that is necessary for the happening of
phenomena.”
The real question at stake between the Christian and
the Atheist is contained in this latter phrase, “ necessary for
the happening of phenomena.” What is the nature of this?
Is it material or spiritual, physical or intelligent ? The
question in dispute is not as to self-existence, but as to the
nature of that which is “self-existent, eternal, infinite.” To
say that the “phenomenal” or “conditioned” is “self-
existent.” is a contradiction in terms. What is it that is
phenomenal, that is conditioned ? The something “ that is
necessary for the happening of ” (an Atheistic circumlo-
cution for the simple phrase, “cause of”) “each and every
phenomenon,” can only become part of an Atheistic defini-
tion by becoming materialistic. A Theist could use the
words as they stand, and say that this “ something” refers
to God,” as being “ necessary for the happening ”


SECULARISM AND THE CHRISTIAN REVELATION. 6l
of the moral and spiritual phenomena of the world
If the Atheist denies this he must interpret this ‘‘something”
as only referring to matter, not to God. Shall we find in
matter, as a distinguished scientist has done, “ the promise
and potency of all terrestrial life.”
It is assumed by those who hold Materialism as giving
an explanation of the nature and origin of the universe,
that in matter we have a clearer, truer conception than in
the term God. This is seen to be an illusion as soon as
we enquire as to what matter is, and how we know it.
The great majority of our scientific men, and the most of
the leading sceptics, reject Materialism as strongly as the
Christian, preferring to rest in an Agnosticism which
declares that we know only phenomena, that we are in
ignorance as to the real nature of things. It is impossible
for us to get to matter minus mind; and it is therefore
irrational to say that matter is the cause of mind, or mind
a manifestation of matter. The message given to us from
the exernal world, through the channel of the senses, has
to be interpreted by mind, which marshals and groups
the phenomena in regular order, according to their resem-
blances and differences. Phenomena without an intelli-
gence to arrange and interpret them, are dumb, meaningless
phantoms ; add mind, and they arrange themselves in
ordered harmony. The term matter is as truly an inference
of mind, to explain the origin of the phenomena presented
to us through the senses, just as truly as the inference of
God is to explain the facts that belong to a higher sphere.
Man is more certain of his own consciousness, his own
existence, than of anything in the external world. With
his mental impressions, moral perceptions, thoughts, wishes,


and hopes, he constitutes a world as real as that which lies
outside him. With these he is face to face, while the world
outside can only be known through a certain medium.
While he sees everything around him in a process of
change, and knows, too, that his own body periodically
changes, he is yet conscious of a personal identity that
remains through every change. Mind is not only the
highest, but the most certain fact in Nature. To say that
mind is a function of matter is not only to make an un-
proved assertion, but to distort the real character of things;
it is to find the origin of Nature, the source of intelligence,
in what is the lowest element in Nature. The highest
manifestation in Nature must give a truer interpretation
of the cause than is to be found in material phenomena.
Materialism can only become a reasonable system of the
universe by deducting man; but in doing this we take
away the very intelligence that interprets the universe,
and that which most needs interpretation. While, on the
one hand, we are willing to grant the right to assume the
existence of a material world from phenomena that are
distinctly material, we claim, on the other hand, the right
to assume the existence of a personal God, the source of
all, both from the phenomena of the moral and spiritual
world, and the laws and order of a material world that is
intelligible.
Secularism fails in the attempt to build a system of
Nature without God, just as it fails to guide and interpret
human life. The attempt to sever life from the unity of
religion, and to bring it into harmony on the principles of
Secularism, only ends in confusion. A system that ignores
God, that treats all the religious manifestations of the past


as the result of ignorance and superstition, that makes man
the creature of circumstances, fails alike to satisfy the
demands of the intellect and the cravings of the heart.
Appeal to the history of the race, or the experience of
the individual, will show that man is not a secular but re-
ligious being. He is too big for the limits that Secularism
marks out. His intellect demands a cause sufficient to
produce the changes he sees in the external world, an ex-
planation of the phenomena ever passing across the stage
of his consciousness. His own Hfe is the greatest mystery.
Behind him there is the great blank that precedes the dawn
of conscious life ; before him there lies the mystery of
death ; and the question naturally rises, Whence have I
come, whither am I going? Life is like a gleam of light
between two eternities; but man is not content to live only
in the light of the present, heedless of the past, careless
of the future; he cannot live in a merely sensuous animal
enjoyment, like the ephemera dancing in the rays of the
setting sun, whose existence ends with the fall of night,
but is compelled by the very necessities of his being to
look before and after. There are in him instincts that
link him to earth, and were these all, this life might be
sufficient for him, and there would be no conscious need
of God ; but these physical instincts are felt to be the
lowest element in man’s complex nature. There are other
and deeper wants of the heart, and mind, and spirit, that
can only find their satisfaction in God. It is the grandeur
of man’s nature, not its littleness, that makes man religious
and seek after God. The higher and nobler the nature, the
more is this life felt to be insufficient. It has always been
a struggle with the nobler spirits of our race to be recon-


died to the conditions of the present life, and this could
not be so were man, as the secularists say, *“ circumstance
made.” It is instructive in this light to read the biogra-
phies of such men as J. S. Mill, Carlyle, Goethe, Byron,
and to see how powerful minds are so painfully sensitive
to the insufficiency of life in itself to satisfy the cravings
of the heart and mind, how intense the struggle to find a
resting-place, the whole man rising in rebellion against
the narrow limits—which Secularism would declare to be
natural —which bound a life without God ; fretting against
them like a bird beating its wings against the bars of its
cage, longing for its native freedom. The search for God
is natural to man. It may often have been misguided, and
the wayfarer led still further astray by hopes that were to
him like the deceitful mirage to the wearied traveller,
promising cooling water, but leading him still further into
the wilderness. Religion may often have degenerated into
degrading superstition ; but the wildest superstition but
proves the intensity of the search after God, the reality
of the needs that are felt, the deep-rooted nature of the
religious instincts that must have some form of faith in
which to rest.
Even in modern times, amongst writers the most scep-
tical, it is not difficult to trace the influence of some kind
of religious faith that makes life bearable, that gives some
kind of guidance. No drearier position than pure Secular-
ism could possibly be imagined. Life without God, or the
hope of immortality, in a world wholly at the mercy of
mechanical forces, is like the last hours spent on a sinking
ship far out at sea —no land of safety in sight, no friendly


voice sending words of cheer and promise of rescue, no
help in the stormy heavens above, no mercy in the yawning
waves beneath, all the hopes that brightened life and filled
the future as with the glory of the sunrise, now darkened
into a night of despair, unillumined by a single star. But
Secularists will not look their system right in the face.
Religious instincts are too strong even for irreligious
systems. Though God is denied there is a certain deifica-
tion of nature. Even with their low views of morality
they are compelled, especially when speaking free from
the controversial bias, to recognise the infinite nature of
duty. It is like finding a spring of bright water in the
desert to find language such as is used by Holyoake, when
speaking of virtue : “ We say virtue ought to answer, and
as far as lies in our power it shall answer, and if you want
to know what our faith is, this is it —we know how small is
our power, how great are the odds against us ; but we whom
the world counts as men of merely speculative opinions
hold this positive belief. Vast is the power of believing
needful to maintain this principle, but we whom you paint
as sceptical hold faith, as to the possibility of this firmly.”
What do words like these mean, if not the recognition of
a righteous Ruler in the universe, the very vigour of the lan-
guage, and the assertion of a faith that is held in spite of
confessed difficulties, proving that on moral truth and in the
feeling of moral obligation, man rests as on a rock. Some of
the strongest protests against Materialism and the degrading
views of life (often put forth in the name of science) have
come from the pen of F. Harrison, the leader of the
English Positivists. Artificial the system of Positivism
undoubtedly is in its conception of the Supreme Being as


humanity, and in its impersonal immortality; but it gives
evidence of the deep-felt need of religion that must have
a God to worship, an immortality to brighten life, a faith
that will give colour and significance to morality.
“ The hallowed name of religion'’ says Mr. Harrison, “has
meant in a thousand languages man’s deepest convictions,
his surest hopes, the most sacred yearnings of his heart,
that which can bind in brotherhood generations of men,
comfort the fatherless and widow, uphold the martyr at the
stake, and the hero in his life-long battle.”
The dim and scattered ideas of God that may every-
where be found in the writings of the sceptics of to-day,
as well as in thip religions of the world, are brought into
clearness and harmony in the Christian revelation alone.
Scientific Agnosticism has so far acknowledged God as an
inscrutable Power, and this perhaps is all that we could
expect from a science that deals with the physical world.
Another Agnostic has gone still further, and spoken of the
Eternal as a power that makes for righteousness. To know
God as an inscrutable Power only makes man realize more
keenly his helplessness ; to know Him as a Power that
makes for righteousness, brings Him no nearer to the
human heart; but to know God in Christ as Omnipotent
Power working on man’s behalf, as not merely Eternal
Righteousness, but Infinite Love, giving itself on man’s
behalf, the just for the unjust, is to bring peace to the
human heart and fill it with joy unspeakable—it is to
awaken the deepest reverence and love for God as the
Eternal Father. The conceptions of God given in natural
religion seem to remove Him to an infinite distance from His
■creatures; God revealed in Christ brings Himself near to


man, and raises man to communion with the Highest. The
Christian revelation is its own and best evidence in its fitness
to meet the wants of man, and while we fearlessly assert
that the theoretical arguments for its truth are unassailable,
even in the strongest light of the present day, we point to
its grandest evidence in the history of what it has done for
men. All other miracles in the physical region shrink into
insignificance before the moral miracle that Christ has
wrought, and is still working in the world's history. On
earth He lived in the lowliest sphbre, in an obscure part of
the world, among a conquered people, His companions
were men of humble position, He wrote no book, He
appealed not to the schools of philosophy, He sought no
help from the socially great; but His words had in them
creative power; they sank like precious seed into disciples'
hearts, and given to the world, they have wrought a moral
change amongst men in comparison with which all other
changes are insignificant. Men are not to be fed with
■chaff, tinsel may stand in the sunshine of the day, but will
rust in the storms of life ; the words of Christ have stood
the test of long centuries, and while kingdoms and empires
have passed away, while revolutions have altered social
conditions and changed men’s opinions, Christ’s name still
remains above every name. The fiercest opposition to His
claims has spent itself like idle wind on an adamantine rock.
The best argument to-day against Secularism, and all
other Scepticism, the one most powerful in conviction, is a
strong religious life that will permeate every nook and
cranny; not separating itself from human affairs, but flinging
beauty over them, giving a sacred meaning to the commonest
■duty; and a development of Christian doctrine that shall


embrace and harmonize all other knowledge, so that religion
and science shall not seem as they have done, to stand in
opposition, but be joined hand in hand, increase of know-
ledge giving increased reverence for the Divine, the
intensifying of the religious life quickening zeal for know-
ledge. Secularism must inevitably fail, from the simple
fact that it ignores the highest aspirations of man. As
Hegel has said in words which have been described as a
Hymn to Religion, deeply felt and nobly conceived : “All
the nations have felt that the religious consciousness was
that in which they possessed the truth, and it is for this
reason that they regarded it as that which gives dignity and
consecrated joy to their lives. All that awakens doubt and
anguish, all sorrow and care, all the limited interests of
finitude, the religious spirit leaves behind on the sandbank
of time. And as on the highest top of a mountain,
removed from definite view of the earth below, we peace-
fully overlook all the limitations of the landscape and the
world, so to the spiritual eye of man in this pure region,
the hardness of immediate reality dissolves into a semblance,
and its shadows, differences and lights are softened to
eternal peace by the beams of the spiritual sun.”
“ FIRMIAN.”




