

. • ■■ •• .
2.




CONFERENCE
BETWEEN THE
AMALGAMATED SHEARERS’ UNION
OF AUSTRALASIA,
AND THE
Pagtopaligts’ Federal Connell
OF AUSTRALIA,
HELD IN
THE (BjHAMISER OF SYDNEY
Ifcihaaj 7th Sc Bth 1891,
NEWPORT, VIC. :
ANDREW & TAYLOR, GENERAL PRINTERS.
I Bgi.




CIRCU LAR
TO MEMBERS OF THE
UNION OF
Gentlemen, —In order that you
may be placed in possession of the
circumstances leading up to, and
connected with, the recent conference
with the Pastoralists’ Federal Council,
we have issued this report.
You will remember that we have
always desired to meet the Pastoralists’
Union in conference, being confident
that if such was held, an amicable
settlement would result. The Pastor-
afists’ Union, however, would not
meet us, unless we first conceded
u Freedom of Contract.” Several
letters passed between the two bodies
without any practical result. Recently,
however, through the secretary of the
Young Branch, a basis upon which a
conference could be held was sub-
mitted, in which there was no re-
ference to the “ freedom of contract”—
a term which has become so objection-
able to our members.
The P.U. agreed to meet us, if we
withdrew our objections to work with
non-unionists. In view of the strong
pressure of public opinion in favor
of a conference, and the wish of the
community generally that a conflict
similar to that which ended in
Queensland, should if possible be
avoided, we felt that it would be
unjustifiable to continue the demand
for an unconditional conference.
Many of our members have already
suffered considerably in defence of
AMALGAMATED SHEARERS’
AUSTRALASIA
their rights, and have sacrificed a
great deal in their efforts to build up
the Union to its present position. By
united effort they have secured an
immense improvement in the position
of the shearers.
Your Executive Council felt that
having gained that for which the
Union was primarily organised, they
would not be justified in refusing a
reasonable compromise, and therefore
conceded the point asked for.
A conference was therefore held on
Friday and Saturday, the 7th and Bth
August. We wished to have a repre-
sentative of each branch in New
South Wales, with two members of
the Executive Council, but the other
side would only agree to meet five
representatives.
In order to have the voice of each
branch, however, delegates from the
respective branches were present, and
those taking part in the conference as
your representatives consulted them
on all important matters. In order
that you should be placed in almost
the same position as if you were pre-
sent, we have attached hereto a
verbatim report, specially taken by
shorthand. This will enable every
member to learn all that took place, as
if he was present in the chamber.
You will observe that we declined
to discuss “ freedom of contract,” and
the terms offered to, and accepted by,


us not being what we understood to
be embodied in the term “freedom of
contract,” we can honestly say that
we have not accepted it. We were
not even asked to accept it. The
only thing we accepted was the terms
and conditions of engagement, &c.,
as given in the opening proceedings,
and placed in the heading of the
agreement —a definition of the limits
of the freedom of employer and
employe , and as the terms of a contract
entered into by the parties concerned.
The report will distinctly show the
attitude of both sides. We sincerely
trust that the action of your delegates
will give you satisfaction. You will
see that a very great improvement
was made in the conditions of the
agreement, and as all settlements
between contending parties must be
necessarily by compromise, it was not
to be expected that we would get all
we wanted.
The recognition of the Eight
Hours principle, and the supply of one
comb and four cutters for every 1500
sheep shorn, are important conces-
sions in the working rules; whilst
the recognition of the A.S.U. is
important in principle. It is to be
hoped that every member wdl loyally
carry out what has been agreed upon.
Strikes must be avoided, and all
causes of friction obviated. Regard-
ing non-members, they must now
see that it has been the organisation
of the A.S.U. that has been the means
of improving their position, and they
will no doubt readily join their
brother unionists. Let us forgive
their past actions, and extend a
brother’s hand to them. Moral
suasion is the weapon which has the
most lasting influence, and must be
the only means used to induce them
to join.
By each member of the A.S.U.
remaining firm in his loyalty to
unionism, and the sacred cause of
the betterment of humanity, we will
soon cease to have non-unionists in
our midst. Let us not be discouraged,
but work quietly, earnestly, unitedly
in the new direction now being taken
by unionism.
We are, yours in unity,
W. G. Spence, President.
H. Langwell, V.P.
D. Temple, Hon. Sec.
J. M. Toomey.
Thos. H. Williams.
Delegates to conference representing
the A.iS.U.
IV


Ilcprcsmtatibcs:
Pastoralists’ Federal Council:
Amalgamated Shearers’ Union
DAVID ELDER (Vic.)
„ T. WILLIAMS, M.P.


VERBATIM REPORT


VERBATIM REPORT
CONFERENCE
BETWEEN
THE AMALGAMATED SHEARERS’ UNION
THE PASTORALISTS’ FEDERAL COUNCIL
IGREEMENT as submitted by
PASTORALISTS.
Shearing Agreement. —To be used in New
South Wales, Queensland and the
Northern Districts of South Australia.
Adopted by the Intercolonial Conferences
held in Melbourne, 7th November ; and
in Sydney, 22nd December, 1890.
lcreement made this day of
89 between hereinafter called
he employer of the one part, and the
ndersigned shearer of the other part. The
erms of this Agreement are that the
ndersigned shearer hereby agrees to faith-
ully serve the employer by shearing with
11 reasonable .despatch all the sheep
equired of him by the employer or his
gent during the present season in a good
nd workmanlike manner and to the satis-
mtion of the employer or his agent, the
otal number of sheep required to lie shorn
y the whole of the shearers employed
uring the shearing to be not less than
thousand nor more than
iusand
1. The price of shearing wethers, ewes,
md lambs (including ram lambs under six
months old) to be at the rate of twenty
shillings per hundred for all such sheep
shorn ; rams at the rate of forty shillings
per hundred for all rams [shorn ; money to
be paid by cheque on a local bank, or
exchange to be added.
2. The shearer shall be at the
Station or run ready to commence shearing
on the day of 189 ,
and the employer agrees to be ready to
commence shearing on that date, and to
keep the shearer fully supplied with sheep,
unless prevented by weather or by some
unforeseen cause.
3. The employer shall, during the whole
of the time the shearer is engaged shearing,
provide him with hut accommodation,
cooking, and table utensils, wood, and water
free of charge.
4. The shearer shall not absent himself
from work, but in case he leave before the
completion of shearing, owing to sickness,
accident, or other such unavoidable cause, or
by the permission of the employer or his agent,
he shall be paid in full for all sheep shorn
by him, but shall be charged 15s. per week
for his board and lodging, cook’s remunera-
tion included, such sum to be deducted
from the amount due to him and placed to
the credit of the shearers’ mess account.
5. If the shearer be discharged, as he may
be, for breach of this Agreement, or of the
Rules endorsed hereon or attached hereto,
he shall be paid for the number of sheep
shorn by him up to the time of such
discharge, but he shall be charged 20s. per
week for his board and lodging, cook’s
remuneration included, which amount shall
be placed to the credit of the shearers’ mess
account.
6. Once a week, on a day to be named at
commencement of shearing, on demand, the


employer shall pay to the shearer any sum
not exceeding 50 per centum of the amount
due over and above one week’s earnings at
the time of such demand, except in case of
the shearer breaking this Agreement.
7. The employer and the shearer shall
conform to the Rules endorsed hereon or
attached hereto, which Rules it is hereby
agreed shall be taken and deemed to be and
form part of this Agreement.
As Witness the hands of the parties
the day and year first before written.
Signed by the Employer
in the presence of
Signed by the Shearer
in the presence of
RULE S
Embodied as Part of Agreement.
1. The shearing shall be carried on under
the direction and supervision of the employer
or the person placed by him in charge of
the shed.
2. Before commencing work the shearer
shall draw lots for his pen, and shall abide
by the result of such drawing, the person in
charge of the shed having the right to make
any alteration deemed advisable.
3. All sheep must be taken carefully from
the pen to the shearing board and be shorn
closely and in a fair and workmanlike
manner, and to the satisfaction of the
person in charge of the shed, the belly wool
to be taken off’ first and laid aside.
4. In opening the fleece at the neck and
belly, both blades of the shears or the
machine to be kept under the wool and
close to the skin so as to avoid twice
cutting, and the shearer shall not be allowed
to run the shears or the machine through
the fleece so as to break it down the centre
or the back, and shall not stand on the
fleece.
5. In case the shearer turns out a sheep
badly cut or insufficiently tarred, he shall
at once sew and tar such cut or wound, in
his pen, or otherwise dress or treat such
sheep as directed by the person in charge of
the shed.
6. The shearer shall not be allowed to kick
or otherwise injure or illuse any sheep, and in
case seriously injure or illuse any sheep, or
cut the teat of any ewe or pizzle of any
wether or ram, he shall immediately report
same to person in charge of the shed ; and
he shall pay to the employer the mess rate
for the sheep so injured, and if the sheep
be fit for food it shall go to the shearers’
mess, the employer to have the right to
refuse such payment and keep the sheep.
7- The shearer shall not be allowed to
catch any sheep from his pen while it is
being filled, but shall during such filling
shear from any pen or pens that may be
allotted to him by the person in charge ol
the shed. No sheep to be caught after the
signal has been given to cease work by the
person in charge of the shed.
8. The prices to be charged by the em
ployer for rations and shearers requisites
shall not exceed cost prices, with 10 per cenl
and cost of carriage added.
9. Each shearer may have free run foi
two horses, but the employer accepts m
responsibility for them.
10. No shearer shall bring, or cause to bt
brought, any intoxicating liquor on to tin
station ; no profane or obscene language o:
singing shall be allowed in the shed.
11. The employer shall provide at leas
one grindstone for every ten shearers em
ployed.
12. Shearers shall provide their own cool
except where cooks work conjointly fc
shearers and the employer, in which case th
cook shall be engaged by the employer, an
the proportion of mess account and of cook
remuneration shall be matter of mutut
agreement.
13. In all sheds where shearing machine
are provided, shearers shall pay fc
cutters and combs a price not exceedir
cost. In case of stoppages through breal
age, or otherwise, shearers shall, if require
go on shearing with the hand shears.
CONFERENCE.
The members of the conference assembl
at II a.m.
Mr Whiteley King laid on the table swo
copies of the correspondence which had h
up to the conference.
Mr Abbott—-Gentlemen, before we take at
steps to constitute ourselves a conference
take it, and I think you will agree with m
that it is absolutely necessary we should ha'
signed by both sides a preliminary of tl
arrangement which has led up to this co
ference. That we hold to be absolute
necessary, and we will furnish you with copi
of a memorandum as we propose it, and yc
can see what you think of it.
The following is the text of the docume
submitted :
“We, the undersigned, duly accredited repr
sentatives of the Pastoralists’ Federal Coum
of Australia, on behalf of New South Waif
and having direct interest in pastoral pr
8


Arties in the colony of New South Wales,
i the one hand, and we, the undersigned,
aly accredited representatives of the Amalga-
,ated Shearers’ Union of Australasia on
ehalf of New South Wales, on the other hand,
2reby agree and declare on behalf of our
ispective Associations, and as a preliminary
i. a conference to be held between us, that
nployers shall be free to employ, and shearers
lall be free to accept employment, whether
elonging to Shearers’ or other Unions, or
ot, without favor, molestation, or Jntimida-
on on either side ; this being in accordance
ith the admission made in the memorandum
; the 23rd Jul} r , addressed by the Secretary
t the Young Branch of the Amalgamated
heareis’ Union to the Pastoralists’ Union of
few South Wales, which says :—“ I concede
lat members of this Union may work with
6n-members,” which admission was ratified
y the Secretary of the Amalgamated Shearers’
Inion in his letter dated from Creswick on
Dth July, 1891 and by him expressly con-
rmed in his telegram dated from Creswick
n 3rd August, 1891 ; and it is also agreed on
ehalf of the Pastoralists’ Federal Council
tat the Council will use its influence to pre-
ent the employment of Chinese or Kanakas
3 shearers or shearers’ cooks.”
Mr Spence—We w’ould like to retire for a
linute to consider this document.
Mr Spence and his colleagues then retired
om the room with several of the spectators.
On their return a few minutes later,
Mr Spence said—Gentlemen, before touching
le question involved in this document, I wish
) explain what might appear to be strange
ithout some explanation. Two or three of
te gentlemen whom we called out of the
iom represent districts in New South Wales
id their branches. We are anxious that
hat we do shall not be found fault with and
irped at by our people afterwards, and we
ish to bind them with us. They are simply
presenting other districts, and it was on that
:count that we asked your people to make
le number nine so that they would all be in,
id be bound by the decisions of the conference,
at as we arranged that five on each side
jould act, we took this Way of consulting
ith them in any important matter.which may
)me up. We have gone over this
emorandum, and we are quite willing to
jree to it with an exception. The part we
e not quite satisfied is that at the close of
ie document. It may of course be cleared
3, but it is the last clause having regard to
ie employment of Chinese or Kanakas as
carers or shearers’ cooks. The sentence
ads—“ It is also agreed on behalf of the
astoraiists’ Federal Council that the Council
will use its influence to prevent the employ-
ment of Chinese or Kanakas as shearers or
shearers’ cooks.” We would like that clause
made more definite and direct—for instance,
what has specially emphasised our feeling in
this matter is the fact that one of the
pastoralists during the past few days has
employed forty-six Chinese. He is a member
of the Pastoralists’ Union, and therefore we
emphasise this point. We understood before
that there was no desire to employ Chinese,
and that you do not approve of their being
employed. As we understood that, we feel
that this point will not be a serious difficulty
between us, but here is the fact that one large
pastoralist has already emploj’ed a large
number of Chinese on his run. That makes
it a somewhat important point with us, and
we would suggest
Mr Abbott—What is the name ?
Mr Spence—Mr P. C. Watt, of Goonah.
It was circulated in town that a large camp
had been established at Moree. There was
no camp there, but the police were sent out
and they were used to escort these Chinese to
the station. That caused additional soreness.
I do not know that the same thing has
occurred in any other part of the colony, but
what we would like is to make this clause
direct and empnatic, that the Pastoralists’
Federal Council will prevent the employment
of these aliens. This ought to be put in a
definite form.
Mr AbboU —Will you allow me to say a few r
words in regard to Mr Watt’s case. V/e hold
that we have a right to use our influence to
prevent the employment of Chinese, and the
course taken by us in Mr Watt’s case would
be the course we would adopt in any other
instance. That is what we mean by using
pur influence. In that case I may tell you
that what we did was to instruct Mr Watt not
to employ Chinese shearers, and on his
persisting in doing so his membership sub-
scription and levy payment were returned to
him with an intimation that our Union
declined to recognise him any longer as a
member. We could not take any stronger
action than that. That is using our influence.
If we say to a man absolutely you shall not
under any circumstances employ a Chinaman,
how are we to enforce our rule ? I think
may very well accept the action already taken
as an evidence of the strongest power we can
use. At the same time I quite agree with Mr
Spence that in this colony it is absolutely
undesirable that Chinese should be employed.
Allow me to read the resolution arrived at in
the case of Mr Watt.
Resolved—“ That in consequence of the
action of Mr P. C. Watt, of Goonah, in
9


employing labor on his property in defiance of
rules ii and 12 of this Union, his membership
subscription and levy payment be returned to
him forthwith, with an intimation that the
Pastoralists’ Union declines to recognise him
any longer as a member of the Pastoralists’
Union of New South Wales.” Carried
unanimously.
Mr Spence—As we are not anxious to raise
any bar at all to conference going on, and
having the assurance you have just given us,
which of course is now a definite statement,
we will agree to this document.
Mr Abbott—lt is absolutely necessary that
this document should be signed in writing.
You had better read it over before signing to
see that you are not signing a document
different to that which has been laid before
you.
Mr. Spence then read the document, and
two copies were signed by each of the dele-
gates.
Mr Spence—Now we are ready, I will
move that Mr Abbott occupy the chair at
this conference.
Mr Cottee seconded the motion, which was
carried unanimously.
The Chairman (Mr Abbott) —In taking the
chair on this occasion I still maintain my
right to vote on every question raised, but I
do not retain any casting vote at all as is
retained in the usual way by a chairman of
directors who claims the right to a casting
vote. I may mention that a gentleman is
here taking a definite account of everything
that occurs. We have obtained the services
of a shorthand writer. Have you any
objection to that ?
Mr Soence—Not the slightest.
The Chairman—We are not depending upon
what the newspapers may take down or leave
out. Will you please appoint a secretary for
both sides to take charge of the papers. Mr
Whitely King will act for us.
Mr Wilson—l will move that Mr Whitely
King and Mr W. W. Head be secretaries of
this conference.
Mr Spence seconded the motion.
Carried unanimously.
The Chairman —What I suppose will be
the order of business to follow what has al-
ready been done is to take the shearing
agreement. Have you any other proposal to
make before that ?
Mr Spence—l think that the shearing agree-
ment will be the first business. I assume, Mr
Chairman, that under the agreement the
heading will be represented as an agreement
mutually adopted between the two bodies.
The Chairman—l should say the course to
be taken would be the course always adopted
with bills in the House. You simply put the-
preamble aside until the end, when you know
what you are going to put after it. I think
until we know that we have an agreement it is
no use saying what form the heading will
take ; but I think the proper course would be-
to begin with the preparatory clause—Agree-
ment made this day of —then,
if we agree mutually on the crovisions of the
agreement we have a definite agreement and'
rules before us, and then we can put in a-,
heading in accordance with what has taken
place.
Mr Spence—l am assuming when it is
finally agreed upon that will be done.
The Chairman —-Then we will postpone the
heading.
Mr Spence—ln the first clause ?
Mr Elder—You are speaking as to the de-
claratory clause.
Mr Spence—Yes. It may be as well to
mention that in doing our work, whatever may
be our individual oninion, we are endeavoring
to have this agreement so plain, as to give
satisfaction to the mass of men we are acting
for. At our own conference the words “ faith-
fully serve the employer” were thought to be
unnecessary, and in the agreement originally
drafted between ourselves and the South
Australian pastoralists the clause was altered
to leave out the intermediate words between
“ agrees to” and “ all the sheep.” Ido not
know if there is any objection to that being;
done. When we had our own conference sit-
ting (at the express desire of a large number
of delegates) it was held that these words-
ought to be left out. That is the reason I!
raise the point.
Mr Campbell But they subsequently-
agreed to it.
Mr Spence—l am referring to a large con-
ference of our own body held in February last.
I know that since then they have given way
on it.
Mr. Campbell—Does not this more re
cent agreement nullify any previous agree-
ment } r ou may have made ?
Mr Spence—But it does not nullify the-
wishes of a large number of our representa-
tives ; that is the point I raise.
The Chairman—lf there are any other
amendments in that particular clause it will be
better to get them before the meeting, so as to-
see how they affect each other.
Mr Temple—lt is desirable that a friendly
feeling should be inculcated between the-
employers and the men, and the general dispo-
sition among the men is against these words
referred to by Mr Spence. They do not
appear to be of any great value to the em-
ployers, and their excision will do away with
10


this little bit of nasty feeling on the part of
the shearers.
Mr Spence—There is no objection to the
other portion of the clause. There is only one
point which has heen referred to before. You
notice in the agreement which the Shearers’
Union itself has adopted, it could be signed
by the whole body of men or it would act for
one man. We do not know what your opinion
on that point may be. It is only a matter of
detail in connection with the working which
makes them all able to sign. They can all
sign together at one time, after which an indi-
vidual agreement can be signed.
Mr Campbell—l think it is more conve-
nient for both sides to have a separate agree-
ment, and in connection with Mr Spence’s
contention I would draw attention to a case
tried in Mutta Burra, Queensland, in Decem-
ber, 1888. The contention of the shearer’s
lawyer, Mr. Byrne, was that the agreement
was not a valid one at law, inasmuch as there
was no separate contract entered into with
each shearer individually. The judge held
that although there was no valid agreement at
law, still that the spirit and intention of the
shearer to shear in terms of the agreement was
sufficiently evidenced by their having signed
a collective agreement. We think it is more
satisfactory to have each individual shearer
sign. It is as much for the protection of the
shearer as the sheepowner. Another argument
against it being signed by a body is, suppose
that a shearer has a dispute with the sheep-
owner, and has to go to a court fifty miles
away, where the agreement has to be taken.
In the meantime, suppose another dispute
arises at the shed ; they have to wait for the
return of the document before any settlement
can be arrived at.
Mr Spence—We are not raising any
objection, but I think it is as well to discuss
the matter now. The legal advice we have
had on more than one occasion is different
from the opinion there, and it is the opinion
of very good firms, but we do not wish to run
any risk, especially if there is any division
among the lawyers.
Mr Campbell—lt is fair for both sides.
The Chairman—The only matter then, is
this question of ‘‘faithfully serving” the
employer, how do you propose to alter that ?
Mr Spence—Leave out the words “ faith-
fully serve” the employer by shearing with all
reasonable despatch. Mr Temple has ex-
pressed the ideas of the men. It is a good
deal of a sentimental objection, but we have
to be guided by those we act for. It will give
satisfaction to a large number of men if the
words are not left in. I think they may
attach a meaning, which possibly is not in-
tended. We know that they have to faith-
fully serve in any case, but we are certain the
omission will give satisfaction.
Mr Williams—Although those in South;
Australia agreed to those words being left in,,
they only represented South Australia. There
were three of the Executive Council of the
A.S.U., and they acted fcr South Australia
pure and simple, but we are here on behalf of
New South Wales, and I am sure that the;
feeling of the majority of the members of our
bodies throughout is that these words should!
be omitted. I think their exclusion makes
very little difference, and as Mr Temple has
pointed out, it will avert friction and illfeeling.
Mr Spence—With regard to the settlement
made in South Australia, the meeting was.
held at Port Augusta at which satisfaction;
was expressed, but a meeting was afterwards
held in Broken Hill, New South Wales, at
which they expressed strong dissatisfaction. I
received from the Chairman a strong wire on
the subject, and I was to ask the delegates
what they meant by their conduct. That
shows that there was a strong division of
opinion of the matter.
The Chairman—With this difference, that
at Port Augusta the men were shearers, but.
at Broken Hill the men were miners.
Mr Temple—No.
The Chairman—There are not many
shearers there.
Mr Spence—Yes, they come from Wil-
cannia and all around the district to a meeting
of the Shearers’ Union.
The Chairman—lf you are satisfied, make;
the thing run “ hereby agree to shear with all
reasonable despatch.”
Mr Toomey—l take it that the expression)
to shear all sheep during the present season
may be read that if a man signed this agree-
ment and the employer, if he had three or
four different sheds in different colonies, could
compel that man after signing this agree-
ment to shear the whole season, from one
shed to another.
Mr Campbell—Clause 2 names the station.
The Chairman—l would point out that the
clause says that the total number of sheep-
required to be shorn by the whole of the
shearers employed during the season are not.
to be less than so many thousand, nor more
than a particular number. That specifies-
exactly the limit of sheep that he will be
asked to shear.
Mr Toomey—But they may fill in not less
than “ one hundred thousand” and not more
than “five hundred thousand.”
The Chairman—He need not sign then*
This makes the whole thing clear, and it was
intended to do so, that the men should know
11


at least the number they would have to shear.
Mr Temple—lt it is stated, before this
agreement is signed, it is all right.
The Chairman—l am putting it to you
that the declaratory clause of the shearing
agreement provides the minimum and maxi-
mum number that are to be shorn.
Mr Spence moved—To strike out the words
“ faithfully serve the employer by shearing”
be omitted, and that the word ‘‘shear” be
inserted after the words “ agrees to” in the
.fourth line of the declaratory clause.
Mr Temple seconded the motion, which
was agreed to,
The clause was agreed to as amended.
Clauses one and two were agreed to without
amendment.
Clause three.
Mr Toomey—l wish to add the word “good”
before water.
Mr Campbell—That is beyond our control.
Mr Temple—l propose that we insert before
■“water,” the words “ best available.” At
some stations it is perhaps not possible *o get
good water.
Mr Campbell—lt goes without saying that
the men get the best water that is to be ob-
tained.
Mr Temple —They do not get it.
Mr Campbell—The boss and all alike are
served from the same supply.
Mr Wilson—You cannot give a case other-
wise.
Mr Temple—Yes, we can give names.
Mr Spence—We will not object to the
■clause. If there is anything wrong, we will
report to the Pastoralists’ Union.
The clause was agreed to without amend-
ment.
Clause 4.
The Chairman—l have had some sugges-
tions submitted to me by men in my district,
which I wish to place before the conference.
I wish to alter Clause 4 with regard to the
rate of 15s per w?eek to be charged for board
.and lodging, Cook’s remuneration included.
That 15s is a sort of a compromise in many
parts of the country. The charge of the mess
rate comes far below that, and it has been re-
presented to me by some of the men—l think
with good reason—that in the district to which
d belong, if they happen to leave the shed,
without the permission of the employer or
from sickness before the completion of the
shearing, they would be fined virtually Js or
6s a week, and it would not be in the power
of the enployer to remit that because the 15s
a week goes to the mess rate. I want to pro-
vide for that by inserting after “ fifteen
.shillings,” the words “or such rate as the
shearers agree upon.” That will leave them,
in a district like that to which I belong, to
fix ten shillings if they like, or in a district
where the charges may be higher, to decide
upon 16s or 17s if they choose. The matter
rests altogether with the shearers. The
employer has no share in the matter, and it
should be with the shearers to fix the rate.
Mr Williams—l think the Chairman’s sug-
gestion is a very good one, because there are
districts where the mess rate does not come to
anything like 15 shillings. If the alteration is
made then the shearers in that shed will
decide what mess rate should be paid, and I
take it that the shearer leaving or being dis-
charged, and not feeling, satisfied with the
rate fixed by his fellow shearers, will say “ I
will not ab de by the rate fixed, but will pay
15 shillings.”
Mr Spence—l think it is a g'ood pro-
posal.
Mr Williams—l will second the motion.
The words “or such rates as the shearers
agree upon ” were inserted after the words
“ per week” in the third line and the clause
was agreed to.
The Chairman—Of course we claim the
right to insert, on behalf of non-union men, a
number of whom are w'orking for us, an}? pro-
vision such as this which has been suggested
to us -
Mr Spence—We are making these for
shearers. That point has been dealt with.
Clause 5.
Mr Spence—There is an objection to this
clause, and I may have to move two amend-
ments to it, one in the second line. We have
an objection to the words “ attached hereto.”
The men think this clause as it stands is
rather indefinite. It says that rules are
“ attached hereto.” That will leave indivi-
dual pastoralists to attach any rules they may
think fit to this agreement. As it stands the
agreement seems indefinite and unfinished, as
if there w'as something we do not know any-
thing about. I move that the wmrds “attached
hereto ” be struck out.
Mr Campbell—lt sometimes happens that
the agreement has to be posted up, and you
cannot then see both sides of it.
Mr Spence—The words “ endorsed hereon”
cover that. In posting them up you post up
two agreements, one with one side exposed,
and the other with the other. As the agree-
ment stands, it could be taken advantage of
by having any number of rules attached to it
of which we know nothing.
The Chairman—The suggestion comes from
another direction also, and we have alreadv
agreed to strike these words out. We would
have moved it if you had not already done
so.
12


Mr Temple—With regard to the cost of 20
(hillings a week for board, etc., the shearers
:onsider that rather a high rate. If a shearer
vere discharged almost at the end of the shed
te would have to pay a terrible amount for his
■ations. He would thus have a lot of his earn-
ngs taken away. It would not matter so
nuch if he was discharged at the early part
)f his engagement. The amount is rather
hgh, and I would suggest that we make it
:Bs. per week.
The Chairman—ls that - the only amend-
nent proposed to be made. We may as well
jet them all in hand.
Mr Spence—l think so.
Mr Campbell— On the other hand a man
light want to go away before the shed was
at out.
The Chairman—That tw'enty shillings per
'eek is in the nature of a fine. It is a charge
gainst him for board and lodging, that is for
is mess rate. It is more than the mess rate
>y five shillings, if he left in the ordinary w r ay.
But the emnloyer does not get the money or
my part of it, it goes to lessen the change on
he other shearers, and I have always held on
hat point that the man who slums his work
or the sake of getting a discharge at the end
if the shearing, does an injury, not so much to
he employer, as to the other shearers whom
le delays getting to the next shed, and for
hat reason the fine for cutting himself out is
he best. The shearers, b} r this agreement,
lave a compensation for the injury done by
hat man cutting himself out, and endeavoring
0 get his discharge, thus keeping his fellows
onger in the shed or making them delay or
ireak their contract for cutting into another
hed. It is necessary to have some charge
ind it is simply a question whether it is too
ligh.
Mr Langwell—l think what we have
already agreed to in clause 4 might very well
be carried out in clause 5. As the chairman has
already said, the sheepowner derives no bene-
fit from this extra 5 shillings. I think that if
the matter is left as in the first case, where the
shearer leaves through some accident or cause
over which he has no control, the subject is
delegated to his fellow shearers to decide, and
in this instance if it is left to the same autho-
rity they will decide justly whether he goes
away with the object to benefit himself or not.
I w ould move that the sum of fifteen shillings
fixed in clause 4 be adopted here with the
addition after the amount “or such terms as
may be agreed upon by the shearers.”
The Chairman—l may point out the
difference between the two cases. In the
first instance the matter is wholly between the
shearer and his mate. He goes with the per-
mission of his employers or because of sickness.
In the second place, if he cuts out, the injury
is not wholly with his mates for he also does
an injury to his employer by leaving him.
You must make a hard and fast rule or > the
employer must have the same safeguard as his
mates.
Mr Williams—l would like to point out
there is no provision here for a man leaving.
I take it that if the sheepowner has a perfect
right to discharge the shearer who does not
suit him, the shearer individually should have
a right to leave any employer w r ho does not
suit him. Some provision should be made in
that direction. I myself would have no
objection to 20s. being left as it is, if it is dis-
tinctly understood that it should cut both ways
and it is a very poor rule that does not act in
that manner. If the sheepowner has the right,
and he should have the right, to discharge
every man without being questioned, the
shearer should have the same reasonable right
to leave.
The Chairman —We representing the em-
ployers do not agree with the opinion
expressed by Mr Williams that the employer
should have the right without stating any
reason to discharge a man. Under this rule
an employer can only discharge for any
breach of the agreement signed.
Mr. Spence—Of which he is the sole judge.
The Chairman —He is the sole judge in the
first place, but in every case there is an
appeal to the courts of the country. The
employer may say you are not shearing the
sheep in a workmanlike manner, and I admit
there is a difficulty in the man proving ithat
he is shearing in a workmanlike manner, but
in the courts of law hus rights are exactly
equal to that of the owner. Supposing he
could go and prove he is shearing in a work-
manlike manner, he could recover from the
owner for breach of agreement, or the em-
ployer could recover from him were he to leave
without reason. The shearer would have to
prove his case, although I admit there is a
difficulty about proving it. But that opinion
of Mr Williams’ is not endorsed by the
employers, and we do not claim that we have
a right to discharge any man without giving
a reason. We say we should have a right to
dismiss a man for breach of agreement, and
no other cause, and he has to prove if he
bring us to court that there has been a breach
of agreement on our part.
Mr Spence—Theoretically that is so, but
practically the other side has it their own way,
and no court in the world will get over the
emplojers r power to discharge men. Do you
not see that in the first statement in this
agreement the work has to be done to the
13


satisfaction of the owner. It is a question, not
•of carrying out a contract according to certain
specifications, but the work has to be done to
4he owner’s satisfaction, and if a man says “ 1 am
dissatisfied with this,” it is a complete reply
at law, because the contract says the work has
to be done to his satisfaction. If he is hard
to please, I claim he has a right to discharge
a man when he likes. I am not raising an
objection to the existence of that power.
Practically a man can prove nothing by going
to law, when he has agreed to do work “ to
the satisfaction” of the other party. That
-does not say whether the woik is well done or
not—it must be done to please the employer.
A man says, “ 1 am not satisfied,” and is asked
■“ why.” His reply is, “ Because I do not
agree with the way in which he did his work,”
and that is an end of the matter. We recog-
nise that this 20s. which has been alluded to
is a fine, and we have not objected to it,
because we desired to prevent, with you, a
man purposely slumming his work, in order
to get his discharge, but on the other hand,
men have been discharged who have done
good work. Their mates working beside
them when they have seen that, have felt that
they have been unjustly dealt with, and they
■consider that to punish them by a fine is still
more unjust. This is where the difficulty
-crops up. Starting from the point that the
employer must have a right to say that the
agreement is being properly carried out, we
assume from that, that the fact of a man being
discharged argues that he broke his ageee-
ment and deserved to be punished. I am
inclined to think that the simplest way is to
have an amount fixed. Twenty shillings is a
large sum, and I would second the proposal of
Mr. Temple to make 18s. the rate. That
would amount to a considerable sum under
the penalty. Besides that there are other
methods of pi eventing a man from slumming
his work. So far as we can exert the power,
we would say, if there is to be co-operation,
such an individual as has been spoken of can
be punished, and the Union itself will find a
method of dealing with him. The amount of
the penalty does not stop the slumming, but
we think we can deal with it. We recognise
that there should be some penalty, and it is
only a question of the amount. We are not
differing very much as to the price. I think
18s. might be fixed ;it is not quite so large a
sum as 205., but it comes very close to it, and
it ought to meet the case.
The Chairman—None of the propositions
have been seconded, unless Mr. Spence
seconds that of Mr Temple.
Mr Williams—l second that of Mr Lang-
well.
Mr Langwell’s amendment was put, tha
the rate be fixed at 155., with the addition
words “or such rate as the shearers agr(
upon,” and was negatived by seven votes l
three.
Mr. Temple’s motion in favor of fixing ti
rate at 18s., as seconded by Mr. Spence, w;
then put.
The Chairman—l might mention that v
have to keep in view that you represent tv
other colonies besides New South Wales, ar
that we represent three colonies beside oi
own. Uniformity must be remembered.
Mr Williams—l understand that the pri
amble spates that we are meeting on behalf 1
New South Wales,
The Chairman —That is admitted, but
point out that you must have in view interes
outside New South Wales.
Mr Langwell—Although we are represent
ing New South Wales, we are not guided b
anything that has taken place outside of it.
The Chairman—Neither are we. One 1
our members has pointed out that the sheare:
in the other colonies have agreed to one thin<
and therefore they must be satisfied.
Mr. Spence—l think the cost of living it
South Australia is a point which ought not t
be overlooked—lBs. here is equal to 20s. there
I know that they have to cart goods h;
camels, and consequently the cost of article
is more than in many parts of this colony.
The amendment was carried, at eightee:
shillings.
The clause as amended was agreed to.
Clause 6 :
Mr Spence—l do not think there is an]
special objection to this clause, although
have a question or two to put in regard to it
It states “ once a week on a day to be namec
at commencement of shearing.” I presum
that would be a day of the week.
Mr Elder—lt says so.
Mr Spence—But suppose a man is dis
charged, or he leaves under clause 4, would h
have to wait for his pay ?
The Chairman—No. This rule says tha
the employer shall pay to the shearer an;
sum not exceeding 60 per cent, due over am
above one week’s earnings, on demand. I
would be a tremendous inconvenience to hav
each man coming up on a different day to b
paid. The best thing to do is to fix a da
beforehand, and let the men draw on that da
what they want.
Mr Spence—The same as an ordinary pa
day.
The Chairman—Yes.
The clause'was agreed to.
14


Clause 7 ;
Mr. Spence—l move that the words
attached hereto” be struck out in this clause.
Mr. Temple seconded.
The motion was agreed to, and the clause
idopted_as amended.
RULES,
Rule r was agreed to.
Rule 2 :
The Chairman—Everyone knows why that
is put in. It is to allow the first shearers to
be brought close to the table.
The Rule was agreed to.
Rule 3: —
Mr Williams—This clause needs some
alteration. It says all sheep must be taken
carefully from the pens to the shearing board,
and be shorn closely, and in a fair and work-
manlike manner and to the satisfaction of the
person who is in charge of the shed. The
belly wool to be taken off first and laid
aside. I want to substitute for the word
“ first ” the word “ separately.” There is a
class of country where the sheep get the wool
very sandy or muddy so that it is almost
impossible to shear the lower portions of the
animals first. In the back country the
sheep have to go to the dam to get water.
The edges of the dams are muddy and the
mud becomes caked on the fleeces, from the
feet upwards, and if the shearer had to take
the belly wool off first it would make the
shears so dull that he could not shear the rest
of the sheep with them. It would be best to
alter this sentence by either inserting the word
“separately” or “where practicable ” instead
of first. It is not practicable where the
country is sandy or where the sheep have to
go to the banks of a stream or a dam and the
mud becomes caked on them to carry out this
portion of the agreement.
Mr Spence—l think it would be better to
adopt Mr Williams’ suggestion.
The Chairman—lt seems to me where the
shearer does not take that portion of the fleece
referred to by Mr Williams off first, he takes
it last.
Mr Temple—l will second Mr Williams
motion for the insertion of the words “ where
practicable.” At nearly every previous con-
ference we have had before with the pastoia-
lists those words have been adopted.
The Chairman—But Mr Williams moved
the insertion of the words “separately.”
Mr Temple—That will do.
Ihe Chairman—l am thinking whether the
other part ought not to go in also, and whether
we ought not to say that where there is
nothing to prevent it, you should take this
portion of the wool off first.
Mr Williams—That is a matter which rests
with the person in charge. It is always
understood that either one or the other has to
be taken off first. It is a matter left entirely
with the the shed. In some
parts of New South Wales it is i.ot taken off
till the last, so that if you use the word
separately it will meet the case.
Mr Wilson—l will point out that there is a
strong argument in practice against Mr
Williams’ proposed arrangement. If the
shearer is allowed to leave that part of the
wool on till the last, opportunity may be given
for shirking. In a large shed where there are
a number of sheep being turned out it con-
tinually happens that sheep are sent out with-
out that portion of the wool being taken off at
all. I have seen this done myself and I think
it is best, if pos°ible, to keep the clause as it
is. In any case I would not agreee to any-
thing more than the insertion of the words
“where practicable.”
Mr Spence—Either of the phrases will meet
our wishes.
The Chairman—lf you will alter your
motion to “ where practicable ” we will be
able to agree to it unanimously.
Mr Spence—That will indicate that this
work is to be done first, but if it is impractic-
able it is to be done last. Some of the men
keep one pair of shears for this work and a
sharp pair for the other portions of the
animal.
The rule was amended by the insertion of
the words “ where practicable ” after “ first ”
and was agreed to as amended.
Rule 5: —
Mr. Temple—l would suggest that the
words “or treat ” in this rule be eliminated.
I believe that at the conference held recently
between the Shearers’ Union and Pastoralists’
Union of South Australia these words were
struck out.
Mr Campbell—What is the objection to
their being left.
Mr Temple—We scarcely' think they are
necessary.
The Chairman—He has got to sew, and
probably, where a bad cut is made, he has to
treat it, or tar, or dress it, with some of the
washes in use now. I cannot see that there
is anything very important involved in your
suggestion.
Mr. Campbell—This is a very simple
matter and the phrase covers the ground very
well.
Mr Spence —Is it necessary to put this in.
In some agreements it was stated that no
shearer shall tar his sheep except in the case
of a severe cut or stab. Would it not be wise
to have something of that kind at the begin-
ning of this clause. A tar boy is kept to tar
15


the'sheen, but I know in some of our agree-
ments this provision is inserted and my
brother delegates, who are practical sheep
shearers, know whether it is necessary to have
it mentioned. Is it sufficient to leave it as a
recognised practise ?
The Chairman—lt is a recognised practice
that a shearer does not tar his own sheep.
Mr Williams—l will move the addition of
the words that “ no shearer shall tar his sheep
except in the case of a severe cut or stab, in
which case he shall dress the sheep to the
satisfaction of the emplo}'er or his representa-
tives.”
Mr Campbell—l will draw attention to the
fact that your own agreement is the same, except
for the exclusion of the words “or treat.”
That in case any shearer turns out a sheep
badly cut or insufficiently tarred he shall at
once sew or tar the wound if require I to do so.
It is your own rule.
Mr Spence—We have another rule on the
line Mr. Williams has now indicated, covering
the recognised practice.
The Chairman—l would like to be told if
any one knows of a case where this rule has
worked wrongly. Really, the one rule is
taken from the other—from your own agree-
ment and no difficulty has been found in
regard to it.
Mr Spence—We have an additional rule
covering the tarring of sheep by boys. Ido
not think there is any particular objection to
this rule. It is intended to make the man
bring his sheep back if he cuts it badly. The
rule in our former agreement says—“ No
shearer shall tar his sheep except on a severe cut
or stab, in which case he shall dress such cut
or stab.” How would it do to insert a clause
as follows ?—“ No shearer shall be required
to tar his sheep except on a severe cut or stab,
in which case he shall dress or sew such cut or
stab to the satisfaction of the sheepowner or
his representative.”
Mr Temple—l will move the insertion of
that.
The Chairman—Mr Temple’s proposal is
that this rule should be substituted for
rule 5,
Mi Langwell—l will second the motion.
The Chairman—There is not an agreement
of opinion on this point, so I shall have to
take a vote on the question.
The voting resulted in a tie, five members
voting for and five against the amendment.
Mr Spence—There is really no practical
difference between us, only in the condition
of the statement that a man shall not be
required to tar his sheep except on a bad cut
or stab. We want the tar boy to tar small cuts;
The proposal was only intended to cove:
that. There is nothing more between us.
Mr Williams There are several shed;
where no tar boys are employed. A tar.pol
is p'aced alongside each shearer, and he has tc
use the tar. Every little cut, now matter hov
small, requires tarring, and it is only righ;
that this work should be done, but it is no:
reasonable that a man should be asked to dc
it. I think it is only fair that the owner,
should do as they do in most cases, find tht
tar boy.
Mr Campbell—l would draw your attentior
to the word badly used in the tule. That is ;
complete answer to your contention.
Mr Wilson—One object of this rule is to
keep the responsibility with the shearer who
knows of the cut. You admit that the
practice of supplying a tar boy is invariably
accepted except at small sheds where any
rules are ignored. I must emphasise that the
object of this rule is very much to attach
responsibility to the shearer to see whether
the tar goes on the animal. He knowsiJ
the cut and ought to see about the matter.
The Chairman—The only thing we can do
is to dispose of the rule for the present. We
shall have to pass it as it is, and to put it to
the vote to be recommitted or postpone it.
The further consideration of the rule was
postponed.
Rules 6 and 7 were agreed to.
Rule 8 :
Mr Temple—ln this clause I would suggesi
that the prices to be charged by the employei
for rations and shearers’ requisites shall noi
exceed cost price with “ five per cent” insteac
of “ ten per cent.” as stated here, added. The
shearer is under considerable expense in
travelling about the country to shear, and 1
do not think that the employer should wish
to make anything out of the men who do the
work. It is thought the charge of ten pei
cent imposed in this rule is a little bit high
and I would ask the gentlemen on the othei
side if they can reduce it to five per cent.
Mr Campbell—We have to keep a man ic
charge of the stores, and that man’s wages
have to be paid.
Mr Toomey seconded the motion.
Mr Wilson—Of course in the present rule
we are dealing with a very wide and varying
state of circumstances. You are all aware
that there are stations in this colon}' which
sometimes have their stores a year behind
hand. I have known them to be two years
behind hand when receiving stores despatched
up the Darling, and a second set of stores
have had to be sent from some other point in
the meantime. There is a considerable
amount of lost time in transit, and the goods
16


have to be paid for before they reach the
station, and sometimes even 20 per cent,
would not pay the owner to sell at the rate
over that at which he has bought them. If
you take any station where the goods are only
10 days or a week in transit ten per cent, is
sufficient, but there are other cases where ten
percent, is altogether under the mirk, and I
contend that that allowance is a very fair
thing, besides it is not to exceed ten per cent.
That is the maximum, and I know that many
back country will lose considerably on that.
Mr Spence—The cost of carriage is added.
The owner has the right to put that on.
Mr \\ ilson—lt is only ten per cent, on the
invoice price, and not on the whole of the
charges and the loss of time in transit. I
maintain this is a very reasonable medium to
adopt. Of course it is a recognised practice
now in a great many places, even when they
are outside stations to adopt the system of
tendering, and the station owner is only too
willing to arrange with the contractor. I
have done so myself and allowed everything
to be contracted for delivery at the shed by
any outsider rather than by the store. It is not
practicable to do that everywhere, but in cases
where it cannot be done the sheepowner is the
man who stands to lose money. He has to get
up his stores a long time in anticipation. Wheie
it is practicable to obtain them early there is
no hardship because of the contract system.
Wheie you can save money you contract, but
where you might lose money you compel the
station owner to abide by what is laid down
Mr Temple withdrew his motion, and the
rule was passed without amendment.
Rule 9 :
Mr Wilson—lf there is no other amendment
I would suggest that it is only fair to many
small owners in all parts of the country—and
-here are many such in the far back districts
-hat free run should only be given for one
horse, and therefore I would move the addi-
tion of the the words “ after horses,” “ where
3000 sheep or more are to be shorn, but in
:ases where there are less than 5000 sheep to
be shorn, one horse,”
Mr Spence—We will agree to that, and I
second the motion.
Mr Langwell—lt may be necessary to put a
provision for a man having two horses.
The Chairman—lt is impossible to go to a
imall selector and say you must take my
lorses. A man says I can only give you a
un for one house and I cannot take the other.
Mr Langwell—Many men have two horses,
md he would say I cannot employ you.
The Chairman—You cannot determine in
■n agreement like this beforehand what a man
shall do with his own grass, or fix the price
at which he wishes to sell it.
Mr Spence—lt must be a mutual agree-
ment.
The amendment was agreed to, and the rule
was r, a-srd as amended.
(vulcs to and ii were adopted without
amendment.
The co i r'e ence adjourned for lunch.
AFTERNOON SITTING.
Rule 12 :
The Chairman—We will take up the matter
where we left off before the adjournment.
The next question before us is Rale 12,
“ Shearers shall provide theii own cook
except where cooks work conjointly for
shearers and the employer, in which case the
cook shall be engaged by the employer and
the proportion of mess account and of cook’s
remuneration shall be a matter of mutual
agreement.”
Mr Wddams—l w mid p-ffnt out that I
think it would be advisable for the shearers
if they wished, to have a choice of cook. I
think if there are say 20 shearers and as many
rouseabouts, that they should choose in the
event of there being two cooks on the ground,
as to which shall cook for them, because the
shearers have to pay for a portion of the
rations at all events, and they are not likely
to put on a man who would deliberately waste
anything.
The Chairman—On the other hand I would
point out that it is not the rouseabouts who
pay for the other portion of the rations.
Mr Williams—But the shearers have to eat
what is cooked for them.
Mr Wilson—l would point out that the
rule is made to provide at least to some extent
for a different set of circumstances. In many
cases, that is in the small sheds, there are
perhaps only 4or 5 shearers engaged, and it
is like a harvesting at a farmer’s house where
the people do the cooking. It is simply to
do away with a special set of agreements. My
experience is that where there are more than
about 10 shearers there is nearly always a
separate cook. It is not a matter which is
very often fallen out about. As a rule the
employer leaves it to the men and mostly to
the shearers to say whether a ccok shall be
replaced, if he can be or not. But I don’t
thi , k there is anything in it, because I know
that nearly all sheds where there are more
than 20,000 sheep there is a separate hut, and
it is just to show that the employer is not
responsible for the cook, where there is a
separate establishment for the shearers, than
17


anything else. That is the object of the rule,
and I think it is the best arrangement that
can be made.
Mr Campbell—lt is hardly likely that the
employers will clash with the shearers, as it is
to his interest as well as to that of the
shearers and the rouseabouts to have a good
cook.
Mr Spence—They are scarce articles un-
fortunately.
Mr Campbell—Yes, but it is to the interests
of the men as well as the owners that they
should have a good one.
The Chairman —My experience in the part
of the country where I am, is, that shearers
would be put in a fix if the employers were to
say to them, “find your own cook.” They
would be stuck up for a week in many cases,
as they could not get cooks. It is a trouble-
some thing to get cooks to come even there.
It is all very well to cook for 40 or 50 shearers.
Then a cook makes a good cheque, but where
there are 10 men or so, the cook does not
make a high cheque, he only makes perhaps
10s a week. As a matter of fact, an employer
has to look out for weeks before he can find a
cook, and from the employers point of view it
would be infinitely better to say “ find your
own cooks, I have nothing to do with it.”
The effect would be, however, that he would
find the shearing stopped because the shearers
could not go on for want of a cook.
Mr Williams—What 1 meant to point out
was that where there are two cooks, the men
should have the option of making a choice.
Mr Campbell—Where there are two cooks,
it rests with the men to say which they will
have.
Mr Williams —That is what I want. I
have seen on large stations instances of where
there were two cooks, and there has been no
matter of a choice.
Mr Elder —Can you name an instance ?
Mr Williams—l can. Mr Hill, of Barra-
bogga station.
The Chairman—Shearing under what agree-
ment ?
Mr Williams —Verbal agreement, I think.
The Chairman —Barrabogga does not come
under this agreement at all.
Mr Williams—Yes; but it was a large shed.
Mr Wilson —He had no power.
Mr Williams —No, but the men yielded the
point rather than make a fuss.
Mr Campbell—This is not for big sheds at
all, the difficulty can never crop up in a big
shed.
Mr Langwell —l think I can make a sug-
gestion which will get over the difficulty. I
would suggest that the latter portion of the
rule, “ proportion of mess account and of
corks remuneration” shall be a matter c
mutual agreement. By this suggestion
have made, I think there would be a bette
feeling on both sides if it was made by mutua
arrangement. I will move that the word
“ mutually agreed ” be inserted in the secon
line before the words “ by the employer.”
Mr Wilson—That might lead to a ver
serious dead-lock. The employer may say “
won’t have that cook,” and the shearers migh
say “we won’t have this.” Then which cn
will you have ?
Mr Langwell—lf a man is engaging anothe
man it is only right that he should have a sa;
in the matter.
Mr Campbell—He does when he is beinj
engaged ; it is a matter of mutual agreement
Mr Langwell—But the shearer has no sa
in the engagement. He has only to do wit!
the payment
Mr Campbell—But the one goes with thi
other.
Mr Langwell—Not necessarily.
Ihe Chairman— My own experience is ii
the district to which I belong—at any rate
speaking for myself, I certainly always pro
vide for a cook before any men are engaged
and the men always say they will have him.
Mr Langwell—Then he is appointed bi
mutual agreement.
The Chairman—l always tell him to b(
there so that they may consider the matter.
Mr Williams—l should like some provisiot
to the effect that where there are two cooks, th<
men should have a choice.
Mr Spence—Would it meet the case if th<
number of men were inserted ?
The Chairman—l don’t see how it wouf
come in. In some cases where they onl
shear 20,000 sheep, they have only eight 0
nine men, and were you to stipulate for 1
shearers that would not affect them. Wher
would jou think of fixing the limit ?
Mr Spence —Say where there are i 3 or mor
shearers.
Mr Williams—l think we are quite satisfiei
that the employer should employ his cooli
but that there should be some mutual arrange
ment in the matter.
Mr Campbell—And where would you pro
pose to put that ?
Mr Williams—ln the second line: “ En
gaged by mutual agreement.”
The Chairman—Would “ engaged mutual!
by the employers and shearers,” meet you
views ?
Mr Spence—Yes, that would cover it. I
would not appear so arbitrary then. YOl
want to have a little give and take in thi:
kind of rule.
Mr Whitely King The entry on thi
18


minutes we have here is—•“ Moved by Mr
Langwell that the words ‘ mutual ’ be inserted
after the words ‘ engaged,’ and the words ‘and
shearers’ after the words ‘by the employer.’
Seconded by Mr. Williams.”
Chairman—Will that amendment meet your
views ?
Mr Spence—Yes.
The motion was agreed to unanimousl}'.
Rule 13. —“In all sheds where shearing
machines are provided shearers shall pay for
cutters and combs a price not exceeding cost.
In case of stoppage through breakage or
otherwise, shearers shall, if required, go on
shearing with the hand shears,”
Mr Spence—This rule is one which of
course is a very important one, and very con-
siderable interest is taken in it by the shearers,
and naturally also by the other side. It is a
question of money to both sides. The feeling
of the shearers appears to have been from our
experience of the past that there is a difference
of opinion and a difference of experience.
Some say that had they been compelled to pay
up for the combs or cutters they would have
had a very serious loss. There is a very great
difference between them and hand shearers.
That has been their experience in the matter
of breakages, owing largely to inferior combs
and cutters being supplied. Some of them
are not so well shaped, and had to be ground
down so much that by the time they were in
proper form they lasted no time, and were
liable to break. In some other cases, of
course, it is admitted that there has not been
a very large number used. In fact, the wish
is that this should be left an open question
with the employer to find them. That is the
desire. The reason generally given is that
when they shear with hand shears they find
the shears.
Mr Campbell—And occasionally get bad
Mr Spence—They think that if they have
to provide their own combs and cutters there
should be an equivalent in the shape of in-
creased wages. It has been the experience of
some that it would practically reduce their
wages to a very small sum. That may be
owing to the newness of the hands using them,
or possibly to the inferior quality of the appli-
ances themselves. Our request, therefore, is
ttiat this rule be altered to provide for the
employer finding combs and cutters.
Chairman—We would like to have the form
in which you propose that. I would tell you
in reply to your argument, that our expe-
rience is that there is a very strong desire on
these terms to get into machine sheds. Every
man tries to rush the machine sheds, so that
seems an unanswerable argument to your
statement that a man can make less money by
using machines.
Mr Spence —There is a division in the
experience.
, Chairman—Our experience is all in the one
direction—that they tried to rush the machine
sheds.
Mr Spence—But you must not forget that
the combs and cutters have been found them in
the past. That is the difference.
Chairman—But it is under this agreement
that our experience has been gained, during
the piesent season. -
Mr Spence—But that is hardl}*- an expe-
rience yet.
Chairman—ln Queensland, at any rate, they
have had the same experience. Before we
can discuss that, however, we want to get the
form in which you propose to amend the rule
or any substitute for it which you may have
in view.
Mr Temple—l beg to move that it be put
in this form—“ In all sheds where shearing
machines are provided sheepowner shall
provide cutters and Combs free of cost. fn
case of stoppage through breakage or other-
wise shearer shall, if required, go on shearing
with the hand shears.” This is a ver}' impor-
tant matter for the shearer. The general
quality of this machinery is not Ai just yet,
and if a man broke very many of these
combs it would be a very big item for him, I
have known some of these to break as soon
as they touched the skin. This machinery
was introduced for the benefit of the employer.
The Chairman—And the shearer.
Mr Temple I think it scarcely fair to ask
the shearer to pay the cost of it, seeing that
the machinery is provided for the employer's
benefit.
Chairman—The shearer gets the benefit of
it too.
Mr Temple—lt is a big item to the shearer
if he has to pay for all these combs and
cutters.
Mr Wilson—This question has to be
approached with the understanding that this
matter of machine shearing is in its transi-
tion state. It is continually changing from
season to season, and may change from
month to month. Therefore it is impossible
to legislate by a hard and fast rule. We
know that similar machines, such as sew-
ing machines, have wonderfully improved. In
a few years several of these have gone utterly
out of date. Now I approach this clause with
that understanding, and probaoly before
another three months have passed there may
be some totally different circumstances to those
which at present exist, for every shed that has
been shorn in Queensland this year where men
19


have been engaged, and under the Pastoralists’
Union in this colony, it has been found that
all the hands nearly have desired to get into
machine sheds. Even first-class hands require
that if they can get into machine sheds they
shall have them. That is the best contention
on behalf of the machine sheds. I grant you
that the machinery is new, and somewhat
crude in some cases. Therefore there is a
heavy loss, and to my mind the satisfactory
answer to the statement put forward by Mr
Spence and Mr Temple is that there has not
been a single case adduced where a sheep-
owner did not take into consideration bad
material. Where he has supplied unworkable
combs and cutters he has put them aside, and
he has not charged the men. No one case has
been advanced where an unreasonable charge
has been made, and the men have been re-
lieved from the cost. It is the universal
practice to relieve them, and they are imme-
diately supplied with every part of the machine
that requires to be replaced. That is a good
argument in favor of retaining the rule as it
stands. On the other hand, from the em-
ployers’ point of view, there may be doubt as
to the quality of the material supplied, in
which case he has always made allowance. In
cases where machines are admitted to be of
fair material and workable, it is only right for
the employer to say that they should be paid
for. This fact, coupled with the strong desire
shown by every man to get into a machine
shed and shear with the machine, and the
strong desire shown by men who have never
shorn by a machine to get into machine sheds
is the best argument in favor of this rule. I
would strongly insist upon this clause being
adhered to.
Mr Too m ey—l think in the district in
which I live, Young, there are more machine
sheds than in any other part of the colony in
close proximity, one of the sheds, Burrawang,
is perhaps the largest shed in the colony, and
employed 100 men. In previous years, I had
if from Mr Edols himself, that there was now
only from 30 to 40 men employed in the shed all
the shearing through. Now, I filled Burrawong
last year and the year before at the office at
the time machines were adopted there, and the
result of the first trial of the machinery was
that there was a large number of men who
left the shed because they were unable to use
the machines. I know a good many men who
can shear 150 sheep for every day, who are
unable to shear more than about 70 with the
machine, and they give as a reason that the
machinery is bad. These men were a picked
lot of men, and they said they would have had
no objection to pay a portion of the expenses
of the machinery if they could get good
machinery. They complained, and our mem
hers do the same, that the machinery used is
very inferior. It is of colonial manufacturec
rubbish. That is about the whole of it, and I
can bring 300 men to prove that. Men whc
have worked in Burrawong have broken a-!
many as from 20 to 30 cutters the first thm£
on a cold morning, so if a man was compellec
to pay for machinery like that he would be ir
debt. It would cost a man about 30s. a daj
at the rate they were broken at Burrawong,
We have no guarantee from employers thai
they will provide these combs and cutters
otherwise I don’t think there would be anj
objection. At the present time I might say ir
all those sheds in our district where there an
the best employers, Mr Edols and a numbei
of others, including Mr Duncan, who have hac
no difficulty in other years in getting men
have now great difficulty in getting them
Men who live in the district, and have workec
with them year after year, have gone else
where, because they cannot earn a living b}
the machinery. That is the chief ground 01
which they object to pay for the broket
machinery.
Mr Wilson—May I ask if the men wei
charged for these broken machines ?
Mr Toomey—Yes, they were charged f<
the whole lot.
Mr Wilson—That is a very deliberate stati
ment. Now, I happened to be at Burr 1
wong
Mr Spence (to Mr Toomey)—He said wei
they charged.
Mr Wilson—Were they charged for thei
excessive breakages ?
Mr Toomey—No, I cannot say so.
Mr Spence—l was going to point out th;
the experience that has been quoted to-da
of Queensland is not a fair way of putting i
The circumsmances there have been brougl
about under exceptional conditions this yea:
As to the men going, that is not a questio
of their choice altogether. It is a question i
necessity, so to speak. We are judging <
course from our experience. That has bee
in these Southern colonies, where combs an
cutters have been charged to the men, at a
they have suffered in many cases considerabl
loss. The Union agreement specially provid<
that the employer finds combs and cutters s
that the men have not been charged for breai
ages. Under the Pastoralists’ agreement th
opposite is the case. I believe, as stated, ths
a large number of the men prefer the machin
sheds, but there are a great many also wh
prefer the other way. I agree that it is in
sort of transition state, and that is where th
men feel that though they would not object t
pay for a certain number, they woul
20


object to pay for the whole of the break-
ages which may occur. For instance, there is
the personal experience the other way, of men
of the kind indicated by Mr Toomey. Al-
though the evidence is contradictory and as
far as our experience goes it decidedly shows
that there is a variety of opinion on the sub-
ject. Is there no kind of compromise which
can be made ? It seems to me that we have
not sufficient experience to make a correct
guage of what the effect will be. They have
not been in operation long enough to enable
the men to arrange any kind of average which
would equalise matters. At any rate, 1 know
that on the part of a large number there is a
very strong objection to pay for the combs
and cutters, w'hile on the other hand there are
others w'ho would not mind.
The Chairman—lt seems to me, and I know
it to be a fact that where men are taken who
can shear with the hand shears 150 a day they
will not shear as many with a machine, but
there is nothing to prevent them from going
into the sheds where hand shears only are
used. We all know' that men who with the
hand shears can only sheer 50 or 60 a day can
do more with the machines, and they are
desirous of getting in the machine sheds. If
you leave the thing as it is, these ringers, the
men who can do 150 a day, can avoid machine
sheds altogether. There is nothing to prevent
them going on the others as long as there are
any others. I think that anyone here knows
that the average man’s tvages are improved by
the machine ; he makes more per day, and can
shear more sheep.
Mr Wilson—On the point of the average
increase in w'ages, I stated in evidence before
the Royal Commission on Strikes, that the
average advantage to the men from the use of
machines was certainly from 10 to 15 percent.
That was never taken ex; eption to. As to the
150 men, I would never have them in my
sheds if I knew it. I only knew two men w r ho
could shear at that rate reasonably to my
satisfaction. 1 have seen men who can only
shear 40 by hand shears able to do by the
machine nearly 100. 1 will leave out Queens-
land, but I will take this Pastoralists agree-
men signed this year. We have had men
come to us and say “ We will sign your agree-
ment, provided you put us into a machine
shed with this clause in it.”
Mr Langwell—Were they practical shearers?
Mr Wilson—They were practical shearers.
It is all in favoi of an increased remuneratiDn,
As to Mr Toomey’s statement that Burrawong
did not fill up because it was a machine shed,
I was there on the evening before the men
were put in.
Mr Toomey—l mean the year before.
Mr Wilson—You said the year you started
with the wachines. They have stuck to the
machines. I was there last year when the
call out took place, and I suppose there was
no more sorry lot of men in New South Wales
on that day. They were a good lot of men
and they were very sorry to go. I think Mr
Toomey will admit they were a good lot
of men.
Mr Toomey—Yes.
Mr Wilson—Perhaps Mr Toomey is not
aware that this year Burrawong is over
applied for. If he is not aware of it I will
give it for information. That seems to me to
settle all this question because it is under this
agreement they have signed. That being the
case I don’t think I, as an employer, have any
hesitation in saying that I would admit the
principle because the employer has no check
over the men in using the machinery and they
might run him into any amount of damage.
Mr Spence—l think there is scarcely so
much weight in this argument, because we
have seen in the past that men will sign any
unreasonable or unfair agreement, and they
will sign anything now in many cases to get
w’ork. They will take what they can get, so
that that argument does not carry weight.
There is scarcely enough experience to enable
us to judge. We may get men who have
made a good record, but I do not know that
there is enough to enable us to say that on
the average the men earn more by the
machines than by the hand. We have not
got enough data yet, and we are only judging
from individual cases. That the men are
signing the agreement is no proof that the
conditions are fair. It means that the condi-
tions are the best they can get, and they must
have the work. Just as they used to sign the
unfair agreements that obtained in the older
days as to second price, raddling, and so on.
It was undoubtedly the case that they had to
get the work and that was the reason they
signed.
The Chairman—Does any one second the
motion moved by Mr Temple.
Mr Spence—l will second it.
The Chairman—This is a direct reversal of
the position of the sheepowner and shearer as
provided in our clause. If such a thing as
this were agreed to it would put it in the
pow r er of any person criminally inclined to do
great injury to the employer, and this is quite
out of tne question.
Mr Spence—He would not be kept if he
was to do anything wrong.
Tha Chairman —That he has agreed to stay
and could not be dismissed.
Mr Spence—No ;he breaks the agreement.
21


The Chairman—That is just the point ; he
doesn’t break the agreement.
Mr Spence—You can always discharge
him—an employer has the right to discharge
a hand.
The Chairman—But what can you do if he
says “ the machines are bad and they are
liable to break ?” We kno/v that there are
cases in which the men set themselves
deliberately to break the machines.
Mr Langwell—Have you any cases ?
The Chairman—Such a case has occurred
in my knowledge, at Kunganoo. A man
there set himself most deliberately to break
the machines, holding the view that the in-
troduction of machinery was detrimental to
the men, because fewer men could do the
work. It is necessary, therefore, that we
should discourage the breaking of the
machines. I have that from Mr King, the
general manager, that two men set to work
deliberately to break the machines wholesale,
and I don't think they ever sheared Union in
that shed.
Mr Langwell—The argument has been
raised here that the fact that men have signed
an agreement to get into machine sheds proves
that there is more in shearing with machines
than by hand shears. I will instance a case
that took place. I daresay Mr Wilson is con-
versant with it. At Dunlop shed in 1889,
they had used the machines from the previous
year, and when the men started work, Mr
Wilson, the manager of the station, agreed
with the shearers that they were to pay for
their combs and cutters. They started work,
and they worked one week. But at the
expiration of the week they found out that if
they continued through the season in the
same way as they had started the expense
W'ould be so heavy in buying these combs and
cutters that they would have very little to
take, so the majority of the men decided that
as the result of their experience the}' would
not continue to shear. They went to Mr
Wilson and asked him as a favor if they could
go on hand shearing, as if they were to con-
tinue they would not have sufficient at the
end of the season to take them away. They
put it to Mr Wilson, and he decided, sooner
than have any bother, to accede to their
wishes. He told me himself that it hardly
seemed fair, as the breakages were so heavy
that the men should be asked to pay so much,
and he removed this condition that the men
should pay for cutters. They went through
the season, he finding combs and cutters, but
the shearers owing to the state of the season,
which w'as very wet, did not do very well.
Eventually he had to postpone the shearing
till some three months later, in October 1889,
He wanted to start shearing again on the
same conditions as he had in the June shear-
ing, and said—“ any men I employ now will
have to pay for combs and cutters.” It was
nearly the end of the shearing now and he
thought there would be plenty of idle men and
they would be glad to do the work on these
terms, but the men would not accept these
conditions and pay for their own combs and
cutters, and remained out on strike for one
month sooner than accept the conditions.
That is a very good argument against this
rule as it stands, because these were men who
had shorn in that shed the year before, and
had been there for two or three years before.
Another point, and one which I think is of
the greatest importance in connection with
the finding of combs and cutters, or the
greatest argument that can be raised to show
that the employer should provide combs and
cutters, is this—That when a machine like a
shearing machine is introduced it should not
be introduced to benefit one class alone, or
two classes. In this case we have two
classes. In the first instance the inventor of
the machines, we know what he derives from
it, I think. It means something like £35,000.
The Chairman—He has derived somethin
like a loss at present.
Mr Langwell—That is what we are led to
believe, and that is the idea which has b:en
put forward for the public to believe through
the press. At any rate, that is an advantage
which one individual derives. In 1887 1888
I think Mr Lloyd, of H , published
in all the papers of the colony the benefit he
had derived from introduction of this machine.
He gave the total amount of wool that he had
cut the year previous, and the number of
pounds of wool that he had cut that year, and
the difference was made up, and the benefit
which accrued to him was through the in-
vention of this machine. Mr Wilson, of
Dunlop, also pointed out in the Bouirke
papers the benefit he had derived from the
introduction of this machine. If we can take
this for granted that the inventor of the
machine and those who use it derive direct
benefit from it, then I say those who.are using
the machine are entitled to a little benefit.
Up to the present time I fail to see that even
with the combs and cutters provided, any
direct benefit has been granted to the workers,
because, as the Chairman has already admitted,
a man who can shear a lot of sheep with the
shears, cannot do so well with the machine.
The Chairman—You make a mistake about
what I mean. The men who can shear 150.
sheep are in a very small minority in the
country, and the majority are affected for the
better. But I don’t think these gigantic
22


speeches will do any good, and that there is
10 necessity for all this political economy as
;o the benefit to be derived from the machines.
We are getting away from the real business,
and we are drifting from the point at issue. If
you would confine yourself to a direct reason
we could get on much quicker. Ido not wish
to rule you out of order, but if you will con-
fine yourself to the immediate subject, and
state the reasons why the motion proposed by
Mr Toomey and Mr Spence, or the rule as it
stands, should be carried, we will get through
our business much quicker.
Mr Snence—We are drafting an agreement
and endeavoring to make fair and just arrange-
ments.
The Chairman—l am not going to rule
Mr Langwell out of order, but I am pointing
out to him that if all the gentlemen here got
up and made long speeches of this kind, it is
utterly impossible that we could get to the
end of our work within the next three weeks.
Mr Langwell—l am sure that you will
agree that while we have been here to-day, I
have taken very little part in the discussion.
The Chairman—Very little; but when you
get steam up you seem to make a very good
start.
Mr Langwell—l think that is a just reason
which I have put forward. I was trying to
prove honestly why combs and cutters should
be provided free of cost.
The Chairman The question is whether
the matter shall stand as printed, or be
exactly reversed. The matter as printed
throws the responsibility on the shearer for
any misadventures he has, he being the only
man that can guard against misadventures
with a machine. The proposition of Mr
Temple throws the cost on the employer, he
not being in a position to guard against any
misadventure. We can only put it to the
vote, and take a division on it. I think now
we all understand it exactly', that we are
coming to a dead-lock on this particular posi-
tion. Then it will be open to any man to
propose my compromise that may occur to
him.
Mr Spence—Yes, that is *he way 7.
The Chairman —Then I will put Mr
Temple’s proposition.
Mr Whitely King—l will read the motion
as I have it here: “ That the word ‘ paid’ at
the first line be omitted with a view to insert-
ing ‘ provided for,’ and that the words ‘ price
not exceeding ’ in the second line be omitted
with a view to inserting the words ‘ free of
cost.’ v
Mr Spence—l second the motion.
On the motion being put to the vote, five
votes were recorded for it, and five against.
The Chairman —The only other course now
is to see if any other arrangement can be
made.
Mr Spence—There is a way that might do
somewhat on the lines indicated in Mr
Wilson’s opening remarks. In speaking of
the changes going on in the experience which
we are gaining, I would like to draw attention
to what was done in South Australia. Under
the agreement there the question is left open
to be dealt with by the individual sheepowner
and the shearers. Leave it to be decided by
mutual agreement. That appears to be a
method that covers the two cases where there
is a station that may have had experience in
the past, and where they are satisfied to pay
for the cost, knowing that it would not bear
heavily on them, they might make the
arrangement desired by the rule as printed,
but in the extreme cases indicated by Mr
Toomey, they might fix the question either
way. I cannot say whether there is a differ-
ence in the machinery in different places, or
how it is, but there is a difference without a
doubt. Now I think that proposal might be
accepted by the other side, as a compromise
out of the difficulty.
Mr Wilson—l have considered this maiter
from this point of view—that it should be left
open to any sheepowner to make his own
arrangement. I will take my own case. If I
was starting machines to-morrow in a new
shed, I should say to the men, “ Go on ; try
and do your best, and we will see how this
thing shapes. I cannot charge you, because
the whole thing may be a failure,” But the
moment I saw, so far as my judgment would
permit me, that the thing was a reasonable
success, and that it only wanted nous on the
part of the men to make it a workable success,
I would say this. And you, gentlemen, must
be aware that there are many cases in which a
shearer has been made a present of his shears,
although in no way provided for in the agree-
ment. That is exactly the position now.
Under the old agreement, at the bottom of
the agreement was the price to be charged
for the ptincipal article necessary for the
shearer, but, in many cases, the shearer, al-
though he was put down to be charged for a
thing, he was not charged, and so it is here,
A man may be put down to be charged, but it
is open to any owner, where the circumstances
justifv him, to say, “I won’t charge you for
the things.” He has the power if he sees that
it is a fair thing, to say, “ I will charge you.”
I claim that the case quoted by Mr Abbott is
sufficient answer to that statement, and the
Burrawong experience, as related by myself in
contravention of Mr Toomey’s statements,
goes in the same direction. I can quote a
23


case in New England, where a shearer went
through a whole shearing with only one cut-
ter, and not any man in the shed used half a
dozen. Of course, a New England shed
shears soft wool—that is something which has
to be considered, but it shows what is possible
to be done where men make up their minds to
do work well in their own interest and the
interest of their employer. I don’t want to
answer the speech of Mr Langwell on the
general question of the mutual benefit which
machines are, but I will refer him again to my
evidence before the Royal Commission on
Strikes. Here I said that I considered the
advantage to the employer was from to to 15
per cent, in the saving from the of his
sheep, and in the destruction of wool and the
advantage to the average shearer in every case
was quite the same percentage, when you
considered saving of labor and the enhanced
amount of work done. I have seen that ,-ute-
ment made over and over again. Mr Lloyd,
Mr French and mmy others have slid the
same thing, and it has never been challenged.
No doubt in some of the back country sheds it
might be slightly |different, but the whole
arguments go to show that the shearer has
got the best of it, and as no doubt machines
will be very greatly improved in the future I
contend that there is no justification for the
relaxation of the rule, because the rule leaves
it open to any employer, by arrangement with
his shearers, to make any remission he pleases.
But this leaves no matter of room for doubt
just as we had in the other clauses gone
before, which put the matter bej'ond all
misunderstanding. If the men and the
employers like to make any such arrangement
it is quite open to the employer, without any
contravention of the Pastoralists’ Union
Rules, to make such arrangements as he may
please, and it will be for the shearer to do the
same, therefore I insist that the clause as it
stands be retained.
Mr Spence—l do not wish to prolong the
discussion. Mr Wilson has stated that he
has given the opinion before as to what he
considers the advantage gained by the
workers. I would like to know if that was
based upon the experience that we have had,
and if so, whether it was not the case that the
combs and cutlers had been found for the men.
If the shearers have had a gain of 15 per cent,
under these conditions the point arises
whether the whole of that gain will not be
gone if they have to pay for the combs and
cutters. I wmuld like to know if it is based
upon the experience of the past that he has
made that estimate.
Mr Wilson—l have quoted one case where
a man went through a whole shearing with
one cutter. There would be an average o:
2000 sheep.
Mr Spence—That case is very remarkable,
but you can’t judge from that one case.
Mr Wilson —The employers and men can
make an agreement beforehand.
Mr Spence—We want to legislate for those
who are interested in both sides, and we
would like to have it so that the thing may be
definite, and that those who may be so inclined
cannot take any advantage of the others. As
it stands it leaves it all on one side. As it is,
there is nothing to make a man who would be
inclined to take advantage do otherwise.
There are just two ways of meeting the
difficulty. I have met with one pastoralist
who considers that it is very unfair that the
men should be called upon to provide for
all combs and cutters. His proposal was to
define a number of these articles to be allowed,
and on his own station where he employes 10
or 12 shearers he is prepared to give two
combs and six cutters. That is a fair compro-
mise, but I think perhaps the best compromise
would be the plan adopted by the South
Australian people.
The Chairman—l would like to ask you to
suggest a way of getting over it. In my own
district it is usual to send an agreement to
the man who signs his name, and if you ask
him to sign it you leave this indefinitely
to be arranged by mutual consent. That is
no agreement at all, because when the
man comes to the shed he may say I
want to be supplied with 500 combs and
cutteis. I will have these or none ; and if I
refuse to give these the man might break his
agreement. That is the man we have to
legislate for.
Mr. Spence—We have suggested one plan
and that is not agreed to.
Mr Elder —Mr Spence has suggested two
combs and six cutters. That was a suggestion
from Mr Cullen. He is not the only one who
has made that suggestion. I believe that was
made in Bourke, and the proposal was made
by official representatives of the pastoralists
that they did not wish to charge all of them
to the shearers. That is rather extreme in
some cases, and it might not be fair. 1 would
prefer a definite number, but I fancy that
the proposal for South Australia might be
more satisfactory.
Mr Wilson —I would point out how little
benefit is likely to be derived from the pro-
posal made by Mr Spence. One man goes
into an outside shed, Dunlop, with an average
number of 8000 sheep per man to be shorn,
and all back country sheep, and another man
goes into a New' England shed with perhaps
1500 sheep, and it is rather hard to expect one
24


man to go through shearing the same number
of combs and cutters as he would in the other
case. That is not fair.
Mr Spence—Why not so much per thousand
then ?
Mr Wilson—You are going into too much
detail. Any hard and fast line like that would
be absurd. s°° sheep at Dunlop require as
much allowance of combs and cutters as a
thousand in the New England district. The
more you look at it the more difficult you will
find it.
Mr Williams—Mr Wilson quoted an argu-
ment just now that if there is any sort of
provision made by which these combs and
cutters would be paid for by the sheepowners,
they would he practically at the mercy of the
shearers. Well, it cuts both ways unless there
is some understanding arrived at. The
shearers may subject to be a loss the same as
the employer if he goes on breaking combs
and cutters through bad material, it will all
be out of his pocket.'
The Chairman—l say that the responsibility
for breakages should be thrown on the
shearer, because it depends on the shearer
whether there are breakages or not.
Mr Spence—Not altogether. There are
accidental breakages.
The Chairman—Do you think you could
make any compromise by fixing some definite
price for breakages.
Mr Spence—l suggested the South Aus-
alian proposal.
Mr Elder—That cannot be done.
Mr Spence—How can they do it in South
Australia ? They do more than is done in
this colony. They make engagements with
the men and they pay their fares up to the
station. If they get over the difficulty it can
be got over here I should think.
The Chairman—lt might be overlooked
here if we did not know what the circum-
stances would be.
Mr Spence—ls it not the practice to an-
nounce starting shearing at a certain time, and
that the men are there and they sign an
agreement.
The Chairman—That has been the practice
perhaps, before the calling out of men com-
menced, but we have to adopt a different
system now.
Mr Spence—l think that the old plan could
be adopted again now with satisfaction.
The Chairman—We cannot revert to the
old plan after our experience.
Mr Spence—l understand that there are to
be no strikes, and that it is to be agreed that
there will be nothing more of that kind. If
so, what is the necessity for that sort of
thing ?
The Chairman—l would like to say a word
or two on that. You say that it is understood
that there is to be no strikes. Now it is bad
bringing up old sores. Was it not understood
that there should be no strikes when the men
signed the Union agreement last year, but
there was a strike. Now when men sign this
agreement what better guarantee have we that
there will be no strikes now than when the
men signed the agreement you drew up your-
selves.
Mr Spence Those same circumstances
cannot possibly arise again, shall not arise
again so far as we are concerned. We will
never be in the same position, because we will
take fine care we will not get into it so far as
we are concerned. It won’t arise from us, we
can assure you of that.
The Chairman—That is no good without a
guarantee.
Mr Spence—l think your own reason will
indicate, and it is not necessary to tell you,
that we don’t desire to have the old experience
over again. We do not wish to go into that
at all. The position is, I think, that we
should know something about this matter, and
what underlies it. If the suggestion is taken
of paying for a part of the combs that can be
made definite perhaps, although Mr Wilson
seems to think it could not be arranged on a
basis that would be satisfactory. Could we
not have some such arrangement as that the
men should pay for one half what they break ?
That would be definite and would meet every
case, 1 think.
Mr Elder—lt would be very indefinite be-
cause an employer would never know how
many the men are going to break.
Mr Spence—l think we may assume this,
that a man is not going to deliberately break
machinery, especially if he has to pay for half
of it himself. The position is very different
now to what it was when machinery was first
introduced. We have no men now like the
Nottingham weavers, and there are very few
cases of that kind where men break machinery
because they think it will do away with the
necessity of manual labor. I thin k you must
know that it would be a very small percentage
of the men who would deliberately go in for
doing that. Of course it is admitted that
some men are more careless than others, but
every reasonable man wmuld see that the
machinery was properly looked after, and I
think you might fairly say that there are no
criminal men, or men sufficiently careless and
reckless who would do this sort of thing to
any extent. Therefore I think the test plan
would be, and it would be a preventive for
careless men, to have a definite number fixed,
and make the men pay for half what they
25


break. He will then see that if he is causing
loss to the employer, he is also inflicting loss
upon himself. I think we might fairly discuss
that proposition.
The Chairman—At any rate, we can’t dis-
cuss the other one of putting the whole cost
on the employers.
Mr Spence—We have accepted that but
there is the alternative on the lines adopted in
South Australia, and the other of making it a
definite number. Suppose we try one half.
The Chairman—Then would you make
some proposal on the subject.
Mr Spence—Very well, I will move this,
“ That each shearer shall pay for an equal
share of the combs and cutters used by him
at a price not exceeding the cost price.”
The Chairman—We must at any rate add
to the cost price the cost of carriage, and the
percentage for railway expenses.
Mr Spence—Very well then, we will put it
at ten per cent, and the cost of carriage, etc.
The Chairman—lf that proposal of yours
was adopted, it would allow the members of
the Pastoralists’ Union to do exactly what is
done here if they chose.
Mr Spence—The only way it could be done
would be to have the agreement fixed up at
roll call.
The Chairman—lf you want a complete
agreement it must be done beforehand, if you
leave a blank there will be trouble.
Mr Spence—l can see there will be a diffi-
culty in it.
Mr Campbell—As it is, the men pay for a
good deal at the present time, they pay for
stones, oil and so on, there are plenty of sheds
left for the other men if they don’t wish to go
to the machine sheds.
Mr Spence—The trouble is that a certain
number of the men have had experience, which
goes against the taking of those sheds and the
others do not do so.
Mr Campbell—The cutters are better now
than they were previously.
Mr Spence—Yes, they tell me they are
better now than they were. I look upon it
that this matter is changing a good deal.
Mr Campbell —As a matter of fact, I think
the probability is that the shearers will have
to pay less than if he paid for stone, oils and
shears. It is tending that way.
The Chairman—l think that on our side
we are fairly agreed that there is some show
of unfairness to shearers. As matters stand,
the shearers used to pay for cutters and combs
without any promise at all. On the other
hand, we quite see that it is utterly unfair to
throw the whole cost of the combs and cutters
on the sheepowners, when the number to be
destroyed depends on the want of care of the
shearers. For that reason we think that the
best compromise is to fix a number which will
be agreed upon. That would be following the
old rule in many sheds by which a
pair of shearers or two pairs of shearers
were supplied. In most cases, it is one pair
supplied free at the beginning of each season.
We would now propose to supply three combs
and six cutters to every shearer in a machine
shed, in some cases in small sheds the number
required would be less than the larger one.
But I think that is a fair compromise, of course
there is this to be considered always, as time
goes on there will be less and less bad
machines. I know what you object to, and
what you put forward is the case to this extent.
Some sheds have started with machines which
were overtempered, so that it is impossible
for the men to avoid breaking them. I knew
two sheds where they started, one had large
breakages, and the other none at all,'and they
both came from the same place. But that
sort of thing will disappear as years go on.
Combs and cutters have been improved every
year since they were first brought out. We
would be willing to receive that compromise
as proposed by Mr Spence, of two combs and
six cutters to be supplied to every shearer ; all
over that number to be paid for at a price not
exceeding cost price.
Mr Spence—The difficulty about that is
that it makes no difference for large or small
stations, which was pointed out by Mr Wilson.
Mr Elder—But at the large stations the
men take away more money than in the
smaller ones.
Mr Spence—Still the cost to them is greater,
and it is the same in proportion as in the
smaller sheds. In the small sheds practically
the whole cost should be covered.
Mr Langwell—Mr Wilson, speaking of this
very thing of two combs and six cutters, sug-
gested that it would be practically useless. He
quoted a case at two sheds to prove that in
the larger sheds it would be very much more
unfair where there is an average of say 8000
sheep per man, then another where there are
perhaps only a few hundreds. In the big shed
the men would have to pay for nearly all in
use. I know that in a large shed where they
shear on for two or three months these cutters
would only last a few days, so that they would
have to pay for a very great many more than
they would in small ones.
Mr Temple—l think the proposal that each
party pay an equal share is the fairest one that
could be put forward. I presume that the
representatives of the Pastoralists’ Union have
come here to-day prepared to decide all these
questions on the side of equity and justice,
and that they are fair and reasonable minded men
26


who don’t want to take any advantage of the
shearers. This machinery is introduced to
benefit the employer, and probably it will
benefit both parties in time. But just now it
is no benefit to the shearer at all. It is just
reversed. Surely if we agree to pay half the
cost of the machinery, that is a fair and reason-
able method of dealing with the matter. As
a delegate said just now, this question of giving
a shearer two combs and six cutters free of
charge is conceding it on fair lines, I think,
because he may use ten times that number of
combs and cutters.
The Chairman—lf he is careless.
Mr Temple—ln that case he is paying three
fourths of the cost of these machines.
The Chairman—l will contradict that at
once. Does he pay for the engines or the
machinery?
Mr Wilson —No one has dared to contra-
dict my statement that it is from ten to fifteen
per cent, advantage for the shearer. We will
presume it is to the employer also. But he is
providing the machinery, and has done so
much for the shearer, to save him a great
deal of hard work. That has not been con-
tradicted, and wipes out all the arguments
that have been put forward to the effect that
the benefit is all on the side of the employer.
How many pairs of shears would a man require
to shear eight thousand sheep in the back
country ?
Mr Spence—Your statement is based on
the past.
Mr Wilson—lt is based on equity. I
will not allow any statement to go out that
the employer gets the only advantage in the
saving of the cost by machinery. I
challenge contradiction. Every writer and
speaker takes the same course of argument
that the employer is put to a great deal of
extra cost. He is put to the first cost, and
cost of running it, and that wipes out all
that argument, it seems to me, of the
workmen gaining no advantage at all. 1
think we had better come back to the
old point and stick to our rules.
Mr Spence—How would it work to fix it
at one-half of the cost ? The point is this—
that this is a new departure of a sweeping
character as compared with what we have
had in machine sheds in the colony. It is
jumping from the position of men having
provided for them everything that they
require, and which may be broken, to
having to pay for all of them themselves.
It has been admitted that these machines
are extending, but the feeling is that we
have to come to some compromise, and it
would be better than to jump from one
extreme to the other. We have, as I say,
so far had very little experience, but I ami
guided by what I know of the feelings and
oiroumstances of the men that it is not
desirable to have any conditions irksome to
them for them to work under, and if that
were done, it would be a loss to the em-
ployer and to the men. I think the com-
promise seems to be fair, as we are desirous
of arriving at something which will be
mutually satisfactory. It would be harder
on the men in the large sheds than in the
small ones, to have a fixed number, and I
think that fixing it at one half would be
more satisfactory.
The Chairman—l would point out some-
thing that you seemed to have overlooked.
It seems at the first glance perfectly fair to
say that the sheepowners and shearers should
pay an equal proportion of the cost. I
would admit that if the shearers would pay
half the cost of the engine driver and the
interest on the wear and tear of the ma-
chinery in which he receives an equal advan-
tage with the employer. If he would
divide the whole of the cost, then it would
be no doubt quite fair,
Mr Spence—Would you have him go
shares in the station then, and give him
permanent employment ?
Ihe Chairman —No; but if the shearers-
would pay half the cost of the running of
the machinery that would put the employer
and them on an equal footing. It is only
equity. You say that the shearer and the
sheepowner should go halves in the smallest
part of the cost of these articles, but that
the sheepowner shall pay the whole of the
heavy part of the cost. That is not equit-
able, and I take it if the provision is to make
some fixed basis, it should be on some dif-
ferent arrangements to that proposed. We
know that the tendency is that the machines
shall improve, and I think the only way is a
fixed number of combs and cutters to be
provided, and see how it works. That is
the only way of getting over it.
Mr Williams—Why not one comb and.
three cutters for every thousand sheep.
That’s about the average number used now,,
Mr Spence —Perhaps some of you people
can speak with some practical knowledge as
to how many have been used, and suggest
something that will perhaps meet the case,
and have it on a more definite footing.
Mr Williams—l will propose that the
shearers be found one comb and three
cutters for every thousand sheep they will
shear, and pay for all used over that num-
ber.
The Chairman—l am inclined to think
that that makes the employer pay for them.
27


all. Here we have an instance of one man
shearing, and having only one cutter right
through'.
Mr Williams—That is an extreme case.
I have shorn two thousand sheep with one
pair of shears.
Mr Spence—l think that the number used
last year and paid for by the employers,
would be a fair test of the case. As it is
proposed, the men will be as careful with
them as possible. Previously they have
been found by the employers, and it was
not to the interests of the shearer to use any
more than was necessary, and it must be
remembered that it has not been tried yet
properly under a system by which the men
would have to pay for them themselves. I
think it is only fair to assume that they will
be as careful as possible with them. I think
we must have some experience of an average
kind, based upon the past few years, where
there was no inducement so to speak to
make a man very careful, and the effect of
the compromise proposed, would probably,
I think, have the effect of making a man
more careful. We have not even found a
case of destruction to property. There was
one criminal case quoted, but all the country
is not criminal, and in any case that is an
exceptional instance. We want to know
the average work of the shearer, and it has
not been shown that there has been very
great recklessness at all. On the contrary,
we have had cases brought up where so
many combs and cutters only were used.
But surely we can get some exact data.
Mr Wilson —Mr Spence was just now
arguing that we should provide everything.
He says “find out the average number that
has been used by the men,” and that would
admittedly if they adopted that basis, make
The pastoralist pay for the whole lot.
Mr Spence—No, the average generally.
Mr. Wilson—lf we were to take the
average generally used, and supply the
shearer with that number, we would be pro-
viding him with everything free of cost.
We must remember that this agreement is
mot for to-day, or to-morrow, it will prob-
ably last some time, and in two or three
years perhaps ; perhaps next year there will
be very considerable improvement in the
machinery. Therefore to accept any aver-
age previously ascertained, would be to say
That the owner should provide for every-
thing. That is actually the effect of it.
Mr Spence—-It appears to me that the
effect would be just the opposite, and that
if we say the shearer is to pay for all over
so many combs and cutters, say one per
thousand, then if there is improved machi-
nery he will not use so many and he will not
need to be provided with them. Personally
I do not know whether the number sug-
gested (one comb and three cutters) is a fair
average or not.
The Chairman—lt appears that there is
nothing before the conference at'the present
moment. Mr Langwell’s proposal has not
been seconded.
Mr Spence—l thought that I had pro-
posed a resolution, and that Mr Langwell
had seconded it.
The motion was put, an equal number of
votes being recorded on either side.
Mr Langwell—-I move then “that each
shearer be allowed one comb and three
cutters per one thousand sheep shorn, all
over that number to be paid for by the
shearer.”
Mr Toomej'—l second the motion.
The Chairman—lt is suggested by our
side that if you alter that a little, we will
vote for it. We hold that as it stands it
would throw the whole cost on the enm
ployer, which would come to the same thing
as Mr Williams proposal. As far as we can
guess we think that is sure to be the effect
however careful a man may be. But we will
say if you make it fifteen hundred sheep in-
stead of one thousand, we will vote for it.
That throws the cost of providing cutters
and combs on the shearers for five hundred
sheep only, and on the employer for one
thousand.
Mr Williams—lt has been pointed out to
us that if we make it one comb and four
cutteis to fifteen hundred sheep that would
make it a fair thing.
The Chairman—Very well, we will do
that.
Mr Langwell—Then I move that the
words “ shearers shall pay for cutters at a
price not exceeding cost ” be omitted with a
view to inserting the following words in lieu
thereof; “be provided with one comb and
four cutters free of cost to every fifteen
hundred sheep shorn by him,” all combs and
cutters used by the she shearers above that
number to be paid for by him, at a price not
exceeding cost.
Mr Elder —Make it “ cost price.”
Mr Langwell—Very well, put it “at cost
price.”
The motion, as amended, was then put to
the meeting, and carried unanimously.
The Chairman—We have got to the end
of the rules ; what next is there ?
Mr Spence—There is just a clause or two,
Mr President, that we would like to add.
Taking the most important one, from one
point of view at any rate, we would propose
28


adding a clause in the rules from the South
Australian agreement, that no shearer shall
be compelled to work more than forty-eight
hours per week. It leaves the hours and
the arrangement of the the time to the man
over the board.
The Chairman—We will agree to that.
Mr Spence—l will move that, sir.
Mr. Williams—l will second that.
The motion was agree to unanimously.
Mr Spence—The next in importance is one
about wet sheep. This is a vexed sort of
question. We have discussed the matter,
and we would ask you to accept that which
they have in South Australia. We accepted
a compromise as to what our ideas are, and
as it has been argued so many times before,
we need not state our views again now.
The Chairman —We have proposed some-
thing which will perhaps suit your views,
“ that “no shearer shall be compelled
to shear cancered or wet sheep.” Will that
do ?
Mr Spence—That would suit us exactly if
you add a few words. A man over the board
may say that the sheep were not wet, but
that they are dry, and the majority of the
men will say they are dry, but some others
say they are wet, and we hold that a man
should not be compelled to shear them when
it is likely to result in an injury to his health.
The South Australian people got over it by
saying that a refusal on the part of the
shearer should not be considered as a breach
of the agreement. Unless you provide a
means of settling disputes between the par-
ties, there is no one to say who is right, and
there might be a good deal of friction other-
wise. We used to have a rule that no man
shall shear wet or cancered sheep. Here
was a difficulty. There were one or two
disputes about it, and it might be the means
of making a loophole and causing unpleasant-
ness.
Mr Wilson—l would point out that I don’t
think the proposed alteration will make a
bit of difference in removing the difficulty.
The overseer says they are dry, and the
shearers say they are wet Who is to settle
this ? He says no shearer should be com-
pelled to shear wee or cancered sheep. As a
matter of fact, was it not the case in the old
days that if a man went to the hut and
would not shear, unless that was a very bad
case, he was never discharged for any such
reason as that. You must have some one to
settle that, and in order to avoid having too
many words, I would advise that the pro-
posed rule suggested by Mr Abbott be
accepted,
Mr Spence—Very well, we will accept
that proposal you made.
Mr Campbell—-I would suggest that that
be put as clause 14, and that the forty-eight
hours’ clause be put last"
Mr Spence—Yes, that would be better.
The suggested alteration in the sequence
of the clauses was adopted.
Mr Spence—The other point that I have a
note of here is in regard to harrowing. Our
people are opposed to barrowing. We do
not object to learners, that is men put on to
learn. We do not wish, then, to interfere
in that; but there are objections to the sys-
tem of barrowing, and they think there
should be a rule to prevent it. Would there
be any objection to have a rule to say that
there should be none?
The Chairman—As far as I am concerned,
there would be a very strong objection. The
question of who shears my sheep is a ques-
tion resting only with me (as the employer
and the owner of the sheep) and the man.
As long as it does not interfere with the
men, it is no question at all.
Mr Spence—But the barrowing does inter-
fere.
The Chairman—How ?
Mr Williams —Two shearers are shearing.
In nearly every shed it happens that two
shearers have to draw sheep out of one pen.
1 suppose that is the case in ninety-nine out
of every hundred sheds in New South
W T ales. One man is probably a very fast
shearer, and the other is only a medium man
A learner, if he wishes to learn, will go to
the good shearer, and during the dinner
hour he, and possibly two or three other
learners, will go barrowing, will pick out
three or four of the best sheep in the pen to
practise upon. They are shorn, and they are
counted to the fast man without his mate
fetting any advantage. At any rate four or
ve of the best sheep had been taken, and
they are nothing to the other, who has to do
all the cobblers which are left for him. I
feel sure my co-delegates will agree that
that is an objection to barrowing, which
should meet with some consideration.
Mr Wilson —It seems to me that as we
have got so far that it is hardly worth whlie
bringing in a point like this if it is in any
way to restrict the learner. I think it will
be understood that we on our part disagree
to it, as it is a matter on which it is almost
impossible to frame any suitable rule. I never
heard any question of ill feeling amongst the
men over this point, and I would suggest
that we had better go on with the more
serious business, and get through.
The Chairman—lt seems to be a matter
29


for mutual arrangement. It is not a serious
matter.
Mr Spence —No, it is not a serious matter,
“but some pastoralists have an objection
themselves to it.
The Chairman—lf the pastoralists object
to it let them deal with it. I, for myself,
refuse to let any learner into my shed, and
to let any man touch the sheep in it. I
object to men touching sheep, but I don’t
bind myself to it.
Mr Spence—Then we will let it be at
that. Then there is only the preamble to
deal with, unless you people have something
else to view.
The Chairman—We want to recommit
clause o' for reconsideration, and I would
like to say we also want to recommit another
■ clause.
Mr Langwell—There is one little thing I
would like to re-open in reference to that
■question of the machine sheds. There were
two words which I omitted to take notice
•of when we were discussing it. “If re-
quired,” in the matter of going on with hand
shears. If this rule stands, and through
breakages the machines are stopped, it is
inferred that the men shall only go on work-
ing with hand shears if they are required to
go on. I would suggest that the words “if
required” be struck out, and that the words
“be allowed” should go in. My reason is
that there may be a breakage in the
machinery, a rope may break, or something
may go wrong with the engine, and it is
optional with the employer, then, whether
he will allow the men to go on and shear
with hand shears or not. They cannot go
on unless they are required to do so. It
may save time if it is understood by both
parties that the men shall be allowed to at
once proceed with hand shears.
Mr Campbell—l think it may be taken as
certain that they will be required.
Mr Langwell—l recognise that there may
be a break of a day, and the majority would
like to go on and they might not be required.
The Chairman—l think we might leave it
,as it is.
Mr Elder—Why not leave out the words
altogether, and make it “shall go on.”
Mr Spence—Yes, that binds it on both
sides.
Mr Williams—That suits very well.
Mr Langwell—l beg to move that the
words “if required” be omitted from the
rule.
Mr Toomey— I second the motion.
The motion was agreed to unanimously.
The Chairman—We propose to recommit
rule 5 with a view to making amendments
as to the question of tarring sheep.
Mr Spence- How would this meet the
case, Leave the words “ insufficiently
tarred - ’ out of clause 5. It will then ma.<e
him do both.
Mr Wilson—l would point out that this
does not by any means leave it in the same
position. Very often a sheep is cut in many
places, but not badly cut in any one place,
and that is the worst kind of case the shed
manager has to do with. These are the ones
that give the most trouble, and the “ in-
sufficiently tarred ” is a very important
consideration.
Mr Spence—What we want is that there
shall be a recognition of the tarring only of
ordinary cases. Ido not think there is any
difference between each side as regards the
matter, except in the way of providing for
it.
Mr Campbell—You take exception to the
words “or treat.” I think I would suggest
that it start no shearer shall tar his sheep,
except for a severe cut or stab,
The Chairman—What I thought you pro-
posed now is that you should strike out the
words “ insufficiently tarred.” In case a
shearer turns out a sheep badly cut, he shall
at once sew and tar such cut or wounds iu
his pen or otherwise dress or treat such
sheep as directed by the person in charge of
the shed. I think we all agree that that
refers to cases in which a man shall bring
back a sheep and sew it. We believe that
is so, but would that be clearly conveyed in
the absence of any statement to the con-
trary.
Mr Temple—Would the representatives
of the Pastoralists’ Union be prepared to
accept Mr Williams proposition in addition
to this instead of putting it as a substitute.
1 think we could carry both.
Mr Wilson —I think that will then pro-
vide for every case if it is made an addendum
to the clause.
The Chairman —How would you do it?
Mr Spence—My idea is to add it on at
the end : “ But no shearer shall be required
to tar his sheep in any other case. ” That
would meet the case I think.
The Chairman —Yes, that I think will
cover it.
Mr Wilson —I would suggest to make this
clear and remove any doubt in my mind that
you put after the word cut and wounds be
insufficiently tarred.
Ihe motion was agreed to, and the rule
as amended was passed.
The Chairman —Is there anything else to
bring up in this agreement before we go to
30


the preamble. I want to bring up the
declaratory clause of the agreement. We
dealt with this clause I think under some-
thing of a misapprehension, and we want to
know from you what your intention is in
reference to it. You have said “ hereby
agrees to faithfully serve the employer etc ’
should be cut out. Is it intended to take
the agreement outside the Masters and
Servants Act ? We want to make it clear
that we do not intend to do that.
Mr Spence—We cannot do it. What we
wish to do, without reference to anything in
our own agreement, is to remove the words,
which may seem a little objectionable. We
never wished to take it from out of the
Masters’ and Servants’ Act. In the agree-
ment we drafted which has been very little
circulated, it is provided that it may be
terminable on a notice given. This has led
to the wrong impression that we desired to
have an agreement that we could break. To
remove the words “ faithfully serve ” would
not alter the agreement, and the only way to
remove it from out of the Masters aud Ser-
vants Act would be to make it terminable by
notice. There is no wish in any way to take
any advantage. We desire now, and we
have desired, that we should have a mutual
agreement. We are aware that this can only
be arrived at as this has been done, by com-
promise. We did not yesterday say that we
had got all we desired, or what our members
desired, but we realise the great advantage
of working amicably together, and have no
wish to take any advantage of anything by
which those amicable relations would be
strained.
The Chairman—l would like to get that
put in somewhere so that you cannot do it.
Mr Spence—lt has been decided under the
Masters’ and Servants’ Act, which is very
clear, and there is no doubt that this agree-
ment is binding upon the men, and that
they would have to carry it out to the finish.
We have no desire to escape from that
agreement. We provided in our other
agreements for an escape by a provision
under which it coiild be broken by giving
notice, on the advice of two solicitors. But
we have not asked you for that. That is not
asked for here, and, so far as we can, we
will use our influence to see it is honestly
carried out.
The Chairman—The only point I have in
my mind now, and I want to be clear about
it, is that I do not want to alter the word-
ing in any way which would place the agree-
ment outside that Act. If the omission of
these words, “faithfully serve,” would do
that we would not agree to it.
Mr Spence—l did not know you were
referring to this. It is a mere matter of
sentiment, and all we want is to make it
as palatable to our members as we can.
They do not like these words, though we do
not look upon them ourselves as meaning
anything. If their omission would alter the
legality of the agreement it is news to me.
I do not think it is so.
The Chairman—Still, I think I would
like to have the words ‘-shear with all
reasonable despatch, subject to section so
and so of the Act.”
Mr Elder—l think that, as the reason is
only a sentimental one, it had better be
left in.
Mr Spence—Sentiment rules men very
much—often very much more than tangible
things.
The Chairman—Would there be any ob-
jection to put in l> hereby agrees to shear,
with all reasonable despatch, all the sheep
required of him by the employer or his
agent, subject to the provisions of sections
so and so of the Act?”
Mr Spence—But the Act specially pro-
vides that shearing comes under it. The
shearing is specially named in the Act, and
it is made legal by the law of the country.
The Chairman—We don’t know that; we
have to find it out.
Mr Spence—We have had a good deal of
information on the subject. That matter
was tried, and you can’t get outside the
Act. We have never had any advice to the
contrary, and you may depend that if the
lawyers could give us advice favorable to
ideas which we might desire to give effect
to, we should be very glad of it. But we
cannot get out of it except by a provision
for a termination of the agreement by
notice. We had advice from both Sydney
and Victorian solicitors—from more than
one—to make sure of that, and that is the
only possible way of escaping the provisions
of the Act. The only objection I feel, and
it is a very strong one, is that the Act is a
very unpopular one. It has been adminis-
tered harshly in this colony, and that is
why we don’t like it, and I don’t think you
wish to put anything in to cause any un-
necessary annoyance. We know it is the
law of the country, and we have to bow to
it until we can make people believe that
there should be a fairer one.
The Chairman —I quite understand that
men with not very great education would
object to the reference to section so and so,
which would perhaps be worse than the
words we have struck out, because they
would not know what it means. Under
31


these circumstances, perhaps we had better
leave it as it is.
Mr Elder—l beg formally to move that
the following be the preamble or heading of
the agreement that we have practically
agreed to : —“ Shearing agreement for New
South Wales, adopted by a Conference be-
tween pastoralists and shearers held in
Sydney on Friday, 7th August, 1891, where-
at the following definition of Freedom of
Contract was agreed to by both sides:—That
employers shall be free to employ and all
shearers free to accept employment whether
belonging to Shearers’ or other Unions or not
without favor, molestation, or intimidation
from either side.” These are the words used
in the preliminary memorandum signed this
morning.
• Mr Spence—We would rather prefer that
you named the Unions taking part in the
conference.
Mr Elder —We thought it embraced all
shearers.
The Chairman —We all know that large
numbers of men will be employed under it
who may belong to no Union at all, and
that the agreement may be used by non-
union shearers and non-union pastoralists as
well.
Mr Spence—We recognise that. In
South Australia different sides of pastoral-
ists and the Union representatives met
together, the names of the two bodies being
stated on the agreement. There is a good
deal of objection on our part to having the
agreement in the form proposed, although
it is a fact in a way. I should prefer
Mr Williams—l think we could meet the
case if we were to put it this way, and I
move that the following be the heading:—
“Shearing Agreement for New South
Wales, adopted by the representatives of
the Pastoralists’ Union and the Amal-
gamated Shearers’ Union, at a Conference
held in Sydney, August 7th, 1891, at which
it was agreed —‘ That employers shall be
free to employ and all shearers to accept
employment whether belonging to Shearers’
or other Unions or not, without favor,
molestation or intimidation from either
side.’ ”
Mr Elder—We considered this matter
very carefully, and have come to a definite
decision on the subject. In the first place,
we have been shearing, as you all know,
under the Pastoralists’ agreement, so we
thought that by simply putting in the
words “ Shearing agreement ” at the head
of the agreement that would be what we
considered a fair compromise. Then, again,
we did not seek to refer to our Union at
all in this, and we simply referred to our-
selves as pastoralists, and to you gentlemen
as shearers. We thought that that was
necessary, seeing that this agreement would
be used not only by Union shearers but also
non-union shearers, and our view is that if
we were to adopt any othe*’ heading we
ought to ask non-union shearers to come
and confer with us also. We recognise
that. We have ascertained from recent
events that there are a very much larger
body than we thought twelve months ago,
and they have asked us to consider the
position. In the heading of such an agree-
ment as this, covering the whole body of
shearers, we think it is only right that we
should ask you to adopt this heading to the
agreement.
Mr Spence—Well, Mr Chairman, the pro-
posal by Mr Williams is simply a statement
of the facts. It is a fact that representa-
tives of the two bodies have practically met
here, and it is only representatives of the
two bodies who could come together. Only
bodies can send representatives, and, in
this case, I think the statement of fact is
the best way to put it. I don’t think there
can be any objection by any of those who
are not members of the Union nor who are
not members of the Pastoralists’ Union to
use the same agreement. It is simply a
statement of fact that it is a shearing
agreement adopted at a conference by re-
presentatives of both sides, and it is, conse-
quently, a compromise which may be
considered to fairly represent both sides.
We consider the non-union shearers were
pretty well in the same position as Union
shearers in regard to the terms for shearing,
and that they will try to get as much as
they can. That is only nature. Such an
agreement as this will, however, in repre-
senting an organised body, represent also
the interests of the pastoralists who have
not joined that body, and the same with the
shearers, and I think it might be put as a
statement of fact. There is no reason why
we should ignore a statement of fact—that
point which might have caused difficulty
has been got over, and will I hope cause no
further friction. I do not think that any
other heading than that of Mr Williams
would be necessary in the matter.
The Chairman—There are a few points to
which I should like to draw your attention.
A large number of these alterations that
have been made were made at the sugges-
tion of some of your delegates, but they
were also suggested to us and agreed by us
to be made for non-union men working out-
side the Shearers’ Union. Some of them
32


3re put in without your suggestion ; they
cl not come from you, and were made at
r own suggestion. Some of the amend-
3nts were also made at your suggestion,
it we had similar amendments, noted here,
eluded in the agreement which came from
rsons outside your Union. VVe at once
cepted your amendments therefore, al-
ough it does not appear anywhere on the
3e of the work which we have been doing
re to-day. That it is a conference in
lich all shearers are represented is to a
[■tain extent the case, and the views of all
isses of shearers have been put before you
day. and have been dealt with. The non-
ion men have put them through the men
whose employment they are, and many of
sir views have been forestalled by the
lion delegates, which, if you had not pro-
sed, would have been proposed from our
le. Therefore, this agreement may be
rly taken to be an agreement arrived at
the Pastoralists’ Union, Union shearers,
I non-union shearers. The difficulty now
lut the heading is that if we put in this
'eement that it is between the A.S. U.
1 the Pastoralists’ Union, it will appear
it there is more in it to some men whose
lings are perhaps bitter towards the
ion 'shearers. I may tell you from
■ knowledge that it is so. Some non-
ion shearers, who have been persecuted,
think they have, are more bitter in this
tter than any pastoralist. VVe think
.t it would be not at all unlikely that if
put a heading on our agreement such as
' Williams proposes these men will say
won’t shear under this agreement,
ere is a row over it at once. The only
y of getting out of it would be for us to
,w up another agreement, with another
.ding, but we prefer the course suggested
Mr Elder. If the course suggested by
a were adopted, and that suggested by
Williams were adopted, then it would
necessary for us to have two agreements
ming. That would be a very objection -
e thing. What I hoped for always was
lave seen long before these shearing rows
;an one uniform agreement printed and
ognised generally by sheep owners and
arers. If you adopt a heading which
s non mention either Union or non-union
i, but only pastoralists and shearers, we
get such an one generally accepted. If
i don’t adopt that, if you adopt one that
t fixes it for Union men and the Pastoral-
’ Union, then it would be absolutely
essary that there should be another
aring agreement working outside that.
■ tha/t reason I think there are very
strong reasons why the proposal put for-
ward by Mr Elder should be adopted. I
quite agree with you that Mr Williams’
proposal is an absolute statement of fact,
but Mr Elder’s is also an absolute statement
of fact; there is no difference between the
two proposals in that way. The question
we have to decide is whether Mr Williams’
proposal or Mr Elder’s proposal is most
likely to lead to a general peace. I think,
and I may be allowed to say that I have
given as much thought to that as any
shearer or any shearers’ delegate in Aus-
tralia, I think that Mr Elder’s proposal is
more likely to lead to peace than Mr
Williams’. For that reason I would ask
you to allow it to go in unless there is some
stronger reason than any yet shown for
excluding it.
Mr Spence—l think the argument you
have brought forward can be also applied
on the other side, and that in avoiding one
you fall into the other. I don’t exactly see
it in the way that you do—that there can
be a reasonable objection taken to this by
anybody. But, supposing it held good that
some non-union shearers may object to the
agreement because it is simply stated that
it originated at this Conference, when they
know that it was drafted at such a Confer-
ence in Sydney, I do not think that any
advantage could be gained by hiding that
fact. On the other side, there may be
members of the Shearers’ Union who may
have objections, and, if they did, then that
fact is to be counted also. It is of more
importance, perhaps, than appears on the
surface to examine into. I do not see how
anybody can raise objections to a simple
record, stating where it was adopted, and
by whom. It is admitted that we here re-
present practically the pastoralists and
shearers, but we are also here in terms of
the agreement signed at the beginning of
the Conference, in which we affirm our
position. It means that it is an agreement
only between these ten men, not represent-
ing any particular organisation, if we put it
as suggested by Mr Elder. The question
will then come up —How did they come to
represent anybody at all? We know how
we came here to-day, and to ignore that
does not seem to be a wise plan or neces-
sary. I do not wish to attempt to cause
any friction, but I know it would cause a
good deal of satisfaction if this were put in
this way, for the reason that you have given
in support of it, That is where the trouble
comes in. As you must know, a large body
of unionists would probably raise objection
to it, and it seems, then, to be a choice
33


between the two. I think that there is no
getting away from it. This Shearers’ Union
has conceded something which is referred to
here, but Mr Elder, in his proposal, dis-
tinctly deals with the question of non-union
men. It shows there a definite statement
that there has been no interference at all
with them. It also tends to the other side.
The amendment simply provides that it
shall be declared in the agreement what we
have drafted and signed between the two
bodies at the beginning. That is stated
most clearly and distinctly.
Chairman—l don’t see where the non
union men are represented.
Mr Spence—lt declares the new relation-
ship between Union and non union shearers.
It declares peace between them instead of
war. This is an agreement between us as
you have put it, between all of us, those
who are Union and those who are non-union,
and the idea is to avoid any friction in con-
nection with the engagement of men and so
on. What lam arguing now is that there
is a recognition of what we agreed upon at
the start of this conference. Therefore, our
position is a perfectly clear one, and I think
the amendment proposed by Mr Williams
is the best way of meeting it, because I am
sure that to have it in the other bare form
would not at all give satisfaction to our
people, whereas in the other form they
could not raise any objections to it, for the
reason that all the points which they re-
quire has been dealt with and put into the
new agreement, which provides for a new
relationship between us, and something that
is quite different to anything we have had
before. Perhaps you would prefer to retire
and consider this matter.
Mr Elder—l think so too.
The pastoralists’ delegates then retired for
a few minutes.
On resuming,
Mr Wilson—l will point out that the
shearers did not understand what this free-
dom of contract means, or, at least, that is
what they say. If this definition and these
words are put on the head of the agreement
as suggested by Mr Elder, with the authority
of this meeting that state of affairs will be
at an end.
The Chairman—What we suggest now is
that Mr Williams should take that part, add
it to his heading, and let the whole thing go
in as the heading. We want to see if you
will adopt that, and we will disperse for a
few minutes and consider it. That would
be our declaration when we engage non-
union men under that agreement chat they
they were not to be excluded.
Mr Spence—l always like to be franl
and in this Conference it is best to unde
stand exactly what we are about. Wil
regard to this addition at the bottom, thei
is only one term in it that we fail to have
liking for, and we want an alteration in tl
wording. Ido not know how it is, but th
term, freedom of contract, has got associate
with a number of ideas which make it di
liked among our people. If it was worde
“ terms of contract or engagement,” th<
would do away with that feeling in respei
to this particular matter. We are giving
little to sentiment, but it is that idea that
guiding us. We are not acting here on oi
own individual opinion, but are| followir
lines which will remove all friction. W
do not object to the definition as containe
in the memorandum,
Mr Elder—l have for some considerah
time, I do not know haw many years heai
the Shearers’ Union asking us to meet the
and if possible give a definition which can
accepted by both sides of “ freedom
contract. ”
Mr Spence—Only this year the quest!
cropped up about that term.
Mr Elder—A definition of freedom of co
tract has been agreed upon by both of us
that memorandum signed this mornin
That being the case, there can be no possil
reason why we should not give that defix
tion to the Australasian world and let it
known that the Shearers’ Union and tl
Pastoralists’ Union have at length agre<
that is what they understand by the word
“ freedom of contract.” I think it is mo
important, both for your sakes and our ow
that these words should be left in.
Mr Langwell—The memorandum has i
ready been signed, and will be published
the world in fuller terms than in this agre
ment, and I do not see why the term shou
be inserted in the working agreement. Y
have already agreed and attached our sign
tures to a document containing this defix
tion and a little more than these words. T]
only thing is, we do not think it desirable
have the term “freedom of contract” i
sorted in the working agreement.
The Chairman—The point I want to g
is that we require this thing as our justific
tion for asking non-union men to sign th
agreement which we have agreed upon, b
cause many would say to us at once if tl
heading proposed by Mr Williams we
adopted to our agreement. “ You want i
to sign the Union agreement, do you? V
will not do it. ”
Mr Williams—lt is not a Union ag:
ment.
34


The Chairman—But if it has that heading
it will be taken by a lot of men as a Union
agreement.
Mr Spence—lf we retire and talk it over
we may be able to come to some decision.
The Shearers’ Union delegates then re-
tired.
On their return,
Mr Spence—We come back to suggest a
little further amendment of this heading,
which we think will meet the case, and get
over all little objections, and we can then
agree to it. Our idea is to make this read as
follows:—“Shearers’ Agreement for New
South Wales, adopted by representatives of
the Pastoralists’ Union and Amalgamated
Shearers’ Union at a Conference held in
Sydney, August 7th, 1891, at which it was
agreed : —That employers shall agree to
employ and shearers shall be free to accept
employment, whether belonging to Shearers'
or other Unions or not, without favor,
molestation, or intimidation on either side.”
You will see that I propose to leave out the
words “ whereat the following definition of
freedom of contract was agreed to, and in-
sert the words “at which is was agreed.”
Without repeating what I have raised before
in looking up the agreement you will see that
this closely copies it. Keeping in mind that
memorandum this would meet the case
exactly. I do not think there is any desire
on either side to raise any quibble, but the
employment of these words is likely to have
an influence on many minds. That heading
I propose clearly defines the basis of the
whole agreement, and the position of either
party concerned. It is binding on the Union
members who sign it and the non-union
members who sign it, and the pastoralists
who sign it. There are three sections who
are signing the agreement.
The Chairman —There may be four. Non-
union pastoralists, non-union shearers,
Union shearers and Union pastoralists.
Mr Spence—Yes, but they could all em-
ploy this, and the reason why you would
have this on is clearly set forth in the
phrase, “at which it was agreed.” If you
would accept that suggestion our side is
prepared at once to agree to the heading.
Mr. Elder—l think we might say at once
we deem it of the very first importance
that the definition of freedom of contract
should go forth to the Australasian world,
and this is our reason for stating that this
is a definition you have agreed to. I sup-
pose you will not argue for a moment that
you have not agreed to this definition. We
have been told times out of number that
because we would not define it, or you were
not told how to define it, that that created
the whole of the difficulty, and I cannot
understand, and I don’t think Mr. Spence
can put forward any reasonable argument
against the inclusion of the definition I have
proposed.
Mr. Spence—We do not object to the
inclusion. We propose in the amendment to
include the definition.
Mr Elder—Then why not say so ?
Mr Spence—lt cannot be more plainly set
forth if you insert “at which it was agreed,”
and then include the whole of the memorandum
if you like.
Mr Elder—l think we should put at the
head of our definition the “ freedom of
contract” we have agreed to. The Pastoralists
Unions of Australasia define “freedom of
contract” We have asked the Shearers’
Union to define it over and over again but
they never would, and now we have come to
an agreement why not publish it ?
Mr Spence—We have accepted the proposal
you made but we have a strong objection to
putting in these working rules something
which is not in the agreement. There is no
such thing as the definition of “ freedom of
contract” in the preliminary we signed. The
term is looked at in a variety of definitions
that have been given at odd times regarding it.
Mr Elder—Only because it was undefined
before. Now we have a definition, we have
both agreed to it, and why not adopt it ?
Mr Spence—lt is the term “ freedom of
contract” which is objectionable, because it
conveys to different minds different meanings,
and we are desirous of avoiding the creation
of an}' feeling of dissatisfaction. I want the
shearers to all go together amicably, and I
know the use of this term will from their
ideas create anuoyance. They have read
history, and they know what it meant at the
beginning of the century. They attach a
certain meaning to it from our point of view.
Mr Elder—But you are discussing th
definition ?
Mr Spence—We do not object to the
definition going on. We agree to it, but we
have an objection to stating that the definition
of “ freedom of contract” was agreed to where
there is no such definition in this agreement.
I said, in speaking before, that the term
“ freedom of contract” should be omitted in
this wording. It might be done, and we
could get over the difficulty, and avoid all
objections by leaving out the term and stating
the definite agreement. There is more in the
deduction from the use of the term than may
appear to be the case at first sight. If what
we propose is done it would give much more
satisfaction and will be a great advantage to
35


the pastoralists, I am not giving my personal
opinion alone.
The Chairman—We must take the re-
sponsibility of our acts.
Mr Spence—Our members do not do what
we tell them. They are guided by their own
ideas, and I am desirous that all cause of
friction shall be removed. They would come
to us and ask us what we have done. There
is this point I wish you to look at. There was
great objection with some to making what
the} - term a concession of this kind at all.
There are a lot of strong-minded men who
feel very warmly about it, and we have to
consult these men and persuade them to
accept the position and go to work heartily.
We do not want, especially as we deem it
unnecessary, to bring in anything, even if it
is a mere word, which will add to the
ill-feeling. I can assure you that is the only
reason, because we do not wish to escape from
or alter what we have done, but we claim, if
you read what has been signed, that it is not
necessary to put in those words that “ freedom
of contract” has been adopted, but it is
necessary to have a definition of this working
agreement. That is a necessary part of it,
and we expect the men to abide by it though
they may not like it. It is our earnest wish
not to cause annoyance and friction, and we
know if these words are kept in it will create
ill-feeling. lam one of those who take men
as I find them. I cannot help if the men hold
these particular views. The question with
me is the matter of fact whether they do hold
them, I know they do so, and that is the
reason why I urge that it should be accepted
in the amended form suggested, because I
think it will meet the whole case.
Mr Wilson—l will point out that this is the
first occasion on w'hich the representatives of
employed and employers have mutually
agreed, and said wEat is “ freedom of con-
tract ?” We have been w'ritten at from every
source that one can imagine in this country,
and told “ why do you not meet these men
and define freedom of contract ?” We have
done so, and we do not want Mr. Temple or
anyone else to say that w - e failed to give such
a definition of “ freedom of contract.” There
is “freedom of contract,” and we are taking
the words to be what we mean. Let us have
a statement of “ freedom of contract” made at
the conference between employers and em-
ployed and placed here in this agreement.
Mr Spence—Even this agreement will not
say that we hold this to be freedom ot con-
tract. We do not by any means argue that.
That is what you define freedom of contract
to be, and we accept the conditions, but it
does not follow by any means that w r e accept
this basis of freedom of contract. We have
hundreds of men who look at freedom of con-
tract as something different.-
Mr Elder—Do I understand you to say that
is not freedom of contract ?
Mr Spence—You cannot convince hundreds-
of men that is freedom of contract. I do not
call this freedom of contract, if you ask my
opinion. If we had strict freedom of con-
tract we could marry as many wives as we
like, or do a lot of other things, but this is
an agreement arrived at by us to which we
consent. I do not wish you to think we
object to the agreement, but a lot object to
the use of the term freedom of contract -
Mr Elder—We might as well say that a lot
of our pastoralists object to our meeting you
a; all. Will you tell me whether you accept
that as a definition of freedom of contract
agreed to between the Amalgamated Shearers’
Union and the Pastoralists’ Union, sitting in
conference ?
Mr Spence—l do.
Mr Elder—Then why object to our recog-
nising it and putting it at the head of the
agreement ?
Mr Spence—But I am speaking of a num-
ber of men who do not accept this as a
definition of freedom of contract in the ab-
stract.
Mr Elder—You are here to act for a cer-
tain section of men, who must be bound by
your acts, or must repudiate them, and you
have said you accept that as a definition of
freedom of contract agreed between us. What
more ?
Mr Spence—lt is because I am afraid the
men will repudiate that I do not w'ant these
words inserted.
Mr Elder—We will take the risk of repu-
diation.
Mr Spence—We do not want to take the
risk because we will have to answer to these
men. It will be an advantage to have it said
by resolution that this is chosen to be recog-
nised as freedom of contract between us, but
this is a different thing altogether. It is put
as a printed agreement.
Mr Elder—After we have agreed to it. We
have agreed to a lot of provisions in this
agreement, and we have also concurred in
this definition of freedom of contract, and we
want to put it in our agreement, and at the
head of the agreement.
Mr Spence—We ask you to keep to what
has been agreed upon here. You yourselves
drafted a preliminary arrangement, and we
signed it without alteration. We are bound
by that, and intend to stand to it. You are
now introducing something in the preamble
of an agreement which is not in that agree-
36


ment, and I say it is not necessary to do that.
Further, it is not in keeping with our views,
and I am sure it will cause an amount cf
friction unnecessarily. If it is necessary to
have a resolution at this Conference that there
is a definition of freedom of contract between
us that is different to putting on the preamble
of the agreement something we have not
signed in that agreement.
The Chairman—lt seems to me it is a
matter or some importance. Are you willing
to accept that as a definition of freedom of
contract apart from putting it on the agree-
ment altogether as a fair definition of freedom
of contract ?
Mr Spence—Between us two parties ?
The Chairmen—You have accepted that
saying it is a definition of freedom of con-
tract. What we want to know, apart from
this question raised by you, whether you are
prepared to accept this as a fair definition of
freedom of contract, so that we may say when
the question is raised in the future —There is
our mutual definition. The Shearers’ Union
had for twelve months refused to tall into any
arrangement with the pastoralists, because
they said there were a number of definitions
of freedom of contract, and they did not really
know what freedom of contract meant. They
wanted it preparatory to falling into their
places, and taking their shaie in the produc-
tive work of the country. They wanted to
have a Conference to define the term freedom
of contract, so that they might know what it
meant. You know as well as I do that over
and ove r again the different Employers’
Unions anc i the Pastoralists’ Union have
given a definition of freedom of contract, and
have as ke( j t b e Shearers’ Union to give their
definiti on 0 f freedom of contract, so that the
two co u id be set side by side, and the public
could be placed in a position to judge what is
the diff erence between them. We have never
succe e d e( j j n getting that definition of free-
dom 0 f contract from the Labor Union or the
Shea rers ’ Union. We have always been
ready produce ours. Now we have met in
conf erence here we have placed a definition of
fr ee dom of contract. We have not said it
wa s a definition of freedom of contract, but
we told you that we asked you to agree to it.
You signed it, and agreed to it. Now are
you willing to tell us, and put your name to
it, that this is a definition of freedom of con-
tract to which you have agreed, apart from
putting it on the definition of the condition of
agreement ?
Mr Spence—You do not want to have us
signing this as freedom of contract ?
Chairman —Yes.
Mr Spence—That is straight out. I can
understand the position you have been in, and
there has been some difficulty in bringing
about a straight conference. We are not
going to deny that this is a definition of free-
dom of contract agreed to here.
Mr Elder—Why not lie frank then, and
admit that it is a definition ?
Mr Scence—We have said it.
Mr Elder—But you have not said it is an
admission of freedom of contract.
Mr Spence—We cannot deny that the defi-
nition given by you has been accepted as a
definition of freedom of contract.
Mr Elder—And agreed to by you?
Mr Spence—ln one sense. We have
agreed to a definite thing, and that we do not
want to back down from. But the question of
freedom of contract and the opinions people
hold on it are very divergent.
Mr Elder—Then you a imit that between
our two bodies this is a definition of freedom
of contract ?
Mr Spence—lt is the definition agreed
upon between the two bodies.
The Chairman—Will you give us your de-
finition of what freedom of contract is ?
Mr Spence—l do not think it is at all
necessary. We wash to get to business. Ifyou
will read in the history of labor—and I believe
Mr Abbott does read history—what was to be
found under that heading of freedom of con-
tract, in the early part of the century, you
will get one definition of the term. This is
not the same sort of thing.
Mr Elder —Are you not anxious to have a
definition of freedom of contract between us ?
Mr Spence—l think the employers’ de
claration—what has been sought for and
signed—gives the definition between us.
Mr Elder —Why not put it there ? We
want you to admit that it is what has been
agreed upon.
Mr Spence—There is no objection to that
being understood here and agreed to, but we
do not think it is right to put it in the pre-
amble in the agreement.
Mr Elder—We consider it is of the utmost
importance that it should appear in the
heading of the agreement. You have asked
for a definition so long, and it should be on
every agreement between shearers and em-
ployers.
Mr Spence—Let us keep to the agreement
as put here. We want to keep to that,
because that is what we want to finish this
evening. This is bringing in something else.
We have gone right through the agreement.
We started on certain lines, preliminary to
so dealing with the matter. We signed a
memorandum. We know what was meant,
but we have finished up all our labors
37


something comes up which is not in this
agreement, and that is the objection we take
together with the other as to the fear of the
effect. We are not going to deny and say
that we have not accepted this definition of
freedom of contract.
Mr Toomey—Why not publish what we
have signed on the agreement ?
Mr Spence—l do not suppose there will
be any objection to publishing the wh>le
agreement between us, but I do not see that
there is any necessity to put this in the pre-
amble to the agreement. We do not find the
use of the term in this preliminary memo-
randum. The Chairman suggested a way out
of the difficulty just now.
The Chairman—No, I asked Mr Spence if
he would be prepared to agree to further
state that this definition of freedom of con-
tract was agreed to by his party and by ours.
What I wanted to gee at was this difference
which has so long existed. I tried my best
to get from the Shearers’ Union a definition
of freedom of contract to place side by side
with the definition that we have always been
prepared to issue, so as to see what was the
difference Detween us, on if there was any.
I have never succeeded in inducing any labor
union to put forward a definition. I thought
tip to this moment we had arrived at that
definition and mutually agreed upon it;
now it seems it is only provisionally accepted
by your side as your definition, and you re-
fuse to accept it as a definition of freedom of
contract.
Mr Toomey—As your definition.
The Chairman—What is yours ?
Mr Toomey That is what we have
signed.,
Mr Spence—You have had it all your
own way.
Mr Abbott and his colleagues then con-
sulted for some minutes.
On resuming—
The Chairman said :—Well, gentlemen,
after having considered the matter, we are
willing to accept Mr Williams’ proposal for
the first part of the heading, but only on
condition that the proposal made by Mr
Elder follows it.
Mr Spence—l am very sorry, Mr Chair-
man. One point in regard to this freedom
of contract, because that is the objectionable
term. You had it all in your own hands in
regard to this agreement, and we accepted
it without any alteration at all, and signed
it. I do not think it is fair now to bring in
this in this way, and in avoiding the use of the
term we do not want to take any advantage
You spoke just now about freedom of con-
tract. A definition of freedom of contract
was given by employers in Adelaide, and it
is totally different to this.
Mr Elder—We have nothing to do with
them.
Mr Spence—But I say that that shows
that there is a wide difference of opinion
about it.
Mr Elder—Tell us yours ?
Mr Spence—We do not meet to discuss
that, and have not discussed it. It has not
been the business of this conference to arrive
at a formal definition of “ freedom of contract 1 ’
for the employers and workers of Australia.
We met desiring to prevent any friction or
trouble and now this abstract question of
“ freedom of contract” crops up. I submit if
this is to be called “ freedom of contract” as
we have agreed between us that it is definite
and clear enough. Ido not suppose there is
any objection to that view of it. This is to
be agreed upon by all parties as the true and
full meaning of “ freedom of contract,” is
wrong, and 1 say there is no necessity to raise
the point as it is not our business to deal with
it yet. You are asking us to put on the
heading something we have not agreed to.
That was the condition antecedent to the
conference. I think we may fairly agree to
this heading without using a term as we th.nk
unnecessarily, and knowdng that it will be
calculated to cause friction, which we are all
anxious to avoid, and will accomplish no good
purpose. I think it is not fair to put it in, or
for you to force it to be put in. I do not
think it is needful to do that. If the terms of
the memorandum are put on as we have
signed them 1 think it will accomplish every
object. We recognise that we have accepted
the definition of *• freedom of contract” given
by the Pastoralists’ Union We are not going
to quibble at that.
The Chairman —You have accepted as the
definition of *• freedom of contract,” and it is
then only a sentimental objection to allow it
to appear here. You have accepted this as a
definition “ freedom of contract” mutually
agreed upon, and your objection now is a
sentimental one to this appearing on the
working agreement. Is that it ?
Mr Spence—Yes, most certainly 1 said that
in reply to Mr Elder. It n.ay be called by
some sentiment, but I am taking the objection
because as a matter of fact it will be seriously
cavilled at by many of the men. It will be
no use doing excellent work and winding up
by putting a head line in the agreement which
will be the sting. We stand by that and say
that the definition of *• freedom of contract”
has been agreed to between us. Sentiment,
you must remember, is very often a powerful
factor in determining men’s actions. I repeat
38


iat we are prepared to stand by the fact that
lat definition of freedom of contract has been
»reed to between us.
Mr. Wilson—You have not said that.
The Chairman—Oh, yes ; Mr Spence has
.aid it just now.
Mr Spence—On a previous occasion when
iomething was said about a definition being
iccepted a denial went forth. It was doing
njury in an adjoining colony where a struggle
vas going on over which we had no control,
ind with which we did not wish to interfere,
md their interpretation was so wide that it is
dear that a great divergence of opinion exists
n regard to the definition. This agreement
>f ours will be enough, because it is a clear
ind definite thing. 1 hope you will reconsider
he matter. I would not be so firm only I
enow this will cause a great deal of trouble.
There is no desire on our part to take any
idvantage. We gain nothing and avoid a
;reat deal of trouble and annoyance by not
fragging in a term which is not here before
is. In this memorandum of yours we are
cleased to find that the term was not used.
iVe know that a definition has been given
before by you, because that is an undeniable
act. Mr Temple said that in his letter in-
iicating that so far as it went we recognised
t as being given, and fair, to the limit of its
;xtent.
Mr Elder— He telegraphed to Queensland
stating that he did not say so.
Mr Temple—As far as we understood it.
Mr Spence—ln history there is a distinct
nterpretation
Mr Elder—We have nothing to do with
ristory, but we have a great deal to do with
reedom of contract. It has been a burning
question here for the last twelve month, and it
s absolutely necessary before the conference
breaks up that we should agree to state the
iefinition of freedom of contract which has
ieen accepted.
Mr Spence—Have we not done it ?
Mr Elder—Then why not acknowledge it,
f you are straightforward men.
Mr Spence—We have acknowledged it, but
may see we wish to put nothing in the
irovisional agreement which the men will not
sign.
Mr Williams—When we assembled here we
vere met with a document giving the l : nes
mder which we hoped to come to an under-
standing We signed that without objection
n any w r ay. We then drew up an agreement
md rules on the bac* of that agreement which
loth parties have accepted, and are satisfied
vith, and now we are asked to sign something
vhich is altogether different to what we signed
his morning. I for one, and I believe that
the whole of the delegates on this side agree
with me, am quite prepared to have the whole
of the document we signed put in on top of
the agreement and rules, which we have both
considered satisfactory. There can be
nothing fairer than that.
The Chairman—Mr Spence said a while
ago that freedom of contract was not one of
the things which was before us to-day, but I
say that Mr Spence is altogether wrong there.
We asked over and over again to have the
objects to be brought before this conference
specified and define i. They never were, and
if they had been they would have appeared on
an agenda paper, and we could not have gone
outside it. The Shearers’ Union claimed over
and over again that one of the objects was to
define freedom of contract. I ask you, are
you prepared, supposing that we were simply
to accept the argument so olten used that be-
cause these words freedom of contract do not
appear in the preliminary memorandum that
they ought not to appear here. To accept
that as a definition of freedom of contract, as
we are, and put your names to the memo-
randum as such, because I take it that the
definition of freedom of contract is of as much
importance between us now, as representing
the labor bodies and the employers, as any-
thing we have been doing. It is as much the
business of the conference as anything we have
been endeavoring to accomplish. If we put
it in this way that would answer our question,
and would be a declaration of what freedom of
contract was, as understood by you or by us.
If we do not put it in somewhere, or do not
have it appearing on the records of the con-
ference in some way, we may lay ourselves
open to the charge of having a lot of discus-
sion on this question and yet of having shirked
a settlement of it. We do not want to shirk
it. You object on the ground that it would
perhaps cause friction if the term appeared in
the shearing agreement. Are you prepared
to accept it apart from this shearing agreement
as a definition of freedom of contract ?
Mr Spence —Your conditions in the past
were that you would not meet us unless
freedom of contract was admitted.
Mr Elder—We have always admitted it.
Mr Spence—lt was defined last year.
There was a reply written by the representa-
tives of labor and they recognised freedom of
contract. The proper time for this was when
we met, because it was antecedent to this sub-
ject. We do agree to something, and we did
accept that definition. When we accepted,
that was the time for this action. You now
bring in something new and ask us to agree
to a definition of freedom of contract.
The Charman—But you say you have
39


agreed to a definition of freedom of contract.
We accept that you have agreed to it, and we
note what you have said in regard to our
shearing agreement. As a matter of course
you have agreed to it, but you say you object
to the words freedom of contract.
Mr Spence—Our difficulty was that the
term, freedom of contract, was very vague and
had a variety of meanings. You ask us for
something definite—you give us a definite
proposal and we accept it. You term that
freedom of contract. Other people and other
employers do not term it that,
Mr Elder we hare nothing to do with other
employers.
Mr Spence—We have accepted it, and what
more can we do than that. Now we are asked
to discuss the matter of contract. We accepted
it as antecedent to this question and why
should it be raised again. The Chairman says
we should dis uss the particular matter of
freedom of contract and that will bring in
something about which we might differ. We
have accepted this as a definition between two
bodies, and it will have a vast influence among
others. If the statement of the heading, leav-
ing out the term, or, as Mr Williams suggested,
putting in the whole of the agreement signed
by us and by yourselves is adopted, that will
satisfy us.
The Chairmna—l do not see any possibility
of our arriving at an agreement at present.
Mr Spence—l would suggest that perhaps
it would be as well to adjourn. This is a very
big question, it affects a very great body of
nten, and although these are only a very few
words much importance will be attached to
them if they are put in an agreement. We
should not fall out over them having got so
far through all the other trouble. I do not
know whether any other matter is likely to
crop up but it would be as well perhaps to
adjourn just now.
Mr. Elder—Till when ?
Mr Spence—Any time you please. We
have had a long discussion, and we have been
able to keep good temper. Why should we
fall out now. I feel that about the matter and
I think it would be better therefore to adjourn
the discussion till to-morrow. We will then
approach it with fresh min is.
The Conference then adjourned till the
following morning at n o’clock.
SECOND DAY
(Saturday, August Bth.)
The Conference assembled at ii. So.
Chairman—l think the first business will be
to read the notes of yesterday’s meeting.
The minutes were then read by the Secre<
tary (Mr Whitely King).
Mr Spence—l move that the minutes fc
agreed to.
The motion was carried
Chairman—Would it not be better if you
signed for your side ?
Mr Spence—No. You are chairman for
the Jonference. That will be sufficient.
The minutes were then signed by the chair-
man.
Chairman—l would ask you if you have
any suggestion to make or any proposition to
lay before the Conference ?
Mr Spence—Mr Chairman, we have, of
course, met on our side and discussed the
position very carefully, and we cannot see
any reason for changing the opinions that we
expressed here yesterday, with regard to our
objections to the full text of the resolution
proposed by Mr Elder, or rather the amended
form of it. We have looked over the official
correspondence that has been here very care-
fully, and over the agreement signed between
us, and we take it that we are now introduc-
ing matter foreign to that, and not in keeping
with what was agreed upon. It is useless
hiding the fart that a good deal of soreness
and friction has been caused by this term
being bandied about, and whatever ideas we
may hold personally, as to its meaning, pos-
sibly the bo iy of workers may have made
mistakes in their interpretation of it. At any
rate, for some time it was a bar to conference,
and at last between the two bodies circum-
stances arose which brought us together, and
these conditions are not altered in principle.
That is to say, you refused to meet unless it
was made first a condition of precedent that
certain things would be done. In the original
correspondence it was stated that unless free-
dom of contract was accepted prior to the
meeting your body could not meet. Then a
definition was given in some correspondence,
but no action was taken, and no practical
result came about from those original letters.
But recently, as I have said, a definite pro-
posal has been made. It came from Mr
Toomey, as is shown in the correspondence
published this morning, and it was accepted
and confirmed by the simple authority repre-
senting the Shearers’ Union. I may say this,
that we bad a meeting of the full Executive
Council, representative of the three colonies,
in Melbourne. We found that this proposal,
which came through Mr King, and which I
must say was very different in tone from some
of the other letters which we bad previously,
was of such a character that we accepted it,
though it is slightly different from what we
had before. We saw, however, that there
40


must be some compromise, and we recognised
that throughout. When we came here we
recognised the principle which had been laid
down, and we have accepted that and fol-
lowed it all through. But we have not dis-
cussed the question of freedom of contract.
You held to the position firmly that before we
went to conference you must first have some-
thing laid down on the lines indicated in the
correspondence, and we accepted and signed
that memorandum, which you made a condi-
tion precedent. That, I think, is admitted.
Now, we want to adhere to that principle.
The principle you yourself laid dow r n in your
previous correspondence with us—that the
question of freedom of contract must not
be discussed, and that you decline
to discuss it as being absolutely un-
necessary—we wish now to follow. You
yourselves declined to discuss it, and
have said that it must be a recognised prin-
ciple. Now, we have been given to under-
stand that you want something further be-
yond what has been admitted here. But we
do not think your body wishes to press un-
duly or unfairly upon us. Our position is an
awkward one. We want to be loyal to what
we have accepted, and we are prepared to be
so, and we ask your side to be the same, ind
assist us as far as possible in our efforts. We
are bonestly endeavoring to take whatever
steps we can to avoiu an\' friction. As we
have stated previously, the point in dispute
may appear to b • but a trifling one, but we
feel that the wording proposed will not be
accepted by a large body of the men we
represent, and we think it would be unfair
to you, as well as to the public, to
come here and do a thing which we know
will not settle this question, so that after-
wards you should come to us and say you
came to terms for your men, and you have
not carried out what you agreed upon. We
know the 'outh Australian agreement, which
does not contain the objectionable clause in
reference to freedom of contract, is very ob-
jectionable to a large number of men, and
they feel very warmly about it. It does not
matter what the papers say as to whether
they should do so not ; all I have to
say is that they do so, and no matter what
people may say to the contrary in agreeing
to go a step further in this matter, as we
have already dune, we are adding to our bur-
den, and will have to educate these nr ore
extreme men, if we choose to call them so, to
take this forward step, 1 am asking you to
look at the matter fiom the point of view I
have put it to you, and to see the effect as we
see it upon those who we are here to repre-
sent. It would not be honest on our part to
mislead the public or the Pastorahsts’ Union,
and that is the reason why 1 ask you to
compromise the matter further. We believe
that we went io the utmost limit when we
accepted the task of inducing the men to
agree to what we have already signed. Of
course, it would be said these men who dis-
agree need not work under the agreement,
but you do not want, I presume, to cause
the men to lose employment or to cause the
pastorahsts to lose the services of a number
of good workmen. I take it that what we
want is to see the pastorahsts and shearers
work as amicably as possible, and that the
best men are obtained, and that no friction
should be created. We have been, I think
you will admit, ready to compromise as far
as possible, and we cannot be expected to go
beyond a limit. 1 have heard no reason put
forward yesterday to show that it was neces-
sary to put ihe heading in this particular
form, in the face of what we have already
agreed to. In that definition we have gone
further than they have done in South
Australia, and further than has given the
men satisfaction, and we feel that it is the
utmost limit that we can go t°, and that
having gone so far, we do not think we can
see any alteration beyond what we have sug-
gested ; that would be satisfactory. That is
our position, and I sincerely trust that we
may finally wind up in a satisfactory man-
ner. We had no other matters that we
desired particularly to bring forward. We
wo ild be satisfied with the acceptance of
this, and if this little trouble is got over we
will do our best to assist in seeing that the
work goes on satisfactorily, and in maintain-
ing the good feeling which we hope will re-
sult and increase between the two bodies
after this conference is over. That I think
is the position.
The l hairman —Gentlemen, I may say
that we are quite satisfied to adopt the agree-
ment as expressed in the amendment up to
our parting last night, that is of the pro-
posals made from your side and entered on
the minutes. Now in reference to this pro-
posal of freedom of contract, what we want
to get is a statement of our definition of
foeedom of contract on the agreement for
this reason :—You have said, Mr Spence,
that many mistakes have been made by the
workers as to what freedom of contract
means.
Mr Spence—Diffeiences of opinion and
possibly mistakes.
The Chairman—We desire to let the men
know what freedom of contract means, and
what we are particular about is that there
shall be no mistake as to our definition of
41


freedom of contract, and what we mean by
the term. We have announced it over and
over again, and we have asked the men to
show us if there is anything wrong about it.
But we have found no one to show us what
is wrong in it. We have, said if this defini-
tion has anything inequitable in it, give us
your definition and let us see how thev stand
side by side. We have never got a definition
from any labor bodies of what should be a
properly accepted idea of freedom of contract.
Now as you see it is perfectly true that the
working men, shearers all over the country,
are in error about what freedom of contract
means.
Mr Spence—l don’t say they are in error.
The Chairman—They are not in error
perhaps about what freedom of contract
means, but what we mean by freedom of
contract. Our views have been misrepre-
sented from one end of Australia to the
other. They have been told all over the
country that the pastoralists meant so and
so by feeedom of contract. I have heard
several definitions. I have heard one defini-
tion which ran something like this, The
pastoralists mean by freedom of contract
that every employer shall employ any man
he pleases, Chinamen, Kanakas, or Cnolie. at
any terms on any conoitiun lie p.eas s.”
That is the definition of freedom of contract
that has been circulated all over Australia
as the pastoral sts’ definition. In reply to
that definition we want to put on every
agreement, and we don’t care if it is your
definition or not, we want to put on every
agreement that we offer to our men,
whether they be union shearers or nonunion
shearers, to every man who is prepared to
work for members of our union, and to show
him what we mean by freedom of contract.
What we mean, and not what others mean.
We do not care what anyone else means, but
we wish that this misrepresentation shall be
carried no further. We want an end of it
now, and we drew up in the form of a pre-
liminary memorandum what we mean by
freedom of contract, and laid it before the
conference. This preliminary memorandum
was signed by us, and that is the definition
that will be accepted not only in New South
Wales, because this only refers to New South
Wales, but from one end of Australia to the
other by the pastoralists. That being so, it
seems absolutely essential to us, never mind
what the press say about it. and what other
people may say about it. Those are our
views, and we wish to insert this for tin*
purpose of preventing misrepresentation,
without using any sponger word, that has
been going on. You on your side have
accused the employers of circulating mis-
representations through the press. We on
our side, as I hold with much greater reason,
have accused you of circulating misrepresen-
tations through the press. Now we have a
definition of freedom of contract and that we
wish to put, apart from the press or any other
institution, before the workers of Australia as
a definition. Can there be any objection on
the part of the shearers to us putting our
definition on every agreement, when we ask
the man to sign ? We look upon that defini-
tion as our chaiter of freedom, and as the
charter of freedom of every working man in
Australia, unionist or non-unionists, but more
particularly we look upon it as the charter of
freedom of the men who have refused to put
themselves under the tyranny of any union.
That is our object in putting it on the agree-
ment. We want it put forward for we think
there is no objection to putting it forward as
our definition so long as there shall be no
mistake that this is what we mean by freedom
of contract. That is what we mean to stand
by. We must have it in our agreement in
some form or other. We must have it on our
agreement, at least, as our definition of free-
dom of contract beyond all question. I can
see no escape from it. It is more essential
than anything else done at this conference.
When we have gone through the agreement
we find that nearly all the questions dealt whh
were absolutely fair, and that all the matters
you have brought up or practically every one
of them is entered here upon a paper by us,
suggested from other directions, and agreed to
before you proposed them, by us. That shows
that we are prepared to make a perfectly fair
agreement, and the amendments have been
immaterial, as you must admit. Now, because
one point is brought forward as to which I
think the value of this conference will be
greater than anything which can be brought
forward, that of giving the Pastoralists of
Australia an opportunity of putting upon
their agreement, their definition of the free-
dom of contract which has been so much
bandied about and so much misrepresented, to
all the workers of the colony, objection is
taken to it. We wish to prevent the possi-
bility of all mistakes or misrepresentations for
the future, so that we can say to every man
who works for us for the future that we are
putting this on our agreement a definition of
freedom of contract which we ask him to work
under. We ask you to sign that as the defini-
tion we have framed, and which we mean to
stand by, no matter who tells you anything
else. As an alternative to that it seems that
we are likely to reach a deadlock. I will put
before you a consideration of the alternative
42


if we do reach a deadlock. We have gone
through the whole agreement and have agreed
definitely on a form of agreement which we
think is perfectly fair, and you think so too,
or you would not have admitted it.
Mr Spence—lt is a compromise, and like all
such things it is the best we can agree upon.
The Chairman—lf we put this to the vote
and there is equal voting on each side the
alternative is this ; —The agreement goes out
from this conference without any heading.
You can put what heading you please upon it
and we will put a heading giving our defini-
tion of freedom of contract on it with the date
of the conference. We must have that on it,
to our own protection whether it is agreed to
by the A.S.U. or not, because there are
other people you do not represent, to whom
we propose to offer this agreement for signa-
ture. These men are as worthy of as much
consideration as any member of the Shearers’
Union, and possibly more consideration from
us than any members of the Shearers’ Union,
though we have always put union men and
non-union men absolutely on an equality as
far as the Pastoralists’ Union was con-
cerned. We have discountenanced, in
every way in our power every attempt to
to discriminate between union and non-union
men. We say that every man in Australia
must have a right to work. He must have
the right to work when it is offered to him,
without being prevented either by any com-
bination of employers or unionists or union
leaders. Now I think I have put our position
as plainly as possible before you. I don’t
want to close the conference, I don’t care even
if it lies over till Monday. We think it of so
much importance that a mutual arrangement
had better be made if possible, that we will do
everything we can do to bring it about. But
we think it better to have this agreement as
drafted with no heading, if we cannot agree
on a heading. Then we claim the right for
our Pastoralists’ Union in the case of sheds
belonging to our members, to have an agree-
ment with a heading giving our definition of
freedom of contract, andyou can if you please,
in sheds that belong to pastoralists who are
not members of our union, give your definition
of freedom of contract on this agreement,
which I presume you will offer to men not
working in our sheds. For there is a body of
people, pastoralists and shearers, working out-
side both our organisations that may adopt
the agreement in its bare form, putting any
heading on it they please. There are non-
union shearers, and there are also pastoralists
who are not members of the Pastoralists’
Union, and these consider themselves free to
net as they please. That is exactly our posi-
tion. We don’t want to hurry the matter, but
we have considered it, as you have, very care-
fully. We have given every point the very
fullest consideration, and we have come to a
definite decision on our part, so that it is
scarcely necessar}' to put the matter to a vote.
We have come to a definite decision on our
part, that it is absolutely necessary that we
must have the definition of freedom of con-
tract, that is our definition, agreed to in the
preliminary memorandum, put on as the
definition of freedom of contract by which
pastoralists of Australia are prepared to abide
If you will not consent to that, then we have
no other course than that I have indicated.
Mr Spence—Without in any way touching
upon those points that might be referred to
such as the remark about tyranny of the
union, and I know sometimes people are apt
to take up a thing of that kind, I think it is
desirable to keep to the point before us.
Consequently, leaving anything of that kind
aside, let me say the feeling of the delegates
on our side is to stand by this agreement. The
work we have done will be recognised as being
a ■work that is a reasonable compromise be-
tween two parties considering the whole inte-
rests at stake, not so far as the agreement and
method of working under it is concerned, but
even to the agreement signed between us
yesterday. That will still hold good. The
real position between us seems very like a
deadlock, because we are just as equally firm
and we cann it help being so. That is the fact
which we have to look at, and what I rose to
call attention to was that we had no objection
to that definition being put on, but we have
objected to the introduction now, and discus-
sion of a question which was not set down for
discussion, and was not proposed to be dis-
cussed either by you or by us. That is the
principle we wish *o stand by, and we v/ill
adhere to the engagement made at the start-
ing of this conference.
The Chairman —We had no specification of
the matters to be discussed
Mr Spence— No, there is no exact business
set down, but I have in my previous remarks
set down the lines you have yourself followed
as to the condition precedent, that there was
to be no discussion of freedom of contract.
Mr Elder—Certainly not.
Mr Spence—That remark was not ques-
tioned when I made it before.
Chairman —We admit that.
Mr Spence—Very well, it has been ad-
mitted. But last night we were drifting
towards the introduction of such a discussion.
We were asked whether we would give a.
definition of contract, and we declined. We
declined to discuss the question as we con-
43


sidered that we had no object for putting that
■definition on the heading of the agreement.
What we object to is that it has been stated
as a definition of freedom of contract. If you
■call that your definition of freedom of con-
tract we are prepared to recognise that you
do so, but, as this Conference has not dis-
cussed the question of freedom of contract, it
•cannot in fairness be put forward as a defini-
tion of freedom of contract from this Confer-
ence. That is the position I take, and I say
it is unanswerable. You have now informed
us that you have desired it to be put before
the public as your definition of freedom of
•contract. That has been done over and over
again. We are not now objecting to that
being done on the heading of the agreement,
so that narrows the thing down to a very fine
point. What we do object to is dragging in
■these three objectionable words now, for the
reasons I have intimated, and because of its
effect on a large body of men. That is the
position I take up. We are all alike desirous
with yourselves, and I am glad to hear you
■express that wish. Even if we should come
come to a dead-lock, I do not think that it is
fair to the bodies we represent or the general
•community. Everyone agrees that it is
desirable there should be no friction in regard
to this great industry of New South Wales.
In all my connection with Labor Councils I
have been in favor of conference and com-
promise, although of late I have somewhat
lost my character in that respect, for no reason
that I can attribute. I cannot go further and
be honest and fair for those whom I am
acting if I were not to protest against the
inclusion of these undesirable words. We
have carefully gone into the matter, and I am
speaking the sentiment of those who are
acting with me that if this line is left out
friction will be avoided. The definition is
there. We said last night that we would not
object to the whole of the memorandum going
at the hea 1 of your agreement. Surely,
we cannot reasonably be asked to go
farther. _ We do not think that you
want in any way to humiliate -us.
(Hear, hear.) In using the word humi-
liate I employ it not in the extreme sense
that you wish to make us swa!low_ something
that is objectionable to us. We have en-
■deavourea to avoid quarrelling. One of the
reasons we did not give a definition, was that
we feared it would create a difficulty. We
■were anxious to confer. Some of your people
■say they had an impression that we did not
■desire to do so. We desired open conference,
but we had no objection to discussing any-
thing at it. But taking up the line of your
own side, I do not hesitate to gay that we
have to some extent gone back from the
desire from an open conference and accepted
the principles that you have laid down, that a
certain thing should be agreed to beforehand.
We did that quietly and civilly, and we want
to keep to that and have that definition. I
was rather surprised to hear the Chairman
say the pastoralist cause had been represented
as putting forward that definition which he
shortly quoted. I have spoken at a number
of places in the country, and I have never
given that as the Pastoralists’ Union defini-
tion. I have given a definition which was
given as that of the Chairman of an
Employers’ Union,
Mr Wilson —In such a way as to imply it
was frecedom of contract by every Union.
Mr Spence—l can challenge the whole
w'orld that I have never represented that. I
have been made by the press to represent
certain things, and you Mr Chairman, know
as a public man, that the press do not always
accurately put forward what a man says. I
have enough sins to answer for without that
additional responsibility, but it has been put
by a chairman of an Emplojers’ Union, and
as they are all federated bodies, and as the
Employers’ Unions first raised this question,
I stated it as one definition of freedom of
contract, but I have never charged the
Pastoralists’ Union with such a definition.
My last address, a copy of which I can
produce, contains a statement in which I
distinctly say that the pastoralists are not to
be charged with having given that definition,
because they distinctly go against it in
agreeing to pay the prices. I thought that if
I did not mention that, it might be taken that
I was consenting to that having been put
forward. So far as I know none of our body
have put that forward. It would be unfair
and dishonest to do so as you gave your
definition a long time ago. The other was
given as an illustration to show' the mere use
of the term. We should recognise each
other’s difficulty, and try to help each other
over them by mutual concession. I think
your point is amply met in what was done at
the opening of the conference an i by the
definition being printed on the preamble,
without the use of the term, objectionable to
us. It may be called sentiment, but even if
it is that ought to be taken into considera-
tion.
The Chairman Something has been
handed to me by a South Australian present,
and he says that that definition which you
quoted as the definition of one of the branches
of the Federated Employers’ Union was never
issue 4 from South Australia by any branch of
44


the Federated Employers’ Union, but was the
definition of a single individual.
Mr Spence—lt was a definition given at a
conference by the chairman of that conference.
Mr Elder—What was the conference ? and
who was the man ?
Mr Spence—The chairman of the Master
Bakers’ Association of Adelaide. (Oh.)
Mr Elder—He gave it out as his own indi-
vidual definition.
Mr Spence—He gave it as the definition of
the conference. The Employers’ Union may
have repudiated it, but I am not responsible
for his error. I have always been using it,
and 1 have quoted it on over fifty platforms
in the three colcnies, and stated how I became
possessed of it. I simply gave it as an illus-
tration of the divergence of opinion on the
subject. I was careful to read the copy I got
from the original. I used it an an explana-
tion, and to remove away an impression that
otherwise might be misunderstood.
The Chairman—l would like to point out
to Mr Spence and his colleagues that the
argument offered by him now is the strongest
one which could be adduced for putting our
definition of freedom of contract on the agree-
ment. You have now shown us that the defi-
nition given by an individual owner has been
circulated by you on fifty platforms in the
colony. That is a definition which is repudi-
ated by every Employers’ Union.
Mr Spence—l have never seen a repudia-
tion, I have asked for it.
The Chairman—We know it is the defini-
tion given by an individual man. You cannot
bind all employers by it. If I had the
opinion of every shearer I happen to know,
and I were to say these are the opinions of
the Shearers’ Union, and so are those of the
shearers generally, you would see the absurd-
ity of the statement. That is the argument
you put forward, and, though you have
guarded yourself against being charged with
misrepresentation, I know that hundreds and
thousands of men believe that is what we think
is freedom of contract.
Mr Temple—They do honestly believe it.
The Chairman—fust so. We want to show
that is not what we mean by freedom of con-
tract. I cannot understand the objection on
your part to put this matter on here.
Mr Spence —We have not objected to the
definition going on.
The Chairman —You have not objected to
the definition going on, but we want to put
the additional term on as a direct contradic-
tion of all the misunderstandings that have
taken place right through the country from
one end of Australia to the other, as some-
hing settled and definite—a pledge to our
men, which we expect to be asked for—say-
ing that we are not going to take any
advantage of them. We do not want to do
that, and we have not wanted to take any"
advantage of workmen, whether unionist or
non-unionist, from the beginning of this
trouble to the present time. Now, we want
to announce what is the definition, for
no other reason than as a guarantee to
the workmen of Australia that we do
not concur in such a definition of free-
dom of contract as has been circulated-
I can see no other way for us to act, but I
would like to see any suggestion which could
be made to get it on, as we hold it to be abso-
lutely necessary as a contradiction setting at
rest false notions circulated through the-
country. We know that this agreement, as-
accepted by the conference, will go personally
to all the working men in the country. That
is, all the bush workers, and if we get our defi-
nition of freedom of contract on that agreement
it matters little what misrepresentations are put
forward in the press. We can refer any man
to that. If any man tells another that freedom
of contract means this or that, we can say that
you have the definition on your agreement.
Mr Spence—That does not get over this
difficulty. We have been endeavoring to
arrive at the contract ; the limit of the freedom
of the parties concerned in carrying out that
contract is set forth first in this agreement,
secondly, in connection with the work in the
specifications of the work. We hold that is
the limit between the whole of the parties con-
cerned ; between us two as two bodies, but
with regard to others we cannot say that
nothing more is necessary. Our difficulty is
that if we are announced as having accepted
freedom of contract the idea that our men have
associated with the term, whether rightly or
wrongly, matters not, will cause difficulty-
There is the fact that they will assume that
is a sort of freedom of contract which we have
accepted on their behalf, and they may object.
That is the grounds of difficulty on our side-
The conditions have been accepted, and we
have not objected to them, but freedom of con-
tract, as a term is what they will object to.
The Chairman —That is because the thing
has been misrepresented.
Mr Spence —But it is not so.
The Chairman —Misunderstood, then. That
will be better.
Mr Spence—Misrepresentation, if you like-
I do not object because misrepresentation takes
place between all bodies, and on both sides,
but when an Employers’ Union at an Inter-
colonial Conference put it forward last year
that it was the old freedom of contract, of indi-
vidualism (they said it was individual freedom
45


between employers and workmen) trouble
arose in our mind. You were one of the first
bodies this year to put forward what } - ou
meant. Under the advertised definition you
gave you could have employed Chinese or any
one else. That fact showed what explanation
and modification was required, so that if we
announced that if we accepted the Pastoralists’
Union “freedom of contract” it would have
conveyed a certain meaning to these people,
who go into the exact terms under which they
have to work. We accepted your explanation
yesterday as a satisfactory one, because you
proved by actual fact, owing to a certain course
pursued, the lines you took up in regard to
the. Chinese. Nevertheless, without that un-
derstanding, there would have been room for
you under that definition to have acted in a
manner which we believe you did not desire
to follow, and which would have been
unfair to the workmen if it had been pur-
sued, by replacing good workmen by Chinese.
The Chairman—That case has been
absolutely provided for by the law's of th«
country which are the limit of freedom of con-
tract. The law excluding Chinese limits their
employment.
Mr Spence—lt cuts off the supply to a large
extent, but there are a sufficient number here
to displace a large number of better men. I
am giving this as an illustration that the bare
use of the term conveys to our men a certain
idea and that is what I am anxious to avoid.
The Chairman—With regard to the em-
ployment of Chinamen I have seen both Mr
Spence and Mr Williams employ them. I
happened to be at breakfast at a certain rail-
way refreshment room and 1 sat down with
Mr Williams and Mr Spence and two other
gentlemen. There was a Chinese waiter
attending to us and a Chinese cook cooked the
food. (Laughter.)
Mr Spence—l suppose you were like other
men and did not want to go without your
breakfast.
The Chairman—l mentioned it to show the
absurdity of your argument. The law pro-
vides that you cannot introduce Chinese.
Mr Spence—lf we find an hotel wdiich keeps
a Chinese cook we go to one w'hich does not
employ such a man. We would not hold our
positions if we did not do so. I am only
stating this as an instance, to wdiich I refer,
altogeher by the way. We suggested a course
yesterday which would have avoided the use
of this particular term, but it seems from the
position you have taken up that your side is
very anxious, not to use a stronger term, to
have it stated that this is your definition of
freedom of contract. I have seen no reason
why it should be put here, and I say that it is
not fair to bring it in now after having made
certain arrangements at the beginning when
as we understood this question was finally
dealt with. We have no objection to the term
of the condition going cn although we do not
like that. That might affect our own side.
Yet we have withdrawn our objection, and we
would ask you not to insist upon the insertion
of that term “ freedom of contract ” because of
the great dislike to it.
Mr Elder—Your objection is very senti-
mental.
Mr Spence—lt is not sentiment, although
what guides people in many things, is pure
sentiment. This is a very practical thing to
our mind.
The Chairman—We want to get it out of
your mind.
Mr Toomey— Publish it in a handbill,
Mr Spence—You can get it circulated.
You can post it in your shed. There are
thousands of ways of getting the thing pub-
lished. We would not be honest if we agreed
to something which would be repudiated, and
we are not going to have terms here which
we cannot carry out to a reasonable extent, or
to a very large extent. It would not be fair
to j'ou to agree to something which when we
would not be in a position to fulfil, and you
would be able then to charge us with not
carrying out the agreement and would
say what was the use of our meeting. That
is not what we want. 1 do not know what
we can do now unless we let the matter
stand over. Our party is very firm on the
point because we are sure the insertion of this
term would be repudiated by our own men. I
had a wire this morning from Wilcannia
because they have heard there that we have
accepted freedom of contract.
The Chairman —That is just the thing we
want to get out of the heads of the men, and
get it replaced by a genuine definition,
Mr Spence—We have to educate them on
the point as to what are the terms we have
agreed upon. We have to say to them this is
not the sort of freedom of contract you believe
possible. That is what we would say to them,
but if it is said, you have accepted freedom ot
contract, no amount of persuasion will drive
it out of their heads because they will say here
it is on the agreement. I have explained
with what they associate the terra.
The Chairman —It appears to me that what
you really want to do is to accept freedom of
contract as defined by us, but not to appear
to have accepted it to your men, in order to
satisfy the prejudice of the extreme section of
the Shearers’ Union, and to prevent them
from taking action, possibly extreme action
46


and opposing your views. You want a settle-
ment and we want a settlement.
Mr Spence—That is it.
The Chairman—You want to accept
freedom of contract as you are perfect!}' satis-
fied with it, and we are perfectly satisfied, but
you do not want it to be put to your extremist
men as freedom of contract. Do you not see
that you are keeping these men who are only
a section, the extreme section of the workers,
Under a misapprehension.
Mr Spence—We will not do that.
The Chairman—Would it not be a kindness
to them and justice to them that that mis-
apprehension should be removed with the
smallest amount of delay.
Mr Spence—That will be done.
The Chairman —We hold that this is the
way to remove it.
Mr Spence—But we hold that this will
create prejudice, and will cause us greater
trouble and that the removal of the words will
allow us to educate them Up to understand
what is really meant. I very much regret
that the members of the Pastoralists’ Union
should insist on embodying any portion of the
memorandum in the agreement, as I think the
only effect it will have wall be to create irrita-
tion among the men and the employers.
Mr Wilson—l do not think so.
Mr Temple—Both parties should aim at
minimising any feeling of discordancy. In the
first place the concession of allowing unionists
to work with non-unionists is a substantial
concession from our side.
The Chairman—l understood it to be a
concession from our side after the trouble we
have had.
Mr Temple—We make this inclusion in the
interest of peace. We signed the memorandum
in writing and delivered it into your hands to
do as you liked with, and I do not see that it
is essential to have it mentioned on the head
of the agreement. It is like flaunting this
continually before the eyes of the working
men. It will mean the retention of a bad
feeling between the pastoralists and their
workmen.
Mr Elder—That does not follow ifyou place
this at the head of the agreement.
Mr Temple—The only effect would be to
perpetuate the irritation between the men and
the employers. I do not see why the Pastor-
alists’ Union cannot show the same spirit as
their fellow-pastoralists in South Australia.
They did not want this placed at the head of
the agreement once our delegates had signed
it in writing. That was sufficient for them.
They made no mention of this. With regard
to freedom of contract, I do not recognise that
what we have attached our names to is
freedom of contract in the fullest sense. It
simply means freedom of contract as to whom
the employer shall employ. It does not give
him freedom of contract as to what wages he
shall pay. Where there is combination there
is no absolute freedom of contract. A mem-
ber of the Pasloralists’ Union is not free to
propose any terms to his workmen. He is
supposed to abide by the agreement arrived
at. It is a modified form of contract, but
pure freedom of contract is a misnomer.
Mr Campbell—This is the definition of the
Pastoralists’ Union.
Mr Temple—You are flaunting this con-
cession before the eyes of the men, and you
will keep up a bad feeling among them.
Mr Elder—According to your argument
there should be no bad feeling here, but you
have accepted this.
Mr Spence—We are not extremists.
Mr Temple—Yesterday, Mr Elder said that
I agreed in a letter I wrote to the Secretary
of the Pastoralists’ Union to freedom of
contract, and afterwards contradicted it in a
wire to Queensland. That is not correct. I
know that I never yet agreed on behalf of our
union, or personally, to accept the pastoralists’
freedom of contract. In a letter to the
Secretary of the Pastoralists’ Union I said I
had agreed with it as far as their definition
went. That is different to saying I had
accepted it as a proper definition of freedom
of contract, that I had agreed to it in toto.
There has been a good deal of misapprehension
regarding that. I wish to clear this up.
Mr Elder —I am very glad Mr Temple has
afforded an opportunity to refer to this matter,
because it gives me a chance to ask him to be
good enough to give us his definition of
freedom of contract. Reading from this very
letter he wrote, I quote as follows : —“ With
regard to the subject for diecussion, all that
there is to discuss, so far as there appears to
us is the agreement, working rules, and the
question of freedom of contract.” I contend
we have just exactly followed the course he
suggested in that letter. We have discussed
the agreement, have discussed the working
rules and come to an agreement about them,
and we are now on this question of freedom of
contract. Then he goes on to write ;
“ According to your definition of freedom of
contract, there will be no quarrel between us
regarding the same. You define the term to
mean that an employer is to be free to engage
whom he pleases, and an employee is to be
free to engage, or refuse to engage to work as
he pleases. We are quite in accord with that
definition so far as it goes, and we even
consider it should go further to provide for
possible contingencies.” Our answer to that
47


is, let us know how far you are going to give
us your definition. Put it on paper. We
have been perfectly open and frank with you.
and have placed our definition before }'ou, and
now we ask you to affix our definition to that
agreement. But you are not satisfied. What
do you want ? Place your definition before
us and see if we cannot come to a common
agreement. That seems to me to be a sensible
and right course for us to pursue, not simply
to sit down and say “No. we do not agree to
it. You ought to give us a definition so
that we can come to an agreement.
Mr Spence—That offer was not accepted.
We came on different lines.
The Chairman—We are in the same posi-
tion.
Mr Langwell—l wish to point out the
position I have taken from the first. From
the start in the negotiations to bring about a
conference I have always believed that the
conceding of the point of allowing non-union
men to work with Union men was to be re-
cognised. We have done that. After that
was done I was led to believe that the discus-
sion of the question of freedom of contract
was not to occupy the attention of the Con-
ference.
The Chairman—l ag ee with you gener-
ally.
Mr Langwell—That is the position taken
up fiom the beginning. Now, we find, and
it is claimed, that it was a mistake. Yester-
day, before starting on the agreement, this
matter was put back until we had got through
the whole of the agreement. I suggested
something about the preamble, and asked if
it was usual to adjourn it to the last. This
matter ought to have been brought forward
at the beginning.
Mr Spence—l raised it,
The Chairman—You suggested it should be
postponed.
Mr Spence—l raised the question of the
preamble, but you suggested that it was a
purel}' formal matter.
Mr Toomey—The chairman said we had
better take the coarse followed in Parliament
in dealing with bills.
The Chairman—l laid down what was the
course pursued there, and it was unanimously
agreed to postpone the preamble.
Mr Langwell—lt was agreed to, but it was
at the suggestion of the chairman.
The Chairman—Yes.
Mr Langwell—l maintain that is where the
mistake came in altogether. If it was the
intention of the pastoralists’ delegates to
introduce this subject of freedom of contract
it should have been brought up then, because
it would have followed the preliminary given
to us, and which was signed by us. I main-
tain our right in what we are doing, and, as
the chairman has confirmed what 1 have said
—chat the question of conceding the right of
non-union men to work with unionists was
not to be debated by the Conference.
The Chairman—lt has not been debated.
Mr Langwell—The subject has been drawn
in, and I maintain not rightly. I think it is a
matter which should not have been discussed
in any way. We have conceded the right you
asked, and we have signed your definition of
freedom of contract. Mr Spence and Mr
Temple have been asked to give their defini-
tion of freedom of contract in writing. I
maintain that is not our position here to-day
at all. We have not to give that definition.
We admitted your definition of freedom of
contract.
Mr Elder—Why not say so then.
Mr Langwell—We have said so from the
very beginning.
Mr Elder—lf you admit it put it on the
agreement.
Mr Langwell—But although we admitted
your definition of freedom of contract, we do
not say that is our definition of freedom of
contract, or that it is what we consider freedom
of contract, and we have not come here to
point out what our opinion is of freedom of
contract. That is not our intention in coming
here, and I claim it is wrong on the side of
the pastoralists’ delegates to ask that we should
put our definition of freedom of contract
before you, or that we should sign on the
working agreement, your definition in a place
where it has no right to be, as the agreement
is simply a mutual agreement for working
purposes.
Mr Campbell—l understood Mr Spence to
say that he accepted our definition
of freedom of contract, as between the two
bodies, and Mr Langwell also agreed with
him, and just now he said the same thing.
That being so we particularly wish that defi-
nition to appear on the agreement to prevent
any misunderstanding as to what we do mean,
because Mr Spence this morning admitted
that mistakes had been made as to what our
definition is. We want to put it beyond doubt
We do not want any more misunderstanding.
We want it placed on record in the printed
agreement. We have defined, and you have
accepted our definition, and we merely want a
record of that definition so that any shearer
may see it. We desire that every individual
shearer should see it, and therefore I beg to
move a resolution which I think may meet the
case from your point of view, you having
already admitted that you accepted our defi-
nition. I will move—“ That the heading be
48


‘Shearing agreement for New South Wales as
adopted at a conference between the pastora-
lists and shearers held in Sydney August Bth
1891, where freedom of contract was defined,
by the pastoralists as follows :—That
employers shall be free to employ and shearers
free to acceptemployment whether belonging
to shearers or other unions, or not, without
favor, molestation, or intimidation on either
side, and accepted by the representatives of
the shearers.” You have accepted the defini-
tion. Both Mr Langwell and Mr Spence have
admitted that.
Mr Langwell—Freedom of contract was not
spoken of until last night.
Mr Campbell—You have admitted our
definition of it, and we want that definition
put on record.
Mr Elder—l will second this motion
formally unless Mr Spence cares to do so.
Mr Spence —l am sure I do not intend to
do so.
Mr Campbell—You do not object to the
words which we call our definition of freedom
of contract appearing on the agreement.
Mr Spence—We made that concession last
night and we will stand by it.
The Chairman—The only point really in
discussion is whether the fact what we call our
definition of freedom of contract shall appear
on the agreement or not.
Mr Spence—That is the point.
The Chairman—That narrows the question
down to a very small matter. We want for
our own purpose to have this definition, which
we are all agreed on, and which we all con-
cur in, to appear in the agreement. As far as
I am personally concerned I do not want it to
appear as your definition at all. I am satis-
fied with it signed by you, but we want it to
appear to get rid of a misapprehension which
exists all over the colony.
Mr Langwell—lt must appear as our defini-
tion on the agreement which is to be drawn
up.
The Chairman—We only want it as our
definition.
Mr Langwell—We accepted and signed it
yesterday, and in putting it on the shearing
agreement which is adopted by by both sides,
it will go out to the world as such.
The Chairman—l want to restate what 1
pointed out early in the discussion, that
whether you accepted it or not, there is
nothing to prevent us putting it on our agree-
ment to our own men. Suppose we agree to
the heading, and left out these words, “ free-
dom of contract ” there would then be nothing
to prevent our putting it on our agreement as
our definition of freedom of contract, and that
is what we shall do.
Mr Spence—Our object is to mutually
agree upon any agreement regarding the main
questions. We have done so and we are dis-
agreeing about a heading. The whole head-
ing should be one representing the feelings of
the whole of the conference. There is a dead-
lock about including in the heading “ freedom
of contract.” We hold we have not been
asked here to discuss that. We are not here
to do so. and if it were discussed, it is not
necessary to this agreement.
Mr Campbell—ls it not important enough
to discuss.
Mr Spence—l think not. You did not
state it in the correspondence, and the proper
time to have dealt with it was in connection
with the memorandum. We have said “ you
can put the wording of that on the top.”
Surely it will be enough to put the whole of
the preliminary there. As far as putting the
definition before the shearers goes, the report
of this conference will go before them. Every
one of them will read it; unionist and non-
unionists alike. All our members will have sub-
mitted to them the statement, and your defini-
tion and what has been accepted. All this
will go before the shearers, and your object
will be accomplished in that way. We
will see it will go before them; it will be
in every shed in the colony, and your desire
to get it into their hands will be accom-
plished. We are only qnarrelling now
about its being done in this particular
form. Your definition will go before every
one of them, and thus yon will gain your end
and remove the misapprehension about which
you complain. That can be done and will be
done, but it need not be accomplished in the
way you suggest. By putting the definition
on the agreement you will miss achieving your
object, for that agreement is signed and then
put away. In the other form it will be put
before them and circulated, and they will dis-
cuss it in the workroom and by the fireside,
but as an agreement it will be put into their
pockets, and only be brought out to be referred
to when a dispute arises. We will take care it
gc es before them as your declaration.
Mr Wilson—You are just missing the whole
point of the thing. If we put this definition
on the agreement, we know it will get safely
into the hands of every man who accepts our
employment. We know that, and we do not
leave the matter to anyone.
Mr Williams —If that is the point the report
of this conference will go forth to the world,
not only to Australia. I venture to say that
before forty-eight hours’ are over, the result of
this conference will be known in London, and
the next mail will take the terms and the
enderstanding arrived at there, If that is the
49


main point all this will be published in the
press, and everyone will see that we have
accepted your definition of freedom of contract.
We accepted it in the memorandum we signed
yesterday, and we have already said we do not
object to have the wording, every word if you
like, put in on the top of the agreement. What
I object to, is that this shall go forth as our
definition of freedom of contract. From my
point of view that is not —-the definition I
mean—a fair, just and equitable freedom of
contract. The laws of our country do not
allow any man to have any absolute freedom
of contract. Freedom of contract is absolutely
impossible. We are prepared to accept that
as your definition ot freedom of contract.
Mr Temple—That is the case. We are pre-
pared to accept the definition, but the agree-
ment is not drawn up on the lines of absolute
freedom of contract.
Mr Spence—ls it not sufficient if it goes to
everyone ? We will undertake to have it
posted up in every shed, and you can easily
prove whether we do so or not.
Mr Wilson—We might not be allowed.
Mr Spence—We will help you.
Mr Wilson—We want to have it in every
shed, without a doubt.
Mr Spence—We will send it there.
The Chairman—lt will be perfectly satisfac-
tory to us if Mr Temple puts, in any terms he
likes, that this definition of freedom of contract
was the definition recognised by the Confer-
ence, as the pastoralists’ own definition. But
we want that to go in. We do not desire to
say it is your definition. We only ask to get
it to the men who work throughout the country
as being our definition. Put that on the agree-
ment in any form you like. You say you are
satisfied that it shall go on the agreement as
our recognised definition. We are perfectly
satisfied when you say that. I have a recogni-
tion from your side that you may have other
ideas of what freedom of contract means, but
we must get befoie the men what we mean by
freedom of contract. I know there is no such
thing as absolute freedom of contract strictly
construed, but I hold that the limit to freedom
of contract is the laws of the country.
Mr Spence—And the agreements adopted
between bodies ?
The Chairman—That limits it still further.
We are quite willing to make the arrange-
ment I have suggested, if it is stated that it is
our definition of freedom of contract. We do
not want to do what Mr Spence referred to a
while ago—humiliate men by compelling
them to sign an objectionable agreement.
We do not seek to achieve anything of that
kind—to humiliate or rub it into the men by
putting a statement into something, and
make them sign that which they do not like
to affix their name to. All we want is to
have our definition of freedom of contract put
before workers who do not see the newspapers
to the same extent as we do. We, therefore,
want to get our definition in the agreement.
We will circulate that ourselves in every part
of Australia. I may say that we can do that
without your consent, supposing the Confer-
ence broke down. Of course, we would then
put in our definition of freedom of contract as
being ours and not your definition. You can
please yourselves whether you adopt it or not,
but, if you recognise it as our definition, put
it in. Use any words you like, and we will
consent, but the definition must go there.
Mr Spence—You do not get rid of the term.
The Chairman—You want to put it out of
sight, and we want to put it on the front,
Mr Spence—You want to drag up a hob-
goblin—a something which will annoy. You
gain all that you want by putting the whole
of the memorandum before them. You can
put v. on the housetops in big red letters if
you like.
Mr Elder—Put it in any words you like,
but this is our definition.
Mr Spence—We have said it is your defini-
tion.
i ,Mr Elder—We want it in our agreement.
Mr Spence—Why do you want it ?
Mr Elder—To prevent misunderstanding.
Mr Spence—Theie can be no misunder-
standing that this definition of yours is on
certain lines, and has been adopted by the
Conference in a definite for n, but I see no
necessity cr reason for placing it on the
agreement.
Mr Campbell—To prevent misunderstand-
ing.
Mr Spence—That can be met.
Mr Elder—We do not think so.
Mr Spence—By the circulation of it in
thousands.
Mr Elder—Still, we do not think so.
Mr Spence—Anyone can see that you can
circulate it, and we will do so also.
Mr Wilson—We want every man who
accepts our work to see that definition plainly
stated.
Mr Soence—We can guarantee that.
Mr Wilson—No you cannot.
Mr Elder —We ask you to say that is our
definition. Simply say it is our definition,
and put it on the heading of the agreement.
Mr Spence—The men—a certain section of
them at least—are very hot on this point, and
that is the reason I argue so strongly that
they will feel the inclusion of these words as
a humiliation. It will cause friction, and it
will, to a large extent, nullify the whole of
50


of the Conference, after vve have got on so
well. I cannot agree to something which 1
believe will be objectionable, and it will not
be honest to do so. I have conferred with
my friends, and they are all agreed in this
feeling. It will be undesirable for ns to
come to this standstill. We have the infor-
mation that the men hold this view, and they
would not agree, even if we did. That is the
trouble we are in.
The Conference then adjourned for lunch.
AFTERNOON SITTING.
Mr Spence—Mr Chairman, we had another
consultation over the subject since the morn-
ing sitting. We have weighed the reasons
that you have put forward, and the position
you have assumed, and we have endeavored to
arrive at something which might meet your
wishes, and avoid as much as possible the
danger which we felt staring us in the face, if
we accepted the proposal you had previously
asked us to accept. We think that this form
of heading would meet the case, and would
carry out what you wish it to do on the agree-
ment as to freedom of contract, that is to say,
the heading would read this way, “ Shearing
agreement for New South "Wales, adopted
between the representatives of the Pastoralists
Union and representatives of the Amalga-
mated Shearers’ Union at which the following
was agreed to ;—That employers shall be free
to employ and all shearers free to accept
employment whether belonging to shearer’s or
other unions or not, without favor, molestation
or intimidation on either side.” (This is tlje
Pastoralists’ Union definition of freedom of
contract.) This carries the whole of what you
wish put in. It states that this is the defi-
nition you have adopted, and the terms of the
preamble of the explanatory note give the
position fully. I think that could not be
objected to by your people on the lines you
have objected this mor . ing. We are not un-
animous and some are very strongly against
I -On not having this brought into
conference wnTraTC i as’iui aubis u uicr,
had been in accordance therewith
arranged for the morrow, and )s
would be necessary to arrange certain-
matters. First, the P.U. had fix( d
the number of delegates at five, thoug
Mr. Temple had endeavored to pr I
vail upon them to arrange for nif n
representatives on each side, so
the whole of the N. S. Wales branch
might be represented, as well as t
Mr Elder—Let it be put directly under-
neath.
Mr Spence—lf that matters very much it
might go underneath there.
The Chairman—Very well.
Mr Spence—l think you will see tins: It
covers your ground and it avoids, as well as
we can frame anj-thing, placing us in an
awkward position. We have endeavored to
scheme out a resolution as you have seen,
which will meet you as far as possible, and 1
think that this does so. It states the defini-
tion of freedom of contract that you require.
As you have seen we have decided to recog-
nise this as your definition of freedom of
contract, and that explanatory foot note would
I think, meet the case and get over the diffi-
culty.
The Chairman—l think we had better
retire and consider this question.
At this stage the pastoralists delegates
retired to consider the matter in private.
Or. resuming,
The Chairman said—Gentlemen, we have
discussed this matter very carefully. As we
have said before, what we wanted was to get
on to this agreement our definition of freedom
of contract, and so prevent misunderstanding.
In the past there has been a great deal of mis-
understanding and we would prevent it in the
future. Now, after discussingit very carefully, we
have come to the conclusion that the proposi-
tion made by you to us is a fair compromise
of the difficulty. We desire, however, to make
a few verbal alterations. We have not
altered the sense, and we have followed the
wording as nearly as possible. We have
drawn alternate notes showing exactly what
we suggest. In the first place we have
followed your wording, stating that the
agreement was adopted at a conference be-
tween the representatives of the Pastoralists’
Union and yourselves. We are representa-
tives of the Federal Council of the colonies,
but we are only acting for New South Wales
here, so that we have only to put on
“ Shearing Agreement for New South Wales,
adopted at a conference held in on
the 7th and Bth of August, 1891.” You have
left out the second date, and it is it
should come in “ Between representatives of
the Pastoralists’ Federal Council of Australia
and representatives of theA.S. U. of Australia,
at which the following was agreed to :—‘ That
employers shall be free to employ and shearers
free to accept employment, whether belonging
to Shearers’ or other Unions or not, without
favor, molestation or intimidation on either
side.’ (This is the definition of freedom of
contract of the Pastoralists of Australia.”)
The term “Pastoralists Federal Council of
51


Australia” seems to us to be the best way of
putting it. It is more concise than the form
proposed by you, although it really is the
same thing. These are, you will see, purely
verbal alterations. If you are satisfied with
them the only way in which we can make the
matter formal is to withdraw the other resolu-
tions and propose one giving effect to this. 1
do not know who seconded Mr Williams’s
motion yesterday.
Mr Langwell—l seconded it.
The Chairman —Very well, if Mr Williams
and Mr Langwell will substitute the following
and withdraw their other resolution they can
put it as the substantive resolution, and Mr
Elder will withdraw his motion. That will
put the whole matter in order.
Mr Spence—Yes, I think that will be satis-
factory. We quite agree with the amendments
which have been made in the wording.
The original resolution and amendments
were then withdrawn.
Mr Spence then moved the resolution sug-
gested by the Chairman, in its amended form.
Mr Elder seconded the motion.
Mr Spence—l think it more advisable to
use the term “ Federal Council.” It gives it
more weight.
Mr Temple—Yes, then it applies to all the
colonies.
The Chairman—No, we are only acting for
New South Wales ; but no doubt it will be
accepted by the Federal Council for the whole
of Australia.
Mr Elder—No doubt you will find it
accepted by many other bodies in the same
way.
The resolution was then put and carried
unanimously.
The Chairman —There is one other matter
necessary before we can complete the business.
It will be necessary to adjourn for an hour to
enable the minutes to be written up so that
everything can be completed, and }-ou can
hold a copy of the minutes and we can also
hold one. Is it your wish that we should
adjourn for one hour ?
Mr, Spence—That is satisfactory to us. 1
don’t think there is anything else we desire to
bring forward.
The Chairman—We have nothing else.
The meeting then adjourned for an hout.
On resuming at half-past four o’clock,
Mr Spence said—Just before the minutes
are read and finally closed I desire tn move a
resolution, which I think we can do, and that
is :—“ That the thanks of this Conference be
accorded to Mr Abbott, for his conduct of the
business, as chairman, during the sittings of
the Conference.” I know that he was in a
position which must have been very trying.
He was acting as a representative, and yet
also as chairman, and I think we will all
agree that he did not take advantage of his
position of representative unfairly, nor forget
that he was also chairman as well as delegate.
I, therefore, move that the thanks of the Con-
ference be accorded to Mr Abbott for his con-
duct of the business during uhe sittings of the
Conference.
Mr Elder—l have veiy great pleasure in
seconding the resolution.
The resolution was carried by acclamation.
Chairman—Well, Mr Spence and gentle-
men, 1 need hardly say that I thank you very
heartily for having moved and carried in the
way that you have the resolution just pro-
posed. I will not use any unnecessary words,
and I will endeavor to be as short in my
remarks as Mr Spence was. I intend to say
a few words in closing the Conference after
the minutes are signed, and 1 will now simply
thank you for the vote you have given me.
I may say that I have done my beA to do the
work that you asked me to do when placing
me here, and I am glad to feel that my efforts
in that direction have met with the approval
of this Conference. There has been a little
informality in the proceedings, which will
require, I think, amendment before the
minutes are signed. Mr Williams had a
resolution on the minntes, which we sub-
mitted to partially, but which was afterwards
withdrawn, I think it will be necessary for
Mr King to read that minute, in connection
with yesterday's proceedings, which has been
re-draft'd by Mr Williams, and inserted in
.the book. It will be necessary for him to
read it, and it will be approved of, as the
other minutes were this morning. Then it
appears later on as withdrawn. It is a mere
formality.
The necessary amendment was then made
in the minutes, and attested by the chairman
in both copies.
I he minutes, as a whole, were then con-
firmed, and signed by the chairman, on behalf-
of the Conference.
man who
accepts our work to see that definition plainly-
stated.
Mr Soence —We can guarantee that.
Mr Wilson—No you cannot.
Mr Elder—We ask you to say that is our
definition. Simply say it is our definition,
and put it on the heading of the agreement.
Mr Spence—The men—a certain section of
them at least—are very hot on this point, and
that is the reason I argue so strongly that
they will feel the inclusion of these words as
a humiliation. It will cause friction, and it
will, to a large extent, nullify the whole of
52


MEETING
THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
Immediately on the arrival of the
Executive Council in Sydney on the
sth instant, a meeting was called, and
this opened at 3 p.m. at the Sydney
office of the Union. There were
at. present —Messrs. W. G. Spence,
president ; H. Langwell, V.P.; W.
Percy, J. M. Toomey, J. Mclnerney,
W. W. Head, T. H. Williams, and
D. Temple, Gen. Secretary; Mr. James
Slattery, Secretary of the Casterton
Branch, and Mr. G. A. Andrew
(Record), were also present.
The President opened the meeting
by reference to the object that had
called the members together, and he
then recounted the circumstances
which had taken place since the
meeting of the Executive Council in
Melbourne. At that meeting a re-
solution was passed empowering the
Executive to adopt a certain course
after a given date. He said that a
conference with the Pastoralists’ Union
had been in accordance therewith
arranged for the morrow, and it
would be necessary to arrange certain
matters. First, the P.U. had fixed
the number of delegates at five, though
Mr. Temple had endeavored to pre-
vail upon them to arrange tor nine
representatives on each side, so that
the whole of the N. S. Wales branches
might be represented, as well as the
Executive. A conversational dis-
cussion ensued in which all agreed
that the N. S. Wales representatives
should, if possible, take a direct part
in the business.
The position was discussed.
Mr. Head was the only one who
took exception to the terms of the
conference, but after an explanation
from Messrs. Spence, Langwell and
Temple, he agreed that such was the
best course to follow.
Mr. Williams stated that he under-
stood the Pastoralists’ Executive were
then sitting, and he suggested that
Mr. Jas. Slattery and Mr. Andrew
(who were present) should be asked
to wait upon the P.U. executive as
independent men, and lay the cir-
cumstances before that body, and
request that the number be increased
to nine from each side. This was
adopted and the gentlemen referred
to, accompanied by Mr, Mooney,
pioceeded upon their errand.
On their return, the deputation
reported that they had been courte-
ously received, and had made the
request desired. It was pointed out
that a decision directly concurred
in by the whole of the representa-
tives of N. S. Wales would be more
satisfactory than by a section only,
and other reasons were advanced in
55


Fs^3
support. In reply, the deputation
was informed that the whole of the
arrangements for the conference, as
regards the pastoralists, had been
completed, and that several of the
members of the P.U. Council had
returned home. It would therefore
be impossible to re-open the question
in their absence. At the same time,
it was pointed out that there was
no objection whatever to the whole
of the executive being present, but
not to take any direct part in the
proceedings.
Mr. Spence remarked that there
was one way of overcoming the
difficulty. The whole of their Execu-
tive Council could attend, and should
any serious difficulty arise, the five dele-
gates would retire and they could
consult as a whole.
This course was resolved upon, and
it was decided to proceed to a ballot
for the five representatives.
Mr. Percy remarked that it was very
necessary that their president and
secretary should be selected, as they
had conducted the negotiations up
to the present point, and could safely
be entrusted with the representation
of the N.S.W. branches.
Messrs. MTnerney and Head also
said they would give way for similar
reasons regarding Bourke and Scone.
A ballot was taken, which resulted
in the election of Messrs. Spence,
Temple, Langwell, Toomey and,
Williams. \.
Mr. Temple said he would have \
been only too glad to waive his
right to be elected, but he had acted
as the mouthpiece of the Union by
correspondence. In this, several
misunderstandings had arisen, and
he would like to be present to ex-
plain any point that might crop up.
He fully recognised that the represen-
tatives from N.S.W. even better
understood the requirements of their
colony than himself, and so far
as he was concerned, he intended
to let them take the principal part
in the discussion. He felt that he
should make this explanation.
The council then proceeded to
earnestly discuss the position, and it
was arranged that the whole of the
members should attend in the
chamber, so that in any important
proposal the whole should arrive
at a decision.
After a three hours’ sitting the
meeting closed.
CORRECTIONS.
Page 5. —“ Gen.” Sec. instead of “ Hon.” Sec.
Page 22. —Read “ Yamma” for where “ H ” blank line is placed.
Andrew <&• Taylor, Printers, Newport, Vic.
56




