

In the night, when 8 miles off the rocks, I was suddenly disturbed
by hearing Lieutenant Jardine, the officer of the watch, call to the
quarter-master, and tell him to jump into the chains, and take a cast of
the lead: no bottom was found, so I directed the deep sea-lead to be
hove, but, finding no bottom at 80 fathoms, and the ship being appa-
rently on a bank with discoloured water, I examined the sea-water with
a microscope, and found it full of small animalcula, in shape resembling
limpets, of a white colour, which of course at once accounted for the
white appearance of the water in a clear, star-light night: this appear-
ance was similar to muddy water in 5 and 6 fathoms.
Having experienced a similar white appearance on the coast fre-
quently, and tried the same experiment, I merely mention it that navi-
gators may not give notice of a supposed danger when the experiment
of sounding will prove that there is none.
’Aden, May 4th, 1844.
HI. — Account of Governor G. Grey’s Exploratory Journey along
the South-Eastern Sea-hoard of South Australia. By Mr. Tuos.
Burr, Dep. Surv.-Gen. Communicated by Lord Stanley.
Governor Grey’s Letter to Lord Stanley.
Adelaide, June 22, 1844.
My Lord, — I have the honor to report, that towards the end of
the month of April last, I left Adelaide for the purpose of explor-
ing the south-eastern portions of this province, which abut upon
the territory of New South Wales.
This part of South Australia has been hitherto almost unknown,
having been only traversed in one direction by overland parties;
and as the line of route which they had always pursued, passed
through a country for the most part of a very unpromising cha-
racter, it was very generally imagined that the south-eastern por-
tions of the province offered little inducement to settlers, and that
there was little probability of any continuous line of settle-
ments being established between South Australia and New South
Wales.
I hoped, however, that a minute examination of this country,
and more especially of those portions of it which were yet un-
known, might show that these impressions were without founda-
tion ; and in order that the exploration which I was about to
undertake might be rendered as effective as possible, I took with
me Mr. Bonney (the Commissioner of Public Lands), a gentle-
man of much enterprise and ability, and who was the original dis-
coverer of the overland route from Port Phillip to South Australia ;
and also the Deputy Surveyor-General, Mr. Burr, with whose


knowledge of the bush, and talent for surveying and exploring, I
was well acquainted. lam happy to be able to assure your Lord-
ship that the results of our journey were of the most satisfactory
nature ; and that we ascertained that by keeping near the sea-
coast, instead of pursuing the line of route previously adopted,
there is an almost uninterrupted tract of good country between the
rivers Murray and Glenelg. In some places this line of good
country thins off to a narrow belt; but in other portions of the
route it widens out to a very considerable extent, and on approach-
ing the boundaries of New South Wales it forms one of the most
extensive and continuous tracts of good country which is known to
exist within the limits of South Australia.
One peculiarity of the good country near the south-eastern
boundary is, that it is of recent volcanic origin, and that there is
every reason to suppose that some of the numerous craters with
which it abounds must very recently have been in a state of action.
The accompanying map of the newly-explored country, executed
by Deputy Surveyor-General Burr, contains plans and elevations
of two volcanic mountains, which convey a very good idea of the
character of these hills; and the enclosed sketch by Mr. G. F.
Angus, a young artist who accompanied me, represents very faith-
fully one of the most remarkable of another species of crater,
which are very numerous in this country, and which are filled
with fresh water, and are almost unfathomable. The water in the
one represented in this drawing was 103 feet deep, close to the
edge of the crater.
The length of time occupied in our journey, and the extent of
the country which we traversed, preclude me from attempting to
give a detailed statement of the results of this expedition in the
form of a Dispatch; and I have, therefore, enclosed for your
Lordship’s information a Journal of the proceedings of the Expe-
tion, which has been drawn up by Deputy Surveyor-General
Burr. I think it, however, proper to state briefly the following
points which it has decided, and which, as bearing directly upon
the future prosperity of these colonies, it is desirable that your
Lordship should be made acquainted with.
The south-eastern portion of the province of South Australia
has now been ascertained to be at least as fertile as any other
known portions of that colony; and the excellence and great ex-
tent of the good land in that portion of the province, the whole of
which belongs to the Crown, affords a guarantee that the fund
arising from the sale of land, and consequently the means of de-
fraying the expenses of emigration, will increase, for a considerable
number of years to come, with the increase of the population ; and
nearly the whole of this country being unoccupied, a large outlet
VOL. xv. m


yet exists for the rapidly-increasing flocks and herds of the
colonists. These circumstances cannot fail to produce most
advantageous results, both for the inhabitants of this colony, and
for the commercial interests of the mother-country.
Another material point connected with the fertile tracts of land
in the south-eastern part of South Australia is that this good
country lies in the immediate neighbourhood of the sea, and that
this part of the coast contains three bays, one of which has been
ascertained to afford good anchorage to small vessels, even in the
winter season, and there is good reason to suppose that the other
two bays, more especially Lacepede Bay, will be found to possess
the same advantage.
The inhabitants of the country which has now been explored,
will therefore be able with great facility to ship their produce to,
and to receive their supplies from, the adjacent ports, either in
New South Wales or South Australia.
As this country lies immediately between New South Wales
and South Australia, and forms an almost continuous link of good
country between the rivers Murray and Glenelg, and can, in its
natural state, be traversed in nearly all directions by drays and
carts without the slightest difficulty, there can be but little doubt
that in the course of the next few years an uninterrupted line of
settlements will exist between Adelaide and Port Phillip: indeed
the squatters from New South Wales have already begun to
occupy the most extreme south-eastern portion of this new country
with sheep and cattle stations.
During our journey we had an opportunity of visiting Rivoli
Bay, which is one of the bays to which I have before alluded, and
which had previously been only seen from a distance. I formed
our depot at this bay, and proceeded with a detached party to the
S.E.; and during my absence a survey of the greater portion of
the bay was made by some men of the Royal Sappers and Miners ;
and the master of a whaling-vessel which was lying there at anchor
having lent his boats for the purpose, soundings were obtained
both across the entrance to the bay, and over that portion of it
which affords the best anchorage.
I thus have it in my power to enclose a chart of a considerable
portion of the bay; and I have also forwarded an outline sketch
of Rivoli Bay, which was made by Mr. G. F. Angus.
I have the honour, &c.
(Signed) G. Grey.
P.S.—Since writing this dispatch I have received another very
interesting sketch, which I have forwarded for your Lordship’s


information. It gives an outline of Mount Schanck, which is the
mere elevated shell of an extinct crater; and it shows in the fore-
ground another of the extinct craters full of fresh water, which
are found in the coral formations.
(Signed) G. Grky.
Extracts from Deputy Survey or-General Thomas Burrs Journal
of his Expedition in company with Governor Grey.
10 th April. —At 1 p.m. I left Adelaide for Mount Barker; and
on the
Wth. —The drays, which had been dispatched from Adelaide
on the 9th instant, were overtaken by me at a sheep-station on the
Bremer; proceeding with which, we encamped at 4 p.m. on the
N. coast of Lake Victoria, about 12 miles from Wellington.
13 th. —Arrived at Wellington, on the river Murray, at 3 p.m.
On the road we met a party of eleven persons, with seventy head
of cattle and four horses, on their way to Adelaide from Port
Phillip. They had been nine weeks on their journey, which was
performed without accident.
\4.th. —Proceeded up the Murray river to the crossing place;
the weather was very boisterous, and the road along the river, at
the crossing, under water for a considerable distance ; however, we
succeeded, in the afternoon, in getting all over to the E. side of
the river, except one empty dray, and the bullocks and horses.
15 th. —One of the horses, on landing, after swimming across
the river, put his near hind foot into a hole in a sunken rock. The
hole being wide inside, the horse by struggling got his foot turned
round, and so firmly fixed in the stone, that notwithstanding every
exertion was made to extricate him, by the men belonging to the
party and by the natives, some of whom, although it was a cold
day, remained in the water for more than four hours, and endea-
voured, by diving, &c., to set the horse’s foot free, it was not until
the horse had been thus confined, with only his head out of water,
for more than five hours, that he was released. This was accom-
plished at last by a native, who contrived to work with a hammer
at the rock under water, and, by increasing the of the aper-
ture, set the horse’s foot at liberty. This accident detained us so
long that we were unable to proceed on the journey to-day. The
horse died from the effects of the col d two or three days after-
wards.
16^A,—Started at 8 h. 20 m. down the river Murray; signalized
when opposite Wellington. On finding that his Excellency had
not arrived there, we proceeded about 6 miles down the river, to
the head of Lake Victoria, and encamped for the night.
M 2


1 7th. —Arrived at Bonney’s water-holes on Lake Albert at
1h.30 m. Met Mr. Bonney, Commissioner of Crown Lands
there : he had gone on ahead of the par ty on the 14th.
18£/j.—Having procured a supply of seven sheep for the party
we proceeded on our journey. On the eastern borders of the
lake we passed several huts of a far better description than those
built by the natives more to the westward. These huts were
nearly circular, and 7or 8 feet in height. The wall was com-
posed of small spars placed in the ground, and rising to about
5 feet at a steep angle; on the top of these spars other lighter
ones were placed, and met at the centre; these were but slightly
inclined, and formed the roof; the whole was covered with turf,
with the exception of a triangular doorway, facing the N.E.
Having followed the overland track round Lake Albert until it
took a westerly direction, we left it, and steered nearly S., over a
narrow branch of the desert. At 1h.55 m. the horse-dray arrived
on the Coorong, and a proper place was selected for encamping;
at 2h. 50 m, the bullock-drays arrived.
19 th. —According to directions given to me, the party was to
halt, until bis Excellency arrived, at the first good camping-
ground which we came to on the Coorong; we therefore re-
mained stationary this day. At 3h. 45 m. the Governor arrived,
and went over to see a party who were on their way overland with
horses. They had had an unpleasant journey, more than four
months out, and were very short of provisions : we supplied them
with flour, mutton, tea, and sugar. They informed us that there
was a creek on this side the Glenelg, bearing westward, about
50 miles from the coast, on which there were some settlers; also
that we should meet tw r o bushrangers on the road, who had five
horses with them, and were making their escape to Adelaide from
Portland Bay,
20 th. —Encamped at 3 p.m. on a flat, near to the spot where
M‘Grath was murdered by the natives, about two years ago. We
saw many natives, who endeavoured to make us understand that
they had not been concerned in that murder, or in the murder of
the passengers of the Maria.
2ls£.—ln consequence of our being crippled by the loss of two
pair of bullocks—one pair having been left on the other side of
the Murray, and another rendered unavailable through accident—
the serviceable number was reduced to eight: it was, therefore,
considered advisable to leave some of our luggage and one dray
behind, and to put the whole of the remaining baggage on one
dray ; but notwithstanding the load was thus considerably reduced,
the eight bullocks were found insufficient to convey it in one dray,
as in a soft or heavy soil it sank considerably : the load was there-
fore divided again, and on we started with the two drays, each


having a team of four bullocks. At about 4 miles we met a
party which corresponded so exactly with the bushrangers that
had been described to us on the I9th as being on the road, and
who we might daily expect to meet, that we were rather suspicious ;
and it was not until after a very minute examination that the police
were satisfied they had not captured a prize. After a delay
of about twenty minutes each party proceeded on its respective
route ; and at 4 h. 45 m. we encamped on a fine flat, with several
wells of excellent water.
22nd. —Rode on, as usual, ahead of the drays, and at 1 p.m.
made the “ Salt Creek,” or “ Bonney’s Creek.” After we had
been there about 40 minutes an overland party arrived, consisting
of eleven persons, with four horses and a tilted cart. It was the
same we had met on the river Murray, only nine days before, con-
ducted by a person named Wood. His Excellency, accompanied
by Messrs. Bonney, Gisborne, and myself, walked up the creek
about 2 miles, when we came to a large hole containing salt
water. On walking round this hole it was observed that the
native dogs had been there recently, and at several places had
scratched away the earth; at one place a small hole had been
made by them, only removed by a ridge of earth about 6 inches
across and half an inch in height above the water in the large
hole: on tasting the water in the small hollow it was discovered
to be perfectly fresh.
23rd. —At Bh. 50 m. the Governor’s party started for Mount
Gambier, and Wood’s party for Adelaide. At about 5 miles we
came to a well of water, situated about 50 yards to the right of the
road. The well contains the best water for many miles, and its
situation does not seem to be generally known. In April, 1842,
when I had the honour to travel this road with the Governor, this
well was discovered by his Excellency, who left the road to shoot.
Since that time, I have inquired of all persons that I have met who
had travelled on this road, and have found invariably that this well
was not known to them. It is situated about 50 yards to the right,
after the road leaves the scrub and passes on to the sand-hills. In
order to render it conspicuous, we set up marks in such a manner
as to direct the traveller to it. About 4 miles beyond this well
his Excellency crossed the Coorong at a place where the water did
not exceed 6 inches in depth, and went to the beach. The sand-
hills from this point are from one-third to half a mile across, and
about 200 feet in elevation above the sea. Amongst them the
scenery is very beautiful, and may be termed mountain-scenery in
miniature ; in some places the. sand-hills rise precipitately, in
others gently; there are many glens and lofty summits, with
undulating plains. Shrubs of a peculiar character, and fine
bright green foliage, grow among these dunes in luxuriant patches.


whilst in other places nothing but the bare white sand is seen,
forming a remarkable contrast. Among these sand-hills we saw
several spots which are termed “ sand-patches.” They are rather
remarkable, for they have the appearance of trees or shrubs com-
posed of stone. On inspection I found that these stone shrubs
were invariably hollow, and in several cases when I examined the
inside of these tubes the appearance was that of a cast, taken from
the stems or branch of a tree ; this leads me to believe that the
sand-patches have been formed as follows :—A shrubbery similar
to those at present seen on the sand-hills has at some former
period been wholly, or in part, covered with drifting sand; the
trees thus covered would naturally die; the dead wood absorb
the moisture and form a nucleus around which the lime in the
mass would accumulate, and cement the sand in the immediate
neighbourhood: this would go on for a time, when a portion of
the sand which covered the shrubbery being thus cemented, the
remainder, which would still be loose, might by some peculiar
eddy of the wind, caused by hills or dales formed in the mean
time, be drifted to some other spot, leaving only the portions
which had become consolidated, and which have now every ap-
pearance of petrified trees. I am still more inclined to believe
this to have been the case from having seen similar tubes, on the
western side of Spencer’s Gulf, with the wood actually filling
them.
I believe there are sand-patches presenting a similar appear-
ance to those on the Coorong, the origin of which is quite dif-
ferent ; but as they did not come under our observation during
this journey, it may not be necessary for me to enter more fully
into the subject.
The rollers on the beach were considerable, although the day
was perfectly calm. At 3h.45m. we encamped near the road : a
well was dug, but the water was brackish, and only fit for cattle.
24th. —Having dispatched the drays, his Excellency proceeded
to Wambat range, about 2 miles to the E. of the road, from a
point on which we proceeded 10 miles in a S.E. direction, to
the top of some low scrubby eminences, beyond which to the
N.N.E. and E. were apparently a succession of low barren
ridges, with wide valleys between them; to the S.E. there were
some distant ranges, which appeared to be wooded. From this
place we struck off S.W., and crossed a low swampy ground
that must be subject to periodical inundations of fresh water, for
there were numerous fresh-water shells (particularly Bulimus)
on the surface. This swamp continues from where we were to
the salt creek. The salt is rotten, but good. There are upon
it many small sand-hills, well wooded and grassed, which from
the range have much the appearance of islands. Encamped at


the crossing of the Coorong in lat. by Regulus 36° 30'; here
is a well of tolerable water. A remarkable change takes place
in the character of the country at this point. The Coorong, which
has been continuous for many miles (from the sea-mouth of the
Murray), becomes here a succession of lakes, and instead of wash-
ing immediately under the dunes of sand, there is a space of half
a mile of grassy flat between the dunes and the Coorong. The
dunes of sand beyond this point also lose their mountain character ;
they do not attain near the altitude of those to the N., and are no
longer bare, but covered with vegetation.
25th. —Rode over the sand-hills to the beach, which we fol-
lowed for two or three miles. On our return at noon we met
another overland party. This party consisted of twelve persons
(all male) ; they had with them 550 head of cattle, 320 rams, and
12 horses. At 1 p.m. we came to the granite rock. This is,
perhaps, the most remarkable feature in the country that we had
seen to the E. of the river Murray. It consists of a large pro-
truding mass of coarse-grained red granite, with numerous em-
bedded masses of fine-grained dark grey granite, and to the
N.W. a vein of vitrified quartz rock. It rises to about 20 or 25
feet, and to the N.W. consists of a large smooth mass, rising
like a blister from the plain, whereas to the S.E. the blocks are
irregular and piled one upon another. There are several small
patches with soil upon which kangaroo-grass and casuarina grow.
On this spot we saw several kangaroo-rats, which belong to a new
species. To the E.N.E. and S.E, there are several other pro-
truding masses of granite near to that described, as also to the
N.W. jutting into the sea. The Coorong maybe considered to
cease at this point. This low granite-range forms a water-shed,
throwing the drainage to the N. and S. respectively, to the
salt-creek and the sea-mouth of the Murray and to Ross’s creek,
that by an embouchure, through which a considerable quantity of
water flows, finds its way to the sea: on the shore the granite-rock
forms a remarkably bold point in a long straight line of coast, and
has evidently been taken for a cape by Flinders and M. Baudin;
on the chart of the former it is called Cape Bernoulli!,* and on the
chart of the latter Cap Morard-de-Galles. This rock projects
but a few feet into the sea ; there is, however, from this point a
sunken granite reef jutting into the sea, which, I have no doubt,
will be found to be connected with those rocks that break the
water, and render it so tranquil in Lacepede Bay: in all pro-
bability the entrance to this bay will be found to bear nearly
N.N.W. from its bight. We passed four wells on this day’s
* The C. Bernoulli! of Flinders is not exactly the Morard-de-Galles of Baudin.
Flinders’s C. Bernouilli is 4 miles N. of the granite rocks, and is clearly more of a
cape than is laid down in Mr. Burr’s map.—(J. A.)


journey, which had been dug by different overland parties at their
camping-ground, and we dug a fifth at our own camp : water was
obtained at feet, in a bluish sand, which lay beneath a white
sand. In the sand were numerous shells in a perfect state of
preservation, and either belonged, or were nearly allied, to those
species which are now found on the coast.
2 6th. —His Excellency crossed over to the beach from the
camp this morning, and followed the beach to Ross’s creek; we
saw many portions of vessels that had been wrecked, but there
was nothing by which they could be identified. It was remarked
by Mr. Bonney that there was a great difference in the surf
on the beach from that which we had observed on the previous
day, when the weather was calm, whereas on this day, with a
moderate breeze setting in from the sea, there was no surf, and
the sea appeared more like a lake. We were at a loss to con-
ceive the cause of this difference, and went on to the sand-hills
to look for breakers, but were unable to see any; specula-
tions were entered into as to the cause of this stillness of the
ocean on an apparently open coast. At this time we were not
aware of the granite-reef spoken of in this journal on the 25th
instant, but not seen by me till the 13th of May, although it is
previously mentioned as being connected with the granite-rock.
At Ross’s creek we noticed for the first time a trellis, which
is erected by the natives and used by them to capture birds.
The trellis is formed by seven slender sticks, two of which are
fixed in the ground about 5 or 6 feet apart, and rise about 4
feet; the tops of these are connected by a third, whilst the
remaining four are placed diagonally across. At about 4 feet
from the trellis a hollow is formed, which is screened by small
branches of trees that rise about 2 feet from the ground, and a
small hole is left at the back through which a native creeps, and
thus concealed, places the first and second finger of his left hand
across his lips, which are slightly opened, and by drawing in his
breath, he makes a chirp that calls the birds, which, thus enticed,
perch on the trellis-work.- The native, concealed in the small
bower, dexterously places a noose, attached to a long slender
stick held in the right hand, round the neck of any bird that
may settle on the trellis, and draws it into the bower. The pro-
cess is similar to wiring pike. Corporal Mason, of the police,
shot several ducks at Ross’s creek. His Excellency, being de-
sirous to communicate with the natives, and to establish a friendly
intercourse with them, went to their warleys, but they had fled.
We saw their tracks, which we followed for a short distance ; so
rapid had been their flight, that they had left some of their goods
behind them, and on further pursuit we discovered a basket, an
old rug, a digging stick, &c., which, in their trepidation, they had


also left hung on a tree, and in order to mark the spot a fire-
stick had been left. The Governor placed some damper in the
basket, and we gave up the search. I have no doubt they were
watching us from some thicket. There is a very extensive plain
at Ross’s creek; the soil is rich, but a great portion appears to be
subject to annual inundation. This plain is bounded to the S.E.,
and E. and N., by a low casuarina range. Encamped a short dis-
tance to the right of the road amongst the casuarina hills ; a well
was dug through sand, and tolerable water obtained at about 5 feet.
There were many recent shells in the sand, and a recent sandstone
with shells in it; the shells were either identical with, or nearly
allied to, existing species ; at about 4 feet below the surface there
was a thin bed of sea-weed between recent sandstone; the sea-
weed had every appearance of that at present on the coast.
2 7th. —His Excellency determined on halting with the drays
for two days, in order that the equestrian party might visit Cape
Bernouilli, and that the bullocks and dray-horses might be rested.
At 9h.40 m. his Excellency started for Cape Bernouilli; at about
2 miles we made the coast. We passed several fresh-water tea-
tree swamps, also some salt lagoons; but by the course which we
followed we did not cross any swamps, and a dray might be taken
to the coast. Our course is tolerably well defined, as seven
horses passed and repassed it. We noticed the same smoothness
of the sea as on the preceding day, but could not perceive the
cause until we were within 4 miles of Cape Bernouilli, when a
heavy surf presented itself, stretching from the cape to the N.W.
and N.N.W. until lost below the horizon. The view from Cape
Bernouilli is magnificent; the sea was broken for miles as far as
the eye could travel; the breakers extended from the coast to the
S. round to the W, and N.W., when they were lost in the dis-
tance. From this to the coast on the right the water was as
smooth as a lake. I have an idea that Lacepede Bay is sheltered
by a granitic reef connected with the granite rock on the coast
before mentioned, which is a portion of the granitic chain that
terminates the Coorong, and forms the water-shed of the salt-
creek to the N. and Ross’s creek to the S., and that this granite
will be found to protrude in many places to the N.E., between
the head of the Coorong and the river Murray.
28 th. — Remained stationary.
29 th. —Proceeded on our journey, and at night we came up
with a party from whom we obtained eleven more sheep. At 4
miles from the camp we passed a well which had been dug by
Mr. Bonney in his overland expedition in J 839. The well was
sunk through a recent limestone containing many shells. As the
water was good, we filled our kegs and proceeded. At 200 yards
we entered a wood, the character of which was quite distinct from


that which we had previously seen; the wattle, gum-tree, black-
wood, &c. grew luxuriantly, and there was a water-course having
a drainage from the eastward. His Excellency was desirous to
visit the country round Mount Benson ; we therefore left the drays
in the road, and steered in the direction of that mount. We
passed over about 2 miles of the forest before mentioned, and
came to a plain bearing E. and W. On this plain we for the
first time met with a calcareous Tufa, which is generally termed
“ Biscuit.” This Tufa presents a singular appearance ; the plain
was covered with it in pieces of various sizes, some being small and
some of a considerable size; each piece was nearly circular, and
had much the appearance of ship-biscuit. One of these cakes was
broken by me; the form was nearly circular. They appeared to
be formed by the deposit of lime held in solution by shoal-water.
There is a nucleus for each, round which the lime is deposited in
successive layers. If the nucleus had had a rotatory motion in-
stead of being stationary, these biscuits would be in the form of
a globe instead of being nearly flat. Beyond the biscuit-plain,
we come to a fresh-water tea-tree swamp, with a drainage towards
the coast; and from this to Mount Benson the country was
gently undulating and grassy, thickly wooded with casuarina,
banksia, and stringy bark. From Mount Benson we had an
extensive view over an undulating, grassy, and thickly-wooded
country, and had a good prospect of Guichen Bay. Returned
to the road, and at 4 p.m, encamped under the range immediately
to the E. of Lake Hawdon. This range is rather singular; it
falls down abruptly to a swampy flat, and immediately below the
range there are a succession of tea-tree swamps, in which is an
abundance of excellent water.
30^/i.—Showery morning. We made very little progress this
day, as we were desirous to find one of Mr. Bonney’s old halting-
grounds ; but being unsuccessful, we encamped in a scrubby
plain at night, without water,
\st May. —Our cattle having strayed in the night, we lost much
time in looking for them. When found, we proceeded on our
journey, which was very short on this day, as we did not make
more than 5 miles when we came to a tea-tree swamp imme-
diately under a casuarina range, at which we halted, and dug two
wells; we came to good water at about 4 feet. Four natives
joined our party; they were very shy, but we were able to get them
to the camp. Mr. Bonney prevailed on the eldest of them to go
with him and show him a native well, for which service he was
rewarded with a shirt, and Mr. Gisborne also gave a shirt to
one of the others for standing in the same position whilst Mr.
Angas made a sketch of him. These natives seemed tolerably
well satisfied with their visit to our camp, and were particularly


well pleased with some grease and a damper that was given to
them. In the evening his Excellency and I rode to the top of a
range about 3 miles to the S.W. We were much delighted with
the prospect. To the S. we saw Rivoli Bay, with two vessels
riding at anchor, whilst immediately between us and Rivoli Bay
and to the W. there was a lake (Lake George), only separated
from another large lake (Lake Eliza), which terminated near
Guichen Bay, by a narrow strip of land. These lakes had not
been previously seen, and were named by the Governor. We
were able also to see a high range to the S.E. and Mount Muir-
head. There are many low ranges well grassed, and wooded with
banksia and casuarina, in the neighbourhood of Lake Hawdon.
! 2nd . —Off at Bh, 30 m, Passed for 4 miles over a country
wooded with casuarina, banksia, and stringy bark, with several tea-
tree swamps, when we came to a long plain, which we followed for
about 3 miles in a S.E. course; passed by a casuarina hill, with a
good supply of fresh water at its base. I climbed up a tree at the
top of the hill, and saw Mount Muirhead and high sand to the S.
and S.E. ; the country immediately round appeared to be wooded
with casuarina. The range between the coast and our line of
route was of a similar description. From this we proceeded on
a course rather more southerly, which we followed up for 4 miles,
until we came on the coast-range; the country was well wooded,
and adapted for cattle. We crossed over the coast-range, and
encamped on the borders of a plain covered with biscuit (Tufa),
about 3 miles from the coast. The range, where we crossed it,
was finely grassed and well covered with timber, with casuarina,
banksia, and stringy bark. We passed by a camp of natives;
they had two wambats roasting for dinner; but these natives were
so timid that we were not able to communicate with them. On
our approach they ran off into the woods, and left everything
behind them.
3 rd. —Up at break of day. The Governor walked over to the
beach at Rivoli Bay ; the party consisted of seven persons. On
arriving we signalized and were heard by the whalers. We
walked towards the nearest point from the vessels, and on coming
near were met by a party of sailors who had been sent to see
who we were. The surprise of the whalers was great; they
considered we must be a party from some ship that had been
wrecked; on hearing that the Governor was with us, their polite-
ness was great; they took us in. one of the boats to an island
on the N.W. point of the bay which is covered with penguins.
From this island I took many bearings to distant points situated
to the S.E. The whalers had a station (two huts) on shore, and
had dug a well, in which there was good water. The vessels in
Rivoli Bay were the Isabella and the Prince of Denmark


schooners, from Hobart Town. Mr. W. Sherbert, of the Isabella,
spoke in high terms of the bay. Back at the camp at 111 a.m.
His Excellency determined on moving the camp to the beach, near
to the place where the whalers were stationed, and on establish-
ing a depdt there, at which the drays, tents, &c. should be left;
and on proceeding from thence on horseback, with a reduced
party, to Mounts Gambier and Schanck. At p.m. the whole
party had removed to the spot fixed upon for the depot, a large
well was dug, and excellent water found in a bluish sand at
about feet. The rock at Rivoli Bay is a kind of oolitic lime-
stone, and on the beach there are numerous flints of various
sizes.
4th. —At 8 a.m. his Excellency and I started for Mounts
Gambier and Schanck : we were accompanied by Messrs. Bonney,
Gisborne, and Angas, and three of the mounted police. One
packhorse went with the party. We followed the outline of the
coast for about 8 miles, when we struck rather to the right of our
course, in order to have a view of Rivoli Bay, having taken bear-
ings to Cape Lannes, Cape Martin, the Reefs, and the vessels, to
assist in ascertaining their relative positions. We proceeded on
a course nearly S.E. for about 1 mile, when we came to a tea-
tree swamp, draining into a lake to the left. This lake was not
previously known: his Excellency named it “ Lake Frome," after
the Surveyor-General. We then bore off to the right, to some
low grassy hills, which we followed for about 8 miles. From
these hills we saw a large lake, which his Excellency named
“ Lahe Bonney." For about 2 miles, after leaving these hills, we
crossed a plain, when we came to a swamp, in which there was a
native well. At this place we halted for an hour to dine. We
then followed the range, under which the well was situated, for
3 miles, when we crossed a swamp and followed another range
until it became nearly dark, when we tethered our horses in a
beautiful valley, lighted our fires, and made arrangements for
sleeping; as it was dark, and we had dined only a few miles
back, we did not trouble ourselves looking for water, although
there was plenty in the neighbourhood.
sth. —Soon after 6 A.M. we were on our way. The morning
was so foggy, that we were unable to see any distant object by
which to direct us in our course; consequently, the compass was
in constant use. At about 2 miles from the place where we
had bivouacked, we came rather suddenly on a camp of natives;
there were several fires, but we only saw two of the natives, who
were men; the remainder of the party had no doubt concealed
themselves. These natives did not appear hostile, but were quite
unacquainted with the manners and customs of white people ;
they did not know the use of damper. The Governor dismounted.


went towards them, and giving a piece to each, endeavoured to
explain that it was food; whether they profited by the lesson I
cannot say. After leaving the natives we followed the range for
about a mile, when we crossed a plain, and came to another narrow
range, having passed which, we reached a prettily wooded plain,
and followed it for about 8 miles, when we stopped at a tea-tree
swamp, dug a well with water within a foot of the surface, made
our several fires, and, having tethered our horses to enjoy the luxu-
riance of the pasture, proceeded to breakfast. A fine range lay
about 6 miles to the north. The trees for several miles had altered
much in character; the blackwood grew to an enormous size, the
Sydney wattle was intermixed with the gum, the mahogany, &c.
Having breakfasted off a turkey shot the previous day, we proceeded
on our route. The country had much improved since we crossed
the Coorong, and we had passed many places which I have no
doubt will ere long be occupied by settlers; but in the last few
miles this improvement had increased rapidly, and we were fairly
in a country of volcanic origin. One mile from the place where
we had breakfasted his Excellency noticed some volcanic rocks.
We pursued our course through luxuriant forests, and at 2 p.m,
passed a small flat which presented a remarkable appearance; the
whole surface was bristled with rocks, which stood up from 1 to 12
inches, and might be considered Alpine ranges in miniature;
they were of coral limestone. At about 28 miles we crossed a
watercourse with many holes, but at the point where we crossed
there was no water. At 3 p.m. I called the attention of his
Excellency to what appeared to be a chasm in the rock, and
which was about 200 yards to the left of our line of route; we
made off towards it, and discovered it to be a well of pure water
of an oval form, the longest diameter of which was 80 yards, the
shortest 70 yards, with perpendicular or overhanging cliffs. Our
tether ropes were immediately put in requisition, for the purpose
of ascertaining the depth of this singular well. A large stone
was tied at one end of the line, which was let down from the cliff;
the stone sunk immediately, and the bottom was reached at 132
feet, namely, feet from the crest of the cl iff to the surface of the
water, and 103£ feet for the depth of the water. This however
can give but a poor idea of the depth of the water in the centre,
as the place where we measured it was close to the edge. This
well is situated in a level country, and there is no indication of it
until one approaches close. The .rock is a coral limestone, and
the water, although of an inky blue when seen from above, is
perfectly pure and fresh. This well was called by the Governor
“ The Devil’s Punch-bowl.” At 1 mile S.E. we came to another
well, similar to that just mentioned, except that it was divided
into two portions by a narrow rock that sloped gradually to the


water, which could thus be reached with little difficulty. From
this second well we had a view of Mount Schanck, which bore 108
(deg. ?),* and was 10 miles off. We made for Mount Schanck, and
after crossing a narrow belt of scrub, with deep pits and chasms,
we came again into a beautiful country. At about 2 miles from
Mount Schanck we crossed a dray track running at right angles
to our path; we were at a loss to know whether the station to
which this track led was to the right or to the left, but from the
appearance of the sheep tracks, which were fresh, we considered
that the station must be to the right. We then made for a rising
groqpd, and from thence saw something moving among the trees
to our right. On calling we were answered by the barking of
dogs, and made off in the direction from which the sound came,
and in 1 mile arrived at the head station of Messrs. Arthur.
There is a well of water similar to the “ Devil’s Punch-bowl”
close to the station, and Mr. Arthur has put up a windlass, with
a rope and bucket, on an overhanging rock, and thus the water
required at the station is drawn from the well. Mr. Arthur
informed us, that he had thrown a weight attached to a line into
this well, and the water near the edge was 156 feet in depth; he
said there were several similar wells within a mile or two of the
station, but that he was not aware of the existence of the large
one which we had passed in the afternoon.
6th. —His Excellency with Mr. Arthur visited some caverns
in the neighbourhood, and procured from one of them many
bones and teeth belonging to the kangaroo, opossum, wam-
bat, and dog. Some of the teeth were very large, and must have
belonged to animals far exceeding in size those of the same
species which are met with at the present time. During the
absence of his Excellency, I walked round to see several wells
similar to those we had met with on the preceding day. One of
them, which is about 3 miles W, of Mount Schanck, has been
converted by Mr. Arthur into a sheep wash. The sheep are
driven down an inclined road cut through the coral limestone,
which is very soft and easy to work before being exposed to the
atmosphere ; when properly cleaned the sheep pass up another
inclined road, which is arched over on the opposite side of the
well. After breakfast we rode to Mount Schanck, tethered our
horses at the foot of the mountain, and ascended on foot. This
mountain rises at an angle of about 45 Q for about 600 feet from a
comparatively level country, and attains the altitude of 800 or
900 feet above the sea level. There are three distinct craters:
the principal one is 500 yards in diameter; the crater to the E.
is about one-third as high as the principal one, and 200 yards
The direction, inadvertently left out in the text, will be seen on the map. —Ed.


across; that to the S. is rather more elevated than the eastern
one, and about 250 yards across. The small craters are on the
slope of the main crater; they are all nearly circular; there is no
water in either of them, but they are covered with rich vegetation
on the inner and outer slopes. From the rim of the main crater
there is a very extensive view; many of the hills in New South
Wales about Cape Bridgewater are plainly visible. At the base
of Mount Schanck, to the S.E. and S.W., there is a large mass
of cellular wacke, which is generally bare and rises abruptly
above the plain, with a wall nearly perpendicular about 6 or 8
feet in height. The wall has much the appearance of having
once formed a sea beach. When riding on the S.E. end of the
mountain we noticed a hollow sound, as though we were riding
over a vault; this sound was not so apparent on the other sides.
The basalte, or cellular wacke, in some places formed dykes in
the inner slope of the crater, where it contrasted beautifully with
the vegetation, which on either side of the walls of bare rock
reached from the top to the bottom of the slope. The crater was
inhabited by numerous animals, the traces of which were plainly
visible. The lava that I obtained was nearly black, and in irre-
gular masses. Having devoted as much time as could be spared
to Mount Schanck, the party proceeded to Mount Gambier,
which is situated 8 miles from Mount Schanck, and in a direc-
tion 9° E. of N. The country that we passed over was of the
richest description, and the scenery beautiful. Mount Gambier
is rather higher than Mount Schanck, and of an oval form. The
length is 600 yards, the breadth 120 yards, and the largest diameter
has a direction nearly E.S.E. We passed up to the top of the
crater at a low point to the S.E., from which we proceeded along
a sidling pathway to the bottom. About one-third of the eastern
portion of the crater forms a lake, with high perpendicular cliffs,
except to the west, where it is bounded by a gently sloping hill that
runs nearly N. and S. across the crater, dividing it into two nearly
equal portions. The water in the lake is good and very deep, and
there were numerous ducks upon it. The western portion of the
crater has several small lagoons, which contain water; by the side
of one of these we bivouacked for the night. There is a cattle
station about 2 miles to the right of Mount Gambier belonging to
Mr. Henty. Having descended from Mount Schanck, we dined
on damper and tea. The night was exceedingly dark, with heavy
clouds, through which occasionally a star was seen ; when the
moon rose, the effect was singularly beautiful; to the E. the black
wall which surrounded us was finely thrown out in relief by
clouds which rose behind in silvery masses. During the short
time of light which remained, after our getting to the crater, his
Excellency walked to the eastern rim with Mr. Arthur, to see


two other craters that are situated immediately to the E. of that
in which we were. The second crater has no water in it. The
third forms a large lake of deep water, and is only separated
from the second by a narrow ridge, which is nearly perpendicular,
and forms a bridge between the second and third.
7th. —The rising of the sun this morning was magnificent; the
atmosphere was clear, the rosy hue of the sky was cast upon the
side of the crater, and showed upon its eastern wall two men and
several dogs, whom we afterwards found were coming to us with a
supply of beef. When the sun was well up, we made our exit at a
low' point to the W. in the rim of the crater : it was excessively steep,
but the horses managed to scramble up; his Excellency, with the
remainder of the party, descended to the plain below in our line
of route, whilst I and Mr. Arthur ascended to the highest point
of the mountain. Having taken the necessary bearings, or rather
such as my time would allow, we descended to the plain, to which
our horses had been led. I procured some red porous lava and
other volcanic productions from Mount Garnbier. Mr, Arthur
left us here, and we proceeded on a N.W. course, through a
country very finely timbered with gum trees, Sydney wattles,
stringy bark (Sydney), and blackwood of gigantic growth. We
crossed, at about 9 miles, two narrow swamps, and then entered a
forest principally wooded with stringy bark; this we followed for
about 3 miles, when we passed over a swamp for about 2 miles,
at the termination of which we again entered a fine country, that
continued through the remainder of this day’s journey. At about
2 p.m. we made the top of a range, the principal summit of
which his Excellency has done me the honour to call after my
father. The Mount Burr range is about 1600 feet above the
level of the sea, and generally steep to the S., S.W., and W.; but
on the opposite side the ascent is more gradual, so much so, that
we were hardly aware of being on high ground until we were
near the summit; it appears to be connected with Mount Gam-
bier by a lower range, which we had kept on our right during
the day. From the most western point of the Mount Burr range
that we visited, we were able to see Mount Garnbier and Rivoli
Bay, with many other points. After I had taken some bearings
we proceeded about 5 miles, when we came to a fine spring,
which rises at the foot of a limestone hill, and forms a pretty
little stream. At this place we saw a new kind of cockatoo; it
was small, and of a dark rifle green : unfortunately we were un-
able to procure one as a specimen. We bivouacked near the
spring, which is about 4 miles S.S.E. of Mount Muirhead.
Sth. We started early this morning for the depot, and after
riding about 14 miles across a fine plain, 6 or 7 miles N. of our
track*on the morning of the sth, w e came to the range crossed on


the 2nd. We fell in with some natives at a camp on the range;
we saw only women and children, and they ran off and concealed
themselves in some reeds at a well hard by ; his Excellency dis-
mounted and followed them, and although they were exceedingly
shy, he succeeded in holding a short converse with them. He
gave one of the women a handkerchief and some damper: with
the former she expressed herself much pleased ; she was quite
unacquainted with the use of the latter; on being shown that it
was intended to be eaten, she put some into her mouth, but did
not swallow it in our presence. By the camp of the natives there
were many small fish and beetles, some of which were roasting
for dinner; these delicious morsels would have been overcooked
in consequence of the delay occasioned by our visit, had we not
removed them from the fire. We examined all their shields,
spears, &c. Mr. Angas took sketches of such as were of a
different make from those we had previously seen. There was
one piece of limestone rock 4f inches in length, and IJj- inch in
diameter, which was used by them as a pestle for pounding roots:
this I coveted for my cabinet, and consequently stole ; but as a
good supply of damper was left in its place, I trust they will
pardon the theft. The boomerang is used by these natives, but
does not appear to be in use by those farther north. From the
natives’ camp we proceeded to Lake Frome, and followed a native
path which went round the head of the lake. At 3 p.m. we ar-
rived at the depot, having ridden along our outward track for
about 5 miles. During our absence. Corporal Ide and Private
Baker, of the Royal Sappers and Miners, had made a chart of
the bay, and Mr. William Sherbert, the master of one of the
whaling vessels in the bay, having allowed them the use of a
boat and crew, they were enabled to take the soundings over a
portion of it.
9th. —His Excellency, accompanied by Mr. Gisborne, went to
a rock (Sherbert’s rock), in one of the boats belonging to the
“ Prince of Denmark," to hunt the sea-lions which are on that
rock. Mr. Bonney and I started homewards with the bullock-
drays ; the horse-dray remained behind to bring any specimens
that his Excellency might procure. At about 2 miles from the
camp we passed a number of natives, but they were too shy to
speak with ; although Mr. Bonney rode after them, and made
signs of friendship, they ran off and concealed themselves. Soon
after 4 p.m. we arrived at our camping ground of the Ist and
2nd May, having halted for two hours in the middle of the day:
and in about half an hour, the Governor, with the remainder of
the party, came up. His Excellency had been so fortunate as
to capture one of the sea-lions, by putting two balls into its
head; the party in the boat landed on the rock, and killed it
VOL. xv. n


with clubs. There were four of these monsters on Xfie rock :
that which was killed roared loudly when he received the shots,
and showed fight afterwards when approached. The length of
this animal is 8 feet, the girth of the body 9 feet; the head is
much like that of a lion, and when enraged he bristled his mane,
roared loudly, and opening his mouth displayed his tremendous
teeth. On opening it, the stomach was found to be lax, and not
muscular, so that in this respect the stomach of this animal
almost exactly resembles that of an albatross. The sea-lion lives
on squid and small fish, and is in the habit of swallowing stones;
in this it also resembles the albatross. In the stomach of that
shot by his Excellency there were five large pebbles (limestone),
which weighed in all 4 \ pounds. The Governor had also brought
with him two natives (young men), who I believe were with those
passed by Mr. Bonney and myself in the morning, and who, on
seeing us with the bullock-drays, considered that our party was
gone, and went down to look about for any little thing which
might have been left behind, for soon after our departure they
Ctune to the camp. At first ithey appeared surprised to find any
one there*? but having gone so far, found it difficult to retreat.
After a little parleying they were induced to go to the camp, and
expressed themselves much pleased with everything they saw, mqre
especially with the well. Having thus made acquaintance with
the party, and feeling that they were safe, they were induced by
a little coaxing to come on, and were much delighted at riding on
horseback. They were very merry fellows, and exceedingly
careful not to give offence: they would not move hand or foot
without first obtaining permission; when they wished to sit down,
they asked leave most submissively, and did not rise without
doing the same., A sheep had just been killed, the head and in-
terior of which were given to them. They first asked whether
they might put it on the fire to cook, and when it required t<* fie
turned, they sought permission to do so, as also to eat it when
cooked.j- Mr, Gisborne, to assist them in their meal, cut the
head into pieces, and tried to divide the bone with a large buck
knife which he had: the blade of the knife broke, leaving a por-
tion in the head, and Mr. Gisborne kindly spent some time an
taking it out, fearing lest the poor fellow should swallow it.. At
dinner time the use of knives and forks, and spoons, and pan-
nikins, &c., was explained to these good natives, and they ex-
pressed themselves much satisfied with the treatment they re-
ceived, and were particularly pleased with eating sugar. When
they had been well feasted, and had anointed their bodies with
grease, they wished to go to bed; and on being shown where they
were to sleep, which was at a fire about 20 yards from the camp,
they laid themselves down to rest. I wished very much to get


’ erf' thh ’damp,' but as Regulus, the only Star which
passed the meridian at a reasonable time, was in its place for
taking an altitude, he was obscured by a cloud, and we all retired
Oybod out lo ibiig :r^ 9^„ w^
At 1 p m. the dogs barked a great deal, but as it was
supposed that their uneasiness arose from wild dogs being in the
neighbourhood, no notice was taken of them. At ‘ih. 20m. A.ivt.
I Was aroused by the serjeant-major of police, who came to ask
%hat was to be done, as the natives had decamped, and had taken
the sheep with them. I immediately went out and ascertained
that these submissive natives had taken the opportunity when we
were asleep, and had stolen everything they could lay their bands
on. They had taken six spoons, four forks, and six knives, which
had been used at dinner, and were cleaned for breakfast, and
'Wrapped up in a cbuple of towels they had also taken three
pannikins, an axe, and the sheep (the head of which they had
eaten for dinner), with a portion of the rope With which it had
been hung in a tree : not satisfied with this, they had been daring
enough to go to serjeant-major Alford and private Hall of the
police, and had stolen their hats. I was much amused, during
this examination, by Baker (who was sleeping under one of the
drays) putting his head out and drily saying, “ Give a look round
and see that none of the drays are gone.” Having satisfied my-
self as to the extent of the loss, I retired again to rest, knowing
that pursuit would be useless. I have no doubt but the natives
who served us this trick were conjurers or jugglers amongst
their tribe, for they were the most active and restless fellows 1
ever beheld. During the time they were with us they were con-
Js dfttially in' motiorW and said
liitkidefr foo doubt they were
anxious we should sleep. In all probability there were others
who helped them off with the plunder, and they will be consi-
dered great men among their tribe. They are the first natives I
have known who have been able to set up housekeeping with
family plate. If our party had consisted of only three or four
individuals, there is every reason to believe that, in order to attain
their end, these natives would have committed murder; but, with
‘4 party so large as ours was, they were afraid of causing an
alarm, in which case they must necessarily have been ovei-
powered. At about 8 a.M. we were on our road. At 4 miles
from the 6amp we passed over a low ridge to i ’the southern border
of Lake Hawdon, where we struck off in a course nearly N., across
the swamp which surrounds the lake, and, having gained one day
on our outward journey, at 4h. 40m, we arrived at the spot where
the Messrs. Scott were stationed with their sheep when we passed
on the 30th of Apfil: as this Was a good camping ground, we
remained there for the night. During the day we had seen many
n 2


emues, kangaroos, and wild dogs, and had some good hunting
after several of them.
-11 th. —Rather a wild-looking sky, but as there were only a few
showers, his Excellency determined to visit Guichen Bay; accord-
ingly, orders were given for the drays to proceed to a certain spot,
which was chosen as a camping ground for that night. Having
made these arrangements, his Excellency, accompanied by Messrs.
Bonney, Gisborne, and myself, with one of the police, proceeded
to the bay, where we arrived after a ride of about 10 miles ; our
coui'se was nearly W, On the road we passed a place covered with
calcareous tufa, in balls nearly spherical. From the coast-range
we descended a valley to the bay. Near the coast we came un-
expectedly on two natives who were lying in the grass; we halted
and spoke to them, but they seemed much annoyed at being dis-
turbed, and rose, each having a large bundle of spears in his
hand. They would not approach us, but walked off in our rear,
at an angle of about 45° from our course, looking scornfully.and
with suspicion at us, but evidently afraid. After they had walked
about fifty yards they sat down, and the younger one showed
that he recognised us. He was one of the natives who had been
at our camp on the Ist instant, and had been well treated. The
shirt that Mr. Gisborne had given him was laid aside. These
natives would not become reconciled to our presence, but called
out for the natives in the neighbourhood. We therefore rode on,
and after I had taken the bearings which would suffice to give a
general idea of the form of the bay, we returned, and passing
over a very picturesque country came to the overland road, about
5 miles from the place at which we were to encamp for the
night. Just after coming into the road we encountered a thun-
der storm, with heavy rain ; which I have great reason to remem-
ber, as my mare was knocked up a few minutes before it com-
menced, which obliged me to walk to the camp.
I- th. —His Excellency left us, accompanied by four of the
police, at ( Jh, 45m. this morning. There were heavy showers
occasionally in the day, especially during the early part. At
JOh. sm. the drays started. We halted for a few minutes at
Ross’s Creek to take water for the night, and then proceeded for
about 4 miles, when we encamped.
13i th. —1 rode off to the Granite Rock, as we passed it, with a
view to get one of the kangaroo-rats, of the kind which we had
seen there on our outward journey; but the gun would not go off
in consequence of the rain, which had fallen since we started,
having damped the caps. From thence I proceeded to the
beach, and visited the granite rock mentioned on the 2Gth of
April ; from the sand-hills near which, I perceived that the
Wain bat range had not terminated, but, though farther removed
from the coast, continued towards the S. Mr. Bonney and I met


on the coast, he having left the road some time after. At 2£ p.m,
vve arrived at the place where we had previously encamped at the
crossing of the Coorong, and halted.
1 4fh. —This day we proceeded to about 40 miles beyond the
place where we encamped on the 23rd and 24th of April.
15th. —We passed the Salt Creek, and encamped on a plain 2
miles beyond.
1 6th. —Messrs. Gisborne and Angas left us this morning for
Adelaide ; we encamped on a flat near the Coorong, at which the
Governor stopped in May, 1842.
1 7th. —At Jh. 30m. p.m. we arrived at the place where M‘Grath
was murdered, and, having taken up the articles we had left there
on our outward march, proceeded. At about 1 mile from the well
Mr. Bonney and I went off the road, and met an old native, who
was sitting under a little bush. We immediately recognised the
old man as one we had seen at the same place on the 20th of
April, and who was then in good health, and robust; but what a
change! Now he was lying, almost without covering, by a small
fire, with a few sticks by his side, and nearly dead for want of
food. He was very glad to see us, and vociferously asked for
damper, making us understand by signs that he wished to have
branches of trees placed so as to make a warley,also that he required
fire-wood : these wishes were complied with, and a plentiful sup-
ply of each was brought to him; but we noticed that he was much
emaciated and in great distress. I therefore sent for Jemmy, the
native who accompanied us, and although Jemmy belonged to
the Rapid Bay tribe, he was able to understand a good deal of
what the old man said, and in this way I learned that, being sick
and unable to provide for himself, he had been left by his tribe to
perish (this is commonly done by the natives). On examination,
1 found that the poor old fellow had lost the use of his legs, and
was therefore unable to move about in search of food; that the
small bundle of wood that lay by the fire had been reached by
him around where he lay; and that he had been left thus for
seven days, to die of cold and hunger. As he had collected all
the wood that lay within his reach, and was destitute of food, in
the course of a few hours he must have perished. I measured his
arm above the elbow, at the thickest part, and found that it was
barely five inches round ; his stomach was in folds, for want of
food ; and in every respect the most emaciated being 1 ever be-
held. Finding this to be the case, I considered that the warley we
had made, and the food we had given-to him, with the fire-wood
we had put within his reach, would only last for a short time,
when he would be in as bad a situation as that in which we had
discovered him : I therefore put him on Hall’s horse, and Jemmy,
who showed great kindness towards the old man, was put behind
to keep him on, as he was unable to sit upright, We thus pro-


182 Gov. G rev’s Exploration of the S.E. Coast of S. Australia.
ceeded to the drays, and having made as comfortable a place as
time would allow on one of them, the old native was taken from
the horse and placed on the dray. We proceeded 4 miles, and
encamped for the night. The natives who had left the old man
we had brought on, encamped near us: on the invalid’s being
informed that this was the case, he was very anxious that we
should shoot them. The natives came to our camp, but it was
a long time before he would speak to them. ' . f
J XfM. —As I was anxious to get 16 Adelaide as soon as possible,
I struck off the road across the desert for Mr. Giles’s head station
on Lake Albert. The old native we had saved from perishing
was brought on with the drays ; when he left his kindred he said
in his native language that he “ would return when he became
fat.” A boy, about nine years old, belonging to his tribe, wished
to come with me to Adelaide, and accordingly I brought him.
At 3 p.m. we arrived at Mr. Giles’s station, having crossed the
desert at a narrow part; and when free from scrub and hills, our
course from the Coorong was straight, and we came into an over-
about 3 miles from Ronney’s vi?aler-holes. I would
strongly recommend persons who are going overland to follow our
track, as by doing so they will only be one day longer than by
going to the Salt Creek by the road through the desert, and will
save two days by the road in general use along the Coorong.
Our track may be known, as it is well beaten by our three drays
having gone in line over it. We passed just to the left of a sand-
hill, about 5 miles from Mr. Giles’s house at Lake Albert, and
came into the overland track about 3 miles from the water-holes.
19^,—Encamped on the eastern side of the river Murray, 3
miles below Wellington. The old native we had brought with
us was rather troublesome, as he wished to be left behind with
some natives we met on Lake Victoria; however, as he had ctihie
so far, I did not like to leave him behind on the lake, and wished
to-take him to Wellington, where he would have been properly
taken care of. During the night, however, he was conveyed
away by the natives, and concealed in the reeds. The boy I took
up yesterday was much alarmed at the natives on the lake, and
when we were near any of them he concealed himself under a
large cloak in the dray.
20 th. —Followed the river Murray to the upper crossing-pi ace,
and encamped at2h. 20m. p.m. • 1
21.tf.—We were moving by peep of dawn, and by llh. 30m.
a.m. all was over the river, although we were much troubled by
the bullocks—they w ere urged in, but would not cross : the boat
thch took one in tow, and I expected that the others would fol-
low, but they would not do so; and it was not until three of them
had been towed across, and a fourth taken in tow, that the remain-
der Wbuld follow. Having seen everything safe on this side of


Return to Mt. Barker—Remarks on the Country traversed. 183
the river Murray, I considered that my duties as regarded t&e ex-
pedition were concluded, and as Mr. H. Giles was on his road to
Adelaide, 1 accompanied him ; we rode straight across the scrub
to Mount Barker. The scrub in some places is very thick and
high, but, with a little labour, a good dray-road might be cleared.
Arrived at Mount Barker, where I remained for the night.
2'2nd. —Discovered on the estate of Captain Davison at Mount
Barker some of the first granite I have seen in that neighbour-
hood. At 2 p.m. I reached home ; and therefore bring this report
to a conclusion. y I j/ -jot jj 9g9 j
In the foregoing pages I have given a detailed account of the
proceedings of each day, I may now be permitted to offer a few
remarks relative to the country passed over during the expedition.
From the neck of the peninsula which separates the Coorong
from Lake Albert to the Salt Creek, or Bonney’s Creek, there is a
belt of grassy casuarina hills, with numerous plains of good soil,
and in which water may be obtained within a short distance of the
surface, as far as I have seen not exceeding 6 feet. This belt is
bordered to the N.E. by the desert, and to the S.W. by the
Coorong- sabnemmoosi
hrom Bonney s Creek to the crossing of the Coorong, a dis-
tance of about 35 miles, the road passes generally amongst a suc-
cession of salt swamps and low scrubby hills; but in this distance
good water may be obtained at two points,—viz., at 5 miles and at
30 miles, leaving only a space of 20 miles to be passed over with-
out water. About 2 miles N”. of the road, and following a direc-
tion nearly parallel to it, there is a low range (Wambat Range),
behind which there is an extensive fresh-water swamp several
miles across, which appears to be subject to annual inundations.
The soil on this swamp is similar to that of the flats of the river
Murray. There are many grassy isolated hills in the swamp ;
these hills have much the appearance of islands. Beyond the
swamp to the N. and N.E., there are a succession of ranges
which do not from a distance look very promising.
From the crossing of the Coorong to Cape Bernouilli the
country improves : from Cape Bernouilli to Guichen Bay, and
for some distance around Mount Benson, and to Lake Hawdon,
there is an useful tract of country.
The range that follows the coast from Cape Bernouilli to Lake
Bonney, and which we crossed at several points, is very pic-
turesque, as far as we saw of it, especially immediately at the back
of Rivoli Bay ; and there are many other similar ranges, separated
by low level ground, a great portion of which is subject to inun-
dation ; but the soil is excellent: and some of these plains have
been so far raised by the action of earthquakes as to render them
dry, and available for pasturage or agriculture.
Rivoli Bay was mentioned in a former part of this report as


having been spoken of in the highest terms by the masters of
vessels at anchor in it. Mr, Sherbert informed me that he had
anchored under Cape Cannes, and afterwards gone round between
the reefs and the land to the spot where the vessels were at the
time we were there; that the depth of water within the reefs was
from sto 6 fathoms. He also informed me that a vessel entering
the bay must keep well out to the westward, and then run right
in about midway between Penguin Island (Cape Martin, probably
Cape de Joffa of the French, but not previously named in the
English charts) and the next reef to the S., which is about 1 \
mile from the island, and not between the two reefs, which are
about 1J mile apart: the channel is from to 5 fathoms deep.
From Rivoli Bay to Mount Schanck, and from thence round by
Mount Gambler back to Rivoli Bay, we passed, for the most part,
over a country of the richest description; the soil was a dark-
brown loam. The trees grow luxuriantly; the blackwood grows
there to an enormous size: beside which there are several trees
quite different from those in the neighbourhood of Adelaide. We
also saw several new birds ; but owing to the rapidity of our
movements, we were unable to procure any specimens.
The country around Mounts Gambler and Schanck is evidently
a coral reef, which Las been raised from the deep. As these
reefs always occur, forming a succession of islands which have a
particular line of direction, we may hope to be able to follow this
line up, and to discover more tract of country of a similar descrip-
tion to that which we visited.
Lake Bonney is the largest sheet of water we saw to the S. of
Lake Albert. This lake borders the ocean, and at one point
there does not appear to be anything to divide the lake from the
ocean, as there is an apparent gap in the sand-hills. If this should
be the case, and a navigable entrance be found even for very small
craft, the lake will be of great value to this part of the country; but
considering the openness of the coast, I much fear any connection
between the lake and the ocean would be choked up by sand.
There is much of the country from the river Murray southward,
within the limits of this province, which still requires to be ex-
plored before we can give any decided opinion as to its character.
There are several points, as far as I could judge during this expe-
dition, from which an examination of this country might be under-
taken, One is from Cape Bernouilli, or Mount Benson, or some-
where in that neighbourhood; another, from Mount Muirhead,
in a course to the E. of N. In either case, I believe that the
mysteries of this portion of the continent might be solved ; or it
might be done from several places on the river Murray, between
the head of Lake Victoria and the Great Bend.
