

THE
FLOWER GARDEN
IN
QUEENSLAND.






SEEDS, PLANTS,
GARDEN TOOLS, &G., &c.
Flower Seeds, Garden Seeds, Agricultural
Seeds, and Grass Seeds,
Wholesale and retail. Small parcels sent by post.
Stations, Plantations, and Farms supplied in any quantity.
The trade supplied in the most advantageous manner.
FRUIT TREES
Of choicest European and American sorts, carefully grafted,
true to name.
VALUABLE EXOTIC FRUIT TREES.
PACKING BY EXPERIENCED HANDS.
Flowering and Ornamental Plants
Of the choicest kinds. The Largest and Best Collection in
Queensland.
Large Trees for Avenues, Centre Beds, &c.
In Pots, ready for transmission and planting at all times.
Catalogues forwarded to any part op the Colony,
upon Application.
A. J. HOOKINGS,
SEED AND PLANT MERCHANT,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE;
And NURSERIES, MONTAGUE ROAD, SOUTH BRISBANE.


THE
FLOWER GARDEN
IN
QUEENSLAND.
CONTAINING CONCISE AND PRACTICAL IN-
STRUCTIONS ON THE CULTIVATION OF THE
FLOWER GARDEN, AND THE MANAGE-
MENT OF POT PLANTS, IN
AUSTRALIA.
BY
ALBERT JOHN HOCKINGS,
AUTHOR OF TUB “ QUEENSLAND BARDEN MANUAL,” &C. &C.
BRISBANE;
GKO. SLATER & CO., QUEEN STREET.
MDCCCLXXV.
Price 1/6; by post, 1/8.


BRISBANE :
PRINTED BV A. CLEOKUKN, ADELAIDE AM) EDWARD STREETS.


INDEX.
PAGE
Anemone 30
Azalea 31
Balsam 32
Begonia 33
Bouquet making .. .. 28
Bulbs 33
Cactus 33
Camellia japonica .. 34
Carnation 37
Cineraria 36
Chrysanthemum .. .. 89
Cockscomb .. .. .. 40
Compost for Pot Plants 17
Contrast of Color .. .. 28
Dahlia 41
Drainage 4
Drainage for Pot Plants . 22
Edgings for Garden Borders 10
Ferns 43
Fuchsia 44
Garden Edgings .. .. 10
Garden Hedges .. .. 8
Garden Calendar 57
Garden Walks 7
Geranium 45
Green Screen 8
PAGE
Heartsease or Pansy.. 49
Hedges for Gardens, <tc. 8
Hollyhock 46
Hydrangea 48
Introductory 1
Labels .. 26
Laying out Gardens .. .. 5
Liquid Manure .. 25
Management of Plants .. 1
Moss for Garden Pots -. 25
Pansy or Heartsease.. .. 49
Potting 20
Preface i.
Properties of Violet.. .. 12
Properties of Flowers .. 13
Ee-Potting .. .. ..21
Rhododendron .. .. 50
Rich Top Dressing .. .. 19
Rose 52
Salvia Patens 56
Shade for Plants .. .. 23
Soil and Aspect of the Garden 1
Standard forjudging Flowers 11
Striking Cuttings .. .. 19
Trenching 3




PREFACE.
The large and increasing demand for some simple
and trustworthy directions about the cultivation of
Flowers in Queensland, will bo sufficient apology
(were any needed) for the publication of this little
work : and the flattering reception accorded to the
“ Queensland Garden Manual ” affords the Author
reasonable hope that his efforts may be rewarded on
this occasion also, with public approval.
The different papers have been written with espe-
cial regard to Amateurs residing in the Brisbane
district; but a slight modification, to suit the Reasons
in the various districts, will render nearly all the in-
structions equally applicable, not only to every part
of Queensland, but to New South Wales and Victoria.
The “first edition of the Garden Manual, consisting
of one thousand copies, being exhausted, he has been
urged to issue a revised edition, adding a part devoted
to Flower cultivation. Upon consideration, how-
ever, it has appeai-ed to him that it would be more
convenient to the public that the two works should
be separate, as so many persons cultivate Flowers who
do not possess a Kitchen Garden, Orchard, or Farm.
To make the publication popular, and thus to give an


impetus to Flower cultivation, the information lias
been written concisely, ami printed in tin; present
cheap form.
The Author acknowledges his obligations to Messrs.
Loudon, George Glenny, John Cranston, and other
standard authorities, whom ho has consulted on points
beyond his own experience; and to whose more elabo-
rate and expensive works he refers those who may
find his directions insufficient.
Bhisbane, June, 187").


THE FLOWER GARDEN
IN
QUEENSLAND.
INTRODUCTORY.
THE MANAGEMENT OF PLANTS.
It it proposed here to introduce to the attention of
amateurs a few very important instructions, under
separate heads, for the purpose of more particularly
enforcing their necessity, and to avoid repeating them
when referring to the same subjects in treating of the
cultivation of different flowers. The beginner is espe-
ciallyurged to acquire a thorough practical acquaintance
with the directions given in these introductory chapters,
as the easiest and surest road to success. The intelli-
gent application of this knowledge will be found useful
in every department of the garden, and will assist in
determining the treatment of hundreds of plants, which
the limited space at command will prevent being more
directly referred to.
SOIL AND ASPECT OF THE GARDEN.
The soil and aspect of the flower garden cannot
always be selected ; as, in the majority of cases, its
position will depend upon the situation of the house.
A


The soil best calculated for general garden purposes
is of a rather light, rich, friable, loamy texture ; dry
and mellow ; capable of being wrought at all seasons,
and being from two feet six inches to three feet in
depth. A loam rather inclined to sand will be lonnd
suitable for the majority of plants ; and should the
nature of any particular plant demand a special soil
to grow it to perfection, the necessary material could
easily be added—such as peat for rhododendrons,
azaleas, &c., and clay loam to refresh old rose beds.
Frequent digging improves the texture of all heavy
soils; but to keep them open, it is desirable to add
sand, ashes of wood and coal, lime rubbish, decayed
bark, scrub soil, vegetable matter of every description,
including sawdust, stable litter, &c.
In procuring mould, either for renewing or improv-
ing the soil, care should be taken to prefer such as is
near the surface, as it is in general the most productive
and fruitful. The top spit to the depth of six inches
from the surface of any well-grassed field which has
not been cropped is to be preferred, and the fuller it is
of fibrous matter the better it will prove for the growth
of plants.
The most desirable aspect for the garden will depend
partly upon its size and partly upon the district in
which it is situated. If the establishment is large,
and the surface of the ground undulating, the different
aspects may be taken advantage of to secure a succes-
sion of bloom, as the beds with an eastern and northern
aspect will be earlier than those facing south or west;
and as the territory embraces within its limits both
temperate and tropical districts, the same aspect cannot
be suitable for all alike. But while at Warwick and
Toowoomba an eastern or northern aspect may be


necessary, at Townsville or Cardwell a slope facing
south or west would be found preferable, to avoid Sol’s
more fervid glances, unless for purely tropical plants.
TRENCHING.
The whole of the land intended to be used as a
garden should be trenched and drained.
As soils differ much in character, trenching has to be
modified accordingly. In some cases it may be desira-
ble to bury the top soil six or eight inches for the roots
of the plants to grow in, while the next spit would be
exposed on the surface, to be gradually meliorated by
the sun and atmosphere ; in other cases, such as the
gravelly ridges around Brisbane—which generally have
a clay subsoil, and those of a schistose formation, re-
quire digging to the full depth, and mixing thoroughly;
while a third class, having a rank and unproductive
subsoil, requires trenching in such a manner as to leave
the bad soil at the bottom.
Common trenching (which should be two feet to two
feet six inches deep) is performed as follows : —On the
upper part of the ground to be trenched, mark off a
strip two feet six inches wide ; divide the remainder of
the ground in a similar manner; dig the whole of the
earth out of the first portion to the full depth, and
wheel it to the lower part of the ground where the
work is to terminate; dig the top spit of the next
space and throw it into the bottom of the newly-made
trench, and so on until the second space is to the
required depth, and thus to the end of the work.
The method adopted when the subsoil is to be left at
the bottom, is to remove the strip of surface soil two
feet six inches wide, as directed previously, two spits
deep, and dig the subsoil thoroughly and as deep as


possible without throwing it out, mixing manure with
it if thought desirable; then dig and throw in the sur-
face soil from the next portion, repeating the operation
to the end.
In trenching land, great care should be observed lest
the bottom is left in hollows where water would collect,
and injure the soil. — Hackings’ Queensland Garden
Manual.
DRAINAGE.
Drain the land, and have it thoroughly pulverised,
and it will then lay light, so that excessive rain falling
on it will percolate through and run off by the drains,
an ample store being retained by absorption for the
supply of plants during drought. By thus draining
we deepen the soil, and allow the roots to travel further
in search of nourishment; we admit an increased
supply of atmospheric fertilizers, which hasten the
decay of vegetable and other organic matter, and accel-
erate the disintegration of the mineral parts of the
soil. It improves the mechanical texture of the soil,
and warms it, by which the effects of frost are much
modified, and the plants bloom earlier in spring. It
allows us to work sooner after rain, prevents the for-
mation of acetic and other acids, and it admits largo
quantities of rain to pass into the soil, which is always
more or less imbued with the fertilizing gases of the
atmosphere, to be deposited among the absorbent parts
of the soil, and given up to the necessities of the
plants.
Drains should invariably be placed deeper than the
land has been trenched, and the level should be very
accurately taken, to ensure a fall for the water through-
out the whole length, so that it cannot lodge anywhere,
but may run off freely. Where the surface is uneven


therefore the drain will be much deeper in one place
than in another. The drains should not be less than
two feet six inches deep in the shallowest part, and
from three to four feet is the most effective and ap-
proved depth. They are placed at from sixteen to
twenty feet apart, according to the nature of the soil,
being closer in that of a retentive character. One-
inch drain pipes are generally found to be large enough,
and empty themselves into cross-drains at a lower level,
and of sufficient size and inclination to carry off the
water freely.
LAYING OUT FLOWER GARDENS.
“ One of the best contrivances by which the gardener
can simplify his work in planning a fancy garden, and
afterwards transfer it to the ground, is that of using
ruled paper for his design. Let the paper be nded in
small squares with the ordinary faint lines. These
squares may be eighths of inches, which may represent
feet or yards on his ground, and it will be obvious in
an instant, that he can, by measurement alone, transfer
any figure with the greatest nicety, whether the design
be geometrical or otherwise. In this way engravers
transfer drawings or paintings from the largest to the
smallest size, and vice versd. He will merely place or
pin threads across the larger or smaller object from
which he is to copy, and thus divide it into squares ;
he will then divide his canvas or paper into the same
number of squares by faint lines, and he can thus see
nearly enough even to preserve the likeness of a por-
trait where every line is to be placed; so also in the
garden, he may, with a garden line for small plots,
divide his ground into so many squares as will make
his yards or feet correspond with the squares on his


paper, and peg out the most complicated figures with
the greatest accuracy. For geometrical patterns he
can work without the squares, because these figures are
formed with circles from a common centre, and where
these circles intersect each other, he can form his
straight lines with the greatest precision. In giving a
gardener a plan on paper, all the marks should be left,
that he may see how the figure has been obtained;
because although a good ground workman would find
out a way to obtain all the forms, it would assist him
wonderfully to see how the figures have been originally
drawn, and what portion of the complicated figure has
been adopted for beds. We need hardly say that the
garden line enables us to strike circles on the ground
as correctly as the compasses will on paper. Before
we begin a figure, the ground must be trenched,levelled,
raked, and rolled hard and smooth ; a pointed stick
will then make all the mark we want, and a number
of pegs to place in the portion of figure that is to bo
preserved, is all wo require. The marks not wanted
may then be obliterated, the soil be removed from the
paths, the edging for box made perfect, and the laying
of the box, already prepared for the operation, can
scarcely go wrong. In the plans for geometrical flower
gardens there is room for exercising great taste and
invention ; but nevertheless, a good deal of choice is
secured by the simplest means : a pair of compasses
will, in a short time, produce the most complicated
figures by only drawing circles intersecting each other
in a variety of ways, and keeping them in the same
relation all round the centre. One limb of the com-
passes being a double pencil, our first circle would then
represent a lied with a path round it; put the point of
the instrument on the inner line of the path, and draw


another circle, and next, put the point where the
inner lines intersect five more times, and you will have
formed six circles round the centre point. Choose any
new points you please for another series of circles, or
open the compasses wider and do the same thing again
on a larger scale, but from the same centre, and you
will find such an infinity of forms, that you might
actually make a dozen plans from the same thing.
Choose any set of forms out of this figure for your
beds by filling them up with black ; but always tak-
ing care that the path between must, be the same width.
But a thousand ideas will arise out of this simple
process ; and by changing the width of the instrument,
or drawing a few straight lines across your figure, or
adopting various other modes of intersecting your
diagram, you will find the changes to be made in a
flower garden as numerous as the tunes played on eight
notes of music, and yet all distinguished by mathemati-
cal accuracy.”—(
Glenny.
FORMING GARDEN WALKS.
Tlio walks should be laid out and formed with a rise
of two inches in the centre, to prevent the lodgment
of water, and on a sound bottom ; the gravelly clay,
such as is found on the surface of the ridges about
Brisbane, would prove a sufiicicntly good material to
make a solid walk without any ballast under it. For
this purpose, spread three inches of the gravelly clay
the full width of the walk ; rake and roll it, preserving
the rise of two inches in the centre. If thought de-
sirable, half an inch of gravel could be spread over it,
and be raked level.
Where the earth is not so sound or dry, it will be
necessary to put a layer of stones, brickbats, shells, or


clinkers six inches deep, over which a layer of gravelly
clay two inches deep should be spread and rolled, with
a rise of two inches in the centre, and a layer of gravel
spread neatly over all.
Have the walk two inches on each side wider than
you desire; this checks grass and weeds from encroach-
ing, and prevents the rain water getting to the founda-
tion of the work.
In large gardens where the walks are wide and long,
all the declivities, at least, should have brick and ce-
ment surface drains'properly laid at each side, and ample
catch drains in the lower parts to carry oil’ storm
water : otherwise great injury will be done to the paths,
and possibly to the flower borders, during heavy rains.
A GREEN SCREEN.
A very effective light evergreen screen can be made
with galvanised iron wire upon a hardwood frame,
having some slender climber trained thinly over it.
The maurandyas of various colors, white, blue, and
pink, the bignonia tweediana, rhyncospermum jas-
minoidies, stigmaphyllom ciliatura, and ivy, would all
be suitable for this purpose; and there are many posi-
tions where such contrivances would prove both useful
and ornamental.
HEDGES.
[This list, and the following one of Plants suitable for Garden
Edgings, have been kindly furnished by Mr. F. M. Bailey,
Collecting Botanist, Brisbane Herbarium.
A few plants which might be used for hedge-making.
* Marked thus are A ustralian.
Aberia Caffra ( of Caffraria)
Acacia horrida (Doornhoom of South Africa)
,, arabica


* Acacia juniperina
* „ armata
* „ farnesiana
* Alyxia ruscifolia
* „ var. pngioniformis
Agave Americana
Arduina bispinosa (Carissa Arduina)
Azima tetracantha ( a South African shrub)
* Bursaria spinosa
* Citrus Australasica (Native Lime)
* Citriobatus multiflorus
Csesalpinia sepiaria
* Canthium vacciniifolium
Ceanothus rigidus
Cotoneaster microphylla
Crata;gus oxyacantha
„ pyracantha
Cydonia vulgaris (Common Quince)
* Carissa ovata
* Cudrania javansis (Maclura cahar-galli)
Duranta Plumieri
Flacourtia cataphracta
* Guilandina bonducella
Gleditschia triacanthos
Ilex cornuta (China Holly)
Lantana camara
Lawsonia inermis
Maclura aurantiaca ( Osage Orange)
Pterolobinm lacerans
Plectronia ventosa
Parkinsonia aculeata
Poinciana pulcherrima
Prunus spinosa (English Sloe)
Punica granatum fl. pi, JJoubleJlowering Pomegranate)


Rosa canina (Dog Rose)
,, bracteata ( Macartney)
„ rubiginosa
,, microphylla
„ Boursaultii
Ulex Europseus (English Furze)
Zizyphus spina Christi (South African shrub)
„ Paliurus
EDGINGS,
FOR GARDEN BORDERS.
The following plants would be suitable for this pur-
pose :—
* Marked thus are Australian. + Where a high edging is
required.
* Andropogon falcatus (Grass)
Anthemis nobilis (Camomile)
J Buxus sempervirens (English Box)
* Brachycome microoarpa (Queensland Daisy)
* Cynodon dactylon (Couch Grass)
Diantbus plumarius (Common Pink)
J Euphorbia Bojeri
J Lavandula Stsechas
* Mazus pumilio
J Mesembryanthemum aureum
* Paspalum distichum
J * Phyllota phylicoides
J Rosa Lawreuceana
Stenotaphrum Americanum (Buffalo Grass)
Trifolium repens (Dutch Clover)
Thymus vulgaris (Common Thyme)
* Yelleia spathulata


STANDARD FOR JUDGING FLOWERS.
IMPROVED SEEDLING PLANTS.
“ The Properties of Flowers and Plants,” written by
the late George Glenny forty years ago, has produced a
marvellous effect upon “ Florists’ Flowers.” Before the
appearance of that work there was no standard of
perfection, clear and well defined, by which new seed-
lings could be judged, and to approach which the
raiser could aim. The consequence was, the endless
multiplication of named plants, with only some slight
difference in color, and no improvement in texture or
beauty of form. On the appearance of this able work,
it was violently assailed by many of those who had
been making large profits by raising and naming a
promiscuous multitude of seedling flowers. But al-
though this opposition has been continued from the
same quarter to the present day, the soundness of the
old veteran’s judgment has been sufficiently attested by
the manner in which each flower is received in the
horticultural world, which shows itself to be one
step nearer to his “ standard of perfection.” The
abridged “Properties of Flowers” will shew his ideas
of perfection; and, although the model may not be
reached, those which come nearest to it will be
best.
In illustration of the subject, and to enforce its
importance, an extract is appended from Glenny’s
chapter on the “Violet.” High cultivation and careful
selection, when intelligently directed, and pursued with
untiring perseverance, will produce great results,
whether applied to flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ani-
mals ; and in the interests of Queensland this fact
cannot be too much impressed upon the people.


“ PROPERTIES OF THE VIOLET.
“ The flowers sliould be round, with a perfect out-
line, and slightly cupped.
“ The petals should lie close at the edges, not
showing the divisions, but lying close over each other.
“ The petals should be thick and smooth at the edges,
and the flowers as large as a shilling, and highly fra-
grant.
“ The stems should be strong and straight, so as to
stand out and keep the flowers above the foliage.
“The plant should be dwarf, short jointed and com-
pact, the foliage bright and even, and flowers abundant
and equally distributed over the plant.
“ The double flowering should be ranunculus-formed,
in preference to globular, and in all cases symmetrical.
“We may be told, as in fifty other cases, that it is
impossible to attain these qualities. We will not admit
this ; but if it were so, it would not alter our decision.
If it were impossible to obtain all we have set down
as necessary, it is quite certain we can get nearer than
we have yet done ; and the nearer we can approach
perfection, the better a flower must be. For the fiftieth
time we throw all the objections by, as we did those
which were made to the tulip being a portion of a
hollow ball, or the pansy, cineraria, and petunia being
a circle (and the very men who contended against us
then, have since adopted our notions as their own), we
care nothing if all the floricultural world objects ; the
objections are oidy the complaints of idlers and sloths,
men who object to anything that gives trouble or
requires perseverance. Let the florists once take up
the sweet violet as they did the pansy, and see how
soon there will be an approach to a circular cupped
flower; see how soon they will find in a batch of


seedlings some with thicker or smoother petals than
others ; and, once the improvement begun, it is very
difficult to say where it will end. With these qualities
pointed out to his attention, let the seedling raiser
watch his bed and preserve anything from among
them that exhibits the least improvement. Is there
one among the whole with a thicker petal 1 put it
aside. Is there one with the petals closer together
than usual 1 save it. Is there a flower rounder 2 select
it for that one point. In short, save any one that
exhibits the slightest improvement upon any one
point; make much of it; and having selected only
such as show some favourable point, destroy the rest,
and save the seed of the improved ones to produce
another year still greater improvements, and as the new
ones beat the old ones let them take the place of the
old ones, and a few seasons will materially advance
the flower.”
PROPERTIES OF FLOWERS.
(Abridged, by George Glennv.)
The Auricula. —The pip round, flat, and smooth-
edged ; the edging, the colour, and the eye, the same
width ; tube small, and bright yellow ; filled with the
pollen; the paste smooth, even, perfectly white, and
round; truss not less than seven pips, edge to edge,
and forming a globular surface.
The Polyanthus. —The edge should be scolloped,
but not deeply; the pips, in other respects, circular ;
the yellow eye perfectly round; the tube well filled
with thrum. The centre of all the divisions of the
pips similar to the side, the lacing to go down into the
eye, and down the sides of where they divide ; lacing
the same width all over, and the same colour as the


eye; truss not less than seven pips, which should
touch at the edges, but not overlap, forming a rounding
surface.
The Tulip.— From one-third to one-half a hollow
globe, when expanded ; edge smooth and even, petals
thick, marking unbroken round the exposed edges of
the petals when expanded; all six petals alike; colours
well defined, and the bottom of the cup free from the
slightest stain; the white or yellow pure ; the stem
stiff, from eighteen inches to three feet in length.
The Hyacinth.— The pips round in outline, and
also on the face close together, with good stiff foot-
stalks, standing well out from the main stem ; the
spike compact, and tapering from the bottom to
the top.
The Crocus. -Form like the tulip; petals very
thick ; edges smooth ; colour bright or dense ; and, if
variegated, the colours distinct and well defined; and
all six petals alike.
The Cineraria. —Flowers round ; petals broad and
thick, smooth in texture and blunt at the ends, sitting
very close ; centre small; colour bright or dense.
The Ranunculus. —Two-thirds of a ball, well filled
up ; the petals thick, close, smooth-edged, and sym-
metrical ; centre up to surface.
The Pansy.—A perfect circle; smooth at the edge,
petals thick, and of velvety texture ; the marking
uniform; the two top petals alike, and the two side
petals alike; the ground on the three lower petals the
same shade, whether white, yellow, straw, or any
other colour. The eye not through to the margin.
The Dahlia. — Two-thirds of a ball for the exact
form, and well filled up to that form in the centre.
The petals free from notch, thick, broad at the


ends. If cupped, it must not show the (jack of the
petals ; if reflexed, it must be as close as the scales of
a fish. They must lie symmetrically.
The Geranium.—The five petals must form a
circle; smooth at the edges, thick, of rich texture;
colours well defined. Truss, not less than five pips,
and one not lap over the other.
The Verbena. Pips round, free from notch,
substance thick, smooth texture ; truss large, pips
edge to edge, not less than thirteen in a bunch, not to
lap over each other; colour dense or bright; and all
the pips alike.
The Narcissus.— The petals to form a circular flat
surface ; the cup prominent ; the colours distinct.
The white ones very pure, the yellow very dense.
The Carnation and Picotee.— The form half a
ball; the outline round ; the petals imbricated ; the
petals thick and smooth; edges free from serrature or
notch; colours dense and distinct, white pure; every
petal to maintain the character of the flower, whether it
be flake, a bizarre, or a picotee, and of the latter there
should be no mark that does not come from the edge.
The Pink.—Half a ball ; petals thick ; edges
smooth ; lace round every petal, within a slight stripe
of the white outside ; a good centre or eye of the
colour of the lacing.
The Chrysanthemum.—Round outline and half a
ball; double, symmetrical ; centre well up and perfect;
petals broad, blunt and thick; colour decided; petals
free from notch.
The Ehododenron. —Flowers to be round ; slightly
cupped, large, well spotted, smooth-edged and thick;
colour dense; and truss a bold, round-sided cone;
footstalks thick and elastic.


The Azalea Indica.— Flowers round ; petals thick,
of fine texture, smooth at the edges; colour .dense ;
marking well defined.
The Rose.— All kinds to have thick, smooth-edged,
stiff petals, plenty of them, imbricated to the centre ;
fragrance strong ; footstalks long and stiff; form
round, rising on the face to half a ball; colour dense,
and the back of the petal same colour as the front.
Moss Roses cannot be too thick of moss, and the
larger the calyx, the better. Climbing Roses to be
short-jointed and abundant bloomers. Noisette Roses
to be in good bunches, with strong footstalks.
The Camellia Japonica. —Flower circular; form
half of a ball, petals thick, broad, and smooth at the
edge, and imbricated to the centre ; colour dense, or,
if white, pure, if blotched or striped, a distinct con-
trast. The plant short, jointed, and bushy; foliage
large and bright; bloom abundant.
The Calceolaria.— The bloom should be perfectly
ronnd, every way; colour at back as bright as the
front; the lip, throat, and calyx, small; the markings,
if any, very decided and dense ; the substance thick
and still’; the stems strong and branching; the foot-
stalks elastic. The plant decidedly shrubby, and the
bloom just above the foliage.
The Fuchsia. —The flower-bud globose, until it
opens, short, or without any tube; the sepals on
opening to reflex so as to show only the inside surface ;
the corolla to be a decided contrast to the sepals;
sepals bright all over alike ; footstalks, long, wiry, and
pendulous; the flowers to come at the base of every
leaf; the foliage bright and close, and the bloom to
hang down free of the branches; habit shrubby;
stems strong.


The Petunia.—The flowers perfectly round, thick,
smooth-edged, free from serrature, and not indented at
the divisions; colour bright and distinct, and, if
variegated, the contrast to be decided ; and the veins,
stripes, or blotches well defined.
The Hollyhock.—Guard petals, thick and smooth
at the edges ; florets close, and forming half a ball, to
occupy two-thirds of the disk ; footstalks long and
strong; colour brilliant or striking ; main stem stiff;
flowers form a close pyramid with a wide base.
COMPOST FOR POT PLANTS.
The composition of a suitable soil for the successful
growth of choice pot plants, is of such importance as
to call for special attention. The materials adapted
for this purpose, or some fair substitute for them, are
within the reach of most persons ; and all that is
necessary to ensure a supply, when it is wanted, is to
lay up a store beforehand , and this is the more
necessary as the ingredients require some time to
render them fit for use.
A compost, in which almost any plant may be
grown to perfection, can be formed of well rotted
turves, cow-dung, and peat; a little silver sand being
added if not sufficiently open, and for such plants as
require a sandy soil.
The turves should be cut with a sharp spade, hot
more than half an inch thick, where the grass forms a
compact sward. These should be thrown into a heap
to decay, and should be turned over about every three
months. In from six to twelve months the heap will
be broken down into a lumpy soil, very rich in
vegetable matter, and will be tit for use.
The cow-dung should be placed in a heap, kept wet,
B


and turned over frequently while decaying, as it
deteriorates greatly if allowed to “ over heat,” which
it is liable to do. If properly attended to in this
respect, it will have become an unctuous black mould
in about six months.
The peat may not be so readily procurable. It
should be of a spongy, light nature, full of fibre. If
peat cannot be obtained, a good substitute will be
found in the great old roots of the Stag-hom Ferns
(Platycerium grande), and the Elk-horn Ferns (Platy-
cerium alcicorne), which grow abundantly in our scrubs.
These can be broken up small, and rubbed through
a coarse sieve, which would allow a hazel nut to pass
through.
The materials being thus provided, they may be
thoroughly mixed in the following proportions :—The
loam from rotted turf, two barrowsful ; cow-dung,
half a barrowful; and peat, half a barrowful. If the
turf was taken from stiff soil, the compost will require
the addition of a little silver sand to correct its reten-
tiveness, and will form a soil in which almost any
plant may be successfully grown. The importance of
securing soil of the best quality cannot be overesti-
mated, as it renders all the other work comparatively
easy, and is the first step towards success.
Certain modifications of this soil will be requh-ed
for plants of a very different nature. Some, for
instance, delighting in a sandy soil, will need the
addition of more sand. Others, on the contrary,
which need a rich, rather stiff loam, like the Rose,
would not require any sand, and might do without
the peat.


RICH TOP DRESSING.
Horse and cattle droppings, in equal portions ;
thoroughly mixed, thrown into a ridge, and saturated
with strong liquid manure. Spread a thin layer of
finely powdered charcoal over the whole, and in two
days thoroughly mix and use. There is no surface
dressing equal to this; the effect is almost magical.
It is suitable for large plants grown in pots as
specimens, where the soil has become exhausted;
and should only be applied to plants which from their
nature would not be injured by so active a stimulant.
Apply it on the top of the soil, filling the pot up to
the rim.
STRIKING CUTTINGS.
Many of the more succulent cuttings are liable to
fail through “ damping off.” The following treatment
is recommended. Fill the pot half full of crocks; take
the compost (page 17), and mixing with it finely broken
bricks, sifted, about the size of sweet peas or Indian
shot, to the extent of one-third. Fill up the pot with
this to within one inch of the top of the rim, level
it, and strike the bottom of the pot gently upon the
bench to settle it; then fill up to the top with silver
sand. Give a slight watering to make it firm. Pre-
pare the cuttings of the extreme ends of the shoots,
one inch and a quarter to one inch and a half in
length, cutting the bottom straight, just under a joint,
with a sharp clean knife, without bruising. Remove
the leaves from each cutting for one inch from the
bottom, and dibble them in one inch in depth, so as
just to pass through the sand and scarcely to touch
the compost. Water, to settle the sand about them,


and make all level. Cover with a bell glass, and stand
in a shady place. Water very moderately, after the
first time.
POTTING,
AND THE MANAGEMENT OF POT PLANTS.
The successful cultivation of plants in pots, depends
partly upon the presence of certain necessary conditions,
such as light, air, warmth, moisture, and soil; and
partly upon skill in the general application and man-
agement of them, which can only be acquired by
experience. In practice, and particularly among
amateurs, it appears especially necessary to enforce the
importance of suitable soil and ample drainage ; as a
disregard of their value is the frequent cause of
loss and disappointment. The compost previously
described possesses the qualities of a good soil in the
highest degree, as it is extremely fertile and sufiiciently
porous, while it is free from that stimulating quality
(arising from the presence of crude manures) which
causes a gross and straggling growth. “ The drainage
of Pot Plants,” is fully treated of under that head, as
its importance demands. The other necessary con-
ditions can only be learned by careful and intelligent
observation. The amount of protection required from
sun and wind, by the different sorts of plants, while
the free admission of sufficient light and air is secured ;
the adequate, but not over supply of moisture ; and
other details of management, must be determined
chiefly by experience.
To prepare for potting, fill the pots a fourth full of
drainage in the manner recommended in the article
“ Drainage of Pot Plantscover with a small quantity
of moss, if convenient, but if not, cover the crooks


with a little lumpy earth, not too coarse. If the
plants to be potted have a ball of earth about their
roots, the method of handling them will be found
under the head “ Re-potting; ” but if, as is more
frequently the case, they are seedling plants, with
spreading fibrous roots, take the pots, prepared as
before directed, and pile in the centre of each sufficient
fine earth to bring the collar of the plant nearly level
with the rim of the pot. While the plant is held in
this position, the fibrous roots should be spread out
evenly over the little hillock of earth, and should be
carefully covered with fine soil ; when full, being
gently struck on the bench to settle all. Water them
and stand them in shade.
EE-POTTING.
Before commencing to re-pot, have all the materials
ready. Provide a large quantity of crocks—broken
pots or pieces of broken brick—for drainage. “ Then
bring plenty of the compost to your potting table, and
a supply of the crocks, and having your plants and the
new pots all ready, fill the latter about two inches
up with crocks, after first covering the holes with
pieces large enough to stop the smaller ones from
going through. Then put on compost high enough
to enable you to place the ball of earth con-
taining the plants at a proper height. Now place
your fingers on each side the plants in the small pots,
and turning the pot wrong side upwards, strike the
edge against the edge of the potting table or
bench, and the ball of earth will leave whole. Let
the loose crocks of the small pot fall away, but do
not use force to remove them, as if the fibres have
got around them it is far better not to disturb


them; placing the ball in the left hand, the
upper surface of the soil of the small pot may be
removed as far as it can without touching the fibres ;
then with both hands place the ball in the centre of
the large pot, pressing it gently down among the new
compost, to bring the collar of the plant, which is the
base of the lower leaves, within half an inch of the
level of the top edge of the pot, then fill up with the
compost all round the ball, pressing it gently down,
but not pressing the ball out of its place. Fill up the
pot to top, and lifting it level with both hands, strike
the bottom gently against the table, to settle it all
down; and making it all level, the pot may be placed
in any sheltered spot, under canvas if possible, to keep
off heavy falls of rain or hot sun.” When all are
done give a gentle watering.
DRAINAGE OF POT PLANTS.
Bad drainage will defeat all attempts at good
cultivation. As a rule, there should be at least one
inch of drainage material in a four-inch pot, and so on
in proportion. Where there is any fear of worms
rising through the hole, it should be covered with
something flat, such as a small piece of tin. The
drainage should be in three layers, the lowest being
composed of large pieces, the next layers of smaller
pieces, as they ascend; and on the whole a slight
sprinkling of moss to keep the soil from mixing
with it.
Another very great danger affecting the proper
drainage of pot plants may arise from the material
upon which the pot stands, and this cannot be too
strongly impressed upon the novice. For instance, if


standing upon retentive soil, a small quantity of water
underneath the pot effectually excludes air, and no
water can pass from the pot until it is removed. If
upon a smooth board the same evil occurs. But in a
saucer, worse than all; for here, in addition to the
danger mentioned, there is this further one, that if
exposed to rain or other excessive supply of water
the roots are kept standing in it by the operation of
capillary attraction.
Let this danger he thoroughly understood and
appreciated, and the cure will be simple. If pot
plants stand on soil, cover it with two inches of coarse
gravel. If on boards, have them narrow, so that a
seam will come under the hole in the pots. If in
saucers see that no water is ever allowed to remain in
them.
SHADE FOR POT PLANTS.
In the absence of glass structures, by which the
plants can be protected from excessive rain and wind,
and the temperature can be properly regulated, the
ordinary “bush house” affords a cheap and valuable
shade. Whatever material the frame of the house
may be constructed of—whether of rough saplings or
of sawn timber—it should be neatly and faithfully
built, not only to avoid offending the eye, but to enable
it to resist the effect of high winds, and the tendency
to decay, which its exposure to the weather would pro-
mote.
About eight feet from the ground will be found a
convenient height for the wall-plates, which should be
tied with cross timbers. These will act also as sup-
ports for the brushwood, which is to be laid flat upon
them and tied down. The brushwood should be short


jointed and twiggy, with small foliage, and its density
must be regulated by the season of the year, more
shade being requisite during the summer months than
at other times. No climbing plants should be allowed
to run over the house, as they cause too dense a shade,
which is destructive to plants. For the same reason,
some judgment is requisite in determining the manner
in which the sides and ends are to be enclosed, so that
while sufficient shade and protection are secured, care
be taken not to “ draw” the plants by carrying it to
an excess. If the house is in an exposed position, the
sides and ends should be closely boarded about half or
two-thirds up from the soil, to protect the plants from
the effects of high winds. Hobart Town palings will
be found convenient for this purpose. On the sunny
side, or the quarter exposed to strong or bleak winds,
the space above the boards should be lightly bushed,
the remainder being left open for a free circulation of
air. The floor should be levelled and covered with two
inches of coarse gravel for the plants to stand upon, as
recommended in the article on “ Drainage of Pot
Plants.” The number and position of the posts sup-
porting the flat roof will depend somewhat upon the
arrangement of the paths: whether there be one
centre path, or two side paths.
The adornment of such a house affords ample scope
for the exhibition of taste. A few well-grown orchids
and other epiphytes judiciously affixed to, and grown
upon, the posts, add a new and appropriate charm to
the scene. Having a special attraction and interest of
their own, they rather heighten the general effect than
detract from the terrestrial beauties which they may
be said to crown. A few hanging pots with suitable
trailing plants, arranged so as not to be in the wayof the


heads of visitors, and a few slender climbers to twine
gracefully around the pots, would be appropriate and
effective. But these should never, on any account, be
allowed to reach the roof.
LIQUID MANURE.
In the cultivation of plants either in pots or in the
border, the application of liquid manure is often neces-
sary. It is made in various ways, according to the
facility for obtaining the material, and the requirements
of the different plants; as a manure, however good,
will not be found suitable for all plants alike. The
following will make good liquid manure, in the appli-
cation of which care should be taken not to use it too
strong or too frequently. The water should in every
case be allowed to settle well and be drawn off clear:—
Half-an-ounce of sulphate of ammonia dissolved in a
gallon of water, and used once a week, will be found a
cleanly and convenient liquid manure for ladies to
apply to pot plants. Sheep’s and fowls’ dung steeped
in water, at the rate of two ounces to a gallon ; cow-
dung, at the rate of half a peck to ten gallons of
water; guano, at the rate of an ounce to a gallon of
water—in each case completely dissolved, and the
liquor used after it has settled and become clear—will
produce very satisfactory results.
MOSS FOR GARDEN POTS.
Nothing adds so much to the effect of plants culti-
vated in rooms, whether in jardinieres or otherwise,
than the use of moss, which at once hides the mould and
prevents rapid evaporation ; but it has the very great
disadvantage of containing innumerable eggs of insects,


and thus of filling the apartments with disagreeable
visitors. Prepared moss is well-known, but it is gene-
rally of a dull bluish-green color, that destroys all
illusion. A French chemical journal gives the follow-
ing recipe for preparing moss with slight alteration of
appearance:—Dissolve one grain of nitric acid, and
about fifteen grains of indigo, in two quarts of water ;
tie the moss up in small parcels, throw them into the
solution while boiling, and leave them in for a minute;
after being dried in the open air, the moss will after-
wards last for an almost indefinite time without
tion.
LABELS.
These are made of various forms and materials,
according to the purpose for which they are required,
and the fancy of the people using them. They are of
leather, wood, zinc, galvanised iron, pottery, porcelain,
gutta percha, iron, &c. Labels being generally
exposed to the weather, or the influence of moisture,
the writing soon becomes obliterated, and they are
therefore constantly in need of examination and
renewal.
For use in flower pots, the imported wooden labels
are the best. They are cut, pointed, and painted,
ready for writing on ; and are made up in bundles of
100 each. If labels of a more permanent character
are required, zinc or galvanised iron may be used,
written on with a black lead pencil.
Labels for the garden border cause more trouble on
account of their liability to decay, and the greater
risks to which they are exposed. For ordinary pur-
poses, beech battens, of three quarters of an inch
thick, four inches wide, by sixteen long, pointed,


smoothed at one side, painted two thin coats of white
paint, and written upon with soft black lead pencil
while the paint is wet, will be found very serviceable.
Dr. Schomburgk, the talented and indefatigable
director of the Adelaide Botanic Gardens, feeling the
need for some cheaper and more durable label than any
at present in use, has for some years devoted much
time and thought to this subject; and in his report for
1874, he says:
“ I am in great hopes that the labels prepared with
the composition mentioned in last year’s report will
stand our climate. The first labels prepared with this
mordant were written in 1871, and show not the
slightest effect of the weather. The contrary has been
the case where the mordant had not been made use of;
the rust penetrated even in the second year through
the color, and in some places it shivered off. Ido not
consider a three years’ trial a perfect one ; but some-
thing is already gained, as by our former method the
labels became effaced in the course of two years. It
would, indeed, be a great boon to this and any other
kindred establishment, as the writing and renewing
the labels has hitherto been a constant source of trouble
and expense.
“ The labels are of sheet iron, and before painting, a
mordant of composition is employed thus ; —One part
chloride of copper, one of nitrate of copper, and one
of ammoniac, are dissolved in sixty-four parts of water,
to which solution is added one part of commercial
hydrochloric acid. The iron labels are brushed over
twice with this liquid, which gives them a darkish
rusty color. In the course of from twelve to twenty-
four hours they become dry, and to their now dirty
surface a coat or two of black oil color will firmly


adhere. When dry, the names of the plants are written
with white oil color, and immediately sanded with fine
white sand, which dries with the white paint and be-
comes compact, and the letters stand out on the black.”
CONTRAST OF COLOR.
The difference in the appearance of one flower
garden in which all the sorts are arranged har-
moniously, and another in which they are grown
indiscriminately, is so great as almost to exceed belief.
It would be out of place here to enter into any length-
ened analysis of the laws of harmonious coloring; we
shall only advert to the well-known fact, that if we
look steadily on a spot of any color upon a black or
white ground, it will appear to be surrounded by a
border of another color, called its complementary
or contrasting color, and it will be bordered by
that color, which will make up the three primary
colors. Thus blue will appear surrounded by orange,
a compound of red and yellow, which two colors,
together with the blue, make up the three pri-
mary colors. Yellow contrasts with purple, orange
with blue, red with green ; but as green is always
represented by the leaves of plants, its place may ap-
propriately be supplied by white, which harmonises
with every color. There is an almost infinite variety
of colors in flowers differing in degree of tint, and one
color should be contrasted with another of the same
intensity, such as a dark blue with a dark orange.
BOUQUET-MAKING.
This is an art that requires a good taste and a
natural gift. To make one well, the manipulator


must feel a real interest in what he is doing. No one
can attain to any degree of proficiency without the
last desirable consideration is felt by the operator.
It should be of an almost flat shape, just a little
inclined to a roundish form, and being intended for
the hand, should be small and light. It ought to
be about six inches in diameter, or seven should be
the outside allowed. We have seen bouquets made up
for the hand that looked not unlike great cabbages,
instead of being a light and elegant assortment of
choice flowers. A bouquet should be so made that the
beauty of each flower can be seen, and not a mass of
confusion, as is often the case when the flowers are so
tightly packed together, that the beauty of each indi-
vidual one is lost. White should be the groundwork,
tastefully set off by red and bright pink, with here and
there a deep blue. Dull colors should be eschewed
altogether, if a number of bright-colored ones can be
obtained. A few spikes standing an inch or so above
the other flowers enhances its elegant appearance. A
nice half-opened white rose or camellia should be chosen
as a centre, round which should be arranged a light
and elegant green, standing up nearly an inch above
it. A few sprays of southernwood should now be
placed around the centre, to fill up the hollow, and a
few bright colors added filling up each hollow with the
southernwood, passing a string around each flower as
soon as added, to prevent it from moving. When it
has attained the desired size, edge it with leaves or
sprays of the brightest green obtainable. The green
used among the flowers should be maidenhair fern, or
Brazilian Lycopod.


FLOWER CULTIVATION.
THE ANEMONE.
The anemone thrives in a good, rich, well-drained,
loamy bed, not too strong. It is mostly grown from
the root, but can be raised from seed sown in spring.
The bulbs are injured by being kept long out of the
ground, and should be planted as soon as procured (in
soil which had been manured the previous year), at the
distance of six inches apart and two inches deep.
Many persons leave the roots undisturbed for three or
four years, with good results. The roots should be
quite ripe, and at rest, all the foliage being dead before
they are taken up. Any small piece of the bulb which
has an eye left will grow, and the divisions should be
made on taking them up, that the wounds may heal.
Before the bulbs are re-planted, the bed should be
refreshed with a dressing of the compost.
Sowing Seed. —An experienced grower recommends
that the bed should be selected in a sheltered part of
the garden, high and dry, with a sandy or gravelly sub-
soil. After marking off the bed a convenient width,


say about four feet, remove all the earth to a depth of
sixteen or eighteen inches. Then put in from four to
six inches of unmixed cow-dung, such as might be
gathered near the stock-yard. Upon this layer of dung
place as much good fresh loam as will raise the bed a
little higher than formerly. Make the surface very
fine, and then sow in drills six inches apart, and cover
with sifted fine sandy soil half an inch. Beds so made
will bloom the same year.
THE AZALEA.
The evergreen or green-house varieties (Indian or
Chinese) are those generally cultivated in Queensland ;
and from their season of blooming and their diversity
and brilliancy of color, they are most desirable plants
for either the parterre or conservatory. Some sorts are
liable to produce branches which “sport,” or have
blooms quite different from the rest of the plant; and
these “ sports” may be fixed, and propagated by taking
grafts from the branch producing them. The following
have been conspicuous for this peculiarity, and many
fine new varieties have thus been obtained from them :
Her Majesty (Barnes), Admiration, Iveryana, Alba
Magna, Madam Miellery, and Barclayana.
Soil. —The azalea delights in a sandy peat or peaty
sand ; but the former would be preferable, as the peat
should preponderate. Mr. Glenny says, “ that in soil
which suits the hardy azalea (the deciduous or American
varieties) the seedlings may be seen coming up under
the plants in such quantities as to be like so many
weeds.” “The natural situation for this family seems to
have been the ordinary reclaimed or drained bogs,
where the earth is one close mass of half-decayed


vegetables and their roots.” Soil suitable for growing
heaths is also adapted for azaleas. The compost may-
be used for them, with the addition of a third more
peat and sand.
Propagation. —By seed, cuttings, layers, and grafts
ing. They propagate easily by layers, as they root
freely. If grafting is resorted to, it should be done
early in spring, strong growing sorts being used for
stocks, such as azalea indica alba, or A. phoenicea, both
easy to strike from cuttings.
Position. —In pots in the green-house, or in the open
border, in the temperate districts of the colony.
THE BALSAM.
To secure the fine large double flowers, which is the
chief object in cultivating these, the seed should be
saved only from the finest plants, producing the best
blooms ; and if the seed is two or three years old the
plants will be less luxuriant, and the blooms will be
more double. To have them very fine, the seed should
be sown early in spring (in the protection of a frame
where there is any danger from frost); the plants
pricked out into small pots when fit to handle, using
light rich soil, shifting them again and successively,
never allowing them to be pot-bound until their last
shifting into eight, twelve, or sixteen-inch pots, accord-
ing as you aim at moderate-sized or very large speci-
mens. The plants must have full exposure and not be
crowded together, that they may be fully developed
and grow bushy ; and richer materials should be used
each time of potting, until the last soil used may
consist almost entirely of the mould from thoroughly
decayed cow-dung, adding only a little sandy loam.


THE BEGONIA.
Tliis beautiful soft-wooded stand plant may be grown
to great perfection in the compost, with the addition of
a little sand. See that the pots are well drained, and
if large specimens are required, shift the plants as soon
as the pots are filled with roots, into those of a size
larger.
All the varieties propagate freely, either by division
of roots, cuttings, leaves or portions of leaves, and by
seed sown as soon as ripe.
BULBS.
Those are among the most striking objects in a
flower garden, and from the early and extended season
of their blooming, and the ease with which they may
be cultivated, are deserving of general attention.
Most bulbs will grow well in ordinary garden soil if
worked deeply and enriched with thin turf well rotted,
but the addition of the compost would be preferable.
Bulbs increase rapidly at the root, and most of them
should be taken up every second or third year to be
sorted into sizes and re-plantcd—the largest ones being
placed where they are to bloom, and the remainder in
beds for further growth.
CACTUS.
The cultivation and propagation of this interesting
group of plants present few difficulties in the warmer
parts of Queensland, if due regard be paid to drainage
and the application of water. The compost would form
a good soil by adding a little more leaf mould and
C


silver sand. Cuttings or plants in pots should have
ample drainage, and be kept almost dry while making
roots and during the season of rest. But in the sum-
mer, when making growth, they may be watered rather
liberally, and, if possible, be surrounded with a moist
atmosphere.
In preparing cuttings, the ends should be dried for
a few days before inserting them in or laying them
down in any loose material, such as gravel or rough
leaf mould, to form roots. If they are in a warm,
damp atmosphere, no water whatever should be given
until they are rooted; and, under ordinary circum-
stances, only the merest sprinkle of water should be
given to preserve the soil from becoming absolutely
dry. Soil suitable for growing cactus may consist of
loam, peat, lime rubbish, and dried cow-dung mixed.
The small sorts may be grafted on the cactus specio-
sissima, and make handsome specimens. The scion is
inserted into the top of the stem, and is kept in its
place by a cactus spine run through stock and scion.
They must be kept dry and in shade until healed, or
are liable to damp off like the cuttings. The epiphyl-
lums are very suitable for hanging pots, when grown
on their own roots. The plants placed round the edge
of the pots and hanging pendant, present a splendid
appearance while in bloom.
THE CAMELLIA JAPONICA.
This noble evergreen plant deserves more general
cultivation. It is perfectly hardy in Queensland, and
requires no special care after it is established in the soil.
Its splendid rich evergreen foliage renders it at all times
highly ornamental, and when covered with its magnifi


cent flowers, which come in the winter when flowers
are scarce, it is a most beautiful and attractive object.
The camellia may be grown to a large size in pots or
tubs in the green-house or conservatory, but, where
practicable, it should be planted out in the garden
border. In the pot culture provide ample drainage,
use the potting compost, and water copiously while the
plant is making new growth. The form of the plant
should be regulated by pinching out the ends of long,
straggling, or mis-placed shoots; and shifting into
larger pots should be done when the roots are begin-
ning to run round the pot, and before they cross or mat
together. The earth in the pots should never be
allowed to become dry, or the death of the plant will
be the inevitable result.
In the open ground the camellia requires some care
and attention in Queensland during the first year or
two; in fact, until it has made good, healthy, vigorous
growth, indicating that it has got firm hold of the soil.
Before planting, the land should be carefully prepared
by deep digging, and the compost should be added in
greater or less quantity, according to the quality of the
soil. The plants should be effectively shaded from the
sun, watered regularlyin dry weather, and well mulched
until established.
The camellia is propagated by grafting, inarching,
layering, and by cuttings. Layering will generally be
found most satisfactory. The single varieties, for stocks
upon which to graft approved kinds, may be grown
from cuttings or from seeds, the latter being produced
in great abundance by the common sorts, and germinat-
ing very freely.
It should be planted very early in spring, say during
July or August, so as to make its spring growth (which


appears in September and October) in its new position.
Each plant should be thoroughly protected from the
sun by slips of brushwood stuck into the soil closely
around it, and which should not be removed until it
has made and ripened a strong new growth. Be care-
ful to mulch the soil, and give water when required.
THE CINEEAEIA.
Star-shaped flowers, brilliantly tinted with white,
pink, blue, crimson, purple, and violet in the richest
hues. The starry flower consists of narrow petals pro-
jecting all round a yellow disk, such petals being pointed
or notched. Florists have been endeavoring to improve
its form by raising from seed new varieties, having
rounder-pointed and broader petals set closer together,
and having a smaller disk. Cinerarias are very valua-
ble on account of their great beauty, and the long
period during which they may be had in bloom. They
grow readily from seed, and are increased freely by
cuttings and divisions of roots.
Sow the seed as soon as it is ripe in spring in pans
or pots of the compost, with ample drainage. As soon
as the seedlings can be handled, having three or four
leaves, prick them out into similar pots at about an
inch apart, where they may remain until strong enough
to pot off into separate No. 60 pots. From these they
should be shifted into the next size, No. 48 pots, as
soon as the roots begin to mat about the sides.
After flowering, the stems should be cut down, the
surface of the earth be disturbed, and the pot filled
up with compost. In a few weeks there will be an
abundant selection of cuttings, many of them with
roots.


THE CARNATION.
The cultivation of the old and deserving favorites,
the carnation and picotee, may be taken together.
Few among the beauties of the flower garden are more
generally admired. The charm of their form, the
variety and disposition of their color, and their delight
ful fragrance, unite to render them unsurpassable by
any other flower.
In the temperate districts of Queensland they may
be grown with fair success in the open border, and also
in some of the warmer portions of the colony, if a little
regard be paid to aspect and shade.
The compost will be found well adapted for their
growth in pots ; and beds in the open ground may be
rendered fit for their reception by forking in a dressing
of three inches of mould, made by thoroughly decom-
posed stable manure. Plant them in rows eighteen
inches apart ; the rows to be two feet apart. They
should be planted out not later than July, as they
bloom during September and October. *
As the flower stems appear they should be tied up to
supports. The buds, when ready to expand, should be
tied round the middle with a piece of coarse worsted, and
the tips of the calyx may be torn down to it at each
division : it enables the flower to open evenly.
While the plants are growing and blooming they
require a good deal of moisture, and the watering
should be regularly attended to in dry weather.
Seed. —Sow seed very thinly in large pots (with
ample drainage) in early spring. Water regularly, so
that the soil never becomes dry, but very moderately,
or the young plants will all damp off. Give them light


and shade, and protect them from heavy rain. As soon
as the young seedlings are large enough to hold, stir
the earth between them, and thin them out to two
inches apart, pricking the little plants taken away into
other pots.
Pipings or Cuttings. —These are made as short as
possible ; but there should be a stem with three joints
to insert in the soil. The bottom leaves should be
carefully removed, and the stem cut off clean under
the last joint. Give the soil a good watering ■with a
fine rose watering-pot, so as not to disturb the surface.
Thrust the pipings in to the depth of the stem, but do
not shorten the top leaves, as some recommend. When
the pots are filled, at about two inches apart, water
sufficiently to settle the soil, and shade from the sun
until they have struck root. Water occasionally as
required, but not too copiously, or they will “ damp
off.” When rooted, prepare a bed and plant them out
six inches apart. From this bed all the intermediate
plants may be withdrawn as required.
Layers. —“ Cut off the leaves pretty close from all but
the top three joints; then make an incision in the
stem, on the under side, half way between the second
and third joints, under the lower leaves left on, and to
nearly the middle of the stem, bearing the knife up-
wards, right through the second joint, and cut off at
the joint the sloping piece below it; the place to peg it
down on must be dug up or loosened with the knife,
and a little sand should be mixed, and with a peg made
like a little hooked walking-stick, four inches long, peg
down the layer, so that the whole slit part is under the
surface. Water, to settle the earth about them.”—
Glenny. In the warmer parts of Queensland the
slit part should be two inches under the soil, or the


surface should be well mulched. Before making layers,
it is desirable, whether in pots or in the open border,
to stir the soil and mix a good compost dressing of half
road sand and half leaf mould, or dung rotted into
mould The layers will root in pots in a month or six
weeks, but should be left attached to the plant until
they have plenty of fibre, and when thoroughly rooted
they may be cut off and potted, two in a four or five-
inch pot, in soil from rotted turves, but no dung, and
plenty of crocks for drainage.
For the standard of perfection of these flowers see
Glenny’s “ Properties.” Of the picotee he says ;
“ The properties of form are similar to those of the
carnation, but the distinction between carnation and
picotee is, that the color of the former is disposed in
unequal stripes, going from the centre to the outer
edges, and that of the picotees is disposed on the outer
edges of the petals, and radiates inwards; and the
more uniformly this is disposed the better,
THE CHRYSANTHEMUM.
Pyreihrum Sineasi, the large flowered show varieties,
and P. Indicum, the pompone or small flowered varie-
ties. These showy and useful plants generally receive
very rough treatment in Queensland. They afford
great variety of form as well as color; there are the
quilled, the tasselled, the the clustered, the
ranunculus (flowered), the marigold (flowered), and the
aster (flowered). They are all easily propagated by
cuttings and by division of the roots. They should
have rich soil and moisture, and when about to bloom
should be watered occasionally with liquid manure.
The flower stems should be neatly tied up and the


clump be kept from spreading too much. When the
bloom is over cut down the stems, thoroughly loosen
the soil about the clump with a fork, and give a top-
dressing of manure.
Good specimens may be grown in pots in the com-
post. They should be potted singly in three-inch pots,
and as soon as they start into growth pinch out their
tops to encourage a bushy habit. Shift the plants into
larger pots as soon as their roots fill the smaller ones,
and regularly stop the lateral branches every third leaf.
When coming into bloom they may be watered thrice
a week with liquid manure.
Plants in the open border should be stopped in the
same manner.
THE COCKSCOMB.
A well-grown cockscomb is effective either in the
conservatory or the open border ; and although the
climate is in many respects more favorable to its growth
than England, we may with great advantage adopt
much of the treatment, which, in the hands of Mr.
McEvoy, has produced such marvellous results there.
Sow the seed in boxes or wide-mouthed pots filled
with the rotted turves and a little silver sand only, as
no manure is to be used in the earlier stages of its
growth. The seed cannot be sown too thinly, as the
plants should not bp less than one inch apart, and the
most thorough drainage should be ensured by the use
of abundance of crocks. When they have six leaves
pot them singly into No. 60 pots in similar soil, where
they remain until the roots are thoroughly matted in
the pots, when they are shifted into No. 48 pots. They
should be stood upon tiles, slates, or some other such


material, to prevent the roots obtaining nourishment
through the bottom, as the object is to starve the plants
up to the time that the bloom appears, when they may
be shifted into 32 pots, and be treated more liberally.
In re potting, see that the ball is not broken. The
compost may be used after the removal from No. 48
pots, and ample drainage be provided. The plants
from this point forward are to be stimulated to the
utmost, for the purpose of developing the bloom. For
this purpose they should be watered with liquid manure
two or three times a week. When the flowers first
appear, the form of the crest and the closeness of the
texture will give us a pretty good idea of the promise,
broad ones being better, to our fancy, than the long,
narrow ones.
Dwarfing. —Mr. McElroy adopts a curious method
for producing dwarf cockscomb by cuttings, and after
many experiments, Mr. Glenny of late years always
had recourse to this plan when he wanted handsome
dwarf plants.
After the crest is well formed, the flowering part
(that is, the upper part of the plant,) is severed, with
eight leaves attached. Each cutting is inserted one
inch deep in No. 60 pots. They have a little water,
are plunged in bark or similar material, covered with a
hand-glass, and shaded from the sun. When the pots
are filled with roots, each plant should be shifted into a
larger pot, in the soil mentioned for old plants.
THE DAHLIA.
The soil for the dahlia should be a rich, deep, friable
loam. It should be trenched two feet deep if it will
allow it, and if not already rich, a spadeful of well


rotted dung should be added where each root is to be
planted. They should be placed about four to six feet
apart, and one or more stakes should be driven securely
into the ground for the support of each plant, to which
it should be carefully tied as it advances in growth, as
the stems are very liable to be broken off by high
winds. To produce fine blooms, all superfluous and
weak side shoots should be removed. With good cul-
tivation it is usual to leave a strong stake near the root
to which the main plant is tied, and afterwards three
other stakes are added in the form of a triangle, for
the support of the branches. They may be planted
for succession of bloom from the beginning of August
to the end of October, at about three inches under the
surface of the soil.
Tuhers. —As soon as the plants are past their beauty,
and cease to produce good blooms, pass a fork or a spade
under each root and gently lift it. The plants will then
wither, and in a week the tubers will be ripe, and
ready to take up and store away in some place free from
frost and wet, until the next planting season. The
names should be fastened to them with wire.
Propagation. —The easiest and best way to increase
them is by division of the root. Every eye or bud
with a small piece of tuber attached will make a plant.
They are also propagated by cuttings of the ends of
young shoots, and from seed, when new varieties are
desired. The cuttings are taken as soon as they are an
inch and a half long; cut them oil under the lowest
joint, and strike them in heat, with a glass over them.
It is a good plan to pot the cuttings separately in thumb
pots.


FEBNS.
These beautiful, curious, and mysterious plants are
ever effective where they can be grown to perfection,
and there are few establishments where some damp,
shady nook does not exist, difficult to turn to any other
useful purpose, and well adapted for a fernery.
Soil. —Ferns require a light, open soil, composed of
sandy, fibrous peat, turfy loam, and leaf mould. When
grown in pots, the latter should be one-third full of
crocks or pieces of sandstone.
Cultivation. —The natural habitat of the different
kinds, indicating the dissimilar positions in which they
grow, will suggest the necessary modifications in their
treatment But as they all perish if allowed to become
quite dry, this should be most carefully avoided. If
drainage be amply provided for, shade, a moist atmo-
sphere, and a liberal supply of water, will be found
suitable for most of the sorts.
Fropagation. —Some kinds of ferns are readily in-
creased by seeds, as follows:—Procure a wide earthen
pan, a hand or bell glass that will go within it and rest
on the bottom, and a shallow, wide pot that will stand
within the glass and above the rim of the pan two or
three inches. Fill this pot half full of potshreds, and
upon them a sufficient number of small pieces of turfy
peat, mixed with small pieces of sandstone about the
size of peas, to come up to the rim of the pot Then
take the frond, full of spores or seeds, and with the
hand brush them off upon the prepared pot; set the
pot in the pan with the glass over it; place it in a
warm, sheltered spot, and keep the pan always full of
water. The young plants, attached to pieces of stone


or peat, are easily potted off when large enough. Some
kinds propagate freely by division of the root, on
separating which care should be taken that each portion
has sufficient root attached. The emission of new roots
will he greatly facilitated by placing each little plant
between two pieces of crock, and gently pressing it
thus into the soil in the pot, but leaving the stems and
crown uncovered. Several species produce miniature
or embryo plants on the fronds. These latter should
be pegged down round the pot until the plants have
made roots and sent forth new fronds, when they may
be detached and potted as previously recommended.
THE FUCHSIA.
The shrubby kinds will generally form into hand
some plants without much recourse to pruning; but
the tall kinds require constant attention during their
early growth to induce a bushy habit. This is accom-
plished by first topping the cutting, and afterwards by
stopping the laterals every third joint as they appear,
taking care to balance the head.
Soil. —The fuchsia will grow rank and vigorous in
rich soil, assisted by liquid manure ; and it is by these
means that the gross long jointed and often ungainly
specimens are reared which are to be seen at our exhi-
bitions. Healthy, compact plants, with well ripened
short-jointed shoots, covered with fine well developed
bloom, may be grown in soil from well rotted turf, full
of vegetable fibre. If suitable soil is not available,
mix some of the compost with it.
Propagation. —The fuchsia strikes very freely from
cuttings during the spring and fall of the year. See
article on “ Striking Cuttings.”


Management. —The cuttings when rooted should bo
potted into thumb pots, from which they should be
shifted to pots of the next size larger, when the roots
reach the side. Use plenty of crocks for drainage.
THE GERANIUM.
The geranium will grow under such unfavorable
circumstances that it may appear superfluous to give
directions for its cultivation; but it is so seldom that
a well-grown specimen is to be seen, and some of the
fancy and show varieties (pelargoniums) would so well
repay the trouble, that it has been thought desirable
to do so.
Soil. —-This is of the utmost importance; the soil
must be sandy and free in the open border, and ample
drainage must be provided for such as are grown in
pots. The compost recommended at the beginning of
book, with the addition of a little more peat and silver
sand, would grow them well. Some persons mix a
quantity of small broken brick, about the size of peas,
in the potting earth. If the soil be too rich, a long-
jointed luxuriant growth is induced, which gives the
plants a straggling appearance, whereas a sturdy, short-
jointed growth should be aimed at, with rich, well-
developed foliage and bloom.
Plants for Show. —When the trusses of bloom are
formed, it will generally be desirable to apply liquid
cow-dung to these—one quart of cow-dung mixed with
six quarts of water—and when settled, let the soil
be watered with the liquid every fourth day until they
bloom, pure water being used on the other occasions.
Garden Culture. —Some of the most healthy of the
fancy and show geraniums to bo seen in the vicinity of


Brisbane are grown in the open crumbling soil, largely
mixed with gravel, which is on the neighboring ridges.
Thorough drainage is, in fact, the chief requisite in
the successful cultivation of these old favorites.
Propagation. —The zonale varieties strike from cut-
tings with such facility that no instructions are neces-
sary. The fancy and show varieties, generally called
pelargoniums, are, however, not so tractable. Cuttings
of these should be taken in June or July when they
first start into spring growth. The extreme ends of
the new shoots are taken, about three inches in length,
cut clean, just under a joint. Remove the lower leaf
with a sharp knife, and dibble the cuttings in rows in
an open sandy or gravelly soil, in a shady border,
Some of the best sorts, which it is almost impossible to
grow from cuttings of the head, may be increased by
cuttings of the root which have a few fibres attached-
All of them may be propagated by layering during the
early summer months, just as the green stems are
assuming a mottled brown appearance, shewing that
they are getting ripe. At this stage of their growth
they root very freely in suitable soil.
THE HOLLYHOCK.
This noble-looking and beautiful flower merits more
attention. The majestic spikes of brilliant double
flowers of almost every hue appropriately fill up every
vacancy in shrubbery or border. The splendid double
sorts raised by Chater and others of late years, have
added additional charms to this old favorite of the
English cottage-garden, and it is now as a “florist’s
flower worthy to be admitted into the most select col


lection. There are few plants more effective than well-
grown specimens of the best double varieties.
Soil. —lt thrives in a deep, dry loam in which has
been trenched a liberal dressing of dung. It will not
succeed in wet soil.
Cultivation, — Plant out during autumn or very
early in spring when the soil is damp but will not
adhere. The position should afford shade from some
distant object during the hottest portion of the day;
but avoid placing them where they will be over
crowded by other strong plants. A good mulching of
long stable litter will protect and stimulate the roots,
and water should be given in dry weather. When the
buds are formed upon the spikes, the plants should be
watered every other time with liquid manure. The
spikes should be tied to stakes to protect them from
injury by high winds.
Propagation. —The hollyhock is propagated by seed,
cuttings, and division of roots; and whichever method
is adopted, the utmost care will be necessary to avoid
“ damping off” from excess of moisture, until the
plants are strong. The seed should be gathered early,
that the old flowering spike may be cut off, to encour-
age the root to throw up shoots, for cuttings. Sow
the seed as soon as ripe, and by transplanting the young
plants, when large enough, into separate pots, they
will be strong for blooming the next spring and
summer.
It strikes readily from cuttings, and this plan should
always be adopted to increase approved sorts, although
they generally come pretty true from seed.


THE HYDRANGEA.
The two kinds most generally cultivated are II.
Hortensis and H. Japonica, but there are other varie-
ties here including the H. Otaksa and the H.
Japonica rosea alba introduced by the Author ; the
former of which especially promises to be a great
acqusition, with its profuse display of noble masses of
large pink and ultimately blue blossoms. The H.
Hortensis also grows to perfection in his grounds, the
great heads of pink bloom turning to a beautiful blue
after they have been open a few days.
Soil and position. —In the warm parts of Queensland
the hydrangea should have a slight shelter from the
direct rays of the sun, and the situation should be
damp. But that it will grow and thrive under other
conditions is sufficiently attested by the fact, that H.
Hortensis and Japonica have lived throught a severe
and protracted draught in the highest part of the
grounds of the Author without watering. The soil
should be sandy with a fair supply of vegetable
matter, enriched with rotten cow dung.
Cultivation. —This consists in giving water in dry
weather; adding a little leaf mould to the soil about
the plant once or twice a year ; and thinning out the
weakly and over-crowded branches, to throw all the
strength into the large heads of bloom. Powdered
charcoal, iron-filings and a little alum are sometimes
used with success to produce the blue color ; but it is
better where the soil effects it naturally.
Propagation. —It is freely increased by division of
roots and by cuttings.


THE PANSY OR HEARTSEASE.
The climate of a great part of Queensland is quite
unsuited to the garden cultivation of this charming
little flower; but even in the semi-tropical districts,
by giving it a proper aspect with suitable soil and
position, it may be grown with considerable success ;
and the appearance of a little bed of them in full
bloom, under such unlikely conditions, amply compen-
sates for the trouble in their cultivation.
Soil. —The “ compost ” will grow the pansy to per-
fection. If however the natural soil be good, it may
be sufficient to fork in about three inches of leaf mould
into six inches of the soil. The situation should be
open ; the plants should be put in the beds six inches
apart one way, and nine from row to row. The beds
should be four feet wide. When the beds require
refreshing, fork them over lightly with a hand fork so as
not to disturb or injure the roots ; then place heaps of
the “ compost ” between the rows, and level it down
among the plants, so as to be ii good half inch in
thickness.
Propagation, —The best varieties are continued by
cuttings. Good sorts are however often raised from
carefully selected seed. The young plants should be
put out where they are to flower, while they are quite
small. They will soon begin to make lateral branches
from near the root, from which an ample supply of
cuttings can be obtained to provide a constant succes-
sion of young plants. When the first bed is in full
bloom, another bed should be prepared and planted ;
and more cuttings should be put in to strike. This
plan will be found far preferable to endeavouring to
D


nurse the old plants ; and it has the additional advan-
tage that there is always a supply of young plants to
make good any failures. Continue hiking cuttings all
the season whenever they can be had without materi-
ally damaging the old plant ; and whenever the heads
make a strong upward growth, pinch the top off, to
encourage the lateral shoots, and form bushy plants.
Cuttings of the lateral shoots make by far the better
plants.
THE RHODODENDRON.
The soil in which to grow this splendid plant to
perfection, is pure peat ; but as this is not plentiful,
recourse must be had to some good substitute.
The dead roots of old staghorn ferns will be found
to yield good material, and other sources of supply will
doubtless occur to the reader. Where peaty earth can
be found, it should be spongy and light, and be a
matted mass of fibres, roots, and decayed vegetable
matter. Beds intended for rhododendrons should be
dug out four feet wide, and eighteen inches deep, and
filled with peat chopped into small pieces ; and until
settled down, by working for a time, it should be a
few inches above the level of the path. The beds
must be well drained at the bottom, as stagnant water
would be very injurious, although the plant is often
grown in America in boggy situations. Some growers
mix one third of rotten turves with the peat to stimu-
late the plants to rapid growth, and this is especially
the case with small plants in pots. There ought to be
means for occasionally floating the beds with water
during hot weather.
Thousands of hybrid varieties are raised from seed,
the result of crosses between the hardy and tender


kinds, embracing every shade of color from deep purple
to white.
As it blooms early in the season, and makes a spring
growth, it should be planted out during autumn or
winter.
Raising from Seed. —The seed may be sown very
thinly in seed pans or large pots; place sufficient
crocks at the bottom to ensure good drainage, and fill
up nearly to the top with the compost just mentioned
for pot culture. Level it, and then sift through a
medium seive a further quantity to fill up to the rim.
Strike the pot on the bench to settle the earth, and
level it with the top of the rim. The seed, which is
as fine as dust, and should have been carefully saved
in an earthen vessel, should be mixed with six times
its quantity of sand, and sown evenly and as thinly as
possible over the pots or seed pans ; the thinner the
better. Then sift over them through the finest seive
just sufficient earth to cover the seed, and no more.
They must not be watered with a watering pot, as the
seed is so fine it would be washed away. Some
growers stand the pots in pans of water and depend
upon the moisture obtained by absorption. Others
wet a common clothes brush, turn the hairs upwards,
and by drawing the hand along the hairs, throw off
the water upwards in such small particles that it can
not disturbj anything, as it falls like a dew. These
pans should be placed in the greenhouse with glasses
over them to keep the moisture from evaporating.
The soil must on no account be allowed to get dry
until the seed is up; when it begins to vegetate, care
must be taken to protect the pans from the direct rays
of the sun ; and as the plants gain strength the glasses
may be removed. As soon as they can be handled, the


little plants should be pricked out into seed pans or pots,
leaving the remainder one inch apart all over the origi-
nal seed pans. The operation is performed thus : —the
new pans being prepared, and filled to the rim, level
them and strike them gently on the bench to settle the
earth. Dig out the seedlings with great care, one at
a time, with a sharp pointed stick flattened like a knife,
and prick them out into the new pans, beginning close
to the edge, and placing them all round one inch apart;
then begin a row an inch nearer the centre, planting
them an inch apart, and so on until all are finished. They
may be watered with a clothes brush as before, and
set in a cool frame or greenhouse until the plants have
grown so as to meet, when they may be potted
separately into thumb pots.
THE EOSE.
This queen of flowers delights in a rich deep stiff
loam, which has been drained. The loam may be of a
retentive character, but should be drained and manured
with cattle or horse dung. Even if the soil be natur-
ally rich, some manure should be added when the roses
are planted, and they should have a dressing once or
twice a year. They are always grown in the open
grounds when possible, and generally upon their own
roots.
Roses in Pots would thrive in soil from rotten turves
cut very thin and rotted in a heap, as previously
directed, and mixed with an equal quantity of well-
rotted cattle dung. Thorough drainage should be
secured ; first by pieces of brick or broken crocks, and
secondly by a plentiful supply of lumps of rotten turf


from the size of hazle nuts to that of peas, mixed
through the soil. Select pots large enough to hold the
roots without cramping them too much j and carefully
put the soil among the fibres and large roots. Give
the pots a good watering to settle the soil, and stand
them in gentle shade for a few days until the plants
make new growth. As the pots require it, fill up to
within half an inch of the rim, with mould from cattle
dung. Before the plants become root-bound shift
them into larger pots as directed in “re-potting."
Water with liquid manure once a week.
A FEW OF THE BEST SOSES FOE POT CULTUKE.
Provence. —Cabbage.
Moss. —Common, Laneii.
Hybrid China, —Madam Planter.
Hybrid Bourbon. —Coup d’ H^b<5.
Hybrid Perpetuals. —Anna Alexieff, Caroline de Sansal,
Franeoise Arago, Geant des Batailles, General Jac-
queminot, John Hopper, Jules Margottin, La Eeine,
Leon des Combats.
Bourbon. —Louis Odier, Souvenir de la Malmaison.
China. —Cramoise Superieur, Mrs. Bousanquet.
Tea scented. —Devoniensis, Glorie de Dijon, Safranot,
Souvenir d’ un Ami.
STOCKS.
The cultivation of the rose upon its own roots is
generally practiced in Queensland, as the growth and
ripening of the wood are so rapid, that it is not
necessary to resort to budding and grafting, as in
Europe, to promote early maturity. By adopting this
method we also escape the annoyance of suckers from
the stock, and risk of the bud being broken off in high
winds.


Handsome Standards may be grown from plants on
their own roots, by selecting a straight vigorous shoot
of the required height and pruning away the rest of
the plant. This stem should be firmly staked, perfect-
ly upright; when the wood is ripe, shorten it to about
four feet high, and allow no huds to grow except the
four top ones, from which a well-balanced head may
gradually be formed, which, when in proportion, will
be the same distance across as the head is from the
ground.
The stocks most in use are the Dog-rose, China-
cluster, Manetti, Celine, and the Black Boursault.
The Dog-rose is used for standards and half standards:
For dwarfs, dwarf standards, pillar roses, and for potting,
the Manetti is preferable. Wien dwaif roses which
have been budded are planted out, it will be desirable
to plant them quite over the collar of the bud, so that
the union of the stock and bud is perfectly covered.
If the plants are budded low there will be little
difficulty in planting them thus The Maiden’s Blush
is the favourite stock in Melbourne, and may probably
be found the most suitable for Queensland.
Pruning. —No definite rule can be laid down for
pruning roses, as the habit of each variety has to be
considered. Train pillar roses with one strong leader,
remove weakly branches, and' shorten in all laterals.
Moderately weak-growing hybrid perpetuals require to
be pruned down to two or three eyes, the weak and
crowded shoots to be taken out. The robust will
require the same thinning out of superfluous wood, while
the strong shoots must be pruned down to six or eight
inches in length, and the smaller ones to four or five.
If the shoots are left too long, the plants become
weaker each pruning. Some of the vigorous growing


hybrid China and hybrid Bourbons require to be left
long, or they will not bloom. Remove weak shoots,
old wood, and branches which cross each other. By
pruning half your roses six weeks before the others,
a succession of bloom is secured.
Manure. —This is best applied in a liquid state dur-
ing the growing season. Horse and cow dung, burnt
earth, charcoal, soot, wood ashes, and bone dust mixed,
may bo forked in around each plant during winter in
small quantities.
Pegging down. —This is a modern plan, and under
good cultivation, the result is a “ bed of roses,” show-
ing a mass of first-class bloom, not to be equalled under
any other known system. The Goant des Batailles is
magnificent, and others would doubtless prove equally
effective.
From strong healthy roses, on their own roots, train five
or six stems from the ground of equal length. When
they are quite ripe, and before the buds break, prune
them all to eighteen inches or two feet in length. Have
sufficient hooked pegs ready, and carefully bend down
the shoots one at a time, without straining, flat on the
ground; pegging them down firmly. The shoots
should be arranged at equal distances, and will thus
radiate all round from a common centre. Almost
every bud will produce a spur with a splendid head of
bloom, and a batch of strong shoots will grow upwards
from the centre of the plant. When the bloom is all
over, the old shoots are cut clean away ; and as soon as
the new shoots are ripe they are pegged down in their
turn, as before.


SALVIA PATENS.
This is a very effective plant whether used singly
or for bedding. It requires light rich garden soil,
and will make a good return for the application of a
little of the compost about the roots. A few pots of
old roots submitted to heat in early spring will send up
a good crop of cuttings which strike freely at that
season. It should be bedded out thickly, and kept
well pegged down until the bed is quite covered, when
it may be allowed to throw up its spikes of azure blue,
which arc surpassingly brilliant.


FLOWER GARDEN CALENDAR.
JANUARY.
The hoe should be freely used to destroy weeds as
they appear, and to keep the surface friable. Many
plants in the borders will require water in dry weather,
and when it is given, it should be in sufficient quantity
to thoroughly saturate the spot; which should then be
covered with some light litter to keep off the sun and
wind, so that the plant may have the full advantage.
Roses may still be budded. Showy annuals for autumn
planting should be sown in pots in a shady part of the
greenhouse. If sown thinly, they may be turned out
in a ball and planted in the border as the weather gets
cooler. Layer carnations, picotees, and pinks, in dry
weather, as the stems being then less brittle, are not so
liable to break: give the bed a good soaking with water,
after they are done. Tie up dahlias, hollyhocks,
climbers, and other plants, so as to keep them firm with-
out allowing the bandages to cut them. Much taste
may be shewn in the manner of training climbing plants
so that while they are made to conform to the general


plan, and are too firmly secured to be much injured by
high winds, the grace of the general outline be not
disfigured by ill-judged confinement, but that nature be
so far imitated as to preserve that appearance of free-
dom which is one of their distinguishing beauties. Cut
back pelargoniums that have done flowering; remove
dead leaves, flower stalks, and other unsightly objects.
Shade pot plants, and keep them well watered twice a
day. If necessary have them plunged, and water them
occasionally with liquid manure. Have the verges close
mown, with the lawn, croquet ground, and all other
grass about the house', and go over them after every
good shower and draw out with the hand all docks and
other injurious weeds. Collect seeds as they ripen,
carefully label each sort, and dry them in the shade.
If the bulbs are to be stored, let them be dug up as
they ripen (which may be known by the leaves dying),
and after carefully labelling each sort, pack them away
in buck-wheat husks or similar material, in drawers,
secure from mice and cockroaches.
FEBRUARY.
Finish budding roses; save such seeds as are re-
quired for sowing, preserving them in a dry airy place
secure from vermin, and properly named. Keep the
borders neat by removing all dead leaves and flower
stalks. Clear out all surface and catch drains after
every shower, that they may be in an efiicient state for
sudden storms. Trim up and preserve the paths in
form, and free from weeds and dead leaves. As many
plants are now in bloom, frequent notes should be made
as guides to future improvement in the disposition of
the colors so as to produce the most harmonious effect.


Plant out stocks, gaillardias, coreopsis, balsams, migno-
nette, &c. See that pot plants are sufficiently, but not
too densely shaded; and water every morning and
evening in dry weather. Watch the plants closely
after rain, and see that they do not suifer from want of
water, as they are otherwise likely to do at this season
from the sudden change and great evaporation. Peg
down monthly roses, verbenas, &c., shortening the long
straggling branches. Propagate geraniums, carnations,
picotees, chrysanthemums, &c., by cuttings.
MARCH.
Sow a selection of showy annuals in vacant places in
the borders, giving some protection from the sun.
Shrubs of straggling habit should be pruned to half
the previous season’s growth, thining out any very weak
or over-crowded branches. Roses may be pruned as
directed under that head ; and the cuttings planted in
a shady part of the border. As the nights get cold, pot
plants must be watered more sparingly, and then only in
the morning. When the borders are too heavy for
successfully raising annuals from seed, they may
be grown thinly in a number of small garden pots,
plunged in soil in- some shady spot, and when strong
enough they may be turned out and planted in clumps
during showery weather. Bulbs, carnations, pinks, and
hardy shrubs may be planted in favourable weather;
and the warmth of the soil will promote the rapid
emission of new roots. Layer shrubs and roses.
APRIL.
.Keep the weeds down, never allowing them to seed ;
and preserve the borders and paths trim and neat.


Complete work previously neglected. Prune petunias,
verbenas, vincas, &c. Pot off cuttings which have
rooted. Transplant evergreens, shrubs, trees, and
herbaceous plants. Gently lift with a spade such dahlias
as have done blooming, to ripen the tubers. Continue
to plant bulbs. Cut Mck pelargoniums, and propagate
perennials and herbaceous plants by division of the root.
Fuchsias, heliotropes, verbenas, &c., may be struck
from cuttings; and carnations, picotees, &c.,from pipings
or cuttings. Take up dahlias that have died down, and
store the tubers as directed. Layers that have made
sufficient roots should be gradually severed from the
plant, and left for a fortnight before potting, to ripen
the young roots. Cut a quantity of tuft of the best
quality, to store up for potting earth as directed.
MAY.
Gladiolus, hyacinths, and other bulbs may now be
planted for early bloom, some being reserved for later
planting so as to prolong the season. Continue to
strike cuttings of chrysanthemum if required. Let the
borders be dug, and manured where necessary; fill up
vacancies among hardy shrubs. Prune roses in accor-
dance with the directions under that head, dig in around
each root a little stable manure, and if the soil is very
light and sandy, add a little clay loam. Remove dead
flowers from camellias, which are now clothed in splen-
dour, All tender pot plants should have protection in
proportion to the degree of their tenderness ; some being
placed in frames, and others merely requiring to be
plunged in gravel or sand to protect the roots from
injury. The granadilla is amongst the latter, at this
place; as the whole of the potted plants are invariably


lost during the winter, if not plunged, whereas if so pro-
tected the cold does not injure the foliage. Pot plants
should have very little water during winter, but it will
be necessary to watch them during the prevalence of
strong westerly winds. Collect and store manure of all
kinds while the weeds do not demand so much time.
JUNE.
Croquet grounds and lawns may now be formed,
either by laying down turf, or sowing fine grass seeds
suitable for the purpose, such as the festuca hetefophylla,
F.duriuscula, perennial white clover,&c. The couch grass,
mixed with perennial white clover, if kept well rolled,
mowed, and free from weeds, forms an excellent sward.
All soft wooded plants used for bedding purposes, may
now be propagated from cuttings, taken from the ends
of young succulent shoots ; such as petunias, torenias,
heliotropes, verbenas, &c. Salvias, fuchsias, &c, may
still be increased from cuttings. Pot off such cuttings
as have struck. Any dahlias left in the border should
be stored as directed. Put in well-ripened cuttings of
pelargoniums in porous soil. Plant out carnations,
pinks, and picotees.
JULY.
Examine dahlias that have been stored, and if any
are rotting pot them at once, as a shoot may often be
thus obtained. If they are shrivelling or drying up too
fast, lay them on some soil in a frame and they will
start into growth; from which take cuttings for striking
as soon as they are an inch and a half long. Planting
of all kinds of ornamental shrubs and transplanting


hardy flowers should go on in suitable weather. Strag-
gling branches of shrubs should be pruned after they
have bloomed to preserve them in form. Continue to
collect manure so that there may always be a supply,
in a thoroughly decayed state, ready for use. Sow
showy annuals and biennials; for names of which see
seedsmen’s lists. Plant out bulbs. Dig and manure
flower borders and fill up vacancies, making such alter-
ations as the past season’s experience has proved
necessary. Re-pot fuchsias as they need it. Ee-pot
begonias, caladiums, gloxinias, achimenes, gesneras,
&c., for early bloom. Continue to increase fuchsias,
verbenas, &c., from cuttings.
AUGUST.
Perennials of all kinds, ornamental and flowering
shrubs, and various kinds of bulbs should be planted,
The transplanting of large shrubs should be done in
showery weather if possible, but in dry weather they
should be very liberally watered about the roots to
wash the soil into the interstices, and when the water
has soaked in, and the earth settled, the surface may
be filled up with the dry soil. If there is any prospect
of a dry spring lot all newly-planted shrubs have a good
mulching of stable litter around their stems, to the
extent of their roots, to protect them from the drying
effect of sun and wind, and to secure to them the full
advantage of any water that may be given to them.
Prune roses that have been left to form a succession of
bloom. Refresh the rose beds, if not previously done,
by forking in strong loam and dung in equal quantities.
Any roses, camellias, azaleas, &c., intended to be
grafted may now be done. Plants in the conservatory


and green house should be re-potted, if only to renew
the soil, and those that are to be encouraged to vigorous
growth should be shifted frequently into larger pots as
the roots reach the sides. Attend to pots of cuttings
and pot them off into thumbs or 60’s as soon as rooted.
Occasional hot days and drying winds at this season
will require vigilant attention to pot plants, to prevent
their suffering from want of water ; but be careful not
to give too much. In warm sheltered positions a few
dahlias may be planted for early bloom; and a few
clumps of balsams, stocks, phlox Drummondii, and
others may be turned out of their pots and be planted
about the borders.
SEPTEMBER.
Camellias which have been recently planted should
bo carefully attended to. It is fatal to allow them to get
dry, and almost as destructive to merely sprinkle them
with water. They should be copiously watered in dry
weather, the soil being well mulched to prevent it
binding, and to keep off the sun. They arc greatly
benefitted by being well “ bushed ” during the first
year after planting. They will not suffer if the shade
is even dense, so long as it is above, and does not
smother them.
Dahlias should be planted in rather dry soil well
enriched with old manure. Each plant should be sup-
ported by three stakes in a triangle. Layer camellias,
rhododendrons, azaleas, magnolias, &c. Support the
spikes of gladiolus now in bloom, by sticks, where the
plants are exposed. Divide roots of hardy herbaceous
plants. Continue to strike cuttings of dahlias, fuchsias,
<fec. The flower borders should be thoroughly renovated


■wherever necessary. Finish pruning shrubs and filling
up vacancies; and dig the borders, adding manure or
new soil as may be required, to refresh the surface and
impart new vigour.
OCTOBER.
Layer pelargoniums as soon as the shoots are ripe,
as they root freely at that stage. Watch pot plants,
that, as the sun gains power, they do not suffer from
want of water; be careful also to remove all kinds of
insect pests. Such plants as have not been re-potted,
should be refreshed by filling up the pots with “ the
rich top dressing.” Stop chrysanthemums regularly as
they throw out their lateral shoots as soon as they are
two inches long, to make the plants more dwarf and
compact; and give them a little liquid manure occa-
sionally before coming into bloom. Keep the borders
clean ; never allow weeds to seed, but destroy them as
soon as they appear. Mow verges, lawns, &c., fill up
any inequalities in the surface of the latter, and pass
the roller over after rain. Whenever docks, sida retusa,
or other weeds make their appearance, draw them out
with the hand in wet weather. Roses and other plants
should be examined frequently, and dead flowers and
insects bo removed. If the aphis or scale be trouble-
some, syringe the plants with a solution of Gishurst’s
Compound.
NOVEMBER.
Attend to work previously neglected. Carry on active
warfare with the weeds, the rapid growth of which
will now require the utmost vigilance to keep them in
check. Run the Dutch hoe over the borders every few


days, as soon as the weeds can he seen. Tie up dahlias,
climbers, and other plants, as they require it. Cut
back and collect dead flowering stalks, dead leaves,
flowers, and all unsightly objects and carefully remove
them from view. Plant dahlias for succession of bloom.
At the end of the month, a few roses may be budded,
in a sheltered spot. Layer pelargoniums. Water pot
plants sufficiently to wet the whole of the soil. See
that the shade is perfect, and if convenient, plunge the
pots in gravel up to the rim.
DECEMBEK.
Bud roses. Examine plants for caterpillars, slugs,
and other vermin, and destroy them. Thin out seedling
plants cither in pots or in the border, where they are
drawn and weakly by being too close. Propagate
carnations, picotees, pinks, &c., by cuttings, pipings, or
layers. Balsams and other seedlings, where very
double, or exhibiting any special excellence of color or
otherwise, should be carefully marked while in bloom,
that the seed may be collected for future sowing.
This course, systematically pursued, would lead to great
improvement in our common flowers. Gravel walks
should be re-formed where necessary, and receive a coat
of gravel before the approach of the wet season. Devote
every spare moment to the eradication of weeds.
THE END.


A D VERTISEMENTS.
GARDEN CUTLERY,
GARDEN REQUISITES.
Pruning Knives, imported direct from the best Eng-
lish Makers; German Vine Knives, of best Steel;
also, Pruning Shears, for Grass and Hedges; Pruning
Scissors; Flower Gatherers; Bose Pruners; Pruning
Saws; Budding Knives; Grape Scissors; Syringes,
various prices ; Sulphuring Bellows ; Fumigators ;
Tobacco Paper for fumigating; Sulphur; Watering
Pots ; Garden Reels and Lines ; Garden Trowels ;
Weeding Forks; Hoes; Spades; Rakes; Selves; Sets
Ladies’ Garden Tools; Pots and Saucers; Hanging
Pots; Seed Pans; Wire Supports; Wire Baskets;
Dock Spuds; Turf Cutters; Scythes; Garden Gloves;
Gishurst Compound; and every other article required
in a well-ordered Garden.
Also,
GARDEN ROLLERS,
Of the best material and construction;
LAWN MOWERS,
Of various approved Patterns, with Grass Boxes, &c., &c.
A. J. HOOKINGS,
mtit yiaal djtjrtljmil,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


A I) VEI! ns SHEETS’.
L. CARMICHAEL,
IMPORTER OF
Drugs, Chemicals, Perfumery,
SOAP, BRUSHES, AND CHEMICAL WARE.
Manufacturer of Perfumes, Chemicals, and Mineral Waters.
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
The Telegraph is the ONLY DAILY EVENING
PAPER published in Brisbane.
Price-ONE PENNY.
Subscription—Six Shillings and Sixpence per Quarter.
It is the best medium for Advertising, having the
Largest Town and Country Circulation
of any Paper in Queensland.
ODD NOTES, BY “A BOHEMIAN,”
Now appear in The Telegraph every Saturday.
OFFICE—
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE, opposite the Old Post-ollice.


A D VER TISEMKN TS.
THE FLOWER SEEDS
Sold by the undersigned are carefully selected to afford the most
varied and brilliant display of bloom at all seasons, and include many
new and rare kinds, in addition to the seeds of the choicest flowers in
his own garden.
Small Orders forwarded by Post throughout the Colony:
Ten sorts for 6s. Id.
Catalogues sent Gratis to any Address .
KITCHEN GARDEN SEEDS.
His long experience, perfect arrangements, and large capital, enable
him to command a supply of the best Seeds from the first markets in the
world ; and, as he has all the tender kinds grown for him in the Colonies,
he is enabled to offer to
STOREKEEPERS, DRUGGISTS, & OTHER
WHOLESALE BUYERS,
Advantages not to be surpassed by any other house in Australia.
THE HIGH CHARACTER OF HIS COLLECTION OF
Is still preserved by judiciously culling the choicest varieties in every
new list, and avoiding the common error of adding indiscriminately every
new sort regardless of its quality.
He invites attention to his Collection of
TRICOLOR, FANCY, AND ZONALE GERANIUMS,
DAHLIAS AND EOSES,
as being unique.
ms STOCK OF
CLIMBING- PLANTS
Is rich in those which are conspicuous for beauty of foliage or brilliancy
of bloom; and the
QMmM’fkh PUSTS
Include a large number of well-grown Conifer®, four to six feet high (ia
large garden pots), suitable for planting for
LANDSCAPE EFFECT OR FOR AVENUES.
A. J. HOOKINGS.
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


A D VER TIBEMENTS.
M. HUGHES,
WHOLESALE, SHIPPING, AND FAMILY
GROCER,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
THE FAVORITE BRANDS OP
ALE, PORTER, WINES, &c„
Always in Stock, by Dozen or Case.
T. EOEEE,
(Sa&inetraaktt, Miiliolsttw,
AND BEDDING MANUFACTURER,
(opposite joint stock bank,)
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
CABINET AND UPHOLSTERY WORK
Of every description, of a Superior Quality, made on the Premises.
T. It. gives special attention to the manufacture of Bedding of all kinds,
using only the best materials.
Old Hair Mattresses Re-made, and the Hair Cleaned hy Machinery, and
can be returned the same day.
Furniture Carefully Removed hy Spring Yana.


ad\ r i:n tisem ex ts.
CHAFF CUTTERS,
By the Best Makers—Various Sizes.
CORN CRACKERS.
CORN SHELLBRS,
Best Colonial and American Made.
STEEL FLOUR MILLS,
With large Hopper and Fly Wheel.
PLOUGHS, HARROWS, HORSE HOES, GRUB-
BERS, SEED DRILLS, SPADES, HOES,
RAKES, GERMAN PRONGS,
FORKS, SHOVELS,
SCYTHES, GRINDSTONES, HAY RAKES, HAY
KNIVES, BILLHOOKS, BAGGING HOOKS,
PICKAXES, AXES, BARROWS, BAN-
DICOOT TRAPS, CHURNS,
And numerous other articles required on a Farm.
Every Article of the Best Quality, and at the
Lowest Remunerative Price.
A. 1.
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENT DEPOT,
BRISBANE.


A D VEE TISEMENTS.
R. OLIVER,
WHOLESALE AND FAMILY
GROCER
AND
Wnu ami fjririt gteftnut,
QUEBIT STREET,
BRISBANE,
F. LASSETTER & CO.,
WHOLESALE, RETAIL, AND EXPORT
112/0 isr zMioisra-EHR/S,
HARDWARE AND METAL MERCHANTS.
List of Departments.
Bar Iron; Hoop, Hate, and Sheet Iron; Steel and Metals of
all kinds; Blacksmiths’ and Wheelwrights’ Tools, &c. ;
Builders’ Ironmongery; Carpenters’ Tools; Tools for all
Mechanical Trades; Agricultural Implements; Farm, Garden,
and Vineyard Tools ; Firearms and Amunition; Pumps and
Pump Fittings; Saddles and Saddlery; Best Sheffield Cutlery;
Klectro-plated Wares; Lamp-ware; Bedsteads; Stoves of
every description; House, Furnishing, and Domestic Iron-
mongery of every class.
F. LASSETTER & CO.,
421, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


A D VER TISEMENTS.
BOOT CROPS, LUCERNE, &c.,
FOR
STUD SHEEP AND CATTLE.
—~HH—
THE necessity for making special provision for feeding stud sheep and
cattle, particularly during winter and early spring, has led to the
extensive cultivation of lucerae ; and extended experience of its merits
has more firmly established its character as a most valuable forage plant.
Persons sowing large areas would do well to entrust their orders for
seed to the undersigned, who imports very largely from the best markets
in the world, and can supply this seed to advantage, either by the bag
or by the ton.
A WINNOWING MACHINE has been imported from England at
great expense, expressly for the purpose of re-dressing Lucerne Seed, to
remove from it “Dodder " and other seeds.
MANGOLD WURTZEL.
The seed of this valuable root is grown largely for the undersigned, and
can therefore be depended upon as being acclimatised and of superior
quality.
SWEDE TURNIP.
This root has been very largely grown, during the last three seasons, by
one of the most experienced and successful of our Queensland graziers ;
and the results have been most satisfactory, not only as to the weight of
crop, but also as to its value as a food for stock during winter and spring.
SUGAR BEET, BELGIAN CARROT, KOHL RABL
AND CHICORY
Are also valuable roots, and
TARES OR VETCHES, PUMPKINS, PRESERVING
MELON, AND RAPE (FOR SHEEP)
Are valuable for fodder.
HAND SEED DRILLS;
A shipment of these useful little machines, imported expressly for
sowing the foregoing seeds evenly and economically, is now to hand.
A. J. HOOKINGS, Seed Merchant,
BRISBANE.


AD VER T 1 SEMEN TS.
GEO, SLATER & CO.,
ortscllm and M totitmtts.
G. S. & Co. are constantly in receipt of the Newest Works in all
departments of Literature.
Classified Catalogues can be had on application, or sent by post to
any address.
Special Works not obtainable in the Colonies can be ordered through
their English, American, Rnd Continental Correspondents.
©Mrjnuws, jptlwflraptoris, grinfew,
AND
MANTJFACTUBING BTATIONEES,
BRISBANE.
Manufacturing Department—Edward Street.
Retail Department—Queen Street.
GXKA.SS SEEDS.
The Mixture of Grass and Clover Seeds supplied for LAWNS and
CROQUET GROUNDS will be found to produce, under favorable cir-
cumstances, a fine and compact rich green sward.
Prices Strictly Moderate.
The HAY and PASTURE GRASSES are mixtures of the most hardy
and nutritive kinds in cultivation,
LUCERNE SEED and PRAIRIE GRASS can be supplied by the single
pound, or by the ton , at the lowest market price .
COUCH GRASS, for Embankments, Head Stations, &c.
A. J. HOOKINGS.
DRAIN PIPES, GARDEN POTS, &.C.
am,
POTTER,
BREAKFAST CREEK, BRISBANE.
Manufacturer of event description of DRAIN PIPES, GARDEN
POTS , TILES, GARDEN EDGING TILES, <kc.


AD VER TI SEMEN TS.
THE COLONISTS’ GUIDE,
By ANGUS MACKAY.
The Press and Public speak highly of Mr. Mackay’s new
work, “The Semi-Tropical Agriculturist and Colonists’
Guide.”
The contents embrace the keeping of Horses, Cattle, Sheep,
Pigs, Poultry, Bees, Farming in all its details. Implements.
How to Cure Meat of all kinds; to make Bread, Butter,
Cheese, Soap, Candles; to cure Skins, preserve Birds, &c.
Gardening. —Budding. Grafting, and General Principles, fully
illustrated. Insects injurious to vegetation, &c.
Methods of treating Snake Bite, Accidents in the Bush, ap-
parent Drowning. &c. Also, a mass of practical informa-
tion valuable to Colonists in Warm Climates, and especially
to Australian Colonists.
The whole is the result of Ten Years of active experience
amongst Australian Colonists. With numerous Engravings,
Brisbane, Geo. Slater & Co.; Sydney, J. J. Moore; Melbourne,
Geo. Robertson; Adelaide, E. S. Wigg & Son; and all Book-
sellers. 10,6; postage, 1/-.
WORTH A GUINEA A BOX.
CLARKE’S LIVER AND BILIOUS PILLS.
THE best Medicine you can possibly take for Indigestion, Wind in
the Stomach or Bowels, Sick Headache, Giddiness, Drowsiness,
Langour, Spasms, Pains or Fullness at the Pit of the Stomach or ILegion
of the Liver, Loss of Appetite, Diarrluca, Dysentery, <tc., &c.
ALMOST A SPECIFIC FOR FEVER AND AGUE,
A few doses being generally sufficient to resolve the attack, an occasional
dose being a certain preventative.
They are guaranteed to contain no preparation of
MERCURY OR OTHER MINERAL,
Being made exclusively from Vegetable extracts, mild in their operation
but certain in their results, and may be at all times taken without
danger of taking cold.
Scarcely any disease will resist their restorative properties, whilst
thay purify the blood and renovate the system.
Sold Wholesale by the principal Merchants of the Colony,
Manufactured only by the Proprietor,
DAVID CLAKKE, Manufacturing and Wholesale Chemist,
WARWICK.


ADVER TI SEME NTS.
Established
1859.
AUCTIONEER AND VALUATOR,
House, Land, Squattersand General Commission Agent,
CITY AUCTION MART,
Corner of Queen and Edward Streets, BRISBANE.
NOTE - A M. is gazetted Auctioneer for the Sale of Crown Lands, Forfeited Runs,
WUT and all other Auction Business for the Queensland Government.
SEM@M FMSEI,
(Late Fraser <t Fuckland),
guictionm*, ami (Commission
SHARE BROKER AND MINING AGENT,
STOCK, STATION, AND PRODUCE BROKER.
BRISBANE.
MORTGAGES AND LOANS NEGOTIATED.
JOHN F. BUCKXAND,
Auctioneer, Shipping & Produce Broker,
VALUATOR, &c.,
IMPORTER OF AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY, Ac.,
QUEEN STREET,
OPPOSITE BEATTIE’S COMMERCIAL WHAHE,
BRISBANE.
JOHN CAMERON,
auotiohebb,
LAND AND ESTATE AGENT,
VALUER AND STOCK BROKER.
OFFICE:-TOWN HALL,
BRISBANE.


AD VERTISEMENTS.
PATENT WASHABLE GOLD
AND
VENEERED MOULDINGS
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION, FOR
PICTURE FRAMES AND ROOM BORDERS.
ALSO, A LARGE STOCK OP
CHROMOS, ENGRAVINGS, PHOTOGRAPHS, OLEO-
GRAPHS, AND CHEAP PRINTS
(plain and colored),
WHOLESALE AND BETAIL.
> —♦ <
O. KISTIGKEETS & CO.,
CARVERS, GILDERS, AND
PICTURE-FRAME MANUFACTURERS,
OPPOSITE SCHOOL OF ARTS,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
OLIVER & CO.,
WftoleisaU anil |Utail
Importers of Best Brands in TEAS and OILMEN’S STOKES.
Finest Woollongong Butter. Tasmanian Cheese, Bacon, Hams, Ac., by
each Steamer.
Goods delivered daily to all parts of the City and Suburbs.
STANLEY STREET, SOUTH BRISBANE.
QUEENSLAND BRANCH.
IJeur Zealand gnsuruncc (Etomjmny
(FIRE AND MARINE).
REDUCTION IN EIRE RATES MARINE RISKS AT LOWEST
CURRENT RATES.
Losses payable in Brisbane, or at any of the Company's Agencies.
EDGAR W. WALKER, Agent, Queen Street.


AD VER TI SEMEN TS.
Handbook to Queensland Ferns ,
WITH ILLUSTRATED GENERA,
By F. M. BAILEY,
Keeper of Herbarium, Brisbane.
o*o*o ■
OPINIONS.
“ It appears to be admirably adapted to the use of Fern amateurs
whose numbers I have no doubt it will greatly serve to increase.”—
Geo. Bentham, F.R.S., F.L.S., &c.
“ Highly useful as a popular work on Queensland Ferns.”
Sydney Morning Herald.
“ The work, being in English, will supply a want felt by many; and one
cannot but wish for a similar work on the Ferns of Victoria.”—
Melbourne Leader.
“It is an excellent little work.”— Brisbane Telegraph.
PRICE-FIVE SHILLINGS.
To be had of all Booksellers, and of
A. J. HOOKINGS, Brisbane.
PHILLIPS & WOODCOCK,
TAILORS,
OPPOSITE THE JOINT STOCK BANK,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
Country orders containing remittance or reference will
receive prompt attention.
Patterns of materials and rules for self-measurement
sent on application.


a n rim ti semen rs.
IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1872
REMITTANCE PASSENGERS.
ERSONS resident in Queensland, wishing to obtain Pas-
sages to the Colony for their friends or relatives in
Europe, can do so under the Provisions of the New Immigra-
tion Act, by paying to the Immigration Agent in Brisbane, or
to any of the Clerks of Petty Sessions in the Colony, amounts
in accordance with the following scale: —
Males and Females, between 1 and 12, each £1
Males, between 12 and 40, each 2
Females, between 12 and 40, each 1
Males and Females, above 40, each ... 4
Infants under 12 months, Free.
Employers of labour in the Colony are directed to the
liberal provisions contained in the New Act, whereby Me-
chanics, Laborers, or Servants, engaged through Agents in
Europe, will be provided with passages to the Colony by the
Agent-General.
Applications from Employers will be received by the
Immigration Agent in Brisbane, or by any of the Clerks of
Petty Sessions in the Colony, from whom further particulars
and all necessary forms can be obtained.
HIRE OF LABORERS IN EUROPE.
ROBERT GRAY,
Immigration Agent.


A D VER TI SEMEN TS.
lUST THE PRESS,
AND WILL SHORTLY BE ISSUED.
SECOND EDITION
(Carefully Revised, Corrected, and Enlarged)
OF THE
QXJJEEISrSRAND
GARDEN MANUAL.
By ALBERT JOHN HOOKINGS.
CONTAINS CONCISE DIRECTIONS FOR PLANTING AND CULTIVATING
CULINARY VEGETABLES,
FRUIT TREES, TROPICAL FRUITS,
AND ECONOMIC PRODUCTS
ADAPTED TO TUB CLIMATE OF QUEENSLAND;
ALSO,
SIMPLE AND PRACTICAL ARTICLES ON DRAINING,
TRENCHING, SUBSOILING, IRRIGATION,
MANURING,
HYBRIDISING, REARING THE SILKWORM, &c., &c.;
SEVERAL USEFUL TABLES;
RECEIPTS FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF INSECTS, VERMIN, Ice.
HANDSOMELY BOUND IN CLOTH BOARDS.
PRICE-Ss. 6d.
Forwarded by Post throughout the Colony on receipt of 4/-
in Postage Stamps.




