

PRINTERS'
ROLLERS
686.231 P957












PRINTERS' ROLLERS
A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF THE
COMPOSITION ROLLER


Copyright 1932
The National Association of
Printers’ Roller Manufacturers, Inc.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Foreword 7
A Better Understanding of the Composition
Roller 9
How Composition Rollers Are Made 15
Care and Adjustment of Rollers 17
What the National Association Means 28
Quantity Distribution ys. Quality Distribution 30
Composition and Rubber Rollers for News-
paper Presses 3 5
Humidification of Pressrooms 39
Delivery Service 41
Efficiency and Rush 44
Conclusion 46
List of Members 47




FOREWORD
The whole printing industry has been
strengthened and developed through inten-
sive educational campaigns, on all the
mechanics of printing. Rollers are an im-
portant mechanical factor in the production
of good printing. Press speeds depend on
rollers, standing time of the press depends
on rollers, clean-cut finished presswork de-
pends on rollers, in short the return on the
capital invested in whole pressroom equip-
ment in the home stretch depends on the
rollers, €][ In this book we have endeavored
to bring about a better understanding of
the composition roller, and the work it pro-
duces. The purpose of the book is educa-
tional. We have tried to give clearly and
concisely facts about rollers that would be
of value to the users of rollers. Also to
convey some idea of the various processes
of roller making so there would be a better
understanding of why roller makers
recommend that a reasonable time be
allowed for the casting of rollers.




A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF
THE COMPOSITION ROLLER
IN the early days of civilization letter writ-
ing was the one written way that knowledge
was diffused until printing brought the
World out of its early daze. The story of civili-
zation has come through the printing press, and
since that first cylinder press in 1816 to the
presses of today those interested in the develop-
ment of printing may well look and marvel.
The first cylinder press was a failure due to
the lack of a satisfactory inking device. Then,
as now, the roller was the connecting link be-
tween the ink fountain and the form. The suc-
cess of the press hinged on a proper distribution
of ink. Nearly two years elapsed from the in-
vention of the press until the composition roller
was developed and the problem of ink distribu-
tion worked out. Leather rollers were tried, but
owing to the seam they did not produce good
work. Roller composition was discovered in
England in 1808 and replaced buckskin for
the contact surface of ink balls. The cyl-
indrical roller of composition was used first at
Cambridge, England, in 1816. Composition
rollers were introduced in France in 1820;
in Germany in 1823; and in the United States
in 1826, the first user being Daniel Fanshaw of


New York City, printer for the American Tract
and Bible Societies. In 1828 Harper Brothers
and other printers of that time began making
composition rollers. In 1829 the process was
passed to Philadelphia and Boston; by 1830 it
was used quite generally by printers in all the
large cities, and in 1832 was introduced to Can-
ada. Its spread was rapid and effective, and made
possible the development of high speed presses
and good presswork.
In this enlightened day it seems strange that
printers 5 rollers, which are the most essential part
of the art of printing, are still considered by the
average printer as a necessary evil. Why this
should be is difficult to understand, considering
the great care given to selection of type, paper
and ink. Possibly this is due to the fact that the
majority of proprietors, managers, and superin-
tendents come from the composing room and
have little knowledge of presswork or rollers, or
the problems of the pressroom. The fact remains
that ninety per cent of poor printing is due
either to the use of inferior rollers or to rollers
not being set properly. The average executives
in a printing plant (exclusive of the pressroom
executives) do not know what constitutes a rol-
ler, yet the basic formula has never changed.
Many variations have been tried but glue and
glycerine continue to be the best combination
found for making rollers.
The method of casting rollers has been per-
fected. If rollers are inferior this is due to just


one cause —the buyers of rollers refusing to pay a
reasonable price for them. In many cases the
roller buyer demands finished rollers at prices
that are less than the cost of raw materials. Some
roller manufacturers meet these prices by exces-
sive reclaiming processes, and the use of low
test glue and crude glycerine. Roller makers with
a reputation for manufacturing good rollers re-
fuse to meet these conditions, and this business
passes to those who will, with the result the buy-
ers of such rollers broadcast that there has been
no improvement in rollers when they are not in
position to make any statement regarding rollers.
A pressroom executive never suggests buying an
inferior roller. He knows such rollers will not
stand up for any length of time, and realizes the
expense of having rollers "go bad” in the middle
of a long run. The cost of stopping the press and
changing the rollers amounts to more than
enough to pay for a good set of rollers for the
press.
Until the latter half of the nineteenth cen-
tury composition was prepared over an ordinary
cook stove, the stocks centered in hand moulds,
the composition poured by hand, the moulds
left to cool overnight, and then the rollers were
pulled from the mould by hand. The rollers
were good, but the method was slow, cumber-
some and tiring. Today large vacuum reducing
kettles are used for mixing the composition, and
modern casting machines for manufacturing the
rollers.


After nearly a century of constant improve-
ments in roller casting machinery, methods of
manufacturing, and improvements in formulae,
we still hear such remarks as "composition rollers
look the same today as they did forty or fifty
years ago. There has been little if any improve-
ment in the past two decades, and they cost too
much anyway.”
These statements remind us of that famous
humorist Mark Twain. He was once called on to
make a speech on a subject with which he was
not familiar, so he prefaced his speech with the
remark that he felt fully competent to discuss
the subject as he was not hampered with facts.
That is very much the same position as the
makers of these comments on the composition
roller are in. Paper and type look the same as
they did a half a century ago, except that there
are different grades and faces. The same applies
to composition rollers. The manufacturers are
not going to publish their changes in formulae
or processes; the improvement in the face of the
rollers, their ink distributing qualities and their
durability answers these comments. A further
indisputable proof that composition rollers have
improved lies in the fact that no existing ma-
chine designed as a printing press has had its out-
put reduced due to roller deficiencies.
There are many types of rollers in use today
other than composition rollers, all claiming to be
vastly superior. One manufacturer of another
type of roller claims that his roller is non-melt-


ing, non-shrinking and non-swelling, but he
omits one very important fact in connection
with this roller —it cannot be used as a form
roller. As to roller costs, the average in the
United States per printer per year, where com-
position rollers are used, is less than one thou-
sand dollars.
The principal ingredients of roller composi-
tion are glue and glycerine, and each must meas-
ure up to certain tests before they are accepted
by the reputable roller maker for the manufac-
ture of roller composition. Glycerine must be
free from acid or alkali. Glue must come up to
certain standards of viscosity and tensile strength.
Any foreign matter in either of these materials or
a poor quality of either would be disastrous to
the composition. Roller making is a highly tech-
nical process, requiring men skilled in testing,
mixing and casting. The use of unskilled labor
in any of the processes of manufacture would
be detrimental to the composition and the rollers.
Temperature is supposedly the governing fac-
tor in the manufacture of roller composition.
As the principal ingredients are glue and glycer-
ine, which are hygroscopic (readily absorbing
and retaining moisture), humidity is the most
important atmospheric condition the roller
maker has to contend with.
Composition for winter rollers is not intended
for use under natural atmospheric conditions,
but in artificially heated pressrooms which are
very dry. The large amount of glycerine neces-


sary to prevent the rollers drying out causes the
rollers to swell, tear, burst or melt when they
come in contact with warm humid air. Winter
rollers should never harden or toughen. They
should remain soft and pliable until worn out.
Mid-season rollers are made to combat the nat-
urally cool, moist conditions which exist in the
pressrooms during the spring and fall seasons.
They give the longest service, and can be used
in mild winter weather and cool days in summer.
Composition for summer rollers contains con-
siderably less glycerine and is naturally dry, as
these rollers are for use in hot, humid weather.
Heat and humidity are necessary to bring out
their good working qualities. These rollers will
harden and shrink as soon as the air becomes nor-
mally dry and cool.
If you leave it to your roller maker he will
give you the right composition for the season.
In air conditioned pressrooms the same grade
of composition roller can be used the year round.


HOW COMPOSITION ROLLERS
ARE MADE
Composition rollers are cast in steel or brass
moulds which are true to the thousandth part of
an inch. They are centered in the moulds by cen-
ter pieces or stars that are one thousandth of an
inch less in diameter. These center pieces or stars
are placed on the journals of the core, and if the
core is crooked or bent it is impossible to slide
the core in the mould easily; it will jam and have
to be straightened before casting. If the jour-
nals of the core are worn they are wrapped with
thin paper and built up until the center pieces
are fitted firmly on the journal but not jammed
on. When the mould is heated the metal of the
center piece expands as well as the mould, still
fitting snugly in the mould, and these center
pieces contract when the mould is cooled, so
there is no possible way for the roller to rest on
one side of the mould and be lop-sided or out
of true when finished and run in the press. When
the printer receives the roller it is perfectly true,
but if the sockets in the press are not snug and
true the roller will not ride easily, but spin and
slip when it reverses on the form.
One of the essential processes in casting cyl-
inder rollers is the preparation of the cores for
binding the composition, which must adhere
firmly.


After the old composition is removed the cores
are put for a few moments in an iron trough
containing boiling hot lye water. They are then,
one at a time, scrubbed with brushes until every
vestige of foreign matter is removed. While hot
they are coated with a special preparation, which
when dry makes a firm foundation for the hot
composition to adhere to.
The cylinder roller cores are wound on the
ends, or wherever the composition is to be cen-
tered on the core. High grade twine is used, free
from knots or lumps, to avoid air bubbles form-
ing in the composition.
Before casting cylinder rollers the date of cast-
ing and grade of composition (whether for
warm or cold weather use), is stencilled on the
roller cores. They are then centered in the
moulds in the roller machines for casting.
The hot composition is drawn from the ket-
tles into movable vats, and rolled on trucks to
the casting machines. Hose connections are made
and the composition forced by air pressure into
moulds which have been heated with hot water.
When the composition reaches the top of the
moulds the pressure is shut off, and the cooling
process starts.
When the cast is cooled, the bottom plate of
the roller machine is removed and the cast rol-
lers drop from the moulds by gravity. They are
trimmed to suit the requirements of the cus-
tomer and are ready for delivery.


CARE AND ADJUSTMENT
OF ROLLERS
When rollers are received in the pressroom
they should have the same careful attention as a
halftone plate. They should be stood or hung
securely in racks in a well ventilated section of
the pressroom. After the rollers have seasoned
for a week, if they are not to be used at once
cover them with machine oil to prevent their
drying out or absorbing too much moisture. If
left standing against the wall even for a few
minutes they should be so placed that they would
not start to roll and of their own momentum
knock down those near them. A roller with dents
or cuts in the surface caused by carelessness in
handling should not be used even for a back rol-
ler where perfect results are expected from half-
tones. Such rollers should be kept for type. Do
not condemn a roller as soon as received as being
too hard or too soft. The roller is not made for
using one day or one week; it is intended for a
period of at least three months. Give it a chance
to develop itself. Do not use fresh rollers for
running stiff bond inks. Have the rollers well
seasoned before using them with these inks.
New rollers should not be bevelled until they
are to be used, as the bevel is governed by the size
of the form. For the average form the rollers


should be bevelled a half inch from each end.
In the event of a capacity form, where the bear-
ers are sometimes cut to give an extra inch width
to the sheet, then the full length rollers do not
hit the cylinder bearers so require less bevel-
ling. Ink usually accumulates on the ends of
the rollers, and bevelling will prevent high edges
as the rollers dry out, which in turn eliminates
splitting on the extreme ends when the rollers
are adjusted for shrinkage. In trimming or bev-
elling the ends of rollers, never cut the winding
of cord which covers the ends of the cores un-
derneath the composition. If this is cut the
composition will loosen on the ends, oil and
ink will seep in between the composition and the
core, and loosen the composition the full length
of the stock. The loose composition will pull
to pieces and damage the press and other rollers
while running.
On heavy forms requiring the maximum dis-
tribution of ink to produce satisfactory press-
work, a full complement of rollers is required.
When the press is started equipped with three
form rollers, one rider and another form roller
are added to give a better distribution of ink.
These extra rollers help to cut up the ink, avoid
filling up of forms and eliminate slip-sheeting.
The rollers must be pliable and tacky. Rollers
that have hardened, dried out, or cracked will
not distribute ink satisfactorily. Just because
the roller sockets are full does not mean good ink
distribution. The quality of the rollers as well


as the number of rollers is of vital importance.
A light form does not require the full equip-
ment of form and table rollers. If the ink con-
tains a very quick drier the quicker it is distrib-
uted from the fountain to the paper the bet-
ter for drying firmly on the sheet. Too many
rollers result in too much distribution which
causes the drier in the ink to evaporate and leaves
an insufficient quantity in the ink to dry prop-
erly on the paper. In other words, cut down the
distance your ink has to travel.
When putting rollers in or removing them
from the press, do not throw them to their posi-
tions, as the jar might easily spring the core and
cause the roller to run out of true. Use no un-
due force anywhere about the press. Remember
adjustments that will stand firm under a steady
strain are easily disturbed by a sudden jar or
shock.
The adjustment of the form rollers and riders
should be examined every morning when placing
them in the press, as in removing them the night
before they may not have been placed in proper
sequence alongside the press by the night men or
wash-up man. Under the impression that the
rollers were placed in rotation, the feeder
takes them in the order they stand. Frequently
No. 1 roller is where No. 2 or No. 3 should
be, with the result the rollers do not ride prop-
erly and may run down if the error is not dis-
covered in time.
In printing a short form on a large press using


only part of a fountain, rollers (even though
set properly) may melt on the ends. This is
due to the fact that sections of the rollers are
running on a dry ink plate, to which the rollers
adhere and heat up quickly. This can be avoided
by applying a thin film of Albany grease or
vaseline to parts of the rollers contacting this
dry surface. This reduces the friction and pre-
serves the rollers. The grease does not work back
in the ink. Machine oil will.
Inferior rollers will soften easily on warm, hu-
mid days, causing a mottled and greasy appear-
ance on the printed surface. Under fast and con-
tinuous running they will surface tear. They will
shrink in certain small areas and this means white
spots on the printed surface. This is especially
troublesome as these spots are not always con-
tinuous but may appear and disappear. Inferior
rollers will loosen from the stock under the re-
verse action of the vibrating roller. This results
in filling up of your printing plates.
Worn roller sockets are one of the main causes
of rollers splitting. If the sockets are not snug
and true, the roller does not ride easily, but spins
and slips when it reverses on the form. When
form rollers are not distributing properly and are
causing slurs and fill-ups, nine times out of ten
you will find the rollers to be in good shape, and
can locate the real trouble by examining the vi-
brating carriage where the iron rollers rest in
the sockets. If the sockets show considerable
wear, this will cause the form rollers to wobble


in opposite directions as the revolution of the
press changes which in turn may cause the trou-
ble above. This can be remedied by having shims
welded on the sockets to eliminate the play, and
overcome one serious difficulty in the pressroom.
Every pressman has his own idea of setting
rollers, with the result that rollers which are en-
tirely satisfactory to one pressman are not to
another. Proper setting of rollers is necessary
not only for good presswork but for prolonging
the life of the rollers. In setting rollers, both
forms and angles, adjustments should be loosened
so that daylight appears between both the vi-
brator and the ink plate. Then set lightly, never
leaving more than a half inch track. The ad-
justment should be the same on each end. The
form rollers should be set on the ink plate rather
than the form. The form should be bearer high,
as the ink plates are generally the same height.
Should the rollers be set to a low form they will
jump when they hit the ink plate. If set to a
high form they will not contact the ink plate
properly. Rollers swell on warm days and this
sometimes necessitates the adjusting of rollers.
It is advisable to look them over after a few
hours’ running, and reset them. The fountain
roller is often neglected, only being changed oc-
casionally. This roller should be set as carefully
as any of the others. It is a good plan to ex-
amine the adjustments of all rollers each morn-
ing, especially over the week end, as frequently


there are great weather changes overnight, which
affect rollers.
The roller adjustment varies on the size and
makes of cylinder presses but due allowance is
made by press manufacturers for the slight
changes that take place in the diameter of the
rollers. On some the distributors are geared and
travel continuously. On others they are not
geared but rely on small trucks which are fas-
tened on the ends of the rollers. These trucks re-
volve the rollers by coming in contact with a
piece of leather which is attached to the end of
the ink plate. If the leather is low and does not
touch the trucks it should be packed. If not
done, the rollers are revolved by the plate and
will tear.
Job press roller troubles are usually due to the
right sized truck wheels not being used; some-
times a larger wheel is used on one end of the
roller than the other, sometimes new style wheels
are used on old style presses and vice versa. The
truck wheels should not be less than one-six-
teenth of an inch smaller than the roller, or one
thirty-second of an inch on a side. If the roller
shrinks to the size of the wheel then another
smaller sized wheel should be used. All truck
wheels on standard makes of machines are slotted
on the inside face so as to fit snugly over the pin
in the journal. This pin in the journal is to cause
the roller on the reverse movement to revolve as
soon as the press begins its upward stroke. The
roller gets its reverse motion for the downward


stroke from the ink plate. If the roller does not
revolve it drags along until it comes in contact
with the form, causing a slur on the lower edge.
If the bearers are of wood, sharp edged, they cut
a little gully in the composition. If perforated
rule or any rule is used in a form, be sure it
is not more than type high. If in running a rule
job the vertical lines appear light in the center of
the sheet, this would indicate that the form roll-
ers are slipping over the form and not rolling
on the faint down rules. This does not occur
where your roller gets some drive on the opposite
side of the form. This is due to two causes: one,
your rollers are larger than your truck wheels,
and the other that the pins on the ends of the
roller stocks have been broken out and your
truck wheel is not driving the roller properly
when it is passing over the form. These condi-
tions can be remedied by having the roller stocks
properly pinned and using expansion truck
wheels, or using bearers in your form. The metal
type or overhang bearer would be the most sat-
isfactory as it requires a minimum of space and
the ink does not pile as easily. Wheels approxi-
mating the size of the rollers should be used.
Where expansion trucks are used see that they
are expanded exactly alike at each end. If they
are not so adjusted the roller will set at an angle
and slur at one end.
When printing half-tone plates on platen
presses in double tone ink, a streak will some-
times appear on the lower end of the plate. This


is due to the fact that the rollers are not inking
the form properly. When your rollers are not in
good condition this will be quite pronounced,
but even a good set of rollers will sometimes
cause a streak to appear in the lower end of a
halftone cut. The streak is formed by the rollers
depositing too much ink on that particular spot.
The streak usually happens in this manner. The
rollers ink the form on their downward stroke,
and in doing so most of the ink is transferred
from the roller to the form, but as the rollers
reverse and start their upward stroke those parts
of the rollers which have not previously touched
the form now come in contact with it, and a
double film of ink is deposited on the lower part
of the form. Sometimes the use of a vibrator
will overcome a portion of the double inking and
it will be hardly noticeable. The streak can be
eliminated through the use of a roller trip. By
this device the third roller, or the one that goes
over the form last is tripped on its downward
stroke, but inks the form on its upward stroke.
This gives a better distribution of ink, and elim-
inates streaks.
Cracked rollers have always been a subject of
great interest to the printer, the pressman, the
roller maker and the ink maker. Their cause has
been discussed exhaustively.
The ink maker, especially during the past few
years, has claimed that rollers cracked from lack
of sufficient glycerine in the composition; the
roller maker claimed the cause of this cracking


was due to acid in the chemical used in the
color in the inks. Cracking is sometimes caused
by quick setting ink left on rollers during the
lunch hour or during make-ready. If rollers are
not washed clean before starting up again you
have a dry caking effect on the roller. Then
when the new ink is applied it works all right
until wash-up time, when you will find you can-
not remove this accumulated ink with regular
washing fluid. What is the result? You have to
resort to some chemical wash to remove the dry
hard ink. This wash will dry on the surface of
the roller, causing it to crack.
On a job running on a two-color magazine
press the rollers were divided into two sections;
one section, three-quarters the length of the
rollers were run with a black ink, the other sec-
tion, one quarter of the rollers with a colored
ink. At the completion of the run the surface
of the three-quarters of the rollers using the
black ink was intact. The surface of the rollers
where the colored ink was used was found to
be completely ruined. We say that the crack-
ing in this instance was due to the chemical used
in the color.
Of course, all cracking is not caused by the
chemicals in the inks. Patent washes often con-
tain too much drier. This causes the surface of
the roller to contract or harden. As the com-
position below this surface has not been affected,
and is of the regular consistency, the least pres-
sure on the face of the roller causes it to crack or


check. Rollers will sometimes crack if used out
of season.
Rollers may melt or soften from frictional
heat. The causes for this are: rollers being set too
hard against the press vibrators or down on the
form, lack of oil or grease in journal boxes, ink
that contains too much tack or drier, rollers that
are too soft for the day’s temperature. When
melted because of being set too hard on one end,
the composition melts or softens up about four
inches from the end. When melted from tacky
ink or high temperature they give away in the
center.
Rollers sometimes warm up just enough to be
soft, without notice being taken of them and at
end of the day’s run they are set off for the night.
In the morning they have become lop-sided. If
taken out of the press and stood on end the com-
position sags to one end. The remedy for this is
to watch the rollers toward the end of the day’s
run and if found warm, reduce the speed of the
press; thus allowing the rollers to cool while ro-
tating, and insuring their maintaining their
shape.
Rollers may melt or soften up from the fact
that the form is not properly underlaid, either
from lack of time or carelessness. This means the
rollers have to be set considerably lower to ink
the lowest spot in the form. As the rollers are
riding hard on the high spots, friction is caused,
and within a short time the rollers are damaged.
The abuse of rollers is largely in the cleaning.


As much care should be used in the washing of a
roller as in the setting. If a roller is washed care-
fully at night you will find it will give perfect
satisfaction much longer than if this is neglected.
Where quick setting inks are used the rollers
should be washed as soon as the press is stopped
for any length of time. With these kinds of inks
the rollers should never be allowed to remain
stationary in the press for even half an hour, as
the ink will dry, and when the press is started up
it gives a pull on the composition, causing it to
crack. Even if a short stop is going to be made
the rollers should be lifted. In washing the rollers
such solvents should be used as will not have a
hardening effect upon the surface. Kerosene oil
is the best solvent for such purpose. Benzine and
gasoline dry the composition surface and cause it
to crack. Turpentine is also a drier. Anything in
the nature of an astringent, either acid or alkali,
that will leave the hand dry and rough, always
affects rollers. After using oil as a wash, wipe off
the surplus remaining on the face of the roller,
so that your "color” may not be reduced. Waste
as little strength as possible in wiping off the
face of the roller. When washing a roller, it is
not necessary to rub it hard, as you are liable to
break the face, which will eventually result in
a serious tear and probably a burst roller. In
large cities there is a towel service for washing
rollers, which is used by the majority of printers.


WHAT THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION MEANS
When the United States entered the World
War in 1917 the Government started a conserva-
tion drive, and all business considered non-essen-
tial could not be placed on the priority list for the
purchase of manufacturing materials. There were
two materials necessary to the manufacture of
printers’ rollers that were essential to the carrying
on the war —coal and glycerine. As the publish-
ing and printing business were placed on the
priority list, roller making necessarily had to be.
To assist in conserving such supplies, the National
Association of Printers’ Roller Manufacturers
was formed at the request of the Government to
act as a Unit to receive permits for their purchase.
The Association was incorporated in 1918 and is
an active organization. At the time of incorpora-
tion the officers were: President, Carl G. Bing-
ham; Vice-President, William C. Hart, and Sec-
retary, H. D. L. Breen. The present officers are:
President, Carl G. Bingham; Vice-President,
Frank H. Stevens, and Secretary, William P.
Squibb. Directors are: Fielding A. Utz, Jr., John
S. Robertson, D. S. Hamilton and Frank A. Rep-
penhagen.
Since the inception of the Association many
improvements in the industry have been brought


about through the free exchange of ideas, meth-
ods and experiences in the manufacture and use
of all types of rollers. To bring about a better
understanding of the composition roller the As-
sociation instituted a nationwide publicity cam-
paign in September, 1931, of an educational na-
ture, for the benefit of all users and purchasers of
printers’ rollers. Most of the Members of the As-
sociation are not competitors. The roller making
industry is a localized one, each member depend-
ing on the printers in his immediate territory for
his business, so there does not exist the cause for
trade jealousy among the members that exists
among manufacturers of a commodity of a more
universal nature.
Any developments by the members that tend
to improve rollers are matters of open discussion
among the entire membership. All members ben-
efit by it, and this in turn is of benefit to the
printer. If a printer feels he has been treated un-
fairly by a member the Association will gladly
give an opinion in the matter if requested to do
so. Information as to the type of roller best
adapted to any particular printing job can be ob-
tained by writing the Association. This informa-
tion would not be the opinion of one man or firm,
but the combined experience of the largest roller
manufacturers in the world.


QUANTITY DISTRIBUTION vs.
QUALITY DISTRIBUTION
The idea is as old as the story of scattering grass
seed. Some flopped by the wayside, some with-
ered on barren rocks, the birds picked up some,
but a percentage lit on fertile ground worth a
couple of hundred dollars an acre, and two blades
came up where there were none before. All a
question of sane and sensible distribution, proving
that a little in the right place produces greater
results than spilling it promiscuously. Now apply
this to the pressroom. Distribution in the press-
room means just one thing —good rollers. You
can get distribution of ink from wornout, hard
or unseasonable rollers. You get it all over the
place, most of it falling by the wayside, or smear-
ing the form, and when the cost of spoiled sheets
and the large amount of perfectly good ink
wasted are taken into consideration, it is realized
that the loss is sufficient to buy two new sets of
rollers for each press.
Rollers are a part of the press equipment and
if of seasonal composition are used on various
jobs from several weeks to a few months. They
should not be purchased on the basis of their ini-
tial cost but on the amount of presswork they
produce. As the form reaches the pressroom it
is sometimes composed of a variety of surfaces of


various heights-to-paper, light and heavy type,
cuts made by various methods, electros and brass
rules, each requiring varying degrees of impres-
sion and varying flows and treatments of inks.
After the pressman has made all necessary ad-
justments and starts the press, it is then the real
worth of the rollers is apparent. If soft and
pliable they will ink up the low spots in the type
form without wiping the highlights in the plate,
and produce clean-cut impressions that are a
credit to the pressroom. While the initial price
of such rollers may seem high, they have saved
money in operation and produced a satisfactory
job, therefore, these rollers were low in cost. If
the rollers are hard with little suction, excessive
impression is necessary, which is the cause of such
troubles as wearing of plates, digging out hooks,
slipping packing and wrinkles in sheets. They
nullify the efforts of the pressman to produce a
really good job. Although low in price, they
are very expensive rollers.
Soft pliable composition rollers are necessary
for fine halftone and process color printing.
They keep the form clean, produce clear high-
lights, and good solids. They eliminate roller
marks, reduce the wear and tear on the press and
lessen the time consumed in makeready. If the
printed job has a mealy appearance after an hour
or so running, it is caused through the use of
hard rollers with very little suction. For instance
if the printing dot is too sharp, pliable composi-
tion rollers can be set down harder so they will


ink up the side of the dot, and with a little softer
packing the results are satisfactory. Should the
reverse be the case firmer rollers can be used, pos-
sibly some that have become firm through long
use.
This method does away with the excessive
squeeze necessary at times to print dots and
match progressive proofs. Many a job was and
is rejected on account of finished color work not
matching proofs, caused wholly by hard rollers
not inking the plates, and not making the dots
appear as large as in the proofs. Naturally,
printing three or four colors in process this de-
fect in each printing is multiplied and by com-
parison to progressive proofs the finished result is
far from pleasing.
Pliable composition rollers are the most satis-
factory for four color printing by the Me Kee
Process. By this process the make-ready is put
in the face of the electrotype plate. The high-
lights and shadows are taken care of by the vary-
ing heights of the plate on each. The plates
are treated or processed while flat, and then cur-
ved to suit the impression cylinder. No make-
ready is used on the impression cylinder and all
four colors are printed in one operation. The
rollers must be very durable with excellent ink
distributing qualities as the inks vary from quite
stiff for the first color, to very soft for the last.
Composition rollers are also used on coating
machines, corrugated box machines, bag ma-


chines, bottle cap machines, tube machines, and
all specialty machines.
On the corrugating machines particularly
many short forms are used. These are not always
located on the same part of the cylinder or bed,
so that quite a section of the roller is not in con-
stant use. For instance the roller may be fifty-six
inches or more in length, with only an eighteen
inch plate on the press. The form for the next
job may be longer or shorter and located in a dif-
ferent spot on the cylinder or bed of the press.
This is why it is necessary to cast the roller the full
length of the core. In order to protect the com-
position on the unused part of the roller, and pre-
vent the chipping that is sure to result from com-
position contacting the brass vibrators and steel
ink distributor, coat that section of the roller with
Albany grease or vaseline. This grease does not
work back in the ink. For these machines, we
suggest non-meltable composition for forms and
distributors, and cloth covered non-meltable
composition for fountain rollers.
Pliable, tacky composition rollers are the best
rollers for use with metallic inks. Although
these inks are quick setting they will not damage
the rollers, but should not be allowed to accumu-
late on the rollers when not touching the form. In
running metallic inks the rollers should be
washed every four hours, that is, at noon and
at night. First the rollers must be of a good
grade of composition, and set accurately. When
setting rollers for a metallic ink job, place a


one-point lead in the journals and set the rollers
to a very light contact, tighten the adjusting
screws and remove the lead. This will give
satisfactory contact, and eliminate scuffing and
wiping. Apply a little vaseline to the ends of
the rollers outside of the form lines, and be sure
that all of the ink is removed from the ends on
the four hour washup. Many a metallic job has
been killed due to hard rollers, or too much fric-
tion between the composition form rollers and
the vibrators.
The demand for color in modern packaging
brought about the problem of printing on trans-
parent cellulose and glassine papers. This work
requires very stiff, strong, full bodied inks, and
good tough composition rollers. Naturally, good
plates, careful makeready and proper setting of
rollers bear the same relationship to a satisfactory
job on this material as they do on all other kinds
of printing. None can be slighted and expect
good results.
Composition rollers are the most satisfactory
for muslin bag and fabric printing, wall paper
and graining work, and all kinds of printing
where ink, varnish or lacquer are used. When in
doubt as to the roller best adapted for any class
of work, write to the Association for an opinion.


COMPOSITION and RUBBER ROLLERS
FOR NEWSPAPER PRESSES
News, with speed and accuracy, is the demand
of every large metropolitan daily. The public
want news, not history, in their morning and
evening papers. High speed presses are neces-
sary, and they must be equipped with rollers that
will run continuously at from thirty to fifty
thousand an hour. Non-meltable composition
rollers will not run down at any press speed.
They can be made very soft or to any degree
of firmness, as preferred by the pressman.
They require very little washing up and less re-
setting than any other type of newspaper roller
in use today. They are not affected by changes
in the atmosphere and the diameter of the roll-
ers will not vary to such an extent that the roller
adjustments in the press will not take care of
these variations. The first cost of these rollers
is their only cost. They can be used for forms,
distributors, and fountain rollers. The cost of
these rollers in comparison to the work they
turn out is negligible. For the smaller edition
newspaper where the presses are operated at a
moderate speed, seasonal composition rollers are
the best and most economical.
A well printed paper depends largely on the
kind of rollers used. A good distribution of


ink is made possible by vibrating rollers, set
properly, that have sufficient tackiness to grip
and cut up the ink on the ink cylinder and pass
it along to the first form rollers, then to the
finishing form rollers and lastly to the plate.
The rollers must have perfect face alignment,
and be so carefully set that they will deposit the
ink only on the face of the type and halftones,
not bury into the bowl of the letter or mesh of
the cuts. A medium grade of composition roller
(not too hard or too soft with a little tacki-
ness is your assurance of good, clean-cut print-
ing. Such rollers, properly set, will leave the
face of the plate clean with every impression;
therefore it is advisable to make sure that the
rollers (whether of non-meltable or seasonal
composition, or of the various other materials
now on the market) are perfect on the face;
that is, have no low spots, pin holes or dead sur-
face. Blankets if worn and defective can be
doctored, and an inferior ink can be distributed,
but defective or lifeless rollers are responsible
for poorly printed sheets. One sure way to eli-
minate losses in the pressroom, worries in the
publication office, and a collection of complaints
from advertisers, is to have your presses equip-
ped with pliable rollers with a perfect face.
Non-meltable rollers have only been perfect-
ed in the last few years, which accounts for the
fact they have not been used to any great ex-
tent. They are not affected by atmosphere con-
ditions. They do not have to be taken from


the press and reground which is a big saving.
They do not require the frequent re-setting
that rubber rollers do. In fact they are the most
economical roller there is from the standpoint
of price, operating cost and printed results.
A wise man may change his mind but the fool,
never. We do not recall who first noted this
truth, but he made a debatable statement. We see
the idea work out daily in the roller industry, not
so much mind changing as roller changing. Years
ago the public were content to read the news of
the day in the morning edition of the newspaper.
Today they expect to read at least three-quarters
of the day’s happenings in the late afternoon edi-
tion. They expect the stock editions in less than
an hour after the bell rings on the floor of the New
York Stock Exchange. They demand the base-
ball editions a few minutes after the last ball has
been pitched. Speed and accuracy is the demand
in the office of every afternoon newspaper in the
country. To meet these demands the large Metro-
politan Dailies have changed from composition to
rubber rollers. To satisfy this demand some of
the roller makers manufacture their own rubber
rollers, while others have rubber rollers manu-
factured to their specifications by reputable rub-
ber manufacturers. Rubber rollers are not af-
fected by temperature, humidity or frictional
heat. They will swell from the oil in the ink
penetrating the surface of the rollers. When these
rollers have swelled to such a degree that there
can be no further adjustments on the roller


sockets, they have to be removed from the press
for regrinding. It costs as much to remove a rub-
ber roller from the press and regrind and repolish
it as a new composition roller would cost. Rubber
rollers have to be reset as often, and some users
say oftener, than the composition roller. They
cannot be used as complete press equipment. Even
where used as forms and distributors, it is still
necessary to use non-meltable, cloth covered
composition rollers as fountains. In this connec-
tion let us say, the non-meltable composition
roller is the best complete equipment for high
speed newspaper presses. These rollers do not re-
quire much washing up. They will not melt and
they will not swell. They may shrink slightly,
but the adjustments on the roller sockets will
take care of this. In this connection it has been
noted that even the new presses for newspaper
work carry more of a down than an up adjust-
ment. Their initial cost is half that of rubber
rollers, and it is their only cost.
For the smaller newspapers we recommend sea-
sonal composition rollers. If of good quality, they
give long continuous service, and are very eco-
nomical.
Your roller maker is equipped to supply you
with rubber, non-meltable composition or sea-
sonal composition rollers. He is in better position
to render good service to the pressroom than a
tire maker.


HUMIDIFICATION OF PRESSROOMS
Its Effect on Composition Rollers
Nature does not produce uniform humidity.
It has to be secured by artificial means. The pur-
pose of humidifying pressrooms is to eliminate
static electricity in paper. Moisture carries elec-
tricity away, not dry air or paper. Cold air in-
doors or out can hold but little moisture. Warm
air retains a large percentage of relative humidity.
However, static in paper is not the only condition
the pressman has to contend with. The composi-
tion rollers on which he depends for the proper
distribution of ink are affected by excessive mois-
ture. In a humidified pressroom where there is an
equalized temperature of seventy degrees and a
relative humidity of fifty-five per cent, the
composition roller will season, retain its ink dis-
tributing qualities, and the life of the roller is pro-
longed for several months. Should the humidity
increase some ten to fifteen per cent the composi-
tion rollers will absorb too much moisture, the
rollers will swell, and the increased diameter
causes a drag that tends to injure the surface of
the roller. If cast of a medium grade of compo-
sition the rollers can be used from season to sea-
son without changing, provided the rollers are
not worn out. The cost of using worn rollers
amounts to several times the cost of replacing


them, in lost time in the pressroom and spoiled
sheets. Non-meltable composition rollers are not
affected by humidity in the pressroom. They have
been known to operate continuously at a speed
of forty thousand an hour, where both the
temperature and humidity were high.
Humidification does not affect rubber rollers,
but rubber rollers are not adapted to the general
run of process color and commercial printing.
They have their own particular field. In the
majority of pressrooms where fine color work is
done, humidity control will be as common as heat
control in a comparatively few years.


DELIVERY SERVICE
To the Out-of-Town Customer
Printers’ roller cores are part of a printing press
and consequently the property of the owners of
the printing plant.
When sent to a roller maker to be covered with
roller composition they are parts sent for repairs,
and this means that all expenses incurred are
charged against them. The expenses chargeable
are covering with roller composition, straighten-
ing and repairing the stocks and boxing the rollers
for safe delivery back to the printer.
The latter item varies, new boxes, repairing
boxes in poor condition by putting in new fit-
tings in place of lost or broken ones, or making a
box used for one size or lot to carry a different
kind, so that the face of the roller does not come
in contact with anything to cut or dent it. Much
time and expense would be saved if all the fit-
tings were preserved by the party opening the
boxes to remove the rollers when received in the
pressroom.
Transportation companies, to protect them-
selves from claims for damage, require printers’
rollers to be carefully and properly cased and
marked clearly with warning signs to insure prop-
er handling in transit, and the roller maker has
no option in the matter.


The out-of-town customer receives just as
much service from the roller maker in the way
of delivery service as the customer located in the
home town of the roller maker, in the way of call-
ing for old rollers and delivering new ones.
When the freight arrives at the freight station
from the customer, a truck is sent to the station, a
distance of at least half a mile to three miles, one
or more times. The truckman waits on a long
line from fifteen minutes to several hours for the
delivery clerk to receipt his freight bill, to find
the freight in the station and get his truck up to
the goods to load the same.
The time consumed in doing this by one truck
is used by another calling on a local customer,
picking up a 100 or so old rollers and returning
to the factory, or making several stops and col-
lecting a truck load of rollers.
When boxes are received at factory they have
to be opened and rollers tallied the same as local
orders. Then when rollers are finished and ready
to be returned they have to be reboxed, sometimes
several hours being required to refit the box as
the boxes were sent in without fittings, or be-
cause the boxes will hardly hold together on ac-
count of ill usage or age.
An experienced man is required to fit up these
boxes, with knowledge along these lines.
Just as much time is required to make out
freight bills of lading, as in making out itemized
roller receipts for city deliveries.
When the truckman reaches the freight station


he is lucky if he can discharge at once. Fre-
quently he waits in line for a long time, then hur-
ries off to the next station, only to be told by the
receiving clerk the time is up and no more freight
will be taken that day.
The delivery service is part of the roller maker’s
organization. Very few roller makers depend
upon public truckmen for deliveries as such a
service would not be satisfactory.


EFFICIENCY AND RUSH
Of all the abused, misused and picked-on words
in the English language, there is none more over-
worked and, incidentally, misunderstood and
cursed, as "efficiency.” To the average business
man the mere mention of the term is anathema.
Yet it is a good word. There is nothing wrong
with it nor with its true definition, but the public
has chosen to embellish it with meanings which are
entirely erroneous and foreign to its nature, with
the result that the word and all it stands for are
made to suffer.
Instead of signifying good workmanship and
first-class production, with waste of time and ef-
fort eliminated, "efficiency” has come to be re-
garded more as a synonym for "rush,” and the
person who dashes around and keeps actively busy
(or creates that impression) is generally consid-
ered efficient. And all the time the two terms
are almost exact opposites. In most cases rush
work is not efficient in the best sense of the term.
Roller-making plants are efficient. They are
arranged along scientific and systematic lines so
that there is very little wasted effort or lost mo-
tion in their operation. They are equipped so
that orders may be handled in the safest, easiest
and best manner, giving the customer the maxi-
mum quality and service at the lowest possible


cost, and —as in all intricate work—best results
are obtained only by careful attention and high-
class workmanship.
Yet many printers think that unless the roller
maker "rushes” a job through, he is inefficient;
and if the rollers themselves refuse to bear up un-
der rush conditions, they are no good.
In roller making certain definite things must
be done. It requires just so much time to pre-
pare and melt composition. So much more time
is necessary for molding, so much for cooling, so
much for boxing and shipping, and these things
cannot be rushed, regardless of the wishes of either
the roller maker or the printer.
Rollers, to give the greatest satisfaction, should
be ordered in advance. If ordered a month before
needed the printer would not only receive them
in good time, but the fresh rollers would have an
opportunity to season and give much better re-
sults. The seasoning should be done on racks,
preferably, where there is a good circulation of
air. They should not be put in the press as soon
as received from the factory.


CONCLUSION
Good impressions are necessary to the success
of any business or social enterprise, but we think
we can say truthfully that roller makers depend
on good impressions for their success more than
any other people in the world. In this book we
have tried to cover all the problems that arise
in the pressroom in connection with rollers. We
have pointed out the precautions that could be
taken to avoid these problems. We have endeav-
ored to prove to all users of rollers that with rea-
sonable care good rollers will create good im-
pressions. If we have succeeded, the purpose of
this book has been accomplished.


MEMBERS
American Printers’
Roller Co.
1332 N.Halsted St., Chicago, 111.
Bingham Brothers Co.
406 Pearl St., New York, N. Y.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Baltimore, Md.
Rochester, N. Y.
Sam’l Bingham’s Son
Mfg. Co.
636 Sherman St., Chicago, 111.
Cleveland, Ohio
Des Moines, lowa
Kalamazoo, Mich.
Nashville, Tenn.
Atlanta, Ga.
Detroit, Mich.
Kansas City, Mo.
Pittsburgh, Pa.
Dallas, Texas
Indianapolis, Ind.
Minneapolis, Minn.
St. Louis, Mo.
Springfield, Ohio
Cincinnati, Ohio
California Ink Co.
42 6 Battery St., San Francisco, Cal.
Chicago Roller Co.
154 W. Harrison St.,Chicago,lll.
Dry Climate Ink &
Roller Co.
1530 Blake St., Denver, Colo.
Globe Printers’
Roller Co.
154 Purchase St., Boston, Mass.
Godfrey Roller Co.
211 N. Camac St., Phila., Pa.
Harrigan Roller Co.
311 Guilford Ave., Balt., Md.
W. F. ISLEY & Co.
Greensboro, N. C.
Milwaukee Printers’
Roller Co.
420 S. 4th St., Milwaukee, Wise.
National Roller Co.
307 Pearl St., New York, N. Y.
J. H. Osgood Co.
29 Purchase St., Boston, Mass.
Frank A. Reppenhagen
339 Oak St., Buffalo, N. Y.
J. S. Robertson
Montreal, Quebec, Can.
Sinclair & Valentine Co.
of Canada, Ltd.
Toronto, Canada
Wild & Stevens, Inc.
5 Purchase St., Boston, Mass.
Wortman Roller Co.
1212 Race St., Cincinnati, Ohio
GOOD ROLLERS
CREATE
GOOD IMPRESSIONS






