

103rd ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE
British Medical Association
HELD IN MELBOURNE, SEPTEMBER, 1935
UNCORRECTED BY AUTHOR
CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL AFTER DELIVERY
SECTION OF MEDICAL SOCIOLOGY
THE CHILD GUIDANCE CLINIC*
BY
HARVEY SUTTON, 0.8. E., M.D.Melb.
PROFESSOR OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE AND DIRECTOR, SCHOOL OF
PUBLIC HEALTH AND TROPICAL MEDICINE, SYDNEY
UNIVERSITY
Problems in behaviour, especially bad habits —the “ every-
day problems of the everyday child ” —have been for
* Read in opening a discussion in the Section ol ! Medical Sociology
at the Annual Meeting of the British Medical Association,
Melbourne, 1935.
many years discussed by parents and others interested
in children. Controversy as to school discipline and
corporal punishment seems to have originated in England
with the appearance of grammar schools of the early
sixteenth century. In Elizabethan days schoolmasters
showed an implicit belief in the maxim of Solomon, “ spare
the rod and spoil the child,” and the ability to flog
pupils became for over two centuries one of the vocational
attributes of the pedagogue. Ascham, the tutor of Queen
Elizabeth, protested against the universal indiscriminate
use of corporal punishment. It is interesting to note the
corporal punishment of schoolgirls lately discussed in the
British Medical Journal.
John Locke, who, as is sometimes forgotten, was a
physician as well as a philosopher and a politician, wrote
a book, in every way a modern work, on How to Bring
up your Children. The pronoun your is significant, for
Locke was a bachelor and exercised the perennial right
of the unmarried to instruct parents in their duties.
Corporal punishment is shown by him to be a failure,
yet its practice was, and to some extent still is, exten-
sively followed. It required a generation of universal
(compulsory) education to discredit its use except in a
few limited definite breaches of the school rules. Making
the punishment fit the crime by making " the prisoner
pent—unwillingly represent —a source of innocent merri-
ment ” may prove a solution, for ridicule and shame are,
as Locke pointed out, powerful influences. Increasing
experience, however, points to other methods: just and
unemotional criticism, encouragement of good efforts, the
selection of sound, interesting outlets for energy, and
better personal understanding between teacher and pupil.
These positive and often indirect controls give better
results than more obvious direct and drastic repressive
action, and this agrees with the study of human behaviour
or human nature. Children, especially, react best to
indirect influences. It is often difficult for parents or
teachers or doctors to realize this trait in which they
resemble the gyroscope. Press sideways on the top of
a gyroscope and instead of tilting over it turns inwards
towards the deflecting force and rights itself. Ask a
child to breathe deeply in and out, and he will expand
his chest like a pouter pigeon and remain distended as
long as his breath holds. Ask him to take a big breath,
and then get him to tell you his name and where he
lives, and he wiil, in order to talk easily, effect a good
complete expiration. A good children’s doctor soon finds
that he must stalk his patient down l ; ke a shy wild
animal. In the adult similar methods may be useful,
but in school life the direct attack tends to be pre-
dominant, yet disregard of the indirect method may end
in waste of much time and trouble. How often do we
find the longest way round the shortest way home?
Bad Habits and their Correction
The development of the study of children and children’s
diseases in the latter half of the nineteenth century drew
attention to many of these difficulties, especially bad
habits. Parents worried particularly over such unfor-
tunate happenings as bed-wetting or as masturbation.
Spanking and the dark room, threats and cajolings, wail-
ings and pleadings having failed, the exasperated parent
sought the doctor for help. Could this persistent habit
of " swamping the bed ” mean that there might be some-
thing " wrong with him ”? The doctor, little wiser,
though perhaps more experienced in having to deal with
many cases, took refuge in drugs, regimen of life, amount
of fluid, waking up after an interval, removal of irritation
—whether preputial or urinary in origin—operative inter-
vention, etc. This indirect attack has often succeeded,
but not always. Especially in intractable cases does the
full social investigation of the home as well as the patient
—the explanation to the parent of the need for quiet
automatic control, the direct suggestion a la Coue to the
child (which, incidentally, I have seen notably successful),
together with the creation of an atmosphere of under-
standing and sympathy and encouragement—restore to
the bewildered child the necessary sphincteric control.
To disregard the parental and home phases of this
habit is to run a very definite risk of failure in treatment,
even though a physical basis initiating or aggravating the
difficulty can be discovered by the doctor and medical
treatment is a necessary procedure. Because of these
physical origins and their undoubted frequency, a medical
overhaul is an essential in this and indeed in other
behaviour problems, if only to clear the decks, as it were,
and to leave the field clear for the psychological control.
Best still would it be if we could combine in one person
the physician who has both paediatric and psychiatric
training, and reinforce his efforts with the educational
psychologist and the social worker. Any one of these
three working on his own may do much, but a person
combining all three would be in a far better position to
solve the situation.
Perhaps of all bad habits masturbation is the best
example of the failure of ignorance. For years moral
propaganda described alleged rotten effects on the central
nervous system. Even accidental artificial stimulation
by young children was included as an actual habit. We
now know that masturbation is a symptom of mental
instability rather than a cause of many serious nervous
diseases, and that its occasional occurrence has no serious
effects on the body. Even its constant habitual practice
is injurious only to certain special types, as is seen in the
early history of dementia praecox.
We do not even know what should be the rate of
appearance of the male emission ; it is obviously much
more irregular than its female counterpart. In a group
of a hundred medical and other university men students
inquiry demonstrated a regular rhythm of about fourteen
days’ interval, usually beginning the fifteenth year, a
little before the sixteenth birthday, and after years of
irregularity becoming much more regular in the adult
after about 21. This emission is strictly physiological,
but thousands believe it as a fount of every evil thing.
It is difficult to convince parents that the proper pre-
liminary is to tell even young children the simple facts
of life, meeting natural curiosity with simple truthfulness.
Especially should the facts of their own sex be presented
to them in a wholesome correct fashion before the occur-
rence of these phenomena of early adolescence. Attention
to general health,, especially personal hygiene, and the
diversion of interest into attractive and valuable changes,
such as outdoor sports and interesting occupations, are
of value. A limited amount of free discussion of the
defect quietly and incidentally arising gives the suitable
opportunity pf direct suggestion by the examiner.
■ —SUTTON—Section of Medical Sociology—TWO—
THE PROBLEM OF STAMMERING
A constant problem in school life is stammering. In
New South Wales about 1 in 40 boys showed disorders
of speech, chiefly stammering. Only 1 in 120 girls experi-
enced speech difficulty, and that, as a rule, not to any
marked degree. In Australia very little has been
attempted of any organized character to deal with this
defect, which may be a very real nuisance to the in-
dividual, markedly influencing his personality, and quite
possibly adversely affecting his occupational chances. The
idea of classes and clinics collecting groups of stammerers
used to be viewed adversely, but the atmosphere of success
and the expert teaching made possible more than over-
come any such handicap.
The proportion of left-handed children among
stammerers is higher than the proportion in the school
population. Dr. Jean Greig of Victoria gives twenty-five
“ left-handers ” among 1,000 children, and four among
thirty-one stammerers, or about five times as many among
stammerers as would have been expected from an ordinary
sample of the population. Evidence seems to show that
the left-handed who stammer are those who have been
changed to right-hand writers under pressure or penalty,
whether at home or (rarely nowadays) at school. Left-
handed children whose left-handedness has been accepted
apparently get on as well as the right-handed. This is
another example of the danger and futility of repressive
methods.
The introduction of compulsory education, the greatest
social experiment of modern times, brought to light many
of these problems of childhood. The teacher, at any rate
during the hours at school, seven hours (9 to 4) for five
days a week, or 210 each year, or about one-fifth of the
child’s life, becomes at this period the official parent,
and so responsible for his pupil’s well-being and progress.
Soon teachers and departments began to realize their
responsibility, not for instruction in the “ three R’s
alone, but for health, both physical and mental, and
for the development of the boy’s personality and character.
In discipline,, in instruction, in progress, in promotion, on
the playground as well as in the schoolroom, they began
to sense new difficulties previously hardly dreamt of.
In institutional life many of these difficulties became
still more important—sleep-walking, bed-wetting, for
example—and residential schools must necessarily take
a much fuller responsibility than day schools, for their
control covers the whole life of the boy and for a longer
period.
Minor Defects : Their Influence on Mental and Physical
Progress
The appreciation of the official responsibility for the
child’s health and the finding of extensive defects in the
population—defects which could, and should, have been
remedied in childhood—caused the introduction of school
medical inspection in 1907. The medical examination of
school children brought the realization of an enormous
amount of minor defects in apparently healthy children.
Defects of vision, hearing, nose and throat, nutrition,
heart, etc., which required medical attention and which
interfered with educational progress or handicapped
physical development, were present in at least thirty out
of every 100. With it, too, came the precipitation of
the medical officer into all sorts of new problems —notably
mental deficiency,, truancy, delinquency—on which depart-
ments requested their opinion, while parents increasingly
sought their advice regarding bad habits, disorders of
speech, of sleep, and of conduct generally, while teachers,
especially head masters, discussed with them the physical
and mental background of difficult children.
Recently, in the Medical Journal of Australia, I have
given examples drawn from such experience and demon-
strating the profound and persistent effects which can be
produced by various minor defects—defects often un-
suspected by parent or teacher or by the child itself.
Myopia may prevent the child taking part in games and
foster the creation of a bookworm, a “ shut in ” person-
ality. Deafness, especially on one side only, was found
far more common in a large group of incorrigible boys,
and, in many instances, was the origin of misunderstanding
and conflict with the teacher which led to truancy and
defiance. The effect of colour-blindness in flattening the
tone of life as of colour, and the intense mental conflicts
of the stammerer, were noted.
The rapid reduction of the birth rate has meant an
increase in families of one and two children. The one-
child family tends to set up a series of conditions, such
as excessive parental and adult influence and reduced
opportunities of child contacts, which may prove very
unfair to the child. The increased city life—the relative
isolation of residential areas—and the gross overcrowding
of industrial suburbs introduce artificial conditions which
may handicap more or less seriously the children involved.
The lack of playgrounds, the natural training ground of
the young child, bears hardly on these unfortunates, and
so delinquency is a constant association of the overcrowded
suburbs ; add to that the complete disregard by the com-
munity of the need for training in parenthood before
marriage.
In all these problems, whether in school or in pre-school
life, it is the parents, as controlling the family and the
home, the leal units of human society, who most deserve
to receive our consideration. To solve these ever-recurring
and almost universal everyday problems of everyday
children, child guidance clinics have been called into
being. The name is somewhat misleading. The person
eventually to be guided is undoubtedly the child, and
its physical and mental make-up and its family environ-
ment are our prime study, but more and more investiga-
tion shows the failure to be referable to the parent, whose
wrong methods or attitudes or emotional irregularities,
apart from economic difficulties, decide the child’s
responses. Children have grown up sound in mind and
limb, with well-developed personality, mental poise, and
stable character even in the most unfavourable home
conditions —for example, when the father is a criminal,
the mother a drunkard, and there is poverty, overcrowd-
ing, lack of the amenities of existence and of play, and
so on. But these are the exception rather than the rule.
The Importance of the Pre-School Period
Every person is the resultant of a wide series of in-
fluences, and none of these are so powerful, so profound
and persistent in their effects, as those in the early period
of life experienced in the home and decided by the parent.
That we have personally forgotten them as adults does
not affect the matter. Hence, in the work of the child
guidance clinic, while the object of diagnosis is the child,
treatment is most often only effective after study of the
home and the parents, and operates chiefly by and through
the parents. The home is the laboratory of character,
the parents the executives, and the doctor the expert
available for the anxious parent who is faced with the
very real difficulty of rearing this complex human machine.
The child is knitted to him so closely, his own flesh and
blood, that impersonal criticism, so valuable in these
emergencies, has become impossible to the parent, and
he must seek help elsewhere. The whole tendency of
modern medicine and psychology alike is to take a longi-
tudinal view of life and of the individual. The test of
the adult or of the school child forms a valuable cross-
section revealing the present appearances, but these cannot
be properly understood unless we trace them back to
their origin.
—SUTTON —Section of Medical Sociology— THßEE —-
This reference to early life is common to Freud, Jung,
and Adler’s hypotheses. It is a commonplace of paediatric
experience. Repeatedly we find definite evidence of
occurrences in the second to the fifth year of life —the
pre-school period of life—occurrences which represent the
beginning of asthma, adenoids, stammering, etc. More
and more adult fears and phobias are found to arise in
tiffs garden of childhood. This is the age of habit develop-
ment, of habit control of speech, of sleep, and of bodily
functions. All sorts of tricks, capricious appetites, and
eccentric behaviour are now recognized. The rapid growth
of brain and body, the new contacts with the new worlds
of the home and of the street, the steadily improving
discovery and control of the individual’s body, all give
possibilities of maladjustment in relatively plastic person-
ality. The frequency of mild rickets, which affects the
stability of brain as well as of body, is an important
factor.
THE DOCTOR'S PART
When one thinks of the many doubtful habits which
may persist at this age period and worry parents, one
realizes how these difficulties tend to gravitate to the
doctor. Some of these habits may be of little moment,
such as nail-biting, nose-picking, thumb-sucking, hair-
biting, teeth-grinding ; others may be more annoying,
such as head-rolling, head-banging, habit-spasm, yet all
are due to local irritation. On the other hand, the
impulse in the background may be gratification in such
habits as rumination, masturbation, and even enuresis,
while subconscious factors may be responsible for speech
disorders, sleep disorders, capricious appetite, tantrums,
persistent lying, thieving, running away, and so on. In
all the medical contribution is a very real one.
Again in the pre-school period for the first time we can
recognize the varying and blossoming personalities. No
doubt even in the first year of life some types can be
identified, but before the fifth year they are usually
well developed. The difficulty of gaining control depends
greatly on the particular type of child. Different types
may occur in the same house, similar types in very
different homes, while the children may differ markedly
in type from either or both parents. All these variables
must be appreciated before we deal adequately with the
variable product and the problem itself. The reaction of
the young child to certain home stresses will depend much
on whether it is shy or friendly, timid or bold, subdued
or boisterous, quiet or excitable, slow or alert, dull or
sensitive, overbearing or affable. Behind these personality
phases can at times be sensed a whole series of biochemical
states or changes, perhaps periodic changes such as are
seen in epilepsy, asthma, migraine. The endocrinal
balance, allergic incompatibilities, and immunity develop-
ment may all be actively manifest in the young child.
The child is adjusting itself to two worlds, the world
within as well as the world without, while new roads
are being developed in its central nervous system. At
the same time it is exposed to fire—the, at times, danger-
ous or damaging fire of infection—and its nutritional
needs are not adequately recognized. The whole future
of the child depends on the few years before school, a
period when its character is in the melting-pot and will
receive the stamp the impress of which will depend on
the parent and home. The period of which the teacher
has so little experience is the most important of all, and
the parent can alone find help in the doctor. By the
frequent repetition of various types, whether of environ-
ment, of response, or of personality, by all this experi-
ence the doctor keen on his work becomes increasingly
expert, surer in diagnosis and sounder in treatment. Work
at a school doctor can form an excellent background to
his work.
Situation and Personnel of the Ideal Clinic
Presuming child guidance clinics are developed, where
should they be located? By whom should they be
staffed? What will be their objective? Hospitals are
frequently chosen. Aids to diagnosis are more ample
and contact more extensive with a large out-patient
population. The medical control is unquestioned. Educa-
tion departments also provide suitable locations, and much
of the work on which modern practice is based was carried
out at school, at a departmental office, or at an institution
like the Children’s Court, and so on.
Outside these two official relationships separate private
clinics are known. Many parents do not wish to go near
a hospital, and their child may not be of school age,
and they do not naturally seek departmental help, and
so private organizations cater for them. Unless some
definite control could be established over the bona fides
and training of the organizers these clinics may prove
failures, and the quality of the work may be low. The
ideal head of the clinic is a young man (or woman).
Best of all he is a doctor (medical) with wide sympathies,
a deep personal interest in children, and the gift of
handling them. Among doctors the choice would be one
who is versed in the study of paediatrics, while, in addition,
some knowledge of psychiatry is helpful. School doctors
make excellent recruits for this work, and possess a clearer
idea of the normal and abnormal and of the needs of
the growth period of life.
The combined physician, paediatrist, psychiatrist, and
school doctor will have, as his second in command, a
trained educational psychologist, who will explore the
happenings at school and the reaction of the child to
mental tests. The final member of this trio is the trained
health or home visitor, who evaluates the parents in the
home.
In conclusion, may I again emphasize the importance
of biological, physiological, and medical training for the
fullest appreciation of these problems of personality.
This does not mean that the psychologist cannot, and
does not, do excellent work in these problems, and a
definite field of activity should be allowed to him. The
same may be said of the home visitor or probation officer,
or social science student, who estimates the parental
attitude and home conditions. But we cannot regard
these children as disembodied spirits any more than we
should treat them merely as if they were animal bodies
-—a higher group of animal it is true, but merely biological
entities. Both attitudes are incomplete. Mind and body
are inextricably interwoven and dependent one on the
other. The very integration that makes the individual
organism must be recognized by an all-round view, which
watches every phase of its multiple reactions and
responses.
