

A CHAPTER
ON THE
PRESENT CONDITION AND PROSPECTS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
BY ROBERT SULLIVAN, LL.D., &c.
DUBLIN:
MARCUS AND JOHN SULLIVAN,
27, MARLBORO UGH-STREET.
1857.
Price One Penny.


DUBLIN: PRINTED BY ALEX. THOM AND SONS, 8 7, ABBEY-STREET,


THE PRESENT CONDITION AND PROSPECTS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.*
The mainland of Australia comprehends four distinct British
Colonies, namely—New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
and Western Australia; and the island of Van Diemen’s or
Tasmania constitutes a fifth.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
New South Wales, which, till 1850, included the present
colony of Victoria, under the name of the Province of Port
Phillip , lies on the eastern side of the Australian continent.
Its line of coast extends from the district of Moreton Bay
(27° 2' S. lat.) to Cape Howe (37° 35' S. lat.); and the area
comprised within the boundaries of this important colony is
estimated to contain upwards of 250,000 square miles; or, in
other words, it is more than double the size of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland. New South Wales was
originally (1788) a penal settlement ( Botany Bay); but the
system of transporting convicts to this colony was finally put
an end to in the year 1840. Since this period, and particularly
since the discovery of the Australian gold-fields (in 1851), the
population of this, and the adjoining colony of Victoria, has
been rapidly increased by the influx of immigrants from Great
Britain and Ireland —and indeed from all parts of the world.
As a proof of this, it may be stated, that In 1810 the whole
white population of New South Wales (which was then, and up
to 1829, the only colony in Australia) amounted to but 8,300
persons. In 1821 the population had increased to nearly
30,000; and in 1833 the number of whites in the colony was
60,794. Of these 60,794 persons, two-fifths were convicts in
actual bondage, and one-half of the remaining number were
ticket-of-leave men or liberated convicts. After the discovery
of the gold-fields in 1851, the white population was found to be
336,000; and it now (1857) probably amounts to three-quarters
of a million. The aboriginal inhabitants of Australia are com- *
paratively few, and their numbers are rapidly diminishing.
The capital, and as yet the only large town in New South
Wales, is Sydney. It is beautifully situated on Port Jackson,
one of the most magnificent natural harbours in the world.
A 2
* The Physical Geography of Australia and Van Diemen’s Land has
been already given.


It is therefore admirably well adapted for commerce; and it
well deserves to be called the metropolis of the Australian
world. The main body of the town lies between two of the
numerous arms of Port Jackson, which are known by the names
of Darling Harbour and Wooloomooloo Bay; and Sydney Cove,
another and smaller inlet, indents the northern or older portion
of it. The older part of the town consists of low and irregular
buildings, but the newer streets have been systematically and
beautifully laid out. In fact, there are buildings and shops in
Sydney which would do no discredit to the best parts of the
metropolis of England; and the suburban residences of the
citizens are beautifully situated on the sloping and picturesque
shores of Port Phillip, In short, it may be stated, that Sydney
has, in every respect, the appearance of a first-class English
town ; and when the British emigrant lands upon its crowded
wharfs, after a voyage of 14,000 miles, and hears his mother-
tongue spoken on all sides around him, he is almost tempted to
believe that he has returned to his native country again.
The population of Sydney is now considerably above 100,000,
which is truly •surprising, when we consider that it is not yet
three-quarters of a century old; for It was in 1788 that its first
foundations were laid by Governor Phillip. But it is within the
last few years that this wonderful increase in the population has
taken place. In 1846 its population was under 40,000; in
1831 it was 60,000; and at the close of the year 1835 it had
increased to 100,000.
Notwithstanding the attractions of the gold-fields, the^ occupa-
tion of the majority of the settlers in New South Wales is sheep-
farming, and hence the principal exports of this colony arc
wool and sheep’s tallow, large quantities of which are annually
exported from Sydney.
The other towns of New South Wales are Paramatta, at the
head of the estuary of Port Jackson, about fourteen miles from
Sydney, and with which it is connected by a railway; Liverpool,
on a small river that falls into Botany Bay ; Campbeltown, on
the river Hawkesbury; Goulhurn , in the district of Argyle,
about 100 miles south-west of Sydney; and in the district of
Hunter’s River, Neiccastle , at which there are important coal
mines, and Maitland , which possesses an extensive manufactory
of colonial tobacco. Maitland is a busy and flourishing town,
and between it and the capital there is a daily communication
by means of river steam-boats. In the inland division of the
colony the only considerable places are Windsor , on the Hawkes-
bury, about seventy miles from its mouth; and Bathurst , on the


Macquarie, about 100 miles west-north-west of Sydney. A few
years ago Bathurst was a small place with two or three thousand
inhabitants ; but since it became the centre of the gold-mining
operations, it has rapidly increased in population and importance.
Between Sydney and Bathurst there is a magnificent road across
the Blue Mountains, which is regarded as the greatest engineer-
ing work of the colony.
In addition to goi.d, the mineial produce of New South
Wales includes copper, lead, iron, and coal. It is in valleys,
watered by mountain torrents, that gold is principally found;
and it is In such districts that the diggings or gold-fields of
the colony are situated. In various parts of the mountain ranges,
copper, lead, and iron, are found in greater or less quantities;
and also some beautiful and valuable kinds of marble. 'Lhe coal
is found principally in the valley of the river Hunter. Irom
Newcastle, in this district, there are large quantities of coals
exported to the neighbouring settlements.
The great defect of New South Wales is the deficiency of
water. Compared with the vast extent of the country the
rivers are few and inconsiderable ; and in the dry season many
of the smaller streams disappear altogether, the consequences of
which are often disastrous to the settlers; for, on such occasions,
large numbers of their docks and herds perish for want of
water. These droughts, which occur at intervals, are the chief
drawback to the otherwise fine climate of New South Wales.
THE COLONY OF VICTORIA.
The colony of Victoria, till the year 1850, formed a part of
the colony of New South Wales, under the name of the Pro-
vince of Port Phillip. It consists of the south-eastern corner
of the Australian continent, from Cape Howe along the coast
to the meridian of 141°, which divides it from South Australia;
and its northern boundary is formed by the course of the river
Murray. The extent of the area of this important colony is
estimated at 98,000 square miles; and in it is contained a larger
proportion of fertile and available soil than in any other known
portion of the Australian continent. From this circumstance
this colony has been called Australia Felix, but it was to the
rich and beautiful tract of country between Portland Bay and
Geelong that the name was originally given (by Sir Thomas
Mitchell).
The climate of Victoria is more like that of the British Islands
than any other part of the Australian continent; but the sud-
den and frequent changes in the temperature from heat to cold,


particularly in the interior, are very trying to newly arrived
immigrants. Upon the whole, however, the climate may be
pronounced healthy. The droughts, which are so frequently the
scourge of New South Wales, are scarcely ever felt in this colony.
Port Phillip was occupied in 1833 as a Province of New
South Wales; and in eleven years after (1346), the population
had increased to 32,800. In 1830, the year in which it was
separated from New South Wales, the population was found to
be 77,000; and it is now estimated to be upwards of 330,000 !
And of the whole population of the colony, it is calculated that
more than a third reside in the capital.
Melbourne , the capital of Victoria, stands upon the river
Yarra-Yarra*, which flows into the upper part of the magnifi-
cent land-locked bay of Port Phillip. It is, however, badly
adapted for commerce, for it is at the distance of eight miles
from the mouth of the river, and only the smaller class of vessels,
such as coasters, can go up to it. All vessels of a larger size
are obliged to discharge their cargoes at William's Town, which
stands at the mouth of the Yarra. William’s Town is now con-
nected with Melbourne by a short line of railway. It is built on
a low sandy flat' and its appearance is any thing but attractive.
It is not twenty years since the first foundations of Melbourne
were laid (1837) ; and it is now a flourishing city, with upwards
fof 100 000 inhabitants. Such have been the wonderful results
of the discovery of the Australian gold-fields in 1851, for it is
since that period that this amazing increase has taken place.
Ten years ago (1846) the population of Melbourne was under
' 11,000 (10934).
The site of Melbourne, particularly that part of it which lies
along the river, is low, and it is frequently flooded; but the
newer part of it, from extending in the direction of the country,
is free from these objections. The suburbs of the city, which
already stretch far Into the adjacent country, include several
pleasant localities, as Collmgwood, Richmond, and Flemington;
and the neighbouring villages of St. Kilda and Brighton, which
are prettily situated on the shores of Port Phillip, serve as
bathing-places for the citizens.
The principal exports of Melbourne are similar to those of
Sydney, namely, gold, wool , and tallow; but the amount ex-
ported from Melbourne is much greater. Even of wool the quan-
* This river continues to flow throughout the year, and hence it was called
by the natives Yarra- Yarra, that is flowing flowing. In the dry season
many of the small rivers in Australia are either dried up, or are converted
into detached pools.


tity now exported from Victoria is greater than that which is
exported from the older and more extensive colony of New South
Wales. In both colonies, so rich are the pastures, and so
numerous are the sheep, that large numbers of them are annually
killed and boiled down for their tallow alone, which is exported
chiefly to the London market.
But though sheep-farming and cattle-rearing are the principal
and most profitable occupations of the settlers, agriculture is
also extensively pursued; and for the growth of wheat, maize,
and potatoes, the country lying round Melbourne is unsurpassed
by any part of Australia.
Geelong is the second town in the colony in point of trade and
population. It lies at the opposite or south-western extremity
of Port Phillip, at the head of Corio Bay. This inlet is so
shallow that all vessels above the size of coasters are obliged to
discharge their cargoes at Port Henry, ten miles lower down the
bay. A railway between Geelong and Melbourne is now in
process of construction. The population of Geelong is upwards
of 20,000.
Portland , on the shores of Portland Bay, ships large quantities
of wool, and has extensive whaling establishments; and Beljast,
on an inlet called Port Fairy, to the eastward of Portland, is
also a thriving and busy town. Belfast is famous for its butter
and cheese, and the land in the neighbourhood of it is distin-
guished for its natural richness and fertility. For agricultural
purposes there is, perhaps, no better land in the colony.
Towards the eastern extremity of the colony, near Corner
Inlet, is the settlement of Alherton , which serves as one of the
outlets of Gipp’s Land District.
In the vicinity of Mount Alexander, and in other auriferous
districts, several townships have been laid out within the last
few years, some of which are already populous and thriving.
The most considerable of these is Castlemaine , which is about
sixty-five miles distant from Melbourne; and the roadbetween it
and the capital is at all times travelled by crowds of persons pass-
ing to, or returning from the diggings. The motley appearance of
these travellers, as coming from almost every part of the world —
even from China; the rude and primitive vehicles which are
met with everywhere on the road; and the military escorts
which guard the weekly produce of the gold-fields, give to the
whole scene a novel and exciting aspect. The road to Balla~
rat , which is in a more westerly direction, exhibits similar
features —as indeed do all the roads to the districts in which
gold has been discovered.


Of the agricultural townships in the interior, Kyneton is the
most populous and thriving. It is on the Mount Alexander
road,
SOUTHERN AUSTRALIA.
The colony of Southern Australia lies to the westward of New
South Wales and Victoria; and it has been so called because it
includes within its boundaries a large portion of the southern
coast of the Australian continent. From east to west it extends
from the meridian of 141°, which divides it from Victoria and
New South Wales to the meridian of 132°; and it stretches
into the interior as far as the parallel of 26°. The area within
the present limits of this colony is estimated to contain about
300,000 square miles, but not a twentieth part of it has as yet
been occupied by settlers. The occupied portion of the colony
lies principally in the neighbourhood of Spencer’s and St. Vin-
cent’s Gulfs.
Southern Australia is more strictly agricultural than any
other of the Australian colonies, excepting Van Diemen’s Land.
It is, however, very rich in mineral treasures, as copper, lead,
iron, tin, &c. Its copper ores in particular are most abundant,
and perhaps the richest in the world. The most productive of
the copper mines is Burra-Burra, which is situated about ninety
miles to the northward of Adelaide. The ores of this mine
contain from thirty to seventy-one per cent, of pure copper.
The want of running water is severely felt in this colony; for
with the exception of the lower portion of the Murray, it does
not contain a single stream which deserves the name of river.
Even the Torrens, on the banks of which its capital is built, is,
for eight months of the year, either dried up altogether or con-
verted into detached pools. Fortunately, however, for the
inhabitants, an abundant supply of good water may be procured
in almost every part of the settlement, and at all seasons of the
year, by sinking wells; and the quantity of rain which falls
annually is found to be sufficient for tlie purposes of the hus-
bandman. The rains fall chiefly during the winter months,
which, in Australia, are June, July, and August; and at all
other seasons of the year the atmosphere is, generally speaking,
dry, and the sky clear and cloudless.
Adelaide, the capital, is situated about four miles from the
eastern shore of St. Vincent’s Gulf. It is a well built and
flourishing town; and its population at present is upwards of
20,000. Port Adelaide, on an inlet of the gulf about eight miles
north-west of the capital, is connected with it by a good road;
and a railway between the two is in process of construction.


About the same distance from the capital as Port Adelaide, but
in a south-westerly direction, is the thriving village of Glenelg. ,
on that part of the gulf called Holdfast -Bay, Macclesfield,
which is about thirty-four miles to the south-east of Adelaide, is
one of the most flourishing townships of the mining districts; and
Kooringa , near the Burra-Burra mine, is also a busy and thriving
place. It contains several thousand inhabitants, with churches,
schools, inns, and shops of various kinds. The other towns in
the colony are Gawler , about twenty-five miles north-by-east of
Adelaide; and about the same distance eastward from Adelaide
the pretty village of Hansdorf, which is populated by an indus-
trious colony of Germans; Port Lincoln, a promising settlement
on the south-western shore of Spencer’s Gulf; and Kingscote, a
beautifully situated village on the shore of Nepean Bay, in the
eastern part of Kangaroo Island.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia, which was originally called the Swan
Fiver Settlement, comprises the south-western corner of the
Australian continent, or that portion of it which is south of the
parallel of 30°, and west of the meridian of 120°. It is the
poorest and least promising of the Australian colonies. The
most important parts of the colony are those in the neighbour-
hood of Swan River, on the west coast, and King George’s
Sound on the south. Perth , the little capital of the colony,
stands upon the northern bank of the Swan liiver, about nine
miles from the sea. Below the town the Swan discharges itself
into an estuary called Melville Water, at the mouth of which is
Fremantle, the principal port of the settlement. At Fremantle
has been recently formed a convict establishment on a limited
scale. In the interior, a few miles above Perth, on the banks
of the Swan River, are the small villages of Guilford and York;
and on the shores of Geography Bay is the small and not very
promising settlement of Australind. On King George’s Sound,
which is a fine bay, surrounded on three sides by hills, is the
little town of Albany, which is the principal place in this part of
the colony.
This colony has scarcely yet recovered from the difficulties
experienced by the first settlers on the banks of the Swan River;
but its prospects are now decidedly better. Compared, however,
with the much younger colonies of South Australia and Victoria,
its progress has been very slow. Though it is more than a
quarter of a century since it was first colonized the amount ot
the whole population is under 10,000.


The chief export from Western Australia is wool , though
sheep-farming cannot be said to be very successful. Cattle,
however, and horses thrive well in it; and it will not, it is sup-
posed, be found deficient in mineral wealth. Good coal has been
found in the neighbourhood of the Swan River, and lead, also,
has been discovered in several parts of the colony. Indications
of the existence of iron, copper, and other minerals, have also
been observed in different parts of it.
Sandal-wood and several other descriptions of trees valuable
for timber are abundant in this colony; particularly a tree called
the jarrah, which is found to be well adapted for ship-building.
From Western Australia bullocks, sheep, and potatoes are
exported to our colonies of Singapore and the Mauritius; and
sandal-wood to the markets of India and China.
THE CLIMATE OF AUSTRALIA.
As the Australian continent stretches from within eleven
degrees of the equator to the parallel of 39°, there must, neces-
sarily, be great diversities in its temperature and climate. Gene-
rally speaking, i© the northern parts of it, the heat is equal to
that which is felt in other tropical countries; and in the south-
eastern portions of it, that is, in the British colonies, it is much
the same as that which is experienced in the southern countries
of Europe. Measured, therefore, by our standard, the climate
of every part of Australia is very hot; but it is found that the
British settler soon becomes accustomed to it, and that It has no
injurious effects upon his constitution. The heat of this climate
is not productive of lassitude like that which is felt in other
countries at equal distances from the equator; and the settler,
therefore, is seldom prevented by it from pursuing his usual out-
door occupations. In the summer months, indeed, the heat in
most parts of Australia is really intense ; and when the hot
winds blow, it becomes altogether insupportable. These winds,
the sirocco of Australia, blow from the interior of the country
during the extreme heats of summer, but, fortunately, they do
not occur oftener than about four times a-year, nor do they con-
tinue longer than from twenty-four to thirty-six hours. These
hot winds are injurious and often destructive to vegetation ;
and upon the beasts of the field they produce similar effects,
particularly when, under their scorching influence, the streams at
which they quenched their burning thirst are entirely dried up.
Sad proofs of this are often met with in such localities; and even
along the roads in the interior, the whitened bones of oxen, and
other beasts of burden, which perished during their journey for


Name of Place.
Latitude.
Moan
Summer
Temperature.
Mean
Winter
Temperature.
Annual
Temperature.
1
o /
O
o
0
London,
N.
51 30
63
3.9 i
51
Dublin,
53 23
60
40
50
Edinburgh,.
„
55 57
58
38
47
Sydney,
S.
33 51
74
55
65
Melbourne,
37 48
65
48
57
Adelaide, .
34 57
82
56
65
Hobart Town,
42 53
63
42
52
Auckland, .
36 51
67
51
59
Gibraltar, .
36 7
77
57
67
Cape of Good Hope
34 11
74
58
66
New York,
N.
40 49
71
30
51
Quebec,
46 49
68
14
41
Toronto,
43 40
65
25
45
Jamaica,
18 0
81
76
78
Hong Kong,
22 12
81
55
68
Calcutta,
22 35
86
72
82
Constantinople, .
9f
41 0
71
41
56
Cairo,
30 2
85
58
72
Singapore, .
1 17
81
79
80
want of water, are frequently seen. The effects produced by
these scorching winds upon the human frame, are checked per-
spiration, a determination of blood to the head, feverish excite-
ment, great exhaustion, and a difficulty of breathing, almost
amounting to suffocation. It is at these periods that the dust,
which is one of the discomforts of Australia, becomes a real
plague. Driven by the winds, it makes its way through the
thick veils which are worn to keep it off the faces of those who
are exposed to it; nor are even closed windows and doors a suffi-
cient protection against its all-pervading particles.
With these drawbacks the climate of Australia may be said
to be in general very fine and very healthy. Upon pulmonary
complaints the extreme dryness of its atmosphere has a most
beneficial effect. In fact, such diseases are very rare in Australia.
We shall now add, in a tabular form, the mean summer,
winter, and annual temperatures of the capitals of the British
islands, the chief towns in Australia, and a few other places of
note in different parts of the world, with their distances from
the equator, north or south.
The above table will enable us to form a more precise idea
of the climate of our Australian colonies, particularly if we


keep in mind, that the more equable the temperature is, the
more favourable, generally speaking, is the climate. This
observation applies to places whose mean annual temperatures
are nearly the same, but whose winter and summer temperatures
are very different. For example, the mean annual temperatures
of London and New York are nearly the same, namely 51°, but
their mean summer and winter temperatures are very different.
In London, the mean summer temperature is about 63°, and
the mean winter, about 39|° ; while in New York the former
is about 71°, ami the latter about 30°. In London, therefore,
the temperature is more equable than in New York, and, con-
sequently, the climate may be said to be more favourable.
TAN DIEMEN’S LAND, OR TASMANIA.
The large and important island of Van Diemen's Land , or Tas-
mania, forms a fifth Australian colony. As it has been already
described, we shall merely add a few particulars regarding its
present condition and prospects.
Its convict settlements, the horrors of hush-ranging, and the
murderous conflicts with the natives, retarded, for a long period,
the colonization of this beautiful and fertile island; but it is now
entirely free from these evils, and it promises to become, at no
distant day, one of the most important of the British colonies.
From its insular position, and its greater distance from the
equator, its temperature is more equable and much cooler than
that of the Australian continent. In fact, it may be regarded
as possessing, in almost every respect, one of the finest climates
in the world.
Though the industry of this colony is chiefly agricultural, yet
sheep farming is carried on very successfully in it, and wool
forms a large portion of its exports. Whale-fishing is also car-
ried on very extensively from its shores. The tracts of land
situated on the eastern and northern sides of the island are
those in which agriculture is carried on with the greatest success.
All the grains, fruits, and vegetables, of middle and southern
Europe, are produced there in great abundance, and of excellent
quality—particularly wheat and potatoes, great quantities of
which are exported to the neighbouring colonies of Victoria and
New South Wales.
Coal has been found in several parts of the island, and also
iron ores of very pure quality. Copper has also been found in
some of the hills near the coast; and indications of the existence
of lead and other useful minerals have been observed in several
localities.


Timber is abundant in it; and in Hobart Town, and on the banks
of the Huon, ship-building is carried on to a considerable extent
In 1851 the population of the entire island amounted to
74,000, but it has since largely increased. In 1803, when it
was first colonized, the aboriginal or native inhabitants amounted
to several thousands, but they have now entirely disappeared
from it. In 1835 Lite remnants of this unfortunate race were
removed, with their own consent, from the mainland to Flinder’s
Island, in Bass’s Strait. Their number then was 210; and
though every care has been taken of them since, which civiliza-
tion and Christianity could suggest, they are now nearly extinct.
In seven years after (in 1842), their numbers were reduced to
fifty-four; and in 1848 there were only thirteen men, twenty-
two women, five boys, and five girls remaining—in all but forty-
five! They were then removed to a station at Oyster Creek, on
D’Entrecasteaux Channel, which was considered a more favour-
able locality. They are under the care of the Colonial Government.
Hobart Town, the capital, is peculiarly well adapted for com.
merce. It stands on the banks of the Derwent, about fourteen
miles above the entrance of the river into Storm Bay, and ships
of the largest size can come close up to its wharfs. The
town is built around the shores of a small and sheltered bight
called Sullivan’s Cove; and the approach to it by the river is
through scenery of the most beautiful and picturesque description;
and the huge mass of Mount Wellington, which, for six months in
the year, is capped with snow, forms a magnificent background to
the picture. In fact, the scenery in the neighbourhood of Hobart
Town surpasses, in picturesque beauty, even that of Sydney.
The population of Hobart Town is now (1857) considerably
above 20,000.
The second town In the colony is Launceston, which is about
130 miles from the capital. It stands immediately above the
junction of the North and South Esk rivers, which by their union
form the estuary of the Tamar. Its site is low and unhealthy,
and from the difficulty of the navigation of the Tamar, it is not
well adapted for commerce. Ships of the larger class are
obliged to discharge their cargoes at George Town, near the
entrance of the estuary. Between Launceston and Hobart
To.vn there is a good macadamized road, which is daily travelled
by stage-coaches.
Launceston is the nearest port to the Australian mainland,
and between it and the neighbouring colonies there are frequent
communications by means of steamers. The population of
Launceston is about 10,000.


The other towns in Van Diemen’s Land are Port Arthur ,
which was formerly the head-quarters of the convict settlements,
and in the interior, Campbell Town , Oatlands, and Green Pond ,
which are small but thriving places. They are all situated on
the main line of road between the capital and Launceston.
There is also another small town called Richmond , about fourteen
miles from Hobart Town, at the head of an estuary which runs
up to the southward of Storm Bay. As Richmond forms the
outlet of an extensive agricultural district, it will probably soon
become an important town.
Norfolk Island was formerly under the government of Van
Diemen’s Land, but since it ceased to be used as a penal settle-
ment, it has been transferred to the colony of New South Wales.
This beautiful and fertile little island has been given up to the
descendants of the mutineers of the Bounty, who were removed
to it from Pitcairn's Island , in 1855, at the expense of the
Government. The whole of this interesting little community
numbered, when removed to their new abode, 194, including
men, women, and children.
Norfolk Island contains 13£ square miles, and lies about 900
miles distant from the east coast of Australia (S. lat. 29° 3',
E. long. 167° 58').
In each of the five Australian colonies the supreme executive
authority is vested in a governor appointed by the Crown. But
the Governor of New South Wales ranks as the Governor-
General of all the British possessions in Australia. In 1850 a
law was passed by the British Parliament which gave to the
Australian colonies the power of independent legislation, by
means of a representative system; and they have all, with the
exception of Western Australia, availed themselves of the pri-
vilege. The form which they have adopted (which was in a
great measure left to themselves) is in accordance with the Bri-
tish Constitution, namely, an Upper and a Lower House. The
former is called the Legislative Council, and the latter the
Legislative Assembly. In New South Wales, the members of the
Legislative Council are, under certain restrictions, nominated by
the Crown, the Lower House only being elective. In the other co-
lonies the members of both Houses are elected by the inhabitants.
In the Australian colonies education has not been neglected.
Under the auspices of the Colonial Governments, colleges and
other educational institutions have been established, and—which
is of still greater importance—many excellent schools have been
opened in different parts of the colonies, for the education of all
classes of the people.


IMPROVED SCHOOL BOOKS,
BY PROFESSOR SULLIVAN.
I.
THE SPELLING-BOOK SUPERSEDED; or A
New and Easy Method of Teaching the Spelling, Meaning, Pro-
nunciation, and Etymology of all the Difficult Words in the English
Language; with Exercises on Verbal Distinctions ; and an Appendix,
containing Proverbs and Precepts to be used as Copy-pieces (sup-
plied by a distinguished Prelate). Forty-tifth Edition. Price Is. 4 d,
11.
GEOGRAPHY GENERALIZED; or, An Intro-
duction to the Study of Geography, on the Principles of Classi-
fication and Comparison; with upwards of 700 Questions for Exa-
mination; with Maps and Illustrations, and an Introduction to
Astronomy and Geology. Twenty-eighth Edition. Price 2s.
HI.
AN INTRODUCTION TO GEOGRAPHY, Ancient,
Modern, and Sacred; with an Outline of Ancient History.
Maps and Illustrations. Thirty-sixth Edition. Price Is.
iv.
A N ATTEMPT TO SIMPLIFY ENGLISH GRAM-
MA MAR, with Observations on the Method of Teaching it.
Thirtieth edition. Price Is.
v.
THE DICTIONARY OF DERIVATIONS; or An
•A introduction to Etymology, on a New Plan. Seventh Edition
Enlarged. Price 2s.


VI.
DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LAN-
GUAGE, for the use of Schools, and for General Reference.
Sixth Edition. Price 3 s. 6d.
VII.
T HE LITERARY CLASS BOOK; or, Readings
in English Literature; to which is prefixed an Introductory-
Treatise on the Art of Reading and the Principles of Elocution.
Fourth Edition. Price 2s. 6d.
VIII.
pAPERS ON POPULAR EDUCATION, Original
and Selected, for the use of the Managers and Teachers of Ele-
mentary Schools. Price Is, 6d.
%* The circulation of these books in Ireland, Great Britain,
and the Colonics, amounts to upwards of 130,000 copies per annum,
as appears by the following return, from Messrs. A. Thom and Sons,
the Government Printers in Ireland:—
“By referring to our books wc find that 535,500 copies of Professor
Sullivan’s School Books have been printed in our establishment within the
last foift- years.
“Alex. Thom and Sons.
“Ist July, 1850.”
MARCUS AND JOHN SULLIVAN,
27, MARLBORO UGH-SXREET,
SCHOOL BOOK AND EDUCATIONAL PUBLISHERS,
Are constantly supplied with the above Works,
THE IRISH NATIONAL SCHOOL BOOKS,
and all New Publications of Merit.
Dublin: Printed by Alex. Thom and Sons, 87, Abbey-street.
•** Booksellers and Educational Establishments will be liberally dealt
with, and to all Schools for the Education of the Poor, School Books and
School Requisites will be supplied on the lowest possible terms.


