

THE RISE AND PROGRESS
Quartz Mussing |
GLUMES.
By THE SPECIAL REPORTER OF THE “STAB.”
PEICE : OH"E SHILLIira.
BALLARAT:
Printed at “ The Ballarat Star ” Office, Sturt Street.
1 8 C 9.
f '
m t
OoJ J
1
‘V
6^o




THE RISE AND PROGRESS
Quartz Muring
cxjTjustieis.
13f the special reporter OF THE “ STAR.”
PBXCB : OHE SUXXiXjXiTCr.
BALLARAT:
Printed at “ The Ballarat Star ” Office, Sturt Strecti
1 8 0 9.




iT-i -rr
THE RISE AND PROGRESS
QUARTZ MINING AT CLUNKS.
By THE SPECIAL REPORTER OP THE “STAR.”
About thirteen years ago in attempting to get back
to Creswick from Tarrengower, I straggled into a wild
desolate looking place with which I was utterly un-
acquainted, and which I felt anxious to get away from
as soon as possible. A drizzling rain and a doubt as
to whether I had not missed the track made the
dreary prospect still more uninviting than the na-
turally repugnant features of what appeared to be an
almost unoccupied waste. The home station in the
valley, unknown to me then, was not visible where I
sat on my horse, doubtful of the direction to take,
uncertain of where I was and whether there would be
sufficient daylight to enable me to reach my destina-
tion before darkness mystified me more than ever.
Seeing a dingy and diminutive tent in the distance, I
made to it and enquired of some rough looking in-
habitants if I was on the road to Creswick, and what
place that was? The answer was that I was going
right and that I was at Clunes. This made me look
round with interest, for though I had never seen, I
had heard a great deal about Clunes, and knew that
there gold had been discovered at a very early, if
not the earliest, date in Victoria. Having
journeyed pretty well round and through the
county of Talbot during an election for the Legis-
lative Assembly, I had heard very strong expressions
of opinion by miners in nearly every part of the
county in reference to the Clunes quartz reefs. It
had become generally known that some negotiations
were going on between the proprietors of the land on
which the quartz reefs cropped out, and some mining
speculator who proposed to form a company to work
them on a large scale. Many of the miners expressed
their determination to proceed to Clunes and resist
any attempt to work those reefs by the landowners


or any one delegated by them. The popular min-
ing view was that the reefs had been sold by
the connivance or mistake of the Government, that
the people (meaning the miners who wanted claims)
had been robbed of their patrimony, and that they
were justified in resisting, by force, any attempt to
use the land for private benefit in the hope, then re-
garded as a certainty, that the sale would in some
way be annulled, or at least a law be enacted to enable
miners to enter upon alienated land for mining purposes.
At this time very wild notions were held by the
miners as to their lights, and they had rather wide,
and free and easy notions as to the rights of others
than themselves. In several instances these wild
notions had been carried out, and private laud rushed
and worked out without any sufficient interference of
the authorities, and without the owners getting any
compensation from either the miuersorthe Government.
These things made the name of Chines more than in-
teresting, and 1 learned from the residents of the tent
I had addressed, that they were occupied in what
they called “holding on to the reefs.” Some six
months after this, hearing that Mr Charles Kinnear
had succeeded in forming a co-operative company of a
hundred men, and had taken possession of the reefs, I
rode over, out of curiosity, to observe the situation of
affairs. The outsiders had increased in numbers, and
it was apparent that many miners had kept their
promise to return to dunes and resist the working of
the reefs. There was resolute antagonism outside, and
doubts andfears inside the paddock, and had it not been
for the resolute bearing of the resident proprietor, and
the pluck, and energy of J. M. Davis, the first mining
manager, and craft of the projector of the company, the
co-operatives would never have mustered up couiage
to go to work. The co-opcratives, not without
a show of reason, considered that they ought to
be put in quiet possession of the claim, and they
also seemed to think that some one ought to have
maintained possession and have done any necessary
fighting for them. Raids were made into the paddock
at night-time, and rich stone, on or near the surface,
taken out and crushed at a mill on the banks of the
creek outside the pre-emptive right. This state of
things went on for some time, arrests were made for
trespass, and the majority of the outside miners in
time became convinced that their efforts were futile to
stop the progress of the company’s works. There
were some wild attempts to enlist public sympathy, but
at this time no effort was made to state a case
for the authorities, and no reasonable means (if any)


were taken to obtain the interference of the Crown
law officers or of Parliament in the matter, and the
greatest and most important experiment in quartz
mining in Victoria was successfully inaugurated.
Two very important questions affecting the interests
of not only our mining population, but of the whole
community, were influenced by the first success and
the after success of the Climes Co-operative Quartz
Mining Company over their outside opponents. In
the first instance, an experiment was initiated on a
scale sufficiently large, on what was then almost en-
tirely a new character of mining adventure. Nothing
is better proof of the novelty of the experiment than a
comparison of the price paid for crushing by the Clunes
Company,at the time it started work, and the price
now paid in the Ballarat district. Then it was £3 or
£3 10s per ton, now it varies from 4s to 20s per ton.
It would not be saying too much if I were to assert
that the success of the Clunes Company was the cause
of the development and rapid progress of quartz
mining in Victoria, that it has, in connection with the
Port Phillip Crushing Company, placed Victoria in
advance of any country in the world, both as to
scientific and practical gold mining, and dealing with
the auriferous stone when delivered at the mill, in all
the various ways which experience has taught. This
may seem tall talking to those who are not well
acquainted with the literature of gold mining, and
who have not had the opportunity of knowing what
is doing in the more ancient gold mines
of other parts of the world, where all that science can
do has been done in conjunction with cheap labor to
save all the gold that it is commercially profitable to
save. Those who have perused the letters of the
various secretaries of the Boyal mines of Hungary and
Austria, as well as communications from the greatest
authorities of England, will not be surprised at my
statement. Every now and then we hear of some new
invention that is to work wonders, as, for instance, in
an American newspaper, a few months back, the name of
which I forget, there was an editorial upon the in-
vention of some captain or colonel, that extracted
three hundred per cent, of gold out of quartz in which
only the color could be discovered by fire assay.
Stupid as such an assertion was, it is hardly
more so than the once wild expectations
of the unlimited amount of gold supposed to be left
in the generality of quartz tailings. In Europe the
gold not obtained amounts to from thirty to thirty-
five per cent., at Clunes it is now reduced to about
twenty-twd per cent., a large margin for inventors to


experiment upon, but nothing for us to cavil about as
practical miners and reducers of auriferous quartz.
This position in the foremost rank as scientific miners
we owe to the English and local company, and had
anything prevented the working of the Cluues reefs as
they have been worked, we should in all probability
be as far behind the rest of the mining world as some
of our newspaper critics seem to imagine we must be be-
cause they do not know any better. The other important
question that the success of the company influenced
was that of “ mining on private property,” as it is
generally called. The acquiescence of the Government
in the taking of the gold from the Chines reefs, and
in the levying of a so-called royalty by the proprietors,
was accepted as a tacit admission that the Crown
would not interfere with the bargains of mining ad-
venturers and the owners of land. It is not my busi-
ness in these papers to refer to this matter further
than it affected the progress or stability of quartz
mining on Clunes. Beaten in their direct attack on
the Clunes reefs, many of the men left the neighbor-
hood. A few of the more persevering took up
claims on the southern and northern boundaries of the
Clunes paddock, possibly with a hankering after the
stone inside, but with the expressed determination of
looking for the continuation of the quartz reefs north
and south. To the south the reefs cropped out im-
mediately outside the paddock, and could be traced
across the creek and valley till they showed on the
surface on the opposite rise. Though gold was seen
in the stone it was nothing like as rich as the stone
inside, and as it could be taken without difficulty and
■without danger or remonstrance, it was regarded with
undeserved contempt, as was afterwards proved by
the Criterion, the Clunes United, and the South
Clunes Companies. Many mining battles were fought
between the Criterion men and the insiders, both on and
in the ground and the law courts, and it was not until
the Clunes Company had carried out works at its
southern boundary for the protection of its ground,
that the Criterion men desisted from their encroach-
ments. Before this occurred the Sons of Freedom
Company, on the northern boundary, had, in sinking
for the reefs, come upon a quite unexpected lead, or
rather bank of washdirt, and had a considerable pad-
dock well filled before the Clunes Company suspected
that the lead had anything to do with their
claim. A shaft sunk opposite the outside shaft,
revealed the fact that the wash, if not entirely
within the paddock, was so with the excep-
tion of a corner or elbow upon which the


outsiders had bottomed. This intensified the anta-
gonism, and the feeling of injury became greater, and
seemed more justified, as there was an appearance of
equity in the claim set up by the outsiders that the
lead discovered by them should belong to them, and
not be taken from them by a company that had not
spent a shilling to discover or develop it. Two ideas
impregnated the minds of the miners, and to them
justified any effort against the company; one was,
that the company had no legal right to take the gold
out of sold land, as it belonged to the Crown, and the
other was, that the holders of miner’s-rights had an
equitable title to take the gold if they could get at it,
and they certainly did their best to do so, and
succeeded to a considerable extent. At this time at
least a dozen shafts were being sunk along the paddock
fence, with the intention of driving into the paddock
to take out washdirt. Considerable success attended
their efforts, for it was admitted in court that over
£60,000 worth of gold had been washed out by the
various outside companies. The washdirt trended
further and further into the paddock until it was out
of reach of the last shafts sunk eastward of
the Sons of Freedom, the Ballarat West Com-
pany having driven between 200 and 300 feet
into the paddock without breaking through. The
Clunes Company struggled manfully against their
outside assailants, and were gradually beating them,
by cutting them off from their inside works. The out-
siders, though harassed, were undaunted, and some-
times drove over and sometimes under their opponents’
drives to get out the washdirt. All this was not only
vexatious, but costly, to the Clunes Company. The
law was often invoked, but with little beneficial re-
sult. Every obstruction was offered to the surveyor
who appeared with authority to descend the outside
shafts, and when he succeeded in getting down, the
outsiders resorted to every artifice and subterfuge to
prevent the discovery of encroachments, and even
when discovered, the remedy to the company
mining for gold on private lauds was of
a very doubtful kind. Injunctions were granted
by the courts, and frequently disregarded or
evaded. When the outsiders were nearly at a stand-
still, a new direction was given to their attack and an
appeal made to the Government to stop the works of
the Clunes Company, on the ground that they were
illegally at work, and without authority taking away
the gold which of right belonged to the Crown, and
that in so doing they were depriving the discoverers
of the alluvial lead of the results of their enterprise


and labor. A careful statement of the facts as they
then existed, and of the law affecting those facts was
made, and delegates appointed to proceed to Mel-
bourne and present a memorial to the Governor and the
Ministers of the day. The memorial prayed that the
Clunes Company might be stopped from working the
alluvial lead or hindering the outsiders from so doing.
It recognised the public benefit of the quartz mining
operation, and on that ground expressly did not ask
for any interference with it. After a long interview
with his Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, Mr O’Shanassy,
and Mr Chapman the delegates were promised that
they should have a written answer to the memo-
rial. After besieging the Crown law-offices and having
several interviews with the then Attorney-General (Mr
Ireland) and the Solicitor-General (Mr Chapman) a
promise was made that a letter should be sent calling
upon the company to stop work on the alluvial
ground. This letter was sent and caused consterna-
tion in the inside camp, though very little was said
about it in the neighborhood of Clunes. The com-
pany, of course, remonstrated, and produced its
charter from the Crown, giving it a right to mine for
the precious metals within her Majesty’s dominions.
The production of the charter acted on the Attorney-
General in the opposite way it was expected, and per-
emptory instructions were forwarded to stop all the
works. The production of the charter was regarded
as an attempt to defy the Constitutional Government
of the colony, into whose hands the Crown had sur-
rendered all its rights over the lands of the colony.
At this time there was a disposition to compromise
with the outsiders, but neither side proposed terras.
At a meeting of the outside committee a statement
was made that a compromise might be come
to, but it was almost unanimously determined
to have all or none. It was pointed out that in-
siders were working hard to bring about a collision;
that a riot would discredit the outsiders with the
public, and that they would then be deserted by the
Government, and instead of getting half the alluvial
ground in peace they would get nothing but what had
already been secured. In less than a fortnight the
collision took place. Attempts to smoke each other
out had been continuous. Men went below with arms
of one kind or another, and prodded at each other
with long iron rods; timber was knocked out to ren-
der ground insecure, until one evening, when the
night shifts came to work, a speech was made from the
brace of the Sons of Freedom shaft, and the outsiders
rushed the inside shaft, cut down the whim, set fire to the


shed, pitched timber down the shaft, knowing that
men were below at the time. This was the end of
the outsiders. Police were sent up from Ballarat
with instructions to take possession of all the outside
shafts. This was done, but the men resolutely
stayed below, determined to defend what they con-
sidered their property to the last. The women went
to the shafts to speak to their husbands, and dropped
down food to them, but were afterwards prevented
by the police. Mr Warden Amos (who was drowned
in the London) and Air Superintendent Foster were
the officers in charge, and on the promise of one of
them that the drives should be left intact, the men
were advised to come up. This- promise was not kept.
When the police left and the men got posses-
sion of their 'shafts it was found that the
drives were strongly barricaded at the boundary-line
of the paddock, and the timber pulled down in some
instances beyond the boundary. Still some hope was
kept alive that Government meant to act up to the
intimation given by its Attorney-General; but this
was soon after dispelled by Sir Henry Barkly, who,
on passing through Clunes, was waited upon by a
deputation of outsiders. Calling one of the delegates
who had presented the memorial to him in Melbourne
aside, his Excellency urged that the struggle was use-
less, and advised its abandonment; and on being
pressed with the argument that the Attorney-General
had taken action against the company, said no depend-
ence could be placed upon him, and what had been
done was not likely to be followed up. Thus ended the
wars of the outsiders and insiders. A bitter feeling
existed for a long time after, but has gradually died
out, and the facts themselves have grown dim, as men
found room and opportunity for their energy and
activity on the Crown lands to the north and south of
the Clunes Company, and discovered that industry and
enterprise were better remunerated than fighting
questions of equity and doubtful law. The result
has been that the Clunes Company is now the centre
of a great mining industry, which bids fair to stretch
on the north to the Majorca, and back south to the
Bald Hills, spreading out west and east of the direct
line of the celebrated Clunes reefs, till stopped by the
granite range on the south and checked by the deep
alluvial ground to the east, and new reefs and
deeper leads may be discovered than have hardly yet
been dreamed of; and junctions may be effected be-
tween Creswiek, Bald Hills, Ballarat, and other leads,
until they trend into one or more great—but yet
undiscovered —auriferous arteries, the ultimate dire?-


turn of which it would be presumptuous to indicate at
present.
The Climes Co-operative Quart/ Mining Company,
and the White Flat Company, Ballarat, which was
also co-operative, were the first attempts in the colony
at mining on a lai'ge scale, and proved that extensive
operations were not only possibl* l , but profitable, and
that the co-operative principle had a vitality and
practical usefulness capable of indefinite extension
and application. This promise has not been ful-
filled, because business experience and economical
laws were disregarded, but it has bridged over the
gulf that separated ignorance and narrow-minded
selfishness from experience and intelligent progress.
The formation and successful working of these two
companies widened the ideas of the miners and their
local representatives, and the very men who had at-
tempted to howl down the supporters of the recom-
mendation of the White Flat lease and to predict the
failure of the Clunes Company were among the first to
propose grand extension schemes which gave to one
man more land than either company was formed to
work. It is generally supposed that the placing an
amount of capital to the credit of a company is a new
idea. Twelve years ago the Clunes Company and the
White Flat Company, Ballarat, placed the whole
amount paid for shares to the credit of the shareholders,
and no calls were ever made in either company. The
promoters of these companies deserve the credit of
having first initiated large operations in alluvial and
quartz mining in Victoria, and of having led the way
to larger combinations of capital and labor, and to more
liberal local laws, without which our deep leads would
not have been developed, and of having been actually
ten years ahead of the promoting world, in what is
now admitted to be the only correct way of starting a
company. The Clunes Freehold Company has now
been at work for twelve years, has produced over
£1,000,000 worth of gold, out of a claim equal to about
thirteen men’s ground, under the Ballarat bylaws, and
bids fair to produce as much more during the
next twelve years. This alone would make the story
of the Clunes Company of historical value, but it has
done more. When its present mining manager, Mr
C. J. Harvey, was appointed in 1857, some six or
seven months after work had been started, the mine
was being poked and fossicked over very unlike, to
say the least, the initiation of a great and permanent
undertaking. The hundred co-operatives were of all


Sorts, gooti, bad, and indifferent, and, like the general
public, required educating as to what mining really
was. Many of the men held half-working shares, and
received from the holder of the other half 25s to 30s
per week until dividends were paid. The process of
education was gradual, and some curious and
instructive results came out in the process.
At the time (1857) that this company was
started, it would have been impossible to have
obtained capital in any other way than it was
obtained. Like many other successful companies,
there was more flourish than fact about the allotment
of shares. Of the hundred co-operative shares at £ls
each, not half were actually applied for. Many were
given away, and a large proportion were allotted to
men who gave promissory notes for the fifteen pounds,
a sufficient proof that even in this way it was difficult
to get capital. Under these circumstances there
could be no choice of men, and fitness or capacity
was not questioned. Some had never been down
a shaft, some had never put in a set of
timber, others had never struck a drill or put
in a blast in the course of their lives. One
or two things saved the company from early ruin, the
stone was easily gctt at, and was rich, and the .associa-
tion of the mining company with the Port Phillip
Company was a fortuitous combination of capital and
labor that probably saved both. The co-operative
company had neither experience, capital, nor credit,
and could not have held together; and the Port
Phillip Company, which had failed in all, or nearly
all its former ventures, had exhausted its capital, and
disgusted its shareholders, and could not have lasted
much longer. The co operative idea saved both.
It is only proposed to trace the salient and import-
ant features in the history of the mine, and not the
personal differences that existed. To Mr Charles Ivi li-
near belongs the undoubted credit of initiating the
company, putting it in possession, and starting work in
the face of an opposition, and in the midst of threats
and actual peril that few men would have succesfully
faced, and which required a combination of qualities
not frequently found in one individual. The co-ope-
rative idea was only successful in the initiation of the
company. The conditions of co-operative success
never existed. The simplest business necessi-
ties were disregarded, and the few capable men
in the crowd soon began to object to the
bungling and incapacity of the rest. Gradually
demoralisation took place, until the laziest and most
incapable man became the pattern and example of


the whole lot. This resulted from the good, bad, and
indifferent being paid all alike. No extra ex-
ertion, no greater skill, obtained for its
possessor tangible recognition. There was a
dead level, a stagnant uniformity, that ended in
bringing down every man to the lowest level of inca-
pability and uselessness. The first deep shaft sunk
through dry state reef was nearly lost by the insiders,
and men had to be employed outside the company’s
force to set it to rights. The co-operatives used to only
pretend to work when they had the chance, and at
this shaft they used to draw the signal hammer line
up the shaft and carry it into the shed where the whole
shift played cards, and when the deal was taking
place the hammer would be set going, to make it ap-
pear that they were at work ,in case anyone
was passing. This is sufficient to indicate the
state of things that had grown out of what
was called a co-operative organisation—that was, co-
operative in nothing but having a joint interest in a
claim that was being ruined, and an expended capital
of £l5OO that was being lost. Had it been possible to
have destroyed the mine by carelessness, incapacity,
and folly, it would have been destroyed, and the more
intelligent of the shareholders saw that the time was
approaching when a change must b£ made if the mine
was to be developed and made to pay as it ought.
Gradually the men became convinced that by aban-
doning the co-operative form and letting the work of
the mine on contract, they would get as much out of
it as they did whilst doing the work of the mine them-
selves. When the change was made this was found to
bo the case, and was a sufficient proof of the value of
the work done by the hundred co-operative partners.
This result must not be regarded as any proof of the
value of co-operative organisations, but as merely indi-
cating the utter inutility of the mere form of co-
operation when all the usual conditions of successful
and efficient work are abandoned. We may
learn from this that until we can wed the practi-
cal business experience of the old forms of indus-
try to the principle of co-operation, it will never
become more than an initiative power in the history of
industrial development, and what Carlyle calls the
“ organisation of labor” will continue to be an impotent
aspiration, without form, without force, without cohe-
sion; a battle-cry of the working millions that
will never lead to that industrial victory which the
most intelligent in their ranks seek as the goal where
labor and skill shall be the co-equal of capital, and
cease to be the victim of chance or change for the


future, when the promise of the golden year shall be
kept.
“ When wealth no more shall rest in mounded heaps.
And light shall spread, and man be liker man
Thro’ all the seasons of the golden year.”
The change from co-operative to contract work
marks a new era in the company, and ever since that
period the mine has steadily progressed, the manager
having resolutely persisted in keeping the mine open
ahead of actual profitable operations, his object being
to have at least some three or four years profitable
work in sight. The amount of dead work
required to be done was not paid for with-
out a struggle, as it seemed to lessen the dividends
from the mine while, in reality, it was providing for
continuous in the place of intermittent dividends, and
set an example which has been of incalculable ad-
vantage by encouraging other companies to do the
same, though it has too often been disregarded for the
sake of immediate returns, or for the purpose of rigg-
ing the market, an operation that is not new to either
Ballarat or London. As the Chines Company developed
others followed suit. The Yankee Company and the
Victoria were the only companies at work on the
north, and the Criterian and Clunes United on the
south of the paddock. In the meantime the town-
ship had been steadily increasing in dimensions and
population. In 1860 it was proclaimed a municipality,
and now a population of about 5000, all residing
in well built cottages and houses, gives some
slight indication of the result of twelve years
successful mining on the part of one well
managed company, for it is an unquestionable
fact that the result is owing to the success of the
Chines Quartz Mining Company, without which not
any of the present mining enterprises would have
been entered upon. What was a mere waste a few
years back is now a thriving town, with all the con-
comitants of civilisation, the centre of a great mining
industry surrounded by a fine agricultural district,
dotted with thriving homesteads. It was some years
before there was any great extension of mining enter-
prise, Though rich stone was obtained from the two
companies working on the north, the only claim taken
up beyond them was the now celebrated New North
Clunes. There had been one or two attempts to
occupy this ground, and an application for a lease of a
square mile of Crown lands to the south was made by
Mr Charles Kinuear, but none of these attempts came
to anything until Mr Wanliss’ application for a
lease of a portion of the ground now held


by the New North Climes Company, which
was recommended by the Local Court, to some extent
out of consideration to Mr Esmond, who claimed to be
the discoverer of the dunes gold-field, and had an
interest in the application. It will be remembered
that it was owing to this gentleman making known to
the Government the existence of gold on the surface
that the first Climes rush took place in 1851. The
ground was soon abandoned, as the miners, or rather
diggers, of that period had no experience of quartz
mining, and the land was sold as has been related.
The New North Climes lease was, I believe, the first
actually issued under the mining leasing regulations
originated by the O’Shanassy Government. It was
not the first applied for or recommended by the Local
Courts, as the White Flat lease, Ballarat, was applied
for in June, 1856, and another on the Commissioner’s
Flat, Creswick, but as there were no regulations and
no forms prepared, no leases were issued; and
although the applicants were put in possession
of the ground by the wardens, and paid the
rent of five pounds per acre per annum, they obtained
no title to the ground, and the working shareholders
in both instances obtained possession of the claims.
The local courts, going outside the powers conferred
by the act, saddled their recommendations with a
number of conditions, under the impression that they
were conserving the interests of the working-miner,
instead of which they, combined with the laches of the
Government, only deprived the projectors of the fruits
of their enterprise and superior knowledge, and en-
tirely ruined one of the companies referred to. The
New North Clunes application was in some respects
more fortunate, and obtained a title to the ground,
which was made over to Messrs Esmond and Irwin,
and a company formed, which expended its capital
and broke down without having discovered anything of
value. A second company was afterwards formed which
also broke down, and a third, on a larger scale, and addi-
tional ground obtained, and after the expenditure of a
large sum of money and a seven years’struggle, the enter-
prise and skill of the proprietors have been rewarded by
the possession of a mine that is affirmed by the most
competent judges to surpass in richness and continuity
any gold mine in the world. In the meantime a com-
pany had been formed to work the reefs on the south
side of the creek, but Avithout much success. The
first company was known as the White Flat Company,
named after the Ballarat alluvial company, and since
re-formed under the title of the South Clunes Quartz
Mining Company, which, if it has not had marked


succor, has clone sufficient to prove the fallacy and
absurdity of the notion that all the gold had gone to
the north. It may be as well to point out here that
north and south are relative terms which can have no
logical application, no scientific meaning of any im-
portance in connection with a system of quartz reefs,
except for a very limited distance. Had a mine been
started half a mile south of the Clunes Company, the
lodes would in all probability have got poorer as
they went north until the company’s claim had been
reached, and richer as they went south. There is little
doubt but that this will be practically proved, now
mining enterprise has set in south as well as north of
the Clunes paddock. The rich stone obtained from the
Yankee and Victoria claims gave force to the northern
notion, and the wonderful richess and size of the lode
in the New North Clunes naturally directed attention
to that line of country, and claims have now been
taken up, many of which are in full work, and carrying
on mining operations with a spirit and a method that
prove that the proprietors regard their claims as an
investment rather than as a speculation. Of these the
Clunes Consols, and the London and Australian are
the most notable examples, and are almost certain to
be the first to strike the continuation of the lode now
being worked by the New North Clunes Company.
“ All is not gold that glitters.” Clunes has had its
difficulties and its disasters, its failures and successes,
as well as other gold-fields. Rapid as has been its
progress, and great as has been its success, when com-
pared to old country ideas of progression, it has, for
Victoria, been a slow and laborious success. Clunes
can hardly claim any share in the honor of starting
the New North Clunes Company, and it is chiefly to
the enterprise of Ballarat that the great extension of
mining adventure is now due. The Clunes men are
deficient in what Mr Kinglake calls “ the initiative,”
and rarely move unless Ballarat instigates the action.
If it were not so, Clunes would hardly be without an
adequate supply of water for mining and domestic
purposes. Ten years ago, or less, the Murray cod was
no uncommon inhabitant of the Toollooroop Creek,
and a pair of black swans disputed the right of bathers
to invade a large water-hole opposite Mr M‘Donald’s
home-station. Now every water-hole is filled with
the sludge and tailings from the mines
for more than twenty miles beyond Clunes. The first
attempt to conserve the water of the creek was made
by the Port Phillip Company, and a dam was erected
across the creek. After a time the reservoir so made
became little better than a sludge hole, the sludge


from Creswlck gradually accumulating at the dam, and
choking the outlet pipe. This dam was carried away
by the storm waters some years ago, but without doing
much damage to the town or the mines, beyond flood-
ing out a few of the inhabitants, carrying away all the
bridges, and creating a sensation of a somewhat start-
ling character. A proposition was made by a resident
of Climes about this time to bring in water from
Birch’s Creek, but hardly any one would listen to it,
and no one showed any disposition to help its fulfil-
ment with the exception of Messrs Marks, Dockery,
and Langford. Circumstances prevented these gentle-
men going further in the matter. The line of race
was surveyed by Mr Stevenson, the district surveyor,
the distance from where the creek was turned to
Clunes, being seven miles with a fall of thirteen feet
to the mile. In the face of these facts an attempt was
made, I believe, by the municipality in conjunction
with the Government to bring in water from Coghill’s
Creek, on the south west of Clunes. The embank-
ment erected there was carried away, and after the
expenditure and absolute loss of over £20,000,
arrangements have, after nine years, been matured, or
nearly so, to bring the water in from Birch’s Creek
along the line of race originally surveyed. The Port
Phillip Company, more alive to the necessity of clean
water and fully aware of the loss of gold through
using water already charged with the slime from the
crushing mills, has had an engine pumping water
from Birch’s Creek which flows past Clunes about a
mile to the east of the works. It would be difficult
to calculate the loss of fine free gold from the
mills of the different companies, but some idea may
be formed from the fact that private parties have
sluiced the deposits from these mills and made it
pay. Had a private company brought in the water
from Birch’s Creek when it was originally surveyed there
is no doubt that they would have commanded an in-
come of between three and four thousand pounds per
annum, and at the same time blessed the community
with one of the vital necessities of life, and have
saved more gold for the companies than would have
paid for the works ten times over.
ITS GEOLOGICAL FEATURES.
Had the cataclysmic forces which cut the present
Clunes valley out of the basalt rock been a trifle less
energetic, we might have had a few more feet of
basalt, and the Clunes reefs would have been covered
and out of sight, and all the great things that have re-
sulted from the workings of these mines would not


have been. By such accidents as this, the most
trifling incident in the natural operations of _ the
material forces that affect the world, are our destinies
moulded and our histories made. Geology would have
done little to help us to the discovery of the _ hidden
treasures. The geology of gold is still in its infancy,
and gropes feebly in the dark, following more than
leading or directing the pick of the miner. The men
of science condescendingly allude to the practical
miner as a useful, but generally wrong-headed creature,
and no doubt he has often enough been wrong; but,
if a balance were struck between the two, it would be
found that when science has attempted to theorise
about golden leads or paying reefs, that it has been
more frequently wrong than the practical miner, who,
if he was wrong, proved it by hard and expensive
work, and generally added another fact or two
to our knowledge. Geology has made plenty
of mistakes in its own proper sphere, and
has garnered a crop of fallacies large enough
to teach its votaries prudence in promul-
gating notions in reference to the occurrence of gold,
which may any day be proved or disproved by the
work of the pick. To start a theory and then seek the
facts to establish it, is not only justifiable but useful,
but is a very dangerous practice, and like all a priori
reasoning, a new fact may take away the foundation
and topple over the edifice that was built upon it. The
safest process is to follow the slower but surer method
of deduction from ascertained facts. One of the most
important in connection with gold mining was the tracing
of our alluvial leads under the basaltic rock. The prac-
tical miner was very ignorant at the time this was done
in 1854 or 5, and geologists were not any wiser in
reference to this particular fact, for it is generally ad-
mitted that nowhere in the world had basalt or vol-
canic rocks of any kind been sunk through in search of
gold deposits beneath them. Nor is the practical miner
entitled to much credit in the matter, as he rather
followed his nose than anything else, and it was no
great intellectual effort to come to the conclusion that
it was advisable to sink through bluestone, after it
was proved to overlie the gold drifts, by following
them under the extreme edge of the basalt overflow.
From what I have said it will be understood that"! am
not going to give any undue weight to geological data,
and certainly not to any geological theory.
I have no intention of attempting to account
for many things that are mysterious. I make no pre-
tence of being an interpreter of what is called
“ nature.” I only propose to record facts and suggest


reasonable inferences. There are plenty of maps pub-
lished by one or another, some by government depart-
ments and some got up to order. In the most reliable
there is a great deal of delusion. It is very pleasant
to have leads laid down in bright yellow, and quartz
reefs dotted backwards and forwards in beautiful
conformity with one’s wishes; but, unfortunately for
us all, there is no reliability in these pleasant indica-
tions of pretentious science. There is not a surveyor
whose opinion is worth having but who will admit
that the topographical survey of the colony is defec-
tive, unreliable, and that nothing but an actual
survey of a particular reef will justify men
talking, as many have done of late of the
Climes line of reefs, for instance, being traceable
back to Cape Otway, and onward to Tarnagulla.
When we know that the sources of rivers are wrongly
laid down in every plan of the colony, that ranges are
put in where there are none, and left out where they
are most prominent, I shall perhaps not be thought
presumptuous if, in sketching the few simple geological
features of the Climes district, I question some of the
generally received facts .of constituted authorities. It
is broadly asserted by men of special attainments in
such matters, that our topographical survey is
from seven to eight miles out at the coast line,
and cannot be connected with the Admiralty
survey of the coast. It is time that we knew whether
this is fact or fiction; for the value of all other sur-
veys depends greatly on the correctness and complete-
ness of the topographical survey. It is sufficient for
my purpose to show that such blunders are believed
in, to make intelligible to the confiding public that
there is as much fancy sketching or filling in among
our map makers, whether they'work in a government
department or in a private studio, where the trend of
a lead or the strike of a quartz lode is sketched to or-
der, and is sometimes made to show in opposite direc-
tions on different plans.
“ The art of arts is the art of seeing,” of seeing only
that which is, of recognising a fact in all its reality
without anytinge orcolorof what is in the “mind’s eye.”
This is a rare faculty. Few men have the courage to
acknowledge their own ignorance to themselves, or the
candor to say to others they do not know. They
humbug themselves as well as mislead others. There
is an insatiable desire to account for everything. A
man without a theory is as rare as a woman without a
beau. The Cornish miner’s theoiy, in answer to a
gold commissioner’s question as to “ where was the
best place to look for gold,” is almost as applicable


now as when it was given —“ Where it is, there it is,
and you had better sink and search for it.”
During the twelve years since that answer was
given we have learned something from hard
experience and a little from science. We know
enough to cease to be dogmatic, and have learned the
dangers of a too rapid generalization from a small
amount of fact. Just as the ignorant howl of the old
colonists against gold mining has nearly died out in
the face of the continuous prosperity and development
of the resources of the colony, so have the wild notions
of fortune-making grown moderate, until mining has
become more of a business investment than a wild
game of chance, and we are now learning to so direct
our energies as not to waste them on country the
value of which is indicated to the trained eye without
the costly exploration of the pick. Without entering
into the scientific questions that bristle on every
side in relation to the origin of volcanic
rocks, we may rest satisfied with the “ blue-
stone” of the miner, and with the few facts which
mining has established in reference to it. This “ blue-
stone,” or basalt, wo know by experience covers the
deep ground of the country, has filled in the valleys,
covered the ranges, and made plains Of regions of hill
and dale. When it was done we do not know, and
how it was done does not concern us as miners. Its
significance to us is, that it indicates, in conjunction
with the cropping out of any slate reefs or bottom
rock, the direction of the deep ground, and nearly
always covers the deepest ground in its own neighbor-
hood. The watershed of the surface country is
directed and decided by the great dividing range
which is situate, at its nearest point to us, about
eight miles north of Ballarat, and thirteen from
Clunes. The leads in both neighborhoods have until
recently trended in the same direction as the surface
streams. It is now hardly doubtful that, as far as
Ballarat is concerned, the theory based upon the few
known facts is incorrect, or at least incom-
plete. However this may be, an important
fact has been overlooked, and that is that
about thirty miles of the dividing range consists of
basalt, from Sulky Gully, or Bald Hill diggings, to
Mount Gap, surrounding to all appearance and flowing
in between the granite ranges of Mount Beck-
with and Mount Bolton. A shaft has been sunk, lam
informed, in the immediate neighborhood of the Bal-
larat racecourse, to within a short distance of 400 feet,
and this is adjacent to the dividing range, and when
we know that at Mount Glasgow and some


other basalt hills the leads have been followed
right under these so-called points of eruption,
we have good grounds for assuming that beneath the
many miles of basalt that stretch from Sulky Gully,
where it thins out and junctions with the slate reef
on the east, to where it does the same on the west,
there is width enough and depth enough for all the
leads yet discovered in Ballarat to pass through, and
deepen as they go. Ido not say they do go—l only
say there is room enough for them, and I only desire
to kill the fallacy that the range which divides our
surface waters necessarily divides the ancient water
courses, the present auriferous drifts of the miner.
These facts will be found to boar upon the geological
features of Clones and to be capable of an
important inference in connection with spe-
cially local facts. Climes is between four
and five hundred feet lower than Ballarat,
and is more of a great basaltic valley than a plain
bounded on the west by granite ranges and low silurian
(slate reef) hills. On the east by basalt hills, and by
shallow ground beyond them. The trend of all the
country to the east and south-east is towards Climes,
which is much lower than the country on both sides of
it. There is a fall of about seventy feet to the mile from
Hepburn’s Lagoon on the south-east, to the township
of Climes, or of something like a thousand feet in
fifteen or sixteen miles. On the west the geological
sketch map is in error, as are also the maps that have
been made to order. Between the granite range and
the basalt, which separates Climes from Mount Beck-
with, the bed rock (silurian) crops out, and quartz reefs
are abundant, and gold has recently been discovered.
Between this outcrop, which extends for many
miles south and north, and about half a mile
further west of the Clunes reefs, there is a belt of good
agricultural land before you come to the granite range, I
have not yet had an opportunity of examining the run
of basalt that in the geological sketch map and others
connects Mount Gap, which is beyond and between
Beckwith and Bolton, with the Clunes basalt. Not
much more than a quarter of a mile from the south-
eastern corner of the Clunes Estate there is a bore
down, I am credibly informed, to the depth of
878 feet, through the bluestone rock, but not bottomed.
If this depth of sinking is added to the
five hundred feet that Clunes is below Ballarat,
we have a depth of eight or nine hundred
feet, a suggestive fact for speculators on deep ground.
In the immediate neighborhood of Clunes, east of the
present workings, bores have been put down giving a


depth of rock of about two hundred feet at least, and
the Eastern Victoria is the outcrop of the idea that
deep alluvial ground is worth looking for east of pre-
sent workings. If we are to judge of the future by
the past, the alluvial greatness of Chines will vie with
its renown as a quartz district. It is impossible to
say what will be the result of the many experiments
that are being made south of Climes and also south-
west. I have not the slightest doubt that the
absurd notion that the further north you go
the better will be the stone, will shortly
be disproved, and I hope to see the notion
that there is only one auriferous belt of reefs dispelled
before many months are past. To those whd are
anxious about the direction of alluvial country, I
would suggest the advisability of remembering that the
Clunes reefs and the bed rock crop out on both sides
of the creek and valley, and that, going south, it is
not difficult to trace the direction of the shallow
ground, even as far back as the neighborhood of As-
cot, and that there is little probability of the line of
reefs being crossed by an alluvial lead. There is sur-
facing towards Mount Beckwith, which dips under
the basalt, and I think there can be little doubt that
there is an alluvial lead, the same as the Ballarat and
Clunes Company are working, that trends towards
and passes between the home station and the out-
cropping rocks to the west. From Creswick there is
deep ground between Spring Hill and Cattle Station
Hill, in the neighborhood of which the bed rock crops
out in the road and both sides of it, and a quartz reef
is near the surface. The most important lead is the
lied Streak, now known as the Grand Trunk and
Australasian, &c. This lead must go east or w'est, as
the bed rock crops out to the north, and it can hardly
turn up hill and go back south. My notion is
that it trends to the west and then gradually
to the north and north-east, till it reaches tho
deep ground cast of Clunes. I have now r very
nearly mentioned all the salient geological features
known to be interesting to Clunes, with the excep-
tion that if the great congeries of deep leads
from Ballarat do pass beneath the dividing range,
and run north-east to Clunes, and thence north
and north-west till they pass out of the basalt be-
neath the tertiary plains of the Murray, it seems
doubtful what the course of the deep ground is along
the Loddon valley, as the basalt thins out about forty
miles north of Clunes, .and I have no personal know-
ledge of the country. It may be reassuring to some
to know that the theories of geologists arc not like


the laws of the Modes and Persians, and that they oc-
casionally admit that they have blundered. This is
the case in reference to granite rocks, generally called
plutonic, intrusive, and regarded as the oldest of
rocks, older than the paleozoic series, and the
basis of all other rocks. If this were so, the
Beckwith granite might ultimately, at great depths,
cut out the Clunes reefs, but fortunately for the in-
vestors among generations yet to come in these mines,
geologists have modified their granitic views, and Mr
Selwyn tells us that the notion is almost exploded
that there is any connection of granite rocks with
lines of upheaval, and that the fallacy is exemplified
by the distribution and relation of these rocks in Vic-
toria. Dana says—“ The crystalline rocks, granite,
mica, slate, &c., once called primitive, and regarded as
situated beneath all other rocks, are now known not
to be exclusively of any particular age.” In fact,
granite is admitted to be a metamorphic rock,
and, instead of being thrust up from below,
is the same rock as its neighbor, altered
in character by heat or other influences, of
which we know so little at present that it would be
absurd to attempt to indicate them. There is this
satisfaction in the admission of the geologists, that
we may go on sinking with something like security
to unlimited depths without fear of the granite cutting
us out entirely. When we find such an important
fact as this, in which geologists have been wrong from
the birth of their science to very nearly the present
time, it behoves us to be careful how we accept their
decision in reference to the many problems that
still puzzle the gold-miner. The change of
opinion in regard to granite is almost a re-
volution in physical science. The character, posi-
tion, and relation of granite to other rocks is quite
altered, and established ideas based upon the old
theory of its plutonic and primitive origin are in a
state of chaos. “ Beware,” says Emerson, “when the
great God lets a thinker out upon the earth. There
is not an art or a science, a religion or an industry, that
may not have its flank turned to-morrow.” As to the
geology of gold mining we know so little that we may
always expect surprises, and have no justification
for taking for granted any of the many
theories in respect to the origin, occur-
rence, or the limits of the distribution of
pur auriferous drifts, or the extent and resources of
our quartz reefs. One of the facts that puzzles science
is, the superior quality of alluvial gold to that of
quartz gold. Another is the formation of nuggets^


some of the heaviest being found in the sand or
headings above the washdirt, and the most recent
weighing 83 oz on the top of a high mullock
bank at Rokewood, At Creswick, at the head of
Cobbler’s Gully, nuggets have been found solid and
water-worn, or at least compressed into a round and
compact mass, and within a few feet of a bank of
auriferous gravel that yielded nothing but ragged
quartz gold. The heaviest nugget found in a quartz
reef is said to have been sixteen pounds
weight, and was taken from a depth of forty
feet. It is assumed that the balance of facts is
therefore in favor of the theory that gold gets finer
as we sink deeper in quartz reefs. Why should we be
in such a hurry to explain everything, when every
day gives us new facts ? Now we have nuggets being
found in the Clunes Company’s reefs at greater depths
than they have ever been found before, and thus the
rule that the gold gets finer as we go deeper receives
a contradiction. There are one or two facts of very
great importance which have come under my notice
at Clunes, which bear upon the interests of all other
gold-fields. Where the great deposit of alluvial wash-
dirt was taken out on the northern boundary
of the Clunes paddock, the quartz companies got
richer stone at a considerably deeper level than the
wash, and the Clunes Company and New North
Clunes, and other companies, are still getting richer
stone below the alluvial lead or gutter, a fact that
helps to sustain the expectation that the Ballarat
quartz reefs will prove richer when tested at depths
below instead of above the deep leads, and evidence
in Ballarat itself is steadily accumulating in support
of that theory. The increase or decrease in richness
of the stone as the quartz is worked deeper, is to a
great extent answered by the facts that the
Clunes Company, after twelve years’ work, can
raise as rich stone from its deepest levels
as it ever did, and that its neighbors are doing or can
do the same. It by no means follows that the opposite
theory is sound, that the reefs get richer as they grow
deeper, and we may as well remain satisfied with the
negative admission that depth has nothing to do with
the richness or poverty of the stone.
The geological features of Clunes seem favorable to
a great development of both alluvial and quartz min-
ing. The auriferous belt of quartz reefs north and
south of the Clunes Paddock is much nearer the surface
as it is traced south than going north, and there are many
indications that the basalt but thinly overlies it. The
fine farming land to the south, south-west,


and south-east of Chines is certain to be mined upon
at no distant date, as well as that to the north
and north-east. This belt of quartz reefs divides,
or rather I should say indicates, the direction of the
deep ground to the eastward of the line; and between
it and the more westerly outcrop of the silurian or
slate reef there is a run of deep ground which appears
to trend to the north in the direction of the Clunes
Wonder and Clunes North-West Companies’ claims.
Further west, before reaching the granite mount,
there is good alluvial soil and to all appearance
another run of deep ground; and there is Mount Gap, a
basalt hill westward of the granite ranges, but the same
basalt has filled in the gap and flowed onwards to the
Clunes side. In the granite range, I am informed
that a quartz lode is being worked, and that it runs
diagonally with the range. The value of the quartz
reefs now being tested on the first south-western out-
crop is not yet proved, but the only certain test is
being applied, that of work directed by mining expe-
rience. For the Bald Hill, Ballarat, or the Creswick
Grand Trunk Leads to junction with the deep ground
of Clunes on the east of the township, they must gra-
dually work round from a westerly trend to the
north, and in crossing the Clunes plains steadily
trend to the east before again turning to the north.
This is, of course, conjecture; but it would not be
difficult to show that more can be said for it than for-
mally time honored theories.
FACTS IN RELATION TO THEORIES.
The specialities of the Port Phillip and Colo-
nial Gold Mining Company’s claim, and of the
claims going north till Mount Cameron is reached,
and of the claims west and east of that line,
will form the subject of this paper. I have
now examined the country, and visited all the claims at
work included in the area bounded by Mount Beck-
with on the west, Mount Glasgow on the north-west,
Mount Cameron due north, and the eastern boundary
of the Clunes Estate, in the parish of Glengower.
Taking the Port Phillip Company’s claim as the
starting point, and standing at the centre on the lines
of reefs, Mount Cameron is about six miles due
north and a short distance further north than the
Clunes Estate, which intervenes, and would have been
long ago taken up under mining leases or miner’s-
rights had it not been sold by the Government before
mining enterprise was directed so far north. Mount
Glasgow is about five miles to the north-west, and
Mount Beckwith about four miles west. The south-


feast corner of the Clunes Estate is about five miles
distant. I know of no claims eastward .of that point,
but there are many indications of the existence
of shallow ground and the presence of alluvial
washes worth testing. TII3 Clunes Estate at
its northern extremity extends right across the
great basaltic valley covering the deep ground, and
exten ding westward until the basaltnearly thins out. On
the south-eastern boundary, the Great Globe Company’s
lease of 800 acres squares the estate, or nearly so.
This lease and the purchased land has forced mining
adventurers to take claims a little to the west of the
meridional line from the Clunes reefs, and as a conse-
quence there are as many opinions and theories as to
the trend of the Clunes reefs, as there are interests
depending on the supposed lines west or east of north
or due north. My own opinion is that a
considerable margin is necessary both east
and west for anyone to be certain of being
on the line of strike of any quartz reef where
there is a mile or more of untried country between
the known reef and the claim it is supposed to go
through.' It appears to me that it has yet to be
proved that there is any continuous line of quartz
reefs anywhere. There are known belts of auriferous
country containing quartz reefs, some auriferous and
some not, some rich and some poor, cropping out in
one place, and disappearing or dipping to unknown
depths, possibly out of existence altogether, a short
distance north or south. Other out-crops are met
with on the same line, but there is nothing
to show that they are identical reefs. So
manifest is it that there is no proof, no col-
lection of facts to go upon, that there are only
some three or four instances of the same number of
consecutive claims being at work on the same line of
reefs as are now working on Clunes, and by no means
the same extent of country worked. From the South
Clunes Company to the New North Clunes, the six
claims getting gold give a line of reef about 8000 feet
long, and in that length there is every kind of varia-
tion known in quartz reefs. One has been broken in
two, as you would snap a carrot; another has been
broken horizontally, as a loaf of bread might be broken
in two, and the top half moved away from the
under part; rich reefs have grown poor and poor
ones rich; steadily-paying reefs have grown patchy;
thick reefs hare grown thin; some have become
attenuated to a thread; and one has again widened
out to a solid, rich, well-defined lode; and two solid
.odes have at a few hundred feet “ strung out” into


Valueless quartz leaders, which may, or may not, make
again into valuable lodes. Some have dipped
out of the levels north and south, and been struck in
lower levels, and some not. Some have continued
strong, well-defined lodes, right through, and great
reefs, not worth working, and rich stone of only a few
inches in width may be found cheek-by-jowl in the
same claim, or within a few hundred feet of each
other in the same country, and all on
the same lines of reefs or belt of auriferous country.
These facts indicate my idea of the value of being exactly
on the line of reef. I do not mean to say that there
is no value, and when we add to these facts that there
is no line of connection from the Port Phillip Com-
pany’s claim to the Victoria, or New North Chines,
though the Eastern and Welcome Reefs continued into
the adj acent claim, and that the last named company was
misled for four or five years by advice from the Victoria,
by the endeavor to get on the “true line of reef,” some
estimate may be formed by the uninitiated of the
factitious value of being on the true line of reefs. The
authorities are, with one exception, in favor of an
eastern trend going north. Mr Selwyn, the late direc-
tor of the Geological Department, held that opinion,
as well as Mr J. Munday, assistant manager to the
Port Phillip Company, and an experienced miner, who
has surveyed the line of reefs as far as they can be
seen underground, but as the reefs are not on the sur-
face from the paddock to the Great Northern claim,
the trend is still a matter of opinion.
Mr C. J. Harvey, mining manager, considers
that there is no proof of any distinct per-
manent trend, it being sometimes easterly and some-
times westerly, and, as far as known, as near due
north as possible. Whichever theory is right it has
yet to be proved whether the reefs are continuous,
whether there are other reefs in the country north
and south, and I have no hesitation in affirming that
there is plenty of evidence to justify the claims that
are down four hundred feet to open out and explore for
themselves, and very little to justify further hesitation.
They have gone through the same strata as the claims
now working rich stone, and have every reason to
expect the same good fortune. The claims further
north and on both sides of the strike of the Chines
reefs have everything to justify active exploration.
Not only has golden quartz been found due north and
to the west of north, but the surfacing has been to a
considerable extent worked, and a shallow lead, trend-
ing towards the south-east, has been abandoned
at a depth of eighty feet because a wet drift


was struck in the shaft. There are not
only reefs cropping out to the north and
on the other lines referred to, but many indi-
cations of tributaries and feeders of the deep
ground from the low silurian hills on the west, but
every probability that what can be plainly seen on
that side of the country also exists on the eastern
side. Nothing but actual work can prove what are the
riches that underlie this great basalt valley, flanked on
each side by shallow auriferous country, intersected by
auriferous quartz reefs, and having numerous leads
from the south-east, and some from the south-west,
trending towards its deep ground. It has been said
that there is local capital enough to carry out any rea-
sonable mining enterprise. So contrary to fact is
this, that here within the boundaries I have men-
tioned at least half a million of money could be
reasonably invested with, in most instances, a certainty
of a rich harvest, and instead of a hundred or a hun-
dred and twenty miners being out of work, employ-
ment could be given in a few months to a thousand
additional men. It would hardly be going too far to
say that on Clunes every available shilling, and nearly
every ounce of gold that is got, that belongs to the
Clunes inhabitants, is being paid in calls. For want
of capital great enterprises are dormant, that ought to
be actively prosecuted, and the burthens that would
be light if divided among the many, arc almost over-
whelming to the few. Claims have been taken
up and abandoned for want of means over
and over again, and not for want of will or because
there was any lack of faith in the projected
enterprises. The Clunes Estate is as good a case in
point as can be found. It has every condition to
ensure mining success. The proprietors have only to
wait to have their property trebled in value by the
exertions of others, as the Winters have done, and
the Clarkes are doing; but in the meantime mining
development is checked, and mining enterprise is
stayed by the intervention of this unexplored magni-
ficent mining estate of nearly 10.000 acres, just as the
intervention of private laud at Sulky Cully and at
the Bald Hills checked and then extinguished mining
enterprise in those localities, and deprived the public
of important facts respecting the deep ground in the
immediate vicinity of the dividing range. No one
doubts the value of the Estate, yet the attempt to put
it on the market failed, though backed by the proprie-
tors, and all, or nearly all the leading men on Ballarat
and Clunes.
The Port Phillip and Colonial Company now stands


as the representative of both the crushing and mining
company, and by a recent agreement pays to the
shareholders of the mining company, after payment
of the royalty to the proprietors of the lands, seven
shillings out of every twenty shillings profit on the
crushing and mining operations. This agreement
hands the mine over to the Port Phillip Company.
It will be seen by the last half-year’s report of The
Clunes Quartz Gold Mining Company (registered),
that Mr R. H. Bland, the manager of the Port Phillip
Company, signs the general report, and Mr John
Munday, another officer of the Port Phillip Company,
signs the mining report. Mr C. J. Harvey, who took
charge of the mine twelve years ago, is still in charge
of it, but is now in the employment of the Port
Phillip Company. During the last half-year the
quartz crushed amounted to 33,073 tons, or 1202 tons
per week. The yield of gold was 12,578 oz 2 dwt,
which, with 756 oz 18 dwt from pyrites, gives an
average yield of 7 dwt 211 gr to the ton of stone.
The profits for the half-year, with balance from
last statement, .are set down at £13,135 18s Id,
divided thus:—Port Phillip Company, £8515; Clunes
Gold Mining Company, £4585. The total expenditure
is £1 3s 5d per ton of quartz raised and crushed,
against £1 Os 5d per ton for last half-year. As the
mine gets deeper it gets more costly, and a large
quantity of unprofitable dead work has also been done.
This statement sufficiently shows the present constitu-
tion of the company, and its present prosperity,
but hardly the promise of its possible future.
In the mine there are five reefs; some of the fancy
plans have seven carefully lined out, but I could find
no authority for more than five actually worked. The
most eastern is the Welcome Reef, and beyond that a
drive has been put in two hundred feet to
the east without meeting with any other reef.
This reef is an underground mountain of
quartz, and was rich all through. It dispersed
at the three hundred feet level into strings
of quartz, and dipped out of the different levels north
and south until the widest base was reached, and it
dispersed. The veins of quartz were followed to a
depth of four hundred and forty-four feet without any
change for the better. The next reef is the Eastern
Reef, which dispersed in the same way to the north
about the centre of paddock at the 400 feet level.
To the south it is as strong as ever but poor at the
500 feet level, and did not vary much in yield of gold
from toil to that level. The third reef is the Old
Man.” There wap no change from top to bottom,


the reef being as big and poor at the lowest level as
on top, and never paying to work. “ Robinson’s Reef”
is the fourth. It was poor on top, improved as it
deepened, was irregular, and occasionally rich. It
began to improve at 120 feet, continued good for
200 feet, and then got poor again and is now being
tested at the 520 feet level. The “ Western Reef,” is
the fifth, and was good on the surface, variable along
the line of reef, getting poor to the south and poor
to the north, and was best in the middle of the paddock.
Where it was good on top it was good below. It was
from five to fifteen feet wide. The Old Man has varied
from three to 100 feet wide, and in Robinson’s and the
Eastern reefs from two to thirty feethavebeenworkedin
width. Nuggets have been found at 300 and 371
feet levels, not supposed to be in the quartz,
but in dark seams of black clay in the quartz contain-
ing decomposed quartz, the gold itself being of a dark
color. These nuggets were from a pennyweight to T£
ounce in weight, and are described as not like
quartz gold. The Welcome Reef went down nearly
perpendicularly. The Eastern and Old Man reefs un-
derlie to the east, and Robinson’s and Western reefs
underlie to the west. The underlie has varied in one
or two instances, but has been for some years deter-
minedly in the directions stated. West of
the reefs already worked, there are known to be two
others called the Haphazard and Glendonald. These
are now being driven for. The five reefs have been
worked for twelve years, and have yielded from June,
1857, to March, 1869, from a total crushing of 470,839
tons of stone, 253,046 oz of gold; alluvial gold, 26,059
oz; total value, £1,102,184; to which has to be added
the value of 6859 oz 4 dwt, the yield up to June,
1869, making the twelve years the company has been
at work. The original lease was for twenty-one years,
and I believe an additional lease for the like number
of years has been obtained by the Port Phillip Com-
pany.
An interesting feature in relation to the working of
the Chines reefs was the discovery of alluvial wash-
dirt on the northern boundary of the paddock by
the outside miners. The company traced it right up to
the Eastern Reef without any signs of the Wel-
come Reef, the course of which it must have crossed,
and which was afterwards discovered in skirting the
western slope of the gutter. The reef was cut through,
and the wash found to continue on the other side.
Driving on the reef to the north, at 114 feet level, the
reef disappeared into the washdirt. The wash was red
and was followed nearly south-east until it ran out or


was supposed to run out. The same kind of wash
was struck near the south end of the Eastern
Reef, and ran out, or at least was followed until the
wash merged into the other, and appeared
to end in a sandy bank. As much as 78 oz
to the machine was taken from this dirt. A
white wash about five feet high was discovered, con-
nected with these runs, but it was poor in gold, not
giving more than 2oz to the machine. This was not
followed and its trend is not accurately known, except-
ing that it is towards the north east. The tailings from
the red wash were crushed, but*only yielded from 3 to
4 dwt to the ton, and would not pay. It is
as well to remember that nearly all the quartz
reefs, both inside and outside of the paddock, have
been quite as rich, and sometimes richer, more than
two hundred feet below the level of this washdirt.
Another feature of some interest is the apparent cer-
tainty that the alluvial deposits were made before the
present Clunes valley, or the smaller valley that divides
the New North Clunes Company from the Victoria,
was cut out by the surface floods of the present geolo-
gical era, and after the washdirt had been covered by
the basaltic rock. If that had not been the case the
washdirt would have been carried into and down the
present course of the Toollooroop Creek in an almost
opposite direction to that in which it has been
worked.
The progress and development of the crushing
plant is no less interesting than the development of
the mine. In 1857 the Port Phillip Crushing Com-
pany started work on Clunes with two Chilian mills
and a battery of twenty stamps. Twelve other stamps
were shortly after added to these. Mr H. A. Thomp-
son, now mining manager of the Wentworth Estate,
New South Wales, was assistant manager to the Port
Phillip Company at that time, and he had a very
strong opinon in favor of the Chilian mill. So had
Mr Charles Kinnear, the then chairman of the Clunes
Quartz Mining Company, and the shareholders were
generally in favor of the more expensive mode of
crushing, under the impression that more gold was
saved, and no doubt influenced by the fact that
the cheaper process was in favor of the
crushing company. The Chilian mills were
tried against the batteries for six or eight
months without leaving a shadow of doubt as to the
advantages being in every respect in favor of the
batteries. The Chilian mills were supposed to sicken
the mercury, pyrites not being then thought of. The
result cannot be better stated than in the words of Mr


E. H. Bland, that it was proved that stone yielding an
ounce to the ton would not pay for crushing with
Chilian mills, and had batteries not been available
the mine would have been stopped in its second or
third year. Then the question of calcining arose, and
was tried for a long time and found to be of no advan-
tage except in making the stone easier to crush, and
it was thought to coat the gold with sulphur freed
from the pyrites and sicken the mercury. Hand'
breaking the stone to the requisite size was
substituted, until Enoch Chambers perfected
the stonebreaking machine which has been used ever
since 1862. Two of these machines reduced 31,633
tons last year. At starting every battery had a sepa-
rate engine. In 1860 the Neath’s Abbey engine was
got to work, driving 56 heads of stamps. It is about
60 horse power. A duplicate engine, No. 2, started
work in February, 1861, driving 21 heavy stamps and
two stonebreakers. The heavy stamps are 8 cwt., and
the others 6 cwt. The company began to separate
pyrites from tailings in 1863, and to perfect the sys-
tem of roasting. In 1864 76 tons were concentrated,
which yielded 201 oz of gold. In 1868, 366 tons
yielded 1322 oz of gold. The profit on 76 tons was £417,
on the 366 tons £4157. In 1864 the huddle was ready
and the reverberating furnace completed, the pyrites
after roasting being ground in a Chilian mill. 80 per
cent, was first obtained, and now 91 per cent, of the
whole contents of gold in the pyrites is secured. The
cost of extraction at starting was £1 13s 8d per oz of
gold, the last operation cost 10s Id per oz of gold
obtained. Copper plates have been discarded, as no
advantage was obtained by them, and mercury is only
used in the troughs, and is found by long experience to
catch fine gold that would otherwise in all probability
be lost. From one year’s return it is ascertained that
63 per cent, of gold is obtained in the beds of the
batteries, 24 per cent, in the boxes, 8 per cent, out of
the blankets, and about 5 per cent, out of pyrites.
I was unable to ascertain the cost of the many
experiments that have been made with new
inventions, but must rest satisfied by stating that the
country owes a debt of gratitude to the Port Phillip
Company for its constant and determined efforts to
test anything that is likely to improve our appliances
for saving gold. The latest invention tried has been
the patented Brown and Stansfield’s concentrators,
and, although they do their work well, and will no
doubt be a great boon to small companies, they do not
justify any change in the mode of concentrating at
the Port Phillip works. The buddies improved by


Mr J. Munday do their work well. The assay office
was established on finding that there was a loss of
nearly six dwt per ton of qurtz in the reduction process.
This has been lessened to one and a-half by Mr
Latta, who has charge of the assay office and the treat-
ment of the pyrites. The value of the machinery at starting
was about £5000; now it is valued at about £40,000,
and is insured for £20,000. ■ The plant of the mining
company is valued at about £IO,OOO. Mr Rees
Davies is the head engineer of the Port Phillip Com-
pany, in charge of the machinery, and the whole of the
plant has been erected by him. Mr C. J. Harvey has
been the mining manager for twelve years, having
been engaged by the Co-operative Mining Company a
few months after starting work. Since the amalga-
mation of the two companies he is in the employment
of the manager of the Port Phillip and Colonial Company,
Mr R. H. Bland. To these gentlemen is chiefly owing
the steady progress of the company. In closing this
brief historical sketch of the first great quartz
mining company in Victoria, I feel bound to refer to
the debt we owe these gentlemen and the company',
as well as to the organiser of the Co-operative Mining
Company. The prudence, good sense, suavity, and
admirable business qualities of one; the mining skill,
caution, and perseverance of the other; combined with
the engineering skill of Mr Davies, not only sustained
but developed quartz mining into a great
and profitable industry when professors, with
foregone conclusions, and Royal Commissions
were pronouncing against the investment of capital
upon facts that were at least doubtful. The Port
Phillip Company is the historical starting-point, and
the source and record of quartz mining enterprise and
experiment. What no ordinary company could do,
and few, if any, would do, it has done for itself and
the public—tested all inventions of its own officers or
of others. Had the company been a public institu-
tion it could not have been of more use to the public,
and might easily have been of less. The mine and
the machinery have always been open to visitors, and
every information given to those seeking it for prac-
tical purposes. Pecuniarily it is the greatest success
in the colony, and the best proof of the advantages
open to English capital if judiciously invested. The
value of the Port Phillip Company’s machinery and
the capital of the mining company amounted in
1857 to £6500. In 1869 the joint plant is valued at
£50,000, after producing a million pounds worth of
gold. It is to be hoped, and there is every proba-
bility of it being so, that the amalgamated company


will prosper in future, as the double company has in
the past, and with increased experience and wealth
long live to help scientific discovery and its application
to the greatest industrial interest of Victoria.
NORTH CLONES.
The Yankee Company is the first claim north of the
Port Phillip Company, and is the smallest claim in the
district. It has been at work nearly as long as the
ClunesCompany, and traced the alluvial washdirt up to
the Eastern Reef. It was then called the Sons of Free-
dom, and changed its name when it became a quartz
mining company. It consisted of nine shareholders,
and still consists [of the same number. As much as
£35,000 of gold has been obtained from this claim,
though at present the battery is not kept supplied
with stone, and expenses are just about covered by
the yield obtained. The shaft is down nearly 800
feet, but I am not aware what prospects the company
have of profitable work before them.
The Victoria Quartz Mining Company is also on the
northern boundary of the Port Phillip Company,
a portion of the claim being between the Yankee and
the New North Clunes, the rest extending east along
the paddock fence to some distance beyond the east-
ern boundary, and north to the Oriental Company, and
along the western boundary of the New North Clunes.
The eastern portion of the Victoria has been separated
from the quartz mine, and a separate company formed
for the purpose chiefly, I believe, of proving the deep
ground presumed upon very good evidence to be
somewhere in the neighborhood of the eastern
end of the Clunes paddock. The white run of wash-
dirt, and the continuation, if any, of the richer red
washes, are known to trend in that direction, and are
expected to prove of a valuable character. Of the
existence of a deep lead there can be no doubt, but its
situation, extent, and value, can only be proved by
work. The Victoria Quartz Mining Company is as old,
or nearly as old, as its two immediate neighbors, and
has gone through a good many changes of one kind
and another, but was some few years before it was
made to pay. It is now the deepest mine on Clunes,
the shaft being down about 800 feet. This company
is said to have a portion of the New North Clunes
reef and that company has driven to within five feet
of the boundary. The amount of gold taken out is
stated at very nearly 50,000 oz, and from all 1 could
ascertain, there is good reason to expect a favorable
future, and it will be one of the first claims to prove


what can be clone at great depths on a well defined
and well worked line of reefs.
The New North Clunes Company’s mine is as im-
portant to the present and future of Clunes as the
Port Phillip Company was to its beginning and early
history. One fostered mining industry in its infancy,
and sustained it in its maturity; the other has
given a new and expansive life and energy to mining
enterprise in the district, and is now giving indica-
tions of permanent wealth beyond the expectations of
the most sanguine. The battery was erected three
years ago, and since that time the great success of
the company has caused the line of reefs to be rushed
even beyond Majorca, and caused attention to be di-
rected to the country east and west. The present
company is the third, and the old interests have been
absorbed or capitalised. The original No. 1 shaft was
marked out by Mr C. J. Harvey, mining manager of
the Clunes Company, and was sunk 180 feet, and left,
as it was thought by the Ballarat directors that the
reefs were underlying too far to the east, and a se-
cond shaft was started 1000 feet east, and sunk 600
feet, and driven 454 feet west, and struck the same
lode now being worked. The company then
went back to the old shaft and sunk it
a further 60 feet, and came on cap of the lode, and drove
about 150 feet on the course of the lode south, ave-
raging about thirty-eight feet thick. Taking fifteen
or twenty feet of the stone it yielded 7 dwt to the
ton. This was the 240 feet level, and proved Mr
Harvey and the Clunes representatives of the com-
pany right, and the Ballarat directors wrong. Theory
and amateur mining had a good deal to do with the
persistency that ruined two companies, and drove
many of the early shareholders out of the company.
Four hundred and fifty feet were driven in quartz at
this level, when the lode dipped down north and south
out of the level. At the 320 feet level, 1000 feet have
been driven in quartz without a break to the boun-
dary south, 520 feet from shaft, and 480 feet to the
north, leaving 1996 feet to be yet driven before the
boundaries of the claim are reached. The manager is
still driving north, the lode being small,
varying from six inches to two feet in
thickness, and looking poorer. No. 3 level
is 400 feet deep, and 1000 feet have been driven in
quartz. Here a horizontal break was discovered; the
upper portion of the lode and its accompanying bed
rock was heaved to the west. By sinking a winze and
following a thin line of quartz not half an inch thick, a
distance of thirty-four feet brought the workers on to


the top of the new make, or the lower portion of the
broken lode. No. 4 level is 500 feet and driven 225
feet north in quartz. The lode is from four
to six feet wide; north and south one hundred
and fifty feet it is eight feet wide and looking first 4
rate, and calculated to yield 14 oz to the ton. No. 5
level is 590 feet deep, and the company is just driving
on it. The lode is about eleven feet wide,
and looks like payable stone. In getting at
the reef a spur was crossed twelve to four-
teen inches wide and very rich, calculated to yield
eight or nine ounces to the ton. This spur is being
driven along, and looks well, and keeps same thick-
ness. In putting in pump-shaft to the west three
quartz reefs were cut through that have not yet been
proved, making five discovered in the claim, counting
the so-called spur. The mining manager, Mr Lewis,
thinks the New North dunes Reef, now being worked,
is a continuation of Robinson’s Reef, which is said to
have split in the Yankee and Victoria claims. Of this
there is no certain proof, as, although the company
has driven to within five feet of the Victoria boun-
dary, they have stopped there, as to hole would make
their shaft the up-cast shaft, and give them their
neighbor’s bad air, &c. The mine is well ven-
tilated, as there are two shafts down, as well
as pumping and winding shafts. Between 240 feet
and 320 feet the reef narrowed to an average
of six feet, and yielded one ounce to the ton,
and this yield has been more than maintained
ever since. The gold is just as coarse at the deep
level as in cap of reef, but there is more mineral as
the stone goes deeper in the bowels of the earth. Mr
Lewis is justly proud of the completeness, efficiency,
and economy of the surface work?. They are so
adapted that there is no cost for trucking. The stone-
breakers are above the hoppers, which receive the
stone direct, and it runs through by itself into the bat-
teries. The stone is never touched after it leaves the
stopes. The manager calculates that there is enough
stone in sight to last present battery for five years,
and he hopes to keep the mine so well opened out
ahead of actual requirements for stone as in the future
to have ten years’ work in sight. This kind of
management is somewhat different from the ped-
dling penny wise and pound foolish kind too
often forced upon mining managers by impatient
shareholders or scheming directors, which has ruined
many an excellent mining venture in the eyes of the
public. From the description, of what we may a t
present with some accuracy call the main reef, it will


be seen that the New North Clunes lode is an under-
ground mountain of quartz, like the Welcome Reef in
the Chines paddock, differing in this respect that it
has not strung out as it went deeper. Those who are
looking for the same lode to the north may as well re-
member that although dipping to the north it is as
likely to rise again at a short distance as the reefs to
the south appear to have done, and that several other
reefs are known that are worth looking for. The first
company was wound up on the 29th September,
1860, after expending £3IBB 13s 7d. The second
company was wound up in December, 1862, after
expending £11,692 6s 3d. The third company,
after a preliminary meeting in December, 1862, was
started in March, 1863, and has expended £76,146 Os
sd, making a total expenditure upon this claim of
about 170 acres of £91,027 Os 3d. The first crushing
took place in October, 1867, and the first dividend
was declared in August, 1868, since which time the
value of the gold obtained to the 4th August, 1869, is
£115,443 2s 7d, There is a reserve fund amounting
to £12,500 to the credit of the company, and the value
of the plant is set down at £12,000. The average
number of men employed is 140. The total cost of
raising and crushing exclusive of dead work is 16s per
ton.
The North Clunes Consols Company is the next, and
I hear, intend opening out at the 350 and 420 feet
levels at once, and there arc not two opinions as to
the advisability of this course. There is every
reason to expect that one or more quartz
reefs will be cut in those levels. Recently there has
been a change in the hard rock in the shaft, and a
considerable amount of likely looking quartz was sent
up. The depth of the shaft is about 435 feet. The
plant is efficient, and work is being energetically pro-
secuted. At this claim gun-cotton is used for blasting,
and is reported to be far superior to powder. It is
safer under all known circumstances, and its explosive
force is about double. The London and Australian
Company is the next claim, and is still sinking, the
Oriental Company’s ground being on the eastern side
and also sinking, and the Golden Point Company be-
tween them. The two first calculate on the western
trend of the Clunes reefs, the Oriental on the eastern
trend, as well as upon the chance of alluvial east-
ward. Other claims have been taken up but have not
started work. It would be invidious to express
an opinion on the merits of the claims. They are all
in good likely country, which has to be proved. That
there is gold in the neighborhood there can be no


doubt. In the creek below the Consols some pros-
pecting was done about twelve years ago in search o£
alluvial. The bed of the creek is about 100 feet
below the basaltic plateau, and the red clay which
overlaid the washdirt in the Ciunes paddock cropped
out on the bank. Three or four shafts were sunk, all
dipping eastward under the basalt, the deepest about
90 feet, making about 180 feet from the top of the
plateau. There was a kindly looking pipeclay bottom
and a fine quartz drift, but it is doubtful whether
gold was obtained or not. Further explor-
ations have been made in this neighborhood
without throwing any additional light upon the char-
acter of the country. The probability is that the al-
luvial wash, that I believe there is good reason to sup-
pose to be in that neighborhood, is to be found under
the basalt to the north-west, and has no connection
with the deep ground supposed to be east of the Con-
sols. The prospectors began on the top of a rise in
the bed-rock and followed the dip to the east, the dip
on the other side of their starting point has never been
tried. The Ciunes Wonder and the Ciunes North-
Western Companies which join the western bound-
aries of the Consols and London, will at no distant
date prove whether this view is right or wrong. Both
these companies are sinking in the rock, and appear to
stand well for both alluvial and quartz. The Ciunes
Wonder obtained gold in the drive from its first shaft,
which it lost by neglect or carelessness, and is now
about to be organised into a public company. The
Haphazard and Glendonald Reefs may be found in
the eastern portion of the Wonder if it extends as far
as I suppose. The North Ciunes Extension Com-
pany is the next claim due north, and is still sinking
in the roek. Machinery has been purchased, and
is to be at once erected. On its eastern boun-
dary is the Great Wheal dimes, bounded on
its eastern and northern sides by the creek and
the Great Globe. The shaft is down about 8(5
feet to water, and engine, &c., is purchased, and
contract for erection to be made immediately. And
next to that is the Great Northern, in which the reefs
are on or very near the surface. This ground is held
under the 42ud clause of the Land Bill by a Mr Sulli-
van, who three years ago, in sinking a hole for a cis-
tern, came upon quartz either in the form of disinteg-
rated cap of a reef or wash, in which he found gold,
and a very beautiful sample of gold it is, consisting of
about three-quarters of an ounce of haggerly gold,
quite free of quartz, but looking as if it had not been
long out of the quartz or whatever preserved its edges


and shape. No one believed Sullivan at the time)
and it was not until the second or third incursion of
Ballarat speculators that terms were made for mining
and the Climes Great Northern Company formed. This
company is down 100 feet, and report that a great body of
quartz was struck in the shaft, and that water came
ill so fast that the men were with difficulty got out of
the shaft. An engine is being erected, and sinking
will be soon resumed. This company since dividing
its ground has £2OOO to its credit, and a new company,
the Chines Northern Light, has been formed to work
the other half of the claim, and has £llOO placed to
its credit. These claims look well, and bid fair to be
soon in gold. The shaft of the Great Northern is
sunk a short distance south of the cistern where Mr
Sullivan found the gold, and is in all probability on
the cap of a good quartz reef.
On the eastern boundary of the claims is the Great
Globe Climes Company, consisting of 800 acres under
ruining lease. The Argo Company, which is north of the
Great Northern thrusts a portion of its claim between the
Great Globe and a portion of the Climes Estate, so
that it has a chance for any continuous line of reefs
from the Clones paddock whether the trend is east or
west. Mr Munday’s line would take the Climes reefs
right through the Leviathan, east and north of Mount
Cameron. This would be about Mr Selwyn’s line also,
passing through the Great Globe, the narrowest part
of the Argo, and the Climes Estate. The Leviathan
Company has sunk a shaft 100 feet, and gotwater heavy.
Two fine quartz lodes have been discovered on or
near the surface in a ravine that crosses the claim.
There is a thin covering of basalt rock, which deepens
to the north-east as it leaves the Climes Estate, and
turns again to the north through basalt plains past
Carisbrook to the Loddon. The Cameron Company
is on the eastern edge of the Bucknell Range, west and
north of Mount Cameron. Gold seen in the stone, but
trial crushings poor. On the west of Mount Cameron,
about a mile, is situated the Annuities Company,
in which I am informed there are three or four good
looking reefs cropping out on the surface. The com-
pany is at work, and has sunk about 100 feet, and will
probably shortly open out and test the quality of the
stone, in which I am assured gold has been found.
Further west, we have next to the Clunes North-
Western the Sunderland, then the Eureka, and
then the Clunes and Talbot Company, whose
shaft is down over 60 feet, in which several
quartz leaders have been struck containing gold,
and the latest news is that two runs of


stone fourteen indies thick have been reached.
Beyond this claim, and still further west, on the
south-east slope of Mount Glasgow, is situated
the Magdala Company’s claim. Here the quartz is on
the surface, and gold has been obtained in payable
quantity from it, and the head of an alluvial lead has
been worked for some time almost from its rise in
low quartzoze ranges further west until the depth
reached eighty feet, and a wet drift was struck. The
Argo Company appear to be on the ground through
which this lead runs, as although their neighbor to
the south has no basalt, they appear to have a consid-
erable quantity to get through, and are on appa-
rently deep ground running into the Clunes Estate.
The Magdala shaft is down 200 feet without getting
water, and the contractors have begun to open out,
with the intention of driving east and west. There was
an old tunnel put in about 200 feet below where the shaft
is situated about nine years ago, and I have heard that
one or two good trials of stone have been made from
this claim. The character of the country right
through, whether east or west of north, or due north,
is very promising; gold has been got in nearly every
direction, and the next six months’ work will prove
more at this northern end than has been proved in
two years nearer Clunes; and to those who believe in
continuous lines of reefs, there is every indication
that there is good stone on more than one line, and
that what is the favorite trend to-day may be un-
popular on the morrow, and those who have gone
south and west of Clunes may take heart and en-
couragement from the prospects of those who have
gone west and north of Clunes, in the hope of finding
something new and quite as good as the old.
SOUTH CLUNES.
The first claim south of the boundary of the Port
Phillip Company’s ground is the Criterion Amalga-
mated Company; that is, the old Criterion and the
Clunes United companies made one, both of which
started work soon after the inside company got
established. The Criterion was taken up by Billy
Morgan, and others of the old identity, an energetic and
rather violent opponent of the insiders. Good in a
row, a proficient in abuse, and tenacious of his rights
or supposed rights, he had some of those sterling
qualities of which successful men are made; but none
of the graces that sometimes adorn success. He is
dead, but the claim still lives, and as the rough leader
in rough times he deserves a niche in this sketch of
the scene of his industry, and of his fruitless efforts


to force Government to redress a public wrong. In
the amalgamated claim work is at present stopped in
the western cross-cut, on account of excessive hardness
of the country, until one of Ford’s patent boring
machines can be obtained. The eastern drive on the
same level(s6o feet) is being proceeded with. The
shaft is now down 580 feet, and is being sunk deeper.
The condition of this claim is further evidence of the
insufficiency of theories respecting the continuation
of quartz reefs, and additional proof of
the sufficiency of well directed work to prove
the value of ground. Robinson’s, the Old Man, and
the Eastern reefs are found in this claim large, well-
defined reefs, but too poor to work. There is any
amount of stone, but no gold to speak of. One of
them runs diagonally across Frazer street into the
South dunes Company’s claim. The cap of a new
reef is, by some, said to have been struck at a level
of 560 feet, or about 80 feet deeper than the Port
Phillip workings. That fact, if fact it is, would be a
pleasant one to record, as well as agreeable to all spe-
cially interested; but, as far as I could learn, stone
has been struck with coarse gold in it, and of a white
color and without pyrites, but what the find amounts
to it is impossible to say; it may lead to great things,
and it may lead to nothing. The value of the ma-
chinery on this claim is stated at £12,000. The
amount of gold obtained before the amalgama-
tion of the two claims was in round figures
about 47,560 oz. Thousands of tons are in sight,
which, if it would yield another pennyweight _to
the ton, would give handsome returns for breaking
out, raising, and crushing. It may be as well here to
observe that there is no doubt of the Clones reefs
having continued south, but the only payable course
on the Eastern Reef was at the 420 feet level, in the
Criterion, and 460 feet in the Chines United. Some
very excellent looking stone has been sent up out of
the shaft, which has to be tested, and out of a winze
sunk on the supposed new lode, in which there is coarse
gold. These companies were originally co-operative,
nine partners being in one and twelve in the other;
and instead of working together and aiding each other,
were generally at loggerheads, and hindering, by mutual
jealousy, the progress of the mine. The amalgamated
company gets its work done by contract, and there is
every probability of future prosperity, and of other
facts being added to those already in existence of the
richness of quartz at greater depths than it is at
present worked. The machinery is very complete.
There is a powerful battery of the best construction,


a pumping, a winding, and a crushing engine,
all supplied with steam from the same boiler; and
there are efficient arrangements for concentrating and
dealing with the pyrites. The claim of the company
extends across Frazer street. The inhabitants wish to
get the allotments on which their houses stand sold,
and the claim holders want to get a mining lease.
Counsel’s opinion has been taken by the townspeople,
and, it is said, if all agree, that there is no difficulty
in the way.
The South Clunes Company is the first claim on the
south rise from the valley. It is partly an English
and partly a colonial company. The claim was first
tried by the White Flat Company, which failed to do
any good, but I believe obtained a lease for twenty-one
years, which has been transferred to the new company.
In the early days some of the stone on and near the
surface was crushed at Robinson’s batteiy, and gave
good returns. This is the gentleman whose name has
become historical by being given to one of the Clunes
reefs, and his battery was erected on the north side of
Fra/er street, the first mill on Clunes. Had there
been knowledge and skill, and a little less hankering
after what was difficult if not impossible to get, the
outsiders might have had the honor of initiating
mining enterprise on Clunes, and the profits of success;
but at that time, even more so than it is now in the
Gipps Land Ranges, the miners did not know how to
make less than an ounce or 11, oz to the ton pay, and, like
a great many other people, overlooked the good things
at their feet to grasp at those beyond their reach.
There are three well defined quartz reefs in the claim,
and trend towards each other. The stone is described
as highly mineralised, but poor in gold. About 7000
tons of stone per annum is crushed, and gives an
average yield of from 4 to 5 dwt per ton. The reefs
are large and gold freely seen in the stone by the men
breaking it out, and it is all more or less auriferous.
This has probably led to the statement that the company
could get as rich stone as any on Clunes if it liked.
I am assured that this could only be done by picking
out the eyes of the mine, and that although blocks of
remarkably rich stone are met with, the rest of the
stone is poor, and reduces the yield to what has been
stated. This does not satisfy the easily-roused sus-
picions of miners who are interested in the southern
development of the Clunes reefs, and they roundly
assert it is desired to check progress southward, but
what for it is difficult to say. However this may be,
the Ballarat and Clunes and Sir William Don com-
panies will soon be able to prove for themselves and


the public the worth of South Clunes. There are two
shafts in the South Chines Company down 490 feet,
and the company is stoping in the 223 feet level.
The 440 teet level has been worked, and the stone
yielded from 5 to 7 dwt, including the yield from
pyrites. The value of the plant is about £SOOO.
There are two engines for winding, pumping, and
crushing. The Criterion Amalgamated shaft drains
the mine, a pretty good proof that these reefs are a
continuation south of those in the paddock. The
southern point of the claim has not yet been explored.
An opinion has been expressed that an alluvial lead
from the western side will cross the line of reefs, but
I do not see sufficient grounds to sustain that opinion
myself.
The Ballarat and Clunes Alluvial and the Clunes
Quartz and Alluvial companies are both south of the
township. Little, if anything, has been done of late
to either of them. The Ballarat and Clunes has been
re-organised and capital increased to £15,000. It is a
large claim and situated due south of the Clunes
reefs, part of the claim being on the western boundary
of the South Clunes Company, and joining the road
applied for by the Old Comet Company. In the
workings of No. 1 shaft two quartz reefs were cut
through from four to five feet thick. These are said
to be distinct from the Clunes line of reefs, and the
washdirt to have been richer in their neighborhood.
The washdirt is not like that washed in the Clunes
paddock, not so clayey, and boulders more water-worn.
The trend of the lead is supposed to be north-west,
and an opinion was expressed to me that the probable
direction was the south-west corner of the Clunes
paddock. The reefs have not been tested, and were
standing out of the bed rock in the washdirt. No. 2
shaft was merely bottomed and nothing done. An
opinion exists among some experienced miners that
this shaft was not bottomed, but I have no means of
judging upon what grounds the opinion rests. No 3
shaft is about 260 feet deep, and sunk considerably
west of the line of Clunes reefs, and twelve hundred
feet south of the reefs struck in No. 1 workings. They
were struck again in same bearings, and a 2oz 17
dwt specimen was found here, looking as if recently
from the reef. The fall from one shaft to the other is
about fifty feet east to west, and trending south, but
until further work is done nothing certain can be told
of the direction of the alluvial lead or the value of the
reefs. The value of the plant on the ground is stated
at £SOOO. Since striking washdirt £30,000 of gold
has been taken out, a pretty good evidence that all


that is required is economical and intelligent manage-
ment to make this claim pay. Nothing has
yet been done to explore the claim for the
expected continuation of the Clunes reefs
south. It ought to be possible to open
up the company’s claim thoroughly, and not only
search for the Clunes reefs but prove those they have
discovered accidentally. The additional capital and
the fact of being in gold ought in a short time place
this mine into a first-class position. There is an im-
pression that there has been a good deal of bungling
management below, or of dodging above ground, and
that a valuable mining property has been damaged to
suit the jobbing requirements of a few largo share-
holders. In these matters it is difficult to arrive at
the truth; but a great many Clunes people bought in
on statements which appear to have contained a large
proportion of fiction. It now remains for the share-
holders to see that the work on their property, that
might be second to none on the Clunes, is properly,
perseveringly, and economically prosecuted without
delay, for which there is no excuse that the public can
comprehend. West of the Clunes Valley and along
the southern line of the Clunes paddock fence is the
Comet Gold Mining Company, which, I think, was
originally the Haphazard or New Sons of Freedom
Alluvial Company. As a co-operative company nearly
24,000 oz of gold were obtained, and below, in the
valley, some good washdirt was also got. The wash
was red, and very like that obtained in the paddock
on the opposite side. There was also a second wash
like the bed of an old creek with much less clay and
much less gold. If we consider the depth of the Bal-
larat and Clunes Alluvial shaft there does not appear
to be much chance of this lead crossing the line
of reefs which crop out so near to it.
Further west than the Comet Company is the Bri-
tannia Company’s claim, but I do not know for certain
what has been done, though gold was said to have been
found in the claim. It is well situated both for allu-
vial and quartz, as it laps round the south-western
corner of the Clunes paddock and one or two lines of
reef have been crossed in surface cuttings inside. The
Clunes Wonder is on the other side of the pad-
dock. Going back south of this western line there is
a good deal of open ground, likely looking low quartz
ranges, and still further west on a north and south
line with the Magdala. South of the Clunes
Wonder, and west of the Ballarat and Clunes
and the Sir William Don Company, are four or five
.claims which appear to stand well. There are two


reefs on the surface, and gold has been found in
quartz from the shaft of the Great Extended, and on
the line of reef north of them. The Great Extended
is the only company that has shown energy in the
attempt to prove these reefs. The shaft is down
between 90 and 100 feet; water has been struck, and
a whim has been erected. It is intended to open out
both and cross-cut the two known reefs east and west
of the shaft. On the claims to the north nothing has been
done. The Golden Crown Company has applied for a
lease of thirty acres, and no doubt waits with exem-
plary patience for it as the Great Extended proves the
adjacent ground. Immediately south of the Ballarat
and Chines, and right on the supposed trend south of
the Chines reefs, is the Sir William Don Company, in
an excellent position for both alluvial and quartz.
The works of this company are being carried on with
well directed energy, and with a determination to
prove the ground for themselves instead of waiting
for their neighbors. This claim extends a long way
both east and west of the line of Climes reefs,
and has therefore additional chances of get-
ting alluvial leads, whether coming from the
north-west or north-east, that is, from Spring Hill,
Creswick, the Bald Hills, or Ballarat. This concludes
the description of the rise and progress of mining on
Chines up to date. There is plenty of room for valuable
observation from where I have left off to Creswick on one
side and Ballarat on the other, but at present that is
not my duty, I have already exceeded the limits in-
tended for these papers, and gone to some extent
beyond the boundary I fixed and the scope of the
investigation, and shall conclude with a brief summary
of the chief points that are sustained by the generally-
known facts connected with the workings of
the Clunes quartz reefs during the twelve years they
have been worked, since the Port Phillip Company
took possession in August, 1857.
The mining adventurer, the promoters, and the
public, may or may not be gratified at the sketch I
have given of the rise and progress of quartz mining
at Clunes. I have not endeavored to please all or
any of them, but to record all important facts bearing
upon an already great industry, and one that now bids
fair to steadily advance until its gigantic proportions,
if we live to see them, will astonish, if not astound,
those who remember the small beginning and the
long years of many blunders and mistakes, the theories
that have broken down, and the notions that were
laughed at until work proved them true. We have


little to hope from science until work, well directed,
has given us facts and confidence in results, but let it
not be imagined that because I say the geologist fol-
lows rather than directs the pick of the miner, that I
deride or despise science. I state it as a fact, that I
have no doubt most geologists will accept: There is
no occult method of divining the secrets that lie
hid in the bosom of mother earth. We know a few
facts, and are justified in making careful and limited
inferences from them, and those men who have
had the best and most continuous opportu-
nities to know and to observe the various
phenomena relating to auriferous quartz reefs, are the
men who are the least bold in asserting anything
dogmatically beyond what the pick has actually taught
them. They have been too often admonished by dis-
appointment, and surprised by success, not to know
that in nearly all mining adventures, whether quartz
or alluvial, whether working for gold and silver, cop-
per or lead, coal or tin, that the problem to be solved
is always one of probabilities which nothing but the
bore, the pick, and intelligent management, can solve.
Science gives us a few valuable hints, and without
them the miner would often waste his time, but there
is not sufficient yet known to justify any one in dog-
matic teaching, whether it be based upon scientific
theory or practical experience. We have not yet
ascertained all the facts respecting the modes
of occurrence of gold, we know absolutely
nothing about its origin, and merely a few facts
about its distribution. One of the absurdities which
prevails among the public, although no one will admit
it, is that everyone wants a certainty although he
knows that to expect it is ridiculous. He who invests
a ten pound note on the advice of a friend expects a
fortune in return or considers that he has been a
victim to a swindle. Much of this we owe to the
theoriesthatexistin relation to mining, and especially to
quartz mining. Next to a paying claim the public de-
sire to be on the line of some celebrated quartz, reef,
and any such claim can get its promoters to float it. The
public rush in and as madly rush out if the first cross-
cut fails to strike the wished-for reef. It is time
that the public recognised the difference between
buying into a known mine and prospecting for a
new one. Whatever may be the tricks or dishonesty
of the mining adventurers or promoters as a class,
there is no doubt in my mind that the public is the
most ready to be dishonest, and quite as ready to
escape its liabilities as any promoter living. There is
not a more disastrous, and certainly not a more dis-


honest act than the neglect or refusal to pay calls
when due, and afterwards to resuscitate a right to an
interest that has been practically and voluntarily
abandoned. This might be to some extent
done away with if the public was treated to
a little more fact and a little less fiction in
the prospectus that ushers in a new venture. From
what I have said it will be seen that I do not expect
to please any one, and shall be satisfied if a few at
least gain some information to guide them
in their future investments, as the Clunes
reefs are in nearly every important respect simi-
lar in the conditions of success to most other reefs,
except in one important particular, and which to a
very great extent has been overlooked, or at least its
full force not made as clear as it appears to me it
should be. That special fact is that the Port Phillip
Company started with three well-defined, known auri-
ferous reefs, and afterwards discovered two more, making
five parallel quartz reefs to work, giving a reliable
basis for the most extensive operations. If one reef
broke up into strings or dipped out on the line of
strike, as the Welcome Reef has done and the Eastern
Reef has partly done to the north, the company had
not to entirely depend upon these reefs making again
at greater depths, but had others to work
at, as well as additional reefs to explore.
It is hardly necessary to say that this
is not generally the case with quartz claims,
although it is more frequently so than is generally
supposed. This is another intimation of the necessity
of, in times of prosperity, providing for the steady
exploration of the mine ahead of existing works.
Just as the Welcome Reef was discovered, and the
alluvial deposits were found, more by acci-
dental than intentional exploration of the country
at Clunes, so may it be in other quartz
claims. The New North Clunes teaches the
same lesson, and the deep shaft sunk by the second
company, although disastrous to that company, is a
blessing to the present one, and has proved the exis-
tence of three quartz reefs that have not yet been
explored. These special features should give confidence
to the working parties both north and south, for
where there are so many reefs it may safely bo
inferred that one or more of them will
continue, 01 at least make again within a moderate
distance of the line of strike, as well as give promise
of the finding of other reefs to the east and west of
that line, as the country is similar and, to all appear-
ance, the like conditions exist for the formation op


existence of gold-bearing quartz reefs. To this we have to
add the important facts that such quartz reefs arc
found again cropping out on the surface at various
distances from the Climes reefs on the line indicated,
and on the west and east of that line, not to speak of
the existence of other reefs said to have been struck
in some of the outside claims on the north, eastward
of any reefs yet Worked, while the alluvial wash was
being taken out. Although Ido not consider that
there is sufficient evidence to justify the theory that
any particular quartz reef is indefinitely Continuous,
north and south, I do not mean to say that there is
sufficient evidence to assert that it is not so, but
merely sufficient to show that that theory is not sup-
ported by any reliable series of facts on Clunes,
although more so there than anywhere else. If the
New North Clunes Reef is not a continuation of any
of the Clunes reefs, then it is a cheering fact in sup-
port of the supposition that though lines of reefs may
not be indefinitely continuous, other reefs make in
the same line of country £qual, and sometimes supe-
rior, in richness to those being worked, and a sufficient
justification is given to explore country adjacent to a
known and valuable lode. Another important feature
proved by the Clunes works is, that the gold does
not get finer or the stone poorer as greater depths arc
reached. This is not only the case in the Port
Phillip Company’s claim, where nuggets are found in
the 300 and 374 feet levels, but is also the case in the
other companies. The gold shown to me in some of
the stone from the rich spur in the New North Clunes
was much coarser than gold obtained nearer the sur-
face. As a rule, the stone is more metallic at greater
depths, and a marked change generally takes place in
the quartz below what is called the water level; but
the stone recently taken out of the lowest level of the
Criterion Amalgamated claim does not show this
change, although freely showing coarse gold. A fact
most important in its bearings on future quartz mining
on Ballarat is, that on Clunes, leaving out of question
the surface stone, that richer quartz has
been worked below the level of the alluvial
washdirt than has been worked above it,
thus sustaining the theory or supposition that our
reefs may prove richer at greater depths than they
have been near the surface. Whilst distinctly assert-
ing that the facts do not prove that quartz reefs get
poorer as they get deeper, it must be remembered
that I am just as clear that there is not sufficient evi-
dence upon which to assert that they get richer. As
it is said in racing, that “ you never can tell till the


number is up,” so in quartz mining, you never caii
tell till you work down and look for yourself. All
that we are justified in asserting is, that there is no
evidence to justify an assertion one way or the
other, and that the facts are sufficient to jus-
tify the testing of any known auriferous reef
as long as it holds out. There are many
statements made public as to the total
cost of raising and crushing the stone, and extracting
the gold; but, as far as I can judge, a good deal is fre
quently left out of the total—different com-
panies calculate the totals in different ways. Some
leave out all charge for dead work, new explorations,
&c. On Ballarat it has been frequently asserted that
3 dwt to the ton can be made to pay. This I doubt,
excepting under special circumstances, and for a
limited time, at no great depths, if it can be done
even then. The Queen’s Birthday Company the other
day stated the total cost per ton at 24 dwt, depth 201
feet. The Black Hill Company calculate the total
cost to them at 3 dwt per ton. The Port Phillip
Company at £1 3s 5d per ton, inclusive of dead work,
&c. The New North Clunes at 16s per ton, exclusive
of dead work and prospecting. It would be worth
while to all concerned to have these figures examined,
and the question, if possible, set at rest.
In reference to machinery, the only difference is
between the use of revolving stampers and those, like
the Port Phillip Company’s, that do not revolve.
With steel stamp-heads the question is of no import-
ance, and with good iron stamps opinion is in favor of
the revolving stamper. A more important matter is
the use of quicksilver in the battery. The Port Phillip
Company have discarded copper-plates as useless, and
the result of all their experience is, that quicksilver is
of no service anywhere but in the troughs or boxes,
and I am assured that the flue gold is caught in the
boxes and retained by the quicksilver, and would bo
washed away whenever the blankets got fouled if
the silver was not there. I must confess th it I have
very little opinion of the use of quicksilver, ex-
cept as an amalgamating agent. When used in
the battery, troughs, or elsewhere, the process is
not an amalgamating one; the conditions necessary
to amalgamation are not there, and if they were the
silver would only act efficiently for a short time. I
should like to see a battery without silver tried against
one charged in the usual way. Inventors still run
their heads against the notion that we have yet to
learn how to get the gold out of the pyrites, and do
not generally seem to comprehend that the real diffi-


culty of the problem is, how to separate the small
quantity of pyrites from the bulk of crushed quartz.
As far as the experience of Clunes goes, nothing has
been found to justify them in superceding the buddies.
Mr H. A. Thompson’s adaptation of the percussion-
table is said to look well at the Crooked River, Gipps
Land, and a recent trial of Messrs Brown and Stans*
field’s concentrators proved them to be very efficient.
Since then we have Mr Hunt’s separator, but how it
deals with large quantities I am not in a position to
say.
[Appendix A.]
In the Inter-colonial Exhibition Essay on “ Mining
and Mineral Statistics, 1866-67” (by R. Brough Smythe,
F.G.S., London,' and Secretary of Mines, Victoria),
there is a valuable note —taken from Dickers' Mining
Record, but originally appearing in the Alta California ,
an old-established and reliable American newspaper —
which gives a brief history of the development of quartz
mining, and is a parallel instance to that of the Clunes
mines here. In America the theories of scientific men,
based upon insufficient data, deterred capital and dis*
couraged perseverance in working quartz reefs to great
depths, and had Mr A. Haywood, of Sutar Creek,
Amadar County, been also deterred, our American
cousins would by this time have been many years
behind us in quartz mining. This gentleman’s claim
is now being worked 1200 feet below the surface, and
about 300 feet below the sea level. Like the New
North Clunes reef it was poor at first, and has got
richer as it was worked deeper ; but unlike the Clunes
reef, instead of the body of stone getting less, the
American reef gets wider as well as richer. At first
the stone yielded from eight to ten dollars worth of
gold to the ton. At the lowest level (1200 feet) the
stone yields twenty-five dollars worth of gold per ton.
The shaft has been sunk in the quartz. The eastern
wall is of granite, and is almost perpendicular. At


the lowest level the stone improves in quality both
north and south of the shaft, but much more rapidly
going north, where it has yielded as high as fifty
dollars of gold to the ton. The writer professes to
have personally inspected the mine, and states that
the “ clean-up ” every fourteen days varies slightly,
but invariably increases in yield of gold. Mr Haywood
has become the sole proprietor of the mine, and has
now been at work fourteen or fifteen years. Without
going as far as the American writer, who draws whole-
sale inferences from his one great fact, we can receive
his evidence as of immense importance to us, and as
another proof of the possible and probable value of
quartz reefs at great depths, and as an encouragement
to persevere.
The bore referred to on M'Kenzie’s farm (now
Penny’s), south-east of the Clunes Estate, is down 378
feet, and was given up in drift, which frequently rose
pi the bore as much as 11 feet in a shift, despite the
efforts of the men at work. The strata passed through
is stated to be as follows Surface clay, 6 feet; Ist
rock, over 100 feet; stiff clay, about 10 feet; 2nd rock
over 100 feet; black clay, about 6 feet; 3rd rock, ove r
100 feet; yellow clay and drift made up the total of
378 feet. This, though not exact, is valuable iufor.
mation, and is given on the authority of the men who
worked at the bore, and of a neighboring landowner
who is an old Ballarat miner.
Since going to press, I have been informed that the
only connection that Mr S. Irwin had with the first
New North Clunes Company, was in aiding Mr
Esmond to get an extended area from the Local
Court,


« 45 a a
J 3 O 'S £ -g rf
•HI I | gsi I llial |ai
II IS 111 nil 11|||| lIS I ||l I®. I £ls
d d did p 4 h> I Pq
T 3
c a) a) £ TS
p o3-'S a)^§Srt 5Sg
■a S> ash STS g’.lo.lll'S'S po®g| £3 g| g-g g-|3|
bo rf £ ® 2S a tB.>< JS O -o-C o.g S>. a
S 9 'SoOOO S JO o SOOK SM p S
g ® • -T-S- Jria
Hi Hi hi i I fldflHEH'hfeOO^SV^Hbh'^BWlliH
H
0Q
P
O
P
of
w
p
p
p
p
g gi
£ C 3
a a a 0 ia “o o eaofSS
[3 _ 0.2 S ,0 o ,OOrf® ,1/500 f googoog I OOnj,
oao O 1/5 50 0«9)3 N'OO -fc OO OM - J
SCS corf—l 1 rfs- I-H I toH 51 'cor— O t-- rfi rfi l>- CO i/5 *H <*l £3 S 3
a art ocrj art=rt«rt° =rt =rt
% %
O .
cl
If
sa
g§oooo o oogggogoooooooogoog|g
«o5o 555^5
oof o"da o'm"S «<=3o' s' of 23" ®j o' oo'o'o of o' rff o' o' o 00t-
i,'l HM« 'M H H H 4| HSIHHHIN«(N H O H (N <M HWSC OJ
Ctf C*i
CO
w
-tj
P*
S
o
o
o
g ®
-s s
o £
S*CQ
£
ggBBBigBiSSBii|i||i||B|||||||
000000 OOOOrHOOOOOOOOO'OOOOOOOO
Tfi CO Tjl^-aIITji^COfMrHC^C^TtiT^C^COCO
p
PH
a -•
P a>
' p
*2 «8
*o3
Ph ,/j
1 1111|-§ i| isiii|ii 111111 1§ 11 05
O
w
P 5
P
H
cc
I—l
P
-;
Ph
J,
M
x.
9 S 1
r 9 a
•;■::::: ;W o ; : :
s :::::::::: s :: s s : : sou • • •
; _||
5 :::: : : i :: : : : | : : : x.| : 2I :::
:|||| ; |*x> ; :l :i|:|: -li :|*§ ,: ,
■|l|||§.|li '2l 'lt ’3 |*|| a 3S
: |e|sal (s l| :S||o| I :&ISI ill :
ill ifisil II Ills- fill ll
i|s^^SaS6g^f||Si«|SG 3 ||6-g
oliiliill ill Ivlin's, §
»*5 |.-g S 3 2 2 g££| o o*c g p §3§
x
k
-a
x
s
o
o
X
o
a
S
fc
Q
§
Ph
P*
I—l






