

LIGHT FOR THE MILLION
THE
EDUCATION OF NATURE;
NOT THE
POPULAR MISDIRECTIONS.
TRACT No. 2—To be followed by several others, for the continuation of
the work nobly commenced by the authors of the Essays and Reviews and
by Dr. Colenso, in his books on the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua.
By TH. BERIGNY, M.D., &c
.
PRICE OF SECOND PART,
OIE SHILLIIO AID SIXPENCE.
A Discount of thirty per cent, allowed on all Cash Orders for 1000 Copies
AND UPWARDS.
MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA:
F. F. BAILLIERE,
Publisher in Ordinary to the Victorian Government, and Importer o f MedicaJ and
Scientific Works. London. New York. Paris. Madrid.
COLONIAL AGENTS :
Sydney : A. Cubitt; Adelaide: W. C. Rigby; Tasmania : Walch and Sons.
1863.




LIGHT FOR THE MILLION.
THE
EDUCATION OF NATURE ;
NOT
THE POPULAR MISDIRECTIONS.
TRACT No. 2—To be followed by several others, for the continuation of
the work nobly commenced by the authors of the. Essays and Reviews and
by Dr. Colenso, in his books on the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua.
[STEREOTYPED EDITION.]
By TH. BERIGNY, M.D., &o.




INTRODUCTION.
The Author intends to bring forth before the British Nation
a series of Lectures upon various subjects, and thereby present
in their own language, of which he was ignorant when twenty-five
years of age, how he has come to the conclusion that, civilization
being upon wrong foundations, no reform will be fraught with
permanent benefit, unless the primary cause of social evils he
eradicated, i. e., Superstition.
He is not of the class of philosophers who acknowledge that
the people must have something false to believe when they cannot
have the truth: he holds scepticism as the most fertile ground
for the cultivation of knowledge, truth, and wisdom, and he
believes that evidence has no authority where there is no honest
doubt. Popular faith that indolently contemplates itself as
Narcissus at the fountain, is the atrophy of men’s higher faculties,
the baneful virus inoculated into the blood of human childhood;
it has been the Harbinger of a gospel of fatality, despair, and
offensive exclusiveness, for the defence of which, men have carried
on destructive wars, and are now wasting their valuable energies.
Knowledge on the contrary, being the impressions received by
substantial, real, and intellectual evidences, will alone restore
religious harmony throughout the world.
It will be noticed, he apprehends, that his dictionary of the
English idiom is rather limited, and the French phraseology
disagreeably prevailing ; his object, however, is not to exhibit
literary attainments, but to avow fearlessly, his sentiments in a
pertinent and significant language, to which he has been driven
by public injustice, and the love of truth.
127 Collins Street East, Melbourne.
July, 1863.




THIRD LECTURE.
(DELIVERED BEFORE THE TRUTH-SEEKERS’ FREE DEBATING SOCIETY,
ON JUNE 28, BY DR. BERIGNY.)
SEVEN STEPS TO EDUCATION.
On the maternal bosom the mind of nations reposes; their manners, prejudices
and virtues —in a word, the civilization of the human race—all depend upon maternal
influence.— [Education of Mothers, by Aime Martin.)
The object of my last lecture (or Tract No. 1), was to impress
upon the human mind that the Religion of God as given to man
through Nature’s revelations, is obedience to her laws. The
question now presented is how to determine the knowledge of
these laws ? The answer is, by education man will be gradually
provided with the knowledge of these laws. Nature always tends
to progressive development in all she originates under the su-
perintendence of a wise Providence; Nature always moves in cir-
cles, and ascends in spirals ; Nature abhors contrast and disorder,
as well as inertia, and her laws of motion are everywhere the har-
bingers of higher developments, and better future. The question
now is, to enter fully into the subject of Education.
What do we mean by education? The arrangement of crude
materials into form and harmony ; the careful nursing and
judicious training of human childhood, and weaning the ad-
vancing mind from the un-nutritious authority of past ages and
ancient testimony. Mankind is hardly out of its cradle of edu-
cation when it shrinks from self-reliance and clings to antiquity ;
it is as the infant child, frightened by the sea-side, with the
horizon of immensity before him, who rushes back to its mother


for protection. The promoters of natural education have a
strong battle to fight against the disordered elements of social
chaos, while Christendom is yet in the swaddling clothes that
even forbid this infantile temerity.
Education is the lever which raises social manners into intel-
ligence and loveliness ; that which is beautiful in its perfection
is only to be arrived at by the unfolding process which nature
gives to every flower during its growth; so the innate faculties
bound up in the germ of youth which have been so long smothered
by artificial culture and overwhelmed in the current tending
towards public approbation. Through theological systems of
salvation the human mind has been cramped, as the female organ
of locomotion is hindered in China by the fashionable appliance
of tight shoes. Curiosity, instead of enticing man to fall, as the
first pair are supposed to have done, is that divine shoot that
will expand its numerous ramifications when man has developed
the tree of manhood which will put forth the delicious fruits of
knowledge, and exhale the fragrance of individual conviction.
Our common school education soon disgusts the young inquisi-
tive mind when it has no other authority to invoke but that of
musty books and gloomy creeds —foreshadowers of discouraging
prospects. The idea that book-learning is education, and uni-
versity degrees instruction, must be dispelled as a fiction dan-
gerous to the future welfare of mankind, to give place to a
higher moral, physical, intellectual, and social development,
upon which foundation depends integrity, strength, intelligence
and merit, the combined elements of universal happiness.
Our popular systems of education stay the requirements of the
mind, and turn its energies to material gratifications —fictitious
possession of wealth never enjoyed, but tempting the needy ;
whereas education excites all the faculties to activity, and keeps
up increasing desires for improvement and knowledge, that are
fraught with new gratifications, new contemplations, new feel-
ings, and new happiness.
Conventionalism, the counterfeit of education, tramples upon
individual sovereignty; it enslaves, degrades and oppresses the
poor, after they are inculcated at school with superstitions that
train them to pay an extravagant tribute of respect to their
enslavers, oppressors, and destroyers of their rights. The
victims of that system are called “ criminals,” “ prisoners,”
“ vicious, ignorant mechanics,” “ rough farmers,” and “ narrow-
minded shopkeepers,” while the vietimizers are stylishly and
pompously termed “holiness,” “lordship,” “grace,’ ‘‘most
reverend,” “ doctors,” &c. The emblem of the former is a swarm
of tottering mules under heavy burdens, and the symbol of the
latter a party of sanctimonious drivers. The deception is main-


tained with no end of sermons, recommendation of faith m the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the license of eternal salvation for passive
obedience and non-resistance to the yoke of slavery,— the crop
that promises a rich harvest if the Nemesis of “infidelity
make none of its ravages. . .
The object of education is to restore humanity to social equi-
librium through more adequate respect to labour and industry,
and less unmerited homage for useless and expensive social
articles. Those that require most the blessings of such reform
are the governing, oppressing instruments of corruption and
degradation, whose time of probation will be more dreadful for
being delayed ; these misdirecting classes, relying upon the broken
reed of popularity, are generally selfish, mercenary,—-aiming at
social distinction and power, which, when attained, debar them
the more of happiness; whereas, the unpretending, well-balanced
mind is unconquerable in his possession, and contemplates is
strength in the principles of nature, and —far from anxiously
apprehending any rival, —feels an increase of happiness m
sharing the blessings of knowledge with others.
Popular education is the grand organization of fraud ; separate
interests engender mercantile deception, sordid avarice, and in-
dividual discouragement, that fill our prisons, asylums and
workhouses, and supply armies ; in fact, but few of the human
family are real useful producers of labour, knowledge, skill,
public service, &c., but many are begging, many are obtaining
money under false pretences, and many are stealing fiom the
treasure of humanity, and for compensation permit their slippers
to be kissed by the oppressed; whereas education, which is a
divine law, to be followed in all integrity, will restore to each
member of the human family the inalienable rights inherited
from nature, for it is a social law that the more these rights aie
individually understood and freely exercised, the more secure
will be the general welfare and peace of the community; and
society, ceasing to wrong men, she will cease to be wronged by
offenders.
Our present systems of education are accountable for all the
contentions and criminalities perpetrated upon earth. Reason
has been long condemned and banished, whilst pernicious doc-
trines, fortified by battlements of dismal institutions, are intimi-
dating the weak and dissatisfied mind. Presumption, ignorance,
bigotry and tradition are the salaried pedagogues who strive with
vain pride for their maintenance at the university of Saint
Custom, and mar the happiness of their candid students. The
crumbling scaffolding of popular superstitions is no sooner
assailed by chivalrous thinkers and promoters of natural religion,
than Hypocrisy, the favorite of emperors and queens, clothed in


ermine rob--, and - tting in the temple of “religion,” excites
the credulous mass to resist progress by the opprobrium of a
hard name, and thus nourish popular aversion for public
benefaetors-
The praxpose of education in our day is twofold ; firstly, to
abstract the vicaaostendeneies inherited from progenitors, and
secondly, to ] rer-me the human mind for a higher state of being
by developing the fundamental characteristics bestowed by a
vhse Providence : and this is not the work of colleges nor uni-
v-:ties, for these superficial and shallow institutions only make
sectarian s. shots, e'.ocnent sermonizers, learned advocates of
t h oo i. s m d they fail to make men who will officiate as pioneers
rmrnfiT. progress : this alone is the work of education, com-
menced by virtuous mothers, seconded by wise fathers, con-
tinued tv intellectual development, and terminating by social
errerdence and self-cultivation. Seven steps mark the gra-
duating degrees of mis grand philosophy :—
Ist. Congenial matrimonial union.
2nd. Education of wives through husbands,
drd. Infiuenee of mothers on their offspring.
4th. Moral education of children,
ydi Physical education of children,
bth. Intellectual education of youths.
Tih. Sodal education of men.
hfis first 'ter t: education is Obedience to the second
vrnmarament cf God. conjugal love by two con-
r-mh. minds, uni healthy pair. The regeneration of
■- .. - x Tmesis ecmmenoe-d mere, will be a failure. If there
b no |dbm septrite from congenial association,
ziz. he S 3 true man out of matrimonial lust and fashion -
L: - ecsntrarts. Man may possess a harem of women, have
— r ifffeTTT a *r-enal Tirgin disparity ol age, but
i»r command, without mutual affinity, that love
of mpaior offsprings. If he be not the
&ther <of his wife’s children, it is lmpos-
«s"Hie but that me untesiret maternity should produce fiom ega
adobes* anything hot a sk-kly. degenerated, mentally deformed
cmtaß. veil disposed to take his revtmge for thus being
branched mn society grossly mode up. Divorce is a divine
Ist ®f remfieshrm and an obiisadon enjomed to all mistaken
rails, and must he obeved, to put a stop to a generation of imbe-
rt.es.. sert&mans. kypoerifles, and wretched beings. Prematuie
manias* between cotrmkl partners should also be avoided, as
it :s a ft: observed that nearly all great men and women were
bora from parents between 30 and 40 years ot age, an 6


children of young parents are feeble, delicate, and though pre-
cocious they invariably fail to he remarkable. Prolonged court-
ships are ridiculous; prejudicial to manners, and detrimental to
mind and health. The maxim that love is blind is the inversion
of a truism, but it is desirable that young men and women
should long several years for conjugal union, so that tlieir
energies be directed upon self-development, provided that chastity
be religiously observed. .
The second step to education is, the education oi the
wife through husband. Woman is the shield of humanity,
and through woman regeneration is to come. There was a time
when women, cattle and horses, were reckoned as the “ goods
and chattels” of a man’s property. There was a time when
polygamy was alleged to be a divine institution (is that time
past?)—dispensed for the “ favorite people” of God. What has
become of bis u favoured children ? llnslaved once, subjugated
several times, dispersed since, and their nationality gone, as that
of ancient nations that also treated angelic females as marketable
shares. Polygamy has always been a sure beacon of national
ruin, and the nations that remain sole vendors of their daugh-
ters —such as the Chinese, Arabs, and Turks, are a sure piize
for English, French, and Russian aggrandisement. The sale of
a woman in Turkey, China, or Africa is the mortgage of all her
offspring to European nations. There was also a time when
theologians contended for the refusal of a soul to the sweet
members of our sisterhood; and when we reflect upon what has
been done by insensible fathers and tyrannical husbands, to
degrade woman, and what has been done by the latter to soften
human tyranny, it seems to be a long conflict between hatred
and love, —between cruelty and gentleness,—between the lion
and the lamb ; and a constant rolling under the social waves of
human agitation, of angular, rough granite pebbles, wrestling
with unpolished diamonds for their mutual smoothness. If the
British nation is now spreading fast all over the earth, the secret
of her greatness, in my opinion and that of many others, does
not lie in the belief of the Bible, as once announced by their
gracious sovereign, but owing to the respect paid by this nation
to mothers and sisters that adorn the family circle, and also to
foreign marriages now facilitated by easy transit. The freedom
to select husband and wife with nature’s consent is a divine right,
granted to all except to royal heads. To deny such prerogative
to our offspring is fraught with their ruin and degradation, with
peril to our descendants and sure remorse to ourselves. To
maintain this exception to royal families, is foretelling a sad pre-
dicament for monarchy, for nature will not accommodate herself
to suit aristocratic pride.


However, if female elevation has already conferred great boons
upon the present race of men, it is far from having reached the
limits of full justice. The bible, which occasionally presents
sublime sentiments that suggest social reform, is not partial to
improve woman’s condition. “ Thy desires shall he unto thy hus-
band, and he shall rule over thee;” —nor is the great Paul in
advance of the Old Testament, when he says—“ I suffer not a
woman to teach; man was not created for woman, hut woman for
man Wives submit yourselves to your husbands Let the
wives he subject to their husbands in all things.” We are compelled,
therefore, to turn away from the venerated gospels to interrogate
venerable nature for better inspiring the many sectarian parents
who still sell their daughters to the highest bidder, not for cash,
but for the vain gi’atification of social pride. The will of nature
is the will of God: does nature consent to matrimonial union
with great disparity of age between the partners ? What becomes
of the precepts of Christ when he says, “ He that does the will of
my father is my brother,” wdien a minister legally and “ reli-
giously” unites two incompatible hearts, and thus insults both
nature and * * * But of course ministers and priests do not
intend to be the brothers of Christ; their business is to elevate
him as high as they can, and lower humanity at the same ratio.
If the divine teacher (divine, because true and divine are
synonymous in real meaning,) is not made to dethrone the
Divine, Incomprehensible Providence, it is owing to a conven-
tional provision called mystery, a war engine intended for the
coup de grace to the great foe, reason.
Keturning from this digression, I continue, and say that in
the immediate elevation of the female element lies the reciproca-
tion of elevation of the next generation. Men must at once
become better husbands, to make better mothers, who will form
better children ; men must kindly enlighten the minds of their
wives by daily breaking up their dangerous fancies. But
if our matrons be irretrievably wedded to the respectable
doctrines of vicarious atonement, total depravity and eternal
misery, the work must be directed by intelligent fathers upon
their daughters, so that by them the ensuing generation may
be redeemed from superstitions. It is deplorable that many
clear-sighted fathers indolently leave undisturbed the super-
stitious notions of their beloved wives, not reflecting about the
danger they run by thus swelling the list of sectarians with
perpetuating narrow-minded descendants who will spread falla-
cies throughout the world, whilst retarding their own progress.
I will remind them that it is the privilege of the male element
(as practically experienced by myself in less than half-an-hour
previously to marriage,) that man, by his affectionate wisdom


and kind firmness will easily uproot sectarian weeds that stifle
the moral and intellectual growth of a chaste companion ; there-
fore bachelors as well as married men should consider it a
religious duty to God and man to reason with their betrothed 01
wife, and deeply appeal to their highest faculties for answers to
all questions suggested by the love of truth and freedom. •
that the minds of mothers be free from sectarian misdirecting
influences, and all our social evils and degrading superstitions
will be dispersed before the hurricane of a single generation.
How to do it ? Here lies a deep problem ! .
The third and most indispensable element of education is
the Influence of Mothers !—the most holy condition of woman
is motherhood. By maternity, while woman becomes an object ot
more sacred regard to her husband, she also becomes a divine
representative of the life-giving fountain to her helpless otispnng.
She alone can descend to the level of her pupils’ understanding ;
she alone is the faithful interpreter of the wants and troubles ot
the entrusted apprentice ; and her smiling infant intercomse aie
divine radiations felt by the dumb being; the influx she trans-
mits from her heart commences to exercise the organs ot senti-
ment until the fulness of time sends forth the good and the
great, which is the nobility of manhood. Despise not the truth,
0 vain man, that the “weaker vessel’ must be youi stiong
teacher, your inspirer, and your educator before you become
purified from the dross of popular superstitions, prejudices, and
falsehoods. Only grant woman a congenial husband, and let
this husband have industry enough to provide all her require-
ments and that of her offsprings : let him possess sense enough
to counteract the contamination of old worm-eaten church cus-
toms, and a new social order will spring up with the rising
generation.
The whole world now comprehends that the influence of
woman is traceable in all great national events. It is acknow-
ledged that she has been the inspiring genius of heroes: Napo-
leon once said, “ The future destiny of a child is always the work
of his mother.” Woman is the queen of her family circle, and
her husband is but the viceroy. She shapes the hearts of her
children by the reflex of her virtues or vices, as the father devel-
opes their perceptions by imparting instruction. She is the
family book of moral emotions, the index of happiness and
success, and a faithful barometer of family apprehensions. She
will furnish her offsprings with the characteristics that will dis-
tinguish or doom them in their social relations, either illiterate,
or possessing scientific acquirements ; the laws and instruction
she imparts cannot be forgotten like the lessons of teachers.
Who can easily dispel from his memory the impressions incul-


cated by an affectionate mother ? Misdirected though she may
have been, still her kind voice is never forgotten; and men are
ever too apt to exaggerate maternal authority, even when mis-
applied.
Let us now consider the fourth step to education, viz., Moral
Education of Children.
Moral education is the inculcation of kindness, benevolence,
gentleness, faithfulness, sincerity, justice, friendship, candour,
&c., &c.; but no book, no sermon, no ecclesiastical organization
can impart its teaching equal to maternal instruction and example.
The man who has had no mother for early moral training is unfor-
tunately situated. “ Out of sixty-nine monarchs who have worn
the crown of France,” says a French philosopher, “ only three
have loved the people, and these three were brought up by their
mothers.” Moral education is the domain of mothers exclu-
sively : the new-born infant is like the potter’s clay—the skull,
almost plastic, reveals an interior still more delicate. If nature
moulds the body she intends the mother to be the matrix of the
soul. She will make the moral vase susceptible to resist the
pollution of popular idolatry, and preserve the flowers of Heaven
in the limpid crystal of his mind, or cause this beautiful vessel
to be so fragile as to crack in all directions with the scalding
theological fusion which condemns it to hold earthly rubbish
only. It is true that the evils of initial misdirections will “ visit
the sins of the fathers until the third and fourth generation,”
not because it is written in the bible, but because it is resting
upon a physiological law—founded upon no human authority,—
but revealed by the facts that many children have manifested the
characteristics of ancestors even more remote. The character we
inherit from our mother is beyond our absolute control; we are
low or elevated, enslaved in superstition or free from its
shackles, selfish or generous, nearly as our mothers have been.
Our moral freedom is the amount of all our individual energies
to emerge from all vicious influences, and to work out our own
individual divine character, so difficult to develope. The
greatest philosopher I know, Andrew Jackson Davis, one whom
I venerate as my greatest benefactor, inasmuch as I consider
his works as most reflecting the great light of reason
upon mental philosophy, thus expresses himself upon
the nature of parental influence:—“ A child inherits a body
and a head at the top of it, and the future man must live
in the thus bequeathed habitation. He has inherited some-
what of his father and his mother, and his character will be
manifested concordantly therewith. The shape and qua-
lity of his ordinary character will resemble the shape and
quality of his immediate inheritance Man’s body is inhe-


l Wzo a dwelling-house, and he must live in it whether he
ti e shape o' not The faculties are the furniture also
inherited with the habitation. It is impossible radiea y °
change a single faculty; in fact, in this world it is hard even
superficially to make alteration. Every chair and every »
every item of furniture bequeathed to man by his earthly prog -
nZls is placed in his rudimental house, and he can scarcely
move them. He must sit low or stand upright, must breathe
and feel and think in accordance with the structure of his ha 1-
tation and the arrangement of his furniture, «c. .
1 After this, the subject of man’s free will needs no discussion,
we comprehend also 'how it is that so many men and women who
can exercise their sense well enough when speaking of pounds
shillings and pence, will maintain that Joshua once stopped the
sun, when they have the living revelation of Hod befoie then
eves that the sun cannot be made to stand still, when 1 _
immovable! They contend for it because the bible claims this
miracle for Joshua ! Were there a new edition of the bible pub-
lished, with a printer’s mistake m placing “ Jonas instead of
“ whale,” and vice versa, so as to make the former having swal-
lowed the latter, and such edition fraudulently substituted foi
those now adorning every household in Scotland, it would be
blasphemy in that dark region of the earth to question the
feasibility of this fact.* The study of mental insanity will reveal
that a deranged mind is the inversion of certain faculties of the
understanding ; and superstitions are inherited malformations
of the organ of veneration. There is no universal brotherhood
possible without forbearing hearts and sane minds. Moral edu-
cation, by subduing our social anomalies and teaching man to
live a righteous life, alone will prepare a righteous death, do
go further without psychological faculties being developed, is a
mischievous speculation, and breathes impostures upon the
human family. .
To resume our subject—Moral Education of Children com-
mences before birth. If during pregnancy the mother is con-
templating in her offspring the pledge of a beloved husband, she
imparts to the foetus the sublime essence of purity ; but if asso-
ciated with an uncongenial partner, she apprehends her
* While vindicating my religious principles once with a Scotch lady patient
of mine, I was emphatically told by her that- I had no more idea of God than
(then looking round for some material inspiration towards the fireplace)
“ than that poker !” Her learned governess, to show herself worthy of the
trust of the moral education of the children, added that she knew well where
all my ideas came from ; and upon my stimulated inquiry being manifested,
she answered, “ All that came from the black gentleman.’' If so I shall try to
prove that he has become a progressive being of late, for I am inspired to love
and not to hate—to assist and not to persecute the victims of errors.


involuntary maternity will thrust upon her an unwelcome in-
truder, she commences to hate the unborn, and thus conspiring
against the moral attribute of the future man, she dooms him to
hatred. All wrong done to mothers by improvident husbands
during gestation is also an outrage perpetrated upon the new-
comer. Husbands exercise a fearful influence over the mental
condition of their wives during pregnancy either for good or
evil, which is always faithfully stereotyped upon the unborn,
and will control his character and destiny in spite of all systems
of salvation. As the favorable growth of a tree requires a fertile
ground and a calm and even temperature, husbands should also
surround their wives during nursing with all the comforts and
happiness possible, because from the same breast the infant
draws life he may also draw jealousy, hatred, bad temper, and
other defects, too soon developed in a vicious society. “As the
tree bends, so it inclines,” but not for eternity, thanks to the
moral remedies which a divine dispensator has in store for
human rectitude.
Moral education should never present to the mind any object
for apprehension or hatred, and “ the fear of the Lord,” incul-
cated by superstitious mothers is a great injury to his moral
organ as it is a gross misrepresentation of, and an injustice to,
the Divine Character. Moral education is entirely based upon
feelings consequent upon experience commenced in the family
circle, and continuing in the social squalls of life. The princi-
ples of justice and righteousness are inculcated in childhood
under the tuition of mothers superintending brotherly relations,
but never read and learned in printed book. The secrets of ma-
ternal success in teaching her offsprings, is that she never makes
her pupil feel that she is a master, for if true to nature, she
delights in being his associate, playmate, exemplar, sympathiser,
and protector, but never a superior. To send children to cate-
chism or the church for moral education, is as preposterous and
vain as to send them to a professor of anatomy for learning
swimming, or to teach music and drawing by lecturing upon the
fine arts.
Do we not find every day among the frequenters of church
services men who have not the remotest idea of moral discipline,
devising plans to defraud their neighbour while chanting a
hymn, and ostensibly subscribing for the support of the church
with the money belonging to orphans and widows. Secularists
have proved to the world that they are better men than they
appear, and sectarians are doing the reverse. I know myself an
elegant gentleman who once made bitter reproaches to a noble
and free-minded friend of his for having left the popular church
and joined the Unitarians, whilst he was himself frequenting the


fashionable place of “worship” to carry on amorous mtl Jgues
with another man’s wife. I have seen myself a wesley
preacher hung for the murder of his mate after he had seduced
his wife. I have known a catholic priest in central America
who had committed murder, and was at large; and heard o
another prostituting his daughter for foreign money. I have wit-
nessed the most indecent scenes of wretchedness and moral
degradation in the convents of Peru. If the protestant clergy
are not so degraded as Spanish and Italian priests, it is not
owing to a better (rather not so bad,) “ religious system, but
owing to their national enlightenment. This proposition is
amply substantiated by the fact that the catholic clergy in Eng-
land are as respectable a class of men as the protestant ministers
and generally more learned ; the former contrast morally as
much with the Spanish clergy of the same creed, as O Connor
did from Loyola.*
Again, maternal education opens the conception of the prac-
tical religion that hinds man to God through obedience to na-
ture • but no church services, no mummeries, no psalms, no
raising of the arms, no vociferated terrifying sermons no devo-
tional contortions, or periodic ecclesiastical shows afford the least
help to the mission of mothers in training her offsprings for
future usefulness and happiness. It is well proved by the sta-
tistics of prisons, that nearly all criminals and offenders have
attended Sunday Schools, where they were represented as a race
of villains, horn with “ thoroughly depraved hearts," and their
souls involuntarily withered from that contemplation of future
bliss, which maternal education promises. This doctrine of
despair is apparently compensated for by the pernicious assump-
* I feel bound to say that while residing in England some eighteen years
ago I had some occasion to witness several deeds of- unostentatious benevo-
lence and charity shown by some English catholic priests towards a destitute
countryman of mine, and that I also had similar evidence of protestant
intolerance exhibited. For instance, a poor French teacher, reduced to men-
dicity applied to a protestant minister named Nicholson for a situation in a
boarding school. This teacher of Christianity asked him in my presence what
religion he followed ? The poor young man answered that he had been born
a Catholic, as all French were. Thereupon this clergyman answered, “If you
say you are a catholic, parents will not allow their children to sleep under the
same roof as you?" I then came to the conclusion that if protestantism, as a
religious system, is in advance of Catholicism, English catholics are more
Christian than protestants ; and better it is to remain with the best though
apparently most misdirected men. This fact, and similar ones daily occurmg
in England, explains the many catholic conversions going on there. Majori-
ties always exhibit a spirit of pride in intolerance, no matter what flag they
bear, and minorities are compelled to rely upon social virtue for existence, no
matter the name they are known by.


tion that divine forgiveness will be obtainable in exchange for
belief and repentance, so that if the sophisticated victim
shrinks from Charybdis he falls into Scylla ; —it would be no less
preposterous to contend that there are no intermediate colors
between black and white. Instead of depending upon toil and
reform to strike off his moral angularities, the misguided youth
too often imitates Constantine, the first compiler of the bible,
who was converted to Christianity by the liberal promises of for-
giveness for his sins, offered by Christian baptism, but put off
this propitiatory ceremony till death was approaching, and in
the meantime entertained the notion that he might continue per-
petrating all sorts of crimes with impunity (as he did), since
baptism was so efficacious “ in changing man’s heart” *
* Constantine is represented by history as one of the two greatest monsters
that inhabited the earth. He was the first who convoked an assembly of
bishops at the Council of Nice: they had to select the genuine gospels from
the spurious, and to pass a bill of the deification of Christ, and deliberate
whether he was created or uncreated. As they could never agree, their
disputes amounting to forty volumes, and many bishops had protested
against the decree carried on, he took the presidency of the council, disquali-
fied the contending bishops, and thus enacted the • ‘ word of God.” Parsons
delight to dwell upon the respective doctrines they culled out from the.
bible, but they invariably avoid the origin of the claim of inspiration for their
text authority.
Immediately after the Council of Nice the victors conspired to annihilate
the former dissenting Christians, and ever since all “ Christian” churches have
faithfully continued to strive proving that the “ Kingdom of Christ is not of
this world.” What humanity has had in the name of Christianity has been
the inversion of Christ’s excellencies, i.e., love, benevolence, charity. The
reformation, which had such glorious work to perform, has commenced, with
the same spirit of human vindictiveness and maniac cruelty as. Catholicism.
Calvin, the great reformer, attending the roasting of an Unitarian reformer,
exhibited the delight of his madness and protestant fanaticism. The crimes
of the infancy of protestantism in England are the parents of modern
sectarian shoots, and “ by the fruit you know . now the tree.” . If the
individuality of evil could be supposed to exist, the philosophic mind
may think that since the Council of Nice the true spirit of Christianity
has been conquered by the Demon of all human wickedness, who has
ever been domineering over Christendom : this is the foe . I want now to
face. My object, while attempting to bring reform in all social departments,
is to awake the prepared thinkers from the sleep of indifference in religious
matters, and stimulate many to help me to unfetter the weak souls. Our
armour is charity ; our aims are wrought with the steel of benevolence ; we
will smite the victim of misdirection with kindness and philanthropy, if we
possess pecuniarv means. Our conquests are not contemplated for our bene ' ,
and I may be the first victim of vindictive superstition by being compelled to
dispose of what I possess to extricate myself from debts in this land o
idolatry, if public patronage fails me. No compromise is possible with our
honest conscience, and when the volcano of indignation bursts out of our
bosom, we must be ready to drink the bitter cup of Jesus, and. sneer at e
sectarian bigotry of the nineteenth century, the relics of inquisition, st e,
faggot and dungeon, of barbarous ages.


The fifth step to education is Physical Training of the
rising generation. Physical education is essentially animal;
and its object is firstly, to secure health by strict obedience to
organic laws, and secondly, to develope growth and strength by
daily muscular culture. Now let us pause here before examining
this subject. * _ ,
The sanitary condition of civilization presents the bare
fact that four-fifths of the human family are somewhat
or other ailing in some particular organ—in a word, dis-
satisfied with their existence; that one-fourth of children die
before they reach the seventh year; and one-half of humanity go
to the cemetery before the dawn of maturity fills upon them.
As we do not see anything of the sort among the brutes endowed
with much less enduring constitution than man, the philosophic
inquirer—after he has paid his heavy.tribute to experience by the
loss of some sweet children, a beloved wife, or the ruin of his
health, and not resting satisfied with the theological argument
that “ God giveth and taketh,"— will naturally inquire into the
cause of this great human failure, source of sorrow and family
affliction, more dreadful than a transitory plague. Dear reader,
if you think that premature death is divine dispensation from
the Ruler of Nature, it is useless for you to peruse these pages;
but if you feel disposed to accompany me into a philosophical
exploration, you must be ready to hear .a regular cannonade
against another tottering, crumbling, dilapidated edifice, the den
of that insatiable Moloch, preying without mercy upon human
life for his dignified existence, and conspiring with our often
attacked foe, Superstition, against human happiness. The name
of this artful dodger, since we must call it by its exalted but
bloodstained title, is The Medical Faculty.
Medicine has run parallel with theology: while the one has
made its way to the present through carnage, and lingers in the
incapability of further bloody sanctimonious gratification ; the
other, whose name is legion, has insulted and profaned the
holy temple of health with the legalized administration of dele-
terious drugs, as incongruous with the vitals as hungry wolves
with innocent lambs —as detrimental to the fine texture of
internal membranes as strong acid with mineral, yet still keeps
the ignorant and fascinated under the spell of assumed science.
The truth is that medicine has its baneful sup> rstitions, as
every church; and that all new systems are but sectarian scien-
tific advancements in the healing art.
I have said that there is but one religion—that of God, —in-
compatible throughout with human compromises and conven-
tions. There is also but one true healing art; it is obedience
to organic laws through dietetic reform, and direct physiological


instruction. Yes, dear reader, if you are sick you should pay
your medical adviser for information about the causes of your
ailment; you should listen to a stern physiological admonition,
“ Throw physicto the dogs,” and “Sin no more!” As the know-
ledge of moral religion is the knowledge of God’s will discovered
by individual moral developement, and not by the spectacle of
human vices and degradations, so is the healing art the know-
ledge of the laws of health and not the study of the kaleidoscope
of organic derangements. The greatest physician of the age,
George Combe, though he might have had a limited practice,
has prevented more diseases in this generation than the most
skilful practitioner can possibly cure during his life-time, and the
country that has the glory of producing such a boon to humanity
thus compensates for the great curse of her intense bigotry.
Recognized practical medicine differs as much with the healing
art as professed Christianity with religion. Religion and the
healing art are immortal, immutable, never changing principles
of soul and body ; orthodox medicine and Christianity have as
many different definitions as professors and teachers, patients
. and believers.
Together with the Church, the Medical Faculty is dividing
the spoils of the infatuated, thoughtless, money-grasping and
hard-working multitude, and lives sumptuously a life of idleness
and dissipation by complicating human sufferings. It is rich
with technical jargon for usurping popular admiration, but de-
prived of humanitarian sentiments. For instance, the only light
that orthodox medical science can throw upon the treatment of a
cold in the head, is to call it coryza, while dosing the stomach
during the natural process of recovery. In no part of the world
can we find greater gullibility for medical humbug than in England
and its colonies. About 160,000 British young men and women
die annually from consumption consequent upon the prolonged
use of physic prescribed by legalized quacks, and nearly half of
that number from liver complaint, brought on by the adminis-
tration of blue pills ; and millions of the members of that great
nation cannot have a natural excretion without going to the che-
mist’s shop for some perturbating poison. John Bull is con-
stantly haunted by the dread of sluggishness of his bowels, for
he delights in the anticipation of eating heavy meals. Poor old
gentleman!—what a good customer for the profession ! He
pays them as much as all the world together; he will swallow
anything, provided it is highly recommended by the faculty. If
ever the doctors could succeed in killing him, his viscera would
remain rich mines of mineral deposits, that would supply the
whole world with drugs enough to re-poison mankind for centu-
ries. And what to say of Mrs. Bull—always doleful, meagre,


with elongated teeth (if any) from the baneful action ot steel
mixtures, sinking down from dyspeptic digestion, and every day
dispensing physic to herself and the family if the doctor is not
called in. What a wretched home is that of an Englishman
whose mantelpiece is covered with pill boxes and emptied vials.
What delight for me, when I am sent for, to sweep away these
outrageous engines of human destruction ! .
The reason why medicine is so unsatisfactory, is owing to
medical education being, as the church, too much bent upon
superstitions. The study of complex manifestations of organic
derangements, has received the name ol Pathology, as speculation
upon evil spirits that of Demonology, and both have rendered
the same service to humanity for sanitary purposes and spiritual
welfare. In calling themselves pathologists medical men affect
the wisdom to know how disease grows, to comprehend its use
and course, and consequently how to root it up,—but it is a great
deception. Pathology is the bastard of medical misdirection, as
superstition is the offspring of ignorance. This pseudo science
has wasted more time in the investigation of morbid effects than
would be required to teach the principles of physiology, and
point out to all civilization the penalties consequent upon its
infringement; it stands in the relation to physiology as theology
does to that of philanthropy. Medical men have long studied
the nature of cancer and consumption, but do they cure these
diseases any better? They have no knowledge of the pathology
of the multitudinous forms of nervous diseases, but do they
abstain to treat them, and sometimes with better success ? *
Physiology heartily laughs at the impotent folly of patholo*
gistic assumption, for it can say, “ Do this no longer, and you
will get rid of what you term Disease .” While the ordinary
* In the most glaring case of surgical malpractice I ever witnessed in this
colony, I was once present whilst a surgeon was explaining to his patient the
modus operandi of his “new” prescription. The latter had been several
months upon his bed in consequence of a fracture of the thigh, and the bones
not having been fixed to meet at the severed extremities, no progress was
made towards recovery. The said surgeon thought he had received an in-
spired illumination in his pathologistic lantern, with the idea that the bones
would not cement together for want of their components in the system; and
thereupon prescribed massive quantities of phosphate of lime, as a common
mason would administer for sticking bricks together, while the deluded pa-
tient accepted this theory as a wonderful mark of superior skill. Had this
orthodox practitioner comprehended the first principles of physiology, he would
have known that the crucible of digestion is a fine laboratory, that prepares
the assimilation of necessary components by its self extracting distillery and
that it was useless, if not very detrimental to the digestive organs, thus to clog
the system with unassimilable substances. The victim is now a cripple for life.
I know another votary of pathological researches being asked how he could


practitioner is in pursuit of an imaginary enemy receding before
him as he approaches, firing and slashing right and left with his
dreadful weapons (bleeding, cupping, purging, vomiting, narcot-
izing, &c.,) he hits upon—what? The poor infatuated dupe
who too often dies “with his disease, cured.” In fact, pathology
studies Death, and physiology Life ; they both have at your com-
mand the article of their predilection.
Let it not be understood that I repudiate the study of disease
manifestations, but that I consider it only useful in immediate
relation with the laws of health : in the same manner I neither
reject the inquiry into social vices, if conducive to promote
human virtues. Pathology has been too long magnified into
an unmerited importance that deviates the medical mind entirely
from the true study of the healing art, and becomes fatal to
society.
The medical faculty has its bible authority, i.e., the Materia
Medica, a book venerated as the great inspirer of efficacious
remedies, but in reality the record of mischievous agents that
thwart nature’s self-rectifying forces. The celebrated Bichat, in
speaking of this farrago of caprice and knavery, used to say, “ It
is a shapeless assemblage of unexact ideas, of observations often puerile,
of deceitful means, of formulas as absurdly conceived as they are fasti-
diously collected.” But, unlike the Scriptures of Christendom,
which contains a pei'-centage of glorious truths and noble senti-
ments, that will preserve them as the precious history of men’s
spiritual aspirations from the time of barbarism to the far off age
of reason, this monstrous “ dunghill, which physicians have been
heaping up for two thousand years,” —as a German medical philo-
sopher calls it, —has not a single prescription that will save it
from the total contempt of an enlightened generation ; because
account for the death of two strong girls, treated by him for colonial fever,
whose candid answer was, —“ In the first case I tried to kill the disease, and in
the second I fed the disease .” Had he known that he had nothing to kill nor
to feed, his patients, I venture to say, would have recovered from the penalty
inflicted by nature for the ignorance and violation of her organic injunctions.
If any one doubt these facts I am ready to substantiate them by requisite
evidence.
The unprofessional man may ask, do not all the doctors learn physiology
before they graduate ? Yes, they learn it, but do not comprehend more the
force of its imperative principles than the criminal comprehends the dictates
of morality after attending theological sermons for years. As morality is a matter
of gradual practical refinement of human conscience, so the knowledge of phy-
siology is a matter of observation by the developed understanding, but not
stored up by the retentive memory for the sake of university graduation or
license to kill or cure. It only requires memory and a father that has the
means to keep a youth at college to get this license, but it requires a natural
vocation to officiate as a beneficent physiologist.


there was a complete ignorance of each ingredient’s peculiar pro-
perties. when absurdly amalgamated with other drugs as much
unknown.
Disease is the devil of the medical faculty; this nocturnal fic-
tion is the best stock in the laboratory of human sufferings.
No theologian ever saw the devil, yet without him there is no
church possible. The pathologist never saw, heard, or touched
a disease, yet the idea is the most prolific source of his trumpery
success, and keeps his victims under the spell of assumed ability.
The healing art is as distinct from this demon as moral integrity
may be from the knowledge of criminalities. It is alone founded
upon affirmations, laws and principles, within the comprehension
of all men and women. When physiology and hygiene will be
better understood, pathology and materia medica will nearly
serve the car of medical practice as two extra wheels Anatomy
and surgery are useful sciences, but their domain is essentially
mechanical, though we find many surgeons better physiologists
than physicians, and consequently more successful as prac-
titionei’S.
Homoeopathy, the most rational medical theory, and most suc-
cessful of all 'systems, being founded upon two physiological
principles, shamefully ignored and ridiculed by the orthodox
profession,* now marking an era of mighty advancement in medi-
cine (though limiting its benefits solely to the few liberal and
enlightened persons), unless disposed cordially to blend with dis-
senting improvements, is also destined to be defeated by another
medical reform that will be less perplexing to the practitioner
and simplify his practice ; for the fault of that great reform lies
in its polypharmacy, and the dogmatic assurance that its thera-
peutics are of general application. It is a fact of notoriety that
there is a vast difference in the success of some homoeopathists,
and that the most successful are not the most enthusiastic of the
fundamental principles (then degenerating into dogma when
concentrating all dependence) but are the best physiologists and
hygienists. Though their two systems differ as much as the
tiols of jewellers from those of a blacksmith’s, a few homoeopa-
thists are less successful than certain allopathists of sound expe-
rience, who administer their filthy com pounds with reluctance, but
fail not to point out to the patient the reform he must bring into
his habits. If patients could appreciate the latter class, they would
* The dynamic action of infmitessimal poisons upon vitality, and the
administration of medicines indicated by the analogy of the ascertained pro-
perties of drugs with the diseased condition presented for treatment, so as to
secure or at least assist the triumph of the organism struggling for functional
harmony.


recover much quicker by returning the prescription folded up
with a double fee, and bear in mind the physiological instruction
imparted to them. It is my firm conviction that a sound know-
ledge of physiological principles, attention to hygienic conditions,
and nature’s own anti-therapeutic resources, are the future ele-
ments of medical reform.
As true religion is distinct from metaphysical or theological
speculations, the true healing art should not be founded upon
any doctrine, and have no association with any “ism” or
“pathy.” The fact is, that the healing art is nothing but the
teaching of physical and organic religion as best interpreted
from the physiological phenomena (revelations) of nature by men
of sagacity, and naturally inclined to study with delight the
manifestation of life. Nature makes the physician; medical
education being wanted, practice will develope him better than
schooling; and our conventional pride, by forcing an unconge-
nial avocation upon young men for the sake of a respectable
living, and legal exile of “unqualified” scientific men, trusts to the
tortoise for bringing most important despatches, compels the bul-
lock to run steeple-chases, and condemns the best blood horses to
the team; hence the mystery of legalized human slaughter, and
the existence of illegitimate striving medical benefactors.* When
* Europe may think that this young Australian Colony is liberal and invites
foreign talent as it does universal emigration, but the most oppressive and out-
rageous piece of medical legislation that can be found in any part of the world
emanatedfromitsparliamentlastyear. Amedical billhad been originally framed
by a professional clique, alarmed at the progress of the irregular homoeopaths.
This concocted sham had miscarried many times at several sessions, and at last,
under the auspices of a medical co-operator, enrobed in the cloth of a legislator,
it became law, by. being artfully smuggled through four readings in both houses
of parliament on the last night of the session, together with a heap of minor bills.
The chief provisions of this act plainly comes to this: — Foreign Medical Practi-
tioners shall be deemed legally qualified men by presenting their foreign qualifi-
cations before the Medical Board, and all such persons whose qualifications are
unregistered will come within the pale of uneducated assuming quacks, and shall
forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty pounds for taking or using any medical title
conferred on them by a foreign university.
ft was a snare to entrap and stay the progress of medical heresy, and parlia-
ment was so blind as to associate itself with the odium of crafty persecution
and monopoly. Fortunately that since the English nation has fought for the
liberty of conscience, Englishmen cannot be coerced into going to a particular
church, or to a particular doctor or chemist’s shop, and this machinery for
convicting homoeopaths, hydropaths, mesmerists, &c., or disqualifying foreign
practitioners practising heretic doctrines, from recovering fees, holding public
appointments, delivering certificates, fining and incarcerating them, has proved
impracticable. It is evident to all that the act is an impotent and foolish
attempt to repeal a fact, noxious to the medical mob, The government, by
fining a foreigner for keeping and using a foreign title, either medical, clerical,
or military, would commit an encroachment against the rights of nations,


the time comes that physicians, surgeons, and carers of diseases
will be permitted to send the evidences of their superior skill
and talent to the public exhibition, as common industries do:
then quackery will stand abashed,—the friends of humanity be
surely acknowledged,—and scientific legalized affectation will
vanish like smugglers when the liberty of commerce is universal.
If the book of human “ Profit and Loss ” were published, society
would not ask a man “ Where did you graduate ? ” but “ What have
you done, and what can you do V ’ Natural genius would be en-
couraged where it is most wanted ; the noble missions of phy-
sical and moral religion (now the privileged property of the
fiends of the human family, whose door-plate is “ Science and
Church,”) would be redeemed from the threshold of duplicity,
iesuitry, selfishness, and dignified trickery. Is this a work for
legislators ? No ;— for their constituencies ? No. They both
linger in the rear of social progress; but it is the work of indi-
vidual economy—the private discovery of all unbiassed men.
The great saviour of social abjection is “ It does not answer, my
searching for happiness to keep faithful to popular systems.”
You will realise the kingdom of heaven at home, as I do, when
you will be condemned as a heretic out of doors, and enjoy, like
me, a mental paradise when consigned to Hades in my company
by the actual inmates of that fictitious place.
The object of physical education is, first to preserve health,
the origin of strength, symmetry, and beauty. The conditions of
health°are pure air, reasonable exposure to all degrees of temper-
ature, judicious use of garments, daily ablutions, and lastly, the
natural use of plain food, to satisfy the honest demand of growth
and wear and tear of the system. The infringing of these laws
is always fraught with an inevitable variety of penalties, which
orthodox medicine has absurdly personified with names as a
pianoforte tuner would call, by a technical name, the various
recognized all over the world. What would an English captain think, if tra-
velling on the continent, he was fined and arrested for presenting his card
with his title, because :t set of captains should have obtained an act whereby
no foreigner could call himself captain unless it pleased a board of captains
instituted for sanctioning such claims ? It is requisite that society should be
protected against medical pretension, but it cannot be coerced at the same
time against being benefited by the skill, discovery and knowledge of any man,
whoever he may be. Medical legislation, while protecting the conventionally
educated profession, should also protect society against its idle monopoly and
dogmatical insufficiency. The only desideratum is to punish heavily any ille-
gitimate practitioner who tampers with human life by destructive treatment,
but not to grant, by Act of Parliament, the licensed doctors means to dis-
courage and persecute the illegitimate benefactors, whose successes create
competition, and injure the interest of their trade.


discords of the key notes he is sent for to rectify, while,
deficient in the sense of hearing for judging rightly of the laws
of harmony. m
At the birth of every child, popular ignorance of the laws of
heahh inaugurate upon the innocent a sample of our medical
system of life profanation, and this first deviation from nature
consequently brings on her reaction of self rectification ; soon the
aid of medical interference is invoked to stay this process of na-
ture’s self-resioring action, and her divine ways become more and
more obstructed through narcotization added to perturbations,
mischievous stimulants to propping up. After an organic demo-
lition has been professionally carried on; the whole gradually in-
volves a complication of struggles, and plucks myriads of human
buds, as a violent tornado. Should the child survive his first
dentition, together with these assaults of the medical rams of the
f,culty, as morbid appetites are generally favored by ignorant
parents, whose object is to raise strong children, a deplorable
encouragement is given to them to partake of animal food, gravies,
potatoes, pastries, pies, rich puddings, A’c., (to say nothing of
destructive “ lollies,”) the system becomes over loaded with carbonic
obstructions which childhood cannot rid itself of as well as man-
hood exposed to daily fatigue and expenditure : soon nature makes
strong efforts to set the illused right, through a severe illness,
commonly called ‘'scarlet fever,” “croup,” “diptheria,” and
“ lm asles.” when the atmosphere is charged with unwholesome
exhalations, and dwellings illyentilated or kept unclean; —soon
a regular doctor is sent for who, “scientifically” but mischievously,
clogs the circulation with cramping, undigestable physics and
“soothing” powders, that afford a deceptive palliation,—well
accommodating thtFdemands of his ignorant clients, and thus
one-half of the rising generation is immolated upon the shrine
of Learned Ignorance, patronized by parental credulity. The
parson generally obliterates these blunders by charging a benefi-
cent Providei ce with the misdeeds (“ God giveih and God taketh”)
and the sorrowful parents allay the weight, of the calamity by
sighing “ amen." Too happy will they be if their prejudices are
as curable as the dreadful maladies that stalked their cherished
offsprings, and if the dearly bought experience induce them to
trust in future to the irregular abused homoeopaths or hydropaths,
or if, per chance, they should fall into the hands of an honest
qualified physiologist. Millions, alas, are yet to be slain at tie
medical abbatoirs, in spite of self-evident success of medical
heresies.
However, a child may live and pass through these severe
ordeals; but unless the laws of health are understood and reli-
giously obeyed, his mind will never expand to its full nobleness


nnd growth. Unless the lower organs are harmoniously per-
forming their respective functions the higher powers are im-
paired : unless a musical instrument is perfect no brilliant music
can thrill the soul with its delight, and no sublime ideas emanate
from a discordant, grossly fed, organization ; or. when sickness
casts its gloom over human contemplation. The body, there-
fore, is the basis of that future moral and intellectual super-
structure which constitutes the holy tabernacle of many divine
attributes, i. e., purity, integrity, beauty, strength, the beaming
radiations of benevolence and knowledge, the fragrance of moral-
ity and reason, that inspires man with that faith destined to
move mountains of superstition and disperse clouds of social igno-
rance, leaving on its track an immortal light in the memory of
mankind.
The least particle of food and beverage partaken by children
or men, for building up the body, is favorable or unfavorable in
influencing their moral and mental development; but this truism
is only admitted in regard to intoxicating liquors, and no one
arrests his attention upon the choice of solid nutriment for intel-
lectual development. By eschewing artificial dietetics and strict-
ly observing natural diet, children not only fulfil the most im-
portant conditions of health that preserve them to their affection-
ate parents, and render them capable of resisting all sorts of
epidemical diseases, but they are also slowly building up a cere-
bral apparatus, which, when fully developed, will be found the
richest reservoirs, for invigorating the vital principles of health
to others, therewith exhibiting greater curative properties than
the scholastic faculty with its filthy farrago of incompatible
recipes, gilded with big names derived from the languages of the
dead, and leading its dupe to the same .company. Through a
coarse nutrition man buries within himself greater powers for
the pacification of the discordant world than armies or gunpow-
der possess. In consequence of long organic obedience man not
onlv can acquire longevity, enjoy mental contentment, but by the
combination of love and volition he will become enveloped with
an individual atmosphere, radiating consolation, assistance, and
courare to all around, and more productive of human happiness
than the most eloquent sermonizers in Christendom can possibly
do. It is a law of physiology that the more gross the assimilation
of food the more coarse is the human electricity thereof develo-
ped, and also, the more crude are the manifestations of human
desires : it is a pity that chemistry cannot decompose the hidden
agencies of criminalities, and that the student of physiology only
arrives at this conclusion from induction, authoritative to him
only while veiled in mystery for others.


As young ducks naturally take to water, children are, from
nature, made to be the best judges of what and when they should
eat; but parents vitiate their appetite as their own are vitiated by
“respectable” institutions ; hence, morbid gratifications aie im-
plored for, and with the help of the doctors, millions are torn
from the affectionate bosom.
Physiologically considered, the most prolific source of infantile
diseases, of animal propensities, of sectarian animus, and conten-
tions is the early use and subsequent abuse of animal food. It
is true that Nature, by revealing a dental structure for cutting
and tearing, classifies man as an omnivorous animal, but it is
highly probable that this physical characteristic will be modified
when several generations will become more moralized and refined
by ceasing to slay for nutrition. The present generation, how-
ever, which must work with body and mind is not adapted to
live without flesh meat, because there would be too great an exal-
tation of the mind, and social avocations being neglected the
vegetarian would be isolated from society in pursuit of his lng
occupation, as Emmanuel Swedenborg was, in fulfilling a pie-
mature social design, confusing more than advancing the human
mind with his great discoveries and individual speculations.
But it, is*a monstrous violation, especially in warm climates, to
stuff children with animal food before they reach the dawn of
adolescency, when vigorous exercise can be indulged in, thereby
preventing the retention of carbonic gas inappropriate to the
system. * .
As children are inclined to imitate their parents, the latter
should abstain to have them taking meals at the same table,
unless they are strong minded enough to refuse what is im-
proper for their stomachs. Children should never sleep with
their parents, nor in the'same room, after weaning, and still less
with a mercenary nurse; but above all, two should never sleep
in the same bed, because such habit is fraught with magnetic
vital disturbances prejudicial to both; and lam impressed to
make such recommendation because I have noticed in my prac-
tice, that when one of the bed-fellows die, the other mate, though
then in perfect health, soon commences ailing and follows the re-
gretted companion. Infants should also be trained to bieathe
only through the nose during sleep, as the impure atmosphere
* I have four children who have never partaken of animal food they have
never been ill seriously since their birth—they will be an exemplification of
my theories on education, and the world will judge when they are thrust upon
society to develope themselves with their own toils, blunders, and reforms,


is then filtered by the olfactory canal and suitable for the lungs,
as muddy water is more suited to the delicate stomach after filtra-
tion. When children are compelled to keep the mouth open
during slumber in order to inspire oxygen and expire carbonic
acid to satisfy the full demand of the lungs, it is because their
stomachs have been overloaded with food, sickness is not far off
and the treatment consists in giving no “ patliic ” medicines, but
inflict half a day of starvation, consequent upon a morning warm
bath, followed by cold shower bath, allowing the body to dry
itself while exposed to the atmosphere of the room.
But it is not enough that children should not be sick and have
selected articles of vegetable food for nutrition, they should eat
slowly, masticate well, and never take beverage to accelerate
downwards the half prepared nutriment. This habit has been
the foundation of dyspepsia and consumption. If the salivary
juices are wanting, and morbid appetite be excited by gluttony,
take away all liquid during a meal, and nature will have her own
way.
Nature intends the digestion to be stimulated by the intro-
duction of liquid only after the meals ; thirst before or during
mastication, is the first symptom of gastric derangement, and
should be remedied to prevent complication, diseases, doctors,
chemists’ bills and untimely death. But yet these last pre-
cautions are insufficient to secure permanent health ; the human
constitution to remain sound must be every day tempered by
exercise, to fit it for social use and self-gratification.
An important pari of physical education is mechanical deve-
lopment through daily gymnastics, swimming, running, fencing,
&c., and muscular strength is always the foreshadower of mental
vigor, intellectual energy, and perceptive development. It is
related that Napoleon, when at school, was not noted for pro-
mising intellectual disposition, but excelled all school boys for
physical exercise and juvenile trickery. Newton, Sheridan, Adam
Clark, Shakspeare, Humphrey Davy, and all the great minds
that have contributed to our intellectual advancement, were all
dull at school but lively and buoyant in the wilderness of nature.*
* When seventeen years of age I myself walked, in one day, from St. Lo
to Caen, in Normandy, viz., about 45 miles, and returned a few days after in one
day, stopping only once at a public-house for refreshment. When twenty-two,
I could move with live peisous on my back, arms, and shoulders, and could
hold a chair at the extremity of each out-stretched arm, and bring them
several times to the mouth. I have endured several days of starvation and
thirst in travelling. in South America, and these physical ordeals have been
less painful to me than sectarian protestantism and its bitter intolerance is to
my mental felicity. The same characteristic I have exhibited in my past
ordeals ought to be found in the writings that will emanate from me in going
through my probation of wrestling with British idolatry.


Gymnastic? were less neglected by the ancient heathen nations
than by modern Christians, and so fully aware were the Greeks
of the influence of physical training upon national prosperity,
that it was an affair of the state, as it is now with us about main-
taining popular superstitions. With their polityism, the latter
had better ideas of education than the money-grasping commu-
nity has with various Christian systems of salvation, and their
painting, sculpture, and glorious language have left us the
products of their system of early education. The boys were not
only subjected to ithe daily performances of gymnasia, but the
girls also were as carefully designed to undergo physical temper-
ing. What a contrast to our present system of girl education !
Look at the young ladies just leaving the boarding school. It
is considered indecorous for young females fettered with the
incubus of large crinoline, to perform gymnastic labor as well as
piano exercise; the whole object fathers and mothers have in
view is to have their daughters acquire drawing-room accomplish-
ments, and get them married, and the whole object of school-
mistresses is to supply the demand and get a miserable living by
it (for if justice be done to them we must acknowledge that they
are not adequately retributed for their noble mission), therefore
no care is taken if young girls have crooked spines, pale faces,
margin round the eyes, instead of rosy cheeks, full blooming
countenance, and enticing cheerfulness. The only physical ac-
complishment enforced upon them is to slender their waist till
exhibiting the form and shape of an hour glass, no matter if the
lungs cry “ murder ” within, and consumption threatens to prey
upon the sufferer.
Gymnastics should be as compulsory to the rising generation
asfvaccination, and if our women had as many games and bodily
exercises in their youth as sermons and sectarian misdirection ;
if boys had as much muscular exercise as grammar and Sunday
school, our hulks, treadmills, penal settlements, and peniten-
tiaries would save annually millions of pounds to the state. To
endeavour to provide against social evils is the mission of our
parliament, rather than to enact vindictive provisions of
gallows.
Mechanical education not only forms a most indispensable
part of early training, but under the control of anatomical and
physiological knowledge, it forms the most important branch of
pi’actical medicine, next to hygiene. But the doors of the
faculty are shut against it, whereas some new, absurd, poisonous
compound, artfully puffed by some medical authority, has every
access within its portals. During manhood, most diseases arise
from abuse of the gastric organs, yet in such cases the faculty is
devising new indigestible mixtures, new obstructing pills, to


introduce into the inside of the docile dupe, never thinking that
exercise does not affect the muscular tissue alone, but also every
vessel, tendon, ligament, bone, every blood globule, imparting
electricity ter the fine ganglionic apparatus, bringing fresh vigor
to the digestive laboratory, new impetus to the nerve force, and
thereby overcoming many forms of diseases from impaired nu-
trition, without therapeutical interference whatever. Many
gastric derangements entailed upon sedentary occupation or
mental fatigue, will find its sure remedy in systematic exercises,
amusements and recreations, instead of swallowing muddy water
from the chemist’s shop, prescribed by his acolyte, the regular
practitioner. The cultivation of our muscles by eliminating un-
healthy fluids, and disturbing unhealthy secretions, is the best
stimulant for indigestion, and prepares the mental impression
which the investigation of nature’s phenomena produces; but
knowledge has no charm for the apathetic unfortunate youth ar-
tificially trained in common boarding school, and constrained to
receive a gloomy system of ethics on every Sabbath day, while
labouring under laborious digestion of slaughtered flesh and
extra pudding allowance.
Bodily exercise is the fulcrum of animal heat, which keeps up
the ebullition that purifies the blood from all destructive atoms,
and Nature is pleased in generously alimenting the fuel by a
fresh supply of oxygen only granted to the favorite child of her
who occasionally breathes rapidly and violently, and excites his
circulation to rid itself of the incubus of dead molecules through
the skin and natural excretions.
Now let us inquire into the sixth step to education, i.e. —
Intellectual Education or Instruction.
As toys, games, and manly sports have the same attraction for
childhood as books, mental culture, and knowledge have in
manhood, the natural process of child instruction should also be
as pleasant and inviting; and the momenta child’s disgust is
manifested, his attention coerced, natural education is supplanted
by artificial training* you instil into his mind popular notions
* I prefer my youngsters to be full of mischief, noisy, dancing, singing, or
breaking things, than studious, pale, and delicate, to store their memory with
a lesson for parental approbation, and still worse, for school distinction, which
engenders that social pride manifested in after life by the desire of domineer-
ing over others. My children are now from three to seven years of age, and
know nothing yet of books, except they contain pretty pictures ; the eldest
commences to notice large letters with interest, and when ready to learn them
with pleasure, then the time of reading education will have arrived. I am
now preparing the way by inspiring them with the desire to peep into inter-
esting little stories, and the same process of tuition will be applied in deve-
loping their mental perceptions, subsequent to implanting the love for inquiry
knowledge and information in all the departments of nature.


but you develope nothing—you bend the tree but do not water
it, —and he will always require propping in after life, by a con-
ventional standard of right and wrong, truth and falsehood, for
you have failed by artificial education to teach him to develope
it.out of himself. This artificial standard in our days is “ Ihe
Bible says so,” and usurps the divine standard of righteousness,
as the “ The Faculty says so,” is assuming the authority of physio-
logical principles. The authority of God’s moral discipline is a
subject of individual interpretation, as the laws of harmony are
felt and appreciated by the individual exercise of one’s organ of
hearing; every standard of morality loses all command when
determined by others, or coming from second-hand evidence.
Judging by myself, my first free interpretation of the dictates
of moral laws, was to do no harm; my second, and better one,
was to do good; and the third, and most improved, is to exercise
all the wisdom possible to do good most effectually. For the
future my power of success will increase with my individual
progression in interpreting the Divine standard of righteousness,
purity, benevolence, &c.
The object of intellectual education is to modify and correct
vicious phrenological organizations, while wisely fostering the
developement of all innate good propensities by an attractive
process of tuition carried on simultaneously with moral and phy-
sical education.
As the body, made up by assimilated select elements from
dietetics, is developed by systematic physical culture, so the in-
tellect of man is likewise a faithful stereotype of all useful or
injurious impressions received from birth and developed by men-
tal exercise. All the conventional clap-trap knowledge of the
universities that stimulates the students with the contemplation
of ruling over the uncared, born amidst inferior circumstances,
hinders them from intellectual growth, arrests all aspirations be-
yond worldly ambition, and infuses more moral depravity into
their heart than it can adorn the retentive memory with useful
information**
* The University of Melbourne is striving its best to indoctrinate students
with the foul respect for popular superstition at the cost of their reason and
future happiness. Once this proposition was put for examination in “logic
“Jt is more probable that witness should lie than miracles should occur. IS mo
the evidences of Christianity are miracles attended by witnessess, therefore
these evidences are more probably false than true.” It is useless to say that
the candidate, in defending his position, had to prove that orthodoxy is right
and heterodoxy is shamefully wrong, and the more intense passion the argu-
ments could elicit the more triumphant was the examination—and this was
called examination upon “ logic.”


It is not possible that real instruction should emanate from
teachers who have not unfolded their own moral and intellectual
faculties, but have gathered a certain amount of conventional
knowledge, and keep rampant before the causes of social evils
for the gratification of selfishness.* Their parents having bought
knowledge for them, they think they are qualified to deliver it to
the highest bidder. Their association of aristocratic scholarship
constitutes a despotism as fatal to society, in our present day, as
ecclesiastical jurisdiction was in past ages. Columbus, Fulton,
Franklin, Leverrier, Lambert, Descartes, Galvani, Jenner,
Priesnitz, Hahneman, &c., were all opposed, in their particular
path of discovery by the “ learned” bodies. We must not either
forget the immortal Harvey, who, after his great discovery, had
bis practice destroyed by the faculty, and was reduced to poverty;
while the inventors of “ liver pills ” and “ patent aperients,” were
driven in equipages, and his enemies, robed in purple, bowed
down their venal heads before their august sovereign. At the
present day the medical faculties and universities are indulging
in the most disgraceful abuse of language against rising doctrines
of medicine ; for instance, “ The Lancet ” has exhausted the dic-
tionary of vulgarity by the often repeated epithets of “ quackish,”
“ half-cracked,” “ brutal,” “ knaves,” “ fools,” “ madmen,” con-
stantly poured upon learned men, gained over by the Homoeo-
* The same University has a professor of physiology who actually indulges
in intemperate language and sectarian animus, as a vulgar parasite, or puritan
fanatic. For instance, in alluding to a respectable member of the profession,
a champion of intellectual freedom of this colony, the said professor of phy-
siology qualified this adversary as being “ more infamous than Gardiner” (a
celebrated colonial highwayman,) “ and his gang,” and in referring to Profes-
sor Huxley, in regard to the scientific investigations about the “ terminal
divisions of man and monkey,” the same dignified personage cannot treat his
opponent as a differing adversary, but, in trying to recruit on his side the
weak-minded and misdirected class, together with the haughty victimizes of
our corrupted society, he assimilates the distinguished professor with a devil
for being in error, (if in error he is). If this colony has its university dis-
graced by a set of narrow-minded pedagogues robed with the title of pro-
fessor, it has at least the advantage of possessing a bold champion Of truth
and justice. In an excellent leading article of The Argus, July ~0, 1803, the
conduct of this professor being ably commented upon, I beg to quote the fol-
lowing : —“ To accuse Professor Huxley of being inspired by a devil in writing
his work, is imbecile even beyond the imbecility of malice. If to maintain a
theory which is opposed to the correct orthodox philosophy is to have the
spirit of the devil, then the greatest philosophers of all ages have been devils
in their day. Copernicus was a devil ; Harvey was a devil ; Laplace was a
devil; Descartes was a devil; Darwin is a devil; * * * all the geologists of
the present day are devils ; in fact, all science is one vast pandemonium, ac-
cording to Professor Halford,” (the professor of anatomy and physiology of
the said university,) &e., &c. Is it possible to find such bigotry mixed with
science in any other country ?


pathic medical reform. University and medical associations
have proved to the world that there is no conscience governing
them in their conclaves, but that a spirit of jealousy, hafcrea,
and selfishness, is binding them together. Indeed, union is
strength; but union without right and justice is pregnant of its
elements of inevitable destruction.
As physical education is importing firmness and assurance
in the general deportment of man, intellectual education is the
tempering, of thoughts reverberating upon his features the
internal beauty of the mind within ; and the bold thinker who
unfolds his perceptive and reflective faculties, regardless oi pub-
lic disapprobation and bigotry, keeps his physiognomy m con-
stant repair, and preserves the imprint of nobleness in spite oi
the ravages of old age. But it is not so with the most pre-
possessing youth, who is trained to respect the verdict oi
majorities ; he grows flabby in smothering the natural rise oi
his doubts ; he may be ambitious, but being unaspiring, he
remains useless to society and insipid to himself; and though
well favoured by nature, he would never find the way to the
heart of a sensible young woman, if she was not like himself,
in the bondage of superstition, and moving in the same gloomy,
social atmosphere. . . .. ,
As the whole muscular apparatus requires exercise oi all tne
various muscles, so intellectual education, that springs from the
knowledge of all that which is contained in nature, ought to
be made°familiar in the daily life of every child, youth, man and
woman. The study of geology and astronomy, simultaneously
contrasted, are the two most important items of mental training:
by the former you direct the mind to material observations, and
by the latter you expand the intellectual vision, and prepare the
mind for meditation and aspirations, which speak better sermons
to the soul than any precept, lecture, or book can ever do.
Next, drawing and music should daily appeal to the exercises ot
the finest senses of childhood; book instruction should be su-
perseded almost entirely by oral demonstration ; the organ of
memory less acted upon than the senses cultivated; and the
attention less concentrated than the unfolding of the judgment
resorted to by teachers. School discipline that strives to obtain
precocious intellectual developement, is abominable; for it is a
fact that the greatest minds that have moved upon earth were
inattentive and undisciplined while at school. 'lhe svstem of
school instruction followed in Paris is the most shameful system
of speculation that can be carried on, and fosters a general ion of
ambitious, useless parasites. Boys of all age are confined from
six o’clock in the morning till nine o’clock at night; ten hours
are tediously imposed upon the sufferers in dosing the mind


with acquirements only useful to promote the pecuniary interest
of the establishment. A pupil, with narrow shoulders, is forced in
Latin ; another, with a pale countenance, is made a Greek
machine; another, with dyspeptic stomach, is made-a moving
record of ancient history. Some are giants in one respect, but
all are intellectual dwarfs when thrust upon society, to say
nothing of the almost universal starvation of these establishments,
and the rank poison of vicious habitskcommon to all.
The system of school education in England, being generally
superior to that followed in France, chiefly accounts for the many
advantages which Englishmen have exhibited over their rivals.
But, unfortunately for the United Kingdom, these advantages
are nearly over-balanced by a greater national passiveness, under
the pernicious influence of theology now existing in Great
Britain, and by the anti-protestantism animus which haughty
England has politically bred in Ireland, actually contributing
more to the unification of British Catholicism than the loyb of
papal spiritual dictatorship. Intellectual France has that great
superiority over other nations, that she is the least sectarian of
all. Although her state religion is fortunately nominal, still the
fact cannot be denied on the other hand, that since the noisy
crackers of the Vatican have ceased to frighten educated French-
men, they remain apparently wrecked upon the shoals ot religious
apathy. Notwithstanding this drawback, I have but little doubt
that when lifted up from the shore of scepticism, my country
will be found sooner prepared to sail upon the ocean of religious
aspirations than the clumsy-looking soul slaver ship called the
Reformation, whose course has been an artful perjury to its.
original programme *
* I apprehend it will startle a protestant gentleman who never travelled
on the continent of Europe, to be told that his country is more superstitious
than France, when he is able to comprehend the degrading influence of Catho-
licism, and the awful power of Jesuitism. This is nevertheless a fact
acknowledged by enlightened Englishmen who do not disdain to admit their
national disabilities in view of reformation. I have suffered much public
wrong from the English community, yet I am under no resentment in writing
against its demerits, having been amply compensated by the personal virtues,
friendship, and justice of many. As a proof that I also admit the merits of
Great Britain, I beg to give the following extract from a speech of mine, in
proposing a toast to the Anglo-French Alliance at a banquet held by my
countrymen to celebrate the f4te Napoleon 111. : —■“ This is a justice we must
express to our allies, viz, being the mistress of the seas, patroness of weak
nations, the great inspirer of national freedom, ever sympathising with
national struggles, and organising that secret police against monarchical
tyrrany, called public opinion in England, the British Nation has most contri-
buted to the expansion of civilization throughout the world, and humanity
owes her a debt of gratitude for having been the purveyor of her necessities,
and having given birth to the most successful colonizing people on earth,


However, as Great Britain, happily for herself, possesses the
most profound thinkers in the world, and is the parent and
guardian of free speech, I trust that the groans of British theo-
logic ignorance will not impede her religious reconstruction
more powerfully than the success of French materialism can do
in France ; and I hope also, that the British nation in soon
disentangling herself from her superstitions, for the time when
France will be awakened from its present religious carelessness ;
these two great people will both keep pace in religious recon-
struction and exhibit an alliance, founded upon no mutual
national interest, but upon religious duty to the Sovereign of
universal peace, oi'der and harmony. If England venerates the
bible as ancient Egypt once reverenced reptiles, I regret to say
that France seems to me the embodiment of a Mirabeau reluc-
tantly associating with an impotent despised priest, by mere
force of habit and idle conventionalism. The intellectual
idiosyncracies of Luther and Calvin have made the “ religious ”
British nation what she has been since the Reformation, as the
philosophers of the seventeenth century have moulded the
French mind. The demerits of Voltaire are imprinted upon
the character of France, and its merits unfortunately rejected *
thereby forming the nucleus of future empires, where savages dwell, marshes
and deserts existed,” etc. I now add that the British people is the only one
in the world to whom I can be allowed to remonstrate freely and severely
for their degrading superstitions, without any other fear than to peril still
more my professional and social condition among them. But this misfortune
is the cross I have taken upon my shoulders, in obeying this injunction of
Jesus, ‘ Take no thought for your life, neither what ye shall eat and drink,
or wherewithal ye shall be clothed.’ ” Prudence, say my friends, should
make me consider that my family is in danger to share with me the sting of
sectarian aversion, apparently inevitable. But I answer that I never could
reason with my conscience, nor sit content in seeing a whole community call-
ing themselves Christians when laboriously busy in gratifying their selfishness,
whose love of property has obliterated all Christian feelings; whose assumed
teachers of Christianity make a merchandise of chartered inspiration, all
“ laying up treasures for themselves upon earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.” To be “ persecuted
for righteousness’ sake,” is to me a harbinger of divine blessings. The only
property I am concerned about is to preserve my soul unconquered by any set
of men assuming divine command over me.
* I think with another pioneer of progress, Thomas Carlyle, who says,
“it is time that Voltaire should be judged of by his intrinsic merits, that
justice should be done to him also; for injustice can profit no man and no
cause ; his chief merits belong to Nature and himself, his chief faults are of
his time and country.” He was as much a believer in God and of the
immortality of the soul as the moat enlightened Christian religionist, a,nd
certainly understood much better Christ’s mission than a contracted sectarian
intellect. Upon these three momentous questions we find the following in
his philosophical dictionary:—


The spirit of intellectual education is to keep f up juvenile
attention, and hail with good omen all inquisitiveness, doubts and
inquiries as means of developing the modus operandi of ideas,
through mental exercise, instead of training youths to remember
what to think, or perplexing their mind with foolish proposi-
tions, fostering an angry tendency to subtilties, and encouraging
speculative dispositions.* Children of all classes of society
should receive instruction in the same company, and this as
freely as they breathe the air. They should receive information
in all the rudiments of every science ; their taste cultivated tor
every useful, agreeable, and elevating pursuit; leaving to them-
selves the perfection of their acquirements when they will choose
the particular avocation which the God of Nature has allotted
to them. Tuition should be regarded by a well constituted
society as the most noble and worthy avocation, instead of being
“ There is something eternal, for nothing is produced from nothing. Here is
a certain truth on which the mind reposes. Every work which shows us means
and an end, announces a workman ; then this universe which has its end, dis-
covers a most mighty ,• intelligent workman." Of soul, lie says, “ Soul is a
vague and indeterminate term, expressing an unknown principle of known
effects, which we feel in ourselves. * * * We know certainly that we
exist, that we feel, that we think. Seek we to advance one step further, we fall
into an abyss of darkness. The whole body of the church has determined that
the soul is immaterial. These holy men had fallen into an error then universal,
they were men; but they were not mistaken concerning immortality, because it
is evidentlywmnounced in the gospel.”
How much in advance to the “ divines ” of our age he was when he also
penned the following. “ The soul separated from its body might very well
show itself upon occasion, revisit the place which it had exhibited, its parents
and friends, speak to them, and instruct them. In all this there is no incom-
patibility.” Oh no ! great man, there is no incompatibility ! and it is now
the problem of religious philosophy to direct the human mind to psychological
phenomena. But to prove with Paul that “ there is a natural body and a
spititual body” we must dispel all supernatural speculations, and make the
subject a matter of knowledge, and no longer one of belief if possible. If the
soul’s existence and individuality be facts in nature, it must be in accordance
with a divine principle capable of human investigation.
Voltaire’s estimation of Christ’s mission is as follows. The greatest benefit
for ivhich we are indebted to the New Testament is its having revealed to us the
immortality of the sold. The revelation of the immortality of the soul and of
pains and rewards after death is the more to be blessed, as the vain philosophy
of men always doubted it," etc.
* A minister once attempting to explain the nature of a miracle to his
catecumen, called out a country lad not yet sophisticated by catechism, and
thus addressed him : “ Now, my little man, that you have heard the explana-
tion of a miracle, tell me, if you were to see the sun at two o’clock in the
morning, what would you say it was ?” “ hooidd say it icas the moon!” “ Non-
sense ; but suppose you knew it was not the moon, and yet was two o’clock in
the morning ?” “ Then I would say it was time to get up." The minister had
to give him up as already half “ infidel,” and found better soil for superstitious
culture with the city urchins than with this child of the wilderness.


as it is, the refuge of aborted missions, and creating a needy,
discontented, and often disheartened class. The superinten-
dants of public education should receive the emoluments now
bestowed upon useless bishops, and depraved prelates. All
professors of science, heads of schools, teachers, professors of
tine arts, gymnastics and drilling masters, etc. should be as
generously remunerated as dignified idle parsons of all sects are,
and kept free from want and social anxieties, In fact, all the
money now so fatally misapplied to the support of diversified
systems of ethics, most improperly called “ religions,” should
be directed by the state to the natural education of the
rising generation. By so doing, the next generation would save
many millions of pounds now requisite to keep up armies,
navies, prisons, asylums, etc., the offspring of popular super-
stitions ; and a perfect public concord and religious harmony
would reign upon earth, before the dawn of the twentieth
Besides having given guarantee that they are possessed of
every necessary requirement, the knowledge of phrenology is the
most indispensable requisite of school teachers, _ Every school
should have classes for pupils deficient in certain intellectual
faculties ; for it is now a fact beyond little dispute, that every man
acts according to his moral and mental organization. Therefore
as every feeling and emotion has its organ somewhere, children
who present themselves with a propensity to acquisith encss,
should be trained every day to exercise interchange of little
gifts and never permitted to accumulate ; others, deficient in
the organ of benevolence, and possessing large destructiveness
should°be trained with the same wisdom now exhibited in Paris
at the school for idiots; and those whose organs of veneration and
basilar development overbalance the reflective faculties should
be considered as the most immorally conceived and parentally
situated, disposed to perpetrate fanaticism and superstition, the
main source of human miseries, that characterizes the piesent
half-civilized race of mankind. _ .
The evil of our present system of intellectual education is
manifested by the fatal misapplication of intellectual faculties,
which render men the rulers of fanatics, and leaders of sectarians;
whereas true intellectual development which does not spring
from selfishness and ambition, but from the exposition of the
order, beauty,* and harmony of Nature, reveals the course of
Providence, and teaches the real adaptation of man’s faculties,
and relationship to God, Nature, society, and himself. When
the baneful popular respect to bad laws, to the pernicious dictates
of human creed, and the rank influence of bad reading, written


“ by generations of vipers, out of the abominations, of their heait,
shall be extinct, the authority of Nature will easily penetrate the
human mind. When the mental energies of the governing class
are no longer directed to oppose progress in all directions, when
theologians, universities, and learned bodies, cease to exercise
the moral police over the soul aspirations, intellectual culture
will reveal new faculties, develope new motive powers, disable
all inimical reaction, and inaugurate universal peace upon
earth. . . .
In our days, a strong strategy of war is set working against
this advent. The down-trodden masses and money-grubbing
community being urged incompetency in doing their own think-
ing, abstain to perplex their organs of reflective causality abou t
subjects grappled by salaried individuals, by whom
mental indolence is encouraged, as human passions are awakeneoT
But, as a wise Providence has ordained an antidote to all social
evils in the development of the human mind, all bad laws, bad
hooks, bad systems of ethics are destined to be consigned to the
limbo of oblivion, at the ratio of better legislation, better philo-
sophy, and more religious enlightenment under the authority of
principles of Nature. Already the pioneers, of progress have
taken from the enemy of mankind these strong pieces of theo-
logical artillery, viz. the faggot, the halter, the stake, inquisition
and rack ; and like the impotent giant of Despair, their retreat-
ing foe, while groaning and grimacing, fires away his last shot
of “ infidelity .” If he occasionally condescend to argue, he
revolves round the narrow circle of a religious idea, and as the
mule at the mill, he considers that he has surveyed a vast terri-
tory of intellectual domain, when he falls exhausted, after pulling
round and round with the theological lever, that the Bible is
the Truth, and the Truth the Bible.
If college and university-bred men who, by their baneful
talents, promote popular errors, have been compelled to abandon
the system of social venesection for every fluttering in the arteries
of humanity indicating progress, they are now administering
filthy compounds for every symptom of intellectual and religious
emancipation. In their procession their banner has on one side
respectability, and on the other side servility. Innovation, free
discussion, intellectual freedom, and honest scepticism are as
many traitors they have to arrest. Their appointed detectives are
all riding a particular hobby, one has predestination; another,
election; another, original sin; another, atonement; all cling
obstinately to total depravity ; and when assembled together,
they form a tohu bohu mounted guard, exhibiting all shades of
human vicas and criminal propensities.


The supporters of superstitious “ faith ” are for ever troubled
lest the present state of things may discontinue ; all aie, however,
discernible by jthree common characteristics, viz., hypocritical
charity, assumption of possessing the standard of intellectual
acuteness, and the “ sure ” secret of eternal salvation. Their M
narrow vision cannot face the daylight of truth, and they cow- j
ardly assailed their adversaries in the dark, through then effoits
to injure their social welfare by false imputations. And yet it ||
we reflect deeply, we must acknowledge that it cannot be other-
wise, and that it is no absolute fault of theiis, when their M
religious food has always been ancient creeds, musty parchments,
and old remains of the past, stewed afresh, and served up upon
the dish of popularity. To see the weak, misdirected minds
tattering to and fro on every seventh day, to get their plate full
m theological mess, is a pitiable spectacle, most painful to the
heart of an enlightened philanthropist.
Intellectual education does not foster the powers of eloquence
onb, but causes the mind to be more calm, reflective, meditative,
and contemplative. In solitude the developed intellect wi
realize inward happiness, and endless gratifications. By constant
application to inquire into the causes of all phenomena, the
intellectually developed man will fathom new depths, ascend,
new heights, thereby harmonizing himself more and more with
God • and if ever capable of fulfilling strict obedience to all the
divine revelations of the heavenly Parent, he might truly and
honestly proclaim that God and he are one, i.e., physically harmo-
nious with Nature, and morally harmonious with the Divine will.
Difficult as it appears, yet it is not impossible, when humanity
has been gifted with the boon of a living pattern, m the person
of the Nazarene Reformer. . »
Again, intellectual education leads man to the highest form of
religious worship, i.e., devotional contemplation of God’s works,
thereby developing in him the power to foster Divine will upon
earth. This sublime development is not to be confounded
with the various methods of popular worship manifestations;
the former indicates the full growth of the soul, and the latter its
narrow bondage. To teach men to worship is as absurd as to
teach them to grow, or get more advanced in age and experience.
Divine worship is inherent in the nature of man ; but its mani-
festation varies as the manifestation of humanity does with
every man and woman. To enact by act of Parliament, a form
of public worship is replete with inevitable national calamities-,
and the past and present evils of civilization have had no other
cause. Religious growth is the sum total of humanity s worth
at all times, but conventions do no more hasten these processes


than the gardener does the maturity of his fruits, without the
help of season and heat. These remarks are much enforced by
one of the mental ornaments of civilization, which the British
nation has had the honor to produce, George Combe, as when
he says, “ The history of all Christian nations shows that while
they profess to believe in the divine authority of the scriptures,
they were in great measure sceptics as to their precepts being
supported and enforced by the order of nature. In their prac-
tical conduct towards each other, they have too often set them at
defiance ; nay, each has striven to depress, spoil, and ruin his
neighbour, as the most effectual means of raising itself to inde-
pendence and prosperity, but not one of these nations has
succeeded in attaining its ends by these means. The history
of England’s treatment of Ireland, affords an instructive lesson
on this topic, * * * a calm survey of her history will
show that from the first day of her opression to the present time,
every injury inflicted on Ireland has recoiled on her own head ;
and that at "this hour, Ireland is the source of her greatest weak-
ness, anxiety, and suffering.” It would be otherwise if England
had understood the sublime precepts of Jesus, instead of having
theological doctrines forced into her mind by act of Parliament.
Nor would she be now a sectarian nation if she had been allowed to
individualize herself without the inoculation of continental inebri-
ating biblical metaphysics, and trusted to a Locke instead of exhi-
biting religious servitude under the spell of a German “ theologian.
The various religious transformations of humanity commen-
cing from fanaticism, passing to superstition, bigotry, and sec-
tarianism, reaching to materialism and scepticism, and ascending
to contemplative and aspirational emotions, all are natural pro-
cesses or progression taking place without transition. It is a
divine law, impossible to avoid, that every man and woman is
progressing with an undeviating' regularity, and in ascending its
degrees none can arrive at the top of the ladder without passing
through the intermediate steps. What man terms conversion,
is the revulsive system of treating mental deformities ; a gross
application of the homoeopathic law of cure, substituting a form
of disease to another one ; a deceptive palliation ; a calm subse-
quent to fits that convulse the victims of errors. If we reason
from analogy, Nature is the best revealer of the probable
existence and immortality of the soul; every phenomenon is the
process of a higher form of sublimation ; she makes no retro-
grade movement, is never at rest, and wastes nothing. If a
spirit is one day to emerge from the earthly body, death is the
last and most glorious degree of material refinement which the
handmaiden of God, Nature, has worked, and we need not be


weaned of her maternal protection to have a glimpse at the
boundaries of a future world.
I know well that my friends, the unbiassed sceptics, will not
follow me so far without more appropriate demonstration, but
I am deeply convinced that they will soon arrive at this conclu-
sion, if they are only stimulated to follow the same course of
enquiry that has redeemed them from the threshold of parental
superstitions; for they possess powers that enable them to advance
in the search ol the highest principles of mind. But it is
otherwise with the sectarists, who will have to perform a great
work for disentangling themselves from conventional super-
stitions ere they become blank sceptics. It was for this class of
men that Jesus once spoke this apparent syllogism, “ Whosoever
hath, not, from him shall be taken, even that he hath.” Isot-
withstanding all the crimes his blessed name is made connected
with; notwithstanding the unrealability of his fragmentary
discourses, enough is to be found among biblical dross and pious
interpolations to reverence him as the highest, most sublime
teacher that ever trod upon earth. He is the future germ of
social harmony, and happiness in every home.
Daily papers and periodical publications now exercise the
most potent aid to popular intellectual training, and fall like the
rain drop to strip away the disguise of craft and fraud. But if
the press has broken many popular fetters, its needy members
are nearly all immorally situated, venal, and their employers
pursuing "mercantile speculation, only require this intelligent
class of men to stereotype vulgar prejudices and eulogize its
haughty and influential patrons. Whilst their numbers precludes
the entire success of speculation, the little good done is every
day counteracted by the avaricious supporters of superstitions
and popular ignorance prostituting literary talents.*
* This colony has in the Argus the most fearless champion of religious
progress I have ever found in a daily paper. Not long ago I was much
gratified in reading the following sentiments. “ The close atmosphere of
academical churches as it has been called rather than genuine church principles
requires ventilation. The walls of the college act upon the mental vision of
the speculatively disposed student of theology as a bandage does on his eyesight.
It is a gain to the cause of liberty when a ray of profane light disturbs the
mist and webs of his dungeon,” etc. How does the organ of “ Christian
progress," the Weekly Review animadvert to this ? purely in a mercantile
point of view, with a prophecy more indicative of his Christian adaptation to
pounds, shillings, and-pence, than of seer seeing foresight, when he says,
■ < SU ch articles as that of Monday has caught enough to produce a sweeping
change in the literary conduct of any respectable journal. But let the prop-
rietor look at it! They may find out when it is too late that periodical outbursts
of scoffing, unbelief, and blasphemy are not the best methods of extending the
circulation, and increasing the influence even of a colonial journal," (see the


Now let us inquire into the seventh and last step of the
education of Nature, i.e., Social Education.
If congenial marriages are the first germ of human regene-
ration ; if the education of wives through enlightened husbands is
the preparation of individual soil; if the influence of mothers over
offspring is the incubation of human virtues; if moral training
strikes off the sharpest angularities of the human diamond; if phy-
sical education drills it into symmetry and beauty, while securing
health and vigor; if intellectual acquisitions cuts its multitudinous
facets, then social accomplishments become the last polish requi-
site to perfect the most beautiful gem of Nature—Man.
Man is a rolling pebble on the shore of life, and his sociality
indicates affinity towards perfection. The misanthropic hermit
and the mistaken nun, who retire themselves from the “wicked”
world, are labouring under a sectarian narcotic that robs huma-
nity of their worth, and themselves of most valuable time while
they are vainly toiling to reach the celestial realms where solitude
has its delights. By shock and constant friction, grosser material
contribute to the individual nobility and refinement of every
social creature. The most unfortunately situated are those
born and educated amidst wealthy circumstances more disastrous
to the perfection of mind than extreme poverty. To grumble
against Providence for a hard lot upon earth is a mistaken notion
of Divine course. The greatest living sovereign of earth by
draining the cup of adversity has become qualified to hold the
reign of France, the most ungovernable country of Europe; and
Weekly Review, July 25th, 1868,) nothing can be more plain: the press is
“ a method of extending and increasing influences,” and it requires no deep
penetration to discover the sort of influence which the “ Christian” organ seeks.
But, if this champion of sectarianism is actually flourishing, the future will
show the tables turned against him, patronized as he is by the worse kind of
patrons, the parsons, the bigot, and sectarist, in whom selfishness is a char-
acteristic feature. The “ Gates of Hell ” with the Weekly Review and all
colonial sectarists will not prevail against human progress ; but the “ Gates
of Heaven” with the Argus’s sensible remarks and the increasing, liberal
community are pre-ordained by a wise Providence, to prevail against the
corrupt press that trample upon human reason. hile sectarian publications
set themselves in opposition to the march of progress, as the inventor of the
guillotine, they will suffer more by the instrumentality of their low motives
than by the triumph of their adversaries : for it is a divine law of mind that
error recoils against its perpetrator. The _ learned advocates of superstition
are heaping upon their heads social and spiritual calamities most terrible to
apprehend. “He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity.” Better
it is to be the down trodden victim of oppression, than the blind leader of
the blind ; when both fall into the ditch the victimizer has a double exertion
to go through, *'. e. the smothering weight, and greater depth of the crevice
of error out of which he will have to extricate himself, and give an awful
account for every word said or written.


for my part, I bless all the misfortunes, hardships, and perplexities
I have ever met with, and feel within me a mighty inward impulse
that tells me, Thou must go. “ The morrow shall take thought
for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.”
While Nature is never consulted to determine the social avoca-
tions of men, society will remain disordered and discordant in
its essentials : for instance, a mercantile and calculating organi-
zation is often forced into the church, and the most lofty mind
compelled to till the ground ; an inventor is imprisoned into a
shop, and an orator has a commission in the army; the physician
ordained by Nature has no means to get his university degree,
while the licensed ignoramus has purchased the privilege of
dosing to death the stomach of the sick ; the truly religious
teacher is branded as an infidel, and the vicious intellect steps
in as a spiritual broker, etc.
The nineteenth century is the last rehearsal of every dogmati-
cal recrimination of the past: a chorus of fanatic, superstitious,
and sectarian lucubrations, accompanied with weeping, wailing,
mourning, lamentation, and woe of churches. But this noisy
orchestra must listen to the laws of social harmony, when
society has for its manager, Nature, for its instrumentalists,
men of Principle, and for auditors, earnest friends of Truth.
Nature teaches organization, by working everything with the
co-operation of various elements; but as society is sub-organized,
every association mutually repels one another, and all suffer for
this lack of social means and energies. When the association
of capital will blend with the organization of labour, and talent
conciliates these two foes, men need work but a few hours to
follow a physical avocation, in order to secure the necessities of
life; and the idle class will no longer be a prey to commercial
perplexities, more ruinous than poverty; consequently more time
will be left for mental culture, social and family amusements.
When society can emerge from the bondage of theological
organization, a benign tei dency will take place of combative
propensities. W T lien degrading creed will give up their hold
upon human associations, the mock charity of Christendom will
stand abashed before universal Justice, the greatest of all human
virtues. When medical assumption will be dethroned by the
healing art, medico-scientific bodies will be in a poor predicament
with their nostrums and clap-trap jargon. When sectarian
animus and national hostilities turn their energies to promote
universal peace independant of printed authority, the heart of
society will be regenerated. When society bestows her maternal
love upon all mankind, irrespective of birth and country, then
will every member of the human family love that mother with


all his heart. War, cruelty, extortion, fraud, theft, avarice, etc.,
will vanish when the monster Priestcraft is no more to discourage
man or render easy bis reconciliation with the Divine Parent,
according to ecclesiastical caprice. Then will men comprehend
that no forgiveness being possibly granted by Nature for violating
her laws, no moral transgression can possibly be forgiven, lest
it be atoned by adequate penalty, and reform be persevered in.
For God speaks to man of moral, spiritual, and celestial laws by
the analogy of Nature’s'imperative commandments. Humanity
being a grand organization of sympathising influences, will
reach this development when all forms of oppression are
abolished. The criminally disposed and ambitiously trained
should receive the greatest amount of social love and educational
attention, as the helpless cripple has a greater claim upon parental
indulgence and affection than his sound brothers and lively
sisters. All the fragments of our divided society will be gath-
ered when humanity grows too large to keep the swaddling gar-
ments of religionists associations. When society is redeemed
from despotic selfish corporations, then the spirit of a new organ-
ization will animate mankind, whose motives will be, one purpose,
unity; one authority, principles; one end, happiness; one
master, God ; then will there be no credulity, very little belief,
but more knowledge, and death be robbed of its sting,
Pope, cardinals, bishops, priests, ministers of all denomi-
nations, and all other subordinate grim spectres, entrenched
behind the fortress of Ignorance, will soon find the stuff for the
making of them getting scarce. The many millions of enslaved
souls "necessary to constitute a “ Holiness” are so many
rotten' bricks that will crumble when a greater number of
social engineers will work at the paralells of religious inquiry.
The stream of Reason, as a mighty torrent, is inundating the
Protestant Church and its bastions are already deserted by the
most noble-minded. The Almighty Providence is entering into
an immortal covenant with humanity, and the human mind is
deputed by its full development to enfranchise society of its
most pernicious trammels—viz., total depravity, that has
depraved man ; vicarious atonement, so disastrous to his self
reliance; eternal misery, so grossly misrepresenting the character
of Divine Fatherhood; the Trinitarian polytheism, which is
nothing-short of idolatry ; the existence of an individualized
evil being, impugning the infinite wisdom of the Divine Author
of all existences ; all inheritances bequeathed from a savage
tradition, and doomed to the pit of perdition which it has
invented for others. The Dispensor of all blessings will supply
the human mind, as a flying artillery, with the grape of new


discoveries, before which all ecclesiastical fortifications will be
razed to the ground. The deserved fate that await “ Theology ”
will bring the Spirit of Peace upon earth, reconciling man to God
by obedience to Nature, the mother of mankind and the faithful
interpreter of the Fountain of Love giving forth His command-
ments through her proxy. < _ 1
Astronomy is the best source of social teaching to mankind.
All stars, planets, systems of planets, execute orderly their
revolutions in various directions with liberty and without conflict.
The liberty given to every planet of pursuing its own particular
course, and the law of repulsion and attraction exercised by the
central parent is the best exemplification of social liberty and
governmental control and protection. These sublime teachings
are thus interpreted by the illustrious Combe : “ Man has
received from his Maker certain powers of action and enjoyment,
and been placed in a world adapted to his constitution. He has
aright therefore, derived directly from God, (who called him
into existence, and provided the world for his reception ) to the
full enjoyment of all his powers and capacities, but under two
restrictions: first, that he shall not transgress the laws which
divine wisdom has established in his own and external nature
for their regulation ; and secondly, that he shall not convert his
individual enjoyments into sources of annoyance to his fellow-
men, whom from the necessity of his and their being, must live
with him in society.” But yet society does not exercise towards
its members that relationship which our central sun does to its
system of planets. No care is taken to teach man to regulate
his passions, which, remaining self-uncontrolled, are the causq,
of human miseries, calamities, and degradation. Society is
vindictive, unjust, and repulsive, but not yet attractive, nor
enjoying order. The ignorance of every man costs more to the
state than the proper natural training and support of fifty
similarly born men. The ’grain of crime prevention is disre-
garded by human legislation, and massive doses of revolting
penalties daily enacted, to arrest unsuccessfully the tie of social
mistraining. When religious reorganization is carried out, the
time is not far off when government must undergo a thorough
change. It is now a premature work to reform government
before a new generation is reformed by a better system of educ-
ation ; a deplorable anarchy would be the result; and? I cannot
but admire the English Government, which remains solid before
the difficulties and uncertainty of desirable reforms.
When Parliament will comprehend that men are best governed
from within their own moral organizations than by outward
restraint, then legislators will meet the requirements of society


in taking the human body for legislative pattern. The legis-
lature of a country is, the mind that has to conceive and
determine according to the physiological principles discovered
in its social constitution. Before courting the approbation
of constituency, and seeking for popularity, legislators should
have given proof of fidelity to the principles that govern their
■well-being, i.e., sobriety, integrity, and evei’y social and domestic
virtue. The executive should exercise the organ of volition
imparted by the superior wisdom of social physiologists, the
government’s employers will officiate as the hands and feet, and
the general wheal of the body be represented by the mass of the
people, so that the hand cannot say to the mind, I have no want
of thee, nor the mind to the feet, you are beneath my notice. A
wise government thus constituted would resemble much the
barrel maker, who takes every loose piece, putting the hoop of
binding principles around all its parts, and thus renders every
stave an indispensable and useful part of a stupendous whole.
Labor is a divine ordination enjoyed to every member of the
human family, and idleness a great wrong perpetrated against
society. No bread is sweet that has not been earned by the
sweat of a man’s brow. Work is also as much a moral necessity
as an indispensable requirement of health; and to all men and
women Nature preaches the gospel of labor. Woe to those who
disobey her good tidings, for such disobedience rusts the mind,
freezes the faculties, and leaves man as a rough draft.
Courtesy is a valuable acquirement of social intercourse, and
is the most beautiful characteristic of our deceptive civilization.
But “ all that glitters is not gold,” and it is a strange fact that all
literary men that have left immortal monuments of their great
talent were most bashful in fashionable circles. Descartes
was out of place in a drawing-room, and Lafontaine, who exhi-
bited such exquisite wit in his fables, was dull and stupid in
society. Buffon the great naturalist was also lost among gay
and talkative persons. Great philanthropists and celebrated
moralists have never been extra gallant near the fair sex: and
you have to fathom great men deeply before they will reveal
their worth in a vain world. Modern courtesy that does not
spring spontaneously from the heart is a counterfeit of real
sentiments on the part of many. The courtesy of the untutored
Indian of America, and Otaheitie Islanders has proved to me
more Christian like than the sectarian politeness of civilized
Londoners.
Social amusements and cheerfulness are as necessary to keep
up the health of mind and body, as relaxation of the string of
a bow requisite to preserve its elasticity. Kind, sympathetic,


friendly, and talented social meetings are the most powerful
medicinal antidotes to the plodding cares and disappointments
of life. But the sectarian, with his undisciplined awe of God,
his long-facedness, bible reading, his pious thanksgiving after
luxurious desserts, and blasphemous disobedience to the authority
of Nature, by rendering themselves disagreeable to others, are
obliged to narrow their circle within the serious devotee of their
gloomy form of worship. By repressing the requirements of
Nature, the bigots fall victims to dyspepsia, monomania, melan-
choly, or become harsh and bitter because of their world-hating
disposition. As their affected piety does not spring from devo-
tedness to Truth, Justice, and Bighteousness, but from selfish
motives of moving the Divine Dispensor of blessings, to insure
His partial favoritism (which is tantamount to fiattering an
easily to be deluded despot), they reap the most immediate
penalty of their fearful ignorance, with every fresh complaint,
new discord, and relapsed disharmony, to which they are liable.
I believe, in fact, that the British people support the medical
profession better than any other country because of their per-
verted religious habits, that banish social enjoyments on every
Sabbath day, while they gratify their gross appetites for heavy
meals, and remain in indolent torpor during the remainder of
the day. I have also noticed that among the English community
the Mondays and Tuesdays are days that call for more medical
attendance than any other day of the week.
The absence of social enjoyment is certainly more injurious,
and irreligious than its excess. Kefined entertainments are the
rest of polished minds, as coarse amusements are indicative of
vulgar souls, and the absence of hilarity the dark course of life,
afflicting bigots of all sects and countries. If society had as
many places of public gratuitous mental recreation as ttiey have
sectarian prisons, how quick the misled or lukewarm religious
mass could be warmed to- a higheiynoral temperature. The past
has already proved that human senses, sentiments, and maimers
have been more refined by the plays of Shakespeare and Moliere
than by any theologian of England and France. These two
geniuses, by their profound knowledge of antropology, have
more contributed to the grandeur and judgment of their respec-
tive countries than any system of religious ethics. The former
has moulded the characteristics of the advanced English intellect,
and the latter has developed the clear-sighted social appreciation
of educated Frenchmen. The two different influences accounts
for the lofty tendency of the English mind, and French tact for
detecting religious hypocrisy and social eccentricities. When
the theatre will be better appreciated, it will be supported by the


government, instead of unsafe, superstitious scaffoldings, and
thereby an instrumentality for inculcating moral and social
virtues into the popular nurseries of crimes and vices, will be
discovered to save at the same time much of the expense entailed
upon the keeping up of judges, magistrates, police forces, detec-
tives, and penitentiaries.
In fact education is nothing else than the fostering of natural
growth of humanity as a single individual. Although of divine
origin, mankind has commenced from the lower state of savagism,
become barbarian, then patriarchist, fanatic, and is now a sec-
tarian rascal, or a refined savage, the natural prolic of the
elements* of its actual education, i. e. falsehood, covetousness,
selfishness, pride, fear, sensuality, and indolence. In spite of
the great help received from enlightened philosophers, this
personation of the human family will undergo no sudden change,
and must progress in perpetual obedience to the unchangeable
laws of the Kuler of Nature. To attempt to change man’s
heart because it is wicked, is as absurd as to change a man’s legs
because of his first missteps when attempting to move with his
unsteady organs of locomotion. Those that defend such foolish
theological nonsense stand in need of a change of head on their
shoulders. Though man cannot yet determine either his origin
or his destiny, it is nevertheless a blasphemous misrepresentation
of the character of the Deity to admit that man’s primitive
nature is a mark of divine failure, or that a single member of
the divine family, ( divine , because proceeding from the originator
of all beings,) may be left unprovided by an Omniscient and
Benevolent Father, with the means to gravitate to the ultimate
harmonious position attainable to all.
Sailing upon the agitated sea of social reformation, propelled
by the steam power of knowledge, having for ballast moral
integrity, many living pioneers of human progress are as many
meteors ready to convert a perverted society into a harmonious
community. But when the numerous cries of assist the blmd are
uttered at every corner of the street, it is a difficult task to let in
wisely no more vivifying illumination that the present condition of
society can admit in recovering from mental cecity. I apprehend
that, having fallen myself in this extreme, I shall do less good
than many less bold but wiser reformers. Nevertheless, though
branded as an “ infidel ” since I commenced to speak as I felt, I
shall be faithful unto death to my philosophy in which I have
progressed without wavering since I assumed my own govern-
ment. I shall water my trust to the principles of nature with
the sweat and tears of poverty if necessary ; in faith bury it in
the sands of sectarianism, conscious that a coming generation


will manure this arid soil,; and the 'germ I have planted pushing
itself up, will become a mighty tree, whose expanded ramifications
can shelter the weary, while its fruits of universal concession,
peace, and harmony shall ripe for the coming age of Reason.
As I religiously trust that the Divine Being will speed the
right—“ that light will overcome darkness ” —so I have the glorious
conviction that such will be the voice that shall awaken the
sleepers. There shall be wailing in the desert and lamentations
in the cities, and a universal thirst for the fulfilment of all these
methods of instruction that will tend towards the reformation,
the elevation, and the sun-light of future ages.
hearkens to Divine instruction through the medium of moral
intuition, the waters of desolation shall sweep over the length
and breadth of his beautiful dwelling place, the earth. Bui
when the light of reason has become his guiding star, he shal.
live in a daily paradise of harmony and love. Let him Beware
and keep his foot from slipping into the degrading depth o.
Ignorance, while the teaching of wisdom is within his grasp.
Amen.




