

n&i/


The Four Mails, Fri., 22nd Feb., 1957.
THE LATE T. L.
BADGERY
The Berrima District lost
one of its outstanding citizens
on Friday night when Mr. Tho-
mas Lambert Badgery died
suddenly at his home at Wan-
ganderry at the age of 73 ye-
ars. Known throughout the len-
gth and breadth of the district,
his genial manner endeared him
to all.
Born at Exeter, Mr. Badgei y
was a member of a pioneering
family of that village. His
great-grandfather, James Bad-
gery, reached Sydney in 1779
from Exeter, Devonshire, Eng-
land, and settled in the Exeter
district of New South Wales in
1819. On Ist November, 1822,
he received a grant of 500
acres at Exeter. It is believed
hat a son of James Badgery
was responsible many years af-
ter for naming the locality after
the birthplace of his father.
When Mr. Badgery took over
at Wanganderry, it was
virgin country and he purchas-
ed it from Mr. A. E. Cordeaux.
It is believed that the first
superphosphate used in this
district was applied by Mr.
Badgery after taking over the
property. Over the years it has
been greatly improved as a re-
sult of his diligence and is now
one of the best sheep proper-
ties in the district.
Particularly generous to cha-
ritable organisations, Mr. Bad-
gery donated annually to Bow-
ral Red Cross the proceeds of
a sale of a bale of wool. In
the war years he gave generous-
ly to appeals to better the lot
of those in the services.
In public life, Mr. Badgery
gave yoeman service as a mem-
ber of Nattai (now Mittagong)
Shire Council. He expressed
regret when forced to resign
through ill-health in June 1946
that he could not complete his
quarter-century of service as a
councillor. He had then served
for 23i years. He was President
in 1931-32 and again in 1943-
44 when his task was a difficult
one, as the finances of Council
were restricted as the result of
the war and manpower was li-
mited. A man of progressive
ideas, Mr. Badgery, as a coun-
cillor, contributed much to the
advancement of the district.
When the Nattai-Bowral Re-
patriation Committee was at its
busiest, Mr. Badgery was its
Chairman and its suuccessful
work was largely due to his ef-
forts.
Married 39 years ago, Mr.
Badgery is survived by his wi-
dow and two daughters, Rosa-
lind and Cecily.
The large attendance at the
funeral service, conducted by
Rev. G. A. Hook, at St. Jude’s
Church of England, Bowral, on
Monday morning, prior to cre-
mation at Northern Suburbs
Crematorium, was a tribute to
a man who had devoted all the
time he could spare to the ad-
vancement of the district in
which he lived.






SOMETHING ABOUT THE
EARLY HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA.
My position here this evening is one which to me has many
very pleasant features. On most occasions when one appears in
public to speak, or as you are good enough to say, lecture,
there is an object in view. It may be for political in-
fluence, the advancement of science or an institution.
Certainly our meeting has no political significance or intention.
It will not be scientific but I do hope it will be for the advance-
ment of knowledge, and that it may create a desire on the part
of our young people to know and learn something of the earl}'
history of this great country. I believe lam correct in saying
that both the native born and others know less, and learn less
in the colonial schools, of the history of this country than of any
other in the world. There is a colonial history which has
been adopted by the Education Department of Victoria, and I
trust we may have one as good for our public schools here. My
desire then is to place before you a concise account of the early
voyages of discovery, early occupation, and a general outline up
to the present time ; and to do this in such language and with
such arrangement of dates and incidents as to make the informa-
tion acceptable, and to create a desire amongst you to become
familiar with a country so full of interest, and so remarkable as
to make its early history a special feature in the work of modern
historians. A country of which more than a century ago in a
book called the “ History of New Holland ” by the Right Hon,
Wm. Eden, there is a manuscript note as follows:—“The first
written history of that great country in which the perfection of
the present race of man appears on the most enlarged view destined
to be consummated.”
The old Roman Empire with its attractive and long record
of noble deeds and heroes; its men of great learning and power, the
British nation from its rise and progress to the foremost place in the
world of wealth and commerce by sea and land, China with her
ancient records of learning, perseverance, and ingenuity, the
magnificent continent of America with its astonishing develop-


merits, progressive and inventive population—a country in which
not only its own inhabitants boast of all that is great, massive,
and unconquerable, but the Almighty Ruler has seen lit to
bestow on her visitation of greater magnitude than upon any
other ■ her lakes, rivers, mountains, floods, hurricanes, blizzards,
are mightier than elsewhere. All these countries are known to us
and their histories are read with interest by the scholar, historian,
librarian, and schoolboy. But a knowledge of our own country
seems to be but little encouraged or possessed. In modern
times we have had issued at high prices, publications which have
been written by travellers who have spent very few days or
weeks amongst us. It is then, of the utmost importance that
everything tending to a knowledge of our own early days should
be encouraged. I know, and I know well that the time is
coming rapidily when we shall be recognised as a powe r which
will take a prominent part in settling great questions affecting the
commerce, peace, and social welfare of the whole world. I
would here like to say that these words were written by me some
time before the late unhappy disturbances which not only affected
our own people, but created a large amount of interest all over
the world commercial, and is a striking proof of the importance
of our country. It would be much out of place to further refer
to that unfortunate circumstance in our history, and I only
mention it now with much regret, and hope that peace and
general prosperity may soon follow in the wake of the stormy
troubles.
The history of Australia is the most remarkable of any
country in the Universe, inasmuch as her progress has been so
wonderful and so rapid; and because she has grown in one
century from a distant land—a place to which persons were sent
as a punishment—to a country now taking a very important
position in the markets of the older countries. With her
produce of wool, coal, gold, silver, copper, meat, leather, grain,
etc., etc., her cities, seaports, universities, schools, hospitals,
railways, and her people individually admitted to be equal in
intelligence, courage, and strength to those of any other country ;
and bearing in mind the progress of the past century she is
destined to become a great food and wool producing country.
One of the greatest orators, one of the most influential and
eloquent men of his day, and one who dearly loved his country
said : — £! That the day would come when by a combination of
England and her colonies with the great continent of
English speaking people America, we would be able to dictate to,
and insist upon terms of peace to the whole world.”
1 am one of those who believe that war is not necessary, and
when the time comes which has been so vigorously alluded toby my
late gifted countryman and friend, the Right Hon. W. B. Dailey,


Australia will play an important part in these great questions
by reason of her productiveness, enterprise and intelligence,
which in the near future will enable her to become an independ-
ent nation in herself. Certain it is that if our progress is as
great in the century to come as it has been in the century just
ended in our history, none of us can gauge the magnificence or
power of future Australia. Now in collecting matter for this
evening I have had at command many books, records and
friends • and I have endeavoured to place all before you correct
as to dates and incidents. Of course no living man could give
you his own experiences from the beginning of the colony’s
occupation, and it is a work of great interest to search from
volume to volume, to converse with well informed persons and
to arrange the work so that it may interest you now and in the
future. A very complete and excellent history was begun at
the Government Printing Office, compiled by Mr. E. B. Barton.
It was to have comprised fourteen volumes, one of which has
already been issued, but I regret to say that the issue of any
more seems doubtful.
We now come to the early voyages made in the century
previous to the one in which the intrepid Cook took
possession of New South Wales. It is supposed that some
of the north-west coast was known to the Portuguese, in 1542'
and in 1606. L. Y. de Torres sailed through the straits now
called after him. It was for upwards of 200 years the opinion of
philosophers and geographical students that some great continent
existed near the South Pole to balance the vast areas about the
North Pole , and it was during these two centuries the ambition
of adventurous navigators to sail the vast seas of the Southern
Hemisphere, and to explore the great unknown lands. In 1609
one Don Pedro Fernandos de Quiros, asserted to the Court of
Spain that he had spent fourteen years and travelled 60,000
miles by sea and land, prosecuting discoveries, and he begged for
assistance to start for what he said was a continent equal in size
to Europe, and the lesser Asia—a continent containing gold,
silver, spices and pearls, and occupied by people of different
colours. It is very probable as he sailed west from Peru, that
he alluded to the New Hebrides, and afterwards fell in with the
northern part of New-Guinea. Being ignorant of the seas
which divided these islands from New Holland he looked upon
the whole as one vast continent, especially as the New Hebrides
somewdiat answer his description. From the time of De Quiros
to the middle .of the seventeenth century there are at present no
known records of any further discoveries or explorations in this
great continent excepting a note by a Dutchman, who in 1616
fell in with part of our west coast, and gave it the name of
Eendraght land. In 1618 one Zeachen discovered part of the


coast and gave it the name of Arnheim and Dieman. Others
saw the coast and gave various names to it. In 1628 Peter
Carpenter, a Dutchman, explored that extensive gulf which we
now know as the Gulf of Carpentaria. In 1629 one Francis Pelsart
was wrecked amongst the islands of! the coast, when he and his
crew suffered much before they eventually and fortunately made
their way to Batavia. No doubt many discoveries were made in
these almost unknown seas by different voyagers, but it seems
certain that if any records were made they were destroyed by
the Dutch East India Company. In 1642 one Captain Abel
Jansen Tasman was sent from Batavia for the purpose of making
a complete survey of this country; but the only trace of his
discoveries is a map of New Holland sketched on the pavement
of the Stadt house at Amsterdam. His journal was never
published, and probably never was intended to be published.
About 40 years after Dampier’s discoveries in YanDiemans
land, he explored part of the northern coast of this continent,
and in consequence of his success he was chosen to command an
expedition to New Holland, and for that purpose he sailed from
England on the 14th January, 1699, in His Majesty’s ship
Roebuck. On August 15th he fell in with New Holland, and ex-
plored about 900 miles of its west coast, where we now have Roebuck
Bay, doubtless called after the ship. He describes the country as
low and sandy, and the natives as repulsive and miserable. Up to
this time discoveries were confined to the West coast, and to Dampier
we owe the greater portion of the knowledge of the character of
the country, its climate, soils, produce, inhabitants, etc. As the
discoveries of the Dutch were suppressed by the Dutch East
India Company, it then fell to the lot of old England through
that illustrious navigator, Captain James Cook, to explore the
Eastern coast for 2000 miles, land at various places, and with due
solemnities take possession for his Majesty, King George 111
and under the name of New South Wales. It was on
April 19th, 1770 that the great seaman first fell in with this
land. Leaving Cape Farewell, in New Zealand, in March, 1770,
he sailed away on the voyage to New South Wales, guided by
Tasman’s chart, which Cook believed was as nearly as possible
correct. Such was the great skill and care in preparing charts
in those early days that modern scientific navigators find them
most reliable. On April 15, Cook saw some birds which never
go far from land, and continued sounding all night. On the 16th
some small land birds perched on the rigging, but still the
sounding showed 120 fathoms. On the morning of the 18th
they saw a pair of Egmont hens which was a certain sign of
approaching land, and on the 19th April, 1770, they sighted
land and gave it the name of Point Hicks, because it was first
seen by Mr. Hicks, first lieutenant. Cook then sailed on North,


watching the coast and giving names to prominent features of
land such as Ram Head, after Ramhead, at the entrance to
Plymouth Sound, Cape Howe, Mount Dromedary, Point Upright,
Pigeon House, Cape St. George. On Saturday, April 28th, 1770,
the gallant captain worked his ship into Botany Bay, when,
after remaining some days he sailed North. On Sunday, May 6,
1770, about noon, he passed a bay or harbor in which there
appeared to be good anchorage and which he called Port Jackson.
1 read in one of the early records that in the morning a seaman
named Jackson, on the look-out at the mast head, reported to the
captain, who was at breakfast, that he saw an entrance to what
appeared to be good anchorage and that the captain jocularly
said “we will call it port Jackson,” but I prefer Cooks own
words especially as it would be nearer noon when they passed
Sydney Heads. The navigator sailed on north and at sunset
saw some broken headlands which he called Broken Bay. Cook
then sailed along our Northern coast taking careful observations
and giving names to places on the coast which to-day are known
as Port Stevens, Cape Moreton, Smoky Cape, Kepple Bay, Broad
Sound, Edgecombe Bay, (now Port Denison) and other bays and
headlands were seen and names given by which they are still
known. I now come to the period when it was a matter for
general discussion in England as to the wisdom or- otherwise of
sending convicts to Botany Bay. It w r as in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth that the first statute inflicting transportation as a
punishment was passed, but it was not till the year 1619 that
regular transportation took place. The convicts were sent to a
settlement in Virginia in America. The historian says of that
project:—“ This colony was begun under the unhappy influence of
a charter of a king who affected to be a legislator. The present
colonisation of New Holland is likely to be established under the
wiser policy of an act of the whole British Government founded
in visible expediency and matured by temperate deliberations.”
The same writer goes on to say; (and please remember that this
was written before the occupation of this colony by the first
fleet) —“ But the future existance of such a colony is by some
regarded as a visionary event and deprecated by others as a
probable source of unhappiness to the parent state. * * *
And there are others who look upon the forming of a new
settlement amongst an uncivilised people as impracticable with-
out committing an act unjust in itself and in its circumstances
■calamitous and sanguinary. * * * To time however must
be left the fulfilling and overturning of these arguments. Time
will show how far it may be entitled to the approbation of the
judicious and disinterested, by either adding to the acquirements
of philosophy or pointing out new sources of national wealth.
Time will show how far the knowledge of these lately dis-
7


covered parts of the globe may be directed to enhance
the comforts and add to the lights of polished society
as well as of their own uncivilized possession; and how far it may
tend to the general happiness of mankind and the glory of the.;
Being whose providence has reserved the discovery of them
imperfect as it is to the present generation. ” Time has indeed
shown a marvellous development of what was then looked upon
as impracticable and unwise. It has shown a most wonderful
advancement in civilisation and commerce, the greatest yet re-
corded in the world’s history. So much then for the little known
of the country. In 1786 the commissioners of His Majesty’s
navy advertised for a certain number of vessels for the purpose
of conveying convicts to Botany Bay, New South Wales, Six
transport ships, the Alexander, Scarborough, Charlotte, Lady
Penryhn, Prince of Wales, and Friendship with the store ships
Fishburn, Borrowdale, and Golden Grove, were chosen, also the
Sirius, a ship of 20 guns to which was attached the pendent of
Arthur Phillip, Esq., who was appointed Governor of the colony;
and the Supply, a brig under command of Henry L. Ball. The
following short poem from the Whitehall Evening Fost, on the
21st November, 1786, will give an idea of one class of writing in
the English press, having reference to the new colony:—
Let no one think much of trifling expense,
Who knows what may happen a hundred years hence,
The loss of America what can repay
New colonies seek for at Botany Bay;
Of those precious souls who for nobody care,
It seems a large cargo the Kingdom can spare;
To ship off a gross or two, make no delay,
They cannot too soon go to Botany Bay.
They go on an island to take special charge,
Much warmer than Britian and ten times as large ;
No custom house duties, no freightage to pay
And tax free they’ll live when at Botany Bay;
The total number of persons aboard this small fleet was 1,033 all
told, and nothing worthy of note occurred till they arrived at their
destination on the 20th January, 1788, when the whole of the
vessels came to anchor in Botany Bay. After an examination of
the country around, Phillip determined upon exploring Port
Jackson and Broken Bay. He proceeded in open boats and after
passing uninteresting portions of the rugged coast, was much
surprised and delighted when he saw Port Jackson and decided
at once to here fix the future seat of his government. Returning
to Botany Bay orders were given for the fleet to proceed to the
new-found harbour. When Captain Hunter was bringing the
Sirius out to follow Phillip to Port Jackson, La Perouse entered
Botany Bay with the two French ships Le Boussole and L’Astrolabe
on a voyage of discovery. An interesting reference is made to


this circumstance in the London Globe newspaper, on January 26,
1888, in which the writer says ; “It is not generally realized that
a matter of no more than three days prevented New South Wales
from becoming French instead of British territory, and very
possibly from remaining so to this hour. * * * * It was
a race to Botany Bay between Captain Phillip riding for England
and La Perouse riding for France, and Captain Phillip’s fleet beat
the Boussole and L’Astrolabe by just three days. La Perouse
arriving and finding the first English Governor in possession,
submitted to the inevitable with national courtesy and sailed off,
to be lost on a coral reef, leaving his fate wrapped in mystery for
40 years. The birth of New South Wales as a colony took place
therefore under more than ordinarily romantic circumstances and
the whole history of Australasia, in a large sense, has grown upon
that accident. “ The British ships having safely arrived in Port
• Jackson, the people landed at a spot at the head of the Cove near
a small stream of water. It is the spot as near as I can fix it where
the Exchange building now stands in Bridge-street. On the
following day January 27, 1788, the Union Jack washoisted on the
volleys were fired, the healths of His Majesty and the
Royal family were drunk, and thus was the birth of the infant
■colony celebrated” —the infant who then, distant from the parent
by so many months’ long voyage is now only separated by days.
The events occurring in one place being spoken in the other in
a few hours, thus realizing Shakespeares “ Girdle round the earth
in 40 minutes.”
Government House—not the Government House we now know
—but a portable canvas house brought over for the Governor, was
erected on the east side of the Cove which was named Sydney.
The stock consisting of one bull, four cows, one calf, seven mares
and horses were taken to a spot which was cleared for a farm,
and which is now Woolloomooloo. Plants and seeds which had
been brought from home or were procured at the Cape or Rio
Janeiro were planted. On the 7th February, 1788, the Governor
caused His Majesty’s commission appointing him Governor and
Captain-General to be read, together withletters patent for establish-
ing civil and criminal courts. He also delivered a well chosen
address to the convicts, promising encouragement to those who
were well conducted, and severe punishment to those who were
determined to act otherwise. During this week 14 marriages
were solemnised, and, notwithstanding the advice of the Governor,
several convicts absconded. Thieving was complained of, and in
spite of contrary orders the sailors from the transports frequently
brought spirits ashore. A muster of the convicts took place
when a number were found missing. It was proved that some
of them made their way to Botany Bay hoping to be taken on
board the French ships which were supposed to be short handed.


A number of them returned in a half starved condition- — a
woman and man have never since been heard of. It may
be said to the honour of the French commander that he
refused to take any of them on board his ships. Hoping to put
a stop to the absconders or the landing of spirits, a court
assembled on February 11th, 1788, when three persons were
tried, one receiving 150 lashes, one was confined for a week on a
small allowance of bread and water on a rocky island, and to
this circumstance the convicts gave the expressive, but not
classical name of “ Pinch Gut,” to what we now know as Port
Denison. Punishments in those days at home, and in the
settlement were severe, and for what are now trivial offences,
and punishable by smallfinesor a fewday’s imprisonment, transpor-
tation, flogging, or even death was the penalty. Thus we have a
record to the effect that one man was, for stealing seven pounds of
flour sentenced to death, but reprieved on the gallows, on condition
that he accepted the position of common executioner. I was
amused by the remarks of a very old settler in this colony who
came out “ for his country’s good.” He said, “why they sent
me out here for shootin’ a rabbit, and now they want to tax me
for not shootin’ of em.”
Because of the inadequate provision for a proper control
and management of individuals, there were many cases of
insubordination and much severe punishment, probably
amounting to cruelty. Three witnesses who were convicted of
perjury were sentenced to stand in the pillory with their ears
nailed to the rostrum, on the execution of which the mob greeted
them with the true English accompaniment of dirt and rotten
eggs.
In March 1804, at Castle Hill, between Parramatta and
Windsor, an insurrection broke out among the convicts employed
on the Government agricultural establishment. They numbered
233 men, armed with muskets and weapons of all kinds taken
from the settlers. The convicts marched towards the Hawkes-
bury hoping there to be joined by a sufficient number of convicts
employed in the farms to be enabled to overcome the military.
The Governor went to Parramatta, and Major Johnson with 85
men went in pursuit of the rebels and overtook them at Vinegar
Hill. An engagement commenced but immediately the troops
fired the convicts fled. The ringleader was hanged on the spot,
some slain and others flogged, and thus it ended as all such
attempts to upset the law of the country generally end. The
men, the historian relates, were influenced by the oratory of a few
political exiles, and it is not the only instance of men being
induced to run into danger and trouble when excited by others,
who would never be content to abide by the laws of the land in
which they live, or to earn a living by steady industry.


A very large proportion of the reading matter in the early
information given of this country is devoted to the description of
the soil, animals, birds, climate, and timber, the whole of
which is to us now familiar. But we can readily understand the
wonder created in the minds of the first visitors and settlers
Nature's strange birds, beasts and plants to her neophyte dear,
That rare and grotesque live and vegetate here.
The grass tree and bottle tree flourishing green
Where the belly pouched tribes of the forest are seen,
And the web-footed platypus, nature’s dwarf droll,
With the bill of a duck and the fur of a mole.
The formation of the continent, or rather its general
appearance if one could see it all in one view, is remarkable,
inasmuch as a large proportion of its high lands are on the east
and south-east coast, and nearly all our larger rivers head in the
mountains almost in sight of the Pacific Ocean on the eastern coast
and flow thousands of miles through the continent to the west,
where they empty themselves into the sea.
Now our infant colony was fairly established, and under
the rule of Governor Phillip, who seems to have been a man
particularly qualified for the position by reason of his tact, by
reason of his perseverance and by reason of his submission to
share in the trials and privations to which the settlers were
subjected. The whole available men, convicts and others, engaged
in clearing, building, and making preparations which were
necessary for the shelter and comfort of the new inhabitants of
the strange land. Yery unfavourable weather was experienced,
and unfortunately during the storm a considerable number of the
small flock of sheep were killed by lightning, and we find that
on the first of May following, the whole live stock possessed
consisted of: —One horse, three mares, three colts, two bulls, five
cows, twenty-nine sheep, nineteen goats, seventy-four pigs, five
rabbits, eighteen turkeys, twenty-nine geese, thirty-five ducks,,
one hundred and twenty-two fowls, and eighty seven chickens.
Some time after this two bulls and four cows strayed from
the little herd. The Government was informed of the loss two
days afterwards, and though every exertion was made to recover
them they were given up as lost, but in 1795, some prisoners
heard the natives speak of having seen some cattle. The
Governor being so informed headed a party which set out from
Parramatta, and after travelling two days, to his surprise and
satisfaction, found a fine herd of cattle upwards of forty in
number grazing on what we know now as Oowpasture River at
Camden.
In 1790, the whole of the people of the settlement became
very anxious on the question of supplies. It became the painful


duty of the Governor to serve out rations from one to three on
the afternoon of each day. The week’s rations consisted, for
each individual, of four pounds of hour, two and a half pounds of
pork, one and a half pounds of rice. The working hours were
reduced from sunrise till one o’clock with the usual intervals ku
meals. Then the rations were further reduced to two and a half
pounds of flour, two pounds of rice, two pounds of pork, and the
'Governor had the same as the others.
Amongst the incidents in connection with this short allow-
ance may be mentioned the fact of a convict having been found
dead, and the medical evidence proved that he died from want
of nourishment. It was also proved that he had saved his pro-
visions for the purpose of selling them at the high prices then
Tiding, and had actually starved himself to death for the sake of
money. Another man cooked the whole of his flour and ate it
at one meal. Whether from indifferent cooking or inadequate
digestive powers is not stated, but he died.
In “ Barton’s History of Hew South Wales theie is a very
touching description of the arrival of the long looked for ship
Lady Julianoe. So anxious were the inhabitants for her arrival
that a party of seamen were located at South Head for the pur-
pose of signalling with a flag the approach of any ship, and the
historian says At length the clouds of misfortune began to
separate, and on the evening of January 3, 1790, a cry of
‘ the flag’s up !’ resounded in every direction. I was sitting in
vmy hut musing when the convicts clamoring in the street diew
my attention. I opened my door and saw several women with
■ children in their arms running to and fro with distracted looks
congratulating each other and kissing their infants with the
most abundant and extravagant marks of fondness. I needed no
more, but instantly started out and ran to the hill, where, by the
assistance of my pocket glass, my hopes were realised. My next
door neighbour, a brother officer, was with me but we could not
speak. We wrung each other by the hand with eyes and hearts
■ overflowing.”—He goes on to say. « The weather was wet and
tempestuous, but the body is delicate only when the soul is at
ease. We pulled through the wind and rain, the anxiety of our
sensations every moment redoubling. At last we read the woid
“ London” on her stern. “Pull away lads, she’s from old Eng-
land ! a few strokes more and we shall be aboard. Hurrah foi
news from our friends.”
The Governor had previously formed a settlement at Kose-
'hill, now known as Parramatta and having seen during one of
his excursions, into what was then the interior, a range of
mountains to the westward —they were what we call the Blue
Mountains, which can be seen from parts of the present city and
suburbs—hoped that a river might be found taking its source


under the base of the mountains, and set out with a small party
and six days provisions, but failed to reach either the mountains
or the river. It was about this time in consequence of the
very severe drought which prevailed in the colony, and the
prospect of not being able to grow sufficient food for the settle-
ment that Governor Phillip wisely induced the Imperial
Government to form a settlement on Norfolk Island which had
been highly spoken of by Cook. Accordingly Lieutenant King was
sent with twenty seven persons in all, to occupy this fertile spot
which in 1791 produced 1000 bushels of grain. It is hard to
understand why the Secretary for State ordered the abandon-
ment of this Island and the sending of the convicts to New
Norfolk in Van Lie mans Land. It was again occupied in 1825
during the rule of Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane,
By this time Governor Phillip had got matters into what
we call pretty good working order. Spots of ground were
cleared, vegetables and crops became more plentiful and those
amongst the convicts who had learned trades were put to work.
Buildings were erected. The keel of a vessel waslaidin Lecember,
1788. She was built for the Parramatta trade and was called
“ The Rosehill Packet.” Sydney was called after Lord Sydney,
Hawkesbury after Lord Hawkesbury, Richmond after the Duke
of Richmond, Mulgrave after Lord Mulgrave. All members of
William Pitt’s ministry.
Sutherland in Botany Bay was called after a seaman of that
name who was buried ashore during Cook’s first visit.
There was still considerable trouble with the convicts, many
of whom possessed an insane idea that they could reach China
overland. An amusing incident is recorded of one absconder
who spent several days wandering in the bush trying to find his
way to China or some other place where there was no work.
Returning much emaciated, he was asked how he found his way
back. He replied, “ That paper compass was no good at all, but
I kept my face towards the place where the sun came from, and
if I had not the Lord on my side I would have been lost
entirely.” We presume from this that he was in what was then
called the interior, somewhere about Burwood, and considering
that China in a direct line would be nearly 5000 miles distant,
he made what the sailors call “ very bad weather of it. ’On
-January 4th, 1789, His Majesty’s birthday, the Governor enter-
tained the officers at dinner in the New Government House, and
some of the convicts were permitted to play Farquhar’s comedy,
“The Recruiting Officer.” This was before Barrington’s
account of the performance of “ The Revenge of the Hotel,”
which was on January 16th, 1796. The convicts were
cautioned that any misconduct would be punished severely
in addition to the closing of the place in which they were


permitted to have their performance. Some attended,
it may be presumed, for the purpose of carrying on their old trade
at theatres—pick-pocketing, kc !—but their object in being there
was to see who was present so that they might rob their houses,
which they did on the second night.
An interesting and appropriate prologue was spoken on the
occasion, and was supposed to have been written by one of the
convicts. Some quotations from it may be familiar to you, but
as many of you have not heard it throughout I will quote it in
full:—
From distant climes o’er widespread seas we come
Though not with much eclat or beat of drum ;
True patriots all, for be it understood
We left our country, for our country’s good.
No private views disgraced our generous zeal,
What urged our travels was our country’s weal;
And none will doubt but that our emigration
Has proved most useful to the British nation.
But, you inquire, what could our breasts inflame
What in the practice of our former days,
Could shape our talents to exhibit plays;
Your patience, sirs, some observations made
You’ll grant us, equal to the scenic trade,
He who to midnight ladders is no stranger,
You’ll own will make an admirable Ranger;
To seek Mack Heath we have not far to roam,
And sure in filch I shall be quite at home.
Unrivalled, there none will dispute my claim
To high preeminence and exalted fame,
As oft on Gadshill we have ta’en our stand
When ’twas so dark you could not see your hand;
Some true bred Falstaff we may hope to start,
Who, when well bolstered will play his part;
The scene to vary we will try in time
To treat you with a little pantomime.
Here light and easy Columbines are found,
And well tried Harlequins with us abound ;
From durance vile our precious selves to keep
We often had recourse to the flying leap;
To a black face have sometime owed escape,
And Hounslow Heath has proved the worth of crape;;
But how, you ask, can we e'er hope to soar
Above those scenes and rise to Fragic lore.
Too oft’ alas ! We’ve forced the unwilling tear
And petrified the heart with real fear;
Macbeth a harvest of applause will reap
For some of us I fear have murdered sleep ;
His lady too with grace will sleep and walk,
Our females have been used at night to walk,
Sometimes indeed, so various is our art
An actor may improve and mend his part.


“ Give me a horse !” bawls Richard like a drone,
We’d find a man would help himself to one,
Grant us your favor put us to the test,
To gain your smiles we’ll do our very best;
And without dread of future turnkey lockitts
Thus in an honest way still pick your pockets.
The price of admission was one shilling paid either in money,,
flower, meat, or spirits, according to the market price.
It would occupy volumes to relate the incidents which
occurred in the early part of the settlement of the country, and to
give even a summary would require much more time than we
have at our disposal. I propose therefore relating to you circum-
stances which occurred during the first years of our existence, and
which I have selected from books expensive and difficult of access.
With such a population as Governor Phillip had to manage,
and the circumstances surrounding the early occupation, one can-
not fail to admire his tact and bravery under many trying
circumstances. He was particularly anxious that the white
population should remain at peace with the natives, and he made
many excursions and saw a good deal of them with this object in
view. We have it on record that in March, 1790, the Governor
with a party of marines and officers went to Manly Beach. He
recognised amongst a large number of natives present one
Bennillong, an aboriginal who had been with the white people in
the settlement and who introduced the Governor to several of his
distinguished countrymen. The Governor stepped forward to
meet one of them, holding out both his hands, which action the
black possibly misunderstood, and fearing that he was going to be
seized drove a spear through the Governor’s shoulder a little above
the collar bone. The patient was placed on board his boat and.
taken back to the settlement.
The early settlers were several times reduced to a state of
semi-starvation, but thanks to the energy and example of the
Governor, farms were established at Rose Hill, Toongabbie, and
on the Hawkesbury. The earliest settlers on the Hawkesbury
and the generation that followed them are believed to have been,
the finest race of men in the world. This was possibly due to the
fact that they took less adulterated food and drink, that they
produced by their own labour what they ate, and their rest was
natural and refreshing. Hence it is that in that part of the
country we still have centenarians and others approaching that
age. To give some idea of the opinions formed by some persons
of the prospects of the success of colonisation here, I quote you an
extract from a letter from an officer, dated Port Jackson, April
14th, 1790 ; —“The country is, past all dispute a wretched one—
a very wretched one, and totally incapable of yielding to Great
Britain a return for colonising it. There is no wood fit for naval:


purposes, no fibrous grass or plant from which cordage can be
made, no substance which can aid or improve the labors of the
manufacturers, no mineral productions, no esculent vegetable
worth the care of collecting and transporting to other climes, and
lastly which is of the most serious consideration, no likelihood
that the colony will be able to support itself in grain or animal
food for many years to come, so that a regular annual expense is
entailed on the mother country as long as it shall be kept.”
On the departure of Governor Phillip, December 11th, 1792,
the reins of government were handed over to Lieutenant Grose,
and he held them until December, 1794. In September, 1795,
Governor Hunter arrived and remained in power till 1800. A
large amount of work was performed during his reign in making
roads, building houses with stone, and the first school-house was
erected. Important discoveries were made in the interior,
and round our coast. Captain King succeeded Governor Hunter,
and it was during his term of office that the before-mentioned
battle at Vinegar Hill occurred. In 1801 there was a serious
flood in the Hawkesbury destroying over £20,000 worth of
grain and other property. This was a great blow to the young
country and its industrious pioneers.
In 1803 the first newspaper was published, the “ Sydney
Gazette.” In 1806, King resigned his office. His successor
Governor Bligh as subsequent events will prove, does not appear
to have been capable of managing the affairs of the colony,
considering the class to which the bulk of its population
belonged. His conduct to the convicts and settlers amounted in
many instances to cruelty, while he was haughty and overbearing
to the officers and others holding good positions in the colony.
This culminated at last in a quarrel with one of the leading
colonists, John Macarthur, who was arrested and committed for
trial. The magistrates disagreed and the court was adjourned.
The Governor immediately sent for Major Johnson commanding
the New South Wales corps. The next morning Macarthur was
apprehended for being illegally at large. On Johnson’s arrival
in town he had a petition presented him signed by the whole of
the leading settlers and officers begging him to arrest the
Governor and assume command and undertaking to support him
with their fortunes and their lives. Fortified with the petition
Johnson got his regiment formed and marched to Government
House with bayonets fixed, band playing, and colours flying.
The Governor’s daughter, widow of Lieutenant Putland, alone
resisted the entrance of the soldiers. Governor Bligh was
arrested and subsequently placed on board the Porpoise with his
family, he undertaking to proceed straight to England, which
promise he did not keep. However, in the course of time he
arrived in England. Johnson was charged with mutiny, and


was tried by Court Martial at Chelsea Hospital in England, in-
May, 1811. He pled “ not guilty.” After a careful trial and
exhaustive cross examination the court found him guilty of the
act of Mutiny, and sentenced him to be cashiered. This sentence
was spoken of as inadequate to the enormity of the crime,
but taking into consideration the circumstances which existed
during the administration of Governor Bligh, both as affecting
the tranquility of the colony, and the necessity for immediate
action the Prince Regent was pleased to acquiese in the sentence
of the court.
The affairs of the colony after Bligh’s arrest, were managed
by Johnson, Eoveaux, and Paterson, successively, and no incident
of any consequence occured during their time of office. In
December 1809, Governor Lachlan Macquarie arrived and took
possession He was selected by the Home Government as a man
capable of restoring peace and order in the young country, and
of managing the affairs so as to improve the prospects of the
people. And it may be here stated that it would have been
hardly possible to have selected a more successful man. Many
of the old public buildings bear his name and many miles of
roads were constructed during his administration. The list of
works, including barracks, stores, hospitals, churches, schools,
wharves, etc., fills ten closely printed pages of a Parliamentary
report. Soon after the discovery by Wentworth Lawson and
Blaxland, of Bathurst Plains, Governor Macquarie and his
lady paid a visit to this new land and expressed the opinion that
the country was adapted for grazing and farming. He drove a
stake in the ground as a site for a town where the city of
Bathurst now stands.
Governor Macquarie was succeeded by Governor Brisbane, in
December, 1821.
Though the colony was subjected during Brisbane’s term of
office, to considerable drought extending over the small part then
occupied, numerous excursions were made in the interior, and
settlements formed in the then distant parts.
Governor Darling succeeded Brisbane in 1825.
During his term of office large grants of land were made,
notably to the Australian Agricultural Company. The land
instead of being granted free was subsequently to be put up for
sale according to the valuation of the Surveyor General.
Many acts of insubordination took place.
The Legislative Council was established and held its first
meeting.
Darling was never popular, and as there were now three
newspapers which naturally enough took different sides on
different questions, there was newspaper war, arrests and duels.
Between the departure of Governor Darling and the arrival


of Governor Burke the position was held by Colonel Patrick
Lindesay. From this time during all the periods of different
governors, the history of the colony, though not without much
interest, possesses no features worthy of being specially noted
this evening. It is well, however, to remember how different the
position of Governor was in the very early days as compared to
the present time. Without Executive Council, without
responsible advisers, without civil courts, the governor then
had to personally manage the whole of the public affairs by
his own head and hand. One instance may be mentioned
which will perhaps better explain the duties and powers of
the Governor. A proclamation was issued forbidding any
person to cross the Hawkesbury River without a permit signed
by the Governor’s own hand. Although the Governor of to-
day has the assistance of the experienced advisers who form the
Executive Council, he must, to successfully govern the colony,
be a man possessed of many high qualifications, tact and dis-
cretion, so that he may faithfully represent his Sovereign,
gain the approbation of the community generally, and, in short,
rule firmly but justly in this great land.
We shall long remember Lord Carrington who was ever the
friend of the poor and needy, the companion of the industrious
and prosperous, a capable representative of his Queen, and in
every sense of the word a nobleman. And 1 do believe that he
and his amiable lady when leaving us felt as we did that our
hearts were in our voices. And if Lord Carrington’s prophetic
words to me are realised, we shall find his equal in Lord Jersey, who
with his talented lady is making sure ground by the interest
they take in the management and welfare of the country’s
social and political affairs.
Because I am unable to record every individual interest
in the early history of Australia, what I have said, and
will say to you, will naturally enough be found to be
somewhat disjointed. I want you to be familiar with the early
days, and I want you to imagine if possible by contrast what the
■manners and customs of the early inhabitants were how differ -
ent from the present day. They had their severe trials, and they
ihad their enjoyments. Horse racing was indulged in to a
considerable extent, and possibly once or twice a year races
were held. In Sydney the racecourse was wdiere Hyde Park
now is. A relation of mine has a cup in his possession won in
1819, which is by some supposed to have been the first cup ever
run for in the colony. It bears the following inscription which
goes to bear out the theory of its antiquity.
Pledge from the cup this first Australian prize,
May each succeeding year the races bring,
That breeding horses from these sports may rise,
Health to the patron, and long live the King.


Most of the trade of the colony was carried on in spirits
and many of the buildings were paid for in rum.
I have a document in my possession dated August, 1812,
wherein Governor Macquarie contracts with one William
Roberts for the forming of George street in the town of Sydney,
forty feet wide, from near Hunter street to Mr. Wilshire’s cottage
on Brickfield Hill, for the due performance of which the con-
tractor was to receive 400 gallons of spirits and be permitted to
purchase two bullocks from the Government herd for which he
was to be allowed eighteen months credit ; terms which I am
happy to say do not prevail at the present time.
After the discovery and occupation of the country
immediately beyond the Blue mountains, and the opening of what
is called the new country from the county of Argyle by Lake
George and the Manaro Plains, those whom we number now
with the early pioneers began to occupy the country. And any
of the old colonists now surviving must feel a sort of regret at
the difference in the class of hospitality now extended to
travellers and visitors as compared with the good old days.
Possibly we have benefited as a nation by the introduction
of population, of wealth, and of knowledge, but if there is any-
thing to lament in the altered circumstances of the country it is
the decrease in the kindly welcome which every traveller
received. Though the dwellings were rude and homely the food
was wholesome, and the welcome hearty. In those days, with-
out railways, electric telegraphs, and rapid postal communication,
the traveller was looked upon as one bringing news from all
parts, and no pleasanter hours are spent in the magnificient
mansions of the aristocracy of to-day than were spent in slab
cottages of the early settlers. Many of us can remember in the
olden times that the sound of the stockwhip was the signal for
the preparation of the meal and for the reception, with a genuine
feeling of joy, of the traveller whoever he may be. And instead
of the liveried servant answering your ring at the door and
handing your card to the master or mistress, one received a
genuine old fashioned and cordial greeting, with a shake of the
hand and “ come inside.”
And as a proof of the high opinion in which young
Australians held their country, even in the very early days, I
may mention to you that a young Australian in London on being-
asked his opinion of a grand shop on Ludgate Hill, simply
replied : “It is not equal to Big Cooper’s in Sydney.”
A young lady of the same period when asked if she would
like to go to England, said : “ Ho, I should be afraid because of
the number of thieves there.”
This is about on a par with the ideas that some English people
of the present day have of the colonies, when they imagine that
most of us out here are all black.


The town of Sydney by this time had assumed considerable
proportions. Streets were formed, and with the increase o
population came an increase of buildings both as regards numbers
Li, and elegance. A story worth relating is recorded o »
wealthy merchant who, at enormous cost built for himse
mansion on a lofty sight near the town. About the time ot its
completion a person returned from England who had previous y
visited the colonies. After admiring the progress made in the
city and the numerous massive buildings he took the trouble to •
look over some documents in his possession, and found that the
mansion of the Sydney merchant aforesaid was built upon apiece
of Ground which he had Purchased on his previous visit. Ac g,
doubtless, upon legal advice, he entered into possession, the result
being that the builder of the mansion paid him a considerab e
sum travellers i n to the interior of this country had
difficulties to contend with such as we can hardly imagine, and it
is easily understood how much puzzled some of them must have
been by the remarkable formation of the country through which
they travelled, and those who went into the great interior foun ,
for hundreds, almost thousands of miles, the country so level and
of such sameness that it was difficult to tell which way the water
ran unless they came upon an actual water-couise or river,
of the first parties who explored the Western country on ie
Darling took a view from a remarkable mountain cal ed after a
late Surveyor-General, Mount Oxley. It happened at the time
of his visit that the country was suffering from a pro-
tracted drought and presented the appearance of a desert,
which he described on his return to Sydney, and said
that he had discovered from whence the sometimes prevail!
hot winds came. Another explorer looked from Mount Oxley when
the country was inundated—the Darling had spread for many
miles as it did during the late Bourke flood On his to
Sydney he reported the discovery of an inland sea. A " ofc
feature of the Western country which was a great puzzle to the
explorers was the River Macquarie which some of us have seen
or crossed at Wellington or Dubbo. When they endeavoured to
striker it lower down they found it had disappeaie .
know the Macquarie River spreads out into marshes. Oomi b
now to our own part of the country we find attempts were made
in 1816 to penetrate a tract called Bargo Brush lying o
east and south of the Cow Pastures for the purpose
fresh pasturage for the cattle, and a station was fixed on the
River P about which time Mr. Thrasby obtained permis-
sion to make a settlement between Mengong Range and the
Wolondilly River. We have now come near home, and many ot
us can remember when in Moss Yale the only building of any


pretensions was a bark hut still standing, and occupied by Billy
Moss after whom this place was called.
I must apologise to you for the apparently disjointed way in
which I have placed this address before you, but the difficulty
has been, having to gather information from so many different
sources and put so much matter together in the form of a
narrative. I have been actuated by the best and kindest feeling
towards you and your institution. I have been encouraged by a>
sincere and undying love for my country, and I cannot better
conclude than by quoting a few lines from a poem written in
England many years ago by a visitor :
‘ ‘ Beautiful land farewell, when toil and strife
And all the sighs, and all the sins of life
Shall come about me ; when the light of truth
Shall scatter the bright mists that dazzled youth;
And memory muse in sadness on the past,
And mourn for pleasures far too sweet to last.
How often shall I long for some green spot
Where, not remembering and remembered not ;
With no false verse to deck my lying bust,
With no fond tear to vex my mouldering dust•
This busy brain may find its grassy shrine,
And sleep untroubled in a shade like thine.






1 (\ * p
bl&uro
Fbr;
•
■
*
♦-. : ‘
■
**
*
,
,
-




PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF
“ T HE SYDNEY STOCK AND STATION JOURNAL,
SYDNEY.
