

• AUSTRALIAN
• INDUSTRIES
• PROTECTION
• LEAGUE
Ship-building
and
Other Naval Needs
in
Australia


FOREWORD
SHIP-BUILDING
AND
OTHER NAVAL NEEDS
IN
AUSTRALIA.
At this date, —January 1941, —a demand for the
building of Ships in Australia is insistent all over the
Continent.
This is a recent development. It indicates an interest
in the subject which the Australian Industries Pro-
tection League has been endeavouring to stimulate
throughout the last four years.
In this Pamphlet the more important efforts made
by the League to secure attention to Australia's Naval
needs are set out in a connected form. Although some
minor details have been necessarily omitted, the State-
ment shows when, —and on what lines, —the agitation
was begun, and how it was continued.
The facts are taken from letters and other printed
matter in the possession of the League. The Pamphlet
was compiled by Mr. J. Hume-Cook, Secretary to the
Australian Industries Protection League.
T. S. NETTLEFOLD,
President.
Australian Industries Protection League.
422 Collins Street,
Melbourne, January, 1941


INTRODUCTION.
The subject of Ship-building in Australia is not a new
one with the Australian Industries Protection League.
Nearly four years ago the League began a campaign
for various Australian Naval needs, —including the
construction of large-size Ships. That campaign has
unceasingly continued ever since. Amongst others
addressed on the subject were: All Members of the
Commonwealth Parliament, all State Premiers; several
large Organisations, and every leading Newspaper in
Australia.
In addition, many public addresses were given by the
Secretary to the League; Naval architects and probable
Ship-builders were interviewed, and letters sent, and
statements made to Newspapers whenever the oppor-
tunity offered. So it is that, to-day, the story of the
League's efforts may be of interest to the general public.
APPROACH TO THE PRIME MINISTER.
The first move made by the League was to place its
views and suggestions before the Commonwealth Gov-
ernment. By correspondence,—beginning on sfh
March 1937, —the Prime Minister was asked to give
consideration to the undermentioned Naval needs.
A. The Construction of a Naval Base, — on Singapore
lines, —at Darwin, or such other place on the Australian
Coast as may be approved by the Naval Authorities.
(Note. —" Singapore Lines" meant, —as the corres-
pondence makes clear: the stationing of a
fleet of War Ships at whatever place was
chosen.)
SHIP-BUILDING
AND
OTHER NAVAL NEEDS
IN
AUSTRALIA.


B. The establishment, or subsidising of. Ship-building
Yards, and, —
C. The provision of adequate Dock-Yards.
In support of these proposals,—or in reply to points
raised against them, —various arguments were from
time to time advanced.
For instance, —in answer to Ministerial Statements
made in the letter acknowledging the League's first
communication, it was said: —
"The construction, by Britain, of a Naval Base at
Singapore, to which you refer, is a perfect illustration
of the principles underlying the League's suggestion.
There are, however, some added advantages about the
Australian Scheme. They appear in the statements that
follow:
The Singapore Base was designed for the
protection of British possessions in the East, especially
India. To a degree it was also meant to serve Aus-
tralia and New Zealand. Nevertheless, if there arose a
simultaneous need to act for India and Australia, a
division of forces would weaken the assistance that
could be given in each case.
On the other hand a Naval Station at Darwin, or some
other chosen point on the Australian Coast, could give
protection to Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea and
the Islands of the Pacific. Moreover, in the event of
the Suez Canal being blocked, Naval and other aid
could be more quickly sent to India or Malaya than from
the British Isles."
In the same letter of reply,—on the matter of large-
scale Ship-building, and the provision of Dock-Yards
big enough and properly equipped to overhaul or repair
all kinds of Ships,—from battleships to ocean liners,—
the League added:
"Another consideration of very great importance (in
the defence of Australia) is the building up of a larger
population. There is but one way in which this can be
speedily done, namely by the establishment of Indus-
tries in which immigrants to the Commonwealth would
find permanent and profitable employment. Ship-
building is one of the greatest of these Industries, and,
with all its subsidiaries, would find work and wages for


a large number of people. With adequate Dock-Yards
as well, the maritime position of Australia, —both in
peace and in war, —would be greatly strengthened.
Indeed, nothing else the Commonwealth could do would
so rapidly and permanently achieve the end in view."
The implementing of the three proposals above-
mentioned would, it was recognised, involve a large out-
lay of money. On this matter the League took the view
that as Defence was, —by its very nature, —Imperial in
character, the expenditure should be adjusted to the
capacity to meet the obligation. A fourth suggestion
was therefore included in these words:
"The newly stated Defence policy of Great Britain
induces the thought that, say, five or six per cent, of
the proposed expenditure of £400,000,000 might,—
with advantage to the Empire, —be diverted to Aus-
tralia."
Some seven weeks after the League's first letter, the
attention of the Commonwealth Government was again
drawn to the Naval needs of Australia. In a communi-
cation to the Acting Minister for Defence, dated
27/4/37, the League prefaced a re-statement of its
proposals and arguments as under: —
". . . . The League is pleased to learn that, —at the
forthcoming Imperial Conference, —'a review is to be
made of the measures to secure greater Empire co-
operation in Defence/ It was in the hope of such a
proceeding that the League ventured to make certain
suggestions to the Prime Minister which may be briefly
recapitulated."
A formal acknowledgment was received on 3/5/37,
and, a month later, —2/6/37, —a letter reached the
League, saying:
"With further reference to your letter of 27th April,
in which you conveyed the views of the Australian
Industries Protection League in regard to measures for
greater Empire Co-operation in Defence, I desire to
inform you that the suggestions put forward have been
noted by the Government, which appreciates the interest
displayed by your League in this important matter.
Further consideration to the proposals of your
League has been deferred until a decision on the prin


ciple of this and other matters relating to Defence has
been given by the Imperial Conference/'
As to what took place at the Imperial Conference the
League has no knowledge. But, —inasmuch as nothing
appeared to have been done, —it was decided to keep
on placing the Naval needs of Australia before the
public. This line of action was constantly followed for
rather more than a year,—when the Commonwealth
Government was again approached, and the subject
re-opened in the following manner. In a letter to the
Prime Minister, —dated 23/5/38, —it was said;—
"Some fourteen months ago the abovenamed League
had the honour to draw your attention to the necessity
for Ship-building in Australia.
At a later stage,—it is understood, —your Govern-
ment ordered an Enquiry into the question.
As the League is deeply interested, I am directed to
ask if such an Enquiry has been made. In addition, it
would be esteemed a favour to know the scope of the
Enquiry,—if proceeding,—or the results, if closed."
Three weeks later, 14/6/38, the League was sent this
reply;
"Enquiries are at present being made by the Depart-
ment of Trade and Customs with the object of obtain-
ing information as to the extent to which Australian
Ship-builders require assistance in order to extend the
present scope of ship-building in Australia."
In November, —having heard nothing more from the
Federal Government, —the League resolved to re-open
the whole case. This it did in a letter to the then Prime
Minister the Hon. J. A. Lyons, M.P., dated
23/11/38. The full text reads:—
"Dear Sir,
A NAVAL BASE. SHIP-BUILDING YARDS.
AND
DOCKING FACILITIES.
"The establishment of large-scale Ship-building
Yards, and the provision of Docking Facilities in Aus-
tralia, —have previously been the subject of correspond-
ence between your Government and the abovenamed
League.


Initially, these matters were raised by the League in
March 1937. Subsequent events in Europe and else-
where have reinforced the arguments then advanced.
It is now clearer than ever that, —in defence, —Aus-
tralia is expected to rely almost wholly on her own
resources. This fact induces the League to again draw
attention to the suggestions it offered over eighteen
months ago.
It will be recalled that three main points were put
before your Ministry, namely:—
1. The establishment of a Naval Base at Darwin, —
or at such other point on the Australian Coast as may
be approved by the Naval Authorities.
2. The establishment, —or subsidising,—of Ship-
building Yards, and
3. Docking Facilities at approved situations within
Australia.
The purposes to be served by the adoption of the
measures proposed and the arguments in their support,
may be set out as follows:
A NAVAL BASE.
1. A Base, —on the lines at Singapore,—would pro-
vide protection for Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea
and other British possessions in the South Seas.
2. In the special circumstances and possibilities of
to-day, the Base at Singapore,—and the squadrons
allotted thereto, —may be unable to protect the parts of
the Empire just named. For example, if the need arose
for simultanteous action in guarding India and Australia,
—the division of forces would militate against success
in either direction.
3. The sea-girt situation of the Commonwealth, and
its dependence upon sea-going craft for the transport
of goods and people, render it imperative that the
defence of sea routes be given serious attention. With-
out actually attacking Australia, an enemy Naval Force
could smash up Interstate Shipping, and, of course,
intercept and capture or destroy all Australian Ships
attempting to carry on overseas trade. These dangers
have been noted, —and commented upon,—by no less
an Authority than Sir Ragnar Colvin. In a recent
address he said:—


Tor every ton of goods carried by land, sixteen tons
are carried in ships between Australian Ports. Thus, —
without an invasion, —and without a single soldier wet-
ting his feet, —an enemy could render Australia incap-
able of affecting the issue of a war, or of sending
supplies to Great Britain/
4. In the light of these facts it appears that the
establishment of a Base, —together with some ships of
war, —is a sound step towards the defence not only of
Australia, but of all the British possessions south of the
Equator.
SHIP BUILDING YARDS AND DOCKING FACILITIES.
1. It follows naturally that, —if war-ships are to be
stationed in Australian Waters, —there must be facil-
ities for their maintenance, repair, and re-conditioning.
2. Even if, —as at present,—Australia must largely
rely on British Ships,—it is still essential that there be
adequate docking accommodation to enable those ships
to be overhauled and repaired as and when required.
On this matter the remarks of Rear-Admiral W. B. Mac-
kenzie are most apposite. He has recently said:—
'A Dock capable of servicing battle-ships was the
first need in Australia's Defence System. In the event
of the eclipse of Singapore, Australia would be left
undefended at sea .... He goes on to point out
that Australia should, therefore, become 'the second
string to Singapore.'
3. While the present need is for ships of war, it can
be justifiably claimed that, —in the future, —the ship-
building yards would be very valuable assets for the
construction and maintenance of the Merchant Vessels
which are so important to Australia's Trade.
4. A further incentive to action along the lines sug-
gested is that direct employment would be found for a
substantial number of artisans, —some of them from
overseas, —thus contributing to a very necessary in-
crease in the population. With all its allied and sub-
sidiary Industries, ship-building would find work and
wages for large numbers of people. Thus, —since
defence depends upon Industrial establishments to
manufacture civil and military requirements,—and upon
population to provide man power,—it is obvious that
ship-building is valuable in both connections.


FINANCE.
As the problem of Finance is really Imperial in char-
acter, it was previously suggested that its financial solu-
tion should be treated on Imperial lines. For the safety
and security of the Empire as a whole the several parts
must, necessarily, act in co-operation; but, in justice to
ail, —the financial outlay should be adjusted to the
capacity to carry the burden."
No reply to this communication was written until the
6th January, 1939. It came from Mr. J. N. Lawson,
M.P., Minister for Customs, —who wrote on behalf of
the Prime Minister:
"NAVAL BASE AT DARWIN."
The Defence Development Programme includes
appropriations for further increasing the defences at
Darwin, which will result in Darwin becoming
a most useful adjunct as a Secondary Naval Base to
Singapore Preliminary decisions have also been
taken in regard to the provision of a sub-lease in Papua,
which will further strengthen Australia's position in the
North.
SHIP BUILDING YARDS AND DOCKING FACILITIES.
The Government is alive to the importance of Ship-
building and Docking Facilities in Australia. The posi-
tion in regard to Docking Facilities is not unsatisfactory
in so far as present requirements for the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy are concerned. There is, however, no Dock
in Australia capable of accommodating a Capital Ship.
This matter is at present being closely investigated in
conjunction with the Imperial Authorities.
The importance of a Ship-building Industry is fully
realised, as it is essential to maintain in peace the staffs
and facilities needed in war, not only for ship-building,
but also for the vital requirements of repairing war-
ships. The Defence Development Programme makes
very adequate provision for this."
Some important particulars of work to be done were
added; but it is not considered advisable, nor is it
necessary, to include them in this Pamphlet.
However, two things concerning the Minister's letter
may be emphasised:
1. The open admission that there was "no dock in
Australia capable of accommodating a battle-ship," and


2. The lack of any reference, in "the Development
Programme," to the building of merchant ships.
Two months later, —August 1939, —the Common-
wealth Government announced its preparedness to grant
bounties upon ships built in Australia. But the amounts
to be paid,—and the limitations as to the tonnages on
which the bounty would be payable,—rendered the pro-
posals wholly inadequate to meet the situation. The
League therefore, —though pleased at any attempt to
foster ship-building in Australia, —had no hesitation in
drawing attention to the inadequacy indicated. It also
took occasion to bring to the notice of the Minister for
Customs another possible method of procedure. In a
letter dated 22/8/39 it said:
"The abovenamed League has previously made some
suggestions to the Federal Government respecting large-
scale ship-building in Australia. On its behalf I have
now the honour to draw your attention to a statement
published in the 'Daily Telegraph/ London, on 8/7/39;
and to make another proposal. The statement reads: —
'lt is reported here to-day (Ottawa, 7/7/39) that
British ship-building interests are considering the estab-
lishment of Ship-building Yards in Canada.
Engineer Vice-Admiral Sir Reginald Skelton, —a
Director of J. I. Thornycroft and Company, the well-
known British Ship-building Firm, —who has arrived
here, —is said to be in charge of the negotiations with
the Dominion Government.
The amount of Capital involved is not revealed. It
is stated that Sir Reginald will make an exploratory tour
of the lower banks of the St. Lawrence between Montreal
and Quebec to select a suitable site before beginning
negotiations.'
This method of procedure indicates a course of action
which the League thought might well have been ob-
served by the Commonwealth Government. Even now,
it suggests, Thornycroft and Company,—or some other
great Firm of Ship-builders,—might be invited to con-
sider establishing a Branch in Australia.
As pointed out in the League's letter of 27th April
1937, the establishment of large-scale ship-building in
Australia would not only provide employment for a large
number of people, but, as a Defence measure, its value
would be incalculable.


In this respect I may add, that to regard the pro-
posals for a bounty on Ships built in Australia as some-
thing apart from the Commonwealth's Defence Commit-
ments is to ignore the very crux of the matter. The
building up of industrial strength is an essential pre-
requisite to the adequate defence of Australia."
The, Minister acknowledged the receipt of the letter
and promised "consideration."
Nine days later came the crash which the League
had so long feared would come! The military invasion
of Poland by Germany forced Great Britain to declare
war upon Germany, and, —over-night,—almost all that
the League had done to induce or persuade the Com-
monwealth Government to get ready for such an event-
uality became as nought.
REQUEST TO THE MELBOURNE HARBOUR TRUST
COMMISSIONERS.
But the need for Ships remained. Indeed, —judging
by the experience of the Great War of 1914/18, —the
demand must increase. The League therefore seriously
considered what new steps it could take to stimulate
Ship-building in Australia. It was thought that the
Melbourne Harbour Trust might have the power to build
ships as well as Dock-Yards. This led to the Honour-
able John Lemmon, M.L.A., being asked to obtain, and
send to the League, a statement of the Trust's Powers.
He promptly and courteously supplied the required
information, and it was found that the Trust had the
hoped-for right. A letter, dated 1/12/39, was there-
upon addressed to the Chairman of the Trust asking him
to grant an interview to three Members of the League
on the subject of "Ship-building in Victoria." Eight
days later the League received a reply, signed by the
Secretary to the Trust, saying, inter alia:—
"The Commissioners consider that no purpose could
be served by interviewing your Members on the question
of Ship-building in Victoria."
Seven months later, —shortly after the new Chairman
—Mr. A. D. Mackenzie—was appointed,—a second
attempt was made to secure the interest of the Harbour
Trust Commissioners. The result was very encouraging.
After an interview with the Chairman, —and the passing
of correspondence both ways,—the Trust wrote and said,
inter alia:—


"The Commissioners are anxious to see the Ship-
building Industry flourish at this Port, and would wel-
come any move to bring that about.
With this end in view they are prepared to make
available for the purpose what they feel is an ideal site
on the Maribyrnong River between the new Footscray
Road and the Coode Canal, and, in an endeavour to
encourage the enterprise would give consideration to
the provision of means of access to this site.
The Commissioners are prepared to give every assist-
ance to the establishment of the Ship-building enter-
prise at the Port of Melbourne."
OFFER TO THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT.
Early in February 1940, —as the result of the pub-
licity given to its efforts to secure the establishment of
Merchant Ship-building in Australia, —the League was
consulted with respect to a proposed new Shipyard at
the Port of Melbourne.
The first interview took place on 2nd February. Others
followed, in the course of which the following facts were
disclosed.
A. That a substantial group,—having Australian and
British Members, —was considering . the question of
starting the construction of large-scale Ships at the Port
of Melbourne.
B. That the necessary Capital was available, —other
things being propitious.
C. That to overcome any possible difficulties con-
cerning Expert assistance and skilled Labour, arrange-
ments had been made, —in England and in Denmark, —
to obtain such aid.
D. That the Group might need the assistance of the
League in obtaining a site for the new Shipyard.
E. That the Group required a positive assurance, from
the Commonwealth Government, of "some definite form
of protection" or the scheme would not materialise.
F. That, —if a start were made, —preference in the
building of Ships would be given to the requirements
of the Australian Naval Authorities; but, as soon as


possible, the construction of Merchant Ships, of about
ten thousand tons each, would begin; orders for two
such Ships having already been promised through the
British connections of the Group.
These proposals were regarded as being so highly
advantageous to Australia that the League asked the
Minister of the Navy,—The Honourable A. G. Cameron,
M.P., —to receive a small deputation concerning them.
The request was granted, and, on 26th March 1940, —•
Mr. T. S. Nettlefold, —representing the League,—and
Captain J. P. Williams, —representing those proposing
to start the new Ship-building Yard, —together with the
Secretary of the League,—set out the facts above-
mentioned.
A second proposal,—from a well-known Melbourne
Engineering Company,—was also submitted. The Com-
pany authorised the League to state that it could begin
the construction of Ships,—up to four thousand tons, —
as soon as an order was given it; the necessary mach-
inery, equipment and plant being ail in readiness to
make a start.
During the discussion that followed, questions were
asked and answered; the Minister eventually stating
that he was "interested and would take the matter to
Cabinet for consideration."
This promise was as much as could be expected at
that stage. However, to make certain that other Mem-
bers of the Cabinet should not be unacquainted with the
matter, —each Member of the Ministry was sent a
special letter drawing attention to Mr. Cameron's inten-
tion, together with particulars of the two offers. In add-
ition Mr. Cameron was advised of what had been done.
A month later, —28/4/1940, —Mr. Cameron was
asked if he were ready to state the Government's decis-
ion. In a reply,—2/5/40,—he said:
"I shall inform you as soon as I am in a position to
make a statement in regard to the proposal submitted
to me by your League on 26th March."
Again, on 28/6/40, the League wrote him as under:


SHIP BUILDING AND DOCK YARDS, AUSTRALIA.
"From previous correspondence you are aware of the
interest taken by the Australian Industries Protection
League in the above-mentioned matters. Over three
years ago it suggested three major moves to the Com-
monwealth Government.
"1. The establishment of a Naval Base, —on Singa-
pore lines, —either at Darwin or such other place on the
Australian Coast as the Naval Authorities should advise.
2. The construction of Docking Accommodation cap-
able of serving the largest ships afloat, and
3. The starting of large-scale Ship-building in Aus-
tralia."
Two years later, —January 1939, —the League was
informed that:
"Additional work at Darwin is making it a secondary
base at Singapore, and a sub-base in Papua may also
help."
Quite recently it was announced in the Newspaper
Press that the Commonwealth Government had decided
to build a Graving Dock, —in Sydney Harbour, —of the
size necessary to handle the largest vessels. It was
added that work on the Dock would begin almost
immediately.
These advances have given great satisfaction to the
League, and it congratulates the Government thereon.
There still remains the Ship-building question. So far
as the League is concerned, this has two aspects:—
A. The general necessity to start large-scale ship
construction in any or all States, and
B. The offers to begin Ship-building in Melbourne, —
particulars of which were sent you by the League on
26th March 1940.


Reverting to Docking Accommodation, I am directed
to point out that Melbourne is so lacking in this respect
that practically all the larger vessels requiring repair
or overhaul, whilst in Australian Waters, are compelled
to go to Sydney for such services. This is a serious, —
and possibly a dangerous,—situation which should be
remedied without delay; and the League therefore
thinks it proper to bring the matter to your notice/ 7
On 2/7/40 the League received this reply:
7/ l have your letter of 28th June 1940, in which you
make representations on behalf of your League as to
Ship-building on a large-scale in Australia.
As this aspect of your letter concerns the Minister for
Trade_gnd Customs, I have referred your letter to him,
and have asked him to reply to your letter direct.
I am considering the representations made by you on
the lack of Docking Accommodation in Melbourne and
shall write to you further as soon as possible.
(Signed) A. G. Cameron. 77
But time passed; the Government made no decision
with respect to the offer to open a new Shipyard at the
Port of Melbourne; and, eventually, the project was
abandoned. As to why the abandonment took place a
few words may be added:
Whilst the Government was taking its own time to
deal with the offer, events in Europe were moving with
swift and astonishing rapidity. Amongst other happen-
ings, Germany over-ran Denmark; —thus cutting off the
assistance which the Promoters had arranged to obtain
from that country. That break in the promoters 7 plans
was, —with other things,—sufficient to render further
action impossible; and thus a new Enterprise was lost
to Australia.
OTHER STEPS TAKEN.
But, despite the setback occasioned by the failure to
take advantage of the before-mentioned offer, —the
League resolved to continue its campaign for Ship


building in Australia. That decision applied more par-
ticularly to merchant vessels. The widespread destruc-
tion of such ships by the enemy rendered their replace-
ment absolutely necessary; otherwise, Australia would
be unable to send foodstuffs and other things to the
Mother Country and other parts of the Empire. For the
primary producers, especially, the outlook was serious
indeed.
The first opportunity to press the matter arose out of
a letter received from the Customs Department. As will
have been noted, the Minister for the Navy, in his last
letter, stated that he had referred the question of
Merchant Ship-building to his colleague the Minister for
Customs. This Minister, on 24th July 1940, wrote to
the League as hereunder set out:
y/ Dear Mr. Hume-Cook,
My colleague, the Minister for the Navy, has referred
to me your letter of the 28th June, for reply in con-
nection with the question of Merchant Ship-building.
In this connection I wish to inform you that the Gov-
ernment still has under consideration the question of
building Merchant Ships in Australia. Examination of
general plans and specifications for a suitable large
cargo steamer has already been made by technical
Experts, and the essential detailed plans and specifi-
cations, including Bills of Quantities, were recently
despatched to Australia by the High Commissioner in
London. The latter Documents will be examined by
Experts immediately on their arrival.
Meanwhile, no definite action can be taken in regard
to building Merchant Ships in Australia owing to the
fact that practically all existing building berths and
skilled labour are being employed upon the construc-
tion of an urgent order from the British Admiralty of a
large number of small naval vessels/ 7
(Signed) George McLeay.
The League posted its reply on 30/7/1940. It reads:
'This is to acknowledge,—with many thanks, —your
communication of 24th July with respect to Ship-build-
ing in Australia. Pursuing the matter further lam
directed to add:


1. That the Australian Industries Protection League
has been endeavouring to enlist private persons and
public bodies in this very important matter.
2. That, amongst others, it has laid the subject in all
its bearings before the Melbourne Harbour Trust Com-
missioners, and has received an encouraging reply,—
part of which reads as under:—
The Commissioners are anxious to see the Ship-
building Industry flourish at this Port, and would wel-
come any move to bring that about.
With this end in view they are prepared to make
available for the purpose what they feel is an ideal site
on the Maribyrnong River between the new Footscray
Road and the Coode Canal, and, in an endeavour to
encourage the enterprise, would give consideration to
the provision of means of access to this site.
The Commissioners are prepared to give every assist-
ance to the establishment of the Ship-building Industry
by private enterprise at the Port of Melbourne/
In the light of these offers I am directed to suggest
that you might get into touch with the Melbourne Har-
bour Trust Commissioners with a view to taking advan-
tage of their proffered assistance.
In the same connection, —and in a way that would be
complementary to such ship-building as is being or may
be carried out at the Port of Melbourne, —I have been
instructed to call your attention to the need for more
up-to-date Docking Facilities. At present, these facilities
are wholly inadequate for servicing large-sized ships.
This state of affairs, —the League considers, —is a
serious, —and possibly a dangerous,—situation which
should be remedied without delay. To this end consult-
ation with the Melbourne Harbour Trust, or the State
Government, or both, might lead to the enlargement of
existing Docking Accommodation, or the construction of
a new one that could give service to the largest sized
merchant vessel requiring repairs or overhaul whilst in
Australian Waters/'


These representations were formally acknowledged
on 1/8/40 and the statement made that:
"I shall give the earliest possible consideration to the
suggestions contained in your letter/ 7
Three weeks later a second letter was received, —
22/8/40, —in which it was said;—
"With further reference to your letter of 30th July,
on the question of building Merchant Ships in Aus-
tralia, I wish to advise that the Government is unable,
owing to an exceptionally large and urgent programme
of construction of many small craft for the British and
Australian Navies, to initiate for the time being the
construction of cargo vessels in Australia.
The present and near future Naval programme will
temporarily exhaust existing supplies of the necessary
skilled labour, and require the use of present ship-build-
ing accommodation and facilities.
It is obvious that Defence considerations must take
precedure over all other matters. Nevertheless, the
Government has not by any means overlooked the ques-
tion of building cargo ships.
Nothing can be done in the direction of building cargo
ships until the present volume of urgent Naval work
shrinks, —a position which may not arise for a number
of months.
Meanwhile the Government has collected the data
essential to enable merchant ship-building to be com-
menced, and will be ready to take steps to develop this
Industry immediately circumstances render such a
course possible and desirable/'
(Signed) George McLeay.
Four days after the foregoing letter was received by
the League the Commonwealth Parliament was dis-
solved. A General Election followed, and not until 20th
November 1940 did the Houses meet again.


Meantime the attention of the League was drawn to
the State of the Fishing Industry. It was said that, —
by reason of Australia's Fishing Fleet having been
diverted to Mine Sweeping and Patrol work, —the regu-
lar supplies of Fish had been seriously curtailed. The
shortage applied not only to the supplies of Fresh Fish
for immediate consumption; but also to the greater
quantities that were required for Canning.
These assertions led to the Executive of the League
asking the Secretary to make a special all-round invest-
igation. This was done, and a Report written and pre-
sented to the Executive. That Report is too detailed for
insertion in this Pamphlet; but a summary of the facts
elicited forms part of a Statement prepared for present-
ation to the Commonwealth Government. That State-
ment sets out the position as it stood at the 31st Decem-
ber 1940. Here it is;
"SHIPBUILDING IN AUSTRALIA.
Australia appears to be in need of three kinds of sea-
going vessels: —
1. Those required for Defence purposes.
2. Merchantmen for Coastal and Overseas Services.
3. Fishing Boats to assist the Fishing Industry.
With regard to Ships for Defence purposes, the Com-
monwealth Government, it is known, has done much to
speed up production. Nevertheless, it is hoped that, in
this statement, some of the suggestions offered may
lead to an even greater output.
As to Merchant Ship-building, certain reasons are
constantly being advanced for the lack of action. These
reasons may be summarised as under:—
1. 'Shipyards with the machinery and plant neces-
sary for the construction of sizable ships are all engaged
in building war vessels for the Navy.
2. This means that, for the production of trading
vessels, new Shipyards might have to be laid down.


3. Even if new Shipyards were brought into being the
matter of providing additional ships with engines,
boilers and other equipment would still remain. This
difficulty, it is said, cannot be overcome because every
engineering shop capable of producing these require-
ments is already loaded with orders from the Navy
Department, and, therefore, no others can be accepted.
4. That there is no more skilled labour available/
In answer to these contentions the Australian Indus-
aries Protection League makes the following rejoinders:
A. That, in the matter of extending existing Ship-
yards or building new ones, the League understands
that there are Companies and persons ready to make the
venture provided they receive some form of assistance
from the Commonwealth Government.
B. The first form of assistance is protection through
the Tariff. Other suggestions,—supplementary and
otherwise, —embrace an embargo on the importation
of ships below a certain specified tonnage, loans at low
rates, bounties and subsidies. These claims show that
no one can be expected to expend large amounts of
capital in establishing new businesses which, —when the
War is over, —will have no chance of profitable con-
tinuance.
On the matter of obtaining engines, boilers and other
equipment for the extra new ships, the problem of in-
creased output might be solved in one of two ways:
A. By enquiring from those already engaged in the
class of work what room they have for expansion if the
necessary capital and/or plant were made available.
B. By giving to approved Companies or persons grants
in aid; loans at low rates; bounties on production, or
such other form of assistance as may be mutually deter-
mined.
(NOTE: In view of the compulsory closing of some
shipyards in Great Britain, it may be possible to get
some of the plant and machinery transferred to Aus-
tralia.)


Another method of overcoming the difficulty under
notice would be to do os was done in the United King-
dom during the Great War. Then, —so the League has
been informed, —a standardised type of vessel was
designed, 'not only for large cargo-carrying capacity,
but also for ease of quick production. Ease of quick
production meant that parts could be fabricated in
engineering and steel shops anywhere in Great Britain.
The templates and patterns for the hull were made by
one Firm of Ship-builders who also supplied the plans.
The plans were handed out to ship-builders all over the
country. Templates and patterns were made and sup-
plied to all steel workshops; the finished pieces were
despatched to the various ship-builders where the ship
was assembled, riveted and launched. The engines and
boilers were also done on the same principle.'
Touching the question of experts in Naval Architec-
ture and Shipyard direction, the shortage may not be so
acute as it is believed to be. The League knows of two
men, —and there may be more, —who appear to have all
the necessary qualifications required. Their names and
addresses can be supplied if desired. Others, from
Britain, can surely be spared where the need is so great.
With respect to skilled labour for Ship-building, two
or three things can be said: —
Firstly, a broadcast advertisement for men of exper-
ience would probably bring in a number who, —in Aus-
tralia during the last War, —were employed in Ship Con-
struction. In this case the League cannot furnish the
names and addresses of such men; but it has been told
that some are in Railway Employment, and that some
others are with the Tramways Board.
Secondly, Australian labour is so highly intelligent
that, under trained direction, most men would soon learn
the work to which they were set. There is surely no
more skill required in producing a brass casting for
ship-service than for any other purpose. Riveters
engaged on steel girders for buildings should easily
adapt themselves to a similar class of work on ship's
plates.


Thirdly, there is the matter of diluted labour. In this
case also the obstacle would appear to be more imag-
ined than real. This is so because the Trade Unions
likely to be most affected are wholly in favour of Ship-
building in Australia. They are therefore practically
certain to aid in the making of a maximum effort to
produce the ships so urgently required, not merely as a
great contribution towards the winning of the War for
democracy, but in the general interests of the Common-
wealth.
In further support of the claim Tor some form of
Governmental assistance/ in order to make sure that
new Shipyards will not be scrapped when the War is
over, the League stresses the undermentioned points:
1. Where new Yards are to be started, premises, plant
and machinery will have to be hurriedly set up at costs
that are bound to be above normal.
2. To induce suitable men to leave their present jobs,
—with a view to assisting in the war effort, —they
should at least be offered the prospect of continuing
employment.
3. Even then, staffs so obtained will not be so effi-
cient as those used to team work, or those already
engaged in the Ship-building Industry. For some time,
therefore, production costs are bound to be higher in
the new Shipyards. Thus, insistence upon competitive
tenders in all cases might easily defeat the end in view.
4. In short, the conditions are such that individuals
and companies cannot be expected to make the financial
sacrifice necessary to obtain the required output of Ships
for National Service. It is therefore imperative that
some guarantee shall be given them against losses of
capital moneys.
Lastly, on the subject of Fishing Boats in relation to
the Fishing Industry, enquiries made by the League have
elicited the understated facts:—
1. That the diversion of Trawlers and other large type
fishing boats to mine sweeping and other Naval pur-
poses has greatly reduced the local fish supplies.


2. That this reduction applies to fresh fish and to
those used for Canning.
3. That certain of the Canneries have the premises,
machinery and plant to process and pack much greater
quantities of fish than were previously available.
4. That the Market is large enough,—and ready to
purchase,—all the fish the Canneries are capable of
canning, and even more.
5. That, from the investigations made by the Com-
monwealth Institute of Scientific Research, 'Australia is
fortunate in having its major supplies of fish suitable
for canning within several hundred miles of the Capital
Cities.'
6. That the main factors militating against full sup-
plies of fish, of various kinds, are the lack of suitable
fishing boats and gear.
7. That there is, therefore, good reason for the Com-
monwealth Government giving limited assistance to
approved persons or Companies for the building and
buying of Fishing Boats.
8. That such assistance can be justified on three
grounds:—
A. The stimulus it would give to the building of the
right kind of vessels for fishing purposes.
B. The fillip it would give to the Fishing and Fish
Canning Industries, and
C. The additional supplies of nutritive fish that
would thus become available in the markets of Aus-
tralia; markets which are at present very much under
supplied.
By way of supplement to the foregoing statements the
League respectfully makes the following suggestion:—


That in view of the urgent necessity for new ships,
and with the object of obtaining more from within the
Empire,—the Commonwealth Government approach the
British Government and ask that some of the money
set aside for Ship-building in Britain be diverted to
Australia/ "
FINAL NOTE.
On the 20th January 1941,—-by direction of the
Executive of the Australian Industries Protection League,
—a copy of the above statement was sent to the Min-
ister for Customs and to the Prime Minister.
Up to this date, —25/1/41, —no reply has been re-
ceived from either Minister; but, —in a newspaper state-
ment published 24/1/41, —the Prime Minister is re-
ported as having said:—
'That, in England, he would discuss the possibility of
securing from Great Britain assistance in Ship-building."
(THIS ARTICLE IS PRINTED ON PAPE*
MADE IN AUSTRALIA
FROM AUSTRALIAN WOOD-PULP:
IT IS KNOWN AS
“AUSTRALIAN M.F. PRINTING PAPER.”)
ISSUED BY
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES PROTECTION LEAGUE
JAN UARY. 1941
HICKLING &. POWELL PTY- LTD.-Print.
