

The Higher
Education
of
Journalists
AN INVESTIGATION
CONDUCTED BY THE
Australian Journalists’ Assnriation


The A.J.A.
HE Australian Journalists’ Association was founded
by working journalists in Melbourne, in December,
1910, with the object of improving conditions
in the profession. In these objects the Associa-
tion succeeded, for by an award of the Common-
wealth Arbitration Court, dealing with metropolitan
newspapers, made by Mr. Justice Isaacs on
11th May, 1917, salaries were increased, hours
of work shortened, and other benefits conferred. A unique
feature of this Award, which was made retrospective to
Ist January, 1917, is the provision for grading the reporting staff
into three-fifths seniors, one-fifth generals, and one-fifth juniors,
with a limited number of cadets. The Association has arranged
agreements with the proprietaries of newspapers not covered by
the award. Governed by a Federal Council, which meets annually,
the Association is administered by a Central Committee, composed
of representatives of the districts, each of the six States of the
Commonwealth constituting a district, with its own committee.
Having improved journalism, the A.J.A. is devoting much of
its attention to the improvement of journalists. This booklet
gives the result of its inquiries into the question of bringing
newspaper men into closer touch with the culture of the
Universities.
“ The Australasian Journalist”
A monthly publication, is the Official Organ of the Association,
having been founded with this object in November, 1912. The
address of the Central Committee of the Association is:
237 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE, VICTORIA.


INTRODUCTORY
In publishing this pamphlet on the Education of Journalists, the
aim of the Australian Journalists’ Association is to arouse interest,
or greater interest than exists, in the subject among members of the
profession, and to- have suitable schemes of training devised. It is
also hoped to secure the co-operation of proprietors of newspapers.
Addressed, as the pamphlet is, mainly to journalists, there is no
need to emphasise the recommendations and suggestions made, but
I would like to draw special attention to the paragraphs in which
Mr. Farmer Whyte, Chairman of the Inquiry Commission, says that
the adoption of even, some of the proposals put forward would un-
doubtedly add to the attractions of journalism; and that newspaper
proprietors should welcome educational reforms that will have the
effect of combating any tendency which (in their opinion) arbitration
awards have to stifle ambition and kill incentive.
If an experience of 30 years in metropolitan journalism entitles
me to express an opinion, I would say that I am in accord with Mr.
Whyte that the journalist who loves his work, far from shirking it,
and far from allowing himself to fall into slovenly ways, finds his
chief pleasure in giving of his best.
Mr. Whyte is right in declaring that there is no calling outside
public life in which the opportunities for doing useful work for the
community are so great as in the field of journalism, and I would add
that the greater the capacity and the better the equipment of the
young men entering the profession, the more valuable will be the
services given.
While claiming remuneration commensurate with the worth of
their work, and conditions of employment that will permit of reason-
able leisure, Australian journalists are not obsessed in gains of this
kind obtained and obtainable under Arbitration Acts awards, and have
made the improvement of the standard of training an objective of
their Association. The issue of this pamphlet is proof of this aim.
In the name of the Association, I thank all the contributors, and
particularly Messrs. Whyte and Dixon.
P. J. BENNETT,
President.
Australian Journalists’ Association Offices,
237 Flinders-lane, Melbourne,
Victoria, November, 1919.




The A.J.A. and Education.
TRAINING OF JOURNALISTS.
As improvement of the system of training journalists for their
profession is one of the purposes for which the Australian Jour-
nalists’ Association was founded, the Federal Council of that organi-
sation, at its session held in Melbourne, in 1917, appointed a Com-
mission, consisting of six members (one for each State of the Com-
monwealth), to consider the matter. Incidentally, the Commission
was empowered to go into the whole question of the education of
journalists.
Reports were presented to the 1918 Conference by two mem-
bers of the Commission —Mr. W. Farmer Whyte, then of New
South Wales, and now of Brisbane, the Chairman, and Mr. G. C.
Dixon, of Tasmania. The Council adopted the general conclusions
arrived at by Messrs. Whyte and Dixon, and authorised District com-
mittees to open up negotiations with the educational authorities of
their States.
A scheme, proposed by the Central Committee of the Association,
and forwarded to District (State) Committees, is appended.
In the belief that the aims of the Federal Council respecting
education will be forwarded, and the negotiations of State District
Committees assisted, this pamphlet, giving a fair summary of the
report and conclusions of the Commission, is published.
COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATIONS.
Mr. Whyte, whose report covers 48 closely typewritten pages, In
which he gives the opinion of University professors, newspaper
managers, leading journalists, commercial men and publicists, made
the following recommendations:
(1) I am of the opinion that the present method of selection of
journalists is calculated to give the best results, and I, therefore, do
not think it desirable to lay down any special standard of education
for youths desirous of entering the profession of journalism.
(2) The present population and the number of newspapers of
standing in Australia do not seem sufficiently large to warrant the
establishing of a chair and the appointment of a professor of
journalism, unless some arrangement could be made which would
allow the professor of journalism to divide his time between the
Universities of Sydney and Melbourne. It is highly desirable that
there should be some connecting link between the University and
the Press, and failing the establishment of a chair of journalism, I
recommend: — ,
(a) The establishing of a lectureship in journalism in con-
nection with the University (the lecturer to be a trained journalist
possessing a University degree).
(lb) The arrangement of a three years’ special University
course for journalists.
(c) The granting of a diploma of journalism to candidates*
who pass the final examination.


(3) lam of the opinion that candidates for a degree or diploma
in journalism should be required to pass in the following subjects:
(1) Practical Journalism.
(2) English language and literature.
(3) Philosophy (general).
(4) History.
(5) Constitutional history.
(6) Political economy.
(7) Science of politics.
(8) An optional subject, to be chosen from the following:
Sociology; some special branch of philosophy; constitutional law;
public International law; a foreign language; a science; statistical
method; art; music; the drama.
(4) In regard to a diploma of journalism, the matriculation
question will not arise, but should a professorship be established and
a degree of journalism be given, I am strongly of the opinion that the
matriculation examination ought to be waived, allowing the candidate
to proceed direct to the course, and eliminating unnecessary waste of
time; providing that candidates have had not less than three years’
experience in active press work.
(5) The standard required for a pass should be equal to that of
B.A. or B. Commerce, and I would suggest that the arrangement of the
course be roughly on the following lines: — ,
First year.—Journalism (I.), English language and literature,
philosophy (general).
Second year.—Journalism (II.), political economy, history,
constitutional history.
Third year.—Journalism (III.), science of politics, optional sub-
ject.
(6) I recommend that steps be taken forthwith to ascertain the
number of journalists who desire to take the suggested course in
journalism, provided that satisfactory arrangements can be made to
enable them to do so. (This may have an important bearing on the
question whether a professorship or a lectureship should be estab-
lished).
(7) I recommend that a library, containing specially selected
hooks and including all books required for the University course in
journalism, be established in each capital city in connection with the
Australian Journalists’ Association.
(8) I am of opinion that nothing is more calculated to benefit
the members of the profession and advance the interests of
journalism generally than the adoption of a system for the interchange
of journalists within the Empire. I am further of the opinion that
much good would result from the extension of this principle to include
the United States of America, China and Japan.
It goes without saying that the first step to be taken is to arrange
for a conference with the newspaper proprietors of Australia, for
without their cordial co-operation the whole scheme falls to the
ground. But I do not doubt that this co-operation will be secured,
and I advise that the Institute of Journalists be asked to support us
in this matter. In the multitude of counsellors) there is wisdom,
and in the scheme here outlined, imperfect as it is, some basis may
be found for future action.
If journalism as a profession has some drawbacks, it also has many
privileges and many attractions to offer young men. The adoption of
some of the recommendations in this report would undoubtedly add
to these attractions. One of the complaints of the newspaper pro-
prietor and manager in Australia to-day is that, under the system of
arbitration awards, some men are paid more than they are really


worth, with the result that the more competent men have to be con-
tent with less than they are worth. And, perhaps, the complaint
is not wholly on the one side. If the effect of it is to stifle ambition
and kill incentive, to discourage the good men from putting forth their
best efforts, the proprietors ought to welcome any proposal which will
have the effect of combating this tendency.
It can hardly be doubted that the adoption of a scheme for the
interchange of journalists on the lines I have suggested would have
this effect. Here is something which would make a powerful appeal
to the brightest and best of our young men, spurring them on to the
highest endeavor, encouraging them to apply themselves to their
studies and their daily newspaper work, in order to qualify for
selection. Personally, however, I feel bound to give it as my opinion
that the man who loves his work, far from shirking and far from
allowing himself to fall into careless and slovenly ways, finds his
chief pleasure in giving of his best.
Outside of public life, there is no calling in which the opportunities
for doing useful work are so great as they are in the field
of journalism, and the fact is not without its significance that many
men who have made their mark in public life have graduated from
this splendid training ground.
Let us strive to maintain our reputation; let us see to< it that
the Australian journalist of the future will be second to none in the
world. We ask the newspaper proprietors of Australia to' co-operate
with us in an earnest endeavor to improve the educational standard
of Australian journalists. We invite the University authorities to give
careful and sympathetic consideraton to such suggestons as may, in
due course, be placed before them.
And I would like to quote one brief extract from an address
delivered by a very able man in the Sydney School of Arts on june
15, 1854: —“By all means abridge as much as possible the necessary
process of education; substitute for old and cumbrous methods others
founded upon a clearer understanding of the human mind; select the
subjects of instruction not in superstitious compliance with tradition,
but by their adaption to the development of the rational faculties
and the requirements of actual life.”
It is a far cry back to 1854, but the words are applicable to-day,
and a further reason for quoting them is that the man who uttered
them was none other than Professor John Woolley, D.C.L., Principal
and Professor of Logic and Classics in the University of Sydney. It
was Dr. Woolley who delivered the oration at the inauguration of the
Sydney University on October 11, 1852, and he was a great and
learned and far-seeing man.
MR. DIXON’S VIEWS.
A separate report by Mr. G. C. Dixon, of Tasmania, dealt compre-
hensively with the whole subject of the education of journalists.
Mr. Dixon expressed regret that there seemed to be a tendency
to approach educational problems with an obstinate prejudice against
any education except that acquired in the rough and tumble of the
“game.” “We keep hearing the old and, to my mind, futile compari-
sons,” he says, “between the young University graduate and the man
who has worked his way up from the ranks, greatly to the disadvan-
tage of the former. What is the use of asking: ‘ls not the reporter of
20 years’ experience a better pressman than a cub straight from the
classroom?’ No doubt he is; but that is not the point. What we
should ask is this: ‘ls not the man of 20 years’ experience likely to
be an even better journalist if he has a good education to begin with?’
I think any reasoning and unprejudiced person will say ‘Yes.’ ”


A sound education and wide reading, Mr. Dixon continues, would
be a safeguard against the ghastly lapses which go so far towards
impairing a paper’s standing in the community. In the same way,
special study—not necessarily at a University—would save man} 7
leader-writers from rather disastrous excursions into modern history
and economics. “But most important of all,” Mr. Dixon goes on, “is
the argument brought forward by Mr. M. C. Keane, M.A., who set
the paper on journalism that aroused so much discussion. As Mr.
Keane says, even the best newspapers contain a proportion of
‘shoddy,’ the result of bad taste, which is, in turn, largely the result
of defective education. The material chosen for presentation is poor,
and the English in which it is set forth is often even worse. I will
admit that poor work of this kind can never be completely eliminated,
but it could be reduced to a minimum, I think, if all pressmen had
their critical and other faculties trained by sound instruction and
wide reading. Scholastic training, too, serves as mental discipline.
Even mathematics and science, though of little direct value in jour-
nalism, help to develop habits of clear and logical thinking. Most of
the opponents of higher education devote their energies to annihilat-
ing claims that have never been put forward. It has been said by
several contributors to the Journalist that a man may be stuffed fuil
of learning, and not know a decent par. when he sees it. That is so
obvious that I wonder anyone took the trouble to mention it. A suc-
cessful journalist must obviously possess strong commonsense, but,
for the life of me, I cannot see why he should not possess common-
sense and fairly wide knowledge at the same time. To say that all
University graduates are useless in journalism, simply because one
of them does not know a good thing when he sees it, is just about as
sensible as condemning a knowledge of the alphabet on the ground
that it does not necessarily teach a man to come in out of the rain.”
Mr. Dixon condemned suggestions for the establishment of Schools
of Journalism, on the ground that under Australian conditions such
schools would be “neither practicable nor particularly desirable.” He
suggested as an alternative the granting of a degree to candidates on
the following qualifications:
(1) The production of a satisfactory record of experience.
(2) The writing of a thesis which constitutes an original con-
tribution to the literature of journalism.
(3) The passing of University examinations in—
(a) English Language and Literature.
(b) Modern History (including General History of Eng-
land, History of the British Colonies, and European
History).
(c) Economics.
MR. W. G. CONLEY.
Mr. W. G. Conley, General Managed of the “Sydney Morning
Herald,” is a practical journalist, who has risen from the ranks He
wrote: —
I certainly agree with Mr. Farmer Whyte, who has asked me for
my views as to the “Education of Journalists,” that the subject is a
very difficult one. In every trade, calling and profession during the
last 20 or 30 years we have seen this movement for better education,
and the improvement in service to the public, following upon the
higher standards attained, has been remarkable. Those of us whose
careers are bound up in the conduct of newspapers are naturally
anxious that journalism should keep pace with the upward movement.
It is a noteworthy fact that the movement for improved status took
practical shape within the profession ,and one of the most encouraging
things about this question of higher education for journalists is that


it is agitating the journalists themselves. This is the crux of the
whole matter. The journalist must himself be anxious to improve his
education.
In the past there has been the excuse, on the part of a great
majority, that the arduous nature of the employment prevented
systematic study—this notwithstanding the fact that in a fair number
of instances journalists qualified themselves for and attained high
positions in other walks of life. This excuse no longer holds good. By
the terms of a Federal award, the journalist is allowed ample leisure
for study, or the pursuit of a holbby. It is only fair to say, though,
that the calling itself is not one that is conducive to study. Dis-
tractions there are, which call for a fairly strong will in the over-
coming. Supposing a fair proportion of those already engaged in the
calling wish to improve their education, the question of providing for
them is fairly simple. A course of useful study could be devised
by a conference of representative men, lectures could be arranged,
convenient as to both time and place, and some hall-mark of scholastic
achievement devised. This would do an immense amount of good, as
it will meet the intellectual needs of a large number of journalists who
have not had the opportunity of the best education in their youth.
It is a little more difficult to deal with the beginner. The nature
of his work prevents that close association of theory and practice
which is possible m the case of the articled clerk, or the medical and
dental student. The work is irregular—at times it is exhausting.
There are no long vacations, and tutorial fees are a heavy tax on those
with only moderate means. And it is highly important that the cadet-
journalist should get the best education possible. It has been
suggested that a qualifying test should be imposed as a qualification
for employment as a cadet. This would be dangerous, as narrowing
the field of recruiting, which is bad for the industry, and eventually
also for the public. It would be all right if a certain standard of
education were the only, or even the main, qualfication of a journalist.
But it is not; the first essential is natural aptitude—which can be
developed, but not created, by education. Under this heading of
“natural aptitude’’ comes a “nose for news,” good address, an ability
to inspire confidence, a faculty for absorption in his work in spite of
manifold distractions.' These qualites can only be tried out in the
school of experience.
As someone has said, with a good deal of truth, the best school
of journalism is the newspaper. I have put in this qualification because
the big daily newspaper, in all its departments, has a tendency to
over-specialisation—and this tendency has to be corrected.
I must, however, resist the temptation to pursue the many phases
of an interesting subject, and will boil down my suggestion to the
following brief outline of a scheme:
(1) A department of journalism of the University to be
established under the faculty of arts.
(2) The course of study to be open to all students, but
degrees to be granted only to matriculated students who have
also had five years’ practical experience.
(3) Course of study to be arranged so that students quali-
fying in arts may take certain journalistic subjects.
(4) Course of study—including, of course, optional subjects
in literature and science—to be determined by a conference repre-
senting the University and the industry.
I am tempted to elaborate the above scheme, but details are best
filled in by the conference proposed, which should, of course, consider
suggestions from all sources. I want to stress this point, however,
that the widest possible range should be given to “optional” subjects,


that as many lectures as possible should be arranged for the city and
at a convenient hour, and that various bodies interested in the subject
should endeavor to provide funds, not as a help to financing the
department, but for the provision of exhibitions or scholarships for
promising students.
The movement will have my most cordial support.
MR. ADAM McCAY.
Mr. Adam McCay, editor of “iSmith’s Weekly,” Sydney, wrote:
In response to your request, I submit some views on the question
of the possibility of associating the University more closely with
journalistic education, and especially on the question of the possible
value of a “Diploma of Journalism,” to be issued by Australian
Universities. I regret that for lack of time I cannot formulate my
views more accurately than will be the case in what follows. Having
graduated B.A. in 1894 and M.A. in 1896, University of Melbourne, I
can speak with some personal experience of the value of a University
training for journalism. On occasion I have heard mooted the pro-
position of “the University teaching journalism,” and am by no means
considering the subject for the first time.
My conviction is that a curriculum of University lectures cannot
train a man or woman as a journalist; and that a University “course
of journalism,” having as its climax the issue of a diploma pretending
to be a certificate of excellence in the performance of newspaper work,
would be a farce. Temperament, flair or “nose for news,” a certain
vividness of perception, a quick sense of touch with the public—by
whatever terms you describe the qualities of a good journalist—they
cannot be communicated by text-books and a professor. The pharma-
copoeia and the dissecting-room will educate one profession in its
daily duty; the laboratory and lecture-room, the book of “cases” and
the legal text books will educate others; but there is no such rule for
the selection of a trained journalist. There is only one training school
for journalists, and that is the actual practice of journalism. “They
that do the thing have the power, and they that do not the thing have
not the power.”
We have all seen brilliant journalists who began life in varied
ways. They were copy-boys, compositors, clerks?, engineers, architects,
diplomats, parsons. By temperament and imagination thev were
impelled into journalism. They have maintained its versatility, its
alertness, its sympathy with social development, and its power. No
University could communicate these things to our profession in higher
degree.
It goes without saying that educated journalists are better than
uneducated. Knowledge brings power; and every atom of knowledge
acquired by a journalist is ultimately useful to him. But I submit,
with the strongest emphasis, that University teaching i» only one
way of acquiring knowledge. What a man has learned through his
own intellectual curiosity is incomparably more fertile in his mind
than what he has accepted from a iprofessor’s lectures.
I have called it farcical to suppose that a University “Diploma
of Journalism” could guarantee the possession of journalistic ability.
At the same time, I stress the value of education. Is it, then, that
men and women will qualify for journalism by attending lectures
aiming at that profession? Again I say, “No.” In journalism I have
seen the University graduate and the man who left school at thirteen;
University-men, brilliant and duffers as journalists; ex-errand boys,
duffers and brilliant. In not one case could I perceive that the
University teaching, or the lack of it, had affected the man’s jour-
nalistic ability. The more a man reads, knows and thinks, the better


journalist he is; but it has needed no guidance from Univeristy pro-
fessors to make the acute intelligence of modern journalism, and it
needs none now.
Journalism has its specialists. It needs no Diploma of Jour-
nalism to enable an important newspaper to find men for its financial,
legal, agricultural, commercial or scientific columns. Let us think of
some of our distinguished financial journalists, and laugh at the idea
that a mediocre University qualification would make them any more
authoritative. Theatrical and musical critics, the delightful and
widely-informed gossipers of the racecourse, the cricket and football
fields, the boxing ring, the fishing stream—what on earth would be
the use of a. University professor to these men, who are none the
less of extreme journalistic value? The “Diploma of Journalism”
would not evolve that rare and most desirable asset to a newspaper,
a reporter with political genius, nor an O. Henry among roundsmen.
Journalism has its “culls,” the myriads who are tried and found
wanting. Ido not -believe that University classes in journalism would
yield us any smaller percentage of “culls” than we have now. The
man with the “Diploma of Journalism’’ would be just as likely as
any other man to find that his qualification “to join your staff” was
derisory.
Mr. Walter Williams, of U.S.A., explained while in Australia that
America, realising that journalists must be trained on a journal, had
adopted that system. The students in the University city “turn out
a newspaper,” under trained supervision. In this way, some of the
obviously impossible may be weeded out. Special aptitudes may also
make themselves noticeable. But that even the students of such a
University would on the average excel, in the qualities necessary
to keep journalism in its place of influence in the community, the
men who now maintain journalism is, I think, a proposition to be
combated. Fifty* diplomaed and hall-marked “University jour-
nalists” could not have created a Bulletin as did one great news-
paper brain —J. F. the University never touched.
That the educated man is a better journalist than the uneducated;
that the man whose education is continuous and self-impelled is
better than he who relies on diploma or degree as his certificate truly
carved in stone; and that the newspaper itself teaches the newspaper
man —these claims are quite alien from a declaration that the Univer-
sity professor can give stimulus to- journalism. In one way we may
hereafter find the professor and the University in Australia coming
closer to journalism than they did before. Salaries and rewards in
the profession are raised beyond the expectation of a few years ago.
University graduates in arts, even in engineering and law, will be
tempted to look more closely at journalism as a possible profession
than they used to-. But it needs no “Diploma of Journalism” to make
the better-educated undergo the process of sifting by which the
residuum of capable journalists is at last obtained.
MR. PETER BOARD.
Mr. Peter Board, M.A., C.M.G., Director of Education, N.S.W.,
wrote, inter alia, as follows: —“It seems to me, as an outside observer,
that a good general education, carrying with it, as its results, a wide
range of information, a power of discrimination and ready draft of
ideas, is by far the most indispensable. The higher the position in
the journalistic ladder the more are these elements of qualification
demanded. Oil the other hand, the technique of the business is
absolutely necessary for those on the lower rungs of the ladder, and
this calls for specific training. Looking at these two elements of
qualification, the general and the specific, the latter appears to me


so limited in comparison with the other, that it is a matter for a
technical School of Journalism rather than a University. The former,
the general qualification, would best come from a University educa-
tion, but would not demand a separate department or chair of a
University. The best results would, I think, be gained by means of
the Arts course now provided by the University.”
PROFESSOR MacCALLUM.
Professor M. W. MacCallum, Professor of English Literature,
University of Sydney, states:—“l think it highly desirable that in-
tending journalists should take a University course, including, say,
History, Economics, Literature, and perhaps Science or Philosophy
This, however, can be done without establishing a School of Jour-
nalism.”
PROFESSOR MACKIE.
Professor A. Mackie, head of the Teachers’ Training College,
Sydney“l do not favor a special degree for journalists. There
would be danger in making it unduly narrow and technical at too early
a stage, whereas it seems to me that the journalist requires a train-
ing to develop his interest in the main aspects of human culture quite
as much as a technical training in his craft.”
PROFESSOR IRVINE.
Professor R. F. Irvine, Professor of Economics and Commerce,
University of Sydney, stated: —“I do not think the time has arrived
for the creation of a School of Journalism. The population is still too
small to warrant such an outbreak. But it is highly desirable that
our journalists should be as well equipped for their work as other
professional men for theirs.”
“A good general education is essential, but it should be of a kind
as far removed as possible from the purely academic ideal —of learn-
ing merely for its own sake,, and without reference to the life of
to-day. Classics, Modern Literature, History, Philosophy must con-
descend to come out of the past and into the present, and this they
have rarely been willing to do in British Universities. Even if they
did so, they would be far from meeting the requirements of the jour-
nalist, who, of necessity, lives in the firing-line of progress, and should
therefore be well-informed as to all the problems which occupy the
attention of his contemporaries. For this reason it seems to me ex-
tremely important that he should have given special study to such
subjects as the following:
(1) Modern History (right up to date).
(2) Constitutional History,
(3) Political Science.
(4) Economics (Political Economy).
(5) Sociology.
(6) Statistics.
(7) Elementary Accountancy.
(8) Commercial and Industrial Law.
(9) Administration (National, State and Municipal).
“For the technique of journalism, all that seems necessary at
present is the appointment of a competent lecturer, who should, of
course, be an experienced journalist.
“I am glad you (Mr. Whyte) refer to the matriculation difficulty.
In my own Department of Economics and Commerce we have the
same trouble. Many men of mature age come to us, get interested in
the work, and wish to take a degree; but they baulk at the necessity
of having to matriculate, for that means going back to schoolboy
subjects in which they have no interest. It is not unlikely that some


thing will be done in the near future for this class of student —often
among the best we get.’’
INSPECTOR S. H. SMITH.
From Inspector S. H. Smith, Inspector of Continuation Schools,
N.S.W., and author of “The History of Education in Australia,”
“Careers for Boys,” etc.: —“I suppose I am safe in assuming that the
outstanding qualities required in a successful journalist are (1) the
power of forming independent opinions, and (2) the power of clearly
and forcefully setting forth these opinions. There are some boys who
could never, in any circumstances, make successful journalists,
however thoroughly they were educated. The first point, then, would
be to ‘catch your hare.’ A parent or a teacher who found a boy
very fond of reading, and especially of reading other than fiction,
with first-rate powers of observation, with facility in expressing him-
self in writing, with any kind of originality or unconventionality of
thought or expression, would mark that boy out as a potentially suc-
cessful journalist. If the boy could write out a description of some
event or occurrence in such a way as to impress the reader with the
fact that it was interesting to the writer, he would indicate the pos-
session of powers which only need to be developed, I take it, to be-
come a good journalist. Of course, good spelling would be vital,
and the hand-writing must also be good, at least in the early stages.
But those are the mere mechanical arts of the profession. I would
not be in favor of special schools for journalism, because I believe
that the best school would be the practical work of a journalist,
superimposed upon a solid groundwork of general education, which
would have given the breadth of view necessary to anyone who aspires
to be a publicist. Thus any boy who passes through the ordinary
High School course should have received the necessary groundwork,
especially if, in addition to the English course, the boy has done a
good deal of independent, systematic reading on his own account.
The ideal course, I think, would be one up to the High School Inter-
mediate Certificate stage, in English, History, Geography, Arithmetic
and Alegbra, French and German, Physics and Chemistry, and Busi-
ness Principles. As alternative subjects, I would include Latin,
Music and Art. They are all desirable, but I doubt whether any
child could be expected to take more than eight subjects. Seven is
usually supposed to be the limit. During the next stage, the Leaving
Certificate High School stage, I think the youth might drop Physics
and Chemistry, and take up in their place two other sciences, say,
Botany and Geology. Then possibly Geography would need to be
dropped in favor of the more practical and immediately useful
subject, Economics. Shorthand, I suppose, would come in as one of
the subjects of the last year, perhaps in place of Mathematics. The
misfortune of this suggested course is that it would not give admis-
sion to the Arts course at the University, which, of course, I would
hold to be the proper stage to complete the formal education of an
efficient journalist. So long as the University insists upon the
mediaeval requirement of a dead language as a passport to the Arts
course, it would be necessary to drop out one of the subjects re-
commended by me in order to qualify for admission to that course.”
MR. WHYTE SUMS UP.
In the course of summing up the evidence obtained by him, Mr.
Whyte said:—Here are some extracts from an article on “Journalism
as a Profession,” contributed to the May (1917) number of “Hermes,”
the magazine of the University of Sydney, by Dr. F. M. Gellatly, LL.D.,
formerly financial editor of the Sydney Morning Herald, and later


Director of the Federal Bureau of Scientific Research. Since this was
written, the death of Dr. Gellatly has taken place.
While the relationship between University men and jour-
nalists has! ever been of a cordial character, they live in dis-
similar atmospheres, and for the most part fail to understand one
another’s point of view. The University graduate is apt to look
upon the journalist as a man who is always loose in his facts,
who is disregardful of authorities, and, in fact, is what may best
be described by the word “slap-dash.’’ The newspaper man, on
the other hand, regards the University man as too slow, as
pedantic, as unoriginal, a mere mirror of other men’s minds. As
one who is both a journalist and a graduate, I must admit that
there is a good deal in both contentions. The journalist has
something to learn from the University man, while the Univer-
sity man cannot afford to neglect emulating in some degree the
quickness and the brightness of the journalist. . .
First of all, can the University be of any service to jour-
nalism? I think it can, with some limitations. Journalists, like
poets, are not made. But such as are born journalists can be
improved. . . We journalists know that the ranks of journalism
cannot be unduly swollen. A School of Journalism at the Univer-
sity would utterly fail if its students comprised young men whose
parents had beforehand selected journalism as their future pro-
fession. Nine out of every ten, possibly 95 out of every 100,
could never become effective journalists, who would do credit to
themselves and to their craft. But if in any way the University
could get hold of that tenth, or that twentieth, whichever it is,
and give them a University training, nothing but good could re-
sult. . . . Where, then, is the way out? It lies just here: That
the selective process must be left just where it now is, that is,
to the newspaper proprietors. They try young men, and weed
out the unsuitable. Only such as are reasonably fit remain.
These should be taken in hand by the University, if it can get
them. Possibly the newspaper proprietors would co-operate. In
a minor way some of them do so to-day. Several young jour-
nalists, with the knowledge and approval of their employers, are
taking lectures, chiefly, if not exclusively, in Arts (Commerce
and Economics) and in Law. The other faculties have not at-
tracted them, the difficulty being probably that of making the
time fit. The journalist does not, nowadays at least, work any
longer hours than most other men who are compelled to earn
their living, but his hours are necessarily awkward. This fact
would have to be provided for in any School of Journalism that
might be established.
Now, a University education is not only no bar to a journalist,
it is a great advantage. Where it has seemed to be a bar was in
those cases in which a man, having passed through, say,
the Arts course with some credit, was under the impression that
he was at once fitted to take an important position in a news-
paper office. He vainly believed that if he was not fitted to be-
come the editor-in-chief, he at least could write leaders. What
he should have realised was that the profession of journalism has
to be learnt, just as any other profession must be. He must start
at the bottom and go through the mill. If he by any chance
escapes the early drudgery, he will suffer in competency all his
life. There is no royal road to editorial chairs. . . Journalism,
said Mr. Justice Isaacs recently, is a profession sui generis; and
he was right. It cannot be measured by ordinary standards. . .
It was once practically impossible for a mere' reporter to
become a member of the editorial staff. The former were the


plebeians, the latter the patricians of the calling. To-day, how-
ever, the Press has been so democratised that ability could take
the boy who handles “copy” to the editor’s chair, and nothing
but ability could do so. There is no such thing as influence in
a newspaper office. Social position, wealth, friends, political
pull, all count for nought. They may in some cases get a man
a start, but to hold his position down, as our friends across the
water would put it, he must deliver the goods. So nowadays
practically every newcomer must begin by being a cadet, and then
go through the various grades of junior reporter, general, senior,
and then, if he is lucky, he may become leader of the staff, sub-
editor, or the editor himself.
I have quoted at considerable length from this article (continued
Mr. Farmer Whyte), because, coming from one who is a journalist,
as well as a University graduate, it is, for the purpose we have in
view, full of “wise saws and modern instances.” Dr. Gellatly gets to
the root of the matter. He knows. And in referring me to this
article, he makes one or two additional observations. “As an inter-
mediary stage,” he writes, “could it not be possible to get the A.J.A.
and, say, the Institute of Journalists to arrange for a series of lectures
upon professional subjects? I would suggest, for example, lectures
upon:—The art of leader-writing, descriptive writing, condensation,
libel law, interviewing, sub-editing, proof-reading, anonymity and the
mechanical side of a newspaper. If the lecturers were carefully
selected, and took a little trouble, their discourses would be of great
interest. I would suggest further that the lectures should be pub-
lished so as to give them the widest possible value.”
Dr. Gellatly is right when he says that, no matter what scheme
of higher education for journalists may be decided on, complete suc-
cess is not to be hoped for without the co-operation of the newspaper
proprietors; and as furnishing an encouraging light on this important
aspect of the matter, he quotes from a paper read some years ago by
Mr. J. O. Fairfax, of the Sydney Morning Herald, before the annual
congress of the Institute of Journalists of Great Britain. Mr. Fairfax
said: —
“I hope the day is not far distant when an efficient School of
Journalism will be in working order. . . . Meanwhile in default
of a special course or degree of journalism, we are doing what
we can to encourage University men to take up press work, and
several are already on the staffs of the leading daily papers. So
we are trying to give effect to the doctrines in which I have a
profound belief that, wherever and however we can get our men,
modern journalism wants the very best.”
And again:
“Those who are responsible for the management of news-
papers of any position and influence know how welcome men are
who have had the best liberal education before they took up jour-
nalism. But they know, too, that some have fallen by the way-
side, because they had no technical knowledge of the work, and
all were too busy to teach them. The profession is not so over-
crowded with the best men that we can afford any wastage of the
best material, and the better educated the people become the
more need we have of pressmen of the highest qualifications.”
This, I think, may be taken as representing the views of newspaper
proprietors as a whole. There is every reason why the proprietors
should co-operate in such a movement as this, and if, on the other
hand, there is a genuine desire on the part of the employees to im-
prove their education, and so, inevitably, improve the status of
their profession, I feel sure that that co-operation will be obtained.


EVIDENCE ANALYSED.
Analysing the evidence, Mr. Whyte remarked: —We may now
proceed to consider carefully the views expressed by the authorities
quoted above. On the fundamentals practically all are agreed—the
importance of a liberal education to begin with, and then a special
training in special subjects; but as to what these special subjects
should be, opinions differ, and it should be our aim, first, to find those
subjects about which all are agreed, and, secondly, to make a wise
selection from the rest. When we come to the question of establish-
ing a School of Journalism in connection with the University, we find
a wide divergence of opinion. For myself, I confess that I have my
doubts about it. Journalism is not a thing that can be taught like
law and medicine and engineering, for in those branches of know-
ledge the information that is imparted to the student at the Univer-
sity equips him for his life’s work, whereas the best part of a journa-
list’s education is that which he gives to himself. This must always be
the case, whether there be a School of Journalism or not. I do not
mean to suggest, of course, that the lawyer, the doctor, the engineer,
the scientist, have learnt all there is for them to learn when they
pass out of the University gates—they go on adding to their know-
ledge—but they are concerned only with that sort of knowledge that
has to do' with their particular profession; and, as Dr. Gellatly re-
marks, there is no kind of information, no branch of knowledge, that
is not of value to the journalist. In proportion to the wideness of a
man’s knowledge is his usefulness in the field of journalism, for
journalism, in its broad sense, confines itself to no particular part of
men’s activities, and, indeed, to no particular part of the world, but
embraces all. The journalist is a citizen of the world, and he goes
on educating himself all the time. If he does not do this, he must
give way to the man who does.
There are, of course, journalists and journalists. And this
brings me to a remark that is made by two of my correspondents—
“ The journalist is born, not made.” I accept this with some limita-
tion. A poet will write poems, and cannot help himself, but the
journalist must be born and made. True, he may have the instinct
of the journalist, but that will not take him far without a sound
education, and without considerable application to his work, and to
the continual acquirement of knowledge. With almost as much truth
it might be said that the lawyer, the doctor, the engineer, the clergy-
man, the scientist, or the school teacher, is born, not made. No
matter what a man’s profession, he must be born for it if he is to
succeed. The engineer would doubtless be a failure, comparatively
speaking, as a softgoodsman; the successful architect might fail
miserably as a banker.
The profession of the school teacher approximates to that of the
journalist; and a great headmaster, like Dr. Arnold, may be com-
pared to a great journalist—a Delane, a Mudford, a Dana. Both are
many-sided men, and all things come within their ambit. Both teacher
and journalist are engaged in the work of education, and there is no
greater work than this. But the journalist has a class-room larger
than that of any teacher—he seeks to educate the people of the
whole nation, of the whole world. If he is to succeed in this great
task, with men and women as his pupils, instead of children —a task
in which he even attempts to educate the educationists —he must be
properly equipped for it. This is an age of specialisation, in jour-
nalism as in other things, and this is a fact that must not be lost
sight of in any attempt to provide for the education of journalists.
America furnishes the best example of this specialisation, and the
great journals of that country are in never-ending competition for


the services of the best writers, whether it be in the field of literature,
of dramatic criticism, of descriptive writing, or some other depart
ment of newspaper work.
The question of signed articles has nothing to do with this in-
quiry, but one may be permitted to express the view that in America
and in France the leading newspapers owe their commanding posi-
tion in large measure to the recognised standing of the men who
contribute to their pages —men who are known to the public at large
by reason of the signed article. I believe this is also largely the
case in Germany; and in the United Kingdom we see a growing ten-
dency in the same direction. Even in Australia the old tradition of
the anonymity of the Press has been rudely upset by the Federal
law requiring the signing of articles relating to elections and referen-
dums. At the same time, we must not forget that it has been cus-
tomary for writers on special subjects to sign their articles in certain
of our own newspapers—-in certain branches of sport, for instance.
To the journalist there is no compliment like “the craft compli-
ment” —, a nd whether he writes anonymously, or under a nom-de-plume,
his work is known to his fellow-craftsmen; but the fact that some
newspapers search out the best man they can find in the sporting
world, and insist on their articles being signed, may be taken as in-
dicating that the proprietors recognise the value of a man who is
known to be an expert in this subject. And if in sport, why not in
other things? If in leading and other political articles at election
time, why not at other times?
The object in putting these questions is not to discuss the merits
or demerits of the signed article —and the writer of this report has
yet to be convinced that the merits outweigh the demerits —but to
lead up to a consideration of two things that are pertinent to this
inquiry. The first is this: If men are to be qualified to teach in any
special subject, whether they sign their articles or not, they must
have a special training in that subject. And the second is this: No
University course, and no training in any School of Journalism, is of
any use to men engaged in certain expert journalistic work. In other
cases, it would undoubtedly be of some help; in no case would it be re-
garded as all-sufficient. In the case of dramatic criticism, for in-
stance, some valuable groundwork might be furnished in the way of
lectures —the early drama, the unities, and this and that but the
chief part of the dramatic critic’s education is that which he gives to
himself, and he gets it mostly by going to the theatre and by reading.
In the case of the turf or any other sporting writer, it is difficult to see
what benefit he could derive from attending a School of Journalism;
it would be but time wasted. As Mr. Adam McCay remarks, the
special knowledge that such newspaper men as these require is not
to be acquired in that way.
Nevertheless, there are many other men in journalism to whom
a University course offers great advantages. We have all. of us seen
the University graduate in journalism. We have seen him succeed,
and we have seen him fail; and the conclusion we are led to is that,
whilst a University education will not make a journalist out of a
man who was never meant to be a journalist, it will make a bettei
journalist than he would otherwise be out of the man who has
the natural bent for it. In other words, a man’s heart must be in
his work, he must love his calling, if he is to succeed; and this ap-
plies, of course, to any man who is to make a success of his pro-
fession, no matter in what field it be.
It follows that a young man who has taken up journalism for
the love of it will become a better journalist, and a better man all
round, if the opportunity is given to him to pass through the Univer-


sity, adding greatly to his knowledge, and imbibing that refinement
and culture that are to be found within its walls. But whilst the
Arts course is good, a special course for his particular profession
would be better. It should not be beyond our power to agree in
conference with the newspaper proprietors, editors and managers
upon this special course, and it should not be too much to* ask of
the University authorities that they should help us to realise our
aims.
The relations between the Press and those in whose hands rests
the sacred trust of education have at all times been very friendlv.
Without the support of the Press the way of the education'st, thorny
as it is, might be much harder; and now that an opportunity is given
to our education authorities to do something which will not only be
a direct -benefit to the Press of Australia, but must, in the nature of
things, be of material and lasting benefit to the country at large, it
is sui ely not too much to ho-pe that the opportunity will be embraced.
Not long ago there was established at the University of Sydney
a Chair of Architecture —“A new and experimental undertaking,” to
use the words of Professor MacCallum, in his Memorandum of 1913 —
and at the time of writing this, the University Senate was consider-
ing a proposal that the Government be urged to place a sum on the
Estimates for the establishment of a Chair of Domestic Science. If
these are possible, if they are justified, surely one may be pardoned
for thinking that the claims of journalism are entitled to some con-
sideration.
If we ask ourselves how it is that so few University graduates
take up journalism, or, taking it up, remain in it, we shall find the
explanation in the fact that they are under a great handicap com-
pared with other young men who, whilst lacking the finish of a
University education, have yet the natural aptitude for journalism,
and have been gaining that special kind of knowledge which is so
essential to the journalist. The journalist, if he is to make: any
headway, must have some literary ability to- begin with, and for the
rest he must have a knowledge of life and character, and, above all,
trained faculty of observation. Carlyle, in his address to the students
of the University of Edinburgh, remarked: “It is the first of all -pro-
blems tor a man to find out what kind of work he is to do in the
universe. . . . The most unhappy of all men is the man that can-
not tell what he is going to do, that has got no work cut out for
him in the world, and does not go into it.” You will find, as a
general rule, that the journalist who gets to the top of the tree is
a man who found out early what kind of-work he was to do in the
world, and got into it early. The problem for us, then, is to- take the
young men who, with the natural inclination for journalism, and the
natural gifts that make for success, have already started on their
career, and allow them to pass through a University course. And
that should be a special course for journalism.
It cannot be done without the sympathetic and practical co-
operation of the proprietors. I have heard the case of Dr. Gellatly
cited as furnishing an example to other journalists. We are ail
proud of what Dr. Gellatly has accomplished, but he could never have
accomplished it i£ he had not had certain advantages, which are
denied to the general run of newspaper men. He had fixed hours of
work, for one thing, and was able to attend lectures in his own time
whereas most newspaper men are less favorably situated. In this
respect, matters have improved somewhat in recent years, but, ex-
cept in a few special cases, it is quite impossible for newspaper men
to attend lectures regularly. Some of us have made valiant attempts
from time to time to do it, but have sooner or later been compelled


to abandon it. There is only one way. If it is to be done at all, it
can only be done bv such an arrangement of the office work as will
allow of the attendance at lectures of those who are desirous of
taking the course; and there must be evening as well as day lectures.
Everything, therefore, depends upon the attitude of the proprietors.
These are days of revolutions, and even journalism is not immune.
The relations between newspaper proprietors and newspaper
workers have undergone a radical change, in common with those of
employers and employees in most walks of life, as a result of Con-
ciliation and Arbitration Acts; but there is no reason why employers
and employees, taking things as they find them, and laying stress on
the word “conciliation,” should not endeavor to turn these things to
their mutual advantage, in a mutual spirit of friendliness. It should
be the earnest desire of all journalists who love their profession and
value their own place in it to improve themselves in every possible
way, for the time is coming when only the fittest will survive; and,
on the other hand, one cannot help thinking that the< proprietors,
appreciating this effort on our part, will be ready to do their share,
seeing that they will in due time reap their reward.
THE MATRICULATION EXAMINATION.*
And here I come to a point which I regard as of very great im-
portance. Many of our rising journalists—perhaps the great majority
of them—are young men who found themselves compelled to earn
their living at an early age, and if a matriculation examination is to
be laid down as a hard and fast principle before allowing them to
proceed to a degree (assuming, that is, that it be made possible to
obtain a degree in journalism), I fear the result would be disastrous—
they simply would not bother. The experience of the School of
Economics, as related by Professor Irvine, of Sydney, would be re-
peated in the School of Journalism. In other words, the school would
fail to reach the very men it ought to reach. One has nothing to
say against the matriculation examination, of course, as applied to
youths proceeding direct from the schools to the University, but it
does seem to me that our University authorities might relax this
ancient rule in the case of men of mature age who would consider it
time wasted to go back to “schoolboy subjects.” Let the greater in-
clude the less. Let the first-year course include matriculation.
Modern times, modern manners. The trend of modern education
is to eliminate all unnecessary subjects. Life is too short for the
wasting of time. What we ask our University authorities to do —
in waiving the matriculation examination in special cases —is to take
some account of what is known as the “law of compensation,” to
recognise that, if a man has, through force of circumstances, been
deprived of certain classroom benefits, there is a compensating ad-
vantage which balances things in the work he has been doing in the
world, and the experience he has been gaining of life and its many
phases and problems. I was much struck, some time ago, in reading
in “The School World” an address delivered to the Educational Science
section of the British Association at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, by the
Rev. W. Temple, M.A., President of the Section. It ought to be'read
in full by all education authorities. For my own purpose, I make
these extracts from it:
“Anyone who has taken any part in administering our present
educational methods must surely be convinced that we are relying
far too much upon books as our method of instruction. There
are many people of very decided intelligence and capacity who
can scarcely learn anything at all out of books. . . . There is
a real distinction between education, the aim of which is the


employment of leisure, and that the aim of which is the practical
work of life In order that a man may live his life, and
discharge his responsibilities as a citizen he needs knowledge.
Wihat is the most important sort of knowledge to have? None
can be put on a level with the knowledge? of human nature.
Whatever a man is going to do, he will have to deal with his
fellow-men, and find his own place among them. This knowledge
cannot be adequately obtained from books alone, and training
through membership in a social, life is the best means of it. But
it may also be fostered in a very high degree by what are called
the humane studies; the study of the best that men have thought
in philosophy, the study of their highest aspirations and deepest
woes in literature, the study of their attempts and their achieve*
ments in history. This is the most serviceable of all scientific
studies that a man can undertake. ... It is undoubtedly best
for the student to begin at the beginning, and the beginning of
European thought is to be found in, the pages of Aeschylus,
Sophocles and Euripides, of Plato and Aristotle, of Herodotus and
Thucydides. But the study of these great literatures, with their
attendant history, is largely ruined by two facts. One is that
far more ,boys are driven into this study than will ever seriously
profit by it, and for this the Universities are, on the whole, to
blame, though it is to be remembered that nearly all professional
examinations make a fetish of elementary Latin, requiring not
enough of it to be any kind of use, but quite enough to waste a
great deal of the student’s time. And the other ruinous fact is
that we have continued a system appropriate to a time when there
were few subjects to supply the place of mental gymnastics.”
I have quoted this to point a moral and strengthen an argument.
The world moves, and the old methods must be revised to meet
modern needs. What is needed to-day is clear thinking on this greatest
of all questions, education. If there is something that stands in the
way of men desiring an education that will make them more valuable
members of society, something that stands in the way of progress
and enlightenment of the nation, it ought to go, and the end will
justify it. If the proper study of mankind is man, then the journalist
who has been rubbing shoulders with the world (and at the same
time pursuing a course of judicious reading) may well claim exemption
from an irksome and unnecessary preliminary examination —though,
of course, many journalists have already matriculated. If it means
the establishing of a precedent, what matter? It is a good thing to
establish a wise precedent.
AMERICA’S EXAMPLE.
Turning to America, where special schools have been established
in connection with some of the Universities for the training of
journalists, we can have little doubt that much good is being done.
When, in January, 1914, Professor Walter Williams, Dean of the
Faculty of Journalism at the University of Missouri, visited
Australia, in the course of a tour in which he was studying the world’s
journalism, it was my privilege to interview him for the Sydney
Morning Herald. The remarkable fact is that Professor Williams him-
self has never taken a University degree, though several honorary
degrees have been conferred upon him. “I never had the time for
it,’’ he said, for his experience was very similar to that of most
journalists. “I began work at a very early age, and, like many
another journalist whose hours of work are so irregular, I never got
the opportunity of going to a University. But my experience is that
the man with a University education does not always make a good


journalist. The qualities that make a journalist are not to be obtained
at any University—or, I should say, were not to be obtained at one
until Schools of Journalism were founded.” A few days later, when
he was entertained iby the New South Wales Institute of Journalists,
he said: —“A journalist should be a trained man —trained in history,
in government, in the use of English, in psychology, in sociology, in
languages, humanity, philsophy, and science. This is the training
we hope to give in the Schools of Journalism. If that is supplemented
by knowledge of technique and phraseology, the ability to write and
use that marvellously fluid instrument of torture and education, the
English language, we have done something to promote the interests
of journalism and the interests of the Commonwealth, and the world
as well.”
EDUCATIONISTS’ PROS AND CONS,
Experience Teaches, But Not Everything.
Some of the most interesting articles in the “ Journalist” of a few years
ago dealt with the subject of this pamphlet, and though there is not space
in which to quote all those contributions, it will be of advantage to
select representative opinions from other States than New South Wales.
Particular interest attaches to the views of Professor Scott, who, before
being appointed to a chair of History, was first a journalist and afterwards
a reporter on the Federal Hansard staff.
PROFESSOR ERNEST SCOTT.
Professor Ernest iScott, of the Melbourne University, wrote as
fellows:
“The subject of providing for an educational qualification for jour-
nalists is a very old one. It was under the consideration of the
English Institute of Journalists, of which I was an original member,
at least twenty-eight years-ago; and it was discussed by the Melbourne
Institute of Journalists about twenty-three years ago. I must confess
that I never saw much practical value in the schemes then formu-
lated. Journalism differs from the profession of medicine and the
law in this important respect: That the lawyer and the doctor work
independently; they make for themselves professional reputations
by their individual exertions; they are not employed persons. But
journalists, in the nature of things, work for newspaper proprietors,
who are at liberty to employ whom they will. If an educational course
for journalists were prescribed by any society, and a newspaper pro-
prietor chose to employ a person who had not obtained the diploma,
who would prevent him? Would the diplomaed journalists refuse
to write reports, articles and paragraphs for a newspaper which printed
contributions from undiplomaed people? If a man with a genius
for writing offered his services to a newspaper proprietor, would he
be debarred if he had not passed a prescribed examination? Parlia-
ment allows the legal and medical professions to set educational stan-
dards, not because it is desired to confer privileges upon lawyers and
doctors, but because it is in the public interest that unqualified prac-
titioners should not be allowed to wreak their incompetency upon the
public. But an incompetent journalist could safely be left to the
gentle admonitions of the sub-editor and the boot-toe of the proprietor
or manager. Ido not suppose that the University of Melbourne would
hesitate to grant a diploma in journalism if there were a demand for
it by a representative professional body. But I doubt whether you


can teach practical journalism anywhere else than in a newspaper
office. You can teach things which a journalist is the better for
knowing; the ordinary B.A. course would be suitable in that respect.
But that course is already open to all who choose to take it.”
SIR HERBERT NICHOLLS.
Sir Herbert Nicholls, Chief Justice of Tasmania, stated:—
“Journalism, in one important aspect, closely resembles a bar-
rister's work. Both are done in full view of the public, and are, there-
fore, subject to continual criticism. Taken broadly, it may be said
that skill and incompetence, either at the bar or on the press, are
sure of being sent each to its proper place. Still, it would be well
if those who contemplate a journalistic career could have special
training for it, before being faced with the vast demands upon their
learning, powers of expression, tact and worldly wisdom, which so
often daunt the beginner at press work.
“It would be well also if those who are unfitted for journalism
could discover that fact before they are committed to the task of
trying to earn their living on a paper.
“An influential paper written in bad English undoes the work of
the schools, and can corrupt a community, while a good literary style
in a leading journal affects the writing and speaking of all its readers.
“Grammar and style can be taught. General knowledge, of which
no pressman can have enough, can be taught, and the mechanics, the
responsibilities and the morals of press work can be taught. I can
see no reason, therefore, why the universities should not be able to
frame a scheme for a diploma in journalism, or why they and the
High Schools should not be able to provide a course of study which
would enable every intending journalist greatly to improve his quali-
fications, and would also attract and benefit many other persons,
purely as a liberal education.
“The rights of the real journalists and the responsible and honor-
able nature of their 'profession have never been adequately recog-
nised. The proposal now made seems to me to be well calculated to
improve the status of journalists and benefit the public. I have no
right whatever to make promises on behalf of the University of Tas-
mania, but I know that institution well enough to prophesy that it will
be found heartily willing to assist, as far as it can.”
MR. THEODORE FINK.
In expressing his views, Mr. Theodore Fink, chairman of direc-
tors of the Herald and Weekly Times Proprietary (Melbourne),
stated: —
“I know that many university courses for training journalists have
been established in the United States and elsewhere, but I do not think
the time has arrived in Australia for any such University course. I
doubt if any university here is equipped for such a course, and make-
shifts are useless. They waste time and energy, and mislead
students.
“A patchwork course, such as has been suggested, composed of
smatterings of English literature and crammings of political or econo-
mic history, and other snippets taken from several university courses,
such as Arts, Law and Science, do not give necessarily the breadth
of view and outlook which a university degree should denote.
“Again, university work, it is universally agreed, should com-
mence after full secondary school instruction, that' is, after 18 or
17 at the earliest. Three or four years’ university training on the
top of that would delay the entrance into a newspaper office until it


Is too late. From the Australian point of view, journalism itself is
the best training for a journalist, but it should be based upon very
sound education until 18 at least, and wide reading afterwards.
“Any good university course for any faculty in Arts or Science,
or, in fact, any professional course, is an ideal mental discipline, if
time and money permit. But, apart from and in addition to this, the
more a man knows and reads the better. A man who knows Pal-
grave’s Golden Treasury off by heart, as a great many of my early
companions did, and who knows enough of the great and enduring
masterpieces not to surrender to the morbid literary freaks of the
hour, whether German or Scandinavian, is usually a better writer and
thinker than many students who have ploughed through a severe
course, getting judgments ready made from authority.
“The man who seemed to me to know most about literature in
the way of appreciation and sound judgment, is the man who has
read because he liked it, and has mixed his learning with life.
“<So the journalist ought to be a reader and a lover of good
bookb, familiar with the panorama of history (even the history of to-
day), thought and politics, rather than a scholar.
“My knowledge of journalists of the last generation in Victoria
gives me a long list of such men, and although the ranks during later
years have been recruited here and there by some men of university
attainment, there are not many of them among the ranks of robust
and effective journalists, apart from a few scholarly and elegant
writers.”
MR. F. TATE.
The Director of Education of Victoria, Mr. Frank Tate, M A
C.M.G., 1.5.0., said:
“At the outset we must recognise that the term ‘Journalism’
covers work of widely differing character and importance. Reporters
who are engaged in collecting and presenting in more or less attrac-
tive form the ordinary happenings, ‘the abstracts and brief chronicles
of the time’ from the public departments, or from the law and police
courts, or from the world of sport, are journalists equally with those
who, by editorials and special articles, shape the policy of a great
paper, and endeavour to show ‘the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure.’ The demands made by their work on each
class of journalist are many and varied. In some cases the demand
is for developed common sense and worldly wisdom, for the faculty
of discerning a good subject and how best to attack it, for a sense
of due proportion in viewing events, rather than for technical skill,
advanced scholarship, or encyclopedic information. Any discussion,
therefore, on the education of journalists must take these facts into
consideration.
“Those whose duty it is ‘to hold as it were the mirror up’ to the
community, to gather news and present it with little or no comment,
except such as is embodied in the telling, must undoubtedly have the
ability to turn out paragraphs and special articles easily and cor-
rectly, and must have a good general education —sufficient, at least,
to bring them into intelligent touch with the great variety of sub-
jects they are inevitably called upon to handle. A really good
secondary education, preferably in a big school, should suffice to give
these qualifications. (Such a technical subject as shorthand could
be and, I think, should be learned at school. I see many good
reasons why shorthand should form a portion of the; course of study
in all secondary education. Ability to use shorthand is valuable in
many branches of professional and commercial work. But these
qualifications alone will not carry the journalist far. He can be
taught to use his mother tongue easily and correctly. He can be


given a well-proportioned fund of useful knowledge, and he can be
taught how to use books of reference, and, generally, how to acquire
new knowledge. These things a school can do.
“But for any real success he must have natural qualities highly
developed, such as tact and good nature, push and energy, imagina-
tion and quick sympathy, and a strong sense of humor. Then, too,
there are qualifications arising out of a knowledge of the technics
of his profession. No school or college can give the qualities arising
out of mental endowment, and I doubt whether any school of jour-
nalism could develop these inborn qualities so quickly and so surely
as the routine discipline of journalistic work on a good newspaper.
The young journalist is learning to reflect in his work the every-day
happenings, and the best of all schools for this is to be mixed up
intimately with the vigorous life of the world around him.
“As for the staff officers of the journalistic army, a different train-
ing, or, at any rate, a supplementary training, is desirable. To-day
the newspaper endeavors to present and interpret the big problems
that are continually arising in our society. It voices, or should
voice, the forward aspirations of the thinkers among us, and it sug*
gests practical methods for advance.. Surely, some higher qualifica-
tion than worldly wisdom gathered from mixing with men and affairs
is needed in those who claim to guide the community. Worldly wis-
dom born of experience may be a fine thing wherewith to check
over-impulsive action,, but every society needs the ‘overseeing power
to kindle and restrain.’ It is essential, then, in my opinion, that the
higher ranks of journalism should be recruited from men who have
at some time made a disinterested and careful study of such subjects
as economics, sociology, education, and the like. It is easy for the
man in the street and for the man in Parliament to speak on prac-
tical questions arising out of these subjects, but the man who is
commenting upon and criticising public movements should have a
knowledge of these questions based upon fundamental principles. The
training given in the universities in the faculties of Arts and La,\vs
should be useful to journalists, but, unfortunately, in the Melbourne
University the subjects above-named do not at present receive the
attention they deserve.”
WESTERN AUSTRALIA ACTS.
The Western Australia District has taken practical action in the
direction of securing educational facilities for journalists. With a
view to securing the opinions of all concerned in the outcome of its
inquiry, the District Committee invited the following gentlemen to
assist it by forwarding statements of their views upon the question:
Mr. H. P. Colebatch, Minister of Education; Mr. T. Walker,
ex-Minister of Education (1911-16); Professor Walter Murdoch, Pro-
fessor of English literature, University of W.A.; Messrs. A. Dangler,
Editor-in-Chief, A. Carson, Associate Editor, and C. Frost, Chief of
Staff of the West Australian; Messrs. A. Lovekin, Editor-in-Chief,
and W. E. G. Salter, Associate Editor and Chief of Staff of the Daily
News; Messrs. J. MacCallum Smith, Managing Director, and J. E.
Webb, Editor of the Sunday Times; the Hon. J. W. Kirwan, Editor-in-
Chief, and E. H. Irving, Associate Editor, of the Kalgoorlie Miner.
Statements were forwarded by Messrs. Colebatch, Walker, Murdoch,
Frost, Salter, and Kirwan. In a report to the members of the Dis-
trict the Committee stated:
The first question arising for consideration—the method of
selection of youths desirous of entering into the profession of
journalism —is not the least difficult. The Committee has carefully


considered the suggestion put forward by Mr. Frost, in the course of
his contribution to the discussion, that no lad who by his 18th year
has not passed the Senior Public Examination (known in Western
Australia as the Leaving Certificate Examination) should be eligible
for membership of Association. Whilst realising the urgent need for
some such educational standard on the part of youths about to enter
the profession, the Committee has come to the conclusion that it
would be unwise to place such a barrier in the way of the young
aspirant to a journalistic career, because, as Professor Murdoch so
aptly puts it, “ability to pass examinations is one thing; journalistic
ability is quite another thing.” It agrees, moreover, with Dr. Gellatl.v
that the selective process must be left to the proprietors, and that it
must be their task to try out young men and weed out the unsuitable.
At the same time the Committee is of opinion that if, as far a 3
possible, proprietors were to ensure that the youths selected for
cadetship were possessed of proper recommendations as to their
fitness for a journalistic career, much waste of time and energy on
the part of proprietors and their chiefs of staff in trying to fit
unsuitable lads for newspaper work, and of would-be journalists
themselves, would be obviated. It is true, as has been argued, almost
ad nauseam, that “journalists are born, not made.” It is equally true
that these born journalists are capable of improvement and mental
development by education, and, in the opinion of the Committee, some
such standard as that indicated should furnish the foundation on
which to build up a more specialised education after the entry of the
cadet upon his professional career. The Committee would not go so
far as to fix a definite and imperative qualification for entrance into
the profession, because it is aware that there might be special cases
in which natural aptitude was so obvious that to refuse admission
because of the mere failure to present proof of education, with which
the applicant had never probably had the opportunity to equip himself,
might result in the loss of excellent material, which could be furnished
with the necessary educational equipment at a later stage. It merely
recommends that, as far as is reasonably practicable, such a standard
should be insisted upon, and to this recommendation it would only
add that under the new order of things Australian journalism should
readily attract the brightest and most promising students.
Having arrived at this conclusion as to the general standard of
education which should be required from applicants for entry into
the profession, the Committee next considered the various proposals
which have been made for the institution of Schools of Journalism,
the establishment of lectureships and professorships, and the granting
of diplomas. The difficulties which have presented themselves in
connection with all such schemes appear insuperable, but the Com-
mittee is of opinion that a useful course of University teaching could
bo devised without great difficulty, and in this connection it desires
to direct attention to the paper furnished by Professor Murdoch, for
whose suggestions it is specially grateful. Briefly stated, Professor
Murdoch’s scheme provides for the attendance by young journalists
at courses of University lectures in certain subjects, to be arranged
between the Association and the 'Senate of the University, without
subsequent examination in such subjects, and, subject to the consent
of the Senate, he has kindly offered to prepare a special course in
English, “somewhat wider and somewhat less! academic than the
ordinary university course.” The Professor, as already pointed out,
is a stern opponent of what he considers “the prevalent mania for
examinations.” He regards the ability a journalist needs as quite
irrelevant to the ability to pass examinations, and would make use
of the University “simply as a place where the young journalist can
get knowledge.”


There is much to be said for the view that the passing of an
examination at the close of the University course provides an incentive
to make real use of the advantages the course affords, and gives the
student an opportunity to make a practical test of the extent of the
knowledge which he has drawn therefrom, but in this instance it must
for the present be assumed that those who attend the lectures will
realise the value of the teaching and make the most of it, and the
Committee therefore endorses in their entirety Professor Murdoch’s
proposals, and suggests that negotiations be opened up without delay
with a view to giving effect to them.
As to training in practical journalism, the Committee can only
reiterate the view so often expressed in the course of the discussion,
that the one school of practical journalism is the newspaper office.
Here again the future of the young journalist is almost entirely in the
hands of the proprietors. It is for them to see that during his cadet-
ship his sphere of practical experience is as wide as it possibly can
be. Some offices, fortunately, are excellent training-grounds in this
respect, others allow the cadet to settle down at one class of work
and to remain at that class only for the whole three years, with the
result that the so-called period of training is a farce. Members can
do their share by supervising the work of cadets, and a sound practical
training can be supplemented in several ways. Lectures and demon-
strations on the reading of proofs might be given to cadets, and we
are of opinion that the assistance of the printing trades instructors
at the Technical School should be invited with a view to arranging a
course of instruction. The suggestion of Dr. Gellatly as to the insti-
tution of a series of lectures on professional subjects is also well
worthy of consideration, and here again the co-operation of the pro-
prietors might be invited. Lastly, “The Journalist,” in the Committee’s
opinion, should be used to a far greater extent than at present for
the publication of articles helpful to the young journalist.
There is one other channel through which the education of the
journalist can be considerably extended —that of wide reading. This
phase of the question was touched upon at a very early stage of the
discussion by Mr. Theodore Fink (Chairman of Directors of the
Melbourne Herald and Weekly Times Company, a member of the
Melbourne University Council, and a recognised educational authority)
of Melbourne, who in the course of a thoughtful contribution, said:
“The more a man knows and reads the better. A Jman who knows
Palgrave’s Golden Treasury off by heart, as a great many of my early
companions did, and who knows enough of the great and enduring
masterpieces not to surrender to the morbid literary freaks of the
hour, is usually a better writer and thinker than many students who
have ploughed through a course, getting judgments ready made from
authority. The journalist ought to be a reader and a lover of good
books, familiar with the panorama of history (even the history of
to-day), thought and politics, rather than a scholar.” The Committee
is in full accord with this view and is of opinion that much advantage
might be derived from a specially planned course of reading, each
having a definite aim in view. Here again it suggests that the assist-
ance of Professor Murdoch be invoked.
The Committee would point out that the scheme above outlined
i°' necessarily of an experimental character. Actual working will
doubtless prove the need for many amendments, and it is hoped that
with successive additions it will become but the nucleus of a wider
and more effective system of education which will prove of real
service to Australian journalism, and, through that medium, to Aus-
tralia. The co-operation of the proprietors is, of course, the
first essential. The journalists on their part will have to sacrifice


time and pleasure; the proprietors may he asked to assist at times
by so arranging the official duties of the students as to allow of their
pursuing their studies uninterruptedly. The Committee is confident
that the requisite spirit of sympathy and support will be forthcoming
from every proprietary in the District, and that the proprietors will
welcome, equally with members, this important movement for self-
improvement.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
In conclusion the Committee submitted the following recom-
mendations: —
(1) That, as far as possible, each applicant for cadetship should
be possessed of a recommendation from some educational
authority, preferably his last headmaster, as to his fitness
for a journalistic career.
(2) (a) That negotiations be entered into with the Senate of
the University of Western Australia for the institution of a
special course of lectures in subjects to be arranged, students
not to be required to pass examinations in such subjects;
and that the assistance of the Hons. H. P. Colebatch and J.
W. Kirwan and Professor Murdoch in the negotiations be
sought.
(b) That proprietors be asked to afford opportunities to
cadets to pursue an uninterrupted course of study at these
lectures.
(3) (a) That it be a further request to all proprietors that cadets
be afforded the widest possible sphere of practical training
during the three years’ term.
(b) That it be a request to members to afford cadets all the
assistance in their power.
(c) That, if possible, lectures and demonstrations in prac-
tical subjects, including the reading of proofs, be instituted,
and that reports of these, as well as useful articles, be pub-
lished in “The Journalist” for the benefit of young journalists.
(4) That courses of reading for young journalists be devised and
that assistance in this matter also be sought.
(5) That before the above recommendations are given effect to:
(a) The Proprietors’ endorsement of the same be sought,
and
(b) Steps to be taken to ascertain the number of
journalists who are willing to take the suggested course of
University lectures provided that satisfactory arrangements
for the same can be made.
AUTHORITIES GIVE VIEWS.
Appended to this report were the following statements by Mr.
H. P. Colebatch, M.L.C., Minister for Education, and Professor Walter
Murdoch, of the Chair of English in the W.A. University:
MR. COLEBATCH.
Mr. H. P. Colebatch, M.L.C., who in private life is the proprietor
and editor of the Northam “Advertiser,’’ one of the leading country
newspapers in the State, and a journalist of over thirty years’ practical
experience in city, mining camp and provincial town, wrote:
“I take it the proposal to establish a University course in journa-
lism does not imply that at some future time the press will become a
close preserve for those who have obtained a diploma. If my assump-
tion is correct, two conclusions follow:


“(1) We need hardly debate the question of whether or not the
University graduate makes a better journalist than the youth who
goes straight to the paper from the public school, since the two
are still to be available for selection, and free to compete against
each other; and
“(2) Since the holding of a diploma is to give tne journalist
no such protection as is enjoyed by most of the learned professions,
the obtaining of it must not be made too difficult, and the encour-
agement to try for it must be real.
“I cannot imagine any but one answer to the question so
frequently raised in the Journalist: ‘Should journalists as a class be
better educated?’ Of course they should. There are few, if any,
classes in the community that would not be benefited by being better
educated. As one outcome of the war, we have England, France,
America and other countries expanding and reforming their educa-
tional systems, in the hope—as Dr. Fisher, the President of the Board
of Education in the present Imperial Government, puts it —of ‘giving
to every unit of the population a well-developed mind and a good
digestion.’ If boys and girls leaving school at fourteen to go into
shops, factories or farms are to be compelled to attend continuation
or technical classes for eight hours every week until they are eighteen,
those of the coming generation engaged in commerce and industry are
going to he better educated than their predecessors. Unless the
journalist also moves forward with the spirit of the times, he will not
be able to reflect, let alone lead, public opinion.
“Quite recently, thanks to your Association, much has been done
to improve the status of the journalist. He gets better pay and works
shorter hours than he did before. This will make the profession more
attractive than in the past, and may subject the young man, who goes
from the higher public school on to the reporting staff at, say, 17 to
19 years of age, to much keener competition than he has previously
experienced. Your efforts have given him some reasonable leisure
from employment; what more fitting than that you should also give
him opportunities to so spend that leisure that he may be better
equipped for the competition he will have to face?
“Let us take a typical case. An average lad, who has attended
the State school until he was fourteen, and a decent secondary, school
until he was eighteen, goes on to the reporting staff of a city paper.
It may be assumed that, during the closing years of his secondary
school course, he anticipated the career he was to follow, and devoted
some time to shorthand, as well as specialising in literature and essay
writing. His first care should be to perfect his shorthand by an
intensive course. It is a subject better learned in three months at
four hours per day than in two years at four hours per week. Also,
for a journalist, it is a subject worth learning thoroughly. The
question then arises: What is he going to do with his leisure hours?
I do not mean the leisure hours necessary for rest and refreshment,
but the leisure hours your Association has secured for him as a part
of the improvement it has made in the working conditions of the journa-
list. If he is wise, he will spend his leisure hours on his own improve-
ment, and your Association can do no better work than to help and
encourage him.
“Obviously it is through the medium of our Universities that
opportunity should be afforded to the city journalist. Mr. G. C.
Dixon’s article appeals to me as a wise and comprehensive review
of the position, and I would be prepared to endorse in its entirety his
concluding summary. I think it is chiefly a matter of enabling the


young journalist to continue at the University the studies he has
entered upon at the secondary school in English literature, history,
geography, French and economics, whilst he is at the same time
learning in the unequalled school of practical endeavor and work-a-day
worldly knowledge that the newspaper itself affords. It is incon-
ceivable that either the University authorities or the newspaper
proprietors will be backward in extending practical sympathy to a
project designed to extend the usefulness of the University (which
should be helpful to every profession and to every industry in the
country), and to maintain the power and influence of the press.”
PROFESSOR W. MURDOCH.
Professor Murdoch wrote:
“Having had some experience both as working journalist and as
University teacher, I have often thought about the question whether
the quality of Australian journalism and the status of Aus-
tralian journalists might not be bettered by some sort of
University course for journalists. I am convinced that some-
thing can be done, and therefore ought to be done, but I am also
convinced that the question is not by any means so simple as some
people would have us think, and that there are very grave dangers
to be guarded against. To begin with, let me warn you against
yielding to the prevalent mania for examinations. Ability to pass
examinations is one thing—journalistic ability is quite another thing;
and some of the ablest journalists I have known have been men who
did not distinguish themselves at school and could not have passed
even an entrance examination to a University. Put what obstacles
you will in the way of entrance to a journalistic career, but let them
be such obstacles as are to be overcome by the kind of ability a
journalist needs, not by some other and irrelevant kind of ability. By
shutting the door uipon all boys incapable of passing a University
examination, you would undoubtedly be shutting it in the faces of
many boys capable of first-class work in journalism. The same argu-
ment applies to the idea of a degree or diploma as to the idea of an
entrance examination.
"My own belief is that, for the present, and by way of tentative,
young journalists should be encouraged and aided to attend courses of
University lectures in certain subjects, but that they should not be
required to pass examinations in those subjects. The most useful
subjects would be, in my opinion, History, Economics, English Litera-
ture, French, German and Biology. (I include the last because the
modern journalist ought at least to have some idea of the methods
of science). Logic might also be included. The cadet might be
allowed to choose, say, four of these subjects; and I am, of course,
biassed, but I think English Literature should be looked upon as the
most essential of the four. I think that, so far as our own State is
concerned, your Association should approach the University Senate
with a view to a conference on the subject. I, for instance, would be
very willing to give a special course in English, somewhat wider and
somewhat less academic than the ordinary University course; but I
should have to have the approval of the Senate to do this.
“I have nj doubt at all that some such course as this would be
useful as part of the training of the young journalist. I quite agree
with most of what Mr. Adam McCay says, but his chief objections
seem to me to be met if you put examinations, diplomas, degrees, and
all that sort 6f thing, on one side, and look on the University simply
as a place where the young journalist can get knowledge, of which he
cannot have too much. Mr. McCay is a University man himself, and
therefore knows, as I do, how apt one is to become over-academic if


one has anything to do with a University; but if the cadet is learning
practical journalism side by side with his University courses, all
tendencies to priggishness and pedantry would be sufficiently kept in
check. As to getting the subject of ‘Practical Journalism’ taught at
the Universities, i am exceedingly sceptical, but as my scepticism is
based on a more or less complete ignorance, I had better not dilate
upon it.”
A SCHEME ARRANGED.
Acting on this report negotiations were entered on with the Senate
of the University of Western Australia. As a result the Senate
arranged for a special course of study for journalists, which com-
menced in March, 1919. The classes include: (a) English; (b)
History of British Colonial Policy; and (c) Economics. Students may
take one, two or three of these as they desire. One lecture per week
is delivered on each subject. No examinations are held.
DETAILS OF SUBJECTS.
ENGLISH. (Lecturer: Professor W. Murdoch.)
Courses of lectures on (1) English Composition, (2) History of
English Literature, (3) Prescribed Books.
During the first term the subject treated is English Com-
position. During the second term an outline of the history of English
Literature is given. No text books are prescribed for either ot
these courses, but the names of a few will be mentioned during
the second term. During the third term the following text books are
read: (a) Shakespeare’s Coriolanus, (b) Macaulay’s Essay on
Addison, and (c) Carlyle’s Essay on Scott.
The lectures are delivered on Mondays from noon to 1 p.m.
and repeated from 8 p.m. to 9 p.m. Students may attend the afternoon
or evening lecture, as is most convenient; but it is desirable that,
as far as possible, they should confine their attendance either to the
afternoon or to the evening.
HISTORY OF BRITISH COLONIAL FOREIGN POLICY. (Lecturer:
(Professor E. O. G. Shann.)
Courses of Lectures as follows:
I. Unique quality of the English State, developed by the Tudors
and against the Stuarts--Its insularity —The principle of law as the
expression of the experience of the governed.
11. Expansion of Europe overseas —Prince Henry the Navigator—
The Papal grant of monopoly—English seamen attack the monopoly
and assert the freedom of the seas —'Commonwealth versus despotism
in the new world —-The English colonies in North America—New
Amsterdam, New France, and the dream of a French Middle West —
Colonial indifference the result of the partial responsibility of the
colonies for their own destinies —Disunion and trading with the enemy.
111. The Conquest of Canada —Pitt and Colonial nationalism —
Wolfe and Montcalm —Break-down of the Old Colonial System—
Kalm’s prediction and Grenville’s folly—Was Colonial representation
in the Commons a possible solution?
IV. The American Revolution —Why Massachusetts took the lead
—Having gone to war against compulsory contributions to the cost of
American defence, the colonies try a method of voluntary co-operation
between separate States —The Continental Congress—French aid saves
the revolution—-Shay’s Rebellion —“Influence is not government”—
Washington’s part.


V. The Age of Disillusionment and Centralisation —Downing
Street and the Mother Country—Colonial resentment not directed
against the commercial policy of the day—-Racial and political dis-
cords in Canada —Papineau’s Rebellion —William Lyon Mackenzie and
the “Family Compact.”
VI. Durham’s Canada Report and Colonial Autonomy—Wakefield’s
Theory of Colonization —Lord Elgin and the growth of Canadian self-
government—lnfluences which led to the federation of the North
American Colonies, and their effects on the Dominion constitution —
Early Australia and the convict system—“ The Theorists of 1830” —
From autonomy to Federation—Boer and Briton in South Africa.
VII. The Problem of a British Commonwealth of Nations —•
Colonial Tariffs and Imperial Defence —The Colonial Conferences —•
Imperial War Cabinet —“A League of Nations.”
Text Book suggested. —C. H. Currey: British Colonial Policy
(Humphrey Milford.)
Books of Reference Recommended. — (1) J. R. Seely, “The Ex-
pansion of England. (Macmillan.) (2) Ernest Scott: “A Short His-
tory of Australia.” (Oxford Press.) (3) R. H. Brand: “The Union of
South Africa. (Oxford Press.) (4) L. Curtis: “The Commonwealth
ot Nations.” Part I. (Macmillan.) (5) L. Curtis: “The Problem of
the Commonwealth.” (Macmillan.)
ECONOMICS. (Lecturer: Professor E. O. G. Shann.)
Courses of Lectures as follows:
I. Introductory, “The Laws of Political Economy.” Economics
as a “science of wealth” —Sketch of social institutions aiming at
satisfying human wants—Necessaries, Comforts and Luxuries —The
reactions of waste on well-being—Class standards of spending.
11. The system of “Enterprise”—Forms of businesses —The joint-
stock company—Ordinary shares, preference shares and debentures —
The tendency to concentration —Trusts and combines under protection
and free trade —International combines and national supervision.
111. Money and Value —Development of the forms of money—
Legal Tender and private adventure or banker’s money—The central
reserve system—British and German conceptions of banking—Prices
and index numbers —What is value? —Value as stored-up labour —
Identification of value with cost of production—Marginal utility as
determining the individual consumer’s demand—-Control of values in
sellers’ interests —Need of statistics of consumption.
IV. Distribution of Values to the participants in production—
Wages and the wage-proletariat—Methods of paying wages—The
typical risks of a wage-earner’s life —Insurance against unemployment
—“Scientific management”—Profits and Interest —Rent —Taxation, the
State’s share in distribution —Direct versus indirect taxation.
V. Schools of economic thought—Mercantile systems—The physio-
crats and Adam Smith —the school of laissez faire —Historical and
socialistic reactions —‘Syndicalism.
Text Book suggested.— C. Gide: “Political Economy’’ (translated
by Archibald). (Harrap.)
Books of Reference Recommended. — (1) Hartley Withers “Poverty
and Waste.” (Smith Elder.) (2) Hartley Withers: “Stocks and
Shares.” (Smith Elder.) (3) M. E. Hirst: “The Story of Trusts.”
(Collins.) (4) B. Muscio: “Lectures on Industrial Psychology.”
(Angus and Robertson.) (5) Hartley Withers: “The Meaning of
Money.” (Smith Elder.) (6) Hartley Withers: “Our Money and the
State.” (Smith Elder.) (7) Henry Clay: “Economics for the General
Reader.’’ (Macmillan.)


STUDY BY COUNTRY JOURNALISTS.
Journalists resident in Fremantle, Kalgoorlie, Boulder and other
centres outside the metropolis, desiring to participate in the course,
may be enrolled as external students and provided with synopses of
lectures.
THE COURSE LAUNCHED.
The Education Course in Western Australia was launched on
March 17, 1919, when eleven journalists sat down to hear Professor
Shann deliver the first lecture in Australia associated with the
education movement. In the West, 29 members enrolled for the 1919
sessions, and of these 10 are Kalgoorlie or country members who
entered as external students. Of those who enrolled 26 are taking
English, 22 Economics, and 26 History. More than half the members
of the District are attending the lectures. Both the University and
the District officials have received many applications from persons
outside journalism for permission to participate, but it has been
deemed advisable to confine the course to journalists only, thus giving
effect to the scheme as agreed to between the Senate of the University
and the Association.
By arrangement with the Pro-Chancellor (Professor Patterson)
and Professor Shann, members taking the course will have the
privilege of access to the University Library.
WHAT NEW ZEALAND IS DOING.
A diploma in -Journalism is now given by the University of New
Zealand. The particulars are set out in the University Calendar as
follows:
A Diploma in Journalism shall be granted to any candidate who
passes an examination in the subjects of the course prescribed as
follows: —
(1) English Language and Literature as for B.A.
(2) Modern History as for B. Com.
(3) Economics as for B.A.
(4) Constitutional History as for B.A.
(5) Economic History as for B. Com.
(6) Statistical Method, as for B. Com.
(7) Psychology and Logic as for B.A.
(8) A paper on the classical work of journalism, the meaning of
“news,” the respective value of facts as “news” reporting, the
writing of heads and titles, paragraphing and summaries, the
economy of words, interviews, preparation of copy, proof reading,
the use of works of reference, dictionaries, atlases, encyclopaedias,
handbooks, and year books of history and statistics, quotations,
civics, the proper application of a knowledge of history, economics
and political science to contemporary public affairs, the relations of
a newspaper to the public, comparison of the methods and styles
of representative newspapers and journals, advertising, general
acquaintance with the mechanical process of printing books and
newspapers, and the general organisation of a newspaper office.


Central Committee’s Recommendations.
In October, 1919, the Central Committee of the Australian
Journalists’ Association agreed upon a scheme for the higher
education of journalists; recommended District (State)
Committees to act upon it, and urged those committees to
seek the co-operation of newspaper proprietors. The Com-
mittee proposes: —
(1) The establishment of a course for journalists at
each of the Australian Universities, and the award-
ing of a degree or diploma in journalism.
(2) That a Fellowship of the A.J.A. (F.A.J.A.) be
instituted.
SECTION 1.
University Course for Journalists.
After long and careful consideration by the sub-committee
appointed to consider the question of education in journalism,
the Central Committee recommends that an attempt be
made to establish a course for journalists at each of the
Australian Universities.
In doing so, it would draw special attention to the fact
that several of the Universities —Melbourne is a notable
example—have great difficulty in accommodating the students
now enrolled, and would no doubt find it inconvenient to
set aside special class rooms, and provide special lecturers,
for a comparatively small number of journalists. For this
reason the University authorities would probably condemn
as impracticable any proposal that their curricula should
be unduly extended.
The Central Committee is of the opinion that this difficulty
could be avoided by adopting a course which, on the
academic side, would resemble as far as possible the Arts
Course already established at each University. It is felt that
the great need of the young journalist is not so much
technical knowledge as general education and the culture
and breadth of outlook which come with it. The Arts
Course —including as it does Classics, English Language
and Literature, Foreign Languages, Modern History,
Economics, Philosophy, and Mental and Moral Science—is so
comprehensive that students are able to exercise a wide
choice, knowing that in the varied work which the journal-
ist has to do, each and every subject has its special uses.
In view of the fact that a candidate for a degree in Arts
may now choose between four or five different schools, it is
difficult to see any wisdom in attempting to secure the
establishment of a special academic course, even if it were
practicable to do so. It should not be overlooked, more-
over, that the adoption of the Arts Course would be at-
tended by two very practical advantages. In the first place,
journalists who have already graduated could be admitted
to the degree in journalism without further academic exam-
ination ; secondly, young pressmen who desired to take au
Aids Course would have the satisfaction of knowing that
the same course of lectures and study would enable them to
qualify for the two degrees simultaneously.


But although the Central Committee is of the opinion that
the Arts Course is, in the main, well suited to the journalists’
needs, it is considered desirable that one or two modifications
should be made. In the first place, only a small proportion
of A.J.A. members have matriculated, and it would obviously
be unfair to expect men who have been years away from
school to pass the matriculation tests. This difficulty could
be obviated by adopting a provision—as has been done by the
University of London —that the classes shall be open to
matriculated students, and “all other persons of adequate
scholastic attainments.” Secondly, the Arts Course com-
monly embraces Latin and Mathematics as compulsory sub-
jects. Whilst History, English and Economics can be worked
up without great difficulty, Latin and Mathematics are not
considered essential, and it is recommended that an attemp!
be made to secure a provision that they shall not be made
compulsory.
It goes without saying that a degree in Arts is no guar-
antee that a man is a practical journalist. The question
therefore, arises as to whether a course in journalism should
not be added to the purely academic work required by the
University. The members of the Central Committee are quite
willing to admit that journalism, in the broader sense, can be
learned only by years of experience on a newspaper; but
at the same time they are confident that it would be possible
to establish a severely practical course from which young
pressmen could derive nothing but benefit. The arrangement
of news, the writing of headings, condensation, proof-read-
ing, the sub editing of “copy,” the law of libel, common mis-
takes in the use of words—all these, and many other sub-
jects might be discussed with advantage. The lectures
would of course be delivered by practical journalists, with
the sanction of the Universities. Since there is ample pre-
cedent for the creation of such lectureships, it is not likely
that any serious objection would be raised bv the University
authorities.
No doubt A.J.A. members outside the capital cities would
desire to take advantage of any course that might be estab-
lished. In order that they may not be placed at a disadvan-
tage, it is suggested that attendance at lectures be not com-
pulsory. There is no reason, moreover, why the lectures
should not toe printed in pamphlet form, and circulated
throughout each District. It is suggested, too, that candi-
dates for a degree be asked to contribute an original thesis
on a subject having some bearing on journalism. As the
years go by, these theses and lectures should become an in-
creasingly valuable body of literature on the work of the
profession.
The question has been raised as to whether the course
adopted should be terminated by formal examinations and
the granting of a degree to successful candidates. It has
been urged that if examinations were adopted, prospective
students might be frightened away by the fear of failure.
The Central Committee does not think that this considera-
tion should have much weight. In no University is it
obligatory to take examinations, and anyone who wished to
do so would be at perfect liberty to take lectures only. On
the other hand, there are many young pressmen who feel
that if they take a course and pass the tests successfully,
they should have something to show for it. The lawyer,


the doctor, the engineer, the dentist —all of these have a
degree indicating that they have reached a certain standard.
Why should the journalist be deprived of the same advan-
tage? Provided that the practical tests are of the right
kind, there is no reason why the letters “8.J.” should not
come to denote a pressman of wide education, practical
experience, and general competence.
The Central Committee accordingly recommends: —
1. That efforts be made by District Committees to secure
the establishment of a course for journalists at each
of the Australian Universities.
2. That the course be as nearly as possible identical
with the Arts Course, with the addition of lectures
and examinations in journalism.
3. That classes be open to matriculated students, and
all other persons of adequate scholastic attain-
ments.
4. That Latin and Mathematics be not compulsory sub-
jects.
5. That where necessary the University authorities be
requested to consider the advisability of reducing
lecture fees.
6. That examinations be. conducted in connection with
the course, and that each successful candidate be
awarded a degree in journalism, subject to the
production of satisfactory evidence that he has
worked in journalism for a period of not less than
three years.
SECTION 2.
A Fellowship of the A.J.A.
The Central Committee further recommends: —
That it is desirable, in order to mark a standard of attain-
ment in journalism, that a fellowship of the A.J.A.
(F.A.J.A.) be instituted. Candidates may be admitted on
the following conditions :
1. That the candidate make application on the proper
form to the Central Committee of the A.J.A.
2. That the candidate has worked in journalism for not
less than four years.
3. (a) That the candidate has obtained the degree or
diploma of journalism of an approved University or
College, or an equivalent distinction, or has passed
an examination conducted by a central board of
examiners, to be appointed by the A.J.A.; or
(b) has been certified by the Central Committee of
the A.J.A. as worthy of admission without degree,
diploma or examination.






