

T II E
DISCOVERY
SURVEY & SETTLEMENT 3
PORT PHILLIP
(}. W. RTJSDEN
MELBOURNE
GEORGE ROBERTSON 69 ELIZABETH STREET
i i
|| | MDCCCLXXI
fU
m
PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.
z!3U@
l : 1




THE
DISCOVERY
SURVEY & SETTLEMENT
PORT PHILLIP
G W. EUSDEN
MELBOURNE
GEORGE ROBERTSON 69 ELIZABETH STREET
MDCCCX/XXI


MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BV WALKER, MAY AND CO.,
99 BOUKKE STREET WEST.


TO ANTHONY TROLLOPE, Esq.
My Deae Sie,
Permit me to dedicate to you the following pages.
They form a mere narrative, but they deal witlra subject of importance
in Victoria, on which many mistakes have gained currency.
I have endeavoured to make clear one or two points on which
accident and the taking of second-hand statements on trust, have
apparently misled writers on this chapter of our colonial history. It
may be thought strange, however, that there should have been a wordy
warfare as to the supposed discovery in 1835 of a river of which a
careful survey was made in 1803, and the course of which was laid
down in Flinders' charts sold under the auspices of the Admiralty. In
our world, however, mostly composed as a wit has described it, error is
sometimes more tenacious than truth.* Perhaps we live too near the
time of our pioneers to prize their labours so highly, and trace their
steps so closely and curiously, as colonists will trace them in after
years. If I have furnished them with the means of avoiding error, I
am satisfied.
A more serious historical error is committed by those who ignorantly
rob Pitt of his claim as the arch-founder of English settlements in
Australia. Let me glance at it for a moment. To do so, one must
scan the existing state of Europe and America. Within the memory
of men then active in public affairs, Chatham had wrested her
» The foothold which errors obtain through the press is absurdly shown in the fate of a
passage in one of our great English classics. Some writer attributed it to Talleyrand ; and for
years past, with an unpardonable credulity, one newspaper writer has followed another until at
last I see in Farrar’s “ Origin of Language “ Talleyrand’s wicked witticism that language was
given us to conceal our thoughts.” It is rather hard that a late Fellow of Trinity, and a chaplain
to the Queen, should ascribe to a Frenchman a witticism not his, and which, as thus preached by
South in Westminster Abbey, in 1676, was not wicked—“ What between French fashions and
Italian dissimulations, the old generous English spirit which heretofore made this nation so
great in the eyes of all the world round about it, seems utterly lost and extinct.
speak with designs of mischief and therefore they speak in the dark. In short, this seems to be
the true inward judgment of all our politic sages, that speech was given to the ordinary sort of
men, whereby to communicate their mind ; but to wise men, whereby to conceal it.”


American colonies from France, and the hereditary hatred of the
French had been intensified by the heroism of Wolfe. When, there-
fore, in spite of the wisdom and fervour of Camden, Chatham, Burke,
and Barre —the last of whom had been Wolfe’s comrade on the
heights of Abraham —the wicked folly of Grenville and North, and a
supple and servile majority in the House of Commons, brought about
the revolt of the United States, France was but feeding fat her ancient
grudge when she yielded to the earnest prayers of the united colonies,
and, with French armies, talent, and gold, nerved the battalions of the
colonists in striking at the heart of their mother. Few seem now to
remember that in that day neither the colonists nor the French
imagined that the independence of the colonies could have been
procured without French support; and yet, in spite of the coalition of
France, Spain, and Holland, and the unfriendly Armed Neutrality of
Russia, the close of the war saw the fleet of He Grasse vanquished
by a solitary foe.
But never was more fatal gift won by a conqueror than France thus
gloried in obtaining. It was the old story of Athens and Persia.
The Great King, worsted at Marathon and Salamis, as in later days
the Grand Monarque was often worsted by the English, availed
himself of the follies and crimes of Athens, and Persian gold arrayed
Greek against Greek in intestine strife. Athens succumbed to a
coalition, but not before it was made abundantly plain that the
Persian would be powerless before the Greek; and by her own acts
Persia paved the way for her fall. So with France and the agencies
she had invoked. The watchwords of the strife in America were those
which historic struggles in England had made sacred on her own soil
as well as in America. No doubt, under bad guidance,* England had
unworthily departed from them, and sadly has posterity reaped from
her unworthiness perennial crops of jealousy and mistrust. There is
not a mean cur in either country that does not in some way make his
snarling more malignant by harping on old wrongs, which all good
men in both countries should combine to quench in oblivion.
But our historic watchwords became dragons teeth in France.
The pomp and circumstance of La Fayette —the gifts showered upon
him in America —the clamorous applause which followed him in
France —were but the precursors of the new watchwords which were
to captivate the French mind with the ideas of liberty, equality, and
fraternity, never yet enjoyed by French bodies. Like those fabled
« Whether because the sense of honour is keener in the House of Lords than in the Commons
or not, the student of history cannot fail to observe that the designs of Isorth found more
opponents and the colonists a larger phalanx of friends in the Lords than in the Commons.


poisons, which, though harmless in proper vessels, shattered others to
fragments, so did the new principles imported by La Layette and his
eager soldiers scatter to the winds the peace and happiness of France.
The French had neither the patience nor the respect for law
required for the use of constitutional weapons. Grasping at equality
they stifled liberty; and their fraternity degenerated into fratricide,
pompously paraded in public under the name of the “ rights of man.
They shut out God from their world, and their “ heavens were hung
with black.” Little did the French Court imagine, when they
intrigued against their ancient foe, that on themselves would come the
swift reaction from the weapons they had wielded, and that, in a few
short years, King, Court, and Fashion would be weltering in their own
blood in the orgies of 1793.
And how did England comport herself? The United States
wrenched from her —Canada* scantily populated and unimportant
the East Indies being then but a germ in the Company’s hands —the West
Indies constituting England’s principal external claim to importance
the ship of the State did indeed seem, after her late distresses, “lean, rent
and beggared by the strumpet wind.” Fortunate for her that she had
then the man who could guide her ! —more fortunate still that he had
the strength and ability to enforce his wisdom upon others : following
what was right in “ scorn of consequence,” and resisting the wrong
in utter contempt of danger or obloquy for so doing. He was not
the head of a party which was moved by its tail. Canning, in 1826,
averred that he had “ called the New World into existence to redress
the balance of the Old.” With much more truth could the same be
said of Pitt. Will his successors have the wisdom not basely to throw
away the pearls with Avhich he adorned the English diadem ?
Many an ancient colony has been lost, and even made hostile, by
the effrontery or incapacity of the men in power in the mother country.
Many a folly has been perpetrated in a colony to which unwisdom in the
mother country has given permanence. Even now wisdom is crying
out in England by the mouth of Froude, and we see some in high
places, with cool, half-patronizing superciliousness, “ whistling as they
go for want of thought,” and incapable of rising to the height of his
argument.
Here is a continent secured, as never was continent before secured,
by the genius of one man, for his countrymen to occupy. On the
soil of Victoria there stand between seven and eight hundred thousand
♦ Upper and Lower Canada contained then less population than that of Melbourne and its
suburbs in 1870; and the renegade Tom Paine announced that “ Canada never will people.


persons where twenty years ago there stood some seventy thousand.
Thus fresh from their native land are they not bone of their bone,
and flesh of their flesh to all living Englishmen as fully as if they
on English soil ? Must it not be the shabbiest of states-
manship either in England or in the colony which would fret away the
ties that bind the one to the other ?
Yet when we scrutinize our Imperial affairs, where are our grounds
of hope?* With the heroic sacrifices of America before us, while the
world is ringing with the achievements of our old and natural allies, the
Prussians, who have toiled through two generations to wipe out their
national disgrace, —we see the House of Commons, as much too large
for an Executive, as too small for an army, produce a miserable
abortion by way of re-organizing our military system. Hitherto it has
cost England about twice the sum expended by Prussia, and has
* The manner in which occurrences abroad are misquoted or made light of was remarkably
displayed in debate on the Ballot Bill, in June, 1871. Sir Michael Beach complained of the
absence of any provision to prevent tampering with the voting papers, and referred warningly to
the French functionaries under the late Empire. Although the conduct of those functionaries
has been the subject of continual comment in the Times and other papers, Sir C. Dilke, who,
besides writing a book grotesquely erroneous in many respects about Australia, has visited America,
replied that the best answer was “ that in the great towns of France, where the Government
strained their utmost, the elections were almost always lost! ” Mr. Bernal Osborne too—although
secret voting, with possible scrutiny under process of law, has worked admirably in Victoria for
many years as regards preserving the strictest secrecy and order—said that voters could not be
protected from mob tyranny except by the introduction of “ secret voting without scrutiny.
Although Mr. Graves and Sir Stafford Northcote earnestly warned the House as to dangers from
tampering with the voting papers, and the latter referred to recent startling abuses in America,
Mr. Gladstone, in reply, prudently avoided that part of the subject.
Yet, in America, where the total legal number of voters was 1,810, the pro-slavery party by
means of “ ballot-stuffing ” gave 5.427 votes, and the ballot-stuffing in California notoriously
culminated in the violence of the Vigilance Committee. In the Congressional Globe, March,
1858, I discover a “ comparison of the reported vote of four precincts, with the actual vote as
proved by the judges and clerks of the elections, before the Investigating Committee of the
Territorial Legislature (Kansas):- u« n .i
Reported. Actual.
Oxford ... ••• 1,226 ... 42
Shawnee ... 753 ... 115
Fort Scott ... ••• 329 ... 150
Kickapoo ... ••• 1,017 ... 385
8,325 692 ”
This audacious imposture appears to have led to an investigation outside of the election law:
but had there been a possibility of scrutiny within that law, neither this nor a much less glaring
imposture could have been attempted with any hope of success.
Mr. Gladstone, while supporting secret voting, declared (amidst loud opposition cheers) that
“ One of the merits of open voting is that it enables a man to discharge a noble duty in the
noblest manner ” :-but in a most inconsequential manner professed to believe, against all
experience in America and elsewhere, that secret voting has a tendency to diminish bribery.
You have no need to come to this colony to learn the tendency of general principles : indeed
the intelligence and independence of our voters are such that it is not here that one should come
to appreciate the fact that secret voting encourages the meanest forms of bribery; but if you
should see a contested election among us, you will observe that while the possibility of a legal
scrutiny is an absolute preventive of ballot-stuffing, and a very complete guard against persona-
tion, perfect order and secrecy prevail throughout the day; and, moreover, in the very rare
cases of a scrutiny only those few papers which are demanded by the Court are ever seen again.


yielded about one-fourtb of the Prussian results. The re-organizing
bill would have added some 60,000 men, on the same distorted scale
of expense. And even this miserable further instalment of a con-
demned system dwindles to a Bill for the abolition of purchase, for
which we are afterwards informed that no Bill is required; and those
who urge more thorough measures are put aside with the retort that
if the defence of one’s native land is to be confronted as a duty we
shall “ interfere with the industry of the country! ”
Has patriotism been altogether deposed by cotton ? Are we now to
glory in the charge of being a nation of shopkeepers, and have we
reached the “ shoddy ” period of even such a nation ? Is Lambeth our
oracle, which ostracizes the author of Tom Brown’s Schooldays for
daring to denounce false weights ?
Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget.
Hot from such principles can we expect a worthy conception of a
brotherhood among all English-speaking races ; and if adversity be
the only cure for the decay of national honour, then adversity should
be welcome, if it bring nobler aspirations in its train.
Yours sincerely,
G. W. RUSDEN.
Melbourne, September, 1871.


ADDRESS DELIVERED 22nd JULY, 1869, AT THE THEATRE ROYAL,
MELBOURNE, AT A PERFORMANCE IN AID OP THE OLD
COLONISTS’ HOMES.
We know it’s customary to compare
All things that are with all the things that were ;
To vaunt how recently the kangaroo
Hopped where our Town-hall rises now in view ;
To gloat upon the lots in Collins Street,
Where banks and shops supplant old Buckley’s feet;
And giant buildings rising to the skies.
Fill their rich owners’ heart with ecstasies.
But, that this habit’s not alone Victorian,
We’ve lately seen in Motley the historian,
Who flouts the recent scalps and tomahawks.
Where New York now in chignon proudly walks ;
Forgetting that from any Indian’s mouth
The retort courteous comes, of —North and South !
Yet, boast of modern progress as we may,
Wo cling to memories of the olden day ;
Through ruins toil, o’er musty records pour,
Gleaning stray waifs of antiquarian lore.
We gloat o’er broken vases, or still better,
Shout o'er some fragment with a broken letter:
Pleased, though like Pickwick, near the Leather Bottle,
We think Bill Stumps as old as Aristotle.
He who of old would build a town, took heed
Eamparts to raise, impelled by warlike need;
But under England’s flag, where’er we roam,
Our first best impulse is to found our home;
And thus from humble slab to chiselled stone.
Within our memories has Melbourne grown ;
And after many a pastoral,—mining,—spasm,
We still can show Victoria’s protoplasm :
A new-coined word, which need not fret us much—
Nothing, it seems, is changed by its dull touch ;
Dogs still are dogs, the donkey’s still an ass,
And we all knew before that flesh is grass.
But, ere our national germs become a myth,
Or lost in countless tribes of Jones and Smith, —
Why should we not each earlier name preserve
For some good deed which may such fame deserve ?
Sharing the parks which now our town enfold.
Why should not future myriads be told
That kind Latrobe designed them all of old ?
Why not record in some enduring book
That, seeking a just magistrate, we took
Our Cincinnatus—Pohlman —from the plough,
And wigged and gowned him as you see him now ?
And last, not least, why should we not record
That artful rhetoric which could afford
To preach on Loyalty, without one word
Of comment on th’ electric thrill, which ran
Throughout these lands, from loyal man to man,
When struck behind by foul assassin blow
Our Queen’s Son fell before a treacherous foe ?
Who can enough extol that graceful wit
Whieh Hamlet’s part from Hamlet could omit,
And yet command applause from gallery to pit ?
But while with care we cherish the antique,
Immediate wants our sympathy bespeak ;
Same grey-haired veterans linger on the stage,
Some helpless orphans, with no heritage
Save that, of nearer relatives bereft,
To the whole world, as next-of-kin, they ’re left.
The sternest satirist of olden times
In this with our own gentle Shakspeare chimes —
That the best gift on man by heaven conferred
Is that by woes of others he is stirred.
And mingles Mercy still with Justice’ solemn word.
May your kind presence here assist to shed
Sweet gleams of Hope o’er many a sufferer’s bed :
Blest alchemy I which thus, out of your pleasure,
Distils the sacred drops of Pity’s treasure.
Eebatxjm : —Page 5, line 21, for “Grant” read “Murray.”


THE DISCOVERY, SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT
OP PORT PHILLIP.
American colonization sprung mainly from private adventure. The
foundation of colonies in Australia was not the result of private
enterprise, but of the policy of the ministry of which Pitt was the real
as well as nominal head.
It seems to have been an object with the English government to
plant their flag in many places, so as to exclude the pretensions of
other nations.
When Governor Phillip reached Botany Bay in 1788 (the first ship,
the Supply, arriving there on the 18th January, and the remainder of
the convoy on the 20th) it was found that Botany Bay was an unsuit-
able site for the new settlement, and on the 22nd January, the
Governor, with three boats, started to explore Port Jackson, the
entrance to which Captain Cook had seen, but which he had not
explored.
Manly Beach, now so well known by that name, was so christened
by Phillip because of the manly bearing of the natives whom he met
there. Having explored the harbour, Phillip returned to Botany Bay
on the 24th January, and on that day some French ships under La
Perouse were in sight. La Perouse had sailed from France on the Ist
August, 1785, and it was evidently the intention of the French Govern-
ment to explore the new continent—perhaps to lay claim to a part
of it.
On the same day (26th January) on which Phillip took formal
possession of Sydney, hoisted the English colours, and assembled his
officers round the flagstaff to drink the king’s health and success to the
settlement, La Perouse’s ships anchored in Botany Bay. Pitt had
therefore succeeded in taking possession first, although much time
2


had been consumed between the date when Captain Cook nominally
took possession in 1770, and the actual occupation in 1788.
Lord Sydney (who, as Mr. Thomas Townsend, had vehemently depre-
cated the American war) was Secretary of State in 1788, and Phillip
called the new town by his name, Collins, who accompanied the first
fleet as Judge Advocate, dedicated his book* to Lord Sydney, as the
originator of the plan of colonization of New South Wales.
The English Government, however, still thought it needful to keep
a watchful eye upon the proceedings of the French.
Norfolk Island was occupied immediately after the foundation of
Sydney ; Van Diemen’s Land after lapse of several years, Bass and
Flinders having in the meantime circumnavigated it.
After Pitt’s retirement in 1800, the French applied to his more
facile successor, Addington, for passports recommending Captain
Baudin (in command of Le Oeographe and Le Naturalists') to the
favourable hospitalities of British establishments, and Mr. Addington
(called in the Edinburgh Review, August, 1810, “the good-natured
minister ”) furnished the required passports. The Reviewer states,
however, that the ostensible pretext of a voyage “ round the world is
clearly shown by the French instructions (afterwards published) to
have been but a cloak for the real design of spying the state of the
English possessions in Australia, and obtaining a foothold for the
French:—to rear the standard of Buonaparte, then First Consul,
on the first convenient spot; and finally, that the only circumnavigation
intended in this voyage d’espionage was that of Australia.”
On the 19th October, 1800, the French navigators left Havre, and
on the 27th May, 1801, they sighted New Holland. In 1802 we find
them at Van Diemen’s Land, and after they had conducted survey
operations there, we encounter them again on the South Coast of
Australia. From Wilson’s Promontory to Cape Leuwin they took upon
themselves to christen the country “ Terre Napoleon.”
To a deep gulph, St. Vincent (running 100 miles into the interior),
in honour of their august Empress, they gave the name of Josephine’s
Gulph.f Cape Otway they called Cape Desaix, and Cape Shanck
(named after an English Admiral) they called Cape Richelieu. Thus,
if the French had really been the first on the field, nearly the whole
of the colony of Victoria, the whole of the colony of South Australia,
and part of the colony of Western Australia might have become
French.
* An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales from its first settlement in January,
1783, to August, 18"1 : London, 1804.
+ Buonaparte changed the name afterwards to Louisa’s Gulph.


But, meanwhile, the English had not been idle. On the Bth January,
1801, I find (in private letters from Sir Joseph Banks to Governor
King)
“ Lord Spencer has promised to make Flinders a commander, and, in case he does
the business he is entrusted with well, to make him Post on his return.
Two French ships sailed from Havre in October last, for the avowed purpose of sur-
veying the IST. W. coast of New Holland. Their names are Le Gcographe and Le
Naturalists, commanded by M. Baudin. They have a passport from the Admiralty,
and they carry men of science of all descriptions.
“ (22nd June, 18011. I hope you will find Flinders active and able. He has been
fitted out with the utmost indulgence.
“ (21st August, 1802). I hope the discovery ship has arrived safe, and is diligently
employed in the survey. Flinders will, if he behaves well, meet with the best
encouragement, but he is not without enemies, who will find out his faults if he
commits any.
“(Bth April, 1803.) Flinders’ charts have not arrived. I fear the ship that
brought them must have been lost It is a great misfortune for the
voyage, for the success of what has been done has not been so well impressed on the
minds of his friends as would have been the case if the charts had been forthcoming,
and his enemies suspect idleness on his part, or some other had reason for omitting
to send them. lam sure, sir, everyone here who interest themselves in the success
of the voyage are under much obligation to you for the liberal protection you have
given to Flinders, and the constant assistance you have given on all occasions to the
undertaking. Flinders speaks warmly of your friendship, and I beg you will
accept my best thanks for your goodness on that occasion. This will he delivered to
you by your old friend, Colonel Collins, who is come to extend the hounds of your
dominions by establishing a new colony at Port Phillip and the opposite island.
“ (29th August, 1804.) Poor Flinders put into ITsle de France for water, was
detained as a prisoner, and treated as a spy. Our Government have no communi-
oation with the French, hut I have some with their literary men, and have written,
with the permission of the Government, to solicit his release, and have sent in my
letter a copy of the very handsome one which M. Baudin left with you. If this
should effect Flinders’ liberation, which I think it will, we shall both rejoice.”
“(20th September, 1806). At last I have succeeded in soliciting an order of
liberation for our Flinders. M. de Bougainville, the circumnavigator, got an order
for his release, which I hope has gone from France,* a month ago. He has been
grievously used. Captain Milius, whom you saw and who always expressed the
highest gratitude for your excellent usage of the French discoverer, was a prisoner,
and I obtained his release on that account.”
In some of these quotations the course of Flinders’ discoveries and
misfortunes is anticipated, but the name of Sir Joseph Banks is so
intimately connected with the discovery of Australia that the digression
• The sequel will show that, though the order reached the Mauritius in July, 1807, it was not
until 18X0 that Flinders was permitted to leave ; the result of his discoveries having by that
time been embodied in French maps by the authority of Buonaparte. In that year, also, the
Mauritius was compelled to capitulate.


may be pardoned. He accompanied Cook in 1770, when the expedition
to observe the transit of Yenus was undertaken, and when New
Holland was discovered and claimed. He warmly exerted himself to
obtain a recognition of the principle that scientific explorers should
even in time of war be hospitably treated; and when the collection of
a French naturalist was captured, and taken to England, it was he who
obtained its release, uninjured, to the French. With a delicacy which
must have heaped coals of fire on the head of the jailors of Flinders, he
abstained from inspecting the contents of the collection, lest, as he
wrote to Jussieu, any part of that knowledge to which so eminent a
botanist as Labillardiere had devoted the best years of his life should
become alienated from its rightful owner.
As President of the Royal Society for forty years, Sir Joseph Banks
was continually able to perform kindly offices to Australian colonists
and discoverers.
While M. Baudin was, as we have seen, cruising along the south
coast from the eastward, he met (on the Bth April, 1802) Flinders
sailing in the Investigator from the westward. Flinders, who had left
England in July, 1801, had by this time verified old, and registered
new, discoveries from Cape Leuwin to Encounter Bay.
The portion of the coast on which the French had preceded
Flinders, Bass, and Grant, was only that which lies between Cape
Otway and Encounter Bay, and the French did not observe Port
Phillip.
Naturally indignant at the French claims,* Flinders maintained in
his work that, as regards the coast he himself explored, the Invesligatoi'
had an “ undisputed claim to affix names; and to her and the British
Admiralty, only can this right belong, so far as relates to European
nations.” Captain Baudin, however, so little respected this right that,
after Flinders was imprisoned at the Mauritius, and his maps were
seized and used by the French, we findf Cape Jervis called Presqu’-
Ile Fleurieu, although Flinders had pointed it out to him from the
deck of his own ship as Cape Jervis,
Flinders then pursued his voyage eastward, and on the 26th April
he discovered the entrance to Port Phillip. He entered, and, though
» The care with which Flinders recognized the legitimate claims of other discoverers, is
patent upon his charts. On the south coast we find Peter Nuyts credited as a discoverer to 131
E. from King George’s Sound. Thence M. Flinders to 139 E., including Spencer’s Gulf, &c.
From 140 E. to Cape Northumberland, he gives to Mr. Nicolas Baudin, 1802. From Cape
Northumberland to 144 E., “ coast discovered by Captain James Grant.” Thence the dis-
covery and survey of Port Phillip is duly ascribed to Murray, Grimes, and himself. Gipps
Land is marked as “ Discovered by Mr. Geo. Bass in 1798 ; ” until, from Ram Head northwards,
we find “Discovered by Captain James Cook, 1770.”
+ In the maps published by Imperial Decree in Paris, 1812.


his ship grounded on a mud-bank, with a kedge anchor and a judicious
use of his sails, he drew her off into deep water —
■“ And it being then dark, we came to an anchor. The extensive harbour we had
thus unexpectedly found I supposed must be Western* Port, although the
narrowness of the entrance did by no means correspond with the width given to it
by Mr. Bass. It was the information of Captain Baudin, who had coasted along
from thence with fine weather, and had found no inletf of any kind, which induced
this supposition; and the very great extent of the place, agreeing with that of
Western Port, was in confirmation of it. This, however, was not Western Port, as
we found next morning ; and I congratulated myself on having made a new and
useful discovery, but here again I was in error. This place, as I afterwards learned
at Port Jackson, had been discovered ten weeks before by Lieutenant John Murray,
who had succeeded Captain Grant in the command of the Lady Nelson.% He had
given it the name of Port Phillip, and to the rocky point on the east side of the
entrance that of Point Nepean.”
True to his usual honourable sensibility, Flinders, who had named
the harbour, and various points when he first saw them, recognized
Lieut. Murray’s prior claim, and adopted the names given by Murray
as soon as he became acquainted with them. It was Governor King
who christened the bay Port Phillip, after the first Governor of New
South Wales, Grant having called it after King himself.
Flinders’ narrative states :
“ The Bluff Mount (named Arthur’s seat by Mr. Murray, from a supposed
resemblance to the Hill of that name near Edinburgh), bore S. 76 deg. E., but from
thence the shore trended northward so far that the land at the head of the port
could not be seen even from aloft. Before proceeding any higher with the ship I
wished to gain some knowledge of the form and extent of this great piece of water;
and Arthur’s seat being more than a thousand feet high, and near the water side,
presented a favourable situation for that purpose. (This was on the 27th April,
1802.) The western shore extended from the entrance ten or eleven miles in a
northern direction, to the extremity of what, from its appearance, I called Indented
Head At day dawn I set off with three of the boat’s crew, for the
highest part of the back hills, called Station Peak. Our way was over a low plain,
where the water appeared frequently to lodge; it was covered with small-bladed
grass, but almost destitute of wood, and the soil was clayey and shallow. I left the
* Western Port was discovered on the 4th January, 1798, by Bass, who had only a whale boat
«n a voyage of discovery, which occupied twelve weeks.
+ Nothing shows more clearly the disingenuousness of M. Freycinet, who edited Baudin’s
discoveries, than this statement. Baudin told Flinders that he saw no inlet; yet after Flinders’
map. had been seized, the French maps published in 1812 contain Port Phillip, and the offing is
called “ baie Talleyrand ; ” and Freycinet says of Port Phillip itself, “ Nous le designames sous
le nom de Port du Debut; mais ayant appris dans la suite qu’il avoit 6td reconnu plus en detail
par le brick anglois the Lady Nelson, et qu’il avoit et 6 nommd Port Phillip, nous lui
conserverons avec d’autant plus de plaisir ce dernier nom celui du fondateur d’une colonie dans
laquelle nous avons trouv£ des secours si genereux et si puissans.”
t Grant took the Lady Nelson from England in 1800—coasted on the south shore of Australia —
named Cape Nelson, Portland Bay, Cape Otway, &c.; and Murray was afterwards put in command,
and sent by King to explore further.


ship’s name on a scroll of paper deposited on a small pile of stones upon the top of
the peak; and at three in the afternoon (Ist Ma\’) reached the tent, much fatigued,
having walked more than twenty miles without finding a drop of water
No runs of fresh water were seen in my excursions; but Mr. Charles Grimes,
Surveyor-General of New South Wales, afterwards found several, and in particular
a small river falling into the northern head of the port. Mr. Grimes was sent hy
Governor King in 1F!03, to walk round and survey the harbor; and from his plan* I
have completed my chart of Port Phillip. The country surrounding Port Phillip
has a pleasing, and in many parts a fertile appearance, and the sides of some of
the hills and several of the valleys are fit for agricultural purposes
Were a settlement to be made at Port Phillip, as doubtless there will he some time
hereafter, the entrance could he easily defended, and it would not he difficult to
establish a friendly intercourse with the natives, for they are acquainted with the
effect of firearms and desirous of possessing many of our conveniences.”
Elsewhere Elinders says that, “ Colonel Collins was sent out from
England to make a new settlement in this country, but he quitted Port
Phillip for the south end of Diemen’s Laud, probably from not
finding fresh water for a colony sufficiently near to the entrance.”
When Flinders reached Sydney he was welcomed by Governor King,
who, he states, “ was pleased to assure me that every assistance in the
power of the colony to render, should be given to forward a service so
interesting to his government and to himself.”
In the following month (June 20th) —
“ Captain Baudin arrived in Le Geographe, and a boat was sent from the Investi-
gator to assist in towing the ship up to the cove. It was grievous to see the miserable
condition to which both officers and crew were reduced by scurvy; there being not
more, out of one hundred and seventy, according to the commander’s account, than
twelve men capable of doing their duty. The sick were received into the colonial
hospital, and both French ships {Le Naturaliste was at Sydney before the arrival of
Le Geographe ) furnished with everything in the power of the colony to supply.
Before their arrival the necessity of augmenting the number of cattle in the colony
had prevented the Governor from allowing us any fresh meat; but some oxen
belonging to Government were now killed for the distressed strangers; and by
returning an equal quantity of salt meat, which was exceedingly scarce at this time,
I obtained a quarter of beef for my people. The distress of the French navigators
had indeed been great; but every means were used by the Governor and the principal
inhabitants of the colony to make them forget both their sufferings and the war
which existed between the two nations.”
Eeferring to a conversation with Freycinet, first Lieutenant of Le
Qeograghe, Flinders says, that in the house of Governor King, Freycinet
* It is probably quite unknown to any one who has supposed that Mr. J. P. Fawkner or
J. Batman discovered the Yarra-Yarra, that in Flinders’ work—“ A Voyage to Terra Australis”—
published in London, 1814, the Yarra-Yarra is marked in the chart (with its junction with the
Saltwater river), with the large loop which it forms below the junction of the Merri Creek, as it
flows by Hawthorn and Xoorak to Melbourne. Port Phillip and King’s Island are “ copied from
Charles Grimes, Esq.”


said to Flinders, “ Captain, if we had not been kept so long picking
up shells and catching butterflies at Yan Diemen’s Land, you would
not have discovered the South Coast before us.” “ How then, says
Flinders, with reference to the French claim of prior discovery (after
they had, as they thought, secured Flinders’ charts) “ came Monsieur
Peron to advance what was so contrary to truth? The motive for
this aggression Ido not pretend to explain. It may have originated
in the desire to rival the British nation in the honour of completing
the discovery of the globe ; or be intended as the forerunner of a claim
to the possession of the countries so said to have been first discovered
by French navigators.”
Flinders had, indeed, ample grounds of suspicion of the motives of
some of the French; for while he and Governor King so handsomely
acted up to the spirit of the arrangement between the French and
English governments that discovery ships should be treated as though
the two nations were not at war, Flinders himself had soon after-
wards to suffer from gross violations of that arrangement. Briefly X
may state here that Flinders sailed from Sydney with the Investigator
and the Ladg Nelson in 1802, sent back the Lady Nelson as unsea-
worthy, made further discoveries on the Australian coast, and returned
to Sydney in 1803. The Investigator being there pronounced unsea-
worthy, Flinders sailed in the Porpoise, en route to England, but was
wrecked, in company with another vessel, the Cato. Flinders, though a
passenger, was, after the wreck of the vessels, recognized as commander
of the united crews.
With fourteen men in a small cutter he returned to Sydney for
assistance, walking into Governor King’s parlour, travel-stained but
not disheartened, to announce his own disasters.
Governor King managed to let him have a wretched vessel to return
to the reef with —the Cumberland, schooner, of 29 tons burthen ; —with
this he made sail, and finally took off the remnant o the crew, some
having been previously taken off by trading vessels.
I have a copy of a letter which Flinders wrote to Governor King
while at sea in the Cumberland ; and, as I have observed some erroneous
statements lately in print about the character of Governor King, I here
give the letter in full, because it states so clearly the well-grounded
opinion of Flinders as to Governor King, and also reveals much of
Flinders’ own ardent and devoted disposition.
It is not often that one can lay hold of so clear and full a testi-
monial, honourable alike to him who wrote, and to him who received
the letter.


“ Cumberland, at Sea, September 24th, 1803.
“ Dear Sir,
“ Not knowing what time I may have at the 'reef for writing, I begin
now. Before the midnight after our leaving Port Jackson, a south-easterly gale
came on, and by such time as a ship would have taken her top-gallant sails in from
over double-reefed topsails, the Cumberland was reduced to a reefed mainsail and jib,
and I expected we should soon be obliged to lie to ; we tacked, therefore, in order to
keep Port Stephens under our lee until the weather improved, and at night the Rolla
and Francis ran in there. I anchored in a bight on the south side of Point Stephens
in five fathoms, open only from S. to S. by W., and next morning joined them in the
Port.
“ Yesterday morning we sailed again, and the same kind of weather is again
come on, but I have got the yards down and mean to persevere, if possible. From
her want of breadth, the Cumberland is exceedingly crank, so that, if there is not
room to run before the sea, she must lie to in a double reefed topsail breeze. She
has also been very leaky, and in one hour and half’s cessation from pumping, the
water washes on the cabin floor; but I believe it is wholly owing to the straining.
Hitherto we have been very uncomfortable, and dry only when at anchor. lam
now sitting on the lee locker, with my knees up to my chin for a table to write on,
and in momentary expectation of the sea coming down the companion and sky-light,
for they have broken me two panes of glass out of the four, already.
“ 27th September. I wish much that the Cumberland had been broader, for the
sake of the projector, the builder, myself, and you, who have been so kind to give
her up to my convenience. We lose much time from inability to carry sail: the
Rolla is generally under three topsails, with one of them laid aback, but this is in
strong breezes only; in light winds, such as I expect from Torres Straits to near the
Cape, I think we should get on at least as fast as a ship. My present intention is to
go on to the Cape, or until I meet with a more expeditious conveyance, when I think
of quitting the Cumberland and embracing it. I fear the strong westerly winds near
the channel, but dislike, still more, the loss of time to writing and chart-drawing from
hence to England; for in the Cumberland it will, as to these material objects, be an
entire loss. Writing here is like writing on horseback on a rainy day, and much
worse than in the Norfolk , sloop. Lat. now—2B deg. S., Long, 155 fE.
“ Ist October, 1803. I intend to get studding sails at the reef for a jib, fore-top-
gallant sail, top and lower studding-sails, and a gaff maintopsail for the schooner.
“ Since the execution of my duty first occasioned a communication between you
and myself, I have necessarily observed the ability with which you execute the
arduous task assigned you, and, I think, traced the motives of your conduct to those
around you. In my own case, I attribute your repeated kindness and attention, not
to anything personal, but to the belief that I had at heart the good of the service
intrusted to me, and was active therein; these, joined to the opinion that in many
points my ability was equal to the task assigned me, and perhaps a wish to forward
the plan of the patron of the voyage, I apprehend to have been the motives by
which you was influenced; and certainly, if right, they are most just, and must
raise you infinitely more in the opinion of every man than any partiabty to an
individual. Permit me, Sir, to place you in the small list of friends whom 1 respect,
esteem, and wish to serve; and to hope that I shall hold a kind place in your
memory. The making an accession to my own happiness is, perhaps, the interested
motive; but the sentiment is warmed by gratitude and strengthened by respect.


sth October. I have, indeed, much kindness to thank you and my dear friend,
Mrs. King, for; more, indeed, than I can enumerate. Words are inadequate to
■express my sense of them ; but be assured, Sir, they will never be forgotten. It is a
part of my disposition to avoid receiving obligations as much as possible; but when
from peculiar circumstances I am brought under the yoke, few retain a stronger
sense of them or are more desirous of making returns. To balance this, lam but
little given to conferring kindnesses. Upon the whole, lam more guided by justice
than generosity, for an act of the latter never escapes me, from natural impulse ; it
is upon mature deliberation if lam ever generous. This is saying but little for
myself; but I wish to be known by the few whom I would have for my friends.
“ I have the pleasure to find the Cumberland more weatherly than the Francis or
Folia. In working to windward during a night, I have had to run down four miles
in the morning to join the latter, although they had carried all the sail that could
conveniently be done. This is a good property; but of all the filthy little things I
ever saw, this schooner for bugs, lice, fleas, weavels, mosquitos, cockroaches large
and small, and mice, rises superior to them all. We have-almost got the better of
the fleas, lice, and mosquitos, but in spite of boiling water and daily destruction
amongst them, the bugs still keep their ground. I have never stripped myself before
the last two nights, but usually slept upon the lee locker with my clothes on ; not-
withstanding which, I have at least a hundred lumps upon my body and arms ; and
before this vile bug-like smell will leave me, must, I believe, as well as my clothes,
undergo a good boiling in the large kettle. I shall set my old friend Trim to work
upon the mice.
“ We had north-easterly winds for the two days before we got into the latitude of
Wreck Reef, which prevented us from fetching more than 10 min. to the eastward of
it. We steered due W., however, and ran to the longitude of 154 deg., but without
finding the bank. Thus from some error, either in the Porpoise's time-keeper by
which the reef was laid down, or in our present observations, or probably from a
small error in both, we were to the W. of the reef when we thought ourselves 10
min. to the eastward. We are now steering to the eastward again.
“ Friday, 7th October, in the evening. We anchored here, under the lee of
Wreck Reef at 4 this afternoon, being six weeks to a day since I left it. They have
finished a boat of about 20 tons, schooner rigged, and were out to-day trying her
with the small cutter; we got sight of the boats at noon, to our surprise. The keel
of another boat is laid.
“ Never were three cheers more heartily given than those I received on landing at
the bank ; and the expressions of their joy did not stop here, but they fired a salute
of guns also, having got the carronades on shore.
“ The poor Porpoise is still whole, a monument of our misfortune.
“Lunar observations by Mr. Flinders give Wreck Reef in 155 deg. 35 min.,
instead of 13 min. as given by the Porpoise's time-keeper ; and our lunar observa-
tions, as well as the time-keeper, now corroborate this, nearly.
“The reef extends no further to)the eastward than what we before saw, about
7 min. E.N.E.-ward from the wreck; and in this space there are two wide and
apparently good channels.
“ 10th October. The Folia has taken all the provisions, and a few stores. Mr.
Lacy brings the small schooner to you, which will be some compensation for the loss
of the Cumberland. I lost an anchor last night, from the cable being cut by the
coral rock. lam pressing Cummins to sail to-day, lest the same should happen to
her: he would certainly go on shore if should take place in the night, as the


wind is now. Everything will, I hope, go well; the Cumberland , Holla, Francis , and
Resource are all in a fair way.
“ Requesting your Excellency and Mrs. King to accept my respects and best
wishes, and not forgetting my little Elizabeth, I am, dear Sir,
“ Your obliged and faithful servant,
“MATTW. FLINDERS.
“ To His Excellency Governor King.'
Flinders still desired to test again some points of his previous survey,
and did not sail straight for England in this uncomfortable exploring
vessel, so different from the noble ships of modern days which carry
our preux chevaliers round the world. On the way homewards he had
to seek shelter at the Mauritius, and he and his brother officers were
thus placed at the mercy of the French Governor. His maps, too,
were with him, and when seized were doubtless looked upon as a
valuable prize which would be most useful in furnishing material for
improving the French maps about to be published with the discoveries
of Baudin. But though Flinders, holding his French permit as
commander of a discovery ship (such as when issued by England had
been so useful to Baudin in Sydney) applied for national hospitality,
he had not placed his discoveries themselves at He Caens mercy,
whatever the latter might think at the time. He says :* “ Before
leaving Sydney cove (in 1802) I placed in the hands of Governor King
two copies of my chart of the south coast of Terra Australis in six
sheets, with three other sheets of particular parts on a large scale.
One copy I requested him to send with my letters to the Secretary of
the Admiralty by the first good opportunity that offered, the other was
to remain in his hands until my return, or until he should hear of the
loss of the Investigator , when it was also to be sent to the Admiralty.
The French t Governor at the Mauritius seems to have had a thorough
Anglo-mania, and Governor King specially warned Flinders not to
touch there. Flinders is often censured for calling at the Mauritius,
Those who wish to learn the reasoning which swayed him to do so, will
find it fully detailed in his work. He asserts that he did not know
whether England and France were at war at the time (Dec. 1803)
that touching somewhere was imperative —that having no Dutch pass-
port, but having a French one, he preferred the Mauritius to the Cape,
relying in part on the kind treatment he had joined in extending to
Captain Baudin, in Sydney, in the previous year.f
* Flinders’ “ Voyage to Terra Australis.” London, 1814, p. 237.
+ The many difficulties under which explorers laboured in Flinders time are roug i
Btrong relief by his statement, that when he put in at the Mauritius he had no more information
about it than was in the third edition of the “ Encyclopedia Britannica,” (vol. 11.)


However, lie was immediately seized, and not only his log-book, but
his own private papers were secured by his new jailor. It seems
almost incredible that, while he was imprisoned, some of the French-
men who had been so hospitably entertained in Sydney called at the
Mauritius, and that these officers took no steps to abate the injustice or
rigour of their countrymen to one who had been so kind to themselves.
Flinders bore himself like an English officer, and his mind was
unsubdued.
On the 17th December, 1803, he first saw Governor De Caen—“ a
shortish thick man, in a laced round jacket ” —in company with “ a
genteel-looking man whose blood seemed to circulate more tranquilly.”
Without salutation or preface De Caen demanded Flinders passport,
his commission. “ Having glanced over them, he asked in an impetuous
manner the reason for coming to the Isle of France in a small schooner
with a passport for Le Investigator. I answered in a few words, that
the Investigator having become rotten, the Governor of New South
Wales had given me the schooner to return to England. ’ After further
colloquy De Caen said, “ with much gesture and an elevated voice,
(l You are imposing on me, Sir. It is not probable that the Governor
of New South Wales should send away the commander of an expedi-
tion on discovery in so small a vessel.” Flinders says, “in effect they
took all the charts, papers and journals relating to my voyage, as also
the Port Jackson letters and packets, both public and private,” and
Flinders was taken on shore as a prisoner. On the following day further
questions were put, and Flinders’ answers, with Governor King’s orders
relating to the Cumberland, were carried to De Caen,
«And S oon afterwards to my surprise an invitation was brought me to go to the
general’s table, his dinner being then served up. This invitation was so contrary
to all that had hitherto passed, and being unaccompanied with any explanation, that
I at first thought it could not be serious, and answered that I had already dined \
but on being pressed to go at least to the table, my reply was that ‘ under my present
situation and treatment that it was impossible ; when they should be changed, when
I should be set at liberty, if His Excellency thought proper to invite me, I should bo
flattered by it and accept his invitation with pleasure.’ It had indeed the air of an
experiment, to ascertain whether I were really a commander in the British Navy ;
and had the invitation been accepted without explanation or a change of treatment,
an inference might have been drawn that the charge of imposture was well founded ;
but in any case, having been grossly insulted both in my public and private character,
I could not debase the situation I had the honour to hold hy a tacit submission.
By tbe Wednesday, after perusal of papers, and time for considera-
tion, De Caen determined to seize Flinders, his papers, and his vessel,
alleging in his order that the passport had not authorised Hinders to
stop at the Isle of France to make himself acquainted with the


periodical winds, the port, present state of the colony, &c.” Flinders
addressed a manly remonstrance, in which he denied any thought of
acting as a spy ; pointed out that French discovery vessels touched at
English ports; that when Baudin and Hamelin were at Port Jackson
there was a declared war.
“ But were they forbidden to make such remarks upon the state of that English
colony ? Upon its progress, its strength, the possibility of its being attacked with
advantage, and the utility it might afford to the French nation P I tell you, General
De Caen, No. The Governor in chief at Port Jackson knew too well the dignity of
his own nation either to lay any prohibition upon these commanders, or to demand
to see what their journals might contain I sought protection and
assistance in your port, and I have found a prison ! Judge for me as a man, sir—
judge for me as a British officer employed in a neutral occupation—judge for me as
a zealous philanthropist, what I must feel at being thus treated.
■‘At present I quit the subject with the following requests: that I may he per-
mitted to have my printed books on shore; and that my servant may be allowed to
attend me in my apartment.
“ With all the respect due from my situation to the Captain-General,
MATTHEW FLINDERS.”
From my Confinement,
21 st December, 1803.”
Receiving no answer, Flinders wrote another letter, couched in yet
stronger language, and De Caen answered, that as its terms went
beyond all bounds of propriety he was compelled to deny further
correspondence until public opinion could pronounce between them,
“puisque vous savez si peu garder les regies de la bienseance.” “The
accusation,” writes Flinders, “ of not preserving the rules of decorum,
seemed not a little extraordinary from one who had kept me above
two hours in the street when I had gone to wait upon him, and who had
qualified me with the title of impostor without examination.” Flinders
admits that his language may seem warm, but he begs the reader
“ To suppose himself to have executed so much of the same task, escaped the same
dangers, and under the influence of powerful motives to reach England with expedi-
tion, to be arrested on the way, his misfortunes either not heeded, or converted into
proofs of delinquency, and himself treated as a spy ; and this is done by the
representative of a government which had promised assistance and protection, and
moreover owed him a return for the kind treatment recently experienced by French-
men in the port from whence he came. Let him suppose himself writing to his
oppressor with these various recollections crowding on his imagination, and the
allowances he would then desire for himself, I request him to make for me.”
At one time Flinders reminded De Caen that “ since the shipwreck
of the Porpoise six months before, my people, as well as myself, had
been mostly confined either upon a small sand-bank in the open sea,
or in a boat, or otherwise on board the Cumberland where there was no


room to walk, or been kept prisoners as at that time ; and that I had
not previously recovered from a scorbutic and very debilitated state,
arising from eleven months’ exposure to great fatigue, bad climate, and
salt provisions.” At another time the officer commanding the guard
over the prison, “ demanded all the spy-glasses in our possession.”
“ To the measure of taking away our spy-glasses was added that of
nailing up the door leading to the flat roof of the house. At sunset
the sentinel was accustomed to quit the outer gate, and to be posted
before the door of the prison to prevent any person going into the
enclosure after that time : then it was that a walk upon the roof, after
the heat of the day was passed, became a real pleasure, but of this we
were now deprived.”* To this statement, Flinders adds in a note —
“ It being afterwards suspected, and not without reason, that some of
the gentlemen had forced the door, we were officially informed that the
sentinels had received orders to shoot any one who might be seen on
the roof; this produced greater circumspection, but the pleasure of
the walk, and having a view of the sea, was such that it did not wholly
remedy the evil.” Think of our gallant explorer going on the roof, —
Si Frenchmen quseris, circumspice : —and think of a soldier of the
“ grande nation ” watching to shoot him !
Flinders kept a sharp look-out to prevent De Caen from profiting
from his unjust conduct. He obtained some of his books, and “so
soon as the two gentlemen were gone, I took out my naval signal
book, and tore it to pieces; the private signals had been lost in the
shipwreck, so that my mind was now freed from apprehensions which
had given much inquietude.”
In 1805 an English ship, the Thetis, arrived at the Mauritius under
cartel colours, with a special request from the Marquis Wellesley for
“ particular attention to the truly severe case of Captain Flinders, and
earnestly requesting De Caen to release Captain Flinders immediately,
and to allow him either to take his passage to India in the Thetis, or to
return to India in the first neutral ship.” De Caen’s secretary told
Flinders that he could not be released, because his case had been “ sub-
mitted to the French government;” but, says Flinders, “I did not feel less
gratitude to the noble marquis for his attempt.” On the 23rd August
ho was paroled in the country. A literary “ Society of Emulation ”
petitioned the French National Institute in his favour. He himself
speaks most gratefully of the kindness and good qualities of his friend
Thomas Pitot, a young French merchant.
* Vol. ii., p. 394. It is pleasant to reflect that, in 1853, the Legislature of Victoria, following
the example of New South Wales, granted a pension of £lOO a year to the widow of Flinders,
with reversion to her daughter.


It appears that in March, 1806, the French Government “ approved
the conduct ” of De Caen, and “ par un pur sentiment de generosite,”
granted Flinders his liberty, and released the Cumberland ; but it was
not until July, 1807, that the order reached the Mauritius. His
papers were partly returned to him, but Governor King’s despatches
to the Secretary of State were not returned ; and we may imagine
that as Governor King was peculiarly bent at the time on excluding
the French from Australia, there may have been expressions of which
the seizure by the French must have been very grievous. Still
Flinders was not allowed to leave; and though Captain Hamelin, who
had commanded the Naturaliste at Port Jackson, arrived at the Mauri-
tius in command of the Venus, and reported that several officers of the
Geographe and Naturaliste had made applications to the Marine Minister,
and that the answers received were that orders for the release had been
sent out; yet he added that it was known in France that these
orders had not been obeyed.
And now the French were hurrying on the publication of their
French discoveries ; Napoleon had granted a considerable sum to
render the publication complete. Flinders learned from a Moniteur of
July, 1808, that all his discoveries were claimed as original by the
French: and it is sad to picture to ourselves this adventurous mariner,
of so ardent a temperament, thus chained to his rock, and knowing that
the credit of his labours was being claimed, with a flourish of trumpets,
by others, and those others his country’s enemies. It was hot until
the 31st March, 1810, that he finally received permission to leave in
the cartel Harriet; but it was not until the 7th June, 1810 (a few
months before the capitulation of the island), that, on his “word
of honour not to act in any service which might be considered as
directly or indirectly hostile to France or its allies, during the course
of the present war,” he was really allowed to go on board. His
log-book and the despatches which he still asked for were refused,
both to his own solicitations and those of Mr. Hope, the Commissary
and Agent of the British Government in India, in exchange of
prisoners ; but he was glad to get to sea on any terms, and as three
English frigates, and the Otter, sloop, were cruising before the port,
Flinders was put on board the Otter to proceed to the Cape. Flinders
records in his work, the “ hospitality and attention to strangers —the
sensibility to the misfortunes of others —which he experienced from
the inhabitants of the Mauritius ”; but draws up a stinging indict-
ment* against his persecutor, Governor de Caen.
• Vol. ii., pp. 487-491.


The last sentence in Flinders’ work refers to his detained log-book.
When it was demanded by the English Government in 1812, tbe
French Government answered that “as it did not make part of the
papers brought from the Mauritius by the Prefect of that Colony, a
demand has been made for it to the Captain-General de Caen, who is
with the army. In default of an answer, he will be again written
to.” .... “But,” concludes Flinders, “the Captain-General had,
probably, his reasons for not wishing even the minister to see it; and up to
this time, the commencement of 1814, he has so far persevered against
both public and private applications, that neither the original nor a copy
has been obtained.”
"Various circumstances show that Flinders was right in his surmise
that the French had an eye upon Australia with a view to claim terri-
tory there. Having him in prison, and not knowing perhaps that any
copies of his charts were safe in English hands, they published charts
by which they claimed to have discovered places which they knew
Flinders to have discovered, and a part of which he showed them
with his own hand when he met them in Encounter Bay.* The
resUess way in which the French not only sought to discover, but
sought credit for the discoveries of others, would of itself have excited
suspicions: but suspicions on the latter ground could only be confirmed
after the publication of Peron’s book. There must have been suspicions
at the time. This is shown by the equally restless way in which while
the French ships were in motion, the English were planting numerous
colonies, apparently with a view to keep off intrusion ; and, of course,
at very considerable expense; for which I know not that any one is
now grateful to the arch author, Pitt, whose policy was followed by
his immediate successors. Thus, in 1801, we find a settlement at the
Hunter Elver, with which there was communication then only by sea •
it seems to have been abandoned subsequently : but in 1802 and 1803
the activity of the French on the coast seems to have stirred up the
English ministry to appropriate as many sites of settlements as possible,
und in a remarkably short space of time.
A MS, Order Book of Governor King’s shows that Newcastle was
thus re-established in obedience to orders from England.
“By His Excellency Philip Gidley King, Captain-General and
Governor-in-Chief in and over His Majesty’s Territory of
New South Wales and its dependencies.
“ Whereas it is expedient in consequence of an intimation from His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies and War Department, as well as from
existing causes, that the settlement at the Coal Harbor and Hunter’s River now
* So named by Flinders in consequence of his meeting there the French ship.


distinguished by the name of Newcastle, in the county of Northumberland, should
he re-established without loss of time, and you having offered to take charge and
command of that settlement, which you have been enabled to do by resigning the
command of the Detachment of Royal Marines on Board H.M.S. Calcutta , and being
discharged from that ship at my request, you are therefore, &c., &c., . . . for
which this shall be your authority until His Majesty’s pleasure shall be known
thereon.
“ Given under my hand and seal at Government House, Sydney, New South
Wales, this 15th day of March, 1804.
“PHILIP GIDLEY KING.”
To First Lieut. C. A. F. N. Menzies,
hereby appointed to command and superintend the settlement of Newcastle, county
of Northumberland , in His Majesty's Territory of New South Wales."
Apparently instigated by the same authority, but bearing earlier
date, I find in another MS. Memorandum Book, belonging to Governor
King, the following entries :
“Whereas there may occasionally be sent on board H.M.S. Buffalo, under
my command, a number of troops, prisoners, and other passengers, for Norfolk Island,
and other places , and likewise a necessity of bearing supernumeraries under many
other circumstances, you are therefore, &c., &c.
“ Given, &c., 14th March, 1803.
“ P. G. K.’”
“ To Mr, J. Sherrard, Purser, H.M.S. Buffalo
“ The undermentioned persons being ordered to embark on board H.M.A.T. Lady
Nelson , for a passage to (the settlement intended to be formed in the river Derwent),
you are hereby required, &c., &c.
Given, &c., 10th June, 1803.
P. G. K.
To Acting-Lieut. G. G. Curtoys, Commander of H. M. A. T. L. N.
Whereas, it may be deemed expedient that H. M. S. B. and A. T. L. N. should
be sent on particular service to establish a settlement at Port Dalrymple, in Bass’s
Straits, for the benefit of this colony, and as many supernumeraries may be ordered to
embark in both vessels, . . . You are hereby required and directed to purchase
a sufficient quantity of biscuit to complete the victualling of those vessels to six
months for their complements, &c. &c.
Given, &c. &c., Ist July, 1804,
P. G. K.
To Mr. J. Sherrard, Purser.
In 1803 Governor Collins landed, to form a settlement at Port
Phillip, already surveyed by order of Governor King. In a small
note-book I find, in the hand-writing of Governor King, a tabular


Port Dalrymple is set down at a cost of
.. £22,452
10 2i
Hobart Town ditto
ditto
, ,
.. 18,952
19 2
Norfolk Island (in 1800)
ditto
• ,
6,792
13 9
Newcastle (July, 1801)
ditto
• •
.. 6,363
12 4J
As the total population is
set down in the same book thus
Men.
Women.
Children.
New South Wales ..
• • • •
4,224
1,412
1,883
Norfolk Island
394
183
437
V
Hobart Town .. ..
344
73
69
Port Dalrymple .,
210
33
200
statement of the expenses of Dependencies, in which (for provisions
purchased and supplied)—
and as, out of 5,636 men and women in New South Wales, no less
than 4,002 were prisoners (140 men were “Wishing on different
islands,” and 160 in 11 King’s ships ”) ; and, further, as no less than
74 soldiers were required at Port Dalrymple to guard a settlement
where there were only 129 male prisoners, some idea may be formed of
the expense which attended the formation of so many settlements in
so short a time; and, it must be admitted, that there is strong
circumstantial evidence to the effect that the establishments at Port
Phillip, Port Dalrymple, and the Derwent, almost at the same point
of time, were dictated by a desire, on the part of the English
Government, under the impulse given by Pitt, to exclude the hostile
Erench from Australia.
Enough, however, has been said upon this point, and I turn to the
special occupation of Port Phillip under Governor Collins, who,
having gone to New South Wales as Judge Advocate in 1788, was
selected as Governor of the new settlement. There is extant a short
narrative by Lieutenant Tuckey, who sailed with the expedition. He
says that the settlement was formed, first, “ to give secure port to
sealers to collect produce ; in the next place, this measure would
prevent any rival nations from establishing themselves on this coast,
whb might become troublesome neighbours to our colony at Port
Jackson, which must no longer be considered a contemptible part of
the British dominions.”
Collins committed a serious error in his selection of a site : an error
which appears inexcusable when one knows that the careful survey of
Port Phillip by Mr. Grimes, by direction of Governor King, had
shown where the Yarra Yarra, and the other fresh waters near the bay,
were to be found. Seafaring men, however, are prone to select sites
as near the open ocean as they can; and, therefore, the sapient
Tuckey writes—“ As it was of the first consequence that the settle-
-3


ment should be of easy access to shipping, the shores near the mouth
of the Port were first examined.” A second consequence was that the
new colonists were in straits for fresh water, and Tuckey went out to
explore. He says (speaking of himself in the third person) —“ The
unfavourable account given of Port Phillip by the first lieutenant of
the Calcutta immediately presented the necessity of removing the
colony to a more eligible situation. ... It was deemed necessary
to receive instructions on this head from the Governor-in-Chief, at
Port Jackson.” Tuckey implies that “ Governor King, from a correct
survey of Port Phillip made by Mr. Grimes, the Surveyor-General of
the colony, was already convinced of its ineligibility for a settlement
but I must take leave to doubt this conclusion, as the evidence seems
to show that both Plinders and King thought the site eligible, and
King had already ascertained the existence of good land, and a run-
ning river of fresh water. Plinders also, in 1814, attributes the
abandonment of Port Phillip to the non-discovery of fresh water suffi-
ciently near, in Collins’ opinion, to the entrance.
Tuckey’s explorations, instead of being made towards the Yarra
Yarra, or to the westward, were devoted to the scrubby ranges near
Western Port, and his “ unfavourable account ” seems to have decided
the already pre-disposed Collins.
“ The Ocean, transport, being now discharged, was to proceed on her
voyage to China, and could not, therefore, be detained without a heavy
expense to the Government, Thus the only means left of communi-
cating with Port Jackson was by an open boat. A six-oared cutter
was accordingly fitted for the purpose, in which Mr. Collins (who had
come out on a sealing expedition) undertook to convey the Lieutenant-
Governor’s despatches.* After being nine days at sea, and encounter-
* A strange accident has brought to my hands the original letter forwarded by this boat by
one of the convicts, a United Irishman, to General Holt, once so celebrated in Wicklow and
Wexford.
The letter, which might have been written by O’Donovan Rosa instead of by one of the dupes
of Wolfe Tone, is here in part printed
“ Sullivan Bay, Port Phillip,
“ Nov. 5, 1803.
Di.An Joe, <( yoQ willj j j a re say, be surprised to hear that your unfortunate Friend is a
Convict at this horrid desolated place.
“ I was Tried last December twelvemonths for Sedition, in London, and sentenced to ho trans-
ported for seven years, so that I have five years still to continue in this wretched situation.
Would to God, my dear Holt. I was at Port Jackson, Sidney, or any place where I could enjoy
the company of some of you, my fellow-sufferers and friends. I have no particular news to
inform you of, only that our friend John Neil has turned out a Villain !-he resides at the Castle,
with (he bloodhounds, and is a most notorious common informer. Harry Downs, Antrim Jack,
Conway, Aioore, Whitty, Billy Byrne, and many others, have suffered death, but to the last
behaved like men. I had the pleasure of seeing Mick Reynolds in London ; he was perfectly
well, and beyond every one’s expectations recovered of his wound.


ing much bad weather, he was picked up by the Ocean , who sailed six
days after him, within sixty miles of Port Jackson, and by her conveyed
thither.”
Though Lieut. Tuckey would probably have chosen Sheerness
instead of London as the site of a town, he seems to have been of a
contemplative turn, and a kind-hearted man.
“ Some of the convicts,” he says, “ were accompanied by their wives; to these
helpless females all the attention that humanity dictated, and that the nature of the
service would admit, was extended; but still it was impossible to separate their
situations entirely from their guilty husbands, they were consequently far, very far,
from being comfortable When I viewed so many of my fellow-men
sunk, some of them from a rank in life equal or superior to my own, and by their
crimes degraded to a level with the basest of mankind : when I saw them, naked,
wading to their shoulders in water to unlade the boats, while a burning sun struck
its meridian rays upon their uncovered heads, or yoked to and sweating under a
timber-carriage, the wheels of which were sunk up to the axle in sand, I only con-
sidered their hapless lot, and the remembrance of their vices was for a moment
absorbed in the greatness of their punishment And now, again, when I
considered the motives; when I contrasted the powers, the ingenuity, and the
resources of civilised man with the weakness, the ignorance, and the wants of the
savage he came to dispossess, I acknowledged the immensity of human intelligence,
and felt thankful for the small portion dispensed to myself. These thoughts naturally
“If you are acquainted with Phill Cunningham, Bill Leonard, John Bowen, or any of them
who were transported from Clonmell in the year ’99, remember me most kindly to them, and let
them know I expect to hear from them per return of Bearer None of my relations
know of my present misfortunes, not even my old uncle.
“Your sincere friend.
“ EOBT. WALSH.
“N.B.—Do not neglect writing per return of Bearer, and let me know everything worth
relating.- Adieu.”
I know not what became of Walsh. Joseph Holt (who, however misguided, was a really gallant
fellow, and perhaps the ablest of all the United Irish military leaders), had never been kept to
forced labour, and had, in 1803, accumulated considerable property in laud and stock. But his
vanity led him to keep up a correspondence with the seditious. Maurice Margarot, too, poisoned
his ears continually with his malignant and treacherous counsels. The result was that, at the
United Irishmen’s rising in 1804, direct evidence was given of Holt’s complicity, which, however,
Holt denied. His papers were seized, and Walsh’s letter, which he had time to tear into pieces,
but not to destroy, was found among them, and having been preserved, has fallen into my hands.
The Phill Cunningham Walsh alludes to was one of the leaders, and was seized on the field
and summarily hung. Margarot’s papers, seized also, and now in my hands, amply revealed
his malicious character, false alike to friend and foe. Yet, on Calton Hill, in Edinburgh, in
1844, a memorial in honour of him, among others, was raised by a people not usually charged
with credulity.
Much has been written to prove how the woes of Ireland are caused. The woes of Irishmen
are sometimes caused by their Irish friends. In this instance, poor Holt, in consequence of his
seized papers and the evidence against him, was torn from his excellent wife and his children,
and sent to Norfolk Island. Eventually he obtained a free pardon and returned to his native land,
where he lived long enough to find out the hollowness of his seditious friends, and to put on
record, in his memoirs, his belief that even the success of the rising in 1798 would but have
plunged Ireland into deeper misery. 11 What trash, dear Daniel ” (wrote Sydney Smith to Dan
O’Connell], “to be bawling in the streets about the Green Isle, the Isle of the Ocean; the bold
anthem of Erin go Bragh 1 A far better anthem would be Erin go bread and cheese, Erin go
cabins that will keep out the rain, Erin go pantaloons without holes in them 1 ”


led to the contemplation of future possibilities. I beheld a second Rome rising from
a coalition of banditti. I beheld it giving laws to the world, and superlative in arms
and arts, looking down with fond superiority upon the barbarous nations of the
Northern hemisphere • thus running over the airy visions of empire, wealth and
glory, I wandered amidst the delusions of imagination.”
Though Melbourne is not yet a second Rome, and though no
metropolis was likely to spring up where Collins and Tuckey pitched
their tents, there was in Tuckey’s sight food for serious contemplation,
if not wonder, to which, now that its object has passed away, allusion
may be made historically, even in Victoria. One of the helpless
persons whom Tuckey so commiserated was accompanied by a child
about ten years old, who was permitted to accompany his parents, and
who no doubt looked with some awe upon the accoutred Tuckey. If any
one could have told Mr. Tuckey that the settlement would be abandoned
in a few weeks, that in process of time various other settlements would
be formed on the coast (notably one by Mr. Henty in 1834), that —
after an organized plan for occupying Port Phillip itself by John
Batman in 1835, which was carried out in May, 1835 —that same
ragged urchin, whom he saw scrambling in the sand at Port Nepean,
would cross from Tasmania in October, 1835, go to that river of which
Tuckey had the description in his hand (as supplied by Governor King
from Mr. Grimes’ survey), and claim to have discovered it, although
immediately warned off by Batman’s agent, even Mr. Tuckey’s credulity
might have been severely taxed. Had he been further told that in
consequence of the importance ascribed by the government of New
South Wales to Batman’s movements, it was determined to found a
settlement at Port Phillip; that, accordingly, it was founded by
Governor Bourke; that in process of time there would be a local
parliament into which the ragged urchin would find his way; that in
the year 1869 he would die; that a public funeral would be determined
on, concerning which there would be a Government Gazette Extra-
ordinary on the previous day; that shops would be shut and traffic
closed in a city numbering, with its immediate suburbs, some 160,000
inhabitants; that between two and three hundred vehicles would move
in the funeral procession—he would indeed have reflected most gravely
on “ future possibilities,” But if —knowing what luckey knew, even
in 1803, about the Tarra Yarra River, and being able to foresee what
Henty and Batman and Governor Bourke would do in 1834 and 1835
Tuckey had been told that on the coffin would be inscribed —
THE HON. JOHN PASCOE FAWKNER,
FOUNDER OF THE COLONY
OP VICTORIA,


I can hardly think that Tuckey could have been induced to accept that
as a “ future possibility.” Yet it was a fact, and we may presume that
those who inspired the inscription believed in its truth.*
Good wishes and kindness make traitors of many memories, and
there is no doubt that the indomitable perseverance, in every cause
which he believed to be right, which characterised Fawkner’s career,
—his devotion to the public service, an unfeed devotion, often rendered
at great personal risk and expense, won from the public that
unqualified admiration which culminated in the last tribute which they
paid to his memory in September, 1869. To him it mattered not
merely whether the cause he advocated was popular only —it required
to be commended to his judgment as right j and thus, though he was
often wrong and almost always intemperate, the will was in his case
taken for the deed, the heart being believed to be in the right place.
His career, too, was marked by toil, which left him but small leisure to
acquire information in his youth : first a sheep boy, then a sawyer,
then a publican, then a newspaper proprietor, in Yan Diemen’s Land.
When he came to Victoria, publican, editor of his own newspaper,
squatterf for a time, and general champion; sober and just in his
personal conduct, he fought his way through the Insolvent Court, the
City Council, and the first Victorian Legislative Council in 1851, to
the Legislative Council, in which he held a seat when he died, in 1869.
With no large views, no constructive power, he has left no mark on
the Statute Book of the colony ; but, in spite of ignorance and way-
wardness, the acknowledged sincerity of his purpose secured for him
the sympathy of the people, whom it was his custom to address as his
“ gentle public,” but whom when he thought them wrong, the old man
did not shrink from opposing. The preposterous nature of the claim
* Even Fawkner himself must have gradually worked himself into the belief that he was
entitled to some credit for founding Melbourne “ Melbourne,” writes the Hon. J, P. Fawkner,
“ completed on the 29th August its thirty-third year. On 29th August, 1835, the first landing
was made, on a small rising ground on which our tent was pitched on that evening. Our horses
were then landed and set to graze. Early in 1835 I resolved to attempt to settle in Port Phillip,
having been one of those who landed on Point Nepean, from the Calcutta, under Governor David
Collins, to colonise at Port Phillip. This was on 19th October, 1803. Governor Collins declared
the place unfit for settlement, and took the whole of the people to the Derwent, I sought
out some friends to come with me in 1835, and five persons agreed to help to found the new
colony. Their names were Robert Hay Marr, William Jackson, Samuel Jackson, Captain John
Lancey, and George Evans. They all deserted me. Some went away, and others took to sheep-
farming, and I alone remained to found the famous city of Melbourne. I purchased a schooner,
the Enterprise, to bring my horses, cattle, and household goods, and six days after landing had
five acres of land ploughed and sown with wheat. This produced 100 bushels in January, 1836.
A wilderness in 1835 ; a fine flourishing colony in 1868, though only thirty-three years old 1”
+ I once saw Fawkner’s application for a licence. It was an amusing instance of the proverb,
“The buyer saith it is nought.” He denounced the run as scrubby and worthless. He may
have been right in so doing, but he scarcely showed sympathy enough afterwards towards fellow-
sufferers.


made for him, and, I am sorry to say, vain-gloriously made by himself,
as tbe “ founder of the colony,” will more fully appear when Batman’s
proceedings are dealt with; but thus much it was convenient to
say now.
Our friend Tuckey’s “ unfavourable account ” and Governor Collins’
predilections happening to concur, Collins “ represented ” as we are told
by a careful chronicler* “to Governor King the desirability of removing
the settlement to Yan Diemen’s Land, and having gained permission
to do so, operations to that effect were shortly afterwards commenced.”
Mr. Bonwick has preserved a letter written by the wife of one of the
officers, which is conclusive on the point that it was not in consequence
of orders from Sydney that Collins left Port Phillip :
“We arrived,” sbe wrote, “in October, 1803. My pen is not able to describe half
tbe beauties of that delightful spot; we were four months there. Much to my mor-
tification as well as loss, we were obliged to abandon the settlement, through the
whim and caprice of the Lieut.-Governor. Additional expense to Government and
additional loss of individuals were incurred by removing to Yan Diemen’s Land,
which can never be made to answer. Port Phillip is my favourite, and has my
warmest wishes.”
The place to which it was determined to remove was Sullivan’s Cove
at the Derwent river, “ chosen by Lieut. Bowen as the site on which
the people removed from Norfolk Island were to form their new
settlement.” f Unless some other reason can be assigned for calling
the place Sullivan’s Cove, it would seem that Collins affixed this name
wherever he went, for the MS. letter written by the convict Walsh
from Port Phillip was dated from “ Sullivan Bay, Port Phillip.”
A few of the convicts escaped from Point Nepean while the settle-
ment remained there; and of those who had not repented and returned
before Collins abandoned the place, only one, William Buckley, sur-
vived to see his countrymen retake possession in 1835. He was, as
has been usual where previous cruel treatment has not inspired fear
and revenge, kindly treated by the blacks; but so little truth is there
in the idea that the average uneducated white is superior to the average
black —(there being no doubt less gradation observable amongst the
latter) —that, far from raising the standard of the blacks or profiting
by his European knowledge or skill, he was no sooner shorn of the
material appliances which he had inherited, and which constitute the
greater distinctive part of modern civilization; he no sooner became
“ the thing itself, unaccommodated man,” than he was “ but such a
* “History of Australinn Discovery and Colonization." Samuel Bennett, Sydney, 1867. The
best work on the colonies with which it has been my fortune to meet, as regards information.
+ Bennett's “History of Australian Discovery and Colonization.’


poor, bare, forked animal,” dependent upon the kind courtesies and
superior aptitude of the despised Australian black; and so remained
for thirty-two years.
No effort was made to colonize Port Phillip for many years after
1803 : yet public opinion was slowly diverted in its direction. In
1813, William C, Wentworth* (a name now famous in Sydney), with
Messrs. Blaxland and Lawson, had penetrated through the Blue
Mountains, and had given a fresh impetus to New South Wales.
Governor Macquarie followed up their discovery by sending a surveyor
(Mr. G. W. Evans), who saw and named the Macquarie and Lachlan
Rivers. In 1814, Hamilton Hume, then 17 years old, and his two
brothers, had pushed their way through Bargo Brush to Bong-Bong
and Berrima; and somewhat later, Hamilton Hume had discovered
Goulburn Plains. Governor Macquarie, in 1820, went to inspect the
“ new country ” thus made known, and himself christened Breadalbane
Plains.
In 1817, Oxley, the Surveyor-General of New South Wales, had
traced the Lachlan River nearly to its junction with the Murrum-
bidgee, and had, therefore, nearly approached the present boundary of
Victoria, being within 240 miles of the site of Melbourne. In 1824
stations had been formed on the table-land, between Breadalbane
Plains and ,the Murrumbidgee River, near Yass, improperly so called,
for the native name is Yarrh, and the letter S does not exist in the
vocabulary of the blacks there; and Yass Plains had themselves been
discovered by Hume in 1821. f As Yass is about 180 miles from
Sydney, imthe direction of Port Phillip, it will be seen that nearly one-
third of the distance between Sydney and Melbourne was already
known, when, in 1824, Sir Thomas Brisbane (who was desirous to have
the east coast explored by landing a party at Cape Howe, or Wilson s
Promontory, and causing them to work their way inland to the
county of Argyle, in which Goulburn was situate) was advised by Mr.
Alexander Berry, of Shoalhaven, to apply for assistance to Hamilton
Hume, who was celebrated as a marvellous bushman. The project
was, that the"expedition should be taken by sea to Western Port, and
should thence travel overland to Lake George. Hume declined to
accede to the particular form of Sir Thomas Brisbane’s proposition,
but (he says) “ I stated my readiness, if provided with six men and six
pack-horses, and furnished with the necessary provisions, to take my
departure from Lake George, and push my journey on to Western
* He was then only 22 years old.
+ “A Statement of Facts in connection with an Overland Expedition from Lake George to Port
Phillip in 1824.” Hamilton Hume, Sydney, 1855.


Port, in Bass’s Straits. This proposition was accepted by the
Governor.” At the request of Mr. W. H. Hovell, he was allowed to
join the party.
Western Port, it will be recollected, had long been known, having
been discovered by Bass, in 1798. A glance at the map will show
clearly to those even who are not personally acquainted with the
country, that though there was no possibility of foreseeing the fact,
the line thus marked out for the journey ran through an almost
impracticable country. After crossing the deep gorge through which
the Murrumbidgee runs, it would meet the still deeper gorges of the
Coodradigby, and as it neared the highest shoulders of the Australian
Alps or Snowy Mountains, would be intercepted by the Boogong
Mountains, or Kiandra country, at the head of the Tumut Biver ;
escaping from which the travellers would encounter the broken
mountainous country which separated them from the Murray or
Hume Eiver ; whence again plunging into the Benambra mountains,
westward of Mount Kosciusko, the Mitta Mitta and its adjacent
mountains, some thousand feet high on each side, would meet them;
thence, with Omeo on the left, and the Buffalo Mountains on their
right, and kindred mountains over which they would be climbing,
they would only be clear of them to find themselves traversing, by an
unhappy fate, the most mountainous escarpments with which the
Snowy Mountains, in Gipps Land, frown towards the sea. If that
difficult toil could be overcome —marked as the spot still is on our
maps, “ scrub almost impracticable” —they would yet have to pass
through the mountain ravines and pinnacles at the sources of the
Yarra Yarra, with Mount Baw Baw on their left, and crossing the
almost impervious timber north of the line of the present Gipps Land
Eoad, would descend from their mountain labours to find the Great
Koo-wee-rup Swamp thrown between them and their destination. Of
course, the existence of these obstacles was unknown, but they would
probably have foiled almost any man, except Hamilton Hume, and it is
interesting to observe how his peculiar sagacity enabled him to evade
them. His instructions were “to take departure from Lake George,
and push on, at all hazards, to Western Port; and in the event of
meeting any river not fordable, if practicable, to trace its course to the
sea, or as far as means would permit.”
On the 17th October, 1824, Lake George was departed from; and
on the 19th the Murrumbidgee was reached, but it was flooded and
unfordable. On the 22nd, as the river was still swollen, Hume and his
gallant little party, under his direction, formed a punt by covering their
cart with a tarpaulin ; himself and Thomas Boyd having first swum


over the river with a line in their teeth. Even at this early stage, it is
the statement of Boyd that Hovell wished to give up the expedition,
“ as we cannot cross those rivers.”
It does not seem that the following of the course of the Murrum-
bidgee commended itself to the travellers; and it would appear that
the rivers whose course they were intended to follow were such as they
might find flowing to the eastward, whereas the Murrumbidgee, where
they encountered it, was flowing almost westward, not having reached
the southward bend, which it describes near the mouth of the Yass
Eiver. Some of the party, I fear, might have been deterred by the
aspect of the hills, which closed in upon the river’s course where the
Coodradigby joined it, and denied all passage, except to climbing
creatures. Eacing the mountain country, they reached “ Narren-
gullen Meadows,” a pleasant enough situation, bordering on the steep
descent down the mountain side to the channel of the Coodradigby.
I myself remember standing on the pinnacle of a rocky point at the
opposite side, and admiring, as I viewed, the sagacity with which
Hume’s keen eye detected the favourable sinuosities by which he
threaded his way across the Coodradigby gorge. What paths may now
exist there, I know not; but many years afterwards only one was
known passable even for a horse, between the track selected at a glance
by Hume, and the impassable junction of the Coodradigby with the
Murrumbidgee: and it is probable that many a traveller will yet stand
on the south promontories of the Coodradigby mountain chain, and
admire the sagacity of Hamilton Hume. The country, however,
became so difficult that the carts were abandoned. Still persevering,
Hume crossed the Tumut Eiver and says—
“A few days afterwards I found we were getting into too high a country, for the
Snowy Mountains* (the Australian Alps) were observed crossing our course. I
proposed that we should take a direction more westerly in order to avoid the
formidable harrier which threatened to intercept our way ; but Mr. Hovell dissented
from my proposal. After some wrangling and disputing, each being positive of the
correctness of his own opinion, we resolved to part company and follow each his
course. Accordingly we did separate; Mr. Hovell held his course south, I
steered mine west. However, when my party turned into camp, and lighted the fire
for the night, great indeed was my surprise to hear one of my men call out, ‘ Here
comes Mr. Hovell; ’ and sure enough there he was with his man Boyd running
down our tracks.”
Tbe statement of Boyd on this important turning-point of the
expedition is—
* The Boogong Mountains, at the Tumut River sources, would be seen by Hume from his
position : and they are near the very highest points of the Snowy Mountains, whence the Tumut,
the Murray or Hume, and the Snowy Eiver spring.


« Two or three days after we came in sight of the Snowy Mountains, after having
crossed the Tumut, Mr. Hume and Mr. Hovell had a great difference as to the course
they should go ; after quarrelling over it they parted, each going his own way. I
had to go with Mr. Hovell: after travelling some distance I represented to him that
the course we were steering led us right among the Snowy Mountains, and that if
we once got among them we could never get out, and must he all lost. He agreed
with me, and, at his desire, I sought and found Mr. Hume s track, run it down, and
we joined him and his party about dusk the same evening, just as they had camped
for the night.”
Those who have not travelled over trackless wilds, will find it hard to
realize the importance of these disputes about the course to be chosen
—and yet what can be more thrilling than the interest taken by the
actors P Far away from all human aid, in the “ Manus ” elevated dis-
trict, these few wayfarers, bent on fame, but encountering misery and
risking life, sit before their log fire, discussing, wrangling about the
course —but the issue to them is life or death. Hume had three men,
Claude Bossawa, Henry Angel, and James Fitzpatrick. Hovell had
the same number, Thomas Boyd, William Bollard, ana Thomas Smith.
How earnestly these men must have watched the argument! Poor
Boyd had been with Hovell when Hovell lost his way at Narrengullen,
and Hume had to show him the way back to the camp. What must Boyd s
feelings have been as the discussion went on? No wonder that on the
following day’s journey he represented to Hovell that “ they might
never get out ” of the Snowy Mountains. On November 16th they
reached a river. “ I named it the Hume in compliment to my father.
We crossed it above its junction with the Mitta Mitta. On the 20th
and after travelling four or five miles, we came upon the latter river.
Here there was another wrangle. Boyd’s story, which agrees with that
of Hume and Angel, is: —
“ We crossed the Hume, and travelling two or three miles wo came on the second
branch of the river, the Mitta Mitta, hank high. As we were getting ready the
punt to cross, Mr. Hovell made an address to the men, advising them to turn back,
saying he was determined to go hack himself. He said, our tarpaulin, which was
all our dependence, was all but worn out, and what had we to trust to for getting
back, or for our lives, hut it? Mr. Hume, thereon, asked for volunteers, saying he
would never stick for want of a boat, and if the tarpaulin did go, he would kill a
bullock or a horse, and make a boat of its hide, rather than he heat; that he had set
out with the determination to make Bass’s Straits, and on he would go. Each
sticking to his point, Mr. Hume got ready and went across with his men, I was
obliged to remain with Mr. Hovell, hut after Mr. Hume had packed up and made a
start on the other side, Mr. Hovell called out to he taken with him. This was
agreed to. I had to swim across for the boat, which Mr, Hume rigged again, and
we all went on together.”
Still keeping bis course, and avoiding, as be best could, mountainous


and impracticable country, Hume crossed the Ovens and the Goulburn
Eivers, but
“ We met with a complete check to our progress at Mount Disappointment, where we
endured great fatigue in endeavouring to cut our way through the dense tangled
scrub. I felt perfectly convinced, and I then stated my conviction, that, from the
nature of the timber and other appearances, we were then on the dividing coast range.
We long persevered in attempting to cut our way tßrough these scrubs, and, had we
succeeded, we should have reached the present site of Melbourne sooner than we
reached Geelong. However, lat last met with an accident which caused us to give
it up, and return to our old track at King Parrot Creek, and taking a more north-
westerly direction, we subsequently struck the coast more to the westward than we
intended.
Near the present site of Kilmore, when Hume returned to the camp,
after searching for a crossing place over Sunday Creek, he found the
men discontented, and Hovell standing aloof. “At last I came to a
compromise with the party, that if we had no decided prospect of
making the coast within the next two or three days, I should give up
the journey and return with them.” On the 13th December Hume,
“being some distance in advance of the party (on the Big Hill)
observed an opening and fall of land far to the south. Thinking the
struggle at last won, my heart rose, and I cheered long and loud.
. . . . We encamped that night within one mile of the Downs,
and three days afterwards we made the coast.” Fitzpatrick says :
“As we approached Bass’s Straits we were grumbling at our hardships
and discouraging prospects, getting disheartened, and desirous of giving
it up. Mr. Hume assured us we were within two or three days’
journey of the sea, and it proved so.”
On the 16th December Hume reached the bay, and on the 17th
December they camped near the present site of Geelong. On the
18th December they started homewards, having with them 150 lbs.
flour, 6 lbs. tea, and neither sugar nor salt. They learned from the
natives whom they met on the shore that the inner bay was called
Geelong, that the picturesque hill (Station Peak) was called Willan-
manater, and that the Downs were called Iramoo. Hume called our
Mount Macedon, Mount Wentworth, after his talented countryman.
Boyd narrated afterwards that —“ When Mr. Hovell was funking at
Geelong about the time it would take us to get back, Mr. Hume told him
he would make his station at Gunning within a month, and offered to
bet him his mare against the others. We made the station to the day
Mr. Hume said. We made a much shorter road of it coming back.”
Fitzpatrick says:—“ As we returned, Mr. Hume would tell us of a
morning that we would cross our outward track that day, and he was


always right; we always did so. We made a much shorter road home
again.” Hume says that —“ The number of miles outward from Lake
George was, by log, 670 ; on our return we cut off upwards of 150
miles. I never was at a loss to judge correctly of the different points
at which I would come upon my former trails, and I used to cheer the
men by telling them when and where we should strike it.”
Such being the facts we must all sympathize with Hume when he
concludes his pamphlet, published in 1855, with these words:—
“ Although I have lately been made to appear but as a subordinate to
Captain Hovell on the expedition, I, notwithstanding, respectfully
submit that it was I who took him to Hobson’s Bay, and brought him
back again.” Each member of the party is to be respected for the
hardships undergone, but to Hume alone can be ascribed the leadership
and its results: and it is proper to mention that even while at Geelong
Hume and Hovell differed as to the spot which they had reached.
Hume asserted that they were at Port Phillip : Hovell that they were
at Western Port. Hume says that when he “ sighted Willanmanater
bearing forty or fifty miles S.W., I then made direct for it, believing
it to be, as it afterwards proved, the Station Peak of Blinders.”*
In Sturt’s work, published long before the correctness of Hume’s
opinion was satisfactorily tested, we find it remarked that “ Mr. Hume
was afterwards associated with a Mr. Hovell in an excursion to the
South Coast, under the auspices of Sir Thomas Brisbane. After a
most persevering and laborious journey they reached the sea, but it is
uncertain whether they made Port Phillip or Western Port. Mr.
Hume whose practical experience will yield to that of no man, enter-
tains a conviction that it was to the former they descended from the
neighbouring ranges ; but Mr. Hovell, I believe, supports a contrary
opinion.”f In face of this irrefutable evidence it is rather hard that
Hume should have to complain that in Dr. Lang’s “Phillip’s Land”
he is charged with mistaking Port Phillip for Western Port. The sub-
* It may seem wonderful that Hume could arrive at this conclusion. He had, however, in
former years explored in company with Mr. Meehan, a surveyor, who had accompanied Mr.
Grimes in 1803, and from him he had heard a general description of the country.
+ It is proper to mention that Mr. Hovell published in Sydney, in 1855, a “ Reply to (Hume’s)
Brief Statement of Facts.” He traverses many of Hume’s statements, and places no faith in
“ the vague recollections of convict servants,” which Hume had published. Time plays havoc
with many memories. Mr. Hovell says in this 1855 pamphlet, “ When we made the seacoast
we both believed we had arrived at the district of Western Port. We had been travelling for
that purpose, and whether we were right or wrong in our conception of the true geography of
our location, is a matter of no importance ; in fact, we neither of us could know whether it was
Western Port or Port Phillip, and that Mr. Hume ever intimated in any way that we were at Port
Phillip, is a fiction of his own fancy.”
Here Mr. Hovell is clearly wrong on a point of great importance: for if Hume had not
said that he was convinced that he had reached Port Phillip, how could Sturt have recorded that


sequent occupation of Port Phillip, and the fact that Batman found the
same native names given to Station Peak, the Downs, and Geelong, put
beyond doubt the accuracy of Hamilton Hume’s marvellous faculty for
exploration and knowledge of country.
Hume says: —
“ One chief reason why Mr. Hovell was associated with me in the expedition
was that, being a nautical man by profession, he would be of great service in ascer-
taining by observation our latitude and longitude Whether the fault
lay with Mr. Hovell or with the instruments, no correct observations were taken. I
could not use the quadrant, but I set out trusting to my compass, my knowledge of
bush travelling, a stout heart, and a hardy constitution. Accordingly my compass,
my base line, the sun in the heavens, and my dead reckoning, brought us safely to
(Port Phillip) and they did not fail in bringing us back with equal safety, to the
point of departure, Gunning.”
I gave a cursory glance at the obstacles which lay in Hume s way if
he had not swerved westward from the course prescribed, and skirted
rather than traversed the mountains and their gorges with their im-
penetrable jungles-*-impenetrable that is to say for a travelling party
having no leisure for much clearing or road making, do any one who
will make himself acquainted with the route prescribed, Hume s success
must always appear almost miraculous.
One result which flowed from his being thus east upon a mountainous
route was that he was almost always among perennial streams, and thus
encountered little or no difficulty with regard to water for his stock.
Having mentioned the mountain route, let me add, that by drawing an
arc of by no means a deep curve on the map, it will be found that
the line passes from Yass to the Murrumbidgee, near Wagga Wagga,
almost without encountering a hill, and thence it is well know, now,,
that through the level country called Eiverina, Melbourne may be
approached without surmounting any mountainous obstacle except the
dividing range which Hume passed over at the “ Big Hill ” on the
Kilmore Eoad. Of course it was Hume’s object to start from the
nearest point in New South Wales to the one he had to reach ; but he
must often have thought since, as he looked at the map, of the pleasure
journey he would have had, presuming that water could have been
found, if the line selected for him had been from the Lachlan, at its
conviction ? Moreover, Sturt’s book was published (1833) long before any one else visited Port
Phillip. As Hume was Sturt’s companion in 1828-9, no doubt he then often spoke to him on the
subject. . .
For the above reason, and the fact that Hume’s statements are corroborated by other actors m
the scene, I have adopted his “Statement,” as the correct one, though without any desire to
detract from the credit of Mr. Hovell, who still lives, hale and trong, at a great age, and shows
that exploring has left him with one of the finest constitutions in the world. Hume, also, is
still alive (1871).


junction with the Belubula, to Port Phillip, instead of a line from Lake
George to Western Port.*
Hume’s journey, and the fine country he described, induced Governor
Darling to request him to accompany an expedition sent to form a
penal settlement; but Hume states that his “ impaired health pre-
vented him from complying,” and “ Mr. Hovell was then employed by
the Government to conduct the expedition, by sea, to the country and
port described by us, and he led, I believe, the expedition to Western
Port, where the settlement was formed.” Hume, in his (1855)
pamphlet, indulges in a pardonable tone of triumph at what must
have been Ho veil’s confusion when he reached Western Port by sea,
and could find no Iramoo Downs, no Station Peak, no Mount Went-
worth, such as Hume had shown him at Port Phillip.
Towards the end of 1825, and early in 1826, rumours, which were
confirmed by official despatches,f reached New South Wales to the
effect that the French were about to revive their schemes for forming
a settlement on the coast of Australia. Hume’s journey had shown
the fatness of the land, and the English Government determined to
exclude the French from their coveted Terre Napoleon, as laid down
in the charts of Baudin’s Expedition. It was believed that Western
Port and King George’s Sound were aimed at by the French, and at
both these places Governor Darling was directed to form settlements.
Major Lockyer commanded the party sent to King George’s Sound.
Hume, as previously stated, declined to accompany the Western Port
expedition, and Hovell accompanied Captain Wright thither. When
there, he must soon have come to the conclusion that Hume had been
right, and himself wrong, as to Port Phillip having been reached in
1824 ; but no further steps were taken in order to establish a settle-
ment at the fine country previously seen by Hume and Hovell. The
fears of French colonization evaporated, and Western Port was aban-
doned, its shores being described as scrubby.
The increase of flocks and herds was at this time driving the settlers
of New South Wales to occupy large tracts in the interior; and
Liverpool Plains, the country west of Bathurst, and the courses of
the Lachlan, Murrumbidgee, and other rivers were being gradually
taken up by the early squatters. The occupation of the valley of the
Murrumbidgee was slowly but surely leading to the gradual occupation
* It is almost incredible, but it is true, that within the last year or two, confident statements
have been made in the newspapers to the effect that the New South Wales people are likely to
form their Southern Railway from Goulburn or Yass direct to Albury, thus selecting the moun-
tains and chasms in preference to the almost level country at their choice.
t Bennett’s “ Australian Discovery and Colonization,” p. 569.


of the Murray or Hume, and eventually to the settlement of Port
Phillip.
At this period John Batman must be introduced upon the scene.
He, like Hume, was a native of Paramatta, in New South Wales,
and was called by Governor Arthur, of Tasmania, an enterprising
settler, and commended for his prudence and humanity. He was then
in Tasmania, but he had observed with interest the account of his
fellow-countryman Hume’s discoveries, and on January 11th, 1827,
he, jointly with Mr. J. T. Gellibrand, addressed from Launceston the
following letter to Governor Darling of New South Wales :
“ Sir, —Understanding that it is your Excellency’s intention to establish a per-
manent settlement at Western Port, and to afford encouragement to respectable
persons to settle there, we beg leave most respectfully to solicit at the hands of your
Excellency a grant of land at that place proportionable to the property which wo
intend to embark. We are in possession of some flocks of sheep highly improved,
some of the Merino breed, and some of the pure South Devon; of some pure
Devon cattle imported from England; and also of a fine breed of horses. We pro-
pose to ship from this place 1,500 to 2,000 sheep, 30 head of superior cows, oxen,
horses, &c., &c., to the value of from £4,000 to £5,000, the whole to he under the
personal direction of Mr. Batman (who is a native of New South Wales), who will
constantly reside there for the protection of the establishment. Under these circum-
stances we are induced to hope your Excellency will be pleased to grant us a tract
of land proportionable to the sum of money we propose to expend, and also to afford
us every encouragement in carrying the proposed object into effect.
“ T. J. GELLIBRAND,
“JOHN BATMAN.
“ To His Excellency Lieut.-General Darling.
Governor Darling’s Minute on this application was as follows: —
« Acknowledge, and inform them that no determination having been come to with
respect to the settlement of Western Port, it is not in my power to comply with their
request. March 17 (1827). R. D.”
Thus Batman was foiled in his first attempt, and the apprehensive-
ness of the Governor put off the day of settlement. But exploration
was still continued. Allan Cunningham penetrated northwards, and
in 1829 Captain Sturt, of the 39th Regiment, associated with Hamilton
Hume, discovered the Darling River, which, however, where they first
struck it, they found to their horror to be salt! I need not dwell on
this expedition long, as it bears in no manner on the occupation of
Victoria. It is sufficient to say that the season was one of drought,
that the heat was intense, that the straits to which the expedition was
put were most severe; that Sturt behaved like the gallant fellow ho
always was, that he bore high testimony to the marvellous faculties ot


Hume, and modestly contented himself with saying that he hoped that
it might be thought that, under the circumstances, all had been done
that could he done.
But in 1829 Sturt left Sydney on a second expedition, the results
from which were rapid and momentous. Hume was unable to accom-
pany him, as his harvest demanded his attention, and my friend, Mr.
George Macleay, a son of the Colonial Secretary of the day, in New
South Wales, travelled with the expedition as much in the character
of friend as that of assistant.
The gradual occupation of the Murrumhidgee valleys had, between
the date of Hume’s discovery of the overland route (1824) and Sturt’s
journey, advanced from the neighbourhood of Tass to the neighbour-
hood of Wagga Wagga.
On the 7th of January, 1830, Sturt, having formed a depot on the
Murrumhidgee, not far from its junction with the Lachlan, committed
his fortunes to a boat and started down the river. On the 14th
January he passed the junction with the Hume, and it is a most
unfortunate circumstance that Hume was not there to recognize, as he
would at once have recognized, the river he had named after his father.
Sturt called it the Murray, after Sir George Murray. It is high time
however, for New South Wales, South Australia, and Victoria, to
agree upon a fitter name. Either the whole river should he called the
Hume, after its first discoverer, or the swollen volume of its waters,
after it reaches the plain country, should keep the native name, which
the early travellers unite in giving us, as Millewa, in most tribes ; but
occasionally as Murrewa. Sturt himself had no desire to rob Hume of
his river : he almost apologizes for having appeared to do so by mistake;
though he says it gave him pleasure, as a soldier, to christen the
stream after the name of a soldier.
On the 23rd, Sturt passed the junction with the Darling, which he,
of course, recognized ; and thence he swept victoriously along to Lake
Alexandrina, named after our good Queen, and to the shores of
Encounter Bay, where Baudin met Elinders and tried to rob him of the
fruit of his labour. The descent of the river was like that of Avernus,
easy; but the retracing of their steps was similarly a tough task.
Sturt describes, in moving terms, how the men laboured—how they
became haggard from exhaustion —how he heard them sometimes at
night (when they thought he was asleep) muttering that they must
“ tell the captain to-morrow that they could pull no more ”; how when
morning came they still pulled on; how he himself (in spite of
what we know to have been his fine temper) felt himself becoming
captious and losing his equilibrium in contemplating the condition of


his companions ; how, finally, one man lost his senses ; how, when
rowing the boat was physically impossible, two men started for the
depot with the last divided remnant of food ; how they returned with
the man in charge there, but were themselves in woeful plight, and
sank to the earth, with swollen limbs, but with countenances cheered
by having brought help to their companions. Thirty-nine days were
spent in regaining the depot after the coast was left; but it was
regained, and Sturt sent a despatch to the Governor containing high
praise of his companions. On the sth May Sturt left Wantabadgery,
and reached Guise’s station on the Murrumbidgee. On the 10th May,
1830, a Government Order appeared in the Gazette complimenting
Sturt on his performance, and eulogizing, by Sturt’s request, Mr.
Macleay and all the men of the party.
The publication of Sturt’s report brought about a complete change
in public opinion about Australia. Here were rivers shown to be in
some sort navigable, where hitherto a desert or a marsh had been
supposed to exist. This was nothing short of revolution. Men who
scorned colonization before, were attracted to it now.
In 183 L* the project of founding South Australia was first broached.
Time rolled on, indeed, but the impetus having been given, the colony
was, after various delays, established. On the 15th August, 1834, an
Act of Parliament was passed for the purpose. When Batman saw the
preamble he must have scowled at the treatment he had received from
Governor Darling. It stated that—■“ Whereas certain lands supposed
to be fit for the purposes of colonization .... and whereas divers
of His Majesty’s subjects possessing considerable property are desirous
to embark for the said part of Australia, .... and whereas it is
highly expedient that His Majesty’s said subjects should be enabled to
carry their said laudable purpose into effect,” &c., &c. Batman, of
course, took a note of these things. Sturt’s discovery, however, we
cannot fail to note, led directly to the settlement of South Australia,
and assisted, perhaps, indirectly in stimulating the early occupation,
by New South Wales settlers, of the valley of the Murrumbidgee ;
though the fact that stations were formed, at the time of his expedition,
far below Gundagai, may show that this is at least doubtful, as already,
with the natural increase of stock, fresh stations were taken up as they
were required. If there be any man in South Australia who can date
his success in life to his emigration thither, he owes a debt of gratitude
to Charles Sturt, the gallant soldier who risked life, and lost health
and eyesight in opening fields of promise for others to profit by.
♦“Colonization of South Australia.” R. Torrens, Chairman of the Colonization Commis-
sioners for South Australia. London, 1835.


■ But our immediate business is with Victoria, whither, undeterred by
Sir Ralph Darling’s rebuff of Batman, Mr. Edward Henty bent his
steps in 1834.. In that year, Mr. Thomas Henty having first explored
by sea and land, despatched the Thistle , schooner, with Mr. Edward
Henty on board, from Launceston to Portland Bay, where a whaling
establishment and an agricultural settlement was at once formed. No
permission was obtained from the Government j but Mr. Henty
shipped off building materials, agricultural implements, and live stock.
On the 19th November, 1834, having lost fifteen head of stock on the
voyage, the adventurers reached Portland Bay, and on the 6th
of December ploughing was commenced ; and thus the first unbroken
colonization of Victorian soil dates from the enterprise of Mr. Henty.
In a very short time his few head of stock increased to some 7,000
sheep, 217 cattle, and 25 horses, and continual intercourse was kept
up with Launceston.
Batman, of course, took a note of these things. Sturt s Two
Expeditions into the Interior,” being published in London in 1833, of
course forced the subject upon public attention. To the maps of his
own route Sturt added the route of Hume, and across the tract of
country skirting the N.W. shores of the Bay of Port Phillip, we may
still read in the map the inviting words, “ Extensive and beautiful
downs called Iramoo by the natives.” The junction of the Yarra
Yarra with the Salt AVater River is also duly copied in Sturt s map
from that of Blinders, although the true circuitous course of the
Yarra Yarra is not so carefully followed. “ Fresh water ” and “ good
water ” are marked at two places where they are laid down by Flinders on
the Eastern shore, plainly proving that Flinders’ chart was followed;
for no explorer of the Eastern shore had, since Governor King’s time,
returned from Port Phillip.
Provoked beyond endurance, Batman would no longer be debarred
from the downs of Iramoo, so temptingly described by Hume and
mapped by Sturt. He determined to carve out his own way. South
Australia was being occupied, and the occupation was called laudable
in the preamble of an Act of Parliament. Henty had gone to Portland
Bay, and no man had stayed him.
Batman would go to Port Phillip, and as the New South Wales
governor had not recognized his right to go there, Batman would make
a convention with the rightful and natural lords of the soil. A native
of Australia himself, and acquainted with the habits of the aborigines, an
excellent bushrnan, and fond of the sports of the field, he had years
before been engaged in capturing bushrangers ; and when the sad days
of hostility between the colonists and the unarmed aborigines of


Tasmania occurred, he had been distinguished for success in capturing
them, rather than destroying them with that triumphant cowardice
which has marked with blood so many scenes in Australia, and which
still marks them on almost all its borders of so-called civilization. He
had on his grants of land in Tasmania some New South Wales
aborigines staying with him. With their help, he felt that he could
successfully “ colonize ” anywhere. Hume’s overland journey had
stirred him, but subsequent events decided him. On the 12th May,
1835, he endeavoured to sail in the Rebecca , 15 tons burthen; but
baffling winds detained him, and it was not until the 29th May that he
reached Port Phillip. Bushman as he was, he knew that Hume had
been right about Port Phillip Bay and Station Peak. That he
had Plinders’ chart of Port Phillip, derived from Surveyor-General
Grimes’ labours in 1803, is as clear as any point can be made by
eircumstantial evidence.
Batman did not attempt to explore the east side of the bay. He
landed on Indented Head, explored part of the western shore of the
harbour to the Salt Water Biver and the Merri Creek and Tarra
Tarra, and having made his assumed bargain with the Dutigalla natives,
returned forthwith to Tasmania, leaving Port Phillip on the 14th June.
That he had Flinders’ chart is plain from this fact. In announcing his
proceedings to Governor Arthur, and seeking countenance for his
treaty, he transmitted a plan of Port Phillip, on which will be found*
marked, on the eastern shore, “ Good water,” “ Good water,” and
“ Fresh water,” in three places where they may still be seen so marked
in Flinders’ chart, published in 1814, in London. On the same chart,
be it remembered also, that there may be seen to this day the course
of the Yarra Yarra all round by Toorak and Hawthorn, to the neigh-
bourhood of the Merri Creek.
There were, of course, copies of Flinders’ work in the colony, and
Batman wisely made straight for the Iramoo Downs described by
Hume, and then explored further till he came upon the river
which Flinders says Mr. Grimes found “ falling into the Northern
head of the Port,” Mr. Grimes had not given the river a name,
and Batman styles it the Batman Elver in his plan. The plan
itself was drawn by Mr. John Helder Wedge, one of Batman’s
• “ Report from the Select Committee on the Disposal of Lauds in the British Colonies, together
with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed,
Ist August, 1836.” Batman’s chart and letter are in the Appendix. When I prepared these lectures
I had to prove the facts relating to Batman’s chart by circumstantial evidence. Afterwards
I happened to meet (in 1871) Mr. William Robertson, of Colac, who was announced by Batman as
one of his associates. On my mentioning to him that Batman's own chart contained internal
evidence that it was in great part copied from Flinders, he at once said —“ Of course it was. We
had Flinders’ chart. That was the one we went by.”


associates, who states—“ I laid his route down from his journal.”*
This circumstance will account for many minor errors in laying down
the route, which seems to have been as follows. Landing on Indented
Head he travelled by land to the site of Geelong; entering in his
journal —“from what I have seen I am quite delighted with Port
Phillip.” On Tuesday, having recourse meantime to the Bay, the
2nd June, he reached the neighbourhood of Williamstown, and
thence he travelled up the Salt Water Eiver (many miles of which
are laid down in the chart of Flinders, to which I have so often
referred), and after satisfying himself that “the pasturage was
the most beautiful he had ever seen,” he crossed the country till he
reached the Merri Creek, “which I have named Batman’s Creek,” he
says, “ after my good self.”
On the Merri Creek he made his memorable but fruitless treaty
with the natives. It is a singular fact that the spot at which he made
that treaty is supposed to have been at or near the spot where now
the “ Old Colonists’ Association of Victoria” have been granted a site
whereon to build their “ Founders’ Home.” The treaty is said to
have been drawn in blank beforehand by Mr. Gellibrand. It has been
so often printed that it need not be set out here at full length. By
its terms, Jaga Jaga and others “do for ourselves, our heirs, and
successors, give, grant, enfeoff, and confirm unto the said John Batman,
his heirs and assigns, all that tract of country situate and being in
Port Phillip, running from the branch of the river at the top of the
Port, about seven miles from the mouth of the river, forty miles N.E.,
and from thence west forty miles across Iramoo Downs or Plains, and
from thence S.S.W. across Mount Vilumanata to Geelong harbour at
the head of the same, and containing about 500,000 acres more or
less.” “ The land,” quoth Batman’s journal, “on each side of the
creek is excellent.”
Thence, not having yet observed the Yarra Yarra, which was
shrouded by forest, he passed over the hills on which North Melbourne
is now built, saw (on what is now called Batman’s Swamp) “ quite a
cloud ” of quails, and reached the junction of the Yarra Yarra and
Saltwater rivers. “To our great surprise,” he writes, “ when we got
through the scrub, we found ourselves on a much larger river (i.e., the
Yarra) than the one we went up.” Two of his Sydney blacks (all of
whom had been most useful in bis negotiations with their countrymen)
swam the smaller river ( i.e ., the Saltwater river), and after three hours
* “John Butman the Founder of Victoria, by James Bonwick. Melbourne, 18G7” It is a
remarkable circumstance, that neither Mr. Bonwick nor any other writer I have met with cites
the fact, that the course of the Yarra Yarra had been laid down and published by Flinders
in 1814.


returned with the boat. “ I was glad to see them,” he says, “as we
had got on the point at the junction of the rivers, where the tide had
come up to our ancles.” The wind being foul on the following day,
Batman’s boat was taken up the “much larger river,” the Yarra \arra.
His journal states, “ Bth June, Monday. The boat went up the large
river I have spoken of, which comes from the east, and I am glad to
state about six miles up found the river all good water and very deep.
This will be the place for a village.”
Thus having, as he thought, secured the land from Queenscliff to
Richmond, with a north-easterly extension which included Keilor, and
the Merri Creek beyond Pentridge; having determined, on the Bth
June, that Melbourne or Emerald Hill, or both, should he the “site
for his village,” Batman returned to Yan Diemeji’s Land to secure
the favour of Giovernor Arthur for his scheme, leaving the hulk of his
party in Port Phillip. On the 25th June, 1885, he made an official
communication, the heads of which were; —that he had long desired to
form a settlement at Western Port or Port Phillip ; that others had
associated themselves with him; that the Sydney natives living with
him were partially civilized; that through their means he had hoped
to obtain from the Port Phillip natives “ a portion of territory upon
equitable principles: ” that accordingly he did through their means
make a treaty which was carefully explained to the chiefs, between
whom and himself there was formal livery of seisin: that he had bound
himself to feed and clothe them, and to render them an annual tribute :
that he had parted from them in a most friendly manner: that he had
traversed the country in opposite directions about fifty miles ; that he
had had much experience in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, and had no hesitation in asserting that the general character of
Port Phillip was superior to any he had ever seen. “ The limits of the
land purchased by me,” he said, “ are defined in the chart which I have
the honour of transmitting, taken from personal survey.”
By these words and this map the question of the founding of Mel-
bourne by any private person may fairly be tested. The words were
written on June 25th, 1835, and both the words and the map are con-
tained in an English Parliamentary paper, having been transmitted to
England by Governor Arthur. Mr. Fawkner, it must be remembered,
did not arrive in Port Phillip till October, 1835. The map includes as
Batman’s territory'soven miles of the Yarra Yarra above the junction of
the Saltwater River ; it colours, for settlement purposes, both sides of
the Yarra Yarra in a block rectangular on its Eastern boundary;
Batman’s lagoon and the land enclosed in the angle between the rivers
it reserves as a public common; the N, bank of the Yarra Yarra it


marks as part of Batman’s territory, about as far as the heart of
Richmond ; while the whole of the modern Emerald-hill and Sandridge
are marked in common with the site of Melbourne, as “ Reserved for
a Township and other Public purposes.” (When lithographing this
map I found it convenient to have the names written at right angles
to those I found on the original parliamentary paper, in order to
present it in the form familiar to people now.) Finally, Batman
announces that his associates in the colonization of Port Phillip are
Messrs. C. Swanston, T. Bannister, James Simpson, J. T. Gellibrand,
J. and W. Robertson, Henry Arthur, J. H. Wedge, John Sinclair,
J. T. Collicott, A. Cotterell, W. J. Sams, M. Conolly, and George
Mercer.
Batman confidently trusted “ that the British Government will duly
appreciate the treaty which I have made with these tribes, and will not
in any manner molest the arrangements I have made, but that I shall
receive support and encouragement, of not only the local Government,
hut that of the British Government in carrying the objects into effect.”
On the 3rd July, 1835, Batman was informed by Governor Arthur
that he had perused with much interest his report, and was highly
gratified by the very favourable opinion Batman had formed of the
fertility of the territory ; but Port Phillip was not within the jurisdic-
tion of the Government of Yan Diemen’s Land, and the recognition of
Batman’s treaty “ would appear to be a departure from the principle
upon which a Parliamentary sanction, without reference to the abori-
gines, has been given to the settlement of South Australia as part of
the possessions of the Crown.” Also, it was stated that with regard to
“ Mr. Henty’s application to be allowed, under certain conditions, to
locate a grant of land on the southern coast of New Holland, His
Majesty’s Government declined to accede to the proposal, conceiving
that to have done so would be to deviate from the principles involved
in the Act for the settlement of South Australia.”
On the same day, 4th July, Governor Arthur enclosed to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies Batman’s letter, his map, and his
treaty ; but though his own nephew was one of Batman’s associates,
the Governor was constrained to observe “Notwithstanding the
respectability of the gentlemen interested in the arrangement, that it
does not appear to me that it can be advocated on any valid grounds.
He commended Batman’s prudence and humanity, and thought that a
liberal grant of land in the country he had explored would be well
bestowed ; but had plainly told him that he could not hold out the
slightest prospect of the favourable consideration of his treaty. But
he adds —“ As the company will probably proceed at once to take


possession, and as other individuals may follow, .... I cannot,
I most respectfully submit, be made acquainted at too early a period
with the views which His Majesty’s Government entertain upon this
very important subject.” He submitted that the settlement might bo
placed temporarily under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Van
Diemen’s Land.
A settlement, therefore, was an accomplished fact in the eyes of
Governor Arthur, who well knew the energy of Batman and the
intelligence of some of his associates ; and, indeed, they were already
at work making overtures direct to the English government.
But now another power comes upon the scene. No sooner was Sir
Hi chard Bourke made acquainted with Batman s proceedings than, on
the 26th August, 1835, he fulminated a proclamation, declaring that—
“ Whereas it has been represented to me that divers of His Majesty’s subjects
have taken possession of lands of the Crown within the limits of this Colony under
the pretence of a treaty, bargain, or contract for the purchase thereof, with the
aboriginal natives : now, therefore, I, the Governor, do hereby notify, &c., &c., that
every such treaty, &c., &c., is void as against the rights of the Crown ; and that all
persons found in possession, &c., without licence, &c., will be considered as
trespassers, &c., &c.”
But Sir Eichard Bourke was in a dilemma. On the 4th July, 1834,
he had favoured a proposition for the settlement of Twofold Bay, by
Mr. James Atkinson; but had been informed by the Secretary of
State that “ His Majesty’s Government are not prepared to authorize
a measure, the consequences of which would be to spread over a still
further extent of territory a population which it was the object of
the late land regulations to concentrate.”
After this intimation, wrote Sir Eichard, in a despatch of 10th
October, 1835—it was only on account of Batman’s proceedings
having forced the question upon him that he was induced to revert to
the subject: —“ There is little doubt,” he sajs, “ that Mr. Batman and
his part) will continue to convey cattle to Port Phillip, and to invest
capital in buildings and other improvements at that place.” Sir
Eichard then ventures to repeat his arguments in favour of allowing
settlement: —
“ The proprietors of thousands of acres already find it necessary, equally with
the poorer settlers, to send large flocks beyond the present boundary of location, to
preserve them in health throughout the year. The colonists must otherwise restrain
the increase, or endeavour to raise artificial food for their stock. Whilst nature
presents all around an unlimited supply of the most wholesome nutriment, either
course would seem a perverse rejection of the bounty of Providence; and the latter
would certainly require more labour than can be obtained in the colony, or


immigration profitably supply. Independently of these powerful reasons for allowing
dispersion, it is not to be disguised that the government is unable to prevent it. No
adequate measures could be resorted to for the general and permanent removal of
intruders from waste lands, without incurring probably a greater expense than
would be sufficient to extend a large share of the control and protection of
Government over the country they desire to occupy. One principal objection to
dispersion thus becomes as powerful against its restraint.”
After urging other reasons, Sir E. Bourke adds, “ Such are the
considerations which rendered me unwilling to oppose the settlement
of Twofold Bay. The same considerations induce me to believe that it
will be more desirable to impose reasonable conditions on Mr. Batman
and his associates, than to insist on their abandoning their under-
taking. I would propose that a Township be marked out both at
Twofold Bay and in some eligible spot on the coast, to which Mr.
Batman’s party has proceeded. ... I beg leave to observe that
it is in consideration of the capital expended by Mr. Batman and
bis associates that I am inclined to recommend so early an occupation
of Port Phillip.” The date of this despatch is 10th October, 1835, and
as Mr. Pawkner only arrived at Port Phillip on that day, it will at
once be seen that no proceeding of his influenced Sir R, Bourke
in founding the settlement. For this reason I have introduced
this passage here, although a little out of the order of events
as to date.
Batman and his friends did not content themselves with his letter to
Sir George Arthur. On the 27th June, 1835, they addressed a letter
to the Secretary of State praying that the crown would “ relinquish
any legal point of constructive right to the land in question.” They
urged that through Batman’s conciliatory conduct most happy and
philanthropic results would ensue in the intercourse with the natives
to whom had been secured an annual tribute distinguished as to its
equity from terms by which in other British plantations the soil had
been taken from the aborigines. One of the Association (Mr. Mercer)
undertook to press their claims on the colonial department. In
January, 183 G, we find him writing from Edinburgh to Lord Glenelg
on the subject; —after dwelling on the philanthropy of Batman’s conduct
and asking either for recognition of the treaties executed, or for a
royal grant of the territories as feudatories of the crown (on behalf of
the Geelong and Dutigalla Association, of which he was shareholder
and agent), he adds ; —“Under such circumstances I trust I may with-
out presumption flatter myself that His Majesty’s Ministers will bo
glad to find it consistent with their duty to the crown and the country,
to sanction and foster a colony founded upon principles of humanity


and civilization, and opening a new field for emigration and British
industry.” Lord Glenelg, however, informed him that the territory
was part of the colony of New South AVales, and that no title to lands
could be acquired there except upon the terms prescribed in Sir R-
Bourke’s Commission and Instructions from the Queen.
The Association must have been prepared for this rebuff, for they
had already obtained legal opinions from the great lawyers Burge,
Pemberton, and Pollett, to the effect that the Crown was not concluded
in any way by their treaty. Mr. Mercer returned to the charge, how-
ever, and wrote along letter on the 16th March, in reply to which he
was told that the Governor of New South Wales would receive the
requisite instructions for the appointment of magistrates, &c., and the
government of the settlement. To conclude account of the pro-
ceedings of the Association, I may here mention that they sent* Messrs.
Swanston, Gellibrand, and Dobson, to Sydney, to urge claims for com-
pensation. Eventually, we are told, Messrs. Swanston and Learmonth
bought out the other members, and the Government remitted, by way
of compensation, the sum of £7,000, at a land sale, in Eebruary, 1838,
in consideration, as stated by the Gazette , “of expenses incurred by
them in the first formation of the settlement.”f
Thus the settlement of Port Phillip and foundation of Melbourne
are shown to have taken place without any reference to Mr. T awkncr,
who has erroneously been credited, by some people, with having
been the discoverer of the site of Melbourne, and of the rivex
Tarra Yarra.
By Governor King’s orders, in 1808, Mr. Charles Grimes walked
round and surveyed the harbour, and laid down the course of the
Yarra Yarra up to the falls above Studleigh Park. Hume laid down
the position and described the capabilities of the open country between
Kinlochewe and Geelong. Hume’s description instigated Batman, who
came not to discover, but to occupy,the country mapped out by Blinders,
Hume and Sturt, Batman, on his chart sent with his letter of June 25th
1885, marked out and coloured as the site for his township and public
reserves the land on both sides of the river for seven miles above the
junction with the Saltwater River, and he merely noted, with an ordinary
mark, the spot at which he formed his first temporary encampment at
Indented Head. Batman was no discoverer, but a determined man,
whose energy forced on the settlement of the country, as we learn from
Sir Richard Bourke’s admission.
If we were merely considering his character, his peculiar adroitness
in dealing with the natives by means of his aboriginal companions, and
♦ Berwick's “ Tort Phillip,” page 81. + Ditto, page 102.


by resorting to the tribal marks made upon trees where aboriginal
ceremonies are performed, might deserve special notice. Here it is
only needful to allude to it.
But, these being the facts, it may be said, how could Bawkner or
any one on his behalf claim the title of founder of Melbourne ? It
is most probable that Bawkner was not aware that Batmen had in
June, 1835, plotted out the “ site for his village ” at the Yarra Yarra.
Batman and his friends, when Governor Arthur could not confirm
their treaty, may have hoped to succeed best in England by not
trumpeting too much in the colony the limits of their claim. However
that may be, there is their claim, marked and coloured in the English
Parliamentary papers.
As the thread of Batman’s later proceedings is mingled with those
of Bawkner and others, I will now take them together. Batman s
narrative created a fervour in New South Wales as well as in
Tasmania. I was, myself, very young at the time ; but I have a clear
recollection of the excitement produced in New South Wales, whither
my family had immigrated in the preceding year ; my father being a
clergyman of the Church of England, and a Cambridge M.A., who, as
he had no cure in England, came to serve his Master as a chaplain in
an English colony. The excitement was great, even in the sparsely
inhabited country districts; but the expense of fitting out o\crland
expeditions with large quantities of stock was so serious, that some
time elapsed before the “ overlanders,” as they were called, organized
their parties.
Batman, meanwhile, was working so hard in Tasmania that others
were soon spurred to follow him. As early as June, 1835, a writer in
the Cornwall Chronicle , alluding to Batman s schemes, remarked
“ The site of a township has been marked off, to be called Batmannia,
at the head of Port Phillip, well supplied with a running stream of
fresh water.” As M!r. Bonwick remarks on this passage, written
some months before Mr. Bawkner saw Port Phillip, it is absurd to
ascribe to him any credit for the discovery of the Yarra Yarra, when
its existence was thus publicly advertised.
Brom Tasmania, then Van Diemen’s Band, all the earlier adven-
turers came, though they were not very many in number. Mr. J. H.
Wedge, one of Batman’s associates, held an office in Tasmania, and
having applied for leave of absence and being denied it, resigned his
appointment, and sailed in July, 1835, for the new land which he was
to survey carefully and report upon. On his arrival he found that the
long-lost William Buckley, who had strayed from Governor Collins at
Point Nepean, in 1803, had joined Batman’s party.


At this point Mr. Fawkner and Mr. John Aikin appear on the scene.
On the 27th July, Fawkner put off from George Town in the
Enterprise, intending to go to Western Port. Only four of her
passengers were Fawkner’s people, the rest being adventurers on their
own account. It would appear that he had more faith in Hovell than
in Hume; while Batman, as we have seen, like Sturt, relied on Hume.
Sea-sickness, however, overcame Fawkner, and his party had to leave
him behind. He gave them instructions however. In his own
narrative, published in the Digger's Advocate, Mr. Fawkner rather
sneers at the fact that Mr. John Aikin, in a sloop, without a navigator,,
managed to slip over with his Enterprise, “ which, from her slowness,”
he says, “was no great difficulty.” If Mr. Aikin had done this, I know
not that his adventurous spirit was to be decried. „ But the Launceston
Advertiser, of July, 1835, gives the name of Captain Beilin, as
commander of the Endeavour, in which Mr. Aikin, with five others,
sailed for Port Phillip, where they landed their sheep near Arthur’s
Seat, and drove them round to the Yarra, crossing which, they went
on to Aikin’s Gap, and there settled down, undeterred by Batman's
presumed domain.
It is alleged by Fawkner’s friends, and truly, that though his little
vessel sailed in July, her trip was planned at an earlier date. A letter
from Batman* to Mr. Wbdge, dated 18th June, 1830, narrates a visit,
in Launceston, to Batman from Fawkner, who stated that he was
awaiting the return of the Enterprise from Sydney, “ that he wished
to be on good terms with us, and would not in any way interfere with
us, and hoped we should act in the same way towards him ; that was,
that we should not encourage his servants, &c. . . AVhat think you
of all this ? For my part, as he goes to the opposite side (Point
Nepean), I think it all the better for us ; the more the better. . .
He intends to purchase the land from the natives, and said he did not
want a large tract; that he would have some difficulty in treating
with them, unless I would allow him one of my natives, and if I could
not, the only thing he could do after settling there, would be to send
to Sydney for some.” As this letter was written by Batman before
Fawkner’s vessel sailed, and when no dispute could have been
anticipated, we may safely accept it as evidence, though it certainly
induces us to wonder that, in after years, Fawkner should have made
himself merry at the expense of Batman, because the latter made a
bargain with the natives.
The Enterprise having received her sailing orders, went to Western
Port on the Bth August. George Evans, one of her passengers, says
* Bonwick’a “ John Batman,” pp. 39, 84.


that he came over to look for a run for his flock, but that he saw the soil
at AYestern Port would not suit, so, although they had already been
warned off by Batman’s brother, at Indented Head, and had then turned
back to Western Port, Mr. Evans persuaded Captain Hunter to run the
blockade at Indented Head, and seek for pasture at Port Phillip.
There they tried the Eastern Shore, but Eawkner says “No eligible
spot was found.” On the 20th August they anchored in Hobson’s
Bay. “On Friday the 21st August,” writes Fawkner to the Digger s
Advocate , “ Messrs. Moor, Evans, W, Jackson, and Captain Lancey
putting some provender into the five-oared whale-boat, brought for the
occasion, pushed off* with two workmen to explore the inlet. In fact
they all, except Captain Hunter, Master of the Enterprise , doubted as
to that being the debouchement of any stream. But he found it on his
chart, and advised their trying to find, what he was sure they would, a
fresh water river.”
These words are enough to convince the most sceptical, that
Fawkner’s party discovered no river, and that like Batman, who plotted
his course on a copy of Flinders’ chart, Fawkner’s party were led by
existing published descriptions to the river spoken of by Flinders as
surveyed by Surveyor-G-eneral Charles Grimes, in 1803. In Bonwick’s
“ John Batman ” will be found a statement made by Eobson, who
accompanied Batman on his first trip, that Hobson had told Captain
Hunter about the Yarra. The boat-party went up the Salt AYater
Fiver, but failed to find fresh water, not having followed the river so
far as Mr. Grimes had mapped it. They returned to the vessel
exhausted; and on Saturday they went up the Yarra Yarra in their
boat, while Captain Hunter, Avith his crew, was working at his sound-
ings so well, that on the Sunday he reached the Yarra Yarra basin at
Melbourne. Greatly pleased with their success, and not knowing that
they stood on soil marked and coloured, for settlement of his “ village,”
by Batman, they proceeded to build a hut. On the Wednesday, how-
ever, Mr. AYedge appeared. Evans gives the colloquy thus : —“ AYhat
do you here P ” was the cry. “ I have as good a right here as you,’
was the reply. “ But,” added Mr. Surveyor AYedge, “ all this land
belongs to John Batman and the Association. I go by the chart.”
“ AYell, and I go by the chart,” meaning the ship’s chart.
Thus, on the 2nd September, 1835, was Batman’s alleged territory
invaded. Mr. Wedge himself states that, on this first interview, he
“ received nothing but civility from Mr. Lancey; he received in good
part the written paper I gave him, explaining that Batman had secured
the land on the north side of the Yarra from the natives, and requesting
him not to interfere with it. I believe it was on this occasion that


Mr. Lancey told me that they were going to take possession of land on
the south side of the Tarra.” *
However, Fawkner’s people did not move off at Mr. Wedge’s bidding ;
and he himself arrived at Melbourne on the 10th October. By this
time Batmans association were roused to consider the propriety
of removing Fawkner. “We have heard,” writes one of them to Mr.
Wedge, “of Thompson’s and Fawkner’s parties, and we had a meeting
on the subject. and were for hostile measures, at once
setting on the blacks to eat them out, or drive them out even. I at
once held up my voice against such imprudence, and was supported to
the echo by and and the ! We in the course of the
day saw young Thompson, who assured us that there was no truth in
the report of Fawkner having squatted. We then considered every-
thing at rest; just then comes your letter to me, confirming the fact
of an encroachment, and your sentiments so fully in accordance with
the majority.”
Batman was at this time in Tasmania, arranging, as he wrote to
Governor Arthur on the 23rd October, “ to proceed with my family to
Port Phillip to take with Mr. Wedge the direction of the affairs of the
Association,” and applying for assistance, towards which the Associa-
tion would cheerfully contribute, in regulating matters at the settlement
where “ the Association has already felt some inconvenience by
individuals who have recently quitted the port of Launceston, and in
defiance of our occupation of land from the natives, have fixed them-
selves on part of the territory,” &c.
* It may well be a matter of wonder that either Mr. Fawkner’s vanity or the mistaken zeal of
his friends, could set up a claim for his having been a discoverer under these circumstances.
Yet, at page 84 of Bonwick’s “ John Batman,” I find it stated—“ Mr. Fawkner emphatically denies
that his rival saw the Yarra and the site of Melbourne on his first visit to Port Phillip, but claims
the merit of the discovery, or re-discovery, for his party in August, 1835.” . . . Elsewhere
he writes, that “ a Mr. Gibson discovered the river in 1804, and reported the same to Governor
Collins, who would take no notice of it.” This is an allusion to a rumour that one of the run-
aways (who absconded, like Buckley, but returned to the camp) saw the Yarra. I have already
shown that Governor King had had a survey made of the port in 1803, and of many miles of the
Yarra Yarra; that Lieutenant Tuckey, of the Calcutta, mentions that survey in his book about
the Point Nepean settlement; and that Flinders published the map of it in 1814. I have also men-
tioned that, in Batman’s map sent to Colonel Arthur in June, 1835, he marked the Yarra Yarra,
called it River Batman, and plotted out his township and reserve on both banks of it, and
evidently had access to Flinders’ map, as he has marked watercourses in places which he did not
himself profess to visit. There is, therefore, no room for dispute on the point. I have in my
possession copies of Flinders’ map and of Batman’s also. It may be asked why Batman did not
deny Fawkner’s assertions. Most of them were made long after Batman’s death; and th#
existence of Batman’s map seems to have escaped Batman’s friends, and to have been unknown
to Fawkner, who had not the same evidence before him which I have been enabled to produce.
(Yet how hard lived is error I This day, sth Septeml or, 1871, as I correct the proofs of this
pamphlet, I read a report of a lecture given at Colling wood, in which, it is said, the lecturer
“ alluded to the rival claims of Mr. Fawkner and Mr. Batman to be considered the founder of the
colony, but he did not pretend to determine between them.”)


Almost every one now in Melbourne lias seen tbe small and
active but far from robust frame of Fawkner, but Batman’s stalwart
strength is not so well known. One anecdote related to me tbe
other day, by Sir Eobert Officer, near whose property the deed was
done, will give some idea of Batman, Being powerful and daring, he
was employed by the Government in dealing with desperate men,
and was, of course, no favourite with wrong-doers. A bushranger
attempted to rob him ; Batman managed to close with him, despite
whatever weapons he bore, and the two struggled in deadly strife,
Batman having to rely only on his muscular hands. Batman
overpowered the other, and rose from the ground. When he did so,
it was found that his antagonist was stone dead, choked by the
grasp which had been upon his throat.
No wonder that some of Batman’s partners shrunk from the idea of
a resort to force to expel Fawkner. On October 13th Mr. Wedge
wrote to Batman solemnly protesting against Batman’s presumed
intention to remove Mr. Fawkner and those connected with him. The
letter though earnest, was friendly, and was answered by Batman in a
friendly tone, on the same day.
“Launceston, 13th October , 1835.
Dear ‘Wedge,
“ I received your letter, on my arrival here, which did not a little astonish
me, particularly your protest. In the first place you are in error in stating that
and recommended me to remove Fawkner hy force. . . . Your
protest is the first I have heard of it. Ido not, neither did I, intend to use violence
to remove Fawkner, as I am convinced there are many ways to get rid of him
without that I have not the least doubt that Fawkner will see the
necessity of crossing the river, as we shall over-run the land at once with stock. I
am half inclined to think you have heard some strange tales since your arrival. I
am sorry to think you should wish to leave us. If I can, I will ride out and see you
before I leave. But write me. Yours faithfully,
“JOHN BATMAN.
« p.S.—I cannot help thinking,—and reading your Protest, you are surely wrong
in everything. Surely I would not do anything to thwart our prosperity with the
Government. —J. B.
“ You must have mistaken the thing altogether. I will see you, if possible, before
I leave.”
A straightforward kind of man, this Batman, apparently. Mean-
while, at the other end of Tasmania, Mr. Gellibrand drew up a docu-
ment on the same October 23rd, for] Batman’s guidance in dealing with
Fawkner and the other invading squatters. “It will be expedient,”
quoth this memorandum, “to show Mr. Fawkner the chart, and also
the description in the grant from the natives, in order to satisfy


him that the land occupied by his people belongs to the Association; to
offer him every assistance in procuring other land for him, and also in
removing his goods, &c., and also in the erection of other buildings, &c.
. . . . If the parties set us at defiance, it will then be expedient
to fence them off, so that they may not further trespass, and by
annoying them in that manner compel them to leave; but on no
occasion to offer them actual violence, unless in self-defence.”
I need not enlarge further upon the question of right or prior
occupancy. In IVIr. Bonwick’s narratives it will be found that Batman
and Fawkner contended for the soil of Melbourne ; that Evans sought
the country pasture he came for ; that Batman managed to assert his
rights at one time to such an extent that, for twenty pounds, Fawkner
consented to leave the north bank, and relinquish his crop, and flit to
the flat near Emerald Hill, whence, however, he returned again, when
he found that other intruders could not be expelled by Batman s
Association.
Meantime a few words must be added as to the general settle-
ment and discovery of the rich lands of the Westward. Sir E.
Bourke, in 1885, desired Sir Thomas Mitchell to conduct an expedition
to survey the Darling Fiver ; and in May, 1830, he despatched Mr.
Stewart to proceed to Port Phillip as a magistrate, and report on the
state of the settlement.
BltltG OI BtJL Lit?li.lt/111/.
The condition of affairs at this period is graphically shown in the
following award, which has come into toy hands. John Batman’s
brother having quarrelled with Fawkner, the dispute was referred to
arbitration. The award runs thus :
“ We award, in the disputes between Mr. Henry Batman and Mr. John Pascal
Fawkener—on the first claim, Thirty Shillings. On the second claim, nothing ;
altho’ a strong presumption is on our minds that some hasty expressions of Mr.
Batman may have led Bullett to destroy the Rabbits. On the third claim, damage
Five Shillings, and a fine of Twenty Shillings, in consideration of its being an act
of unauthorized aggression, and in the fourth claim nothing, as it does not appear
that Mr. Batman set the dogs on the calf. We cannot omit remarking that there
had been a degree of forbearance on the part of Mr. Fawkener highly gratifying to
us, and if generally practised, very conducive to the general good.
Signed A. THOMSON,
„ JOHN AITKEN,
May Ind, 1836. „ JAMES SIMPSON.
Mem.—The fines to bo appropriated to some general purpose.”
Of course, if a man pays a fine voluntarily to you, you may do what
you like with it; but our friends had no power to inflict penalities:—
therefore when Sir E. Bourke’s legate arrived on the first of June,


1836, in the Revenue cutter Royal George , the principal settlers (we
are told by Bonwick) met at Mr. Batman’s house, and drew up a
memorial requesting the Governor to send them a Police Magistrate,
and afford them the advantages of a government. Meanwhile they
resolved that Mr. James Simpson, formerly a Magistrate in Yan
Diemen’s Band, should act as arbitrator of the settlement.
The following advertisement in one of Mr. Pawkner’s MS. news-
papers, at a much later date, gives some idea of the primitive customs
of the country :
*< Tho undersigned begs to inform tbe Public that he beeps a Boat and 2 men in
readiness for the purpose of crossing and re-crossing Passengers between Williams
Town and the opposite Beach,
“ Parties from Melbourne are requested to raise a Smoke and the Boat will be at
their service as soon as practicable.
“ The least charge is 6 shillings, and two shillings each when the number
exceeds two.
“H. McLEAN.
“Williams Town, Feby. 9th, 1838.’
H.M.S. Rattlesnake arrived on the Ist October, 1836, bringing with
her, as the official bead of the new settlement (which the first inhabi-
tants had called Glenelg) Captain Lonsdale of the 4th Regiment,
known to so many of us as a straightforward, upright, dutiful servant
of the Queen, and kind-hearted Englishman. From Mr. Batman, we
are informed that Captain Lonsdale received loyal assistance..
But, while these events occurred at Port Phillip, Bir Thomas Mitchell
was unveiling the pastoral beauties of the West, in a manner which
brought immediate crowds of votaries. After visiting the Darling
River he ascended the Murray or Millewa, and from Mount Hope, on
the 28th June, 1836, descried the land of promise to the south.
Between Hume’s route to Port Phillip and Sturt’s boat voyage down
the Murrumbidgee there was, of course, an unknown area of great
extent. Mitchell determined to explore it. He describes the Loddon,
Mount William, Mount Zero, Mount Arapiles, the Wannon (mark how
much more euphonious is the native name which, in this instance,
Mitchell preserved), the Glenelg, Mount Napier,Mount Rouse, Mount
Abrupt, and various other places of note, and he bursts into a natural
enthusiasm. “Of this Eden it seemed that I was only the Adam ; and
it was indeed a sort of Paradise to me, permitted thus to be the first
to explore its mountains and streams.” On the 20th August
he recognized Cape Northumberland, and turning eastward by
the shore, on the 29th August he reached the settlement
which our fellow-colonist, Mr. Edward Henty, had come to


form in 1834. “It was very obvious, indeed,” Mitcbell says, “ from
the magnitude and extent of the buildings and the substantial fencing
erected, that both time and labour had been expended on their
construction.”
Of course he was kindly received. To have anything for oneself
was, in the early days in Australia, to have it for a friend or guest.
Hospitality was of the heart, and of the hearth.
Turning homewards he passed the Pyrenees, named Mount Cole,
and reached the Geboor mountain, which he most inconsequentially
called Mount Macedon because the bay visible from it was called Port
Phillip. As it was called after Governor Phillip and not after him
of Macedonia, the reasoning is not even as cogent as Pluellen’s : “If
you look in the map of the world, I warrant you shall find in the com-
parisons between Macedon and Monmouth that the situations, look
you, is both alike. There is a river at Macedon, and there is also a
river at Monmouth ; it is called Wye at Monmouth ; but it is out of
my brains what is the name of the other river: but ’tis all one, ’tis as
like as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is Salmons in b#th.”
Mitchell confesses that Mount Geboor (Admiral King’s note-book
calls it Gniburrh) is a better name, because shorter than Mount
Macedon. I would suggest to the Old Colonists’ Association that, as
we have now no place in Victoria named after Hamilton Hume, whose
discoveries mainly led to Batman’s enterprise, they might, with good
reason, pray that the name may be changed to Mount Hume. So far
as we know, Hume was the first white man (setting Buckley aside)
who saw the mountain. He named it Wentworth, but that name
having been discarded, the discoverer’s name is the fittest. Mitchell
on returning to Sydney, wrote thus to Hume :—“ Tou will have seen
before this (or might see) the account of our tour through the
southern country. I have much pleasure in stating that I found
your map of the rivers (allowing for the distance at which I crossed
them below your route) surprisingly correct.”
Can we not name a landmark after such a discoverer ? Moreover,
we have no prominent landmarks named after Plinders or Batman.
Blinders wished to name Arthur’s Seat a Bluff. Let us call it Blinders
Bluff —surely a far more appropriate name than Arthur’s Seat. There
was a hill named after Batman, but in this levelling age we have cut it
down, as cumbering the ground. There is still Batman’s Swamp, but that
may properly be done away with, and then there will be no natural
object to serve as a record of the founder of the settlement of 1835.
Why not name Station Peak after him? Batman’s Peak or Mount
Batman would serve well; and, in this instance, for a rarity, the native


name is lengthy, and not euphonious. I commend these suggestions-
to the Old Colonists’ Association.
After spying Indented Head and the bay, and observing some-
thing which might be the tents or huts of Batman and others,
Mitchell named the Campaspe, crossed the Goulburn, adopted the
name Violet Ponds, given to a small watercourse by some of his men,
“ from some flowers growing there,” crossed the Ovens, notes that the
map* of Hume’s journey was, “in the two rivers we had recently
passed, wonderfully correct,” and reached the Murrumbidgee on the
24th October. The publication of his account added whatever was
wanting to complete the desire to occupy the new country which
Mitchell had christened Australia Felix. Even the road was shown
to be easy, for it was now proved that the Murray, the Ovens, and the
Groulburn ran through level plains after escaping from the mountains
in which Hume had found them.
The occupation of Port Phillip was no longer a matter of doubt. It
was a mere question of time, and of expense in equipping expeditions
and travelling with stock. Thenceforward, as these difficulties could
be overcome, there was a continuous stream of stock and colonists
from New South Wales to Port Phillip. I, myself, residing on the
Murrumbidgee thirty years ago, saw and heard much of the over-
landers. Governor Bourke himself appeared upon the scene in
March, 1837, having arrived in H.M.S. Battlesnalce. He was accom-
panied by my old and much-respected friend, the late Admiral P. P.
King, a son of that Governor King, who had named the port Port
Phillip, and had had a careful survey of it made by Mr. Charles Grimes
in 1803. I have now in my hand a photograph! of a pencil sketch
found in his small notebook. It shows the Commandant’s house,
which stood then on the land between King-street and Batman’s
Hill, A few figures are drawn with it. Under one group is
written “ Hobson making rice pudding.” (This is Captain Hobson,
H.M.S. Battlesnalce , after whom Hobson’s Bay is named.) Several
of the aborigines are crouched around him. Watching the opera-
tion is a figure under which is written “ Batman,” while on the
right hand is a tall figure with the word “ Buckley ” underneath.
Here is a subject for a colonial artist. Governor Bourke’s figure,
and that of the sketcher, Admiral King, might fitly be added in the
foreground. Batman forwarded to Hobart Town (November 30th,
• In Hume’s pamphlet, published in 1855, it is distinctly stated that this map was the work of
Hume, not of Hovell; and Dr. Bland, a friend of Hovell, who in 1887 published an account of
the journey, admits that the latitudes and longitudes were omitted ; the instruments with which
they were attempted to be taken having been found unworthy of confidence, and that the
accompanying map was therefore offered as presenting a mere general outline of the route.
This, of course, agrees with Hume’s statements.
f By Mayall and Sons, Melbourne.


1835) a portrait of Buckley, which he considered “ a very correct
likeness,” and as yet there are ample means of procuring likenesses of
all the characters. Captain Lonsdale, the commandant, would, of
course, be necessary to the picture.
The Hobart Town Courier in November, 1836, states : —“ We learn
that Captain Lonsdale has selected the original settlement formed by
Mr. Batman on the Tarra Yarra as the site of the infant metropolis.”
Governor Bourke confirmed this arrangement, but he fixed the name
‘‘Melbourne” upon it, and named Williams Town on the Western
shore. He also, after a short time, “ having taken into consideration
the number of persons who are now occupying habitations in and near
the territory of Melbourne, waiting for an opportunity of purchasing
allotments” directed that a certain portion- of the allotments
recently laid out “ should be disposed of by public auction on the
spot.” A similar sale for Williamstown allotments was announced
“on account of the advantages it would afford to the commercial
interests of the district.” The maps used at the time describe Flinders
Lane, and Little Collins-street, as “ back lanes.” Governor Bourke
and Admiral King laid them out for easy approach by back lanes for
carts, and for cattle! and now the largest buildings in Melbourne
have frontage to them.
The full particulars of the sale will be found in Bonwick’s “ Port
Phillip.” For our present purpose it will be enough to note the
names of John Batman, the first occupant; Mr. Ebden, lately
removed from amongst us, and of whom I may fairly say that his
energy and sagacity made him a great public benefactor to our most
useful institutions, and that if we knew our own wants we should feel
his loss deeply ; Mr. J. F. Strachan, now a member of our Parliament;
Henry Howey; J. P. Fawkner; John Highett; Charles Wedge;
George Mercer; Joseph Sutherland; Skene Craig; Wm. Eyrie, an
old New South Wales friend of my own; J. H. Wedge; Lachlan
Macalister, a well-known soldier and commandant of mounted police ;
John Gardiner, who, after driving stock from New South Wales, took
up a run where Gardiner’s Creek now bears his name; Eobert
Hoddle, known to nearly all of us; Charles Swanston; James
Simpson; and William Hutton. These and many other well-known
names occur as buyers at the first land sale on Ist June, 1837. At
the further request of the inhabitants, on the Ist November, 1837, the
Governor directed that another sale should be held “ on the spot.”
Again we find the old names, with the addition of other well-known
names, such as Mollison, Hodgson, Hutton, Eoadknight. The prices
are duly recorded in Bonwick’s “ Port Phillip.” One instance will
suffice for my purposes. Half-an-acre —the Union Bank corner—was


bought for £42.* In February, 1838, a Jika Jika suburban sale was
held, and among the buyers we find many Sydney names : Sir
Charles Nicholson, S. A. Donaldson, W. Bradley, Campbell, Dight,
Sandeman, and others. I need not swell the catalogue ; but, in case
Mr, Bonwick should publish another edition of his “ Port Phillip,” I
would mention that he makes our old friend, Dr. Black, now the active
President of our Acclimatization Society, hail from the wrong place
altogether. Dr. Black, buying a Melbourne allotment on 13th Sep-
tember, 1838, is represented as being of Perth, which is in Western
Australia; whereas he was of Penrith , a short distance from Sydney.
While I allude to this error, I may mention another. Batman’s
enterprise gave so special a colouring to the settlement in 1835, that
people who were not on the spot in New South Wales are absolutely
ignorant of the extent to which settlers, squatters, and merchants, and
indeed all classes, migrated hither from New South Wales. The names
of Batman’s associates —Wedge, Eobertson, Mercer, Swanston, and
others: those of Learmonth, Strachan, Murray, Eussell, Simson,
Thomson, and many others —are indissolubly bound up with the
connection of Port Phillip with Yan Diemen’s Land.
Sturt’s work and map, Batman’s and his friends’ movements r
Mitchell’s description of Australia Felix, and Sir Eichard Bourke’s
despatches, brought out large numbers of colonists direct from
the old country ; but a large number of colonists came by sea or
by land from New South Wales.f
• About twenty years afterwards a similar corner, across the street, was sold for 40,000,
having been purchased in 1837 by Mr. Bowermann for £B7-
+ Let a few names within my own knowledge afford an example of what must have been the
bulk of the stream. 0. H. Ebden (to whom the colony owes its Audit Act, so much praised, and
alleged to have been since imitated in England); C. Bonney ;A. F. Mollison and his brothers ;
Mr. J. Graham, now a member of the parliament; Dr. Hope and his brothers; Mr. Joseph
Hawdon, late of Heidelberg, who arrived overland with stock in 1836; Dr. Martin, of Heidel-
berg ;F. G. Dalgety; J. C. Riddell,and T. F. Hamilton, then recently from Scotland ; the three
Eyries; Dalmahoy Campbell; H. Flower; W. Rutledge; J. Reeve; and the Kings, of Gipps
Land; A. McMillan ; G. Faithful; Docker; A. Langhorne, who arrived in 1836; Sir Francis
Murphy; J, D. Pinnock; Skene Craig; H. and C. Fowler; E. Bell; M. Hervey; Captain
M'Lachlan; R. Hoddle; H. K. Hughes; J. Atkinson; J. Riley, and J. Macarthur, who both
accompanied Streletzki to Gipps Land in 1840 ; E. J. Brewster; E. G. Talbot; W. Campbell, now
a member of our parliament; the late Robert Thomson, of Gipps Land, who also lately held a
seat in the Council; W. Verner; G. Cavenagh; T. Strode; J. D. Lyon Campbell; the Temple-
tons ; P. Snodgrass; R. Shadforth ; D. C. Macarthur ; D. C. Simson and his brother; the Cog-
hills ; Captain Hepburn, of Smeaton; T. and H. Wills; H. F. Gurner; Sir W. a’Beckett;
the Mantons; J. Donnithorne; H. F. Gisborne; E, Stewart; J. Murchison; W. Lonsdale;
J. Blair; A. B. Balcombe; W. Brodribb; Dr. T. Black; G. W. Cole; J. M. Grant; W.
McKellar; iV. H. Wright; J. Peter; Walter Clark; J. T. Smith; H. J. Chambers; J. Wil-
kinson; B. Cuninghame; the Reids, who settled at the Ovens River; E. B. Green; Lachlan
Macalister; G. Porter; William O. Raymond and his brother; J. M. Chisholm; Henry Bennett,
Patrick Buckley ; Edward Crooke; G. C. Curlewis; T. McLeod and his sons; Duncan and James
Macfarlane ; Robert Russell; Col. White ; John Roach ;W. H. Yaldwyn ; Archibald Cuninghame ;
Arthur Kemmis; Captain Fyans ; the Duttons ;J. W. Howey; O. Howard ; Sylvester J. Brown ;
B. Baxter ; D. S. Campbell; Alf. Woolley ; Lachlan Mackinnon ; E. J. Hogg; H. and B. and A.
Jamieson ; Whitehead of Goodwood ; Colonel A. Davidson ; Colonel J. Anderson (50th Regt.J


The early chapter of colonization of Port Phillip I may say closed
with the formal approval by Sir Eichard Bourke of the site marked by
Batman in June, 1835, “ for his village.” But I must not omit to
mention Geelong. In Admiral King’s note-book, I find that he
accompanied Sir E. Bourke to Geelong, and that they took Buckley
with them. Two days’ memoranda are as follows :
“ 13th : 11 p.m.—Earthquake ; felt hy natives who had evidently felt the same
before ; for they pointed to the earth, and by signs intimated that it was caused hy some
circumstance or originated in something unknown and [unseen hy them. Eode to
Geelong* (Corayo) and the swamp near the entrance (left bank) of Barwon; and
returned hy the bank of the river (2 Emus) hy Eisher’s (Swanston’s) station.
<< 14th. I remained to chart our track. The Governor received the address of the
Geelong— ‘ We, the undersigned squatters on the hanks of the river/ Dr. Thomson
went with the Governor and Hunter along the bank of the Barwon.
Nor was the Governor’s trip altogether a smooth one. I find
more than one entry of “ broken ” and “ spliced dray poles. After
the trip to Geelong, Admiral King’s notebook records a visit to the
summit of Mount Macedon ; an easy matter now, but when no roads
or tracks existed a task of some difficulty. The bearings of various
hills from the summit are carefully recorded. I find that Admiral
King has almost anticipated me in calling Arthur’s Seat after lenders ;
he alludes to it as Blinders Hill. I wish to call it Blinders Bluff, as
Blinders himself used the word “bluff” on his map. The diagram
of Melbourne, as first intended to be laid out, is before me in the
note-book, and shows Blinders, Bourke, and Lonsdale streets, crossed
by King, William, Elizabeth, Queen, and Swanston streets. Some of the
names have been re-arranged, but enough remain to show that here w o
most likely have the identical tracing which Sir E. Bourke pored over,
as his companion, King, traced it in Captain Lonsdale’s primitive
dwelling. This interesting relic the Old Colonists’ Association might
seek, at°the kind hands of its present owner, a son of Admiral King.
and family ; and many others whom I could enumerate-but that I must wind up with the name
°*Those" who see in magisterial dignity, our worthy Police Magistrate (who is a brother of
Sturt the explorer), perhaps little imagine how nearly his career was once cut short when
journeying overland to Adelaide in the early days. Pushing on to search for water, having
been impeded by a belt of Mallee Scrub ; leaving his more or less exhausted companions, one of
whom was raving mad from thirst, our friend himself fell exhausted, and lay unconscious he
knew not how long. The cooler air of night restored his senses in a measure and he found
though nearly delirious, that his swollen tongue and parched lips had yet invited the ants which
were swarming in his mouth. In this condition -almost helpless, and far from any human aid
—there flashed on his sense of hearing the familiar sound of the wood-duck s flight; and he had
sufficient strength and reason to rise and follow. Not far from where he had fallen exhausted
ho was led by those birds of good omen to a fine pool of water, refreshed by which he was enabled
to return to his men ; but having no bottle, or vessel, he was fain to steep his shirt in the water,
and by that means carry to his companions some drops with which they could slack their burning
thirst, until they all reached the desired pool.
These are some of the elements of colonization which, with numerous flocks, and herds, and
capital, Port Phillip owed to New South Wales.
• Why those who went to Corayo (or Oorio) preferred to call it Geelong, which seems to have
been only the name of the bay, only the genius of misnaming can explain.


Thus was Melbourne, or its site, first seen, settled, and permanently
occupied. One word, as an old Colonist, I will hazard about its site,
and the manner in which the population is located on the low lands.
We are not acquainted with the effects of long-continued, heavy rain
on the watershed of Port Phillip. Our usual rains last but for two or
three days at the utmost; and before the waters from the extreme
heads of the Yarra have come down in their full strength, the fury of
the floods in the AYerribee, the Saltwater River, the Merri Creek, and
other adjacent streams has been spent. Again, the south watershed to
the Yarra itself is narrow—the Dandeuong Creek sources approaching
to it near Melbourne, and the sources of the Latrobe River hemming
it in more to the eastward. Doubtless this contracted watershed
restrains the river from the inordinate floods so frequent in New South
AYales. But we ought not to presume too much, I have seen heavy
rain pour down for more than six days and nights without cessation in
New South AVales; and to say, that if such rain were to
occur here, accompanied, as many of our heavy rains are (notably in
the floods of 1849 and 1863) by a southerly gale at the close, which
prevents outflow from the Bay, the water will rise several feet higher
in Richmond and Melbourne than it has yet been seen by any
colonist; and the site of Echuca, if the rain be general throughout
the watersheds of the Murrumbidgee and Murray, will be, for the
time, submerged in an inland sea.
It may be said, that it never will rain for a week continuously
and heavily. Perhaps not. I only predict the effect of such a con-
tinuance of rain as I have once known in another part of the continent,
—and as tradition records to have happened before.*
As to the fixing of the boundary of the colony there can be no
doubt that the selection of a river was most unfortunate. No river,
canal, or thoroughfare can be a good boundary between one people or
colony and another. The social and mercantile interests of the dense
population which accumulates there, being naturally bound together,
cannot bear to be separated artificially. The Pyrenees divide Prance
from Spain without creating jealousy. The Rhine Provinces have been
the seed of envy and malice for generations. Any mountain chain, or
a line through a desert, or sparsely populated tract, should be selected
where it can be found, if it be desired that the natural advantages
should co-operate with the imposed division.
* In Governor King’s note book (1806), I find:—“The earliest information respecting floods
at Hawkesbury is from an old native, who states (in comparing the event by a man’s age), that
about 26 years ago, a flood occurred, —that no other conception of its height could be formed than
that the natives who had ascended very high trees were swept off. It had then poured in torrents
for nine days and nights.” [The text was delivered in a lecture at Sandhurst in 1870. In
September, 1871, Colonel Sankey has given a similar warning. But, I suppose, we shall behave
like the dwellers near Vesuvius.]


With the formal laying out of the town by Governor Bourke I may
conclude my present task. The rest is matter of history, and history
cannot be impartially written by one whose position prevents him
from dealing fully and freely with all or any subjects, or public men
who have figured at any time. My duty in my own public office
precludes me from now offering opinions as to political events : but
there is one feature about the metropolis and towns of this colony to
which I may fairly allude. When, some time ago, I was asked to
deliver an address at the Theatre Royal during a performance in aid
of the fund for the Old Colonists’ “ Homes,” I referred to the first
Governor, Mr. Latrobe, as the founder of our reserves ;* and that
reference was so heartily responded to by the audience, and I was
so specially thanked for it afterwards, that I thought it well to inform
Mr. Latrobe of the fact. I knew, from my own observation and
from the speeches of others, that many an hour had been spent by
Mr. Latrobe in planning, observing, and riding about, so as to secure
the largest and best sites for parks and recreation grounds—the lungs
for large cities —the country air for the workmen and artisans, and
their families, who have not means to migrate for occasional change of
scene, and thousands of whom would, in time, be doomed to murky
filth and smoke of streets, but for the heritage which Mr. Latrobe has
devised for them. By the return mail I received, through Mr. James
Graham, M.L.C., the following message :
“ Since I received your last, I have had Eusden’s promised note, with its poetical
enclosure. I beg that you would thank him heartily for it, and the kind spirit
which inspired both the lines and the letter. lam not insensible to the compliment
paid me, and the recognition of one good service, at least, which I had it in my
power to render to the public inhabiting the City of Melbourne, and their children
after them. lam jealous that it should not be quite forgotten also, that, from the
first, I fostered the plan of the Yan Yean Lake, and turned the first sod of the
works. Without the advantages thus secured, Melbourne would never be what it
is now.”
By the succeeding mail I received the following letter, signed (but
not written) by Mr. Latrobe, for doubtless you know that he is now
unfortunately blind, and can no longer enjoy those picturesque
beauties which he delighted in planning for others, not in Melbourne
only, but throughout Victoria.
“ By a recent mail I requested my friend James Graham to acknowledge receipt, and
thank you heartily for your kind note of the 9th August, with its enclosure, which,
I need not tell you, both amused and interested me. It is only fitting, however,
that I should take an opportunity of doing this in a more direct manner. lam
much obliged to you for having elicited an expression of goodwill and remembrance
on the part of the old colonists towards me. I have always considered that the
circumstances and position which allowed me an opporf unity of providing for the
ease, comfort, and pleasure of the community among which I was thrown for the
* See page viii.


time being, in the manner you adverted to, gave me a rare privilege ; and I cannot
but be gratified that the manner in which it was exercised is appreciated by the
public.”
Truly, these are two boons for which the Melbourne public may well
be grateful. The Yan Yean (which was completed under the able
control of the late Charles J. Griffiths), or some other reservoir, might,
in time, have been devised by some other person; but the open spaces
arojund Melbourne once converted into allotments —town or suburban
—would have been irreclaimable for the general good. If we are wise
we shall carefully guard them: if we are grateful we shall cherish the
memory of him to whom we owe them. Amongst them hereafter,
many a man shall
“ Sing tbe merry songs of peace to all bis neighbours ;
Our children’s children shall see this, and bless Heaven.”
"What shall prevent this consummation ? Only one course of events ;
which each of us may do much to avert.
With politics Ido not meddle; but education has a higher and
wider scope than the politics of the hour : and on sound secular and
religious education the happiness of future ages must depend.
Obeying general causes, the wealth which arises from agriculture,
mining, or commerce, produces its effects, sometimes so beneficent —now
here, and now there —throughout the world: as the laughing fountain
obeys the pressure of gravitation, or the tides yield to the influence of
the wavering and inconstant moon. But if the pressure or influence
be withdrawn, the fountain gives place to a stagnant pool; and we
know not how the mighty murmurings of the deep would minister to
the general harmony of creation, if the sweet influences by which it is
bound should cease to constrain them. But in the mind of man abides
a principle more enduring than the mere dull matter which he is
permitted to warp to his behests. If he be true to himself, and humbly
confident in his Creator, he may establish happy communities even
where wealth does not abound ; and, if he he favoured with this world’s
goods, how much more good does the same humble confidence enable
him to promote!
But whether worldly fortune smile or frown, whether his bark be
tossed on the waves, or glide smoothly on its- course, the well-trained
mind—prepared for either fortune —is master of its own content: and
blest with this charm, so potent and yet within reach of all, man boldly
breasts the waves of adversity ; and if in the garish eye of the world
he seem to fail, he bears within himself the precious consolation of
religious faith, which can make him, even then, “sovereign o’er
transmuted ill.”
Walker, Mav and Co., Printers, 99 Boorke Street West, Melbourne,




