

THE BRITISH ACADEMY
THE ANNUAL SHAKESPEARE LECTURE
1924
The Disintegration of
Shakespeare
BY
E. K. Chambers, C. B., Hon. D.Litt.
London
Published for the British Academy
By Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press
Amen House, E.C.




ANNUAL SHAKESPEARE LECTURE, 1924
THE DISINTEGRATION OF SHAKE-
SPEARE
BY E. K. CHAMBERS, C. B., Hon. D.Litt.
Read May 13, 1924
The rock of Shakespeare’s reputation stands four-square to the
winds of Time. But the waves of criticism beat perpetually about
its base, and at intervals we must stand back and re-affirm our
vision of the structural outlines. It is perhaps in itself a tribute
to the wide appeal df the poet that so much of what is written about
him is ill-informed and ill-balanced. Small minds are caught by,
and fail to comprehend, that greatness and that variability. Hence
the scouring of the Dictionary of National Biography for an
alternative author, preferably aristocratic, of the plays. With these
paradoxes I do not propose to concern myself. Doubtless they
should be refuted, that the people be not deceived, but the task
must be left to some one with a better temper for the patient
anatomizing of human follies. This is but the spindrift on the face
of the rock.
I propose to consider certain critical tendencies which, in their
extreme manifestations, offer results hardly less perturbing than those
with which the Baconians and their kin would make our flesh creep.
This is the argument. Here are thirty-six plays handed down .'is
Shakespeare’s. You can put them in approximate chronological
order, and arrive at a conception of the author’s trend of develop-
ment, both in mental outlook and in habits of diction and versifi-
cation. But a closer analysis often reveals the co-existence in one
and the same play of features belonging to different stages of the
development, and sometimes of features which it is difficult to place
in the line of development at all. Moreover, an examination of the
texts shows such eccentricities and dislocations as to raise a doubt
whether they can have come to us just as Shakespeare left them.
Tracing these clues, our critics arrive at three results, on which
xi 1 t


varying degrees of stress are laid. Firstly, the extant texts, many
of them not printed until several years after Shakespeare’s death,
have often been altered or abbreviated by other hands. Secondly,
Shakespeare revised his plays, and the extant texts sometimes
contain fragments of different recensions, in juxtaposition or overlay.
Thirdly, the process of revision hy Shakespeare was not con lined to
his own work; he also rehandled the work of other men, and left
some or much of it standing in the texts. And if you ask how far
this process of revision went, and whether it seriously qualifies the
accepted Shakespearian authorship of the plays, you do not get
reassuring answers. One man will tell you frankly that in many
plays which you thought characteristically Shakespearian— Richardll,
Henry V, Julius Caesar, for example—Shakespeare’s part was quite
subordinate. Another will fence with the issue, and explain that the
conception of individual authorship is nut altogether applicable to
Elizabethan plays. The playing companies kept standing texts in
their repertories, and one man after another brought them up to date,
often over a long period of years, as theatrical needs required or
literary fashions changed, so that a drama must really be (.bought of
as an impersonal or communal affair, like a folk-lyric.
Well, you cannot brush away these speculations quite so easily as
you can those of the Baconians. Keen wits are at work; well-
equipped and painstaking minds have stated their theories—their
heresies, if you will—and they demand scrutiny. We must follow
the Logos where it leads. Obviously, one cannot take the matter far
in an isolated lecture. Each of the impugned plays requires its
individual examination. This must be based upon a patient analysis
of the texts available. It must take account of what can be gleaned
of the literary habits of the time ; of the possibilities of sophistication
latent in the activities of stage book-keepers and adapters, of copyists,
of censors, of compositors and correctors of the press. The dis-
integrating critics give us no less; we owe them no less. I can only
hope to make some general survey of the ground, and to chart some
of the avenues of approach.
The traditional canon of the plays has a live-fold basis. Thirty-six
plays were ascribed to Shakespeare in the First Folio. Thirteen of
these had already been printed as his in quarto. Eleven had been
ascribed to him by Francis Meres in 1598. Five are ascribed to him
by other contemporaries. 1 This is external evidence. There is also
such internal evidence as the plays themselves bear to the presence
1 Romeo and Juliet and Richard IT or ITT, liy John Weaver; Hamlet, by
Gabriel Harvey ; Julius Caesar and Winter's Tutu , by lieu Jouson.
4
ANNUAL SHAKESPEARE LECTURE, 1924


of a single ‘ shaping spirit of imagination ’. It is, of course, primarily
this internal evidence which the disintegrators, at this and that point,
dispute. The external evidence they have merely to explain away.
You can always explain away a historical record, with a sufficient
licence of conjecture as to the mala fides of its origin. The earliest
whisper against the authenticity of any play in the canon comes,
I think, from Edward Ravenscroft. Ravenscroft adapted Titus
Andronicus after the Restoration, and, when he printed it in 1687,
said that he had been told by ‘ some anciently conversant with the
stage ’ that the model was not originally Shakespeare’s, ‘ but brought
by a private author to be acted, and he only gave some master
touches to one or two of the principal parts or characters’. We do
not know who were Ravenscroft’s informants. At least one old
actor, William Beeston, whose father had been a ‘fellow’ of
Shakespeare, and who may himself have known Shakespeare in his
boyhood, survived to 1683. A true report is not, therefore, incon-
ceivable. Eighteenth-century scepticism was not slow to seize upon
this notion of revisional work by Shakespeare, and to give it a further
extension. You find the substantial Shakespearian authorship of
Comedy of Errors , Love’s Labour ’s Lost, and oddly enough Winter’s
Tale , doubted by Pope (1735), of Henry V by Theobald (1734), of
Two Gentlemen of Verona by Hanmer (17.43), of Richard II by
Johnson .(1765), of Taming of the Shrew by Farmer (1767). It
would be idle to raise the dust of the resultant controversies, in
which the conservative side was taken by Edward Capell. The
assailants were confident and impressionist. Ritson tells us that in
Two Gentlemen , Love’s Labour’s Lost, and Richard 11, ‘ Shake-
speare’s new work is as apparent as the brightest touches of Titian
would be on the poorest performance of the veriest canvas spoiler
that ever handled a brush’. The mutterings were largely silenced
by the authority of Malone, who accepted Ravenscroft’s account of
Titus Afidronicus , worked out the relation of 2 and 3 Henry VI to
the Contention plays, took Shakespeare for their reviser, supposed
Henry VIII to have undergone revision by a later hand, and beyond
these only doubted 1 Henry VI, the admission of which to the Folio
he explained by Shakespeare’s contribution of the Talbot scenes.
Pope and the rest had been misled by inadequate attention to the
chronology of the plays, which Malone was himself the first to study
in detail, and by a consequent failure to distinguish between the
criteria applicable to Shakespeare’s juvenile and to his mature work.
Malone’s conclusions determined critical orthodoxy for the best part
of a century. There were individual dissentients, notably Coleridge,
5
THE DISINTEGRATION OE SHAKESPEARE


who questioned much of Richard 111 and the ‘low soliloquy’ of the
Porter in Macbeth, and declared in his table-talk, ‘ I think I could
point out to half a line what is really Shakespeare’s in Love’s
Labour’s Lost and some other of the not entirely genuine plays’.
Coleridge being Coleridge, it is needless to say that he never per-
formed this task, Charles Knight (c. 1843) suggested that Shakespeare
was only a reviser of Timon of Athens-, James Spudding and Alfred
Tennyson (c. 1850) fixed the second hand in Henry VIII as that of
Fletcher; and William George Clark and William Aldis Wright
(1874) elaborated Coleridge’s heresy about Macbeth by ascribing
substantial interpolations in that play to Middleton.
Modern criticism of the canon, however, mainly owes its origin to
F. G. Fleay, whose views, after fluttering the dove-cotes of the New
Shakspere Society, were collected in his Shakespeare Manual (1876),
thereafter underwent Protean transformations, and took final shape
in his Life and Work of Shakespeare (1886). Fleay bad read
widely in dramatic literature, and had made a close study of the
early texts, the diction, and particularly the versification, of Shake-
speare. He came to distrust the received chronology, because it
assigned single dates to plays which seemed to him to bear stylistic
marks of more than one period. And he arrived at a theory of
constant rehandling and of the co-existence in the texts of strata
belonging to different dates. This he applied, at one time or another,
and with frequent variations in the dates assigned, to thirteen of the
thirty-six plays; Comedy of Errors, Tioo Gentlemen, Love’s Labour’s
Lost, Romeo and Juliet, Midsummer-Night’s Dream, Richard 11,
Much Ado, Hamlet, Merry Wives, Twelfth Night, All’s Well,
Troilus and Cressida, Cymbeline . As to the occasions of such
revision he speaks with an uncertain voice. One group of plays
may have been re-written, either for stage revival or for publication.
Of another be suggests that fragments left unfinished at an early
date were completed a decade later. But this notion is abandoned
in favour of a supposed desire to replace work of an early coadjutor
by Shakespeare’s own. It is an easy step from Shakespeare as
a reviser of Shakespeare to Shakespeare as a reviser of predecessors,
Fleay distributed and redistributed Henry VI, Richard 111, and Titus
Andronicus among Shakespeare, Marlowe, Greene, Peele, Lodge,
and Kyd; found much of Lodge and a little of Drayton in Taming
of the Shrew, traces of Peele in Romeo and Juliet, traces of Kyd in
Hamlet, debris of Dekker and Chettle in Troilus and Cressida, He
pressed the doctrine of Middleton in Macbeth, but became doubtful
about it; thought the second hand in Timon Tourneur’s, and dropped


him lightly for Wilkins; supposed the mask in The Tempest an
interpolation by Beaumont. Perhaps his most revolutionary hypo-
thesis was upon Jalius Caesar, which he held to have been abridged
and altered by Ben Jonson, as an appropriate return for an equally
conjectural contribution by Shakespeare to a lost version of Sejams.
We approach the point where scholarship merges itself in romance,
I desire to speak with respect and even kindness of Fleay, from
whom, in common in many others, I derived an early stimulus to
these studies. He was a man of fertile and ingenious mind. He
laid his finger upon many of the bibliographical and stylistic features
of the plays which loom large in current speculations. But he had
a demon of inaccuracy, which was unfortunate, as he relied largely
upon statistics. And he betrayed an imperfect sense of responsibility,
both in advancing destructive notions without an adequate support
of argument, and in withholding the explanations and justifications
required by his own numerous and sometimes disconcerting changes
of opinion. His self-confidence has hypnotized his successors, and
many of his improvisations recur in the works of serious students,
not to speak of those school-books, compiled at starvation wages for
competitive publishers, which do so much in our day for the dis-
semination of critical and historical error.
The mantle of Mr, Fleay has descended upon Mr. J. M. Robertson,
who disposes its flying skirts into the decent folds of a logical system.
His method of approach to his problems is uniform. It has three
stages, upon each of which I shall have a cautionary note later. He
begins with impressionist judgements. Certain passages do not answer
to his conception of Shakespeare. Here is braggadocio, there an
archaic stiffness, or flatness, or hackwork, or clumsy stage-craft, or
pointless humour, or turgidity of thought, or falsity of moral senti-
ment. Or a whole play repels him. One reads like e a mosaic of
disparate parts ’; in another he gets ‘ a strange feeling ’ about the
general style. Then he proceeds to confirm- his impressions by
applying what he calls the 'inexorable’ tests of treatment, style,
and metrics; in particular, tests based upon the chronological phases
of Shakespeare’s blank verse. Finally, he settles down to look for
‘ clues ’to the possible presence of alien hands; clues furnished by
the use of words rare in Shakespeare’s vocabulary, but traceable in
the writings of other men ; clues derived from characteristic tricks of
phrase or tendencies in the handling of typical situations. It is all
logical enough, given certain major premisses, largely disputable.
First you decide that Shakespeare cannot be present; then you look
for the intruder. Mr. Robertson has now covered most of his ground.


and tells us that, although he still has to dispose of Cymbdine and
The Tempest, we are at a point where the ‘ idolater 3 —that is to say
the man who believes in Shakespeare’s authorship of the plays, more
or less as they stand —‘ has probably heard what he would term cc the
worst” ’. The worst, however, amounts to an alien invasion. In the
front of a rather dim background of collaborations and revisions
stand the two heroic figures, Marlowe and Chapman. I will dis-
regard the ancient battle-fields of Henry VI and Titus Andronicus,
for the campaign has now become more serious. If I understand
Mr. Robertson aright, Marlowe, more than any other man, is pre-
dominantly the author of Richard 111, Richard 11, Henry V, Julias
Caesar, and paradoxically enough Comedy of Errors, even in the
forms in which they have reached us. Peelo and Greene play minor
parts, but the Two Gentlemen is substantially Greene’s, and work of
Ids remains embedded in Taming of the. Shrew and All’s Well. I
gather that Peele is to be similarly revealed in Cymbdine, And
both men, together with Kyd, Jonson, and the shades of many of
Philip Henslowe’s hungry troop of hack writers, Chettlo, Dekker,
Drayton, Heywood, and Munday, arc evoked as possible contributors
to a series of drafts and recasts, which the Marlovian work has
undergone. Ultimately, of course, the Marlovian plays passed into
the hands of Shakespeare, and they show traces of revision by him,
which however was often limited to a little retouching or the insertion
of particular speeches or scenes, 'substantially preserved’ the original
Richard 11, and even in Henry V did not amount to ‘ vital rehandling 3 .
Chapman, too, was among the intermediate manipulators of the
earlier plays. But when Marlowe passes out of the chronicle,
Chapman becomes a protagonist. His unquiet spirit flies like a
lambent but smoky flame over all the later part of the canon. He
may have inserted the mask into The Tempest after Shakespeare
left it. But in the main his work underlies, rather than overlies,
Shakespeare’s, in the form of drafts or contributions to drafts of
plays, sometimes themselves mere recasts, which Shakespeare after-
wards rewrote as Hamlet, Merry Wives , Alt’s Well , Measure for
Measure, Troths and Cressida, Timon, ami Pericles. To Chapman
I will return. The complicated nature of Mr. Robertson’s recon-
structions and their relation to Flcay’s may he illustrated by the
case of Julius Caesar. Marlowe is conjectured to have written a
sequence of three plays: a Caesar and Pompey, a Caesar Tragedy,
a Caesar’s Revenge, These passed to the Admiral’s men at the
Rose, who revived Caesar and Pompey and Caesar’s 'lVagedy, after
some revision of the latter by Chapman and Drayton, as their


two-part Caesar and Pompey of 1594-5. The first part was now
laid aside and rewritten later by Chapman as his Caesar and Pompey,
printed in 1631. Marlowe’s original third play, Caesar’s Revenge,
was perhaps recast by Dekker, Drayton, Middleton, Munday, and
Webster, in the Caesar’s Fall or The Two Shapes, which they wrote
for the Admiral’s in 1602. However this may be, the Tragedy and
the Revenge, now containing the work of from three to seven hands,
wex - e transferred by the Admiral’s to the Chamberlain’s company,
and wore revised for the latter, still in a two-play form, by Shake-
speare. Finally, perhaps about 1607, the two plays were compressed
into the one now extant by Ben Jonson, who added some touches of
his own in a characteristic anti-Caesarian vein. More of the present
substance is allowed to Shakespeare than in some of the Marlovian
plays retrieved from the canon by Mr. Robertson; but the primitive
Marlowe still shows through the overlay, notably in the speeches of
Antony over the body of Caesar. , It is entertaining to find that
another recent critic, Mr. William Wells, also traces the origin of
Julius Caesar to Marlowe. But he ascribes the revision, not to
Chapman or to Jonson, but to Francis Beaumont, and only allows
Shakespeare the first 57 lines of the play, lines which Mr. Robertson
thinks un-Shakespearian. Evidently the disintegration of Shake-
speare is an open career for talent.
Looking back over the results of Mr. Robertson’s devastating
offensive, I am tempted to quote my friend A. H. Bullen’s comment
upon a more modest raid. ‘lf this goes on,’ he said, ‘ Shakespeare
will soon, like his own Lord Timon, '
be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a phoenix.’
Mr. Robertson will certainly reply that, even if witty, this is not
fair. He is no despoiler of Shakespeare’s authentic plumage. His
eliminations touch nothing ‘ save inferior or second-rate work’; have
not ‘ impugned one of the great plays as a whole, or a really great
speech in any’. On the contrary, it is the sticklers for the canon
who detract from Shakespeare’s greatness. Battling for quantity, they
sacrifice quality. c The vin ordinaire of the Elizabethan drama is
for them indistinguishable from the vintage of the Master.’ In
particular, if they will not recognize Marlowe in Richard II or
Greene in the Ttvo Gentlemen, they are driven back on the alternative
theory of a Shakespeare in bondage to a humiliating trick of mimicry,
a ‘ parrot ’ Shakespeare, a f sedulous ape ’. This brings me to the first
of my cautionary notes upon the. successive steps in Mr. Robertson’s
xi t 3


critical progress. They are, you remember, three; the disquieting
impressions, the ‘inexorable ’ teats, the‘clues’ to other men. lam
sure that Mr. Robertson desires to exalt and not to depreciate
Shakespeare. And that is precisely where the mischief lies. Our
heresiarch, in fact, is himself an idolater. We have all of us, in the
long run, got to form our conception of the ‘authentic’ Shakespeare
by means of an abstraction from the whole of the canon; there is
no other material. Mr. Robertson abstracts through a series of
rejections. He is repelled by childish work, by imitative work, by
repetitive work, by conventional work, by unclarified work, by
clumsy construction, by baldness or bombast. He idealizes. He
looks for a Shakespeare always at the top of his achievement.
This seems to me quite an arbitrary process. I cannot so read
the record. Magic of phrase, lyrical impulse, pervasive humour,
intuition of character, the clash of drama, a questing philosophy,
a firm hold on the ultimate values of life; you are never far
from one or other of these at any turn in Shakespeare. But these
are not the whole warp and woof of the plays. We cannot be
blind to the moments of artistic oblivion or carelessness, where the
brain flags or the insight fails; to the trivial scenes where quibble
speaks to the boxes or horse-play to the pit; to the exasperating
scenes where psychological realism makes ugly nonsense of a romantic
convention; to the perfunctory scenes which amount to no more
than commonplace Elizabethan dramatic carpentry. We cannot
leave these out of the account; if we do, we may get an ideal, but
we lose Shakespeare. Of course I can construct apologies. There
are inconsistencies of narrative and time-sequence. A practical play-
wright knows very well that these attract little attention on the stage,
although they reveal themselves to the student poring over a printed
text in his study. There are jests and wit-combats which do not
seem to have the ghost of a laugh left in them. What is there so
fleeting, so difficult to transmit from one age to another, as that
phosphoric iridescence upon the surface of social life which we call
wit? But I am not looking for apologies. I come to accept
Shakespeare, not to praise him. Obviously there are things in the
plays which any other Elizabethan could just as well, or just as
badly, have written. They do not perturb me, as they perturb
Mr. Robertson, to the point of searching for clues to another man.
Perhaps Mr. Robertson will reply that I have not fully met his case;
that it is not so much the passages of unmannered carpenter’s work
which give him pause, as passages which have a manner, but a
■'manner which he cannot feel to be Shakespeare’s, and does feel,


when he analyses it, to be that of a Marlowe or of a Chapman.
Here we are on more difficult ground, But it is part of the character
of Shakespeare, as I read it in the canon, to be an experimentalist in
style. I cannot regard the many phases through which his writing
went in the short span of some twenty years as wholly due to a
growth in which there was nothing deliberate. I discern abrupt
beginnings and abrupt discontinuances. And he was receptive, as
well as creative. I can suppose him experimenting in the manner of
Marlowe, or even of poor Greene. And I can suppose him, much
later, playing with stylistic elements, which had struck him in the
work of Chapman, and ultimately dismissing them as, on the whole,
unprofitable.
We come now to the f inexorable J tests. These are largely
metrical, based upon the familiar tables, compiled by Fleay and others,
which put in statistical form the relative frequencies in each play of
certain features of Shakespeare’s versification, and notably the per-
centages of rhymes, double endings, and overflowing lines. Ido not
undervalue these features as elements in determining the chronology
of the plays. No doubt there was a period—not, I think, his earliest
period—in which Shakespeare made free use of rhyme; and there-
after even occasional rhymes dwindle. Even more important is an
increasing tendency to escape from the tyranny of the ‘drumming
decasyllahon ’, and to emphasize the verse paragraph rather than the
individual line, by the help of such devices as the double ending and
a varied and subtle distribution of pauses. The tables need to
be used with great discretion. Fleay’s methods, in particular, were
never c inexorable His earliest tables were grossly inaccurate. He
published a revised set, obscurely, in the hook of another man. 1 I have
spent much time, which might, perhaps, have been better employed,
iu checking some of these. They are still inaccurate, but less so. It
is disquieting to find that little handbooks of facts about Shakespeare,
compiled by distinguished scholars, still reproduce the unrovised
tables as authoritative. Other tables, due to Goswin Konig, give only
ratios and not the counts upon which they are based. This does not
inspire confidence. If statistical precision were material, the calcula-
tions would probably have to be done afresh. Ido not think that it
is material. The tests cannot give an exact chronology; in fact,
different tests do not give the same chronology. They can only
indicate a tread of development, and the trend maybe diverted in any
play by accidents of subject-matter, such as refractory personal names
which have to be coerced into the metre; by the appropriateness of
1 C, M. lugloby, Shakespeare , the Man and the Book , Part 11 (1HB1).


particular rhythms to scenes of particular temper ; above all, by Shake-
speare’s expcrimentalism, which certainly extends to rhythm. It does
not therefore trouble me to find a rather high percentage of double
endings in such early plays as Comedy of Errors and Two Gentlemen
of Verona, and then to find the curve dropping through Midsummer-
NighCs Dream, King John, and 1 Henry IV, and then rising again
with 2 Henry IV and other plays. But it does trouble Mr. Robertson,
and, as he is debarred from putting Comedy of Errors and Two
Gentlemen later in the chronological order, because that would throw
out the overflow curve, he falls back upon a theory that they are
mainly the work of other writers with metrical habits different from
Shakespeare’s. This longing for a smoothly progressive curve is only
one aspect of a general tendency to seek an unimpeded development
in Shakespeare’s art. There is a philosophical predisposition behind,
Mr. Robertson dislikes the idea of what he calls a ‘ cerebral cataclysm ’.
To suppose that Shakespeare passed suddenly from the merely average
and imitative merit of Two Gentlemen to the ‘supreme poetic com-
petence ’ of Midsummer-Nighfs Dream is contrary to a doctrine which
sees in ‘artistic growth as in other organic phenomena a process of
evolution ’. I do not know whether the latest theories of organic
evolution have solved that old crux of the emergence of variations.
But in any case biological analogies do not help us very directly
in analysing the development of the creative impulse in human
consciousness. And when Mr. Robertson expresses himself as taken
aback by the notion of ‘ a literary miracle of genius elicited by some
sudden supernatural troubling of the waters I can only reply that he
has given an admirable description of the way in which genius does
in fact often appear to effloresce.
I have not quite done with the percentages. Obviously they have
no value, unless they are worked upon a sufficient number of lines to
allow a fair average to establish itself. This is common to all
statistics. The ratio of blue eyes to black ones throughout England
has a statistical meaning ; the ratio in your house or mine may have
a meaning, but it is not statistical. Possibly the two of three
thousand lines of a play leave room for the averaging of double
endings. But to work the percentage of double endings in a single
speech or scene leads to nothing. Or rather, it should lead to
nothing. It does sometimes lead Mr. Robertson to infer that scenes
in a play which give very different percentages cannot have been
written by the same hand, or at least by the same hand at the same
date. Surely this is an illegitimate inference. If a play has twenty-
five per cent, of double endings, they are not spread evenly at the rate


of one double ending in every four lines. 1 They come in nuggets
here; there are considerable spaces without them. Largely this is
mere accident; they just fall so. But clearly that adaptation of
rhythm to subject-matter, which may qualify the general trend of
metric development in a whole play, is even more potent in single
passages. Here are two examples. The first scene of King John is
largely a discussion of the paternity of the Bastard Faulconbridge.
And the rhetoric requires the emphatic use of the words ‘father’,
‘ mother’, ‘brother 5 , at the ends of lines. These words account for
about half the double endings in the scene, and the percentage, which
for the play as a whole is 6, goes up in this scene to 16. Take again
Coriolanus, a play which Mr. Robertson has not yet assailed, or
expressed an intention of assailing. The double ending percentage is
28. But in v. 3is a passage of twenty-four lines without one double
ending and another of thirty-five lines with only three. One contains
the stately interchange of courtesies between Coriolanus and his wife
and mother on their entry to Corioli; the other the more solemn part
of Yolumnia’s appeal to her son. Are these, therefore, un-Shake-
spearian or debris of early Shakespearian work ?
My third cautionary note is on the final stage of Mr. Robertson’s
process, the quest for alien hands, with the clues of vocabulary and
phraseology. Here I will be brief, for the land is unmapped and the
footing treacherous. Are we really able to ascribe a distinctive diction
to each of Shakespeare’s predecessors ? Do they not largely, together
with the young Shakespeare himself, use a common poetic diction,
much of it ultimately traceable to Spenser and to Sidney ? We could
tell better, if we knew more clearly what each of them wrote and did
not write. The problem seems to me one which calls for exploration
upon a general and disinterested method, rather than along the casual
lines of advance opened up by the pursuit of an author for this or that
suspected or anonymous play. The relation of Shakespeare’s maturer
diction to Chapman’s is a problem of a somewhat different kind.
There is not much point in a controversy as to which was the greater
ncologist. They both innovate freely, and apparently in much the
same manner; and, as far as I know, Shakespeare at least was
not likely to have had any scruple about using neologisms not of his
own mintage. If he borrowed his plots, why should he not borrow
his words ? Nobody would suppose that he could not mint them fast
' I am told that the term ‘double endings’ puzzled some of my hearers.
They are also called ‘feminine endings’, and are those in which the stressed
second syllable of the last foot of a line is followed by an additional unstressed
syllable.


enough, if he wanted to. It certainly does not move me to be told
that Chapman must have worked over a scene, because it contains
words not found elsewhere in Shakespeare, but found half a dozen
times in Chapman. The oftener Chapman used a word, the more
likely it was to stick in Shakespeare’s memory. But Chapman is the
recurrent deus ext machina of Mr. Robertson’s speculations upon half
a dozen plays of the canon. Writing about Hamlet, he formulates
a theory of
f A frequent employment of Chapman by Shakespeare’s com-
pany either as a draftsman or as an adapter of plays, and as
a “ repairer” or patcher of sqme; and the corollary that Shake-
speare, often revising Chapman’s work, which he must frequently
have found trying, might very well let pass, as appealing to
sections of the audience, genre and other work which he for his
own part would never have thought of penning.’
It all seems to have begun with Timon, and here a more intimate
relation between the poets is revealed. Timon is a play ‘ imperfectly
drafted’ by Chapman and 'imperfectly revised’ by Shakespeare.
Mr. Robertson, like some others, thinks that Chapman was the
' rival poet ’ of the Sonnets and the Holophernes of Love’s Labour's
Lost. But this was merely a ' humorous quarrel with his testy rival ’,
and after all the two men ' had a common patron ’, and ' there is no
difficulty in conceiving that, with or without the patron’s intervention,
Shakespeare’s company may have bought a play of Chapman’s for
Shakespeare to adapt’. We are bidden to remember that Chapman
was poor and that Shakespeare must have seen that he was ' worth
helping’. The greater poet had 'no artistic jealousy’, and knew that
' the quality of mercy is not strained ’, and ' even if Chapman had
ruffled him somewhat by his pedantic asperities, he of all men beat
knew the human struggle behind the “ paste-board portico ”, the weak-
ness under the shining armour of literary bravado ’. Mr. Robertson is
an austere rationalist, but I think that this little fantasy would have
evoked comment even in the pages of Shakespeare’s more sentimental
biographers. However this may be, I find it difficult to fit this
employment of Chapman by Shakespeare’s company into the proba-
bilities of literary history. We know a good deal about Chapman, at
any rate from about 1596, when he begins to appear in Henslowc’s
diary. He wrote, or began to write, seven plays for the Admiral’s
men during the next three years, of which two were published, and
one was a considerable financial success. And he is conspicuous in
Henslowe’s motley crew as the one who held most aloof from anything
in the way of collaboration. The oidy exception is a play which he


undertook, but quite possibly never finished, on a plot by Ben Jonson.
About 1599 he drops out of Henslowe’s record, and the next decade
is covered by a long series of nine plays, all of which were published,
for the boy companies. One of these was written in collaboration
with Jonson and Marston. Thereafter, so far as we know. Chapman
abandoned stage-writing, and devoted himself to his translation of
Homer and to other non-dramatic work. In 1613, however-, he did
a mask for the Princess Elizabeth’s wedding. He lived to 1634, and
it is conceivable that in Caroline days be touched up some of his
early plays, or lent a hand to the younger playwright, Shirley. The
only trace of any external evidence for a connexion of Chapman with
the Chamberlain’s or King’s men is the ascription to him by the
publisher Moseley, in 1654, of Alphonsus Emperor of Germany.
Hardly any one now believes that lie wrote Alphonsus, which was pro-
duced at the Blackfriars in 1636, two years after his death, and
twenty after Shakespeare’s. The Stationers’ Register names the
author as John Poole. All this is, of course, no proof that Chapman
did not write for Shakespeare’s company, concurrently with the
Admiral’s or the boys. A dramatist, who was not himself an actor,
was not tied to a single paymaster. But Chapman was evidently
a successful writer from 1596 onwards. He is one of the seven
lauded by Webster in 1612. And it does not seem to me likely, on
a priori grounds, that he would have needed Shakespeare’s patronage
for an introduction to the company; that no work done by him for
them would have reached publication; that his temper would have
submitted to constant revision by Shakespeare; or that, if his work
proved unsatisfactory, the company would have continued the experi-
ment over half a dozen plays.
I have slipped from the. internal to the external evidence on the
canon. Mr. Robertson is rather cavalier with the external evidence.
Of the Folio editors he says :
‘We may pardon the players for obstinately specifying as
Shakespeare's works—in order to maintain their hold on the
copyrights about which they, are so obviously and so naturally
anxious—a collection of plays as to which they knew and we
know that much of the writing is not Shakespeare’s at all.’
I am not concerned to argue for the literal inspiration of the Folio,
It is quite conceivable that in some cases a substantial Shakespearian
contribution, short of full authorship, may have been held to justify
the inclusion of a play. But it was certainly not an un discriminating
collection, since it left out, for one reason or another, no less than nine
plays which had already been printed under Shakespeare’s name or


initials. And what has copyright to do with the matter ? Ido not
know what copyright Mr. Robertson thinks that the players claimed
in published plays; but, so far as our knowledge goes, no kind
of printing copyright existed, which could be strengthened by ascrib-
ing a play to a particular author. As for Francis Meres, be, we are
told, ‘ simply stated the claim of the theatre company, which the Folio
enforces Meres was a schoolmaster and divine, with an interest in
literature, but not, as far as we know, in any relations with the
players, such as might lead him to act as their catspaw in a com-
mercial fraud. Even if he went to the players for his list, there is no
reason to suppose that they told him anything but the truth. The
facts must have been well enough known in the London of 1598, and
any false claim for Shakespeare would have been open to the chal-
lenge of Chapman or another. The testimony of Meres, even if
it stood alone, would he at least as good evidence for Shakespeare’s
authorship of the early plays of the canon as we have for Peele’s
authorship of The Arraignment of Paris in a casual reference by r
Nashe, or for Kyd’s authorship of The Spanish Tragedy in a casual
reference by Heywood, or for Marlowe’s authorship of Tamhurlaine,
of which there is no contemporary record at all. Yet take away these,
and Mr. Robertson’s whole elaborate edifice of conjectural ascriptions
falls to the ground,
I will now leave Mr. Robertson and his Marlowe and Chapman
complexes. I turn to the parallel speculations started by Professor
Pollard and pursued by Mr. Dover Wilson in his new edition of the
plays. Here the problem of the canon is approached from another
angle. The emphasis is less upon versification and diction than
upon critical bibliography; the study of printing-house usage in
handling copy, of the relation which the copy for the plays may have
borne to Shakespeare’s autograph, of the changes which that copy
may have undergone before and after it reached his hands. The
methods of critical bibliography are a notable addition to the equip-
ment of scholarship. But scepticism may be permitted as to whether
they really carry the superstructure of theory about the revision of
the canonical plays, which Mr. Wilson is piling upon them. His work
is, of course, only beginning. It has now covered seven of the
comedies, and not one of them is allowed to be an integral and
untouched product of Shakespeare’s creative energy, in the form in
which he first conceived and wrought it. Inevitably I throw
Mr. Wilson’s cautious and modestly expressed hypotheses into more
categorical statements. Comedy of Errors is ‘of Shakespeare’s
writing in the main ’, but it is a revision of an older play, perhaps the
16
ANNUAL SHAKESPEARE LECTURE, 1924


Historie of Error given by a boy company at court in 1577; and of
this parts have been retained, including the doggerel, none of which
is Shakespeare s. Moreover, the extant text is an abridgement
made in the playhouse by two distinct scribes. Two Gentleman is
also an abridgement, with passages added by the adapter, who
contributed the whole character of Speed. Love's Labour’s Lost was
based by Shakespeare upon a play by a writer of the ’eighties. He
himself gave it a revision, and may then have eliminated bits of the
original which he at first let stand. Traces of the first Shake-
spearian version are left, owing to imperfect cancellation in the copy.
The Folio text shows some further playhouse alteration. Much Ado
contains two strata of Shakespearian work, and has therefore also been
revised. There is no obvious indication of a second hand, although
an earlier play may have served as a source. Here again there are
playhouse alterations in the Folio text. Merry Wives is a transforma-
tion by Shakespeare, f perhaps, with help from others ’, of an earlier
play. The Jealous Comedy, of which parts remain. There may have
been an intermediate version. I do not understand Mr. Wilson to
regard The Jealous Comedy as Shakespeare’s own. In Measure for
Measure, Shakespeare may only have recast an old play, with
a history going back to Whetstone’s Promos and Cassandra. But
the text, as we have it, has undergone a double adaptation by later
hands; firstly an abridgement, secondly an expansion, accompanied
by the re-writing of Shakespearian verse-scenes as prose. Finally,
The Tempest has had a pre-history and a post-history. Substantially,
it is a late recast by Shakespeare of an earlier play, perhaps his own,
and at this recast, matter originally played in scenes before the
wreck has been put into narrative form. Then the recast has itself
been abridged, mainly by Shakespeare, and into the abridgement has
been inserted the mask, the authorship of which is left undetermined.
Mr. Wilson does not, it will be seen, extrude Shakespeare from any
of the seven comedies in as wholesale a fashion as that in which
Mr. Robertson extrudes him from Richard II or Henry V, But he
finds much alloy due to earlier versions and much alloy due to later
adaptations; and these, together with the habit ascribed to Shake-
speare of revising his own work, produce sufficiently ambiguous results.
Implicit in it all is the doctrine of continuous copy. The founda-
tion of this doctrine has, I think, four corner-stones. The first is
a notion of theatrical precaution and economy; precaution in not
having too many copies of a play about, lest one should fall into the
hands of a rival company; economy, in avoiding unnecessary
expenditure upon copyist’s charges. The second is the actual


condition of a particular manuscript which has been preserved, that
of Sir Thomas More. This has been plausibly'shown by Dr. Greg
to have been originally written out in a single hand; then altered in
several other hands, partly by cancellations and marginal insertions
on the original pages, and partly by tearing off some of the original
pages and substituting separate slips; then submitted to a censor and
marked by him ■with directions for the modification of disallowed
passages; and finally, or at an earlier stage, gone through by a stage-
manager, who added some technical notes for the production.
Thirdly, there is the obvious re-writing, scene for scene, of the
Contention of York and Lancaster as S and 3 Henry VI. And,
fourthly, there is the courageous attempt of Professor Pollard and
Mr. Wilson themselves to explain the relation of the ‘bad’ to the
‘good 5 Quartos of certain Shakespearian plays by a theory which
entails the progressive revision of lost versions. , And so we arrive at
the notion of the long-lived manuscript in the tiring-house wardrobe,
periodically taken out for a revival and as often worked upon by
fresh hands, abridged and expanded, recast to fit the capabilities of
new performers, brightened with current topical allusions, written up
to date to suit new tastes in poetic diction. Additional scenes may
be inserted. If the old pages will no longer hold the new matter,
they may be mutilated and replaced by partial transcripts. In the
end hardly a single line may remain as it was in the beginning. Yet,
in a sense, it is the same play, even as our human bodies, the cellular
matter of which is continuously renewed, remain our bodies from the
cradle to the grave. A perpetual form; an evanescent vXr] ! Who
is the author of such a play ? We cannot tell. The soul gets
a ‘ dusty answer 5 , when hot on that particular certainty.
Again I will attempt one or two general propositions bearing upon
the issue. I feel some doubt whether the case of Sir Thomas More
is altogether typical; whether, that is to say, the Master of the
Revels would as a rule have been willing to accept for reading a play
in the state of picturesque confusion which characterizes that famous
document. Professor Pollard, I gather, thinks that he would, and
explains it by a reference to ‘ the easy temper of English officialdom
at all periods 5 . Well, Mr. Pollard is an English oiflcial, and so am
I, and that is the kind of compliment we bandy between ourselves.
Comments in a different tone sometimes drift in to us from the
outside world. lam sure, however, that if the Master of the Revels
had to tackle many manuscripts like Sir Thomas More, that pro-
gressive increase in his emoluments, which is a feature in the history
of the office during the seventeenth century, was well justified. And


personally I feel that his instinct would have been to call for clean
transcripts. Clean transcripts would, of course, be fatal to the
doctrine of continuous copy in its extreme form, and in the prepara*
tion of them most of the bibliographical evidence, upon which
Mr. Wilson relies to prove the revision of plays, would disappear.
That any substantial revision, as distinct perhaps from a mere
abridgement, would entail a fresh application for the Master’s
allowance must, I think, be taken for granted. The rule was that
his hand must be ‘at the latter end of the booke they doe play’; and
in London, at least, any company seriously departing from the
allowed book would run a considerable risk. 1
Whether the manuscript of Sir Thomas More is typical or not,
Mr. Wilson has, of course, no such direct evidence for any play of
the canon. He supplies its place by pointing to indications of what
he calls ‘ bibliographical disturbance’ in the early editions, departures
from typographical uniformity, such as the use for printer’s copy of
an analogous revised manuscript might explain. There are passages
written as blank verse, but set up by the printer as prose. There are
incomplete lines of verse, taken by Mr. Wilson as signs of ‘cuts’.
There are passages which duplicate one another and suggest the
accidental survival of alternative versions. There are variations of
nomenclature in speech-headings and stage-directions, which may
betray composition by different hands or at different dates. It may
be observed that, while bibliography can constitute the existence of
these phenomena, and can sometimes contribute to an explanation of
them from a knowledge of printing-house methods, it can by no
means always give a full explanation. And then the bibliographer,
like the rest of us, has to fall back upon what he can learn or guess
of the methods of the tiring-house, or upon his own insight into
literiuy psychology. Thus the setting up of verse as prose is
explained, prettily enough, as due to the failure of compositors to
appreciate the metrical character of insertions written continuously
in cramped margins. But if you ask why any particular insertion
was made, bibliography is dumb. Mr. Wilson tends to guess that it
was made as part of a general revision. I find myself often guessing
1 This raises a further question. Did the Master himself keep copies of allowed
hooks for purposes of control ? Certainly Herbert laid down in 1633 that such
, copies must he furnished to him by the book-keepers, hut it is not clear whether
he was establishing a new or asserting an old practice. A reference to the
burning of Sir George Buck's books suggests the latter. But this also is obscure;
it is possible that these were not books kept by Buck, but licensed by him, and
burnt at the Fortune in 1621,
19
THE DISINTEGRATION OF SHAKESPEARE


that it was only an after-thought at the time of original writing.
Similarly, a broken line may be, and I dare say often is, due to
a ‘ cut’, but it may also be a mere rhythmical variation and it may
often indicate a dramatic pause, for reflection or the insertion of
stage business. And it is not bibliographical knowledge, but a feeling
for rhythm and dramatic values, that must determine the most likely
explanation in each case. Mr. Wilson is, of course, just as well
qualified to apply the literary as the bibliographical criteria. But
the doctrine of continuous copy seems to have a great fascination
for him.
I will draw to a close with some ‘external ’ reasons for thinking
that the amount of revision in the canon is not likely to be very
great. The ‘ revival ’ of old plays was familiar to the Elizabethan
stage. I first note the technical phase in a letter of 1605, which
states that the King’s men had ‘revived’ Love’s Labour’s Lost.
‘Revived’ is printed ‘revised’ by a contributor to Mr. Wilson’s
edition j that is a mere slip, but revival and revision are not
synonymous. The distinction between a new and a revived play has
financial implications in Sir Henry Herbert’s office notes of 1622-42.
In 1628 he secured from the King’s men a ‘benefit’ during each
summer and winter, ‘to be taken out of the second daye of a revived
play’. In 1633 he laid down that ‘ ould revived playes’, as well as
‘ new ’ ones, must he brought for allowance, and fixed or confirmed
fees of £2 for reading a new play and £1 for an old one. He has
a significant entry of the £1 on one occasion, as being for allowance
‘to add scenes to an ould play and to give it out for a new one ’. After
the Restoration, a dispute, of which we have not the conclusion,
arose as to whether the Master’s fee ‘for supervising reviv’d plaies’
was of ancient custom, and as to ‘ how long plaies may he laid
asyde, ere he shall judge them to be reviv’d ’. All this is late evidence
and complicated by Herbert’s bureaucratic tendency to magnify his
office and multiply his emoluments. But the notions involved were
clearly ancient, and even at the Rose a measure of revision probably
entitled a ‘revived ’ play to rank as ‘ new ’. When Henslowe marks
Longshanks in his diary as n.e. we need not suppose that we have to
do with anything but a recast of Peele’s Edward I, There was
money in it. Even if the entrance charges for a new play were not
higher, novelty had its appeal to the Elizabethan temperament.
Dekker and Jonson have their laugh at the poets employed as ‘play-
patehers ’ and ‘ play-dressers ’. I dare say the process was often only
colourable. ‘ New titles warrant not a play for new,’ says a seven-
teenth-century prologue. On the other hand, a popular stock play,


a f get-penny ’, might draw well enough at a revival, without revision.
Revision then, as well as revival, is a vera causa on the Elizabethan
stage. It is more difficult to give a quantitative estimate of its
frequency. But something can be collected from Henslowe’s dealings
with the Admiral’s men, and something at a later date from Herbert’s
notes. During the six years from 1597 to 1603 the Admiral’s men
acquired about 100 new plays, paying fees to the poets which exclude
any probability that we have only to do with ‘ new titles ’. Of these
we can trace the actual production of about 50, from the purchase
for them of new garments and properties; others may, of course,
have been furnished from the existing tiring-house stock. As against
the 50 new plays, we can trace on similar evidence about 23 revivals.
These had probably been exceptionally successful old plays, since 13
of them have come down to us in print, a quite disproportionate
number, in view of the oblivion which has overtaken most of the 300
or so plays named by Henslowe. But most of these revivals do not
seem to have been accompanied by any substantial payments to poets
for carrying out the work. There are ten payments. Three are
small sums for ‘ altering ’ or e mending ’ plays, in one case a new and
not a revived one, for the court, presumably as a result of the special
scrutiny which plays selected for court performance underwent from
the Revels officers. Three others are only for the provision of
prologues and epilogues, in one case also for the court. There are,
therefore, during these six years and for these 23 revivals, only four
cases of substantial revision, carrying substantial fees to the poets. 1
We have three of the four revised plays, and two of them we have
both in the revised and the unrevised forms, so that we can see
exactly what took place. They are Doctor Fausius and The Spanish
Tragedy ; in each case the revision amounted to the insertion of new
scenes into an otherwise substantially unaltered text. The third play
is Old Fortunatns. Here we have only the revised text; the original
was probably written in two parts, and the revision compressed them
into one. Henslowe’s record, therefore, bears very little testimony
to any widespread practice of revising plays upon revival. It bears
still less to any literary recasting of the whole substance of revived
plays, such as the theories which I have sketched envisage. Ido
not overlook the possible difference in methods between Shake-
speare’s company and the Admiral’s. Two plays belonging to the
1 The normal payment for a new play was £6. The revision of Dr. Fausius
and Tasso’s Melancholy cost in each case £4; that of The Spanish Tragedy £2 and
an unspecified part of £lO ; that of Old Fortunatus £9, including some further
alterations for the court.


former, outside the canon, have undergone alteration of known
character. One is The Malcontent, the other Muceclorus ; in both
the revision took the form of inserting scenes, not of stylistic
rehandling. Jonson, no doubt, re-wrote Every Man in Ms Humour,
before the folio of 1616, and replaced the work of a collaborator by
his own in Sejanus, before publication. But Jenson’s literary
attitude to bis ‘ Works ’ is too personal to be taken as representative.
I come now to Sir Henry Herbert’s notes. Such extracts from
these as have been preserved record 130 licences for the production
of plays between 1632 and 1643. Only fifteen were old plays, and
in only seven is there any record of revision. One is a play of
Fletcher’s ‘ corrected ’ by Shirley; one had undergone ‘ renewing ’
and one ‘alterations’ ; four had had one or more scenes added. We
cannot be sure that the eighteenth-century scholars took all such
notices out of Herbert’s office-book, while it was available. And we
cannot be sure that the Elizabethans and Jacobeans were not fonder
of re-writing plays than the Carolines. But, for what it is worth,
Herbert’s evidence tends to confirm Henslowe’s.
We ought to be very grateful to Mr. Robertson and Mr. Dover
Wilson. We had come to think that all the critical questions about
Shakespeare were disposed of; the biographical facts and even a
little more than the facts chronicled, the canon and the apocrypha
fixed, the chronological order determined, the text established ; that
there was not much left to be done with Shakespeare, except perhaps
to read him. They have shown us that it is not so; and we must
now go over the ground again, and turn our notional assents, with
whatever modifications may prove justified, into real assents. We
have all the spring joy of re-digging a well-tilled garden-
