

Pt?TH
pans.
(WITH AN APPENDIX ON THE SCRIPTURAL USE OF
i CERTAIN ANATOMICAL TERMS
JOHN LE GAY BRERETON, M.D.
AUTHOR OF “ THE TRAVELS OF PRINCE LEGION AND OTHER POEMS”
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCLXXXIII
— r -/ cU4








One Teacher: One Law
WITH AN APPENDIX ON THE SCRIPTURAL USE OF
CERTAIN ANATOMICAL TERMS
JOHN LE GAY BRERETON, M.D.
AUTHOR OF “TEE TRAVELS OF PRINCE LEGION AND OTHER POEMS’
\\ v la. j
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCI.XXXI II




ONE TEACHER: ONE LAW.
There is no book in the world so full of apparent
contradictions as the Bible. What, for instance, could
more contrast with Christ’s command, “ In all things
do unto others as ye would have others do unto you,”
than the injunction, three times repeated, in three
several books of the law— An eye for an eye , a tooth
for a tooth , limb for limb, and life for life ? (Exod.
xxi. 23, 24; Lev. xxiv. 20; Deut, xix. 21.) Is it
possible, one cannot but ask, that the commands,
Thine eye shall not pity,” and “ Love your enemies,”
can be consistent utterances of one and the same
legislator ? Did Christ correctly estimate His own
doctrine of unconditional and universal forgiveness
when He said of it, “Such is the law and the prophets”
—the severe lex talionis of Moses and the sanguinary
imprecations so frequent in the Psalms and other
writings of the Old Testament ?
We are told by the historian of the Water-Babies
that when those sportive beings were considerate and
kind one towards another, they were governed by a
fairy, young, beautiful and generous, who treated
them to barley-sugar and other good things. The
name of this fairy was Do-as-yoit-woidd-be-done-by .
But when the water-babies became greedy and quarrel-


some, they fell under the rule of another fairy, old*
wrinkled, ugly, morose and exacting, who treated
them to the end of a birch-rod. The name of this
fairy was Be-done-by-as-you-did. When the naughty
babies, submitting to correction, thought better of
their foolish resolutions, and began again to be for-
bearing and gentle towards each other, the ugly and
cross-grained old Be-done-by-as-you-did gradually
grew less ugly and assumed a pleasanter bearing,
until, finally, their sight, which had been prejudiced by
evil passions, beheld in her none other than the kind
and beautiful Do-as-you-would-be-done-by. Then they
found they had been mad, and were thankful that
their Good Genius had assumed such an appearance
and rule as alone could bring them to their proper
senses again, and restore them, by means of a frowning
countenance and the birch-rod, to a condition to
appreciate smiles and beauty, and to extract the full
sweets from barley-sugar.
According to the inviolate laws of Creative Love,
suffering is the inevitable result of wrong-doing.
Such suffering has, to the wrong-doer, the appearance
of cruelty and vindictiveness, and it is intended that
it should so appear. It punishes the condition which
originates it. That condition frustrates the end of
the Creator, which is the happiness of the creature.
That end can only be attained by the will of the
creature being brought into harmony with that of the
Creator. When such is not the case, we, the creatures,
are at enmity with the Creator, and thus the moral
laws of the universe, which are the will of the Creator
in operation, seem to be at enmity with us. We
accordingly rail at our imaginary persecutor, whether


we call it by the name of Nature, or Circumstance,
or Fortune, or Providence ; whereas the truth is that
we alone are our own enemy, and the laws which
seem to oppose our interests are really promoting
them. They thwart our end solely because they are
the means of the divine end—happiness.
The object of punishment in the divine economy is
threefold —to restrain the wrong-doer from rushing
into fatal excesses ; to defend the innocent from in-
justice and injury; to bring the offender against divine
order to a sense of the impolicy of his lawlessness,
and thus induce a state in which the adoption of the
Divine Will is possible. The sufferings of hell, or
that state in which self-love is dominant, are as much
the outcome of love as the enjoyments of heaven, or
that state in which self, being subjected to a higher
principle, acquiesces and co-operates with the laws of
Essential Love. In both cases the end is the same-
It is unchangeable, being the inmost will of the
Absolute—the Creator.
The effort of the Father of men, under all conditions
of evil and through all time, is to lift His rebellious
children out of hell and its discords, and lead them to
heaven and its harmonies. God, in short, is the final
ruler of hell not less than of heaven. However con-
firmed we may be in evil, we cannot get beyond the
reach of His loving vigilance and tender care: If I
make my bed in hell, behold , thou art there. Suffering
is the result of the divine rule adapted to the
necessities and capacities of hell, and it is the natural
product of hell itself. The fundamental law, then,
which underlies the lex talionis is love. Punishment,
to those under that law, is more merciful than con-


donence would be—the most merciful, indeed the only
merciful regime possible under the circumstances.
In that God is infinite, His law must be universal,
capable of meeting every particular condition, good or
evil, of every individual in the universe ; and in that
God is Love, his government must, under all conditions,,
be mercy, and mercy only. Mercy was the mission
and teaching of Christ; and mercy, however disguised,
is the basis of every clause of the “ law and the
prophets.” The heavenly law, Do as you would be done
by , becomes, in the inverted mind of hell, Be done by as
you. did; and the law of hell—retaliation—rightly
understood, leads back to the original precept, “ Do as
you would be done by.”
Obstinate, sensual and avaricious, the ancient Jew
represents that state of mind in which the fear of con-
sequences becomes the only restraint to vice, and the
hope of material advantage the only incentive to a
compliance with the laws of virtue. To this condition
the ancient law adapted itself in its literal form. In
an age of universal darkness, superstition, sensuality
and violence, no higher appeal could be made. In
the Jewish religion, formal, ceremonious and corporeal,
Divine Wisdom descended to this last resort to pre-
serve the recognition of a personal God and the
obligations of virtue and humanity. To the children
of Abraham the law presented a code of restrictions
and penalties on the one hand, and of gross and
mercenary rewards on the other—disease, servitude,
penury and death ; or long life, dominion, and a full
coffer—abundance of corn and wine and oil. So far
as men, in any age, are restrained from vice and crime
only by the fear of punishment—whether it be of the


gallows, or hell-fire, or the loss of goods, position, or
health—they come, in one form or other, under the
jurisdiction of this phase of the divine rule. The
legal penalties for crime to-day are not less intended
as “ a terror to the evil-doer ” than was the Mosaic
code of retaliation. They are based on the same
principle and traditions, though tempered with a
growing recognition that philanthropy, and not
revenge, should administer them.
The Jews at the time of Christ had become so
utterly corrupt and sensual that the law, even in the
gross sense in which they accepted it, failed to reach
their case. They feared openly to repudiate it, but
elaborately and ingeniously evaded it, so that a
hypocritical formalism, ludicrous to an outsider,
supplanted the religion of their fathers. They were
at once superstitious and profane to the last degree.
They had perverted the revelation of heaven to serve
the lowest ends. They had renounced the fatherhood
of the God of Love, and had become the avowed wor-
shippers of self-love—the devil. Self-love is the father
of all evil; and its votaries, if they acknowledge any
God at all, will deify the propensities most pronounced
in themselves. The Jehovah of the corrupted Jew
was but a magnified image of his own inverted mind.
It was not unadvisedly that the gentle but uncom-
promising Jesus described his opponents as being of
their father the devil. Not less does this charge apply
to those of our own, or any age, who, having a vested
interest in things as they are, obstruct all progress,
and, when God inaugurates a freer and happier
dispensation, will neither enter themselves nor suffer
them that are entering to enter.


Such were the Jews ; but not all. There were
those among them who lamented the degeneracy of
their race, and for a love of virtue itself, in order not
to lose the remnant of heavenly life which was still
left them, and for a hope of achieving better things
than had yet been attained, to which they deemed
their prophets pointed, kept the law, to the best of
their ability, in spirit as well as in the letter. Such,
for instance, were the faithful Zacharias and his wife—
“ righteous before God, and walking in all the com-
mandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless;”
such was Joseph of Arimathaea—“ a good man and a
righteous,” “ a councillor,” who “ had not consented ”
to the death of Jesus, and “who also himself was
looking for the kingdom of God.” The Jew of this
type hailed Jesus as a teacher sent from heaven, and
represents those who, in any age, make the good they
already possess a stepping-stone to a better, and
allow the knowledge which has been handed down
to them to light their path to a fuller revelation.
The whole teaching of Christ, as adapted to the
transition state from the law of fear and restraint to
that of freedom and love, is epitomized in the sermon
on the mount. That wonderful discourse is essen-
tially a disquisition on the Jewish law, addressed to a
Jewish audience. It appeals to the Jew in whom a
cheerful obedience to the law has prepared the mind
to receive the benefits of a higher dispensation.
Progress is the burden of the whole discourse ; a
progressive development of the divine life within ;
progressive institutions to meet the requirements of a
progressed state ; a progressive understanding of the
Divine Word. “Ye have heard that it was said by


them of old time, thus and thus, but I say unto you,
thus and thus,” is the repeated form of the discourse.
But this progress is not to be effected by ignoring the
past. The new lay in the old, and must come out of
it. The old is still the necessary stepping-stone for
those not yet prepared to receive the new. The
“I” is no innovator, but the secret spirit which has
adapted itself, in various forms, to the ever-varying
conditions of man. It has followed him down in his
successive declines, even to the lowest, organizing its
own dispensation for each ; and it will lead him up
again, through adapted dispensations, to the highest,
when its inmost and unchanging purpose will be
revealed. “ Although I teach a new commandment”
says the preacher, “ I come not to destroy but to fidjil
—to make your law not less, but more than it has
hitherto been to you.” The hearers of the sermon
already acknowledged the divinity of that law, and
the new teaching was presented as a further revela-
tion of its spirit. The old must do its work before
the new can come into operation : “ not one jot or
one tittle shall pass away till all be fulfilled.” It is
through the old alone that the new can be inaugurated.
The one is the necessary basis on which the other is
to be built. As with the material creation, so the
divine work in the soul proceeds from less to more,
from lower to higher. It supersedes, but never
unmakes the past, any more than the plant destroys
the soil or the animal the plant. The work is
continuous from foundation to summit. It never
breaks off and starts again de novo, but progresses in
its own established line. Had Christ ignored the
law and the prophets, he would have forfeited all title


to a direct divine message. So, in our own day, any
“ revelation ” which ignores the Scriptures stultifies
its pretence to a heavenly origin.
True to His divine mission, Christ refers His
hearers from the temporary form to the eternal spirit
of the law. He gives prominence to those frequent
declarations of love and mercy scattered through it,
in which the divine purpose, shining through the
letter, comes to the very surface. Love to God and
the neighbour come out as the very end and spirit of
all divine legislation, and the totality of religion.
From the shadow He points to the substance. A
formal compliance with the law, however necessary in
the past, must now be superseded by a vital fulfilment
of it. Those who, while observing the letter, have, by
a selfish life, ignored the spirit, “ making the com-
mandments of God of none effect by their traditions,”
He unsparingly condemns. Further, with the light of
a more humane and catholic interpretation, He brings
an accession of liberty. Cautiously, insidiously, He
preaches emancipation from galling obligations and
narrowing customs.
To those Jews who, while still reverencing divine
things, looked for a deliverer, all this was welcome
news. It was a gospel which met all their require-
ments. It appealed at once to their moral sense, fed
their highest aspirations, and re-infused life into
religion ; and it was easily understood. This much
of the teaching of Christ lay upon the surface. More
than this they could not have accepted, and did
not perceive. Had more been given, it would not
only have been the reverse of a benefit to that
generation, but would certainly have suffered profan-


ation in the corrupt ages which awaited the Christian
Church.
But though the revelations of Christ took a form
particularly applicable to the wants of His immediate
hearers, who, as we have seen, were in a transitional
state, we must not suppose that they contain no
deeper meaning suited to more advanced conditions.
That the interpretation then applicable was not a
finality He himself teaches. To His most intimate,
disciples even, He declared that He had many things
to tell them which they could not then “ hear; ’ thus
guarding them against the fallacy of limiting divine
truth to the temporary capacity of receiving it. His
teachings were not merely an interpretation of the
Word of God, but were —as also was His life—a
continuation of the Word itself —revealed divinity.
As such, His words were prophetic, not less than
the “ dark saying of old,” of which He was the
fulfilment. In His very explanation of mysteries He
propounded new mysteries. Thus is it always with a
divine revelation : “ I will open my mouth in parables ;
I will utter things which have been kept secret from the
foundation of the world.” These words of an ancient
prophet are re-applied to Christ in the Gospel of
Matthew.
When any particular divine lesson has been
reduced to practice, it will be found to contain deeper
and wider truths, the food for yet further growths.
Shall a divine fulfilment be less than the promise
which led up to it ? If the human mind be capable
of indefinite progression, shall not the crowning revela-
tion of God keep pace with its growing receptivity
and requirements ? That which is a fulfilment for one


phase calls into life new capacities, which will, in their
turn, demand a yet further fulfilment.
The rule which Christ applied to the law—that it
is not to be limited to a temporary or local application
—cannot be denied to His own utterances without
violating their whole spirit and drift. He addresses
always a progressive frame and attitude. “ Excelsior”
is the battle-cry He puts into the mouths of His
followers. By a literal limitation we, in this day,
stultify the Gospel exactly as the Jews destroyed the
law by a similar process. The limits of our knowledge
•and experience limit, it is true, the applicability of the
Divine Word in any particular case ; but we must ever
bear in mind that the limitation is in us and not in it.
It will expand indefinitely with the expansion of our
understanding. It is for all men and for all time, and
admits not of “ any private interpretation.”
But the deeper meaning which underlies all divine
revelations is not merely to be presumed for the
teachings of Christ ; it is specifically claimed for
them. Does He not expressly tell us that He spake
in parables in order that His words might not be
understood as to their interior meaning by those
“ without,” that is, those who were not in a state to
profit by it ; those in whom it would only provoke a
more determined resistance, and whom it would,
therefore, put into a worse instead of a better posi-
tion ? “ With many such parables spake He the
Word unto them as they were able to hear it.”
But even to the most advanced hearer can the ut-
terances of Divine Wisdom be ever other than a
parable ? Infinitely removed from human intelligence,
the Supreme Mind must present to man infinite


degrees of approximation. Each successive stage of
an upward life is invested with its own degree of vision,
each relatively nearer though still infinitely removed
from the divine standpoint, being always on a discretely
lower plane of existence. Where is the man, where
the created being, to whom any revelation of the
Divine Mind is not clothed in a symbol, to whom the
otherwise blinding light of divinity is not covered
by a tempering cloud of appearance ? Every divine
utterance is necessarily parabolic : “ Without a
parable spake He not unto them.”
No ; we have not yet arrived at the full meaning
of the life and teachings of Christ. That man is
greatly deceived, be he apostle, sage, or seer, or all in
one, who thinks he has expounded the final sense of
but a single word of a truly divine oracle. Have we
arrived at a final knowledge of nature even ? Does
science, with all the wonderful appliances of modern
invention, point to such a consummation ? On the
contrary, every new discovery but opens out roads to
undreamed of and inexhaustible fields for further
inquiry. Our labours are for ever being divided and
subdivided into wider and wider divergencies. One
science calls a multitude of new sciences into exist-
ence, and each one again opens upon multitudes
more. Is the chemist of to-day, with his over sixty
elements, any nearer the final knowledge of matter
than were the ancients with their four —fire, earth,
air, and water ? The horizon of knowledge still
expands as we ascend to a higher and higher point of
survey ; the goal of our search recedes ever further
and further into the unknown as we lengthen the
track of the known. If we cannot exhaust nature,


which is a divine manifestation appealing to our
lowest sense, how shall we probe to the bottom a
divine revelation of things which appeals to our
highest sense ?
Any book which man or angel can drain of its
wisdom may safely be set down as not divine. That
the full meaning of the words of Christ does not
appear on the surface, and that, to a superficial
survey, they present riddles and incongruities which
only a deeper understanding can explain and recon-
cile, is, so far, a presumption for their divine origin.
That the Bible is not understood in its applicability
to a new state of things is one reason why it has
fallen into discredit with many of the more advanced
thinkers of the day. But if it contains a sense deeper
than that which has hitherto passed current, one
which meets the moral and intellectual wants of the
age, how is that sense to be arrived at ? Not, cer-
tainly, by standing still and limiting our circle of
view; still less by going back to that which has
already been superseded ; but rather, as in any other
field of inquiry, by pushing forward and making the
known a pathway to the unknown.
Granting a Final Cause for all things, creation in the
aggregate must be a manifestation, a representative
effect of that cause. Granting that there are two
planes of creation, the internal or human, and the
external or material worlds, these two worlds—as
both proceed from the same cause—will, the one
more interiorly and the other more exteriorly, be also
representative each of the other. The two will be
bound in mutual analogies ; and the external—that
which appeals to the earliest awakened and most


superficial sense —will furnish a natural key to the
mysteries of the yet unexplored internal. A know-
ledge of the external will be the basis to a knowledge
of the internal. Again, the internal or human will, in
its turn, furnish a means for the exposition of the
Inmost or Divine; providing thus, in the hands of
God, the basis for an authentic and intelligible revela-
tion of Himself. If the Scriptures be such a revelation,
analogy will be the key by which the Author will
enable us to unlock their mysteries. Natural facts
will become a language translatable into spiritual
facts ; and humanity, when seen in its true nature
and relations, will be the exponent of Divinity—so
far as Divinity can be revealed to man.
Nature, on every plane, from the lowest to the
highest, points to man. There is not a mineral
atom, a weed or an animal, which does not make an
effort towards the human form, and which does not
find in man its fulfilment and final expression; and
man, when erect and in his proper place—exalted by
the adopted spirit of Divine Love, master of his own
passions and lord of nature —is the exponent and
minister of his Maker ; for God is the essential man, and
it is in virtue of that essential manhood that man is
man, and that nature, on a lower plane, repeats His
imaee in all her countless forms. The role of creation
being completed in man, in him the latent divine
capacity and intelligence come to the surface as the
spirit and fragrance of a tree come out in the flower.
God has produced that to which He can communicate
Himself, using as an alphabet the various typical
forms through which He has brought His work to a
final and consummate expression.


Rightly to understand the biblical use of natural
objects, they must be translated into their correspond-
ing human qualities. Man must be taught himself
before he can be made the index of divine verities.
Earth and sky, sea and land, rock and tree, beast and
bird ; garden and wilderness, flood and tempest, earth-
quake and eclipse; the birth of a world or the end of
an eon ; yea, every single object and incident in
nature, in order to carry its spiritual message, must
be seen as something existing or transpiring within
ourselves.
But if nature is explanatory of man, still more
so are the actions of man himself. Every marked
characteristic of one man is but an emphasized
example of some quality common to all. Typical
characters, therefore, whether historic or ideal, and not
only individual men, but nations and epochs, find their
representative use in the Word of God. These also
are to be regarded as realities or possibilities within
ourselves : giants and heroes ; wars and sieges ; cities
and countries ; Jerusalem and Babylon; Egypt and
Assyria; Jew or Gentile ; shepherd or soldier; con-
queror or captive ; king or slave ; friend or foe ; angel
or devil —all within ourselves. The application is
personal and individual, for God’s revelation of
Himself is direct to every man, since He is the inmost
of all alike, whether we know it or not.
The individual significance of any biblical figure
being arrived at, it can then be applied with precision
to outward and general events; to our position and
relation with others, for instance, or to critical epochs
in history, such as the birth of a new dispensation or
the spiritual growth or decay of a people; but, until


the personal sense is ascertained, all such applications
will be conjectural and illusive.
The Divine Word, if not thus capable of individual
application, would not only lose its full practical bear-
ing, would not only fail to be what it professes to be,
“ a lamp unto our feet and a light unto our path,” but
it would forfeit all claim to divinity ; for only by being
individual can it be universal, and that which is not
universal is not divine.
A knowledge of the correspondence between spiritual
and natural things, though not needed in times of
ignorant and implicit belief, is a crying want of an age
of active inquiry like the present, that the knowledge
of spiritual and divine things may keep pace with
physical science, and the mind not be overwhelmed,
and all heavenly land-marks obliterated beneath a
flood of irresistible and fatal materialism. The internal
understanding of the Word of God is the remedy, and
the only remedy, for the steadily growing scepticism
of the age, which is secretly sapping all religious faith,
and with which the generality of the clergy avow
themselves unable to cope. Men will no longer take
it on hear-say that any book is divine ; they must see
its divinity before they will recognize so stupendous a
claim.
But though the divine oracles conceal within their
bosom meanings and applications which are absolutely
inexhaustible, they reveal certain general truths, certain
leading doctrines, in which, as we have seen, the spirit
and purport appear upon the surface, which apply
equally to all states, and are perceptible to the most
superficial observer. They appeal to the universal
conscience of mankind. It is always in the line of


these axiomatic truths, and under their guidance, that
the divinely-provided key of analogy must be applied.
In compliance with this rule, and that also of referring
every illustration to some principle within the mind,
let us now, in the light of analogy, proceed to examine
the particulars of our Lord’s teaching concerning the
Mosaic law of Retaliation ; particulars which were
overlooked by His first hearers, and which could not
then have been comprehended, but of which the
present critical and analytical age demands an ex-
planation.
“Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth ; but I say unto you, Resist
not him that is evil ; but whosoever smiteth thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if
any man would go to law with thee, and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And whoever
shall compel thee to go one mile with him, go with
him twain. Give to him that asketh thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.
“Ye have heard that it was said, thou shalt love thy
neighbour and hate thine enemy ; but I say unto you,
Love your enemies, and pray for them that persecute
you ; that ye may be the sons of your Father which
is in heaven ; for He maketh his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and the
unjust. For if ye love them that love you, what reward
have ye ? Do not even the publicans the same ? And
if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than
others ? Do not even the Gentiles the same ? Ye


therefore shall be perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect.”
No one will deny that these words, even in their
most superficial sense, breathe a lofty morality and a
spirit of generosity much needed by those who had
been trained in a corrupt faith, which represents the
Creator himself as a personification of selfishness.
To minds committed to similar views they lose, in
this day, none of their original force ; metaphor, and
hyperbole—oriental forms of speech—notwithstand-
ing. But, when examined in detail, it must be
admitted they present a series of perplexities. Yet, if
■divine, they must be true in every particular. Such
particular truth does not appear on the surface. It is
not reasonable, for instance, nor is it a Christian
obligation, if assaulted on one side, to invite an assault
on the other; or if a man has a real or supposed lien
on your coat, to give him also your cloak, to which
he does not even pretend to have any claim ; to give
to all who beg, and lend to all who desire to borrow.
The internal sense of these apparently more than
Quixotic maxims elicits, however, a most beautiful,
coherent and progressive spiritual narrative, as will
be seen by-and-bye.
It hath been said refers to a divine teaching
adapted to a state through which the mind has already
passed.
Ye have heard signifies that such teaching has been
accepted and obeyed, thus preparing the mind for
further instruction.
I say unto you refers to that further instruction.
The personal pronoun / has a still more specific
meaning. The term implies individuality and self-


existence. It refers, therefore, to the final divinity of
all truth. There is but one Being who can claim
as positively His own any virtue or any knowledge,
and who can teach in His own name. That Being is
the self-existent Goodness and Truth itself, the one
source of all virtue and intelligence, the fountain from
which all knowledge, though flowing through many
channels, is derived.
/ am is the name by which God designates Him-
self—Jehovah. To Moses He says, “ Tell the people
lam that lam hath sent thee.” No mere man can
say of himself I am that I am , but only lam that I
have been made or have become.
Christ, in His divine character as the Word made
flesh, assumes the sacred and incommunicable name,
/ am. If we fail, in this day, to realize what He
implied by that declaration, it was plain enough to
those who heard Him ; for He no sooner uttered the
word than “they took up stones to stone Him.”
According to their estimate of Him, He had incurred
the penalty of death : He had appropriated the Name
not even to be uttered by man. He eluded them on
that occasion ; but that He had made Himself equal
with God was remembered against Him at His trial
before Pilate, and was made the pretext for His
execution.
As a man , Christ refused to be called “good” and
“master;” but He none the less allowed Himself to
be worshipped by those who recognized the divinity
veiled beneath His manhood. To His most advanced
followers He said, “Ye call Me Master and Lord, and
ye say well, for so I am.” The Divine Truth, in itself,
knows neither past nor future, neither growth nor


decay. It is an eternal and infinite I am. It under-
lies all dispensations, past or to come; “ before Abra-
ham was I am.”
An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. To
the Jew these words meant simply that whatever
injury a man inflicts on another, that same injury
shall be judicially visited on himself; and it was
better that he should so interpret them than that he
should recognize no moral or social obligations what-
ever. But a deeper meaning underlies the words of
Moses. They imply that if any man shall prevent or
pervert the perception of truth in another, he shall
himself become the dupe of his own falsification.
Shall a priesthood, for instance, for the sake of
dominion, set up a false doctrine in religion, it will
by-and-bye be condemned to believe its own lie ; “ He
hath conceived mischief and brought forth falsehood.
He made a pit and digged it, and is fallen into the
ditch which he hath made” (Psalm vii. 14, 15). Eye
represents the perception of truth on the highest plane
of the mind, and tooth perception on the lowest plane,
that of the external senses. When a man successfully
falsifies a spiritual truth, he puts out the eye of his
victim ; when he falsifies a physical fact, he knocks
out a tooth. ( See Appendix.)
So far Moses. Christ, approaching the same law
from a different standpoint, throws an entirely new
light upon it.
But I say unto you , Resist not him that is evil. In
that state in which the leading disposition is still to
commit evil, and thus to decline from bad to worse,
the admonition of the old law that every wrong
carries its own retribution acts as a wholesome


deterrent ; but when a new state is entered upon, in-
which there is a desire to be delivered not only from
the punishment of evil, but from evil itself, the method
of divine action is reversed.
In the next life, where internal states and external
surroundings correspond one with another, both being
of a spiritual origin, all evils perceptibly and imme-
diately punish themselves. By a spiritual law as
inexorable as that of gravitation, spirits, of whatever
quality, are compelled to associate with their likes..
In a spiritual society of selfish men, which is a hell,,
not only does each member punish himself for any
wrong act by paralyzing the faculty he has abused,
but each is also punished specifically by his own vice
in his neighbour; is convicted and corrected in his
own despite, and compelled in self-defence to mortify
his own particular and dominant lust. What he
would justify in himself he will not tolerate in another.
If, for instance, a thief in the next life could elect to-
live amongst honest men, he would have a golden
time of it ; but in a community where all are thieves,
like himself, the inconvenience of being robbed
compels his assent to the suppression of robbery.
He is a party to the laws which restrict his own
freedom. Let him cease to desire to rob, let him no
longer be at home with robbers, and his freedom of
action is restored. As to spiritual things, then, so far
as a man comes out of selfishness, so far is he released
from the laws of selfishness. So far as he learns to
do as he would be done by, so far is he beyond the
penalties of retaliation. He is removed, as it were,,
to another country, and lives under a different code.
Under the law of love he need not resist evil, for evil


cannot touch him. Spiritually, evil can only injure
us by infecting us with its own spirit, and this it can
do only so far as we are ourselves evilly disposed.
Again, falsehood can permanently attach itself to us
only so far as we incline to it. Goodness is its own
security. Truth is its own defence. Therefore the
law, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, gives
way to the higher command, Resist not evil. Let a
devil, as to spiritual things, say and do his worst; he
cannot hurt you. Leave him to himself and his own
laws. Released yourself from those laws, removed
from the spiritual country where they hold sway, it is
not for you to put them into execution. Leave him
to God and to the inevitable fulfilment of His pro-
vidence. To Him “vengeance belongeth,” and not
to you. To Him only can it be entrusted; for His
vengeance, though infallible in its incidence and exact
in its application, is mercy—the correction of Love,
executed by unerring Wisdom.
But until evil is thoroughly eliminated, we are still,
so far as we are under its thraldom, subject to the
law of retribution. We are, as to our spirits, members
of a mixed society. We live in a country where both
laws are in force, the one or other predominating as
good or evil has the greater sway within us. Our
state is one of probation. Not until we have separated
the evil from the good, and put it aside, shall we
escape the jurisprudence of restraint, and become
members of a free community. Begun in this life,
that work of separation will not fail of its completion
in the next ; nor is the humblest endeavour of any
one of us lost to the accumulating force of goodness
in the world. Already the spirit of Christianity,


despite its contact with an opposing element, and the
consequent pollution of its institutions, has so far
permeated the common mind, that the law of retalia-
tion has become largely modified by that of love.
That process, for many ages hardly perceptible, is
now going on at a rapidly increasing ratio. Though
we cannot dispense with penal laws, we have ceased,
in principle, to demand an eye for an eye and a tooth
for a tooth. If we imprison a man, it is not because
he has tried to imprison some one else, but because
he is liable to make a bad use of his liberty. Life is
still demanded for life, but more in deference to
ancient custom than in compliance with the Mosaic
law, though that law is still pleaded by some
advocates for capital punishment. There may be
conditions of society—such, for instance, as the
absence of gaols or other means of restraint—when
it becomes necessary for the public security to take
life. Lynch law, even, is better than no law, and
becomes expedient where the ordinary machinery of
justice cannot reach ; but, taking society as a whole,
there is a growing sense that capital punishment is a
remnant of barbarism which the world has outgrown.
The time is at hand when all punishment, for the
sake of punishment, will be relegated to the limbo to
which torturing captives of war and flogging the
insane have long been consigned. Of the three ends
of punishment, that of the reclamation of the criminal
is beginning to be regarded as paramount. Our
“gaols” are growing into “reformatories.” In short,
the maxim of Christ, Resist not evil, startling as it
was in His own age, is steadily remoulding the
customs and institutions of the civilized world.


Emancipation from ancient restraints carries with
it the necessity for a profounder knowledge of the
laws of spiritual life. Without this, liberty will soon
degenerate into licence, and benevolence into tolera-
tion of evil. The devout mind of the age, sick of
dogmatic theology, and insisting on practical results,
stands trembling on the brink of denial of any super-
human agency in the march of human improvement
What is wanted to avert this mistake is a knowledge
of God’s method in the regeneration of the individual,
and the consequent elevation of the race. Without
this knowledge, the cosmic work of Christ, which is
hardly inaugurated in the world, would lead back to
irreligion, to self-infatuation, and to a reign of
universal disorder. This danger is provided against.
Beneath the revelation of those moral laws which
have effected so much, but which we are now in
danger of attributing to our own sagacity, lies a
deeper revelation, which explains their divine source
and mode of action.
We shall at first sight be struck with the difference,
and even contrast, between this sense of our text and
the one we have just examined; but it is only the
difference which always lies between results and
operative means. It is like the difference between the
internal anatomy and external contour of the body ;
between the machinery and the fabric which it turns
out. Further, when we rise out of a false to a true
position, the appearance of things is actually reversed.
“He who is giddy thinks the world turns round.”
The same effect is produced when a deeper is substi-
tuted for a more imperfect interpretation, or vice


versa. This is the cause of the apparent contradic-
tion between the maxims of Christ and many of those
of Moses and other Old Testament writers.
He who gave us the old law for the old state calls
upon us to receive a fuller and progressive revelation
for the new and progressive state; to set aside all preju-
dice and receive it as it comes. Through the remainder
of this essay our inquiry will be restricted to this
deeper sense of the maxims under consideration.
Resist not him that is evil. The Regenerator has
spoken. Already a new motive has been awakened
in us, and a new reward recognized. We are to do
good for its own sake, and accept it as its own reward.
The progressive career upon which we have entered
will, in its earlier stages, be one of painful conflict.
Self-love is not yet dead, but is so far subjugated
that the light of heaven is more and more admitted
into the soul, and acknowledged to be the true guide.
But it comes not to us as an unmixed good. To the
old ruler it is an enemy. The divine economy now is
to assist the new and good disposition to overcome
and finally expel the old evil bias. To the remnant
of this bias—still active, though no longer dominant—
the new revelation, laying bare its evil nature, is an
aggressor. To one who has made of evil a false good,
the real good wears the aspect of evil. And this is
our actual condition: “We have called evil good and
good evil, put darkness for light and light for dark-
ness, put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter.” The
good which we call evil is the evil we are not to
resist.
To resist evil in the true and real sense is what the
Lord ever enjoins, and which,by the impartation of His


gOOd Spirit, he enables us to do. “ Resist the devil,”'
we are told, “ and he will flee from you.” The devil
is nothing more or less than our own dominant self-
love ; and it is by not yielding to the suggestions of
this devil, who would have us to resist the light which
exposes his real character, that power will be acquired
finally to cast him out.
Whosoever shall smite thee on the right jaw-bone
((Ttaywv), turn to him the other also. The jaw-bone
represents a somewhat more interior perception than
that signified by tooth. ( See APPENDIX.) The right
side, as contrasted with the left, refers to Affection
as contrasted with Intellect; intellect being secondary
to the will, and subservient to its ends.
We are smitten on the right cheek, when, in the
earlier stages of regeneration, a fuller accession of
heavenly light reveals to us that there is an admixture
of self-love in our very zeal for the more interior truths
which are beginning to dawn upon us. We are not to-
resist this correction, but to turn the left side—the
intellect—to receive the benefit of it. As certainly as
the affection for truth is- impure, the conception of it
will be confused, and to the same extent. To turn
the left cheek to the smiter is to acknowledge the
sensuous errors into which our imperfect affection has-
led us, and allow them to be rectified. “ Let the
righteous smite me ; it shall be a kindness. Let him
reprove me ; it shall be an excellent oil which will not
break my head ; for yet my prayer also shall be in
their calamities ” (Psalm cxli. 5). By the oil that will
not break the head is meant the instructions of love, so-
adapted to the condition and capacity of the soul that
they convince the intellect without coercing it, and


therefore without damaging the reasoning faculty and
destroying freedom, which is a necessary condition of
regeneration. When the right cheek has already sub-
mitted to the correction, —when the affection has been
won, —eager for enlightenment, we accept the blow
on the left cheek with joy, and our head—intelligence
—so far from being broken, is strengthened by it.
And if any man zvould go to law with thee and take
away thy coat , let him have thy cloak also. Our
affections—predilections—clothe themselves in know-
ledge and opinions : knowledge and opinions group
themselves into a common garment or doctrine.
Every stage of religious progress has its distinctive
garment. As we grow in spiritual life we adopt a
purer and more catholic doctrine—a garment of finer
texture and more commodious proportions. While
there is still a mixture of self-love in our pursuit of
truth, our perceptions are more or less warped ; our
doctrine has more or less of error inwoven in its texture,
and is more or less straitened by prejudice. “ The
light of the understanding,’’ says Bacon, “ is not a dry
and simple light, but is saturated with the will and
affections, and the intellect fashions the sciences
accordingly.” * Agnus , he reminds us, was the only
word which the wolf, learning to spell, could construct
from the four-and-tw r enty letters of the alphabet.
Self-love fabricates its own clothing, and clings
tenaciously to it, but he who follows truth for its own
sake receives his garments, ever new, from God.
Having accepted correction on our right cheek and
on our left, i.e., both as to motive and perception, we are
* Novum Organum ; Idola Tribus.


now sued at the law —constrained on the ground of
rational necessity—to renounce our old doctrines. We
need not hesitate to obey. Our old clothes no longer
fit us. We have outgrown them; worn them threadbare.
New clothes, fitted for our new service, are ready for
wear. Only by the force of truth does God destroy
error. Only by a higher growth does He displace a
lower, whether in His physical or spiritual field.
The adoption of new garments for a new state is
urged in many places in the sacred writings. Thus
Jacob commands his household to put away the
strange gods that are among them, to be purified and
change their garments. Jesus warns His converts not
to mend an old garment with a new —not to patch up
a worn-out creed with detached truths of a better
knowledge—for that would be to spoil the new and
make the rent in the old worse. Using the same
symbol, when sending out His disciples as missionaries,
he charges them not to take with them two changes
of raiment. It is well, says an old song, to be off
with the old love before you are on with the new;
and, certainly, to preach successfully any doctrine it
should have entire possession of the mind.
The coat is our doctrine as to interior or spiritual
things ; the cloak, as to external or natural things.
One of the effects of liberation from the trammels of
a false theology is the freedom the mind acquires in
the pursuit of natural science. We move without
restraint. We cast aside the artificial veil we once
wore lest nature, seen in her naked verity, should
disturb our religious “ views'.' No longer swathed
from head to foot in the grave-clothes of past ages,
our ears no longer stuffed with prejudices, no longer


looking through a fog of Jewish or mediaeval tradi-
tions, we see things in their own light ; hear nature
tell her story in her own words.
But when the mind shall be not only freed from
the restraints of superstition, but exalted by a higher
knowledge than that which nature can impart, the
light of heaven, flowing downward and outward, will
flood the domain of physical science itself. New
faculties will be awakened ; new fields of research will
be opened up. The dark places of nature will grow
light. Already we catch a fore-gleam of that brighter
age. The science of the future will as far surpass
that of to-day as the wisdom of an angel transcends
the dreams of a monk.
By all means, if the Lord asks us for our coat, let
Him have our cloak also. False theories of science
have their root in self-love not less than false doctrines
of religion. Let them go !
But no man has any right to demand of us to give
up our garment unless he sue us at the law. He must
establish his claim at the bar of Truth. It must be
supported by the whole range of known facts ; by
the whole law and testimony of God. We must
not carelessly throw away even an opinion merely to
adopt that of some one else, though he be the highest
dignitary of the church or a king among philosophers.
The authority of truth, through whatever channel it
may come, is absolute and beyond appeal, because
truth is the voice of God ; but the dictum of belief or
opinion is human, and not only fallible, but sure to
be erroneous, for who can opine a fact, or stumble by
blind credence into an infallible position ?
And iv ho so ever shall impress thee to go one mile , go


with him twain. Put your knowledge into life, into
your daily walk. Every fresh advent of the divine
truth reveals a new man in the old, and calls into life
new faculties for good. But a real and permanent
progress involves a movement of the entire man, an
adoption of the new truth by the will, as well as the
recognition of it by the intellect. The heavenly prin-
ciple revealed is then assimilated by our entire nature,
and becomes a substantial part of our spiritual frame.
Unless so assimilated it fails of its heavenly mission.
The first mile is the acknowledgment of truth by the
intellect, and the increased intelligence so effected ;
the second mile is its embodiment in life. Unless we
are prepared to take the second step, the first will not
advance us; indeed, it were better not to have taken
it at all, for to know what is right and not to do it is
more detrimental than to remain in ignorance.
The first step can be compelled , but the second must
spring from affection. Love cannot compel, and
cannot be compelled—not even on the plane of natural
affection.
“ Love cannot be constrained by mastery ;
When mastery comes, the god of love anon
Beateth his wings, and, farewell ! he is gone.” *
The same law holds good on the plane of heavenly
affection for good. We must choose it in freedom,
and make it our own. A merely adventitious virtue—
one impressed by fear, self-interest, or any other
motive than that of love of it for its own sake—will
have no lasting hold upon us. Neither will even a
mere knowledge take permanent root in the mind
* Chancer : the Squire’s Tale.


unless it commend itself to our affection. It may for
a moment compel a logical assent, but it will not alter
the character, and will by-and-bye be rejected. You
may prove to a fanatic, for instance, that reason and
fact are against him, but he will not give up his point.
Rather than do that he will denounce science and
logic themselves as devices of the devil to entrap him
into hell :
“ A man convinced against his will
Is of the same opinion still.”
Intellect directs the steps, but it is the love which
elects the path. “ Kissing goes by favour.”
A mile, however, implies more than a mere casual
and momentary attention. It is not a step which can
be retraced in a second. It involves prolonged inves-
tigation and a fixed purpose of intellect ; but even
this will lead to no advantage, unless, when our
progress is found to interfere with our selfish delights,
after full deliberation, we determine to continue our
journey and accept all consequences.
To see that an evil habit is wrong, or that a virtuous
one is right, is to go with divine truth the first mile.
To renounce the evil and to put the good into practice
is to go the second mile.
Give to him that asketh thee. The journey upon
which we have now entered with our entire mind
demands self-renunciation at every step. Give !
To give is voluntarily to part with something
which is our own. We can give nothing of any
real value to God. He is Himself the only good,
and the source of all goodness. We have no real
property in anything save our own self-love—the


root of all our mistakes and misery. This, with its
fallacious delights, is all we have to give ; and this is
what He asks of us. We must lose our life in order
to find it. It is God himself who secretly suggests this
renunciation of self. It is He also who accomplishes
it. By the transcendent gift of Himself he wins our
acquiescence ; for it is only in proportion as we receive
Him within ourselves that we give ourselves to Him.
From him that would borrow of thee turn not thou
away. To lend is to place at the disposal of another
something which we possess. If we give our heart to
God we shall submit to His guidance, and lend all
our faculties to the execution of His will. His will
is that we love one another. By promoting the hap-
piness of others, by giving ourselves to those who
need our service then, we lend ourselves to the Lord.
“ Whoso hath pity on the poor lendeth to the Lord,”
says the ancient proverb, and says truly.
Are we losers by this process ? No. We part
with that which, as an end, is worthless, and convert
it into a means of enjoyments which transcend all esti-
mate ; for they are more than human, they are divine,
and can only be attained by the renunciation of a
separated will and by conjunction with the divine
nature itself; by our soul becoming the soil in which
God, as the husbandman, can sow those principles,
which, under His culture, yield fruits of permanent,
satisfying and ever-increasing joys ; and that on
every plane of our being, down to our very corporeal
frames. We saw that spiritual culture was destined
to exalt even physical science. Not less will a
heavenly discipline purify and exalt our sadly cor-
rupted and deformed physical bodies. Health, vigour


and beauty will follow in the wake of a regenerate
life.
“ Every spirit, as it is most pure,
And hath in it the more of heavenly light,
So it the fairer body doth procure
To habit in, and it more fairly dight,
With cheerful grace and amiable sight :
For of the soul the body form doth take ;
For soul is form and doth the body make.”
So sang the gentle Spencer; and a greater than he
has said, “ There is no man that hath left house, or
brethren, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children,
or lands for My sake or the gospel’s sake, but he
shall receive a hundredfold now in this present time ,
houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands, with persecutions , and in the
world to come eternal life.” The general purport of
this passage is that physically, as well as spiritually,
man is the gainer by the sacrifice of a selfish life to
the will of heaven. To explain it in detail would
lead us too far from our main argument; but that it
is not to be read literally is self-evident, for no man
can have a hundred fathers and mothers, or have his
children multiplied a hundredfold, by that or any
other process.
Paul said rightly that to devote ourselves to heaven
is our reasonable service. What does God ask us to
renounce, and what does He give us in return ? To
renounce a crotchet and receive a truth. To renounce
a whim and receive a rational purpose. To renounce
a blundering rule of life, sure to end in disaster, and
to adopt an infallible and perfect law, which will steer
us through all perplexities, overcome all obstacles,


and guide us into perfect peace. And as God is the
real proprietor of all our faculties, is it not reasonable
that we should seek to know the end for which He
conferred them ; and, discovering that end, co-operate
with Him in its accomplishment ? It is by regarding
ourselves as our own, and looking at things from a
standpoint of selfish interest, that we have made such
woeful shipwreck of ourselves, both body and soul ;
have made poverty, disease, deformity, madness and
crime to take the place of plenty, health, genius,
beauty and order. All this could not be if men
would accept that higher manhood which is in God,
and which He ever seeks to confer upon the world,
which is revealed in the written Word, and which was
fulfilled in His personal manifestation as Jesus Christ.
“ Thou seemest human and divine,
The highest, holiest manhood Thou !
Our wills are ours, we know not how ;
Our wills are ours, to make them Thine.”
When we have given ourselves to the Lord we have
completed one phase of the upward life and enter on
another. This command, therefore, brings to a close
the section in which it occurs. That section describes
the progressive steps of the regenerate life in its earlier
stage, when the will has to be subjected to the con-
tinual correction of Divine Truth. Each successive
clause is therefore addressed to the intellect, for it is
through the intellect that truth must enter, whether to
correct sensuous fallacies and erroneous doctrines, or
to light up the path which the will must pursue in
order to attain the desired end.


The use of wisdom with God is to carry out the
purposes of His love. The use of intelligence to degene-
rate man is to correct and guide his infirm will; and,
therefore, in the earlier stages of regeneration, intellect
takes the lead of the affections. But when the will is
wholly regenerated, intellect is no longer wanted as a
leader, but only as a servant to carry out the dictates
of a divinely-animated will. Truth is the revelation
of the masculine side of the Divine Mind, and it
appeals to the masculine side of the mind of man.
In the section we have already considered each appeal
is made from the masculine side. We are to resist
not him that is evil ; turn our cheek to him who
smites ; give the cloak to the man who demands the
coat; go the mile with him; give to him that asks,
and lend to him that would borrow.
This form of address is not carried into the next
section. That section describes the further progress
of regenerate life, when good already predominates
over evil, and the disciple is accordingly led by the
affections. The struggle between what we would and
what we ought is drawing to a close, and the will
begins to act without restraint. Intellect, as we shall
see, has still its uses, but it takes the second, not the
primary position. It no longer commands, but obeys.
We have entered on this second stage just so far as
we have given to him that asks. The career hence-
forth is one of love, and accordingly to Love the
section we are about to consider appeals. It carries
us on from knowledge to the end of knowledge—an
efficient life of good affections ; for Truth, when put
to its highest uses, is but the agent of Love.
Ye have heard that it hath been said , Thou shalt


love thy neighbour and hate thine enemy. Spiritually,
our neighbour is one who, from similarity of dispo-
sition—mental nearness—leads a life in harmony with
our own. In the next life men are actually associated
in accordance to their affinities. Even in this life, so
far as external circumstances will permit, “ birds of a
feather flock together.” We have not only circles—
such as sporting circles, literary circles, fashionable
circles, and the like—but circles have their local
centres, from Doctors’ Commons to thieves’ quarters.
Under the rule of restraint and penalty—the old
time or dispensation—a neighbour, in the interior
sense, is any propensity or principle which inculcates
compliance with the divine injunction. Any principle
which incites rebellion against it is an alien, and to be
resisted as an enemy. Such are the enemies alluded
to in the apparently savage exclamation of the
Psalmist—“ Do not I hate them that hate Thee ?
I hate them with a perfect hatred. I count them
mine enemies.”
But I say unto you, Love your enemies , and pray for
them which persecute you ; that ye may be the children
of your Father which is in heaven. Under the
economy of a progressive spiritual life, where our
slowly yielding self-love is, step by step, overcome
and expelled by the opposing force of love, an
enemy is any principle which attacks our selfish pro-
clivities. Self-love, to the end of the conflict, meets
love as an enemy. There is a radical antipathy be-
tween the two, and only by the death of one can the
other obtain final ascendancy. They can never be
reconciled. They are the tivo masters who cannot be
served together. We must “ love the one and hate


the other, or else cleave to the one and despise the
other.” God’s war in the soul is a war of extermina-
tion. Till the last opposition, therefore, is removed,
our Deliverer is also an aggressor; our real friend an
apparent enemy. But as heavenly principles gain
ground they lose the guise of enemies, and finally are
acknowledged as desirable, loved as friends, and
hailed as deliverers. Then God is recognized as the
rightful ruler, and “the king comes into his own
again.” This appeal is to the affections ; it is sup-
plemented by one to the intellect.
Persecutors are those truths which harass and per-
plex our remaining false conceptions, our pet conceits
and prejudices. To pray for our persecutors is to
desire and seek those truths which correct our errors
and mortify our vanity. “My prayer shall be in
their calamities.”
If we have lent ourselves to the Lord we shall
enlist ourselves in His cause, go over to the camp
of the divine enemy. This done, all hostilities must
speedily cease, and we shall, in very deed, become
the children of our Father which is in heaven ; for His
life and image will be repeated in us, the life which
was the outcome of self-love having come to an
end.
Nor are the rebukes with which the Lord enforces
His heavenly argument the less divine in their origin
and purpose because they frequently reach us through
malignant agents. The recriminations of malice often
become, in His hands, more effective than would be
the solicitations of friendship. The temptations of
vice may, by exciting opposition, strengthen the
determinations of virtue. These also are enemies


which we must, by a right use of them, convert into
allies.
This passage is one of those in which the highest
sense comes to the surface. The divine end in the
conflict is to establish the rule of good, even with those
who resist it. Their welfare is as much desired by
God as is that of the good. If we love God we shall,
even in the ordinary and external sense, love our
enemies, and seek, as far as is possible, to benefit them.
To love God is to love all that He loves ; to love
Love and the ends of love.
For He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and the
good , and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust. By
entertaining, without enmity, heavenly principles
which rebuke us, we reflect the attitude which God
assumes with regard to ourselves. We meet Him face
to face, and give Him the opportunity He seeks. He
tolerates our antipathy; we must admit the justice of
His remonstrance. He makes His sun to shine upon
us who are evil in His true sight ; let us not turn our
backs on him who is an enemy in our false sight. It
must not be overlooked that the “ evil ” here spoken
of are the really evil—evil from the divine standpoint;
whereas the “enemy” just alluded to is not a real
enemy, but good appearing as an enemy from an
inverted human standpoint. This passage implies,
therefore, that the divine example is one of forgiveness
of real enmity, and that our response should be one
of fair dealing with an apparent enemy.
Men may blind themselves to the presence of God,
or turn His bounties to their own evil ends, but He
never withholds Himself from His creatures. His
love is a sun which never ceases to shine. Though


regarded very differently by the evil and the good,
being the rebuker of one and the friend of the other,
He rises impartially on both. He imparts to each
such life as they are capable of, and preserves it
intact. As the Regenerator He does not remove an
evil life except in proportion as it can be replaced by
a good. He does not destroy until He is prepared to
reconstruct. It is better that a man’s affections
should be devoted to unworthy objects than that he
should be deprived of the capacity of love itself. It
is better that his intellect should be occupied with the
wildest follies than that he should lose the power of
thought. Complete vacuity and insensibility would
be the extinction of the soul itself, and the end of
creation would be frustrated. Take away the soil
and the harvest would be impossible. The self-hood
of man is that soil. It is evil when seeking to be
dominant over its Maker, but good when subservient
to the ends for which it was created. In God’s hands
it becomes good. When detached from the rule of
heaven it is evil, and nothing but evil. God’s object
in subjugating a rebellious mind is not to destroy it,
but to lift it up into its proper use, and the enjoy-
ment of its highest felicities. This is the secret of
His long-suffering and unlimited toleration. We
may blaspheme Him and deny Him to His face in
the very courts of heaven if we will, and He does not
prevent us.
The warmth of His sun, the Divine Love, is not
withheld, therefore, even in the most degraded con-
dition ; but the human form which that love takes
depends on the mode of reception. In the inverted
and self-immolated soul it assumes the form of evil


lusts, and the isolated position of selfishness. And
this of divine permission—better an evil love than no
love at all.
Nor is the rain of heaven, which feeds the plants of
wisdom in a responsive and grateful intellect, for-
bidden to nourish the weeds which spring up in a
mind wrapped in the conceit that intelligence is self-
derived. When the time of harvest arrives the tares
can be separated from the corn and burnt. Better such
growth than a fatal vacuity. Better a false judgment,
an “ unjust ” mind, than no faculty of judgment at all.
During the progressive work of regeneration, there-
fore, there being a mixed state of “ evil ” and “ good ”
inclinations, and of “just” and “unjust” ideas, the
work of eradication is gradual, keeping pace only
with that of restoration. The strangers which possess
the Land of Promise are not to be killed off “ all at
once.” “ I will not drive them out before thee in one
year, lest the land become desolate and the beasts of
the field multiply against thee. By little and little I
will drive them out before thee, until thou be increased
and inherit the land.” By little and little also the
new life is implanted, as the soil is prepared for its
reception. “For precept must be upon precept,
precept upon precept ; line upon line, line upon line ;
here a little and there a little : for with stammering
lips and another tongue will I speak to this people.’’
Neither must the searcher after divine truth force
himself into a premature belief. Let him examine ?
understand, and be rationally satisfied : “ I will lay
in Zion for a foundation stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone, a sure foundation : he that believeth
shall not make hasted (Isa. xxviii. 16.)


Though concealed when to our advantage, God’s
sunshine will become visible wherever but the faintest
ray can be made a messenger of love. To one living
in a dark and filthy den of sensual delights, for
instance, but still with some sensibility to higher
emotions, the visitation of daylight, however obscured,
and the free breath of heaven, however imperfectly
inhaled, may invite him outward, and carry a remons-
trance so gentle as not to be altogether rejected.
Nay, through our worst abuses even, God can
insinuate, when the occasion is ripe, somewhat of
their heavenly contrasts. The profligate may, in his
illicit indulgence, be touched by some hint of a
purer love. The new-born babe of one who should
not be a mother may strike a chord which vibrates to
the music of heaven. By means of evils and fallacies,
yea, through agents opposed to Him, the future
Conqueror may hold the land in subjection until the
time arrives that He can take possession of it.
Therefore He makes His sun to shine on the evil and
the good , and sends His rain on the just and the unjust.
For if ye love them that love you , what reward have
ye? Do not even the publicans the same? We must
beware that we do not let the enemy recover his lost
ground. In the stage we have now arrived at, he
will endeavour to creep in under the guise of very
love. We must not be deluded into a self-righteous
and spurious virtue. A merely external conformity
with the laws of heaven may feed self-love itself,
and thus obstruct instead of promoting the divine
work. If we love virtue only because it favours us,
we should, for the same reason, love vice if it were
equally propitious to our ends. If Ido a kind act


merely to ingratiate myself in the good opinion of
my neighbour, to flatter my own self-esteem, or to
obtain some heavenly favour, I should with equal
complacency inflict a wrong if it suited my purpose.
Self-love is the motive in both cases. “Do not even
the publicans the same ?” Such deeds promote no
heavenly growth ; carry no reward.
This subject is carried, with a specific bearing, into
the next section of the discourse : Take heed that ye
do not your righteousness before men, to be seen of them;
else ye have no reward with your Father which is in
heaven. The merely external religionist reaps a
reward, it is true, but it is the reward of the ungodly.
The heavenly reward is of another kind. To those
who pursue virtue for its own sake it is its own
reward. Whoever performs a good act from the love
of good, increases his capacity for goodness ; and this
is the first and chief benefit he receives. As food,
properly assimilated, makes flesh, and as exercise
increases healthy appetite, so the soul acquires new
vigour by rightly applying the means and powers it
already possesses. Its daily food is the divine love,
the “ bread of heaven ; ” and in proportion as this is
applied to its proper end —a benevolent life—both
the appetite, the capacity, and the supply are in-
creased. In heavenly goods, the more we give the
more we possess ; for we possess only what we use.
Love is like the ancient manna ; it cannot be hoarded,
but grows stale and breeds worms if kept beyond its
day. But a heavenly life can spring only from a
heavenly seed. The motive must be drawn from
God if the action is to bear His impress and carry
His blessing.


And if ye salute your brethren only , what do ye more
than others ? Do not even the Gentiles the same ? The
same rule applied to intellect, which, in the preceding
clause, was applied to will. Brethren are those who
hold similar views to our own ; sisters those who
are in similar affections. Internally brethren are
congenial truths. If we entertain only such truths as
favour our own opinions, what progress can we make
in knowledge ? We shall embrace errors just as
zealously if they are equally flattering. We might as
well be Gentiles , or without any spiritual knowledge
whatever, as take disjointed fragments of truth and
wrest them into the service of our own conceits.
Though intellect now takes a subordinate position,
it is none the less an indispensable element in our
spiritual nature. As the will alone does not form a
complete mind, so the mere affection for good will not
produce a perfect character. Intelligence and know-
ledge will always be required to carry into effect a
good desire. It is possible even for the utmost
cruelties to be perpetrated with the most benevolent
intentions. Pious Catholics have burnt the mortal
bodies of heretics in order to save their immortal
•souls, and zealous Protestants have burnt pious
Catholics from motives equally commendable. “O,
foolish devotion!” cried John Huss, when, on his
way to the stake, he saw a peasant zealously carrying
the faggots which were to burn him.
Saluting our brethren only is as mischievous in
effect, and is of the same selfish origin, as loving those
only who love us. It really attributes intelligence to
self, and excludes God from the intellect exactly as
making ourselves the standard of righteousness,


or in other words, righteousness itself, excludes Him
from the affections. Driven home, they both mean
the worship of self.
This passage teaches us, further, that we are not to
be discouraged in our onward march because, from
time to time, we detect somewhat of self-love in our
virtues, somewhat of error in our doctrine. Such
discoveries are indeed proofs that we are making
progress, and are to be hailed as the “ smiting ” of a
friend and the assaults of a deliverer.
Nevertheless, we are not to sit down and be content
with a partial achievement. Every painful discovery
which the advancing invader discloses is a new
demand for self-sacrifice, and must act as a stimulus
to renewed effort and deeper self-examination.
Throughout the whole journey the goal is never to be
lost sight of. It must shine before our eyes, not as a
mere intellectual ideal, but as a visible and attainable
reality. The end of the war is to be a settled peace.
Every trouble is to lead up to a corresponding delight,
every loss to a more than compensating gain, and all
discords are to be resolved into a perfect and satisfy-
ing harmony.
Ye therefore shall be perfect as your heavenly Father
is perfect. The warfare is over. A fusion of interests,
and therefore a lasting peace, is established. God’s
six days of labour are over, and God’s day of
rest is entered upon. We are to be perfect as our
Father in heaven is perfect. It is to be God’s perfec-
tion, not our own. Apart from Him, we are essentially
and everlastingly imperfect. All attempts at perfec-
tion, according to our own idea and after our own
standard, must end, as they always have ended, in


failure and mortification. No perfection will stand a
trial but that of divinity brought down to man.
Have we lost ourself then ? No. We have found
our higher self. The lower self, even, was of God’s
making, and, though placed at our disposal, was never
really our own. The higher self, though seen to be
altogether a divine birth, is more truly our own than
was it. We have been, at all events, assenting parties
to its creation. In perfect freedom, in the full light
of intelligence, in the exercise of an untrammelled
reason, we have been induced so to dispose of the
selfhood which was entrusted to us as to allow the
end of the donor to be carried out. That end was to
be a higher self, of which the lower is the ground and
basis. To this extent the work has been a human—
our own —act, and will, therefore, not be repented of;
it is a divine act, and, therefore, cannot fail in its
issues. God the cause has become God in the effect.
The first has become the last. Divinity has ultimated
in the life and estate of man. Is our righteousness
less our own because it is divine ? What else
were we at any time but a means to an end which
was unseen and beyond ourselves ? Now that the
end is seen and is fulfilled in ourselves, are we more
or less possessors of whatever can be called our own ?
Being more men, we are more possessors than we were
before, although clearly seeing that, of ourselves
alone, we are less than nothing—a minus quantity as
to any real excellence —a resisting power. But it
is precisely because it is not our own that we can rely
on our God-like heritage as sure and eternal.
Can we relapse again ? Can we “fall ? ” Relapse ?
Our whole nature has gone into the new life. There


is nothing left which can relapse. Fall ?—There is
now a divine element in our constitution which can
no more fall in us than essential divinity can
degenerate in itself. We are a new being. The
divine nature, impinging on the human, has brought
to birth a new species. We are the children of God.
His nature, His life, His power, His felicity, shall—in
the created degree—henceforth be ours. He has
given Himself to us, and we have accepted Him.
Being a divine gift, it is also limitless. Progress
will more than ever be the law of our nature; but it
will be a progress without struggle and without
opposition, from perfection to perfection, as easy and
spontaneous as the growth of a tree in a congenial
soil and with the most favourable surroundings : an
ever growing divine affection, enlightened with an
ever wider and deeper insight into the glories of
creation. All nature and universal man will then
become a divine revelation. The Word of God will
no longer be regarded as the history of a single race,
or a particular epoch ; but it will be the same Word,
the utterance of the same Spirit, the unfolding of the
same Divine Humanity, which is, and which was, and
which is to come— The Almighty.




APPENDIX.
Eye: Tooth: Bone; Flesh.
That Eye refers to perception needs no demonstra-
tion ; but that Tooth also signifies perception, though
in a lower sense, is not so evident, and requires
some explanation.
The three kingdoms of nature —the mineral, the
vegetable, and the animal—ascending one above
another, the lower serving as a basis and continent for
the next above it, are repeated, with their mutual
relations, in the human frame. The Animal kingdom
is represented by the organs of emotion, thought and
volition ; that is, by the higher nervous system, the
voluntary muscles, and the heart and higher circulatory
system. The Vegetable kingdom is represented by
the organs of digestion, assimilation, and respiration,
with the nerves proper to them ; by the fatty padding
of the body ; by reproduction, and by the circulatory
system up to a certain point. The Mineral kingdom
is represented by the skeleton. We use that term in
its widest sense, including not only the osseous system,
but the entire mechanical framework of the body,
extending from the bones to the skin, encasing and
supporting all the organs and tissues. All parts of
this system are prone, under certain circumstances, to


assume more or less of an osseous composition,
especially those parts which enter into the construction
of the integument and the larger blood-vessels. Corns,
warts, and epithelial cancer are familiar instances of
this transformation.
We have also normal developments of skin into
tissues more or less approximating to bone. Such
are nails, hair, and teeth. In various lower animals
the outer skin assumes a yet more mineral and fixed
aspect, constituting hoofs, horns, feathers, scales, and
shells ; in the last instance becoming often an almost
purely mineral coat of mail, sometimes siliceous and
sometimes calcareous. Thus in the skeleton we have
represented the sandstone and limestone rocks of the
mineral world. Be the composition of this frame-
work, however, what it may, the analogy of office
remains the same. It is the support and continent of
the higher kingdoms. It so completely permeates
and encases the entire body, that were all the vital
organs and softer parts removed—the brain and
nerves, the viscera, the heart and blood-vessels, the
muscles and fat—it would still present, as to form
and contour, a perfect human frame. It would have
everything, to a hair, which makes up the frame
and outline of our body. Not only externally, but
internally also, the form would be complete ; for this
universal integument surrounds every organ and
tissue—yea, every smallest part of them ; every
nerve and tube of a nerve, every smallest ramification
of the blood-vessels, every muscle, every fasciculus of
a muscle, and every minutest fibre of every fasciculus;
nay, every individual globule of blood which flows
through our veins, every shred of the lining mem-


branes of the internal passages and glands, every cell
■of the brain and nervous centres, and every vesicle
of oil which goes to the making of the fatty tissue.
Each of these three systems or kingdoms within us
has its own degree of sense. The brain and higher
nervous system are the seat and channel of thought
and emotion. The nerves of the vegetable organs
are sensible to hunger and thirst, and to the yet
unnamed appetite for air, which is gratified by
breathing. The mineral department is vested with
the general sense of touch, and its various modi-
fications.
The outermost skin, with its continuations lining
the lungs and various internal passages, receives the
first impressions of external objects and transmits
them to the respective nerves beneath. This common
integument, when required to transmit impressions
of a special character to specially-endowed nerves,
becomes modified into the various external organs of
special sense, such as the external eye and ear, the
nostril, palate, and tongue. The general sense of
touch is, at the same time, correspondingly converted
into the special senses of sight, hearing, smell, and
taste. The brain is, as it were, carried to these
organs, and, in the form of special nerves of sense,
■constitutes their vital centre —the animal within a
mineral covering. Thus in the compound eye, ear,
or other organ of special sense, the inmost and the
outermost come into contact, forming a single, though
compound, agent for combined action. The same
relation exists between a vegetable nerve and its
vegetable organ.
But it must not be supposed that in any organ the


three kingdoms are absolutely separated, though one
or other predominates according to the office of the
part. Nutrition, for instance —a vegetable function—
is maintained in every part; nor is even a hair or a
nail entirely independent of the supreme centre of
animal life—the brain. The brain, in the body, holds
an analogous position to Deity in the universe; all
parts are equally dependent upon it, but the depend-
ence is not equally direct and apparent in all. The
same analogy also exists between Deity and different
degrees of intelligence in men. Some are sensible
of their dependence; and some are like trees and
stones, and, though dependent, do not recognize their
dependence.
But to return to the organs of special sense. In
order that any sense may be called into activity, both
parts —the external and the internal—of the organ
must do their respective work. The rays of light
may strike the eye, for instance, but if the brain be
asleep, or the optic nerve be paralyzed, sight will not
be the result ; and, again, though the brain be active,
it will receive no visual impression from the outer
world if the external parts of the eye be disqualified
to transmit the rays of light. Each perceptive organ
is thus endowed with a double sense, one residing in
the external or mineral, and the other in the internal
or animal part.
The mineral world —including earth, air, and water,
in all their forms —is, as we have seen, the basis and
continent of the vegetable and animal worlds. The
basis and continent of all our special senses is the
common sense of touch, of which the skin is the
common organ. Touch has been regarded from very


ancient times as the mineral sense. Galen and Aris-
totle, both following in the wake of Empedocles, and
quoting his verses, designate it as the “ most earthy ”
of our senses.*
We ordinarily speak of “ our five senses,” but
we are in fact endowed with a greater number.
Modifications of touch, each with a local seat, will
recur to the mind of the most superficial observer,
and need not be enumerated. Amongst these is
the sense vested in the teeth. Though of a low
and coarse character, it is still a special sense. If
touch be the earthy sense, the tooth is the point
where its earthiness becomes most eminently pro-
nounced. Though insensible to all the finer qualities
of matter, it is in its own line more discriminating
than any other variety of touch. This special sensi-
tiveness is so marked that the mere suggestion of
certain kinds of contact call it into play, and “ set the
teeth on edge.” Such, for instance, is the effect of
scraping on a slate or on a silken fabric, though the
direct impression produced does not really impinge
upon the nerve of the tooth at all, but upon that of
hearing, and is only reflected on to the seat of the
discomfort. It is especially to grit, and, in a less
degree, to acid, that the teeth are alive ; and by the
exercise of this instinct they guard the mouth against
the admission of substances which would be injurious
to more delicate, but, in this one particular, less
sensitive tissues. In some animals, as in the horse, for
instance, the teeth form a very important organ of
touch, and we ourselves use them to detect the quality
of coins and minerals.
* See Cudworth ; “ Intellectual System,” chap. v. sec. 2.


Our spiritual constitution is in every particular an-
alogous to our physical frame ; indeed, if it were
not so, the body would not fit the soul as an abode,,
nor meet its requirements as an instrument. The
soul, like the body, has its three planes or degrees
of life. The will and affections constitute its animal
world—its world of motives. The intellect, whether
cultivated or uncultivated, whether a garden or a
wilderness, is its vegetable world. The outer sensuous
frame—for spirit has form and substance not less than
matter —by means of which it ultimates in permanent
and irrevocable acts, is its mineral world. Thus the
highest kingdom of our spiritual nature —the will—
operates through the middle —the understanding—
and finds stability and fixation in the lowest. The
lowest is the world of visible effects; the middle is
the world of thought and active forces; the highest
is the world of motives and desires.
As in our physical, so in our spiritual nature, each
one of these three kingdoms has its proper sphere of
action and its own degree of sense. Each, therefore,
has its own perception, suited to its own range of
objects. A whole man lives in all three planes
of his spirit, making the lower serve the higher.
Such a man is equally in the exercise of moral
perceptions, of rational perceptions, and of sensuous
perceptions. A man who does not ascend above his
intellectual life, however gifted, only vegetates com-
pared with one who is primarily actuated by motives
of love. One who lives in his external senses only,
petrifies. He is, by comparison with the others, a dead
man, and is so designated in the Scriptures.
The special senses proper to the will are seated in


the organs devoted to the fulfilment of volition and
the affections. Of these the muscular system, “ flesh,”
is the only one which claims our attention at present.
Muscle is not endowed with any external sense, being
the ultimate servant of the secret purposes of the
will —the most interior of all principles. But muscle
has a sense and an appetite of its own. Let loose
into an open pasture a young colt, or full-blooded
hunter, or even an old cab-horse which has been
long cooped up in a stable, and he will soon show
you what is the appetite of muscle, and how it is
gratified.
The special perceptive faculties of intellect are
endowed with external organs, whose seat is in the
head, in close proximity to the brain, the centre of
intelligence. Of these the highest in external position,
and the most distinguished in its numerous and im-
portant internal connections with the brain, is the
Eye. Of the nine pairs of nerves which issue from
the brain not less than four are distributed exclusively
to the eye and its appendages, while three other
pairs contribute branches to it: seven pairs out of
nine devoted more or less to the organ of sight.
There is but one other organ of special sense which is
honoured by a pair of cranial nerves exclusively its
own —that of Smell. The nerve of this sense, though
not vested with the external dignities and compli-
ments of that of sight, takes precedence of it, and
indeed of all others, within the skull. It is, as it were,
the firstborn of the king, having the foremost position
as to issue from the brain-substance itself. Though
less active and of less official importance than the
nerve of sight, it enjoys a certain preference —more,


however, within the palace than in matters of public
state. The secret of this preference is that it is not
a male child. Smell is a sense as much of the
affections as of the intellect; or even more so. In
the lower animals, where instinct is paramount, this
relationship is more marked than in man ; but even
with ourselves the earliest, the most clinging and
interior recollections are connected with odours.
Scents carry us back to times when we had not begun
to think, when we only felt. They are redolent of
infancy and innocence.
“ The smell of violets, hidden in the green,
Poured back into my empty soul and frame
The times when I remember to have been
Joyful and free from blame.”
If the eye is the index of intelligence, the nose is
that of will. Imagine a Caesar, a Wellington, or a
Napier with a flat nose ! A noseless face is a weak
face, as an eyeless face is a dull one. The nose,
although the least demonstrative of all the organs of
expression, is also the least under control. Without
any show of rule, it quietly has its way. A man may
disregard his eyes, but, steer as he will, he is bound
“ to follow his nose.”
But as an organ of perception, both as to activity
and importance, the eye is undoubtedly without com-
peer. The tooth, on the other hand, the dullest and
least vital, the lowest in external position and the
last in its nervous connection with the brain, stands
at the opposite end of the scale. The eye, therefore,
represents perception in its highest phase—the
spiritual ; the tooth in its lowest—the sensuous. The


eye, itself shining like a star, takes cognizance of the
light of heaven ; the tooth, a mineral organ, confines
its observations to grit and metal.
Tooth is bone brought, as it were, to the surface.
It is ossified skin vested with the bone degree of touch.
The inner structure is ossified dermis; the outer
structure —the enamel—is ossified epidermis. Tooth,
like eye, signifies intelligence ; but it is the intelligence
of the sensuous mind only, and does not, therefore,
rise above sensuous objects and their impressions.
It is the mineral sense, the sense of the lowest, or
bone-man.
A man living in this degree of his mind only will
judge all things by his own corporeal standard. He
sees with his teeth. His philosophy will be utilitarian
and materialistic. If not physically disposed to
sensuality, he may escape the grosser vices ; but he
will none the less exalt bodily comfort to the highest
place in his estimation, and slight, if not ignore, the
superior claims of spirituality and virtue ; for to these
qualities he is stone- blind. He lives in ultimates
only ; thinks in ultimates ; believes in ultimates. His
religion, if he have any, will be ritualistic. He will
trust in external observances, irrespective of their
symbolic significance ; in deeds of visible conformity
to established ecclesiastical rules, irrespective of
motives.
Intermediate between the world of ultimates
and that of moral motives is the intellect. The
intellectual man looks from a standpoint higher than
that of corporeal sense. He sees with his eyes.
Nevertheless, unless the intellect be permeated and
exalted by the higher—the moral sense —its vision


does not rise above the vegetable degree, and con-
sequently does not recognize the highest qualities
and uses of things. The intellectual man will estimate
objects by their artistic and philosophic value ; will
judge men by their intellectual acquirements and
powers. He perceives spiritual truths, but is blind to
the beauty of love. His religion, if he have any, will
be one of doctrines and sentiment.
The highest degree of vision is attained only by
him who makes intellect the servant of heavenly affec-
tions. He sees men and women and all things as
agents in the hands of a beneficent Life-giver for the
uses and delights of love. His religion is a life of
active benevolence, executed with intelligence, and
prompted by love. His nature is complete from top
to bottom. His will has the spontaneous and sportive
gentleness of the lamb ; his intellect blossoms into
beauty and fragrance; his acts need no recasting ;
they are stable as adamant.
These three degrees of perception are represented
by the stages through which the blind man passed
whose eyes were gradually opened by the Lord.
The first or mineral degree was the state of blindness
in which he was found by Christ. It represents sen-
suousness in perception ; materialism in philosophy ;
formalism in religion. The life-giving touch of Christ
awakens in him perception in the second degree, and
straightway, on looking up, he beholds men as trees
walking. His eyes being touched again, his highest
sense is quickened, and, again looking up, “he sees
all men clearly .” Observing things from the highest
standpoint, he not only takes in the whole, but sees
correctly the relative grade and position of parts.


To discriminate between the different degrees of in-
telligence is to “ see all vien clearly.”
This threefold quality of sight and the corre-
sponding threefold aspect of truth are everywhere
recognized and frequently alluded to in the Sacred
Writings. Truth in the natural degree is represented
by the mineral fluid, water. Truth spiritual is repre-
sented by the juice of the grape. Truth appropriated
by love and applied to the uses of a heavenly life is
represented by the animal fluid, blood. Again,
Christ, representing the Divine Word as adapted to
the requirements of every degree of intelligence—the
mineral, the vegetable, and the animal —calls Himself,
on one occasion, a fountain of zvater , on another a
vine, and on a third declares that unless we drink His
blood we have no life in us.
Men who deny everything above the sensuous plane
of nature are described as dead effigies of men only,
having organs without sense or life—hands that
handle not, feet that walk not, noses that smell not,
ears that hear not, eyes that see not ; and as making
images, lifeless like themselves, and worshipping
them : stocks and stones.
People in whom all religious life and spiritual
perceptions have been extinguished are described as
skeletons ; bones without flesh or life. Such was the
state of the Israelitish church, sunk in sensuality and
a dead formalism, as represented in the vision of dry
bones seen by Ezekiel. Such, in any age, are religious
pretensions and forms without the life of love,
“ which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are
full of dead mens bones." Bone is very good in its
place, but bone alone subserves no use.


The signification of different bones varies according
to their position, relations, structure, and uses. The
same bone will also carry various meanings according
to the quality of the series in which it occurs. More
interior bones refer to less superficial sensuous phases
than do more exterior ; or they may refer also to
sensuous affections as compared with sensuous truths.
Thus the jaw-bone, so often mentioned in Scripture,
according to its associations, may refer to sensuous
perceptions a little removed above those represented
by teeth ; or it may signify those sensuous affections,
evil or good, as the case may be, out of which the
truths or errors represented by the teeth take their
rise.
Bone reigns undisputed in its own kingdom, but
bone invading higher realms is destructive of all life.
Boniness of various internal organs represents the
sensuous subversion of the higher affections. This
condition is frequently alluded to in the sacred Scrip-
tures, especially as affecting the heart. That organ
has the highest signification which anywhere attaches
to flesh. Being a muscle which acts spontaneously,
without any suggestion from the intellect, and alto-
gether beyond its control, it represents love itself.
In the highest sense it is Will animated by divine
love. When the lowest nature usurps the rule, love
is driven from her throne, and the heart is said to be
.turned to stone. The mineral encroaches on the
animal.
This is no mere figure of speech, but, like all
Scriptural emblems, is an analogy growing out of the
very nature of things. In our declining years, in
proportion as we physically recede from a fully pro-


nounced vitality, our bodily organization loses the
higher stamp of animality. Life retires, and its seat
is filled by invading mineral deposits. As a tree
turns to grit, so we, with age, turn to stone. Could
life be indefinitely prolonged under such circumstances,
our very hearts would turn to stone. To this, indeed,
we all tend so soon as we pass the prime of life. Our
flesh not only dwindles, but it begins to ossify.
Stoniness of heart is a frequent cause of death with
the aged.
Spiritual ossification has a like origin. Love, which
is the fire of life, is allowed to burn down, and the
lower nature invades and deposes the higher.
But the soul, which is destined to live for ever, is
capable of resuscitation under conditions which would
be fatal to the body. Though we be reduced to the
lowest plane of life, fidelity to truth on that plane
may be made a fulcrum upon which we can be lifted
to a higher, and again from that to the highest. In
that case a man is said, in the language of cor-
respondence (Job xix. 20), to be saved by the skin of
his teeth. Corrected through his understanding, his
deeper nature is by-and-bye subjected to the softening
influences of love. Our heart of stone , we are
promised, shall be taken away, and we shall be given
a heart of flesh.
The bones, like those of Ezekiel’s vision, may be
scattered and “ very dry”—devoid of truths ; but,
touched by the life-giving breath of God, they will
“ come together,” and resume their places and uses in
the living body of restored Israel—the God-directed
mind. “O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.
Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones : Behold,


I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall
live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring
flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put
breath in you, and ye shall live : and ye shall know
that I am the Lord.”
We will here append a few illustrations, selected
from a great number equally applicable, to the sym-
bolism of teeth and bone as used in the Sacred
Writings.
Gnashing of teeth. The angry collision of sen-
suous fallacies grounded in self-love and supporting
conflicting interests and ambitions.
Prophets that make my people to err , that bite with
their teeth. (Micah iii. 5.) Erroneous teachings as
to spiritual things by falsification or misapplication
of sensuous facts.
The zvicked plotteth against the just , and gnasheth
upon him with his teeth. (Psalm xxxvii. 12.) The
■enmity of evil against truth. Opposition by means of
sensuous fallacies.
My sold is among lions zvhose teeth are as spears
and arrows , and the tongue of a sharp sword. (Psalm
Ivii. 4.) The power of domineering lusts (lions)
through sensuous falsifications and subtle sophis-
tries.
“He teareth me in his zvrath , zvho hateth me; he
gnasheth upon me with his teeth ; mine enemy sharpeneth
.his eyes upon meP (Job xvi. 9.) Evil, at enmity
with heavenly truth, endeavours to destroy it by
sensuous fallacies and spiritual perversions.
“All my inward friends abhorred me: my BONE
deaveth to my SKIN and my FLESH, and I am escaped
zvith the SKIN OF MY TEETH.” (Job xix. 19, 20.)


My interior affections and divinely implanted instincts
of good (inward friends) are violated by errors
adopted in ignorance. Sensuous fallacies cause the
lower nature (bone) to invade the higher, and render
good affections (flesh) powerless. Shut off from the
higher intelligence, though driven down even into
materialism, fidelity to such truth as is perceptible to
the lowest degree of understanding becomes the
means of emancipating the mind from the thraldom
of error. The skin or clothing of the teeth signifies
knowledges on the sensuous plane. The absence of
such knowledges is called, in another place, “ cleanness
of teeth,” and is associated with want of bread and
withholding of rain— the absence of heavenly goodness
and heavenly truth. (Amos iv. 6,7.)
“ Blessed be fehovah , who hath not given me as a
prey unto their teethl' (Psalm cxxiv. 6.) Salvation
from sensuous fallacies by the divine power of truth.
“ Break their teeth , O God, in their mouth; break
out the great teeth of the yoimg lions'.' (Psalm Iviii. 6.)
Confute sensuous fallacies (teeth), however potent
and imperious (young lions) in their own utterance
(in their mouth). A similar sentiment is thus
expressed in another Psalm —“ They flatter with
their tongue. Destroy thou them, O God ; let them
fall by their own counsels.”
** O my Gody fov Thou heist smitten mine
enemies upon the cheek bone; Thou hast broken the teeth
of the ungodly'.' (Psalm iii. 7-) The grosser and
more manifestly ungodly evils and falsehoods having
been overcome, prayer is made for Divine aid against
more subtle and powerful enemies which now threaten
the soul, but which the very fight it has already gone


through has strengthened it to meet. These later
foes are not always avowedly amongst the ungodly,
but often assume the guise and name of religion.
Such are spiritual pride, uncharity for the failings of
others, sectarian bigotry, fanaticism, love of spiritual
rule, and the like. The short psalm in which this
passage occurs opens with—“ Lord, how are they
increased which trouble me! many are they that rise
up against me!” and proceeds to declare—“l will
not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have
set themselves against me round about.” The power
which broke the jaw of the enemy will be sufficient
for his backbone.
“ The wicked shall see it and be grieved; he shall
gnash with his teeth!' (Psalm cxii. 10.) The discom-
fiture of evil at the triumph of love, and its blind
abuse of divine truth from a sensuous standpoint.
“ A nation is come up upon my land, strong and
without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and
he hath the cheekbone of a great lion. He hath laid
my vine waste and barked my fig tree!' (Joel i. 6,7.)
The extreme devastations of evil lusts in the Church
through the power of sensuous and supersensuous
falsehoods, destroying the perception of both spiritual
(vine) and natural truth (bark of fig tree). To explain
the particulars of this passage would lead us too far
away from our present argument.
“ Behold another beast, like unto a bear ; and it had
three ribs in the mouth of it, between the teeth of it;
and they said unto it, Arise, devour much flesh."
(Daniel vii. 5.) Every animal represents some love
or passion in man. The bear —for reasons which we
cannot here stop to consider —is used in the Scriptures


to represent that passion for literalism which becomes,
in the uncharitable, an obstinate and surly tenacity
for the letter of the Word, while the spirit is habitually
violated—becoming often a ruthless misapplication of
Scripture, crushing all hope, and imputing injustice
and cruelty even to God.
Ribs, which are the support, continent and defence
of the vital organs of the chest, represent the literal
or sensuous sense of the Divine Word. The three
ribs in the teeth of the bear are the literal sense of
the Word as to its threefold applicability to the Will,
the Understanding, and the Life. By violating and
misconstruing the letter of Scripture, its threefold
use is destroyed; especially by dragging down
spiritual truths to a merely literal or materialistic
reading. As a bear crunches up bones and tears
flesh into fragments, so the coherence and harmony
of the sacred writings are destroyed by ignoring the
spiritual and divine sense ; for in the spirit and
intent, and not in the letter without these, lies its
unity, power and life. “ The letter killeth, the spirit
giveth life.” “The words that I speak unto you,”
says the Saviour, “ they are spirit and they are
life.”
The inmost organ of the chest is the heart.
Surrounding the heart are the lungs. It is by means
of the lungs that the blood supplied by the heart is
made fit for the uses of the body; and by which also
its circulation is maintained. Stop the breath, and
the blood loses its vivifying power and the heart
ceases to beat. The inmost of the Divine Word, the
end and purpose of revelation, is the Love of God ,
represented by the heart; but it is by His Wisdom
5


that God is able to adapt Himself to the require-
ments of His children, and circulate appropriately
heavenly truth (blood) to each that He can speak to-
ns, breathe His spirit, and bestow all His manifold
benefits upon us. The Divine wisdom, therefore,
which is subordinate to the Divine love, external to
the heart, and thus a “mediator” between that organ
and its distant dependencies, is represented by the
lungs. If the letter of the Word be violated, if its
ribs be crushed in the teeth of sensuous interpreta-
tions, its wisdom is stultified, its end is frustrated,
¥ .
and the spiritual life of the body is damaged: much
flesh is devoured.
When we consider the revolutions through which
religious opinion has passed, the unscrupulousness of
dogmatists and enthusiasts, and the unintelligibility
of so much of the Bible, the Providence which has
guarded over the mere letter of the Book strikes us
as amazing. But when we realize the importance of
the issues at stake, the surprise gives place to more
grateful emotions. No greater calamity could befall
mankind than the corruption of the text of Scripture;
for though the letter is dead without the spirit, the
spirit is impotent without the letter, and practically
nowhere. It was typical of the sanctity of the letter
of the Word that though the side of Christ, the
Incarnate Word, was pierced, and water and blood
flowed from it, despite the Roman law and custom,
not a bone of Him was permitted to be broken.
Age after age men have murdered the Word—they
have spilt its life-blood and its pellucid and purifying
truths ; but its bones, its literal expression, remain.
The letter is to the spirit what the body is to the


soul. In it it ultimates and finds its final expression
and its seat of power. It is also what the skeleton is
to the body; what the mineral rock and basal earth
are to the higher forms of life which they support
and surround, and to which they impart grit and
stability. If the letter were destroyed or seriously
disarranged, the Divine Wisdom would have no-
certain utterance, no fixed form. In the letter it has-
rest and an inviolate medium. The letter is the
basis, the continent and protection of the spiritual
and divine life within. Where it is beyond our
present knowledge it may be a puzzle—must be so ;
but there it is. Its time will come: it can await our
ability.
The same law of interpretation which we have in
this essay applied in certain instances to tooth,
bone, rib, &c., would explain any passage in the
sacred writings where those terms occur, bringing
it into harmony with the entire Scripture, however
incongruous or extravagant it might appear at first
sight ; such, for instance, as the story of Samson
slaying a thousand Philistines with the jawbone of
an ass, or the allegory of Eve being made from a rib
of Adam; but, to pursue this subject*further would
swell this note beyond due proportion.
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.










