

THE BALANCE
HELD BETWEEN THE
CATHOLICS AND DISSENTERS;
OR,
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE EVILS
TO WHICH
THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF THIS KINGDOM IS EXPOSE*
JROM ITS VARIOUS OPPONENTS,
JOHN RIPPINGHAM.
BwiAqu' syu haov croov » a v o\etT6ai.
n. i. no.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR GALE, CURTIS, AND FENNER,
PATERNOSTER-ROW-
-1813.
W. Flint, Printer, Old liailey, London.


TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE
THE EARL OF LIVERPOOL.
My Lord,
Dedications are em-
ployed as testimonies of individual
respect, or as introductions to pub-
lic notice. This humble offering
I shall be correct in attributing, to
the equal influence of these two mo-
tives.
But the feelings of respect, which
I thus acknowledge, forbid me to
enumerate the virtues by which
you have acquired general esteem,
and to expatiate on the talents by


which you have gained extensive
admiration. I feel a pride in being
amongst those, who are emulous of
testifying their regard; and in this
dedication, I pursue the dictates of
conscientious preference.
If there be nnseeming presump-
tion, in addressing this little volume
to your lordship, I should hope that
my arrogance would obtain some
extenuation, from the importance
of the subject to which I entreat
your attention. It is unnecessary
to urge to you, how forcibly the
condition of our established church
appeals to public and individual so-
licitude.
For centuries past, Religion has


been considered by the European
governments as an object of state
policy. It has been pressed into
the service, even of licentious wars,
and made the pretext of internal
discord. Civil commotions can
scarcely hope to succeed, without
religious scepticism ; and Te Deum
is celebrated, in the triumphs of
sanguinary oppression.
dim
Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facia.
Lucretius.
For the safety, as well as for the
happiness qf a people, this power-
ful engine, if it had no quality more
endearing and respectable, should
be most carefully protected. The
prudence* therefore of a British go-
* Nullum numen abest, si sit prudeatia.
Juvenal.


vernment, can never be more use-
fully exercised, than in cherishing
a just concern for the national
church.—The necessity of an es-
tablished form of worship, is an
opinion which has been inculcated
by eminent authority: and the im-
practicability of destroying the
church of England without paraliz-
ing the government, I hope will
never be ascertained by experience.
The peculiar character of the
times, has so frequently been offered
in apology for the effusions of ig-
norance and folly, that I am almost
ashamed of turning thither for an
observation. Yet surely it is not
extravagant to believe, that the
events of our day have a solemn as-
pect. The continent of Europe


has undergone a change, which in
its extent, its circumstances, and
rapidity, will scarcely be credited
by succeeding ages. All has, how-
ever, been accomplished by one
man! But although I believe that
the intellectual and acquired skill of
this stupendous chieftain, will stand
upon the page of history, without
a parallel; yet I look upon him,
only as an engine of great powers,
acting by the guidance of unseen
wisdom. What final result will at-
tend this extraordinary vicissitude, it
is not forhuman reason to develope :
it is for us to see and to adore.
From the wide-spread devasta-
tion, our favored isle has been ex-
empted. Let not arrogance assert
that the strength of our arms, or the


wisdom of our rulers have given
us the shield. In the courage of
Nelson, and in the genius of Pitt 9
in all the bravery and wisdom of
England, we find only men whom
providence has given us; whose ex-
istence is measured, and whose
death is certain.
It is not the dread of imaginary
danger, but just prudence, which
should admonish us, that the ener-
gies, under which Europe now lies
prostrate, are unceasingly employed
to effect the destruction of Great
Britain.
That we may be secure let us be
undivided ;* above all things, let
us be unanimous in religion. There
* Concordia res parse crescunt, discordia raaximse d.la-
buntur. Sallust,


no country, in which it is so
absolutely necessary as in England,
for here the church and state must
be of equal duration. And yet, if
I mistake not, there is a power
growing up amongst us, which is
ajready formidable, but which will
sooßj if not corrected, be too great
to be overcome. You, my Lord,
will not think it an illiberal or in-
tolerant spirit which calls upon the
country to decide upon compara-
tive dangers ; nor will you think it
of fanaticism, that
we can hope &r preservation, only
from the favor of God. Religious
discord, is the harbinger of many
nf the vices which incur Almighty
vengeiance ; and this evil disposition
m increase amongst us, if some


judicious remedy be not soon em-
ployed.
Upon the merit, if there be any
which belongs to this publication,
it does not become me to decide.
To the opinions of others, I am
ready to pay due respect; and if
critics honor it with notice, I shall
not -disregard their suggestions.
As the voluntary guards of religion,
morality and literature, are profess-
edly gentlemen and scholars; to the
judgment of such men, I cannot
declare mvself insensible.
This little book has been written,
indeed, under circumstances of
anxiety, and depression, sufficiently
severe to obtain excuse* for the


occasional want of harmony, and
elegance of diction. Conscious rec-
titude, will however afford me con-
siderable satisfaction, in the motive
under which these considerations
have been written ; and if they ob-
tain your lordship’s approbation, I
shall not feel myself insufficiently
rewarded.
I have the honor to be,
My* Lord,
With great respect,
Your lordship’s most obedient
servant,
J. RIPPINGHAM.


CATHOLICS AND DISSENTERS
CONSIDERED.
IF it be true that the interests of our
C hutch and State are inseparably inter-
woven; it cannot be improper or in-
dedOrous to urge these considerations in
which the security of either establish**
ment is involved or affected.
drie of the views, and a very
if&pDrtaxit one, in which our anxiety
vegardsthe present advances of the Ca-
tholics and Dissenters ; and dictates the
(hidings of those, who adhering to the
Established Church, are alarmed either
by. the requests of one party, or the ap-
proaches of the other;


It is perhaps just that these apprehen-
sions should be entertained, to a mode-
rate extent: inasmuch as some points of
difference between the Church and each
of its opponents* affect the connection by
which the Church and State are insepa-
rably interwoven.
Be it therefore the object of these
pages to ascertain, whether from the Ca-
tholics or Dissenters, there are the
stronger reasons for dreading innovation ;
and thus regulate the fears which are
felt for the safety of our established
religion.
That the mild and pure system of our
reformed Christianity, should, in this ma-
turity of reason, require protection, may
seem extraordinary to those who observe
only the appearances of human action ;
but to those who attentively consider the
secret principles by which the conduct
of mankind is regulated, it will not seem,
either new or surprizing* that the Cat ho-


lies and Dissenters should strive to in-
vade the sanctuary of our religion
The fond attachment, which exists to-
ward the institutions and manners of
forefathers, will plead an extenuation
for the Catholics of our day: nor will
they receive the severe* bensurC of liberal
minds ; fidelity to the fbririciples, hay-
even to the errors, which have obtained
the sanction of a long series of ages, al-
though it may obtain only pity, never-
theless deserves admiration.
If the Dissenters obtain commenda-
tion, it is from different considerations:
the-eafhest zeal with which they seek to
disseminate their tenets, may Obtain the
praise of having faithfully promoted the
cause which they have espoused. It
would indeed be arrogant to inquire into
the sincerity of any religious sect; and
* Dociles, imltandis
Turpibus ac pravi* oranes sumus.-—-
Juvenal.


the Dissenters, in all their varied cha-
racters, have the right to be credited, for
the rectitude of their intentions.
There is, however, this great distinc-
tion between the Catholics and Dissen-
ters: the former are the remnant of a
religious establishment, now no more;
the latter are the professors of a new and
rising system, which the accession of
every day strengthens and increases*.
The object of the Catholics, is to be
permitted without penalty, to pursue
the religion of their ancestors* The ob-
jects of the Dissenters, are, to cultivate
new tenets, and raise a new fabric of
hierarchy.
The means employed by the former
are public petition and remonstrance.
The instruments of the latter, are private
intercourse with mankind, the novelty
* Mobiljtate viget, virseque acquirit enndo.
Virgin.


of popular doctrines, and all the persua-
sives of zealous enthusiasm
But it is to the motives by which they
are both influenced, that their disinclina-
tion toward the established Church may-
be attributed: and it can no longer
remain a subject of astonishment, that
the purity of out nktional religion should
experience hostility, when thb opposing
parties act under such powerful feel-
ings.
It is, however, necessary to control
the undue influence of either: and to
repel every attempt, that can affect the
security and dignity of the Church of
England.
Toleration is a most respectable fea-
ture in any government; it engages the
confidence of all parties, and bears testi-
mony to the dignified security of the
ruling power; but even this principle
may be carried too far, and then it be-


comes the characteristic of imbecility or
imprudence*.
That every man should be permitted
to enjoy and to cultivate his opinion,
upon all the important concerns of so-
ciety, is equally just and reasonable; but
that numerous associated bodies, should
be permitted, not only to pursue doc-
trines, which are contrary to those of the
established religion ; but that they should
be regarded with indifference, in their
endeavours to apostacise the nation, is a
principle, not only dangerous, but ab-
surd.
It has been charged upon the Catho-
lics, that they seek proselytes with great
fervor. Even if this be true, which many
are inclined to doubt, it is of trifling im-
portance. Observation will enable us to
judge, how few have been, and how few
* Avfyuy yap auQpovuv ptv sri, si fw ria-ifxa£siv
eayaOuv $s adiuovftevovs, sh f/,sv stpwvs noMpsiv, su 9t MOtrxfiv m
rtoxtfjiou crvp&rivM. Thucydides.


will be converts to a system, which is
smiled at by the learned, and detested by
the ignorant of this country. Surely the
Catholics are mot more zealous at this
period, than they have been ever since
the reformation ; nor have they greater
hopes at this, than at any former time of
restoring popery in England; Notwith-
standing alltheir exertions during three
hundred years, ; they are reduced - from
undivided popularity to their present
limited numbers. Their places of public
worship in this metropolis, are by no
means numerous ; and there is very little
said about enlarging or increasing them*-
* The Catholics have established schools for educating
and ,clothing;the poor children of that persuasion ; and
has us beiugli ‘temptsition to
the Protestants, who, it is said, may if they please send their
children also. But why should poor people send their chil-
dren to Catholic schools, when they may with equal facility
send them to Protestant establishments ? The illiberality
and cruelty of torturing the exercise of bcnsvDicnce into an
insidious action, is too shameful to obtain encouragesar.L
The Sunday Schools and oths* institute fins of than
seem in no wise to be less exceptionable.


With the Dissenters, it is strictly the
reverse*: they not only endeavour to in-
crease their numbers, but their endea-
vours are successful. Their zeal im-
proves as they advance; and eveiy
accession they obtain, increases their fer-
vor as well as their community. These
rapid contributions teach them to cherish
new and greater expectations: at one
time they were known only as imitators
of the presbytery in Scotland ; now they
are striving for universal suffrage. The
little cloud which appeared in the hori-
zon, swells, as it approximates the zenith,
and threatens to obscure the regent light.
Their conventicles, which are already
to be found in every village, and swarm
in the streets of every town, are daily
multiplying: nor is there any trade or
* ’Hwte the a eiat f/.s>i<raauv atitvauv,
IlfTpi{ vc yotQvpve nv vtov tfxojtivauv,
Borpudov 3« Tcnovrai «■»* avGtaiv ziapivoiaiv,
Ai (asu T*tvQa, fats irencrmrat, at h tz tvSa.
n. 2.


profession which has not furnished minis-
ters for religious methodism.
But it is an untenable position, that
the swelling magnitude of Methodism
affords conviction of its superior excel-
lence*. It is not for the voice of an un-
enlightened multitude, to decide upon
the comparative merits of theological in-
stitutions. In due season, this idea shall
be refuted, and rational grounds shall be
-assigned for the extraordinary progress
of the Dissenters ; but it is the more
immediate object of attention, as it is
the more particular design of this inquiry,
to determine from which of the two par-
ties, the established Church of England
Has the greater reason for apprehending
danger.
There are but two methods, by which
* Velut silvis übi passim
Palautes error certo de tramite pellit,
Ille sinistcorsum, hie dextrorsum abit; unus utrique.
Error, sed variis illudit partibua.——
Horace.


human intentions can hope to be
realized power and ingenuity. If the
strength of any body of people consist
in zeal and numbers, the power of the
Dissenters is far superior to that of the
Catholics, and those who profess to be
alarmed by the subtlety of the Papists,
forget that they are the people on whom
that cunning must be successfully ex-
ercised before it can avail its employers.
The people of England have a rooted
abhorrence to popery, which not only is
by far too deeply fixed to be removed,
but has often led its possessors into ridi-
culous and dangerous errors. How great
must have been the infatuation of our
countrymen, when, without evidence or
authority, they inscribed on the monu-
mental column of the fire of London that
tfie .conflagration it perpetuates was ef-
fected by the malice of popish incen-
diaries*.
* Where London’s column pointing to the skies.
Like a tall bully, lifts the head, and Her.
Pope,


It lias been urged against the Catho-
lics, that persecution is; the marked fea-
ture of their conducts Unfortunately the
Catholics of our day are judged of by
those who lived in the times of ig-
norance and superstition. To defend the
inquisition, to vindicate their notions of
heresy, or to justify their, anathemas,,
would be equally, unnecessary and im-;
practicable. Those features of intoler-;
ance were the offspring of that baneful
spirit, which will ever exist where know-
ledge is limited and rare. It was in those
ages that the discoveries of the illustrious
Galileo incurred the terxorsoftheChurch;
and that printing was sunoosed to have
* “ It i§ greatly to be lamented that the clergy in most
ages bf the trHristlan church have been very generally un-
friendly to toleration ; and that they should have been in-
struments of calling for or stirring up of the civil power to
persecution. This spirit however has not been confined to
ministers oflhe establishment; Jews, Heathens and Maho-
metans, Presbyteriatis, Independents and Baptists, have all
in their turn, when the power, hap come into their hands*
been guilty of the same intolerant conduct.” Simpson’S
Plea for Religion, &c, page 207.


been the work of the devil: it was not
only in religion, but in every institution,
and oh every occasion, that ignorance
«/ ' o
palpable, and its concomitants, op-
pression and cruelty, wereinconsideratety
arid indiscriminately employed : the most
vile turpitude might, in those times, have
obtained sanction; and even acknow-
ledged crimes could have been expiated
by money. From the recollection of
srich scenes, humanity recoils : and even
the majesty of reason is humbled by the
degrading retrospect.
But ir there should be found an in-
stance of persecution or intolerance, in
this improved age, it could not be thus
defended: the ignorance of barbarous
times could hot be urged in defence or
palliation of any cruel or unjust aggres-
sions of this period: yet even so late as
the year 1780 this metropolis was endan-
gered by a mob of fanatics, as furious as
ever polluted the world: these were not
Catholics ; these were not the incendiaries


of popery: no! they were enthusiasts,
who up the war-whoop of “no popery ”
to inflame the senseless zeal of a rabble; ;
They invaded and destroyed r,nc ,pm
vate dwellings of peaceful individuals ;
jthey ; trampled on the laws and on yle-
cency, and defed every controul of hur
inanity ?and f efigiom - ; Thfo to£qay>, pi
those disgusting scenes is written, in the
memory of thousands, who are still; in
existence ; and it will be recollected that
on that occasion, the Catholics were pe-
titioners tq the legislature for that, which
they believed to be their right. The
appeared as an infuriated
mob* threatening vengeauee to the pmr
liameut ti they not only menaced jthe
peace of the; country, but they accom-
plished acts of violence, no less scandal-
ous than unmeaning. The Catholics,
against whom: their indignation, was d|*
rected*, were the patient unresisting
* ** Several chapels have been destroyed, and several inof-
fensive papists have been plundered.’' Dr. Johnson's letter
to Mrs. Thrale, June 10th, 1780.


sufferers in those outrageous practices ;
nor was there an instance, in which any
attempt was made on their part, to in-
crease the horrors of the scene by illegal
though provoked retaliation.
In the portentous season of the French
Revolution, when all that is dear to
Great Britain seemed to be endangered
by the contagion of novel and seductive
principles, what was the comparative con-
duct ofthe Catholics and Dissenters ? The
former deplored an event, which shook
their religion to its base, and they re-
mained in silent despondency. It was a
sacred grief* and the more worthy part
of the community joined in their regret;
but the high court of the Dissenters
sounded with praises of the great and
glorious event; the walls of the Old
Jewry Chapel echoed the glowing tran-
sports of Dr. Price, and the pious con-
gregation exclaimed “ amen" to his
revolutionary exultation and treasonable
wishes!


Even the frightful omen of <c the
Rights of Man/* which menaced the con-
tinuance of security and order, found a
cherish, amongst these non-conformists to
the Church; and had not “ the Age of
Reason,” by endeavouring to wound re-
ligion, destroyed the fanatical pretext,
and thus defeated all the hopes of anarchy
which then Existed/ the' Revolution" So-
ciety, the Constitutional Society, Wd the
Corresponding Society would not have
been unavailing.
The moments of doubt and dismay
and dissention, which followed the anti-
christ ian labours of Paine, were seized by
the vigilancebf the intrepid Pitt] His
penetfatihg t genius saw the object of
those associations-through its disguise;
and in his own capacious mind he mea-
sured its extent. Soon he hurled his
thunders on the aspiring crew ; and all
their machinations became abortive.
Had not this our country, the favored
seat of every thing which can adorn or


improve human life, been protected in
that awful season, by the austere firmness
and splendid talents of her political chief,*
all that is afflicting and degrading in the
dissolution of national greatness, would
have been the sad inheritance of our
land.
None of those designs were attributed
to the Catholics. As far as their dispo-
sition could be known or appreciated, it
was friendly to the Government. But
the people that filled the dissenting
chapels, were the same people that in-
haled apd cherished the seditious and
treasonable doctrines of Chalk-farm;
that abetted the proceedings of the
French National Convention, and sought
to imitate the example of their levelling
brethren. But whilst we think on these
things* grateful recollection restores the
image of our immortal Pitt; and conse-
crates him in every virtuous breast.
* OfAfxara xeu Ktpahrtv A« rspmxtpawu
A pa h {am areptw h Ttwsifoum.
u, a.


“ Yes ! honored shade, whilst near thy-grave,
“ The letter’d sage, and chieftain brave
“ The votive marble claim ;
“ O’er thy cold corse, the public tear
“ Congeal’d", a chrystal shrine shall rear,
“ Unsullied as thy fame.”
Elijah’* Mantle.
It is true that the venerable and illus-
trious prophet of, England, had foreseen
the gathering stormy and whilst man-
kind were inattentive be watched the
approaching danger. He saw the clouds
arise* ; and beheld" them deform the face
of day. Darkness, nullo penetrabilis astro ,
overspread the earth, and affrighting
spectres assumed their reign. The revered
minister of his country’s rights, then ap-
* Mqsunvhilntbe south; wind.rose, und, with black wings*
> Wide hov’ring, all the clouds' together drove.
From under heav’n,: the hills to their supply,,
Vapour and exhalation, dusk and moist,
. Sent up amain ; and now the thicken’d skv
Like a dprk ceiling stood.
Paradise Lost.
So Ovid
Emittitque notum. Madidls notus evolat alis,
Terribilem pice& tectus caligine vultura.
Metam. lib* 1.


proached her sacred altar, and kindled
the holy flame*. The gratitude of Eng-
land still recognizes the faithful pa-
triotism of EnMUNnBuRKEt, the orator,
the statesman, the philosopher, and the
Christian!
Eyw jusv xxrxvoav rov xvfyoi rnv rs rnv
ytvvxonr.rx ours jus jusjuvJicOai JWasjuat butou, ours psjuv*s-~
jusro? juu ouh Xen.
* pulcher fugatxs
Ille dies Latio tenebris,
Qui primus alma risit adorea, Hoat
f Natura il fece, poi ruppe la stampa.
Ariosto.
$ Contemplating the wisdom and magnanimity of that
man, lam neither able not to remember him; nor remem-
bering not to exalt him.
It is with great pleasure I transcribe from the works of a
distinguished writer and elegant scholar the following com-
mendations of Mr. Burke’s Reflections on the French Revo-
lution.
** I conceive there is not to be found in all the writings of
ray day, perhaps I may say not in the English language, so
brilliant a cluster of fine and beautiful passages in the de-
clamatory style, as we are presented with in Edmund
J?«rke’s illimitable tract upon the French Revolution. It is
most highlv colored and most richly ornamented, but there,
inelegance in its splendor*, and dignity in its magnificence.


If however events so recent, be ap-
preciated with difficulty ; and if opinions
drawn from them be questioned in their
premises ; it may become necessary, in
order to obtain safe and impartial con-
The ovatar demands attention in a loud and lofty tone, but
bis voice never loses its melody, nor his periods their sweet-*
,ness. When he has roused us with the thunder of his elo-
quence, he can at once, Timotheus-like, chuse a melancholy
theme, and melt us into pity; there is grace in his anger,
for he can inveigh without vulgarity; he can modulate the
strongest bursts of passion, for even in his madness there is
music.” Memoirs of Richard Cumberland, esq.
In addition to the testimony of this ingenious author, -I
would refer my readers to the u Fursuitsof Literature,” where
they will find Mr. Burke celebrated in a strain such as hia owjl
genius would not have disdained to, employ. It is pleasing
to observe so eminent a scholar, and so masterly a writer
as the author of that extraordinary work—o magna.sacer
superbus umbra—weaving the honors.of departed excellence
and placing them on its hallowed tomb.
And here may if not be inquired, why is the illustrious
subject of this note permitted to lie in his grave, undistin-
guished from the herd which has fallen around hiry. ? I*
England so much reduced, that she cannot afford
monument to that transcendent union of worth and talent
which she possessed in Edmund Burke ? Po we not still en-
joy the light, which that effulgent luminary imparted? po
we not still profit by the warning which the. voice of that
spirit announced ? 4nd should we not be grateful ?


elusions, to recur to more distant periods.
Let unimpeached history be the crite-
rion.
No one, influenced by decency or hu-
manity, can turn to those pages, which
bear record of the reign of King Charles
o
the first, without feelings of pity and
respect, for the unhappy monarch, and
disgust and detestation toward the rigour
of his enemies. Fallen greatness is, and
ever must be', an object of interesting and
painful contemplation : and when those,
who have been known only in distin-
guished elevation, are suddenly thrown
upon the level of mankind, a solicitude
of peculiar character is created toward
them: the victims of vicissitude be-
come hallowed.in every breast.
The unhappy Charles had private vir-
tues ; and even the defects in his public
were the result of weakness
rather than of vice. He was placed, as
the present government of this country


is, between the Catholics and Dissenters ;
the latter of whom were at that time, the
immediate but vigorous offspring of Scots
presbytery.
Between the two parties, it was diffi-
cult to be safe. The wishes and designs
of the papists, were open and declared :
the object of the Dissenters was con-
cealed, and their actions were ambiguous.
The King was desirous of conciliation :
he inclined at one time to the right, at
another time to the left, and hoped thus
to preserve an equipose. The Dissenters
saw his difficulties, and smiled with con-
scious triumph. "If we pull down the
throne/* said they, “ the Church must fall,
and our’s will become the national reli-
gion.” In the embarrassments of the
King, they led him into greater difficul-
ties, and at length raised an impious arm
against their sovereign. In the Catho-
o o
lies, he found subjects, who were faith-
ful. to him in adversity ; and who, al-
though they had felt his control, as well


as his protection, gave him in the hour
of exigence the support of unshaken loy-
alty and true courage.
When, however, fortune appeared in-
auspicious to his interest; Charles, de-
pressed by misfortune, and harrassed
with perplexities, sought the aid of his
countrymen ; and, in the hope of conci-
liating or of alarming the Dissenters of
England, confided his person and his
cause, to the presbytery of Scotland.
These primitives of methodism re-
ceived the King and affected to befriend
him* ; but they betrayed his trust, and
sold him to the English parliament.
The revolution of 1648, was not a re-
volution for liberty, nor for the rights of
the people, nor for any of those objects
* They received him with hows, and smiles, and falsehood,
and kept him until they Lad settled their bargain with the
English Parliament, then basely sold their native King to
the vengeance of his enemies. Junius’s Letters.


which have been holden as justifications
of national convulsion. The levying of
Ship-money, afforded a pretext; but it
was only a pretext: the subsequent con-
duct of the traitors, gave an unquestionable
character to their motives and intent.
They exclaimed, that papacy was about to
be revived ; and not a vestige of art was
permitted to remain, which the imagina-
tion of these fanatics could assimilate to
popish rituals. Even the incomparable
specimen of stained glass now in St. Mar-
garet's Church Westminster, was preserv-
ed from their unmeaning fury, only by the
accidental vigilance ofa private gentleman.
The struggle was for supremacy. The
hopes of the innovators were directed to
the subversion of the Church, and to the
establishment of a presbyterian hierar-
chy*.
* “ Give place to honester men.- to those who will more
faithfully discharge their trust. You are no longer a par-
liament ; I tell you, you are n# longer a parliament; the
hard has done with you. It is you who have forced me upon
this. I have sought the Lord night and dag, that he would
rather slay me than put me upon this work.” Oliver Crom-
well to the English Parliament, lcs-3.


If these conclusions be just ; and if the
Dissenters have increased, and are in-
creasing, in numbers and infatuation ;
the impartial judgment of the Country
will find in them a power more formid-
able to the security of the Church, than
can be apprehended in the comparative
impotence of the Catholics.
The number of the Catholics has been
gradually diminishing, and even now,
bears small proportion to that of the
Dissenters. The conduct of the Catho-
lics seems moderate, when placed in con-
trast with the inordinate zeal of the Dis-
senters. The hopes* of the Catholics,
have ever since the Reformation received
the greatest discouragement, and still ex-
perience the unconquerable opposition of
public prejudice. The hopes of the
Dissenters, are every day obtaining ac-
* By tire word hopes, I do not here mean their hopes of
Political Emancipation : in the course of this work l am so-
licitously cautiotls upon that subject; but their hopes, if
they have any such, of restoring papaqy in Great Britain.


cession; and their doctrines are hourly
acquiring new popularity. The object of
the Catholics is publicly avowed, and
prayed for by petition. The designs of
the Dissenters are ambiguous, and are
promoted by unseen influence. If this
comparison be faithful, it cannot be dif-
ficult to determine, from which of the two
parties, the established religion has the
greater reason to apprehend danger.
There remains but one further point of
view, in whigh their relative influence
can be appreciated: namely, in the doc-
trines which they respectively inculcate.
It is a curious fact, that in the most
distinguished features of their religious
systems, the necessity and all-sufficiency
of faith, they approach each other in
peculiar assimilation.
Whatever may be the extravagant no-
tions of popery, in this particular, they
are equalled, if not surpassed by the
Dissenters. Salvation by faith alone.


and predestination; are the most favorite
articles of their creed.
In the rites and ceremonies of public
worship they are nevertheless in perfect
contrast; but although, the ceremonies
of the popish church are ridiculed ; yet,
what can equal in folly and impiety, the
Dissenters cant employment of religious
phrases, at ail times, and upon all occa-
sions ; and the prostitution of their Sa-
viour’s name, for the purpose of religious
dissimulation.
The severe penances of the primitive
Christians, and their extraordinary for-
bearance from the common indulgences
of life, entailed, even upon them, the
imputation or suspicion of hypocrisy.
But what must be thought of the affected
imitation of such austere purity, by men
who are daily mixing in the society of
the world : who are engaged in the same
pursuits, actuated by the same motives,
and adopting the same conduct as their


fellow men* ? Whatever appearances
may be assumed by any sect, human
nature must still be liable to its ap-
pointed infirmities. In the concerns of
w r orldly intercourse, it is.hot possible to
maintain that warmth of devotion, and
that unfeigned humility, which the Dis-
senters affect to preserve in all their con-
duct.
In the Catholics ©f this day, there is
no such disgusting peculiarity. They
may, and it is fair to believe they do, feel
in their public and private worship, senti-
ments as truly pious as the Dissenters, or
any other religious body. But in their
usual avocations, in their transactions
with the world, they assume no distinc-
tion from their fellow citizens : their con-
versation is not tesselated with scriptu-
* Sauctus haberi
Justitiaeque tenax factis dictisqne raereris ?
Agnosco procerejn.
Juvenal, Sat. 8, 24.


ral expressions ; nor their honesty re-
commended by religious ejaculations.
These observations may not be neces-
sary to the particular object of this in-
quiry ; and if the Dissenters did not give
proof of an hostile spirit to all who dif-
fer from them, and particularly toward
the Catholics, these remarks might be
considered unjustly severe. Every man
should be at liberty to chuse his own
road to heaven, provided he do not in-
tersect another’s path*: and no one
* Mille hominum species, et reruni discolor usus :
Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno.
Persies.
Let it not be imagined that 1 mean to quarrel with the re-
ligious opinions (those which are strictly so) of any sect
whatever. Religion is an exercise of faith, not of reason :
and.no man should be condemned for differing from others
in those particulars which can be regulated by no defined
principles. I make this observation now, lest it should be
imagined that I mean to censure persons for dissenting from
the church on points of conscience. I claim attention to
those things, to which reason and prudence can with pro-
priety be applied ; and if there be any thing in these pages
which upon examination seems to go further, I shall lament
that I have given it a place.


would care, how much biblical phraseo-
logy the Dissenters employed in selling
their merchandize or making a bargain,
if no anguis in herba were suspectedf.
Such doctrines of the Catholics and
Dissenters as involve political opinions,
are the more proper subjects for imme-
diate consideration; and their- kpplica-
tion to the safety of the established
church will be more correctly appre-
ciated, by a momentary reference to the
constitution of our own establishment.
The church of England recognizes the
king as supreme head. And the coro-
nation oath enjoins him to maintain the
protestant religion as by law established;
thus begins the connection between the
church and state. The next trustees of
the national religion are the primates
and prelates ; these are also legislators
-j- Fallit enim vitium specie yirtutis et umbra,
Cunj sit triste habitu, vultuque et veste severum,
Juvenal.


upon the temporal concerns of the coun-
try. It was well judged that men whose
learning and wisdom so eminently adorn
the episcopal bench, are equally quali-
fied with any other men, to decide upon
human concerns: and since there must
be great distinctions in every well regu-
lated state, that they were as well deserv-
ing dignity and wealth, as any other
members of the community. Moreover,
it, was thought that the established reli-
gion should have some representative in
the great council of the nation, as well to
protect morality, as to guard the church
from the consequences of indiscreet legis-
lation.
From the bishops, the clergy emanate ;
jao man being qualified to minister
in the church, who has not received the
ordination of a prelate. The clergy are
dispersed amongst the people, and thus a
strict alliance is created between the
church, the state, and the whole com-
munity. No system can be mW'e wise.


If ever it appear to be deformed, the
defect is in the administration, not in
the construction of the establishment.
Of the Roman Catholic religion, the
Pope is supreme head. He is spiritual
sovereign of every place, whither his re-
ligion is extended ; and temporal sove-
reign of the country, which is the seat of
his ecclesiastical government. He is ad-
vised and assisted by the cardinals ; who
are chosen by him from amongst the dig-
nified clergy. The prelates, abbots, and
priests are dispersed throughout the
papal territories, and so disposed as to
hold the people in perpetual alliance by
fern or inlatuation /with the mother
church.
The ministers of popery preach that
Christianity and their religion are inse-
parably interwoven : the necessity and
the all-sufficiency of faith, are their first
doctrine: the infallibility of their hierar-
chy is the second.


The jurisdiction of the clergy, over
the reason and consciences of the laity, is
without limit. To oppose their church,
is to oppose Christianity : to disbelieve
the efficacy of the priests, is to embrace
infidelity. By the diligent and success-
ful inculcation of these principles, the.
power and influence of the Roman Ca-
tholic religion attained its surprizing
ascendancy.
The subtle policy of the various pon-
tiffs, had engaged the passions and the
ignorance of mankind, to support their
system. Penance, excommunication, and
the inquisition, commanded the fears of
every papist. Nor was it of trifling
weight, that the priests could put to
shame and degradation each unruly
member, by disclosing the secrets of his
confession.
The preservation of the sacred scrip-
tures, and of the liturgy, in an abstruse
language, obtained from the ignorant


the reverence due to mystery. The in-
genuity of priests had been continually
employed, in creating and cultivating
the admiration and astonishment of the
multitude: nor was this policy without
advantages ; we owe to it, the recovery
of t}ie fine arts, and the improvement of
civilization. The pontificate of Leo the
tenth, must ever be regarded with vene-
ration, by those who appreciate justly
the embellishments of human life.
Thus, the Roman Catholic church
was secured by terrors and allurements.
Which influenced every individual: and
thus, passive obedience was found in
practice as well as precept.
This view &{ papacy is written as
though the Catholic church were still in
existence, and still secure. It is not so 1
It now teaches a doctrine, far more awful
and instructive. It affords an important
lesson of the vicissitude of every human


institution* The church of Rome I the
most powerful establishment that the
world ever saw—that vast fabric whose
cloud-capped summit was, in all human
judgment, not more exalted than secure,
has fallen to the dust If Its anathemas,
excommunications, and inquisitions, are
all paralized ! The hierarchy of Europe
is dissolved!
Omnium rerum heus vicissitude eat
Ter.
Whatever causes of alarm might have
been preserved so long as the, popish
system continued, are now removed. If
the Catholics were now to obtain pre-
eminence, subjection to the Pope would
* ‘Opco yap rifjcag xdtv ovras a?Ao f&w
EiJajA otrot irtp £uptv n *oup*v crretciv
Sopiiocees.
f Stepius Ventis agitatur ingens
Pinas, et cels® graviore castt
Pecidunt turres, feriuntque samrnos
Fulmina montes.
Horace.


not necessarily follow. His infallibility
is no longer the subject of discussion ;
the preservation of his supremacy, is no
longer holden to be divine: the humi-
iiation of his greatness, and the close of
his career, are explicit interpretations of
all that has been said or imagined of this
extraordinary sovereignty.
But even if the arms of the French
Conqueror had not entered Italy ; if the
Catholic churches had not been pillaged ;
if the matchless specimens of art, which
graced the papal territory, had not been
removed; if the pope himself had enjoyed
his dignity, instead. of having been
hunted,, and caught, and degraded, and
laughed at: even then what would there
have been to fear from the Catholics in
this country ? Their numbers small,
their ceremonies ridiculed, their tenets
detested, * and themselves supplicating,
for the privileges of mankind.
But if their means had been greater:
d 2


their doctrine of obedience to the ruling
power is not anarchical. Indeed, the
principles of papacy are far from demo-
cratical; the spirit of popery may exist
under a monarchy, but it is absolutely
unsuited to a republic : nor could there
be any form of government, that re-
nounced the authority of the pope,
under which Catholics could live more
satisfactorily, than under the mixed go-
vernment of Great Britain.
The Dissenters have not as yet been
associated under any secular constitution.
They have followed the promulgators o
new doctrines, and their disciples: and
they must be content with this itinerant
establishment, until they can obtain some
country, in which to rear their own
system of religious worship.
But some of their principles have been
disclosed, which call for the serious at-
tention of our government. They dis-
like the relationship or interference of


the temporal government with religion.
They are hostile to episcopacy; and
they dissent from the church, in nothing
more strongly, than in the political con-
stitution of its establishment.
“ The gospel of Jesus Christ will
never have its full and proper effect upon
mankind, till it is completely disen-
tangled from every human institution,
Leave it to itself; let it have fair play ;
clog it not with civil pains and penalties ;
let it stand or fall by its own intrinsic
worth; let neither Kings nor Bishops
lay their officious hands upon it.”
These are the words of one of the
oracles of methodism, the Rev. William
Simpson, M. A. and are extracts from his
“ Plea for Religion, and the Sacred
Writings.”
In the notes of the same book at page
138, the following passages may be
found.


“ Vide the conference at Hampton-
court, for the overbearing conduct of this
pedantic king (James I.) and the fulsome
flattery of court bishops. Several per-
sons moreover were put to death in this
reign for their religious opinions. Is not
this one of the infallible marks of the
Beast ?
The next serious effort for reforma-
tion in our church, was soon after the
restoration. Charles 2d.'behaved hand-
somely at first upon the occasion ; but
acting under the control of a number of
bigoted and high priestly bishops, whose
minds were still sore with resentment, he
afterwards forfeited all his merit as the
guardian of religious liberty, and became
a vile and cruel persecutor. Is not this
too an indubitable mark of the Beast
In page 140 of the same book, there is
the following instructive passage :
“ As to the king or queen of any


country as the case is, being head of the
church, and having the appointment of
bishops, and the nomination to church
livings ; it is considered by many to be
utterly inconsistent with the very essence
of the evangelical dispensation, and the
unalienable rights of mankind. They
will tell us, that neither his majesty,
whom God preserve, nor the lord chan-
cellor, nor his majesty’s ministers,'have or
can have any concern in the government
of the church, or the appointment of
officers, in it or to it, directly or in-
directly, according to the spirit of the
gospel, but only in their private capa-
cities, as individual members of the
church. No man upon earth, as it seems
tb them, is entitled' to any such> power.
They scruple hot to say, it is one of the
very worst traits of popery, and an in-
fallible criterion of anti-Christian assum-
ing.” One more passage will suffice,
In page 141, after having enumerated
the characters, who have to dispose of


church livings ; the writer adds, “ Those
are all heads of the church, in a very
strong sense of the words: the king or
queen of the country, being a kind of
arch-head. Moreover the bishops of
the establishment, are, contrary to all
ancient usage, chosen by the civil power
And then as to the titles, by which
they are designated; they appear to
carry the most indisputable marks of the
anti-christian apostacy. What is there
in the titles of the popes of Rome, that
is more magnificent ?”
These extracts, and many other pas-
sages of the same work bear incontrovert-
ible evidence of the inimical disposition
of the Dissenters; not only to the tenets
of the established church, and to the form
of administering public worship, but to
the political fabric of our national re-
ligion.
It is a doctrine, popular indeed
amongst the lower orders of society, that


♦bishops are useless ,* and the pressure of
the times is frequently attributed to the
large emoluments which they receive*
These are sentiments, which fascinate the
vulgar ear, and sanctify the sapient
oracle by whom they are . delivered.
They are, however, the doctrines either of
ignorance or vice. If any set of fanatics
Should succeed in effecting the dissolution
of that venerable and consecrated band;
in whose profound knowledge, and
did talents, and eminent virtues, the re-
ligion, and the morals, and the govern-
ment of the country, find a faithful and
powerful support; this favored land, in
spite of any new system that may be
trived, will be humbled to a
when the memory of her greatness will
Claim the pity of surrounding states.
Proud and happy is every man of
sound understanding, to see in the court
* Dans uti pays litre, on crie beaucoup quoiqu’on
souffre pen: darts tm pays de tyrannite on se pliant pew
qaoiqu’on souflre baaucoup. Caakot.


and Parliament of Great Britain, the
philosophic Watson, thelearned Hunting-
ford, the amiable and enlightened Fisher ;
to have! seen those luminaries Porteus,
Horsley, Horne, Lowth, and all the
mitred patriarchs, who in our day have
adorned and illumined the church of
England. On whom can wealth and
high distinction be more justly bestowed,
than on such men, as can, in every con-
dition, dignify by their talents, and sanc-
tify by their purity ?
The learning and virtue of a prelate,
preserved and employed, through all the
gradations of his ministry, should secure
from that envy which spares the far
more rich, and it may be, the far less
worthy peer or commoner, the reward
which attends the venerable years of a
bishop.
But it ought not to be necessary in these
times to justify that sacred order. Their
own excellence pronounces the highest


panegyric which men can hope to obtain
or deserve.
Yet the modern manufacturers of re-
ligious systems would desire to overthrow
this assemblage of wisdom and virtue.*
But it is not surprising : it is all in order.
The king, they say, ought to have
nothing to do with religion I nor should
there be any bishops. They have ran-
sacked and tortured the scriptures, to
discover prophecies of the downfall of
the church; and to prove that it is a
part of the mysterious Beast. They es-
tablish principles, upon those parts of
revelation, which the feeble penetration
of man cannot understand: and when
they have puzzled their followers by in-
coherent rhapsody, they draw conclusions*
not only extravagant, but still more
* Damnant quod non IntelTiguht.
Cicero.
f Dolce cose a vedefe, e dolci inganni.
Ariosto.


dangerous in their influence upon de-
luded multitudes.
In the power, the actions, and the
principles of the Catholics and Dissenters,
they have each been examined in these
pages. If the investigation have been
partial or contracted, let it be disre-
garded : if it deserve a contrary character,
it warrants an inference of great impor-
tance: namely, that the established
church is not only opposed, but is likely
to be endangered by the growing power
of the Dissenters. That the mischiefs
which have been apprehended from the
Catholics, are far less probable, is
another result ef this inquiry.
In speaking of the Catholics, more
particular reference has been had to
those in England, than to those of
Ireland, because a comparison of the
former with the Dissenters, could be
more accurately appreciated.
It is however hardly possible to think


on the Catholics of Ireland, without
feelings of solicitude toward their con-
dition. On the propriety of granting
the emancipation, which they pray for».
it is difficult to determine.
Their request is, that they may be
permitted to pursue, without penalty,
the religion of their ancestors : and it is
an undeniable position, that men should
be allowed to follow those injunctions of
conscience, which have been sanctioned
by the practices of their forefathers.
But this position is contingent upon the
policy of granting the concession, to
which the Catholics lay cjiaim. Self-pre-
servation, is the first law of nations, as
well as of nature : and there is no principle
of justice, which can warrant a n y nian pr
nation in being accessary to splf-destrue-
tion.
Upon a question so important as the
complete emancipation of the. Rojnan


Catholics of Ireland,* every honest legis-
* I cannot However forbear transcribing the following
passages, which the benevolent author of the “ West Indian’’
has introduced in his own memoirs.
‘ e 1 looked into society for the purpose of discovering
such as were the victims of its national, professional, or re-
ligious prejudices ; in short, for those suffering characters
which stood in need of an advocate ; and out of these I
meditated to select and form heroes for ray future dramas.”
“ With this project in my mind, and nothing but the turf-
stack to call off my attention, I took the characters of an
Irishman and a West Indian for the heroes of my plot.”
“ For my Irishman, I had a scheme rather complicated;
I put him into the Austrian service, and exhibited him in
the livery of a foreign master, to impress upon the audience
the melancholy and impolitic alternative, to which his reli-
gious disqualification had reduced a loyal subject of his
natural king. I gave him courage, for it belongs to his
nation : I endowed him with honour, for it belongs to his
profession ; and I made him proud, jealous, and susceptible,
for such the exiled veteran will be w r ho lives by the earnings
of his sword, and is not allowed to draw it in the service of
that country which gave him birth, and which of course he
was born to defend.”
Our modern dramatists would do well to study and to
adopt such admirable reflections. We might then hope to
see the morals of our country improved, and its prejudice*
corrected by the strong influence of the stage. It is not
however the political notions of the writer which I desire to
inculcate; but the benevolent feeling from which they ap-
pear to have proceeded,


lator will exercise his most cautious
judgment. He will estimate the power
and disposition of the petitioners: he
will look upon the probable conse-
qyences of acceding to their desire ; and
determine which of the two conditions
will render the government more secure.
In these inquiries he will decide, whether
the solicited forbearance would 5 tempt
them to aspire to superior privileges,
and encourage them in arrogance and
usurpation; or will engage their af-
fections, conciliate their anger, and
make them useful = and loyal subjects.
He will judge what accession they would
obtain to their strength by emancipation,
and I what : motive aor. they
would have in the subjugation of the pre-
sent .government.
Let it not however be imagined that
the claims of the Roman Catholics have
been opposed, from a spirit of religious
intolerance; but from an opinion that
thq staff of power with which we are at


present invested, should not be given up,
until it be clear that the protestant reli-
gion no longer needs it. Which man
in either house of parliament, can be sup-
posed desirous of withholding any indul-
gence from his fellow creatures, from
motives merely capricious or oppressive ?
In justice to those who in the spirit of
affection to the established religion of the
land, have resisted the claims of the Ca-
tholics, it should be temperately con-
sidered what those claims are.
The Catholics ask for the repeal of
certain laws which withhold from them
some of the immunities of their protes-
tant countrymen. The statutes, which
were enacted against the Catholics, ori-
ginated in the struggles between papacy
and reformation. They were not however
passed- with the design of unnecessarily
interfering with the religious opinions of
mankind, but with the Intent of forming
a clear distinction between those who
recognised the political constitution of


Great, ißritaio, and. jtfebso who i insisted
tlij|t it was subservient to the '-wilb of
another< potentate*, The: rigor of these
penal laws appears excessive, and some-
times , ,absurd ; unless *it< be compared
with the rancomus edicts by which it
was excited and opposed. But so long
a# any description of men chose to tefhse
to ! tlie l authbfit^ : the
, r f • * T. . .
‘sO long* it isodtinhed hedbs-
toy to preserve these lairs. K If 1 there
abe uo such persdhs ah this day, the laws
{lthe few of thoSe laws which remain] are
nugatory : and if there be any, the chief
for them inust’ Ire this, 'that
they are how so teW that no danger can
tdllidW their emancipation; l3iit is this
the argument ? I fear that some reliance
is placed on their numbers; . and, that
those, numbers are aunop nc ed, not, in
the tone of suppliance but in the spirit of
demand.
The argument that w f e hgvepothing to
fear, from, the pope, does not prove that
the Catholics believe f that they have


nothing to hope from the pope. If they
feel such a hope it must be accompanied
with a persuasion that it is still their
duty to advance the popish religion.
This is a point of faith, and in matters
of faith, reason cannot interfere.
But the great question arising out of
the Catholic claims is purely political:
and surely the wannest advocates of the
Catholic claims, will acknowledge that
the considerations, thus faintly urged,
are sufficient to obtain respect for that
solicitude toward the united fabric of our
church and state; which has opposed
claims, the concession of which may be
dangerous to our ecclesiastical establish-
ment.
But this is not all. If the emancipa-
tion* of the Catholics is to be the in-
* Again I feel myself obliged to disclaim any opinion as
my own, upon this important parliamentary question. The
object which I have in view, is the present comparative as-
cendancy of the Catholics and Dissenters ; in order that
their respective advances toward general suffrage, may be
observed and felt; and may produce proportionate vigi*
lance and caution.


strument of placing every religious pro-
fession on a level; what security will re-
main for the established church? We
are walking into futurity, and should
therefore step cautiously.
But with the Dissenters in England,
or in Ireland, there is not so much dif-
ficulty in deciding upon probabilities.
.They declare their hostility to the poli-
tical constitution of the country. They
have displayed a revolutionary disposi-
tion over and over again. They desire
not only to pursue their own opinions,
but to overthrow every religious system
but their own. They wage war with
protestants, as well as Catholics. The
church of Rome is the beast: the church
of England is part of the beast,
The Dissenters also are seriously
numerous: their power alone, is suf-
ficient to create alarm ; their doctrines to
justify them. But their numbers, how-
ever,-do not, as some may imagine, prove
e 2


the'excellence of their principles. The
multitude are not influenced by the
purity of any particular system ; eke Ma-
hometanism might : Claim superiority of
merit. The accession of numbers, is
frequently an evidence, that laxity of
lirofajs is not duly corrected by that
system, to which they become so readily
attached f or wplild it be * easy to de-
that■ predestination—the .doc-
trine whkdf teaclies; that notwithstanding
the pfkdiee ofi virtue or vice, the fate
individual is predetermined $
said the doctrine that “ whoever believes
inotheLordufesusChrist will be saved/’
Without any to moral conduct;
do mot rather' encourage, than control
vice, i A. great deal may be said in sup-»
port or explanation of; these two ‘princi-
ples ; but it will be difficult to shew, that
if they have ; any influence upon the vir-
tues of mankind, it i$ not to the disad-
vantage of morality.
These principles so congenial to weak


and vicious dispositions ; WbgeUfer>'Wlth
the hostile i * feeling • toward<■ * the’ -higher
coders of .the stated and the other cha-*
of niethodism., will account
for its popularity.
Those Who object to the political con-
stitution of jour church -■ - and! state; 0* *tW
the tenets of our established ■ Weiision f
O y
Will not feel regret that the Dissenters
O
are shaking great advances ’ toward a
triumph over the church. But such per-
sohsias admire the structure cf bur go--
vernmeiit •; ineorporating, J and making
coexistent with - itself the national: > rc-
Jigiori/ iwid view the approaching danger,
komevehits realaspeefcd&ay btt disguised,
with a determination hpufdsist -it.'t'
; Yir bonus quis;?
Qni consult a p strain, quj leges juraque seyyaf.
'ttdirirj*.
■f Mene sails pi acidi vultum ftuctvisque'quietos
~ Ignorare jtibes ? ifcene fmie*<»onficfee mofistl'd* i


Every human institution must have
imperfections ; and it is not to be ex-
pected that in some particulars, even the
purity of the church of England may be
unexceptionable.
It was instituted at a season when the
conflict of sentiment and of passions was
severe and terrific. The reformers of
popery had, in order to secure the ac-
complishment and permanence of their
new system, necessary recourse to the
conciliation of each contending party.
They had to clear away the rubbish* and
sweep off the cobwebs which in the course
of a long series of ages had been gradually
permitted to pollute a great and vener-
able fabric. They had to remove the
meretricious appendages of false taste,
with which the folly of man had encum-
bered the sacred pile. They had also to
protect the object of their solicitude from
the officious zeal, which would have vio-
lated its proportions, and impaired its


strength, under a persuasion of restoring
its primeval beauty.
Under these difficult circumstances, the
reformers presented to their countrymen,
the edifice which is now regarded, as the
“ church of England, established by law. 5
In defence of this establishment, our
ancestors have cheerfully sacrificed their
lives ; and have left it to their posterity,
as a legacy purchased by their blood.
If it have defects, let those defects be rated
\
with its excellences :* and it will be
found that nothing less than arrogance
can hope to create another system, which
for all the purposes of religion, shall
approach nearer to perfection.
Nothing has yet been urged, to shew
that there is any thing so truly bad in the
t —-Übi plura nitent ———- non ego paucis,
Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura.
Horace.


church of England, or so ' peculiarly' ex-
cellent in the system of the PissCnters, as*
to warrant the dangerous experiment of
another Reformation. Of all the evils
which can afflict a nation, there is scarcely
any other so dreadful as a religious war:
and yet that frightful scene must be ex-
pected, if any seel shall arrive at sufficient
power to combat the established church.
The Dissenters have declared that
they not only differ from the national
religion in points of faith, and in the
administration ; of. public worship, but
also in tliat, f part of its : -the
Continuance of wiped* -paust , w be coeval
with the state. Tbe^-declarations un-
fold their wishes and designs. ? The his-
tory of the reign of Charles the First, the
riots of IfSO, and the commemoration of
the French* * Revolution, > confirm- their
confessions; and more than all, their
amazing numbers, to which the continual
increase of their meeting houses, bears


ample testimony, justify the alamis, not
of intolerance, but of prudence.
Every day indeed farms lies aaamonal
reasons for anxiety. The education of
the poor is no longer limited to the parish
schools ; but is now also carried oh in
the Sunday schools of -Dissenters, and in
those \ Schools religions • latitudina-
rianisni HHiich have emanated from Mr.
Lancaster.
Whether Dr. Bell or Mr. Lancaster
was the inventor of the system for the
instruction of indigent children is hardly
worth inquiry now. They both deserve
great ..prajse:; , Yet surely it .is not
pqssibfe tp H[ view. with indifference ; the
vast number of ■ children who are
trained ?in the system and; under the di-
rection ; of a man who, in cominoiv witii
th^<members of the -sect to which lie
-i
belongs, has the established
religion of the land. Our church and.
state, it cannot be too often repeated,
are indissolubly united ; and therefore
there cannot be a greater act of impru-


dence than that of allowing persons who
are unconnected with the national church
to train the minds of the general mass of
the people.
It one might indulge in speculation ;
would it not seem eligible to excite and
reward the industry of the parochial
clergy to undertake this important trust ?
or if that be unreasonable, would it not
be advisable to take care that there be
in every parish a school for the instruc-
tion of the poor under the auspices, and
in the principles of our holy church ?
It is indeed time that so mighty an
engine as the education of the people,
be not committed to any man or men
whose attachment to the constitution of
our chprch and state be not well ascer-
tained. This precaution will carry with
it neither the effect nor the spirit of into-
lerance. It is not only necessary but
just.*
* I am deeply impressed with the value of the great esta*


If the education of the poor be a mea-
sure of prudence, let it be adopted with
a caution proportionate to its importance,
and may the Protector of empires stimu-
late and bless the exertions of those who
may be appointed to the work, so that
they may make the humble as well as the
exalted “ wise unto salvation !”
To the popular feelings, in the culti-
vation of which the Dissenters have been
judicious and successful, their rapid
progress is not to be altogether attri-
buted.
blishment for the purpose of providing the sort of religious
instruction to which I allude. But although this noble in-
stitution appears in the metropolis to be, as it certainly is,
a splendid union of worth, talent, and every species of dig-
nity; yet some systematic plan is wanting for providing in
every village and hamlet throughout the kingdom, instruc-
tion, even superior to that which the non-conformists admi-
nister. Let there be a well of pure living water in every
neighbourhood, and if the minister of God would conde-
scend to be the water-drawer for those who thirsted, how
great would be the blessing!


It is mentioned with- solemn regret
that - the apathy of the ministers of our*
holy church, have greatly accelerated the
progress of the Dissenters, f Wild eii**
tlmsiasm is not wanting ; that- indeed
may fascinate the - multitude* but it is far
distant from true devotion. The genius
of religion is temperate and benignant.
In palaces and mansions it controls the
ebullitions of prosperity, in the dungeon
it dissipates the captive s gloom. The
same orb which gilds the summer’s day*
shines on winter’s snowy scenes, and.
makes each dreary plain seem cheerful.
But tempered zeal, and purity of life,
our.clergy should preserve. Their, moral
conduct is indeed generally exemplary,
and the few unhappy
exceptions which thy. invidious jealousy
of their;enemies has selected, there is as
iiiuch ability, erudition, piety, and virtue
amongst the ministers of the church of
England, as ever belonged to any body
of men on earth. But all this is not


enough, jiillhe liturgy should/be delivered
witbr than Is usually
ploy ed. - If . the appointed; service . for
pubjiuowo&hip t were to. be performed 4h
-the i i impressive, manner of which •it is
susceptible-; theignorant and the learned ;
■the fervor of youth, and the solemnity of
.agewould be .devoutly affected..
3Dlie idoquehc e: ofibhe' pulpit I has so
often • obtained the Illustration -of great
abilities, that it may seem almost pre*-
sumptuous to revive the consideration
of it in these .pages.
; Much, very much, depends on it., It
is efoalL’ species, off oratory that puea: fo
•which ithe rudon M .argument 3*ls
is iubst, fodispetoble.: Both the neason
•and the!feelings! of mankind, are necese
sajryntd Jbe engaged, in creating a due
regard toward religion.
To accomplish this purpose,, not pnly
the style of composition, but the de-


lively, must be regarded. The errors of
turgid expression and false pathos which
many favorite preachers possess, should
be carefully avoided. v*The language of
a sermon should be simple : its embel-
lishments* few and chaste: in every
feature perfectly natural. This is the
style, which interests and convinces;
which persuades men, <f not to be weary
in well doing,” and “ reclaims the hearts
of the disobedient, to the wisdom of the
just.”
Equal care is necessary in the delivery.
Too much warmth, characterizes, not the
dictates of reason or of faith, but the
enunciations of passion. Coldness of
manner, indicates indifference ; and con-
tradicts that the understanding and the
heart are engaged. Between these ex-
tremes, the minister of the gospel should
* ttou xcupiuf zvtxQw e| t a te TTpaypara jv
TtavfcL diEQopturw, ttou rw tow pmopo; Eysvs afyoav
&vafuv. Longinus, sect. 1.


pronounce his Kor let it be ?
in vain, expected that the clergy of the
church of England, observing the solemn
condition and awful responsibility which
they have now to sustain, feeling how
great a trust is in their hands, not only
collectively but individually; -will-em-
ploy their talents and their vigilance, iii
the preservation of the national reli-
gion.*
"* May I be allowed to suggest the very probable utility
©f some change’ in the present inode of clerical ordination.
It is with great deference, and with pure solicitude for the
welfare of my country and religion, that I adventure this
©pinion.
When a candidate for holy orders presents himself to a
bishop, the first inquiry generally is, respecting his univer
■eity probation ; and if it appear that he has not been of Ox-
ford or Cambridge there is scarcely a prelate, whatever mav
be the talents and acquirements of the candidate, who will
entrust him in, the ministry. There are. certainly very
powerful considerations in favor of this practice. The in-
terests of learning in general, and therein of our universities
in particular, and a laudable desire for the respectability m
well as erudition of the clergy, afford powerful reasons in
•support of this regularity ; though I adventure to think it
•might sometimes be relaxed with great advantage ■ to tht*
cause of religion*


To our government, this subject will
appeal with, due effect. Its importance
But if the candidate have regularly taken his degree,
lie is then only required to expound a passage in the Greek
testament, and produce a certificate by three beneficed clergy-
men of his moral conduct. This examination takes place in
tire bishop’s private apartment.
The alterations which I would respectfully propose are,
that the examination should be extended by probationary
exercises of English reading, and unpremeditated composi-
tion in the English language. That these'arts arc too much
neglected, will be believed by every person who has visited
only a few of our churches; and yet they are the instruments
by which alone the pastor can be useful in his public ' duty.
Where the parish minister is deficient in these particulars,
tv hat wonder is it that the people stray ? '
1 would next be inclined to submit the propriety of having
some part of this ordeal in public. The effect which this
.ceremony would be likely to produce, on the minds of
those by whom it would be sustained , and of those by whom
it would be witnessed, would probably he highly advan-
tageous.
The evident object of these is to assist in. de-
vising a method of obtaining such a clergV, as would incite
audiences, and could command That our
churches would then 'she well attended,: and that much of
the existing schism would expire, will be credited by those
who have .witnessed those places of appointed public wor-
ship in which the service of the established church is per-
formed with energy and: ability, I need hardly name St.
George’s Church, llano ver-squave, St, James’s Westminster,


is every day becoming more apparent.
It need not again be urged, how irrecon-
the Chapels of the Asylum for Female Orphans, of the Mag-
dalen and Foundling Hospitals, &c. as instances of the
numbers and chearfulness of those who attend the service
of the established church, wherever the ministry are able and
resolved, to be understood and to be impressive.
Would it not also be useful, in all populous places, to have
regular church service on the evenings of every Sunday,
particularly in the winter. In the metropolis, persons,
particularly the humbler classes, who desire to attend public
worship, are in many parishes debarred this gratification, or
can obtain it only at the Dissenting Chapels, which are gene-
rally crowded at the latter part of the day. But this is ex-
tremely hard, and frequently injurious to the morals of do-
mestic servants and others, who cannot attend at the earlier
hours.
Perhaps these suggestions will appear of little value. I
do not urge their infallibility : but surely something should
be done to re-acquire to the church its legitimate popular
ascendancy. That this great object can be attained only by
strengthening and invigorating our ecclesiastical establish-
ment has been lately shewn* The bill which was introduced
to parliament during a recent session by Lord Viscount
Sidmouth, was of all measures that could have been offered
to the legislature, the most temperate and benevolent; and
aimed at nothing more than protecting mankind from that
audacious ignorance which should presume to become pastor
of religious sects. Yet, lest this bill should contain some
secret influence, prejudicial to their intentions, (for it did
«©t propose in any manner to alter their present establish-
ments,) the Dissenters arrayed themselves so formidably be-


cileable is true toleration, with the en-
couragement of any power, which is
formidable to the state. God forbid I
that any unnecessary control should be
imposed upon the consciences of man-
kind, but it behoves our rulers to beware
that religion be not made a pretext for
the destruction of the country’s rights
and happiness.
Xu use W)o; xsdvos oiaxoirpofos
&pa%ai Trohitrfxa, wpiv Karaiyiaou rrvoas
Apeos—fioa yap hu/m xepeaiov rparou* .
iEsCHYLUS.
Anxious, indeed, every good man must
be, that all his fellow creatures be at
liberty to entertain whatever opinions,
and pursue whatever modes of devotion,
their own conscience or the example of
their ancestors may enjoin; and it is wise
in every government to remove all un-
fore the Lords of Great Britain, that the government thought
it imprudent to encourage the progress of the bill.
* But do thou, like the skilful pilot of a ship, secure the
city, before the storms of war descend; for a terrestrial
wave of army resounds around it.


necessary impediments to the various re-
ligious practices of the people. But is
it reasonable that sectaries should be al-
lowed the possibility of establishing an
ascendancy in the legislature of the
country ? For what purplose did our fore-
fathers so chearfully sacrifice their lives ;
but for that of instituting and perpetuat-
ing the co-existent fabric of our church
and state; and is a door now to be
opened, whereby those can enter who
may feel it to be a duty to mankind to
destroy our venerable edifice ? God for-
bid !
It has been said that nothing can be
done for the Catholics, without remov-
ing the political barriers from all Dis-
senters. If this be so, then the Catho-
lics and Dissenters are to be considered
as one body as far as regards civil policy.
Whether such a body should be admitted
to all the privileges which have been
asked, prudence and justice will have
small difficulty in determining.


And before any alteration be made in
those laws which have lasted, and under
which we have safely existed, nearly
three hundred years ; is it not necessary
to require some proofs of such an altera-
tion in the mind and affairs of mankind,
as seems to justify and require an abso-
lute change ? Many and great efforts have
during this period been made, to over-
throw the united system of our church
and state : they have all however proved
ineffectual. In Ireland, a country of which
I never think without' an aching heart,
what sanguinary struggles have we not
witnessed, and what violence of feeling do
we not still perceive ? Our laws have
nevertheless still remained, and thanks
be to God, we are still secure ! Against
this weight of experience, a sufficient
counterpoise of reasoning should be ad-
duced, in effectual behalf of any great al-
teration . Ido not adventure, here, to hold
the scales of argument or opinion : I speak
thus in a spirit of apprehension. The
subject presents awful considerations to


the legislature; for one indiscreet step
may be fatal.
And let it not be imagined that
the general imputations contained in this
inquiry, are directed to every one who
dissents from the church of England.
There are amongst the Dissenters,
many persons of piety ; and of virtue,
patriotic as well as domestic. There are
many also who love their country, and
respect their government; and are un-
conscious that in joining others who dis-
sent from the church, that they are
abetting a national mischief. The ob-
jections which have been urged, are
against a system, which if permitted to
acquire ascendancy, will endanger our
political constitution ; and it cannot be
an unreasonable hope, that if there be
any, who have seceded from the esta-
blished church, without knowledge or
suspicion, that they were about to lend
themselves to dangerous and disgraceful


purposes, and shall now see the perilous
condition to which they may expose
their country, that they will re-espouse
that system, which must stand or fall
with the British empire*.
To the people of this country, who
have not only the history of distant
periods, but their own extraordinary
times, for instructive contemplation; who
have seen in these our days, the frightful
horrors of a revolutionf, it will seem pru-
dent to avoid incurring for themselves or
* To yap eaKEuearav oimx irafa, [xvdmg «Moy Trapavpa&vros,
jMyetkag ohvag vvornti.
“It is a proud and awful consideration. Every other
monument of European liberty has perished ; that ancient
fabric which has been gradually reared by the wisdom and
virtue of our forefathers still stands; it stands, thanks be
to God, solid and entire—but it stands alone, and it stands
amidst ruins.” Mackintosh’s speech in defence of Peltier,
Let me earnestly commend the w hole of that energetic
and splendid oration, of which the above is an extract, to the
attention of all persons. It is one of those rare effusions of
genius which will descend to remote posterity. The learned
and unrivalled orator by whom it was delivered may truly
say, Exegi monumentum cere perennius.


their children, the experience of so awful
a calamity. Let them distrust those,
who unceasingly talk of the defects of
our religious and political establish-
ments. It is true there may be imper-
fections in them; but who can hope to
see any human institution without de-
formity ?
Discontent is the unhappy disposition
of almost all men,* but it is the duty of
every man to expel it from his heart.
Look throughout the face of the earth
for a country, which, with all its faults,
is to be preferred to England.
Is France more desirable? Where is
the protection of the property, the
liberty, or the life of the subject ? where
is that palladium of individual security,
the trial by jury ? Where is the freedom
* Oi yap Haw ym/xaitn , r ayaßo* xspoiv
Ex oVTß f) culi wvh vpiv ns tK&aXkv.
Sophocles.


of the press? These are to be found
with us, but they exist not in France,
The meretricious glare of military pomp,
and the spoils of conquered nations, at-
tract the giddy eye ; but they impart
not one solace, to the victims of sus-
pended commerce; or to those who ex-
perience the rigid power of a military
govermflent.
Some may prefer America. That
country seems destined to shew the in-
convenience and mischiefs of a popular
government. There, as in every other
country, all the different classes of so-
ciety are to be found, poor as well as
rich ; the fortunate and the unfortunate,
the oppressors and the sufferers. But
they have not the consolation of possess-
ing those guarantees of public greatness,
and individual safety, which are still to
be found in England.
The fancy of people may see great and


enviable blessings in foreign countries*;
but observation, and still more, ex-
perience, would dissolve the deception.
No ! there is not at this day, any
country, which, with all the defects of
our own, better deserves the patriotism
of its inheritors, than Great Britain.
The more, this assertion is considered,
the more it will be cherished. Impressed
with its truth, let us preserve the firm
resolution to repel every advance, which
shall menace the security of our church
or statef, and in either of those establish-
ments our rights and happiness.
Vive, vale—si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere
mecum.
Horace.
* Strenua nos exercet inertia: navibus atque
Quadrigis petimus bene vivere: quod petis, hie est.
Horace.
f Anglia sic stabit, Christique arx alta manebit.
FINIS.
Punted by W. Flint, Old Bailey, London*
