

FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
BULLY
HAYES
Barrator, Bigamist, Buccaneer, Blackbirder,
and Pirate. AN AUTHENTIC LIFE OF
WILLIAM HENRY HAYES, of Ohio or
New York, U.S.A. Born 1829, Killed 1877.
Compiled and Written by A. T. SAUNDERS
THE AUTHOR
The ‘SUNDAY TIMES' PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
1915




Bully Hayes,
The Pirate of the Pacific Ocean.
William Henry Hayes was an Ame-
rican, born in Cleveland, State of Ohio,
on Hake Erie, in the year 1829, and was
killed in March, 1877,
The following account of the life of
this once-celebrated pirate, sea-rover,
blackbirder, man-stealer, and de-
baucher of white and colored women
and children is compiled from official
documents and newspapers: therefore
its accuracy can be depended on.
The Honolulu “Advertiser” of Sep-
tember 24, 1859, says that Hayes was
the son of a Cleveland “grog-shop
keeper,” that at an early age he ac-
quired a knowledge of the manual part
of the seafaring profession (on the
Lakes presumably), and was married
in Cleveland. He was mixed up in a
horse-stealing transaction, escaped
punishment through some legal flaw,
and fled to California, with another
“wife.” This was denied by Hayes in
a letter to the Sydney “Morning Her-
ald,” January 12, 1860, in answer to
“The Story of a Scoundrel” in the
“Herald” of January 6, 1860, but Hayes
did not say who his father was or give
any account of himself, except to say
that he was in Calcutta in 1852.
The first authentic trace of Hayes
is on March 4, 1853, when the Ame-
rican barque Canton, 198 tons, Elisha
Gibbs master, cleared from New York
for Australia with a crew of nine men
and a cargo of Yankee notions. Hayes
was probably on board the Canton, but
his name does not appear for some
time. The Canton was damaged by a
gale after leaving New York, and put
into Rio de Janeiro, where her cargo
was discharged and reshipped after
she had been repaired. She sailed from
Rio on June 25, 1853, and arrived at
Melbourne on August 25 with 85 pas-
sengers.
On October 6, 1853, the Canton
cleared from Melbourne for Hobart
Town, whence she made two voyages
to Geelong with timber, and on May 4,
1854, cleared from Geelong in ballast
for Sydney, and arrived there on May
10.
In the Sydney “Morning Herald” of
May 18, 1854, the Canton is advertised
for sale, but no sale was effected, so on
May 27 she cleared for Guam in bal-
last.
On July 11, 1854, the Canton, Gibbs
master, arrived in Singapore from Syd-
ney, and the records of the American
consul in Singapore show that on
July 19, 1854, W. H. Hayes sold and
transferred the Canton to John Har-
vey, who put her under the British flag
and renamed her the Santubong.
This is the first time Hayes’ name
occurs in any official document I
have heard of.
The next mention of Hayes is in
Singapore on December 21, 1855, when
the American barque Otranto, 149 tons,
W. H. Hayes master, arrived at Singa-
pore from Swatow.
The Honolulu “Advertiser” says that
Hayes had persuaded a man in San
Francisco to buy and fit out the
Otranto and put him in charge of her,
and the owner saw the last of the
Otranto when she sailed from Cali-
fornia.
The Otranto was in financial trouble
in Singapore, and for more than a
year was lying at anchor in Singapore.
Hayes was master of the Otranto un-
til March 10, 1856, when he bought the
Santubong, previously the Canton, put
her again under the American flag, and
named her the “C. W. Bradley, Junior,”
in compliment to Dr. Bradley, then
American consul in Singapore. On
April 1, 1856, Hayes mortgaged the C.


W. Bradley to Dare and Webster,
ship chandlers, of Singapore, for 3000
dollars. On April 2, 1856, the C. W.
Bradley, Hayes master, sailed from
Singapore for Shanghai, and on No-
vember 18, 1856, she returned to Singa-
pore, and Bully Hayes’ career as thief
and pirate developed.
Hayes and the C.W. Bradley stayed
in Singapore for only two days, dur-
ing which time Hayes bought on cre-
dit as much valuable and easily por-
table property as he could, and had it
sent on board the ship, promising pay-
ment next day. On November 20, 1856,
the C, W. Bradley suddenly sailed from
Singapore without clearing at the Cus-
toms, for an unknown port, and nei-
ther Hayes nor the C.W. Bradley was
ever again in Singapore. I need
scarcely say that Hayes did not pay for
the goods he had bought. Hayes and
the C. W. Bradley turned up at Ba-
tavia shortly after leaving Singapore,
where Hayes bought a quantity of
valuable goods from Dutch merchants
paying for the goods by drafts upon
Dare and Webster, of Singapore, which
drafts he had no authority to draw, and
which, of course, were not paid.
Hayes in Australia
Haj r es sailed from Batavia, touched
at Anjer, and on January 30, 1857, the
C. W. Bradley, W. H. Hayes master,
arrived at Fremantle, Western Aus-
tralia.
For some six weeks Hayes was in
Fremantle enjoying himself. Hayes
was then no navigator; in fact he was
a man of little education and carried
a “nurse.” Captain Edward Willet and
a Mr. B. F. Baker were on board the
C. W. Bradley with Hayes from Singa-
pore to Adelaide, and one or both
coached Hayes, Baker appears again
in Sydney in January, 1860, in connec-
tion with Hayes.
Our hero was a nice-looking young
man with a good voice; could sing well,
was always well and neatly dressed,
and kept his ship in good order. He
made an impression in Perth and Fre-
mantle; was “in society”; was very
popular among the ladies and officials,
and was engaged to marry Miss Scott,
the daughter of the harbormaster.
Western Australia was then (1857) a
convict colony. At this time Western
Australia was in a depressed condition,
and population was leaving rapidly, so
the C. W. Bradley, Junior, was adver-
tised to sail for Adelaide with pas-
sengers, fares being—cabin £l5, steer-
age £lO. On March 11, 1857, she sail-
ed with six cabin and 88 steerage pas-
sengers. Messrs. D. and F. Scott, re-
latives of Hayes’ prospective bride,
were among the cabin passengers.
Hayes arrived in Adelaide on March
24, 1857, and sailed again for Fre-
mantle on April 9; arrived May I*s, and
again sailed from Fremantle for Ade-
laide on June 24, 1857, with 99 passen-
gers, so Hayes must have done well on
these two voyages. Hayes was not so
well received on his return to Fre-
mantle, for meantime the schooner
Swallow had arrived from Singapore,
and her master, Captain Allen, had
given the Western Australians a true
account of Hayes and his doings in
Singapore; but notwithstanding this
Hayes’ plausibility was so great that
he was able to befool several Perth
business men. When Hayes first ar-
rived in Adelaide a Portuguese ship
was there, the Estrella-do-Norte. This
vessel had brought a cargo of Chinese
coolies from Macao, was commanded
by Manoele Goularte, and was in fin-
ancial difficulties. Hayes and Gou-
larte agreed to work a swindle, but the
ultimate result was that Hayes lost
money. Goularte signed a bottomry
bond over the Estrella-do-Norte in
favor of Hayes for £3OOO, and the ship
was sent to BYemantle, sailing from
Port Adelaide May 4, 1857. She ar-
rived in Fremantle, was stranded there,
but was refloated, and proceeded to
the Vasse, where she loaded a cargo
of jarrah which Hayes had bought on
credit from Mr. Yelverton. Meantime,
on June 24, Hayes, in the C. W, Brad-
ley, had sailed for Adelaide, and ar-
rived on July 3, 1857. The Adelaide
papers of July 6, 1857, say that on
Saturday night, July 4, Captain Hayes
entertained a number of gentlemen on
board the C. W. Bradley in honor of
American Independence Day, Hayes
had for the time about run the length
of his tether. Dare and Webster, of
Singapore, had sent to Adelaide their
mortgage and authority to collect it.
The C. W. Bradley was seized—adver-
tised for sale by auction. Hayes was
put out of her, and on July 21 she was
sold for £ 1250. She was again put
under the British flag, renamed the
Federation, afterwards sold to Mel-
bourne, then in 1860 to Christchurch,
New Zealand, and struck off the regis-
ter in 1874, her fate being unknown.
The Estrella-do-Norte did not arrive
in Port Adelaide from the Vasse with
her cargo of jarrah till October 24, 1857,
and then she was too deep to enter the
4
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


river until some of the cargo was dis- the ships’ gigs of the Vision and
charged, as she drew over 18ft., Plstrella-do-Norte, but the gig of the
though she was only 398 tons (Portu- Vision did not turn up, though that of
guese) register. It was a losing voy- the Estrella, steered by Captain Hayes,
age for all concerned. was at the starting point at the ap-
Hayes, after being turned out of the pointed time.
C. W. Bradley, lived ashore in Ade- The end was in sight, and on Feb-
laide and Port Adelaide and had a good ruary 9, 1858, William Henry Hayes,
time. He made the acquaintance of a master mariner, of Port Adelaide, was
widow with a light reputation, Mrs. an insolvent debtor, his liabilities be-
Aiaelia Littleton, and married her at ing £5951/18/5 and his assets £2297
St. Mark’s, Pemvortham, on August 25, 14/2. The latter probably existed in
1857, as the following shows : Hayes’ imagination. Only one creditor
Photograph of part of Hayes’ Marriage Certificate,
preserved in Saint Mark’s, Pen wortham.
When the Estrella-do-Norte arrived took the trouble to prove his debt,
in Port Adelaide Hayes took charge of £l4l/0/7 for money lent and clothing
her, displacing both Parkinson (Hayes’ for Captain and Mrs. Hayes. No divi-
mate in the C. W. Bradley) and her dend was paid and no assets realised,
original master Goularte, but they all On March 16, 1858, Hayes, then an
lived on board, as did Mrs. Hayes also. undischarged bankrupt, absconded
New Year’s Day, 1858, was a great from Port Adelaide in the schooner
day in Port Adelaide, a grand regatta Waitemata, bound for Portland, Vic-
being held. The boat of the Estrella- toria. He skilfully evaded pursuit, and
do-Norte, with J. C. Hawker as cox- withdrew" suspicion from the schooner
swain and four other well-known Port by an arrangement with Goularte, who
Adelaide business men pulling, won the arrived at the signal station with a
Ladies’ Purse. Of this boat’s crew Mr. colored man in a small sailing boat and
C. H. T. Connor, manager of the Ade- said that he had put Hayes on board
laide Milling Co., is now (1915) the sole the brig Fayaway, w r hich had just
survivor. Four days later a race sailed for Newcastle. Upon this be-
w r as to be row r ed for 25 sovereigns by coming known to the Port Adelaide
5
BULLY HAYES— BUCCANEER.


creditors they chartered the steam tug
Young Australian, and gave chase to
the Fayaway, which was now hull
down, passing in the river the schoo-
ner Waitemata, in which Hayes was
safely hidden. About dusk the tug was
near the brig, but darkness fell, a gale
sprang up, and the seasick creditors
had to return, again passing the
schooner with Hayes aboard. The
schooner proceeded on her voyage, put
into Kangaroo Island, and spent a quiet
week in Hog Bay, where Hayes made
himself very agreeable to the Reeves
family, engaging himself to marry one
of the Misses Reeves, it is said.
He duly reached Melbourne via Port-
land, and is lost to sight and know-
ledge for a time. Soon after Hayes
had fled Captain Goularte and the crew
of the Estrella-do-Norte sued the ship
foi their wages, and on May 27, 1858,
the ship was sold by order of the Vice-
Admiralty Court for £650, although
Hayes’ alleged loan of £3OOO was said
to have been expended on her a few
months previously.
On July 21, 1858, Mrs. Hayes ar-
rived in Melbourne by the Admella
from Adelaide, and on September 2,
1858, Hayes sailed from Melbourne in
command of the British ship Orestes
(680 tons), bound for Vancouver
Island. How Hayes, who was an Ame-
rican and had no certificate of com-
petency, managed to clear the Orestes
at the Customs I do not know. Ap-
parently they were not particular at
Melbourne in 1858, and the British
Shipping Act of 1854 allowed men who
had been ship masters prior to 1854 to
obtain “certificates of servitude.”
The owner of the Orestes, Daniel A,
Osborn, in January, 1859, had heard
what sort of a man Hayes was, and
thinking it likely that Hayes would
steal the Orestes he issued a circular
to the British consuls informing them
that he had reason to believe that
Hayes was not a trustworthy man, and
asking them to protect him if the
Orestes came into their jurisdiction.
This was published in the Rangoon
“Times,” and also in the Straits
“Times” of Singapore, on August, 1859.
Hayes did not steal the Orestes, for
the supercargo, Mr. Clements, turned
him out of the ship in Honolulu when
the Orestes arrived there en route for
Vancouver Island.
Hayes was charged with swindling
various people connected with the
Orestes, and the supercargo was glad
to get rid of him.
At San Francisco
Hayes and his wife were stranded in
Honolulu, but Hayes soon raised 2000
dollars by means of worthless drafts
and other devices and with his wife
sailed for San Francisco in the barque
Adelaide. There are many uncon-
firmed accounts of Hayes’ doings in
San Francisco after his arrival from
Honolulu at the end of 1858 or begin-
ning of 1859, but nothing authentic is
known. The ’Frisco “Bulletin” of
August 31, 1859, contains the follow-
ing:—
“FLIGHT OF THE ELLENITA.
“The brig Ellenita, Captain Hayes,
ran off on Sunday night without clear-
ing papers, and leaving creditors to
the amount of several thousand dol-
lars in the lurch. The captain pretend-
ed that he was about to sail for Mel-
bourne, and obtained credit for repair
of the vessel and large amounts of
stores, besides the baggage of various
intended passengers, with all of which
he put off on an unknown and unlaw-
ful voyage. The Martin White was
despatched after her, but was com-
pelled to return without success. The
bird had flown.”
Sunday became a favorite sailing
day for Hayes after this, as it helped
him to evade his creditors.
The San Francisco “Herald” of Sep-
tember 5, 1859, says:
A BOLD OPERATOR
“Some time ago a Capt. Hayes pur-
chased the brig Ellenita from M. S.
Morrison, of this city, for 800 dollars.
He paid nearly 500 dollars of the pur-
chase money, and then had the brig-
placed upon the ways of Mr. Kitchener,
where she was thoroughly overhauled
and repaired. Finding his indebtedness
pressing upon him, and that the brig
was about to be libelled, he applied to
eminent counsel in this city, by whose
exertions the libel was staved off for
two weeks. About half-past 2 o’clock
on Monday morning the Ellenita got
under way and sailed from this port,
leaving all her debts unpaid, and with-
out taking out a clearance or* being in
possession of a single paper. Yester-
day the steam tug Martin White was
sent in pursuit, but returned in the
evening without being able to see or
hear of the brig. We learn that the
following parties have been swindled
by Capt. Hayes:—Mr. Morrison, 300
dollars; Mr. Kitchener, 250 dollars;
ship carpenters, 800 dollars; victuallers
and grocers, 1200 dollars; vegetable
dealers, 300 dollars; a gentleman, per
borrowed money, 300 dollars; legal ad-
6
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


vice, 100 dollars: a bill which his law-
yer promised to pay, 14 dollars; money
borrowed from his lawyers, 30 dollars;
plumbers, 500 dollars; and a multitude
of other liabilities of less note, mak-
ing in all about 4000 dollars. The fel-
low also managed to swindle Mr. Mor-
rison out of some 40 tons of beans. It
is supposed by those who appear to be
best informed that he will steer for
Tahiti, where he will lay in a cargo of
oranges, for the Sydney market.”
In Polynesia
On September 15, 1859, the Ellenita
arrived at Kahului, Island of Maui,
Sandwich Islands, and three days after
Hayes was arrested by Sheriff Tread-
way on a charge of smuggling, but he
induced the sheriff to come on board
the Ellenita, and v/hile he befooled the
sheriff the vessel was got under way;
the sheriff was compelled to go ashore,
and Hayes again escaped from custody.
After escaping from the sheriff the
Ellenita continued her voyage towards
Sydney till October 16, 1859, when she
foundered, the passengers and crew
escaping in boats and rafts.
Hayes, his mate, one seaman, and
nine passengers landed on the Island
of Savaii, Samoa, on October 20, and
ultimately reached Apia. The raft ar-
rived at Wallis Island with the loss of
one man. At Samoa Hayes became ac-
quainted with Captain Abner West
Kempton, an American, whose brig, the
Marian, had been wrecked at Apia,
from whom he borrowed £53, promis-
ing to make Kempton master of a
ship which he told Kempton was his
and was lying in Port Adelaide.
On New Year’s Day, 1860, the Brit-
ish war brig Elk and the brig Anto-
nio arrived at Sydney, the Elk from
Fiji bringing the crew of the raft and
the Antonio from Samoa bringing Cap-
tain Hayes, Kempton, and the passen-
gers and crew of the Ellenita. On
January 6, 1860, the Sydney “Morning
Herald” published “The Story of a
Scoundrel,” being a scathing account
of Hayes’ career reprinted from the
Honolulu “Advertiser” of September
24, 1859.
On January 7, 1860, the Sydney
“Morning Herald” published an ac-
count of William Henry Hayes, late
master of the Ellenita, being charged
with indecent assault on Cornelia Mur-
ray on board the Ellenita. The girl
said she was 15i years old and was
assaulted soon after leaving San
Francisco. There was no corrobora-
tion, therefore the case was dismissed.
On January 9, 1860, the Sydney “Em-
pire,” Sir Henry Parkes’ paper, pub-
lished “The Career of a Remarkable
Scoundrel," with the following re-
marks: —
“For the information of our readers
in Sydney, and New South Wales gene-
rally, we have the satisfaction of in-
forming and of warning them that
there is now, or was a day or two since,
in this colony one of the most syste-
matic and unmitigated scoundrels that
it has ever had the fortune to be pos-
sessed of. He has hitherto passed as
Captain Hayes, or Captain William
Henry Hayes, and is a man of some
32 years of age, 6ft. high, about 15st.
weight, and of rather plausible, bluff
exterior, which with many, it would
seem, has enabled him to pass off, un-
til a settlement came, as a very hon-
est jolly seaman, and he is a man who
at times spends his money, or the
money in his possession, very liberal-
ly, which, considering the very strong
probabilities connected with its ac-
quisition, is not very difficult to ac-
count for. The success of this enor-
mous mercantile humbug (he having
possessed himself probably to the
amount of £20,000, or to the value
thereof, if not twice as much, in the
last eight years, without any equiva-
lent but impudence and promises) is
the more singular from the fact that
he is a man of the most meagre edu-
cation, and possessing no particular
qualities, except rare cunning, attend-
ed by an unlimited command of im-
pudence, and a somewhat more than
average degree of physical power, of
which fact he is partial to giving dis-
courteous intimations to the unfavor-
ably disposed.
“Whether this gentleman, who seems
as yet with impunity to have commit-
ted more scoundrelism than the aggre-
gate of crime which in former days
has sent many a hundred men to the
gallows, will renew his performances
in Sydney by way of relieving us of
a ship as a rover, or will kindly vary
the entertainment with another wife,
or will try his hand at an “escort”
is a matter of conjecture (for of course
now he has a soul above horse-stealing
and such pettifogging transactions),
but it is more than probable he will
confine himself for a time to his favo-
rite peculiarity—an extended system
of credit. Should any further note-
worthy action of Mr, Hayes come with-
in our knowledge, and it cannot for a
moment be supposed that a gentleman
of hi* talents would allow him to lie
7
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


idle, we promise our readers the earli-
est and latest intelligence.”
[The allusion to “‘an escort” in this
means a transport of gold (by mail
coach usually) from the goldfields to
the large towns. The gold was “es-
corted” by armed and mounted police,
and the whole cavalcade came to be
known as the “escort,” or “gold escort.”
On several occasions “escorts” were
stuck up and robbed by bushrangers in
1850 to 1860.]
In the Sydney “Morning Herald” of
January 12, 1860, appeared a long let-
ter purporting to be written by Hayes,
but which he was not capable of writ-
ing, headed —“The Story of a Scoun-
drel —Continued.”
In this all charges against Hayes are
denied except that of befooling the
sheriff at the Sandwich Islands. Four
letters also appeared in the same issue
of the “Herald” in Hayes’s favor. One
is from a lady friend of Hayes who
was a passenger in the Ellenita; an-
other is from B. T. Baker, who came
to Australia in the C. W. Bradley with
Hayes; another from H. E. Nealds, who
says he knew Hayes in Melbourne and
knew his shipping business; and one
from C. W. Jackson, who says he
knew Hayes and his brothers in Ofiio,
that Hayes was master of sailing ves-
sels and steamers, that he was a first-
class commander, a very popular man,
that he never heard of his being mar-
ried except in Adelaide, and had never
heard anything against Hayes’s cha-
racter until he read the article in the
“Herald.” There is no doubt that these
letters were written by Parkinson, who
tvas also known as Baker.
Jackson, who claims to have known
Hayes in Ohio, and was there from
1849 to 1856, says he heard of Hayes’s
marriage in Adelaide in 1857, and by an
extraordinary coincidence was in Syd-
ney when Hayes arrived.
In the “Herald” of January 13, 1860,
Is an account of a charge against
Hayes in the Police Court of obtain-
ing £53 from Captain Abner W. Kemp-
ton by false pretences at Samoa. The
case was dismissed, as there was no
jurisdiction. Soon after this Hayes
was arrested for debt and lodged in
Darlinghurst prison, Sydney. On Janu-
ary 19, 1860, he petitioned as an in-
solvent debtor, and was released. His
liabilities were £l73 —to Kempton
£53; to Charles E. Bunting £2O,
money borrowed; and to Joseph Hem-
ming £lOO, money borrowed on some
non-existent ship. His assets were
£l5 worth of nautical instruments.
Hayes was never granted any certifi-
cate by the Sydney Insolvency Court.
The Bunting from whom he borrowed
the £2O was a passenger with Hayes
from Samoa in the brig Antonio.
Hayes had a tongue which would
tempt a bird off a tree, and few could
withstand his plausibility. For some
time Hayes did not prosper. He joined
a nigger minstrel company, singing at
country races and shows, and was
seen plying this calling at the Maitland
(N.S.W.) races in 1860. In Maitland
he became acquainted with a wealthy
man named Samuel Clift, of West
Maitland, and induced Clift to finance
him to buy the barque Launceston,
which was done, Hayes being regis-
tered as owner and Clift as mortgagee,
Hayes being mortgagor. This was in
April, 1861.
The Launceston, Hayes master, sail-
ed from Newcastle with a cargo of coal
for Bombay, but she had bad weather
and put into Sydney to refit, whence
she sailed on April 13. The Launces-
ton did not go to Bombay; she turned
up at Java, and her career in Java is
given in a circular dated at Batavia
August 30, 1861, issued by the various
insurance offices in Batavia.
This recounts that the Launceston
arrived with a cargo of coals which
Hayes said belonged to him and which
Hayes sold, and then chartered the
Launceston to load back to Australia
with sugar and coffee. The Singapore
Straits “Times” of August 20, 1859,
confirmed the rumors that Hayes was
the notorious Hayes. The merchants
and underwriters were afraid to finish
loading the Launceston, and offered to
pay him the full freight if he would
cancel the charter and discharge the
cargo then loaded. To this Hayes
agreed, but apparently did not perform
his agreement, and cleared out with
cargo worth 100,000 dollars and £SOO
received from his agents. The “nurse”
this voyage was the second mate, and
he and a sailor were so disgusted with
Hayes that they escaped from the
Launceston in Java and declared they
would rather jump overboard thain
proceed with Hayes. Examination of
the papers of Hayes and the Launces-
ton showed that some of the signa-
tures and documents were forgeries.
Hayes and the Launceston then dis-
appeared. The register of the Laun-
ceston in Sydney Customs House
shows that she was sold to foreigners
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


in Sourabaya, and was written off the
Sydney register in July, 1862. I know
nothing further of Hayes till Septem-
ber 9, 1862, when the following tele-
gram from Sydney appeared in the
Melbourne “Age”:—The notorious
Captain Hayes, with the barque Cin-
cinnati, visited Sydney, and after en-
gaging passengers for Dunedin, New
Zealand, and receiving their passage
money, sailed away without a single
passenger.”
In connection with this the Otago
(N.Z.) “Daily Times” of September 24,
1862, says:—“With reference to a Syd-
ney telegram in a Melbourne paper,
Captain Hayes says that the Sydney
passengers referred to had declined to
accept the accommodation which it
was originally agreed they should have
on board the Cincinnati.”
New Zealand Experiences
On September 13, 1862, the Sydney
“Mail” reports the sailing from New-
castle of the barque Cincinnati, Hyde
master, for Otago, with the following
passengers:--Captain Hayes, Mr. and
Mrs, Glogski, Mrs, Buckingham and
daughter, four Masters Buckingham,
and Messrs, Dalton, Ridgeway, and
Conn.
Hayes, soon after his arrival in New
Zealand, “married” Miss Buckingham.
The Glogski and Buckingham families,
who were variety artists, were part of
the company which Hayes was con-
nected with in Australia and New Zea-
land. Hayes was neither master nor
owner of the Cincinnati, but had evi-
dently chartered the whole or part of
her passenger accommodation. Soon
after September 24, 1862, when the
Cincinnati arrived at Otago, she was
stranded, and became a coal hulk.
Various stories are current of Hayes’
doings in New Zealand after leaving
the Cincinnati. It is told that he
went to the Arrowtown diggings,
Otago, and built and kept a public-
house, and that he afterwards kept a
publichouse in Lyttelton. I do not
think this is true, being quite sure he
never had an hotel in Lyttelton.
It is said, with more probability,
that he was connected with a variety
company which toured Southern New
Zealand about this time, and I think
there is little doubt that he did so,
though I cannot find any actual proof
of it. In the votes and proceedings of
the New South Wales Parliament ses
sion 1868-9, in connection with the
South Sea Island labor traffic, is a
letter from Captain Robert Towns, of
Sydney, to Ross Luin or Lewin dated
May 29, 1863, in which occurs the fol-
lowing-:—“You had better call at Lei-
foo (Loyalty Islands) before Hayes
gets there and leave before he may ar-
rive.”
It is said that the Hayes mentioned
by Captain Towns was Bully Hayes,
but I can find no proof of it, and I am
doubtful if this Hayes was our hero.
From the date of the arrival of the
Cincinnati in Otago on September 24,
1862, I cannot actually trace Hayes till
April 11, 1864, when he was registered
in Sydney as owner of the schooner
Black Diamond, 88 tons register,
Hayes afterwards motgaged her to
Edward Campbell.
In the Newcastle (New South Wales)
“Chronicle” of June 23, 1864, appears
the following:
“Departure of the schooner Black
Diamond, 88 tons, Hayes master, cargo
60 tons coal, June 19, 1864, for Bris-
bane. On June 17,1864, the following
members of the crew of the schooner
Black Diamond, viz., Joseph Mitcheson,
Antony Hall, William Bird, Peter Al-
serton, were charged with being absent
without leave. They pleaded not
guilty, on the ground that the vessel
was unseaworthy. The magistrate ad-
journed the case for the purpose of
having the ship examined, but in the
meantime Hayes had obtained a fresh
crew, and taking advantage of the fa-
vorable weather he left for Brisbane.”
Hayes did not go to Brisbane, but a
Black Diamond arrived there on
June 27, 1864. There were three
schooners sailing from Newcastle
named Black Diamond. Again Hayes
chose Sunday as sailing day, viz., June
19, 1864.
The Auckland “Southern Cross” of
July 4, 1864, says:
“The brigantine Black Diamond ar-
rived in Auckland yesterday. She sail-
ed for Nelson from Newcastle June 19,
1864, with a cargo of coal. On June 22
she encountered the cyclone previously
reported by the Alarm and Amazon,
and which proved so destructive to the
latter. Captain Hayes consequently
kept his ship before the wind and
steered for this port. The gale lasted
three days, during which she lost her
fore-topsail, mainsail, and fore-top-
mast-stay sail. During one part of the
gale there were 3% ft. of water in the
hold.”
9
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


The Auckland “New Zealander” of
July 4, 1864, says:
“The Black Diamond was originally
bound to Nelson, but a disagreement
occurring between the captain and the
crew in Newcastle they were taken
ashore to the police office at Newcastle
on June 18, and as the case could not
be heard till the Monday morning the
captain got under way on Sunday with-
out them, and with three passengers
and his mate he brought her to Auck-
land.”
How Hayes improved the shining
hour in Auckland is told as follows by
the “Southern Cross” of July 19, 1864,
and it will be observed that again
Hayes sailed on a Sunday:
“PAYING WITH THE TOPSAIL.
“A brigantine called the Black Dia-
mond arrived in this port a fortnight
ago with coals from Newcastle. She
was under the command of a Captain
Hayes, and the quantity of coals he
brought in the miserable-looking craft,
which he succeeded in navigating over
from Newcastle, was very small, not
amounting to more than £lOO worth.
These were sold through his agent, and
the balance coming to him, some £3O
odd, handed over to him about the mid-
dle of last week. It was fully under-
stood, however, by the captain’s own
statement, that he would not sail until
this day, and in the meantime his cre-
ditors expected to get their money.
Some of them dunned him on Satur-
day, but Capt. Hayes politely excused
himself on the ground that the boat
race had absorbed his attention until
after bank hours; but one importunate
creditor, who succeeded in getting £lO
of his bill, was assured that on Mon-
day he would be paid the balance. Mon-
day came, however, and it \yas then
found that the Black Diamond- —which
we are informed had previously cleared
out for Nelson, whither she was ori-
ginally bound—had sailed during the
still hours of the night. Among those
who suffered are Thwaites, Hender-
son and Co., shipbuilders, who repaired
the Black Diamond, £2O; Owen and
Fendelow, ironmongers, £3O; Nicol and
Co., ship chandlers, £10; Oliver and
Son, clothiers, £8; a passenger by the
Black Diamond, for money lent, £9;
and other amounts, including cost of
water put on board. A meeting of cre-
ditors was to be held on Tuesday.”
Hayes had cleared for Nelson.
We next hear of Hayes on August
19, 1864, The Black Diamond was lying
at the Croixelles, being caulked, and
was loading firewood, when Hayes
borrowed Mr, Askew’s yacht, and his
wife, child, brother-in-law, and nurse-
maid were drowned, as detailed as fol-
lows by the Nelson “Colonist” on Fri-
day, September 2, 1864:
“THE LATE FATAL ACCIDENT AT
THE CROIXELLES.”
“Police-constable Mayo, who was
despatched to the Croixelles to make
inquiry into this deplorable accident,
and to make arrangements for search-
ing for the bodies, returned to Nelson
on Wednesday night, accompanied by
Captain Hayes, the master and owner
of the brigantine Black Diamond,
whose wife, child, brother-in-law, and
maid servant were drowned in the
sinking of Mr. Askew’s yacht in a
squall in Croixelles Harbor on Friday,
August 19. Mr. Mayo arrived at
Croixelles on Wednesday week, and up
to Tuesday evening was engaged in
searching for the bodies of the three
persons who had not been found and
in taking official evidence regarding
the painful occurrence. The names of
the drowned persons are:—Mrs. Roma
Hayes, aged 20; Adelaida Eudora
Hayes, aged 13 months; George Buck-
ingham, brother to Mrs. Hayes, aged
23; and Mary Cowley, the maid ser-
vant, aged 15. The body of the child,
which was found on the beach near
the Boulder Banks, was disinterred on
Sunday in the presence of a number of
witnesses. It had scarcely begun to
decompose, and, with the exception of
a slight graze on the temple—quite a
skin wound —there was no mark on the
body. When the boat sank, which she
did instantly, the captain seized the
infant wtih one hand and his wife
with the other, while his brother-in-
law struck out for one of the islands.
Captain Hayes called to him to take
the baby, but apparently he did not
hear, and by-and-by first one oar and
then another floated in the direction of
the three, and enabled Captain Hayes
to keep up his burden longer than he
otherwise could have done. The place
he landed at was very rugged, and he
must, while in a state of mental insen-
sibility, have climbed over a rugged
point on the coast which intervened
between the spot at which he landed
and that where the ship was lying.
Under the police officer’s management
dragging was carried on around the
spot where the yacht sank, and dili-
10
BULLY HAY'ES —BUCCANEER.


gent search was made for days all
round the harbor, but without success.
None of the bodies has been found.
The yacht herself was raised by the
crew of the Black Diamond on Mon-
day last, and in it was found the coat
of George Buckingham. The hat of
the maid and the cap of Buckingham
were found about the same time as the
body of the child was discovered. Be-
fore leaving on Wednesday morning
Captain Hayes left orders to continue
to search the shores of the harbor, and
send to Nelson immediately if any of
the bodies should be found. But we
fear after this lapse of time that there
is little likelihood of their being found,
late gale and upsetting of our boat at
the Croixelles.
“ ‘To the Editor of the “Colonist.”
“ ‘Dear Sir, —I should feel obliged if
you can insert a letter of thanks from
me to the settlers of the Croixelles.
who assisted me in a most kind and
hospitable manner after the unhappy
and most lamentable loss of my wife,
child, brother, and servant during the
late gale and upseting of our boat at
the Croixelles.
“ ‘The names of those I feel especially
grateful to are Mr. and Mrs. Alexan-
der Rankin and Mr. M'Laren, to whom
I shall feel for ever grateful for their
kind assistance rendered upon this oc-
casion.—l am, sir, yours, etc., W. H.
Hayes, master of the Black Diamond,
Nelson, September 1, 1864.’ ”
The Black Diamond remained at
Croixelles Harbor for three or four
weeks after the drowning of Mrs.
Hayes, and was brought to Nelson in
the following circumstances, as detail-
ed by the Nelson “Colonist”:
“SEIZURE OF THE BLACK
DIAMOND.
“The brigantine Black Diamond is
a vessel not unknown to fame in these
colonies any more than her unfor-
tunate ex-Captain Hayes. She is now
lying in the Nelson Harbor for sale,
but the way she was brought here has
a spice of romance in it which will
make the narrative interesting. The
brigantine was mortgaged to a person
in Sydney, who, being unable to re-
alise or to obtain interest, resolved
to foreclose as soon as he or his agents
could get a chance of laying hands on
the ship. Instructions to that effect
were accordingly sent from Sydney to
Messrs. N. Edwards and Co., of Nel-
son, It was known that the Black
Diamond was lying in some part of
the Croixelles Harbor, loading fire-
wood, and to get there, armed with
legal authority for her seizure under
the powers of the mortgagee, before
it was possible for her to leave the
colony, was the object to be accom-
plished. Mr. W. Akerstein, of Nelson,
undertook the task, which was deemed
one of some difficulty, and it might
be of some risk. He selected a whale-
boat’s crew of six stout fellows, most
of whom were sworn in as special
constables. The boat was towed by
the Lyttelton steamer down to Croix-
elles, which was reached in the even-
ing, but no sign of the Black Diamond
was visible. The crew pulled about
the harbor and into various nooks for
about six hours, and at last, about 3
o’clock in the morning, came on the
brigantine, lying calmly at anchor
near the very top of the harbor, in a
sheltered spot pretty well excluded
from outward observation. Cautiously
she was approached, and as cautiously
but quickly boarded by Mr. Akerstein
and his men, all hands being below in
their berths. The captain first made
his appearance on deck, inquiring in
brief but emphatic language to what
he was indebted for the honor of such
an early morning call. The mission of
his visitors was promptly explained,
and the demand as speedily made for
either the sum named in the mortgage
deed or the possession of the ship.
The money was not forthcoming, be-
cause it was not there, and the visitors
were dared to seize the vessel. The
reply of Mr. Ackerstein was made to
his crew to ‘man the windlass.’ An
incident is narrated of an axe being
thereafter seized, briefly flourished,
and at a word from the chief of the
captors sent spinning into the placid
waters, and its flourisher pinioned and
made harmless until he promised good
behavior. The capture was complete.
The anchor was hove up, sails set, and
in 30 hours from the time Mr. Aker-
stein and his crew left Nelson on the
mission of seizure the Black Diamond
was lying securely at anchor in Nel-
son Harbor. It is as nice a little bit of
‘cutting out’ as we have heard of for
some time.”
Hayes remained about a fortnight in
Nelson, during which he had quite a
lively time.
COURT CASES.
On Friday, September 30, 1864, Cap-
tain Hayes was sued by James Paw-
11
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


son, a laborer, for £l7, for payment of
wages due from August 19 to Septem-
ber 23, for cutting firewood and for
doing other work on board the Black
Diamond, and in connection with that
vessel W. Turner, seaman and laborer,
also sued for £l7, and W. G. R. Hol-
land for £7. Evidence for plaintiff
was that they were engaged by Hayes
at 10s. per day and their food. Hayes
denied the terms of the bargain, but
it was proved by the men and the sec-
ond mate, \yho heard the agreement
made. The bench deemed the claims
excessive, and gave judgment in each
case for two-thirds of the amounts
claimed. The chief mate, John Till,
sued the master and owner of the
Black Diamond on the same day for
£76 wages and cash lent to the master
(Hayes). The private debt was struck
out, and after evidence (in the course
of which Hayes admitted that he had
falsified the log book by throwing
overboard the original book and writ-
ing a new one after the seizure of the
vessel on behalf of the mortgagee), the
owners were found liable to the plain-
tiff in the sum of £22 10s., being one-
half of the amount claimed, with costs.
On October 7 a letter appeared in
the “Colonist,” signed by W. Turner,
asking how it was that a poor man In
the province of Nelson could not get
justice, and stating that he had applied
to the R.M. to obtain a warrant for
the arrest of Hayes to prevent him ab-
sconding from the colony until he paid
him, on the grounds that Hayes in-
tended to sail by the Phoebe, which he
did on the Sunday morning, the day
after he had urged the magistrate to
grant the warrant.
Apparently the Nelson “Colonist”
printed some scathing articles on
Hayes, for one day he visited the office
of the “Colonist” with the intention of
horse-whipping the editor, Mr. D. M.
Luckie. The editor was not in the
office when Hayes called, but Mr. W.
T. Bond was. Hayes produced a whip
from under his coat, and said it was
just as well the editor was not in, as
he had intended giving him a damned
good hiding for what had been writ-
ten about him in the paper. There-
after Mr. Luckie carried a heavy walk-
ing stick, but no encounter occurred.
Hayes was a great boaster, and de-
lighted to tell yarns about himself,
mostly untrue or embroidered. One
of his victims was the Mr. W.
Akerstein who took the Black Diamond
from Hayes. Ackerstein, who is dead
some years, left a large pj,le of notes
re Hayes, but there is little valuable
therein. In Ackerstein’s notes it is
said that Hayes was not Bully
Hayes’s real name, that he made a voy-
age to Sydney in the Sir Charles Na-
pier in 1842, that he got into prison
for forgery and was sent to Van Die-
men’s Land, where he, was from 1843
to 1848, and that he was once in a boat
with £500,000 worth of gold and no
food, it being suggested that Hayes was
a survivor from the Madagascar, an
Australian liner of 952 tons, which
cleared from Melbourne for London on
August 12, 1853, with 90 passengers,
86 boxes containing 64,6600 z. of gold,
and other cargo, and was never there-
after heard of. These stories have
been taken seriously in New Zealand,
and were published and re-published
there. The following is a sample:
“A judiciously written life of Bully
Hayes were the material available,
might easily be made one of the most
interesting and instructive books ever
penned. As a study in psychology
and the influence of heredity it would
have its merits; well-meaning parents
might gain some useful hints on the
evils of unwise training; but its
strongest lessons would probably be
on the futility of brutal legal punish-
ments and the foolishness of society
in endowing prisons which are only
universities of crime.
“The law once got a firm grip of
Bully Hayes in his salad days; it
treated him brutally for a compara-
tively venial offence, and if it did not
beat every spark of humanity out of
him it was because of some inherent
goodness in the man, and his saving
grace of humor. His name was neither
Hayes nor Hayston, and it is to his
credit that he did not drag it through
the dirt.
“One point must strike every
thoughtful reader, the futility of all
his cleverness. A man of the most
exceptional ability, he was often
stranded without a stiver in his poc-
kets. After the capture of the Black
Diamond he had to borrow money to
get a pair of boots —all his energies, it
seemed, were bent on revenging him-
self on that society that had outraged
him.
“Before detailing the mysterious cir-
cumstances of the drowning accident
in the Croixelles in which two of the
Buckingham family met their deaths —
12
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


Hayes’s wife and brother-in-law —it
will be necessary to hark back to Bully
Hayes’s former connection with the
Buckinghams.
“His object in bringing the Black
Diamond from New South Wales was
to put her in the lightering trade be-
tween Moko Moko and Invercargill.
But when her cargo was discharged he
found she drew too much water for
lightering. He had borrowed three
hundred pounds in New South Wales
on a bottomry bond. The law relating
to bottomry bonds is, or was, some-
thing like this: —The master or owner
is under certain circumstances au-
thorised to borrow money for outfit,
pledging the keel or bottom of the
ship—a part of the whole —as security.
In bottomry contracts it is usually
stipulated that if the ship be lost in
the course of the voyage the lender
shall lose the whole of his money, but
if she arrives safely the lender is then
entitled to get back his principal and
interest however much the latter may
exceed the legal rate. It has been held
that the extra hazard run by the lend-
er justifies his securing the highest
rate of interest. Hayes had induced
the lender to put a clause in the bond
stating that the money and interest
were to be paid when the ship was
leaving Invercargill. Hence, if she
ended her days lightering at Inver-
cargill, the mortgagee would have to
whistle for his money. But when he
found the vessel useless for the
lightering Hayes was not at the end
of his resources. He went through the
farce of wrecking her on a sandbank
in the river in perfectly smooth water.
Then he perforated her side with an
auger so that the water could flow in.
His next move was to find two masters
of small craft who could be depended
on to survey and condemn the boat
without discovering the auger hole.
She was then sold by public auction,
and purchased by Bully Hayes
through a dummy. The proceeds of
the sale, after paying the expenses,
amounted to the exceedingly satis-
factory sum—from Hayes’ point of
view—of nine shillings and seven-
pence, which amount was forthwith
remitted with solemn legal familiarity
to the astonished Sydney money-
lender.
“This little matter being satisfac-
torily disposed of, Bully Hayes turned
his attention to amusements. The
Buckingham family of variety artists
were travelling north with him, and
he got some posters out with three
feet letters, placarded Invercargill and
gave some successful entertainments,
in which he himself took a leading
part.
“January. 1863, saw Hayes on the
goldfields at Fox’s —as Arrowtown was
then called —pretty well stumped. He
was not cut out for a gold digger and
as the Buckingham family were doing
a roaring business in the Provincial
Hotel in the main street, he bethought
himself of starting in opposition. By
promises he induced men to erect a
sod building for him, about sixty by
thirty feet in size, with eight foot
walls, and to put over it a frame roof
of saplings. While Hayes was wait-
ing for the arrival of the calico to roof
his embryo publichouse, he met in the
street a Californian gold digger—a
forty-niner named Bill Barr. Both
men were thunderstruck; neither had
any especial wish to see the other.
However, they presently entered into
conversation, and the calico arriving,
Bill Barr and his mate were engaged
to sew it at a wage of two pounds a
day. The United States Hotel was an-
nounced on a flaming sign, and th&
building was shortly afterwards
opened with a lively goldfields enter-
tainment, Money came pouring in,
and for once the whole of Hayes’s em-
ployes were paid in full after a few of
the inevitable publichouse rows.
“The chief attraction of the Buck-
ingham family in their business at the
rival house was the handsome Miss
Rosa Buckingham. She possessed an
extraordinary voice, so powerful, it is
said f that she could sing ‘Bonnie Annie
Laurie’ and other popular songs to the
accompaniment of a full brass band.
Hayes out-manoeuvred the opposition
by getting her over to his hotel and
marrying her, a step that led to ac-
tual hostilities between the rival
houses and divided Fox’s into two
stormy and uproarious groups of par-
tisans.
“It had leaked out that there was a
reason for the handsome captain’s un-
usually long hair. Bill Barr, who had
no wish to make an enemy of Hayes,
swore the rumor did not come from
him. He had, however, been one of
the players in a little game of poker
in Sacramento that was only too well
remembered by Bully Hayes. One of
the losers, detecting something sus-
picious in Hayes’s play, whipped out
his bowie knife and with a swift stab
pinned his man’s hand to the table. In
13
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


the excitement that followed some
cards slipped out of Hayes’s sleeve.
One of the losers pleaded pathetically
for the privilege of stringing him up
on the nearest tree, but the ma-
jority decided that a little ear-crop-
ping would meet the case.
“The story reached the infuriated
Buckingham family, and the prompt-
ly visited the several barbers in the
mining camp, quietly offering a five-
pound note to the one who would cut
Hayes’s hair short the next time he
patronised them. Soon pretty well
everybody was in the secret but Hayes
himself, and a fair amount of wager-
ing went on all over the camp as to
whether he had one ear cropped, or
both i or whether the whole story was
a myth. There was also much specu-
lation as to how long it would be be-
fore Hayes visited a barber’s. Pre-
sently word flew round that the unsus-
pecting host of the United States Hotel
was at the hairdresser’s. Excitement
was at fever-heat, and the number of
digger who straight away set out to
have their hair cut at this particular
barber’s was considerable. Hayes was
found wrapped up in the usual sheet
and gossiping good-humoredly as the
barber plied the scissors. With a fe\V
deft and apparently casual snips the
deed was done, and when the piratical
publican surveyed himself in the glass
he perceived that it was now obvious
to the whole world that he had but
one ear to his head. The nature of
his remarks to the barber, or whether
that gentleman stayed to listen to
them, has not been chronicled. All
that is known is that for some con-
siderable time afterwards Hayes ap-
peared with a carefully bandaged head,
promiscuously threatening to put cold
steel into all and sundry for the trick
that had been played upon him.
“The camp enjoyed the joke hugely,
and the Buckingham family, despite
the loss of their star attraction, again
soared into popularity. Their ingeni-
ous revenge had tickled the public
fancy. Determining to make the most
of the incident, they conceived the idea
of putting it on the stage for the en-
tertainment of the patrons of their
hotel. With the assistance of the
rough and ready wit of the place, the
family concocted what they described
on their bill-boards as ‘that side-split-
ting farce “The Barbarous Barber,” ’
to which the charge for admission
would be ten shillings. This was too
much for Hayes and his friends, who
tried to block the entrance to the
Buckingham Hotel on the eventful
night. But they were lured away i and
the crowd surged in. A local celebrity
‘made up’ as Hayes, and duly under-
went a fearful and wonderful course
of barbering every night for several
weeks to the huge delight of the dig-
gers, and the disgust of Hayes, who
fumed and raged and threatened libel
actions.
“However, nothing came of it all.
The fun palled, new rushes broke out,
and soon Fox’s itself was practically
deserted. The rival publicans betook
themselves elsewhere, and their feuds
became but a memory in the rollicking
life of the place.”
Probably the only correct statement
in the foregoing is that Hayes had
only one ear, but he may have been
born minus that organ. The whole
story about the Black Diamond is
untrue, and probably also the story
about Hayes at Arrowtown. We lost
touch of Hayes on October 8, 1864,
when he left Nelson in the Phoebe.
On November 5, 1864, the cutter
Wave (Mathews master) cleared from
Lyttelton in ballast for Akaroa; pas-
sengers, Captain Hayes, Mr. and Mrs.
Glogski, W. Buckingham, E. Bucking-
ham, J. Strang, and J. E. Chalmers.
The Glogskis and Buckinghams were
passengers with Hayes in the Cin-
cinnati, and the passengers by the
Wave were evidently a variety troupe
of artists. The Wave arrived at Aka-
roa on November 8, 1864, and next
day, the Prince of Wales’ Birthday,
an entertainment was given at the
Town Hall, Akaroa, on Wednesday
evening, November 9, 1864, by a com-
pany of performers calling themselves
“The Buckingham Family.” A large
audience testified by their applause
that they were pleased and were not
disappointed. The company are en
route to Oamaru and Moeraki in a
small cutter cajled the Wave, and
merely made a passing call at Akaroa.
Hayes evidently did not stay long
with the variety troupe, for on Decem-
ber 19, 1864, the Wave, 10 tons (Hayes
master) arrived from Akaroa at Lyttel-
ton in ballast. Neither the Lyttelton
Customs nor I can find any re-
cord of the Wave sailing from Lyttel-
ton, but she did sail, as the following
shows;
14
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


From the Auckland “New Zealan-
der,” February 1, 1865:
•THE BLACK DIAMOND AGAIN.
“The notorious W. H. Hayes, late
master of the Black Diamond, has
turned up in a new character. It will
be recollected that not long since he
drowned his wife, child, nurse, and
brother-in-law, and that he ran away
with a vessel from Newcastle, which
he had repaired and refitted at the
expense of some Auckland firms. The
autobiography of William Henry
Hayes is thus continued by the ‘Marl-
borough Times,’ New Zealand, of Janu-
ary 20, 1865; —Abduction. A most
heartless case of abduction was a few
days ago brought under the notice of
one of the Picton, New Zealand, jus-
tices, but under the peculiar circum-
stances of the case he was unable to
afford any redress to the injured party.
It appears that Hayes, commander of
the cutter Wave, 10 tons, put in last
month at Akaroa, and in a hotel at that
place met a young girl named Helen
Murray, 16 or 17 years of age, a native
of Ireland, a well-educated and intelli-
gent girl, who had lost both parents.
Hayes prevailed on her ‘by fraud and
persuasion,’ which constitute the crime
of abduction, to accompany him in his
cutter to Lyttelton, for the purpose, as
he falsely stated, of +here joining seve-
ral other girls and young women whom
he had engaged to go to China as
part of a theatrical company he was
then organising; that those females
were on board his ship at Lyttelton,
and that a Mr. Chalmers was to in-
struct her and the others in all that
was necessary to fit them to appear on
the stage. The glowing language in
which the bright future was represen-
ted induced the girl to embark, and
the Wave, 10 tons register, sailed for
Lyttelton.
“Hayes, however, had no intention of
visiting that port, and stood on for
Pegasus Bay. Mr, Chalmers left the
craft there, and proceeded to Lyttelton.
After his departure Mr. John Till and
Mr. Frederick Sievwright joined the
cutter, and she sailed for Nelson. Mr.
Till holds a certificate as master mari-
ner, and has commanded a ship be-
tween England and India for years.
The remainder of his narrative is in
his words as nearly as we can remem-
ber them. After boarding the Wave
and getting under way, Mr. Till ob-
served that Hayes was particularly at-
tentive to the young woman, but that
she studiously avoided him, and seem-
ed to have a particular aversion to his
company. She had begged to be put
ashore at Pegasus Bay, but Hayes
would not do it. They had bad wea-
ther, and were obliged to take shelter
at a whaling station near East Cape,
where they remained two nights and
a day. Here again the girl tried to
get ashore, but Hayes would not al-
low her. He promised to send her
back from Nelson to Lyttelton, and the
weather moderating, they again set
sail. The apartment in which Hayes
slept below, and a similar one for the
two men forward, was the only shel-
ter which the cutter afforded, but all
Hayes’s persuasions and entreaties
could not induce the girl to share the
one occupied by him. During wet and
stormy nights she remained on deck,
and one night in particular, when the
waves were washing over the cutter,
she sometimes clung to the mast, and
during a temporary lull would cling to
one of the men, entreating him to save
her. The days she spent in crying and
sobbing, and the nights in terror and
anxiety, wet and cold. The conduct of
Hayes towards her had undergone a
complete change, and he now treated
her cruelly, using the most disgusting
and threatening language, from which
he would frequently deviate by induce-
ments to go below, but she firmly re-
sisted. Matters stood thus when the
cutter entered Tory Channel and an-
chored near Jackson’s whaling station
for one night. She sailed next day
with a head wind and a heavy sea, but
was driven back, and obliged to an-
chor under Long Island, near Mr. Heb-
ley’s pilot station. That night Hayes
lost all command of himself and deter-
mined that the girl should go below
or he would put her ashore. He drag-
ged her most violently, tore off her
clothes, and eventually lifted her into
a boat to lake her ashore. The night
was wet and cold, and with a view to
compel her to go on board again on his
own terms he represented her to the
pilot as a character that no respect-
able man would admit into his house.
By this time, however, Mr. Till and Mr.
Sievwright had reached the house,
contradicted the statement of Hayes,
and refused to re-embark or sail any
further with him. Mr. Hebley enabled
Hayes to bring the cutter to Picton for
the purpose of engaging a couple of
hands. She arrived at Picton on Janu-
ary 13, and sailed again for Nelson on
Saturday, January 14. Meanwhile Mr.
15
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


Till, Mr. Sievwright, and Helen Mur-
ray arrived at Picton, and Mr. Till pro-
ceeded to the Government offices and
reported the case to a justice of the
peace. Our legal machinery could only
punish Hayes for a common assault if
we could catch him, but in our opin-
ion a Supreme Court would treat the
case as one of abduction.
“Hayes has escaped for the present,
and we are happy to say that Helen
Murray was at once taken into the
family of a gentleman at Picton, where
she has a more suitable situation than
that which she was induced to leave.”
It is a coincidence that two girls
Hayes tried to debauch were named
Murray—Cornelia Murray on the Bl-
lenita and Helen Murray on the
Wave. John Till, it will be remem-
bered, was mate with Hayes in the
Black Diamond, and had lent Hayes
money. Frederick Sievwright was
probably the F. H. Severwright who,
in 1869, was said to have applied to
Hayes to provide him with colored
labor, probably as a blind, as he sailed
with Hayes in the Atlantic and was
on board when Hayes was arrested.
Chalmers is mentioned as a passen-
ger with Hayes in the Wave to Aka-
roa from Lyttelton.
Apparently Hayes had stolen the
Wave, and the following shows the se-
quel, which occurred in January, 1865:
DEATH OF GEORGE BRITT
Who Arrested Hayes in 1861 in
Now Zealand
Captain Bully Hayes, of world-
wide piratical fame, says the Nelson
“Mail,” who has recently been set up
as a hero of romance by Australian
writers of Action, and who will prob-
ably, as time rolls on, be gilded with
posthumous glory, belongs to the rap-
idly-vanishing past.
Mr. Britt was the only survivor of
the boat’s crew that sailed down Queen
Charlotte’s Sound in the late summer
of 1865, armed with a warrant to ar-
rest Hayes, who was “wanted” for run-
ning off with a cutter from Akaroa and
for abducting a girl. The boat’s crew
comprised Alfred Bragge, George Britt,
and Captain Hebberley, all of whom
were sworn in as special constables,
and were under the command of Con-
stable Overend, of Picton. Hayes
used to boast to his cronies, and not
without reason, that one of his best
points was picking up a ship and a
stewardess on the cheap. It is worthy
of note that two late Nelson residents,
Mr. George Britt and Mr. Wm. Aker-
stein, both outwitted the redoubtable
“Bully.” Mr. Akerstein commanded the
boat’s crew that seized Hayes’s schoo-
ner, the Black Diamond, in the Croix-
elles, just after the lamentable drown-
ing of Hayes’s family in that harbor
in 1864.
When the warrant from Akaroa
reached Constable Overend at Picton,
he made inquiries about the Sound and
learnt that a strange craft had been
seen anchored behind Pickersgill Is-
land. Fortunately for their enterprise,
Hayes had been put in his berth that
night in a state of intoxication. He
awoke from a drunken sleep to stare
into the muzzle of Constable Over-
end’s revolver, and with Britt and
Hebberley pinioning his arms. As
usual, however, he was clever enough
to escape the meshes of the law. Hayes
blustered when released, and declared
that he would get the best lawyer in
the colony, and commence an action
for £5OO damages. He hinted (unsuc-
cessfully) that if they handed him over
the cutter and stores he might be in-
duced to let the action drop. Mr. Britt,
who had an excellent memory, remem-
bered one curious circumstance —that
the picturesque desperado had a pair
of curling-tongs amongst his belong-
ings in the cabin that were evidently
in constant use.
“He was a bad-looking man,” said
Mr. Britt, when dwelling on his re-
miniscences. “A fine, well-built man,
but there was something bad about his
eyes. You could not move without
their following your slightest motion.”
South Sea
Island Trading
It did not take Hayes long to get
going again, as on February 1, 1865,
at Wellington, Hayes was registered
as sole owner of the schooner Sham-
rock, 71 tons register, and further-
more the vessel was not mortgaged.
I do not know where Hayes got the
£5OO or more to buy the Shamrock, but
one of the New Zealand papers tells a
story of how a lady known as the
“Bull Pup” once Ananced Hayes to the
purchase of a schooner, and perchance
this was when she did so.
16
BULLY HAYES— BUCCANEER.


In February, 1865, the Shamrock
sailed from New Zealand for the
South Sea Islands and left Fiji for
New Zealand on May 8, 1865, arriving
at Lyttelton on May 19 with several
passengers, 60,000 oranges, 4000 lemons,
2000 cocoanuts, 10 pigs, and a pack-
age of curios consigned to W. H.
Hayes, who was, of course, the master
of the Shamrock. The Shamrock was
in Lyttelton for over three months. In
July, during a gale, she broke away
from her holding tackle, but the chief
officer made sail and proceeded down
the harbor, and fortunately got her un-
der the shelter of the land below
Rhodes Bay.
The Shamrock sailed from Lyttelton
for the South Sea Islands, via Wan-
ganui, on July 26, 1865. Hayes was
short of money after his long stay
in Lyttelton, therefore on July 25, 1865,
he mortgaged the Shamrock for £53 at
12 per cent, to Hargreaves Bros., of
Lyttelton. On Sunday, January 7,
1866, the Shamrock left Fiji for Lyttel-
ton, and on Sunday, April 2, 1866, re-
turned to Lyttelton from Fiji and
Tonga, with 30,000 oranges, 20,000 le-
mons, 15,000 cocoanuts, 50 hogs, 2
canoes, oil, shell, coral, war clubs,
spears, and house mats. She -was off
Wanganui bar on Sunday, March 25,
1866, and sent her boats ashore to land
passengers and luggage. The boat in
charge of the mate was swamped on
the Wanganui bar, and four passen-
gers were drowned.
From the Auckland “Weekly News, ’
December 18. 1902:
The following is by Mr. Parker, of
Eoa or Eua, one of the Friendly
Islands:
Eoa is about nine miles south-
east of Tonga, and is about 12 miles
by five miles. We were about to sep-
arate when a brig appeared in the of-
fing, so we saddled our horses and left.
Ships were few in those days, so we
lost no time in seeing what she was.
They seldom came to Eua in those days
except to ship wool. In May whalers
used to come to pick up what pro-
visions they could buy from the na-
tives, go off again, and return to the
harbor at Nukualofa, sometimes to the
number of four, when I have seen as
many as 20 of« their boats, with their
snow-white sails, within a mile of the
Eua beach, looking for whales, which
used to swim close to the reef. Often
when lying at the settlement of Eua
in, a native house at night have I heard
the thundering resonance of their
tails lashing the deep close by.
But this was no whaler, but a nine-
teenth century pirate. At least, the
skipper of her was at the time I write
about very famous in the South Seas.
Though I knew him not I had heard a
little about him. Bully Hayes was his
name.
A burly, fair-bearded, good-looking
man accosted me: “You are Mr. Par-
ker, are you not?” “Yes.” “Well, my
name is Hayes—Captain Hayes, and
the ship you see anchored is the
Shamrock,” said he. “I have just
come from New Zealand, and after I
have been to church we will have a
yarn together.”
He and another man were each with
a young lady, Namu and Felicita were
their names. Captain Hayes and his
companion were each carrying the
girls’ respective Bibles when they van-
ished into the shade of the delightfully
cool thatched church, which, however,
looked curiously empty.
“What a decent-looking man,” said
I; “but what in the world can he be
carrying that woman’s Bibles for?”
“I imagine he wants to make him-
self agreeable,” was the reply; “but we
will see more when they come out..
W'e did not go in, but went to smoke
in a house close to, and waited. The
thought of our cooked cat, so lately
interred inside the parson, led us to
prefer pipes to prayers.
When Hayes and his companions
came out from divine service, “I met
your cousin. Mr. Sherbrooke, in Christ-
church; we were playing billiards to-
gether at the club,” said he.
“Yes!” I was slightly surprised, for
however this as yet to me unknown
Hayes might suit a sunny South Sea
island beach, there was a certain nu-
ance about him which would hardly be
acceptable at the place and in the com-
pany about which he talked.
“Yes, and he sent you his love and a
letter; I haven’t got it with me, but
will let you have it to-morrow.”
“When are you going?” I asked. “And
where to?”
“To Tonga. I want to buy some pro-
visions, and they say it is Sunday, so
they can’t talk of business now.”
Wanting to go to Tonga we asked if
he would give us a passage. He jump-
ed at the chance; at least he said he
would be very glad. So all was set-
tled.
“Kosi,” I said to our cook, who had
accompanied us from the heights, “why
don’t the people supply him with what
17
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


he requires; not to-day, of course, but
to-morroAV?”
“You don’t know Misa Baka, but no
good man.”
“What has he done?”
“He was here 12 moons ago, and he
behaved very badly.”
This was all I could get out of him,
so told him to go to the top of the
hill and bring us down what things we
wanted, as we were going over to Ton-
ga and would be a week away.
At al?out one in the morning, hot
with the heat of the summer night, I
went to the beach. The waning moon
about to rise, as the glare behind the
summit of the mountain showed, was
as yet invisible. I had just squatted
under a rock when I heard voices and
stealthy steps approaching, and the
former were familiar. They were
those of Namu, Felicita, and Kosi, our
cook! The rogue! I had thought he
was asleep at our house long ago,
whereas he must have been taking
bribes from the nineteenth-century pi-
rate, and was now doing his dirty
work.
“Is the skipper on board?” said he.
“Long ago,” replied Felicita. “Tell
my mother that Namu and I have gone
to Haluma (a distant village) to gather
shellfish, and that we may be some
time away.”
Then two almost silent plunges into
the sea. noiseless as a seal’s, a swirling
of water from their limbs, as the girls
gently struck out, and silence for a
minute or two. Then the almost in-
audible sound of oars in their row-
locks, decreasing at each stroke, and
silence again.
I was much puzzled by all this. Not
by the girls’ action, but by that of
Kosi, the cook. For this delightful
Polynesian had but a few hours pre-
viously been expatiating to me about
the iniquity of Hayes, and here he was
abetting him.
“But he is a Polynesian, and they
have funny w'ays of doing all sorts of
funny things,” I said to my brother,
who had just joined me. I told him
all I had seen. We agreed to say no-
thing about it.
There had been an increasing glare
in the sky now for some little time
behind the mountain, and presently the
crescent rising above it shed its faint
light on the passage, reef, and sea be-
yond. We could just see dimly the
white sides of the Shamrock riding
gently at anchor.
“Yes, it is funny,” said my com-
panion, “the unwillingness of the na-
tives to sell him anything, when we
know they have plenty, and this run-
ning away of the girls. But in any
case he can have no object in run-
ning off with us, and is sure to land us
in. Tonga safely. Besides, he says he
has a letter for us, which we must get
from him. Let’s to bed again, and talk
things over in the morning.”
Now, all this is more interesting to
people in the colonies and in the islands
than to anywhere else, for in the for-
mer places this man was only too well
known. His life was bad, and his end
was sad, but perhaps not sadder than
he deserved. I can only write of the
man as I found him. He might have
stolen £5O from me very easily, where-
as he only stole £43, and that’s some-
thing to his credit in the Recording
Angel’s books.
Next morning there was the same
gentle trade that had been blowing the
day before. Hayes sent a boat for us,
and we were rowed on board. His
wife, a rather nice-looking white wo-
man, was on board with him, with two
infants —twin babies. The Shamrock
looked as though care was taken of
her. There was no untidiness on the
decks or below, and she was scrupu-
lously clean. All that struck us was
the numerous kinds of firearms, all
polished as table silver, evidently to
be ready at a moment’s notice.
We were hospitably received, and
had a much better dinner than in those
days you generally used to be given
on board a trader. There were in the
cabin some really beautiful curios.,
consisting of helmets made out of the
red-tail feathers of the boatswain bird,
clubs, curious bowls, and I don’t know
what besides. The pirate gave us
some of these, and presented me also
with a splendid pair of field-glasses,
with which I was much delighted.
“Thank you very much,” I said; “but
now you might as well give me the let-
ter you say you have of mine.”
“Oh, there is plenty of time. I will
give it to you before we part. It is in
one of my lockers below.”
Not thinking the letter would be of
much importance I assented, and we
gave ourselves up to the full enjoy-
ment of the short voyage. We vainly
looked about to see, if Felicita and
Namu were on board, but there were
no signs of them. They must have
been well stowed away. The wind was
so light that it was nearing sundown
18
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


when we anchored at Nukualofa. It was
decided that the King should not be
approached concerning provisions un-
til next day.
To account for our reception by His
Majesty King George, next morning, I
must be retrospective. Not to be wea-
risomely so 1 will only say that when
last here Hayes had got all the pro-
visions he wanted, and paid for most
of them. This done, he had tried to
carry off a white girl, who was on a
visit to a trader in Nukualofa. In this
he signally failed. But he went to
Eua and carried off two women from
there, it was said by force. But hav-
ing seen what I saw on his second visit
I should take this with a grain of salt.
But, however this may have been, the
old chief was furious against him, as I
will now relate.
Next morning, not feeling quite com-
petent to translate myself, I told Hayes
he had better get someone else to do
it, and I advised him whom to get. I
left the curiosities and glasses the pi-
rate had given me on board, saying I
would call for them again, and went
on shore with him in his boat, found
the interpreter, and passed into the
presence of Tongan Royalty. Oh, Jeru-
salem! How black it was! Not so
much its skin, which, goodness knows,
was dusky enough, but the expression
of it.
This fine old Polynesian when he was
angry looked it well. There was said
to be a vein running down his fore-
head which rose up only when in ex-
treme anger. I did not see the vein,
though I looked for it; but he did very
well without it.
“You can tell this man you have
come with from Eua that he shall have
nothing here. I have sent messages
round to all the people to sell him no-
thing, and he will not get a cocoanut
from my people,”
This was translated by the transla-
tor to the pirate, who coolly said:
“How about water?”
“Water!” said the King. “Tell him
he can have water, but nothing else.”
Hayes was not really short of water,
so he said, with much nonchalance,
“the best thing he could do was to
clear out.”
“And tell him, too,” vociferated His
Majesty, “that were it not for my laws,
which I respect so much, I would order
my people to break him up.”
The old gentleman looked so angry
that I verily believe even Bully Hayes
was cowed. In any case, he got into
his boat and quietly rowed off.
The King’s face changed after the
pirate’s departure and got pleasanter.
He asked us to drink kava with him,
and pulled out a bottle of brandy from
under the Queen’s bed. I was pleased
at this, for I thought the old man was
angry with me, too. There must have
been inspiration in the bottle, for its
contents had no sooner touched my
lips than flashed upon me the recol-
lection of my glasses, curios, and the
letter. Finding out the cause of my
disturbance the King kindly told two
of his attendants to row me off.
“I’ll go with you, too,” said an old
hand, a blacksmith, who it appeared
had done some work for Hayes the
last time he was here, and for which
he had never been paid.
The Shamrock had just tripped her
anchor, and was gently moving, when
we arrived alongside. The pirate was
laughing.
“Oh, here are your things I gave you
—the curios and the field-glasses—
catch!”
“And the letter?” gasped I.
“Here you are,” and he smiled again
as he threw it to me. “I would have
given it before, so that you might have
answered it by me, had I remembered
it. Good-bye!”
“And how about my pay for doing
the ironwork last time you were
here?” shrieked the blacksmith.
“You and your ironwork may go to
hell!” was the pirate’s answer. “If you
attempt to climb up I will shove you
overboard if I don’t brain you.”
Very violent but justifiable vituper-
ations on the part of Jim.
Just then, above the Shamrock’s taff-
rail, popped up the heads of Felicita
and Namu, their mouths showing the
white teeth in them, and grinning from
ear to ear. They waved their tappa:
‘Good-bye! Good-bye!” And this was
the last that the Friendly Islands or I
ever saw of Bully Hayes, the nine-
teenth-century pirate, Namu, or Feli-
cita.
On the way to the shore, after con-
doling with the cursing and much-
wronged blacksmith, I opened the let-
ter from New Zealand, which the pi-
rate had smilingly tossed to me. Oh,
horror! My friend in Christchurch had
been fool enough to entrust him with
£5O for me. I only hope that I did
not put my present companion into the
shade by naughty language. This,
however, would have been rather dif-
ficult, or rather utterly impossible. It
was a w'onder that he even gave me a
field-glass, perhaps worth five pounds,
19
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


and some other things, perhaps about
two more, in exchange for the fifty
pounds he had stolen from me, for he
had and has since treated many of his
victims much worse than he did me.
But it was the plausibility of the ruf-
fian which riled me.
On May 3, 1866, Hayes sold the
Shamrock in Lyttelton, and on May
28, 1866, bought the brig Rona, 150
tons register, formerly the Anglo-
Saxon, built at Falmouth, State of
Maine, U.S.A., in 1850, mortgaging her
for £ 970 to Ritchie and Hargreaves,
whom he never paid. On May 31, 1866,
the Rona (Hayes master) cleared from
Lyttelton for Fiji.
Mr. E. J. Turpin, afterwards secre-
tary to the British Consulate of Fiji
and Tonga, was a passenger to Fiji
from Lyttelton on this voyage of the
Rona. Her cargo included 40
cases brandy, 60 cases Geneva, 8
packages sugar, 20 pilot jackets, 24
scarfs, 2 boxes soap, 8 boxes tea, and
sundries, all for Hayes. On Septem-
ber 12, 1866, arrived at Lyttelton
with & cargo of oranges, lemons, cocoa-
nuts, limejuice, and oil, and sailed for
Guam on October 1, 1866, taking drap-
ery, flour, potatoes, sugar, salt, soap,
and preserved meat as cargo. On De-
cember 11, 1866, the schooner Neva
arrived at Auckland from Rarotonga,
and reported that the Rona was load-
ing fruit for Hokitika, via Tongatabu.
On December 28 the Rona arrived at
Hokitika with 50,000 oranges, 50,000
limes, 80 pigs, 200 pineapples, 200 cit-
rons, and a quantity of South Sea
curios. She had also two passengers
—J. Booth and S. Miller —and her
agents were Carey and Gilles.
Both these gentlemen are now (1914)
in Sydney, viz., Mr. J. R. Carey, of
the “Daily Telegraph,” and Mr. A. W.
Gilles, of Challis House. This was
Hayes’s last and most famous appear-
ance in New Zealand. The mortgagees
of the Rona tried to seize her, but
Hayes was too quick for them. He
had his cargo sold by auction, and got
his ship cleared on New Year’s Day
and sailed. Hayes had landed at
Foxe’s River on December 26, the
Rona meantime standing off and on.
After a few hours she headed for
Hokitika, and anchored in the road-
stead. On the morning of Friday, De-
cember 28, 1866, a breeze sprang up,
the anchor chain broke in the hawse
pipe, and the. Lioness towed the Rona
inside. On Saturday the cargo was
sold by auction, and, barring the fruit,
fetched fair prices, the curios, mats,
etc., especially being eagerly pur-
chased.
Hayes finished his business on Sun-
day and Monday, December 30 and 31,
received the .proceeds of his cargo,
cleared the Rona at the Customs bn
New Year’s Day, and got to sea in a
hurry. He had only just got out of
Hokitika when the officials with au-
thority to seize the Rona arrived.
The West Coast “Times” of Friday,
January 4, 1867, says:—“Some potent
attraction on shore must have influen-
ced the movements of the brig Rona,
for, although she sailed on Wednesday,
she hung about the coast until yester-
day, and then, after communicating
with the Lioness, took her final depar-
ture.” It is said Hayes had lent his
flags for New Year’s decorations and
waited for them. It is also said that
Hayes said he had some tons of gun-
powder, aboard, which he sold to the
Maoris, and it is alleged that though
he was paid for his curiosities he did
not deliver them. All that is certain
is that he had to get away, or the
Rona would have been seized by the
mortgagees.
The Auckland “Southern Cross” of
January 16, 1867, says;
“CAPTAIN HAYES AGAIN.
“THE BRIG RONA.
“The veritable Captain Hayes, of
Black Diamond notoriety, arrived off
the port (Auckland, N.Z.) yesterday
morning with the brig Rona for pro-
visions on his way from Hokitika to
the islands. Not being desirous, how-
ever, for obvious reasons, of renewing
his acquaintance with various Auck-
land merchants, the captain contented
himself with sending his mate to town
for the purchase of stores, etc. On his
arrival with two boats well manned,
the mate described himself as master
of the brig Hayward, three months out
from Adelaide on a trading voyage, run
short of provisions, and purchased a
supply of oilmen’s stores, ship chand-
lery, provisions, etc. He produced no
ship’s papers and was not communica-
tive as to his voyage, refusing to make
any report.
“Captain Williams, boarding inspec-
tor and searcher of H.M. Customs, left
for the vessel during the day, and on
20
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


his return in the evening reported her
to be the brig Rona (Captain Hayes),
with a clearance from the Hokitika
Customs, bound to the South Sea Is-
lands in ballast. Captain Hayes was
accompanied by his wife and two
children, and mustered a strong crew.
The vessel was found in a dilapidated
condition, and Captain Williams en-
deavored to persuade Hayes to put into
port, but of course without success.
Captain Williams stated that he found
the vessel about three miles outside
Rangitoto, and on , bearing towards
her orders were evidently given to
weigh anchor, as sail was attempted
to be made shortly afterwards, but
not, however, until Captain Williams
had succeeded in approaching her. She
continued to stand off and on while
Captain Williams remained, but after
he had left bore in shore and dropped
anchor again to await the return of
the boats.
“The Rona arrived at Hokitika on
December 28, 1866, from the islands
with a large cargo of fruit, and Cap-
tain Hayes reports having sold well
and left again on January 2, 1867, for
another cargo. The Postboy, which
arrived last night, reports having pass-
ed a brig standing to sea ouside Ran-
gitoto. This would doubtless be the
Rona taking her departure.”
Thus Bully Hayes took his final de-
parture from New Zealand.
Again in the South Seas
We next hear of Hayes at Savage
Island, Niue. Basil Thompson and
others say that Hayes, in January,
1867, landed Mr. R. H. Head as trader
for him. Mr. Head was on Savage
Island for 30 years or more after this.
The missionary ship John Williams
was wrecked on Savage Island on
January 8, 1867, and Hayes bought the
wreck for 500 dollars. It was said that
Hayes refloated the John Williams, but
this is denied by Captain Turpie in the
Sydney “Morning Herald” of June 27,
1868.
James Chalmers, a missionary who
was on board the John Williams, writes
that after being six weeks on Savage
Island after the wreck he and others
sailed to Apia, and the Rona was sent
to bring all the saved cargo to Apia,
which was done, and the Rona was
chartered to take the missionaries to
Raratonga and Huahine. Mr. Chal-
mers says Hayes was a perfect host
and a thorough gentleman, and that
Hayes’s wife and children were on
board.
The Auckland “Southern Cross” of
July 15, 1867; reports that the Rona
lost a boat and two of her crew in a
gale off Cook Islands.
Very little is known of Hayes’s do-
ings while the Rona was in among the
islands except from reports of officials
and missionaries, for the Rona was
mostly in remote and uncivilised
places.
Till after he lost the Rona, Hayes
does not appear to have gone to the
North Pacific or line islands.
Hayes as Blackbirder
In the Adelaide “Register” it is said
that on July 30, 1868, Hayes was at
Tahiti busily engaged in fitting out
the Rona for another cruise in the
South Sea Islands, and then for the
first time we hear of Hayes as a black-
birder.
On October 20, 1868, from Savage
Island, the Rev. W. Lawes writes to
the Rev. G. Morris: —“Captain Hayes
is here in the Rona waiting for his
schooner, the Samoa, daily expected
from Samoa. Is said to intend buying
a lot of pigs. Pigs are, however, a
secondary object; the primary one, I
have reason to believe, is a cargo of
men and women.”
Consul Miller, of Tahiti, writes to
Lord Stanley on December 16, 1868:
—“There has been introduced by the
brig Rona, of Lyttelton, W. H. Hayes
master, about 150 natives of Savage
Island under contract for service, who
have not, to my knowledge, complained
of having been deceived in their en-
gagement or ill-treated during the voy-
age hither.”
In his “Savage Island,” Basil Thomp-
son gives an account of how Hayes
secured a cargo of Savage Islanders by
stratagem. On March 22, 1869, the
Rona, Captain W. H. Hayes, sailed
from Huahine, Society Islands, for
California, at the same time and from
the same port as the brigantine Samoa,
owned also by Captain Hayes, sailed
for the Navigator Islands.
The Rona, on April 4, 1869, was
making a lot of water, which increased
next day, so it was decided to run for
Fanning Island, but they could not
“fetch” it, so it was decided to run for
Manihiki. On May 1 the Rona had
6ft. of water in the hold, the water
gaining on the pumps.
21
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


Next day the Rona was abandoned,
and the crew of 21 persons embarked
on board two boats. After 12 days
both the boats landed on Reirson’s
Island, and after remaining a few days
they proceeded to Manihiki, where, to
the astonishment of Captain Hayes,
he found that his Samoa had been
wrecked on the coral reef a month be-
fore, and the crew were on Manihiki.
Thus two vessels, one bound east
and the other west, belonging to the
same owner, were lost, and both cap-
tains and crews met upon a remote
and seldom visited island.
The survivors reached Navigator Is-
lands on August 20, 1869, after a long
and perilous voyage in a boat made
out of the wreck of the Samoa.
Mr. Kentledge Pritchard, U.S. Con-
sul for Fiji, was on board the Rona,
bound for California from the Society
Islands t where he arrived in the Ethan
Allen. He was ill when he embarked,
and gradually sank and died on April
15, 1869.
From Betham and Moore of Apia,
Hayes got the schooner Atlantic, and
agreed to supply a Mr. F. H. Seve-
wright with island laborers.
On October 12, 1869, the Atlantic
sailed from Apia, Hayes being master,
Hussey mate, and Sevewright passen-
ger. One of Hayes’s numerous lady
friends, named Jordan < was on board,
her brother, Joseph Jordan, also be-
ing on board and acting as inter-
preter. They proceeded to Manihiki,
kidnapped some men and women, got
some cocoanuts, then went to Puka
Puka and got some men under a false
agreement.
They arrived at Pago Pago, Samoa,
on December 14, 1869, and some of the
kidnapped people managed to tell their
story to Manga, the chief of Pago
Pago, who arranged to arrest Hayes
and release his captives.
At a given signal the natives jumped
overboard, whereupon Manga seized
the mate and some of the crew, who
were on shore, and when Hayes was
coming ashore in a native boat they
upset the boat, thereby putting Hayes’s
pistols out of action, and overpowered
and disarmed Hayes. They treated
Hayes well, and Manga sent an ac-
count of the affair to Mr. Hunkin, Bri-
tish consular agent at Leone, the capi-
tal of Tutuila, 15 miles distant. Hunkin
went to Pago Pago, arriving on De-
cember 18, 1869, and found Hayes a
prisoner, but well treated.
The Atlantic i in charge of Hussey,
her mate, was sent to Apia with the
news, and on January 9, 1870, she re-
turned to Apia with Hayes and the
others, and a consular court was open-
ed, which continued till January 23,
when Hayes had a fit.
Convicted of Kidnapping
The inquiry was finished on Febru-
ary 24, 1870, when Consul Williams
concluded that Hayes was guilty of
kidnapping, and* decided to send the
whole case to Sydney, but he could
not get anyone who had the courage
to take Hayes to Sydney, so he wrote
to Commodore Lambert for assistance.
Before the commodore could send
assistance Hayes had absconded. In
March > 1870, there arrived in Apia the
brig Pioneer, of Shanghai, command-
ed by the well-known American Ben
Pease. This man introduced the first
“blackbirds” into Fiji, and the Bri-
tish Blue Books show he was on July
5, 1865, supercargo and sailing-master
of the cutter Lily, A. K. Rae master,
licensed to convey 40 volunteer labor-
ers from the New Hebrides to Fiji.
The Pioneer was originally the Water-
lily, Aberdeen. She put into
Manila damaged in the year TB6B, and
was condemned and sold there.
On April 1, 1870, the Pioneer sailed
from Apia with Hayes on board, who
had broken his parole and bolted.
On October 3, 1870, Consul Williams
reported to Earl Granville that the
Pioneer is heavily armed with guns
and breech-loading rifles, and carries
a large crew; that after leaving Apia
she proceeded to Savage Island, and
by means of forged orders obtained
£3OO worth of produce owned by J.
and T. Skinner, Sydney. The consul
says he is informed that Pease lands
an armed party on any island, and
takes off to his vessel any cocoanut
oil he can find; in this manner he is
prowling about these seas carrying on
his piracies.
A Complaisant Consul
Consul Williams and his family af-
terwards became very friendly with
Hayes, and connived at his misdeeds,
which were reported as follows by
Commodore Goodenough to the Ad-
miralty on November 16, 1874:—“I was
at Samoa in H.M.S. Pearl in Novem-
22
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


ber, 1873. The ketch E. A. Williams
was then there under repairs. She
belonged to the sons and daughter of
Consul Williams, one of whom, Samuel
Williams, is doing duty as acting con-
sul under a warrant from his father.
Samuel Williams told me nothing of
his intentions regarding the ketch E.
A. Williams, but gave me to under-
stand that Hayes was a great rascal,
and offered to obtain evidence against
Hayes. Yet, on December 3, 1873, he
actually enters into communication
with this man against whom he had
pretended to give me information. I
consider the whole affair as most un-
satisfactory, even regarding Mr. Wil-
liams as a trader. In the position of
Her Majesty’s Acting Consul I con-
sider that he has been guilty of dis-
honest behavior, rendering him un-
worthy to continue to occupy such a
position.” And the Williams family, of
A.pia, unworthy descendants of Mis-
sionary Williams, were dismissed from
the British consular service.
A few months after Ben Pease had
rescued Hayes from the British con-
sul in Apia and had taken him away
in the brig Pioneer, Pease had dis-
appeared, and Hayes was master of
the Pioneer brig, which he renamed
the Leonora, and she flew the Ameri-
can flag, though it is doubtful if she
was legally entitled to do so.
The British Commander-in-Chief on
the China Station reported that Ben
Pease had been captured by the
Spaniards and taken to Manila. Becke
says in “A Modern Buccaneer” that
Pease was captured in the Pellew
Islands, and jumped overboard from
the Spanish warship Hernandez Pi-
zarro, and was drowned. Another ac-
count says Pease was sent to Ame-
rica for trial.
The Shanghai American consular re-
cords show that on March 8, 1869, the
Waterlily, 218 tons, Ben Pease master,
arrived from Ascension, C. A. Williams
being the owner. The records show
that she was afterwards sold in Shang-
hai. The firm of Glover, Dow and Co.
seem to have bought the Waterlily, re-
named her the Pioneer, and retained
Ben Pease as master. It is said that
the firm became insolvent, that the
Pioneer was allowed to become dilapi-
dated, and that Hayes bought her from
the firm’s assignees for a small sum in
cash and the cancellation of a claim
for wages due to himself and the
crew.
The Fiji “Times” of November 19,
1870, says: “Had H.M.S. Rosario ar-
rived at the Gilbert group a week
earlier than she did Captain Challis
might have made the acquaintance of
Captain Hayes, who left, having heard
that the captain of the American war-
ship Jamestown wanted an introduc-
tion to him.”
I do not know much of Hayes’ move-
ments after he escaped from Apia till
March 29, 1871, when the records of
the Bangkok (Siam) United States
Consulate show that the brig Leonora,
previously the Pioneer and Waterlily,
from Saigon and Indo-China, bound for
Hong Kong, W. H. Hayes owner and
master, put into the port of Bangkok
in distress, and after repairing at the
expense of most of her cargo cleared
on April 26, 1871.
The Sydney “Morning Herald” says:
“THE NOTORIOUS CAPTAIN
HAYES.
“By the arrival of the Restless from
Bangkok we learn that Captain Hayes,
who was said to have been killed, is
still alive and active.
“He is now in command of the brig
Leonora, formerly the Waterlily. This
was an armed American vessel, and for
two or three years was reported as
visiting various islands in the South
Seas under doubtful circumstances.
On a visit to China serious charges
were made against Captain Pease, who
then commanded her, and he was sent
to the United States for trial.
“The Leonora arrived at Bangkok
leaky. She discharged and docked,
having a cargo of rice from Saigon to
Hong Kong. The Leonora grounded
soon after leaving Cape St. James, and
made 4in. of water an hour. On March
10, when the Leonora left Saigon, the
colonial vessels Lady Belmore and Re-
cord were loading rice for Hong Kong.
“At 1.30 p.m. on April 27, 1871, Hayes
again put to sea light, having had the
Leonora repaired, caulked, and copper-
ed, and leaving his cargo of rice as
payment for the work, as well as other
expenses incurred in Bangkok.
“It is reported that Hayes chartered
a small schooner from a Mohammedan
at a monthly rate to go to the Philip-
pines, and thence to the South Sea
Islands, where Hayes would fall in
with her, and where, it is reported, the
Moslem would for ever lose all vestige
of his craft.”
23
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


Hayes Seized by
U.S.A. Man-of-War
The next authentic news we have of
Hayes is that on February 10, 1872, the
Americans had taken possession of Tu-
tuila, a small rocky island in the Navi-
gator group, and had “recognised” the
Chief of Tutuila.
Captain Meade, of the U.S. warship
Narragansett, was about to salute the
chief’s flag, when suddenly the Nar-
ragansett got up steam and left the
harbor in hot haste, because he heard
that Captain Hayes was at Apia in his
brig Leonora. On entering Apia the
Narragansett hauled down the English
colors which she had flown in the of-
fing and hoisted American colors. Two
boats’ crews of seamen and marines
boarded the Leonora, took possession
of her, and brought Captain Hayes
aboard the Narragansett, where he was
tried, and after two days was acquit-
ted and brought back in triumph to
the Leonora, which immediately dis-
played a variety of bunting in honor
of the event Hayes was charged with
outrages among the line islands and
with carrying too large a crew and
armament for a merchant vessel of
the size of the Leonora.
The Rev. T, Powell, who assisted in
the arrest of Hayes by Manga, the
chief of Pago Pago, in 1869, wrote on
February 21, 1872, from Samoa, to the
Rev. J. P. Sunderland, of Sydney, agent
for the London Missionary Society:
“On February 10, 1872, while the
Narragansett was at anchor, news ar-
rived at Tutuila that Captain Hayes
was at Api with an armed vessel. Cap-
tain Meade, having orders to arrest
Hayes for reported oppressive conduct
towards the Caroline Islanders, has-
tened to Apia and took Hayes prisoner.
After examining Hayes’ papers and
crew for three days Captain Meade
could find no evidence sufficient to
warrant him sending Hayes to ’Frisco
for trial, and so let him go with a
warning.
“How is it. that, with such a mass of
evidence as was collected on his de-
tention here, which is in British Blue
Books, providing his kidnapping of the
people of Manihiki, that he is allowed
to go at large?”
Mr. Powell was not aware that Con-
sul Williams, son of Missionary Wil-
liams, was then Hayes’ friend and was
assisting him.
The Sydney “Morning Herald” of
April 1, 1872, says:
“The American warship Narragan-
sett, from Honolulu, arrived in Apia in
pursuit of Captain Hayes with the in-
tention of taking him to ’Frisco, where
charges of a criminal nature have been
made against him. He was taken on
board the Narragansett, and detained
three or four days, but after a full in-
quiry was acquitted of the charges,
there being nothing more against him
than being sharper than those with
whom he had been dealing. Captain
Hayes had charge of a fine brig, which
was reported as being armed, and hav-
ing a large crew, but no arms were
found, and his crew was found to be
short of the number required.”
On his acquittal Hayes returned to
the Leonora and dressed her out with
flags in honor of his escape.
Consul Williams reported from Apia,
February 24, 1872: ”On February 19,
1872, the American corvette Narragan-
sett arrived here and arrested W. H.
Hayes, of Atlantic notoriety. It was
announced that Hayes was to be sent
to California for trial under a guard
in the Leonora, now under the Ame-
rican flag, formerly the Pioneer of
Shanghai under the British flag, and
previous to that the Waterlily, of
Aberdeen, but to the astonishment of
the Apia residents Hayes was acquit-
ted, and is now walking his own quar-
ter-deck. I have not heard any par-
ticulars, for the trial, was held on
board the Narragansett.”
Commodore Stirling, of H.M.S. Cleo,
writes: “December 11, 1872. —Captain
Meade of the Narragansett told me at
Samoa he had Hayes aboard the Nar-
ragansett for three days, and as Mr.
Williams, British consul at Samoa, de-
clined to produce sufficient proof
against Hayes, he was liberated.”
Captain Simpson, H.M.S. Blanche,
wrote: “The Leonora was thoroughly
examined and searched by the Ameri-
can corvette Narragansett. This hav-
ing been done at Samoa, I conclude
that the British consul, Mr. Williams,
would have represented to the com-
mander of the Narragansett the fact of
Hayes’ previous escape from that
island when detained by him, and the
grounds of his detention, when the
matter would have been thoroughly
sifted.”
Before and after this various depre-
dations by Hayes were reported.
G, Lechart says he sold to Hayes
on October 16, 1871, at Strong’s Island,
his vessel and goods, but Hayes re-
24
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


fused to pay him, and gave him a hid-
ing when he pressed for payment.
Louis Becke and Hayes
Very little is known of the cruises
of the Leonora, for she seldom was
even in Apia, and none of her crew,
except Louis Becke, wrote or put into
print any account of her proceedings.
Becke is untruthful, contradictory,
and untrustworthy; besides, he did not
know much of Hayes or the Leonora.
George Lewis Becke was born at
Port Macquarie, N.S.W., on June 18,
1855, and sailed from Sydney for the
South Sea Islands on March 21, 1872,
in the barque Rotumah, on which ves-
sel he had stowed away.
Five days previously the new schoo-
ner Taufaauhau, built in Sydney for the
Tongan Government, sailed from Syd-
ney for Tonga. In the “Lone Hand”
of July, 1913, in an article by Becke,
“old-time Australian Shipping,” Becke
savs: “In the Rotumah I made my first
voyage to Tonga and Samoa. We sail-
ed in company with old King George
of Tonga’s newly-built brigantine
Taufaauhau.”
In “A Modern Buccaneer” Becke
says: “I took passage in the barque
Rotumah, Captain Robertson. There
were two other passengers, a lady and
a fine old French priest.”
The passenger list of the Rotumah
for March 21, 1872, mentions Miss Old-
ing and the Reverend Mr. Padel, but
does not mention Becke.
In the “Bulletin” Red Page, Febru-
ary 27, 1913, Becke says he first left
Sydney by “stowing away” on the Ro-
tumah for Samoa. That is why Becke’s
name is not in the passenger list of
the Rotumah.
“Bully Hayes, Buccaneer,” is a re-
print of some of Becke’s writings, and
was published just after Becke’s death
in 1913. The preface says Becke was
born on June 17, 1857, which is wrong.
II also says Becke, at the age of 14,
got a berth on board the Rotumah.
Becke was nearly 17 when this oc-
curred. It further states that Becke
and his brother were both on board
the Rotumah,-and that they went on to
San Francisco.
Becke also tells this story of him and
his brother being in San Francisco in
an interview with the South Austra-
lian “Register,” June 23, 1896, and
various other of his writings. It is also
mentioned by the Earl of Pembroke in
the preface to “By Reef and Palm.” It
is untrue, like so many of Becke’s
statements.
In “Bully Hayes, Buccaneer,” and in
“A Modern Buccaneer,” Becke says he
first met Hayes in San Francisco, and
in “Jlully Hayes” Becke says: “I did
not see him (Hayes) for about five
years, and meantime I had done a good
deal of wandering in various parts of
Polynesia.” This is all untrue.
In the Sydney “Bulletin” of Febru-
ary 18, 1893, Becke says in an article
on Hayes; “About 1871, while in the
service of the North Pacific Trans-
portation Co. of San Francisco I heard
and read a good deal of ‘Bully’s’ do-
ings. The ‘Daily Alta’ used to speak
of him as a venturesome, high-spirited
American gentleman upholding the
honor of his flag in the South Seas
by disregarding the hateful tyranny of
petty British consuls, while the San
Francisco ‘Bulletin’ called him a vile
and brutal miscreant, who should be
hanged on the same gallows with ‘Ala-
bama’ Semmes and ‘Shenandoah’ War-
dell. The spitfire ‘Chronicle’ claimed
that William Henry Hayes was one of
nature’s gentlemen.”
In this article Becke says he did not
meet Hayes for long after this, and
then not in San Francisco, and a let-
ter from Hayes written after this time
is quoted, in which Hayes says he did
not know Becke. Becke had presum-
ably forgotten this article when he
claimed to have met Hayes in San
Francisco.
In “My South Sea Log” Becke says:
“In March, 1874, the Leonora, of which
I was supercargo, was wrecked on
Strong’s Island. The master and
owner was Bully Hayes, with whom
a few months after I had a serious
quarrel. The difference arose out of
Hayes’ treatment of the natives. He
and some of his numerous and ruffianly
crew acting so cruelly to them, I and
a few others of the ship’s company
protested.”
The “Bulletin” of September 20, 1906,
says: “Louis Becke’s respectability is a
tender plant these days.” Virtuous
personal slab from his “Skippers I
Have Sailed With”: “During the two
years (!'!) I was with ‘Bully’ Hayes
we visited many hundreds (!!!) of
islands, and all this time Hayes never
committed any act of piracy. I need
hardly say that had he attempted such
a thing I should have quickly severed
my connection with him.”
In the “Bulletin,” June 29, 1911,
writing of Hayes, Becke says: “Hayes
25
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


was really as mild a mannered man
as ever had a bad name fastened to
him by sensation writers.”
In the Sydney “Lone Hand” of
March, 1912, is an article by Becke,
“The Real Bully Hayes,” in which
is a “faked” picture of the Leonora.
Becke had forgotten that the Leonora,
being Aberdeen built, had full topsails.
Cunningham’s patent, as the British
Blue Books show, and as Becke men-
tioned in chapter IV. of “A Modern
Buccaneer.” His “faked” Leonora car-
ries double topsails, an American no-
tion, not much used in British vessels
in the sixties and early seventies. I
think the picture is that of the brig
Para, a noted blackbirder in the
years 1886 to 1896, but it is not the
picture of the Leonora, and Becke
knew it was not.
Becke was not 17 when he arrived at
Samoa. He procured employment at
Apia in the store of Mrs. Mary Mac-
farland, Macfarland and Williams be-
ing one of the leading Apia Arms. Wil-
liams was the British consul or son of
that official. In a “Modern Bucca-
neer” Becke says: “A short time be-
fore I arrived the American gunboat
Narragansett had suddenly put in an
appearance in Apia and took Hayes
prisoner.”
We know that this was February 19,
1972.
In “Bully Hayes, Buccaneer,” Becke
says “Hayes had been absent from
Apia nearly twelve months.” From
the British Blue Book we ‘know that
Becke did not leave Apia in the E. A.
Williams for Milli till December 3,
1873. He took six weeks to reach Milli
and joined the Leonora about the mid-
dle of January, 1874, and as she was
wrecked on March 15, 1874, Becke
was not more than two months on
board the Leonora. He could not have
even seen Hayes before April 1872, he
was less than 10 months in Hayes’
company after joining the Leonora,
and was 19 years and four months old
when he last saw Hayes. On this nar-
row foundation Becke erected his
superstructure of romance of un-
truth respecting Hayes, and posed
as an authority on Hayes’ life.
No doubt Hayes romanced to
Becke and told Becke wondrous
stories of his past. Some of this Becke
published, and in his turn told a tissue
of lies to the Earl of Pembroke re-
specting his own career, which the
Earl embodied in his preface to
Becke’s “By Reef and Palm.”
In the “Bulletin” of February 4, 1893,
is “Bully Hayes, the Pirate,” by Becke.
It is a lot of untruthful rubbish.
There is also an article by Becke,
“Bully Hayes —by his Supercargo”—
another absurd story. In this Becke
says he sailed wuth Hayes on four voy-
ages as supercargo, which is untrue.
One of the stories is that Hayes had
a watch inscribed “From Isaac Steu-
art, of New York, to Captain William
Henry Hayes, of Cleveland, Ohio, a
gift of esteem and respect for his bra-
very in rescuing the lives of 17 per-
sons at the risk of his own. Honor to
the brave.” Rather long to be in-
scribed on a watch, but if it was I have
no doubt Hayes had it done himself.
It will be noted there is no date or
other particulars by which the state-
ment can be verified. The only trace
I have of Hayes from 1872 to 1874 is
in “Camp Fire Yarns of the Lost Le-
gion,” by Colonel Hamilton-Browne,
who says:—“These were the days when
Bully Hayes, in his Leonora, swept the
seas and established a funk in any-
one not too strong or too poor for him.
We met Bully Hayes and hobnobbed
with him, finding him the most oblig-
ing and courteous of men, but then
we carried two 12-pounders and 50
good rifles.”
A British
Commander’s Report
In September, 1874, the British war-
ship Rosario arrived at Strong’s Is-
land, known also as Ualan, Oulan, and
Kusaii, and there discovered Hayes,
part of his harem, and the crew of the
Leonora brig, which had been wreck-
ed on the island on March 15, 1874.
For more than six months they had
been on the island.
The following selection is from the
“Queensland Government Gazette” of
August 28, 1875, and tells its own
story. If it is compared with what
Becke and Rolf Boldrewood published
in “A Modern Buccaneer,” it will be
seen how these gentlemen altered some
of the documents and suppressed
others. Probably Captain Dupuis was
very glad that Hayes escaped, for it
was dangerous for a British warship
to arrest an American subject in 1874,
when the “Alabama” compensation of
£3,000,000 had not long before been
paid by England to America for a
breach of international law: —
“H.M. Ship Rosario, at Sea,
“October 10, 1874.
“Sir, —With reference to Mr. Hayes,
26
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


master of the American brig Leonora,
I beg to forward the following state-
ment of facts relative to him that I
have been able to collect among the
different islands visited during the
present cruise of H.M. ship under my
command.
“1. There can be no doubt that Mr.
Hayes is a most unprincipled but
shrewd man, one who has (I now
have no doubt) committed many
shocking acts of violence on the
natives, and to say the least of them
been guilty of many of dishonesty to-
wards other persons, yet so clever is
he in methods of proceeding, and so
much has his name got to be feared
by both natives and white residents on
the islands, that, though it was evi-
dent that at nearly all the islands I
visited he was well known, yet it was
impossible to find out much about him
or his deeds. I was perfectly con-
vinced that nearly the whole of the
whites and natives were afraid to
speak out.
“2. With regard to Mr. Daly’s bu-
siness, what evidence I could get was
rather in Hayes’s favor, and tended to
show that Daly’s agents at the differ-
ent islands had sold the trade to
Hayes, instead of Hayes stealing it.
“3. On leaving the Marshall Group
for Providence Island I felt that my
case against Hayes was very weak,
that I had gained no evidence worth
mentioning against him, and that if
I found him on Providence Island I
could hardly arrest him. At Provi-
dence Island I heard the first direct
evidence against him in a case of
shockingly brutal treatment of a
young girl whom he brought from the
island of Pingelap (see statement of
Henry Gardiner, American).
“4. On entering Chabral Harbor
(Strong’s Island) Mr. Hayes (as I
have reported in my letter of proceed-
ings) came out to meet the ship in a
boat. He told me that his vessel had
been wrecked in South Harbor of the
island on March 1 this year, and that
since he had been living on shore and
collecting oil.
“Living on shore was Mr. Snow
(American missionary), who had just
arrived from Ebon Island, and num-
erous white men, part of the crew of
the late vessel Leonora, part-resi-
dents on the islands. In harbor was
a schooner under the German flag,
Mr. Milne (an Englishman) master.
“5. I commenced making inquiries
as quickly and as quietly as I could
about Hayes, but here, as at other
places, I met with the same disin-
clination from all parties to tell any-
thing they might know. Mr. Milne,
though hinting that Hayes had rob-
bed him not long since, would at first
say nothing, nor was it till after con-
siderable persuasion and the delay of
some days that I got the enclosed
statement, with the evidence of vari-
ous witnesses in the matter, from him.
But as he was sailing under German
colors I could not believe my duty
was to do more than receive his state-
ment and forward it through you to
the German Consul at Sydney. I also
accidentally heard of another case of
rape and shocking cruelty on the per-
son of a young native girl, and satis-
fied myself of its correctness. The
king or chief of the place, through Mr.
Snow, also told me he should like me
to remove Hayes from his island, as
he was afraid of him.
“Hayes, alarmed by hearing from
some of his crew of the inquiries that
had been made, left the island in a
boat on the night of the 27th, taking
one man with him. His design was,
I believe, either to make the Island of
Bouabi (Ascension) or Pingelap (Mc-
Caskill).
“6. At their own request, and also
considering it a good thing to rid the
island of them, I took five of the crew
of the Leonora on board for passage to
Sydney, and one other (Louis Beck)
who had been a passenger on board,
and from what I could hear a great
friend of Hayes. This Beck was the
person who had been sent by Mr. Wil-
liams, British Consul at Samoa, as
supercargo of the ketch that I met at
Milli (reported in the letter of pro-
ceedings), but, leaving his charge
there, he had gone to sea with Hayes,
and had been with him since January.
I considered it was desirable that he
should be removed, there being no
chance of his getting back to Milli
from Strong Island; also because the
chief particularly urged his removal
as a man likely to stir up much
trouble in the island. These six per-
sons are now on board.
“7. I visited Mr. Hayes’s residence
at South Harbor; he had made a re-
gular settlement of it. and had col-
lected a large quantity of oil. No less
than five young women or girls were
27
bully hayes—buccaneer.


living - in his house, who had all, with
one exception, been living on board the
Leonora with him. That vessel was
sunk in 14 fathoms, topmasthead a few
feet above water.
“8. The first mate I left on the is-
land, recommending him to take
charge of Hayes’s property. The sec-
ond mate ran away into the bush just
before I sailed, and' could not be
found, or I should have taken him to
Sydney with the others.
“9. Thinking the case over quietly
afterwards, I cannot see how I could
have arrested Hayes. It is, therefore,
with regret that I am obliged to re-
port my failure to collect sufficient
evidence against him to warrant my
doing so. The case of Mr. Daly must
have failed for want of such evidence.
“Mr. Milne’s case was one against a
German subject. The cases of cruelty
to the native girls could have been
proved, I think; but I considered it
would have been exceeding my in-
structions to apprehend an American
subject on such charges, and being
doubtful whether the Sydney law
would have been able to deal with
such cases. Enclosed is a list of the
crew of the brig Leonora, also several
letters and statements relative to
Hayes that I collected at Strong Is-
land.
“I have, etc.,
“(Signed) A. E. DUPUIS, Commander.
“To Commodore J. G. Goodenough,
H.M. Ship Pearl.
“LIST OF THE CREW OF THE
LATE BRIG LEONORA.
“William Hayes, American, master,
left Strong Island in a boat.
“N. Nahnsen, Dane, first mate. Left
on the island.
“Will Hicks, Fj. half-caste, second
mate. Left on the island.
“Jno. Carston, German, seaman. On
board Rosario.
“John M'Donald, English seaman.
Ditto.
“Ah-So, Chinaman, carpenter. Ditto.
“Ah-Ho, Chinaman, cook and steward.
Ditto.
“Bob, Malay, seaman. Ditto.
“Louis Beck, English, passenger.
Ditto.”
Rev. Mr. Snow to Captain Dupuis:-
“Strong’s Island, or Kusaii,
“September 26, 1874.
“Dear Sir, —I am happy to comply
with your request concerning a letter
from me as an American citizen in
regard to Capt. W. H. Hayes, who is
also a citizen of the United States of
America.
“I have known the said Hayes per-
sonally for a few years past, but have
known much more of him by reports,
which have almost invariably been
greatly to his discredit, or, as you
Englishmen would say, he has the re-
putation of being ‘a very clever rogue.’
I have hoped that a brighter phase
might open up to his character from
some source, but I have looked in
vain.
“Having heard that his vessel was
wrecked on this island, the field of
my earlier missionary labors, I availed
myself of the earliest opportunity of
getting here, that I might render such
assistance by my presence and counsel
as might be needed. The prospect of
meeting you here in your man-of-wai
capacity was another very strong in-
ducement for me to come at this time
feeling assured that you would feel
only too glad in adjusting any matters
that might need such force and au-
thority as you have at your command.
And I am sorry to find that your pre-
sence is very timely in the case of
this Capt. Hayes—‘sorry,’ for I would
fain have found such a state of things
as might not require your aid.
“Having been on this island a week,
what I can learn of the said Hayes
only confirms —yea, even strengthens—
previous evil reports I have heard of
him, so that I am constrained to say,
in all sincerity, and in the interest of
our common humanity, that you will be
doing a most praiseworthy act by tak-
ing him on board the Rosario and
taking him to Sydney, where he may
be brought under the cognisance and
jurisdiction of civil law.
“I am fully aware of the difficulty
and delicacy of your situation in thus
proceeding with a citizen of a foreign
Power, but I think I can assure you,
as a citizen of the United States, that
our Government would gladly make
common cause with our cousins across
the water in arresting and bringing to
justice such outlaws as this said Capt.
Hayes has so long had the reputation
of being. Of course I cannot speak
officially, but my firm convictions are
that the course you contemplate in
taking him to Sydney and delivering
him up to the American authorities
there will not only be approved, but
28
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


applauded. It will certainly relieve
our Micronesian seas of one of the
greatest sources of annoyance we have
had during the 20 and more years I
have been a resident missionary on
these islands.
“You will allow me to make kindly
and grateful mention of the visit of
H.M. ships Barossa and Blanche, from
whose commanders and officers myself
and associates received very kind and
gentlemanly attentions.
“Long live your noble Queen, and
long may there exist peace and the
most fraternal goodwill between our
two national Governments.
“I remain, etc.,
“(Signed) B. G. SNOW,
“Missionary of the A.B.C.F.M.’’
“To Capt. Arthur E. Dupuis,
“Commr. of H.M.S. Rosario.
“Henry Gardiner, an American by
birth, states: —In the year 1871 I en-
gaged with Mr. Hayes, master of the
brig Leonora, to go to Providence Is-
land and collect oil and any other
produce the island afforded for him.
"About July, 1872, while living on
shore Hayes came there in his vessel.
He had a young Pinjelap girl on board
with him, and one day be brought her
on shore and took her into the bush.
About half an hour afterwards I saw
the girl coming out of the bush. (What
follows is unfit for publication.) I
afterwards inquired from the women,
and they told me that he had had in-
timacy with her, using great violence.
I should say the girl was about 10
years old.
“I hereby * solemnly declare and
swear that the above is a true state-
ment.
“HENRY GARDINER.”
“We went to the Island of Pinjelap
about the month of March and laid
off. Mr. Hayes went on shore and
came on board with the chief. He
kept him down in the cabin in charge
of the second mate, and sent the na-
tives who had come with the chief on
shore to bring off 7000 cocoanuts and
two girls, saying that the chief should
not go on shore till he (Hayes) had got
them, and that if they were not sent
on board the chief should be taken to
Samoa. About 5000 nuts and one girl
were brought on board. We then left
the islands.
“The above is a true statement.
“N. NAHNSEN.”
“Emma an Ocean Island girl, came
to Strong Island in a whale ship about
six months ago. Several others came
in the same ship. Mr. Hayes on com-
ing to this island took her to his
house and assaulted her; he used most
brutal violence, and the girl bled very
much. This was about two or three
months ago; the girl is not recovered
yet, and can hardly walk. The staff
surgeon’s (of the Rosario) opinion is
that she cannot be more than eight or
nine years old. A Pinjelap called
Beloza actually saw the assault com-
mitted, and described it as being brutal
in the extreme.
“The above statement was made in
our presence.
“(Signed) A. E. Dupuis, Commander.
“(Signed) James L. Whitney, Staff-
Surgeon.
“(Signed) Lewis T. Jones, Lieuten-
“(Signed) E. J. Milne, master of
schooner Matantu.”
“John Carstens, a German, states;--
I was one of the crew of the brig
Leonora some time early in February
this year. About the month of March
in this year Mr. Hayes, in the Leo-
nora, went to the Island of Pinjelap,
hove to, and the captain went on shore
and brought the chief on board. He
took the chief down to the cabin, and
after dinner came on deck, leaving the
chief down in the cabin in charge of
the second mate. He sent the natives
on shore, telling them to bring off 5000
cocoanuts and two women, or else he
would not let the chief go on shore
again. The natives brought off between
3000 and 4000 cocoanuts and one girl.
The girl was crying, and did not want
to come, Hayes then let the chief go
on shore, and we sailed for Strong
Island.
“The above is a true statement.
“(Signed) F. A. CARSTENS.”
“William Hicks, half-caste Fiji man
states:—
I "as second mate of the Leonora.
1 was three years in that vessel.
About March we went to Pinjelap
Island, hove to, and Hayes went on
shore. Came on board bringing a chief,
or rather two. After dining he sent
one on shore to tell the natives to
bring 7000 cocoanuts on board and two
girls. The other chief he kept in the
cabin, and told me not to let him go
on deck. The natives brought between
29
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


5000 and 6000 cocoanuts and one girl,
and then Hayes let the chief go.
“About two and a half years ago he
got a young girl from Pinjelap, took
her on shore at Providence Island, and
violently assaulted her and ravished
her. The girl cried out, and was much
hurt. She was taken on board the
ship, where she was for about two and
a half months, and was then taken
back to Pinjelap. The girl was very
young, quite a child. I have known
him treat other young girls the same.
“The above is a true statement.
“(Signed) WILLIAM HICKS (X, his
mark).
“Witness to the above —A. E. Duptiis,
commander; Lewis T. Jones, lieuten-
ant, H.M.S. Rosario.’’
“Ah-So, a Chinaman—Have been on
board Leonora four years as cook and
steward. About two years ago went to
Merike Island. Plenty of cocoanuts
came off and one woman; another
woman ran away into the bush. Hayes
then let chief go on shore. Woman
cried when she came on board, did not
want to go. Some time ago, about
two years, Hayes took a young Pin-
jelap girl to Providence Island, took
her on shore and ravished her. She
bled very much when she came on
board and cried.
“The above is a true statement.
“(Signed) AH-SO (Chinese charac-
ters). *
“Witnesses to the above —A. E.
Dupuis, Commander; Lewis T, Jones,
Lieutenant, H.M.S. Rosario.”
Strong’s Island,
“September 30, 1874.
“To Capt. A. E. Dupuis, Kaptin Inglish
Man of Wa Rosario.
“My Kind Friend, —I am glad to see
your ship to my island at this time.
I think because you come Kaptin
Hayes he go. I am very glad for this.
What for he fraid mon o wa? Spose
he good man he no fraid. We think
Kaptin Hayes one bad man. Supose
he no run away, I like very much you
take him on board your ship and carrj.
him off. Another thing make me glad,
because you take away Mr. Beck. That
man no speak true. He tell Mr. Snow
‘I belong America,’ then when your
ship come he tell you he belong Eng-
land. No good man when he talk all
same that. I thank you plenty cause
you help me make my island good,—l
am,
“(Signed)—TOGUSA (X his mark),
King of Strong’s Island.
“Witness: (Signed) B. G. Snow, Mis-
sionary A.8.C.F.M.”
“Messrs. M'Farland and Williams to L.
G. Beck.
“Apia, December 3, 1873.
“Dear Sir, —You will proceed ffom
hence to Milli, Mulgrave’s Island, for
the purpose of selling the ketch E. A.
Williams. You Will find Capt. Hayes
there waiting for you, so you will
please consult with him, as he is ac-
quainted with the people who wish to
purchase the ketch. Try to obtain oil
or copra to the amount of £5OO for
the vessel. Ship whatever produce
you may get on board the Leonora and
get Capt. Hayes to sign bills of lading.
Do not sell the chronometer unless you
get a good price for it. Sell the few
things you take to the best advantage.
None of the Samoans are to remain,
but come back to Apia. Have the ketch
painted up on your arrival at Milli.
Wishing you a prosperous and speedy
voyage,
“We are, etc.,
“(Sgd.) M'FARLAND & WILLIAMS.”
“August 19, 1874.
“Know all men by these presents
that I, William Henry Hayes, master
mariner, now residing on Strong’s Is-
land, in the North Pacific Ocean, have
made, constituted, and appointed, and
by these presents do make, constitute,
and appoint Luis George Becke, of
N.S. Wales, at present residing on this
island of Kasaii, or Strong’s Island,
my true and lawful attorney, for me
and in my place and stead, to enter
into and take possession of my station,
situated at Maloe, near the village of
Utive, South Harbor, on the above-
named island; also of my oil casks,
oil, and empty casks, tobacco, and
other trade there may be on said sta-
tion, and boats, canoes, pigs, fowls,
provisions, and all and everything,
whether of value or not, and to look
after the same, together with my fur-
niture and private effects, and take full
charge of all my business on the
abovenamed island during my trip to
the eastward. I have left Harry Mul-
holland to make oil and assist you in
every possible way, to be wholly un-
der your control and orders. Get all
30
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


the cocoanuts you can, and keep mak-
ing oil.
“(Signed) W. H. HAYES.
“Memorandum of Instructions for Mr.
Luis G. Becke.”
“Sir, —As I am about to leave
Strong’s Island, and have given you
power to act in my behalf, I want you
to use every care to close up all my
affairs in the best manner you can. In
regard to the property I leave behind,
you will look after and dispose of the
same to the best advantage. The re-
mainder of the oil after you pay your-
self for the chronometer, and Mr.
Harry Skillings for the trade I had
from him, and also for making 35J
barrels of oil at 2 dollars per barrel,
you will then sell the balance as soon
as an opportunity occurs, also the
empty casks, the large cargo boat, and
all my pigs, together with any and
everything that is saleable. Anything
that you cannot sell give to the people
that have been kind to you, and the
natives. Out of the proceeds of the
sale of my property you will pay the
passage of my natives to Samoa, if
they want to go there; if not, see them
back on tfteir own island, or some
other island of the Kingsmill Group,
that they may get with their own
country people. My boy Toby I want
you to take to Samoa and look after
him as well as you can, and give him
to my wife, also Kitty, as they have
no father or mother, and both were
given to me by the king of the Hope
Island, or rather the head man, as
there has been no king since the old
one died. The stores I left behind
are for you and the natives to live on
until you can get away. The little
trade I leave you, you will be careful
of it and make the most of it, for you
know the Strong Islanders want pay-
ment for everything you get of them
to eat. You will bear in mind that
the king owes me 10 barrels of oil for
the two tripots, also there are two
head of cattle that belong to me; the
large bull I give the king as payment
for allowing the other two to run on
the island until I could dispose of or
ship them. Sell them, if you can, to
the king or Mr. Snow, as you cannot
get a chance to ship them; use your
own judgment in the matter, and do
the best you can. You will also bear
in mind that'the king and chiefs owe
me 12,100 (twelve thousand one hun-
dred) cocoanuts, the balance of the
item of 48,000 cocoanuts that they
agreed to pay to me for the loss of my
property stolen by Strong Islanders
at the time of the loss of the brig
Leonora.
“I write you an accompanying lettei
to each of my agents.. You will have
to settle with them by their own ac-
counts, as my trade book was lost, as
you are aware of; after you have set-
tled up you will please take the bal-
ance of money or property and hand
over the same to my wife, Mrs. Mary
Emily Hayes > now residing at Samoa,
as you are aware of. Out of this you
will pay your own passage and ex
penses and settle with Mrs. Hayes for
anything else you may want to charge
for your trouble. Wishing you every
success, and trusting you will arrive
safely in Samoa.
“Believe me, etc..
“(Signed) W. H. HAYES.’’
“COPIES OF PAPERS IN THE
HANDS OF MR. LEWIS G.
BECKE. LETTERS WRITTEN
BY ‘CAPTAIN HAYES’ TO HIS
AGENTS IN VARIOUS ISLANDS.
“(1) Mr. James Garstang, Island of
Nu-Kulli, Ellice Group, S. Pacific.
“Strong’s Island, September 26, 1874.
“Dear Garstang,—l am sorry to
inform you of the loss of my vessel on
this island, the 15th of last March, and
I have never see a sail since that time
till now. Mellon has come in with a
small schooner, and since his arrival I
have bin arrested by a English ship of
war, and they are goin’ to take me to
Sydney on account of the things I took
from Tarawa with Jim Porter. I don’t
now what they will do yet; I don’t
think they can do anything with me
for it; if not I will soon be with you
again. Give my respect to Bookorow,
not forgetting yourself.
“I have given Mr. Beck my power of
attorney to settle with him, then you
must do the best you can till you heer
from me again.
“I remain, etc.,
“(Signed) W. H. HAYES.”
“(2) To Mr. Marshall, Island of Oaitu-
pu, Ellice Group, S. Pacific,
“Strong Island, September 26, 1874.
“Friend Marshall, —I have lost my
vessell on this last March, and I have
never seen a sail since tel now. I am
sezed heer by a ship of war; am goion
to Sydney. But they cannot do any-
thing with me I am sure. If not, I
will be with you soon again. I have
31
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


given to Mr. Beck, late clerk at Mrs.
Mackfarlin’s stor, my power of at-
torney to settle with you. You will
please settle with him the best you can
the small amount of monney I got of
you the night I was on shore. Mr.
Beck will settle with you for I think
moor a present.
“I remain, etc.
“(Signed) W. H. HAYES.”
Similar letters to the above were
written by Hayes, addressed under
dying seal to the following persons:
3. Mr. James E. Porter,
Island of Niue, Ellice Group.
4. Mr. Geo. Brown,
Island of Ann, Marshall Group.
5. Rsin, Esq.,
Madura Island, Marshall Group
6. Mr. Thompson,
Funafuti Island, Ellice Group.
7. Jack, agent to Captain Hayes,
Milli or Mulgrave Island, Mar-
shall Group.
It will be noted that Hayes on Au-
gust 19, 1874, appointed Becke his at-
torney, and was evidently arranging
to get away from Strong’s Island, leav-
ing Becke in charge. It is also ap-
parent that Becke and Hayes had
made up their quarrel. The power of
attorney was clearly not written by
Hayes, for he could not write decent
English, or spell English words, as his
letters to Garstang and Marshall show.
The captain of the British warship
Rosario says that Hayes left Strong’s
Island on September 27, 1874, in a boat,
taking one man with him. Becke con-
firms this in “A Modern Buccaneer,”
on the strength of what was told him
by a young negro who came on board
the Rosario after Hayes' escape. In
“Bully Hayes” Becke says: “He
(Hayes) left the Island (Strong’s) in
a small boat for Guam,” and in “Ad-
venture” Becke says Hayes left in
one of the Leonora’s boats. Hayes fell
in with an American whaling ship
after escaping from Strong’s Island,
and the boat did not reach Guam, after
a voyage of 1600 or 1800 miles, as Becke
says in “Adventure.”
Among the Spaniards
The next account of Hayes is the
following, translated from the “Diario-
de-Manila” of June 22, 1875:—“Cap-
tain Hayes, an American citizen and
master of the barquentine Leonora,
shipwrecked on one of the Caroline
Islands, arrived at this island (Guam)
on February 28, 1875, with Mr. Whit-
ney, a whaling master, on board the
American barque Arctic, for the pur-
pose of purchasing a small schooner,
which (so he says) was formerly con-
signed to him. After buying the
schooner, Captain Hayes, on April 8,
1875, requested inspection and clear-
ance, and after that had been duly
done he left the roadstead at about 9
a.m.
“Although his little vessel was a
good sailer, and there was a fresh
breeze blowing, it remained in front
of this town all day long, tacking along
the shore. Two days later we learned
that he had kidnapped, or taken away,
several natives. Captain Hayes an-
chored at Fasonan Cove, on the nor-
thern peninsula, but as soon as our
zealous Governor knew of it he order-
ed the commanding officer, Don Jose
Perez y Rivera, and 20 men on the
case, and they, after having posted
themselves all night near the cove,
captured the captain when he came
ashore to bathe, and took him pris-
oner. The captain was brought to this
capital, and placed in gaol (incomuni-
cado). I understand that the pre-
liminary charges have been prepared.
For that reason I suspend here my
narrative, as the matter is now in the
hands of the law, for, although it is
meet for the historians to narrate
public acts it is never permitted to
them to prejudge questions that are
under consideration in the courts.”
The Sydney “Morning Herald” (De-
cember, 1875) says:—
“BULLY HAYES ARRESTED BY
THE SPANIARDS.
“AND TAKEN TO MANILA.
“We have received further informa-
tion respecting this celebrated char-
acter from a trader who has just ar-
rived in Sydney by the German schoo-
ner Coeran, which arrived on Novem-
ber 22, 1875, from the South Sea Is-
lands. This person informs us that
he was at Guam towards the latter
end of April last (1875), and Captain
Hayes was there with the fore-and-aft
schooner Arabia, 50 tons. There are a
number of Spanish prisoners at Guam,
and Captain Hayes made a bargain
with several of these convicts to take
them away in the Arabia in considera-
tion of 24 dollars apiece. They gave
him the money (or money’s worth),
32
BULLY HAYES —BUCCANEER.


and went on board the vessel, but the
Spanish authorities, having obtained
some inkling of the affair, arrested
Captain Hayes on the beach, and
placed him in safe custody. The men
fs. in the schooner, seeing what had oc-
curred, and observing that the soldiers
were about to get into a boat for the
£ purpose of boarding the schooner, cut
the cable and made sail, and were
soon beyond -dispute. In nine days the
Arabia arrived at Pellew Islands, and
the convicts went across the island to
a village called Artocolange, where
they were seen on or about May 5 or 6,
1875, by our informant and the crew
of the Coeran. About this time Cap-
tain Holcomb, of the American schoo-
ner Scotland, arrived at the Pellew Is-
lands, and as there was no one on
board the Arabia able to navigate her,
took possession of her as an abandon-
ed vessel. Some of the escaped con-
victs are said to have arrived in Syd-
ney.”
Slocum of the Spray
Captain Joshua Slocum, of the yacht
Spray, in which he sailed round the
world, continues Hayes’s history. He
says; “One day in Manila I received a
note from the U.S. Consul (Mr. Gris-
wold Herron) saying that a country-
man of ours, one Captain Hayes, had
been brought as a prisoner from Guam
on a charge laid by the Spanish offi-
cials of stealing political prisoners. I
called upon Mr. Herron, who said,
‘Hayes insists that he knows you.
What do you know about Hayes?’
“Of my own knowledge I could tell
him nothing very damaging. My in-
formation had been picked up piece-
meal. I smiled to myself as I remem-
bered our first meeting, which was all
In Hayes’s favor. I recalled him as a
‘convert,’ asking grace at my table,
receiving messages from esteemed
missionaries who called him ‘Dear
Brother.’ The outline of his latest es-
capade as sketched by the consul was
as follows:
“He had rigged the king’s dug-out at
Oulan as a schooner, and with two of
his old Leonora hands sailed for Pon-
ape, where they took in provisions
of cocoanuts and pigs en route for
Guam. According to Hayes’s story,
he knew there were Spanish convicts
at Guam, ‘ but he did not dream they
were so loosely guarded that they could
get aboard his schooner.’ His log nar-
rated that he had anchored under the
lee of the island and landed on the
sandy beach abreast of his vessel,
that he might have a surf bath. Be-
fore he knew it a dozen or more con-
victs had piled aboard his schooner,
evidently with the intention of seizing
her. ‘I couldn’t help that,’ he wrote.
“The account given by the guards was
somewhat different. They swore that
Hayes had stolen one batch of con-
victs and came ashore for more, when
they pounced upon him from their am-
bush in the mango trees, and made
him prisoner. When the convicts on
board saw that Hayes was nabbed they
cut cable and made off before a fresh
trade wind, carrying all sail. They
managed to fetch up somewhere on
the coast of Borneo, wrecked the
schooner, and made good their escape.
“When I called upon Hayes in the
Manila gaol I found him in the,, midst
of the Governor’s family on the veran-
dah, discussing religious matters. He
was reading very devoutly the copy
of the Bible I had sold him at Oulan.
The officers of the gunboat that
brought him from Guam had written
opposite his name on the logbook,
‘Christian©.’
“Hayes became a chum of the gov-
ernor of the prison, and also struck
up a warm friendship with the priest,
who baptised him in the Roman Catho-
lic faith while he was locked up. Now
that he was converted to the true faith
Hayes found an all-powerful friend in
the Bishop of Manila. The buccaneer
was a penitent, and he made a most
impressive and moving figure. Fever
had twisted and shrunken him until
I recognised him only by his long beard
and his unusual height and breadth.
The light, free spring of his gait was
gone, and he was the picture of the
shuffling monk. To behold the old free-
booter, penniless, reduced by sickness,
tall, gaunt, with flowing white beard
half a fathom long, marching bare-
footed, at the head of a religious pro-
cession, and carrying the tallest candle
of them all, softened the hearts of his
enemies, if he had any in Manila.
“His accusers retracted their charges,
and were covered with confusion. Af-
ter his release Hayes obtained passage
Home from Manila on the ship Whit-
tier, bound for San Francisco. The
U.S. Consul vouched for him as a
destitute American seaman. He found
himself in clover on the Whittier.
Parcels containing comforts and knick-
knacks of various kinds were sent him
from ships in the harbor, and the cap-
33
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


tain of the Whittier, being- of a religi-
ous turn of mind, treated the reformed
buccaneer like a brother.”
I have not been able to ascertain
positively how long Hayes was a cap-
tive in Manila. One account says nine
months, which is probably correct.
Captain Slocum is a loose writer, and
is not dependable for times and dates.
The “Daily Evening Post,” of San
Francisco, says Hayes was landed in
’Frisco about April or May, 1876. The
next news of Hayes is from the U.S.
Customs records, San Francisco, which
say that on October 7, 1876, the Ame-
rican schooner Lotus, net tonnage 13
tons, crew two men, cleared from
’Frisco for Samoa. The San Francisco
“Bulletin” records that the Lotus,
schooner (Hayes master), cleared from
’Frisco on October 7, 1876, and sailed
on October 9, 1876. The name of R. L.
Ogden is mentioned by the “Bulletin”
in connection with the clearance of the
Lotus as her agent or her owner, and
the State Librarian of California, from
whom I have the newspaper extract,
says:—“You will see from the above
that Captain Ogden was the owner
of the Lotus, and as he was a life-
long friend of Captain Hayes it is
not likely that the ship was stolen
from him by Hayes.”
The San Francisco “Evening Post”
of November, 1876, says:—“About six
weeks ago Bully Hayes left San Fran-
cisco in the schooner Lotus, well known
to our yachting men, which he got
from her owner, Captain Moody. He
carried away with him 5000dol. in
cargo and money, and the knowing
ones on the city-front shake their
heads and say that Steinberger’s (of
Samoa) friends have something to do
with this voyage, and that we may
soon expect to hear something from
Samoa, Hayes, with all his faults, has
friends who speak well of him. He
has betrayed his trusts, he has stolen,
and rumor says that he has committed
murder. Indeed, it is evident that it
could only be at the point of the
pistol he or any man like him could
keep his crew in order, and his friends
all confess that he cared as little about
killing a man as he would about kill-
ing a fly. Those who wish to speak
well of him tell many tales of his dar-
ing in saving life from shipwreck and
his tenderness to the survivors. He
appears to labor to leave
A corsair’s name to other times
Linked to one virtue and a thou-
sand crimes.
I do not believe that Hayes deserved
either the reputation for having taken
or saved life. No doubt he boasted of
the people he had killed and of those
he had saved, and possibly he killed
some Kanakas, but I do not believe
he ever killed a European. He was
suspected of killing his Adelaide wife
and of arranging the drowning of his
then wife, which occurred in New
Zealand, but there is no proof that he
did so, or that he saved the lives of
17 people, as Becke alleged.
The Hawaiian “Gazette” of Decem-
ber, 1876, says:—“W. H. Hayes, this
somewhat celebrated ocean rover, is
reported to have been last week at
Kawahae (Sandwich Islands) in the
yacht Lotus, of San Francisco, bound
for the Navigator Islands.” The Fiji
“Times” of April 4, 1877, says:—“Bully
Hayes was at Apia when the schooner
CharvPdis arrived, but left the day fol-
lowing (January 2, 1877) for Providence
and Strong’s Island. An immense num-
ber of cocoanuts is said to be in store
at these places awaiting the arrival
of Hayes, who assumes to be the pro-
prietor of Providence Island, which is
consequently unworked by traders.
This well-known character was in com-
mand of a schooner.” In March, 1877,
Hayes was killed by one of the crew
of the Lotus during a voyage from
Bonham Islands (Jaluit on the maps).
The Last of Bully
“Adventure,” a New York magazine,
in its August and September (1914)
numbers, has the following account of
Hayes’s voyage from San Francisco
and of his murder. The account is
written by R. B. Kidd, and was given
by Charles Elson, of Honolulu, who
says he was mate of the Lotus. Elson
says he was in Manila in the barque
Canada in 1876, and was one of those
who tried to get Hayes released. He
met Hayes afterwards in San Fran-
cisco, and says:-—“ln San Francisco
Hayes took a partner whose wife was
very pretty. The couple were to go
in the Lotus. A young Dutchman
named Peter, whose surname I do not
recall, completed the crew.”
In October, 1876, the Lotus was ready
to sail, and Hayes went ashore with
his partner and the partner’s wife. At
-midnight Hayes and the woman came
34
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


alongside the Lotus in a row boat. The
disappearance of the partner looked
fishy to Elson, but Hayes passed over
the matter lightly, and Elson says:
“Hayes was not the man to stand
cross-examination. I knew we would
never see the missing man again,
whatever might have been his fate,
and Hayes knew that I knew it.
Hayes passed a lot of time in the wo-
man’s company, and later I had cause
to think him very much smitten with
her.
“A storm played havoc with their
water-casks, and the straight run to
Apia had to be abandoned. Honolulu
and Lahaina were suggested by Elson
and negatived by. Hayes with a laugh
and on account of certain incidents in
his past that made those places un-
healthy for him. Two days later they
look on water at the north-western
point of the island of Hawaii. Thence
to Apia.
“But before we sighted any islands
or even decided which port to make,
signs of what developed into serious
trouble made their appearance, Peter
aid not get along with the captain. The
sailor was surly, and seemed to think
he had come aboard to do little work.
He had signed on as cook, but in ad-
dition to his duties in the galley we
kept him busy standing his regular
watch and working just as any ordin-
ary sailor would do. Two or three
days after the storm Hayes held the
tiller. Evidently desiring to talk with
the woman, he called to Peter:
“‘Come aft and take this tiller!’
“But the sailor did not start as
rapidly as Hayes was used to having
his crew obey orders, so the old man
yelled, with an oath:
“‘Here, you Dutch fool! Come, take
this tiller!’
“ Take the tiller is it? Take the
tiller is it?’ exclaimed the fellow very
angrily. ‘lt's nothing but work, work
all the time! I’m the cook on this
schooner, not the navigator!’
“You could feel the captain’s rage.
Making the tiller fast, he strode for-
ward. Hayes stood much taller than
Peter, and glaring down on the sailor,
he said between clenched teeth:
“ ‘Oh, you are the cook on this schoo-
ner, are you? Well! I’m the master
of this vessel! Do you know that?’
“ ‘Yes, sir,’ responded the now fright-
ened man.
“‘You lie* You don’t seem to know
it, and I’m going to impress the fact
on you so you won’t forget it again
this voyage!’
“I didn’t see bow or where Hayes
hit him, but I heard the cook fall and
saw him lying stunned, with the blood
coming out of his mouth and nose.
“ ‘Here, Elson,’ ordered Hayes. ‘l’m
going below,’
“I took the tiller and never saw him
again till the next morning.
“After that row, Hayes never show-
ed any consideration for Peter. In-
deed, I’m not so sure, as the cruise
wore along, but that the captain and
the woman had some words over the
rather harsh way he acted toward the
sailor, for the young fellow was not
half bad-looking.
“At Apia the people received Hayes
like some prince come home from for-
eign lands. The American consul, the
cap tarn of the port, and officials gen-
erally came to greet him. . . . From
Upolu we stood north-west through
the Kingsmill Islands. . . . The greet-
ings the natives gave him caused me
more astonishment. Despite the fact
that he was noted among them as a
harsh and often cruel man, they mani-
fested invariably the utmost delight
over his appearance. . . He showed
the utmost consideration and friendli-
ness toward me. . . Evidently he in-
tended to impress on the natives that
I would be his special assistant in the
later operations. . . . We stopped at
fully a dozen islands and headed, final-
ly, for Bonham, . , , then cleared for
Ascension late in January, 1877.
“ ‘We are bound for Ascension,’ ex-
plained Hayes, “to restore my trading
station. I plan, to run back later on
some important business to Strong’s
Island. Mr. White, the missionary at
that place, is a splendid man, and I
feel grateful to him for the aid he gave
me after my brig had been wrecked.’
Killed by His Cook
“But Hayes was never to utter that
speech of gratitude. As if to prophesy
the pending doom of that strange and
awful man, the skies grew dark and
threatening soon after we dropped the
land, and there began to be mutter -
mgs from the heavens that put fore-
boding of disaster in my heart.
“Hayes moved about constantly that
afternoon and night, making ready for
the blow that we knew would soon
strike the Lotus. He stood his watch,
too, like the rest of us. Within a few
hours the wind from the north-west
had whipped up a tremendous sea. The
35
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


night was black; the rain fell in heavy
showers; the wind blew a hurricane.
As the craft would rise to the crest of
each wave the suualls would heel her
over till I thought she must turn turtle.
But Hayes kept her steady on the
course. It seemed as if that tiller -were
the very wrist of the storm, and each
breath of wind, each heave of the sea,
told him when to ease the Lotus off
and give her a chance to shake her
body free from the blue of her waves.
“On watch with Hayes stood the
Dutchman. I’ve always wished since
that I had refused to go below and
stood a double trick with the old man.
Peter lived in mortal terror of the cap-
tain, who had punished him pretty se-
verely for deserting. I’m not pre-
pared to say so of my own knowledge,
but it is not impossible that the
woman might have been the cause for
some of the hard feeling. Anyhow,
Hayes had been away from her a good
deal while in Apia.
“In the stern of the Lotus was a little
cockpit, a couple of steps leading from
it into the cabin. Inside the pit stood
the helmsman. A narrow deck space
ran around it, while about this deck
rose a bulwark about 12 inches in
height.
“I went below about 10 o’clock, tired
out. For perhaps two hours I slept.
Suddenly I woke, sitting in my bunk.
Some sort of sharp report had waked
me. I first thought it thunder. Then
‘Bang! Bang!’ I knew a revolver was
being fired.
“ ‘The captain has killed that Dutch-
man at last’’ I exclaimed, bounding out
of the cabin.
“Though the might of a gale struck
my face, fear oppressed me so I
couldn’t get air into my lungs.
“I con see that scene as if it were
last night. When my feet landed me
in the cockpit, the night seemed as
black as if the black of a hundred
nights were crowded into that moment.
Before me were two forms, the big
frame of Hayes, the figure of Peter.
Both stood on the deck above the cock-
pit. High in the air the sailor held a
strange object that looked like a cross.
But for only a second did I see them
there.
“Before I could stir or utter a cry,
the cross fell full upon the skull of
the captain. Instantly his clenched
bands dropped to his sides, his head
fell on his bosom, his knees sagged,
and as the Lotus swept into the trough
of the sea, his massive body lurched
backward into the water.
“ ‘What have you done?’ I yelled. The
Dutchman stood trembling with fright.
“‘He try kill me!’
“A second later I jumped for the
tiller, shoved it hard aport and brought
the vessel up into the wind.
“‘Captain! Captain!’ I shrieked.
‘Hold on a minute! We’re coming for
you!’
“But full well I knew Hayes had
gone where no human voice or hand
could reach him.
“ Why did you kill the captain?’ I
demanded.
“‘Oh’ Don’t go back!’ Peter kept
pleading. ‘Captain may kill me!’
“Though beside himself with terror,
Peter managed to tell incoherently of
the murder. When he failed to obey
an order promptly, Hayes had started
toward him, declaring he would kill
the sailor and toss his body overboard.
Peter, standing just forward of the
cockpit, had prepared himself. As
Hayes leaped for him, the sailor drew
a revolver and fired in rapid succes-
sion. How many bullets struck Hayes
or how many mortal wounds were in-
flicted, non© can say. Some of the
shots must have caused that mighty
strength to rush out of Hayes’ body,
else the trembling sailor would never
have had time to snatch up the boom-
crutch and strike the blow that crush-
ed in the skull of the buccaneer and
sent his body to its grave in the Pa-
cific.
“Elson, goes or Mr. Kidd, took the
Lotus back to Bonham. Peter, unpun-
ished, drifted out to join the flotsam of
the South Seas. The woman made her
way to Honolulu; to die in poverty and
blindness.
“Despite his evil life, Hayes carried
something big in his soul. Nature used
the extremes of emotion when she
moulded him. To the student of
human nature Bully Hayes is a pa-
thetic figure. Only fifty years of age
when slain, he might have attained an
honorable career had he but learned
self-discipline early in life. He was,
indeed, a strange mixture of a man,
this ‘Last of the Buccaneers.’ ”
36
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


Notes by Becke
In “Adventure” for September, 1914,
the following account of Bully Hayes’s
death by Louis Becke, preceded by ex-
tracts from letters from Becke, ap-
peared:—
“A short time ago I had the pleasure
of meeting Mr. Eager and his son of
Toledo, Ohio, who gave me a copy of
your magazine ‘Adventure’ containing
your queries as to the true story of
Captain ‘Bully’ Hayes, of South Sea
Islands notoriety, and what became of
him eventually. The allusion you
make to my being intimately acquaint-
ed with Hayes is correct. I knew him
when I was quite a boy, and sailed
with him as supercargo and labor-
recruiter for over four years.
“Nine-tenths of the tales that have
been told of and written about him are
purely fiction. He has been held up to
the public as a bloodthirsty pirate of
the worst type and accused of crimes
he never dreamt of. Even now there
are writers who would have us believe
that he is still alive and cutting off
ships, making the crews walk the
plank, stealing white and brown
women for mis numerous harems,’ etc,,
ecc., and playing the devil generally all
ovei the Pacific. That no one of those
imaginative writers ever even saw the
man, you can certainly accept my word
for, for he and I were good friends,
and I alone and one other person (a
lady in this State of New South
Wales) know the true story of his life
and what became of him.
“ ‘Sydney, Australia, April 12, 1912.
“ ‘From London I hope to get across
to your own country and visit some
friends in New London, Conn. Then
on to San Francisco, where I spent the
days of my boyhood and had the honor
of meeting General W. T. Sherman.
And I look forward to the pleasure of
meeting you in New York,
“ ‘George Louis Becke.’
“From a letter written from the Pal-
ace Hotel, Watson’s Bay, Sydney, dated
July 29, 1912:
“I reply at once, for fear that not to
do so may mean many weeks of delay,
for I am In the grip of malarial fever,
and have had to leave Sydney and
come to this marine suburb to pull up
and get into harness again. The above
will be my address for the next six
months.
“I will forward you the story of the
ultimate fate of Hayes this week. . . .
You are quite at liberty to use any
extracts from my letters.’
“THE ULTIMATE FATE OF CAP-
TAIN ‘BULLY’ HAYES,
“By Louis Becke—His Supercargo and
Recruiter.
“I was supercargo and ‘recruiter’
with Bully Hayes for nearly four years
in his famous brig Leonora, formerly
the Waterlily of Shanghai, and was
with him from the time 1 joined him
until the brig was wrecked on Strong’s
Island in the Caroline Group, North
Pacific, in March, 1873.
“Six months after the loss of the Leo-
nora the British cruiser Rosario, Com-
mander Dupuis, who was commission-
ed to arrest Hayes on a number of
charges of piracy and kidnapping na-
tives from various islands, arrived at
Lele Harbor (Strong’s Island) in
search of him. Hayes went boldly on
board the warship, and was at once
informed that he was a prisoner. He
gave me a most whimsical look, and
merely bowed to Commander Dupuis
when the latter informed him that an
inquiry would be held into the charges
against him that afternoon on board
the warship.
“The ‘inquiry’ was a farce. Of seven
witnesses against Hayes (stranded and
dissolute white traders) who had pro-
fessed themselves anxious to give evi-
dence, only two were game to appear,
and they so contradicted themselves
that the commander told them to clear-
out. The other five were too terrified
of Hayes’ vengeance to put in an ap-
pearance. But certain charges brought
forward by the Rev. Gilbert Snow, of
the Boston Board of Missions, con-
cerning Hayes’ treatment of the na-
tives of Strong’s Island were proved to
a certain extent.
“Then here came an impasse. The
commander had been instructed by
Commodore Goodenough to arrest
Hayes on certain specified charges; no
charge had been officially made against
him by the American missionaries to
the British Government, and as Hayes
was an American citizen (he was a na-
tive of Cleveland, Ohio) the British of-
ficer declined to detain him, but told
the native king, his leading chiefs, and
Mr. Snow that if they liked to seize
Hayes on their own responsibility and
37
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


hand him over to an American man-o’-
war they could do so as far as he
(Dupuis) was concerned.
“But the king and his people were too
mortally afraid of the burly alleged
buccaneer to attempt such a course,
and Hayes, who was wise in his gen-
eration, decided to leave the island, and
return at some time in the future. This
he did the same evening—after he had
given me a power of attorney to act
for him in his absence. He left the
township he had founded at South
Harbor (on the south side of the
island) in a fourteen-foot oak-built
boat (one of the four saved from the
brig) with one companion, an Ameri-
can named Harry Mulholland, who
was formerly a trader on Pleasant
Island (Naura).
“The boat reached Guam in the La-
drone Islands safely after a voyage of
1600 or 1800 miles, touching at many
islands en route to get fresh provisions
and water; for, although she was laden
down to the gunwale with both when
she left Strong’s Island, light and vari-
able winds necessitated Hayes’ calling
at Pingelap (M'Askill’s Island), Ponape
(Ascension Island), and many other
spots before he reached San Juan
d’Apra at Guam. He was arrested by
the Governor and sent to Manila to
stand his trial for various alleged of-
fences against the Philippine Islands
Government so far back as 1855-60. He
emerged triumphantly, and then for
some years no one knew of his where-
abouts except his wife and twin daugh-
ters —Leonora and Laurina, then liv-
ing at Apia in Samoa —and two other
personal friends of long standing.
“In 1886 the schooner yacht Lotus left
San Francisco for the South Sea
Islands with Hayes as owner and com-
mander. How he had gotten possession
of the vessel has nothing to do with this
story, which simply sets forth the true
details of his end. He may have
bought or chartered her, and may have
not. The common report—which is
still believed —is that he induced the
owner to fit out the yacht for ‘a lucra-
tive trading cruise to the Marshall
and Caroline Islands,’ asserting that
he (the owner) and his wife would
have ‘a delightful experience’ if they
accompanied him. The owner consent-
ed and the Lotus sailed.
“When off Alcatraz Island, in San
Francisco harbor, and within a few
miles of the Golden Gate, the schooner
was brought to, the boat was lowered,
and the owner, hopelessly ‘doped,’ was
dumped into it, and one of the crew
rowed him on shore and left him to
recover as best he could. Avoiding
Honolulu he yet called at two of the
minor ports in the Hawaiian Islands
to replenish his store of provisions.
Tnen he steered a south and west
course for the Marshall and Caroline
groups. All these details were given
to the German authorities at Jaluit
in the Marshall Islands by the man
who murdered him, and were corro-
borated by the Woman who shared his
fortunes.
“I must now explain Hayes’s object
in running through the Marshalls and
making for the Carolines, of which
Strong’s Island is the eastern outlier.
The day before he fled from the island
in the small boat he concealed some
thousands of dollars at a spot in the
vicinity of South Harbor, and he was
undoubtedly going there to recover the
buried money when he met with his
death. It is quite possible that some
day it may be discovered. In all —hav-
ing counted it, I know —there was
nearly SOOOdol., not the 250,000d01. one
writer on Hayes has written so glibly
about.
“Of this SOOOdol., less than SOOOdol.
consisted of good American and Bri-
tish gold and silver coins, the rest
were Bolivian and Chilian half-dollars,
worth but a little over half of their
face value. One bag of nearly 1000
Mexican dollars Hayes took away with
him to Guam. So much for the ab-
surd story of the 250,000d01. ‘buried in
a cave on Strong’s Island’ —on which,
by the way, there are no caves.
“After passing through the easterly
chain of the Marshall Islands, dis-
sensions arose between the mate and
Hayes through the latter’s refusing to
put into Jaluit. The woman and the
mate then deliberately planned his
murder. Coming up out of the little
cabin one day, after an angry alter-
cation with the mate, the latter struck
him senseless with the yacht’s iron
boom-crutch. He tumbled back into
the cabin, then, still breathing, he was
dragged up on deck and dropped over-
board. The yacht then bore up for
Jaluit.
“And this is the true story of the
end of ‘Bully’ Hayes. He was a much-
maligned man, and scores of writers
who never saw him in their lives have
38
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


made a good deal of money by their
monstrous tales of his alleged mur-
ders, abductions, poisonings, and
piracies.”
The errors in dates are Becke’s,
whose impudent and untruthful state-
ments are amusing. Becke did
know Hayes when he was quite a boy,
viz., before he was 18, but he did not
sail with Hayes for four years—he
sailed with him for only two months.
His statement that he spent the days
of his boyhood in San Francisco is un-
true. Hayes was not arrested by the
Spaniards for offences as far back
as 1855-60. Hayes was not near Ma-
nila between 1856 and 1870. The tale
about the money is very unlikely, for
surely Hayes would have taken the
coin with him when he fled from
Strong’s Island. Of course Becke knew
nothing of his own knowledge of
Hayes after Hayes’s flight, and there-
fore only writes what others told him.
Australasia first heard of Hayes’s
murder from the Fiji “Times,” which
announced on September 1, 1877:
“The great rover and freebooter of
the South Pacific, Bully Hayes, has, we
learn, come to an untimely end. By
the return of the Black Hawk from
line islands we are informed that the
American schooner Maggie Johnston
brought the news to the island of
Makin that Captain Hayes, while trad-
ing in a small vessel off the island of
Jalmit (sic, Jaluit), had a series of
bickerings and quarrels with his mate,
and while in the act of going down the
companion to reach his revolver to
shoot the mate was struck by him on
the back of the head with the iron
tiller, completely smashing his skull.
So ends the life of this fearless pirate.
The unlawful acts and deeds com-
mitted against property and society
by this noted freebooter are very
many, but we much question if they
are deserving of that amount of sen-
sationalism with which it has been the
fashion to surround them,”
About June, 1877, the San Francisco
“Post” published the following:
“Captain Hayes, of the schooner-
yacht Lotus, which sailed from this
port October 9, 1876, for the Samoan
Islands, was murdered in March last
by the cook, a Dutchman, who ship-
ped in Samoa as cook and seaman. The
Lotus left Bonham Island (Jaluit), one
of the Marshall group, and six days
afterwards she came back, and the
following information was obtained
from the man acting as mate: —The
second day out the captain spoke to
the man at the wheel —who was cook
and seaman—about his steering. Some
altercation followed, and the captain
went below. When he came up the
companion-way, some time after, the
man let go the tiller and struck Cap-
tain Hayes on the head with the crutch
to the main boom. He fell
and immediately expired. No firearms
of any kind were found on him. The
acting-mate at the time was below
sleeping. The vessel returned to Bon-
ham. Island (Jaluit) as soon as pos-
sible. The captain was buried at sea.
The Maggie Johnston arrived at Bon-
ham (Jaluit) the latter part of March.
The matter was explained to Captains
Bliven and Henry, and it was found
that the mate (not having signed any
articles or papers of agreement of any
kind to bind himself to the vessel) had
no control over her at all. Rumors
of her going away to other islands in
other hands got about, which induced
Messrs. Capelle and Co., a large Ger-
man Arm there, to ask Captains Bli-
ven and Henry, as American citi-
zens, to do something in the matter.
The only thing they could do was to
deliver the vessel’s papers to Capelle
and Co. for safe keeping, until her
owners in San Francisco could com-
municate instructions.
“The acting-mate was left in charge,
and did everything possible to fix
things up. An inventory of all goods
on board was taken, and all were
stored in Capelle and Co.’s warehouse.
The vessel was to be moored to 16001 b.
anchor, sails unbent, and put on
shore in the warehouse. All was not
completed when the Maggie Johnston
left on May 15, but it was expected
that everything would be fixed on that
day.
“Captain Hayes will be remembered
as the gentleman whose strange life
and adventures were published in No-
vember last under the caption of ‘A
San Francisco Pirate —Captain “Bully”
Hayes, the Pirate of the South Seas.’
He had many friends, who contend
that his errors were those of the head,
and not of the heart, and it is said
of him, even by his enemies, that he
was a man who never counted the
cost when he could render assistance
to a fellow sailor in distress. He was
39
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


equally well known in San Francisco,
Melbourne, Sydney, and the groups of
the South Pacific, where years of his
life had been spent.”
The Hawaiian “Annual,” for 1907,
says in an article on Hayes:—“We
have, through Dr. Ingolls, the last vic-
tim of Hayes’s misdemeanors in the
Pacific, an authentic account of
Hayes’s death. The Lotus left Kawai-
hae, Hawaii, on or about January 1,
1877. She soon reached Samoa. There
Hayes persuaded Dr. Ingolls to sail
with him in order to visit and treat
one of the native kings in the West-
ward Islands. To gain his consent the
doctor was promised a fee of 2000 dol-
lars, half of which was to be paid
shortly, but when they arrived at
Bonham Island (Jaluit) the doctor was
set on shore with his traps under the
threat that, should he make a noise
over his treatment, he would succeed
in getting his bones broken. But while
the schooner lay in port a Norwegian
sailor deserted. He was soon secured
through a reward, and triced up to the
main mast and flogged soundly. This
affair is said to have cost Hayes his
life. The Lotus left Jaluit on March
31, 1877, but returned in less than a
month. It was then learned that,
shortly after sailing, Hayes had an-
other row with the Norwegian sailor,
and punished him severely, if not
savagely. But on the fellow’s con-
tinual resistance it is said (yet there
is some uncertainty at this point) that
Hayes went into the cabin for a pistol,
avowedly to shoot the Norwegian with.
In any event (so reads the testimony),
the sailor took the boom crutch (a
heavy piece of iron) in his hand, and
when Hayes’s head appeared above the
companion way the man struck him
fairly, and stove in the top of his
skull. This was the last of Bully
Hayes, but as the years flit Romance
is deftly weaving her web about his
name, and shall at last pattern the
woof to some South Sea mosaic of
splendid unrealities.”
Thus perished Bully Hayes.
Nothing was done to punish the man
who killed him, and for many years he
lived, and was well known in the
South Sea Islands. It was apparently
recognised that in killing Hayes the
murderer had done the world good ser-
vice by ridding it of a person who, for
20 years, had been a moral, if not a
legal, criminal. I have read that
Hayes’ Apia widow kept an hotel for
some years after his death.
Hayes* Descendants
At the present time (1914) the twin
daughters (Leonora and Laurina, ac-
cording to Becke) are living. One re-
sides near Newcastle, N.S.W., the other
in Fiji, and is the wife of an official in
the Fiji Customs. Both ladies have
large families.
W. B. Churchward says in “My Con-
sulate in Samoa”: ‘‘Hayes’ legitimate
wife,, a New Zealand lady, was resid-
ing in Apia in 1881 with two lovely
daughters and one son when I arrived,
but about a year after left for Fiji.”
This is the only mention I have seen
of Hayes leaving a son, and I can find
no other trace of the son.
Stonehewer Cooper, in his “Coral
Islands of the Pacific,” says: “One of
the most respected of the inhabitants
of Apia, Samoa (in 1881), is Mrs.
Hayes, widow of the notorious Bully
Hayes, perhaps the last of the pirates
of the Pacific.”
Myths and Romances
The most favorite romance respect-
ing Hayes is that he brought a cargo
of Chinese to Australia, and after col-
lecting £lO each from them for poll-
tax, evaded payment by arriving off
Melbourne or Sydney with signals of
distress flying. Steamers went to his
assistance, the Chinese were tran-
shipped to the steamers, and Hayes
sailed away. There is no truth in
these stories, but doubtless Hayes
started them himself.
In 1857 Hayes had arranged to take
some Chinese from Port Adelaide to
Port Robe, both being ports in the
State of South Australia, but sailed
without the Chinese, having probably
been prepaid the passage money. That
was the only time Hayes was connect-
ed with carrying Chinese passengers
in Australian waters.
The following illustrates how
myths and untruths have arisen
in connection with Hayes. His
son-in-law died in Fiji early in
1915, and his death is thus recorded in
the Sydney “Daily Telegraph” of March
15, 1915:
“Captain Robert Crawford Bentley,
whose death has been announced from
Auckland, was one of the oldest civil
40
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


servants in Fiji. He was born in 1862,
and went to Fiji with his parents in
1867. He entered the office of Wil-
liam Scott in Suva, where he remained
until 1888. In 1883 he was appointed
clerk in the Supreme Court of Fiji, and
later became Curator of Intestate Es-
tates. In 1899 he was made sub-col-
lector of Customs and postmaster at
Levuka. As time went on Captain
Bentley was entrusted with the prin-
cipal Government positions at Levuka,
becoming Deputy-Commissioner for
Stamps, health officer, receiver, and
weigher of native taxes, and Commis-
soner of Water Supply at Levuka.
When the Customs Department was
reorganised in 1912 Captain Bentley
became Collector of Customs, a post
which he occupied to the time of his
death. He married Laurina, one of the
twin daughters of the late Captain W.
H. Hayes. His widow survives him.”
Mrs. Bentley was one of the twin in-
fant daughters who were on board the
Rona when she arrived at Hokititka,
December 28, 1866. As Captain Bent-
ley was born in 1862, he was only 15
when Hayes was killed, and as Hayes
was not in Fiji after 1873, and was
only in Samoa for a few days in 1876,
after leaving Samoa in 1873, it is im-
probable that Captain Bentley saw
much of Hayes after 1873, when Cap-
tain Bentley was a boy of 12 years of
age, yet a Fiji correspondent wrote to
the Perth “Sunday Times” in May,
1914, as follows:—“Mr. Bentley told
me that he has several times been face
to face with his father-in-law before
he married Miss Hayes, and that there
was something about the man which
frightened him, and that he was al-
ways glad when he saw the last of
him. The last time he saw him was
here in Levuka (Fiji), when he was
practically a prisoner on one of the
men-of-war, and when he slipped
through the reefs in a sailing boat,
never to appear again.”
“Lord! Lord! how this world is given
to lying,” as Falstaff moralised. Hayes
was never “practically,” or in any
other way, “a prisoner” in Fiji, and did
not escape therefrom in a sailing boat.
In “Outing,” an American magazine
in an article printed about 1906, “from
data supplied by Captain Joshua Slo-
cum,” is the following:
“My first meeting with Hayes was
in 1873, off the island of Oulan.
“ ‘Yonder lies the bones of my ship
the Leonora; she was once the mis-
sion ship John Williams, lost in a gale
of wind,’ said Hayes.
“While he was on board this morn-
ing Bully Hayes got a note from an
old missionary, Rev. Mr. Snow, beg-
ging the old pirate to come to his vil-
lage in a hurry and settle a row be-
tween a white beachcomber and his
native wife.
“ ‘Come quickly, dear brother,’ writes
the parson. Here is that old sundowner
Bully Hayes a pal and brother of this
missionary.”
Now, the Leonora was afloat in 1873,
and Becke, who was on Oulan, or
Strong’s Island, all the time Hayes
was there after the Leonora was
wrecked, does not mention Slocum’s
visit. Further, the Leonora was not
the John Williams or any other mis-
sion vessel, and so far from Mr. Snow
being a pal of Hayes he asked the
captain of the British warship Rosario
to arrest him, and described him as a
pest for years past.
The bulk of Captain Slocum’s article
is no more correct than what I have
quoted, and is secondhand and. untrue
newspaper gossip.
A Blackguard and a Bully
Recent writers designate Hayes as
“Buli” instead of “Bully.” This is, I
think, affectation. Hayes was, I be-
lieve, styled “Bully” because “Bully”
indicated his character and described
his conduct.
“Buli” is a Fijian title of the chief of
a district, and is still officially so used
in Fiji.
That Hayes was a cowardly “bully”
I am satisfied. , There are several al-
lusions in American papers to his cou-
rage, generosity, and compassion, but I
cannot find any record of such ac-
tions.
He was ignominiously captured by a
Samoan chieftain in 1869, was arrested,
and the Black Diamond taken from
him by Akerstein at New Zealand in
1864, and in 1865 Britt and others took
the cutter Wave from him, also in New
Zealand. He was killed by the first
man who seriously stood up to him.
Hayes was a sneak-thief when he could
not cajole or bully. I know of no in-
stance when he did not deceive and
rob those who trusted him. He bolted
41
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


There are scores of references to,
Sydney “Bulletin.”—January 21, 1893,
and articles on, Hayes in official and
page 19, col. 2; February 4, 1893, page
other publications and newspapers.
22; February 11, 1893, page 15, col. 2;
Hev. Lovett’s “Chalmers’ Life.”
February* 1.8, 1893, page 21.
Thompson’s “Savage Island.”
Sydney “Lone Hand.”—March 1,
1912, page 378,
Christian’s “Caroline Islands.”
Churchward’s “Samoa.”
GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.
Cooper’s “Coral Lands,”
“Government Gazette,” Queensland,
Romilly’s “Western Pacific.”
August 28, 1875.
Reeves’s “Brown Men and Women.”
“Colonial Office Circular Despatch,”
Moss’s “Through Atolls and Islands.”
December 22, 1870.
R. L. Stevenson’s “The Wreckers”
“British Parliamentary Paper.”
(preface).
“Deportation of South Sea Island-
Trood’s “Island Reminiscences.”
ers,” No. 399 of 1871, pages 163 to 169.
Burnett’s “Through Tropic Seas.”
“South Sea Papers” (British), 1873.
Gordon Cumming’s “Cruise in a
British Parliamentary Papers.—July
French Man-of-War.”
Dr. Genthe’s “In German Samoa.”
29, 1869, page 17; February, 1871, pages
55 to 99, and 141 to 191; August, 1871,
J. I. Thompson’s “Voyages and Wan-
page 95; February, 1872, pages 32 to
derings.”
37; April, 1873, pages 153 to 157 and
Hamilton x Browne’s “Camp Fire
215.
Yarns.”
“New South Wales Votes and Pro-
Becke and Boldrewood’s “A Modern
ceedings.”—1868-9, volume 88, folio
Buccaneer.”
1184; 1869, volume 89, folio 219; 1870,
Becke’s “Bully Hayes.”
volume 91, folio 579.
from Adelaide in 1853, from Auckland
in 1864, Hokitika in 1867, and Samoa in
1870, having deluded and defrauded
people who had trusted him. The
stories told by Louis Becke of his fistic
prowess are unconvincing, and are, I
think, untrue. Certainly Becke could
not have had personal knowledge of
them, and Becke says he quarrelled
with Hayes owing to Hayes’ ill-usage
of helpless natives on Strong’s Island.
There is no doubt that one' of Hayes’
ears was missing. A printed account
says that this ear was cut off by a
man- whom Hayes had cheated, but
this and some other stories I have read
of Hayes being thrashed or brow-
beaten I have not been able to con-
firm. There can be no doubt but that
Hayes was a “Bully” and a black-
guard. I am prepared to prove the
correctness of my statements made
herein.
The documents from which this his-
tory is written will, in due course, be
handed to the Mitchell Library, Syd-
ney, N.S.W.
A. T. SAUNDERS,
“Omagh,”
Hill-street,
North Adelaide,
South Australia.
May 4, 1915.
SOME REFERENCES.
42
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


ADDENDUM
The following is the latest of many
•official documents received from Ame-
rican and other Government depart-
ments: —
“Library of Congress,
“Washington.
“March 11, 1915.
“Office of the Librarian.
Dear Sir, —We regret the delay in
our response to your letter of Decem-
ber 7. It has been due to an effort to
locate some information to your pur-
pose.
“We have made a thorough inves-
tigation of the documentary material
In this Library, but fail to find any-
thing in regard to William Henry
Hayes. We have, however, consulted
the Navy Department Library, which
reports that in the log book of the
U.S. ship Narragansett, in the posses-
sion of that Department, Commander
Meade has made the following entry
for February 18, 1872:
At 9 o’clock, boarded and took
temporary possession of the Ame-
rican brig Leonora, late English
brig Pioneer. Captain W. H. Hayes
was brought on board and retain-
ed on suspicion, as having been
engaged in unlawful acts in the
Micronesian Islands and other is-
lands.
“Under date of February 21, 1872,
there is another entry:
Investigation in the case of the
brig Leonora having been comple-
ted, Captain Hayes was allowed to
resume his command of her.
“The United States Consular Reports
were not printed until 1880. The earlier
manuscript reports are in the custody
of the Department of State, and we
are advised by the Index Bureau of
that department that there appears to
be no account of the killing of Hayes
in these documents.
“The Library of Congress will be
glad to have copies of any of the ma<-
terial which you may print regard-
ing Hayes.
“If anything further develops re-
garding the subject of your inquiry we
shall communicate it to you.
“Very truly yours,
“HERBERT PUTNAM,
“Librarian.
“By J. L. Farnum, Secretary.
“A. T. Saunders, Esq.,
" ‘The Sunday Times,’
“Perth, Western Australia.”
43
BULLY HAYES—BUCCANEER.


Wholly Set up and
Printed by “The
Sunday Times”
Publishing - Co., Ltd.,
Perth, Western
Australia.
