





iw*
f . v.
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF
MRS, CAROLINE WILLIAMS,
AT THE
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, REDFERN,
ON SABBATH 17th JULY, 1853,
BY JOSEPH BEAZLEY.
PRINTED BY DANIEL LOVETT WELCH, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE-ST.
1853.
PREACHED




iw•
ADVERTISEMENT.
The two following Sermons are published, at
the request of those who mourn over her de-
parture to whom they relate, and just in the form
in which they were preached. The writer would
have attempted something fuller and more
worthy of her, whose memory he cherishes with
profound esteem, had he not the design of pre-
paring a brief Memoir of her Life and character.




SERMON.
The memory of the Just is blessed.—Solomon.
I intend to connect both the morning, and evening, ser-
vices of this day, with the removal of our beloved friend,
Mrs. Williams. The subjects which I shall bring before you,
were suggested, the one, by her lofty character, the other, by
her premature, and most lamented death. I feel perfectly jus-
tified in taking this course, although it is confessedly, an un-
usual one ; for our dear friend appeared to me, in some impor-
tant respects, an uncommon specimen, both of nature, and
of grace, and, as such, her departure seems to challenge the
thoughtful, and solemn attention of those who feel that they
are following in her wake into the eternal world. I shall in-
deed be happy, if the providence we so deeply deplore, and in
which we mournfully acquiesce, should be made a blessing to any
fellow Christian, should stimulate him to prepare to meet his
God. May the Lord help us, that while thinking and speak-
ing of the devoted servant, we may honor and glorify the
master.
“The memory of the just is blessed.” Such are the signi-
ficant and soothing words which, as I gazed on her cold, pale,
marble brow, as she lay in her coffin seemed to be written
there as by an invisible hand. The memory of the just —noble,
admired, enviable character ! He who wears it, wears a robe
more majestic and venerable than the Roman purple. The
term just can only refer, in absolute strictness, to an unfallen
being. The angels of God, are doubtless just, their character
without a flaw; they present but a faint and minute image, of
the infinitely just Creator. Still the image is doubtless an ac-
curate one. When man is spoken of as just, he is to be re-
garded as converted and “ renewed.” Man can be reckoned


just, only on the supposition of his being interested in the
righteousness of Christ, or, in the language of the New Tes-
tament, as “justified freely by the redemption of Christ.”
This doctrine, glanced at and implied in the Old Testament,
is frequently and copiously treated in the New. Justification
may be said to be the great subject of the epistle to the
Romans. I need not stay on this occasion to defend this doc-
trine, against the petty and unwise cavils of objectors, ex-
cept to remark, that the Scriptures ever teach, that, at the
time the penitent believer is justified by the grace of God,
a holy disposition is implanted in the heart by the Divine
Spirit, A principle of justice, a love for, a longing, an
aspiring after universal excellence is communicated. The
Christian’s soul, is influenced, becomes filled, and haunted,
by deep admiration of the character, and image of Jesus Christ.
In the mind of a worldly man, justice is a narrow and meagre
idea, absurdly limited to man, and to mundane affairs. With
the well taught Christian, this narrow notion is discarded. He
has a broader and richer view of the subject. He is blest with
light from heaven, with intelligent, spiritual views of God’s law.
He is raised to an eminence, whence the horizon expands il-
limitably, whence he sees the claims of the Creator, Redeemer,
and man. He sees his own relation to all being, and, prompted
by holy motives and influences, he longs to meet the claims of
all beings, from the humblest creature, up to the glorious Je-
hovah.
Conceive, then, of a person converted by the power of grace,
having a large intelligent view of goodness, character and ex-
cellence as they appeared in such luminous perfection, in the
Saviour, or as they display themselves more faintly, and imper-
fectly in his servants. Suppose him delighted with the admi-
rable, the serene, the lofty beauty of holiness. Suppose him
hungering and thirsting after righteousness, aiming at what-
ever is “just,” “ true,” “benevolent,” and “ pure,” “ adding
to faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge ; and to knowledge,
temperance ; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,


godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness.” Suppose him
cherishing the inspirations of the word and Spirit of God,
watching, praying, having recourse to the means of grace,
courting, and welcoming motives, grand, solemn, redolent of
eternity, and all this that he may display such a character as be-
comes a Christian. Such a person, in the gracious language of
Scripture, is a “just man,” and the man who professes Chris-
tianity without such longing after universal excellence, is either
grievously uninstructed in the nature of his religion, or is im-
posing on himself and his fellow-creatures.
We do not overrate the matter. “ Lord,” says David, “ who
shall abide in thy tabernacle,” and he answers, “ He that walketh
uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh truth in his
heart.” “ Herein do I exercise myself,” says an apostle, “ that
I may have a conscience void of offence towards God and to-
wards man.” The person who can adopt this language, is a
just man, and such a character is the legitimate offspring, is a
fair specimen of the evangelical system, as applied to the heart
by the Spirit of God.
It seems wonderful to us, that when a person appears among
his fellow-creatures answering, though imperfectly, this descrip-
tion of a just man, a foe to iniquity, an example of goodness,
a centre of blessing, that he should be removed, at any but the
extremest period of human life. But when Christians disap-
pear, whose life and faculties were in their zenith, whose cha-
racter inspired large confidence, whose usefulness was great
and increasing, we are literally stunned by the event. Still,
however perplexing and inexplicable, our fellow Christians do
thus pass away. The unexpected change comes at mid day,
their prosperous course is arrested, their purposes are broken
off, their implements drop from their hands, and they leave
their work unfinished; the tree falls in its prime and green-
ness, when covered with foliage, and loaded with fruit, and
those who securely reposed under its shadow, and subsisted on
its fruits, are compelled to seek sustenance and skelter else-
where. The mother, who fondly hoped to train her offspring


for God, to implant honorable principles, to leaven their minds
with the blessed truths of Christianity, to witness their settle-
ment in life, and at last to be laid in her grave, amid their tears
and blessings, suddenly departs, occasioning a loss to her chil-
dren all irreparable, and creating a chasm which God only can
fill. Yes, our fellow Christians depart, their places, become
vacant, their persons invisible, the prestige of their presence
departs, without hope of return. They pass away, not indeed
without reason, for the world has yet a Ruler, a Father, and a
God, but without such reason as we can discern or appreciate,
leaving the survivor to submission, sorrow, and tears, or rather
casting him on the consolatary and magnificent principle an-
nounced by the poet
God is his own interpreter,
And he will make it plain.
Yes, our fellow-creatures quit the stage of life, and if they
are unjust, untrue, dishonorable and worthless, if they have dif-
fused bad sentiments, set an evil example, if they have been
persons of low, sensual, brutish tastes and habits, a nuisance
and a curse in their respective circles, let them pass, and let
their name and memory perish. The cause of godliness and truth,
can be in no degree aided or accelerated by the memory of such.
Or if the departed, were of the useless and trivial order, men with-
out convictions, without energy, without decision of character,
who espoused no cause, who did no work, benefited no soul, ex-
emplified no great principle, men who were rather to be classed
with effects than with causes , who merit rather to be called
things than men , —let us shed a tear, over wasted energies,
over the fallow ground, which might have waved with a golden
harvest, and then let them be forgotten ; to remember such, can
neither benefit us nor our children. But alas ! not merely those,
but the good, the just, men whose lives were a perpetual and
eloquent advocacy of truth and goodness, these pass away.
Yet, thanks be to God, not wholly. Their memory, fragrant and
inspiring remains. In the eye of the survivor, there is a welcome
and beloved image which he “ will not willingly let die.” The
culm brow, the mild beaming eye, the speaking, eloquent face.


shall be faithfully remembered. The person, the voice, the
manner, the words, sentiments, preferences, all remembered.
The spirituality, the intense affectionate sympathy, with all that
was grand, beautiful and holy about the character of Christ, the
lofty confidence in God’s government and character, the avowed
resting on the atonement, the confident anticipation of future
bliss remembered; the high, cultivated conscience, which
would never tamper with the sacredness of truth, integrity, pu-
rity and duty, the zeal which nothing could quench, equally
admirable for the breadth over which it spread, and for the
consummate judgment by which it was controlled and guided;
the whole person with its environments, peculiarities, sympa-
thies and manifestations, all remembered. Surely God gives
to mourners, the sacred memory of departed friends, to soothe
and to sustain, until we meet again in that world “ where
adieus and farewells are a sound unknown.” Oh cherish such
memories, forget not the pious dead. Not the humblest of
man’s faculties is displayed in the loving, the tender, the reve-
rential remembrance of departed souls—not the humblest, but
I suspect one of the noblest and divinest. “ The memory of
the just is blessed.”
There are few thoughts more consoling, and more solemn
than this, that good men have a kind of earthly immortality by
their character and writings, that they do not cease at death to
influence, to actuate, and to guide the living. Look at the
inspired writers, for the highest example of this we can adduce.
Mark their richness of thought, their persuasive eloquence,
their commanding motives. Can the living generations of men
ever forget them ? Can we ever forget David the sweet singer
of Israel? After three thousand years, does he not live among
us, touching and stimulating us in our highest and most sacred
movements and relations ? does he not every sabbath agitate ten
thousand hearts, and furnishappropriate and glowing language of
worship and of praise, to thousands of devout and grateful souls ?
They gladly borrow his words, they eagerly entertain his sen-
timents ; their minds affectionately commune with his, and,
conscious of deep obligation to him, they turn and bless Ids


memory. There is Isaiah, the evangelical prophet, who rapt
into future times, gave such pathetic pictures of the humiliation
and death of the Messiah. His majestic composition resembles
a wide, deep channel, through which the mercy of God seems
to flow, in one everlasting stream. How many weary heavy-
laden souls have kneeled and drank at that stream, and risen
refreshed and courageous. There is the apostle of the Gen-
tiles. See what touching impressive things, he has said, about
Christ and Heaven, Duty and Grace, how many souls are
strengthened and confirmed, aided in obedience and suffering,
how many characters are in process of being formed by his
views and writings. Here is a mystery and a glory. Across
the chasm of twenty or thirty centuries, I can cast a bridge,
can pass over it, and can sit at the feet of the men, udio spoke
and wrote as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Do we
see nothing deep and significant in all this ? to me it suggests a
revelation, and a hope, more radiant than the Sun. Surely the
mind that can thus go back into the night of time, can also
fly forward into the opening day of Eternity.
But taking lower ground than this, let us ask who can tell how
much the living owe to the dead ? The masses of men of by-gone
ages, the thinkers, projectors, and actors of earlier times, the
originators, conductors, and accomplishe'rs of great enterprises,
whose energy and activity have furnished the historian and the
poet with materials for their lore, have all perished. A deluge
more fatal and universal, than that of Noah, has ovewhelmed
them all. They are gone, but thanks be to God, they have
left much behind, the most precious part remains. Their
thought, wisdom, science, travel, piety, and genius still remain
and still bear fruit. Every generation smooths the way for
the next, clears the forest, breaks up the stubborn soil, sows
the seed, and leaves an abundant harvest to be reaped by those
that come after. Every child is born to inherit the boundless
wealth of the past, a patrimony and an heritage ample and
rich, as the experience of six thousand years could make it.
So that, in one sense, men, and especially good men, do not
die. The best part, the distilled essence of human life, the


wisdom, virtue and character remain. Let no one think that
we are giving utterance to what is imaginary and extravagant.
How many a youth has been stimulated tohonourand nobleness,
while contemplating the nobility and reputation bequeathed by
his ancestors. How often has the memory of parental precept
or example, stirred the soul to its utmost depth, arrested it in its
course, and led it to God. How many martyrs have been in-
spirited, rendered bold and courageous, by the glowing words
and high bearing of their predecessors in the same fiery
struggle. It would almost seem as though this was the
chosen way, in which God propagates the more illustrious
virtues that adorn his saints. It was communion with the
Hebrew prophets and apostles in their writings and views that
nerved and strengthened, as by braces of iron, the massive soul
of Luther. And he again with his gigantic projects, and acts,
and burning thoughts, has furnished a study for succeeding
ages. His great life may be called the seed plot of high
virtues, the birth-place of Christian heroes, the source and
nourisher of exalted purposes. Milton, the “ orb divine,” still
shines in the literary hemisphere of England, giving to our
modern poetry its spirituality, elevation and grandeur. John
Howe, still looks upon us from his calm immortal home,
whispering of “ Delight in God,” of the 44 Blessedness of the
Righteous,” and of 44 moderation” iri our intercourse with
those who differ from us. The holy Baxter is re-producing in
our literature, and in our pulpits, the fervour that burned in
his own soul. We have consigned Hall, Forster,
and other illustrious Christians to their grave, but it will be
long before their influence shall die, before their spirit shall
depart, and the impetus which they gave to the religious mind
of Europe shall cease. Their original, beautiful and profound
thinking, has become a valued part of the noble patrimony to
which our children are born. We turn to these holy men with
affection, we breathe their names with reverence, we raise
grateful monuments to their memory, we devoutly thank
God, that they have lived !
But let us fix attention more closely on the fact, that our


memory of departed Christians may just turn into a motive of
high imperial power, animating our life, inspiriting us to ex-
cellence, guiding us in the right course, and moulding the
character into beautiful conformity to that of Christ, giving a
spirituality and dignity to the whole being. Was it so that he
or she you called your friend, by whose side you walked, whose
tones you so well remember, but who has now fallen from your
side; was that a spirit of high intelligence, always avoiding
the trivial and the common-place, and giving welcome to high
and glorious thoughts and views, Was he a Christian, one of a
lofty stamp, frowning with indignation at every form of base-
ness and wrong, pursuing the good, the true, the honorable,
with an ardor which nothing could arrest, drawing you on as
with the magic chain of his influence, beckoning you forwards,
ever crying as he scaled the mountain, “ Excelsior.” “ Brother
let us ascend, let us get nearer heaven !” Is he dead, is he
quiet, under the turf, are the flowers growing upon his grave,
is his place vacant ? Has he left you nothing but the recol-
lection of a strong, masculine, consistent character ? Well,
what a noble legacy is that, more precious than the libraries
of philosophers, or the sceptres of kings. Does not the re-
membrance of that character tell upon your daily life ? think of
that departed soul, now holy and immaculate, looking down
upon you from the heights of heaven, the u mansions” of glory
watching you in your various walks with his calm, affectionate,
passionless, spirit’s eye. Can you do a mean thing under such
an observation ? Can you slacken your pace in your heavenly,
journey, can you apostatize from Christ? If there was a wish
stated or implied, left you by your friend, are you not ready to say
that wish.
All alone shall live,
Within the book and volume of my brail*,
Unmixed with baser matter.
Has not the recollection of the pious dead strengthed you in
the encounter of temptation? Has not the remembrance of their
character inspired a wish for the same? As you have contemplated
the humility, the awe, the faith, the hope, the nobleness, have you
not gone to the throne of grace, and prayed that you might be


clothed with a robe of virtues, equally rich and glorious ? Has
not the contemplation of their character, given birth to a com-
placency, admiration, and devoutness that allied you for the time
being with Enoch, and Caleb, and John; have you not affection-
ately associated your departed friend, father, or child, with Christ,
and heaven, and the covenant, till all seemed more real, palpable,
vivid, and powerful? It sometimes happens on earth, that a
good, intelligent man, one of recognised wisdom and worth, comes
into a circle, and his presence chases away all trifling, and he
brings with him an atmosphere of sanctity, and a train of holy,
elevated thoughts, tie has enriched and glorified the hour,
that he spent in your presence. Has not your communion
with the dead, sometimes produced a similar effect? Have
you not, generally speaking, felt an aversion to what your
friend hated, and an attraction towards what he loved ? And
as Joshua lived under the solemn shadow of his predecessor,
and as Elijah caught the mantle of his great master, and as the
apostles followed in the wake of their Lord, and were lost in
the splendour of his character, so are not you conscious of
having received benefit, stimulus, and elevation, from the re-
collection of friends once on earth, but now in heaven ? <c The
memory of the just is blessed.”
And do they know this, these silent moulders of character,
these inspiriters of their humbler brethren to consistency and
devotedness ? Does the departed parent see, when his child is
suddenly checked in a sinful course by the influence of his
former -words or deeds while in the body; does the departed
pastor know when some great stirring thought to which he gave
utterance when on earth, gives a stimulus, or becomes a weapon
in the case of some surviving hearer ? Perhaps ! At any rate it
is right and important for us to remember the fact of posthumous
influence, and for us, so to act, that our children may remember
us with gratitude, and that our memory may stimulate them to
love and devotedness to their Saviour.
Nor ought we to forget the heavy responsibility resting
upon us in the peculiar and favored circumstances in which we


jive, “ Upon us the ends of the world are come.” For ns, in an
important sense the two earlier dispensations existed the Patri-
archal and the Jewish —we actually live amid the favor and light
of the third. We possess and enjoy the blessing, all but infinite,
of Christianity , with its promises, its motives, and its hopes.
For us, authors have written, martyrs have bled, afflictions
have been borne. Times and seasons have passed, we enjoy
the fruits of all former ages. “ How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? ” if we forget and despise our so-
lemn responsibility. Let us be thankful, let us live up to our
high privileges, let us yield to the motives that surround us.
Let us so act, with such devotedness to Christ, such aspiration
after conformity to his image, displaying such a character that
our children and friends may remember us, and be benefited
—may “ bless our memory.”
I will now give a very brief sketch of Mrs. Williams’ life
and character, whence it will appear that she was one whose
memory deserves to be cherished.
It seems she was impressed in very early life, with the su-
preme importance of divine things. I find her making entries
in a diary when she was scarcely fifteen years of age, and those
entries are of a most mature, solid and spiritual character. I
observe her taking notes of the sermons she heard, and applying
them to herself in a spirit of searching and faithful self-exami-
nation. She appears to me to have set up from the very first
a high standard of religious character, and not to have indulged
herself in any course that had even the “ appearance” of wrong.
Her anxiety to be a Christian of a high order was most in-
tense. Many, many bitter words does she write against her-
self, on occasions of failure ; and frequently does she pray that
she may admit no questionable evidence of personal piety,
but such alone as would stand the tests of death and judg-
ment.
At the age of eighteen she was married, and came, accom-
panied by her husband, and his father, the celebrated Mis-


sionary Williams, to the South Sea Islands, and thus was
gratified, the long- cherished wish of her heart, to be em-
ployed in the Missionary field. She remained in the Islands
twelve years. While there, she exerted herself in estab-
lishing maternal societies, and native schools. The repu-
tation she acquired, and the influence she gained, both
among the natives and the missionary families, were evidently
great. I have heard several of the missionaries speak of her
in the strongest language of esteem and praise.
She removed to the city and neighbourhood in 1850. Since
that period she has been among us, and you know what she
has been, and what she has done. I should, however, deprecate
forming a judgment in any case from what a person has actually
done. There may lodge in the soul great loving thoughts—noble,
heaven-inspired purposes which are never permitted to find
embodiment in action, and such was the case with our dear
friend. It was in her large Christian heart, as a hope, as a
cherished desire, to do much, but alas, it was not done. !
At a very early period of my acquaintance with her, I was
impressed by the deep principle that evidently actuated her. I
believe this was the mainspring of her conduct, the secret of
her influence. I believe her principles were intelligent, abid-
ing, and in ordinary circumstances, invincible. There was in
this excellent person an amount of principle that would have
met any exigency of the Christian life. There was no parade,
no ostentation, but a hidden, mighty force of will, which no
difficulty could baffle, and which death alone could subdue.
From the order and family of souls to which she belonged,
God has selected the martyrs and confessors, whose undaunted
heroism, and unshaken loyalty, have glorified the church in
past ages. The basis of our friend’s character, was resolute,
inexorable principle.
I must also mention her judgment , as a very conspicuous
trait of her character. Ido not remember her having said or


done any tiling, of a serious nature, or of the least public im-
portance, which I, as her pastor, could wish unsaid or undone.
Whether this was the result of previous thought and caution,,
or whether it sprung from her broad common sense views of
matters as they came before her, 1 know not.
No one could be long intimate with Mrs. Williams without
observing her uncommon zeal. No sooner were she and her
family settled among us than she vigorously devoted herself to-
religious effort, to the distribution of Tracts, the visitation of
the sick, and of the Sydney Female Refuge. She afterwards
established a maternal meeting, at which, subjects connected
with the training of children, were discussed, and suitable books
and magazines distributed, and no persons will shed more bitter
tears over her death, than those mothers who have had the pri-
vilege of meeting her on these monthly occasions. Her last
effort of a religious kind was to aid, in connection with another
Christian lady, in collecting funds for the erection of the school;
in the rear of this church. Of her, as of Dorcas, it may truly
be said, “ she was full of good works and alms deeds, which
she did. And yet, all this was secured without the sacrifice of
domestic order and comfort. You might at any time have pointed
to her person, her children, or her house, to shew that an ener-
getic Christian woman may be efficient at home, making all
decent and orderly there, and yet have a spare hour for the
purposes of visiting the sick and instructing the ignorant.
She was arrested in the midst of life and labor, and laid aside,
but she did not think till within a few weeks, that her illness
must end in death. When she was informed that she could
not recover, she received the intelligence with surprise, but
with calm Christian magnanimity. Her deportment on that
most trying occasion, was pre-eminently dignified and sublime,
and plainly revealed the masculine vigour of her mind, and the
uncommon depth of her piety. It reminded one of “ Aaron,
the saint of the Lord,” when his two sons were slain, she “ held
her peaceand when at length she broke silence, it was in


these words, addressed to the partner of her days, “ Must we
then part? The will of the Lord be done!” And now she
turned her face towards home, and proceeded deliberately and
solemnly to sever every tie that bound her to earth. There
was indeed a struggle in disengaging herself from present as-
sociations could it be otherwise, with so deep and affectionate a
nature, with a wife and a mother so happily situated ! She had
“ hoped that the Lord would have spared her to train up her
children, but his will was the best.” Only two or three weeks
of life now remained, she became rapidly weaker and weaker,
and could not see her most intimate friends. Meantime she ex-
amined the foundation of her hope, and cast herself afresh on
the atonement of the Saviour. Her experience did not at any
time amount to rapture, and this, with her cast of mind and pi-
ety, I did not expect. But there was an avowed resting on the
Saviour, a humble confidence that all would be well. And it
was pleasing to find that that confidence never forsook her even
in moments of delirium. Many times, when calm and rational,
did she repeat that sweet verse, which like an Elijah’s “ chariot
of fire” has been to multitudes of dying Christians as the very
vehicle of transmission to a higher world—
A guilty, weak, and helpless worm,
On thy kind arms I fall;
Be thou my strength and righteousness,
My Saviour and my all!
Days and nights passed on, and we watched, and waited,
and caught opportunities to pour words of comfort into the ears
of the dying Christian. She now longed to be gone. Often
repeating with submission the words “ 1 am weary of lingering
here.”
At last the messenger arrived ! It was literally at midnight.
We heard the voice “ Behold the Bridegroom cometh.” One
word was permitted to her eldest child—it was a dying charge
to love and serve the Saviour—one word to her weeping hus-
band—one word to a beloved friend—and then we gazed with
tender awe upon the tranquil setting of that beautiful star;


we saw the most sublime and solemn of all sights permitted to
man —we saw a Christian die !
All was ended now, the hope,
And the fear, and the sorrow.
All the aching of heart,
All the dull, deep pain,
And the constant anguish of patience.
We have borne her mortal part to the grave, amid the tears
and sighs of many. We have laid her there for a season. She
will rise—we shall see her yet again. Meantime let us cherish
her memory, revere her character, emulate her excellences.
Dear reader, can you from your heart say, “ Her Saviour is
my Saviour !” “ Her immortal home and resting place will be
mine ?
“ The memory of the just is blessed’’-


SERMON.
To die is gain.—Paul.
We have already glanced at the life and character of our be"
loved friend, in the morning of this day, and have laid before
you some thoughts, which were not, 1 trust, inappropriate, and
which the occasion will not allow you readily to forget, Che-
rish, oh cherish, the sacred memory of the departed ! And let
heaven appear more bright and attractive from the fact that it
is now the eternal home of your former fellow pilgrim on
earth.
But there is another topic, to which, in our present circum-
stances, I desire distinctly to advert —I allude to the Christian,
the evangelical, the apostolic, view of death —“ To die is gain”
—says the inspired apostle, the oracle of heaven, —Wonderful,
soothing, precious, unrivalled sentence ! It seems to clear the
damp oppressive atmosphere of the vault, and to make it balmy
and healthful, even as a thunder-storm clears the heavy murky
air. May the Lord help us to receive this sentence in the vast
fulness of its meaning.
I shall first endeavour to measure the immense breadth of the
statement, “To die is gain.” We are perfectly willing to
confess, we joyfully admit, that there is much in this life that
may truly be called desirable and valuable, much that ministers
to enjoyment and culture, much that calls for lively gratitude
to God. Behold this fair and beautiful world, with its firma-
ment, and rainbows, and clouds, and rising and setting suns !
with its hills, and valleys, and streams; with its grass, and trees,
and flowers ; its birds, and beasts, and fishes; its seasons, fol-
lowing each other in sweet, unvarying order. Behold man,
“ the head, and heart, and tongue ” of the whole-man,


the interpreter, the priest, the worshipper, the lord. Glance
at the whole, see what wisdom, power, love, taste, beauty, and
grandeur, are displayed. This world, with its furniture and its
inhabitants, and arrangements, speaks most powerfully of the
deep exhaustless resources of the ever-blessed Creator. And,
observe, the majesty, and beauty of nature, does not escape the
eye, and heart, of the inspired writers. Jehovah is represented
as pronouncing his creation “very good.” We read of the
“ everlasting hills,” of the land “ flowing with milk and honey,”
of the “ works of the Lord” being “ great.” We hear the ex-
clamation “ Oh Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom
hast thou made them all.” We listen to the Incarnate One
as he points to the scene before him and says, “ Behold the lilies
of the field, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet I say
unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
of these.” Now, beloved friends, the Christian is an inhabitant
of this varied and embellished globe. His mind, and taste, are
awakened and cultivated. He can understand, admire, appre-
ciate, and enjoy, all around, and surely it is a blessing to him to
live among so many interesting objects—amid so much variety,
majesty, and beauty. In such circumstances, it is a high and
glorious thing to live , but it is better, far better, to die !
Look at mind —and let me pronounce the word mind with
unaffected awe ! Look at the faculties of mind, perception,
judgment, imagination, memory. Mind is incomparably the
highest representation of Deity in existence.
Mind, mind alone, bear witness earth and heaven,
The living fountains in itself contains
Of beauteous and sublime.
Now the present life, with its objects, its intercourse, and its
business, can awaken the mind, so that it shall sleep no more !
The mind can become the subject of an insatiable curiosity—
can be cultivated, furnished, trained to dexterity in performing
the great tasks of life—can acquire boundless information—can
display power —wield influence—can pass from awkwardness to
grace—from rudeness to polish—from darkness to light—from


narrowness to breadth—from the particular and exclusive to
the general and comprehensive—can become trusted and re-
vered—can point to fields of action and lead the way —can
enter as a competitor on the race of mental culture and achieve-
ment, and win the race—can distance the aspiring and inge-
nious. This is indeed an elevated form of human life. It is
good thus to live —but it is better, far better, to die !
Look at social life. “ Behold how good and how pleasant
a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.” Sweet is
the intercourse of a family—the tender relationship of husband
and wife—parent and child—brother and sister; see the endless
play of affection—the interchange of good offices—the giving
and receiving—the cautious forbearance—the imperceptible
training—the nameless charities of home—the quick and ever-
living sympathy by which the joy of one is quickly distributed to
the whole—the sorrow of one shared by the whole. The family
institute is the great civilizer of man. Here man flourishes,
here his faculties and affections and sentiments grow harmoni-
ously. Oh it is delightful to live in a family, an intelligent,
Christian family—a family ever in pursuit of mental and spi-
ritual improvement! But it is better to die !
Look at the soul in a state of grace ! It loves God—it ad-
mires his government. It searches the Scriptures, and becomes
filled and influenced by those hallowing thoughts and views
which once dwelt alone and unrevealed in the .Eternal mind.
It tastes the solemn pleasure of prayer —the joy of gratitude—
the calm ecstacy of praise. It communes with Christ, not fears
him—worships him, admires him only, but communes with
him. There is a complacent interchange of sentiment, a one-
ness, a “blended unity” of thoughts, purposes, and soul, between
the disciple and his great master. Most glorious form of life,
just a fulfilling of the Divine idea of what man should he and
enjoy. Blessed are they who thus live —but more blessed are
they who die !
Look at the Christian in a sphere of usefidness. He has now


attained the eminence so much envied, and coveted, by many*
Having filled his own soul with divine thoughts, being prepared
by discipline, both human and divine, he can now instruct
others. He can occupy the place of the writer or the speaker.
Can stimulate and guide his fellow men in secular or spiritual
concerns, can make his influence felt, where his person is never
seen nor known. It is well, it is delightful to occupy such a
sphere, but it is better to die.
Look at the youth, with all the freshness of young life upon
him—impulses, hopes, ambitions, springing up apace. Sup-
pose him to have talent, piety, education—a large sphere of
action awaits him—all honors are within his grasp —he has the
flattering prospect of wielding an extensive influence in the
Church of God, equal to what has ever been realized by the
most zealous and honored of men. With that prospect before
him it would be better to die.
Look at the case of our dear departed friend, —she was a
mother, in the palmy state of life, with a competent degree of
mental cultivation, enjoying the affection and confidence of her
husband, the love and respect of her children; she was in easy
and improving temporal circumstances—she was living in the
enjoyment of the means of grace —she lived among a congenial
circle of friends—she was occupying an important sphere of
usefulness, presenting in her daily conduct the very ideal of an
energetic, Christian woman ; yet for that zealous, admired, use-
ful, Christian, it was better to die than to live !
Nay, suppose all the advantages we have enumerated could
meat in one and the same person; let there be a sensibility
to the beauties and wonders of nature; let there be mind, and
that mind in a high state of culture; let there be domestic hap-
piness, deep piety, great and increasing usefulness, youth, and
domestic ties; let the person in whom all these advantages
meet, cast lots as to whether he shall live or die, and let the
unalterable decision be death ! Would he be a loser or a gainer f
“ To die is gain ! ’’


We ought also to observe, that the apostle could not, of
course, be ignorant of what usually precedes death. His eye
had rested upon the gloomy avenue that leads to dissolution.
He was well aware of the sickness, the weariness, the pain, the
humiliation, the turning to and fro, of the poor sufferer. He
had doubtless heard the exclamation 44 oh that it were morning
—oh that it were evening.” He had, without doubt, often pe-
rused the celebrated and pathetic picture that Solomon gives of
old age, and death. He had become familiar, by frequent ob-
servation, with all that precedes departure from this life. He
was prepared however to hazard all that—and taking into ac-
count whatever of suffering, either as to length or severity,
might fall to his lot, he boldly declares, 44 To die is gain !”
Thus have we endeavoured, in few words, to give the breadth
of this noble consolatory sentence.
Are we to regard this marvellous declaration as the offspring
of enthusiasm, or melancholy, or misanthropy ? The Apostle
never lays himself open to such charges as these. There is
doubtless some ground adequate to sustain the statement, and
surely you are aware that the blessed Redeemer is, in some
way, connected with the bold triumphant words. Depend
upon it, this glorious utterance grew out of Paul’s exalted
view’s of Christ. The only being that coidd so soften the grim
features, relax the stern malign visage of the King of terrors,
is Christ. Christ has wonderfully irradiated the life and death
of man —has defeated our foes—cast the healing salt into the
bitter waters —has raised the whole sphere of humanity— has
lifted up our obscure humble habitation nearer to the sun !
Listen to the Saviour’s own pregnant words, in which, whether
majesty or grace preponderate, who shall say ? 44 All that are in
the graves shall come forth !” 44 Thy brother shall rise again.”
44 lam the resurrection and the life.” 44 1 wall come again and
receive you unto myself.” 44 1 have the keys of hell and of
death.” The Apostle speaks in the same lofty tone as his
master —- 4< All things are yours, death is yours.” 44 We shall
bear the image of the heavenly.” 44 Oh death where is thy
sting, Oh grave where is thy victory.” 44 Jesus Christ has


abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by
the gospel." And another apostle states in language nearly
coincident with the words of the text, “ Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord.”
But what are the specific reasons for this statement ? I
answer. Death to the believer is the end of trials and sufferings.
I need scarcely remind you that the Christian life involves suf-
fering of various kinds. The Saviour taught his people to ex-
pect this. “In the world” said he “ye shall have tribulation.”
The apostle declares “ we that are in the body do groan being
burdened,.’’ and he elsewhere speaks of the “ easily besetting
sin.” Trial awaits you Christian ! look for it, prepare for it!
You will never have done “fighting till you put on the shroud,”
your enemies, like hell hounds, will follow you up to that line, the
very border line that separates time from eternity, up to that line ,
but thanks be to God, nofurther I The Egyptians rushed madly
into the channel of the Red Sea, in pursuit of the Israelites,
but they never gained the opposite shore, so the foes of the
Christian shall pursue him to heaven’s gate, but they shall not
enter. “ Neither shall the righteous die any more.” “ There
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed
away.”
“To die is gain’’ because the Christian shall then meet with
those who have gone before. Some of you may have a child in
heaven, some & parent, some a wife or husband , some a friend.
How delightful to commune with those whom we have known
on earth, to turn over with them the pages of God’s providence,
to mark again the way in which the Lord our God has led us !
How delightful to meet the ancient servants of God, Moses and
David , and Paul , and John. Heaven has been receiving into
its capacious regions, multitudes of souls, with every revolving
year from the beginning of time, and perhaps never a soul enters
heaven, but presents some peculiar manifestation of God’s attri-
butes, or government. Perhaps the standard, immortal idea of
God’s character, as it will be seen in eternity will be one, towards


which the history of every individual saint will contribute its
quota. Now, to mingle with the holy, the wise, the noble,
to hear their discourse, to learn their history, and to see God
revealing himself in the whole 1 Oh, this makes death a gain.
To die is gain because death removes the impediments to ad-
vancement that exist now—God is a Spirit! Man was made
in God’s image. It is the province of spirit to think, to
know—to advance, to become wiser, stronger, holier. The cry
of every renovated mind is, let us reach towards the things that
are before. But alas, how many difficulties, impediments, exist
here. There is the body — sleep— the humbler duties of life,
all forbidding any very rapid growth in intelligence. But let
death take place, and suddenly, the soul is free ! passes into
the world of light, inhales wisdom and knowledge, as we in-
hale the vital atmosphere. It shall pursue its course without
weariness or fatigue. In all its soarings, its wing shall never
droop nor tire. “ This life,” says the profound Foster, “ should
be spent in accumulating questions to be asked in eternity.
The divine cannot answer our enquiries, nor the poet, nor the
philosopher; but we will ask other respondents, we will ask
angels, we will ask God”! Yes, there shall be unlimited
scope for enquiry, and every enquiry shall be met —every knot
untied, every difficulty solved, and still the soul, true to its
inborn, God inspired property, shall cry onward , onward.
“To die is gain” for the Christian shall then meet with his
Lord ! with him whom the prophets described in such glowing
language, with him, in whom apostles gloried, with him, who
spoke in such terms of love and sympathy to his disciples, with
him, who uttered the blessed sentiments contained in the xiv.,
xv., xvi., and xvii. chapters of the gospel of John, with him
whose presence the apostle coveted, when he said, “ Having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better,”
with him, of whom John, the beloved disciple, says “ we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is,” with him, “ who
died for us, and rose again,” with him, “who ever liveth to
intercede for us.” Beloved brethren, give us your idea and


fabric of heavenly life and glory. Lay the foundation deep ire
the attributes and government of God—raise the superstructure
with those passages which speak of angels, of “ fountains of
living waters,” of the “ crown of glory which fadeth not away,’ 5
but when you have assembled together all the passages of
scripture, which speak of heaven—when your structure is
raised, ready for the roof—what is the farther idea, the majestic
dome with which the whole is to be crowned and surmounted ?
It is this idea— Christ shall be there ! and with that glorious
mediator, that elder brother, shall be associated peace, joy,
security, and life eternal. When a dying Christian heard
the by-standers whispering of Christ and heaven, he said truly
and sublimely, “ Christ and heaven, heaven and Christ, why
Christ and heaven are one.” Yes, Christ and heaven are one,
where Christ is there is heaven, and where heaven is there is
Christ.
We believe that our dear friend is now realizing the truth of
all this. She knows, in a higher sense than we that “to die is
gain.” Her trials are over. She has met her friends, and has
renewed a friendship which shall not be interrupted again, her
spirit has quitted the prison house, and is eternally free. She
has met her Saviour, his smile has assured her, his voice has
blessed her, his presence is her joy and life. It is her elevated
privilege to live in the last and most perfect dispensation of
God towards his creatures.
We saw her lately prosecuting a course of zealous, Christian
labors—we saw with concern her failing health, her reluctant
retreat from the field of action—we saw her obliged to retire
to her house, to her room, to the bed of sickness and death.
But all that is passed! we think of her now apart from weak-
ness, sorrow, suffering, and death —we now link her name in-
separably with the august ideas of life, liberty, eternity. We
shall see her again, we shall commune together. Together
adore, and worship the Lord and Redeemer. Her Saviour is
our Saviour, her God is our God.


We have thus endeavoured to assert with some freedom, the
doctrine of this passage. Let us,’ere we close, make two or
three practical remarks.
First. Let us not, because “ death is gain,” despise and
hate the present life. Brethren remember ! God sent you,
here. He has work for you to do, by which you may glorify
himself. It is not for you to anticipate. 44 He that shall come,
will come and will not tarry.” Jesus will open the gate to
Paradise, not a moment sooner nor a moment later, than infinite
love and wisdom dictate. Work in the vineyard of the Lord,
feel that, in the ordinary business of life, as well as in devout
exercises, you are doing his will, watch, and obey, till your
turn come. It will not he long !
Second. If you are a Christian, do not fear death, commune
frequently with such thoughts as the text suggests 44 death is
gain.” Fix your attention, not so much on the details of the
death and funeral. While your affectionate friends are de-
cently and pensively burying the poor body, your soul will be
in the world of light and glory ! 44 While here to do his will
be mine, and his to fix my time of rest.” Oh Christian, Christ
will save you, to the uttermost, he will be with you when you
die.
Third. Are you, dear reader, a Christian ? I implore you
to ponder that question. God is warning you. Your last
warning will come, —are you living in sin ? then you are not
a Christian, —you have not the character, nor the hopes of a
Christian. Be indifferent a little longer, and the case is
hopeless. “ Awake, arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
you light.” Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is
the day of salvation. 44 He that believeth shall be saved, and
he that believeth not, shall be damned.
PRINTED BY DAN I El. LOVETT WELCH, ATLAS OFFICE.


