

PROBLEM OF SEX
In Relation to Natural and
Social Developments
by
The Revd. Canon T. C. Hammond, M.A., Th. Soc
PRICE 3d.
Published By
THE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY FOR ERADICATION OF
VENEREAL DISEASE
Robs Brothers Pty. Ltd., Printers, Sydney


V -:., v-• * r --.- - ; ;,: ./ ■
.


CONTENTS
The Developing Sex-Impulse
The Sex-Impulse in Man
Hush ! Hush ! and Sex
The Rise of Convention
Is “ Hush-hush ” a Useful Convention ?
Reason and What is called Instinct
Contradictory Instincts -
The Effect of Family Life
Following Nature
The Result of Unrestrained Gratification
Thought Control -
The Family as a Social Unit
The Problem of Harmon} 7
The Influence of Habit


PREFACE
The accompanying booklet has been written to help those who
may have been induced by specious reasoning to adopt the view that
any natural impulse can be gratified without regard to the require-
ments of social order and the final well-being of the community. It
demands careful study if its full significance in this direction is to be
appreciated.
It is by no means a full examination of the problem. There are
moral and divine enactments enforcing a rule of chastity which are
imperative. To these, no reference has been made because the object
is to show that they are reinforced by a study of man’s nature and
destiny as these may be gathered from the facts of life.
The writer hopes that a study of this brochure will create a deeper
respect for the moral law of God which is often flouted to the great
loss of mankind.
He also hopes that it will enable the thoughtful to see that it is
wise to study the developments of the past, and to resist the suggestion
that individual satisfaction of an immediate desire represents the
best method of serving our generation. That course leads to anarchy.
Wise self restraint and a deepening of responsibility to others is
demanded in any new world that is worth having.


THE PROBLEM OF SEX
There is a great deal said to-day about sex-education. An or-
dinary reader of the newspapers with their headlines about the startling
increase in venereal disease, and the comments of Public Health Officers
and other competent authorities, would come to the conclusion that
ignorance of elemental sex matters lay at the root of all our troubles.
This is a big mistake. Proper sex-education is a good thing in its way.
Still, it may be said, with a measure of truth, that the increase in the
knowledge and discussion of sex matters has, in its - own way, con-
tributed to our present evils.
If you ask, How ? Writing has created forgers. The manufacture
of fermented liquor has created drunkards. Stored goods have created
burglars. Democratic government has created place-seekers. Why
multiply the list ? “ What is one man’s meat is another man’s poison."
Knowledge is useful when it is well applied. It is dangerous in the
hands of the unscrupulous.
Practical men know that, whatever the final explanation, we
are largely creatures of impulse. That is the reason why knowledge
of sex matters may easily prove a snare. Designing people will tell
us that knowledge is all we want. If only we know how, we can
gratify all our desires with impunity. And this idea has got abroad.
It is blighting the lives of very many. Apparently those who know
are holding their tongues on this aspect.
Det us look at some of the silly platitudes that are served up on
this question. We are told, with all the assumption of superior
knowledge that there is nothing discreditable about sex.
The proposition that there is nothing discreditable about sex
need not be connected with a “ hush-hush ” policy. There have been
times in the history of the world when there was very little “ hush-
hush.” There have been other times when, in a large section of the
community, it was felt undesirable to publicize certain sex aspects.
But sex remained the same. All through, it was either creditable
or discreditable, or neither. We need to keep this fact steadily in
mind.


Is "Sex” Discreditable?
' And so we can consider first of all the proposition, “ There is
nothing discreditable about sex.” When put by itself, the statement
appears either obvious or silly. The means revealed by nature for
reproduction are twofold. The first is scission a cell splits into
two apparently of its own accord. Both cells then become independent
living creatures. It would be absurd to say that there is anything
“ discreditable ” in an amoeba becoming two amoebas, yet it is a form
of sex-activity —or perhaps, more accurately, a substitute for it.
The other form that nature reveals for reproduction is mitosis.
Instead of a cell immediately splitting into two independent and
equally perfect cells, two cells join together. Kach cell is the counter-
part of the other. The cells in themselves are highly organized, yet
organization of the resultant being emerges later, so that at first it
is a matter of indifference, except in the one point of size, whether
the cells that are there through multiplication are of a specific number
or not. Cells can be removed at an early stage of development without
affecting the perfection of the organism, At a later stage, still com-
paratively early in the process of growth, this cannot be done.
Now this process of mitosis runs through the plant and animal
world. It does not wholly supersede scission, for in the
initial development through mitosis the fertilized cells divide by
forming separate nuclei and developing until complete being is
realised.
Fertilization itself is an interesting phenomenon. Plants give
off spores which are borne by the wind to their suitable mates.
Thousands of these spores fall useless by the way, yet the plants are
fertilized and reproduce their kind by this apparently hap-hazard
incident of wave currents. Other plants are fertilized with the assis-
tance of insects. It is an amazing fact that the lower animal and
vegetable world are strongly co-ordinated in the scheme of life. Bees
and moths are the well-known contributors to the succession of plant
life. They are not the only ones, however. Pollen is carried by this
means from the male to the female plant. In the higher animal life,
where the doubtful border between botany and zoology is definitely
transcended, fertilization is by means of some form of copulation.
This is true of rather rudimentary animal existences, where there
is no elaborate nervous system.
When these facts are borne in mind, there seems something
slightly grotesque in the statement, “ There is nothing discretable
about sex.” Has anyone ever heard of a stern disapproval of the
burgeoning of a cauliflower, or severe stricture on the license indulged
by bees and moths. - Yet no moderately well-educated person is wholly
unaware of these facts in nature. -


The Developing Sex-Impulse
But of course, that is not the whole story, and those who speak
of sex as a simple phenomenon solely related to the mating instinct
are guilty of an isolation of one factor, against which nature itself
protests. As the nervous organism of animals is more and more
developed, the inner sex urge becomes related to other instincts. At
the rutting season, stags will engage in mortal combat. The female
deer becomes coy and elusive, and then watches the fury of the com-
bat, mating with the victor. We are told glibly by scientists that
this is “ a provision ” for the survival of the better adapted. “ Nature
red in tooth and claw with ravin ” secures a stronger strain for the
forthcoming offspring. The scientist conveniently forgets to tell us
who made the provision. To say Nature did, is to raise a host of
inquiries. Is Nature intelligent, and has she therefore skilfully com-
bined the sex instinct with the instinct of what has sometimes been
called “ sudden anger ” ?
But we must not be drawn aside by problems of evolution. Here
is a new phenomenon. Tove and hatred stalk side by side and arise
out of the original sex impulse. But they do not arise by chance.
There is a slow preparation in the development of a suitable nervous
organization, in which desire stimulates the sex impulses so different
from the spores driven by the wind, or the pollen conveyed by moth
or bee, or even the unemotional copulation of creatures lower in the
scale of being. There is nothing discreditable in the fierce shock of
antler meeting antler, in the panting breath of the contestants, or
the bleeding agony of the vanquished. But is it all simply sex ?
The harassed stag will face the hounds. He will rush to combat with
the same fiery zeal, and rip and stamp his opponent until the crimson
life-blood of the hound dyes the green turf. Yet it is not a matter
of sex. Here is a combination of two diverse passions, directed, in
the instance we are considering, let it be said, to the better propagation
of the race. But the passions are diverse. When people talk glibly
of sex as natural, they forget the problems raised by this remarkable
development. The sex instinct evokes rivalry and then anger, but
so do other instincts which have not direct relation to sex. The dog
will snarl over a bone as readily as he will snarl over a bitch. Sex in
the higher animal life cannot be separated from other nervous
reactions, and the operation of endocrine glands called into existence
by varied experiences.
The Sex-Impulse in Man
Now the same characteristics are in man. The instinct to fight
for his intended mate is there, and sometimes finds dire expression.
Man’s nervous organism relates anger to various desires when these
desires are thwarted or threatened just as clearly as in the case of
the different species of mammalia. And so we sometimes read in
popular novels of " the law of the jungle.” Very often the jungle
is ennobled, and “ jungle-men ” are made to share in this largely


imaginary nobility. The law of the jungle : “ Bet them take who
want it, and let them hold who can.” But man does not only fight
with fists and feet; he fights with axe and sword, with revolver and
rifle, with poison gas and howitzer, and with the aid of money. The
jungle law becomes a little complicated in these circumstances ; and
they must all be taken into account if we are to interpret sex as it
emerges in higher organisms with widely ramified nervous conco-
mitants.
If a man fights for his intended mate and splits his opponent’s
head with an axe, we do not say “ there is nothing discreditable in
sex,” we hang him. The deer cannot hang, and do not butt to death
the victor of the rutting season. Why should there be any difference ?
They are both animals, and they both fought for their intended mate
with the weapons that came handy. The answer frequently returned
is that to split a man’s head open with an axe, even to secure an
intended mate, is anti-social. But then, there is or there may be
something discreditable about sex ! The first proposition is simply
unmeaning when it is developed. All it means is that sex is a natural
desire which can be legitimately gratified, and no one who is truly
sane will dispute that.
Enough has been said to teach us that the phrase “There
is nothing discreditable in sex ” is true if it means that a God-implanted
impulse is not itself evil. It is false, however, if the meaning is that
all sex impulses and contacts as we know them have nothing dis-
creditable about them. The least developed races have attached
discredit to certain sex manifestations. Even we who have released
ourselves from so-called “ taboos ” still view with disfavour rape and
incest, and restrain the association between sex impulses and violent
rivalries that lead to splitting men’s heads open with an axe.
Hush! Hush! and Sex
Whether there is anything discreditable about sex or not, it as
an interesting problem as to whether a “ hush-hush ” policy regarding
things of sex is desirable or otherwise. Most of us think there is
something discreditable about lying, yet we do not adopt a “ hush-
hush policy ” concerning it. Most of us, on the other hand, regard
an occassional bath as a highly creditable performance, yet we have
not yet invited the public to exhibitions of ladies and gentlemen
using so-and-so’s soap in their lounge baths. So even here, at the
outset of our inquiry, we find a certain reserve even in dealing with
matters creditable. To put it quite plainly, there is such a thing as
an ingrained sense of decency. The attempt is being made to destroy
it. No doubt decency may be preserved under differing conditions.
The conventions of to-day may not be the conventions of to-morrow,
as the conventions of yesterday are not the conventions of to-day.
But can we sweep aside all conventions To say we can is to raise
an important question, viz., If they are all useless, how did conventions
arise ?


The Rise of Convention
The answer to this question carries us to the heart of the problem
we are now discussing. Plants have not conventions. If we put them
into suitable soil they fertilize one another and live. If we put them
into unsuitable soil, they die. The same seems to be true of the
elementary zoological species. The zoophyte lives its little life and
dies its little death untroubled by community problems. When we
come to the insects there is a beginning of convention. It is exceedingly
rudimentary. The drones are kept for the flight of the queen bee.
The successful drone which impregnates the queen bee is torn asunder
by the very act and dies. The others are stung to death by the workers
when the need of conserving food supplies becomes apparent. This
is an interesting convention with its food laws, its sex impulse, and
its judicial murder. No one accuses the successful drone of anything
discreditable, but he loses his life because of the act of copulation,
without which the bee community would perish. It is worth a moment’s
consideration by those who find the sex problem so amazingly simple.
Drones, by the way, are produced from unfertilized eggs, and fore-
ordained to death. Is it any wonder that Huxley once said that Nature
offered amazing portents before which the miracles of the New
Testament faded into insignificance ?
But all such community arrangements which are illustrated
by the hymenoptera, and those which belong to the wolf-pack or the
elephant herd, the deer, or the fowl yard, labour under one restricting
influence. They are fixed within well defined limits. There may be
violations and exceptions. The rogue elephant is an outcast from the
herd, but he never creates an elephantine equivalent to the cave of
Adullam. The arrangements endure from generation to generation,
but are never varied outside a fixed index. This is a fact to which
attention will be further directed later on in our enquiry. At present
it is necessary to emphasize that sex impulse does not operate alone,
but is co-ordinated with community activities in a very remarkable
order. We cannot say, therefore, that all conventions are unnatural
restrictions on genuine impulses. There are mutual co-relations,
some of which act as retardations on the unlimited exercise of one
element in being. Nature clearly teaches this lesson.
Is Hush! Hush! a useful Convention?
And so we come to the denunciation of the “ hush-hush ” policy.
It may be carried to excess —so much can be freely granted. But
this is the poorest and least useful way of considering it. Is there
any basis for the so-called “ hush-hush ” policy ? Or is it merely
an unintelligent convention ? Bond voices are calling to-day in favour
of the alternative solution. We are almost tired of hearing of our
prudish progenitors. To discuss the matter fully is to go far afield
into ethical considerations that belong to the latter part of this
enquiry, but something may be said here also on the plane of natural
observation. The phenomenon of courtship in animals is well-known


There is manifest a rudimentary coyness, and a certain sense of the
need of protection. The number of impulses in the animal world are
limited, and so is their range. Still the difference between the move-
ments connected with sex impulse in the higher animals and the
comparative passivity in plant life and the uniformity in the lower
animal world advises us that where what we have called convention
operates there is a combination of desires in which one desire acts
as a healthy counter-active to another. James puts this fact very
clearly : “ Wherever the mind is elevated enough to discriminate ;
wherever several distinct sensory elements must combine to discharge
the reflex arc ; wherever, instead of plumping into action instantly
at the first rough intimation of what sort of thing is there, the agent
waits to see which one of its kind it is and what the circumstances
are of its appearance ; wherever different individuals and different
circumstances can impel him in different ways ; wherever these are
the conditions we have a masking of the elementary constitution
of the instinctive life Nature implants contrary impulses
to act on many Classes Of things, and leaves it to slight alterations
in the conditions of the individual case to decide which impulse shall
carry the day.” (Text-book on Psychology, pp. 397-8).
Factors such as these must be taken into consideration when
an indiscriminate denunciation of the “ hush-hush ” policy is lauded
as a most material advance in the so-called science of sociology.
Such characteristics as shame and modesty may, at the very least,
form elements in the “ masking of the elementary constitution of
the instinctive life.”
Reason and what is called Instinct
The way is thus cleared for a closer study of the sex-impulse
and related instinctive actions as they display themselves in the life
of an ordinary human being. Psychologists of the modern schools
are very contemptuous concerning the popular distinction between
‘ * instinct ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ reason . ” It would be a mistake to assert that here
the pyschologists are all wrong, but it may be in point to suggest
that they are not quite fair to the distinction made by the ordinary
man. The reason with which man is gifted is not a substitute for in-
stincts, but a director of them. No ordinary sane individual rejects
this psychological finding. What the ordinary individual observes,
however, is that this direction of instincts or impulses has such an
effect on conduct as to make a wide difference between rational and
sensate animals. It need not be necessary even to draw the line with
complete rigidity between the higher animals and the highest animal
man. The dog comes to heel at the bidding of his master even when
his sex-impulse has been aroused. The jaded horse makes a last
supreme effort, not only under the stimulus of the spur, but under
the stimulus of his rider’s “ Up, boy, up.” These are well ascertained
facts, and ought not to be disregarded. But when we come to “ free
memory ” as it is called, and all the varied activities of a human
being’s existence, the facts multiply and compel the closest attention.


What difference is noticeable between human instincts and those
that prevail in the insect world ? The usual answer is a correct one.
Instincts in the higher vertebrates, and particularly in man, are less
highly organized. The life of the ant or the bee is regulated according
to pattern. Maeterlinck has made gallant efforts to bridge the gap
between man and the insectivora.' His “ Five Horses of Blberfield ”
is directed to the same object, viz., to show that there is no impassable
barrier between brute and man. But when all that can be urged in
this direction has been suitably weighed, the difference cited by the
psychologists remains. It is indeed the invariability to reaction in
the lower creatures that has created the idea to which we adverted
previously, that there is an iron hand of instinct relaxed by the higher
control of reason. Now, as nothing of this sort in nature is purely
adventitious, it is pertinent to inquire as to the possible reasons for
this less organized instinct in creatures of a higher life order.
Contradictory Instincts
The reason that exhibits itself is that instincts are not only
directive to a certain end, but they are often contradictory one to
another. The instinct of anger inhibits for the time being instinctive
digestive functions. To harmonize these possibly contradictory
immediate impulses, room must be found in an expanding life for
the capacity to learn. The iron law is relaxed to permit a freer adap-
tation to varying circumstances. -The rooster lives in amity with
his near neighbour provided that his own selected harem is left
inviolate. Dogs and cats can grow up in harmony if they are familiar
with one another from an early age. These are commonplaces of
psychological observation, yet they are all jettisoned in response to
a meaningless outcry against the “ hush-hush ” policy.’
To apply these commonplaces to the sex impulse as it is displayed
in human society might well deserve more consideration than is usually
given to them. Man is destined to live in society. The human infant
is the most helpless of all creatures. The process of development is
very slow. In the process of this development, the child learns many
things. Sudden anger has to be moderated, and conduct adapted to
new and sometimes little understood restrictions. Hunger has to be
controlled. The instinct to snatch a savoury morsel is held in check
by certain inhibitions that are the result of learning. When the sex-
impulse displays itself, quite a nest of habits have already been fixed
that hold the various immediate instincts in check. Hence habits
of co-ordination are well formed when the testing time of adolescence
makes its demands..
The tendency in modern writers of a certain type to isolate the
sex-motive and make it wholly dominant is a direct refusal to re
cognise this very obvious fact in human life.


The Effect of Family Life
The normal child is brought up in a family. Already there is
a tacit recognition of the fact that members of the opposite sex within
the family group lie outside the lawful sphere in which the sex impulse
may be satisfied. The right-minded boy or girl learns to respect this
necessary restriction and usually succeeds without any undue re-
pression. The ordinary well-balanced individual takes it as a matter
of course that an infringement of this principle is base and contemptible.
Compare this with the sexless workers in the communities of bees
and ants, and the difference becomes at once obvious. What is
achieved perfectly by differentiation in insect communities is achieved
by a process of education in the human species. The education is not
always effective but, on the other hand, it paves the way for a much
more highly organized community life, with capacities for develop-
ment that could not possibly exist in the lower form of complete
instinctive control.
But the very restraint that education brings create reactions
in the direction of shyness, modesty and shame, which are strongly
operative as acquired reactions, and determine largely the individual's
success under training. Here comes in the so-called " hush-hush ”
policy, and it seems better to explain it than senselessly to deride it.
Modesty and shame are emotions, and like all emotions, they are not
easy to explain. It may suffice for our purpose if we say that they
are complexes arising from the co-ordination of tendencies in them-
selves opposed. If it be conceded that the sex impulse is found to
be incongruous in certain circumstances with other equally insistent
tendencies, some compromise must be effected. Most rational human
beings continually effect such compromises. The open display of
sex instincts is frowned upon as harmful to the ordinary processes
of social order. Hence a natural tendency to seclusion. This is learned
as an indispensable condition of human society, and so sex modesty
makes its appearance both in the male and the female. But modesty
is strengthened in the female by the instinct of coyness and allurement
which belongs to the sex-impulse, and leads to the elaborate courtships
observable in birds and animals. The re-enforcement makes modesty
more pronounced in the female.
Reluctance to exposure of the person creates reluctance to certain
forms of speech, often taking other rather strange turns as convention
comes to the aid of a natural harmonizing tendency. So the “ hush-
hush ” policy is not as remote from normal human development as
some people would have us believe. Nor can the developed human
character, which results from the loose organization of instinct and
the formation of acquired emotions and habits through learning, be
thrust aside as a mere useless formulation under the tyranny of
unintelligent custom. To do so is to deny the validity of the slow
racial progress, which has given us the things that fill our lives with
interest.


Following Nature
But it is possible that someone will dispute the value of these
complex arrangements by which man has so far pulled along in com-
munity life. Someone may tell us that we would have gone further
if we had followed Nature. A person who speaks like that gets angry
if you ask What nature ? The nature of the highly organized
instinctive life of a bee or an ant, or the nature of the more loosely
organized instinctive life, supplemented by the process of trial and
error ? So we will bear with this painful lack of definition and come
right to the point.
Hither all this elaborate acquired mechanism, with its emotions
of modesty and shame, and its strange developments in language
and custom is useful or it is not. We are not contending that every
phase in it is equally useful, or even that useful phases at one period
may not become useless or even harmful at another. We are trying
to work out a broad basis for our conclusion. Two factors at once
appear as determining the line of development which is not opposed
by our critic to that which seems to him natural. Restraint upon the
sex-impulse narrowed for the individual the area of selection. It is
not enough, in this so-called artificial condition of society that a mate
should be a female. She must be a female of a certain type. Het it
be conceded at once that limitations were imposed that could not stand
close investigation. Het it further be conceded that the very rigour
of the restriction led to temporary gratification of the sex-craving
that boded no good for the community as a whole. These are but
the incidents of a trial and error proceeding. The question remains
Was the narrowing of selection a true acquired habit ?
The Result of Unrestrained Gratification
The opposite would be the unbridled satisfaction of every sex
desire. No society has ever yet existed on that basis, nor is it possible
to conceive of its existence. If the mating instinct proceeded uncon-
trolled the fighting instinct, closely associated with it, would also
be untrammeled, and the corridors of our homes would reek with
blood. Incest and rape would be more common than thieving, and
family life as we know it, or even as the savage knows it, would be
impossible. And let it be so. Het the jungle law prevail and the race
would blot itself out. Sexual promiscuity is productive of two of the
most deadly diseases known to men. Syphilis the great imitator
that attacks the body under so many disguises, would become rife.
An offspring of blind, scrofulous, idiotic, insane creatures would mark
the final end of man's failure by trial and error to avoid the pit-falls
that beset him. That is the naked truth. Some form of restraint is
the opposide to promiscuity. The prevalence of destructive bacilli
in the blood of the partially unrestrained is nature’s appalling answer
to much of the clamour which shelters under the ambiguity “ There
is nothing discreditable about sex.” There is something not only


discreditable but menacing to the life of the community in the dis-
regard of those barriers to licentiousness which the reason of ages
has erected.
To turn to another aspect of this law of development, where
for obvious prudential, economic and social reasons the sex-impulse
cannot find immediate gratification, the law of what is known as
defence-mechanism operates. The mind is diverted from the un-
attainable immediate and, under the influence of thwarted desire,
directs itself to some other satisfaction. This may have sex emotion
in it in a disguised and socially harmless form. In extreme cases, it
may take the form of complete revolt, when we have men-haters and
women-haters. It more often takes the form of social intercourse,
where the opposite sexes unite in common operations with just enough
of the sex-impulse to give zest to their united labours, and just enough
inhibition of the actual “ end-object ” to achieve a harmony with
insistent prudential and social demands.
Thought Control
In order to attain to the best harmony along these lines, the
thought stimuli to actual sexual relations must be kept in close
control. Here come in the safeguards which are resident in the con-
vention against “ vulgarity," lewd stories, suggestive screen films,
and the numberless safeguards for youth that experience formerly
dictated, and which are now sometimes regarded as mere old womanly
prejudices. Why the defence-mechanism should be recognised in other
psychological experiences, and rejected in relation to the sex-motive
takes a good deal of explaining.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the defence-mechanism sometimes
operates to re-enforce the sex-impulse, A young lady’s resistance to
advances are sometimes so naturally well-regulated that they con-
stitute repulses that invite a more resolute and a more guarded attack.
They form part of the loosely organized instinct towards elaborate
courtship that follows a dreary pattern of monotony in the animal
world —at least to the human observer. Reticence, then, may well
be esteemed as an experiential defence-mechanism that fences the
pathway to promiscuous indulgence, with its hateful precipice over
which even the partially unrestrained plunge to destruction. Reticence
is flanked by modesty and shame, and it will be an ill day for the human
race when these acquired habits are discarded in face of nature and
experience, both of which supply adequate reasons for their retention.
And so we arrive at the solution of the problem which decides
that modesty and a sense of shame are indissoluble in any scheme
of sex-education that can be regarded as commensurate with the
needs of civilized man. To that extent, and to that extent only, would
we defend “ the hush-hush policy.” The same instinct which invites
reserve as to certain intimate family matters when speaking to strangers
invites reticence concerning sex activities and the many stimuli thereto,


and more particularly in the region of the imagination. If we are to
exist comfortably in a certain social state we must perforce check
the riotous exhuberance of the sex-impulse as it finds expression in
mental or physical stimuli. An ordered defence-mechanism comes
to our aid, enabling us to do so by re-adjustments and diversions,
and we would be worse than foolish if we did not utilize the means
that ages of experience has developed, even though changing cir-
cumstances may introduce various modification of method. These
considerations offer a ground in nature and psychological experience
for the principle of narrowed selection as a condition of useful re
striction on the indiscriminate sex-impulse.
The Family as a Social Unit
The second factor is at least of equal importance. Restraint
upon the sex-impulse is necessary for the provision and maintenance
of the family as a social unit. It is impossible to keep these conceptions
widely apart, and already we have seen that the existence of a family
formed an important element in the creation of those preparatory
reactions which helped the adolescent to regulate the stronger sex
urge which emerged at that period. But here we are considering this
aspect from the point of view of the mature individual. Man is not,
any more than the animal, a mere collection of independent instincts
driven first by one and then by another. Man is a unity, and the
gratification of the individual, not the mere response to a primal urge,
is the proper unit of measurement. Now the family is a very complex
affair. There are bound up in it affection, instincts, anticipations of
future good and pleasure, pride of place, sense of dependence, and a
hundred and one obscure convictions, feelings, desires. Gradually,
as time goes on, these various elements take shape into a more or
less harmonious whole.
An illustration may be found in the large extent to which
occupation tends to be hereditary. Natural aptitudes and the influence
of environment here coincide to send a large body of people along
the line of their forefathers. The “ caste ” system represents an
exaggeration, and to that extent a perversion of this natural trend.
The very fact that preparatory reactions emerge in a loosely organized
instinctive ensemble is a warning against any hide-bound determination,
but does not discredit the observed fact to which attention has been
drawn. Barriers are frequently overleaped, but that does not mean
that they are not there. The demands of the family, and the res-
trictions imposed by family life are potent factors in restricting active
selection. The needs of the young children in communities where no
responsibility is taken by the father offer no obstacle to the practice
of polygamy. It is otherwise when the male parent is anxious to
superintend the child’s activities from a comparatively early stage.
The demands of an exacting civilization where the training of the
young involves a wide range of subjects makes closer attention in-
evitable, and so it has become evident that polygamy tends to decline


as a recognized condition of family life wherever the demands of modern
civilization become imperative. This holds true beyond the borders
of Christianity, and helps to explain the inter-relation between the
sex-impulse and the satisfaction of the full life of the individual.
A young farmer is greatly attracted by a pretty empty-headed town
girl. He finds an attraction even in her fear of the farm animals and
her ignorance of farm routine. Her pretty hands were never made
for milking. But by and by, certain insistent demands of his farm life
seek satisfaction. There is a conflict between impulse and interest.
He speedily discovers that the plump maiden who tends the cows
can equally give him sex satisfaction. She can also give him other
things. The family law prevails. The young town maiden rejoices
quite loudly that she has been delivered from the unwelcome attentions
of the lout, and the farm girl has her pangs of jealousy soothed.
Sometimes very material motives may redirect the sex impulse.
Percy French was uttering a real psychological truth when he sang ;
“ Mary Ann is very very pretty, And there’s no doubt Jane is plain,
But sure there’s not the differ of the price of a heifer between Mary
Ann and Jane.” ■
And so the family, our earliest school and our latest ambition
takes its place to correct and direct the directionless impulse of sex,
giving it a new importance as it is woven into a great scheme of ends
in which it plays its part more fully because it is harnessed to other
motives and welded into a greater scheme of things. There is here
something more than the rational measure for the avoidance of the
pitfalls of promiscuity. That is negative even if it is in its own way
of prime importance. But there is here the reaching out into a wider
life. There is the demand for companionship and understanding.
There is the dawning of the sense of responsibility, there is the opening
of the doors of opportunity for the individual and for the successors
born of his desire. To suggest that all this should be relegated to some
obscure corner where the lumber of outworn conceptions may be safely
stowed, is to do violence to the deepest longings of the human race.
All that has already been said concerning the necessity and value
of selection receives here an added stimulus of incalculable value.
The Problem of Harmony
The whole issue of sex-relations as they affect mankind is so
closely related to the problem of family connection in its widest
significance that it is impossible to consider them apart from it.
Here we touch, perhaps, the highest point in the necessary distinction
popularly expressed as the distinction between instinct and reason.
The larger the number of instincts, whether natural or acquired, the
greater the possibilities of conflict, and the more urgent the need of
harmony. Man has more instincts than any other animal. James
expresses the consequence very well “ Man has a far greater variety
of impulses than any lower animal; and any one of these impulses
taken in itself, is as ‘ blind ’ as the lowest instinct can be ; but owing


to man’s memory, power of reflection, and power of inference, they
come each one to be felt by him, after he has once yielded to them
and experienced their results, in connection with a foresight of those
results.” —-(Text Book on Psychology, p. 395). James would extend
the operation of this law very far down in the scale of being. The second
nest of a hen, he suggests, has an element of foresight in it. She has
a dim consciousness that she is about to hatch a brood. It is difficult
to appreciate the mental reactions of a hen, and to measure with any
degree of accuracy her feats of memory. Some of us may remember
Gene Stratton Porter’s anecdote of the hen that went insane when
a chick walked out of an egg after one day’s hatching. The strain
was too much on her limited mental resources. Psychologists, too,
have their moments of spurious omniscience.
The Influence of Habit
But, however difficult it may be really to understand a hen, there
is no difficulty in appreciating the astonishing influence of habit on
the instinctive life. The form in which certain instincts are presented
makes a profound difference to the reactions of the individual, and
it must be increasingly borne in mind that the end-object of impulses
is to satisfy the individual, so that if satisfaction is reached along
any particular line, the urge is taken from the competing instinct.
When also we consider the word “ foresight ” which James employs,
it means a very different thing for a human being and for a lower
animal. The lower animal is dependent on its own immediate ex-
perience. The puppy that has been given a piece of cheese in which
mustard has been concealed sneezes when a second piece of cheese
is offered. That is foresight accompanied by natural reactions. But
it is an individual reaction based on purely individual experience.
The puppy has no method of stereotyping that experience that will
make it available for coming generations of puppies who may be
offered cheese. But it is different with man. He starts where his
predecessor left off. The accumulated wisdom of ages is stored for
rim in the written or printed page.. He does not need to go through
experiences in order to become possessed of foresight. A simple
illustration is the electric shock. A dog learns nothing from seeing
the dead body of a dog in contact with a wire. He must get a mild
shock before he learns to look upon a wire with suspicion. The trouble
is that when he gets a shock he looks on all wires alike as suspicious
objects. He has not the power of isolating experiences and tracing
causes to any appreciable extent. A dog can learn, but only by
individual experiences. The range of possible habits is limited by
the creature’s constitution and by its capacity for action. Man is in
a different category. All the apparatus employed by the dog is his,
and a much finer nervous system. Consequently, he has this avenue
of learning open to him. But he is also able to record his experiences
and communicate them to others. And finally, to eliminate the last
possible link between man and the higher animals in the next grade
of intelligence, he communicates by means of intelligible signs which


his compeers can decipher, and not simply by presenting actions
for observation. All this seems pretty obvious when it is stated, but
these are the factors which are so frequently ignored when we are
bidden to follow nature. It is this fact in human experience that enables
an intelligent schoolboy to start investigation at a point far ahead
of Newton.
Applying all this to the subject in hand, we are able to trace
the development of the family, and to understand the importance
of this development in relation to the sex impulse. The larger the
number of natural and acquired instincts, the more difficult becomes
the taks of harmonizing them. But the progress of humanity has
made this task at once exceedingly difficult and most necessary.
The man who is a mere creature of impulse has no place in ordered
society. At every point he is under necessity to control the first rising
of impulse or emotion. He cannot, for example, leap blindly aside
when he hears the hoot of a motor. He has to relate his impulse of
flight to the laws of the stream of traffic and has to make quick
allowance for the possibility of human error. It is a complicated affair,
getting out of the way of an oncoming vehicle. A dog learns this by
simple trial and error, by a limited amount of observation. But a
child is taught it. Granted, there are elements which can only be
mastered by what we call practice, there is much that is due to
communication. There is an inherited foresight that can be made
available. This inherited foresight of the human race finds its ex-
pression in customs, conventions of various sorts, and in written or
printed maxims. They all have their objective in harmonizing various
instincts and emotions, so that while they are still operative, they
are subordinated to an end-object which reaches far beyond the
individual, and find fulfilment in the ordered life of the community
in which the individual takes a share.
Bose Brothers Pty. Ltd., Print, Sydney




