



THE PRIEST WHO DID.


NOTICE.
Fkice eiAteenp\nce,
from -booksellers; failing,
post frW froni publishers
for P.o\ by l\tter oiUy.
Postage, \lhreepence. \


The Priest Who Did.
TIDBINBILLA TALES.
By
Henry De Ffreyne-Guillmayne.
PERSONAL EXPERIENCES.
“ Standing by a purpose firm, dare to stand alon
Dare to be a Daniel , dare to make it known.
/ Londo/": /
THE CARLTON COY<f 7, ROAD,
V FRIERX N.
/ /' fildwdr




Preface.
These poems were written, and revised up to date, in the decade
1895-1905, in a wild mountain glen at the foot of Tidbinbilla Peak, thirty
miles from Queanbeyan New South Wales, and fifteen miles from
Canberra, the site of the Federal Capital of Australia.
They are the temple of truth and personal experiences. Ido not
make the facts, merely turn on the light.^
The purpose is moral, like the Bible, sin and crime are shown in
proper words and denounced. Due restraint on realistic story being
maintained. No cant; no goody-goody.
Notes of elucidation and glossary at the end.


Literary Notice.
Those verses are constructed in couplets, an even number of syllables
in each verse; occasionally, to change the cadence, an extra syllable is
inserted in both lines, never in one. When a double rhyme occurs, an
additional syllable may or may not be inserted as harmony requires.
The scansion is measured by the formulated rules, not forgetting
quantity, with thisexception-when the adjoining vowels of two syllables-
do not coalesce they are given full value, the definite article elided being
added if the quantity requires it, or the makeweight disposed in some wav
inside the rules.
The rhymes are by rule, the vowel sound identical or nearly so the
following consonants, if any, the same in sound, the accented consonant
preceeding, different, or coalescing with a different sound. The verses are
claimed to be technically correct.— The Author.


The Poetic Spirit.
Hail' Muse, once again, ere fleeting fancy flies afar for ever,
And icy Time’s benumbing fingers, bids mystic essence sever.
The wights who lack poetic soul, at best, are but a paltry thrave,
The more of it we have, the more we feel the life beyond the grave.
God’s prophets were all poets, precursors of the greater Shiloh,
Held in honour by the nobly wise, lightly by Philistine foe.
Like fire girt Latimer, the vatic eye may pierce the future s veil.:- „
“ Be of good cheer, those flames will light afar the Gospel s glorious tale,
No poet ever penn’d a nobler thought, while in the throes of pain,
He saw fell Persecution’s failing hand, Nemesis in its train.
The roll-call of the martyred heroes, makes the gorge rise in a rage,
At deeds of shame, of crime, of blood, of hell, that stain John Foxe s page
The chief endowment shared not with the beasts, to inspiration list,
Whispering in our secret bosoms—that we’re spirits from the Mist.
Th’ inspired see poetry in all things, it drifts on the sweeping blast;
And hoarsely growls in the thunder-cloud, when the welkin is o er cast.
’Tis heard in note of throstle’s song; the murmuring of the waters ;
In the soft low tones that charm the ear, the voice of beauty s daughters.
I've heard it i’ th’ war-whoop’s paean, as Red-Skins charged our scalps to
And in the white men’s volleying rifles, that turned the fierce attack.
Lies low ’neath the maidenhair and towers in the giant redwood s stem ,
Gleams in the dew-drop on the rose ; and sparkles in the costly gem.
There is not a spot in sky, on earth, where poetry can’t be found,
Sweetly woos mankind, to lift the eyes, from grovelling on the ground.
I’ve seen it, as the sable gondola, swept ’neath Rialto’s arch ;
On Algerian plains, as the Arab horse trooped in the spahis march.
Poetry lies in many things, prosaic pass unheeded by,
In the blue-bell by a brooklet’s bank : and chiefest in a sweetheart s eye.
I have heard it in the sighs of night, thro Canadian pine clad wild ,
Sing in the mellow chimes of Shannon's Bells, when erst I roamed a child
I’ve heard it in the strange wierd notes, that resound in Australia s bush ;
In Rome’s old Coliseum, byThe moonbeam’s play, in the midnight hush.
I’ve seen it on Kerguelen’s homeless rocks ; -and in the Gate of 1 ears ;
’Neath the palm-tree’s shade, in the ice-berg's glint, the fog-wrapt
sailor fears. . ,
Loud roaring in the prairie-fire, as it ravined the Texan wold ;
In sun set rays, o’er The Thousand Isles, as they flashed in purple-go d.
From Ratoon’s Pass, I’ve seen it rest, on the points of the Spanish l eaks;
And hovering round fair Ida's Mount, scene of idyls of the Greeks.
I’ve seen it float round coral isles, on the treacherous sunk reefed tide ,
In Norway’s fiords I’ve heark’d to it, as their sweeps the fishermen ply d.
Epnuye in the doldrums’ baffling calms, while drifting to and fro ;
O’er Killarney’s Lakes, as O’Donohue’s Horse rides on the surge below.
I’ve heard it in the lion’s roar, on the Kalahari s thirsty plain ,
And in the tempest’s howl, as the stout ship tosst on Biscayan main.
I have felt it, as the sleepy sun rolled low thro’ the midnight sky;
And in the blaze of tropic noon, as birds fell dead off boughs on high.
I’ve seen it frown on the mountain brown, and smile o’er the Tyrol Lakes ;
Deep down Vesuvio’s crater, as the lava boils the mountain quakes.
Where cayman creeps, and cotton-trees root, in lands lying dark and low,
The home of the fever-fiend, where he hides when wintry breezes blow.
Aye ! ’tis seen in the plumes of Spanish moss, funeral plumes eerie,
As they sway in sweltering dank aura, o’er moor and moss and lea-
in the lonely woods, ’twixt the busy hives where fortunes grow and go,
As paddle-wheels churned and tawny foam spurned, way down the Ohio.
In Muskoka’s lakes and rocky isles, with pleasant memories fraught,
Where frost nip paints the sumac leaves, with gay tints from the rainbow
caught. . , , , , ,
Its spirit sails thro’ Belleisle’s Strait, as we sight the iceberg 5 fearful glint
yy
/ '


While sinks the sun, and the King of Terror looms with dart and heart
of flint.
In glamour of the gloaming, and when gilt with rosy rays of dawn,
Aloft on Tidbinbilla’s Peak, flat lopped as if ’twere featly sawn.
In the rainbow tinted mist, rolling on Rock-Valley’s rough divide,
As if hand of a magician, had strewn with gems a coastal tide.
In the deep, deep blue of welkin, aye where the lyre-birds mocking call;
And in Canadian Indian-summer, ere the wintry snow flakes fall.
I’ve seen it in the London fog, a real land of Cimmerii;
A le flaneur on Parisian boulevard, as lounged the light race nigh.
Marked it in the rich and varied scenes, a-down the Danube river;
As the Spanish donnas walked, like swans glide on the Guadalquiver.
Whispering in Lydian Zephyrs, o’er Ceylon’s aromatic isle ;
In raspy blizzard ; wilting Siroc ; pleasant breezes in Bute’s kyle.
It haunts the stones of Prague’s old towers, where it bathes in the clear
moonshine;
And lives with Lurline in faerie caves, of the grand romantic Rhine.
On castled ait has a pied k terre, anent many a legend tells;
Moans when the wintery wind is wailing, round sky-issing Drachenfels.
Circling Rigi’s belvedere if flits, in that superb view;
The Netherlands’ polders, from Neptune won, may claim a full share too*
While loitering on Killiney’s Hill, in the wood, the glen, the lea,
Where emerald shore marches many a mile, with sapphire Irish Sea.
When on the (Bridge of Sighs I trode, methinks the saddest poetry seen,
Musing on evanished glory, and the Adriatic’s sea girt Queen :
Scant a score of yards divide the palace, where Doges wassailed high,
From the dungeon and the oubliette, where the fettered captives sigh.
The Lion’s-Mouth is gaping still, yet the hungry maw receives no prey,
For the tyrants’ bonds are broken, and their sovran power is swept away.
There is poetry in Australian wilds, an eerie elfin sprite,
Who shuns the towns of the Gold God’s Guild, roams the bush fantastic
dight.
Melancholy’s Genius, brooding o’er grotesque eucalyptus wold,
Fit scenes for Dante’s dreams of Pluto’s Halls, to shape and to unfold.
Where many a lonely traveller died, faraway from hope and home,
Denied e’en when life’s tragedy had closed, a grave beneath the loam.
As the rifle falls from the failing hand, there flickers a faint smile,
Last thought of his lost love, the fiery day-star vanishing the while,
Ne’er for him to rise. Then the dingoes howl and tear in wild accord,
In a fearsome way, as they feast on the clay of creation’s lord.
“Hip, hip, hurra!” the Thirst Fiend cries, as he flings round a dead
gum-tree;
While sadly sighs the Phantom of the Bush : —“ He died for love of me."
So risk the first who penetrate, the unknown wrapped in a robe of clouds,
Brave hearted pioneers, who thankless ope the way to the greedy crowds.
The Great Thirst Land has charms for those, who have tired of the
beaten track,
’Tis Poetry’s Spirit beckoning, away from material pack.
In mountain holts it elects to dwell, where world-weariness is healed.
With peace and health, who have their abode in the free unhackneyed
weald.
How often have I pondered in poetic solitudes, alone,
Listening to the gramarye, which bards may hear in Nature’s tone,
On the prairie, on the veldt, where the surge beats on sequpstered beach,
On the mountain’s rugged precipice, I have sought what it may teach,
The gift that guides the thoughts, and forms the words into harmonic line,
Bestowing what the First Man lost—an immortality divine.
In the quiet fields of farming life, blithely thither rustics wend ;
In the savage Black Land’s forest shades, where fell beasts with men
contend.
Sailing o’er the ocean’s stormy wave ; in the city’s throbbing breast,
A pilgrimage of fleeting years passed by, my footsteps knew no rest.
Elusive as the painted arch on high, to the untutored child,


To grasp at last in vespertine, in far Australian arid wild;
Or where the fern-tree’s graceful plumage, bedecks the lone sombrous dell,
Embowered beneath the eucalyptus, there I dream o er flood and fell.
As the musk-tree’s odor, comes floating on the aromatic air, .
Down from rough Tidbinbilla’s ravines, where the dingo keeps his lair,
Oft I hear the mystic aura, as if the voice of genius fair,
When on me is the glamour, bidding: “ forward ! Fame s proud rampart
There’s poetry in the spray drenched deck, in the midnight watch at sea,
As Saint Elmo’s fire plays on the masts, and the rough gale wantons free.
It ghost like glides o’er the Folgefond, by the reindeers tinkling bells;
Perches in crow’s-nest on whaler’s main, the post of the look-out s spells.
When the Wander Spirit seizes, I must on, why ? I’ve not a notion,
But feel the charming of the roving, and the poetry of motion.
Poetry sparkles in the opalescence, myriad gems of light,
E’er bespangling, when to Avalon rolls Apollo from our sight.
Thro’ Avbca’s Vale, it flits at dawn, as the lark sings merrily ,
A-down Blackwater’s winding stream, ’twixt ruined piles of ch ‘valry.
Those bonny bright scenes in Wicklow and Cork, where I roamed long ago,
Svmbol of life—the river’s dark waters to the deep onward flow.
There’s poetry i’ th’ cushat's coo ; and in the ringing of the axe;
There is poetry in the ripening corn ; and in the blue flowered flax.
There’s poetry in the lyre-bird’s mock, as it flits neath the fern-tree s shade,
There is poetry in the bul-bul’s song, as he thrills his serenade.
There is poetry in the watch-dog’s bark, his honest welcome home,
In Sahara’s gyrating pillar’d sands ; and in the salt sea foam.
In noble thoughts, in chivalrous and in self-sacrificing deeds, f
In banding with the weak against the strong, to plough for freedom s seeds.
There is poetry in the thought-bolt shot thro space unlimited,
In the magian power of mind, from all but few elect it is hid.
May bide in the lowly peasant’s cot, or dwell with the haughty lord, .
But shuns the market-place, where the smug cit sells at the bilking board*
And sumptuous fare of purse-proud Dives, who schemes in counting-house,
For a crust of bread in the gipsies’ camp, eked with a stolen grouse.
In legends of departed worthies, in romantic tales of old.
When ladye gaye swore ‘by my faye, in castled keep of baron bold.
In ancient lands ’tis found in every dell, where rose and woodbine twin ® >
But rare as maid ’twixt convent walls, in Gold-God s dark and gruesome
is the essence, what e’er dull materialists may say.
The grandest gift the Godhead sent on earth, to light mans darkling way.
There’s poetry in the old church tower; in the mystic Druid round,
For those who see. In the old gold moon, rolling thro the blue profound.
None can hope their strains will echo down the canyons of eternity,
Save North-Star bards, yet, all serve who cast a search-li & ht oer the
Whiclf life’s dull mariner descerning, wears ship from the sunken reef.
On trade-wind of righteousness, makes port, where ne er enters pirate grief.
Essence of Wisdom.
Revealed while Death sojourned with me for one year, o eerie jour et soir,
At length unwilling quitted for a time, grimly bidding: “au revoir.
Scentics agnostics and Darwinites, who in error’s regions plod, „
\re not the title-r6le, their foolish hearts have said: there is no God.
Wisdom and understanding commence, when this fact we realize
There is a Great First Cause revealed, the wisest of mankind agnize.
Lt diretSn and wisdom be staffs in your hand e'er from years rathe,
And let understanding and diligence, be lights unto your path
Walk not with the Strange Woman, the allegoric, or the carnal, .
Tho’ her lips drop sweetness, her footsteps trend unto the tragica ,
Her house ?s the house of hell, and her chamber the abode of Death,


Who lurketh privily in darkplaces, and smiteth at the breath.
Whatsoever cometh as thy work, do it with the utmost might,
Twill train the mind, and nerve the hand, for future battles in life’s fight.
Bestowing mercy on the rogue, is rank injustice to the leal,
The same pains that he inflicted, the rascal should be made to feel.
The Romish laws for heretics, ought be enforced against the priest,
“ None outside the Holy Church, have got a right to live”—fearful hest.
Let not th’ unruly member entangle, but think before you speak,
Deliberate before you act, so ne’er you must needs eat the leek.
Enter when a feast commences, and at the wind up of a fight;
Take the world as you find it, or you will be a martyr for the’right.
Ne’er meddle with another’s business, few have wit to guide their own.
Advise not self-sufficiency, nor argue with the mental clown.
Answer a rogue according to his roguery, it will be a blind,
While you probe and analyse and measure, the working of his mind.
Ere you follow suspected advice, be sure to reconnoitre well,
The will-o’-the-wisp plays always, o’er the rotten bogs of fen and fell.
Truth is a native of the skies, where never deception is found,
Like angels, visits few men here below in life’s allotted round.
Success in literature depends on infinite pains, no doubt,
During the best hours of the day, and knowing subject wrote about.
Don’t borrow money, unless a “ broker,” then it makes no matter—
To you. Don’t lend, or you may be one, for the surety may shatter.
Always show a brave front to the world, most men gauge you by your coat.
Trifles don’t exist, a worm-hole may sink the largest ship afloat.
Hail, fellow, well met! ne’er be with all passers on the path of life,
With friends who have stood the test, let not mere trifles be a cause for strife.
Vever do a deed that you would shame to own, in covert act or mind,
■So you will not be false unto yourself, or any of mankind.
Self-respect is man’s sheet-anchor, that holds him in the narrow-way,
Without it, Satan gains access to all the passions of our clay.
Ne’er break your plighted word, and let it be more binding than your bond.
Tell not your secrets to the wall, much less to friend or female fond.
’Tis not wise to trust in woman’s eyes, much less her silvery tongue,
Tho’ sweet as Israfil’s, those lures the sirens use to snare the young.
Abhor alliance ’neath your caste, for love can’t dwell where you despise,
Low company is degrading, and fatal in the wedded guise.
Who ne’er loved woman, wine, and song, in reason, honesty, and truth,
Is but a soulless thing of clay, where nothing noble finds a booth.
Who ne’er felt gorge in fury rise, at fell oppression’s deeds of wrong,
Is fit to wear slave’s manacles, and crouch beneath the driver’s thong;
For what else is the sordid wight, who moils to gather yellow clay,
And never lifts an earnest hand or voice, a wrong to sweep away ?
To be nobly wise and poor, is better, than meanly wise and rich ;
Great wealth is seldom fairly won, for honour is to gain a hitch.
To fear God, a darksome deed, or e’en one you would be ashamed to own,
Is courage of the highest, prevails where lofty thoughts in youth are sown.
Women can be divided into classes —most men find this true —
The World, the Flesh, the Devil, the domestic angels are a few.
rhe World is a very pleasant creature, and circumspect and wise ;
rhe Flesh is mostly dull and empty, yet she binds men with the eyes ;
Ihe Devil is—the devil. The Angel, get one, you are lucky,
She will not drop like o’er ripe plum, you must woo her and be plucky.
The priests ought pay the dog-tax for their jackals, ’twould be only fair,
The canines wear a cellar round the neck, when filling speaker’s chair,
Charged with this legend : “ I’m the Pope's dog ‘Trap,’ true men caution-
ed—beware 1 ”
Unmasking hell-hounds, from rough ranker upward to the debonair.
Wrap a lie in a bundle of truths, and it may pass in the crowd ;
Profess admiration for justice, that nefarious ends may cloud.
Wait and what you want will tumble in, for the tide is bound to turn,
If destiny has not decreed, your course rolls onward as the burn.
A master of diplomacy, when baffled plotters never guess


That they are smoked, and play on still, that is the climax of finesse,
Silence is the refuge of the rogue, sneaking fraud that won t reply,
But honesty and truth fear nought, and ope the subject to the sky.
When the soil is polluted, by the hoof of the servile bovine,
The buffalo-grass dieth out; so freedom doth vanish or pine.
When Satanites settle like vultures, tainting the earth and the air,
The aura of Samiel comes floating, no one can detect from where.
A bad Romanist cannot be trusted, and much less one that s good,
Dissembling hate of heretics, the dagger hides beneath the hood.
•\lene mene tekel upharsin,’ murmured 4 mid the martyrs moans.
At stake, at rack, at wheel, from roasting flesh, rent sinews, breaking
bones. .
Belshazzar of the Vatican, colossal victor then you stood.
The Persian and the Mede are springing from the ground, bedewed with
blood. . ,
You win perverts ’mongst the classes, decadent sons of mighty sires,
But to freedom march the masses, despite your hireling gangs of liars.
Decadent sons of mighty sires, effete descendants of Norse race,
The viking terror of the sea, whose grit has past and leit no trace.
Life was never made for hoarding riches, well spent, a magic wand,
So let them comfort your career, to worth extend the open hand.
Don’t strike half hearted blows at enemies, and crush them if you can,
The beaten foe may court your amity, ’till able to trepan.
Ne’er open all your mind to any one, tho’ seeming staunch the friend,
For he may become your foulest foe, should his interests that way trend.
If e’er you are in doubt to act or not, the safest plan is—don t.
Trust not the person, who, to consort with your enemies is wont.
Shun the paths your foemen recommend, but listen to their counsel;
Take warning by mishaps of others, else you 11 trip and ring your knel .
Ne’er consort with the base, else you will come to see things with their eyes.
Enquire about what e’er you know not of, thus you will be made wise.
Rosewater will not tigers feed, and wheels of Juggernaut won t trig.
Urbanity and reason are wasted, on priestcraft and the pig.
Sans sacrifice, nothing can be won. Life is not all song and jig.
Be satisfied to lose some little things, to win one very big.
The great men of this earth, in every sphere, have been fanatics all,
Orangemen, wear the title proudly, when at you Rome s jackals bawl.
Love and poverty ne’er dwell together, beneath a wight s roof-tree,
Wed not without a competence, for then the Wolf may guest in fee.
To keep the freedom that our fathers won, with war-horse and with glaive,
Eternal vigilance must watch and ward, else Rome will dig its grave.
The price of freedom must be paid in blood, as well as paid in gold,
An adage true in present day, as well as true and sure of old.
The blows dealt by your enemies, may help you onward to success ;
Travelling in the dark is dangerous, may land you in a mess.
Seek not occasions for a quarrel, nor with others’ meddlesome,
But if attacked and forced, no quarter give, strike heavily and home.
Stolen kisses may be sweet, tho’ they often cost one somewhat dear,
But when a fellow feels that way, his reason is not always clear.
Ne’er tell what is not wanted known nor be the bearer of bad news,
A latent prejudice is lodged against, who puts one in the blues ;
But joyful tidings make the messenger most welcome anywhere,
For none are churlish to the wight, whose budget drives away dud care.
Rome’s sap is like the white-ant’s raid, no change in outward show appears,
You never know they’re working, ’till the house comes tumbling round
Never hesitate when matters must be done, for a bold stroke pays,
Put things thro’ with energy, when it comes to parting ot the ways.
Losses and misfortun&s may thicken round, and seas of sorrow press,
Yet weirds may train the mind to steer a course to ultimate success.
The wondrous ways of the Omnipotent, for He makes no mistakes,
Those who trust in Him will stand, tho’ to the very core the world quakes.
To witness truth, the martyr He allows untimely death to dree ,


Few better pleas for mercy at His Throne : “ I died for serving Thee."
Beneath Loyola’s grasp the Oak doth bend, without a warning sound;
Yet, yet, like mighty Milo, he will rue, when caught by the rebound.
Vengeance waits. When Coligny fell beneath de Guise’s felon hand,
No second-sight beheld the day, when priests were banished out the land
If you purpose any action, and your enemy applauds and backs—
Don't. Who is guided by the adversary, a grain of wisdom lacks.
Papists use weak-kneed protestants, to hoodwink, baffle, and to fend,
But if they get the upper-hand, they’ll turn, and limb by limb will rend.
’Tis a wise child who knows his father, when his mother is a saint,
And confesses sins to holy priest, ‘ whose caresses leave no taint.”
“As heretics have got no rights, it follows, that whatever sin,
Or crime, the faithful do against, is nought, and so they Heaven can win.
If you want a wife, pick and choose at leisure, for nothing, never fash ;
If you want a horse, more difficult the quest, and you must part the cash.
When you have got them, you’ll find out their faults. The spouse is yours
for ever.;
The steed you may sell to some other fool, and thus his troubles sever.
Brides are given away with blessings, but horses and husbands are sold,
Knowledge dearly purchased by some wights,, both in those days and of
old.
Youths will fall deep in love with old men’s wives, if they’re young and
pretty,
And then things happen. Joseph is uncommon, but not so, Kitty.
Correct not men’s mistakes, the admonished will hate you for your pains.
Address not o’er wiseacres’ wits, but suit converse to match their brains.
Nil desperandum, Fortune’s wheel keeps turning, turning, ever more,
When you are driven to a cul de sac, she may relent and ope a door
Marching slowly to success, is better than running to collapse,
The last I write will never reach the goal, the first with luck—perhaps.
Wisdom won’t employ ineptness, momentous matters to transact,
Nor with enemies have dealings, nor hold converse, nor make a pact.
Scorn not instruction from experience, that is the conduct of a fool;
Read about the things that hap’d, for history comes again is the rule.
A man must keep the company amongst by fortune he is thrown ;
By the company that he avoids, a man’s character is known.
Blandiloquence soothes wrath, more effectively than the hardest blows,
Non cantu sed actu is best, with some obstreperous fellows
But in the game of life ’tis .found, the gravest wounds are given by words,
And when followed by a war of wiles, cut deeper than Toledo swords.
Whisky, wine, cigars, and kisses, unless they’re of the three-star brand,
Are best left well alone, a quadriga by which men are trepanned.
Wed not a commoner, if you grow poor and fortune’s smiles grow fainter,
For then you cross the rubicon, and for aye cut the social painter.
She will be a fardel round the neck, dragging downward to her level,
The coarseness of her tout ensemble, to instincts a daily evil.
The Old Man of the Sea sits on the back, for ever, ever more,
A bramble rankles in the side, nor e’en high thoughts can freely soar.
Such girls are by training hard, their hands are mostly out for money,
A home with ranker will never be, a bower of bliss and honey.
'Tis well to mix with every one, at times, according to degree,
But marry only in your class, nor with the vulgar be o’er free.
In colonies you pocket pride, and play the democratic rdle,
But the inner man preserves unchanged, the exclusiveness of soul.
One man can force a fight, but it takes more to make a truce or peace.
When visiting the priest, just wink the eye, the lady is his “ niece.”
If you gently touch an enemy, he will down yo% for your pains,
But punch him like a Briton bold, this coup the upper hand obtains.
Most men act as if what is will always be, which is passing strange,
A little thought will make it clear, there’s nothing sure to last but change
The trusting protestant, gulps the pious lie, with which papists gull,
Ignores the specialist who knows, for honesty is mostly dull.
Answer not in haste. Be slow in anger, for ire the temper mars ;
Mr f r
v


Peace quietness and competence, are better far than wealth with jars.
Hpsrkpn not to the slv flatterer, for he has an axe to grind.
Rule the spirit—know thyself —to acquaintance affable and kind. „
To the smUer turn the cheek —parry quickly give him back “ what for,
Thus you obey the Gospel Text, and also prove the conqueror
Th^wll^
?nWS^
He readeth not the writings of wise men, not poets say ’
Frgo in the hands of the brainy, is a lump of potters clay. ,
Sans sucl^subjectsT would' be, when cronies are gathered together.
ran il .en aW So y
Granting mercy seldom hurts the giver, and may disarm the foe,
Sons of Loyola excepted, that’s true to day as long ago
Many a gaUant MBS » “oVptce f/Jowfng.
The Svstem of the Satanites, as the Graveyard of tbe c,r^ nd °fl'. K h s ,’ .
s k .. y »«..
sSSSsUZKSfff! S&ggs
Waterloo lost in the confessional, b .y sl . a h v „ es s ° f e y s * like Caaba’s
Upright men who ve commerce with the Satanites, cna g
A crystal hyacinth bestowed by Heaven, now black as Turkish hone.
can play the devil, but to be a Christian takes some grit.
'Th*. cpr-ret nf success is—stand together, from the shoulder hit.
A prudent man foresees the evil day, and makes arrangements meet,
The foolish lounge in dolce far niente until misfortunes greet.
not wi h th? treacherous for they’ll chouse you be you eer so wise.
ir nf lawvers if vou can, win or lose, there's the devil to pay.
Both counsel arrd^attorneys 11 are liegemen of the Infernal Throne,
tome lay Satanites, so wicked, dark Eblis is ashamed to own.


The doctor is a very worthy friend, best liked when far away,
His craft the noblest on this earth, enjoins surcease to sorrow’s clay.
1 he ministry may run him very close, their claims I won’t gainsay,
Oft watchmen of our mundane liberties, and for our welfare pray.
I’ll say nought against the soldier, tho’ sooth ! I do-not like his trade,
1 he Pope would tyranize the sphere, if 'twere not for his fearless blade.
Commerce is an honourable career, with balance poised true.
I he schoolmaster has made us what we are, so let him have his due.
The producer is the backbone, without whom life would never be,
Primeval Curse falls heaviest on him, tho’ all the fiat dree.
The writer and the poet, this distich isn’t blowing my own horn,
Are blossoms on the tree of life, to cheer to guide and to adorn.
1 he engineer is a mighty man, time and space are in his hand,
He subdues the wave, and rules the earth, with a living iron band.
1 hought flies thro’ ether at his nod ; and he conquers the realm of Gnome ;
He dares to vie in perilous craft, with the eagle in its home.
I he chemist wizard of the latter day, in quiet plies his art.
He seizes Nature by the hand, and wrings strange secrets from her heart.
I he priest—whew ! the nostrils stink ! steady, Muse, come ! be a trifle civil ?
The priest, passim you will find him drawn, a dark incarnate devil.
Woman, she’s ineffable, quintessence of all that’s pure and good,
Day-star of man’s destined ages, and glory of his life when woo’d.
I he gentle hand of woman, aye ’tis missed when sickness racks the frame,
I he gentle voice of woman, aye ’tis missed, when care and sorrow claim,
They are seldom valued ’till they’re gone, aye, gone may be for ever,
And the gaunt gray wolf of want growls hoarsely : “Never, never, never.”
Water is very nice to drink, with a little whisky added,
Maudlin to drown in either, yet, often thus the grave is padded.
Think nobly, for of lofty ideals to rob you fortune never can,
Remember how e’er poor you be, the mind is the measure of the man.
Enjoy evanescent hours of life, you’ll be quiet enough when dead,
And do some little good on earth, ere dark Atropos cuts your thread.
<jo thou to the Jesuit, thou fool-protestant, open thine eyes,
Mark his windings and his twistings, consider his ways and be wise.
Tor he plougheth not, neither doth he sow, yet lives upon the best,
And all the world is his servant, and ready to obey his hest.
I tell thee truly—Solomon in all his wisdom and his power,
Ne’er held such sway o’er men, in a long reign, as he doth in one hour.
Invincible while working in the dark, so fears the clear daylight,
And his only match : The Pen is mightier than the Jesuit.
When writing to a foe, or to one whose good faith is not like Caesar’s wife,
Don t leave blank spaces o’er your signature, forgery may raise a strife.
This rule holds good when writing on post-cards, or documents at large,
I rudence and foresight can baffle cunning, ’gainst trickery a targe.
( nless you want advice from friends, talk not about your own affairs;
Pet not impulse master, calmness and reserve foil the tempter’s snares.
1 wisting threads together, will make a cable that can moor a ship.
A Kingdom may be ruined hopelessly, by a solitary slip.
I he talking foe is seldom dangerous, but fear the silent man.
Ne er take up a position, which to hold at will you never can.
Integrity, piety, and honour, will not command success,
If you take the wrong highway, and neglect to push with good address.
Keep a loaded pistol handy, the best for cash that can be had.
You may never want it, but if you do, you’ll want it very bad.
. Tis better shoot than let the foeman kill, you will come out of jail,
The grave yields not its prey ; first blow is safer than a coat-of-mail.
Ne er trust a man, if once you’ve detected a rogue-thought in his face,
A Bayard tho’ he seems. What kills is not the distance, but the pace.
The grey goose quill has ruled mankind, the war-fiend’s path with corse
lights lit;
Promoted freedom, wrong, and right, since Cadmus armed the hands of
wit;
Thus gave a lordship to the fecund mind, that sways from pole to pole,


The fool-rogue coins money, and is very and j g his unstable feet.
Sees not the sleuth-hounds Want and^ Mammon
The'roo^is^ev?” is gj o ®bad^Tblown,
Chevalier d’industne can live upon iei those of lower sets.
If vouched for by De Brett, but and Say be a coronet,
’Twill purchase many P ledsant tbl S’ dTsdnguished not to wear one yet.
Bestowed upon mere wealth on Scottish moor,
’Twill keep a steam yacht in the bay, a l clined to tour.
And find withal for co Hri er > and keep her when the prize is won,
M att# ifefen 'nea.h fhe sun.
Gives entree to society, to ped.gr plunge at baccarat.
The needful, to lay ponies on the < P ge ntle gliding stream,
It oils the brawling brook of hfes career,
This magic wand can make it so > to cultivate the mind,
’Twill free one, from all sordid care, tim terrestrial rind.
And wander ’mongst the starry isles of W* and^er.terrestnai
A sword to slay your enemy, and send 1 the adverse thrust.
A buckler in the danger hou , to role,
Or you may pose a shinmg th g m s elves to save immortal soul.
Good works, some hold suffic b ® s/ard Roman brand, my word !
The’shoddy’vendedwltere 3 the Pope has power by »>scal«abhorred.
sss^gfiiisr
On earth. The paymm god is bootless jU to win the wrQng and
A mah is a man, tho’ clouted is his shoe, facts we often find.
Bu b t a therrir b e^tings n ?ha a t n money will have found :
And vou mav take a well-bred horse, degrade him to the servile piou a ii.
The noble desert blood rolls in his veins, he’ll show it as ereno .
The mean and petty dirty deeds, betray the wealthy parvenue,
fn h/acts, his heart and mind thisi rule is ever true.
Have you e’er seen a grape to grow, upon a wattle ° r f ttiorn ■
Or plucked a fig from off a plant, the essence being not inborn .


■fit
We re taught, thejruit tree bears it proper kind, that is the only test.
Useless good seed sown on rock or sand, for the harvest is unblest.
Environment shapes with its potter’s hand, the budding human clay,
And what the future man will be in life, it moulds from dav to day.
i he man of unheroic mind, by bard is always held in scorn ;
o scape this fate, at Roncesvalles, Roland would not sound his horn,
i he paladin choose death, than honour stain, or from the foe to fly ;
3,1 , urs l? Provencial, sang his worth, in poesy blazoned high.
W brain mone y'& rubber of high deeds, the muck-worm’s petty
Can never dream a thought sublime, for him there’s nothing worth but
gain. °
We 1ll!!mT 00theS Hfe ' S rUgged path ’ but sheen of il! -got gold can ne’er
The dark plutonian nothingness, that wraps unwept unhonoured tomb.
Keligious orders never die, ’mongst moth and rust they cache the ghelt,
1 hey cannot take it o er life's rubicon, and if they did ’twould melt.
Men will believe most anything in reason, when told ' that’s a fact,’
it they don t know the ropes, when gammoned well with ‘ cardinals ’ and
tact.*
Reprove a fool, and he will hate thee, belie with assish braying ;
Correct a wise man, and he will hearken kindly to thy saying,
wra** ° f P™ blm g 1S a downward grade, that slopes the way to crime,
en tempted in a moment weak, the border may be crossed some time.
As the cocaine demon lures onward, to the abyss of the mind,
bo Armida of the Seven Hills enthralls the weak decadent blind.
As dingoes hide in Fidbinbilla’s gulches, when Sol is in the sky ;
a rk Satanites \ n pnvy places, and shelter ’neath the lie;
s e dingoes prowl in darkness, kill wantonly what they can’t devour;
Thl r l hC fel Satamte, stabs deeply in the unguarded hour.
• ku ? bsb , aT . e a little higher than the angels—l don’t joke—
t is their opinion, that they are far above mere human folk.
Yankees run a dead-heat, their national voice is heard to express
TfrrnH e » th^ mOSt tarnatlo , n tallest humans, on this here earth, I guess 1 ”
If crude self-assertion makes a fact, Australians will take the cake,
l hey are a pattern for the seraphs, the world follows in their wake.
H* eir laws ’ and their S irls > like Mecca’s Holy Stone,
Thi fr ° m Hea Y en - so divinely perfect, Eblis was heard to groan.
« rh m no y everything on earth, tho’ they have never been to college,
lh knowledge dClgn t 0 wnnkleS) for what the y don’t know is not
rhe flauntfng flTg Cd S ° me WOrlds of orbs ' and char ged them on their
And in time, the Universe will be to the Commonwealth—a tag.
ba f tle ' tbe y boast, they’re Sovran of the Southern sea ;f
King Rabbit, th only foe they cannot quell, invincible grandee.
I heir army is the terror of the orb, and not a foe will let
i i and J, ! officers and men are not born yet.
en less tangible than a spook, which has a shadowy entity;
ut, wage—and tax—are high, and there’s wool and cry, 'while Britons
rule the sea. J
S7 e , place > inferior nations, place to Australia (I gas it mild),
I he leading spread-eagle of the earth, Britannia’s terrible child.
National arrogance is ridiculous, for there is no best
Extremes meet in masses and in units, that’s our Creator’s hest
A good assessment of one’s self, is a pardonable vanity
° thcr fello r is not scoff ed, a half evolved chimpanzee,
calling the enemy insulting names, will not a tittle save
* “Cardinal”—a lie.
hold^S,r,' h*„ P T r “ n<l "»* »•'" in.provi.Bd. 1.
nothing; end » fti wSh ™ ,S-?ofc " n,, ” W ‘. «™n > continent, „n do-


Adds nothing to the victory,'tis to conquer the brave.
In coarser arts the Briton*?,/'crafts lor so is drawn the line.
No man, no nation hath all s k| lls in crarrs, or »
The grandly gifted geti.us,in
Never risk when nothing can be on ! faiUwhen put to test.
?S V wtne U cSp chShf Stooping heart, ca Y n snatch a victim from death s
ThebSe lies in the toper's head let all weak men abjurestrong drink.
That most 3 the curse, while Fortune's minions carol
vSsXS^SA'SSSSIffI'SST~‘
ES2=sr=Ss'£SL
Those who’re down, bemoan their fate, impugn ruga
While* thosefwlio’re couched on cloth-of-gold, declare that life has go. no
Yet oft in pleasure’s rose-wrapped agonyis breaking,
Unknown, the crushed and withereddieart im brave
sik not a ?S!H/S irt
££*?£'"m^wSe^lSTo"? Living Lon/' which read very
your client?’* tha/a/igue for your lawyer,
In anterooms of men, inipowenit.joys known
ISrahufcK noHo the y who've failed, and lets them sigh
M?l*lmp*e,/nd t age *Ah *l* friendships shun? the poor's
, f a 0 u es scenes a ,a y nds.ray through glen and
glade.


A<°in ol th* de iS th il to Poe r s m T ‘ nd - for here there speaks a tongue
As in the ancient days when Heaven revealed, and our old orb was young
racon i e V r cap f J ess, light and gay, for sparkling mots he’s making
Th breakmg. and &Ugh may nng ’ yet the heart of the wi g ht may be
Brilliant talkers are not always cleverest, listeners may be more
4 ,‘° know how not to say a thing , and off the audience shrewdly score.
Apparent silly talk, not always proves the babbler is a fool
be P robe ? or mask, for unseen depths can lurk in drumly pool,
i tuition ol genius sees things hidden from the common ken
And as open books, oft reads the most secret characters of men.
1 have seen the wicked in high places, I have seen the righteous down
Whea the °PP ressor seemed assured, he fell before Nemesis’ frown ’
R d hind°whirh See 1S not th n r^ a Lr°^ ld ’ tllat ' S P erdue ’ neath a mask,
task Wir6S are PU ed ’ b and puppets marshalled to the dance or
Laymen most affect the business paths, tho’ some few with pleasure rove *
Som, t, a H re S 'f' ly °, I !. ,he !° ose ' like lhe nau S h 'y Kray bird in the grove
Some ladies love the sable coat, some, scarlet of the martial rake.
° r tak admg armies P lease them well, what e’er the cut the garb may
Fair papists find such very holy flavours, in the divine kiss
laaguisk \ n enchantment, and dissolve into etherial bliss
Withsak we take gay gallants’ tales, about the ladies’ lovely eyes •
Vent, vidi, vici, toll, toll the bell, frail beauty’s virtue dies ” ’
I ales anent “ the love-sick countess, baai Jove ! she did not sigh in vain ”
P f , Donna Isidora, maid of honour to the Queen of Spain.”
ndeed, it we believe the stories lewd, we hear in smoking-room
Or when adventuring on boulevards, or in London’s gas-lit gloom
°wa?s, aV ° Ure y ° Uth ’ ab ° Ut “ the charming creafures”’’ frisky
Ud ® b P t 0 co ™P liment - on Cytherean path she strays,
f they win the favours, tis not for love, ’tis for a shower of gold
Dan Lesbian charms > her kissings and her claspings, are bought and
A^H h frail WO ,T n never love their buyers, for all they want is love—
And money . like priests, when beguiled from narrow road to joys above.
Don t argue with a woman, for when beaten she’ll begin to crv
1 hen you must give in and tell her that she’s a native of the sk^
pm o eP i°R! e h u VG tw ° c b aracter s, the first, an outward honest show.
Give one the chance to chouse, then you will find the dirty drop below.
Nay, more, there are who do prefer the money won by tricky fraud
Th^Prnfic?^ 11 t S ’ i! lke ° ne who to a decent calling prefers the bawd.
The Protestant who marries with the Popish lass; is horned as a beast.
?SiSSA to H m V hfl H a nd ? 11 ;r tted ° af provides a mistress for the priest’
p be deluded husband, in the arm-chair, is taking forty winks,
w.-JV) 8 lty Pm 6 and p u P ld s , dart > the stolid good man never thinks.
Th S . n d ™ e g ldes softly to the bower, where her paramour is waiting
AhPt m^ ny a co ?’ and man y a kiss, as when turtle-doves are mating •
! to couch of sin, with silent steps the lawless lovers hie, g ’
T l h ty couch ’ w bere self-respect and virtue ne’er again can lie
Oh ft i h th7nt?Jhf U SUCh deeds ’ and look so innocent withal ?
Oh, fy . the naughty things you think, when Eros holds you as his thrall *
Demoralising father confessors, detailing your desires ’
Rising in lone celibatists’ bosoms, the flames of Heckl’a’s fires
Ne er wearing snowy robe and purple veil, for Hymen’s nuptial rite •
But in loose Cytherean abandon, disport throughout the night.
How I pity the poor priests, indeed, I do, this is not meant for jeers
When subject to the spell-craft and enchantment, of the deluding dears
Poor Priests, pity the priests ! who must hear o’er each tale of love-sfck woes,
toEZ&ZgZp'ZSZSi naughty *?
authority for allusions, passim, to secrets of Roman rites — The Author. pnests ' He ls m >


With watering mouths, grant absolution while burning in the throes
Of the Irish toothache. Pity the priest ! he gets it very bad,
Snell-bound by forbidden lass, faith ! enough to drive a fellow mad.
Pity pity the priests! enamoured of beauty they must not woo,
Nor e’en think of, tho’ they do, ah ! that is a peccaddillo too !
Disturb not their sleep, the ave the pater, nor any such themes,
•Phey love they adore the sweet eyes, that haunt them so softly in dream,
Who can condemn them, for being partial to whiskey and ladies .
Shme ' eve?; broth of a boy, that’lhim. from Belfast to Belgrade is.
As the glacier daily marches, o’er the valley where the oak once stood _
So silently the popish power moves onward, o er seas of tears and blood ,
Will she meets the sturdy fighter-then her victorious star grows wan,
And theringing war-cryfills the welkin-’ We claim the rights of man.
I ?t not vour vision terminate an inch or two beyond your nose.
Sprats thrown away catch many whales, as fortune s ocean ebbs and
Fxoedence must be purchased, by many who the ingredients lack.
•Tis bootless to strike an enemy, who can give you what for back
The dull mistake a lion for a worm, and trample on his tail,
And deem h% beaten when the hair is singed, so well aimed shot doth
A lie is a lie, however told, ay, begild it as you will,
Fucate in every euphemistic phrase, tis but a falsehood st .
The business lie, the lies political, for party, church or state,
Are reorehensible, in the lie personal have got a mate.
Mendacity is more effective, spoken with a doubtful air _
i‘. i can scarce believe such tales about the man, loath I m to declare
They say he kissed the Colonel’s rapid wife upon the greenhouse stair,
V hkely place for fun and frolic, tho’ such things 111 credit ne er.
"Pis said the lady is a romp, and that she is not comme il faut.
They saw the Captain’s arm was round her waist—a very gallant beau . .
Phev say he drinks and cheats at cards, a libertine, and deep in debt,
Dp ruts a figure in the Row, throws ready cash about, and yet
He can’t pav his servants’ wages, tradesmen’s bills, taxes and house rent,
Not that I believe such tales, sirs, may they to Jericho be sent
Indies excel in fibs ambiguous, they can stab you with a smile.
And with a charming air of innocence, hint things of shame and guile .
Thev ran blast a reputation, by a slight inflection of the voice,
Since Fve interviewed the Serpent, at his duplicity they’re choice ;
Beguiling men with blandishments, soft glances, pussy-pussy ways
faults they’ll turn into sinners, and wisest philosophers they 11 craze.
In crowds so coldly coy and circumspect, Diana-like their airs,
But melt like Cotopaxi’s fires, when Cupid matches loving pairs,
n w hisnering to her mother, they may bar you from the girl you lo\ e,
Then Judasdike pose the friend sincere, suspect you may, but cannot prove.
■ Mr Rover seems a gentleman of means, but be careful dear .
That So?? mixed him up with Mrs. Thing,.bob,” then drawing near -
He might have wed a dozen wives, those men are wicked creatures, deal !
i ola seems to like him, rather, not that there s any cause for fear.
Don’t encourage him, your daughter is sure to make a better match.
lie i„Hac has an axe to grind, Mr. Rover schemes to catch
For her red-haired daughter, a stale old game, yet never out of date ;
Moral don’t as Punch advised all amorous wights about to mate.
‘ Mrs Th?ngabob looked a fright last night, she is too old fortune
Motion dressed as lamb, dear.” Thus characters to pieces she will pull.
“ The hussy showed her limbs, and figure, so prononce at the hip,
,The line above is worse than Greek to me, I hope my muse don t top).
Her chemisette ala Venus, cut so low, quite too shocking, dear
What can this be about ? ’tis risque writing of such things, I fear .)
ne’er afford that lace cymar, such taste ! twisted in a hank .
?fea? i she granted certain favours, to notorious Captain B ank.
1 commiserate her husband, about her goings on-youfenow/
Thus sped the Vilifier’s dart, as rolling snow-ball, so twill giow,


Robed in At6’s mantle, chortling joyfully when she trigs a wheel
h rom sheer love of mischief and finesse, reckless of the woe or weal •
rhis Hecate s hate can blast bliss, e’en when it seems as well as won •
5?. bll gnt ed lives, I’ve traced the tongue of Mrs. Judas Jabberton '
1 he killing smile that rends a maiden’s reputation into shreds.
Feared, yet fawned on, so in her snaky course the mischief-maker treads
A mistress of that deadly art, the slander of the speechless eye
Elevated brow, the uplift hand, the interjection, shrug, or sigh.
She is musical and clever, and far too clever to be blue;
And false to everyone, and to herself, such natures ne’er are true •
A social backbite is her glory, debonair and judge of style,
Bounder of la bonne society seeming candour covers guile,
you’ll find the lady almost everywhere, this is no pasquinade,
In cotton, or in satin robes, darting the deadly camisade,
In no hurry with her cunning schemes is Rome, e’en if she fails to score.
Nought is lost, for she has all the time there is for ever, evermore,
n e er the Satanites attack you, of the ladies you beware,
The Darkies use the beauties, many a time, to decoy and ensnare,
h acts can t be put down, truth tho’ baffled oft is seldom put to rout
Denying them will not avail for aye, like murder they will out.
Some folk advocate vegetarian diet, taboo sheep and ox,
I ne’er can find the stingo in it, to stand the world’s rubs’ and knocks
And predicate, the roast beef of Old England is wholesome and nice
Best of all fare, plum-pudding to follow, then punch hot or with ice •
Pray, kind Heaven ! send me a sufficiency while on this orb 1 stay
Let yogis live on ladies’ smiles, and dew-drops culled by dawning’s rav
Moderation is the desideratum, every food is good,
That from the days of Noah’s yachting cruise, the’eating test has sto and
Alcohol invigorates, whate’er strict teetotallers inveigh,
‘‘Give wine to heavy hearts and perishing,” who’ll Solomon gains y ?
A little when required, ’tis worse than death to be by drink enslaved
Those who view the drinking dens of London, see there in hell is paved
Ihe abstainer from wounds will recover, almost a certainty ;
The moderate drinker has a medium chance, from Death’s grip to free •
Ihe drunkard stands the hazard badly, for he’s nearly sure to die -
So wine and wassail in excess, is keeping the Dark Terror nigh.
Let your conduct be without reproach, for in that true honour lies
From rank, or wealth, or name, that flower of chivalry can never rise.
Ibe self-approval of the upright mind, can scorn the Blatant Beast
Whose judgment does not equal that of Balaam’s Ass, to say the least.
Generosity with borrowed money, or with goods obtained on tick
May raise the symbolic presence, of that celebrated fiend—Old Nick
An empty purse. Ne’er worship wealth, for that betrays the servile mind.
Let not base Mammon use you as his tool, the threads of fraud to wind.
A rogue is a rogue, the poor starving wretch who steals a loaf of bread
Is honester than business men, who in cheat’s ways too often tread.
~” ve U P writing while the blood is boiling, best wait ’till it cools down
lis policy, sometimes, to call ‘honest friend,’ the false knavish lown.
Meanest mind may sometimes bind the loftiest, when fate decre s it so
Like Laocoon in the dragons’ grip, when the environments are low.
Pope Stephen was a gallant spark, and dearly loved the lasses O !
Which penchant kept Saint Peter’s Holy Chair, from being dull and slow :
* le amorous priest, who was caught in squaw Spotted-Fawn’s.
tbe %I d ~ that ’t l T il ] r bone Star State, when a life on the prairie led,
*^ U^a l° roams, the deer and the antelope play,
St 1 f h I hUnted !" dshot ’ * hen hearked to camp tales at close of the day.
While the past still lingered on, in the years gone by when the world was
wide,
Ere the Goth engineer with iron grasp, shrivelled the land and tide.*
The Pontiffs Bride—the Church—her charms pall, easy thing to ken I’m
sure 1 J
*ln A.D. 1880.


For vice will leave an asphodel meadow, to batten on a
Whi?fall h?stll b gotmmk) n r e s buydfrlchahlsfwherfAnti-ChXtearedriven.
£me men^Tprfeh,Through long years, until the touch-stone finds
Let on e e m eet U a chance to safely do a chouse, the cloven hoof will sprout.
Ne’er tmsfa man whate’er his status, if you can’t enforce the pact,
When honesty can be compelled, then tis his interest so to act.
To argue well your thesis, study all the adversary s points,
if vnn'vp first innings forestall him and demolish, racking the joints.
DeemlioMhat your opinions, are the only i * t ? h “ d “l S leafn men 1
Se 4r W SSk O^f e tWngs d Sn’t be° because they are beyond your mental
iecondly, when theaud.ence are swine your wit is thrown away.
Thatffiefttof’tSn^d’fSVtoK e’en to himself is kind.
Fast the leadership is slipping, from * h « Churches itc .theworld .g, .
The puritan no better than the whited-sepulchre he seems.
You may use shady tools to gain your ends, but strike above the belt.
Than 4ovel for the mind will take the colour of th ambient mire.
sr.
rra f r ,f’ t the near est trick, ere ends the game, the winner may score worst.
nSV faklv with the upright beaten foe, but give the snake no law.
gS&SSSßSa^ggseu
‘


Save fellowship with the pagan wights, who worship bread in Masses
A good old name is an asset, the inborn honour will transpire
CaU si 6 re len Wh ° bear ° ne ’ oft to shun the deed that would disgrace the
The millionaire is as poor as the pauper, if he is in want •
JJarl< sayings to dunces are meaningless, yet falsehood they will grant
X be wisest are improved by polish, like the educated fox ■
Who read the newspapers, so saved his brush, tho’ free with hens and cocks
FOr meet— d buSlness far > far awa Y. when he ken’d where hounds would
Like that red-rover, let understanding be a lamp unto thy feet
p y yeaf are getting ripe, for another Cromwell,
it i allest Poppies will be truncated, ’tis not for me to tell.
1 hose dark decadent days, when men betray the Faith for gold or fear •
And the booming of the breakers, sound loud upon the vatic ear '
‘ „,f n °. er the mlght y dead I let s h °P e they have not saved the land in
vci in ,
When the hour of tribulation strikes, will e'er such heroes live again ?
hopT ’° r ’ Wh6n faC6d With C ° Urage ’ grit ’ and and
Falls heaviest on the faint heart, who wallows in a dismal mope
1 he Orange Institution is our sleepless watchman, e’er on guard
Who sounds the larum blast, when base and tireless foes are pressing hard •
Rallys the scattered into a phalanx, bold and arm6d for the fray * ’
Unmasks the cunning ruse of bloody Rome, to face the light ofd’av
Pi ban . k s, ess ta * ks at best : “ th e voice of one crying in the wilderness^-’”
1 louted and ignored, in society, in parliament, and press ;
command d ? Ughty ’ “ standln g by a purpose firm, heeding God’s
Rnmp b fmpc d f oft ’ t °u wi I n - at len Sth, our gallant no-surrender band.
In SI king u P°. n hls throne, to the peasant in the field,
What eW d fonl ermohaw k priesthood, bat-blind obedience yield.
«,? at ® er i ol i befall, swerve not from duty’s path—day-star of the soul
Th t p PrOV H d °L° d ’ to be the road that leads to glory’s golden goal
I he mmd withering curse of popery, blights all lands Sn which it rests
Like creeping paralysis, the bane is working in Britannia’s breasts •
\\ hile in absmtha wrapt, the Satanites are winning trick bv trick ’
Th P p P H n u Sa ?? l 2% 1 . in time to come John Bull wilffeel the stick
Antvv 11 Saxo . n . lS beingout-generalled by the subtle Celt
h.hn K 1 m .P olltlc s, the Praetorian sword is felt.*
a n\r bribed his garrison in Ireland, to pile arms and surrender
And deems the enemy thus bought, to be the Union Jack’s defender’-
A master stroke of Jesuits’ diplomacy, using as tools ’
n P [P teStantS crusb themselves : an Armageddon waits the fools
Whn’ii if-H W^ erSh P P ° f lan< ?’ - the P° wer will pass to England’s sworn foes
thro b es de h6ir G ’ Untl m °’ er matched strength, Britannia’s in war’s
Ullidia’s sons will hold their own, with bloody glaive watch bv the Bovne •
And many a sturdy volunteer will come, the Northern ranks to join Y ’
Choking foemen with stolen butter, history repeats to-dav
Wben„ 0 oo o iv , L W ll be fOU " d ’" ,at daneghelt tribute doeYno. pay.
vv hen poperj geis sovran power, it will, for what is there to stav ?
Roast goose will be the staple dish, at many an auto-da fe * '
Dark sayings of the wise, is “ rubbish ” to the man devoicl of wit •
Thev babble of best °w ed by fools, upon the man of grit. ’
As ohi.fsp i fi bullocks, as they plod in conventional furrow,
■■ I’mnTolfe ‘stuffed ” 'SabT-’f k bUrr ° W -
While all the time Loyola has aYoXiXd7o^ b ° Ut '
♦This was written in A.D. 1002. Now in mm n
order of the vassals of Rome ; both parties ready to wfeck th ® me ' tin f. P ot . b V
were of one mind, when the road to the throne was cleared for a mni't a - fis ? al P° hc y> and
or the green.- The Author ciearea tor a papist. Motley istheonly wear—


Is England sinking in the torpor, which proceeds the sl « e P °* dealh "
I. th/fata. Hidden HandI of Rome• frauds"in trade,
Tl!’eriXquTe%rieS and P shocked, when Godless wight a funny
Of Jotl* about' a girl. Mots anent a petticoat are sinful.
Prudery and puerile pnggishness, ha V e some fo 1 to ‘ himself,
One gets absolution from the pr est, the other g .
Past and oresent trespasses are cleansed, so he is tree to iricK i
En ron? e !w h hen fsMlinT it means’to try.
Ro^eTh/tam? 1 W?t’s lance, 1 have at and
K“Ke.
»|a*;S||e truth In men.
EiVsLe folks ! ? 4 seen taChtSSh,
Fwiif cTdidly admit—that I do not want 1 creed.
And mus't w?th aim, the hearts of men to
ss5" eaMK taps a.
Pitv ’tis true! it is my lot to find the protestants - (( ,,
& SS longed maids and
S2S-» £"'•
ForcSfon unwilling necks, by fiends, who Freedom's'sacred name
ISS“S£S||gHll
thine eyes art blinded to
Thou h wil?°not heed the watchmen warning: “The sky is darkening
Vanish?ng l0 thy'Bible faith, and thy business P rl £hy ls " ou « ht '
loeveryInanVt his price £ Ihekf*h kin betray.
Shame and sorrow' wad *'^“a*“ h S' R lorious heritage away.
An object-lesson to thy foes.The Wooden
y ,Mhr4p™e rU hSd m togllhSr d ? rests wfth°the fiat of the plough,
£ n p d e ” e an a y t a an 0 y k pricl!” men' prate!'while'ta 5 shametef 'private frauds
The&who’ve better iron than they wield, their gold will win'and


For nought can teich !hy' blind SldftV’mfflTt ! hy *““•
f tJeS % V AS; ' ate -
The proudest fawn upon the Irish priest his approaches well.*
And thy boasted strength and are tea ten 5S niel [° r his smile s;
’’-sysr* who ,Led
lion for their prize.
At home. To tend to Jonathan abroad Th v th ? approved English plan,
But fight in coming time you must and’who S^ ms ,^ rowin g Wa n.
On land? which settles it; tho’nan ist the d , ay who ’ ]I gain
Altruism is ennobling much to be'for « h*? hant on the main.
But those who know mankind opine theMinS™ 8 Wr ° U * ht ’
thought. p e ’ tne Million are not worth a
Few would extend him'T a” "Tl- common good,
Success the public only recSgniSf rerk™n, :0 „, dr ¥ him out »>e flood.
Truth and justice know- full Sell 111 ? the hearts that bled,
T.s s chance, his chance, O^Se^fn^^^
fcnVhTffST®the hi Sii P „ U g r S; a " d out the ma " to gyve,
win * taUlns fi * ht > are stepping-tones for those who
The ,iuck L wights „h„ have escaped, the pitfafl, the guagntite, and
Have” an°lncorne V fix€d,° raflier* < mw*e C^ l h ** a " y '“"* a ">*.
Court the cool in summer- the cosv nnoh- ls , repmr . ed > and stick to it.
The way to live a patriarchal age if only ronnfc Wm £ er blusters drear,
But one may live a dpmrfp ’• y , counts each year.
When pent up passions wring the raS^terfb 1 " a single hour-
lower. S tne ra^ln g heart, and stormy sorrows
Th Turr=Sg W „?g 0 h , Sooner face tha ‘he tempest's wrath, the Scythentan
Sf n iSd a be C t b Sh orh 0 rhi a „i a "? ° yster He-
Never satisfied with plenty, buf Swaws w? n f? f rape *£? rudd V
Acquire knowledge, the more vnu nn f somet hmg more.
Superfluous tho’ it seems, vet may teSfkTVn? * Teat , er . is Wur power,
Impostures and diabolical machinati^ns h JfVome wl'? " eedful hour-
beasts many minfo " Ito flocks
OcnsJ-ic'rhobby 1 is’not Vo be wi^vj•’*' I r?T >w f our m undane life,
The thunder-crash and whd wind’s ro*r L of the strife.”’
But hell-notes to the marineTwhen lZ’Jarf
SoTiTu r de U and° TOmempfatio^’a"^^^^^^-?' 1 ° f
Who wears her torch within his breast, Sigh,
~ hW ‘'
25. «£ ow times!
The many ntoil, pay piacenten' an°d^"w^bt'c'Me'^iS' of blood,
* “Police” is used in the comprehensive sense-not “the foorce.”


While hypocrisy and cant sweep o’er the land, deejj)' f S fart
The fool who cannot reason motives grants opinion to be tact,
So Jesuits get at. him, by finesse, cajolery, 3 "? th t he longest purse,
Themis is a courtesan, for sale tobuyer wit in H r ags and
And erring wights who have wooed her costly charms, in k
If a "an£akiss from you, and there’s value her.
She will cool off by and by, and V at Russia, look at Spain,
EnU*h P . r S FSSftffSr the yokei dull England dons the chains
Romffevys blackmail right and left, and the paltr? awards submit,
The’^naxfm
;/ S S P r a qUhX n 'sSnlL™ ng we crushed the man who dared to
KnucSowm bold Protestant boy, else we’ll put you in a comerflight! ’’
S3 ’S r tt”esrSfwd S whe„ e’er they make a
senseless din. . rfVltc npver r, rasp the flaccid mind,
s s£3 55;
traded in the hiKhest
lethal toys, as swords, law, gambling, widows, guns, and
If vou'know the ropes of life, you’ll get kisses enough-and to spare.
Seize fast the opportunity, for it will never come again,
One chance in life is granted, to the tide;.
And foresight sees it coming sails his barque to port bide ;
The dull, the careless, let it pass, so with IJewaMj , ds off .
When girding on your armour for the fray, don t
ztf&zsc&i sss wrt- -r
SSSS C a o „d fl you C Vm‘kS' your %£££&*s?& "
For “holt who lose their tempers and their heads, lose other things
Scrapers nor eares-droppere, iwer were nghteous, loyak £, r^’ n lrl J st d,
There is many a man since Samson s days, Dy ue and about
Se, be aier. on the
IJnle?s°sure of your man, don’t write alleging a thing is a spade,
For that’s oft how the client is ruined^lJ h u VaZigst [he bad,
Trust not implicitly, a man who was brought up amonßStme


fraUd ° n thC bench ’ always judges the small sneak in the
Who had not wit to understand, the legal way to pick a look
A h i£S. Va f ? erSOn u kicks at times ’ 80 P lund€r from the publk one
Help a man T § t 0 Hke> being gammoned and being done,
rieip a man in trouble if you can, some day he may reauite ft
Grab not at more than you can carry, thus greed is often blighted
Be courteous to women, don’t copy the Romanist priest is
robamhocrie tHe husba " d ’ and t 0 tlirt and to romp with the Sdfes
There’c n Tk >S 3 someth,r j£ to . vex °ne, where’er the lot may be cast*
I here s a thorn, or a snake, in every life, commingling with the D ast
pass!" m ° rtal SPan SHde by ’ freely feef them
And grass Ur h ° PeS ’ and j ° yS ’ 3nd fearS> ar€ nought but shadows on the
iruth is better than peace, so is justice, and liberty of thought
bought 8 6 C ° Unter - trade wax Poor, when with our birth-right
He^o UI !! P f Upon 3 ™ an wben be has fallen, nor push him down the hill
He may *et up again, and then he will surely put you thro’ the mill ’
If youare a rogue-ten to one you are-don? deem honest mSi are
OU scTooi a s. f °°’ yoUrself ’ to a that’s logic, not dust of the
For what profiteth the world to gain, and lose the immortal soul
n" ? e t bia r°, blho T S of tbe Ab vss- to everlasting roll.
P- on .•°, dended ’ reader, nor declare your bard for ave to hate
Rmg David s statement was too sweeping, but the odds are as I c Vof~
kLS n^ aliZ€d i n ha , st «’ f write fromexpedence army leisure ’
{>f 0 edg f purchased thro’ long years, and with considerable treasure
Diogenes failed to find an honest man, e’en one in thousands ten
vdUy Q pen! WlSd ° m °" that matter ’ ° nce fdl from Shakespeare’s
hl Gnd are 3ptly COmpressed in a Proverb, current up and down the
“ Y right k handd’ e th ® bUnCh ° f hair that ’ s Rowing, on palm of the
Did you hear what fate befell the donkey, who tried to fool a fox ?
5 " and themse,ves the donkey, from the hones! get
Woman, I deemed once as good as lovely, who with the angels vie
But now I don’t expect to find on earth,' a native of the skv ’
' an and n< fah, be i€Ved hls word ’ and bought, when treated' honestly
Piff pay me bacl j kind but I know better now. In the viper’s lair
I 11 trust my hand before his word I’ll take, or deal upon his deed
T U " l€88 by law enforceable, and hold him—as he keeps his creed^ d ’
Let your jewelry suit your income, for as vou dress von’ll hivn
Ground mgs judge by gilding, but understanding bv qua tj of cla?^’
Brn pi a rif CU voi a are nd *°°l f ° r by these tol^nß t& man most [ell.
swelh f Y P ’ f ° r commonsens e will scorn a cheap-jack
£?i n 5,,?" and polbsh °. n a Pig-sty, alter not its character a jot:
Ihe illiterate boor shows meaner in palace than in cot
t'ihat my W ‘ Sdom ’ vou “ don ’‘ ">uch,” say, whose fault
Thllof Wrl -l e ’ “ fox hu uting, is no sport,” for horses they’ve never sat
Ihustles suit a donkey’s appetence, better than a bunch of grais*
If you 11 haul my logic o’er the coals, I’ll be ante with the jaKS’
1 say not, ‘ ’t,s quite original,’ never said bv any other
moX? Lemuel ’ s ’ which were taught him by his
This proves wise men lived, and women too, before vaunted Solomon;


A variation o’ th’ adage—“ great men lived ere Agamemnon.”
Great Shakespeare culled from eld, matchless Milton paraphrased the
Bible.
Facts known to scholars, tho’ little learning may opine I libel.
Pope in deca measure: “ True wit is nature to advantage dressed,”
The argument is sound: “ What oft was thought, but ne’er so well
expressed.”
His critic writes (slashing Dennis, who to his soul abhorred a pun):—
“ That Horace said as much, and little wit is new beneath the sun.”
With these great precedents to plead, immortal bards of high renown,.
I may throw new light upon old subjects, without the critic’s frown.
Popery menaces the individual’s, and the nation’s life,
Working in the dark, the Silent Sapper bounes for the future strife.
Gudgeons are the British Public, gulping what they want to believe,
“ We are loyal now,” the croppies lie, so the simpletons deceive.
The Jesuits have got their measure well—they will not face the facts:—
l lt must be, for we want it so,’ assertion is more true than acts.
Will the Ulster men be gulled ? place all they love beneath popish power ?
And then in shame and blood and anguish rue the idiotic hour ?
Stand together, help the feeble right that needs the strong assistance,
Stand together, to fight the potent wrong, bearing down resistance.
Never trust a man with money, that you cannot afford to lose,
For gold will sometimes stick to tempted palms, and little your way ooze.
Beware the friendship of the stranger, that leads up to a game of cards,
For if you play, mayhap ’twill leave you poor as Homer prince of bards.
No answer sometimes is the best, that’s non-committing anyway,
And saves trouble, paper, postage, and thinking what and how to say,
Beware the sirens of Bohemia, for as the Venus Fly Trap,
They’ll interlock their fingers round the ‘catch,’ when in love’s balmy
nap.
Ne’er opine that all the wisdom in the world, is centred in your head.
Consider well the site before you build, a fault clings .as when you wed.
Lend money to a friend, just to oblige, then write him down a foeman.
Talk not to crosspatches, yoiHr ne’er can gauge your speech to suit their
span.
Marriage is an enchanted gateway, thro’ which the mated pass to
Heaven only knows, for all that, lads, and fro£?s, will rove upon the woo.
Girls are desperate to be wed, indeed, if you don’t mind your eye,
You will be hooked and mated ere you know, to rue it by and by.
The points of law are nine. The first is obviously some ready cash.
The second, lawyers sound and true, else they will make the case a hash.
The third, sturdy witnesses, who can be relied on in the box.
The fourth, to have a case that all legal chicanery quite mocks..
The fifth, to have friends upon the jury, so th’ other side can’t win.
The sixth, to have a judge, led-captain of Loyola’s sons of sin.
The seventh, to be a “Catholic,” and the adverse side “black
protestant.”
The eight, ere hearing, the panel racked and influenced concordant.
The ninth, to have Satanites working for your interests in the dark.
The last will win the case ’gainst odds, like Aster, seldom miss the
mark.
To wit, Captain Dreyfus, reconvicted with the world at his back;
Plus the Chosen Race, and cash galore, yet succumbed, to the attack.*
Of Paradise the parson tells us and the jo''c that wait us there,
Yet strives to prolong his dreary pilgrimage, in this world of care.
Talking Greek to donkeys is futile, they addle the more that’s said,
When Lovola has them haltered by the nose, to his manger led.
Writing “ Wisdom’s Essence,” is not so difficult, this is the pinch—
To provide the understanding, so that the reader it may clinch.
Wise men see lectures in leven, and poetry in a blade of grass;
But those learn nothing from a book, who are unthinking and nias.
* The conviction was quashed by the Civil High Court, and the Jesuits’ victim reinstated
and promoted.


S * l °'reason t ? ”jj!; n> crowd « l play - house - then is your vaunted
TL b r ffalo€ ? st^" IPe 1 P e^ e in Texas, so runs the leviathan
the General. Ihe sinner is always sliding o’er the thinest ice
SW Safe y m i t i° Hell, J ustice trips up others in a trice ’
Savon- faire mav allay wrath, and sweet blarney woman’s anger sans-
raps ’ 3 ’ blaCkth ° rn ’ ° r bunch-of-fives trained for giv^g
For man, not woman, the only way to beat her, is—to keen awav—
She will cool down when left alone, and begin to cry, or curse or prav
The protestant who plays jackal and decoy for the Jesuit ’
sn t clean enough to spit upon, a carrion feeder like the kite
J he spark struck from a flint, may wrap a city in Apollvon’s arms
c anoes, like false women, safest from afar to view their charms
e^ tbe u baS ? are , satinzed > be they laymen, be they priests of Rome*
Andrtey how! and cut up rough, that’s a that'tfe shot has gone
Trust not the friendly smiling papist, he is taught to dissemble hate
and tS>° r iite? adly than the scowllng foe > which ma y be found out when
min< ? ed men, are ever ready to believe the worst.
Ambition only wins the race, by ever daring to be first
1S a jfProsy of the mind, that blasts the heart and soul
Gentleness will tame, but violence provokes resistance to control
V Ifphofd ” WaStCS Hard W ° n Wealth ’ Which good worli would
Like erstwhile the Australian miner, who rode horses shod with <mld
Confused know edge, often lands a man in very Sous trouble
bu£blo° ne ' ““ y ° U Ve Pr ° Ved Ws metal flaw and
An'! y T r lan su to your subject, fine writing has its proner place
A d g7a h <2! empl ° yed beseemingly, it clothes the thought with tact and
c |f arly about what you know, that is the way to make a hit
But to get new work into print, the best of brains won’t do sans irit
Moral obligation to the mean, is another name for Greek *
Little souls devise little deeds, small things their petty passions nim.P
ohteness is the cheapest com, with which to pay your way about
b th y r S ough h o a it g ° Id WIH not Man mUSt b ° W to fate his a iife’s° span
Thl c °mmence an action, pause, reflect on what the end mav be
dl *? reet man succeeds where the witty fail, in society
criSl? y ° Ur V ° lCe ’ ° r Pen ’ t 0 Shseld the °r to* whitewash
tZ ft" y r OU € ; accessory, and befoul your hands with grime
Ihe jocund spin lightly steps, unto the end of the career
Thirl Lml h ° pe eSS heart way is dark ’ no Yearns of light to cheer
t-hl a ll be . a recompense in Aidenn, where the wicked come not near’
S ° U S Wh ° dwell With sorrow > throughout their sojourn
In the beautiful Avalon, when wins the cross the promised
J ° yS frow°n nd man ’ S finke Visi ° n ’ for the leal who ’ ve braved the world’s
There the Evil Spirit of mankind, cannot harrow up our rest
All our sins and sorrows ended, to rest for aye on Tesus’ breast
The unfeeling man, hath little sympathy with benevolence
preffnS* URh m "' s,ones ' but the fallow are hSwinked by
An with sorrow hardens men, gives fortitude to bear
dare Ve '°" b °‘ d de€ds ’ that fortune ’ s darlinsrJ would not
Hearts that beat highest to loftiest strains life’s destiny can brin*
Feel keenest the wrongs of the world, the insect’s pestiferous stfng.


Life is like the vault on high, UTSS*
Then it deeply darkens, darkens, d; a [ v , .’ h stars Q f hope peep out,
Rolls the thunder of despair Then t bout .
Moonbeams flickering round the > j " n j s own affairs,
Every man ought have a a rudder thro’its cares.
This makes fair saUrngdown the stream of hfe, aru
tL S voS; ,g U J«u?e echosin £. ear,
SfUnds say, when the, sport thro' the
The Gift unlocks her treasure-house, it 1 P f or bidden-tree.
Worth all the wealth of Indies, s^dSws in the air,
We dwell in a realm of faerie, see dl bright and fair.
K5SS2SS#wi¥ ESP- -
M «£? knSi|| : f | rr/ton o, w theor, t 9
Who sues for damages will get them, a tne vomits forth such fear,
Tho ? Vu f SVy wold, they'll track you as the tiger tracks
TOtfgeance for .a blow struck in fair fight
Their rifle-men pick off their arch-fSs to sink the ship, .
That craft— The S Reformation —will soon be in the breakers' grtp;
Laodiceans won’t fight her, pirates a j re , ~on "the* boarders’ an embargo.
Stolid Captain Bull won, . wake. and taj on he subtle cdt .
“ Shure ’tis all imagination, Misther Buii, R ne » er is felt.
Dullness thinks itseif acute, so the me ev ery this
“ Give me ! give me 1” quoth the
and that! ii- y oc . fV»p mnnkcv shaved the cat#
Thus Roman Lais shaves her cully, as private end,
The jackal works for her ini secret, to V e!w t£st to bend.
And every Bayard in the breach, ’monsst the evangelic class,
You’ll find the traitor everyw ere, Nun valued a pane of glass.
And h tu n rEhe Attic-salt (if any) mto gune ]aved
Humour, fun, the cheering-cup, must be put aown the „ save d.”
kL r an r eS y thq h "ake‘to awak/thL, fools, who point the nose on
And want all help to be immaculate,oni^ve 1 !^—except ’the Methodist,
e ot io°kelet, y is on the sable list.


And growmup 1 folk."’ml,Trend a S “(, uk tho ’ about a wench,
u hy are those who ken the French orTW inc l u,^ed ln to excess.
And E c„e„ tended wights he S'^'WET.?
Suppressing what VO the th r>ope h 'deeni™wronp Vh °l lo ? rn< f writers vex,
Index? pe aeems Wron £- placing knowledge on the
You overrate°y o u roli n on^ c .- n } easure of morality?
suppress books with’moral on "' existen t evil see.*
„ , p grasp: Wlth moral the treatment exceeds your
I aU " hty ’ S3yS WlSeacre ’ then he snaps the padlock on the
The times 1 * wedded hen -
Use"
S XnXy y to coll4e *
But 2*? f ° r i5 norance to hold its pea U ce and 006 that wins -
But wisdom should be free to teach P rn Ai ten to the wis e,
T £ e charlatan betrays his want of de’oth nnf rr l an d advise.
The observing man can gauge ’ *, Ua , rd ’ . and wind howe’er
A woman makes the fellest ertm, ’ • .wimpled with the nicest care
? baffle °r to circumvlt her her - that ’« the plan!
Adversity makes men wise h„t rM ? man ever can.
An accomplished mind marks w . lsdom °fttimes comes too late
Be swift to hear, bm Kte«h K «"»• » f “ »f« from fate
Be not hasty in your soeerh c'm >n n Presumptive evidence
Neither believe/nor nu" ‘ he l ack °< sapience
“taS W “ e ' ’ eSr a d „°d n s°‘p U pSl“ t d s ' were
The aTsacts S the a ioya?ty h of States fmpire is lhe ll 'rone,
sea.
Ihe past is soon forgotten by the thront/^if 11 ™H in chivalry.
Ihe present must be as the/think Z ho ne er ahe ad can see
The signs of the times bvlS’ a^ ape at ever V novelty. ’
But dullness see nothing, by every^neciou^ f°n bias ’, can he read,
Ere engaging in a flrrM- Z, ■. s P ecious fallacy eer led
’Tis better to^retire than chances of the fray
Never trust a man bevoml Me •? fortunes . of a fatal day.
And be certain you \e Y gauged Wlt h matter that you prize
Remember rogues are fools' and ff n |,T y i, t , le Wav that interest lies*
“> lr a moS e 4olrfoS. th the
WherOawMs free, and drinlf £ c£&SS SK’ftlVtSU
SlTand C oly n ,hc e Jortf:h, SOm<i shar P wi ‘ s "ho use ,he sped
“If” is a very K“£P™?any tale they wish'to tefh"’
Which mostly don’t come off.'stiinSS k T' St wondr °us things
Ma„mu d? _ dree aHotted oour^'llLre^h^o^tSs^^pt^
Slwp ca'lSs'thefCTCToTthemhid’rtld' 1 ‘ he , tlark , hantl of destiny finds
The healer, the consoler, recCnera,fve ,h eS 'V leep the righteous blew
The men who fail, are
* «—««. <:■. ignorance, i. „„ defence; » i„r,,„ ,„« k ._ THE


-
Don’f follow in his nor of your neighbour uA.ml
If yoScome too often, you will be sure t“/“^^^X'caSft^spend;
The warmest mlve will be when yj ready^casb
The coldest, when you wear a shabby co , s to rea d,
S “’em in the hour 0,
The schemer may win half his life, and mayple up the glundersk^htgh.
To be jockeyed at last by a wench, credit balance in the bank;
Twm d ma S ke ,r ;o n u welcCml°evlrywlfere, from tradesmen up to men of
SlSf o°f U K h U oi’S ff ’speed’sSte "Saceful
When you are writing poetry, * IS * r ’ to the man in the moon.
WithlhoirdevSd of Ssf’to advise.
L o wrre l€ o a f rn ac n ting in upon n impulse^
For your thought may be a. trap, by and parry .
The initiates can t be influenced, tney catch, while here we
We’re yet travelling in dark mist, some glimpses eaten,
Of lighb'and of the Great Thought World, just opening on our present
uplifting, will solve the secret of f™J’ know
Kelp oi e gu n ar U d*and SO wath e his tricks, so you will foil the treacherous
tsSsiiSr— a
§L£SS! t A 1 S! m?re or'llss.Xy ale° oft^lc^dgshJwed men.
Abide at home, when patriots fe llow clay.
NeSr sTeaka justicepfghtland trutih to the
vacant heart, reflected m die.
A cool head ofttimes brings a °ut very hovek „
Kg^’la^
SmemXSNolnas’Srms aJe you cast, clinging tho> unseen.


Command yourself, and have self-confidence to battle in the strife
Of men, without such sine qud non , you connot succeed in life.
’Tis nature’s law, the few to lead, the many thoughtless to be led.
The many labour for the few, who’ve understanding in the head.
Time flies, life is short, ergo, ’tis not worth while to be aught than
upright,
For remorse adds untold horrors to the hour, when lours eternal night.
Socialists would stop the world’s progress, drag th’ elite down to their
level,
To be as sheep and cattle are, and take the short cut to the Devil.
Treason is a fetter forged by tyrants, for the limbs of liberty,
Oft may be the noblest crown, a martyr wears upon the gallows-tree.
Whether patriot, or traitor, depends upon winning of the trick.
They may call the name, who vanquish, and hold the best end of the
stick.
No greater tyrant ever lived on earth, when he gets in the saddle, *•
Than the working-man, whose narrow-mindedness oft inflicts much
skaddle.
Popery is the only creed that is ashamed to own its faith,
Whose filthy working must be wrapt, in language in the shades of death.
Whose teaching, if published in the common-tongue, in its foul detail,
Would be a crime, and cause the printer to be fined, or be sent to jail.
Too foul for poet’s pen to write, too foul for strumpet’s lips to speak,
It can’t be matched nowhere, tho’ in the lowest depths of Hell we seek.
Address your correspondent, “esquire,” it will not cost you any ore,
’Twill be compliment—if not satire—pro tanto serves your end the more.
“ Mr.” shows the writer’s boorish strain, touchy people’s good-will
slakes;
W T hen a wifdit flouts at pedigree, that proves him to be no great shakes.
“Bosh!” quoth the plough-horse to the Arab, “there is nothing in
blue-blood,
You’re but a horse like me, no odds your race two thousand years has
stood. ”
Your political party is always right, the adverse one is wrong,
Casting o’er the land a blight, while yours starts voters carolling in song.
Men of understanding agree with you, but the foolish people don’t,
Your last opinion is always right, what erenow may have been your
wont;
That is, what you read in the newspaper, and parrot through the day,
It cost a penny and its value—casuists alone can say.
Both men and wolves devour their fellows, to-day as in auld lang syne,
The milder tiger and hyena, at their own species draw the line.
Impatience blunders oftentimes, move not without discreet reflection,
The fairest highway may have hidden snares, so step with circum-
spection.
When a writer tells the truth, and paints things as they are, he is
howled at;
When he lies, and draws them as they ought to be, he is praised, e’er
so flat.
Innocence is no protection, against the swindler and the thief,
The rou6 and the rake, to know a thing, oft bars the road to grief.
The lone lands seldom trod, call to the viking’s long descended child,
An odic influence, ’tis the spell of the Spirit of the Wild.
The motive power bv which was reared, our empery in olden day,
And still implants within the breast, the wish to roam the foreign clay.
The empire-builder fearless marches on, with rifle, axe and plough,
The forest falls, and lush the corn grows in the erewhile spewing slough.
Then house by house the city spreads, and turrets pierce the conquered
skies,
While forts and quays and halls of town and state, to order duly rise.
So England forms the future world, whate’er her coming fate mav be,
Protestant faith has made her strong, which she barters for Dopish lee.
Who’ll dare sav, she holds the sway, she held in the nineteenth century ?


Cock of the walk in arts of peace and war, and sovran of the sea.
The Questions out-devil the Devil, tis well the text is Latm,
Else more weak girls would be Phrynes.—Father Snake, you ppe p
Questions of the Confessional, would make a Hottentot Lais blush.
Yet papist damsels listen to them, without een beating r ?£" d b ff u
Priests excuse the filth, who crks “ stinking fish?” pious * Muff us,
With brazen brow they vent their sophistry, ad captandum y ul g u s-
Britannia, wake, and hurl the loathsome vipers from your shore,
Or you will wake in days to come, to find your faith and freedom o er
When Popes ruled in Rome erstwhile, pretty dames could scarcely walk
And keep their virtue. It is well he is now a sham Magnifico.
When virgins met his Cardinals en promenade, they ran to hide,
Becoming mothers, unless a I’orthodox, they could not abide.
Life is a game, men play for stakes, some are honest, the rest knave
For love, ’till Death takes a hand, goes nap, and sweeps
Judge 1 € not° in haste, decide the qualities of all things by the fruits,
Your conclusions will be erroneous, if founded on idle bruits.
The weak spots in the popish armour are—priestly immoralities,
And questions of the confessional. Stormers, take notes in diaries.
Lecturers, expose the militant system, a dread Anaconda,
For Rome is sapping by it, to plain folk a terra incognita.
Fort Dogma has a rubber wall, the shots rebound and slay the stormer,
Turn ye attack the House of Glass, outlined in coming verse and
former.
The Pope is held infallible, a rose of Sharon, tho’ a weed,
The crude anthropomorphism, of an imbecile and dying creed.
Popish dogmas pass as others, and claim the prestige of old age,
Although from time to time invented, Satan’s war with Heaven to wage.
Some are founded on the pagan myths, the nuns are vestal virgins:
And the miracles are pure inventions, to fill the Church s bins.
The Pope is Pontifex Maximus, the chief of the secret rites:
The saints are the gods re-christened, who dwell in the land ot the
sprites.
“ The Glories of Mary ” are paraphrased, from tales of Venus, I ween;
“ The Lives of the Saints,” and the gods, are not the most proper I have
seen.
I versified some, the publisher said—“ they are too naughty to print,”
So I omitted and bowdlerized and filed, according to the hint.
They are now the very nicest reading, fit for lass and Sunday-school,
And any one who lieth, “ nay, not so,” is a microscopic fool.
Attack the Cacodemons with keen ridicule, in wit’s array, „
That drives and kills the foe, “ Cervantes smiled Spam’s chilvary away.
There is no arguing against a laugh, ’twill holes in armour prick;
Sobriquets too will jar, “The Satanites,” namely, so let it stick.
The glass-house of the Romanists, can be shivered with ]okes and wit,
Dogmas and rosewater will not do, putty bullets never hit.
Don’t keep on harping on an oft told tale, your audience are not babes,
And know the Scripture as well as you. Too much friction the chasing
fades.
Don’t spin out yards of hackneyed cant, for we have heard that trash
before,
It makes the reader ring the bell, say, bosh! and indicate the door.
Placing adjectives prefixed the Name, which is above every name,
Is as absurd as the “golden gold,” and is composition lame.
Don’t quote the Bible when you’re short of wit, folks read as well as you,
And when Oriental Text is spoiled, may feel inclined to —whew !
Kid-gloves and courtesy will not win a fight, nor a sea of rant,
The truth strikes hardest when ’tis plainly told, by Christian militant.


YOU a a b r ove, igh and mißh,y "» and hand in hand with those
Thoi f fflly°Wms t fheretad!?, W T- y ° U ’ d 56,8 the **• W°la wove
For secretaries,S StL Jf™' lay leader, aSd for Se,
Fifteen years of fighting with the Tesuits * a ° d th f h all -marked tribe.
Not that any one*wil, &£
® nt Chietata k ow h „ osm 0 s me ’ Strik6 home ta the black <*‘ hearts the Sable
groanr ° Ur freed ° m - faith a "d Fatherland, to music of their
“ S '* S * P Hal,‘ h knSl4nK “ rout ’&
U, gtWm tSf £$ raSrM
Tin™" crime co'nfeSj CrUSh “ With ™*>arin g hand;
Kill or be killed, wel |e?“o' Juarto whST" the v - itals °< land
knife. * quarter when Rome grips the butcher’s
O e t n a ot WkS i ?f a Endo n r e n t ow^ in,; 1 , 1,P Se t tarian strife.
The coming day of wrath if the? skTnit °H? Sauls Who little reck >
Ridicule is a mordant weapon when y tK P ¥ an
It can be daubed on with a shovel h v a ■ , base in fact >
Wit whets it, and ba?bfi? cf. aP , Wlt , h wit and tact.
Truth makes it transude and stlcks *t to the smarting sore;
Be wary and give way whenyou V/V° the , 'ore!
Better than breaking in the stress to drift tbe st ? rmy cloud rolls o’er,
Hate, is the strongest passion bewar* thJlf ec . k on fortune’s shore.
Wealth is a passport an?wW u demon . ldly n °t to rouse.
You may be a youn<* nnd a Thi'ci - P erka P s acquired by many a chouse
For athletics rinM
Life is real with the earnest cnml finj “ttteof the fancy.
A nightmare to the submerged "as
stream. ucrgea, as rudderless barque drifts down the
And a ‘ g^' y hlr e up, y f°“'rhe n wiir 0 se n ,d^ m rt d Un - e J S ““Si i<* as best you can,
Acquire knowledge from every one you* mee t ° ’Hr" W3 " d Span<
own. y u,eet > ott tis best reserve your
If you'
If peace at any price the viking’s JaUov oeman ?. atck J t hot and strong,
Oh ! how I demise that hateful c?eed hvf P A Ol1 *
crimes, eu ’ 01 lust > of hes, of frauds, and
Y °un g maids have many artful ways, with which to hook a money’d
Reproachful g £« attt^craerdraivCT^’m^s‘theV't’ h° scratch -
Tho- some men are pretty ,ou g h art .
rr Th> sr-*- * «-»
man, all the most secret recesses of their to^lloV t‘° Unve!l u heir hearts before a
tn e h? I< i ,^ depr t Ved . harlot would never consent to hear from Ter° f ° l . hem c i uestions which
to be tied on burning coals.’’-Chiniquy’s “ Fifty Years oT Rome*^ * m ° re horrib,e (ban


7
/
With disconsolate air and tear dimmed eye —(hark! youngman, heed
They h m?ke iP you feel a monster, for not kissing the sweet willing lips.
Then sighs just half suppressed, and love-light thro the veiling lashes
seen; T
My word ! it takes some philosophy, to escape the nets, 1 ween.
So beauty lures both fools and sage, who want to wed a pretty toy,
The old man can be meshed as easy, as the unfledged beardless boy.
“ I lov€ you dearly, will you be my husband, darling ? soon they 11 say,
The bashful maid who must be wooed, is getting scarcer every day.
Deter mentals and sentimental misses, sometimes spoil a CO ( U P>
The damsel’s delight and the chaperon’s fear, pennyless won t do;
‘ Mamma ’ tells her chickens: “ Don’t you be flirting with that pauper
Give encouragement where money is, all cats are. gray in the dark.
An arcanum of nature, for all colour is the gift of light, .
Without its aid, matter is a hue like the robe of starless night.
But, if in folly’s hour, the maid upon a traitor’s word will rest,
Ah ! where can injured beauty .find lost peace, and heal her bleeding
and a pen, are things of little worth, the nameless scribe
Writing for the press, may be a nobody of the Bohemian tribe,
Yet, write the words that influence the many headed to the core.
And hurl the bloody despot, from the long oppressed and conquered shore,
Ca ira ’till the world is free. Ne’er trust, a man who serves your foe,
Or expects favours from, whose purse will profit by an action low.
Loud voiced ignorance, oft puts down the learned man and truthful tales,
The donkey’s bray, o’erpowers the carol of the watch of nightingales.
A jewel in the mire remains a jewel, with mire ’tis not blent,
Tho’ its splendour be eclipsed, by the vileness of environment.
Withhold reliance on the probity of the truckler to Rome,
Who places popery in pleasing light, the wires, are pulled by a gnome,
He is either fool or knave, that is to say, a blind tool or a bought;
Experto crede, the hidden hand of hell, a decade o’er has fought.
Beaten oft, the Satanites still keep on building towers of Babel,
But history teaches you all that, better than .1 am able.
Mercy is oft thought weakness, so hit hard ’till you come out on top,
For the half hearted fighter, is sowing oft dragon’s teeth a crop.
1 lie weak enemy begs for toleration, let him get the whip,
Then every rag from off the back of enslaved liberty he’ll strip.
The crevasse in the levee may be stopt, before the rift grows wide,
Neglected, o’er the submerged country, pours the sweeping torrent s
tide.
’Tis all imagination.” that is the hackneyed, refutation,
For popular circulation, throughout our dull witted nation.
Lend money at high interest, or in mines of aught your fortunes try,
Then get a whistle, practise it, ’twill come in handy by and by.
Beware following volunteered advice, for gnomes oft pull the string.
All the seeming is not real, when tested fails true metal’s ring.
Every person, every party, are playing each the petty game,
Satanites using all as tools, have but this solitary aim—
Re-imposing accursed yoke of Rome, upon the Briton’s necks,
And they are winning all along the line, for who the future recks.
They make no secret of it, for they know that John Bull is an ass,
Neglecting to ring-bark the Upas Tree, that’s blasting freedom’s grass.
Stand clear of his heels, th«aa W dangerous, for his kicking can draw
tears,
If you want a safe position—just keep beside his ears. *77*
A Toledo blade can’t be manufactured from a bar of lead.
Theatrical ceremonies of a false faith, for weak minds unread,
Have charms; toys please the full-grown child. Protestants who support
the schools
Of their arch foes, are idiots, ’twould be compliment to call them fools.
dfd


Papal lies have a vraisemblance, when they’re oersistentlv cpt fnrfh•
Protestant greatness is proved by results/the Purestte*o“ w£h’
" and f may P u the Wlres > that move ruling spirits of the world
The self-rehant, pushes on, obstacles off the way are hurled ’
Fadh sans reason is fetish superstition, marks the credulous
and uTS lgenc t’ are not terms synonymous. ' /
No weight ought be attached to calumny and asslssination t>l\-
The time honoured and established modes of pap\d refutation
The self-made man oft worships dual gods, Mammon and his maker
The weakest vessel may contain superior mind and character
Tn h telWtf e [°i US %u na <-u’ t !‘» sil ] y le - both show the empty mind-
intellectual laughs that tell of wit approved, are of another kind
Narrowmmded people, credit not that which is beyond heir ken
S'" ‘° evil on report, marks baseness in men
Tht Z! nd v b ° WS ? Ut the farthin £ candle, but it fans the forest fire-
stmng ma a n n ’s7re!° 0n PUt d ° W " Wkh thr€atß ’ but they rouse ’ the
The deadi h ° Und f ° lloWS While the ChaSC he views > the sleuth-hound to the
R^ 1S d r - Un < a ru> e Z ery f< ?, lly ’ ’ tiU they are well nigh out of breath
Red-skins lift the trail upon the gallop, where city men see nought-
Detectives trace the “ wanted,” by a button and exercishig thSt
Beware when playing with the cunning, not to over-shoot the mark '
Experience should be search-light, to illume the sea of future d™k
e confidant oft includes the latent approver and the spy
The protestant who hath a papist friend, may yet have cause to sigh
Let not prejudice bias judgment, for words wjll not change a fact
h °;cracked. Se ° Ut ’ ° r bUY forei^'n stocks - thus find Iheir pockets
And"fr Sr 8 ar^ Very experts in husbandry;
2L>? gmg ' J ±Gy Ca " h ° ok a £ ud £ €on , flat-fish, or other he-
adsteer: Care graZmg ’ Calves please them not > still less, indeed,
To donkeys they’re not partial, but incline to bits-of-blood I hear
The fool can t appreciate the genius, calls him by his own’ name
b °° r 1 i 6 3 Rubens from a their worth to him the same
Ihe experienced person may once be snared, but scarce a Scond time'
g ifme W thi " k the Same is Won ' are SS; ,o the
. Warßof wil ? s > to the foeman back his own
M ° b k? a ” d and £ uard th J e nest until the bird has flown ’
Men bear great losses with equanimity, corrodes the dailv nrirk"
Most .gnorant people think,, of life they are exiSts in eve?y m ! ck
rpP ( l they don t know is useless; the hog is satisfied wifh mnt o«
Ihe jackass thinks his bray quite musical; Minerva’s bird its hoots
IS f!i H * who kn °ws how to live on and enjoy a little
Is better off than Dives, who finds purchased happintaess is brittle
um 11 ? 1 Z?- at , s on tke surface of a bilabong, gold lies on the bed
lSd r adet b. in the streets, her precepts just as well unsaid
c ia |^ rest . 1S the primal motor of every human action
Save those inspired by higher nature, and those inspired by faction
r°r low ends.(/lake nought for granted, for errant facts oft mazv vake
Test every statement by reason, and see if it rings true or^ a S
ThlT-rfh fr T pass l°n.: or from caprice, in those paths danger stalks
sphet ! es ,f f life, try men’s characters more than humble walk's
Ihe good man ,s hated by the bad, for his life is their reproach
Iho your shield is spotless, slander on amour propre will encroach
TZi°ffix ar v. tlfi a e 7? ark ?. tke ,P? tty mind, and the failing hans
Those folk who dwell on little things, can seldom comprehend the grand
Never let your heart or passions, from wisdom’s ways beguile yoi/head-
he majority of men ne er guide themselves, by others they’re led * ’
The w,se fate heed not to wear their welconj out' Ms Ue always


Silence seldom injures men, talking has mar’d many million scores.
When your enemies admit your merit, ’tis doubtless genuine.
Take advice, if it ought be had, of those who’re experts in the line.
Cunning people are often hoodwinked, caught and easily deceived,
Entangled in the web, their Machiavellian machinations weaved. .
To think one’s self more cunning than others, proves clear a lack of it.
Cash, or wit, rules the world, the pen-whip only gives the crack of it.
Teaching Jesuits to lie, gilding refined gold, painting the lily,
Are some works of supererogation, indulged, in by the silly.
The tools of popery can’t work their dirty tricks, when on the guard;
The antelope fights shy the thicket, where it scents the crouching pard.
When rogues’ characters are clearly smoked, the reptillian fangs are
drawn, , ~
But pit-falls lurk about the feet, when e’er Nox wears the garb ot Dawn.
The great wit says much in few words, a small wit nothing in many.
Don’t ever threaten tit for tat, forewarning serves the enemy,
Unless you want to block a game by bluff. Companies never die,
So the Jesuits can’t fail, for a thousand times and o’er they 11 try.
When reproached for worthy actions, remember, that’s the highest
praise. .... . i
Gold keeps its worth in every shape, coming doth not its value, raise.
Fight shy of wights, sans reasons, if you don’t like the cut of their gib,
’Tis better dining with Duke Humphrey, than to feast with them ad lib.
Pleasure often ends in sorrow, troubles sometimes terminate in joy.
Change is the fillip of man’s life, constant level happiness may cloy.
Many a man marries thoughtlessly, because he has nothing to do,
The pastime is quite pleasant, ’till begins the pinching of the shoe.
If you want to lead a happy life, the less you know the better,
Just enough to see your way round town, and o’er the moor with setter.
Take everything on trust, your sausage and your bride, of course,
included, . ' , ,
So you will lead a pleasant life, and be egregiouslv deluded.
Not that I have practised preoepts such as these, indeed, if I had,
I would not be so wise to-day, but then I would not be so sad.
Alexander- Pope writes: “ The proper study for mankind is man ;
But most men prefer to study woman, and. kiss her if they can.
’Tis true her smiles lead on to folly, and light Eros has got wings,
Kisses don’t pay bakers’ bills, nor get frocks for little cherub things. „
Pope’s essay hits the sex o’er hard: “ They have no character at all,
Ouoth he; but ’tis not meant that way. I deem his wisdom got a tall,
When he tells us bravely, that “ Every woman is at heart a rake,
Which is clear; with a pinch of salt the cruel libel we will take.
Rome materializes the spiritual truths of Christianity,.
Deifies the priest, ministers to his pocket and his vanity;
In twinkling of an eye, he gives Salvation by legerdemain,
And starts a soul for Heaven, for cash received, by a thaumaturgic train.
Holy-water is in the boiler, ’tis fired with radium blocks,
And Charon leaves the effete oar, to drive the saved to saintly flocks.
Poor chaps with little money, must tramp it, or travel on a bike,
For ages cleanse their sins in Purgatorv, or be damned belike.
E’en the holiest of the holy, and the Pope himself, ’tis said.
Must do time in cruel limbo, stretched on its procrustean bed;
For the Masses to get them out, bring custom to the holy-shop.
And the better the business, the more the priests can off the term lop.
Twenty guineas will liberate a leg, and nine pounds nine an arm,
Details are queer, so I’ll pass, not to “ true religion ” to do. harm.
It must be awkward for a girl, with one limb out and th other in, when
She wears the hobble-skirt, of this year one thousand nine hundred and
ten.
The priests increase Heaven’s population, and also that of the earth,
Where in many homes, without their kind assistance, there would be a
dearth. . . , , , c .
I ngoldsby tells us—how a Bishop begot heirs to the throne ot bpain,


Let us hope, no other occupant, will e’er require such aid again.
“ Sacred mysteries ought not be ridiculed,” echos the feather-head;
Where is the sanctity of make-believe, from which wisest men have fled ?
I am willing to be instructed, and then to kiss the Pope’s big toe,
Count beads while praying: “ Hocus pocus hy-kokalorum jocus O.
Pokus bunkumus, Satanus winkus, non hankey-pankeyus.
Av 6 Cuckoous, non phoo-phoous, et noctis hy-jinkeyus.”
I hope my Latin is correct, for since I left Fermoy’s old college,
I lived a life of up and down, and almost lost my bookish knowledge.
But to return to the Beast, who will be chained in Hell a thousand
years,
With Satan, when our Redeemer reigns on earth, and wipes away all
tears.
I am willing to learn the juggle, hight “ mental reservation
And how holy-water drops, can grease the railroad to salvation.
To learn how to defraud and lie, for the greater glory of God;
But draw the line at adultery, and “removing” ’neath the sod.
I’d not object to kiss a maid or widow, tip a bit of blarney,
To learn to prove that black is white, and Hell as lovely as Killarney.
To get up “ cardinals ” by the score, and to prove what is, is not; *
And all the pious Romanist idola, which ’Arry terms “rot.”
I am willing to learn, how to dissemble hate of “ proddy dog,”
While by specious sophistry, lure to ruin on a shaking-bog.
How to lay cunning plots, to get a marked down quarry in the toils;
To set heretics by the ears, and foment internecine broils.
How to manipulate the boycott, for benefit of the Church;
And undermine a character, so that best friends leave in the lurch.
How to work the secret terrorism, yet never the law infringe,
And make knock-kneed Laodiceans, unto Roman Lais cringe.
How to bend a statesman, by threats about a youthful indiscretion,
And thus get laws repealed, or passed, to help the militant obsession;*
Av e’en the noblest in the land: but I dare not write, what all know,
fin my young days ’twas common talk of town) for ’tis too vile to show.
How to get money from the local rates, and the public taxes,
The various clever dodges, by which the priests can grind their axes.
How to place spies to watch and influence, and feel the pulses’ throbs;
To get a legacy, or to engineer political jobs.
Aye how to terrorize a jury, so that justice will miscarry.
To lay a girl on a bachelor, to lure him foolishly to marry,
Then use the wife as fulcrum for a lever, or hostage in the hand.
The puerile moldwarping, by which the Jesuits oft rule the land.
How to get papists into posts of power, as magistrates and judges.
And billets for the faithful flock. Tit-bits blind England never grudges.
Thus link by link to bind the mole-eyed dupes, nor leave a single trace
Of freedom to the protestants, and bind the j*rand imperial race
To kiss the Pope’s big toe. So falls Britannia when comes battle fray,
“ For self-abasement paves the way, to felon bonds and despots’ sway.”
How to destroy by costs of law, all local leading heretics,
So falls the Reformation Oak, by chopping in it ceaseless nicks.
Willing to study, records of the working of the human passions,
From age to age enrolled in registers of follies and of fashions,
Loyola’s Wise Men file, so when they want to hunt a victim down,
They find the schemes that failed or won, elect the best their aim to
crown.
I’ve read the books of Rome so much, virtue is oozing at the nails,
Only wants a little golden greasing, to make it run in pails.
Have had the offer— ‘ five hundred a year, and a pretty papist wife ’ —
But “ I feared the Greeks when they brought gifts,” and smoked a
pitfall for my life.
I’d be engineered into the Treasury, where I could steal a lot.
* “ Cardinal ” a lie, coined in Sydney, N.S Wales : See notes at the end.
* The Irish Home Rule Bill to wit.


f admire their super-infernal cunnjnß’Vhn'BulPs Tret’of clay.
ss? , sE B o s™s- ,a a
V&S? & Purity were
shook
«?r y i^gLrI h o> W uy £ land ords out.
Is daneeel" & no statesman dare Loyola’s ultimatum flout.
L B t r w oh"n”ilnte?taPriet'Sy 0 h"n”ilnte?taPriet'Sy taucteSnVE* Rot them by the
AnT?lio S dme? stile ‘ hfno,
l?£Sed, of an B d and kick'M base are
The t ß e ritlsh Ve premier're ! lis his country, and its ha d ™? n
b^ C chret a nd a h n , 2 wields ’the Irish
.. M y l ßood man, the House of Lords must go," quoth he, threatinß
SHHHas:a£r«ssx,
h^a^yre2 reißn w°itfchris, on earth, unfettered by the
When'pain and Sin and Death are bound in Hell, ere loosed a little
Thetbind with Satan to destroy the Oust, and filll the earth, with Ruile.
- It must be so, therefore it is,’ the basis of the Koman creeu.
When looking for a wife, woo the daughter of a worthy m hei
fee that she fs kind in converse with sister and her k™ the •
The siren makes a sorry mate, the butterfly that is S ceaseless
At home, her pretty wings are flimsy fluff, won t stand me s cease
Th/fnoi dies for his country; but the wise man works and lives for it;
??ue courage is to fight hfe’s battle nobly that proves tterkn* grit
Watching by the fever stricken couch, when contagion u ■ ’
Pufling at the lifeboat’s oar, wreck-bound thro’ the roaring breakers
LivingTalmly when there is no hope, doing little acts of good;


Standing for the right and truth, when wandering lost in Comus’ wood;
Sinking in the fight unbent, treachery withholds the hand to save;
These are true heroes’ paths to honest fame—the bully is not brave.
There will be a roll-call yet, ay! which fell Rapine’s horrid breath won’t
stain,
Where rank by rank the brave will stand, who’ve followed in their
Saviour’s train.
Dark war is only just, when fighting to defend the hearth and home,
The Rights of Man, against open tyrants, or the Burrowing Gnome.
Prepare to fight, but don’t attack, hang"up a ready coat-of-mail,
The worm is crushed, but few men care to trample on the lion’s tail.
For all that, no peace, no pact with Rome, foul she strikes below the
belt.
Ruin seized on every people, who to the Scarlet Dame has knelt.
She keeps no faith with heretics, and treaties may at will be rent,*
Punic Faith is Roman now; claimed lawful according to intent.
“ Live and let live,” a pretty sentiment, while floating down the tide,
And Rome applauds the Laodiceans, who drift to suicide.
Where her religion ends, and politics begin, cannot be defined;
She meekly prays, or fiercely preys, as suits, while Old Derry’s wall
is mined.
Cruel, unrelenting as the tiger, e’en beauty will not save,
Cold and implacable the harpy lives, ghoul feeder in the grave.
Rome never sleeps, yet she dreams, dreams of blood her priesthood
fondly nurse;
She has one eye on your liberty, and the other on your purse.
Like the gold-ships of the Rockies’ valleies, Loyola’s pirate band
Suck the wealth and verdure, and leave behind a barren useless land.
The future age will curse the miner, who ruthless sweeps like Sodom’s
doom,
O’er many a smiling plain, and leaves it blasted, aye, as the deserts loom.
Those wizard craft that sail o’er soil, and with them carry seas to float
in,
Apollyon takes to digging ore, and has a fitting hull to boat in.
Across the travelling lakes he tacks and steers, but never reaches port,
By day and night, like the glacier’s march, ’till not of earth remains
an ort.
O, Christ! that Thy fair orb is thus defaced, to pander to low greed,
Hereafter robbed of homes, for on the monster’s track won’t grow a
weed.
Now if we reason out this parable, this parallel we find—
The gold-ships ruin matter, while the Satanites destroy the mind.
The facts of history prove all this, and Rome boasts 1 semper idem ’;
Where ever did a rose of Sharon grow, upon the nightshade’s stem ?
The Sinner’s vote on polling-day, is good as that of any saint,
If anti-papists want to win their cause, they must ignore some taint-
*Tis folly crass to ask the soldier, who is fighting by your side—
-1 If he likes wine when it is red, and kisses from another’s bride?
Better tell him, ‘ strike and sin no more,’ than be beaten by the foe;
Few saints are born ready made, faith and goodness with experience
grow.
Mohammed’s heart had to be squeezed, to rid it of sin’s ebon drop,
Ere he Allah’s prophet shone, and made hostile giaours to Hades hop.
A little commonsense is badly wanted, ’mongst the Heavenly clan;
With some latitude for wayward weakness, and faults of erring man.
Not all unco’ guid in seeming, will enter the Celestial Gates,
And many a sinner pass the Bar, while hopeless there the ‘ saved ’
sham waits.
That’s evangelic, tho’ ye like it not, and ye must kiss the rod,
For all the ‘ only ” business lies and frauds, are sins in sight of God.
The printer fool “ improves ” the poet, when he cannot be gainsayed,
* “ We are not bound by any promise we do not intend to keep.”—Jesuits’ Maxim, vide-
Pascal.


Ignorant of prosody, which like Haggards She, ?P ust
For words put in, or words left out, make prose with jingles at the end,
Elided word set up in full, doth not the poet’s measure mend.
To change a word is murder, for that kills the cadence and the sense.
Then critics throw the uncouth trash aside, not knowing who was dense.
True rhymes obey rigid rules, and must not grate the educated ear.
This betrays the low-born scribe, who rushes in where experts waU
Two'sylla Wes'are measured one sometimes, for thus the Muse may nod.
A gerundial augmentation may not be counted, which sounds od ,
But that scanning works out right in practise, in scansio
And followed by the poets, who’ve won a niche in fames proud
mansion. . . _
The liquids play the less important part, in measuring a lin.e. .
Such lex loci, the safety-pins that clasp the robes of Muses
License may be taken —not because the bard can do no better,
But on purpose for a happy hit. Nought doth the master fetter.
Printers of this work, kindly take those hints, and stick to the MS.,
I’ve weighed and meted every foot of it, so please don t make a mess.
The rhyme above seems a mootable point, and I admit tis so,
The accent falls on ‘m ’ in ‘ mess,” on e in couplet verse-I trow.
<e ’ vocal for a consonant cannot be sounded sans a vowel.
Thus brick by brick I build my Derry Wall, and point them with a
Mr. Reader of the proof, when on duty, don’t dream your girl,
This causes absence of the mind to correct working deadly peril.
Tho’ you may not understand, the application of a word or th g,
’Tis right; so is golden-fringe, tho’ you don’t see the way a rhyme doth
The Structure and the style are all my own,Jialf s erious, half
Which send the shot right home, and priests call curst sardo
The the Saxon in old times, now Paddy comes along,
The ogham is his scorpion-whip, and rulers cringe beneath the tnong.
“ Mere farmer persons ” compel the danegelt tribute, and veil I \ ee ,
A cfnndlv slice of it goes to Loyola’s camp in Stephen s-Lreen.
The power that undermines the throne, that pulls the string when
tyrannos, who makes high and
“ The British Constitution must burst up, the House of Lords must
Ouoth’he, “ for Rome Rule to clear the wav, it bars, I ordain it so.”
Wisdom can be gathered from experience—ne er trust a man agai L
With money—or a girl—unless bound tight with stamp and legal pe
If he does the smallest dirty trick, for this iess includes the grea ,
And on fraud in larger bulk, this low sparmw-hawk isbutaiv alter.
Never attempt business beyond your finance, forte, experience, po er,
’Twill end in ft fiasco, as did building of the .
Beware of the experienced partner, who is working on your cash.
You may change places by and bye, and then the teeth will
For fifty" years and more, I’ve seen the Earth around the Day-Star roll,
And marvelled, how for very little meed a wight will sell his soul.
Year by year illusions flit, of mans honour, worth and chwalry.
’Till nowf alas! I view the race all rogues, immersed in tread
My heart grown cold, and dark, and hard, beguiled P° y j ‘
The kindly word and cordial grip, can t wake theAfp washod hell
The priests have got the measure of the heart, a little white-washed he ,
By dint of baffled machinations, have taught me but: too weh.
Ah ! man, proud insect! what art thou ? a bubble on the waves
In fitful gleams to float a while, then vanish to an unknown clime,
* Poetic license is departing from the technical rules not indulging in hyperbole or fictio
The Author.


To d hV? S Snc f ’ f th u phant0 ™ ess fnce, we hope a heaven shall win,
Aoriceless 2f?tLr n ° lon * er round the sun will spin.
To P Sfft nnLl H rt G h€ ? d g . 3Ve ’ yet Vller m€ll SO lightly hold,
lo gratify unholy greed of gain, some billions have been sold.
I*’ how ar } thou nobler than the dog’s mere ephemeral clay?
day*" 3 meed hones, will guard his master’s house by night and
While thou wilt take rich fees for work, take with set purpose to betray
Thy boasted reason mimical, thy wisdom but a parrot say. > ’
Who know thy faith despise thee to the core, the young alone beguiled-
In e chlld th ° Ught b€yond thy narrow sphere, nought but a full-grown
For tter !tS f a Ji? got thy measure justly, as all experts can see,
Rm t;! unfathomableness, means thy baseness and stupidity.
™ ™ U n P ° ! ', C y t 0 Wear a , mask ’ lest s corn may be revealed,
I will serve no end to run amuck, so let the contempt be concealed,
may feel and think, “ these men are the lowest dogs I’ve ever met ”
Th?A y £ U trave °. n twelve thousand miles, you’ll find some baser yet.’
this is human nature everywhere, aye the Serpent’s gift of guile:
I draw it from behind the scenes of life, and oh ! it is so vite
AnH^ y h rf" d fra i Ud 18 fai r In trade,” that’s business honour up to date-
pad n Politics and war; civilians copy from the sword and state.
TANARUS&L are the ? wh o saith, that “ future life lies in our mental moons ”
K p „^ n on him > and when he leaves your house, be sure to count the
And ß?av£ if?ht Wh ° ho ‘ dS ' “ * her ® iS a Spirit land somewhere beyond the
for s vi ! doers '” f ? r he tu ™ out a knave.
Critics say. Hackneyed rhymes are fatal to poets aiming at success ”
We must twist, distort, use bizarre words, to suit a vitiated press
The Ae ngUage U96d by Shakespeare < B y ro n. Pope, is good enough for
And rather think the judgment of the reader, with mine will
Iwere e a sy thing to “sport the learning,” but there is noTmuch fn
Thi H° reS ° f tho, j lsands have far more, beneath a very shabby hat
\\-hI I A v f ol .’ w / n o g |er , seldom leaves his name upon the rocks of ages
Whde life’s failures, plough-boys, tinkers, by Fame are writ upon her
pages. # r
Give a dog a bone, and he will thank you, according to his light-
a kindness to a man, it is ten to one but you will get a bite
Sacrifice your all for Beautv. and she’ll betray you with a smile
Ihe angel face may be conceals, the essence of the Serpent’s guile
Scorn or neglect a woman and she’ll want to wed you right or wrong
™hiong Ue YOU 11 bG SPUmed - S ° me Ways of tke Pettkoated
When ideas harbour fast, they master reason gripping by the nose
Will not be ejected by seas of evidence in verse and fcrose
is maxim holds good with all men of lesser and of greater lights-
fen mars successful strategy, with the resourceful jesuits. ’
II rUn brains must wm> a £ ainst ignorance that won’t be
Blindness, cowardice, and venality, that cryeth “ it is naught ”
When the noblest ends are sacrificed, to the greed of grabbing gold
The birth-right that our fathers died to win, is o’er the counter sold
The gTasp and Way t 0 6 haTO fled ’ Wh ' le R ° me plays with the fai lin!g
And gasp Sea > COnqUered VaSSals bide their time, ’till comes the empire’s
j be . vamp s e ' bat) R ome is lulling her dupe-protestant to sleep
By agents on the press, insiduously within the home they creep*
Aver the Jesuit a bug-a-boo, small children’s minds to fright,
* The London Press is rotten with popery


Fee-foo-fum ! I smell blood of an Englishman. Thus obscure the light.
“ Marching thro’ murder outrage and rapine, associates of crime,
Steeped to the lips in treason,” so nobly spoke in the brave old time
The British Minister. Now hat in hand he humbly bends and lawns,
While grimly smiles the Tyrannos, and moves both parties as his pawns.
Self-interest ousts gratitude, for that, man his benefactors rend,
To gain a little thing, do deeds, nor gold, nor years, can ever mend.
The Valhalla of abiding fame, hath narrow gates—just peep within—
The few who have found an entrance there, not always made the loudest
The grandly gifted, the noble soul, have sunk beneath oblivion’s waves;
While many marked with Cain’s accursed brand, are still living in their
Fame may depend on name, suppose, Grace Darling s had been Peggy
Pogers . n
Or Roland’s, Jacque, they would be half forgotten like the poet Rogers.
Ephemeral subjects give passing fame, that shortly will give oer,
While mediocre poets, such as Poe, may win by a Lost Lenore.
Rome’s beautiful lies are good in seeming, but they work out base in
fact, ,
The theory is quite charming, but all wise men judge them by the act.
A superstition leads to atheism, true faith the only rock. _ ,
Virile mind will scorn a childish myth, when comes awakening shock.
“Come to Mass, my Pussy, dear!” quoth the priest, thou divine
perfection.”
Then slyly squeezes her, as an appropriate interjection.
How few there are upon this earth, who like to lend unto the Loia,
For the security stands «.t a discount, by tacit accord.
Silence is not agreement, it may be the listeners thought robe;
Or indifference to the speaker, or the subject, or a probe.
Success is built on failures; and wisdom has its roots in sorrow;
Fortune’s sword is perseverance; and hope lives upon the morrow. _
The spiteful woman is an imp of Hell, and she often wears red hair,
’Twere better mate with Eris or Hecat6, than with the vixen pair,
Women’s characters are seldom smoked, for they change their minds
when they’re cloyed,
They look like angels when they’re pleased, but the very devil when
annoyed.
When your enemies howl and curse you, for adopting any line—
Stick to it, ebullition clearly proves, they know it is a mine.
It is what a man. can do, that makes life a fortunate career.
Not what he knows, yet, money in mean hands is useless excess gear.
Every man ought learn how to do, for when the miser s hoard is ciacked,
He is ruined quite, but the expert’s capital remains intact.
A wounded buffalo is dangerous; likewise the rhinoster;
And so is the enraged tigress, when she finds her cubs are Most her,
The charging elephant has killing ways; few care to;face the lion,
Desperados in the toils, still free to use the shooting-iron,
The basilisk can stop the breath, with a glance of its deadly eye,
A pack of winter wolves malignant, on steppe fearful is their cry;
The reptile tribe exceed all these, if undetected by the hiss;
But the acme of all danger is—a woman refused a kiss.
The eagle in the azure vault, knows not the secrets of the gnome;
The poetic ntind recks not, the ways of gold gropers in the loam.
Treacheries, ingratitude, kill the heart, as the frost bite kills the flowers,
While the inhumanities of man, are pondered thro the lonely hours.
Little folly in the noble, or the wise, provokes the world s frown,
But few “wights care to castigate, the reputation of the clown.
The faintest flaw will mar the diamond, or a colour s slightest tinge, _
The builder’s granite block is none the worse, where shows volcanic
sin(j6.
Many people are so very generous, with other people s cash,


Groundlings vote them “jolly good fellows,” until comes the bankrupt
crash.
The foolish sheep saithi to the watch-dog: “ Trust, let that poor wolf
alone,
Live and let live,” but by and by, remorse will wring with many a groan.
Decadent British rulers, in Dublin’s keep, place the foe in power,
In ruin tears and blood, the land will curse the folly of the hour.
The chilled camel admitted to the Arab’s tent, squeezed the owner out;
The Papal Tiger, off Irish soil, the Saxon yet may drive and flout.
Some journalists take a straw, then build a Spanish castle on it,
Reiterating parrot-cries, and think such drivel shows their wit.
Go not. security for friends, if you can’t lend you cannot pay,
You will lose the friend, and the cash besides, upon the settling day.
The rich and the powerful are well served, the poor are snared by
treachery,
It pavs to walk in upright ways with Dives, few care for little fee.
Mending skins is not the tiger’s trade; the Fenian’s is not loyalty;
The earthquake’s province is not building; nor Rome’s to let the
conscience free.
The infatuation of dupe-statesmen, hearkening to the Siren,
Is ominous of the coming fall, the meed of all priest-ridden men.
Never trust business of importance, to the poor and struggling wight,
Honesty he can’t afford, so may sell you badly in the fight.
Fools think it makes them look wise, to call their betters by their own
name,
Few have reason to judge by acts, so most men parrot cries of fame.
The writer fills his pocket, who panders to the petty passing hour,
Is forgotten in the changing mood, and sinks into oblivion’s bower;
But the writer who states unpleasant truths, condemns and scorns
all shams,
In future age a seer may count, now led to slaughter like the lambs.
The poet who plays nature’s divine strings, rolls on from age to age;
But he who echos passing thoughts, builds papier-mache with his page.
Few know a whit of Shakespeare, except the garbled version of the stage';
Fewer still read Milton’s works, yet talk of them with profound look
and sage.
The Absent Minded Beggar,” most have read, a pony I will wage,
1 hat s the stuff to tumble in the bawbies, it panders to blind rage.
Erstwhile bug-a-boo—France—against the German stands the fond ally
I remember, when “The Watch on the Rhine,” put England in a fry.
The tame wolf is very docile, and fawns like Gelert famed of vore,
But let his master trip and fall, the wolf will rend and drink his gore’
There is a stumbling-block in Ireland; and S’Afric’s lion is not tame;
A coming year of Indian story, may rival fifty-seven in fame;
There, is a giant foe beyond the frontier, looming like a bear;
By rail from Berlin to the Buffer, troops may travel if they care.
On Allan’s Bog, no doubt, the fleet can wade, and with the big guns
pelt;
May take Himalayas in flying jumps; and canter o’er the veldt;
The wigs.will lie upon the green, when tars their deeds of daring do;
But Britain rules the. seas no longer, that’s obvious as *tis true.*
jTis not anti-patriotic, to warn, part of the empire’s walls are clay,
To controvert the fatal fallacies, very prevalent to-day.
How can lies and brag, rebound to credit of country or of man ?
I hev are like roosting chickens, oft return the author’s name to ban.
Lhousing the Irish landlord, by pretence of fixing a fair rent;
Robbing the Boer, by not paying for levied stock, may be' well meant’
But Nemesis waits, and in the reduced credit of the nation,
\\ ill be paid twice o er money saved by Pecksniffian confiscation.+
There are people who believe a thing, and its opposite, at once;
n ,hJ? pa *% ru ( !f s th f Far Ea^ l ; l : A T r!ca rules the West: Britain’s Navy in home waters faces-
& n sxro&sx v&trsgtx rrxs


Darwin and Holy Writ; one who don’t, is called an ‘ old fashioned
The asked in the confessional, the text-books plainly tell.t
Are so damnatory, they’d drag the angels down to lowest Hell.
Men brave and honourable, are mostly the sons of worthy mothers,
How can a woman be unharmed, when in such sea of filth she smothers .
How can the ruling masses know the truth, if they’re not truly taugnt.
Dullards, who shut the eyes, and won’t believe, and so are bent or
bought. ......
The Satanites are rewriting history’s page, to suit the times,
They deny, or explain away, the persecutions and the crimes.
This proves their rating of the Anglo-Saxon reason, say,
Acute in business line, in all besides a lump of potter s-clay.
When Lorelei throws her glamour o’er, most men see things as she
Her imps with tails and horns, are only lambs and pretty golden fishes.
Self-interest and the private end, the rosy spectacles they wear,
For reason, honour, self-respect, and faith, all vanish in thin air.
The editor reviews her most divine, a flagrant falsehood pens,
Knowing the baleful beams that issue, from the lurid page of Dens.
The newspaper makes the man, the magazine wakes him up a little,
His opinions cost pennies one to six, their value—not a tittle.
Never, never contradict a lady, when she makes a mistake, ■
She will not thank you, and the gaucherie proves you are not wide-
awake. .. . T . . ~„ , ,
Walk warily, when on your trail the Jesuit is panting hot,
Or you may be high hoisted, by an up to date gunpowder plot.
Guv Fawkes is all alive again, dressed in a pretty lambkin s skin,
a cunning net, worth two of that, he failed before to spin.
The baser politicians, sell their country s future for nnte
To keep their places, and their only god—the Bank of England note.
Don’t show up the base decadents, hush it up ! whisht! let the white-ants
Let the" sap go quietly on, let Rome do her mining in the murk. .
What cannot be done by fair means, may be done by foul bear this in
When dealing with the papists, and beware the cowardly stab behind.
The extravagant wife, is a triple crown of thorns to her spouse,
So is the married flirt, these traits oft terminate in broken vows.
The roads to poverty are expensive ideas, and shallow purse,
Spending the sovereigns very freely, and the pennies never
Neighbours assess a man’s income at a figure, when he has not halt,
And expect him to live up to it, he’ll do so—if he is a calf.
Keeping up appearances is compulsory, e en sans a groat,
For P there are few about, who can afford to wear a shabby coat.
The roads to independence are, put something by for a n d <^ h
And live within the income, keeping out of debt, maugre what t y
Which'is k snake, a liar, a thief of reputations scandal’s schod,
A murderer that stabs behind the back, the babble of the fool.
If your patronymic were plebeian, as Bug, or Snooks, or Coward,
You would not make it a whit grander, by prefixing Norfdk Howard.
If ’twere of knightly ring, ’twere ill to spoil it by a mean sponsor ial,
For the name has oft declared the bearer, from time lminemoria .
If e’er Loyola’s Brood is beaten, ’twill be by brute force alone,
Tho’ slow the growth, the crop is springing from the dragon s teeth
they’ve sown. . , . , __ >
N’er be enticed into doing wrong, have the courage to say no,
A little practise makes this easy, and averts full many a blo\ .
Where e’er people live, they think that’s the centre of the universe
Other parts are ‘ out there ’ which is a comprehensive style and terse.
Tho’ man cannot command success, it will not come unless we try,
And failing, endeavour still, for fortune’s wheel may turn by an y.


When a stranger comes about, some think he ne’er saw a lass before,
And must fall in love and marry Lola, that is if he has ore.
The voice of Rome is smoother than oil, until she gets one in her grip,
To fascinated ear angelic, >et adders lurk beneath her lip.
Go not with the sorceress, tho’ she is decket with blossoms of May,
For nations who embraced her, are marked by the fingers of decay.
Go not with the siren, tho’ she sings sweetly: “ Come, oh! come love
with me!
I’ll smother thee with kisses, come to the heaven that is waiting for
thee; •
I will call thee my own, come to the blisses that no one must tell!”
For escapees from her arms, aver, they’re a sepulchre, a hell.
What transcends experience, is dangerous to write or speak about,
Egregious blunders always hap, when the uninformed, experts flout’.
Sylphs are lovely to look on, but a good armful is a good thing.
The scolding tongue is a danger signal, saves many a wedding ring.
When composing, what is left out is oft the most important part,
To know this is the primal step to fame, in the poetic art.
The poorman’s wisdom is little regarded, by the crowd who hear,
But Dives’ idlest words are hung upon, and quoted far and near.
Lying for religion’s sake, is far worse than for one’s own right hand:
So is the lie political, for party, or for native land.
The wider be the range of infamy, the deeper is the dye,
That earns the widows’ and the orphans’ curse, that makes the seraphs
sigh.
The press hack who lies for meed, is the very meanest liar of all,
The vice of slaves, the empire’s cancer, herald of the coming fall.
There is no harm in a joke or kiss, tho’ they may be vanity,
It is better far to laugh than cry, so vanity let it be.
Not having wit, the sanctified condemn, holiness to enhance,
And fantastic toe is aye tabooed, because they don’t care to dance
’Tis easy aye to blame what you don’t want, or when the grapes are
sour,
While practising some worser sins, than found in wit’s facetious bower.
Many think this is the road to Heaven, I fear! they are off the track
And will get bushed in the Never-Never, ’till lips and eyeballs crack!
When roving, I observed, Rome’s creed improves the breed in dark
skinned nations,
For little nigger, babes are getting white, all round the mission stations,
I here s a story whisoercd at Cape Coast, where morals are somewhat
free,
About queer amours of a priest, that would disgrace a chimpanzee
Absolutely unfit for publication, ’mongst our moral race,
Where many a tawnv to such origin, a pedigree can trace.
It takes a noble mind, to understand nobility of soul,
That thankless tells, encroaching waves are sapping ’neath neglected
mole.
Narrow sectarianism, this is not, this is a stand for liberty,
The watchman shouting to the sleepers: “ Awake! here comes engulfing
sea!” * *
Dismayed silence suits the coward, but the brave heart under chains
won’t sit,
Nor see Romish tyranny enthroned, whose baffled force falls back on wit.
Experience without reason, cannot be turned to account to steer
Life’s course. The strongest fortress may be captured if you persevere.
A wise man knows how to mark time, watch, and in silent ambush wait
To take. a beating, cut and come again, at last to win the gate.
A. king is but a man, and he will cringe to save repute from shame,
Right well Loyola, knows the way, the proudest in all lands to tame.
When you have said enough to serve the end, ’tis wise to make a halt*
A useless waste of syllables, betrays a lack of Attic salt.
Say, can a man put fire in his bosom, and his robes not be burned ?
Sav, can a nation admit Jesuits, and its flank not be turned ?


The best way to accurately define nothing, is—a woman s vow,
Like Euclid’s point, it hath no parts and no magnitude, wise men allow.
Studv hygiene’s laws, learn something of mankind’s anatomy,
Thus preserve the powers, to buffet the billows of life’s stormy sea.
Health is nature’s greatest blessing, without it, all besides is nought,
And like the choicest gifts bestowed by her it never can be bought.
If fortune throws you ’mongst the lower classes, keep them at arm s
Else year by year your tone will sink, and habit’s chains increase in
Be converse, yet stand off, and ne’er descend unto their level,
Discuss politics or business, but never mix in social revel;
Conversing generally is not wise; ’tis seldom safe to do a wine;
Ne’er talk belles lettres unto them, that is throwing pearls before swine.
There is wit and there is worth amongst them, there is the spirit mind.
But to a well-bred man, sentiments and manners non-attrabent kind.
For all that, don’t pose the haughty aristocrat of superb clay
That’s upstart style, begets ill-will, true metal never rings that wav-
A very fruitful source of knowledge, is observation s habits,
With knack of joining this and that, and of analysing quiddits.
If not well off in world’s goods, ’tis wisdom not to know too much, nor
Verbum sat sapienti, for Greatness’ tongue alone is wise and free.
If ladies plume themselves upon a subject, be they maids or wed,
Compliment them on their talents, not with brusquene, but.neatlysaid.
Then they’ll tell their friends, “ you’re such a clever fellow, and so
Your V sofPso d ap may be false, no matter, that’s the way opinion’s led.
If friends dispute a point, and appeal to you to judge the matters,
On your reputation don’t, or you will rend it into tatters.
Say—“ Escobar saith in maxims: ‘ when able doctors—such as you
Make contradictory statements, both of them are probably true. .
Thus you won’t commit yourself, nor risk making covert enemies.
So you may sup upon the cream of life, while folly drinks the lees.
Seek Health and Wisdom and Understanding, and woo them sans
For all ’laws are pleasant to the leal, bring happiness and peace.
The Priest's Dream,
A legend of Enniskeane House, Co. Cork, Ireland.
On New Year’s Night the Priest awoke, and found an angel by his
In sooth, an angel made of mortal clay—thus miracles betide. #
“ Salv6 salv&! to my couch, adored love,” the portly canon cried,
“ Say, art thou native of the skies, or earth? my beauteous fairy bride.
The holy saints have sent thee sure, ergo, to love thee can tbe s ,
CVlestial sheening of thine eyes, proclaims thou canst not be a gin.
With the snow thfck on the ground, lying double was warm;
The fair one hugged close, ’tis known that a canon can do maids no
was immense, witty, intense, gay as the butterfly’s flutter,
Her tout ensemble distingue, quite too unutterably utter. . ,
The love-sick canon kissed her o’er and o’er, as very well he might,
The rosv oouting witchery, would snare the oath bound anchorite.
He? hair gleamed like the sun-god’s setting rays, her teeth would shame
Her Deerless beauties ineffable, would make inmost recess thirl.
She’d P make the blood surge wildly in the veins, hireNjagara s
When o’er the steep the roaring waters rush, in he^d^. n f. t o or^f„
To seethe and swirl around the stormy heart, and fill the ambient air


With sigh spray thick and fast, then rave to a deep dark vortex of
despair.
The tapering fingers proved her thorough-bred, marks that gold can’t
buy;
The soft and sweet low voice; the gracious mein, proved her of lineage
high.
Her face was beauty’s master-piece, ’twould win the apple, from the
Graces.
Her gait was like the Andalusian maid’s, light as Camilla’s paces.
The Angel’s arms around him twined, captivating like Circean spell,
And various female blandishments, it is not requisite to tell.
Her eyes soft fires would melt an iceberg, let alone the canon’s tallow,
As she sang “ O Sanctissima,” which glided to “ The Rakes of Mallow.”
This metamorphic song oppressed the canon’s mind, a trick was played
He feared, may hap, a fiend had ta’en the semblance of a handsome
maid ?
Demomst as he was, an evil influx seemed to pervade space;
Tho’ divineness of her air, evinced ‘‘an inward spiritual grace.”
Yet, her woodbine breath, caller as the dawn, became taint with
brimstone;
While the echoing Israfilian chords, were blent with many a groan.
Ye gods! the symbolic candle in the room began to burn blue;
The Canon deeming that his soul was lost, changed to the self same
hue;
Then gave a yell, that “ like Peel’s view-hallo, would awaken the dead,”
The Demoness had clutched him by the throat, as he rolled out the bed.
Blithely shone the sunshine thro’ the sashes; whistled shrill the ostler*
The Priest was clasping to his bosom, his darling love—the bolster.’
The Priest’s Song.
Whack fol doodle doodle dime,
Whack fol doodle doodle day,
Shure ! I had a high old time,
When I hugged her ’mongst the hay.
I’m a gay young Catholic priest,
Giving the ladies absolution;
Rising the rafters at a feast,
With Bacchanalian elocution;
Yet fly the glass, the song so witty,
To clasp the melting breast of Kitty.
’Twas yesterday when drunk with wine,
Scarcely could I say the Masses O!
In lovers’-knots my legs would twine,
From my longing for the lasses O !
Hide lights ! while I steal thro’ the city,
To clasp the melting breast of Kitty.
The Church declares it is a sin,
For priests to love a naughty woman;
But I don’t care for laws one pin,
And fling in Cupid’s path, I trow, man!
Tho’ I can’t wed—the more ’s the pity,
I’ll clasp the melting breast of Kitty.
I envy not the monarchs high,
\VhiJe toying with their grand princesses,
Their namby-pamby can’t come nigh,
My fervent Colleen Bawn’s caresses.
Her charms too rare to paint in ditty;
O come! the melting breast of Kitty.


The Countess and the Bishop.
Omitted.
■Sorry; ’twould make cats laugh, horses blush, angels weep—but what
would Mrs. Grundy say.
Coming Home from the Wake.
A Legend of Kildare, Ireland.
O, Mother! darlint Mother, faix! to-night there’s a wake in Kildaiw,
And the handsome curate, Father Cuckoo, I am sure will be there,
He will check the boys’ philandering, and no liberties will take;
Say, my mother, dear, may I be after coming home from the wake.
O Peggv 1 daughter Peggy! shure them wakes, indeed, I do not like.
There’s Mary Tady had a baby, fathered by that spalpeen Mike;
She was a dacent girl, and none at her a head could ever shake,
’Till he got round her in the fairies’ rath, coming home from the wake
Ah! Mother, asthore! Mother, shure you know, the priest he will be
thcr€ *
He’s a very pious man, they say, and has promised me to care.
I’ll be good as gold, and nothing stronger than the tay will I take,
Shure! his Reverence will walk along with me, coming home from the
wake.
Peggy, daughter Peggy, ’tis safer at the pattern, or the fair.*
I am not so sure about the priest, faith! it grieves me to declare;
He owns a merry eye, and by tokens, may be he is a rake;
So don’t be too free with Father Cuckoo, coming home from the wake.
O the wake! it was grand ! there were ruckshons and divarshons galore;
There was bacon, there was baccy, and there was dancing on the door,
There was whisky, there was fighting, and there was beer to fill a lake,
There were broken skulls and bloody noses, coming home from the wake.
Father Cuckoo, he was kind, he was bland, and he talked like a squire.
Tipping blarney to the Colleen, in cosy corner by the hre:
Putting whisky in her tay—for dacency—butter on her cake.
By the pyx! he gave her absolution, coming home from the wake.
Soon Peggy’s state grew interesting, for och hone! no robe could hide.
She’d a specious excuse ready, when her relations queries ply c • „
“ The father is a leprauchaun, I swear! who caught me in the brake.
Maybe ’twas a cuckoo,” joked the Doctor, coming home from the
wake.”
She swore by the saints, “ there were no such goings on along the road,
And the Soggarth aroon angelic was, as he ’longside her trode.
But “ facts are chiels that winna ding, alas !e en for a woman s sake,
Tho’ blessed Virgin may forgive false steps, coming home from the wake.
O, the weary, weary days were over, and time of travail past.
The sinning cannot be denied, for she has got the babe at last.
But she loved the little leprauchaun —for the handsome curate s sake.
Baptized the fairy child—” Holy-water-coming-home-from-the-wake.
* The pattern, a custom of the Irish working-classes meeting at cross-roads for dancing on
Sunday afternoon; extinct since 1868, Eros being too free with the lasses.
* Mud floors of cabins giving no spring for step-dancing, the door is placed there on.


Moral.
Now all ye maids of Erin’s Isle, of Holy Romanist persuasion,
Remember, priests are built like other men, to beauty inclination:
Don t you romp with cleric, or with layman, who by tokens is a rake;
And \vake yS haW 3 daiSy plcker ’ wh€n y° u ’ re coming home from the
A Prayer for the Priests.
May Heaven on them pour the very choicest blessings—over the left.
Let them enter the Celestial Gates—when they slip the Devil’s heft.
Least them on Hesperidean apples, with the golden fruit endow
Let them hypnotize the dragon, and cull the finest from the bough—
io turn like Asphaltites’, when they clutch it in the greedy fist.
Let their joy be as the child’s—when fluttering butterfly is caught:
Oi the lover s—who values only while coy chase is madly sought,
ihrice bless their slumbers with illusion, as they in Mab’s chariot ride
ihe sub-conscious mind on the alert—with the night-hag for a bride!
Holy Virgin, send them lovely wives, sweet Delilahs to entwine
And in the hour of rapture—let the Devil be their Philistine.
“clrink m run^ets tke choicest vintage, and when deep they
Let them taste Sardinian parsley juice, ’till they verge on frenzy’s brink.
L ast let Plenty on them from her Cornucopia pour—into a sieve.
Let their prayers unto the wheat-God, be answered—in the negative
Endow them with castles, abbeys and alcazars galore in Spain.
Immerse them in plenty—like Tantalus, receding, come again.
Garnish their board with nectar, when they raise the goblet to the lip—
Let them feel the desert rover’s pang—let it be mirage thev sip.
May they to Rome subdue Old England—in the calends of the Greeks.
May they pervert the Protestants—when asphodel of garlic reeks.
Av, bless them with gifts galore— to find the fairies were the doners
Let all men see their naked souls—the colour of their characters.
May good-luck follow in their footsteps, e’en unto their final day—
And may it never overtake them. For their welfare so I pray.
When Archangel Michael’s clarion blast, wakes the sleepers from the
grave,
Ixt them receive strict equity—the mercy th’ Inquisition gave
Let them hear the Awful Doom: “ Depart from Me, I know not vou
accurst 1 ” ' ’
To dark Erebus where lawyers dwell, Dante saith that circle is the worst.
In left-handed harmony.
Amen, yea, so mote it be.
The Honksey-Pronksey Catholic Priest.
A Legend of London.
(Chorus, to be sung after each couplet.)
Yinketie, yonketie, yanketie, yare O !
Yinketie, yonketie, yanketie, yea !
Yinketie, yonketie, yanketie, yare O !
Yinketie, yonketie, yanketie, hey!
I’m a honksey-pronksey Catholic priest, expelled from La Belle France
Here met with one London lady, who led me a yinketie dance.
M of C gold : T ’ y ° Ur CyeS are llke tHe StarS ’ yOUr hair like thread s
I do so love the English Mees, sweet within my arms to enfold.”


Monsieur,” said she, “ the Frenchman I adore, so gallant, young,
His the sweetest things in life, I win throughout the day.”
“ My love,” said I, “ let’s drive to hotel, for supper and be funny.
There the vixen picked my pocket, of my gold watch and my money.
“ Excuse, monsieur,” quoth she, “ I’ll speak with friend, come back to
you when done.”
There I smoked one hour and a quarter, corbleu ! that was sorry tun.
I struck the gong, in comes the waiter, “ have you seen my tricksey
She hooked it with the other fellow, sir, I saw them have a kiss.”
Hark ! hark! ye gamesome Catholic priests, now you take warning by
me,
Beware of Cupid on the loose, and let alone London ladye.
Miss Grisette L’Australenne.
A Homily.
Miss Grisette, I admit you’re shapely built, and comely to the view,
Tho’ attrabent air of olden lands, is not seen within your shoe.
You have pretensions to the beautiful; but you are won too cheap,
Epicures don’t relish o’er ripe fruit, which oft makes the angels weep.
There is no fun in hunting, when the willing hare won’t run away,
And kisses offered without asking, are not valued more than clay.
Such favours may be as the wind, which salutes everything it meets;
Maidenly reserve and bon ton I prize, so tempt not with your sweets.
The rose looks fairest ’mid its thorns, the maid bewrapped in modesty,
I’d sooner wear the nightshade for my crest, than wed an unsought she.
The nice girl waits ’till she is sought and wooed, before she tips the
Men like’not a maiden to make love, when they of her never think;
And when the parent takes a hand, to try to rope the laggard in,
The plav is bad as bad can be, such vulgar bungling cannot win.
Miss Grisette, you’re facile clay in priest-craft’s hands to lure the young
But gkunourless your charms for men of sense, who the world at large
have seen.
Anxiety to hook a husband, is aye policy unsound,
And vain, immutable is destiny, when fatal spouse comes round.
Striplings are caught by a love rolling eye, think ’twill last thus to
doom’s crack, . . . .
But experience knows, woman may change, if she a true heart dotn
lack. , . . . .
The matured bird is never snared by chaff, indeed, it is in vain.
When he knows the huntress only seeks his gold, to spread purest grain.
Men who have ruffled in old times of youth, with class of Vere de Vere,
Seldom sink to marry dairy maid, or adventuress found here.
Your kisses may be very nice, my word ! I will admit they are,
But sans most other blandishments, the dainty tit-bits don t go tar.
Tust the thing in your own sphere, not a dish to set before a king;
And kissing you a pastime well enough, when not played in the ring.
If you want to frighten off a wooer, let him suspect a trap,
Then though you were Heb 4 herself, for you he will not care a rap.
With all your lackings, you lack more, indeed, ’tis seldom found with
The 1 sweet low voice that wins the heart, aye, the loveliest charm in
maid. ~
I will admit a lass may be well-bred, yet sans a pedigree,
And that she is no rara avis, in the homes of Old Countree;
* 'lnner class girls are mostly gentlewomen, and are not included in the satire. Working
class tone and style pravails. Everything depends on the point of view, mine-a fish out of
water.-— The Author.


urn pa f rents to whom all the light of old and modern days is Greek
WiH aot . mature daughters into ladies, unless nature’s, by a freak
Miss Gnsette do not be vexed, I give you a wee bit of my mind
I he truth is better far than blarney, tho’ a little short of kind
Chips of a gentle old stock, do not “ keep company ” like a clown-
lut that in your cigarette and smoke it, to sooth*the sullen frown.’ O
our conceit is quite insufferable, what boors your men must be 1
New chums are not “shook” on you, when conversing wkh due courtesy
styir n manners of a countess, aye, no? have you got her
‘ Lydies ’ bred on kitchen floors, have not belair like those on velvet-pile
M tarry 7 g a ° Ce at yOU ’ admire ’ sa Y things, in your entourage
But that’s no proof they are fascinated, and want with you to marry
wodd to him mP mt ° 3 ChUm ’ S armS> and deem You’re al? the
Because he looks approvingly, at your pretty face and figure trim
Beaux may be playing with your vanity, and laughing in the sleeve
Love s foraying free-lances, who own no law, unguarded charms reave
Th °beguil?ng fair ~ and sometimes false-and like your sex elsewhlre-
Y ° U pinng ndiS^mentS arC Httle rCCked may be ’ how e ’ er the blarney’s
Travelled wights have met a girl before, may be got a kiss or two
And deem not the acme of perfection, is found in “ sorts ” like you’
Iho evil fortune strips a man of wealth, and brings him to ranks
He does not wed with any forward minx who wants a kiss—no thanks’
He does not want a wench to cook, and cold to you is fond desire
Mesalliance is a shame to blood and name, disgrace unto the sire
' ° U [J the d veii?s Ve Shapdy mould ’ vvhich tells there’s blue-blood
Your converse grates ofttimes, upon the ear refined inflicts rough pains
ZZ • n° W fil° W to wear attire—tho’ you may look well without it:
ou gait is like the cow s, when thro’ turnip fields with puddle grouted
]°V want re fi nerr \ent, wit, and—no, I will not write the cruel word
Alld board ° mate f ° r ° ther than y ° Ur daSS ’ Chief drud £ e for clothes and
At first a toy and then a slave, may be that’s all that you deserve.
The low ideals of your land, will ne’er fire the heart and high-strung
SSSTShnte 06 wor s hle , ss as the thistle-down, gyrating o’er the wold,
raith . who loses may be lucky, and who wins, my word ! may be sold
You flack the charms of grace, of heart, of mind, that doubly arm the
And gild the wearing hand of time, when comes brumal silvering air.
A pretty animal in petticoats, sans spark caught from above
Beauty is not all in wedlock’s joys, for a man grows tired of love
When I eat the lotus on this shore, and forget the girls I’ve seen.
Ihen mv right hand will lose its cunning, and my mind its wit, I ween r
I he wife must be a comrade, intellectual, and of equal caste
Not household drudge, else love, nor e’en its ghost, will never, never
last.
As snow drift on Kiandra’s Heights am I, nor deem you are a prize-
There re fairer far than you, my word ! beneath the European skies ’
The.demoiselles of Gaul are fast, and rather free, and somewhat fond-
lheidomaed IS cb ° Sen Wltb n ‘ cest taste, and with good grace ’tis
Beauteous Italy’s dark eyes are ravishing, a glance binds as a chain
bpain s donnas glide like swans, where Guadalquivir rolls onward to
* the main.
The Germ an frauleens fair, are more given to melting than to freezing
With flaxen ocks and charms galore, a glorious armful for squeezing
English maids are lovelv as the rose, but they’re very cold and tame


Yankee girls are chick, a blend of all, tho’ new-fangled is their fame.
Byron tells us: “ The Virgin Mary is the only maid in Spain ; .
With the Muses’s kind permission, I’ll write that bon-mot o er again.
Elvira begirt with duennas, alone in love’s dreamland may melt.
But Australie as free as the wind, the rapture of Eros has felt.
Sweet Nora Creina is the style for me, the gem of Erin s shore.
I’ll not trouble with the coloured glass, now that manhood s prime is
You are nothing but a commoner, in sooth, veneered more or less. *3
Kind hearts and manners make gentlewomen, not ostentatious dress.
You’re a cheap imitation, like the trade stuff in the market place,
Unlike the low-born maids of olden lands, you’ve not a native grace.
I’ll live my free unfettered life, for why should it and tranquil mind,
For the false and fickle smiles of beauty, e’er haply be resigned.
Gold, gold, that is your only wish, for gold you sell yourself to man,
Faith ' I won’t buy, the glacier’s snows are safer than the frying-pan.
The Trust Vampire.
Ye are welcome to glut wealth, ye trust-fiends, seasoned with the poor-
man’s moan, , . . . . , , _ _
I would not own it with your avarice, nor chain free thoughts tor a
call it policy, or business, for lucre, Church, or State,
For party, or false patriotism, no, I would not do the thing 1 nate.
The Socialist is close behind your heels, and when your day.is done,
He’ll wield the sceptre you disgrace, for all men hail the rising sun.
Then Want’s grim spectre will not loom ahead, a fell octopus o er
The lives of those who win your tear-stained wealth, for ever, evermore.
Conundrum.
Who are the truest patriots, that e’er on Gallic soil have stood?
The Jesuits —for they left their country for their country s good.
Dreamland.
Alone I dwell in Dreamland, ready refuge in my stormy life.
There escape man’s petty meanness, the lie, the rancour, and the strite.
Aye, a mysticism binds me, be it for good, or be it for ill.
Unfold panoramas of Millennium, without the call of will.
Dreaming in the desert wild, and lonely, where the noet loves to dwell;
Musing by the moonbeams’ mystic glamour, on the weird and wind
Where^the f spirit of the past still lingers, bemoans its passing knell,
There the voice of Nature speaks, in a mother tongue the poets tell.
Then I live in realms of faerv, and Lvdian strains, salute my ear,
Echoing thro’ the distant corridors, and softly falling near.
The Land of Idea, Spirit Land of Mind, is real land to me.
Where men are leal, and women fair and true, a land of chivalry.
Thus lead a double life, with masked front and banal tongue in marts,
Conventional and commonplace, so dear to petty minds and hearts.
For unlike the crowd, I take my ioys from the thunder o er the wold,
* 1. The Bible tells us, Mary, Joseph’s wife, had several children after the birth of Christ.
*2. The protestant lodj-girl is here denoted, “ The gem of Erin s shore. .. is
* 3. The point ol the satire is-the working-class girl and lower middle class» girl■ (there »
no real distinction) think themselves in every respect the equals of the British aristocrac. .
De facto they are on a level with the same classes in England, their egregious conceit and
ignorance of the world’s ways excepted.


Fro gowT iraWn Pa ' ml ' mgS in thc in P"ples, fireens, and tints of
3SSS
Fr h L St t r i zf^g d K t L n s K i t Tiii? whTle 1 T*. ic * ,oom u " fold i
‘he eagle in its flight.
A Fragment.
Och share! ’tis an illigant life his reverence leads,
With a pound in his pocket to spend when he needs
Wh Q ? 1 t V if rS i 110n ?’ and kls . sin £ s ar >d courtings galore: ’
What the duce . can a priest, or a layman, want more ?
Barabbas and Company.*
SSaSwr"-
?t '.3Sl""'“ 4=a?r tew sot
And did not see much harm in having, just a wee bit of a larh
S?f TItIsF a r r U e C^ver h miLdf iled **
A brute of n a C hSand’wMlTneS nSL^Cupitf’."^!- 8 na , u * hi V slip.
* Personal experiences of two London publishers and other* ■ r u a
business contained such men. Chatterton was swindled onto/ 1 had > no u,ea an honourable
s ‘°' en , Reading this exposure, made others attempt the same L™ m °SS’ but . mine w a*
The Author. c n P I ine same game—once bitten, twice shv.—


The whole truth won’t do at any price, writers garbled webs ™
Pooish Silent Sapper must have free hand, to hoodwink and deceive.
Wit and as yours, is too telling, when tis understood,
<*der
Modern curb wit, and write to requirements of the trade.
T ehnnrtht to ooe the Gates of Fame with golden key, so sent some ore,
Jt’cr'ilermt'such mLi n wS e 'rog U ue S 0h if.hTUght-fingered
Is re-incarnate on this earth you must be in case-
Av when the touchstone was applied—oft, oft in life this is th
The Sinner and the Saint were of a Piece, and bo h were gquM base.
'Tga, Wplrhpr shelters in a cove, hard by rJroaa lsis Dusy ouct ,
Where authors who don’t know the tricks of trade, with vampire wings
L-iKSrJ srir«a“si"
A Romish Rite.
Donna Julia’s eyes.
The genus is extinct as the moa, the time was long g , show.
£ andjneady dressed;
T.% da^'^o^etuf yli are^Me fig Mary,
s? “ &
« n H a f P Fa a .h e l ett hos can"? £&*££ not understand,
Why Vute'epthTKiy" of Heaven, P and hold Roman thunder m your
.< By” worshipping the good Saint Priapus with me for ajittle time,*
Tofree a~ul f™/-® mysterious rite”
“ gquoth he, ' to tend tte knee, when falls pluton.an shades
Wha*/ foUowed raconteur sayeth not, for I£<*££?*•
Mv Muse is a very modest n \ r ;’;| h \*“, h ' fi 'i“"," b ush and downcast
Save, Miss Innocence remarked, with a teu-iaie uiu&u
•• TSt'slint Priapus was the sweetest of all the choir in Paradise.”
. Romish “saints” are the pagan gods re-named, I use the old one.-Ta* Author.


The Confessional.
A crucial test of strength, or weakness, a tantalizing hour,
When the Old Serpent coils around priests’ hearts, and grips them in
his power. &
1 hou art so near, and yet so far,” the weakling thinks about the
lass,
For honour’s law begirds the woman, with a triple wall of brass—
Oft broken by the priests. Like other men, they pluck forbidden fruit,
And there are Eves enough beguiling e’er, who e’en a saint can suit.
The Black Nightingale.
A Legend of Epping, England.
In romantic days of chivalry, near Epping Forest dwelt,
A maid so beautiful, her blue eyes the hardest hearts could melt
Her lover was a farmer with shoulders square, and spruce and tall,
Who leased a tidy bit of land, not so far from Old Copt Hall,
lhe usual sort of wooing hap’d, of which nothing need be said;
She plighted yes, then the banns were called, they in due time were
wed.
’Twas merry, until appeared a cloud no larger than a priest
A mere chance acquaintance that they met, while at a civic feast.
Upon the dame he looked with evil-eye, Rome’s foul brand of vice
And valued not his obligations, at half-a-dozen pice;
Holding a flask of holy-water, not so good as whisky
Playing well his cards, found the dame was somewhat ‘fond and frisky
Weeks passed pleasantly, at evening chimes oft hailed a welcome guest;
So crawled the Viper round, spreading venom fouler than the pest.
Ihe dame, at first mdignant, denied, then changed her mind, relented
And planned the time and opportunity, as she had consented*
hor women are a bag of tricks, some of them can trick the Devil,
But in the end, by all accounts, he most always comes off level.
Quoth the wench unto her spouse: “So very ill, my love I feel
O, alas! I am fading away to the Land o’ the Leal.
Upon a couch plaoed on the balcony, let me rest to night
And listen to the nightingale, by the paly moonbeams’ light*
For my blood is all on fire, and my life it is in peril—
Ah! what a lovely song!”—as in the bush there sang a merle.
Bull nightingale ** blowed, you goose,” replied the biuff John
Then he filled a tankard with brown-stout, and at it took a pull.
Let me listen to sweet philomel, my darling spouse, so dear
for I feel faint and feeble, and fear my end is very near ”
“Well! you are too precious far to lose so let be as you say.”
Like a wise man he gave in, for wives most always have their way
that same night, all tired with honest toil, his daily labour o’er
Ihe husband went to his bed alone, and had a quiet snore
On the balcony the lady lay, and hearkened to her bird:
T heard and SpOUSe awoke ’ and thought burglars’ footsteps
“What noise is that I hear?” quoth he, “my darling, are you sick
or nale r
“I’m in extasy,” quoth she, “at the singing of the nightingale.”
He looking through the sashes saw—ah ! enough to blast his sight:
then flung them up, and springing out-just in time to miss the wight.
Womans vows like snow prints fade, for shame! there by the neeo
of day, J , M
Saw the priest skiddaddle, clad in most unclerical array
The farmer was a quiet man, tho’ his fist could fell the ox
And .his native wit oft hit as hard, as Heenan’s hardest knocks!


Picking up a garment, not the dame’s, quoth he, ”
“ My love, your Black Nightingale has left his tail feathers
* * * * *
The sequel of this sad legend, it quite grieves "1?
For the priest ne’er entered Purgatory, but went straight to Hell.
Unconfessed, unjumboed, unkokolorumed, his doom was sealed.
For one who perished in his sinning, no bells requiem pealed.
Flying thro’ the farmyard, his lingerie gating on the brwa.
The great mastiff Nero rushed astern, the fleshy part to ..
While the priest to shake him off was trying—-an unequal fig
In front came the bull-dog Towzer, and gripped hard and very tig t.
The priest kicked, the dogs bit, Towzer held on L l "* W £lind ’
Whilst Nero taking mean advantage, was breakfasting behind.
What a change, from the lady’s arms, to the ban-dogs bloody laws,
With a fearful orospect of a grave within their hungry maws.
Pity 1 theories', ’pdor'chap, he* suffered <1- the Idsh-toothache bad*
And going to his doctoress to cure, by Towzer he was h a •
Pitv oitv the priest, he was naughtv, but then, tis not the fashio , .
For his craft to bide by honour’s laws, and keep bridles on the passi° n *
The holy men when they’re sworn in, ought to an operation,
Which would put an end for aye, to anti-pious meditation.
The Black Nightingale was doomed, for the dogs were killing in t
And 1 all the fat they could not eat, would very soon be in the fire.
A cutting of Saint Peter’s toe-nail, left in his vestment s pocket.
Would have saved his life, but in his hurry-skurry he forgot■ it.
He prayed the Virgin, she paid no heed to the mundane ruckshion,
May be, Her Grace approves not of that wicked sm seduction.
He prayed Saint Joseph, but that most proper person would not hear.
Like his namesake, who jilted Mrs. Potiphar—it is clear .
The combat thickens, on, on ye for none will ‘ *J I: r^av’
Now comes the tinker's “ tarriar-dorg, and joins the^ fatal^fray.
His reverence vowed ten thousand candles to Satan, to save nis c y.
His soul was booked, no answer came, the dogs kept pegging hard
not last. No saint in Heaven; no devil in Hell; would save.
“ Serve him right,” the Crowner’s jury said: the sexton dug a grave.
The Pooe is responsible, for he ought to let his clergy wed,
A Perfect cure for aches and dreams, the best authorities have said
Which trouble pious celibates, spoil their prayers and their conscience
AnenTabsence from the arms, of the fond and fair deluding sex.
A bath of snow the onlv thing, and puts those fantasies to flight.
As erst Saint Francis found, if ancient monkish tales are read ar,*ht.
*****
There is a sweet briery lane, where will roses and raspberries grow
Not faJ from Copt Hall, near the house where the tragedy hap d long
shades of the priest, and the dogs, may be met in the midnight
heard barking in fury, and the spook of the priest to
For The 3 ghosts of lost sinners, must walk eons in the scenes of their
Invisible to all who’re bound in the net of those material times.
Ere men’s senses were blunted in. towns, the cheeks of the listeners
As wfldT wfld’on the night winds were wafted, the cries of the Blade
Nightingale.
• Irish toothache—la grande passion.


Cassandraesque.
Erewhile England and opinion both were free,
Viewless chains now bind the limbs of liberty.
The priest, and sweet sixteen, the standards for the mind;
Our limbs are being numbed, for foreign foe to bind.
* *■ * 4E- *
Hush it up! hush it up! and in a sand-hole stick the head,
“ ° ur c° untr Y right or wrong,” John Bull the Jesuit has said.
Ihe Silent Sapper undermines the principles, as well as power,
Decadent proves the man behind the gun, when comes the fatal hour.
’Tis not so clear we own the best machines, tools cannot win the belt,
E’en granted: and the man of grit, ne’er to the popish toe has knelt.
* * * * *
I’ve read, “ the Boers are- dirty dogs, low down, despicable and vile
Yet, one Boer could fight five Britons—then what are natives of our
Isle ?
1 he best man beats at evensj but five to one is rather odds too long;
I’ve never heard such heroes praised, in troubadour or bardic song.
Iwo hundred million sovereigns squandered—l must call a spade ' a
spade—
Selling the lion’s skin before ’tis off, is not the best of trade.
An Empire s force to smash a gnat, rolled up like Lars Porsena’s men,
hrom snow Hnd, and from torrid plain, from fertile field, and mountain
glen.
Arithmetic is out of date, heroic ’tis to kill a fly,
Amid Mafeking imbecilities, was heard the banshee’s cry.
As fell Leonidas’ immortal corps, some thousands, burghers gray,
And beardless youths, and e’en the women died upon the field ay ay
Overwhelmed by a locust flight they fell, crushed by incessant rack,
When the Devil made the land his prey, with “ God’s English ” at his
back.
Ihe protestant destroyed the protestant, on looked Rome in hu<*e
delight;
war was engineered by Jesuits, prestige vanished in the fight.
The lone widows burned out of home, unto their orphaned children
tell:—
“For freedom on the field of fame, their fathers fiercely fighting fell.
How Cronje broke -the British on his ranks, and Spion Kop was cleared;
lii guarded phrase, of deeds of infamy, defenseless women feared.
Tug£l;k’s stream incarnadine, with blood of vanquished foes was dyed,
When Botha hurled his leaden hail, from vantage on the mountain side'
Altho’ but twenty hundred strong, the Boers foiled Buller’s thousand
score;
A deed scarce matched on Clio’s page, since Marathon was fought of
yore.
Of Sanna’s Post, and Olivier, who led at Stormberg’s victory;
When fleeting fortune smiled upon their arms, Ons Land they dreamed
to free.
How when all hope had fled, for years renowned de Wet and de la Rey
With mobile horse swept round the veldt, and kept the rooineks at bay’
Some died upon the gallows-tree, there is no nobler field of fame,
For one who falls for freedom’s right, may thus immortalize a name.
Aye from the blood of martyred heroes, spring the bays of liberty,
As from ashes round the stake, grew the right to own a conscience free.
Tis ever from the blood-soaked battle-field, that freedom’s laurels
spring,
Yet, yet, their sons will wear that crest, when glaives upon the cuirass
ring.
1 hen let Britannia o’er the tear, the blood-soaked conquered grave-
yards glide,
See the prison-camps, where twelve-thousand babies and her prestige
died.


There Boer women were half starved, while their children died from
unfit bread, ,
A scheme to crush the spirits of the burghers, who scorned mortal
dread. . .
What e’er the merits of the quarrel be, let jurists quibbles pelt,
’Twas worthy of the Rouen Stake, that Moloch’s blow below the belt.
How when like Wallace erst, their chiefs were done to death by felony,
De la Rey victorious, repaid the rooineks with chivalry.”
Then they will take the children to God’s blouse, upon the altar swear—
When grown to man’s estate, Harmodius’ dauntless precedent to dare.
Kyrie Eleyson! on poor victims of self-righteous pharisee.
Doomed is the march of an empire, that walks on the hearts of the free.
“ Matchless is the gallant fight,” records the Muse in deathless story,
“ Since the Persian horde fled from the field, of freedom and of glory.
This is the world’s verdict on the war, for it crowns the Boers with
bays, . , „ . T • ,
Glory rests not with the Despot King, it lies with Leonidas.
*****
“The Boers despise their conquerors,” write Britons who’ve been
thro’ the war; ,
Sicilian Vespers may come again, when declines the lslemen s star.
They’ve shame and slaughter to avenge, and many thousand deeds of
wrong. ,
We’ve lost our prestige, and our money, and the spoil not worth a song.
Twelve thousand babies done to death, a glorious deed of high renown,
I would not have their blood upon my hands, to wear a royal crown.
The Avenging Sword has fallen on the fell first cause, one by one,
The Living-Deadman sees his deed's of hell and tyranny undone. _
Things are just as bad in other lands. Germans seize Alsace-Lorraine.
The Poles have fought a losing fight, to break the Russians’ galling
Austria is a polyglot, bound loosely by a band of failing swords.
The Frenchman o’er the Arab and Hova, sway the suzerain lords.
The Dons have lost the lovely lands, they could not rule with equity.
Holland in th’ East, ean scarcely claim to be the friend of liberty.
Belgium shelters in the skirts of Freedom, by right of guarantee,
Yet, her monarch in the Congo, is but a glorified Legree. *
Fair Italy but lately free, scarce flung the tyrants from her shore,
Attempts to chain the Ethiop, but Negus knocked the bully o er.
Puissant Yankee Doodle joins the rout, t’annex the Philippines.
While nasent nations send their forces forth, to grip the Iransvaal
mines. , , . ~, . ~
Those pots are unanimous, “ the British kettle is brutal black;
The kettle swears, “ it scalds humanely, and holds patents tor the
knack.t
That Saint Thomas Atkins is a Galahad, guiltless of all crimes.
Burning houses, the surest way to civilize the Boerish mimes,
Who ape the Christian white man only, and are de facto Kaffirs;
All dark places its by right divine, so Britons must be gaffers.
That Saint Atkins is a missionary—faith! I don’t mean to joke—
And has been sent to propagate the Gospel—’mongst the female folk.t
He resists temptations of Dutch sirens, when on his sentry goes,
As whilom Saint Dunstan, when fast he gripped the Devil by the nose.
‘ Come, my love,’ the Boerish wanton cried, ‘ Come let us rove
And we’ll taste the rapturous delights, of love amongst the heather.
• Oh! no!’ the holy man replied, ‘ I ne’er kissed a girl in my life;
Avaunt! thou temptress of my soul! avaunt! thee, Satan s warbling
That wicked Boers can shoot with longbow, much better than with rifle;
*1 The late King. Written in 1904.
*2 From the English Tory newspapers in total.


Thl ? ft . h K K .t ttle , } t , ells tbe truth ”- tho ’ this detail is a trifle.
land for gold; ’ W “* 35 tW base forei £ ners . who steal
We annex to civilize, and marts for British commerce to unfold:
British interests will justify the means, “ our country right or wrong ”•
P receden t (< f° r future foes, when comes Nemesis’ hour along
high’” An ° rphans curse can dra £ to Hel] , a spirit from on
« 3 damaed one , has ,to rue, he ever raised the widow’s sigh.
T other S 3dm ° St ’ the roorback runs - one he proves the
Tvvas a way they had in the army, discomfiture to smother.
. and the tactics of the foe, so of course ’twas true—“ they fled ”
The hea S d a got ° ff SCOt ' free ’ while low ‘hey laid a Briton’s
Ann ' tW3S a^ avat .ing, that duckey would not come and be killed,
hat , l n ev ?fy skirmish, by long shots, the rooineks were milled.
Sudan style suits Atkins—die on bayonet, then hie to houris’ arms-
wPtn Ch3r€ f more , sati shed, with less etherial charms,
lwas hard to plod on foot about the veldt, and bv the foe he hit
And not get one solitary chance, the sly sniping to spit ’
So Britons win Cadmean victories, and oft the dead are slain
By zeroes after numerals, the lists of killed and captured gain-
A woman counts for fifty men, and a baby half a dozenf ’
T a™ ’f h^en^° r fu° ‘if cablegrams, poor tax payers to cozen.
L don 1 ,m P u^n the boodler s veracity, nor suggest he lied
BU died? 006 SniP6r bU the dUSt ’ he wired—'‘one thousand foemen
R € f n ?k y *. P^Mi^° unt Everest on Andes, and swamp them o’er with blood
But that will never make a right of wrong, e’en rolling as The Flood’
AnH i z h h a , V? f ° n n L , and again ’ by dint of clever Policy;
A nn d > H lf eft we alone ’ Wlll bide by their lip-loyalty—
Wh h J/o St T g enou gh to cut the painter, in the long future’s gray
Thl n‘ llon frgoments to use, who’ll dare to say them nay!
The British Oak will shed its leaves, it bends to popish gale with fear
"S* b€ “1 3g \ S 7,<V° C °T’ hu } lowers the cataclysm near. ’
r °,. sceptre shall depart from Judah, “descendant of Lost Tribe ”
Cfi t ’scdbe* an ’ SaXOn ’ Dane ’ and Norman, “true Israelites,” saith the
And the Stone of Destiny shall pass, with o’ermastering Rollo’s Race
Binder of the faggots—purblind democrats are thirsting to efface
For sooth to s a y, Gasbag Blowhard Brummagem, M.P. for that ilk,
Will lack the glamour of the past, tho’ robed in presidential silk
Thi°niln^ ay r 3 y if oU a d the 7 hrone - but to save their skins and trade
The painters slip when danger lowers, no magnet is the Brummy Blade
] b l nf im Achl11 ?,? ma Y. yet be f° und upon the Indian border^
, n o alliance will avail, when destiny decrees the order
bmpire that relies for sway, uoon loyalty of conquered race,
§ ° f S3 a d ’ f Sayi " g dark> on time ’ s P ast P a £ es we can trace
ITat nnf ff eSlde a° il®? 0 * 18 - allottin 2 youth ' manhood, and old age!
[J uT favoured shall live aye, can’t be inferred from history’s
As Holland was, so England is, as Holland is, so she will be
Hor Rome s dry-rot is sapping, and to Baal a bending low the knee
DarWw tS th r€ £? untin £ chickens in a dogged undertone;
D thmne Km * m3Y th3nk the P rotestants - not popedom, for his
“ British power is founded on the Bible,” said England’s noblest queen
vm, S ? me ° ne Said lt: for her, how e’er that be, ’twas well said I ween *
WHa way rCStS !t n ° W? g ° ld 3nd tregties - Doth it hold commanding
Ere Darwin and the Higher Critics, wrote its feet of rock awav ?
The Coumree° W mUSt gU3rd the hearth, and muster round the Old


L hr
WWt .
1
While Yankee and the Jap. supreme abroad, now rule the far off sea.
The men who fear the anger of the priest, to secret threaten mgs yie ,
Are not the sturdy stuff to conquer, on sea, or homeland battleheiu.
Six and Utmmthf thousand erst, sufficed to win Waterloo s attray,
Now lacs four of British troops, hardly beat the tiny Boer array.
They fear no cricket-ball, ’tis true, are valiant in the football tight,
But fright-fever seizes, when hissing bolt comes filled with melinite.
’Tis also verity, tho’ the scribes the hero’s weakness smothers,
That kissing Boer girls is better fun, than fighting with their brothers.
“’Tis vain to plead for peace to live and thrive, and keep the spoil erst
For empire builded by the dauntless brand, must be by steel maintained.
To back a friend and whop a foe, was then the only a PP r ° v^
To bend to bloody Rome, and flout his friend, now doth tne Englishman.
He courts the Harlot of the Seven Hills, and he worships in her halls.
So shames his martyred sainted sires, while all in vain the prophet cal s.
The proudest give their daughters to the Beast, that prostitutes the mind;
The Hell-God’s chiefest tool on earth; so thus dark destiny doth blind.
•Crawlings to her by writers of the day, are ominous features;
The truth suppressing and suggesting falsehood, priests pliant creatures.
Hacket holds the helm, traitor aye, as in the days of long ago.
And anchorless the fated ship drifts on, to reef of Roman Woe.
Go look around, where’er you list, in many guises Wlll t f se en „
The man I name—“ Hacket of Dungarvan, who steered the Algerine.
For Jesuits work in the dark, and undermine the Britisn sway,
A little at a time, ’till ancient heritage is swept away.
The cause of the unrest in India, that defeats the British might.
Is plain enough to eyes that see, the same old plot—l
Atropos whets her shears, whirring in welkin of the Isle of Sorrow,
And where the fellah toils on banks of Nile, and dreams of things to-
In jungle o where the ryot curses deep, and plots his land to free;
And in the hammer’s ring on mail-clad ships, along the Northern Sea.
Adamastor wins by policy, wider lordships than he lost,
By gammon smooth and diamond gifts, of conquered sway there s left
TheSnow°Dame’s foreign blend, when ripe the time, elects to live alone.
Some are loyal in the Great Isle, some hostile, the rest as a stone.
So long as loyalty doth pay the Colonies, twill hold the hold.
When pride of place on sea doth pass away, to exigence, twill yield.
Who are too rich, too slothful, or too free, to train in wars black art,
Will find when strikes the fatal hour, they lack the skill as well as
The price of empire must be paid in blood, as well as paid in gold'
Eirenicons, unless backed by force, will not for along
Despite diplomacy and martial front, there opes the destined gate,
All nations must negotiate, when falls inexorable iat°
Tidbinbilla Musings.
When the ruby beams of morning, wake the lory from the nest,
Lighting up the glens of Tidbinbilla, wooded to the crest;
Aurora’s opal splendour, far flashing in the sapphire sky,
Apace rolls Phoebus on, then, the mystic muse I may descry.
She seldom strays on crowded ways, ’mongst the false throng s
But ™ in the bosky dell, with nature’s gramarye.
Or long drawn shades of evening, when Sol appears to sink to rest,
Emblem of all joyful hours— appears— we ne’er are truly blest.
Sinking thro’ the boundless ether, to Avalon s faerie isle, #
Where spirits of the just abide aye, white souls unstained with guile,
i troops under Wellington at Waterloo.
* there were uuimun l.h- r
3front) fyooo /Z^C^iu)


To astral orbs, hight after gods ,to whom Hellas’ heroes knelt
Orion celestial traveller, begirt with spangling belt ’
Volan^thro^fhe 3 ? f he ° f the bound^d earthly air,
volant thro the profound depths, to seek a kindred soirit tW*
aKSffii
9 r ? pir , lts f from the Mist, incarnate transient in a clog’ k ’
OMw/T protoplasm, offspring erst of nature’s thin?
Oh ! better far our fathers’ faith, “ simply to the Cross I clinT”’
I x„ a x w d^r s - post-
-*7 carpmg scribes, who hate to hear Aristides stvled * Thp Tncf ’
Maelstrom is a myth, its wavelets calm as e’er a barque rSe on
The seething, swirling chaldron, as false as fabled Poster Tohn ’
Illusions vanish as we live, fairy fields in which we dwel/
Profr S «r2 o£ n ? W re ’ sinc u e erst 1 roamed a hunter on the veldt
Voyaged*^ from a siar i to > star^r o t^|sTO I J^ | W tj ) *^iQgj^ s s^ n ounce.
And whLSTy fl!ft e T a U f 8 "I 11 inC !" S m ° re " tess ;
Whili^^u^g^h^the C^id^ t ttehnin(^ln t finity n can^rciur^^ a^Sa,K * our
How many worlds in Orion's Belt, and explored Sa Ws rin«s-
Hints rutla^rSri£££
The punch was extra strong that night Buttons lot- tMc f f t
A papist civil-servant who ne’er sold*secrets for bribe ° Ut *
He is dead, the only honest man in all that [udas tribe ° ’
F J f S the ,P rice > woe to him who will not tell
Knows tlkfntZ^ZV^
hrnn v, 0t °T CO PP er - cen time, at saying o’ Inis’ prayers'
on is burning in the sun, he found some in a rav of Hcfht-
But st^’ h° an S ii vlarl f fi , n d a Ium P of coal, in night’
as
™j ™
Tas 5£
The" earth^
So circle-sailing is^o^°thin
I hre musing ’mongst the astral gems, that dik the vault 1
T,strange despots don’t annex them, they’d find th#


Science seems a sorry substitute, for faith in life on High,
Perverted intellect a bane, bars the owner from the sky.
The ant climbs up a sapling pine, to survey the universe,
Thinks he sees all things far better, than his kinsfolk in the grass.
******
Ah ! the world is changing, changing, since I remember long ago,
Yet men are not a whit the better, lovely woman yet pseudo.
Still we have oppression’s wrongs, bitter tears, starvation’s hollow
groan,
As the orb keeps rolling, rolling tireless to darksome great Unknown.
We’re rolling onward unto Aries, thro’ infinity we’re hurled,
Attended by a satellite, erst the basis of a vanished world.
We are rolling with the sun and system, onward thro’ the gulf of time.
(How can astronomers be infidels, contemplating the sublime).
Headlong to the Incommensurable, veiled from the eyes of men,
Where roll terrific suns of monster systems, beyond solar ken.
There the gaseous envelope we breathe, in caloric will absorb,
Earth roll a barren satellite, revolving round some giant orb.
To range the rays of Sirius, would melt solid porphyry to gas,
And who’ll dare say the Omnipotent, will ne’er bring such fate to pass.
Our doom, all mortal life shall perish, Adam’s race shall pass away,
But it may be countless eons yet, ere man’s grass shall be as hay.
Then, then, and only then, shall sorrow cease, when fails all mortal
breath,
And avenging Time shall wrest the dart, from the dying hand of Death.
Mind can grasp stupendous wonders, and scour throughout infinity,
Yet plague fleas kill it, as they kill a rat, the doom of sin we dree.
Others hold, the sun will burn out, and glacial cold destroy the earth,
Mastodons in ice being proof, that present life is of recent birth.
For flesh would never keep quite fresh and raw, for thousand eons o’er,
And pachyderms hold the shape, that in pre-Adamic times they wore.
An orb unknown and dark, may roll into the system of the sun,
And like the Piper Pied of Hamelin, draw earth unto destruction.
Some savants grubbing in the East, unearth a cache of crockery,
Aver the marks thereon, prove clear, the Bible is a mockery;
Those may believe the wondrous tale who list, I hold it idle prate
To say, hieroglyphs upon a shard, can fix an ancient date.
Potsherds are no more infallible, than is “ our Lord God the Pope
Creation’s epoch is adristic, speculation has fair scope.
Throughout the arcana of nature, man’s unfettered wit may range,
Since Rome’s dark incubus evanished, we may hail all worthy change.
Great discoveries are coming, secrets of this wondrous world’s plan;
And in appointed time, the Godhead may again reveal to man.
Yet we regret our early fancies, dreams and hopes that ne’er would form,
E’en won, but gifts of faery, like the gage high hanging in the storm.
One vear of youth, when the hot blood surged wildly in conflicting tides,
Worth cycles of age vespertine, tho’ blest and serenely it glides,
Then thro’ the beautiful exterior, we see th’ ashes at the core,
And don’t deign to stoop and gather, the fruit upon the Dead-Sea shore.
There are some who tritely prose, impassive front unto the world show,
None can tell the wild passions, that are wrecking the sad heart below;
Evanished is the salt of life, all leafless looms the dreary void,
Yet, yet, those feelings will not cease, they rage, they seethe, tho’
unemployed.
Day by day the mask is worn, they must not let the world see their
hearts,
So banal prate like blatant crowd, that dupe of tricksters’cunning arts.
No kindred spirits have such secret souls, a darkling destiny,
Kismet, allotted ages lonely live, life’s strange, weird epopee.
Tho’ wealth may seeming gild the hours, when jocund parasites sur-
round,
Dire poverty will prove a test—then man is viler than the hound.


fleeting friendship flies afar, as life’s stormy thunder-clouds lower
that lovely nymph, who marches in the ranks of fame, of wealth of
power.
******
The lotus thrives not in. this soil, that elf, nostalgia de la pay, *
Oft haunts the exile in the gloaming hours, in dreams of far away
Soft, soft upon the soughing sighs of eventide, steal shades of long ago,
.Nought else is left but saddening sods, where tangled grass and wild
flowers grow.
The cordied grasp of the loving hand—the hand is gone for ever,
Iho Hope expects to meet again, across the dark Stygian river.
The voice once loved to list at eve, ah! the voice as sweet as nightin-
gales’—
Is still. No welcome home from foreign lands, no heed to traveller’s
tales.
Thus the desert wilds no sorrows have, and the hardest lines no pain
Tho memory strays o’er the long, long years, and leagues of rolling
main.
"1 ho’ I’ve little cause to love thee, Erin, in visions oft I see,
The fields where the steps of my boyhood strayed, by Bandon and bv
Lee,
Listening to. the chimes of Shandon, as they pealed the stream along;
Or angling in the pleasant river, far famed in Spenserian song.
Thrice round the orb I’ve roved since then, and some few honest hearts
have met;
Looked on art and nature in the acme, fair scenes I’ll ne’er forget.
The. tide of vespertine is ebbing, on this uncongenial shore.
Revisit ne’er time-honoured lands, nor brave the dark blue billows more
Rambhng alien ’mongst the gum-trees, I yearn for oak and ash and pine,’
w hilst errant o’er the arid plains, thro’ scorching blast and steely shine,
Recall the snow crowned crag, the grassy glen, the brooklet serpentiner
So darkling runs the rill of destiny, ’tis bootless to repine.
1 pus many an exile thinks, and dreams, when the toil of day is o’er*
Sighs for a glimpse of the Land far awav, that will view him no more.
******
Erewhile the Bible was believed by most, to be God’s Word in fact,
The Star of Man, until by Darwin’s false zoogeny attacked.
Natural selection is a myth, all things revert to common stocks,
Farmers know it, fancier breeders to a tvpe, and masters of all flocks.
When has a donkey evolved into a horse, the long-eared race e’er pass?
Tho’ I have seen a theorist, naturally revert to ass.
Mules don’t breed, they are an outrage and against the laws of nature*
Darwin’s mythology, the maundering of a mind immature.
Who has seen a fiilv. ‘ naturally select ’ an Arab mate ?
Carlyle was right, I always think so when I hear the parrot prate.
Spanish barbs left to roam the wild, produced mustang’s degraded shape,
Ergo, they are fittest. Genus homo could ne’er ascend thro’ ape,
From things that crawl and walk all fours, of animals the most unfit,
Without reason, to cope with ways of elements, and survives by wit*
That is th’ immortal part of man, the gift Divine—how came it there ?
’Tis far more likely, mankind have descended from a single pair,
And branches have, degenerated. For th’ environments have power
To mould the plastic growth, into requirements of the passing hour.
But Darwin is the prophet now, that Scylla of infidelity,
And Holy Writ asserted false, by his theoretic levity.
That is, thrives not for the author. For the lower class immigrant it flourishes, he
lives for what he eats only, oft his very words to me, has little or nothing to regret or to
forget, and is more or less prosperous. The business man is also at home. The upper class
man endures because he must, and is a fish out of water, yet quarrels not with his bread and
cheese, keeping opinions dark and doing in Rome as the Romans; for it is better to live
well here than to starve in England. Bulwer-Lytton wrote : “ Life in Australia is an intellec-
tual suicide.” Up-to-date writers say ditto. The crude ignorant self-sufficiency, amusing afc
first, becomes childish drivel and a bore as years roll on.— The Author.


The agnostic Paine wrote: “ Souls are owned but by a chosen few of
men,”
The way empirics foist their Baals now, gives some colour to his pen.
Across the Narrow Path a Monstrous Shape, Charybdis darkly looms,
There superstition beckons on, the ghoul who feeds in martyrs’ tombs.
A hundred breeds of pigeons left at large, revert unto blue^rock,
Thus, breeds that man —not nature—has evolved, revert to common
stock.
“ Survival of the fittest,” is the mustang ‘ fitter ’ than his sire?
Who roamed Sahara’s arid wilderness, beneath a sky of fire.
I have seen a puny hunch-back, with more brains than fifty grenadiers,
The last will be ‘ naturally selected,’ ere lapse of many years;
The hunch-back’s brains may rule a state, and e’en turn the world up-
side down,
But in wedlock the most modest miss, would prefer a strapping clown.
See, great men’s sons, scarce ever have inherited their father’s wits,
Exceptions here and there to prove the rule, a noted one —the Pitts.
The giant’s son a puny whipster, and the dwarf sires six feet two.
Nature still maintains the media, and each genus distinct issue.
Blue-blood evolves a higher type of man, tho’ some disgrace their class,
Remove environment, and from the race bon ton will surely pass.
The soul and mind the real man, the body but a mask of clay,
Concealing demon upward to a demi-god, deeds alone betray.
We seldom see the inward man, the wayward webbing that he weaves,
The spoken word no inkling gives, and if ’tis trusted but deceives.
The Golden Age was in the primal time, man is sinking to decay;
A doctrine reasoned by philosophers, in the olden classic day,
That’s in physique and moral worth, they intellect’s advance deny;
And are we greater than those men, who raised the piles of Greece on
high ?
Doth “ Dreadnought ” improve on Acropolis, are myths of popish
saint,
More matured than the tales of deities, the pagan writers paint?
We are as far below the ancient Greek, as above the negro,
To-day; I predicate; but few men will allow the thesis so.
******
I must cease my musings, shadows darken on Tidbinbilla’s side,
Whilst Old Father Time aye rolls apace, his eternal tireless tide.
Orion lingers o’er the mountain browfrthe curlew eerie calls;
The welkin wakes to the ringing crash, when the forest giant falls.
Then the dingo howls responsive, death to the fleecy flocks around;
Thro’ the gloom of the forest night, accords unken’d uncanny sound.
The dust-fog darkling o’er the Peak; erst so palled rathe joys of May
we wist;
Wild, wild the night wind’s revelry, while the moon gleams tawny thro’
the mist.
The western blast with its siroc breath, rolls up from the back-blocks
drear,
Where it passeth, it leaveth its mark, on the crops and herbage sere.
Drought holds Damocles’ sabre o’er the land, it falls from time to time,
King Coney gnaws the vitals, root and bark. I’m cornered for a rhyme.
Retort Courteous.
“ Ere Luther lived, where wert thy creed ? ”
Quoth Pat. the Papist, as I lashed.
“ Faith ! that staff is a broken reed—
Where wert thy face before ’twas washed ? ”


Austral Gleanings.
Australia borrows from John Bull, squandering on the road to ruin,
Lord Mammon foists his tools to power, cat’s-paws to filch the public
sequin.
Beggars on horseback, who feather their nests, and long-eared Million
rob,
Failures in trade, who get their living on the political job.
The Bankrupt Fiend is chuckling, as he marks the spendthrifts for his
prey,
They’re drifting to the abyss, unless well steered, failure falls some day.
Ruling politicians, sordid and avaricious spirit sate,
While Bayard works in want, Barabbas robs, and Midas sways the
state.
The ‘ slim ’ Ms.P. are in the Devil’s trades—the liquor and the law;
Scant the honesty about the House, small the wit eked out with jaw.
There are squatters’ henchmen on the benches, first class at rolling logs,
Scratching backs and bribery, and some convicts’ sons in broadcloth togs.
Honorariums they get yearly, and whatever they can steal,
“ Perks ” is the euphonic name—thus those wise men serve their
country’s weal.
There are labour members also, who do nothing laboriously,
They drink and vote with the venal ‘ push,’ acting most judiciously,
The yearly guerdon at elections, is not likely to be risked,
Constituents oft change their minds, and members out of seats are
whisked.
Political Praetorians, who sell their votes to the highest bidder;
’Twas ‘ hard-graft ’ ere, now at Lucullus’ board the sybarites foregather.
They debate—wild-cat statutes—in the bar, drink “ snake-juice ” by the
jorum,
’Till they’re called in, to vote a job, roll a log, or make up a quorum. *
In champagne the Ministers swim, (that’s true) at taxpayers’ expense,
This a recognized perquisite of office, I mean no offence.
The bigger steals are worked thro’ agents, like the Thieves’-kitchen at
the Cape,
A commission on the cash received, enough to make a Croesus gape.
Five thousand for a useless bridge, one million for a useless rail,
Ten thousand pounds are jobbed away, to build their future home—a
jail.
When forced by public clamour, to prosecute a detected thief,
Law officers suppress and scheme, so that their case will come to grief;
The Devil’s-Own is pleading at the bar—with his tongue in his cheek;
While the Master-Swindler in the dock, knows ’tis all a play in Greek,
For a dozen spoken words from him. would send the ministers to quod.
So politicians live, fearing not the Devil, and unknowing God.
A popish leaven is still worse, for it makes the stink rise very high;
The iniquity exceeds my muse, so to paint I will not try.
Some are o’er fond of gallantry, a euphemism for perfidy,
Demos and his pals out-Herod, King Arthur and his chivalry.
They love their neighbour—and his wife—entertain them and play the
host,
The public pay the piper—and the cook—for all the boiled and roast.
“ All-Sorts ” roam at will about the House, sans respect they idly hum;
And ’Arry nods to Bill his mate, who is “ barricking ” for bunkum.
In rhetoric’s maze he flounders and he gropes, with a senseless din,
’Till the hansard staff are drowsing, then spawns at last a sooterkin.
O’Blatherumskite the Boaster, my word ! struts ’neath a silken tile,
Spurs Rosinante furiouslv. whilst windmills rouse ouixotic bile;
He was a “ decent sort ” ’till spoiled by place, the Ministry for Jobs,
* Written years ago. Now, 1910, the Labour Party is respectable, well led, and in office,
or the only opposition, in the States and in the Commonwealth. The Nemesis of Capital and
of Land Monopoly, both largely fraudulent.— The Author.


dfd
But now he cuts his quandom pals of work, when walking with the
nobs.
There are honest men about, but you must seek them with a lantern;
I found an odd one now and then, so this statement is not banterin’.
’I is not on record, that Diogenes succeeded in his search
For “ noblest work of God,” as thro’ Athenian streets his cynic march.
******
If you buy a native at his own appraisement, to dispose again,
You’ll not recover sixpence in the pound, in any mart of men.
Australians have no sense of humour, so high, my word! at this they’ll
kick;
Over sensitive ethos of young people, who just have lit the wick.
Bill Adams beat Napoleon, and “ Australia beat the Boers ” —Oh ! halt!
And all the world besides, at trade, arts, and intellect—pass the salt.
Not that I contemn those cocksure dwellers, by South Pacific’s tide,
They have a fine exterior generally, but there’s little inside.
Finest nurture is looked down on with contempt, and so are good
manners,
They know all things in Heaven and earth, in the world’s ways are
blase flaneurs.
Tho’ their education is the slightest, the Rs. and little more,
Laws they can lay down on every topic, and judge on every shore.
(The attribute of genius, to know all by a subtlety of soul,
Which on wings of thought, can leave the mortal robe, and round the
world roll).
Tho’ never from their country they have toured, yet by an intuition
The new-chum is a flat and green, tho’ he is deep in erudition.
He may rank with beaux esprits, versed in arcana the throng don’t ken;
Have roved the world o’er, and have analysed the oolicy of men;
Sat at Nestor’s feet awhile, imbibed the wisdom of greatest sage;
Communed with nature in her strangest moods: and conned the abstruse
page;. 1
His sustained psychic researches, have probed the inwardness of Mind;
And ranged the starry universe, great God given knowledge there to find;
No matter, he’s a flat. Wisdom’s voice sleepeth in the obtuse ear,
What it can’t grasp cannot exist, tho’ seraphs made the matter clear.
This sketch depicts the man we meet in general, not good society,
In the townships and the bush, which most it is the exile’s fate to see.
’Tis fair comment on writ and word, noted travelling round the land;
And as I have no fish to fry, on truth and fact I take my stand.
******
The Colonel is a useful man in Sydney trade, and in the field,
Surrendering to ladies’ smiles; or to the Boers—so heroes yield.
Then brag tarnation tall, about “ how fought they with renowned de
Wett,
Five thousand Boers—in buckram—fled, his star of victory has set.
They’d not yield to any foes on earth, not they.” But it seems they did.
By cunning misuse of language, the truth about a fight is hid.
Sings the native bard: “ Full horbed with Hingland hin heternal glory.”
The’ orthoepy is true. A warrior told me the following story.
“ The fight is lost,” said Bobs, “ England’s glory fades with th’ expiring
ray,
The flag that braved a thousand years, won’t wave on high another day.
Are the Sydney Lancers on the battlefield? th’ only hope now left,
If those heroes of a hundred fights have fled I’m, indeed, bereft.”
* Those charges are copied from Sydney newspapers, each party calls the other — black,
and their own members —angels in trousers.
“ In sooth 1 I know not how the truth may be,
I tell the tale as it was told to me.”— Scott.
The doctrine of probablism may solve the enigma.— The Author.


“We are here, my Lord,” quoth ’Arry Smith, “ and every man is in
the ranks.”
“ The Empire is saved,” said Bobs, “ Colonel ’Airy, accept Britannia’s
'• thanks.”
Quoth the learned native wight, to the “ higgorrant new-chum bloke ”
the Bard,
That’s I, his “ hestimate of my liabilities,” by his standard.
“ Harmonium is a hexilent cure, for bites o’ them varmint snakes.
(Politeness forbade a laugh, but I could not help internal quakes.)
Not the pie-han-er for the music, but what doctors keep in bottles.”
Anglice—Ammon’s alkali, oft used as lotion for sore throttles.
While the billy boiled, round the camp-fire we travellers rested prone,
And wild winds swept thro’ the gum-trees’ leaves, with a sad, sad hollow
moan.
“ Hi will buy a harriborse, ” quoth Cornstalk, “ the next time Hi goes to
Sydney.”
“ Is that anything to eat,” quizzed I, “ devilled drumstick or a kidney ? ”
“ Halfy, this ’ere New-chum can’t tell harriborses from mutton chops.”
“ Say 1 Arab horse,’ to suit his ignorance, ’’while quick the eyelid drops.
Thus, day by day improves my played out Old Country education,
Almost to the matchless eminence, of great Horsetrailyer’s nation.
* * * * * *
The tender-foot when westering, old settlers help him on the way;
But Austral’s new-chum must beware, for traps to “ have ” him most
will lay;
They’ll trick him o’er a petty deal, my word! and think they’re very
smart,
For this euphemism for roguery, passes current in each mart.
From my experience in all lands, none but those who are over fond,
Will trust Modern Man, sans strong test, upon his promise, oath, or
bond.
His word is a mirage of truth, deceitful escobarderie;
His oath is like the septic spume, on Asphaltite’s slimy sea;
His bond -worthless as a rope of sand, false woman’s vows, what you
will,
I have one for three thousand pounds, ’twould not defray a tinker’s bill.
Verily, you can’t trust his ready cash, some snare it may conceal;
Nor can you trust his feed advice, for that’s inspired by Belial.
He measures worth by gold—the Carthagenian of the vilest age—
The only God he trusts—since Clio wrote the title on her page.
Plutocrats set tone and style, begirt by paltry parasitic clan,
And lesser folk all ape the Gold-God-Lords, ruralist and oppidan.
There’s little beauty in this arid land, except along the coast,
The mountains have scant character, and bush and plains can lesser
boast.
Here twines no woodbine in sequestered glade, no bluebell in the glen,
No ruined tower, no battlefield, no tales of Eld and knightly men.
No fairy dell, no ivied wall, no legends of passed chivalry,
For the mellowing touch of time, the annals doth not glorify.
No baron bold and ladye fair, no palmer from the Holy Land,
No haunted house where ghastly spectre walks, and stoutest hearts
unman’d.
No thrush nor linnet in the underwood, no bullfinch in the brakes,
But, (have a care when round you roam), there harbour black and
tiger snakes.
No laverock warbles wild on high, like echoes of an angel’s song;
I miss the watch of philomels, when Cynthia queens the starry throng.
No blackbird thrills melodious note, fit music for the poet’s ear;
All is garish and monotonous, to artistic sense most drear.
No Christmas round a 9ea-coal fire, and no kiss ’neath the mistletoe;
I miss the coral of the holly’s fruit, the blue-black of the sloe.
No martyr’s grave; no hero’s tomb; no famous deeds inspire the lyre,


No man can point with pride to ancient times, and exploits of h •
The moonbeams shimmer thro’ no ruined halls, gleam on no daissic: held.
Where echo waked to the clash of spears, when knights in the saddle
Ah !*no footsteps of sublime departed, to mark where worth had been.
The corridors of Eld were tenantless, high theme the bard can t glean.
No gnarled oak, no gloomy fir, no laurel, gorse, and no hawthorn sweet.
Where’er you roam the bush, the everlasting eucalyptus meet.
Brooks are often dry or brack; sans emerald is the swarthy mead,
For fell AEolus’ fiery furnace blast, doth shrivel as a gleed. ,
Discordant cries pervade the wild, no song bird flits in the greenwood-
Yet still’there is a charm in those solitudes— untrammelled liberty.
Here smug faced Grundy hag rules not with vague J^ 1 f fi thonty ’
Restraining men from doing as they wish, being altogether ,
So I pledge the Bush, the wild, wild Bush, aye a life in the bush for me !
Where I can do as I list to shift, no thrall of dull Propriety.
The women show a want of breeding I like blood in dameand^hors se,
Tho’ they are pretty and engaging, and tis not that they are coarse.
They lack th’ ineffable, by which we know a lady at
So marked in daughters of the ancient lines, who bore the knightly lance.
Stand Together.
Stand together, Christian champions, ’gainst the accursed fiends of
Guard°weil the freedom erstwhile won, the sacredness of thought and
Stand°together, sons of martyrs, and let us glory in that name,
A noble heritage, all men of worth, ought rather die than shame.
Stand together, sons of heroes, and let the brood reptihan feel
We’ll ne’er barter for their lucre, proud freedom won with blood and
Stand together, men of Ulster, for we will rather die than yield.
The birth-right which our fathers won, upon the Boyne s immortal
field *
When the sword was wrested from the Jesuits, Belial’s bloody brood.
And bravely banded brothers of the Faith, the tyrant s might
Stand together, Protestants, what recks trifles which our creeds divide .
Shoulder to shoulder as the brave who fought in freedom s fight and
StancUogether, Orange watchmen, ’gainst cunning foes’ insidious sap,
Hurled from the battlements, the miner’s pick annuls the sword s mis-
Come? P stand together, sons of Christ, ne’er sell your soul for woman s
The S popish maid, perdition’s lure, _ malignant as Lorelei’s wile.
Stand together ’gainst the Ritualist, Rome s tool lurks in the fo ,
His soul is pawned unto the Pope, his conscience cast in hel -craft mould.
The fool of the family has got ordained, and prinks up like a girl.
The doctrines give a base to sport the clothes. So stands the truth in
Stand together, every freeman, all nathless how ye bend the knee,
March forward, in the righteous cause, on this all noble hearts agree.
Stand together ’gainst the common foe, stand together side by. side.
The only way to hold our own, and turn the torrent’s sweeping tide.
Stand together, sons of Britons, ye colonists in varied climes,
Ne’er sell your conscience for their custom, else you 11 feel the yoke
betimes.
* The author is descended from an Englishman who distinguished himself at the BatUe
of the Boyne, receiving a grant of land in Cork County as a guerdon from King William.
The ancestor came from Normandy in France.— Burke.


If protestants won’t stand together, they’ll fall singly to the Ghoul,
And when the ranks of Hell grow strong, we’ll feel the lash and
venom foul.
Stand together on a watch tower, the baffled breed of bloody Rome,
Are sapping, sapping, sapping hourly, while ye sleep befooled at home.
Stand together in a phalanx, ranked serried to our mortal foe,
Let no discord, let no traitors, invite or help a felon blow.
Hark! stand together! no surrender! around the ramparts watch and
ward;
Heed the scout who sounds the larum: “ Rome is sapping ’neath the
portal barred.”
Stand together, aid the redoubts, we’re losing many year by year,
Romeward march neglected rankers, who’d hold the fort if help were
near.
Stand together, help the wounded, hard stricken in the battle fray,
Sops flung to wolves but whet their teeth, they’ll flesh them on a future
day.
Stand together, counter-mine them, place petards in their sappers’ path,
Let them feel our swords are steel, hiking the plunge i’ th’ corselet o’
Gath.
Stand together, guard the frontiers, and ring the vedettes watching
round,
Day by day we’re losing numbers, the foe is winning back lost ground.
Stand together, wake from slumber, Damocles’ sword looms o’er the
Boyne,
When Rome wins strength we’ll feel its fangs, the Tiger-Snake will rend
and royne.
Stand together, Sons of Derry, let each man emulate his sire,
r reedom’s flame will burn on your altars, or in seas of blood expire.
Stand together, protestants, ne’er as sheep run frightened o’er the sod;
r ?, mu ? e to curse the P altr V slaves, who cringe and kiss the rod!
Who sell their creed for custom’s good, and curry favour with the foe
By striking at a fellow-craft, ay, strike below the belt foul blow.
Stand together, sons of freedom, ne’er flout the sentinel who calls:—
Our tireless foes are sapping hourly, sapping ’neath Old Derry’s
walls.”
Stand together, men of England, hold fast by freedom hardly won,
Scout this pagan superstition, never be the turncoat poltron.
Forget not the stake and the torture, incarnadine seas martyred gore,
Keep your daughters from priestly defilement, cringe not the Pope’s
vavasor.
Stand together, Sons of Scotland, ne’er vail your bonnets to the priest,
Who harbour with the Scarlet Woman, are base vassals of the Beast.
Stand together for our faith and freedom, ne’er bow necks to Popish
heel;
Thro’ the ranks of Satan with the war-horse, thro’ their black hearts
with the steel.
Aye let us stand by Jesus Christ, whose liegemen ’tis our faith to be
And let us stand by England’s flag, proud mijtress of the surgy sea.
Catching Monkeys.
I have seen the niggers monkeys catch, in lands far o’er the main;
A hole is made in cocoa nut, then within is placed some grain;
In greedy Jackopops a paw, to grasp a flowing measure,
But cannot get it out again, nor part a bit of treasure.
The hunter catches him quite easy, and makes a nice ragout.
Don’t grab more than you can get away with, if you do, you’ll rue


Tidbinbilla Glen.
Hail! all hail! Australia, freedom’s home, the land of liberty!
There is room for all who fly from wrong, across the surging sea.
Room for men with hands to work, heads to plan, hearts to do and dare,
To win livings in the sedate bush, or trade in city ware.
Hope for lost legionaries, who from society are flung,
With life and fortune blasted, are dropping downward rung by rung.
Fill a flowing bumper high, deep as the home of albatross,
Pledge future empire’s cradle ground, the Land of the Southern Cross.
Untrammelled by convention’s chains, careless of comment I roam,
Unhandseled hills and ghylls and holts begird, my sequestered home.
There’s magic in the trackless wild, deepening on the mountain brown,
Gramarye of solitude, unknown to dwellers in prosy town.
Who hath not marked the mysterious haze, beautifully blue,
Which sheds a glamour o’er monotony, where charms are too few,
The varying nuances, deepening to far horizon’s verge,
A mirage of enchantment, in which unsightly scenes immerge.
Most pleasure take in crowded marts, but I love the lone hill side,
Where health and nature reign supreme meet wold for a bard to bide.
Thro’ many cities I have roamed, to a home ’neath the blue gum-tree,
Nor change would I for marble halls, my croft in the forest free.
Nil desperandum still my motto, it wins the fight at last,
I have charged it on my homestead flag, and nailed it to the mast. *
Come to Mass, Pussy.
A Legend of Enniskeane House, Cork County, during tenure by R.C.
Priest.
“ Ma colleen das, mavourneen,” his reverence coaxed, “ little ducksey
dear,
O ! come and be my own to-night, Pussy, O ! come to Mass—come here!
Fairest of women, divinest angel, will you come to my bower ?
I’ll assoil you in the morning, pet, so no sin on you shall lower. *
My dearest daughter, benedicite !
Sweet Pussy, come to Mass with me.”
“Ah! Father Cuckoo,” said the knowing lassie, Ileen Kate O’Kearney,
“ How sweet you are this Friday evening, with your County Cavan
blarney.
I’ll not come to your bower, you men have got such wild and wicked
ways,
May be ’tis your holy reverence, would spoil the fitting of my stays.
In sinning I’ll have no complicity;
For I won’t be your lass, you see.”
“ Come to the bower, Ileene the Fair, I’ve shaded so sweetly for you,
It is twined o’er with jessamine and roses, to fend off the dew.
Like Eloise and Abelard, in secret and transport we’ll love;
Come to the bower in the Asphodel Meadow, my own turtle dove!
Ileene, ma belle, ah! toujours gramachree!
Sweet Pussy, come to mass with me.”
“That’s the theology you learnt,” quoth Ileene, “at Saint Omer in
France.
Melodramatic euphuism, despair! there is no esperance!
* The author named his croft in Tidbinbilla Glen—Nildesperandum.
* Princess Helen 4 di Carracciolo, who was a nun for ten years, states in her “ Convent
Mysteries ” : “ No military libertine can equal the melodramatic euphuism of seduction prac-
tised by the Roman priests. Her nobility did not protect her from solicitation.


The demoiselles beyond the briny, may be very fond and free,
But such sly ruse d’amour, will not get round the Irish girls, you’ll see 1
Nor will I walk with such iniquity,
For I won’t be your lass, you see.”
“ Cruel charmer,” quoth the priest “ shure my heart is breaking for a
kiss!
If the angels match your beauty, that is the utmost, I premiss.
I will cast a spell o’er you, sweetheart, so no token will betray;
Come and be my own to-night, Pussy, ah ! do come to Mass, I pray I
Come to my arms, adored divinity!
Sweet Pussy, come to Mass with me.”
ou priest of sin, quoth fair Ileene, ” I will not soil my name with
you;
I’ll keep it white for my laddie, who’ll tie the love-knot fast and true-
So keep your hands away, behave yourself! of my charms I am chary;
It you want to sm that way, go find a maid who is not so wary.
I wish your holiness felicity;
Tho’ I won’t be your lass, you see.”
Thought Reading.
When tete-i-tete with the suspect, affect the frank and careless air,
io throw him off his guard. While probing him, of lapsus linguse
ware.
Words are nought, but mark the tones, hesitation, thinking for a space;
Ihe furtive eye, that will not look you square and honest in the face;
Ihe twitching fingers, changing brow, uneasy movements shifty play,
As if he feared your scrutiny, would drag his secret guile to day
Mark him by the treacherous gleam, as faithless eyes betray the thought
A tentacle of the Octopus, your close guarded camp has sought. *
You 11 mark him by low-cunning’s grin, curling the corners of the
mouth.
As he unwinds the net, or sets the snare, with smiling gammon smooth.
You will mark him by the kindly tone and pleasant smile, as a trap
He suggests to you, in hopes ’twill spring and bite when you’re in a nap.
You 11 mark him by the hang-dog air, and in his lineaments you’ll trace
The working of the perfidy, the Devil’s gift to Adam’s race.
You may mark him by the smile of joy, when he thinks that you are
‘ had,”
And after, by his foiled foolish look, when he finds the trip not bad.
You’ll mark him by the serpent-tongue, that vainly strives to mask the
wile,
Unconscious that the cloven-hoof reveals, detected is the guile.
You’ll mark him by the wheedling tone, the shallow rogue’s cajolery
The leading questions and suggestive hints, to drag you to deep sea
Mark his windings and his twistings, what he is trying to get at,
’Twill serve this end if you let seem, that you are something of a flat.
Mislead as to your intentions, or appear to fall in with his views,
Blind your pitfalls well, else he may to your counter-scheming get some
clews.
Doubt his bona-fides carelessly, to test, as-if you scarce meant,
Note sharply if the shot goes home, the guilty look speaks eloquent.
Analyse and gauge his words, and the varying forms in which they’re
wrought,
For speech is a fence, given to fend off pryers into hidden thought.
Put two and two together, the crux resulting will equal x,
Work the problem to complete solution, thus nought can you perplex.
Some spies I have found so stolid, without brains, and expressionless,
•Shows how to detect a Jesuit spy and trapper; a false friend; a sharper of any class;
ana a business schemer. Persona! experience.— The Author.


It took the closest scrutiny, the secret devilment to guess;
These, automata coached by a priest to work along pre-settled track,
Remove a rail or two, they flounder ’till the scheme becomes a wrack.
You will mark him by advice misleading, to lure you to a hobble.
So that when you are in a scrape, the base enemy can nobble.
Be always watchful for the stab, to fend the treacherous attack,
Papists are honey to your face, and cut your throat behind your back.
There is a mystic telepathy, I have the gift but can’t explain, *
When wights are planning mischief front my eyes, I track the snaky
brain.
Mental currents convey an inkling of the thought from them to me,
Boom, boom, swash, swash, the sullen breakers roar, o’er quicksands
on the lee. , . „
Thus the general. But higher in the ranks of intellect and race,
The governed aspect scarce reveals, of inner thoughts a single trace;
Yet insight feels the reptile, winding thro’ the cold and dark crevasses,
The touch is lighter and refined, a velvet sward o’er foul morasses.
Delilahs you will meet, with witching eyes and lovely necks of snow,
And high-bred courtesy and gracious mien, to mask the pending blow.
If you have wit, perchance you’ll mark the guile ’neath the courteous
laid o’er the shaking-bogs, detect the hellish scheming.
As the tawny crest on the billow’s breast, and death-note’s hollow roar,
Show the sunken shoal, grave of skeleton barks that brave the brine no
more.
I never knew those signs deceive, the Jurking evil thus appears,
As plainly as the horse’s savage mood, when he lays back his ears.
The letter of enquiry, with leading questions to draw you out,
Requires most careful consideration, a fly to raise a trout.
The business letter of agreement, with quibbling fraudulent device,
Refer to expert in the line: cats are always looking out for mice.
Guard ’gainst telepathic messages, by foes projected thro’ the air,
Yield not to sudden impulses, consider everv thought with care.
Maugre failures numerous, in the end one mind-bolt may succeed,
Will not to notice (the parry); of every trifling move take heed.
Common sense will not converse with spies, where eaves-droppers may
be privy,
Nor while well coached witness lounges by, Ruin’s Black Horse, mount,
tantivy . , ...
If needs must be, say nothing local to commit, let the trappers talk,
Thus draw thefc out to detect their game, so you can see the way to
balk. , ,
’Tis safer far to shun the popish pimps, how e’er alert your guards,
The faculties may sleep at times, then rends your pitcher into chards.
With noiseless and ophidious wriggling, masked within your doors they
Until their nature is betrayed, by vileness of the poisoned spawl.
If protestants, be doubly ware, they fire the shells the priests have cast,
Their Punic faith is Rome’s best friend, too vile for verse. My Muse,
avast!
Paddy’s Prayer.
Oh ! Holy Mary, most blessed Vargin !
From thy throne of grace, look down upon me
Poor divvil. Shure an’ bejabbers, be gor !
Tis me self nivver throubled you before
In all me born days, like other spalpeens.
Oh ! dayvine craythur of me inside sowl!
I have not a sixpence in this wide world;
Send me a pocket full of mickey-dunns,
An’ be all the powers of Purgatory !
Shure ! I will nivver throuble you agin..
In name of candle, bell, and book. Amin.


Contraband of Love.
A Legend of Fiesote, Italy.
A maiden dwelt near Florence fair, beside the Arno’s stream,
ooth chaste and beautiful was she, heroine of my tragic theme.
Her confessor was a rara avis, ne’er to his vows untrue;
If she d retained him as her ghostly guide, some sins ne’er hap’d to rue.
At matins on an Easter morn, a Jesuit her beauty spied,
S *s!gh d” 1 n^am,e d his heart, then “ farewell ” her good angel
What recks the plotting he soon was chosen as the maid’s confessor;
Quickly was her mind depraved, then he began to kiss and press her,
And other blandishments, the less the better that about is said,
She found her way, like other nymphs, into the holy father’s bed.
Each morn he gave her absolution, ere departure from the cell;
I hen to chantry to make a God of bread, by necromantic spell.
a !u nt cour f e °/ I lo T ve . it was > those priests have got a jolly time,
VV hen they couch with Lais, they can absolve the paramour from crime,
boon the sylphic wench became a certain way, hinting aberrance,
<< mi? boi \est folk began to talk and gibe, and look at her askance.
ihe end will justify the means ” —adding scions to the faithful—
bay causists, the flesh can be enjoyed, nathless the well planned Bull
Of lope Hildebrand, which saith, ‘that Roman religious must not
marry, ’
Yet on the rubicon of chastity, there is no need to tarry.”
Priests nieces come by chance, and Cupid’s darts,” saith the quaint
old saying: ”
Rome’s religion is so funny, it seems fiends a farce are playing.
Ihe lassie went to a distant town for change of air, to see her aunt
A very prudent thing to do, for trace her footsteps there I can’t ’
bom sni S gger hlS ’ a ” d S ° me S3y that ’ SOme joke ’ th€n wink the e^e and
Bor figure S^€ came ka ck, her friends observed, she had regained her
One night she trod the way for girls, that leads to cells of celibates;
1 hose holy men deny the charge, yet rumour’s tongue still lightly prates;
ThS P p ISed fa l n f: lc ? ked beauty’s arms, alas ! such things are said,
The Pope had better far revise the rules, and let the clergy wed.
1 he storm burst—basin, ewer, odds and ends about the crib went flying
The lady raved, the friar fumed Number-Two was scared and crying.
The smash ° theS **** PU ° ff and rent in ribbons - everything went
Betwixt two stools an adage old—ill-fortune chucked him in a plash
Roused from his prayers, from meditation, or perchance from love ‘or
snooze, ’
The latter most likelv, as for some time he had been on the booze,
Ihe Holy Prior came in anger—sad scene to greet his saintly eye:—
By our^ Lord God the Pope! quoth he, “you sinner, what’s this I
espy.
Two contrabands of love, beguiling beauty, in your cell I find
One savours of a spirit from the Pit, with jealous passion blind.
hull penance strict, I must impose for this, to save vou from Hell’s fire
Sknne Gourdes you’ll wend, thro’ storm and cold
«T°T P u Si k n^ r ’^ alk n the i. weary way, with twenty peas within vour shoes ”
1 excuse ” hem ’ thou^ht the J esuit - “Saint Joseph will the crime
“ Ba^ €d aaklets must wear.” “ Yes, kind Father—upon the table
“ And a shirt of horsehair.” “ Assuredly— upon the closet peg ”
Every even you’ll scourge yourself full sore.” “ Aye. Father with a
girl s arms. J '
M[-


“ Ne’er again at your soul’s peril, gaze on beauty’s forbidden charms.”
The friar put a finger on his nose, and made a reverend bow,
Then winking at the wenches, to observe he made a solemn vow.
The holy Prior led the second girl, from out the sinner’s cell:
What happened after that event, ’twould not be meet for me to tell.
Perhaps he gave her absolution, wafted heavenward to the spheres;
’Tis too recondite for the bard, I fear ! the angels were in tears.
Saint Francis cured the Irish toothache once, by plunging in the snow,
But I always had my doubts about it, and think ’twas never so.
’Tis naughty tho’ ’tis nice, my word ! to enfold a girl in the arms,
When monkish vows are made, like pie-crust, lured by those magnetic
charms.
’Tis written: “ Angels fled from Paradise, beguiled bv woman’s smile. ;
Small blame then ! to that erring priest, ensnared by beauty's siren wile.
The friar and his light o’ love, then had a pretty little scene,
But as the reader may be shocked, across the stage I’ll drawn the screen.
The Serpent’s tongue could scarce from Eden’s bower ol bliss more
surely oust,
Than could from virtue’s ways, the sophistry of this dark black-robed
Faust.
’Twas difficult to soothe the angry fair, kisses and caresses,
Made it up once more. Deceitful blarney often binds like jesses.
Things went smoothly for a time, but he found to her he must be true,
For if she caught him tripping once again, such conduct he would rue.
One day she saw a scene in cypress grove, that made her stare and
start,
And vengeance vow, it roused the green-eyed monster in her enraged
heart. . , ,
’Twas surely wrong for him “ to sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
And play with tangles of Neaera’s hair,” amid the sylvan glade.
When next she came unto his cell, a basket in her hand she bore,
And smiled as sweetly on the holv man, as e’er she had before.
“ I bring two flasks of nectar, love, a famous brand of rare chartreuse,
’Tis seldom seen in merchant’s bin, the bulk reserved for royal use;
Come, let us pledge the everlasting troth, that binds ’twixt you and me;
For nought can sever our fond souls, in life, or in eternity.” ,
The priest took note, tho’ capsules seemed intact and flasks fac-simile.
That his was slyly marked on yonder side—suspecting treachery:—
“ My Poppet, ’tis so cold, sweet angel, bring me from the peg my hood,
The wary Jesuit replied, as close ’longside the bottles stood;
“ Your lily hands were never made, my love, for aught but trifling tasks :
And when her back was turned to him, adroitly interchanged the flasks.
They filled, they drank, “ Ha! ha! ” she shrieked, “ to-night the Fien i
will claim his due.”
“ I’ve changed the flasks,” the Jesuit replied, “ he’ll only call for you.
She felt the poison at her vitals grip, no time to pray for grace,
So with expiring life, she hurled her glass full in the friar s face.
Some shattered fragments cut him to the bone, no fender was his hood
The subtle venom claimed another life, it mingled with his blood.
He reeled, he grasped a chair, then fell with howl and curse and awfu'
moan,
Nemesis had her innings then, full soon the Dark One claimed his own.
Is’t the Tramontand, or demons warring in the air of night ?
No! ’tis a lost soul passing, Asmodeus flits home with the Jesuit.
This tragic tale was told to me, where Tiber rolls its classic stream,
A caf4 stands upon the banks, there heard the substance of my theme.
A jovial son of La Belle France, ’twas. in a kiosk we two met,
And a bottle of Lacrvma Christi, snug in an ice pail set;
He told me monstrous tales of monastries, receiving homes for Hell,
I can’t e’en hint about them, for they’re far too vile for me to tell.


Moral of the Tale.
Now all ye gamesome lads of everywhere, when you a wooing go,
Don’t make your beds between two stools, by adage, you will garner
woe:
And when your flame protests o’er much, coming it extra strong—look
out—
Some devilment is brewing; that’s a tip ’twill serve you not to flout.
The Squatter’s Jeremiade.
A Legend of Queanbeyan, N.S.W., Australia.
When I wooed thee by Broad Isis, Nora, while song birds warbled nigh,*
Basking in the sunshine of thy beauty, the witching of thine eye;
Enchanted by thy dulcet voice, harmonious music unto me,
Like angels’ harps in paradise, or sirens singing o’er the sea.
Then I mistook thy gracious manner, and aspired to win thy hand,
Thou daughter of a noble Norman line, long settled in England,
It was folly to have thought it, but love proverbially is blind,
Thou “ wouldst not wed a parvenu,” this left maddening stings behind.
Now wildly rolls the classic river, from the uplands to the sea,
But wilder, fiercer still, my lonely heart, when e’er I think of thee,
As then I saw thee in that fatal gloaming, by its silver tide,
When thy lips pronounced my fate: “ I can never, never be thy bride.”
Ah ! that voice sweet and low ! Destiny, why should it decree my doom,
And plunge my earthly paradise, within plutonian hopeless tomb.
Yet, yet, deny me Lethe’s salve, in vain the pangs of grief I chide,
My lost love’s shade entwines each thought, and is for ever by my side.
Oh ! accursed lot to dree! When will this distracting vision cease,
And my tortured soul be left to voyage to Hades’ shades in peace.
Ah 1 love of woman is a fearful thing, it wrecks the life of man,
Or is his joy, and guide, and star, throughout this life’s allotted span.
Tho’ I am lord of many a rolling plain, and many a mountain side,
Where flocks and herds are growing wealth, as fickle seasons may
betide,
I’ll part with all to fill the lonely void that wrings my aching heart;
Nora, oh ! the magic of that name! from it I can never part.
My Kismet ’twas to love thee, Nora, fate’s decrees can never lie,
And thine it was to doom my wretched soul—Hell claims me by and by.
For when I asked thee to be mine, Nora, my soul was on the die;
Now let the “ crash of worlds ” come, for I reck not if the hour is nigh.
Love will ennoble, lofty passion may beseem a seraph well;
But mine is like the baleful fires, that light the lurid vault of Hell.
I might have been a better man, Nora, hadst thou not sealed my doom,
And o’er my shattered hopeless soul, cast snaky weird and wayward
gloom.
Oh ! had my love been straw on fire, like to the fickle shallow crowd’s,
A fancy of ephemeral thought, like to fleeting summer clouds,
Those fires would not consume my broken heart, where demons hold
revel;
Nor I to all the hopes of mortal life, have bade a long farewell.
A squatter’s joys are nought to me, I feel, fell Hatred, I am thine,
I love to blast all human life, as, Nora, thou hast blasted mine.
No dove of peace within my heart, around it venomed reptiles twine,
And demons tempt me, like ‘ Ben Battle,’ to enlist within the line.
I can never cease to love thee, Nora, as on that fatal day;
Tho’ thou art wed to rival heart, who reft thee from my arms away.
I must sadly wear the willow, all earthly joy for me is o’er.
Thou sad and lonely river! rolling onward, ever, evermore, t
♦The Thames, England, lexicographers say, means—Broad Isis.
•The Squatter lived on the banks of the Murrumbidgee river, which he apostrophizes.


The Jesuit’s Jackal Press Reviewed in
Australia and in England.
THE CHARGE.—I.
That servile sheet, “The Jackal Rag,” to priests and Mammon cringe;
’Twill publish every cunning ad., fair virtue s shield to dinge.
It hushes up expose of Roman sapping knavery, , ,
But gives a cricket match at length, brain babe Y ' »»
In subtle ways it lauds the priest “ best man that earth e er saw,
Adroitly palliates the hellish deeds of papal law.
Sexual crime ’twill advertise, and how guilt may be concealed,
To lad and lass who read The Rag, this lure is oft revealed.
North and south earth’s central Line, where’er breezes blow and billows
For every state is but a province, of Imperial Papal Rome.
THE EDITOR’S CONFESSION.—II.
Those methods are our bread and cheese, so we must gulp them down,
The circulation wouldn’t pay without, nor the pages boune.
We advertise illegal crime, couched so as not to lull,
But clear to those who know the ropes, the fly ones up to snuff.
We 9ell our principles for cash, and turn our coats for gold,
Subventioned by the Jesuits, to drink our page is sold.
On page six we are religious, a sermon there you see.
Yet on page four, a beastly ad., it glares licentiously.
On page two our tone is high, there we make a gallant stand,
Against ships being sent to sea, ill-found and under mannd.
But on page three, we advertise where Jack can be shanghaied,
Or while away the jocund hours, with Phtyne pro tern, bride.
On nage five we discourse on medicine and hygiene,
page oJ, we puff quack stuff to kill the young and green.
We serve Cerberus, or Peter, by turns, to rake the cash,
For we must get it anyhow, or else we d come to smash.
We scrape shillings right and left, don’t e en despise a tanner,
Our glory ’tis with silken tile, to do the grand flaneur.
Rv the oronrieties we bide, nathless what we advertise,
And worship Mrs. Grundy, for her good word we dearly prize.
We publish bishoped foreign news, our page is filled with trash,
Re football, cricket, chestnuts, with the scissors we re-hash.
We print—Queen Ann is dead, teach granny how to suck an egg,
The farmer how to milk a cow, and points of horse s leg,
We know more about a girl’s-don’t laugh-you must keep this dark
In a platonic way, of course, we never have a lark
We Garble anti-British news, suppress it now and then,
But that’s Aux Cayes Gengulphus’ style, to wield th e truthful pen.
While we betray the freedom that our fathers won to Rome,
We pitch into non-subscribers,, who live beyond the foam.
We box up titles, real rank with those of courtesy.
Dub Lord P George a peer, by surname, like a London slavey.
Titles bother us a bit, when we’re writing on our own.
(Low extraction by such trifles, is always surely shown).
We stuff the uninformed public, with puerile gasconade,
Brag the greatness of our Empire-that is for the good o trade.
Pandering to men’s passions, best way to fake the money in >
If it ends in war, we make the more, while fools kick up a din.
Yet we are most respectable, we lead the public thought,
Switch it on as ordered, by those who have our pa<*es bought.
Pose Unionists, while we suggest—’twere well to grant Home Rule,
So Englishmen may sway themselves, sans Redmondite ferule.


THE CASTIGATION.—III.
1 ’ll show them up! those dung-hill kites, who prey on garbage vile;
The Rag is “ taken ” in the Pit, and makes the Dark One smile.
I’ll show them up to infamy, couched cunningly to tilt,
They set the snare, the lure, the trap, and teach disease and guilt.
111 show them up! the wehrwolf pack, who suck lost honour’s blood,
If all the drops were gathered in, they would surpass The Flood.
I’ll show them up! the tiger tribe, who wear the fleecy vest,
Pose guide, philosopher, and friend, malignant as the pest.
I’ll show them up! those cancer spots upon the empire’s shield;
A mouse once gnawed a lion free, entrapped on hunting field.
I’ll show them up! the Devil’s tools, tho’ ranked ’mongst Christian band,
Gamst fraud and guile in every shape, I always make a stand.
I 11 show it up! the servile rag, that lives on drink and crime,
The tool of Sin, a shameful blot upon the rolls of time,
I’ll show them up! those popish snares, that crawl about the land.
And undermine the weakling’s faith, until he is unmanned.
I’ll show them up! those ghouls of sin, who pose as saints divine,
Far better men were sent o’er sea, in days of auld lang syne.
Condemning sins they do not want, yet wink, with all their might,
At those that priests and Dives work, ’gainst justice, law and right.
Old women, some editors, drest in unmentionables,
Who from time to time give doses of mixed truth and fables.
A kiss is wickedness; and a squeeze is Oh! so shocking;
The Devil’s own temptation—trim ankles in silk stocking;
To take a glass of wine is ruin—vile the man who smokes;
To bet a shilling is damnation. So the raven croakes.
That’s his bread and cheese, the stock in trade of those who are “saved 99
The lowest pit in Hell, is with such double-facers paved.
” Not all who saith, unto Me, ‘ Lord, Lord ’—one day out of seven—
Shall see my Father’s face, and enter the Kingdom of Heaven.”
I seldom cite the Bible, for I venerate that book,
Hate albedo, by which o%giarists affect wisdom’s look.
Religion is his cloak, he holds a candle to the Devil,
And looks the other wav. when friends are working deeds of evil.
Some hound the empire on to war, to gratify a spite:
And men by thousands pass away, unto the shades of night
Some will not print a nasty ad., that panders to the beast,
Yet crawl in ways servile, unto to the cunning Romish priest.
They curse the sturdy Protestant, who keeps the colours flying,
And will not be put down, nor own our grand true faith is dvi’ng
Priests grip them by the nose, and hold the portals of their ear;
The Serpent of Ocean, bewrapps the Laocodn ’tis clear.
The vilest are rake-alls, croupiers that I castigate,
Well doth Loyola know the way, to use them as his mate.
111 show them up! those tykes of hell, who live upon the tears
Of hapless maids to error led, nor expiate in years.
I’ll show it up,, the loathsome snake, that crawls within the home
And tempts frail beauty and hot youth, from virtue’s path to roam.’
I 11 show them up! who live upon the erring woman’s shame,
t way to win a crust, that e’er a man can frame.
I will show, them up! Stygian hounds, who bolt the crumbs of crime,
ttvu ° f ruinec * ma id§ lie at your doors, who vend nauseous slime
With gambling news some fill their page, to catch pennies of the fool,
Many a convict learnt first step to jail, in that pernicious school.
Sinner and saved ” are much alike, when rubbed on the touchstone—
Gold: so many shams there are, that cuts to the very bone.
I’ll show it up ! immoral rag, a thing too foul to name,
Ee n when the Devil reads the ads., they nauseate his wame.
i-Jl show fhe.m up! the Jackal Pack, who hunt game for golden pay*
Tis a dirty job, the dung-hills stink, when shown the light of day.
Aye, a herculean task, to sweep their Augean columns clean,


From David’s sling, I’ll cast a stone upon this page, I ween.
A hermit lonely, in the wilds of Tidbinbilla’s mountain glen,
I measure with the magic of the mind, the erring ways of men.
&
THE “ SAVED ” EDITOR OF TOADGUNYAH RAG.—IV.
“On Sabbaths we sing: ‘ Glory Hallelujah! we are saved;’
On working-days, we square the sets with which Sheol is paved.
A burning and a shining light, we pose ’mongst the elect,
In secret lick the spittle of the priest, cringing abject.
He’s got a mortgage on the Rag, so we must kiss the rod, *
Else he’d strike—then a * broker ’ on the wallaby we plod.
They say, “ we’re shook upon Red Harry’s wife,” this we can’t stand
For we ne’er laid on her—save three times—an unlawful hand.
We’ve seduced and ruined many maids, that was long ago,
Now we’re saved ’mongst the elect, and our victims are below.
We can’t be damned for we’re saved, bound for Zion in the skies;
So we can “ best ” one in a “ have,” and e’en indulge in lies.
Extra righteous rigidly are we, and stand up for salvation,
Nathless publish double-barrelled lies, broadcast throughout the nation.
Yes, we’re a burning and a shining light, a journalist peshwah;
And we’re marching on the road to Zion. Glory Hallelujah ! ”
THE CAT-O’-NINETAILS.—V.
I’ll show him up! the lying rogue! hypocrisy I’ll roast;
Rome’s meanest dog is he, Toadgunyah’s sordid town can boast.
I will not publish real name, immortalize the skunk,
The peccant helot low. The crawling slave of gold and monk.
You “ saved,” your paltry soul! Now listen to eternal worst,
Your doom for aye: “ I know you not, depart from Me, accurst.”
Where you’ll go, fiends fearful shun, for it is mv opinion—
You’ll be black-balled out, e’en nethernmost brimstone dominion.
Nor angel throned shall you be, nor volant thro’ the ether soar;
Sweet music from a golden harp, your bribed soiled fingers ne’er shall
pour;
In darkest Erebus you’ll dwell, there to stew in burning sulphur gravy,
Rattling waddy on a billy-can, sing: “ Ave, Satanas, ave.”
Attorney Sell-the-Case. An Epitaph.
A Limb of the Law who Sold Two Cases of Mine, to Curry Favour
with Papists.
Here lies Attorney Sell-the-Case;
A rogue by nature, and some say by trade;
A fool devoid of brains and grace;
A viper in a human masquerade.
He had not wit to know —integrity pays best;
And sold his clients, ’till he could no longer bide.
He sold the hangman—far in lone drought stricken west,
A thirst starved swagsman, on the wallaby he died.
He sold the worms —his loathly carrion they detest.
No mind within his skull, no good within his hide,
The Devil is done brown—no soul could he arrest.
He sold the King of Terrors—with salt you can the latest take—
His corse became a crocodile, and his heart became a snake.
* Anent an Australian Pecksniff, who laid a trap for me —see end notes. His daughter,
owner of the Rag, took the bribe. Fear of exposure in satire got on her nerves, ending in a
fatal paralytic stroke.— The Author.


No Precedent.
On the Adverse Solicitor, who did his best for his Client and Himself.
When Spider Slyboots knocked at Heaven’s gate, Saint Peter oped the
portal wide;
“ 1 claim the entree,” quoth the lawyer’s ghost, “ and in Paradise to
bide.”
“ D «clare your name to me, sir,” the Saint replied, “ your late address
and style;
<T™ n * shall look rny ledger up, to see if you e’er were man of guile.”
My name is Spider Slyboots,” quoth the ghost, “from Toadgunyah
town come I,
There had an office in The Dodgers’ Row, and dwelt in the suburb
nigh. ”
Your name is on my list, I see,” said Peter, “ nor ’gainst it serious
score;
But I will thank you to explain to me, sir, ere you can pass the door,
blow you contrived upon yon orb, to earn ephemeral bread and cheese;
And if, when penance was ordained for you, sir, you ever boiled the
peas ? ”
(To walk five miles with hard dry peas within the shoes,
« t, Is I > oman Penance dire, and puts one in the blues.)
vr m u suitor, “ but I always acted on the square;
Psever boiled the peas, except for inside use, I solemnly declare.”
The Guardian of the Gates, taken all aback, then barred the portal nigh,
And looked upon the applicant, with a sad commiserative eye.
1 here is no precedent,” quoth he, “for admitting lawyers into
Heaven—
Go Below. Spider, all hope for you is o’er, the hour is past eleven.”
The Devil’s Own.
Spider Slyboots never “ had ” a client, an upright man was he;
<<°xj US ls lc£ en d on his tomb was graved, by universal gree:
Halt ! underneath this stone, there lies a lawyer and an honest man.”
A tourist, for half an hour this text seemed most curiously to scan
Now much surprised was Sergeant Kiss-the-Cook, who thought the man
a knave;
So marching boldly up to him, quoth he: “ What’s rum about this
grave ? ”
“ Friend,” said the Globe Encompasser, “ why rest those two men
’neath one stone ? ”
“ What two men ? ” quoth the Sergeant, “ why they planted Slyboots
all alone.”
“ There must be two men, sergeant, for such atnalgam could never clan;
I read: Beneath this stone there lies a lawyer—and an honest man.’ ”
A ’Varsity Degree.
Oh! Khyne o’ the Breeches boasted he’d been thro’ the University
Though his knowledge about this and that, did not with the vaunt agree
Upon strict enquiry, I discovered the reason of this lack—
Oh! Khyne sneaked in thro’ the front door, and was soon kicked out at
the back.
Father Cuckoo’s Trade Mark.
A Legend of Venustown, Ireland.
“I’ll be chaste—’dll I’m tempted.’’ Thus the priests the lovely sex
Covllc W •
Woman being always temptation, what can barred celibates do?


Wedlock debarred unto the priest, ’twere best some other folks as well,
Sailing o’er a sombre sea, ne’er to land ’mongst lilies asphodel.
The irate husband cut up rough, and swore it thwarted his repose,
To see baby had—like Father Cuckoo—a wart upon the nose.
Roaming in the balmy air at eve, adown the woodland cloisters,
A mind oppressed with jealous cares, his sad aching heart no joy stirs;
The forest songsters cheered him not, he heard but that dread monotone
‘Cuckoo! cuckoo! ’ priestcraft’s prototype who haunts sylvan arcades
lone.
No peace e’en in his club, pals joke about the wart upon the nose:
“ Ecclesiastical Trade Mark,” ha! ha! the jocund laughter rose..
With heartfelt anguish I must write the truth, sad Cuckoo’s sins dis-
close—
That many babies in the parish, have a wart upon the nose.
“ The Holy Church in danger, blessed Virgin, shield it from the shock,
Guard secrets from the light of day, so that the heretics won’t mock.
Anathema Ffreyne-Guillmayne of West Cork, who gives them aU away,
In a nutshell handy, for idle folks who sooner laugh than pray.”
Mumbojumbos his Reverence the soggarth, then hurls old Rome s big
Curse; . ,
Yet I am hale and stout and strong, and faith! don t feel a whit the
worse. _ .
Some Benedicts were tearing mad, since Cuckoo got the cure ot souls,
To find the firstborn thus branded, his reverence had been taking tolls.
Alas! the talk of all the town, in sooth, those tell-tale warts depose—
That Cuckoo had been on the loo'Se, and left his Mark on baby’s nose.
Jus primus noctis, a secret rite extant amongst the clergy;
Those note, who think to wed with popish piece, don’t wear horns, 1
urge ye. ,
I couch this phrase in foreign tongue, not on mock modesty to trench.
As the proper petticoat remarked: —“ It don’t sound so ill in ‘French.
Honi soit qui mal y pense, making omelet requires broken eggs;
For me to mark a claim on golden field, requires at least four pegs.
The nurses oft their charges chide: “Whisht!” for thus the Biddys
chatter
“ Whisht! you divvil! here comes the priest, shure and faith, he is
your father.”
(Popish children, list to me, when as romping on the road to school.
Ye meet the priest so spruce, know him the avatar of dupe and wittol.)
He struts along the College Walk, as tho’ he were Saint Francis’ Own.
I’m sceptical about that “bath of snow,” opine a bath of down;
The cooling off, no doubt, a fact, but not the way historians wrote;
That “ snow ” was ninety-eight of Fahrenhite. This I surmise not
quote. # , ,
There is human nature in the saint, as well as in the sinner;
A kiss or two don’t come amiss to both; also a good dinner.
The lady vowed that she was innocent (assoiling cleared her course).
And that a Tarquin from the spirit land, had captured her by force;
She could not say what like the Evil Shape, confused in terror’s throes,
But marked with tear dim’d eyes, the demon had—a wart upon the
nose. , .
The husband did not half believe the tale, yet durst not charge the
priest,
Who may keep him bound in Purgatory, so long as e’er he’ll list.
So ’twas perforce condoned. The Trade Mark being obvious —
I suppose — . . , „
They called the urchin:—“ Little-Cuckoo-with-the-wart-upon-the-nose.
The Soggarth had a glorious time, adored by all the lovely sex,
Who confessed their sins, committed others, with husband in duplex.
He teaches: “ ’Tis no sin to love the priest who pilots to the skies,
Thus barters paradise, to bask awhile in woman’s witching eyes.
“ Amorous sins will ne’er penetrate, to the faithful’s soul and heart.
Being but skin deep, when they perform well the Holy Church’s part.’


lo scale a fortress, or a nunnery, befits the soldier bold:
An open—sesame the priests have got, and adits too, I’m told *
Aye night" tHe n ° VlCe takeS the V ° WS ’ t 0 ioin the P a P hian nymphs of
The holy fathers calm her fears, and Eros triumphs o’er affright
yr °£rTo°ve ”• eard 3 HeaVCn described - he would exchange
fX>€t w ? s a , sc °fhng scribe, denying life above
TW’c u Heaven may be better drawn, than in the orthodox essay;
That s Hyde who s hinting horrid doubts, but Jekyll bids such thoughts
away.
Tis so hard to draw the line; there are naughty stories in the Bible*
And hope the following won’t be risqu6, the love scene is no libel*
nfZiJLtt c , onverted l priest, who said The convent is the grave
Of virtue, freedom, and humamtv. and law alone can save ”
Ihe erring dame confessed to him. (I draw the amour very mild,
hor British bards must have a care, to write as suits a saint or child.
OMITTED.
‘ Benedicite, my daughter, go in peace,’ quoth the holy priest;
A scene oft acted inside convent walls, where Eros holds high feast
. Fl F^' W ® ter S Pr n i d m oer . the erring dame, washed the sin away,
Taux pas roll off like rain drops on a solan’s back,’ the maxims sav
His reverence was toujours gai, and so fond of everything that’s nke*
A gourmet at the table, he loved all bonne bouches, sweets and spice.’
AH ’gdzzies^ray*^ 1111116 ’ fr ° m rathe youth ’ until time’s harsh fingers
So runs life, in pleasure, business, all for love, the bubble flits awav
H‘s rope ran out at last, he made a slip, seduced the Doctor’s spouse
A Darwin ite who did not care a whit, for pope, priest, or recluse
<?Vn, W K re t h cas ,t^ ate the rip, which put his lady in a rage:—
me wkh' th°e W pag?? y ° U qU ° th the dame ’ “ why don>t you char &
1W no matterf— 111 Skip th * S P3rt ’ f ° r ’ twould not Pass, and ’tis
‘‘A fox paw, indeed monster! you are madder far than e’er a hatter!
Don t excite yourself, you are suffering from hallucinations,
|J! do £ k . youi : Wl . ne > cl S ars and whiskey, and put you on short rations
Tis all imagination, you should not take up that position;
His Reverence was admiring the unique pattern on the cushion
Such fantasies are very dangerous. You talk about the crimes
i,. ,Jesuits, expelled from France, nonsense ! you read it in “The Times: ”
Fiddlestick Times! fiddlestick Sue and Pascal! they ne’er existed
Save in your disordered brain the gray matter must be congested.
* barm where none can be, for the priest ne’er cast on me sheep’s-
Don’t you tell me! cuckoo! Charlie, I’ll run with a romany-rye.
T nw U v™, l i? othe i’ ne ’ er Ilve ybb you - YOU iealous monster!
I hope you feel ashamed, you tyrant! how dare ycu thus go on sir’
Such a fuss and fury, about the wart upon the baby’s nose
The spiritual influence of the Church. Then she stopped anhelo^e,
A d J?oans d 3 floOd ° f tearS ’ resumed with sobs and moans and bitter
(The Doctor’ versed in woman’s wiles, detected Judas in her tones).
™ru y th ,l nk J d br ® a , k mv troth, with that ugly, ugly priest
Why! Apollos have sighed to me in vain, their pangs left unredressed
Cardinal Kettle, the champion liar, when half drunk, said, ‘ he would
part
His chance of winning Papal Chair, to clasp me to his loving heart*
Bishops have sworn oft, they ‘ adored me better than the Virgin Mary*’;
* Vide Maria Monk. about the Black Nuns


But I am Virtue’s Own. What were you doing with that blue-eyed
fairy,
You saw home last night? Fiddlestick! You the first to leave the table !
Don’t you think to hoodwink me, sir, with that husband’s specious
fable.
As if I don’t know your games, when you hie to Dublin on the loose,
And your gallivantings after dark. Don’t you take me for a goose.
O Heavens ! why did I quit my mother’s home, to be this monster’s
bride! _
Hysterics closed the scene of wedded bliss, she swooned as if she’d died.
Abigail was summoned, and Galen fetched some simples of his. trade.
(That’s a bluffing way they have, you know, in the petticoat brigade.)
The doctor was no fool, and kept the hatches off his weather eye.
Contrived a snare to trap the sinners. A patient wired: “ Death is nigh,
Hasten to my side,” from a country house some twenty miles away;
“ Avoid the rake and au revoir,” the doctor bids his lady gav:
Who vowed, she|d count the hours ’till he came back, and for his
welfare pray—
Then sent a billet doux to light o’ love, to come and spend the day.
“ The Brute is gone,” the false dame wrote, “so come, my love,
with me to stay,
Come to my arms, adored, come quickly, darling, come without delay.
The doctor stopped five miles from town, and in the small hours of the
night,
Returned to his home, ghost like he glides; woman’s faith! what meets
his sight ?
*****
Wending to his surgery, he fetched two sponges steeped in ether,
Pathology’s nepenthe, oblivion caught from Lethe’s river.
*****
Picture Cuckoo’s anguish, his punishment sad Abelard’s outran,
Picture consternation of the guilty pair, picture if you can.
A distressful predicament for a priest, with penchant bliss,
The sweet deluding gramarye, exnaling with a woman’s kiss.
*****
The sequence showed, the priest’s demeanour changed from bold to
meek and mild,
And ladies whispered ’mongst themselves, ‘ his reverence was n
longer wild.” , . , , ,
Now married men can rest in peace, relieved of jealous fears and throes,
And little strangers all appear, without the Trade Mark on the nose.
The Moral to Adorn the Tale.
The moral of my honest tale, is set forth clearly at the close.
Never, oh! never let your wife meet a rake by moonlight, alone.
Nor by candle light, nor by daylight, else you’ll sadly sigh: Och
hone!” ,
She will be sure to have a baby, with a wart upon the nose.
Eros Erst and E’er.
1.
Sister Veva was a pretty nun, as fair as fair can be;
And Father El Rey was her lover, a sly old pharisee.
“ >Ti s naughty tho’ ’tis nice, sweetheart,” ’longside the Guadalquivir,
Saith Sister Veva, “Oil wish such love may last for ever.


2.
She rather seemed to like it dearly—that holy virgin nun:
She rather seemed to like it dearly—that saintly orison:
When adoring the bless’d angels, ’longside the Guadalquivir,
And urchin Eros shot his arrow, o’er the limpid river.
3.
’Twas not with fires of Vesta, that her dark eyes were all alight,
As she beguiled lost El Rey from his vows, forsworn Jesuit.
So priests and nuns with Eros stray, ’lonside the Guadalquivir.
An olden story ever green, the nun and priest deceiver.
A Pipe Full, New Version.
If the cat will after kind; priests the petticoat will find.
If the hart, doth lack the hind; pie-crust vows will never bind.
When to ’fess hies Rosalynde, her virginity is mined.
—After Shakespeare.
No Surrender.
In memory of the good and brave, the Victor of the Boyne,
Who drove Rome’s hell-hounds o’er the sea, no more to rend and royne;
Tho’ time-servers cringe and palliate, disgrace their grandsire’s blood,
We Orangemen will steadfast stand, to stem the popish flood.
Fill all bumpers high. We pledge our immortal faith’s Defender,
Enshrined within our hearts. To William, and No Surrender.
Boyne Water, Aboo!
Come fill up all brothers of purple, of orange, and black;
We swear to line the trenches, and no foe will see our back;
When freedom calls us to the fight, to crush the croppy crew;
We drink to those who won the Battle—Boyne Water aboo!
The Siren’s Chain.
The Irish Chieftain went a-wooing, his good angel gave a sigh,
’Twas the Captain’s wife he wanted, Erin’s Circe, Kitty O’Fye. ’
He vowed to win the lady fair, for what cared he for deeds of wrong ?
A gay Lothario in love and guile, thus chimed his blarney song:—'
“ I long for thee, my darling, my adored one, acushla machree!
I sigh for thee, my angel, mavourneen!” quoth Parnell on his knee.
“ Never heed the captain, darling, his love, convention in the main;
But mine is earthquake’s roaring, foaming fire, it rends my heart in
twain.
When the crown of Erin’s Isle, will circle fast my conquering brow,
Thou shalt be my queen, my Kitty, darling! accept my plighted vow;
And those accursed bonds shall be dissolved, that bar thee from my side;
Then I may roam in fields of love and bliss, with Kitty for my guide.
I swear! the moral laws were never made, to bind free heart and mind,
An uncrowned king and dictator, can fling such fetters to the wind.
My daily thoughts are thine, my love, of thee I ever dream and sigh,
The sweetest kiss of all, my love, is that we steal upon the sly.
No gem e’er ravished from Golconda’s mine, can sparkle as thine eyes,
Their burning glances rend my doubting heart, with deep impassioned
sighs.
With maids my heart once roamed in fancy, but they never were my
goal,


I vow, I never loved but thee, sweetheart, for thou hast chained my
Therels magic in thy kiss, my darling, there’s glamour in thine eye;
To win thee for my own, sweet idol, I will risk. my hope on High,
Aye, rapture to enfold thee in my arms, and kiss thy coral up •
Can nectar of Elysian Fields, compare unto that heavenly sip .
My heart is thine, my own love, for ever, throughout all time and t de,
And death itself less cruel, than absence from my adored < ones siide.
The matchless magic of thy beauty, enthrals my fond sou l to thine,.
I dream of thee all night, love, and I think that thou art ever mine.
The blue-black glory of the raven’s wing, shows pale longside thy hair,
To win thee for my own, adored, the gloomy Gates of Hell 1 d a ■
My love is like the raging typhoon’s blast, that seethes the stormy^se; a.
I’ll sell my soul to Evil One, to win that longed for kiss from thee.
If I cannot win thee, darling, all joy and hope on earth f*
Now by my hope of Heaven ! thou art my first love and thou art my last.
Very dismal dark and dreary, for me fast fades life s fitful tide,
If I must sue to thee in vain, alas! nor win thee for my bnde - .
Ay, all the plagues that Job oppressed, that hopeless hapless mortals
Are rapture to the agony I feel, at thought of losing thee.
The music of thy siren voice, to me—ah! hear the vows I tell
Are sweeter far than dulcet strains, of seraph harper Israle .
Keeper of the keys of Eden’s Faery Land, where I hope to dwell.
Say, wilt thou lift me to ethereal heights, or plunge my soul in hell?
Oh ! mavourneen, mavourneen, Oh ! alanah, acushla machree .
There is no joy nor hope on earth, except for aye to bl <te wth thee.
Fair Avondale a pleasant place, for faithful true love to abide.
And power and wealth and glory, I can pour upon my bonny bnde.
I swear to thee! mv angel, thou art th’ only earth and heaven I see.
Now pledge thy troth, my own sweet love, say wilt thou ever bide wit
a specimen of blarney, which may be learned Stone ’
The style boys come in Cork, tho rather hy-faloutin in the tone.
I concocted it from Parnell’s speeches, which oft I ,^ d ’
He had a way of proving wrong is right, to suit intended need.
Don’t deem the poet thinks those things of guile, because he indites so,
I hold the man a villain, who is thus a false Lothario.
The sublime, and the ridiculous, have a narrow boundary,
Over done the first, to get the second—that s Guillmaynesque, you see.
Thus Kitty crossed the rubicon, enlisting in the sirens train,
The race is still extant, that tried to lure PJ ysse s f rom the ma .
False Delilah is the first of note, in the history of the past,
Trov lost for Helen; the world for Cleopatra—she is not the last
Dearbhorgil’s treason to her lord, erst fetched the Norman Strongbow
They all brought sin and woe upon their knights, and there are many
light and lawless love, erstwhile coined the verb ‘ to pander.’
Whv in woman’s wily ways, the wayward wight will wildly wander.
Tis writteT two things that Solomon the Wise, could ne’er compre-
“ The 6 wav a ship goes in the sea,” that’s solved, the mystery at end;
The way a man goes wrong about a lass, is still dark as ever »
A ooser for savants to day, they will solve the problem never. f|
VidT Chrysostom (the tongue of gold): “ Woman is the gate of Hell,
If onoe he kissed a coyish lip, I’ll swear ] another tale he d tell.
“ Vir,” a man, and “ gin,” a trap, ’tis joked, from those derived is
For break our necks and hearts, and erewhile peaceful days
Bonnv Annie Laurie, disloyal was, unto her ‘ promise true,
TasscJ mewed long years in dungeon vaults, Leonora s scorn must rue.


q-nl WfT y i ha i°^i h€a M t » ed ’ brok f her troth < to W€d a wealthy clown,
T? 6 & tt€ T 1 loved a ,f vlls rOOt > than poet’s genius and renown.
I he ghastly gory gallows gray, now claims its hapless Hugo’s head,
'i'u ir T^ ai^> in j.’ doub . ly lover and her husband’s bed.
1 h€ score- S dlvorce 1S and sure, he drowns the false ones by the
Lost. Leila’s tale of love and sin, the azure Bosphorous rolls o’er.
Ar°fflV hat and ° f many wives, swift is the summons to the grave;
Muffled groans nereides hear, when the stars peep down on Helle’s
W3VC.
dho ’ a ll things on the globe have changed, the same is woman’s
witching smile,
WH wile eHal,S ensnared to sin ’ she the glamour of his
K « vir i was . severe upon the sex, so was inspired Saint Paul,
When Circe whistles, any saint of them will kiss her at the call.
A general statement, for there are men who tho’ not “ saved ” or holv
Can land upon Calypso’s isle, safely guarded by the moly.
M °wife 3 th€ knightS on roll, but one could boast a faithful
The ltrffe med t 0 k SanS S ° UCi S3ng fr ° id ’ and ne ’ €r a cause for
Compliant husbands they appeared to be, ne’er recked their souls to vex,
Re goings on of better halves, tit-bits of the slippery sex.
Carodoc consort of the constant spouse, could quaff the cup of gold,
brail woman s ways are just the same to day, as in that time of old.
L en royalty may share the common lot, betrayed amongst the rest,
A charge the horns on his shield, and wear cuckoo for his
The sins of false and fickle Guinevere, convulsed The Table Round.
Some question pert, “ if e’er a woman’s love was constant, true and
sound,
Y*„ ini 9 e . ,E ve betrayed the human race whilom, to eat an apple-pie?
T u i!r d f n rtl f hey always want, for it they languish long and sigh ”
I hold it a libel on the sex, to judge all by the erring few,
the many still are guided by Penelope, steadfast wife and true.
The Biter Bit: A Dublin Legend.
As the Parson was driving to service one day;
To the Priest gave a lift, who was walking that way
Ihe pair passed a building, round which scaffolding'clung,
W hilst aloft from a beam, loose a hempen rope swung
Said the priest to the parson—the tale is quite true—
“ Where would you be, kind sir, if that rope had its due ?”
Id be driving alone,” said the parson; so sly,
1 hen smoothing his cravat, gave a wink of the eye
Maxims of the Satanites.
Paraphrased from Pascal’s “ Provencial Letters.”
You’ll find them in Mendoza, in Molina, and in Escobar
V.i y ’ Layman - Barrv - Sanchez, Bauny, Diana, and Navarre
All most grave and reverend fathers, exponents of probabilism,
.Mid ot mental reservation and direction. By a syllogism
1 he Tnf?lHble r ° Ve What e ’ er th€y Wish ‘ Th °’ th€ Pope is decreed
They deduce, his bulls, e’en with the longest horns, are merely probable.
1 hev prove what e er vou see is not, they prove that water is tokav
Reverse conclusion on fast-days, so sinless wet their thirsty clav
Opinions are probable, when they’re vouched for by a grave casuist
ounded on reasons of consideration, fhere vou have the gist


of Tesuitism) for grave and learned doctors of Divinity,
Would ne’er premisses assert, sans substantial probabdity.
dish.
This doctrine of probabilistic the acme casuists averred, , heard,
with envv grew Belial, when he first the wondrous dog ,■
SferA -texss ss: w-
’Tis'not mortal sin to scatter lies, and calumniate another.
To preserve the reputation, and thus the adv e rs e sldet ° smother -
Indefinate charges are the best, for they can t be refuted,
Don’t specify deeds, tell lies with colourable truth diluted.
Adultress mav deny faux pas on oath, repudiating vice,
And poi ? very dainty dame, in virtue’s ways exceeding nice
¥\Vr oaramour may swear-he ‘ never did the deed he will not name.
And due attention merely paid, to charge him with such were a shame.
A lexicon is the approved guide, to theology and ethics,
By 6 selecting words thereout, righteous wrath becomes-
And exposing the priests’ libidinosity, becomes— ‘ immoral.
The B. P. must get nothing brainy, just a picture or a '
If vou are an able man of letters, well versed in ®’ ; a
Your darkest deeds must be forgiven, e en gleam as sunbeams in
Bringshmne and sorrow to a home, or seduce tra^ ngA "l^ ryl guilt all
Those maxims wash your crime as white as snow, so your guilt an
No rights have heretics, ’tis your duty to crush them like a snake;
But you may dissemble, and paths of blac|kest I perfidy may v
You may kill, not treacherously, but privately behind the bac v.
(Dot™ call a spade a spade, thus you will change the nature of the
the intention to defence of honour—not stnfe—
The important point—as between his ribs you slip the fata l knife.
There is a probable opinion, asserting sacredness of lite
In the Mosaic Law, that is now o’erruled and murder may run rife.
Pious assassination, your opponent’s soul being saved from sin .
He’d incur by fighting you. Well sped !he dies by poison, knife, or gin,
You may deny the deed on oath, by using mental reservation,.
You have no/killed him, oh ! no, for you scorn such an abomination,
And mentally, ’twas in defence of honour righteously he fell.
So that you have committed nothing which you are oblige .’
Or vou may swear, you ne’er committed such an act-at other time
Mentallv vid& Sanchez. Thus your conscience owes no mulct for crime.
That’s true ergo, not perjury- Law and judge are mostly asses,
lo exposTng maxims don’t effect, no more than half crown masses
You mav dispatch all witnesses, who are retained to prove a charge.
The judge and counsel too, without sin, for those maxims are y
Ranhomet of the Evil Cult, with which they dupe the human geese,
inslav? the mindfthe reason, and the soul, and wealth and honour
But This is feeble blazonry to charge upon those demons’ shield.
No monster of mythology will serve nor auSht of flow or field
The King of Terrors may suffice, who daunted Satan at Hell s Uate,
And made the Lord of Evil own a peer, controlled by nought but hate.
To fit their feminine affinities, within a lozenge P ress > „
The appalling horror Milton drew, “ Sin, the snaky sorceress.


E en reconciled, you may stab the foe, as you take him by the hand,
Without absolute treachery, if you those maxims can command.
For Escobar is clear upon the latter law— Pascal,
A monk, who has exposed the quibbling of that notorious rascal.
You may kill the calumniator, when arraigning you at law,”
Tanner’s very words, ay! so in this precept there cannot be a flaw.
You may “ remove ” the vilifier, whether the tale is true or not,
In honour’s vindication, for Mosaic Law do not care a jot.
By drawing up a syllogism, and directing the intention,
Men may be. slain sans sin, from king to clown, from palace to eron.
Syllogisms—it is lawful to kiss women, maugre we wear amice,
Lilly Lissome is a woman, ergo, ’tis lawful to kiss the piece
Killing heretics is meritorious—the Holy Church ordains—
Such is John Smith, ergo, it is lawful to put him to death’s pains.
Honour is more than life, ’tis allowable to kill in life’s defence,
Ergo, it is right to in vindicating honour’s exigence.
The greater includes the less, ergo, any greater being granted
lhe less follows; a truth self-evident in logic’s fields implanted.
The first conclusion is clear enough, without schoolmen’s rule of thumb,
Most folk will take the premisses advanced to be an axiom.
Father. L Amy avers: “ A priest may slay those wights he may suspect
Of designs to lampoon him. So I am killable by edict.
A servant non-content may steal from masters, to augment his wage,
If not sufficient, sans sin, nor to Devil doth his spirit gage.
The priests must give him absolution, for they’ll be damned if they
don’t;
Thus casuists make things pleasant, for those who will, and those
who won’t.
Father L Amy, the jocose blade, proves all opinions pro and con.,
Are probable, penitents please themselves which e’er they act upon.
I don’t desire a nicer man, such holy truthful tales to tell,
And guide me on the path to paradise—or wirris throu ! to’ Hell.
Escobar endorses this, esprit de bon camaraderie.
Both dwell in the Darksome Shades, teaching devils escobarderie.
The fiends have been corrupted badly, since those worthies went below,
They now can argue black is white, and pirouette a la jimerow.
To institute the Inquisition, Torquemada worked amain,
But The Fiend put down his hoof, saith he: “ Sir, I’ll send you back to
Spam,
If you pollute my realm, for mankind’s iniquities in Hell can’t home*
So conduct yourself like a decent devil, or bless it! go to Rome'” ’
“Devil, dare you contravene the orders of the infallible Pope’”
“ Man > vile puppet of the passing hour; my Vicar’s tool, there is no
scope
For priestcraft here. We’re not bad as men, tho’ in fiery chaos lost,
Amerced of joy for ever more, and on those brimstone billows tost ”
Father L’Amy, I’allegro, tried to debauch the Devil’s daughter,
Princess Infernolene, whose arch wit was moly to the proven
Quoth the fiendess, greatly shocked:—“Oh! you wicked ghost' I’ll
tell my Pa.,
Do you take me for a Romish nun ? sir, those naughty beings, la!
Here earth-born love is vain, for there is no use for it or money.”
Greatly scared, the reverend spook replied: “ Dear popsey-wopsey
™, e , custom °f the mortal priests, to love the ladies rather,
But I 11 be more circumspect, since with the fiends I must foregather ”
1 o celebrate a Mass, Father Tanner tried—the reader will infer,
He lacked incense, and chief ingredient, to make the holy water
Priest O’Kissem, the type of all, cut capers in a sylvan dance,
1 he ruling passions still obtain, e’en o’er the bar of doomed durance*
Corrupting mankind ere the spirit from its mortal mould was wrenched,


The shade pursues a shadow of the sin, where fires are:
Then fell Torquemada’s time of terror came, begirt by furies rouna.
He howled in more than Hell-fire agony, fast in flaming e ers
For power is given to his victims’ avengers, to make him dree thrice
The°tortures of the Inquisition, he meted on
Loyola next receives his due, bewrapped in anguish of the mind,
His lost tools’ spooks mocked at his plaints and moans, in subt e y
“ *Tis all imagination,” jeered the fiends, “ You take fancies in your
TWp’s no one hurting you, you fool, you are resting on a downy oea.
Tten fast aSd furiouf grew the baiting, while they on Joseph vamly
called *
The vault’of Hell shook with the awful din; and e’en Satan fled
appalled. . . ,
Across the Gulf like the mirage mocking, appeared Elysianglade
And martyrs for the faith on golden thrones, in robes of arrayed.
How sweet the voice of Israfil, like lute notes o er Lake Como glides,
As bless’d hosannas of the saintly choir the Heavenly £u ldes -
But my muse is getting thirsty, to earth P e g hi s flig ,
For I engaged return passage, when late I sought those shades o
in Tidbinbilla jGlen, than down in smoky Hell,
’Mid brimstone bogs and boiling sloughs and concomitants
Rut not one demon of the Pit, so vile as snaky brood around,
In all my roamings round dark Pluto’s halls, so low I have not found.
Wives may pilfer from their husbands, and present their body
Vid/sanchez’ “ Sacrament of Marriage,” by Voltaire made a jest.
Jesuits are all things to all men, thus their maxims for the lax.
They have others for the upright, with these your patience I won t tax.
’T^mortal sin for Mac Bawbie, draper, to kiss his neighbour s wife,
But Captain Slasher of the Greys, may play the devil on the fife -
The Pope’s license is accorded, their sins are sponged off in a. trice,
To gay lads who have a weakness, for woman naughty yet so nice.
Some casuists forbid free love, frail beauty s fatal fascination,
Others permit it, as “ excusable and healthy relaxation.
Yankee Doodles say, you may sin just as you darned
oICHSC
Provided you can part sufficient cash, the priestly palm to grease.
Escobar writes funny maxims, anent romping with the ladies
He forbids and grants; paltering in a double sense, his trade is.
The thief may keep the stolen property, yet get absolution,
By payment of a priestly fee, they'll require no restitution.
Lies theft, assassination, fraud, are valid titles to estate,
All clearly proved by Escobar, if the Church goes shares as a mate.
He writes: P “ You’re not bound by any promise you don t intend to
keep.” . .
Such damnable doctrines coirupt the race by hypnouzing deep.
“ Thou shalt not commit adultery, saith Logos. If „
’Tis none,” saith Bauny, “direct the intention to mere pleasantry.
Both opinions being probable, absolution must be given;
So take a life, a wife, or pelf, the priest will grant a pass to Heaven.
To atrocious excesses, those pernicious maxims well may lead,
Mariana sanctions regicide: “ A glorious and me deed. ,
The very poor with a conscience clear, may steal from the rich man
As heretics have got no rights, their claims may safely be ignored.
’Tis lawful also to disguise the Faith, and pass for protestant,


To serve the Church, betray, play sneak and spy, bv order persuant
These are the ethics of the “ Catholic ” Church and its fraEv
As taught in the curriculum of the Romanist academy. Y ’
the maxims of the Jesuits, traverse every law of Moses
And their system can be summarized—Satan’s apotheosis
Essay on Popery.
Thl y ea p ofpo p ish slime and crime, disclosed by Chiniauv
The Gates of Hell he has flung aside, we view the Cimmerean
The secrets of Inferno are revealed, Oh, horror! and C?h s hame ''
The lowest lust, incest and viler still, too dark for me to name '
Debauchery and gluttony What fends the brimstone from on Hieh '
A swinish herd, sans noble thoughts, as brutes they live their day^nd
Convents are brothels for the p riests, degraded as a Kaffir kraal
&p Ct °, ry ?^ a . rlotS ’ , the Romanist Confessional; kr3a1 ’
“Monk'^Fwtray^ 3^8 *
Bootless expose, , statesmen sell their faith to catch an extra vote'
ProtestXJTeiS Vl ra^ S C n H Writ f r . s > truckle - th eir interests to promote.
decoyed into convents, then hope is o’er
rif 4 hey re law, and as good as dead for ever
Jesuits can teach their fearful maxims, and so degrade the race-'
White aWinks the Government, and thus the downward pushes on
’’ well a darker fiend than Milton’s sublime genius drew
Ye t, f ranked within their serried corps, we’ll find such nltfres not
He preys upon the passions, out-apes the Principle of Evil-
A dirty ragged mean old man, the harbour of a deadly will
toils! 10 1€ maelstrom of his wit - no?e can ’scape the
rhe Garden of Hesperides he mars, Arcadia fills with broils-
rWh W ! d -!i Ap ?- yon u l his word; the faire st fall before thescvthe-
WwfheartT“nsS'lftV"tonl n har ° n ferrys “ his h ’ ithe -
With'^each^Ll
A »
A stately column braved old time, saw Greeks and Romans come and
V\ ithin a crevice at its base, a sprouting seedling ’gan to £row-
Srengrt,"* * S CreP ‘ betwMn the and sappfd it’s massy
The adamantine mortar failed to bind, its 2rio eave in «*
Aurora wooed the aSrial heights, and wkh stSy day
Eld srehc reeled and rocked, then prone on earth in fluSdTragmlnts
Thus Rodin saps the social pile, his arts emasculate the mind,


Unmasked to infamy is nought, he wins, the shallow victims blind.
Eugene Sue’s chef d’oeuvre of a man of guile, never beaten yet:
And he is working in our midst to day, for none the fiend can let.
For where Rome’s doctrines work unchecked, a something eerie seems
to cling,
Like septic slime, we live beneath the shadow of the Devil s wing.
As crawled the monsters from the sea, to crush ill-fated Laocoon,
This Serpent of Ocean begrips weak men, to crush free life ettsoon.
Popery is a plague, and ought to be stamped out as the rinderpest,
Give no breeding ground to virulent disease, north, south, east, or
west.
The only sect that is ashamed to own the tenets of its faith.
Enshrouded in a bygone tongue, they’re muttered low with bated
breath.
Their ideal of Elysium, the basest that hope has ever wed,
Far lower than the Indian’s fantasy, when this life will have sped.
His, Happy Hunting Grounds, where roam the lordly buffaloes at play,
The pale-face comes not with his double-tongue, to chase the braves
away.
August Aidenn, where the Sun-God rolls his resplendent orb on high,
Smiling o’er lost Iran, where erst his Ghebers raised devotion s eye.
Avdlon Isle of Faerie, where to at even sinks the setting sun,
Empyrean for the leal and brave, when destined course on earth has
run.
Valkyrs welcomed heroes to Valhalla’s halls, eternity’s abode,
And Odin bent with a gracious mien, as o’er the crystal floor they
tr«de.
Moslems fly to Paradise, to find a Heaven in the houris’ eyes,
The meed of every turbaned brave, who thither oer A 1 Sirat hies.
Buddha taught most moble doctrines, that put the papal wolves to
blush,
Some, not to harm the meanest creature, nor e’en a paltry worm crush.
Confucius a wight of far renown, erstwhile preached a moral law,
And taught men, worth excels in value every vile acquired gew-gaw.
Who’ll exchange such dreams sublime, for sordid creed of 1 urgatory.
And hold, a silver coin feed to a priest, can ope the gates of glory.
That demon creed, of hate, of fraud, of blood, and crime, semper idem
still- . . .
Which in the dark is working silently, grinding dullards in its mill.
In school-room and confessional, Rome’s cacodemons forge their power,.
Degrading and defiling the intellect, into a moral sewer.
Licentiously suggestive filth, too loathly e’en for Hottentots,
Is whispered to the matron and the maid, poor beguiled mental sots.
This paves the way for vilest crime, betrayal of the nuptial bed
To priapean priests’ embrace: converts from the Church of Rome have
said.
Tesuits boast “their Company will flourish to the Judgment Day.
Then their System’s wrongs will be all righted, and tears all washed
away.
Archangel Michael’s trumpet blast, will wake the sleepers from the
grave;
Then vain the sophistry that now beguiles, such maxims cannot save.
No purchased Masses will avail, nor childish superstitious tricks;
No incense, vestments, rosaries, nor pagods of a saint or pyx.
No candles, relics, holywater, et cetera tomfoolery.
A baseless creed, an idiot’s dream, is pagan mariolatry..
To put it in a civil way, which may receive most approbation,
The doctrine of the Holy Roman Church, is all imagination.
• Let, to hinder.


The Cuckoo’s Call.
A legend of Sydney, Australia.
Caesar’s wife should be above suspicion, and so should one and all,
Be sure no bantling in the crib will cry, the abhorred cuckoo’s call.
Now darkest deeds of popery, must bear the searching of X-rays,
And e’en the mole like plots of Jesuits, are shown to public gaze.
The cat jumped out the bag, my word ! one Sea, a sailor, doth com-
plain:—
O’Kissem, priest, debauched his wife by guile, at first ’twas by amain;
In the sacristy of Saint Vesta’s, where the lady went to pray—
To Venus. Not once or twice, but for many a faithless sinful day.*
Then having had repented of her lapse, she to her spouse confessed—
How the Holy Father many a time, courted, kissed her and caressed.
He suffered from the Irish toothache bad, by all accounts, I trow* 2
Unlike Saint Francis, never tried to cool off in a bath of snow,
When fleecy flakes were falling fast. Such weather being rare in
Sydney,
He may be well excused for not being of cold ascetic kidney.
“Woman once beguiled, and evermore beguiling,” that’s the excerpt
pat!
The pie-crust vow can never bar, for the priest is a man for a’ that.
Sea hales the rip before the court, claims tawny metal for his weal,
For it is held, that gold can sometimes cure the hurts that cuckolds
feel.
To kiss and tell I can’t approve, more especially when poaching,
To tell a husband, upon preserves a priest has been encroaching.
‘ Kiss me quick and go my honey,’ the frisky fair one doth exclaim,
When the injured spouse is heard approaching, the scamp and faithless
dame.
Tho’ ’tis long since I’ve been to college, still I hold the rathe day rule—
It is a shame to split on pals, by telling stories out of school.
Many a man’s rocking his reverence’ child, and thinks he is rocking
his own;
There is many a man kissing his reverence’ Puss, oh! wirris throu!
och hone!
Sadly, sadly calls the cuckoo—that naughty bird with coat of gray,
Sadly, sadly calls the cuckoo—of ladies faithless fair and gay.
Aye the cuckoo’s call is waking, aye waking in the wittol’s heart;
The ‘ clargy ’ keep the keys of Heaven, so Mick must crouch and dree
the smart.
The cuckoo’s call is ringing thro’ the town, o’er mount and plain and
dale,
Aye the cuckoo’s call is ringing, ringing behind the silver veil.
Rome still the medieval monster, her instincts obtain cannibal,
The Devil’s daughter, seducing strumpet, who binds man as her
thrall.
Romanist immorality, tho’ shrouded from the public sight,
Produced, an esclandre, of the worst, in the blaze of law-court’s light.
Ere hearing, Sea’s man of law was arrested on a bogus charge;
This upset the case, broken was the sword and shattered was the
targe.*
No other wight durst fill the gap; Sea fought his crippled case alone,
Called his erring wife to give, her evidence—thus did she depone:—
To naughty.amours, which I’ll skip, admitted cuckoos in the nest,
And how with fondlings and endearments, the Lothario caressed.
* Saint Vesta; I use the old name.
*2 Irish toothache —la grande passion. Maybe Mrs. Grundy will think it sounds mors
41 proper in French.
* The solicitor was trapped, and vindicated.


’Twas: “ Popsey-wopsey, chick-a-biddy, duck, darling, tootsie, honey.’
Pleasantries that have an awkward knack of running into money.
One adulterine was christened ‘ Paddy, ’ after the saint —alack!
The priest’s—sailing too close to the wind, wear upon the safer tack.
The priest denied the accusation, he would swear that on the pyx,
“ Innocent essays,” quoth he, “ to see how many kisses make six.
Details my modest Muse can’t write, perforce across them draws the
screen,
They’d ne’er do for literature, free to perusal epicene.
“ O ! blessed Virgin, grant me a philtre to captivate by love,”
So prayed O’Kissem, said the lady, to his fetish saint above.
That blasphemy was well accorded, aye, hark! hark! the cuckoo’s call,
Reverberates all over Sydney Town, the jest of one and all.
“ Come, let us indulge,” O’Kissem cried, “let us join in the gipsey
dance,
I’ll teach Cytherean steps I have learned, in the pleasant land of
France.”
“ Was that the way he courted ?” said the Judge, “ Yes,” said the lady
fair;
“ Or: ‘ darling let us go to Mass.’ ” Halt! Muse, the rest you can t
declare.
I read this tale in newspapers, couched in the baldest of bald prose,
But when poets say such things, Propriety rages in blind throes..
The journalist may steal a horse, and not incur the slightest peril; .
Laws are different for bards, who o’er a wall must not look—at a girl.
So my Muse is careful to be moral, strictly, in every line,
Else on the golden rolls of Fame, she ne’er may hope to chastely shine.
How the lady and her lover, bowed to Venus victrix’ sweet commands.
Sensationally half robed, like the lasses who bathe on Manly’s sands.
No wonder his morals were corrupted, and pie-crust vows gave o’er,
’Twould quench the virtue of an anchorite, to walk that Lesbian shore.
So let charity hope and pray, his fault is expunged in the skies,
For many a man has lost his all, for woman’s dear deluding eyes.
Whisper! when a pretty maiden enters Saint Vesta’s sacred door,
Out a virgin, when the priests have blessed her, she ne’er departeth
more.
The sacristy is a rendezvous, and harbours the Imp of Love,
There Venus finds a bower, they say, and rivals with the saints above.
Priests like a little love, nathless vows, to illuminate their lives;
There are wenches willing to be won, why not draw the line at wives?
The Virgin has her votaries, whose hearts for mortal virgins burn,
Virgins by courtesy, if there is truth in Government’s return.
Twenty per cent, of Sydney’s births—around the truth I’ll wrap a
blanket—
Alas! how much per cent, is not found outl With Lais’ bower don’t
rank it;
For frailty flocks from afar to city’s dens, to hide its shame;
And gold can always buy a screen; and e’en whitewash o’er a blackened
name.
Priests have built a temple to the Virgin—the only virgin there —
For naughty questions in confessional, corrupt the melting fair.
Tho’ pure in body they may be, they must be very foul in mind,
For all the hideous smut they hear from priests, sinks deeper than the
rind. /
The only law they keep, ’tis sad to say, “ thou shalt not be found out”;
Their practise thro’ life’s varying lot, ’mongst every class, ’mongst
every rout.
Anent married dames ? it is hard to tell, far better be discreet;
* A seaside resort near Sydney, where mixed surf bathing on the open beach is current.
The ladies are more remarkable for their good figures than for their modesty. The Roman
College for Young Priests stands by.— The Author.


I’ll say nought about the famas, re priests, the forces, and the fleet.
May be they’re true as Sir Carodoc’s spouse, and famed Penelope;
Yet the sailor’s star was Venus, when poor Jack was away at sea.
(Gentle reader, I write of Roman matrons and of maids and men,
For heretics outside her pagan pale, don’t come within my ken.)
When Priest O’Kissem poured oblations, the dame’s chastity to
slaughter,
He washed the sin away—she swore in court—with three star holy
water.
What a handy faith the Romish is, more especially for rakes,
The nice tit-bits a man can get, yet ne’er the soul the Devil takes.
So like the frog he will a-wooing go, in amorous emprise,
To play the satyr ’mongst the female folk, a wolf in saintly guise.
And when the anthem floats upon the air, around the Gothic wall,
It reminds the Benedict of priestcraft’s skeleton—the cuckoo’s call.
’Tis writ in many a tale of woe and sin, in hamlet and in hall,
Superstition, hyprocrisy, and vice, the black coat hides them all.
The Pope ought canonize the cuckoo, that friar of orders gray,
So that like every other saint of old, the bird will have his day;
(The round-towers of Ireland, ’tis said, a worship of like subject pall,)
And churches can be dedicated to—Saint Cuckoo of the Call.
Men seek raiown by varied paths, Church, State, the Sabre, or the Pen,
But love alone is woman’s chiefest care, horizon of her ken.*
The priest was “ vindicated,” judge and jury would not dare convict.
Oyez! oyez! oyez! peoples, this was the New South Wales edict:—
“ The priest may seduce wives of protestants.” Cade spaniels, they
submit,
Trade requires a winking eye; decadent things, callous e’en to twit.
Sadly wilts the sturdy British oak, when transplanted o’er the Line,
Knox and Walker’s, Ridley’s race, cringe for yellow ore dug out the
mine.
It were sad to tell, how the cowardly jury sold the case to Rome,
Dared not defend the birthright of the Briton, the virtue of the home.
The palladium of our liberty, native of the British sod,
The secret terrorizing of Jesuits, can wrest into a rod.
I did not make those facts, so never shy your boomerang at me,
Mend grit and morals, ye Laodiceans, else Spain’s doom ye’ll dree.
“ The Reformed Faith is dead amongst the throng,” aggressive papists
vaunt,
O ye knocked-kneed descendants of Britons ! will ye pocket the taunt ?
Ye are very brave, forsooth ! when gathered in great halls of the town',
But when singly interviewed in private, ah ! then ye knuckle down,
Cringing lowly. Are ye the race who still can boast they rule the
waves ?
And proudly vaunt of “ Free Australia,” when ye own the hearts of
slaves.
Ye lack the grit to muster at the polls, and vote your country free;* 2
What then will happen, when the arm&d foe comes inward from the sea.
In vain the fiery cross will circulate—hark! ware the raven’s croak!
For it will never rouse the fight, in weaklings to Rome’s bondage
broke.
The priest was made a bishop, to bluff heretics’ sarcastic jeers,
And his due, at his (cuckoo) calling, being prime amongst his peers.
With head erect as bold as brass, his reverence saunters round the
block, *3
Despite the cool effrontery, ’tis known, false Rome has got a shock.
* The exception prove the rule.
*2 Protestant shopkeepers are afraid to vote, for it is known how they would record it
vide “ The Watchman.”— The Author.
*3 The block—fashionable streets of a citv.


“ The Watchman ” flings his sinning in his teeth, yet keeps inside the
law,
And advises him to ‘ buy a whitewash brush, and ply it o’er the flaw.’*
The faithful gave him sovereigns thousands ten, blackmailed in many
ways,* 2
From which it seems, to be an Abelard, in Roman priesthood pays.
Say, did the protestants assist the husband, wronged by cunning guile?
No. The crowd doth shun the stricken deer, and none help the lame
o’er stile.
He “ was not prominent,” said the Great Priest Fighter, and worse—
he failed.
So the Lords Paramount banished him, perforce for New Zealand
sailed.
The prosecuting lawyer I—Priestcraft, the prisoner in the dock;
This book, the evidence that’s urged, to send the felon to the block.
You, kind readers, judges of the case; hail! Caesar, turn down the
thumb!
Let the men of Baal be silenced, the Tempter’s tools for ever dumb.
The Moral to adorn the Tale.
All ye gay young men of Sydney City, you take warning by Sea;
Never you wed with popish miss, else you will surely sorrow dree.
Don’t ever cross swords with the priest, unless of the sanctified clique—
And ’tis bread and cheese, or kudos, else you a covert far must seek.
Forest Nights in Tidbinbilla Glen.
Far away from the prosaic township, where scheme and trick false
men,
The brooklet wimples ’mongst the ferns, ’mid Tidbinbilla’s grassy glen.
The sun has sunk behind the range, and deeper dark the ravines loom;
The red-gold rays evanish out the sky, while Nox descends in gloom.
No longer sounds the lyre-bird’s mocking notes, innate his vesper hymn.
Fades the ruby glow from out the beryl sky, nature’s arcanum.
Unfold the wings of eerie night; gentle silence wraps day’s clamours;
Murmur the gliding waters by; gone the gloaming’s mystic glamours;
Slow rolls the moon thro’ azure, tremulous the starry galaxy;
Shrieks the quarry in the wild-dog’s fangs, jarring on night’s melody.
Hushed are discordant cries of songless birds, sheep’s bleat, and low of
kine;
Still is the woodman’s axe, the crack of whip, calm reigns around vicine.
Settlers press the humble couch, tired eyes seek the balmy salve of care,
Oblivion blesses man. Wild whisper night winds thro’ the ebon air.
Re-echos mopoke’s monotone, sad cry, throughout the bosky wold,
Those strange survivals of evanished eld, ere yet the orb waxed old.
Far wide in th’ ambient serene, nocturnal notes are hoarsely ringing,
Unlike the nightingale’s, in myrtle groves and olive copses singing.
Rustles the wombat thro’ the wattle scrub; hop-hop the wallaby;
The ’possum plays along the bough, all breath untrammelled liberty.
Eucalypti wave their sombre mantles, resounds the crashing thud,
Old Father Time walks axe in hand, amongst the monarchs of the
wood.
The musk-trees’ aromatic odor, on the balmy night wind steals,
Like memories of the past, that the lonely starlit hour reveals.
As the night advances, sets Orion o’er Tidbinbilla’s Peak,
The classic fields of old historic lands, far, far away to seek.
* “ The Watchman ” —the Orange' organ.
*2 Protestant shopkeepers were forced to contribute by threats of boycott—a usual game.


Weird curlew cries awake the welkin, as if th’ Ethiopian’s shade,
Were wailing o’er lost hunting-grounds, annexed by axe and plough
and spade. >.
So oft in Tidbinbilla’s lonely nights, my vigil banished slumbers,
Hearkening to that bird of sadness, pleading plaints in mournful
numbers,
As soft soughing sounds of surging zephyrs, came sighing o’er the fells,
Ah ! then the spirit voices whisper, dream-tales which the poet tells.
The price-banned outlaws of the waste, with untuned chords salute
the ear,
And tell the Watcher of the night, that Freedom holds her fortress here.*
The Monks of Saint Malt.
1.
Kissing girls and ogling wives,
Courting as the Devil drives,
Drinking whisky all their lives,
Thus the Order gaily thrives.
Fiddling, feasting, sans a halt,
Raking live the Monks of Malt.
2.
Spending freely borrowed cash;;
Always gallant when they mash;
Never reck rash brains to fash,
Soon or late if comes the crash.
Kissing, courting, sans a halt,
Raking live the Monks of Malt.
3.
Then the joys of wedlock try,
Empty purses cellar dry.
Sober down with many a sigh,
For the jovial days gone by,
When they went it, sans a halt,
Raking with the Monks of Malt.
The Wheat God.
The farmer yoked his oxen to the plough, and broke the sod amain;
Then scattered seed broadcast thereon, the harrows followed in his train.
The gentle dews of heaven blest the soil, blithely rose the leaflets green,
And tall and strong they daily grew, it was a pleasant sight, I ween !
So as the sun grew hot and high, the wavy blades were tipped with gold,
While goodly grains of wheat filled every ear, as waxed the season old.
Then came the farmer and his men, who stoutly plied the reaping hooks,
They bound the stalks in sheaves with swathes of straw, and stacked
them up in stooks:
And in due time, the sheaves were thrown about, upon the threshing
floor,
While stalwart rustics swung the flail, to loose from husks the wheaten
store.
Then ’twas winnowed clean, and placed in sacks, and carted to the
miller;
Who ground it ’twixt two twisting stones to flour, selling it for siller.
* Written year* ago, before the advent of the rabbit. Vain attempts to keep down the pest
by poison have mostly killed out the fauna, and the pest mostly killed out the flora.— Th«
Author.


The baker needed some to knead to dough, then baked it into bread,
And sold it up and down the town to folks, it scarcely need be said.
The priest one day cut off a wafer slice, then danced a jimcrow round,
And muttered words in Latin tongue of strange import, blaspheming
sound. . ,
Then placed it in a gold lined silver box—this product of the sod.
And swore by candle, bell and book it was—the Lord Almighty God ...
But there were some who jeered: “ Bosh pagan, we eat your god with
butter; ~
Golden calves were erst divine, the farce will end in gods of gutter.
The irate priest his purpose crossed, then summoned myrmidons to slay;
And fast and furious grew the fight, which lasted many a bloody day.
With red-gilt swords they hacked the ravished maid, and rip’d the wife
with child; . ...
They fired the hamlet and the hall, ’mid hellish orgies low and wild.
They slew the men, who fought in vain, their creed and kindred folk to
So ’till the trump shall wake the dead, they’re sleeping in a martyr s
grave.
“ Hurrah ! hurrah! ” the papists cried, “ lo! we are the Wheat God’s
holy crew, „ . . ~
Who dares deny our Sacred Vegetable? the God the farmer grew.
The Led-Captam Judge.
On an Australian Papist Judge, a Tool of the Jesuits.
As Paddy smoked his pipe before the hotel door, up walked the priests’
led-captain judge; # .
But Paddy smoked away at ease, nor deigned one inch for him to budge.
“ Sirrah, clear the way,” His Honour cried, “ you know that I am a
colonel and a judge.”
Yet Paddy smoked away with nonchalance, and merely muttered: fudge.
“ I’ll have you locked up in the cells,” th’ angry Solon cried, “ I’ll teach
you to cheek a judge.”
“ Of pigs or praties, which,” said Pat, then winked and gave his mate
a nudge.
“ You’d be a long time in Old Ireland, man, ere you’d a way unto your
betters grudge.”
“ That is true, be gor 1 ” said Pat, “ and so would you, ere you would
be a judge.”
The Papist Spalpeen Judge.
A LEGEND OF WEST CORK, IRELAND.
Now kites and buzzards make their prey,
Where eagles cannot perch,
Since every jack became a gentleman;
There is many a gentle person made a jack.”—Shakespeare.
Once on a time in West Cork’s glens, there stood a sheebeen shop,
Where humble estovers were sold, and good potheen too a drop.
Old Paddy was a thrifty carle, the coppers waxed to pounds;
And his ambition grew apace, its limits knew no bounds.
His only son a schooling got, for Paddy had discerning,
“ There is nothing on this here earth,” said he, “ to baate the learning.”
Wisdom kept those views concealed, humble to the quality,
And civil to folks of low degree, was sound policy.
When as driving pigs to fair, he, Sir Saint Leger Gillman met,


The old caubeen was doffed, lowly louting to the baronet.
The humbleness was all skin deep, “ I’ll save what e er I can;
Before I die,” thought he, “ I’ll make my son a gentleman.
Young Paddy in due course was ’prenticed to a solicitor,
Learned to serve the Devil’s Own in petty ways and major.
Next, we find him sworn attorney —and gentleman—by law;
Skilled to plaster o’er a lie, and in truth to pick a flaw.
An office he set up, with clerk and desk brass plate and all.
To the surprise of local swells, who thought the sky would fall.
Protestant ascendancy prevailed, in olden days I write, .. .
And papists under lay, decadent now, changed the sorry plig •
Paddy was a man of grit, quoth he: “ I’ll live down contempt,
Those haughty landlords yet may learn, they re not from ill exempt.
So Paddy plied his craft with skill, and acted on the square,
Thus business waxed by leaps and bounds; his bills of costs were tair.
He got a book on etiquette, and learned to make a bow,
So few would think he was when young, a driver of the plough.
Then landed magnates patronized, some borrowed ready cash,
Those harum-skarum Irish landlords, the first step to crash.
When Paddy had them in his grip, he fished for some invites
To balls and dinners of the Upper-Ten, who flew the kites.
Their high-born dames at first refused—hints about foreclosure
From Paddy, tamed their pride; cards sent, with assumed composure.
The Misses snubbed the parvenu, laughed at his uncouth gaucherie,
Yet one married him for money, a buxom half-bred filly. . ,
(Girls were not so cheap in days «f yore, when George the third was
King, . .
As at present time, when there’s a glut of fishers for the ring.)
That’s the way with women, just keep on wooing and you 11 win,
The darlings change their minds, especially if you have tin.
Under hand the usurer lent, thro’ agent Auch-a-booty,
And thus won money in wavs crooked, that savoured of the sooty.
But all was fair in office work, for honesty pays best,
\nd it requires good character, to be the landlord s guest.
I heard the legend oft in Clonakilty, by a sea-coal hre.
School-boy taunts from me re it, then roused his bantling Jarge s ire.
There was a'thorn in his side, hight John Jokely, graceless wag,
A rhyming blade, who made lampoons couched wittily to tweag.
“ Auchy is going to take tay with Paddy the Upstart, O . n .
‘ Tay without sweetnin’,’ for Paddy ’twas, squirming from the smart CM
“ A bowl of hot porridge, and, pot-cover for to sit down—
‘ Excuse me,’ said Auchy, ‘ shure-I’m in a hurry to town. .
(Rising from the ranks, erst was held to be a sort of social crime
In those western glens, where race pride lingers to the present time.)
Paddy and his landlord backers, one Sunday made a slip,
Sentenced Jokely to six months. Quashed. Then Johnny had a grip.
“ An illegal act,” ruled the Judge, “ to try on the Day of Rest.
A case for damages was clear, so the rhymer came off best.
A hundred sovereigns squared the Thorn; who sailed from the Irish
shore,
Farewell to Jokely and his fun, he is gone for evermore.
Then little Paddy’s ’gan to come, the eldest hope hight—Jarge.
Mastered by the servant folk under peril of discharge.
“ Masther Jarge, indaade, we’ll cock the spalpeen up with titles,
Their pride will bust ’em, by rayson of the dacent vittles.
Maate and puddins, the ould chap lived on yaller maal and bran.
Shure! the upstarts is no better than ourselves, och ! bad scran .
Porridge is riz those times, faix! may be Jarge yet will be a judge.
God bless him—o’er the left.” The spokesman gave his mate a nudge.
When Jarge waxed to his teens, he went to a high class public school,
Learned some Latin, and some Euclid, to parse by Murray’s rule,


In Hingland, to himprove the ’orrid Hirish haccent bad,
And spoiled a decent Erinite, to make a Cockney cad.
His quantities were false, and on the asses’-bridge he stuck.
No odds, for at his back stood fortune, better still, stood luck.
Alumnus next at Trinity he studied with some pains,
And clearly proved he had not got his father Paddy’s brains.
But wealth oft serves in place of wit, so he contrived to pass
B.A. Ihe Provost said, he “ thought Jarge was not quite an ass.”
“ A raael jintleman intirely—bannister-at-law,”
(Defunct Old Paddy used to say), Jarge struts like a bashaw.
At junior bar the tyro pleads, requests a rule nisi,
’Twas granted—’gainst his client—Paddy blamed the fool, my eye!
His father sent him many a cheque, and also many a brief,
And thus he kept appearance up, or else had come to grief,
A mediocre muddler, not e’en gifted with the gab,
He one time proved the adverse case, by over doing blab.
At length in Four Courts takes his seat, in silken gown plus wig,
His menage boasts landau and pair, and liveries and gig.
Jarge has the. entree to all routs and levies in the Castle,
The plebeian is bon ton, sublimed in golden aludel.
(’Twas required to be gentle per contante, or per sang,
Erewhile, now every jack is better than the Castle gang).
Next, pays court to lady, fair daughter of a baronet,
Who at first refused to wed him, not being of her set.
Almighty gold again invoked, what-can’t that god achieve?
’Twill win its way thro’ plates of steel, that Krupps can never cleave.
By influence of wife’s family, he chiefs the Devil’s Own,
A stepping-stone unto the Bench—there he shines a paragon:
Behold the Judge! So the fool-government shackle their own hand,
And step by step the priests are winning, the ruling of the land.
If fortune favours future fate, nor plays false fickle work,
We yet may see Jarge ’mongst the peers—Lord Praties of West Cork.
EPILOGUE.
There is precedent for the promotion, and protestants don’t grudge—
If Roman horse could be a consul, why not Irish donkey be a judge?
No doubt he’ll be a decent Solon, when not led-captain of the priest,
Under orders to prostitute his calling, justice’ scales to twist.
His skeleton sits beside him on the Bench, despite the ale and cake.
High minds are proud of talent for a crest, the cur wilts in an ake.
’Tis all Imagination.
A PLAY UPON THE JESUITS’ FORMULA FOR GULLING.
Thanks Satanites, miscalled Jesuits, for teaching me the cliche—
Tis all imagination, your dull gammon, but it serves the day.
Bishop Berkeley has done for matter, what your lies have done for fact.
And Darwin for the Holy Writ. Ye prove a myth and truth infract.
’Tis all imagination, an argument that gabies ever use,
It suits the comprehension, when reason’s oil is lacking in the cruse;
Yet comes in handy many a time, when you’re gammoning dull asses.
’Tis a very ancient formula, oft used by clever lasses,
And the faithless dame to baffle, when suspected bv a jealous spouse,
Who leaves his wife to mope at home, while he is having a carouse.
A refuge for the hen-pecked husband, when charged with a flirtation,
Tiddly-winking with the girls: “ My dear, ’tis all imagination.”
It is echoed by agnostics, who aver, there’s no supreme God,
All things evolved by nature’s laws, in sky, in water, on the sod.
The formula will suit the statesman—not in words so bold and free.


When millions draw behind a King, ’tis better practise courtesy.
Twill suit the juggling lawyer at the bar, who tries to bluff the right;
And editors, who snugly safe at home, urge witless wights to fight.
Twill suit the dull protestant, aye, indeed, ’twill gull the juggins well,
Any childish lie is good enough for him, papists list to tell.
Twill suit “ cardinals ” and pious lies, to serve pocket of the priest,
And all the tomfool mumbojumboing of worship of Black Beast.
Twill suit savants who discover—bumble-bees within the bonnet;
The poet, when to his lady’s lovely eyes he writes a sonnet.
Imagination, say critics, is grandest of the mental gifts,
’Twill grasp all time and space, e’en pass thro’ solid substance without
rifts.
Imagination, saith the mammonite, is—he knows not himself,
For he has none, his thoughts, his joys, his hopes, are centred in the
pelf.
The best of life, saith philosophers, is but illusion’s glamour,
Romance and love dreams, most of the thoughts that rouse on earth a
clamour.
The imagination of the patriot, is oft extravagant,
Degenerates to fool-fury, floundering in a sea of rant.
All folks great and small build castles, alas! the most of them in Spain;
And if you think it o’er, you’ll find, ’tis in life’s chaff the only grain.
The muckworm has its ghost, he thinks as day by day he hoards the
ore:
“ A god am I, ne’er to die,” for his kin, he’s but an entr4e more.
’Twill suit the canards circulated by Loyala’s lying sons,
And the maxims of their casuists, and the virtue of the nuns;
The popish priesthood’s vow of chastity; the tenets of their faith,
The merest shadow of the truth, as seen, or fancied, in a wraith.
The angler’s expectation to bring home a basket full of fish;
The finder and flinger of a horse-shoe, that he will get his wish.
The fowler’s, that he hit gyrating snipe at seventy yards and three;
That six men, or clocks, upon points of time, or doctrine, can agree.
The poet’s dream of immortality, to live tho’ wrapped in night;
And mine, that I’ll win the battle with the puissant Jesuit.
Most of the love tales, men whisper into ladies’ listening ears,
The vows of everlasting truth they swear, and keep, perhaps, the dears.
Half the tales upon the storied page, three fourths in daily papers.
Lady Crim. Con.’s pleas of purity, when charged with cutting capers.
The young man’s fancy thinks his darling, perfection the most utter,
Tho’ but a pretty maiden, who likes a kiss and bread and butter.
A sect now preaches, we don’t exist ourselves, that man is but a thought,
An airy form of speculation, in which the Hellenes erst wrought.
Poetry is imagination’s truth, formed in verse by sublime art,
A definition not quite complete in all, tho’ it will serve in part.
The “ personal experience ” of the lordling who wrote: “ Boers will run
When fall three men,” since Ananias’ days, the best beneath the sun;*
Too good to lose, in double harness let the worthies take the air,
I’ll pass them down along the vale of time, as—The Immortal Pair.
It will suit the Jesuits’ denials—but that goes without saying.
The wrongs of Ireland, what are they? restraining robbery and slaying.
Adventures of coxcombs ’mongst the ladies, when they don’t kiss and
tell.
Hunting yarns, and campaign tales, snake stories, none e’er fished out
a well.
The viands at legendary banquet, given by the Barmecide;
High hopes springing in the human breast, when comes the turn of the
tide.
*A letter in “The Times,” signed by a baronet, before the war. Thus the Jesuits fooled
John Bull into loss of prestige, and two hundred and fifty millions—to build the Boer nation.


When I explain the hellish arts, passim told in many a story,
And discourse upon historic page, and deeds of horror gory;
Or try to make the dullards realize, dark working of intrigue,
How plots are laid, how passions wrought and victims crushed, by hellish
League;
“ Phoo! phoo!” the parrots cry, “ Micky saith, ‘ that it is his persuasion,
’Tis just Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s foolishness, and ’tis all imagination.’ ”
THE AUTHOR’S RETORT TO CRITICS.
Hark! ye dunces, soak this hit, the shot that now I’m landing—
I write sooth, the foolishness lies in your understanding.
Toadgunyah-in-the-Hole.
Character sketch of those who crossed my path for ill in Queanbeyan
District, N. S. Wales and elsewhere.
I sing a nest of reptiles, named Toadgunyah-in-the-Hole,
Who crawl about as bipeds, sans conscience, may be sans soul.
Low-cunning, treachery, and fraud abound on every side,
Cupidity and ignorance, for ever with them bide.
They care nought for honour, Uprightness, character and deed.
The Papal Upas o’er them shades, it grows a noxious weed.
If unmolesting pass a snake, ’twill let you by in peace;
My theme, choke full of venom spit, their blacker hearts to ease.
They are jackals of the Jesuits, secret, silent,bold,
And ready to do any crime, to grab a little gold.
Mine, a vicissitudinous career, I’ve roamed the world o’er,
Yet, have not met a viler skulk, ay, on any pagan shore.
The righteous can be counted, on the fingers of the hands,
Exotics ’mongst the Roman tools, Lot’s decad in all lands.
Their viciousness is virulent, tainting comelings in their sphere,
So I shun contamination, and of their low ways keep clear.
For mind environed thus, like plant in cellar dark will die,
But like edelweiss, blooms ’neath pure tho’ icy sky.
Books are better mental food by far, than their low company,
Which, like pitch, defiles the decent new-chum from across the sea.
You’re likely to be choused in deals, in private and in mart,
For roguery is rampant, and mean fraud is a fine art.
Yet I have found that Britons—l say so with feeling sad—
When tempted with their plunder price, were every bit as bad.
The men I draw were seeming honest in the face of day,
But when they saw a chance, in Satan’s hands were potter’s-clay.
I have found them everywhere, from Cape Leeuwin to Cape Clear,
Ready to sell their souls for cash, to buy some goods and gear.
Not all poor men who wanted money, but rich who wanted more,
And tho’ worth tidy pile, would not hesitate to sneak a score.
Rhodes the African held, that every man has got his price,
And made giant fortune, in little longer than a trice.
I held men were honourable—and lost the most of mine;
Too late I know the ropes of life, for ebbs my vespertine.
When upright smoke the jackal rogues, no danger lurks one bit,
With safety can be watched, the tricksters’ infantile pig’s-wit.
Tis hard for honesty to hold, they are not what they seem,
But when that’s realized at last, repugnance is extreme.
The Salvation man, and Methodist, were blackest of the black,
That is my exoerience of them, for those creeds I don’t attack.
Amity lures on to Ruin’s inexorable grasp,
Far safer is their rancour, to ken wriggling of the asp.


That all the folk about are villains, indeed, I do not say,
But honest men have got a knack, of keeping out of mv way.
I’ve heard men teaching sons to lie and rogue—stale flat scheming—
To lure me to the toils, whilst I was bat-blind in seeming.
Their only Christian custom, to atone for meanest sin,
When a stranger locates, they will be sure to take him in:
Tho’ they won’t exactly clothe him, they certainly will fleece;
Truth can’t find a well to camp in, and wrong has no surcease.
They lick the spittle of the priest, from self-respect they part,
To get the custom of his flock, each for the private mart.
To the squatter low they crawl and cringe, like spaniels for his smile—
And gold. If he wants your land, around you twines a net of guile.
They will trap a Brother Mason, and fawn Rome’s humblest tykes,
To coax coppers from their masters, The Priest and sovran Mikes.
A woman’s honour is not safe, in township or in fields,
Nor e’en a child’s; such is the spawn that Roman teaching yields.
The jingle of the guineas, to them is music o’ the spheres;
Pan and Mammon are their gods, their heaven is drinking deep long
beers.
Unlettered boorc they think they’re smart, they’re shallow as veneer,
Scratch one, and you’ll find a void of wind, outside ruts and gear.
They’re up in shop, and in their lines they know a thing or two,
The shrines of their devotions, plus perhaps a lass to woo.
They know the ins and outs of things they never heard about,
With cocksure ignorance, don’t hesitate experts to flout.
Their talk is of bullocks, their knowledge confined to their trade,
Poets and savants they ignore, but deep in twaddle wade.
Advantages they’ll take, the very meanest of the mean,
So utterly degraded, they call men of honour ‘ green,’
Who suspect not rogues; for their moral vision is oblique,
And all that lifts mankind above the brutes, to them is Greek.
Hospitality is degraded, to a means of bribery,
Or lure to mask a trap, when unguarded tongue is wagging free.
What a contrast to those Punic wights, germane to the west,
Is the desert Arab, with the lone stranger for his guest.
Once they break the sacred bread and salt v 'thin the nomad’s tent,
Safe the roamer is from fraud or force, ’till one day’s journey sent;
Tho’ unwittingly the pledge was given, to dire enemy:
And paraded ’mongst all true men, in days of chivalry.
E’en the boxer stands by fighting fair, within lowly span,
For he who strikes below the belt, the umpire counts no man.
“ Man’s heart is deceitful, and desperately wicked,” still,
You’ll read this in the Bible, just what I say, if you will.
I write in sayings dark, for I don’t want to be; too clear,
As the application of my verse, extends far and near.
Painting vilest human nature, and fearless marching o’er
Where Sue and Pascal boldly drew, and plied the lash of yore.
Thinking in continents, the world is one country unto me,
With the Roman Church, on that doctrine, I heartily agree.
Envious each petty rogue looks up with adoring awe,
To bigger fish, and crimes that baffle justice and the law.
Eternal Evil their constant guide, marching at their backs,
Where’er they walk, the cloven print is seen above their tracks.
The vilest sounder e’er I’ve met, (experience here I tell),
Venal they are not, for they have no principles to sell.
Tho’ I have lived two decades o’er, upon Toadgunyah ground,
One honest heart I scarce have met, a trusty friend ne’er found.
They would cheat their brother of his due, to bank an ounce of ore;
They are tainted in their blood, and they are rotten at the core.
Each man deals with his fellows as knaves, on guard ’gainst the bite,
And from experience I can add, that is the measure right.


They all aspire to soar the golden-eagle—to be brief—
With scarcely wit enough to sneak, the owlet hen-roost thief.
I have a vital scorn, of the ignoble minded crew,
And loathe the links that make me deal, as if false hearts were true.*
I never heard a flash of wit, when reason’s feast boiled o’er,
Nor e’en high-souled thought, since landing on this medial shore.
Highmindedness and self-respect, languish as exotics,
Or bloom like edelweiss, on marge of glacier’s narcotics.
There is honour amongst thieves, and ’tis not in vain to hope
It may be found amid Toadgunyah—with a microscope.
The Mutton-Headed Protestant.
Smart in business, not uneducated, are five of them in ten;
Yet they cry ‘ yap! yap!’ when wires are pulled by the dark robed Lords
of men.
Eyes have they, yet perceive not, for to dullards’ eyes the page is blank.
Ears have they, they hear, yet comprehend not, for unused powers get
stank.
They read askew, without the mental grasp which puts the thoughts ill
train,
That is, they read words, which convey no meaning to the inert brain.
They cannot realize the low finesse, passim delineated;
They’ve foggy notions, priests are wicked, and ought to be she-mated.
That priests lay plots, somewhere fn books, but not around their daily
path,
Else: “ A clever chap like me would spot them, for I’m no stripling rathe.
As proverbial young man from the country, with both eyes can I see;
This Bard comes it duc6d strong, but his poesy won’t get over me.
They say, ’tis all imagination, aye, Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s jeer and joke;
Such wickedness exists not here—come, let us have a drink and smoke.”
EXPLICATIVE.
Reader, find such people everywhere, ’mongst the haunts of men,
The righteous and the wicked folk, as I draw with my pen.
A sample of the race, with some exceptions, since The Fall;
And when you get behind the scenes of life—know one—know all.
When an honest man is well influenced by a Jesuit,
!n the blackest ways of perfidy, he will wing his flight.
The Sons of Saint Cuckoo.
1.
The Priest he leads a festive life;
Ne’er lacks a kiss, tho’ sans a wife.
So jocund with the fumes of wine;
Whilst round his neck white lilies twine.
Quoth the gray bird: “ Cuckoo.”
The burden sad and true.
2.
The priest he is a cunning dog;
Your bank account he’ll slyly cog;
And with the air of saint divine,
Will spring beneath your feet a mine;
Hoisted by the Cuckoo,
Remorseless as a Jew.*
* Why not quit. When capital is sunk in land and cannot be realized unless at ruinous
loss, that cannot be done.
* I have found the Chosen race as fair in trade as non-Jews. — The Author.


3.
The priest he is a man of wiles;
Lies graciously with wreathed smiles;
No woman e’er like him can shine,
In devious paths and lures feline,
When he plays the cuckoo,
And naughty things will do.
4.
The priest he lives upon the best;
In decent black he’s always drest;
And pockets many a byzantine.
Where guestwise, with Lucullus dine.
Leaves a little cuckoo.
Religion hides the clue.
5.
The priest he keeps the keys of Heaven;
From there all heretics are driven;
He lords it midst the forest pine,
In cities vast, o’er oceans’s brine.
Whistling gaily: “ cuckoo.”
Can such foul faith be true ?
6.
The priest absolves the women folk;
Besetting sins of Cupid’s yoke
Evanish; tho’ by his design,
There comes love’s secret valentine.
Hints not anent cuckoo.
Alas ! such things he’ll do.
7.
The priest he is a learned man,
Escobar’s text can wisely scan,
Prove Britomart a concubine;
And truth and right are all moonshine;
Moral is the Cuckoo.
Tho’ husbands oft look blue.
8.
The priest is hussified by his niece;
For that’s the name he calls the piece;
His daughter—or a mate compline—
Most folk will wickedly opine;
Slyly whistling—* cuckoo.”
But that is nothing new.
9.
The priests on Fridays change to fish,
A turkey, goose, or other dish;
Thus keep the fast in ways supine,
And wassail high with rosy wine;
Romping like the cuckoo.
A jolly rakish crew.


10.
The Priest he is an exorcist,
Fiends fly his spells—the fabulist—
Then in his wicked heart confine;
(The last a happy thought of mine)
Softly singing—“cuckoo.”
(For I see millstones through).
11.
The priest he is the Devil’s Own;
Tho’ lawyers hold that style in pawn.
But here I’ll have to draw the line;
With Momus fly the Muses Nine;
Gibing, joking, “cuckoo.”
Time is beating tattoo.
TO THE READER:—
Sir. —
This skit contained nine stanzas more,
For I had planned to print a score:
But critics said —‘ they’d never do ’
So scored them with blue pencil through.
Re other verse they said the same,
For there are sins I must not name.
Passim, I clipped and changed and filed,
Obeyed the rule—to draw it mild.
This will explain some obvious hitches,
About the clergy and their -•
A lot of laughs were lost no doubt,
When the small jokelets I struck out.
But it is naughty to be funny,
About a lass and kisses honey.
Yours faithfully, for this short life’s fleeting span,
And in Land of spooks. Henry de Ffreyne-GuiUmayne.
Tidbinbilla’s Glen,
Date, sixteen eight ten,
The state of New South Wales,
From hence this booklet hails.
EPIGRAM.
Some call the priests—' deceitful fry,*
That wicked slander I deny:
Their looks proclaim a dark Loki,
And by my faith! they do not lie.
The Proverbial Niece.
“ Father Cuckoo,” quoth I jokingly, “ your crib is ornamented with a
You^sdy^okT sinner, so you enjoy Fair Rosamonda, and yet hoodwink all
“O! you wicked wicked Orangeman,” the priest replied, I pray this
badinage will cease; . . , . . , ,
Bless’d Virgin, witness it! that lady is my married sister s child, y
beloved niece.”


The Dark Hand of Destiny.
The poet’s fickle fate has ever been, a wayward one of wrong,
Wealth’s smug respectability sorts not, with gramarye of song.
His mistress, or his friend, proves false, if true, then fortune frowns
elsewhere.
When steel and granite clash, the sparks will fly; thus bards are wrought
by care.
Job’s luck oft proves the mettle of the man, and sets his grit aglow,
The strong will turn and strive again, the weak fall headlong ’neath the
blow.
When prospects lower and hope recedes, cheer up, ’tis darkest ere the
dawn.
No surrender to fate’s foulest, hardest blows, evince British brawn.
A rift reveals to acumen oft times, the sheening phosphorous.
Nil desperandum wins the quest, vengeance, wealth, or bubble kudos.
Dame Fortune favours those who dare, woo her as Richard wooed
Queen Ann,
Her ‘ no ’ may change to ‘ yes,’ for she ne’er prefers a milksop to a man.
Oft shuns the leal and intellect, and showers her favours on the base;
’Tis not grit, nor pains, nor worth, nor brains, that wins, fate in every
case.
Tho’ blazoned on the rolls of Fame, afar the fickle Goddess flies,
Her daughter haunts life’s rugged path, and fills the gusty air with
sighs.
Tho’ stormed is the jaggy wall, scaled the lofty rampire of renown,
Carking care esquires the bard, and oft rends the bay-leaves from the
crown.
My pen which paints mean men, the rogue and his tool, in the sablest of
hue;
Might have aspired to depict in azure and gold, the noble and true:
But Kismet decrees I must dwell in the Bush, ’mongst the base ones
of earth,
For ever away from the round-towers of Erin, and plains of my birth.
So low environment with stealthy sap, eats slowly to the soul;
Tho’ thought can leap the barriers, o’er land, and thro’ the star-vault
roll.
Kismet! Kismet! it is written! our lots are cast for evermore!
Useless to deny admittance, when Fate’s dark hand knocks at the
door.
Butler asked for bread, and the generous nublic gave his corse a stone.
Otway got the loaf to late to save, choked he died without a groan.
Byron, grass-widower, was ostracised to fame in classic climes;
Shelley’s fate was similar, genius justifies no social crimes;
Both were unharmv in their destiny, exiles from a home unkind,
Yet, each, it must be said, “ the wandering outlaw of his own dark
mind.”
Burns’ glorious genius, was put to gauging th’ intensity of rum.
Moore and Scott picked up by wit and worth, some few trifles of a plum;
But dark destiny could not be foiled, Moore lived a toady to a lord,
Which dwarfed his patriotic fires, ill-spent life his nobler self abhor’d;
And Scott died with a clouded intellect, and with an empty purse,
Which he’d filled to found a family, and kept carefully at nurse.
“ Lousy Lucy ” harassed Shakespeare, the Alexander of all bards,
So great, that commentators climb to glory on his mangled shards.
The world’s sublimest wit, ne’er leisure had, to mete or blot a line,
Cibber and his clan, have hacked and hewed, ambiguous to determine.
Pope sad marked by destiny, a great spirit in weak deformed clay,
Who lashed his insect persecutors, in a grand satiric lay.
Tasso bound in dungeon vile, was compelled with lunatics to dwell,
For daring to love Leonora d’Estd, foolishly but well.


Dant4, taught by man’s infernal arts, experienced his “ Inferno.”
Homer lived and died in poverty. A suicide was Sappho.
Pushkin perished in a duel. Milton, admittedly sublime,
Was held to be of little worth, by the wiseacres of his time.
Keats done to death by a reviewer, who made a shilling by the job.
Mrs. Hemans’ prolific talent, never spared her groan nor sob.
Poe, enamoured of the drink-fiend’s spell, blighting genius at the core,
Cut off untimely by Death’s dart, quoth weird Atropos: “ Nevermore.”
Spencer, a ruined and disappointed man, closed a stirring life.
Petrarch’s fame is based on sonnets, to one who would not be his wife.
Bigot priesthood wreaked a futile vengeance, on Moliere’s obsequies,
But well he sleeps, while fame wafts wide his name where farthest
roll the seas.
Chatterton fell amongst thieves, scarce could keep his garments free
from rents;
And erewhile so did I in London, maybe lineal descendants.
Geraldine erst wept for Surrey, a victim of the headsman’s block.
On Cowper’s gentle head. Pandora’s brood saddest evils flock.
Camoens died in want and misery, when his brave spirit fled,
Thousands prated o’er the worthless clay, who grudged few reis for his
bread.
Coleridge closed a tragic story, sorning with the Highgate Gillmans,
Noble stewards of talents fairly*won, distributed their corbans.
Dryden, “ Glorious John,” time serving turn-coat, rhyming Vicar of
Demise him as a man we must, tho’ master of poetic lay.
Bohemian Goldsmith was a genius, of a good for nothing sort.
“O ! rare Ben Jonson!” your clay is in th’ Abbev, tho’ denied an ort.
Horace lost his vineyards; and Ovid died an exile in a marsh.
On Collins the grandly gifted, fate’s cruel hand fell doubly harsh.
Psudo Little, skilled to strike in erring ways the amorous lyre,
To scorch along the glowing page, and set the young man’s blood on fire,
Sweet Catullus of seducing song. Lethe laps the tainting strain;
Men have become so good—on paper—wit must ride with tightened rein.
That’s just. The bard should aim to elevate, sing high deeds of good
renown;
Whilst all that’s base in love or war, oblivion’s deepest depths should
drown.
The satirist exposing vice, musw paint it with repulsive mien,
And with nice judgment give one glimpse, then closely draw the
shrouding screen.
Gordon loved and sang the horse, fickle fate had marked him from a
child,
A welcome guest in lordly halls; an exile in vast deserts wild.
A rash mesalliance sealed his doom, he sleeps in the unhallowed earth,
Low-born beauty mated ill, with a man of intellect and birth.
’Tis sad to trace the blighted lives, of those on Fame’s eternal roll;
Tho’ it would seem, heart stirring bards have sung the sorrows of the
soul.
The linnet blinded by the fiendish hand, sings sweeter in its cage,
The warblings given to charm the grove, the midnight of its fate
assuage.
Many noble bards ne’er pen’d a line, thus sank beneath Lethean wave,
They lacked the art, but not the thought, so passed in silence to the
grave.
Seeming happy bards have been, but when e’er enshrouding veil
v uplifts,
We find, they shared the destiny of all who have the faery gifts.


The Midnight Ride.
My steed is backed, the rein is loosed once more, as chimes the mid-
night hour,*
Erring ancients held a fitting time, for things ill to prove their power.
More evil lurks in one noon-day, where’er the human reptile crawls,
Than in a cycle of those sombre shades. For truth and honour falls,
In lawyers’ dens, in Mammon’s keeps, in shealings and in princely halls,
Where sated pleasure sinks to vice, and a crowned ambition even palls.
Away we fly, my steed and I, adown the darkful forest glade,
No fairer night to ride abroad, since the Great Fiat mortal made.
Serenely lovely is the hour, a soothing sweetness fills the air,.
The wings of zephyr fan the blue-black; ghost like glides the timid hare.
So soft the night wind balmy blows, as wafts aura in Paradise;
So bluely hangs the canopy, the stars look down like angels’
Aurate coruscations shoot zenith-wards afar, thro’ southern sky,
Like felicity they flit, ere we’re conscious of the treasure nigh.
While mystic flashes in th’ ambient air, inspire th’ enthusiast
With thoughts of life Beyond; and fancy pictures that a spirit past.
’Tis midnight hour. The Ensign of our Faith, immortal cross of fire,
Sweeps with its sable cloud along the firmament. The semi-gire
Of shooting-stars, belace the night’s plutonian robe, those lost rovers,
Who blaze and perish by the friction their earthward flight discovers.
Ay, here is freedom, glorious freedom, far from feints of faithless men,
My spirit owns not their affinity, tho’ fate me here doth pen.
The forest passed. The cleared and settled wealed now broadens on
my view,
Fenced fields and stock-yards then appear, where men their fellow motes
be-mew.
The Homestead nestles by the brook, steel shoon a fly-by-night declare,
The challenged watch-dog gives alarm, the only honest heart that’s
there.
False hearts, and falser tongues, rest snug, beneath the shelving shingled
roof,
But “ Trust ” must crouch on straw. Thus oft with men, for worth
is no behoof.
On we fly my steed and I, tramp, tramp, thro’ the midnight fair and
free,
•Tis better worth than years of toil and strife, this span of liberty.
Past many a settler’s bark-roofed shealing snug, and many a rippling
rill,
O’er bent so brown I lonely ride, thro’ primal holts and craggy ghyll.
Men have come and gone for ever, while o’er the lonely Pine-Hut—
Ford,
The ceaseless, ceaseless Murrumbidgee, in monotony has roared.
They toiled and schemed—to win a grave, when flits the fleeting vital
spark,
Dull plodders, or bright spirits, sunk in that Inexorable Dark.
The rapid river’s torrent race, roars o’er the rockv gurgling ford,
Roaring ever, since Chaos sired the earth at the Omnific Word.
Rolling like the surge of mortal misery, its e’erlasting tide,
Since first appeared to Adam’s sons, the Dark Guest of the Fratricide.
The tawnv foam of the freshet’s flood, the shimmering moonbeams
stealing,
Reveals o’er the saddle cinch, and wild, wild the whirling eddies reeling.
A stumble, ’tis touch and go, a plunge would have closed my life and
lay;
Thus Death stalks at the heels of man, as flits his waking dreams away.
’Tis well I cross to-night, for the swash of the deepening torrent tells—
* From Tidbinbilla Glen, via Pine-Hut-Ford, across Murrumbidgee river, through to
Bungendore, N.S.W., about forty miles. Undertaken to post the MS. of an anti-papal work
and baffle Jesuit tools in post office : of late years the espionage is so close I have to post in
G.P.O. Sydney and insure each parcel for £5O. — The Author.


The avalanche melts on Kiandra’s heights, and floods fill the mountain
dells.
They rush and they rave, roughly they rip, swirling and smashing they
sweep,
Hack in the gulches’ granite beds, as they scour out the ravines deep.
Boulders are wrenched from rocky embrace, and tosst on the turbid
tide,
Spurned and flung, like a shuttle-cock toy, surmounting obstacles ride.
Hurling in haste ’till they swoop into space, o’er the cataract’s brow—
Crash in the caldron. Whilst echo mocks hoarsely the thundering row.
Shrieking and shouting, groaning and grunting, the live long night
and day.
Floods boil froth and bubble, in chaotic trouble, flying to spray;
Then meander and murmur, and wimple and wend by the fern flecked
bank
To the broad bosomed river away; re-filling back-water and stank.
So thus, the snow-flake cradled where the mountain eagle builds her
nest.
Brings life and hope to the arid plain, the pelican’s chosen rest.
The bank is hardly won, tramp, tramp, tramp along o’er grassy ring-
barked downs,
Where Dives feeds his flocks, fortune’s child, benignant o’er him never
frowns.
He schemes to add broad acres to his run, and hoards the ruddy ore,
That wealth is fatting banquets for the worms, and not a tittle more.
The wallaby-track is won eftsoon, its breadth of stumps and pitfalls
clear,
The glinting gravel flies behind, there is nought to check a fast career.
I pause to breath my steed o’er the sleeping town, on the beetling scarp,
Now on vile sample of the human race, disdainfully I’ll harp.
Lawyers dreaming of their fees, those wolves of Themis who drink the
tears
Of human woe, and fatten on the fools who fall between their shears.
A skunk too foul with ghouls to dwell, Satan will not own the losel,
The shallow rogue who sold his client’s case, thus thin’d his clientele.
Ingrate, false coward, cajoled, terrorized, by Jesuitic art.
Dark Loyola’s Minion on the Bench, was Judge Jeffreys’ counter-part.
So may “ His Honour ” ( ?) pander, but Nemesis’ justice will not ’scape.
A colonel erewhile ’mongst the braves, who beat the Handful at the
Cape.
A failure at the bar; an Ancient Pistol in the battle fray,
He funked and fled the fight, when charged the Boers with gallant
de La Rey.
Homeward returning, a hero of course, ’mongst the crime of the brave;
This Daniel sneaks upon the judgment seat, to try his brother knave.
High foisted o’er his betters’ heads, by back-stairs priestly influence;
The cloven-hoof, the idiot creed, the biased mind, en evidence.
Led-captain of the Jesuits, equity by subtlety is tricked,
Juries kow-tow to the Hidden Hand of Rome. Such curs should be
well kicked.
The Methodist Rag-owner, who sold the hope of Heaven for squatter’s
bribe,*
The crown of glory sealed to the elect. A fact. I don’t mean to gibe.
Ten sovereigns on the sly, were worth a sin, who would refuse—an ass;
Like King Henry of Navarre, who held that Paris was worth a Mass.
The snivelling cur whined in the witness-box, juggling by his manner,
For good of trade, he hailed the S.P.Q.R., upon Belial’s banner.
His rag is mortgaged to a Romanist, who had threatened to foreclose,
If he refused to publish escobarderie, thus by the nose
To lead the public ass. So paltered vile to save his bread and cheese.
* This person, owner of a local newspaper, is dead. The skit was written during his life-
time. The Jesuits laid the plot, and the protestant squatter found the money—to serve the
private end.—The Author.


Thus cleave their way the Jesuits, and thus the reins of power they seize.
The protestant squatter found the money, to crush his enemy;
In every case, in every land, so acts finesse Jesuitry.
Quoth the Rag:—“ Ffreyne-Guillmavne writes to say, 1 there is evil
in the town
At some good lassies pointing, so as to bring on them the world’s frown.
Retorted I: “ A lie, a lie, upon my soul! a wicked lie,”
’Twas of boycotting I wrote, down with the dog, kick the rascal, fy!”
And that was held by the popish judge and jury packed, to be a libel,
The DeviPs-own made the worse the better case, truthful as the Bible;
For here the law obtains—the greater the truth, the greater the libel,
If e’er I bring a suit at law again, I will own to be a “ skybele.”
He knuckled down to Mighty Mick, my word! and published loathsome
lies;
Suppressed the truth when written con., to trap, the way the profit hies.
Jackal caitiff, go and hang yourself! let the Devil have his due!
If he will deign to lag, a venal reptile pressman such as you.
Judas, I marked him down, ’tis sad to say, a man of Ulster blood,
Descended from the gallant wights, who blocked and turned the papal
flood.
That faithless friend, who tried to snare, to curry favour with the
priest,
Thus win the custom of his flock, and gnaw the orts of jackals’ feast,
The policy of paltry protestants, selling birth-right rung by rung.
They are cutting rods for their own backs, and forging fetters for the
tongue.
Priest-ridden sycophants, decadent knock-kneed sons of British sires,
Who cringe to Rome, and bank the shekels while their liberty expires.
Oh! can ye name a baser crew, than those who sell their birth-right’s
fee,
For petty pottage of the counter’s trade, don gyves of Popery ?
“ Prithee! peace with popery,” they piteous plead, ‘‘let us sell our
wares;
For fair play, justice, freedom and religion, who the Devil cares?
Let them go, so we get our profits in the bank, the mart, the shop,
All else is vanity. We fling the rest to Cerberus a sop.”
Soulless clods! their eternal spark is but a rush-light in a tomb,
And serves to show the baseness of the heart, the foulness of the gloom.
I don’t say they’re worse than other people, in fact, I know they’re not.
Tu quoque is a lame retort to twit, ’tis the kettle’s to the pot.
Nor that such trash exceeds a moiety, indeed. I cannot say,
The bulk may be honest men, but such kept mostly out of my way;
And I never went to look for any, (because I had no hope)
With a lantern, like the Greek, opining ’twould take a microscope.
Devilish treachery I experienced, exceeding that I write,
’Twould not pay me to expose it, so leave it in the shades of night.
’Tis strange how men will rogue and lie, o’erreach and swindle the
unyare,
And yet, affect the injured mien, when poets tell them what they are.
The sting lies in the truth, however vile men like to be the saint
By repute, ergo, grudge against who them in proper colours paint.
I would rather be a dingo, or a hare, and range the forest—free,
Than vail my chapeau to the priest, and sell man’s birthright—liberty.
’Tis nineteen hundred years and three, since Jesus died on Calvary;
Yet every sin by him condemned, obtains, veiled by hypocrisy;
And if He appeared on earth again, men would slay Him as of old;
For most will risk the life, and sell the soul, and all besides, for gold.
Judases there would be in plenty, aye amongst the protestants,
A fico for their faith ! the thirty shekels would be colliquants.
Sordid vileness is the rule, waits but opportunity to ripe,
Who’ll dare to place his life and property, within another’s gripe?
Not I.®’Tis better trust the carnivore, the tiger, or’the snake,
In sooth! life is safer far, with the fell denizens of the brake.


The cross stands o’er the convent walls, the abode of priapean saints,
There priests and nuns are keeping coarsely, their Walpurgis night of
feints. # . .
Those priests are mighty men, they make the Deity, and His image,
Ope and bar the gates of Heaven, and beat the Devil in a scrimmage,
Experts in Cupid’s witchery, ne’er the spark divine caught from above;
More like the coarse voluptuousness, portrayed in Ovid’s “ Art of Love.”
Skilled in wiles, the honeyed word, the tender tone, the amorous glance,
The pressure of the hand, the whispered sigh, that edge light Cupid’s
lance.
The warriors ever militant, to increase the sum of human life,
They are ready to deplete your pockets and pay devoirs to your wife,
Who returns from confessional, with strangely rumpled, petticoat,
(l wonder why?) flushed cheeks and hair a-tossed, a jealous eye may
note.
I’ve oft seen scratches on the clergy’s hands, methinks were made with
pins,
Which ladies stick about them everywhere, to punish us for sins.
I hate the shams and make believe, with which priests varnish o’er the
mire;
Swans are not hatched from hydra’s eggs, nor doth the tiger fill the byre.
I’ll believe in toleration, for those hircinous debauchees,
And in the virtue of the priest, when apples grow on cherry trees.
Apace the night is waning, I musl on, scant time there is to tarry,
To shoot an arrow o’er the sea, the upas-blazoned shield can’t parry.
The silent streets are cantered through, while loud the hollow hoof-notes
ring,
Hollow as the heads and hearts of those, who ’neath the roof* 1 find
lodging.
The town is left behind, that sink of petty fraud and strife ar* greed,
I’m away thro’ the bush again, on the back of my trusty steed.
The kangaroos are hopping, and the kine.are cropping, as I pass;
Flits the fire-fly in the green-wood; while rests the glow-worm in the
grass.
Night fogs thicken in the valleys; where Minerva’s bird is hooting;
Scarce a scud obscures the canopy; where aerolites are shooting;
And tameless things around are gladsome, as they gambol wild and
free,
While their tyrant man is sleeping, they snatch a furtive revelry.
The raven wings of night are folding fast, as peeps the budding day;
Tramp, tramp along the beaten track, my gallant courser wins his way.
Gay the rosy rays of dawning, laugh in the Tyrian purple sky;
I ken by landscape markings, my destination is drawing nigh.
The roofs gleam bright in the sunbeams’ light, and the morning breezes
blore; .
Here man and beast can rest awhile, so now the midnight ride is o er.
I rode from home in the witching hours, to baffle the Jesuits,
(To play a card I had kept to trump) by the moon and starry lights.
Vicars of Satan; Historic Facts.
Paraphrased from ex-priest Chiniquy’s “ Priest, Woman, and
Confessional.”
Pope Borgia was a Minotaur, indeed, the Nero of the Line,
He lived in incest with his daughter, herself an adulterine,
Luoretia flight. By her he had a child, several by his sisters; .
Vice looks grisly at first sight, soon with a corse-light gleam it glisters.
Chiniquy tells: —“ Recoil the Fair at first from the foul upas mist,
The hideous phantasmagoria, to them unfolded by the priest;
Soon, in secret, gloat upon the evil thought, the beastly desire,
As sow and dog, return priestward, to wallow in the mental mire.”
O, Lordl send Timoleons of the Pen and Tongue. From this lethargy


Rouse men. The virus of the horrid Pest, with dust cleared eyes let see.
The Accursed Thing that wades in blood and tears, in the darksome
hour,
And fattens, while starve her vassalry, for blind men doth she devour.
Borgia adorned the Vatican whilom, with many a pretty miss,
Not sure his keys would fit Above, secured on earth a bower of bliss.
A lusty son of Eros. It is said, faith ! I must draw it mild,
He had but to wink at any girl, she was sure to have a child.
An invitation to his table, was the harbinger of Death,
Thro’ an artful knack of mixing potions, for stopping peoples’ breath.
His ring concealed a poisoned pin, killing as grasping kind the hand,
Preliminary to annexing fortunes, tenements and land.
When in a jocund mood, His Holiness had very funny ways,
But most of them were far too naughty, for description in my lays.
Mandates then were sent to lovely fairs, to him sinning to confess;
When they appeared in Vatican, he coolly told them to undress,
Refusal would be worse than useless, so the blushing belles disrobed,
His Holiness admired their undraped beauties, culling his beloved.
Select cardinals and bishops then were called, to join the ladies,
Devout men, who hailed from divers towns from Buda-Pesth to Cadiz.
The bashful beauties lounged about, whisht! whisper ! tout en deshabille.
I’ll draw the veil of silence. See Clio, if you think this fable.
This is Black Mass, with more I cannot write, ’tis practised up to date,
How e’er the venal protestants deny, and Rome’s hired jackals prate.
Once His Holiness relented, and spared their blushes and their shame.
Said: “ Go to ” —not Heaven, tho’ he held the keys, he’s there—you ken
the name.
Delighted were the maids and wives, thus to escape the Lord’s anointed,
Tho’ traducers of the sex aver, the widows were disappointed.
Once a noble dame refused to yield—weltering in her blood she died,
As when from the camp, proud Tarquin stole, to ravish Collatinus’ bride,
Lucretia passed. Thus entrapped virtue foiled the lecherous attack,
When the monster summoned lackeys, to tear the garments off her
' back.
The Pope was so astonyed at this avis so extremely rare,
He refrained from further sin—for one night—and almost said a prayer.
John Twenty Three was a great adorer of the deluding sex,
His oda contained hundreds two, there in the ear of night he’d vex.
Three hundred nuns whetted his lubricity, for some thousands yet,
So many children called him sire, they’d man commando for de Wett.
Some folk tell me not to print those things, and turn up the squeamish
nose,
A kiss in verse I’m sure, is just as proper as a kiss in prose.
They’re in print ten million times already, for I write nothing new,
Tis the style I couch them in, that causes the pinchinp of the shoe.
One John was poisoned by one Boniface. Excuse dates and numbers,
My Muse can’t sing such awkward notes, for they send her off in
slumbers.
A knight killed a John, for he found the Pope most naughty with his
wife;
Details omitted; so as not with goody clan to rouse a strife.
Such rough and tumble amours, were not Stephen’s modes of dalliance,
He preferred a boudoir, wherein to sport his wit and valiance.
He caught a Tartar —rather the Tartar caught him—on a cushion,
With said Tartar’s better-half in an indelicate position:
“ In flagranti delicto,” writes the scribe—but I must be wary—
His Holiness was on his knees, praying to the Virgin Mary.
The son the grandson and the paramour, of La Marozia fair.
Of Lilith’s earthly race, sat many a day within Saint Peter’s Chair,
Their hellish orgies, prose writers tell in a euphemistic way,
But they’d not bear the glaring X-rays, burning in the poet’s lay.
A pope of sixteen years was murdered, as a beast too foul to live,
Hight John Eleven, he took from women everything they have to give.


Sketches of Black Mass, at each Bacchanalian conversazione,
Would never pass the publisher, I am quite game to bet a pony. _
The Nineth Pope Pius sired two daughters, oft seen walking in the
Corso.
After the previous wickedness and sin, this worthy seems a tyro.
Two mistresses enough for him, plus some few dallyings w T ith dames,
Praiseworthy continence, for a pope-king scarce ever vainly flames.
Popes now-a-days must be elderly, past youth’s wild course of folly,
Discreet. It will not do for holiness, to be drunk and jolly.
“ A frilled linen sleeve —with an arm in it—to be worn round the neck,
When well stricken in years, (signed) David Rex, who slew the
Amalek.” ...
I’ve read this prescription in the Bible, and it is my idea, .
’Twould be nicer far to take, than any in the pharmacopoeia.
Punk Marozia rules secretly, Semiramis of the Papal States,
She lifts her lovers high galore, and ruins as her need dictates.
’Tis true in present tense, as ’twas in past, those states are everywhere;
Verily, an apophthegm that I’ve fashioned with the nicest care.
Once there was a quadrilateral of Popes (infallible you ken)
Who called each other most shocking names, and enemies of God
and men, . , _ , ,
The devils spoke the truth at last. This sketch is sooth, Ido not gloze;
And many crimes a thousand fold more foul, are told in Clio s prose.
Had Him There!
Said Mick to me one day in College Green: “ Look here!
Ffreyne-Guillmayne mark this well, I do not mean to jeer,
The donkeys will be hanged on Billy’s monument,*
And Orangemen to Hell with pike and bullet sent,
When Home Rule rampages, and English chains are rent.
I knocked the ashes from my cheroot; to intensify the fun
Replied: “Faith! when that game commences, you and me must
cut and run.”
Line the Trenches.
1.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
Let none shun the ranks of glory, hark! the herald trumpets call!
Who will be the slave of Rome ? Who will cringe and kiss the rod t
Better far to fighting fall, fighting for our Faith and God.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, for freedom and our faith vve 11 tall.
The trysting place is Old Bridge down, march on, there fame and
Honour call. , , . ~ ..
’Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the Hell-hound s thrall.
2.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
Roll up from North and South, East and West, from Cottage and
from Hall.
We’ll ne’er barter birthright, at bidding of a sordid crew;
We’ll hold the fort our fathers won, and wearing o’ the blue.
We’ll keep the Old Flag flying o’er us aye, or it will be our pall.
The trysting place is Old Bridge Town, march on, there rame and
Honour call. xT ~ ..
’Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the Hell-hound s thrall.
* The historic equestrian statue of King William the Third in College Green, Dublin.
The sword fell from the hand on eve of the day Gladstone’s Irish land semi-confiscation Act
was passed.— The Author.


3.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
Boune ye, true men for the field of death, we’ll win the fight or fall.
Far better fate to part the breath, than wear the foul priest’s chain;
Let cravens yield, we’ll take the field, strike home our blows amain;
For we’ll enroll in freedom’s ranks, and fearless face Death’s hissing
ball. *
Ihe trysting place is Old Bridge Town, march on, there Fame and
Honour call.
’Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the*Hell-hound’s thrall.
4.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
The ranks of fame are filling fast, bound for Home and Faith to fall,
hor death is nought but carting breath, we all that doom must dree,
I hen let us like our fathers fall, unconquered men and free.
Brave o’er sea volunteers come trooping in, to back us thro’ the squall..
The trysting place is Old Bridge Town, march on, there Fame and
Honour call.
’Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the Hell-hound’s thrall.
5.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
Beauty’s smile, nor lucre’s wile, our onward footsteps won’t recall,
’Till Boyne rolls red with croppy gore, we’ll stop their ogreish joys.
“March, march on,” the clarion rings, “march on, ye Protestant
Boys.” /
To shield the ones we love from wrong, e’en cowards would ne’er fear to
fall.*
The trysting place is Old Bridge Town, march on, there Fame and
Honour call.
Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the Hell-hound’s thrall.
6.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
Triumphant spirits of our fathers, in every zephyr call:—
“ Who will be a Roman slave ? and wear the fetters of the Beast ?
Who will place the Rights of Man, at the mercy of the priest ?
Begone, ye dogs, no men are ye!” We’ll boune us for Valhalla’s Hall.
The trysting place is Old Bridge Town, march on, there Fame and
Honour call.
Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the Hell-hound’s thrall.
7.
Line the trenches, Men of Ulster, line the trenches, one and all;
Hark! the battle note is sounding: “ Line the trenches, man the walll”
We’ll ne’er barter faith and freedom, for politics and gain,
Nor blush to own, our fathers fought and died for us in vain.
Come, line the trenches, sword in hand, we’ll freemen live, or freemen
fall.
The trysting place is Old Bridge Town, march on, there Fame and
Honour call.
Tis better aye to bravely die, than be the Hell-hound’s thrall.
* Old Bridge Town—the site of the battle of the Boyne. The most horrible and inhuman
outrages were committed by croppies, Irish papist rebels, on protestant females, before
massacre; young girls were violated and stripped naked and carried thus impaled on pikes
round the streets : ‘ Semper idem ’ Rome’s boast. In the year 1640 upwards of fifty thousand
Anglo-Irish were “ removed.”— The Author.


The Merrie Maiden and the Priest.
I tell the tales the Little Bird who brings the news, has warbled unto
With the plumage of a spirit’s wing, the songster flits o’er the land and
sea.
OMITTED.
But revenous & nos moutons, the tales told by the impish Little Bird
What boots the meanness and the vice! pass on, for enough of them
we have heard.
The Jiggaralites.
“ What blokes is them there Jig-gar-al-ites, ” quoth Cornstalk, “ Ffreyne-
Guillmayne talks about ?
Faith ! if he paints them in their colours true, ere I will fight with them,
I’ll shout. ”* ,
“ Jesuit is the name,” quoth Mickey, “ was there e er a school were
you were raised ?
Irish pigs have got more learning than your likes, for that same the
Lord be praised. ” . T „, 1
“ Jiggaralites is the name,” swore Cornstalk, “ on that I ll take my davy
down; .
You Hirish is higgorrant, we native-borns is fly in the bush and town.
I’ve planned to fix that howdacious varmint, if he rampages in the
fight;
Damn me! but I’ll send to Hireland, and bring hout a bloomin’ Jig-
garalite.”
The Parnell Commission.
When the London “ Times ” once filled the battered breach, the Empire’s
Flag to save. ,
From Parnell’s cut-throat thugs, leagued with Old Turncoat, that much
belauded knave, , , ... _ .
Who commenced a Tory true and blue, then downward falling rung by
Sold his principles for power, which he upheld by glamour of false
tongue; . ,
Consorted with the felons, who “ marched thro’ murder, outrage and
rapine,” , .
To rend Saint Patrick’s blazon from the Jack, blast the trio crosses
twine.
The Dark Hand was in the field once more, to aid all deeds that make
for Hell, ' . , ... .... ,
It worked on Piggot’s fears (the flight and suicide, superstitions
spell), *3
To forswear the truth he told, baffle justice and chieftain of the “Times.”
Thus escaped the crew criminals, the doom of their satanic crimes.
The weak-backed popish Bench who tried the case, recorded no decided
find, . . . ,
Tho’ proved the charges were unto the hilt (bar one) was justice under-
mined ? , . ~ , ,
The public would not see it thus, for the jackass-ears could only hear—
’*l Cornstalk, a native white. Shout, to call for drinks at a hotel bar. A mixture of low-
cunning, ignorance,‘simplicity, cocksuredness, treachery, and shrewdness, makes the bushman;
and oppidan in a less degree of ignorance. There is nothing in the Australian character to
*2 St. Patrick had no cross: that in the Jack for Ireland is the Fitz Gerald saltire.
*3 The mistake in spelling is a common one, may have been Parnell s. Piggot knew he
was trapped, and his nerve collapsed. The “ suicide ” was “ removal ’’—murder : experto crede


Parnell did not a letter write, tho’ more serious charges were quite
clear.
“ The Times ” was beaten by the Unseen Hand, tho’ its chieftain battled
well.
His name is worthy of a place, with Paoli, Wallace Bruce, and Tell.
Breeches Oh! Khyne.
A TYPE OF THE HOME RULE M.P., NOT PERSONAL TO ONE.
1.
Breeches Oh ! Khyne had no trousers to wear,
Ladies were blushing to the roots of the hair.
He went for Home Rule, as the Member for Whine,
To get him the garments. “ They’re illigant fine,
And fit me intirely,” said Breeches Oh! Khyne.
2.
Breeches Oh! Khyne got some rhyme on a card,
Strange was the writing, and unknown was the bard.
His curse burst the breeches, tho’ sewn with hank twine;
The tail of his shirt floated forth to sun shine:—
“ ’Tis the Flag of Home Rule,” said Breeches Oh! Khyne.
3.
Breeches Oh! Khyne made a speech in the House,
The members were not as quiet as a mouse:—
“ ‘ For wrongs of me counthry, I groan and I pine
Shure! I spoke it right well, and cut a big shine,
And larruped the landlords,” said Breeches Oh! Khyne.
4.
Breeches Oh! Khyne, shure he wanted a wife:—
“ Sheela, mavourneen, you’re the joy of my life,
Acushla, I love you, say will you be mine ?
I’ve gold in galore, love, and for you I pine,
I claim you, my own, Mrs. Breeches Oh! Khyne.
5.
“ Breeches Oh! Khyne,” quoth the colleen so fair,
Shure ! I never did likes your carroty hair;
But you’ll trate me dacent; not yet twenty-nine;
To, wed you, asthore, faix! my heart doth incline.
Don’t squeeze me so hard, Mr. Breeches Oh ! Khyne.
6.
Breeches Oh ! Khyne gave an illigant spree.
Father Firstkiss was there, and Curate Bohee.
The praties, the bacon, the rookawn divine,
The blood and the whisky, ’twas illigant fine!
Great day for Old Ireland, and Breeches Oh ! Khvne.
The Distressful Mimbers.
Refrain.
O! we’re the most distressful mimbers, am shure the fact is clear!
We have not fourpence for a whisky, or tuppence for a beer.
O! we’re the most distressful mimbers, that ever yet were seen
For we cannot raise the baccy, shure! for fillin’ our doodeen ’


1.
O ! Tay Pay, dear, now did you hear, the news that’s going round ?
Home Rule has not one leg to stand, upon Old Ireland s ground.
Shure! Mimbers we can be no more, nor sneak the rhino dear,
If there’s a split, the game is up, am sure! the fact is clear!
2.
I met with Misther Parnell, walking down the London Strand,,
Says he: “ How is me darlint Kitty, an’ how does she stand.
‘ She’s the most distressful craythur, that ever yet was seen,
’Tis all U.P. with Parliament, on Dublin’s College Green.
3.
‘ O! Charlie, shure! you lost the Cause, an olayed the bloomin’ fool,
A cully for sly Kitty, faix! iust like a boy from school.
She is the divvil, playin’ soft, an’ getting you in scraps;
Philand’ring with the Captain’s wife, an’ bloomin fire escapes.
4.
Take the shamrogue from your hat, an’ sport the Orange Lily,
Our game is up the spout, me bhoy, sighs on love tale silly.
Shure ! wearin’ o’ the green is o’er, all lost for Kitty s kiss.
I wish he’d wooed a maiden fair, the honest road to bliss.
5.
When English laws can stop the pigs, from growing as they grow;
Or Tim Sweepley’s speeches fail, sir, his gutter breed to show;
Then we will change the Leader, too, who fills our pockets fine,
An’ kep’ the thing upon our legs, that troubles Bill Oh ! Khyne,,
The Faith of Our Fathers.
The Faith of our fathers, is our faith to this day,
Cleansed from foulness of priestcraft, begriming of clay.
The faith of our fathers, the apostles laid down,
Gilt by blood of the martyrs —immortal renown.
The faith of our fathers, ’tis the creed of the free,
To the pope-god of Rome, we’ll ne’er crouch low the knee.
The faith of our fathers, aye we swear to defend,
We may break, we may die, but we never will bend.
The faith of our fathers, ’tis the star of the brave;
Has its roots in the Bible, the sinner can save.
When ’tis challenged by fools, you have but this to say:—
The Faith of our fathers, is our faith to this day.
“The Gate of Hell.” (?)
An enigma I would like to solve—can the gentle reader tell ?
Why is Woman wicked, and oft regarded as the Gate of Hell ?
When de facto every man finds out, that in nine times out of seven,
She is the star of mundane life, and oft, indeed, the Gate of Heaven.
* Written in Rathmxnes, Dublin, when the O’Shea v. Parnell divorce case was talk of
the empire; the Parnelites were then called ‘the split P’s.’ — The Author.
* St. Chrysostom, i.e., the golden-tongued, wrote : “ Women is the gate of hell, and by
her allurements and beguilements men are ensnared unto perdition.” So she is held by the
Roman Church to-day, and no doubt she is—for the priests.— The Author.
a-vtkcV**


The Sphinx.
There’s a land of cocksure, where trees cast no shades*
No water in rivers; no green in grass blades. ’
The courts deal no justice; the birds have no song;
No perfume in flowerets; no redress for wron«.
lis ominous too, that the swans are all black;
Aye, e en wells for poor Truth, there is a great lack
The talk is of bullocks; all wit in crude work;
MnLi Jr °t UghtS u a , y f h ? l uce > like th e steed of the Turk.
Mostly trees shed their barks, instead of their leaves*
Plutocracy trace back descent unto thieves. *
i akes are ak dry—and so is common talk.
I he beggars on horseback, are cock of the walk.
All the goods in the shops, are but a big sham.
The mortals so low, I fear! Satan will damn
No man trusts his brother, still less trusts his friend-
If you want to lose money, give it to lend. ’
AnH re rt r\?° d ever ywhere— except in the banks;
And gentlemen nowhere— except in the ranks. ( ?)
The two pence a week, for good manners to teach,
Is economized for ’tis useless to preach
Men have no honour; and, alas 1 be it said
ris not so certain, that the bride is a maid,
fell me .'where on earth this paradise can be ?
Or is it figment, of fairy fantasy ?
a I!f m t not c th e country—the land of the sun:
And where fits the cap—you may please put it on.
if
Clairvoyance.
fnd^fsCrou'ndtU 0 fot. in the ■«•*,
They’ll rouse them 7om hypnotic 7um b2 aC £K' s ‘f,7 rea, F "«t.
And crush the felon w- imaginatlon «
B,a tr^r eUngS ttXg.es’ surge
That £^7,SSsnjSL.
?he f fS r AaT g hA7shT„S f ‘° snare H E - s "•*» «• lint*.
slaughU, ran * the 10y ' b< “ S ' While the Yamas gloated o’er the
lighter!'* 1 ‘ he marWe pile ’ while loud howl «i the Pope’s hyena
But freedom *t urneJ^antPstruck"* e"'' 7," s . m ? ke reeking in the sun;
An'Ae't‘,7 ° r bloodv war NoJ a e -da?s we-ral^n’™ 8 W °"'


When doctors differ on diagnosis, how can decide lay wight.
If writers try to bell the feline, they’re suppressed for fear of trouble;
So every publisher de facto is the Index censor’s double.
The wolf lies low and wears the lambkin’s skin, walks unchallenged
thro’the gate;
When Gellert growls “ Ware wolf,” the mutton-headed mugs say—
’tis idle prate.
Trade’s wit runs in a groove, nor comprehends when parables are
spoken,
Let it sleep on, until Rome’s pickled vengeance for defeat is wroken;
Then wake to fall upon the sabre’s edge, the rooftree blazing wild,
While shrieks of women tell a fearful tale, the sobbing of the child.
Not yet, the harvest is not ripe, nor the pendulum’s return swing;
But Hydra’s fearful folds are coiling, coiling for the grappling spring.
The “ unrest ” in Egypt and in India—but blind-bats will not heark;
The object-lessons fostered in Hibernia—what boots saying dark.
The War-Lord of the world on land, and of late coveting the sea,
A tool was made (but slipped) to ’venge on France her blow for liberty:
For brains can do to day, what popish superstition did of yore,
De Montforts hounded on the Raymonds, by the Babylonian W .
We’ll have to line the trenches yet, we’ll have to fight Boyne Water o’er,
Supineness your sons will rue, when lost Ireland lies weltered in gore.
Slay the prophet! ’tis all nonsense, those plots and those maxims and
gins,
Jump on him ! ’twill baffle the web the dark hand of destiny spins.
My tales are bound by no locality, they’re apposite tho’ terse,
To every land. The Pontifex has bridges all o’er th’ universe.
The spirit of the Caesars haunts eternal Rome, darkling thro’ gloom,
Embodied in the Pope, to dree the Dying Gladiator’s doom.
My mission, to sound a larum note of intrigues renardine is,
And a rally on the bugle-horn. I’ll here conclude with finis.


The Satanites.
A LEGEND OF TIDBINBILLA DISTRICT, N.S.W., AUSTRALIA.
CANTO I.—DRAMATIS PERSONS.
The Satanites are Jesuits, who haunt our earth in various guise,
Recruiting for the pit of Hell, tho’ seeming saints to dullards’ eyes.
The Vampire, a black-sheep squatter firm, sucks the blood of all around,
And like the banyan-tree, o’erspreads the land, devours adjacent ground.
Trapley and Shindy, Jackal tools, are brothers of the vampire breed;
They have amassed much wealth, by perjury and wrong and dirty deed.
’Tis obvious from the text, those squatters most affect a hat of straw;
And lay snares to trap poor neighbours, in tangled meshes of the law.
Shindy is a bachelor crossed in love, Trapley is a married man,
The Vampire squatter firm, as those will see, who list my rhymes to
scan.
Drunkley their super., bosses Killemkillie, has but scant ideas.
Freyne-Guillmayne, the Orange settler, a Daniel true amongst hvenas.
Father Baleful, a typic Jesuit, with more than serpent’s wit,
Who plots in devious ways to bend, and bites on no-surrender grit.
Long-Ears is the public, present company, of course, excepted.
Judge Urry is a papist tyke, who acts —as may be expected.
Hilly Hack, a jackaroo, who oft roundly swears that black is white,
Crawling to his Vampire boss, for a glass of grog on Sunday night.
Spider Slyboots is a lawyer, fair sample of the Devil’s Own.
Go-it-Hard, and Spy, informers, tho’ English, base as convicts’ spawn.
Old Blazer was a trusty gallant steed, of breeding bone and size,
Ffreyne-Guillmayne held a friend in need, so poisoned was the equine
vprize. ...
The gates are those across some public roads, of driving wights the
curse
Put up to save long miles of fencing, thus keep money in the purse.
The Lost Maid, an oft told tale, loved Shindy not wisely but too well.
Tryon and Hungerlong, are stations, where the vampire-squatters dwell.
Cooley Juggins is a witless groom. Tyke Tenbob a rouseabout.
Toadgunyah is a town, where justice can be purchased for a “ shout.’
Tidbinbilla is a mountain, en face unto Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s nest,
Nil-desperandum styled. They often win who most obey that hest.
A police-magistrate is Cock-Robin, who wears a double face.
And various petty tools held up to scorn, all in their proper place.
Rome’s jackal editor is Pimp, “ elect and saved,” who laid a trap
By order of the priests. With such cat’s-paws they wage the deadly sap.
An earl’s daughter, the charming lovefy Lady Nora Jeu d’Esprit,
This episode, a tale that Little Bird has warbled unto me.
An English lady without doubt, who ne’er has seen the Austral shore.
My opuscle’s histrionic shades, who will march proscenium o’er.
If the reader finds the tale not plainly told, glance along end notes,
Where things that will not fit in rhymes o’er nice, are free from beams
and motes.
CANTO lI.—THE LEGEND ON THE GATES OF HELL.
THE SATANITES! the Satanites! Hecate’s Demogorgon beaux,
The grass must wither where they tread, and there the deadly upas
grows.
A reptile wreathed round a death’s-head, I will blazon as their badge,
Yet Hell can scarce produce a fitting charge, e’en searched thro’ every
I fear not the fell harpy brood, tho’ I have suffered from their might.
With cat-o’-nine I take the field, and mount Pegasus for the fight.
Long years of storm and stress and fears' of utter wreck, leave me
unbent,


Greatly daring to discover, for Rome’s hellish toils a solvent.
Their Ban is like the pest-house air, destroys like Simoom’s blast of
death,
Mercy flies, freedom dies, tho’ hope may linger on the distant heath.
Like Van der Decken’s phantom-craft, the harbinger of coming woe,
No luck that day if fisher meets a priest, is cryptic truth, I trow!
Their touch numbs as the Ice-King’s sword, dragon of th’ undiscovered
Pole; *
Their tongues are like the evil things, Pandora’s ill-kept box let roll.
Tho’ Hope remained to cheer mankind, that Goddess shuns a Satanite;
And Truth lies strangled in her well, where’er those direful harpies light.
Their system like Sahara’s sands, a barren desert of despair,
Which smothers all the worth of life, ’tis noxious as the Dead-Sea air.
Their atmosphere is like the breath of Hell, all die who enter there,
’Tis safer far to face the Fiend, all reeking of abysmal lair.
Insidious as the fever-fiend, who rides by night the tropic gale,
Steals vigour from both mind and limb, and leaves a wreck all racked
with bale.
Aye when their shadow falls across your path, an outlaw’s life you 11
lead,
Proscribed are all the social joys, nor claim a friend in hour of need.
The evil genii haunt your home, around you wind their gramarye,
Their traps and snares beset your path, where’er that hapless home may
be. ~ .
You cannot fly, you cannot fight, around they draw a ring of fire,.
And if you wait, then day by day,you’re surely sinking in the mire.
If their nets entangle, you’re lost, as if the Fates decreed your knell.
Few have ever rent their meshes, and few have e’er defied their spell. * 3
Damocles’ doom, the sword, hangs o’er you, and dark the skies above
you loom,
The Inquisition is still extant, and tortures of contracting room.
Lost Laocoon is in the Furies’ toils, around the dragon wreathes,
Tenacious tightening folds are crushing fast, the flames of Hell it
breathes.
Where’er you roam, they’ll dog you down, wrest every deed of worth
An Ishmaelite you’ll be. Their malice deadly as .Lord Lytton’s “ vril.”
Their chains of air are round you cast, aye there is no refuge from their
rage,
Snared in a labyrinth, as was Bajazet in his travelling cage.
They’ll track you to the awesome Texan Lake, by cow-boys styled “ The
Lost.” , , f
Where red-skin desperadoes hide, and shelter from the norther s frost.
They’ll track you thro’ the doldrums’ maze, to where Kanaka’s skiff is
tosst,
There is no covert anywhere, e’en when earth’s Central Line is crosst.
They’ll track you through the jungle wilds, unto the Mountains of the
Moon. t . , ,
They’ll track you o’er the floating fields, where cayman creeps in black
lagoon,
Along littorals of bayoux, way down in country of the coon;
When e’er they mark you down as plunder-prey, as you will find eftsoon.
E’en to Nicaragua’s sailing isles, green gems in purple collet,
Tho’ yellow-jack the tiller grips, and fisher Death hauls oft his net.
They’ll track you to the Northern Pole, where bothered compass spins
And southward, where Mount Terror thunders o’er Antartic’s lonely
If you charter an aeroboat, and float thro’ stratus and thro’ levin—
* Written years before Peary found the North Pole.
* Mount Terror is extinct; Erebus does the thundering, but will not suit the prosody
*2 They seldom attack the powerful, or go on a forlorn hope.— The Author-


They’re there. Bismillah! take my word for it, you’ll scarce be safe in
t Heaven.
Scratch the priest and you will find the fiend, a cap the shaven jole will
fadge;
The Hierarchy for stray souls and cash, are always on the cadge.
They roam about all o’er the earth, in search of stealings and of pickings,
And practise in ways underhand and fearsome, as amphibious vikings.
The cat the tiger and the Satanite, all torture ere they kill,
The felines fill their maws with blood, Loyola’s Brood engorge the till.
A shadow of a shade stalks by your side, impalpably it glides,
Your guardian angel is nonplussed, as time rolls on from ides to ides.
The Gordian grip you cannot loose, in vain all efforts to untie,
Tho’ you may foil a scheme, yet still obtains the trap, the lure, the lie.
Beware all papist friends, kindest seeming may lure to trap that’s feared,
For the conscience of the faithful, by priestcraft can be commandeered.
Admit them not within your mental gates, or you will sup remorse,
They’ll ope the stronghold to the camisade, as Ilium’s Wooden-Horse.
Agents to provoke you to a rash retort, will spread the fowler’s lime;
Cabals of tools will swear your life away, tho’ guiltless of all crime.
Fidus Achates warps to Punic foe, a whisper oft will serve,
For men untrained to reason can be gulled, by knaves who lie with
verve.
Long spoons required to sup with Satanites, else you may garner woe.
The Punk of Popery erst now and e’er, the freeman’s fellest foe.
If you are dull you will be caught, if sharp, suspicion is your mate,
You find a latent foe in every friend, and life exhales in bate.
A serpent harbours in the breast, which strives to pay them back their
meed,
It withers as Sirocco’s burning blast, or furnace gleed.
For trust and confidence have fled for aye, there twines the Demon Asp,
You’ll feel its fangs on flood and field; you’ll feel them in false friend-
ship’s grasp.
You’ll find it coiled upon the hearth at eve, where peace should be
instead,
And when aweary you retire to rest, ’tis wriggling round your bed.
Night-hags sit upon the sleeper’s breast, ghastly glares a Jesuit,
And elvish sprites torment the dreamer’s mind, until the dawn of light.
Yet higher, higher piles the agony, Pandora’s plagues o’erflow,
And kinsfolk hands that should have helped you on, may deal the
hardest blow.
I can but shed the gallic juice, in lance-thrusts of poet’s idle trade,
But if I could strike, the last of their life blood would have reddened
my blade.
I cannot pray for enemies, nor to the smiter turn the cheek;
Let superstition at Canossa cringe, and jackals eat the leek.
Let those whose past is grimed with filthy deeds, to Rome low crouch
the knee,
There is no stain upon my name, so from her scorpion-scourge I’m free;
She cannot bend, tho’ she can stab, and spit her toxic lies around,
Rightly understood, such methods bearing—to be with honour crowned.
Her hatred is an honour, and her friendship ignominious shame,
The foulest fiend down in the Pit, ne’er stoop such fellowship to claim.
To a priest if you a gift devise, beware of poison in the bowl,
You may be helped upon the road to Heaven, by Messes for the soul.
The venomed ring, the fatal glove, the plague charged cincture At 6
wore,
The “ accident ” upon the shifting seas, and on the solid shore.
Infallible methods of the Borgias, are practised up to date,
By experts in poisoning, whose drugging is thought decree of fate.
But as a rule, those felon deeds are shunned, for Rome has time to wait,
And she can slay in safer ways, by wit, and force the guarded gate.
Babies come and adults die each day, but Lais walks for ever,


And link by link binds fast her chains, which the fighting few can’t
sever.
Beware love of Romish maid, seeming unsophisticated kiss,
She’ll lure you to Ogygia’s isle, then cooings change to serpent’s hiss.
The Satanites! O, Lord ! why may incarnate fiends pollute Thy sal ii
Destroying salt and sweet of life, the joy and hope that men hold dear!
“ The End will justify the Means,” this is the Order’s awful creed,
It sanctions every crime on earth, a spur to urge their ruthless greed.
Tis their acknowledged motto charge, a nepenthine charm to conscience
quell;
The selfsame legend is writ in blood and fire, uoon the Gates of Hell.
The song they sang to martyrs’ moans, to tortured victims’ dying yell,
“ The End will justify the means,” the Legend on the Gates of Hell.
The malignant arrows’ virus, of Kalahari’s nomad pigmies,.
Is crushed from ruddy ants, and flowerets wild, the spoil of desert
trees;* . . ,
Thus Satanites can bane distil, from simple things of hum-drum life,
We droop and die like eland struck, evanish from this scene of strife.
I cannot paint the Loki as I wish, o’er limitations soar,
Twould take a Danffi to depict aright, and stores of varied lore: .
And if I dared to draw the fiend, methinks I’d fall like Frankenstien;
Black-art can raise foul fearful fiends, but none to match Loyola’s Line.
No magic circle witchcraft draws, can guard you from their vengeful ire;
No sanctuary upon this crust, for their Familiars never tire.
The foul avernian fumes pervade'the air, you breathe them in your
sleep,
Around the hearth, o’er bed and board, the noxious anacondas creep.
Your cup of life with bane is filled, the lovely earth becomes a void;
You cannot trust your wife nor child, by ruined hopes and cares annoyed.
Bar papists from your home and path, base protestants will lay the
snares,
To serve the private end—money. So you may tumble unawares.
Ay protestants will prove your foulest foes, strike blows below the belt,
To curry favour with fhe Sons of Night, nor reck the way they re dealt.
The enemy within the gate, is aye the foulest of the foul,
Betraying to serve self-interest, his salt unto the Romish Ghoul.
You can’t trust a single soul in business —experience I reveal.
Agents, men of wealth yvorth many thousands, from you large sums
will steal. . , ~
Police say: “ ’Tis not a case for our department to interfere,
Altho’ the swindle is plainly painted, red, and to a blind roan clear,
For the papist officer has got the wink—Rome protects her tools
“ Let the heretics fight it out, and law impoverish the fools.
The most hellish plot to ruin me, that Loyola e’er designed.
Was worked by one I feed, who schemed to cozen me at hoodman-blind.
Thus day by day an uphill failing fight, o’erwhelmed by long odds,
I find a traitor where I thought a friend, a trap when caution nods.
Metaphorically ’tis true, this verse is written with my blood,
For all the dark rascality that’s drawn, I have alone withstood.
The eve of manhood has been past, a lonely exile in the wild,
For I will not bend to Rome, nor by priestcraft let mv mind be hied.
There are more wavs of killing men, than by burning at the fearful.stake,
And “ Dangerous ” discover in divers ways, the sleuth-hound in the
NowT’m ’on the down-hill road of life, and my hair is growing gray.
Environed by a mean and venal skulk, aye, as e’er was formed of clay;
Intellectual and moral suicide—or keep apart all dgy;
True: “ Better fifty years of Europe, than a cycle of Cathay.
Ave better ’tis to brave the storm, a rover o’er the waters wide;
Than moulder by a slow decay, stranded by the ebb of fortune s tide.
* Formic acid from the ants and nux vomica from the tree—a sort of curari. The Author.
* Why not quit the country? When capital is sunk in land, the sale boycotted, except at a
ruinous price, this cannot be done.


You’ll get no justice in the courts of law, erewhile I heard Judge Urry,
Sell Dike to the Satanites, to win promotion in a hurry; *
I will not write the jackal’s name, tho’ my muse may rhyme it double.
Billows foul will strike your bark, dismasting in the breakers trouble.
You may get a judas-kiss, and worse, from the fond idol of your soul;
And sell yourself, when influenced by tools, for blind cully is your role.
You’ll find treachery and treason, in every seeming friendly grasp,
The door of hope is shut on you for aye, Loyola clinched the hasp.
Their casuists explain away the Decalogue, respect no law.
Unerring marksmen like the Boers, the longbow they can ably draw.
Suppressed in every state of Christendom, Pope Clement signed the
Bull, . ..
Condemned by all the courts, for earth of their iniquity was full.
Scotched, not killed, the Hydra reared its heads again, venom venged
the blow. . , | ,
The Devil fears their darker guile, ’tis said, where Tophet s sorrows
flow. . . , , „
Soon Clement died of “ colic.” The spirit of the Borgia, some say,
Is re-incarnated in the Black Pope, e’en to the present day.
Oh! alas! you cannot hope to shun them, you’ll find them everywhere,
Go round about the earth where’er you list, the Satanite is there.
Far wide their empire as the sphere, outacres that of Tamerlane, _
Or Genghis Khan, fell conqueror, who almost ruled this earth amain.
You’ll find them on Equator’s Line, where azure rolls the torrid tide.
You’ll find them in the frigid Polar Land, e’en where floes ne’er elide.
You’ll find them in the Masons’-Lodge; you’ll find them in the Orange
fold; . „ ,
And perdue in all government bureaux, a traitor spy enrolled.
You’ll find them in the forest wild, their tools upon the mountain side.
The surplice of Reformed Church, well we wot, a Satanite may hide.
You’ll find them in the desert drear; beguiling in the city vast;
A lordling in a royal court; and many a Jack before the mast.
Nay more, the men who eat your salt in fraud their traitor hands
Perhaps, the wife you love; the friend you trust, and think so staunchly
true. , .
You’ll find them in the darkest depths of Hell, wild howling in despair;
And hopeless at the pearly gates of Heaven, for none can enter there.
Their General is a potentate, and rivals with the “ Holy See,
His o’ermastering mind prevails, when those great powers cannot agree.
The Mikado may keep the keys of Heaven, and wear the threefold
crown, , , , . ,
The Tycoon holds the sword of sway, concealed beneath a simple
gown. r .
The Merovingian Monarch seems to rule, enthroned in Vatican,
The Palace Mayor walks humblv by, yet he’s the sovran lord of man.*
They’ll kill the highest in the land, by aid of murderous spalpeens,
To aggrandize their Order, for the end will justify the means.
Brother of their faith and protestant, they oft sweep from out their way,
The vouth with virile vigour plentious, and his sire with locks of gray.
“ Kill them all, the Lord will know his own,” orders when Count
Raymond died,
Butchered by de Montfort’s sword, tool of papal persecution’s tide.
Then outraged women shrieking sank, into the martyr’s bloody grave,
Their kinsmen falling sword in hand, alas! could not their loved ones
save.
Christ, guard us all from fiends like these, nor yield us up to them
their prey,
And let Thy Spirit shine on earth, tho’ Hell of old has had its day.
♦Begrimed clay adjacent coal seams is named “urry”; used as a typical nom de plum*
to cloak a real name and person. —The Author.
* The Irish Ms.P., nominees of the Jesuit Provincial, dictate to the British Government
of 1910, who humbly obey; slaves of slaves, the lowest of the low.


Ah! how can men such demons be, defenceless beauty wrong and
slay;
Existence all men owe to her, and many a while of joyance gay.
When I peruse dark dastard hideous acts, those ruthless deeds of
shame,
Christ’s cause invoked to bless atrocious guilt, the brutal aftergame.
The furious wrath oft makes me long to own, Atropos’ power to still,
Those fiends incaranate I would rend, yea e’en their demon souls I’d
kill.
“ ‘ Vengeance is Mine, I’ll repay,’ saith the Lord,” to Him wrath’s
days belong.
Well we know the sword will fall, to avenge those feats of Romish
wrong.
Say, was the Borgia’s voice infallible, tho’ steeped in sin, ne’er err?
Ah! queer keeper of the Keys of Heaven ! I cite Beziers’ massacre.
Who leads the black crusade ? a man of God, yclad in monkish weeds.
Full sixty thousand blessings he bestowed, that martyred blood the
seeds
From which our Tree of Liberty has sprung. Christ rest each noble
soul!
And guard the freedom we have won, from Superstition’s abject role.
The Albigenses felt Rome’s bloody sword: “ Unfurl the oriflamme,
Heretics dare call their souls their own, that impiety we’ll tame.
Go, give their homes unto the flames; let savage wolves their babes
devour;
No friendly hand, no shelter give, to woman in her needful hour;
And let their maidens be the spoilers’ prey, for all shall feel our wrath.
With swords upon the men, accursed race! and sweep them off our
path.”
So ran the Papal Bull. Semper idem, the fell Pope’s crimes endorse,
For if he had such power to day, he’d rack and burn without remorse.
Superstition inspired those crimes that erst disgraced the Romish See,
The world was swamped with human gore, to prove all men can ne’er
agree.
Semper idem, hark! ye dullards, dark Rome is semper idem still;
And when she snares one in her toils, she grinds to powder in her mill.
Obedience, aye implicit, they must yield to each immediate chief;
Ne’er a question ask or think—Satanites’ Constitution in brief.
(In every Romish Order, the Superior stands in place of God;
And the foulest crimes are perpetrated, obedient to the nod).
No human kinship must they own; no friend; no property in store;
And every joy and hope upon this earth, a Satanite gives o’er.
No locked up box, no private room, to bar the constant mutual spy;
They must not call their souls their own, when ordered, swear the
perjured lie.
Conspire to murder, plunder, persecute, of demons they’re the gem !
The “ Destroying Angels ” of the Mormons, out-heroded by them.
Their mode of breaking a novice to the yoke, is to crush out will,
And voice of conscience hushed for aye, her mandates lulled for ever
still.
This system, as the oriental herb, steals away the judgment,
Until nefarious crimes seem deeds of worth, and reason’s ephod rent.
The wehrwolves will destroy their nearest kin, upon a mental pyre,
If ordered by the awful power they own, for none dare brook its ire.
Demoniac quintessence possesses every mazard—loathsome lair!
E’en lost Afrit flies in fear, for he finds a darker devil there.
’Tis ineffable, tho’ to th’ inmost recess of the soul ’twill work,
Serbonian Bog. They’re kindred spirits of Abdul the damned Turk,
Of essence similar. The one by force, the one by fraud, prevails,*
The Koran, or the Pope, the dervish, or the priest, are but details.
* Since writing, Abdul has been dethroned and jailed for life: the Jesuits driven
France and Portugal.


/-
In retreats ' —their sponging shops—they squeeze all purses dry as
tinder;
Libertines therein. “There is nothing,” say casuits, “to hinder.”
Protestant parsons tramp to Heaven, o’er brambles, briars, and prickly
bushes;
But popish priests pursue a pleasant path, with beauty love and blushes.
Love amongst the lilies, rendered charms the loosened zone discloses;
And golden store, and wine galore, wreaths of myrtle twined with
posies.
Every prelate of the upper ranks, whiles away the leisure hour,
Lapped in secret in the labyrinth of Fair Rosamonda’s bower.
There is no irate Eleanor, to give choice of dagger or the bowl,
So the paphian nymph untrammelled, can roll maf&dd o’er the soul.
The saints are little recked, when rosy wine the love-caught prelate
sips,
And Lydian notes are sweetly warbling, thro’ her pearl deckt coral
lips.
Tis little his reverence cares for the candle the bell and the book,
When wild with the thrilling of passion, the pulse o’ th’ life blood
is shook;
Ay little indeed, for the angels are guarding his couch every night,
While complining in the abandon of rapture’s seraphic delight.
In cloisters by solitude and silence, they work upon volition,
Till in ecstasy’s devotion, to purchase darksome sins remission,
Wealth is assigned unto the Company, t’ ope the Heavenly gates by
Mass.
Osiris’ oreed was sense, indeed, compared to this superstition crass.
But they have two religions, to suit shallow scholars, and the clown,
They can explain away absurdity, or ram their dogmas down.
The priest claims power to free from sin, the wife if she with him
betrays.
When love is challenged at the gate, he enters thro’ unguarded ways.
The shades of all the wise, the great, the good, o’er whom Death’s
chariot rolls,
Are doomed for aye, if priestcraft won’t pray purchased masses for their
souls. *
Half-a-crown the lowest price, but wholesale, ten per cent, reduction;
rare-an-ages! those are truthful pages! don’t raise up a ruckshion !
The gates of Heaven up for sale, two-and-six, no advance, going—gone!
Down with the dust! You’re safely booked for silent shores of Acheron.
The silver coin has won a glorious crown in Paradise for you,
It will buy a pint of whisky for the priest, or sole his Sunday shoe.
A pound of candles presented to a saint, will get you a front seat;
A pretty wife is a passport sure, if you wink and be discreet.
The fleshly sins of priest and nun, will ne’er transude unto the soul,
So they may wallow in a mire, and yet preserve a stainless scroll.
Faith ! ’tis Gospel truth I’m telling, anent the Thugs of Bhowanie,
The tallest. poppies say the same, from Pascal down to Chiniquy.
Letters written to the Virgin, can be mailed upon the altar,
By the priest; postage ten and sixpence, to the Goddess tutelar.
For half-a-guinea you can write to Heaven, the priesthood run the mail,
The profits are considerable, as but little costs entail.
Out mails only, replies are spiritual (good plan to boil the pot);
‘ Shure! ’ the postman’s given name is “ Tommy,” and his patronymic
“Rot.”
Prayers to the saints are efficacious, and also to their pictures;
Indulgence can be bought to sin; and crimes pardoned with few stric-
tures;
Saints’ fabled reliques, e’en in duplicate, have miraculous powers,
To heal sickness in the faithful, but not in false faith avowers.
* “ There is no salvation outside the Catholic Church,” say the priests, but Jesuits explain
that dogma away—when it suits their scheming; in fact, they can explain the Rocky Moun-
tains away to prairie.—The Author.


They’ll make the childless wife conceive, also the unmarried daughter,
When with priestly hands they’re blessed, and sprinkled o’er with holy
water.
That sacred brew is talismanic, barring evil-eye’s enthrall,
’Twill guard your messuage from all danger, like the Luck of Eden
Hall.
Eikons can be worshipped as symbols, if your wit can split a straw,
And in fact, by calling it ‘dulia,’ without breach of Scriptures’. Law.
Agnus Dei, and Bambino, are mascots, they chase th’ evil sprite,
Toys sold by cunning priests to dupes, who in such trumoery delight.
Chained souls, who crawl in mental tutelage from cradle to the grave,
In fancy fond, the babble of the priest, their sins in Lethe lave.
They must beg the question, faith childlike, reasonless, and sans alloy,
That’s believing what they know cannot be true, vid6 Little Boy.
This is the faith of the Catholic Church, I neither jeer nor slur,
If ye do not believe it, ye cannot be saved from Satan’s Spur.
How can men believe such foolish drivel, mistake dross for ingot?
Which turns the thinker to a sceptic, and scorner of the mental sot.
I’d rather own Mohammed’s creed, and al Koran’s mythic story,
Houris’ kisses please me better far, than flames of Purgatory.
Where’er it be, that mystic Aidenn, bloomy Asphodel Meadow,
Strange, how men expect to win it, by hellish deeds of hate and woe.
Crimes horribly ineffable, are sanctioned in the Holy Name,
And scenes are acted on this earth, that would the Halls of Eblis shame.
Ay, there is a spirit life beyond the grave, the poet’s soul can feel,
Where care and sorrow enter not, reserved for the pure in heart and leal.
Strict rule, the novice walks and talks in threes, but never in a pair,
For love, and friendship, consort thus, both tabooed in Loyola’s lair.
For kindred spirits may reveal, and drop the mask conventional,
The rebel thought may find a tongue, in threes by prudence held a thrall.
Inculcated is vilest treachery, in opening years of May;
A socius spies the mature hours, and dogs his chief by night and day.
The Inquisition’s champion belt, they hold for murderous slaughter,
Any ass can make a hell of fire, they made a hell of water;.
As drop by drop the aqua pura falls, it harrows up the brain,
(In secret, the devilries of this bloody tyrant band obtain);
This beats Black-frairs clean, Loyola left them astern in the race,
And when they pass the Gates of Hell, my theme will hold the pride of
place.
The Muse inspires—they’re segregated there, Belial can’t abide them,
For they want to rule Below, still their maxim is semper idem.
There are monsters in the confessional, too hideous to be shown,
Aye its filth is so appalling, all purity of mind hath flown
From matron and from maid, for it debases to a mental prostitute,
(A lust snare for the priest) there virture is undermined by arts argute.
From the duchess to the scullion-maid, their minds are sewers of noisome
thought,
The nobler be the soul, the lower is the Sodom to which ’tis brought. *
The woman throws away all modesty—she must obey the hest—
All decency, reveals most private actions to soul-soiling priest.
The secrets of her married life, the husband’s fondlings and caress,
And her desires and thoughts of love or sin, ere he’ll absolve and bless.
If she withholds the slightest thought, the absolution is no good;
For Peter obeys the priest: Comus still has victims in the wood.
“ Acts follow words,” saith Chiniquy, a priest of Rome for fifty years;
“ With married dame or maid.” Go read and learn, ye who have eyes
and ears.
Yet there is viler still. Revolting questions about beastly desire,
As Semiramis was accused of, in Romish confessional transpire;
And unnatural crime, for which accursed Plain Cities were destroyed:
Priest-ridden vassals, from self-respect, are by this false faith decoyed.
But I must skip the lowest depths, of this very mauvais sujet,
* Chiniquy, word for word, almost.


Twould be offence indictable, to drag such noxious bane to-day.
Exploded myth—the confessional’s inviolability;
Things of shame and sorrow are revealed, sans e’en Jesuitic plea.
Spicy tales of ladies’ thoughts, priests tell when in a roistering mood,
Amongst themselves, and many a lass is shown to falsely wear the snood.
Men must confess, acts with, thoughts of the sex, such items, kissing,
hugging, , , , . .
Saith Chiniquy, a priest for many years, so I am not humbugging.
“ Aye, eighty years I’ve seen,” writes the convert. “ full soon I 11 lie at
As I write false or true, so may I mingle with the lost or blest.”
Likewise so say I, in the shadow of the I error which all fear,
For I am in the last decade of life, looms endless midnight drear.
But all the squeamish sanctified, suppress the truthful telling, hit, .
The gabies ought to buy a grinding stone, and then whet their brains a
“ Let Rome march to victory,” quoth they, “ rather than reveal a hint
Of the horrors hid behind the veneer, in vernacular print;
If needs must be, hush it up in French or Latin,” (which many girls
read).
’Tis very funny for the philosopher, such vargary, indeed.
For ’tis all in print already, in many scores of well known books,
By famous authors, some living and others in the land of spooks.
“ The Name of Jesus Christ, when prefixed to amorous apostrophes,
Sanctifies unbridled lust,” saith Carrocciolo’s “Convent Mysteries.”
A princess, and a parson, I set forth as my authorities,
Witnesses that would hang a man, in home country, and overseas.
This system places penitents in power of priests, an easy prey,
When they want to fill the till, shame-bound dupes can never say them
nay. k
The Satanites upon blackmail, ’tis their chiefest source of wealth,
With legacies from moribunds, who hope to enter Heaven by stealth.
Sins of man, of matron, and of maid, are recorded in their book;
Gallant soldiers, and astute'statesmen, oft before the Order shook.
Plundering like a rapparee they come, their anathemas to howl,
At the dying wretch, who cannot pay the priest to save 1 his parting
“ sowl.” .
The widow’s cow is ta’en, the orphant’s bread, to raise the wanted
cas h
For the Satanites must have their pound of flesh, e’en if the world
smash.
The end will justify the means, their creed, to fill the greedy till;.
I have read them up and know the ropes, for they put me thro’ their mill.
The Satanites use sublime phrase to wimple yare a low intrigue,
The Sacred Name assumed, blasphemed by guilty use, this thuggee-
league
By plots fill their coffers fair or foul, and crush opponents ’neath the sod,
Pious pretence masks a petty spite, “ for the greater glory of God.”
They justify the Inquisition, its nameless atrocities:—
“ Torquemada wise and brave, though heretics’ animosities
Brand him as a fiend. Better burn a thousand protestant pagans,
Than millions should evanish from the fold. Blood and fire for corbans.
The creme de la creme of intellect, inepts ne’er with them abide;
Their machinations loose the floods of war, and stem that torrent’s tide;
Place mitres on Reformed bishops heads; and can terrorize a throne;
They pervert the courts of justice; and strangle freedom in their zone.
The multitudinous manipulations of this Vehmgerichte,
Have wrung the orb with countless tears and groans, sans mercy and
sans pity.
You cannot shun or shake them off, they have a pertinacious grip,
They wait and watch their time and chance, then strike you foully
when you trip,
* Vide Chiniquy’s “ Fifty Years of Rome.”


And if you don’t, your son, or your grandson, so on ad infinitum.
Weigh well the words I hear inscribe, knowledge dearly bought and
'worth a plum.
Let statesmen boast their craft, and soldiers swing the glaive in war
renowned,
They all are babies to the Gnomes in Black, who work beneath the
ground.
Precautions against their methods, they wharp to work with more effect,
Influence victims to entrust their tools, and truest friends suspect.
If you unmask a plot, they can explain the trickery away
To public satisfaction—subtle system—odium to allay.
“ As a Jesuit ” is a byword, for low cunning tricks and vile,
Well known upon the Continent, their heinous schemes of guilt and
guile.
Unmasked, exposed to infamy, by some famous writers: Eugene Sue.
Pascal: Michelet, and many others. Vide “ The Wandering Jew.” —
Lovely Adrienne de Cardoville, with locks of red-gold hair,
Destroyed herself, for love with aconite, in anguish of despair.
A dastard plot, ’twas ably planned, to work upon the o’erwrung mind,
’Twas safe to win the game for them, and left no tell-tale track behind.
The other heirs (save one) ne’er lived to grasp the fatal legacy,
The Dark Hand struck, the ill-starred lives expired, the myopes could not
ree.
The deeds were done by working on -the human passions, fanned to tind.
Law provides no rope for influencer, for Themis thus is blind.
The end gave sanction to the means, secured the Demon Order wealth,
The survivor was a Jesuit, thus they cleared the road by stealth.
Adroit murder looks like accident, or perhaps a suicide,
Their tool manoeuvres in the jury-box, the honest men to guide;
The forged Will looks quite correct, and lay Satanites will swear ’tis so,
Or gold buys oaths from Darwinites, who ne’er reck the peccadillo.
They can play upon the human passions, thus kill the adverse heir,
Then the cash falls to a shallow weakling, and Loyola’s brood ensnare.
They wield the noblest passions, love of wife, or child, or friend, misled,
To clear the road before them, and strike their opposing foeman dead.
They set the husband against his wife, the sister against her brother,
And with Machiavelian art, can all social friendship smother.
All hopes, ambitions, hates, and loves, what e’er to action spurs man’s
frame,
The Satanites can twist to serve their ends, the chessmen of their
game.
Quidnuncs who pry e’en to the secret workings of the open mind,
They diagnose from scouts’ reports, the quarry’s converse with all kind.
This system is an awful odic force, most men can hypnotize,
By suggesting crimeful deeds, e’en staunch probity can villainize.
From generation to generation, the sleuth-hounds track their quarrv
down,
’Till ruined and destroyed the race, success the deathless Order crown.
111-omened is the maid or wife, on whom they cast an evil eye
In confessional. Better fate, to sink on life’s last couch and die:
And if she is obdurate, they will say, she is not comme il faut,
The fama’s source unknown, the gammoned public think it may be so.
Thus they undermine the outworks, to force their quarry to surrender.
To virtue all men homage pay, to woman e’er her best defender.
Once upon the scent, o’er they never give the quest to hit the mark,
The victim falls, we cannot see Loyola’s fell hand in the dark.
A blind bat is the Long Eared Ass, the priest can lead him by the nose;
They never let their swarthy hand appear, foul stabs beneath the rose.
The fearful essence that exudes, along the serpent’s grooved tooth,
Less foully fatal than their baphometic ban. Experience sooth.
Like it, ’twill vitiate the ruby blood, to a black and fetid stream,
Then winds unto the doomed one’s stricken heart, to terminate life’s
dream.


Or like the choke-damp in the dark coal mine, the toiler flows around,
Rolls o’er the exit of escape, while gnomes are raving all unbound.
The pick hath loosed the Genie of the coal, the eon gyved anarch,
Sinofsnow crowned Ice-King, day by day, marched o er the prehistoric
The P fame of greatest prophets, monarchs, bards, Oblivion’s besom
The Ice-King’s repute rests on solid base —his footprints in the rocks.
Yea, like bacilli of the plague, ’twill permeate the human blood,
Impalpable to mind untaught, noiseless grows into a fatal flood.
Tho’ it may fail to quench the vital spark, of death oft leaves the seeds,
Contagion stalks about the land, unknown, disguised in priestly weeds.
Their ban can crush the minds of men, ’tis ruthless as a starving shark,
The war-fiend’s sword, the tiger’s heart, the Inquisition, cark.
Their cellars reek as charnel vaults, foul secrets buried with the dead,
The tiny things in human mould. Some fearful tales re that are said.
Garibaldi unmasked the convent-hells. “ Babies choked, entombed in
The offspring of the seduced nuns, betrayed to lives of vilest grime.”*
Nuns a few are murdered, for ’tis fatal deflowering to refuse,
Precept and example are contagious, so most their virtue lose.
Caught in a trap, the tyro is dazed, perforce the lassie lies still.
Of sacred idalian endearments, the reverend priests take their till.
Saith Miss Maria Monk of world fame, erstwhile a nun ot Montreal,
And many other fearful deeds, o’er which discretion draws a pall.
The Prince of Air their oracle, the sovran seer whom they obey;
I’ve taken off my coat to show them up, those monstrous fiends I 11 flay!
Such is his influence upon those black-robed wolves, the raca clique,
Darwin’s subtle sophistry seems plausible, tho’ tis serpent s gleek.
Ashort time ranked amid the Band, the cloven-hoof begins to show,
And, ere novitiate is o’er, a forked tail is sure to grow.
I love to tint in florid style, half tones for me by far too mild,
Their system deadly as the antiar. of lava s blasted wild.
With dagger clinched in bloody hand, they search our armour for a
And they find the fatal flaw, full soon we feel its poisoned point.
Those dastard fiends ! too base for Hell! so thus they ever plot and prey,
The felons in the Pit all shun their shades, who’re deeper damned than
thev •
Subventioned is the daily Press, with some reviews and magazines,
To influence readers, this to their ends a very useful means.
Lav Satanites are on the staffs of leading papers—theorem—
Their tremendous power is marvellous, few their machinations stem.
Claques abound in drawing-room and in club, ’mongst the upper-classes;
Progressive reviews are influenced, to gull the stupid masses.
Emperors, princes, sovran rulers, and politicians by the score,
Oft have sunk before Loyola’s League, striking silently and home.
The secret of the Uncrowned King’s success, the magic of his spell.
Was Satanite support, without it he could ne er have, wrought so well.
The Jesuits worked Parnell into power, both jackals in their hand, .
When Gladstone turned his coat again, and fell moonlighter s rapine
fcinTl'Gcl* •
Fiesoles Spider has many webs, in which to catch the erring fly,
To circumfuse the earth, unseen, unkenned, by every untaught eye.
He snares the fish both great and small, he snares the body and the
Father 1 Black-Pope rules the world, from Florentine fastness hight
Now^should you think my story strange—some deeper than the herd can
things that hap on earth, by eye of their philosophy.
♦Garibaldi’s red-shirts discovered the tokens in Italy; common talk when I was a boy.-
The Author.


i'he mystical lore of bards, who sit alone on the mountain tops,
In solitude of mind, oft see the canker gnawing at the props;
The passing and the coming, and the flashing of Atropos’ shears;
Still they’re Cassandras: “ Go up, thou bald-head,” the full grown baby
jjeers.
Ritualists crawl cap in hand to Rome—Cranmer, did’st thou die for
this!
To beg the Pope to recognize their “ orders,” and his big toe to kiss.
They’re sapping the foundations—the plus a traitor tide—
Of that glorious faith in Jesus, for which our martyred fathers died.
On the scaffold; at the stake; on the ocean; and the battle field;
Now shall we to a puppet-show surrender our hard won freedom yield?
Put our necks beneath the yoke ? Why quarrel about laying on of
hands ?
For no man of. sense now cares a straw, how e’er this doubtful dogma
stands.
Will it dry a single tear ? or ope the gates of Heaven to you and me ?
An Irish jig is just as sacred, as this ritual mummery.
The ordained babes must wear pretty bibs and tuckers, for zanys meet,
And ask queer questions in confessional, to give the girls a treat.
While the parsons fight o’er dogma, and prink like nursery dolls at play,
Atheism is rampant, and respect is fleeting fast and far away.
The fool of the family robed in motley, where are the cap and bells ?
Is leading lay simpletons a dande, along the road to Romish hells.
Our fathers’ faith, the martyrs’ creed, for which they died long years
ago,
Degraded to pagan pomp, turn about, wheel about, jump jim crow.
Lineal descendants of the Arch-Traitor, wear the Anglican gown,
Church stipends take, and tho’ they true allegiance swear to creed and
crown,
At confession, debauch the women; and beguile the men to Rome,
Lure from the Narrow-Path their fathers trod, oft swamped with bloody
foam.
“ ’Tis a wise son who knows his own father,” an adage pointed double,
Since wives confess to sacredotalists, who can dodge crim. con. trouble.
While they’re marching on the road to Rome, their sly subtle wit
discovers—
Religion cloaks iniquity, and wedlock hides the guilt of lovers.
“ If a rotten branch offend thee ” —this a matchless moral surgery;
“ Cut it off and cast it from thee ” —this ritualistic babery.
Kick those charlatans out the Church, better the ‘ raael thing ’ again,
With thumbscrew, gibbet, rack, and stake, for those who won’t believe
or feign.
They’re marching Romeward, let them, with our boots assisted on the
way,
’Tis better have a loyal flock, than traitors in the fold should stay.
Infallibility is on the war-path still, methods only change,
Since the sword was wrested from the bloody hand, thus limiting the
range.
Auto da fe, gridiron, rack, stillicide, and contracting room,
Have ceased to terrorize, for all that, many a victim fills the tomb.
The tiger has been slain, the cowardly skulking wolf lurks round the
fold,
And oft steals by stealth, the lamb once ta’en by strength, when tears
for martyrs rolled.
Infallibility an attribute to popedom, changing ne’er,
If right at Smithfield and on Bartholomew, same to-day as ere;
If it held empery, with martyrs’ blood ’twould soak terrestrial clay.
Tho’ it rules by trickery, yet now, cannot force by sabre sway.
Lord, save us all from the Dark Hand’s tools, who the innocent bewray;
And guard our footsteps day and night, and yield us not to them their
prey. t
Aye shun the Ritualist in motley, ye lost sheep from the fold,


He is inspired by lust of power, lust of women, and lust of gold.
Rome’s cash is in his pocket, and Rome’s devilry is in his heart;
Around his altar every Sunday morn, dark Eblis holds a mart.
Don’t hearken to the forked tongue, it lures unto perdition’s goal
The subtle Serpent’s slimy folds, are coiled beneath the silken stole.
No more the fires of Smithfield will consume, trapped victims bound for
slaughter,
The flames were quenched that glorious day, ’longside the Boyne’s
immortal water.
Gallant Derry closed her gates, the heroes shouting: “No Surrender! ”
'Prentice boys thus held the walls, for freedom and our Faith’s Defender.
The official garrison capitulated to the enemy,
So fights free-lance to-day for truth, when regulars crouch low the knee.
How few of us can realize, that by this Irish river’s stream
The freedom we so proudly boast was won, tho’ oft we vaunt the theme.
English steel on either side, varied were the tongues in each array,
For countrymen crossed swords with countrymen, in that fraternal fray.
The vanquished demon fell and fled, then Conscience reared her crest
once more;
Beware! he is sneaking back again, thro’ the ritualists’ back door.
Protestants say now: “ We want not to hold the sceptre and the brand;”
So slipped the ancient Roman lordship, from the weak decaying hand.
Those who will not rule, will have to serve, Rome brooks.no equal on
the throne.
The second Roman conquest is afoot, and the dragon’s teeth are sown.
The Satanites abhor exposure, for ’tis fatal to each scheme;
Their blows scorch like doomed spirit’s touch, the nightmare of a waking
dream.
They prefer artifice to violence, to work their wicked will,
And act thro’ tools upon the human mind, oft soul and body kill;
For they instigate to crime, to trap the marked down quarry in the toils,
As a step to win an end, which mostly is a haul of plunder spoils.
You cannot mesh them in the law, no witnesses can prove a case,
For they always act thro’ agents. Their bravos give a coup de grace.
Jesuits have fearless emissaries, who will take life for pay,
As they slew Kensit, to try to stop his exposure of their play.
Undetected seldom miss their mark, tho’ they sometimes meet their
match,
When well known their plan of working. To guard, be ever on the
watch.
You must suspect the kindly friend’s advice, something advised to try,
Their agent suggested it to him, trapping dust thrown in the eye.
Thus they influence to doom. El Dorado proves a wild-cat mine.
Tools keep on suggesting and advising, so round the meshes twine.
Consider closely every word you write; guard the unruly member,
See a future foe in every friend; ’ware the lurking listening ear.
Keep secret, and don’t talk about your own opinions and affairs;
Avoid local gossip as a snake, e’en when closeted in pairs.
As the fearful climbers, silent o’er Mont Blanc’s glaciers cautious creep,
whispers reverberating, would loose the avalanche from the steep.
For we feel our freedom slipping, false the voice of brother man doth
ring,
A frost is nipping social flowers of faith, hark! ’tis The Accursed Thing.
Calumny assiduously asserted, aspersion In the dark,
So friends fall off, look strangely cold, ’gainst this no buckler and no
ark.
Misrepresented, escobarderie, so spreads the specious lie,
Suspected, shunned, misled, then facilis descensus Averni.
An evil spirit dogs your steps, and rumour all your deeds decry
At every turn you meet the shade, as Brutus did at Philippi.
Nothing is too great or small for them, they’ll tackle any job on earth,
From smashing of an Empire, to planting ruin by the humble hearth.
I don’t mean to be sardonic, nor certes do I mean to fleer,


Every General of the Jesuits, claims to be the Devil’s peer.
The Modus Operandi as I sketch. Say you’ve a foe to quash,
The plan lies ready to your hand, provided wit, and guile, and cash.
It is a simple formula—find out a weak spot in your foe,
Then shower your missiles on the place, and you will surely work him
woe.
It is said, that everyone hath a skeleton in a cupboard hid,
So you must scheme, with cunning wiles deceive, to ope the cover-lid.
Shape your plan to fit the man; if he is needy, tempt him on to crime;
Or strike him thro’ his wife or child, that will be successful many a
time.
If he is a thirsty soul, ply him with the devil in solution,
With hog’s wash swill, the Drink Fiend’s joy, the morbid mind’s
accursed pollution.
Or if he is fond of kissing, you can throw temptation in his way,
A passion for the lovely sex, Satan’s surest trap for human clay.
If he owns a greed of gold, lead him on to speculate and plunge,
The road to ruin and despair, he falls before this deadly lunge.
Or charge him with a crime, your bravos prove the case by perjury,
But juries look at traps askance, acquit, or mostly don’t agree.
Tempt tease or lure to a faux pas, giving lies a colourable base,
Then loose the wolves of-law, scared jury and bribed counsel lose his
case.
If he has wealth and wit and influence, not easy to ensnare,
’Twill be an uphill game to play, you scarce can strike him anywhere;
For gold is sovran power, ’twill purchase aid and friends in every place,
And o’er a scoundrel of the deepest dye, it casts a robe of grace.
He is sure to have a skeleton, a woman, or disgraceful trip,
Seek well, and you may track it down in time, then on him lay the
whip.
This is infallible, it kills; ’tis whispered that it bent a king;
And faster binds than Inquisition’s chains, or e’en the wedding-ring.
If a man of honour, chivalrous like Sir Guyon knight of yore,
Rouse up his anger at some dirty deed, and work it to furor;
Then entangle in his talk, or writing, the latter is the best;
And get the Devil’s Own in court of law, the text the wrong way wrest.
If you fail to snare him by those tricks, from Wisdom’s ways to sever,
Get him into lawyer’s hands, and they will skin him clean and clever.
You find sans peur et sans reproche his name, spotless as Bayard’s
shield,
To wine or woman, lust of gold, temptations these, he will not yield;
Then you must Dreyfusize your man, seek well, hunt down some felon
deed,
Rouse suspicion on the author’s slot, your advice he’ll surely heed—
To fit the cap upon the man you’ve marked, and thus escape the doom,
Dartmoor, Devil’s Isle, Siberia, the rope, precursors of the tomb.
Back the charge with perjury, fraud, murder, bribery, suicide,
The storm tosst barque o’erwhelmed sinks, ne’er pilot stem’d such
stormy tide.
But none can work such subtle plots, unless a Jesuit by trade,
They serve their time to demoncraft, such villains ne’er are ready made.
If you find he plays the oyster, with loveless heart and careless eye,
Foment quarrels by dint of lies, concealed by veiled cajolery.
Still if Minerva guides his steps, in this, in every other way,
Then slander’s venomed dart lies to your hand, ’tis proven by—“ they
;say.”
’Twill blast him like the Gorgon’s severed head, Athene’s aegis bore,
Basilisk’s eye, or upas’ shade, less blighting than its lethal lore.
The writhing reptiles myth wraps round, that awful petrifying mask,
Will transude tegument, wind to the heart, and poison joyance’ task,
So darkly in the “ lion’s mouth ” unknown, dispose the specious lies,
Your task is done, for rumour wings them wildly as afar it flies.
Tho’ Pallas parry with her shield, that poisoned dart will wing its way,


And rankle in the galled martyred heart, the parrot cry—they say.
A snake, a jackass, and a cat, come, take your truthful brush and
sketch—
Public Opinion you have drawn; there’s a volume in this distich.
Its ears are long enough for it to catch, what e’er ’tis said—they say,
The wondrous tale enlarges fast, with every gossip’s donkey-bray.
A brainless thing that kicks a fling, when wires are pulled by minds of
power,
Babbling as fugleman directs, in the fool-fury of the hour.
A thing that makes or mars a man, and rouses oft the sauce in us,
A giant striding o’er loose sand—vox populi vox asinus.
Vid6 Carlyle, from memory I cite, about those empty tools:
The Anglo-Saxons are a stupid race, and they are mostly fools.
Calumny will twist men’s tongues into a knife, and stab the low and
high,
’Tis too intangible to fight, none but the wealthy can defy.
When disaster or disgrace lowers low, you assume to be the friend,
Thus worming into confidence you’ll find, how his opinions trend.
Having gauged his bent by query sly, it is easy to lay a lure
To suit tenor of his thought, so gain your ends by tact and pressure.
Of course, you ne’er appeared a foe, but worked sub-rose thro’ trusty
spies.
Thus Satanites scheme in the dark, and gloat o’er anguished victims’
sighes.
I don’t advise a hanging job, with poison, bullet, or the knife,
Tho’ you may safely work it off, if seeming done thro’ neighbours’
strife.
If a woman, she may be snared with jewels, blarney, love, or pelf,
Risky games with beauty, for ten to one but you’ll be caught yourself.
To baffle, mark the influencer’s ruse, and do the opposite,
Or nothing, a plan I’ve proved a trump, thwarting popish hell-hounds
quite.
If you attack, excogitate your sketch, and do not make false moves,
Consider your opponent’s game, a gnome that knows the flaws and
grooves.
This Flying Dutchman’s ropes I know, can mate the king and trump
the tricks,
The Devil’s patent is their creed, an infernal code of ethics.
Wealth, wickedness with wit, will wonders work, when wily wights will
wield,
The maxim of the Order Dark, who blazon upas on their shield.
A serpent twined around the upas-tree, fit emblem of that creed,
Which stabs its victims in the dark, claims Christ will sanction the
foul deed.
“ The end will justify the means, for the greater glory of God,”
All crimes are lawful for the Pope, vicegerant of this mortal sod.
The blasphemy that claims equality with Christ—exclusive Heaven
For priestcraft’s crouching slaves. Decadence brand is on those chains
unriven. *
Such servile serfs of Rome are sinking fast, before the freeman’s sword,
So Spaniards fled like chaff before the wind, when Yankee cannon
roared;
And Martin Luther’s creed has won the belt, from Paris, and from
Wien;
Superstition stabs secretly when safe, but shuns the sabre’s sheen.
The Romanists ! the Romanists ! Bhowanie’s occidentalists !
They’re enwrapped in foul stygian mists, men see no further than the
cists.
Aurated with religious mien, a vraisemblance in outward show,
They’re whited sepulchres, putrescence lurks in hideousness below.
Debauched by filth of the confessional, the matron and the maid,
* In every country Jesuits acquire sovran power, then the people revolt and kick them out.
Latin races are kicking. Anglo-Saxons are fitting on the yoke.


Defiled the purity of home, the nation sinks on downward grade.
If your lies are nailed upon the counter, smiling say—l am exempt
From rejoinder, the man is beneath my notice, yea, beneath contempt.
’Twill seem reply to say, on the nailer you’ll not waste your spittle,
Tho’ what his style or name may be, matters not one jot or tittle.
The point being—is the stated thing true, or false, what e’er it be;
Truth is no more sooth, when said by Arch-Bishop of Canterbury.
You need not condescend to argument, handy terms of abuse
And catch-phrases, are all sufficient for the shallow public goose.
When the Dog-Star rages; or basilisk sheds search-light from its eye;
When the simoom sweeps the welkin; when slander tells the cunning
lie;
When you stray beneath the upas; or Circe lures you with false smile
Beguiled by beauty and sweet singing, on Calypso’s fairy isle;
When the earthquake rends the mountain or typhoon roars along the
sea
When the lightning blasts the oak; when the torrent thunders o’er the
lea;
When the Gorgon snares your glances; or when you tread upon the
snake,
And the python’s slimy folds embrace, there is cause to fear and quake.
But when Satanites have marked you “dangerous,” in their book of
doom,
The Sisters Weird have spun your winding-sheet, and marked you for
the tomb. *
The chiefest danger of all these, as many a wight has learned, I ween!
The velvet sheen of glamour, thro’ the siren’s drooping lashes seen,
When Loyola lays her on the trail; then she has a gang behind her;
The only safety is to fly afar, ignore, and never mind her.
Black-Pope and Conclave at Fiesol6 meet, when midnight shadows
drear,
Lucifer presiding, as their advising lawyer, king, and seer.
A human skull is on the board, from which each brother fills his can,
The fearful draught is quickly drained, ’tis the blood of an Orangeman.
Then round, and round, the charnel-plank, they wildly dance a demon
fling,
The Fiend applauds vociferously: “ Bravo! bravo! that’s the thing! ”
With tails cocked up they chant their gruesome song, while howling out
each stave,
The grume bedaubs their hair and robes, like ghouls fresh risen from
the grave.
The Sataivites’ Song.
1.
Cock up your tails, O ! my brothers galore!
Cock up your tails, and kick high o’er the floor.
Cock up your tails, for our Eblis asthore,
Cock up your tails, for Old Nick, con amore. *
2.
We’ll roast every heretic, brown as a berry,
While they yell in fed anguish, drink and be merry,
Pshaw! blending their blood into nectar with sherry;
So kick them to Tophet, o’er Stygian dark ferry.
* Several attempts on my life were made. Then I made a will in favour of the Orange-
men, and let it be known. Now law traps are set. — The Author.
♦The final e in con amore, and in Fiesolfc, is not accented in the song, and passim
sometimes in Fiesolfe. — The Author,


3.
Cock up your tails, for our caro mio,
Cock up your tails, O ! that is the way so 1
Cock up your tails, with fantastic big-toe,
Cock up your tails; drink to Belial, our jo.
Congregating round the council-board, where many dark deeds are
planned,
Whose influence is felt far o’er wide seas, in many a clime and land.
From Kamchatka’s fields of snow; Europe’s capitals, to Indian strand;
On board the battleship, and merchantman, with hardy sailors manned.
From the smoky streets of London, where beats a mighty empire’s heart;
To flowery Cathay’s vasty wall; and atoll isles scarce seen on chart.
From the glorious Heights of Abraham, far wide renowned in tale and
song;
To grotesque Australia’s arid wilds, where bunyip haunts the bil&bong,
From the Great Black Land with torrid clime, the home and the haunt
of Death;
To the Southern Pampas- wilderness, and Siberia’s moss and heath.
In the depths of Hell the lost souls cry, as Loyola’s shade draws near:-
“ Ten thrillion treble curses on your head, your maxims sent us here.
From the Land o’ Cakes, where the slogan of true faith echos in the sky
To the Cape of Storms far beyond the Line, is never too far a cry.
On Emerald Fields, my native isle, here’s luck to them any way!
You find the Brand of the Demon Band, who ravin in robes of clay.
Dark-ages plots are there contrived, to aggrandize Loyola’s Order;
Lucifer advising on each scheme, and Asmodeus is recorder.
Once I was present spying, like the lady in the tale Masonic,
Perdu, taking short-hand memoirs, in my usual style—the laconic.
Grand Old Turn Coat was there, who hither on a flving broomstick rode;
And a British peer, Lord Viper, a mule between a snake and toad.
Lay Satanites they’re Loyola’s most efficient tools.
Snakes not so dangerous in open land, malefic in drumly. pools.
English ritualists were there, traitors smug in the parson’s gown,
Who said: “In time they’d lure us back to Rome, and papalize the
crown.
An Anglican Bishop proved the smartest of the infernal crew,
When he advised upon a plot, the Fiend said: “ That will surely do!
I can’t improve that cunning plan, the scheme is bound to win the day;
His Lordship, the Mulciber of strongholds, winning realms to my sway.
An Irish patriot was present, from Tullamore by steam and rail,
Who wore no breeches like O’Lynn, renowned of old in Wic tale.
Female Satanites were there, the smiles and blushes of the b— witches,
Ne’er prevailed upon Oh! Khyne, to don the garments hight the
breeches.
I’ll not be bound with British chains,” quoth he, “ nor corduroy and
stitches;
Let us devise a plan to squelch Ffreyne-Guillmayne, sans recurring
hitches.
He made comic squibs about Parnell and me, set folks a laughing,
Ay, he sent them to the House on postcards. Curse the jokes and
chaffing!”
Quoth the Hassen ben Sabbah: “ Who dares smile when Warwick bends
his brow,
That heretic must be put down, he’ll meet his Barnet soon, I vow !
You put your foot in it at Tullamote, inviting ridicule,
A woeful weapon when ’tis wielded well, by wits of that ferule.”
Father Martin was General of the Order, the Old Man of the Mount,
And that Irish-Spaniard, obviously held me of very small account.
“ I’ll have revenge,” Oh ! Khyne replied, “ our occult system is the thing
It never failed to bend a foe, from a yokel upward to a King.
He has toured about abroad somewhere, returned in a manner strange;
We can’t find out a fact about him, or where he had had his range.


He is a secret agent of our foes, the Anti-Home Rule rout;
Treasonous things have come to light, for someone let the cat jump out.
He posts letters at the G.P.0., some addressed in a disguised hand;
A dark mysterious personage, our agents cannot understand.
Our sorter tool fails to find them, always mailed in the closing rush.
We must remove him from our path, the safest surest way is—crush.
Some secrets are fatal to possessors, Ffreyne-Guillmayne has a clue
Which he is following. Exposd of the crime will never do.
The Phoenix Park murders he knows, were engineered by a Jesuit,
Keeps sniffing on the scent, and yet may drag that sanctioned deed to
light.
He knows, I fear! our Brother Number One with Carey and the boys,
In the Hell-Fire-Club that midnight, met the American envoys,*
There the Camarilla laid the famous plot, that made the world ring,
Mustered in the vaulted ruin, was the Invincibles’ Right Wing.
The lots were cast, the chosen Four received the knives to strike the
blow;
For Burke refused to tell official secrets, so we laid him low.
A Catholic who betrayed his Church, by being true unto his salt.
Advance we must regardless of the means, Ruin grips us if we halt.
Thus, I’ve been instructed by our spy, Fitz Lynx of Stony Batter.
We’ll draw red-herrings across the scent, fling mud and well bespatter.
This formula we find effective, and bounce investigation
By averring: “ A fairy tale, sirs', ’tis all imagination.”
When exposed the vileness of confessional, straight deny the fact,
A necessary fetter, for the working keeps our rule intact.
We frighten the fool-protestant by shouting: “ This matter is obscene!’
Like the Gorgon on Athene’s aegis, this word petrifys the green.
We baffle justice, law, and truth, wrest wrong to right by specious gloze,
Then pose as injured saints, whilst to the banned the rack metes out its
throes.
So we destroy a man’s career, by raising ’gainst traducing cry;.
The mostly fools all bleat “ ba! ba! ” for they can’t tell plain truth
from lie.
The law “ a hass,” vide Dickens, ’tis clear the public is a fool,
Despite exposure right and left, we still the ass-eared noodle rule. .
Ffreyne-Guillmayne is a thorn in our path, so he must be swept aside,
And hunted off the murder trail, an exile o’er the soughing tide.
We will burn down his Mansion House, and hunt him all around the
earth,
Turn his friends to Punic foes, and thus ostracize from every hearth.
Mysterious hands will strike him in the dark, ne’er guess who deals
the blows,
So drive him on to death, or ruin and despair, keeping up the throes.
He is an Orange propagandist, dangerous, helped Home Rule to
smash; , , .
Loyola’s whip for him.” The Devil quoths: “That will settle up his
hash.” ,
Fiends drew their tails across their throats, to salute, when they passed
the Chair,
There sate the Soldan of Sheol, whilst round the fiery flashes glare.
Erinneys and Eris erst of Erebus—dark immortality—
Obeisance made, then cried: “ Av&! Satanas, we pledge fealty ! ”
Infernal shapes horrific came and went, foul shadows wrapped in flame,
Whilst sounds of terror rent the air, discords without an earthly name.
I’ll not describe, tho’ I saw well from out the nook where I was pent,
’Twould seem the phantasy of Morpheus, and night-hags, non-credent.
Sol’s herald voiced the dawn, the foul fiends fled from Fiesole far ere
day;
Then I emerged from bivouac, and wended on my homeward way.
My sketch is true in darksome tinct. certes, my verse is fearful fact,
As many find out to their cost or ruin, when thev are attacked.
* Hell-Fire Club, see end notes.


The system is the same allwhere, tho’ methods vary with the clime,
1 was so erst, ’tis now, and will be ever, ’till ripe for scythe of time.
Knuckle down and pay blackmail to Rome, to free life’s little span from
strife;
Or like Ffreyne-Guillmayne shout at large: “ Go home ! the priest is
kissing your wife ! ”
When assailed by emissaries’ tongues, so let them catch- a Tartar,
The biter hating to be bitten, so you will be no martyr.
Semper idem„ semper idem, semper idem, aye that’s the boast;
And by and by ’twill cook the Goose, and serve it to the Pope on toast,
The coveted bonne bouche, the Church of England, pagan still at top;
Telos as friars erst, the laity will make the mummers hop.
Loyola will deny and vilify, my script he overhales,
Or with savoir faire may say:'“ Bless’d Virgin! Ffreyne Guillmayne’s
fairy tales !
He is indebted to imagination for facts—all mere conceit;
And to natural endowment, for his Boeotian sardonic wit.
His verse is only doggerel.” The last, an obvious “ cardinal,”
For by the approved rules of prosody, my Muse is held a thrall;
Fast as a prince of popery, in grip of his familiar nigh:
So coined the Sydneyites this word of jeer—chief, colour, priest—or lie.
The Cardinal’s cardinals—a Catholic truth—cheap goods made in Hell,
And like the Home Rule canards made elsewhere, amongst the un-
informed sell.
Each verse I’ve measured carefully, for accent, emphasis, and time,
And the letter of the law is obeyed, on rhythmus, and on rhyme.
But some double-rhymes have extra syllables, and a few have not,
So the Muse inspired, sans, or plus, would spoil the cadence of the lot.
As for assonance and alliteration, well, “ I ’spect they growed,”
Like Topsey, a tittle tells at times, tho’ ’tis bad taste t’overload.
The scansion is correct. I always obviate pronounced hiatus,
And harmonize, anapaest and dactyl, the trochee and iambus.
Few chances give rny themes for the onomatopoetic word,
\et in “ I he Midnight Ride,” I race and roll and roar the rocky ford.
Caesuras I have placed erratically, a prosodial wile;
Never sacrifice the sense and matter, to hy-faluten style.
Writing simply about things that I know, according to my limits;
For those who paint fine from theory, give erudition scornful fits.
I ne’er wrest a red, red rose, from the raging typhoon’s breast of ire;
Nor soar upon th’ etherial wings of dawn, to orbs of stellar fire.
Ne’er rave of amber tress, the wondrous wealth of gem’d and wavy hair;
Glamour stealing ’neath the drooping lash, fascinations debonair.
Thrilling touch of tiny hands, nor love-light in Leonora’s eye;
Swan-like grace of a noble race, when Lady Corisande swept by.
The anguish deep of the parting kiss, alas! lovers’ last on earth;
The dark despair of the patriot brave, who have failed to free the hearth.
Dian’s paly nitencv, gleaming o’er the perfumed pine top falls,
Glisters on the mullioned casement, and glances ’long the dun eld walls.
With thundering hand, I ne’er strike the lordly lyre’s heroic strings,
Sing high of chivalrv. but rhyme of occult ways and basest things.
The world as it is to-day, not what good folk wish to have it be,
So the reading is unpleasant—for fools, who want not facts to see.
Awake! awake! John Bull, the friendly burden of my honest rhymes,
The Dusky Hand is seeking for your throat, while changing are the
times.
Tho’ light and gay somewhat, and given to persiflage, satire, and mock,
The purpose is serious unto sadness, they’re founded on truth’s rock:
And very lucid is my muse—or else explains things in the notes;
She never kicks like bayadere, and wears decorous petticoats.
Rhvmes are ticklish things, at long intervals one mav be a half note out,
Not more, but ’tis woven in the web, not stuck on like a tailor’s clout.
Semi-discords make golden notes ring sweeter, as o’er the tongue they
stMjo /


Naturally, without efford, like willing kisses from a girl’s lip.
O’er precepts I have poured, tomes casting on the Jesuits a ray,
And read and thought my subject thoroughly, to boune me for the fray,
To hold dark priestcraft up to infamy, a debt of hate to pay,
My dawning thought, my dream when night wind sighs, my work or
love by day.
Not that I condemn those Romish rakes, and brand them all as sinners,
For being partial to kisses, glasses, good cigars and dinners;
They’re human passions, which to gratify most men will do. and dare,
And if the Pope will be advised by me, he’ll let his clergy pair.
Long-Ears laying down the law—for a sage is every shallow lout:—
Such things can’t be, for I ne’er spied those plots and demon priests
about. . . ,
The critic clan may sneer —softly ! I ’ll throw no stones, their choler stir,
Tho’ writers who achieved success, oft found those pundits given to err.
I do not satirize the creed of Rome, foolish idolatry,
But show its claim—that all must die the death, or to it bend the knee.
Abhor its politics, maintained by money filched by fraud and lies;
And its Praetorian Guard of Satanites, who fill this earth with sighs.
CANTO lII.—THE INVINCIBLES’ RANT.
- 1
A health to your welfare, Father O’Snake,
Broth of a boy, to make heretics ake.
Yourself the ogre, at paving the Lake;
Divarting the ladies—soothering rake !
A health ! a health to you, Father O’Snake,
Slantha, ma boughil, and slantha fire-drake !
2
A health to your welfare, Father O’Snake,
Wise as your namesake, who winds in the brake;
Tempting and trapping, with apples and cake;
Your tongue is the blarney, when e’er you spaake.
A health ! a health to you, Father O’Snake,
Slantha, ma boughil, and slantha fire-drake!
3
A health to your welfare, Father O’Snake,
Number One’s vourself, for Erin’s dear sake.
You fill the coffin, and dance at the wake;
Invincible Number, life for to slake.
A health ! a health to you, Father O’Snake,
Slantha, ma boughil, and slantha fire-drake!
4
A health to your welfare, Father O’Snake,
Let others be hanged, you never need quake.
We’ll baffle the bobbies, with gammon fake,
Tho’ blessed knives in the Park have, well strake.
A health! a health to you, Father O’Snake,
Slantha, ma boughil, and slantha fire-drake!
CANTO IV.—DE FFREYNE GUILLMAYNE’S FAREWELL.
Farewell, Erin, farewell, Dublin, enthroned upon thy glorious bay,
Resplendent from Killiney’s Hill, the matchless landscape rolls, away.
Farewell, Wicklow’s-wooded glens, farewell to Carberry’s rocky isles;
And farewell, ruined Enniskeane —an item of Loyola’s wiles.


With bloody sword my foresire won his lands, by Boyne’s famous water,
And his descendants held their own, despite treason plots and slaughter.
Now law retakes the substance, Themis bends what terror never tames.
Loyola stabs me in the back, and gives my roof-tree to the flames.
Give me the men of Eld! with sword and lance and hearts no failing
knew,
They well could win and keep estates, now filched by false forensic crew.
De Cogane erst with sixty knights, made some thirty thousand kernes
run,
A lawyer’s clerk can beat him now, for change rules all beneath the sun.
Dung-hill cocks can flap their wings and crow, where gyrfalcons cannot
perch,
Gutter-snipe are placed in power, sans culottes their country’s name
» besmirch.
Loyalty to throne and flag, virtue in the olden times has been;
Now, treason is the paying game, and wearing o’ the rebel green.
By force and fraud our rents are dipt, while Justice stares agape,
aghast,
Treason rewarded, mulct the men who nail the union to the mast.
Our votes cannot win politicians place, as erst our fathers’ swords;
The land is ruled by spouting fools, whose only wit is in false words.
So we must sink by sure tho’ slow degrees, each decade rung by rung,
Plundered by the faithless friend, as rusty swords aside we are flung.
While some of us in distant lands, must eat an exiled heart away, * r
And purse-proud traders rule the halls, where Norman blood of old
held sway.
Many an ancient castle tower, before the sheriff’s writ will fall,
In bygone days, noughj but bloody swords could force passage o’er
the wall.
Tho’ conquering foreign grafts upon the sod, we love our Green Isle
home,
And memory oft times strays to her, where’er wandering footsteps roam.
Our fathers bled for England’s right, or wrong, on many a well-fought
field,
By robbery of lands we’re now repaid, ’gainst that there is no shield,
For politicians turn their coats, to win the suffrage of a snake;
They’re cutting rods for England’s back. The glutted reptile soon will
wake.
The meanest curs that walk the earth, together ’gainst the wolf will
stand;
But statesmen sell a friend to bribe a foe, the way to lose a land.
Theft is guilt by the Holy Writ, no matter how, the where, the time,
Ten million voters at its back, will never justify a crime.
Nemesis bides the coming hour, and the Union Jack may rue it when—
Faced by the serried ranks of hostile armed and united Irishmen. * 2
The descendants of ex-landlords, will be the foremost in the van,
And as they’ll have no power to rule by might, they’ll lead men as they
can;
Deserted by the kindred blood, and all their lands and honours fled,
They draw the sword for native land: “ What recks it how our fathers
bled.”
Now to the wolves a sop we are flung, to buy weaklings spells of peace,
Our plundered land will only serve, rebellion’s bloody wheels to grease.
The Great Betrayal yet will come, and Ulster forced to draw the sword, *
And those who play with fire find out, it can’t be quenched with faith-
less words.
Bootless themes, idle truths to preach, for o’er me looms Loyola’s spell,
So I must leave the haunts of men, in far-off wilderness to dwell.
*1 Written in 1896, now, 1910, more than half the gentry have left Ireland, priest-rule
being intolerable.
*2 British national credit has fallen from to ,£72 —property is no longer safe under
St. George’s Cross.— The Author.
* Written in a.d. 1898.


Farewell, farewell to Erin’s Isle, adieu, adieu for ever more!
My native land is lost to me, an exile from her rock-bound shore. ,
A lone farewell to thee, fair Dublin, aye farewell for evermore .
The lights of Bray are fading fast, and hushed the booming breakers
Howth’s siren notes by distance dulled, as we steer for the open sea.
The packet mounts on the rolling waves, and the wild foam dashes tree.
Soon I’ll tread the London streets, then pass to the ocean liner s deck,
Loyola’s blood-hounds track my trail, I know, but for their fangs ne er
For 7 have marked some spots on earth, where I can hold my foes at
Their howling will not hurt: “ time and the hour runs thro’ the roughest
dciv *
I saw the Dark Hand on the blackened walls, of fire swept Enniskeane;
I have become an Ishmaelite, his malign serpent’s, tongue, 1 ween■
Tho’ I must fight this world alone, without one kindly word to cheer,
The Demon Band can never truly say, I show one spark of tear.
I can’t parry persecution in crowds, fight every man unknown.
But in the wilderness where men are few, I’ll mark their agents down,
There hold my own by wood and wold, despite all snares and tongues
By wif and* watching, baffle wars of wiles, and pay them back or die.
Farewell, ruined Enniskeane, ancestral home, aye adieu e er more,
I seek a spot where I can live it down, upon the Austral shore.
The hardv sailor oft returns, from Arctic’s dismal ice-bound main;
The warrior from the field of death, where sweeps the hissing leaden
The Traveller ’scapes dark Afric’s upas clime, rejoins the social train;
But Jesuits will cease to lie, long, long ere I repatriate again.
# * * * *
The I C. Bishop of Derry and Raphoe (protestant), in “The
Record,” January sth, 1907, states:—” Protestant clergymen are
terrorized and insulted in Dublin’s streets and elsewhere, the favourite
form is to sing an insulting song about a parson and to shout and jeei
after them as they go. A common feature of Irish life.
The Bishop appears not to know such methods are items of the
Jesuit system. When this form of persecution was used against me in
Ireland'in 1892-3, the protestants helped on the fun, thus growing
a rod for their own backs. _ . „ , n „ c
Persecuted out of Ireland, I went on the Continent, where 1 was
followed by emissaries of Loyola; Enniskeane House, my property in
Cork County, burned down, and. finally forced to hold I by wood ana
wold in the wilderness. The Jesuits having found out I know they are
implicated in the Phoenix Park murders. I beat the persecution by
shouting back ait the Jesuits’ tools: “ Go home, the priest pissing your
wife.” Parrotting the Jesuit formula, fool-Australians told me. ih
all imagination,” when explaining the system to them. .
While inveighing against Rome en masse, they are ready to serve
her in detail—for a consideration. So are protestants in other lands.
The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
will burst up the empire—to keep a bit of salary.
CANTO V.—THE VOYAGE.
“ Arcadia ” steamed right gallantly, no matter how Old Neptune roared,
Pandemonium was the line’s name, when Ffreyne Guillmayne was on
“ The°jackal idiots,” thought the Orangeman, “ Loyola’s tools are they.
And mostly fools, as sage once wrote, the asses know not night from
The boycott can be worked in various ways, to suit the man attacked,


Tis excommunication up to date, revived free rights to fract
he P’ e, ; he J ard l > wh P re erst L ’ Isle Adam held the sway,
bo at Brindisi disembarked, thus lived to write another day
r™™ tkat ancient port to Naples, a pleasant place to see and die,
he I hugs of Fiesofe thought to kill, but I’ll live ’till by and by,”
yuoth Ffreyne Guillmayne, who found the hell-hounds had been on
the boycott work,
For on Vesuvio’s crater well known, as in Dublin and in Cork,
they followed on to fair Marseille, the Mistress of the Middle Sea-
Ihe pilsner bocks oft cheered his perturbed heart, at Cafe Fleur de Lys.
I hen Polvnesien s decks were ranged, her flag-staff flaunts the tri-
colour;
Pett> persecution still obtained, until hailed the Sydney shore. *
r freyne-Guillmayne found a vantage coign, then turned to bay and
showed his teeth, 3
Bullets hissing through the bush, arguments to controvert not eath
home, you fool, the priest is kissing your wife! ” was Ffrevne-
Guillmayne s jeer J
When on roads, and round his home, Loyola’s insulting tools drew near
A retort the most effective, it blocked and turned the tide of war
Lake that single charge at Ivry, made by King Henry of Navarre.’
I is a far cry to Tidbinbilla Glen, for Loyola’s tiger pack
But some local skirmishers, from time to time, make half-hearted
attack. '*' 2
Another scheme was then tried on, and Trapley made a willing tool,
Nature s Satamte in heart and mind, tho’ no lefeeman of their school
Nonplussed the squatter firm. Then to entrafTTy cunning fraud was
sought,
Each plot detected by Ffreyne-Guillmayne, an expert in reading thought.
An editor of Westley s creed, local preacher, and shining light
Was then a snaky tool enlisted, bv the skilful Satanite
Anent_girls he published shameful lies, quoth Ffreyne-Guillmayne:
x fiat s h spade,
Which cost him ponies three. Australian justice of the Romish grade.
Sometimes beaten in a fall, Ffreyne-Guillmayne recalled old Derrv’s
m N L!!PTu nd€r ! -” ‘ took a ?HP k at the lemon and at them again.’
t° 1 i P a P ls t s 80 difficult, without those viper knaves
Jackal protestants, faugh! Lais Babylonnia’s varangian-slaves.
1 in rh G yme mayne showed them U P in court, in Press, and ridicule
He,l time GVen With the Black Bri £ ade > and mayhap pay them back in
CANTO VI.—THE PLOT.
Baleful, as he read the note received direct from Rome:
11 " 6 1S t<X> 111 USG ’ t 0 hunt Ffreyne-Guillmayne from
Twill look quite natural We wire-pullers work in the dark unseen
Our Irish tricks are use ess in the bush, so others we’ll convene
Ffreyne-Guillmayne we’ll surround with spies, and lay snares at every
corner, *
Then egg Trapley on to crush by law, th’ unscrupulous suborner,
J l^ n r If eVlde T e, ! ou g»* J hen human come in play,
rf day’° maVne knocks hls head a £ ain st a wall, upon some future
His land is sold to pay the cost of law, can’t earn a grain of salt,
r£~M s ysris-srsiy'a


Starvation ruin and despair his doom, tho’ now he makes ?
If he olavs a wary game, we can charge him with a breach ot la ,
The faithful flock will swear by rule, from probability ne er yaw.
We’ll get him in a false position, influence to a foolish act,
And work upon this colourable base. The game requires some tact.
We’ll pave the way to his discredit by f la " d . er^ n g> IS to g X fa l^ e me,
Some tale about a girl, may be the best to bringhimtoin-t .
He may unmask our methods as he lists,but useless such ess y,
Sassenachs have not wit enough, to understand our skilful play.
Indeed, when ’tis well explained to them, the dunderheads can t compr -
Wit Ernies the earth to-day, so their empery willsoonbe at an end.
The black protestant we influence, freely by the nose hes ,
A pile-driver suffices not, to Knock our methods thro "is head.
Ffreyne'-Guillmayne may explain the plots, but all his glos
W hen V we direct our tools, to gull the obtuse flats with specious tale.
In our register the measure of useful heretics we grave,
Whenour £ss we Hsfto use them, they dare not an
Others can be commandeered, by working on envy, spite, or
The misbegotten reptiles, for one crown will sell their kin and creea
The better units can be terrorized, with threats of loss of tra ,
InH Wes naked See if the. Registrar of Court a slip e’er made?
No' Write P to Spy-General, for statement of that °® cer ’ s
We'keep the civil-staff beneath the thumb suppress the mutmeer.
Tudge Urry will be sent to try the case, and legal meshes twine.
Thu? we hold the world in the hollow of the hand-hark! Socius
We use Protestants as we list, their vernility beneath contempt.
Our fortress, tho’ oft assailed with fearless pen, '
Yet we must guard against exposure, more especially burlesque
The home thrusts of a free-lance pen, mordant sardonic Guillmaynesque.
CANTO VII. —THE VAMPIRE.
I do not hate this man of crime, tho’ my version must obtain.,
tow P?that, loathing scorn
We fed for dastard deeds of cunning-low, his record now adorn.
K* ‘tto (WY-oIJ tom ,the door.
£ nigger kjd? bfcklTT/e -
! f t
Yet he is crouched and cringed to by all men, for he has eoi the OTC
I t h d ate e .o b S patVofnfemuJks^e,
Ind many a elector’s croft, is grasped in his weedy hand.
* Since writing, the Jesuits and many other Romish orders
France and Portugal. Ere long, England will be the last retuge 01
TH E o{ squatters _ Trapley and Shindy Brothers-is treated as a person.
*2 The block—fashionable streets of Sydney.—The Author.


Now accursed be the laws, that aid this squatter plutocrat scrannel
A bon ?. estead act Yankees have, would bar the ruthless tyrant well
An evil spirit walks with him, to urge him on to deeds of guile
H smile* W 1 Pa e thC bushrnan ’ 8 rudd y cheek, and sti/the’baby’s
° n land ’ he counts th e hours until he can foreclose-
thrZ™' SlCkn6SS ’ Wet ’ and cold - fell hunger’s deadly
a f’ that Jaws may rend the vine, the maidens loved to twine-
Wh shine * Uncovered rafters stripped of bark, the paly moonbeams
And ’possums play along the ridge; the owl hoots o’er the lonely hearth
? b r, t< pf teS i l tf M Ce j f home, the shealing and the garth.
The law upholds such guilty deeds, they increase yearly more and more
store WUI 3dd S ° me Unt ° the Vampire’s bloated
A y m S^lf le rt Cra f ft iT tricks 5 e tries ’ t 0 tempt selectors into debt,
A mortgage follows in due course, the grip is very seldom met,
There are no buyers for the land, so the squatter firm gets it cheap-
Thus the tide of rural population, keeps at the lowest neap.
A st a le old game that has been often played, yet always sure to win
Thus drives a landless peasantry, to wither in the city’s din
He raised a fire of malprepense, a trap, to burn Ffreyne-Guillmayne out
Th aS d ° ne by adverse side ’ and P roved k too by perjured
You cannot trust his plighted word, less valufe than a tinker’s curse-
He 11 trick one oera written deed, some paltrv dodge to spare his purse
The sordid knave is always on the make, he’ll yard and brand a mouse’
P ™ the P ol3BlllllB ’ steals selectors’ grass, he’d skin and eat a
So as the tyrant rides, his trail is wet with tears and soiled with grime
CUrS p S d <* h s u I have heard them many a time
False his oaths as Punic faith, yea, as those that perjured dicers swear-
Nor S ° n g i° ld u Wrung from the brow of care.
fhp R k mU a - r ?° uI ~ by tools—if he can ’scape scot-free;
He bribes the Bench and juries, too—with gold—those things we all
can scg.
He Jays a plot to trap his neighbour, and ruin by a suit at law
Perjured evidence proves the case, in quirks vou cannot pick one flaw
The cunning perjury! One fact admitted by the other side,
He packs his lies uj>on its back, with lawyer’s legal wit to guide-
He only swears to half a lie, the other half admitted true * ’
So hoodwinked justice thinks ‘ a truthful tale,’ and honesty must rue
Magistrates are squared they expect to finger trifles of his wealth
Th€ stealth S ° me Bayards on the Bench > but verdicts are arranged by
Tho’ he poses as a protestant, of the Church of England type
Yet he grovels in the gutter, for priests on him their shoes to wipe
C u llreBs on ce came along, advertised as the Escaped Nun,
bu n an^ered Pomanists ’ wbo bed, she preached to butter well her
The gun? Plre mUStered aU his men > puoth h€: “ Now sure as Cocker’s
If you listen to this lecturess, I shall sack you off my run ”•
He called her by unchaste sobriquet, ay, the Romish Church’s name
H P ime hlngS WHen m Sydney Town > loose Lesbian nymphs of Venus’
Th *thim^ y laU^hed the priests > ha - ha! to see the bully crouch to
The garments WteS P °° r me "’ but crawkd and kissed their
* Settlers cover their houses with “ stringy-bark.”


Tho’ born in a humble humpy, he assumes to be a real “ toff
“ A sow’s ear will not make silken purse,” pho! derisively I scoff.
“ The grand old name of gentleman,” was never dragged so deep in
slush,
Until the Vampire claimed it for his style. A painted beauty’s blush.
He ought to charge the devil-fish, upon his black and grime soiled shield,
Having won that blazon fairly, upon Dishonour’s dusky field.
His crest, a tiger-snake, its venomed fangs an emblem of his mind;
The tiger in his heart responds, proclaims the Vampire’s breed and kind.
Oust him from that wide domain and station, let him begone and find
A pig-sty or a pest-house foul and dark, to suit his snaky mind.
The bluest blood in British Isles, can oft the Norman lineage boast,
Steel-clad knights whilom for many a day, o’erruled the Saxon churl’s
On the Continent, the sword and lance, from Roman’s, Goths, and
Vandals; ssss-*^
Tho’ plebian priests, ’tis said, have caused some matrimonial scandals.
Yankees of the upper crust, trace their trees right to a pilgrim father,
For despite democracy, they like with lordlings to foregather.
The gallant South have got the thing, without the name—the F.F.V.
Where’er I’ve roved, I marked, there is some kudos in a pedigree.
The Boers still bear the names of noble blood, in Netherlands and
France,
It tells, e’en on South Afric’s veldt, that “ picnic ” proved no carpet
dance.
But in arid Austral’s clime, we may find the blackest puddle strain, _
Soi disant patricians, sport oft for crest, the nine-tailed-cat and chain.
All truthful pedigrees, and more exact than seen on herald’s roll,
When old Norman blood is coined for Mammon marching to a titled
goal.
It won’t do to be a gentleman in trade, for that way ruin lies,
Be grasping, false, and mean, not too honest, the way to fortune’s
prize.
The Vampires state their father was a banker, who the seas crossed o’er;
Some sav, lagged in days of old, for a shortage in his golden store.
The meanness of the petty boast, their ideal nobility—banks !
Worth and genius are republican, you will find them in all ranks.
Blue blood is not required, to win the brightest knightly spurs on earth,
Its chiefest good, or ought to be—l’ll ne’er disgrace my father’s birth.
Money grabbing skinflint, I hold to be the lowest type of man,
The ledger is his bible god and seer, his book of fate to scan.
I dare not own a mind and heart so black, for all his wealth and power,
’Twill serve him little when Atropos cuts, upon the fated hour.
His pocket is his daily joy, recks not of works of art or pen,
He cannot tell the songs of Sappho, from the cackling of a hen.
The melodies of Moore, the poet of the Isle of Tears and Smiles,
From gray grimalkin’s hideous caterwauling on the midnight tiles.
Ne’er heard of Hafiz’ bul-bul notes, his mind as dark as Koordofan;
Nor Saadi’s moral lays, on the harmonious page of “ Gulistan.”
He has learned from “ Self-Help ” its lowest lesson, money grubbing
wiles;
A non-intellectual tome, I have found your volume, Doctor Smiles;
Melists to speculate with Hamlet, aye to while away an hour,
Or ponder o’er the fiery wasted life, depicted in the “ Giaour ”;
Disowned by Mammon is such trend of mind, and barred the golden
goal,
Yet, I list to have a shallow purse, rather than a sordid soul.
This monster of depravity, they say, seduced his friend’s pure wife,
A man who helped him once to climb a fence, across the path of life.
The lady vowed that she was foully forced, by this Austral Tarquin,
Her spouse believed the tale, it seems, nor charged it to her as a sin.
A Yankee pair, they compromised, although some inklings have leaked
out,


Tell a secret to a lady, if you want to wing a tale about.
Five thousand and a thrashing was the mulct, to save the Vampire’*
;neck:
Capital crime in the Antipodes, some for this little reck.
This is not vouched by me, tho’ he is bad enough for blackest sins,
For honour’s rubicon once crossed, an abyss yawns beset with gins;
And dallying with baseness, tho’ not called a spade in phrasing rude,
Leads on to dusky deeds. Approach Tartarus doom of turpitude.
No safety off the paths of probity, and realms of rectitude,
Else vipers coil the nadir round, across the zenith darkly strewed.
Thus only to the azure halls of Aidenn, will our spirits soar,
When our corporeal evanishes, from mundane haunts e’er more.
Aye he hath broken every law, contained within the Decalogue,
Now in iniquity he wades at ease, at home within its. bog.
A fitting tool for Satanites’ employ, the vilest of the vile,
With heart as black, and head as full of sin and guilty schemes of guile.
Forsworn are his dummies, who sell their souls and sin for present
meed;
Grant pardon to those men, kind Heaven! the crime, the Vampire’s
felon deed.
But if you cringe and crawl a sycophant, he is not so bad by half,
And damn your soul when ordered, and let the Devil brand you as his
calf; . a ..
Whene’er you cease to serve his turn, look out! he’ll kick you off his
track,
He hath no use for rusty tools, and serves them like a used up hack.
Too mean for major emprise, ay too cowardly to risk deals great,
He scrapes and saves, by petty frauds thro’ years builds up a fine estate.
No generous white-souled act to him is traced, “ they say ” for once
is true,
In every seeming deed of worth, he has ulterior gain in view.
The vilest yet. E’en Nero had a trait from fiendcraft him may save,
For some unknown kindly feeling, with flowers bedecked the tyrant’*
grave.
Yet he affects the honest man, his talk is plausible and fair,.
He also parts small change for drinks, so with the public he keeps
square.
Goes to Church decorously, poses with a sanctimonious air,
Subscribes to charities, tho’ ruined by the land-tax, he’ll declare.
Church service held beneath his roof, the audience quothing in their
sleeves:—
“ Mv house is the House of God, but ye have made it in a den of
thieves.”
He’ll dismiss a man who to him tells a lie, at which stockmen grin,
Hinting long forgotten lore, re Beelzebub reproving sin.
He rails to Sydney for a saturnalia, when his wool is sold,
With lewd and drunken hand, he freely spends the poor man’s plundered
gold,
Where Phryne lightly flaunts, half devil and half woman in her eye;
So might have fallen angels looked, when banished from their throne
on high.
Her waist is tight, her language loose, her corsage cut decollete;
The lustre of her siren eyes, is fatal as the fabled fay
That cries around the homes of Irishmen, when dire misfortunes loom,
If seen by passing wight, ere one vear, he is gathered to the tomb.
(Aye oft the red-cloaked Banshee cryeth, but the dull-eared hear her
Aye oft the voice of Wisdom warneth, but the cocksure sneereth—“ rot.”)
Her skirt is short, her stocking trim, the open clocks reveal the snow,
Thus Circ6 lures men on perdition’s path, the slope to shades of woe.
She claims her votaries in every age, the withered leaf and green,
All reckless of the hidden snare, the deadly snake that lurks unseen.
Flying the fair fields of virtue, with roses and myrtle bespread,


To stray o’er the moorlands of vice, with nettles and nightshade instead.
Tho’ Harpagon on the station, with Lais lets the plunder roll,
He hedges on the ration tea, to save a sixpence sells his soul.
He can block you in the Lands Department, where he retains a spy
Who dodges, shuffles, circumvents, and other Fabian tactics try,
A jack-in-office bribed by him; and a tool on the Land Board too;
Surveyors are his servitors, nepotism, n’importe, you’ve the clue.
He buys tall poppies of police, planks the retaining flimsy down,
A device which succeeds with most, and smoothes away the lowering
frown. # . .
So every neighbour round (bar one) now hold this Evil Thing in fear,
But dauntless pens are paladins, and hydras fight both far and near.
The pen can mock the mightiest, and on them lay the lash of scorn,
Übiquitous like Satanites, it tingles backs of highest born.
The Press is fearful of his wrath, Truth trembles beaten in her well,
Thus Mammon awes the wealden side, plaints human echo the whim-
brel,
Right and justice are withheld, from obnoxious settlers on his run,
There the sky shows dark and dreary, despite the rolling radiant sun.
For those his ravening hand doth grip, breaks them on the wheel of
law,
Or lures them to commercial ruin, the gray wolf’s remorseless jaw.
Foregathered are a few, they tell a story weird and wondrous strange:—
How a damsel lost her reason, weeks in the bush lost wildly range.
She died. By accident—or suicide, to cover guilt and shame;
Some whisper—Murder! Hush it up! hush it up ! ’tis the same old
game!
The same sad tale, the burden of a grief that ne’er can wash away: „
“ When lovely woman stoops to folly, finds too late that men betray.
There’s no mystery anent the crime, the path of sin is broad and clear,
’Tis whispered all about the welkin, ’tis whispered Justice will not hear.
’Tis whispered ’neath the roof of bark; ’tis whispered in the station hall;
’Tis whispered ’neath the gloomy gums, for vengeance doth Nemesis
Ca H
’Tis whispered by the squatter’s wife; ’tis whispered by the “ Missis ”
clown;
’Tis whispered all about the bush, ’tis whispered up and down the town.
’Tis whispered in the miner’s tent; ’tis whispered in the swagman s
’Tis whispered by the larrikins —“ Ha! ha ! the toffs are on the ramp.
It is whispered at the hotel bar, they whisper, stable help and groom.
’Tis whispered by the gibbering ghosts, that nightly haunt her humble
Tis whispered on the railway-line; the stock-horse hears it from his
’Tis whispered bv the female coterie, you know their tongues will clack.
’Tis whispered at the counter-side; ’tis whispered bv the office clerk—
Accessory before the fact, ’tis hinted, hushed up in the dark.
’Tis whispered on the cabbage-board; they gibe where Crispin plys the
Tis very strange, the barber hints, when e’er a client ffivfes a call.
Tis seldom whispered by the toffs, ’tis shunned, for danger mingles
there, ... .
“ A fellow feeling makes us wondrous kind,” at condonation vare.
’Tis whispered in the Sydney Clubs, where blades are somewhat loose
and frank,
The easy virtue of canaille wench, fit sport for man of rank —
Saith soi disant patricians, the outcome of chicane tricks of trade.
Men would be ashamed of wealth, if ’twere known the dirty ways tis
made. .. . . .
“ A duc&d shame it is,” quoth Tubal Cain, while clanging hammers
“ I would not call myself a man, if e’er I stooped to such base thing.”


Twas murmured thro’ th’ Ethereal Serene, and made the seraphs weep;
Twas howled around dark Erebus, where the lost eons of doom must
keep.
The magistrates, police, and Devil’s-Own, are too acute to talk,
They know the side on which the butter lies: “ Why satyr’s foible
baulk ? ”
’Tis whispered on the poet’s page, by trappers round the dingos’ lair;
Go up and down where’er you list, you find, ’tis whispered everywhere.
*Tis whispered she could not sustain her life, for three weeks in the
bush,
’Tis whispered she was snugly in a house, put up by purchased push.
Hush guineas scattered right and left, here in the wilds I heard their
clank,
The wilds of Tidbinbilla Glen, and deep into my mind it sank.
’Tis whispered ‘ hush ’ is clean played out, he will reap the crop he
has sown,
Her blood for vengeance loudly calls, ’till guilty blood for crime atone.
*Tis whispered perjury will fail, he’ll make a false step by and by;
’Tis whispered Evil-Genius tracks his trail, to meet at Philippi.
The Vampire is the criminal, that is, the eldest of the firm,
Tho’ he defies the laws of God and man, my pen has made him squirm.*
A drunken super, said to him one eve—of this the record clear:—
“ I’ll lag you! I’ll lag you, Boss,” then the Vampire’s face grew green
with fear.
Tho’ he can murder paramours, and crime he coolly brazens o’er;
Dike yet at Zeus’ throne, will charge the lecherous Minotaur.
Tho’ he can murder paramours, no odds, for a girl’s life is nought,
And escape scot-free, he knows too much, the law officers are bought.
He is weighed and wanting in the justice-scales, Nemesis hour is nigh,
Who slips her sleuth-hounds from the leash at last, hark! I hear the
ban-dogs cry!
The hemp is sprouting from the ground, decreed the tyrant’s destiny,
Bird of a feather with fearful flock, who swing from the leafless-tree.
“ Mene mene tekel upharsin,” that’s the writing on the wall
Of squatter’s paltry purse proud pride, the herald of the coming fall.
His ill-got gold now shields him from the-sword, the Blindfold Goddess
wears;
Her fiat forth: “ This plundered land shall ne’er descend unto his heirs.
Prometheus’ doom be his, let vultures rend an ever growing heart,
He has wrung so many on this earth, a fitting lot I’ll now impart.
Mene mene tekel upharsin, I ordain the Vampire’s doom.
And others’ heirs will till his land, when o’er him piles neglected tomb.
When the wicked squatter dieth, his expectation shall perish;
His kin shall not inherit his land, nor the gold he doth cherish.
For his substance shall be dispersed, and his sons shall seek for their
bread,
Humping bluey on the wallaby.” Truly so the Fates have said. * 2
Thus I read the writing on the wall, events coming by and by.
So let him pass, mean heartless knave, without a parting prayer or sigh.
Ay let him pass to Hades’ shades, the fiends receive his perjured soul,
No notes of woe we’ll ever raise for him, no bells requiem toll.
No houris e’er will wait for him, nor witching wave their scarves of
green,
Cry: “ Come, kiss me, for I love thee, darling,” enchant with black
eyes’ sheen.
A 1 Sirat’s Bridge he ne’er will pass, nor roam in groves of Paradise,
To feast his eyes on glorious nymphs, who welcome good men to the
skies.
The short-cut downwards, is the track for him, where Eblis waits
below,
*1 “ The Pickled Pasquinade,” a booklet published in Sydney in 1899, the skeleton of
this work.
*2 Tramping with a blue-blanket, the swagman’s usual “ doss.”


The fit finals of an ill-spent life. We reap the crop we sow.
The hangman roundly swore: “ He would be defrauded of his lawful
fee,
If the Vampires died in other way, than a swing from the gallows-
tree.”
The Shade of Judas a caveat lodged: “ For ’twill be disgrace to me,
To soil a gallows with such filth, cast the curs in the rolling sea.”
The fish protest ’twould poison them, and e’en to this the sharks agree.
So Neptune got a rule nisi. Above I state th’ exact precis.
The case is not decided yet, but sharp eyes that read the signs, can
say—
The squatters’ knell has struck, vast estates must break, their day has
passed away.
The varlets of the Vampire’s salt, crouch abject helots of his will,
For paltry wage they sell their souls, alert to serve a deed of ill;
And yet, he is not generous to those knaves, the pay is very mean,
The rations are the vilest viands, e’er upon a station seen.
He won’t employ an honest man, who keeps a conscience free from dirt,
So with the basest myrmidons on earth, this Hector is begirt.
One hundred pounds reward, he offers, to mesh Ffreyne-Guillmayne in
the law,
Who is not “ taking any,” in every trick and trap can find a flaw.
* * ' * * *
It may seem strange, yet once the Vampire had a heart for honest love,
He could whisper honied nothings, the serpent cooed like turtle dove.
O’er vaulting ambition, he would not marry in his shoddy set,
But coveted blue-blood and beauty, for a wife and pretty pet.
An earl’s daughter, faith! nothing less! the Lady Nora Jeu d’Esprit,
Of bluest blood and noble strain, she owned a Norman pedigree,
And dwelt within baronial halls. He wooed her by Broad Isis’ stream.
’Twas thus the tale was told to me, ’tis not the fabric of a dream.
He got the mitten quick, Hibernic6, ’twas the dirty kick out,
Videlicet, to refusal there was added a pointed flout.
Quoth the haughty maid: “ I’ll ne’er wed a squatter parvenue, sans
name,
At best, descended from convicted clown, who stole my grandsire’s game;
May be met with a fatal accident, on scaffold draped in black,
When talking with a clergyman.” Grim joke for lovely lips to crack.
Then gnashed his teeth in wrath, tho’ he wears a spray of the willow-
tree,
Averred: “ If she is not fair for me, what care I how fair she be.”
So the Vampire bade farewell to London, recrossed the soughing sea;
Now pours his disappointed spleen, to crush the bushman’s liberty.
He will not wed an Austral maid, and longs for blue-blood fancy dear,
Having lunched upon champagne, men don’t care to sup upon small
beer. *
Malisons lie on his head, for ruined hopes and wild hearts crushed by
care,
Anathema the voracious Vampire of Monaro’s mountain air. *
CANTO VIII.—LA VENDETTA.
Old Killemkillie station, was once a pleasant place to dwell;
’Tis environed by the forest wild, and many a rocky dell;
’Till Blazer cantered on the scene, with Ffreyne-Guillmayne on his
back;
Now Mother Carey’s chickens, are roosting round th’ invader’s track.
Quoth the Rider: “ Men, no upstart squatter lord will I e’er own.”
(“ Oh ! hear them words!” said Drunkley, with oaths profane and
many a groan.)
*1 Monaro is a name given to an undefined part of N. S. Wales, a geographic phrase only.
*2 He married a young woman, when old in years, a decade after the sketch was written.
—The Author.


“ Those roads are free to you and me, and gates shall not bar the way;
I’ll make things hum now I’ve come, and you’ll find I have come to
stay.
That bully thinks to drive me off, and add my farm to his run;
Faith ! a lively life his Super, lives, when I let slip the fun.
See! all this dummyed land, shall be retaken by the nation,
And so will Tryon, Hungerlong, and Killemkillie Station.
Now rouse ye up, Monaro men, hark! rouse up to freedom’s call,
Come, retake your birthright from those sharks, why should they grab
it all.
With rifles true in trusty hands, we will tell those Vampire-knaves:—
‘ Tyrants, yield up our plundered homes, or we swear to dig your
graves.’
‘ Ye are many, they are few,’ once wrote the immortal Shelley;
They fill a bloated bank account, and starve the poor man’s belly.”
(This talk was only buncome, to mock the bully of the bush,
For Ffreyne-Guillmayne had no animus, against the squatter push.
Take them all in all, they are just as straight as any other;
But tight they grip the land, and thus the growing nation smother.
A black-sheep type is painted here, an Australian Whackford Squeers,
So the reader must not think, at shepherd lords are levelled jeers).
The Vampire’s victims were delighted: “ He is flouted without fear.”
Chuckling round their humble hearths, “ Hurrah; he has struck a
snag,” they jeer.
“ ’Sblood,” quoth the Vampires, we’ll put him down, how dare the
fellow brave
Our might. We’ll serve him as the obnoxious folk ere while we drave.
The quarrel being ripe, to Ffreyne-Guillmayne said Loyola’s spy:—
“ That fern patch is very dangerous, the camp and tent so nigh,
Burn it off.” ’Twas Baleful’s premier trap. No sooner said than done.
That night tools raised a conflagration, which swept the Vampire’s run.
“Aha!” said Trapley, “ we have him now, he is in the laws’ tight
grip.”
“ Ho! ho! ho! ” laughed Shindy, “ my word! old man, we have him
on the hip.”
“ Ay, by the Devil’s tail,” swore Trapley, then donned his hat of straw;
Hied him off to Spider Slyboots, legal light learned in the law.
(Influenced by the agents of the Avernian Company,
For Abaddon like, they argute glide o’er a Cimmerian Sea.)
“ The simplest trick in life, sir, you know well how those nets are spun;
Witnesses must prove the fire he lit, extended o’er your run.”
“ ’Tis that I call about,” quoth Trapley, then winked his evil-eye.
“Right you are!” saith Spider, “my word! we will smash him by
and by.”
Informer Go-it-Hard gave evidence, so did Reptile Spy,
Well coached suborned perjurers, who did not stick at faked-up lie.
Those men had been working for Ffreyne-Guillmayne, when enticed
away
By Trapley, given high wage and easy job, to be potter’s clay.
“Their evidence is false,” swore Defendant, on Slyboot’s cross-test;
And sotto voce: “ I’ll lose the case, but they will rue the gest.
I will make it hot for Trapley’s push, upon the mountain side,
Tearing off the lion’s skin, expose the proper jackass hide.
I mistook that squatter for a gentleman, thought he’d fight it fair,
He strikes below the belt, base tyke, so la vendetta I’ll declare.”
Thus mulct in costs and damages, for a thing he never did,
For blindfold justice could not see, machinations from her hid.
A plan of campaign was made, to warm the wriggling reptile’s back,
And for every cent that it was worth, Ffreyne-Guillmayne plyed attack.
By night and day the war went on, the gates and rails were flying;
\nd so was Drunkley after stock, as up the hills they’re hieing.
He rides all day to muster herds, then he outs them in a pen,


Ffreyne-Guillmayne comes along by night, and stampedes them up the
glen. *
All the gates were off their hinges, some in the bush well planted,
The fences down, the rails non est., they seemed to have levanted.
The dingoes days were jolly, the yelping, yeowling, yellow pack,
They lived on Trapley’s ovine chops, and of tucker found no lack.
For when the wire-net gates were open, the wild-dogs had free range,
Inside the fences built to shut them out. A proceeding strange,
May be, but all is fair in war and love, that is not low and vile.
The vendetta made the Vampires swear, and it made the public, smile.
The stockmen ruled the run by day, safe ’neath Sol’s effulgent light;
Ffreyne-Guillmayne fiercely forayed, when darkly fell the shades of
night.
“ Curse it!” swore Shindy, “ pastoralists flouted lay a cockatoo.
I’ll fix that fellow finely,” then called the station jackaroo:—
“ Go summon Cooley Juggins, dyke denbob, or some other mate,
For Ffreyne-Guillmayne to-night we’ll plant, bv the Rookawn double-
gate.
(The sly Jesuits had engineered, to work up a fatal fight, .
Hoping to get the squatter shot, Ffreyne-Guillmayne in a corner tight.)
The hour was dark the wind was high, as a horseman oped the gate,
Where perdue in a creek-bed, the Vampire and his bullies wait.
“ I’ll do for you,” said ShincTy, “ you’ll never see your home alive,
For I’ve gangs of men at every gate, your cheek they will enerve.”
Ffreyne-Guillmayne jeered the squatter’s threats, and his bearing showed
no fear,
Tho’ the drunken rowdies threatened oft, that his last gasp was near.
Trustv ‘ Colt ’ had been left at home, for he held bush courage cheap,
Twas lucky for them, if handy, red blood on green sward would weep.
“ Four to one, a lonesome road, o’ershadowed by the wings of night,
You squatter cur! speak up, say, is this a manly way to fight ?
“ Darest thou then,” quoth Shindy, “ to beard a squatter at his gate i
I planted here to kill you, for flouting my august mandate.”
“I’ll beard a lion, bunyip, kraken, ghost,. I fear no bug-a-boo,
Bragged Ffreyne-Guillmayne, ii and hold in scorn an Ancient Fistol
such as you.”
Then Shindy swore and fumed in fury, at being thus defied.
Before his stockmen, a period put unto his purse-proud pride. „
He shouted to his myrmidons:—“ Kill this fellow on the spot.
Ffreyne-Guillmayne bounced:—” I have a pistol, and swear you 11 catch
it hot! ”
They bolted quick as thought, Bob Acres’ courage could not face that
CUC!
So the feather for their caps to sport, will be of the lily’s hue.
A prosecution followed duly, the Bench ran with the hare.
And hunted with the hounds, shunning the too palpably unfair.
Shindy got a wigging from the Bench, they sat upon him too.
And Spider was refused his costs, my word ! thereby pinched the shoe.
That, greed of gold, aye the vilest vice, degrading as it grew,
Faith ! it nearly broke mean Trapley’s heart, to part that one pound two.
The Recording Angel pen in hand, ’gainst Shindy marked a score,
’Tis not the only item there, his record shows many more.
I would rather be a lowly swagsman, upon the Crack of Doom,
Than be that Shepherd Lord, whose gold will ne’er Hades’ shades
illume.
But this point we could not understand, upon that year of grace— .
Shindy condemned with costs, while Ffreyne-Guillmayne failed to win
the case ?
Not guilty, but don’t do it again, Queanbeyan justice—see!
* The gates and fences were semi-illegal obstructions across public roads. Cattle stampede
when they see a man on foot, so nothing unlawful was done. — The Author.


Defendant a pastoralist, sporting oft disgraced J.P.
*****
The Squatter’s tale is different, like the story of three crows,
Which twisted in its travels—so errant fact the truth outgrows.
Go back and close that gate,” runs Shindy’s yarn, “ then came
cheeky flout:—
Whoa! whoa! Shindy,’ said Ffreyne-Guillmayne, ‘does your mother
know you’re out ?
She ought to crop your ears, my bully-boy, they are over long
And spank you on a certain place, with a rattan cane or thong.’
Ml lay you on your back, quoth I, within this pool of water-
‘Faith! if you try that game,’ said he, ‘ there will be a scene of
slaughter’;
And then he fiercely drew a pistol, and gave his horse a wink,
) ™ so flaggergasted, bless me! I scarce had nerve to think.
I 11 find a man to bell the cat, his forays I will taboo.
Hilly Hack I’ll send to Sydney, and make him jackaroo.”
‘ Well give him best,” sighed Traplev, “ we ne’er can catch him in
a nap;
He is like a dingo, who once had a front paw in a trap.
I won that case against him, I thought he was our martyr
But like my sorry luck, I’ve surely caught a red-hot Tartar
I truly don’t know what to do, my plots have all miscarried,
I never had such a foul befall, by a cockatoo so harried.
If I had known he d fight like this, I would have left him well alone;
.Now I have got the Devil by the tail, oh ! wirris throu! och hone ! ”
CANTO IX.—THE SPREE.
Yule rolled round again once more, to men for peace on earth good will,
It brought no peace to Killemkillie, Ffreyne-Guillmayne forayed still.
£r. u nkley gave a drinking spree, to drown his sorrows in the bowl
With his mates and cronies dear, to pour the anguish of his soul
I cannot wnte the words he used, they would make a parson groan
I 11 modify, suppress, euphemize, in fact, I’ll use my own.
The Satanites the waters troubled, hoping to make a haul,
When their tools and quarry came to loggerheads, in futile brawl.
I 11 kill that Orangeman,” quoth Drunkley, then swilled the stingo
malt.
“ W^ 11 ?, at him to °. 1 swear! ” said Mickey, “ nor ask one pinch of
“Come on with me, brave boys,” raved Drunkley, “we’ll take his
bloody skin.”
“ ’^l s fer here a !<*>” quoth Mickey, “ please pass the jar of gin.”
I 11 give a tenner for his scalp, brave boys, who will bring it here ? ”
baid the Super., but that none were game to bell the cat was clear
Come on with me, my heroes bold, knock the house about his ears.”
Drunkley s pals refused to stir an inch, of bullets they had fears.
nTght?” 1S thiS ’ hearties ’ not game to P ut him through to-
“ We took on as stockmen, Drunkley, not a-soldiering to fight-
And don t mind a bit of perjury, nor bloodv nose and eye-
Pistol shooting ain’t our work, to Hell! is much too far a’cry
Pen bob a week and.tucker ain’t good enough to face a shot.”’
Quoth Mickey Bejabbers! shure! bedad ! ’tis all a blooming rot,
, 1 .?,. t 1 h1 " k spalpeen blokes as us, will trail our coats along, begar!
While Trapley sits at home at ease, with his whiskey and cigar
i^ e i in^. an - d K th ? £- h -f, ep ’, f .?r. mv pa T rt ’ may fi £ ht lt out Pell-mell;
o- uck this job at Killemkillie, ere I will roast in Hell.
You 11 go there sure enough some day, from that fearful fate I shrink,
Horrid hole for soaking blokes as us, who likes our drop of drink
You heretics will grill; the priest to Heaven has given me a pass'
Swoped for a kiss by my good Missis, when last she went to mass.”


In vino veritas, Mickey let the cat jump out the bag,
And gave laughs and jokes about it, to many a protestant wag.
*' Gangs of us could plant,” quoth he, “ and leave him in a sorry plight,
Four to one, you know the way we Vampires’ bullies always fight.
We would smash him to a jelly, and grind his liver ’till he’d yell;
But the wild-cat’s claws are dangerous, with him I will not mell.
They say he mutters vengeance, and keeps a loaded pistol by,
Don’t care a curse about us blokes, nor ring-tailed-roarer Shindy.”
“ I am weary of this strife,” quoth Drunkley, “ cannot take my rest;
I dreamt last night, Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s horse was cantering on my
chest.
To-day the fences down, the wires cut, the cattle all non est.;
That’s a dictionary word, which means he is a blooming pest.
I cannot stand this racket longer, and something must be done,
I’ll send to Sydney for the Lancers, and hundred toner gun.
Mates! if e’er I say my prayers again, my chiefest text shall be:—
* O! from the terror of Ffreyne-Guillmavne, good Lord, deliver me.’
My word! let us curse this catamont, since we must give him best.”
(Curses are like chickens, sometimes, for they may come home to
nest);
Quoth the Super’s wife: “ Bosh! stop this wild talk, else for you I 11
mourn,
Many a man rides out for wooj, to tramp it home at eve well shorn.’’
Those rowdy roisterers, would not thus have wassailed loud and high,
If they knew their foe Ffreyne-Guillmayne kept armed watch and ward
close by;
Weighed their vapouring as worthless, as a feast of barmecide,
If they had beset his house, their hours were short on earth to bide.
CANTO X.—THE EVIL AVATAR.
As I rode around last night, I met a man near Killemkillie,
On the wallaby was he not, for I saw no swag or billy.
I thought he was the Vampire, when ahead the evil thing I saw,
He rode upon a station horse, it seemed, and wore a hat of straw.
No horns on his head, no tail, no hoofs, and no claws upon his hand,
Commonplace the jackanapes, as any bush yokel in the land.
I saw him in the gloaming previously, my bridle-rein then crossed,
He vanished. Blazer’s furious plunge almost me from the saddle
tossed.
Thunder rolled o’er Tidbinbilla ranges, where Sol had sunk to rest;
The mopoke hushed her monotone, and trembling fled unto her nest.
Much I marvelled on this mystery, whilst crept my flesh with eerie jar,
When pondering on the portent of this omen, this Evil Avatar.
’Tis Traplev’s wraith, I thought at first, his knell the Sisters Weird
now toll,
Yet, no, such sordid worthless loon, can never, never have a soul.
I’ll accost it fair or foul, mused I, be it the Devil or the Pope.
A man who grips Loyola by the tail, nought else has to fear or hope.
Quoth I: “ Are you the Vampire Bully, or an angel unaware? ”
“ I’m the Devil, sir,” said he, “ better drop your banter, have a care! ”
“ Glad to meet you, Mr. Smith, said I, thinking him a mumming fool,
“ Faith! you don’t look like your pictures, in my old story books at
school.”
“ You cannot see my spirit shape,” saith he. “ for you are mortal man;
I always look like deadly enemy, so you the Squatter scan.”
(Old Blazer gave a snort of fear, an awful something he could see;
Volcano’s reek the tainted air, not breeze of Felix Araby.)
“ Thrice before we’ve met in Ireland, once I looked like a Jesuit;
Then sub-commissioner for reducing rents, lastly Chicane Kite,
The lawyer who tried to wrest the wrong to right, by his specious gab,
And proved your case instead of his, by careless overdoing blab.
(A transfer of lease I signed, then gave the deed to Roe to hand to Doe,


But should have given straight to iransferee, so for a verdict had no
show.
Quoth Chicane Kite to witness Jokeley: “ To whom did plaintiff give
it ? ”
“ To Doe,” swore he, so that won the case for me, right as a trivet.) *
You would have lost that case, when ‘ estoppel ’ pleaded Lawyer Chicane
Kite,
Had not Jokeley’s evidence estopped the trick, and won the legal fight.
I ken that you fled from persecution, Loyola’s malign lie,
Whose sons inspired the fell fire fiend, to flaunt his feral flag on high;
Your mansion fed the flames, they thought ’twould prove a final
crushing blow;
Nemesis waits. I’ll garner all that craft within mv House of Woe.
Beware! once I heard your Banshee, moaning her weird prophetic
kheen,
The night before Loyola fired your ancient roof-tree—Enniskeane.
Unscrupulous your enemies, who wear the cassock and the stole;
Beware the Banshee’s warning, weird her death-notes on the night
winds roll.”
“ I’ll live my life ’till Kismet calls,” quoth I, “ despite the black-robed
band.
Now what game are you driving at, unfold to me the plot in hand ?
Don’t think to gammon me with those myths, meet for mind of popish
child,
I am a match for any banshee, priest, or devil, in this wild.”
The Master Fiend with serpent voice, his picaresque began to tell:—
“ Toadgunyah’s clods will broil,” quoth he, “ in brimstone billows deep
they’ll dwell.
Yet deeper down, for they ate doubly doomed, the Vampires dree their
meed,
With awful howls of agony, to suffer for their grasping greed:
And the sin unpardonable, the lie against the Holy Ghost,
For perjurv is the crime, both those rascal practise most.
Aye many a maiden fair and frail, her honour to the Satyrs sold,
Parting with a jewel beyond price, to touch the foully earned gold.
Lurchers lure with lawless light of lust, lurking in the lecher eye;
Recording Angel scores upon his roll, and saints all sadly sigh,
But we laugh ha! ha! Below, to see those Vampires work for evil.
I sometimes tell the truth—to serve my ends—tho’ lam the Devil.
If wild and dark despair wakes in, the trusting gentle breast betrayed,
Death is the only way for her, whose steps from virtue’s path have
strayed.
He cares nought for female honour, a royal quarry to hunt down;
He plays the saint about the station, and the roue in the town.
A faux pas is a joke to him: “ She is none the worse for it,” quoth he,
Then ordering moet laoed with brandy, quickly quaffs it down with glee.
With sword and lance and gallant heart, broad acres won the Norman
band;
By perjured oaths and fraud and guile, the Vampire prigs Monaro’s
land.
Duke Rollo plundered much of yore, backed well by vikings cased in
mail;
And many a fine estate changed hands, the title, Cromwell’s iron hail.
For the skulking thief, there is no title in equity to show,
Then take your birthright from those plutocrats, and lay the Vampires
a low.
They drive a coach and four thro’ every law, and justice cannot win,
They swagger, now in lordlv halls, tho’ but of humblest origin.
The nation’s right, to take its own again, in equity and law,
The courts hold fraud invalidates a deed, per 9e a fatal flaw.
* The fact escaped my memory, so I could not swear to it, and lost the case, and then
won it, as stated. It was about the arson of my mansion-house by the Jesuits. — The Author.


You ought not let them starve, but give them work at dirty jobs about,
They had much practise in that line, so let them feel the flaying knout.”
*****
They only “ best ” like other folks, quoth I, what recks it gold or lance ?
Most business men will practise in that way, when e’er they get the
chance.
They will not steal your character, Satan, their own is on a par;
I ne’er thought, that avarice can the human soul so foully mar.
Squatters are no friends of mine, yet for them one good word I will say,
Tho’ I know some crooked black-sheep, yet others do not work that
way.
Their cards are very difficult, and gold the obvious trump to play,
Combined with skill and luck, it wins the game, for few to cash say nay.
As for fraud and guile and perjury, why, it very ill beseems
The Prince of Darkness to comment on these, his personnel, in themes.
A most censorious satirist are you, severe upon those toffs;
They are no worse than other folks about, for all your gibing scoffs.
Now after all what can be said, but that they work the ancient plan—
‘ That they may take who have the power to seize, and they may keep
who can;
Which still obtains in every sphere of life, from king to working-man;
For cunning always gets the golden grist, and dullness doth trepan.
That’s business up to date, no more, no less, why fash with idle prate?
The small rogue gets the penny fee, the lacs are garnered by the great.
’Tis nought to me, Satan, those crimes alleged against the squatter class,
By have-nots against the haves, who wish wealth easy won to compass.
Men with great yearnings, for the earnings, of the educated brain;
The proletariate league, capital to confiscate amain.
You are the patron saint—that’s a slip—devil, of Loyola’s Band,
I won’t play the game for them, I watch and strike for my own right
hand.
I know their maxims and their methods well, how passions can be
wrought,
But I am not the slave of impulse, for by Minerva I am taught.
I smoke your plot right well, sub-rose Loyola urges on the row,
In hopes a faux pas I will make, ’twon’t work, I’ll my own furrow
plough.
I can play the Jesuit at times, fencing finesse with their tool,
I know mole-tracks and ways that are dark, for experience is my
school.
Indian-sign is read by Texas Rangers, when hunting the red-man;
Loyola’s mark upon the human mind, to read I always can.
Your yarns may be true or false, but I’ll take them with a pinch of
salt;
Candour is not your forte, and on your tongue the truth is known to
halt.
I’ll ne’er choose an evil-sprite, for my guide, philosopher, and friend,
For it is writ on many a page, how such unholy compacts end.
*****
“ You argue like a woman,” sneered Satan, “ I know the sex right well,
They give me lots of trouble down below, beguile the imps in Hell.
Now Cynthia rolls o’er Tidbinbilla Peak, I see the dawn of day,
My work is cut ’till dark to-night, to guide base mankind at foul play.
Farewell, old puritan, I knew your sires in iron Cromwell’s time.
All sturdy blades were they, iconoclasts and foemen of my clime.
You’ll lose that horse you ride full soon, and that will rouse your
latent ire,
I’ll plan the death. No use to draw that pistol ’gainst the King of
Fire.”
My bullet hit him hard and fair, for he turned with a horrid yell:—
“ I’ll pay you back for that,” saith he, “ if e’er I catch vou down in
Hell.”


His protean steed flashed volent as a shooting-star, the meteor’s light
Extinguished over Tryon Hall, and vanished from my wondering sight.
Old Blazer died within a week; now I have cast a ball ot gold,
A bullet that can kill a fiend, and never yet a marksman sold.
MORAL.
Enigmas are nonsense to dolts—to wise men the moral is plain—
Don’t take advice from a papist, else you may sup sorrow and pain.
CANTO XI.—LAMENT FOR THE DEATH OF BLAZER.
O! once I had a trusty steed, no Arab loved his better,
A faithful friend who came to call, and kept to heel like setter.
The boycott could not operate, priests tried it on, I say, sir .
For distance was of no account, unto my gallant Blazer.
“ I’ll clip his wings,” swore dastard priest, that blazed chestnut horse
shrill di€
A ten pound note will do the trick, I’ll egg Trapley on to try.
So the felon tool death’s compound mixed, amid some equine teed,
And sought the trustful, hapless.horse, grazing on the bloomy mead;
A bell was on his glossy neck, guiding poisoner to his prey;
The cowardly crime was done by night, twould not stand the light of
I found tracks and poison, in spite of Sergeant Hushitup’s method,
Who refused to send a tracker, “ for the greater glory of Cod.
Then I swore a solemn oath, as for my steed I gave a sigh. ,
' I will be even with those priests of Rome, who work dark methods by.
Oueanbeyan justice, thou’st had, old Blazer, true in hour of need
Full many a mile we two have roamed, thro’ the drought scorched bush
For ncfrasper fence, no five-bar-gate, could daunt thy spirit high;
No yawning gully stop thy- course, ay o’er it thy hoofs could fly.
Oh! I miss thee sore, my trusty steed, when eer abroad 1 ride;
Long I’ll rue the dreary darksome day, when gallant Blazer died.
CANTO XII.—THE MURDER TRAP.
“ The trap will work, sir,” saith Jackal Cur, “ when me he will attack,
Mv wife will be well planted, to shoot him slyly in the back.
When crippled by her shot, sir, I’ll send a bullet through his heart,
And swear ’twas fired in self defence. (Gammon rules the grove and
mart.) , V 1
I will aggravate him sore, and threaten killing with my gun,
So lure him on to draw his pistol, and then will start the fun.
For if I slay him, and no revolver on the corpse were found,
I would swing for it, and lie with quicklime in the prison ground.
’Twill feather well my crib, by h—! come! fork out that fifty quid.
Clearing off old scores ’gainst him, when planted neath the turt he s
Or, asf Father Baleful said: “ For the greater glory of God,
We remove th’ obnoxious from above to underneath the sod.
That’s not murder’—said the priest—‘the end justifies, (thus they
trim) . ,
And direct the intention to worthy motives, per maxim.
Father Baleful said: ‘ He’d see to the packing of the jury.
Authorities are squared—a wink will calm the pieelers fury.
Saith Jackal-Cur unto the Vampires, while sly the bribe he fobs.
(Jesuits make use of protestants, to work their foulest jobs).
But I smoked the System once again, and shunned the fatal snare,
I saw my foemen’s tool, from his eyes the light of murder glare.
“ You are a paltry cur,” quoth I, “ you’d murder for one tanner;
I will not soil my hands, else I would twist you like a spanner.


You’re not clean enough to spit upon; I will not dirt my boot.
A fico for you! you jackal for Loyola’s hired pursuit.”
It was a dastard popish plot, to probity in apogee:
1 he best laid schemes of Satanites, are apt at times to drift a-lee.
CANTO XIII.—BEHIND THE SCENES.
Is tucker ready? mates, I’m back in time, returned on the run;
The Vampire’s case was on to-day, so I stopped to hear the fun.
Half the town were in the court, the bankers and the other toffs,
When the verdict was pronounced, you should have heard the blooming
scoffs.
Ffreyne-Guillmayne was fined two notes, the trial was a farce, of course;
Them Jesuits I hear tell of, could not wrest the laws much worse.
Baffled Justice stood without the court, groanin’ and a sobbin’:—
“ He’s left me in despair,” she moaned, “ my lost love, false Cock
Robin.”
The traps were there in force, mates of mine, the blooming coves in
blue,
They’ll run a poor chap in like me, but to Trapley’s push they’re true.
That jackaroo can go it hard, swears like all his convict breed;
Munchausen held the belt, Hilly Hack has won it well, indeed.
‘ He never used a single threat, spoke like lassie of sixteen;’
We blokes won’t swallow that there lying rot, chaps as us ain’t green.
“ ’Twas attempted murder,” swears Ffreyne-Guillmayne, and so he
fired the charge,
In foxy knob of Hilly Hack, the bullet nearly found a targe.
The flimseys were flying yesterday, they cashed them in the bank;
There was a rousing spree last night, faith! the town of whisky stank.
“ We’ll give Ffreyne-Guillmayne hell! ” quoth they, as they drained
the snake-juioe down;
There is scarce a drop of swankey left, in any pub. in town.
Cock Robin on the bar-room floor, kicked the can-can step in style,
No ballet belle could hold a glim to him, my word ! roused a smile.
Faith ! His Worship kicked so high one time, he broke the chandelier,
And swore he would not pay the cost, so must fine himself, I fear!
I’d ne’er think such things, to see the sinner on the Bench to-day,
With a oross-bred judge and parson air, ’gainst nab’d ones to inveigh.
Or that he e’er shook a naughty leg. upon a toy-shop floor;
And squeezed the pretty barmaid slyly, behind the kitchen door.
Cock Robin kissed the landlord’s wife: “ Darling! put it in the bill! ”
Pimp, the editor, was twigged, a-loafing round the money-till.
He is * saved,’ they and marching on to somewhere in the skies;
But when the Black Chap gets him, he won’t have great things of a
prize.
Many ribald stories, mostly chestnuts, then were freely told,
And drunken shouts, asinine laughter, around the bar-room rolled.
My word ! magistrates are downy coves, to have a high old time,
The racket rip’d ’till three o’clock, by the note of ticker’s chime.
Here’s a list of all the bribes, Cock Robin dropped it in the dance,
Them toffish blokes should be more careful, when they the hy-jinks
• prance.
Cock Robin gets promotion on the Bench, he turns to a mixen.
There is a price upon Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s head by every token.
*Tis said, Trapley gives one hundred notes, to ruin him by law;
And for the money, many a crawler has got an itching paw.
Tidbinbilla Glen is Naboth’s vineyard, Trapley wants it cheap,
At the sheriff’s sale, at his own price, when thrown on the scrap heap.
There’s five pounds five for Pimp the saint, who huckstered for a dozen.
Thus the plutocrats wrest the wrong to right, and public cozen.
Mike Convict jumped at twenty bob, sold his vote for Irish-stew,
Queanbeyan justice was the law, mates, but that is nothing new.
The ruck were squared by a note, drinks, and a blow-out at the station.


The Peeler got a lift, the biggest rogue in all the nation.
The magistrate to the station gone, at the grub and swill you’ll find him;
A brand new paper collar on. left honour on the shelf behind him;
But back he’ll drive by the light of eve if the Black-Chap’s luck betide
Choke full to the neck with whisky grog; and a brand new cheque beside
him.
CANTO XIV.—QUEANBEYAN JUSTICE.
Oueanbeyan justice is a by-word, for bias, fraud, and wrong, and guile.
For it will convict an honest man, to win the priests’ and squatters
smile. . . ,
The Blind-Fold Goddess groans aloud, as the Solons prostitute her name,
To vent their purchased vengeance, the cringing curs, lickspittles with-
Truckling to the backstairs sway, packed and servile clique of base
crack-ropes, ...
They’re beneath a poodle-dog’s contempt. Plain truth, not hyperbolic
tropes.
Ay, forsworn to their plighted oaths, to mete out justice evenly to all,
Droit is fettered at the bar. and wrong is throned on high and lord
versal
Yes, here are papist judges, and also many staffs of the police, *
Who pervert the ends of Dike, in her sacred name the suitor fleece:
But they grovel to the priest and mammon, can be purchased in the mart;
Fraud is sapping equity, and plunges daggers in obnoxious heart.
Many a jury-panel, disgraces the vilest chain-gang’s muster rolls; .
They sell their verdicts for the good of trade, ’till the Devil nets their
souls. , ~
Aye, liberty’s palladium can be bought, they may foully, sell a case,
So sits the Evil Avatar, enthroned in Pandemonium’s pride of place. _
Oh! how I despise such crawling hounds, who crouch unto the Romish
Satan, you will never think it worth your while, to doom those paltry
slaves.
I can respect a man what e’er his creed, if he is true to honour s crest,
But ere I row a boat with them, I will camp at eve in a viper’s nest.
The jackals guzzle on the vilest garbage, Mammon flings unto a rat;
The dirty-drop is in their veins, atavism proclaims the convict spat..
True patriots were their fathers, who crossed the ocean for their
country’s weal, , t . , , , A ,
Adorned with many a gover’ment brand, with chains and bracelets made
of stool
Now on the judgment seat those Jeffreys hold the scales, Stygian justice
Awarding gyves their fathers wore, to “ white-men ” who paid the
passage o’er. ,
Their chains are forging by the Fates, Damocles’ sword hangs o er them
Then\he fetters due and fit for them, the abject tykes of fraud shall
money, prestige, power, can oft defy both justice and the law,
Without, fail to win a case, ’gainst wealth, or Rome, tho’ evidence
sans flaw.
CANTO XV.—KILLEMKILLIE TEA.
Drunkley execrates it in his sleeve, this Killemkillie Tea,
For it takes one pound to make a cup—on that we all agree.
* Police is used to signify the internal government generally—The Author.


It ne’er cheers low spirits up, the “ pisin ” makes the “ inside ” quail;
A new-chum sort of drink, my word ! ’tis a sorry sort of vail.
Travellers came along one day: “ We like your Killemkillie tea!
Say! Now is it made of wattle bark, or imported o’er the sea ?.
Snake-juice we have drunk in many a pub., from Geelong to Brisbane,
Poison like to this we ne’er tasted, nor maybe will again.”
Then Drunkley, tongue in cheek, replied, while he tried to look demure:
“ Boss Trapley caters for us, I can’t say where ’twas made, I’m sure.’
The Super, could not catch the dingoes, with powder, traps, or salt,
Tho’ he often watched for them—in bed—braced up with rum and malt.
He has done the trick at last—keep this dark betwixt you and me—
Some say by lyddite, but he let slip—’twas Killemkillie tea.
O ! Killemkillie tea is beautiful! as every body knows,
’Twill kill a horse at forty yards, and make rabbits turn up the toes!
The Vampire’s fortune is made, the greatest since Cook first sailed the
sea,
He has patented a plan for killing rabbits, with th’ eerie tea.
“ If I can coax Ffreyne-Guillmayne to sample once my cup that cheers,
Said Trapley with a wink, “ I will put a settler on his jeers.”
The fated hour arrived, ropes of station push were all pulled in,
Now they’ll answer at the Bar, where shades are lagged for deeds of sin.
Queanbeyan justice is not vended there, their doom the false must dree,
Holy water won’t avail, nor will Spider Slyboot’s sophistry.
Tophet’s Chief appeared with all his Tail, a list was in his paw; *
When e’er he spoke an earthquake shook, e’en scared nature seemed
to yaw.
“ Trapley, rouse, rouse up, your course has run; Shindy, you’re wanted
too:
Reptile Spy, and Go\-it-Hard, I’ve made a double blaze for you.
The ovens are all heated red, stokers feed a roaring fire,
Come, rouse ye up, my bully boys, come on, mount the brimstone pyre !
Trapley was a shark, to lay sly plot, or to work a tricky trap,
For Eblis and his myrmidons, the Vampire did not care a rap..
With hat in hand and savoir faire, he spoke the Black One civil,
Revolving in his mind, a plan by which to kill the Devil.
“ Pray, your Majesty,” quoth he, “ try a cup of Killemkillie tea.”
The Demon drank, gave a fearful howl—the sequel dark to me.
CANTO XVI.—DE FFREYNE-GUILLMAYNE TO SPIDER
SLYBOOTS.
Sir. Your rescript received by me, at Rookawn P.O. yesterday,
’Tis another try-on of the Jesuits, ten to one, I’ll lay.
You think me a silly child, to be humbugged with pretty prattle,
Beaten o’er the foray fights, thus you devise to win the battle.
Your soft-soap will never wash, for the style betrays the amateur;
There’s a nasty reek about your missive, ’tis brimstone, I am. sure. *
“ The worse the fight, the more the law, the better for the Devil’s few,”
You write. But ‘ you must catch your hare,’ wrote Glasse, ‘ before you
make a stew.’
The Devil’s Own fights hard on Trapley’s side, so gold and wit combine;
But I have gone one better, for I’ve briefed the Fiend himself on mine.
I’ve got his counsel plain to comprehend, by wireless ’phone from Hell,
As you may like to know your Master’s mind, I’ll here transcribe it
well:—
“ It is not libel, to write what is true in circumstance and fact,
Pro bono publico, without malice, and carefully with tact;
New South Wales excepted, in all the vasty spreading British realm,
For men afraid of honest criticism, are gripping at the helm.
* “ Tail ” —a fighting clique, or the backers in a faction-fight—lreland.
* This is a fact, the correspondence in verse took place in 1898. The lawyer’s commenced :
“ Ffryne Guillmayne is an Irishman of credit and renown, who lives upon a mountain range
some distance from the town.”—The Author.


For all that, take this tip from me, ne’er mention any person’s name,
Use collective common nouns and pronouns, for that’s the safest game.
If e’er a name is fixed on you, repudiate in angry tones —
* I never said such thing about that man, the one I meant is—Blones..’
Don’t point direct words at any folk, or you’ll surely be ensnared;
Beware! for you have foes on every side, both secret, and declared.
Suggestion you must guard against, advice to get you into trouble,
By protestants of all degrees and creeds, who deal in masking double.
They are no better than the Romanists, when it comes to private ends;
The sturdiest of priest fighters, you will find, to his own interest bends,
And practise the Jesuitry of mind, in theory abhorred.
That’s human nature, from Kerguelen, to Ultima Thule of Nord.
Your fellest foemen will be still, the fools and apes of your own creed;
The buzzing insect pesters more, than rogues who work the dirty deed.
Don’t e’er assume a thing is what it seems, but verify each fact.
Be sure you have the law upon your side, ere you proceed to act.
You’re no man’s servant, and need not close the gates; if you are
attacked,
You will be justified in shooting, but with circumspection act.
Don’t hesitate to fire, if e’er there’s serious danger to your life,
For the man who gets his shot in first, comes off victor in the strife.
My liegeman Slyboots is an able wight, knows every point of law,
If you don’t cross the rubicon, for him you need not care one straw;
But of the Jesuits, and pit-fall traps, I caution you, beware;
Of jackal protestants, for e’en Masons will break the oath they sware.
Say nothing ’gainst men’s characters, nor what will injure them in
trade,
Or you will give yourself away. My bill enclosed drawn out and made.
I can’t advise for nothing, so send me along a purse of pelf,
Yours sincerely, Satan Devil.” Yes, ’tis the P-ince of Law himself.
Now glancing o’er your note again: “ It was a snake who struck the
blow,
For ne’er a man would kill old Blazer, act a part so very low.”
Your tale of horse and snake is good, o’er other yarns it has the pull,
And reminds me of the hackneyed saying, about a cock and bull.
I agree with you so far:—“ The folks about are most a dirty lot ”
Trapley’s sycophants, who sell their souls for jobs of work to boil the
pot. i •
Their immortal parts, if any, may swelter in Lost Lake igneous,
’Tis no affair of mine, if their lorn howls will echo in Erebus.
This is not rampant prejudice, nor is it blindness of the eyes,
It is a scorn of all baseness, and Dives’ deeds of low emprise.
So au revoir, ’till we cross swords upon some future legal fight.
Of which I will beware, as I ken Mammon’s and Loyola’s might.
Yours faithfully, for this short life’s little span,
And in land of spooks—Henry de Ffreyne Guillmayne;.
June the twenty-second, eighteen hundred and ninety eight,
Tidbinbilla Glen. Where for the turn of the tide I wait.
CANTO XVII.—SHINDY’S SOLILOQUY.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ th’ Leal;
But Ffreyne-Guillmayne dons his mantle, och hone! my woes will never
heal!
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, and the black-beast of my run,
But Death’s scythe cleft his thread at last, hurra! thought I, the fight
is won.
But Ffreyne-Guillmayne comes on his chestnut steed, and buys Gas
Blowhard’s land;
Then bounces all the station push, my word ! against me is his hand.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, when I tried to be M.P.:—
“ The cheeky little brat, is that his game? the ouppy dog! ” quoth he.
Said I: “ Kind sir, I hope you’ll change your mind, and you will vote
for me.”


“ Vote for you! ” cried the Orangeman, “ will I vote for the Pope ? ”
quoth he.
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he fought me along the line,-
I lost the battle sure enough, alas! a member ne’er to shine.
O’Mickeybog conquered, for ten to one, he top’d the poll’s decree;
They would sooner vote for a tiger-snake, than they would vote for me.
I toured to England on a time, ruffling with upper-ten so gay,
Thought I was au fait at etiquette, of le beau soci6t6;
’Till I overheard Nora Jeu d’Esprit, the terrible bas bleu:—
“ Tell me, dear, where on earth did you catch that unmannered
Kangaroo ?
Your Mr. Squatter is such fun,” laughed lovely Nora Jeu d’Esprit,
“ He asked the name botanic, of some finny swimmer of the sea,
And looked so stupid and conceited, as he hopped along the grass,
I cite instead—l could not help it, dear—the Latin for an ass.
He’s all ba I ba! just like his sheep, whose bleating o’er the bush-land
rings;
A nonentity, nathless wealth, what is its value to such things?
The Thing proposed to me, ’twas such assurance from the parvenue,
I gave it no encouragement, nor did I think ’twould dare to sue.
* Eagles do not mate with crows, sir,’ quoth I, ‘ else they are sure to rue.’
The Squatter whined, “ I broke his faithful heart,” then I suggested—
glue. > -
Back I sailed for Sydnev. Now station hands must doff the hat to me,
For I’m a slap-up-toff, my word ! all the style in the Old Countree.
“ The upstart snob,” quoth Trueman Hint, “ now I will be d— if I do!
Doff my tile to that jackanapes! I’ll doff it first to a jackaroo.”
Old Ondeersun I quizzed, capped he: “You’re a thundering toff, be
gorra!
But ? twas hard lines in your two-roomed hut, ere that fortunate hegira.”
Old Ondeersun was a tough old blade, he’s gone to the Land o’ th’ Leal,
But Ffreyne-Guillmayne dons his mantle, alas ! my woes will never heal.
CANTO XVIII.—THE MURAL RUNE, THE VAMPIRE’S DIRGE.
Refrain :
Oh ! we’re the most distressful squatters, wallowing in care and spleen;
Th’ accursed droughts have burned up the grass, there is no blade of
green.
The stock are going to the dogs; in nightmare dreams like thunder rolls:
“ Confiscate the dummyed land,” echoing the war-cry at the polls.
1
O! Trapley, dear, I sadly fear, our days of pride are o’er,
Yearly droughts have rung the dirge of hope, upon Stygian shore.
The Socialists are in the saddle, taxing land all round,
The public’s right, their argument, to take the dummeyed ground.
2
The Bank is twisting on the fatal scjew: “ Cash up. I say! ”
Writes Director Graball, I got his pressing note to-day.
Here’s bad luck to rabbits, the banks, the dingoes, and the drought;
I though to die a squatter, but a pauper I ’ll peg out.
3
Then take the cheque-book from the shelf, and throw it in the fire,
Ah ! there is no coin in the bank, so we must delve the mire;
Plum pudding days are o’er, alas! scarce left a mutton bone;
So we must hump our swags and march, oh wirris throu! och hone!
ANOTHER DIRGE.
Refrain:
Oh! we’re the most distressful squatters, wallowing in care and spleen,
And we must hump our swags and tramp, like any rouseabout spalpeen..


Selectors now have got our land, in nightmare dreams like thunder rolls:
“ Confiscate the ill-got land,” echoing the war-cry at the polls.
1
O! Trapley, dear, say did you hear, the news that’s going round?
Squatters all must sell their lands, to this by law they are bound.
No more we’ll ride on thorough-breds, across our paddocks green,
For there’s a cruel land-tax now, to squeeze us out—l ween .
2
O ' Trapley, dear, I sadly fear, our days of pride are o’er,
And ne’er upon High-Horse we’ll ride, O! never, never more.
Socialists are in the saddle, tax half-crown in the pound
The public’s right, their argument, to loot the dummied ground.
3
I met with de Ffreyne-Guillmayne as I tramped Queanbeyan streets,
And with an air of contempt, thus he me so caustic greets:
“ The Mills of God grind slow, but in the end he grinds rogues all,
Low-cunning is an ass, nor sees the writing on the wall.
CANTO XIX.—THE SOCIUS LOQUITUR.
1
Father Baleful, you’re a fool, a sorry sort of Jesuit,
Baffled, flouted, all your plots and snares exposed to lucid light.
The Rontgen-rays of satire, are flashing o’er our private paths,
Such writings are swathes, binding fascines of heretical laths.
You’ve failed to smash Ffreyne-Guillmayne, bitten, he shuns our snares
—I trow!
A wounded enemy unbent, is sure deadlier foe to grow.
2
Father Baleful, here’s dismiss, you must plav second fiddle now,
Tussive rescript from Provincial. Baleful read it, made a bow.
You are a fool to think to trap him, by bits of snowy necks,
Why he has seen such by the thousand, for beauty little recks.
You should have changed the style of hooks, when you saw he would
A bungling fisherman are you, faith! Loyola’s Kampenite.
3
Father Baleful of Toadgunyah, you’re the biggest fool on earth,
To gauge by yokel standards, a man of high degree by birth.
You’re no of human naturfl, o’er the faithful touting low.
Nor the Great Wide World, beyond the dunghill where you sit and crow
Although most men have their price, what buys a clown won t tempt
If the theatre were larger, such blunders would mean peril.
4
Father Baleful, you’re a fool, the biggest one I ever met,
Keep the hair upon your mazard, dolt, and do not fume and fre t-
Although the public can be gammoned, some think—as Sherlock Holmes,
And are well versed in Jesuitism, and study deep our tomes
When geese attempt to trap a fox, feathers sometimes deck the spray.
Your Reverence, I must report—you are not the man for Galway.
A


CANTO XX.—THE SOCIUS IN THE SADDLE.
Father Baleful, said the supplanter, write, thus to Abbe Pard:—
That you have messed the scheme, with trite, childish, and transparent
tricks;
And have been set aside by rule. But that I don’t care a shard,
For the exposure. We can mould an infinity of bricks.
’Twill be strange, if I can’t trap, in one way or in the other.
Prooeed. That some person has a mortgage on the Local Rag,
must be secured. Thus its independence we can smother.
The Editor must print a libel, Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s pen will wag;
I ’ll influence by telepathy, lex mentis to him is Chinese,
He’ll ne’er suspect the thought-sprite in the air, tho’ our finesse he sees.
Matter’s laws I can o’ercome since I’ve acquired the powers of Yogi;
I am Knowledge, chiefest pundit ’mong9t ten thousand literati.
Ah ! the viewless thought-sprite in the air, shall enwrap him in a snare,
’Twill be his Mephistopheles, and lure to ruin and despair.
Judge Urry will be sent to try the case; our system comes in plav;
Ffreyne-Guillmayne in the toils, the clearest evidence can’t win the day.
THE SEQUEL.—STALE-MATE.
This trap nipped, the second bite in fifty odd
Set from week to week —for greater glory of God.
The play exposed, their pawns and king were placed in check.
Like Bf-uce’s spider, for such slips they little reck.
Spreading nets is vain, when the quarry is in sight;
A saw discounted by that fiend—the Satanite.
To clearly understand, see passim in the prosaic parts,
Where I set forth the deadly windings of their most hellish arts.
FINALE.
Now I have shown the petty plots, that cause Loyola’s foes to wail;
He spits a sprat upon a hook, then daps, and lands a vasty whale:
You can’t see line or fisherman, to what the sprat’s manoeuvres trendj
But if you bite, you’re done for quite, your paid out rope draws near
THE END.


Farewell to the Muse.— A Pindaric Ode.
Farewell to thee, Muse, I shall woo thee no more,
Nor wake the wild echoes with satiric song.
Yet, yet, I may hail thee on ladders of fame,
Ah ! that hour would atone for a decade of wrong.
Farewell to thee, Muse, my solace, my shield,
’Gainst the treacherous friend, and the venomous foe,
Gauge of mankind—be it so.
Farewell, or may hap au revoir,
For hope is a blossom I never shall yield
’Till life’s stormy passage is o’er.
The granite may shiver, it never will bend,
Trapped eagle will die ere ’twill tame.
A sword thrust at the foemen, my verse abroad I send,
Let them howl and let them lie, let their jackals cry, yap! yap!
Who cares dull enmity for ?
They say, let them say, vox populi vox asinus.
Bechance, some great Timoleon of the Pen, may deign to mark my lay
And in its pages find an inkling,
O’er the Upas-Tree, truth’s holy water sprinkling;
Genius sees an apple fall—Eureka, verbum . . sap.
Martyrs’ blood will melt the Hell-Hounds’ feet of clay;
Tho’ trampled by the hoof of guile, again will spring the grass.
Tyrant hater I have lived, and tyrant hater I shall die,
Whether petty bully on a dunghill, or monarch throned e’er so high.
Hater of all shams and falsehood, hater of a sordid greed of gain,
Hater of a dirty deed, and all that adds a throb to human pain.
Farewell to thee, Pen, the sword of the mind;
Champion of freedom, and guide of the blind.
Go rest ’till thou art wielded for truth the divine,
By the hand of a bard not so feeble as mine.
Go rest on Parnassus, my lone trusty friend,
The shield that has baffled the papists’ design.
When my spirit is wafted where wicked can’t wend,
I will hope that thy echoes the trenches may line.


Notes of Elucidation.
No real names of private persons or of private places are men-
tioned in this work—excepting Enniskeane House, Cork County,
Ireland, and Tidbinbilla Glen, N.S. Wales, Australia, both the author’s
freeholds.
An irrefragable story of Jesuit persecution is recorded in this
volume, drawn frQm personal experiences, the style being the lance
thrusts of satiric song. The terrible, the loathsome, the horrible, the
utterly abominable, are inextricably mixed with the superstitious, the
ludicrous, the petty, and the mean.
* * * * *
A fearless pen I dare to wield, ’gainst the Lords Paramount of earth,
111 omened birds of prey, who perdu sit like death beside the hearth.
* * * * *
The priest decreases the liberty, and increases the body politic, an
apophthegm giving the pith.
Argument. —The adventures of the author, an Irish landlord and
an Orangeman, obnoxious to Jesuits for having discovered they were
the wire-pullers in the Phoenix Park murders; and for other political
reasons, was persecuted out of Ireland, and then as per system followed
everywhere he went; finally settled on a farm ip Australia; where some
local magnates were influenced to attack and attempt to ruin and to
oust him from the coign of vantage.
The incidents depicted mav seem trivial—by such means the Jesuits
gain their ends.
Local Colour. —The General of the Jesuits —The Black Pope—
resides for a part of everv year at Fiesol4, near Florence, where his most
important schemes are concocted. There, Home Rule for Ireland, the
first step to smashing England’s power, is now, A.D. 1910, under con-
sideration.
Dummies, or dummys, as the local spelling has it, are impecunious
persons subventioned and suborned to obtain land from the Crown in
contravention of the law, in squatters’ interests. No one man being
allowed to purchase from the public estate m<vre than a fixed number
of acres (1,280), dummys select, i.e., buy the land wanted, and transfer
it in a few years. This trickery involves perjury. Americans stopped
land monopoly in their country by the Homestead Law, which enacts —
no farmer can be deprived of his implements, furniture, crops, stock,
land, and money, to a liberal amount. ’Twere well if every person were
entitled to retain a competence, say ,£2OO a year capitalized, maugre
all debts.
The Lands Department control the sales of Crown Lands, survey-
ing of roads, et hoc genus omne, the local branches are intituled—Land
Boards.
Squatters are owners of large estates partly leased from the Crown.
Some parts of the leased land can be selected, i.e., purchased on time
payment, in small blocks for settlement only. Many squatters try to
block .the sales by influence and by legal trickery, and failing, to “ work
out ” the selector by persecution, often fraudulent, but few are such
scoundrels as The Vampires.
The farmer is nicknamed “ cockatoo,” a sobriquet given by the
“ station-crawlers,” stockmen who get their own back.
Dingoes are native wild dogs. Wire-net fences are used to keep
them off some sheep runs, when roads intersect these fences, gates are


placed across, it is not illegal to leave them open when not
and a yearly sum paid to the Crown (1898, now, 1910, it is illegal, when
rabbit-proof).
“ The greater the truth, the greater the libel,” N.S.W. law up to
date of tale.
Pope Clement XIV. suppressed the Jesuits in 1775, at the request
of all the R.C. rulers of the world; died of “ cholic ” shortly afterwards.
Pope Pius VII. resuscitated the Order in 1814. They are now more
powerful than ever, and rule the Pope, the Church, and the World and
his Wife. Their emissaries are legion, male and female, of all classes.
First, affiliated lay brothers, sometimes disguised as protestants, clergy-
men included, who obey without question, “ corpses ” in the hands of
their superiors. Second, the Faithful. Third, conscientious Romanists
who are persuaded by specious sophistry. Fourth, persons the Order
have under their thumb, who obey from fear of exposure, statesmen
and kings included, of all creeds. Fifth, protestants who are made
blind tools by working on the human passions and on the proclivities.
Sixth, the jackal, to gain the private end. Seventh, the Public harnessed-
by slander and fool-fury.
“ Thus like a viper to the heart they wind,
And leave the venom there they did not find.”—Byron.
The infamous falsehoods of a Cardinal about protestant mission-
aries in the South Seas are notorious in Sydney, where the new word
“ cardinal ” a synopym for a lie was coined.
Number One was the cryptonym of the leader of the “Invincibles,”
a Jesuit priest, allowed to escape by the police, “ for raysons. ”
Stony Batter is a famous back street in Dublin.
The Hell-Fire-Club in days of old was the scene of rites sacred to
Pan, to Venus, to Bacchus, and to Terpsichore; it is now a ruin weird
and lone, situated on the Dublin mountains four miles from Terenure.
“ Dangerous,” in Jesuits’ registers active enemies are thus marked,
the author has that honour in large capitals.
The phalanger is called opossum in Australia, a brook is called a
creek, and, strangest of all, a reading-room is called a school of arts.
Many respectable families are of convict descent, the ancestor’s
offence was the venial crime poaching—of course.
The Vampire has a relation in the Lands Department, they con-
spire to defraud the author and others. Go-it-Hard and Reptile Spv,
had been working for me; Trapley enticed them away and bribed them
to give false evidence.
When I settled in Tidbinbilla Glen, the Jesuits made strenuous
efforts to influence, to worry, and to ensnare, to utter ruin; being
versed in their methods, I checkmated their schemes. Maugre my
knowledge, was trapoed twice by respectable protestants, for it never
struck me such persons were venal—but I know better now. The
biggest scoundrel of the lot was a Salvation Army man. An uninformed
person would have succumbed. Jesuit tools told the fool public my
tales of their rascality “ was all imagination,” and finding it futile to
tell one devil that another was black, I held my peace, and blocked
every move.
A dingo once nipped in a trap and escaping, can never be caught.
The philippics are not overdrawn, in Australia, justice against
wealth can seldom be obtained; against Jesuits’ influence, never; even
the governments can not get misdoers convicted on the clearest evidence,
politics and popery rule the courts.
The strictures herein require no defence; but I will cite a few up-to-
date specimens of Romanism.


The reveiations in French law courts of the sweating, starving, and
tormenting of child labourers in convents (1906). The all-embracing
horrible and crushing exposures of lust and of sodomy amongst Italian
priests and school-children (1907); the arrests and convictions of the
criminals; the universal denouncement of popery in Italy, are sufficient
confirmation of my moderate satires, even without Father Crowley’s
famous exposures of Anglo-Saxon-Celtic dittos in America, where, as
in Britain and Ireland, priestcraft has a free hand. But those exposures
fall fruitless on the decadent British ear.
New-Chum means rubbish of any sort, and a new arrival, in Aus-
tralia, who is supposed to be very inferior to the native. When ignor-
ance is bliss, ’tis folly to be otherwise.
Many squatters are hopelessly in debt to the banks.
Enniskeane House, my ancestral home, built by my great-grand-
father, in West Cork, had been maliciously burned by a Jesuit, emissary.
An action for damages under the lease followed. Lawyer Chicane Kite
defended pleaded “ estoppel.” Jokeley’s evidence set the plea aside,. the
joke being—the fact was elicited by Chicane Kite during cross-examina-
tion when my case was lost; the lawyer proving himself the “ hass ”
instead of the law. The tenant, who lost the case, recovered the full
amount of damages and costs from the county rates (Irish law).
Environment when young makes the man what he is to be morally
and mentally—with exceptions. An axiom in Ireland: “It takes three
generations to make a gentleman.”
When Shindy returned from his European tour swollen with par-
venue pride, he gave orders to his stockmen: “ Hats must be touched
to me.” Trueman Hint refused and got the sack. The purport of this
civility is misunderstood in new countries, where it is supposed to
mean servility.
In parts of Ireland the priest is nicknamed “ The Cuckoo,” and the
cuckoo ‘‘The Priest.”
The Lost Lake, a romantic tale told to me by Texas Rangers and
cowboys on the Staked Plains, where I went to hunt the buffalo in
A.D. 1879, the site formerly known, but now lost to ken, the Alsatia or
“ tail-timbers ” of redskin desperadoes.
The arrows of the Bosjesmens and of the Massari are tipped with a
virulent compound, made of dried ants and part of a flower growing on
trees, powdered and mixed with the gum of the mimosa tree.
The Banshee, a red-cloaked fairy like an old woman, who kheens
(a mournful cry) before death or serious misfortunes happen to members
of old Irish families.
Jackal-Cur was instigated to poison Blazer, and to lay a murder-
trap for me. The priest laid the plot, and the Vampire found the money.
Father Gury, S.J., a modern casuist, edition 1880, advises: “ When
absolution has been given the sin was never committed, therefore may
be denied on oath.” S.J. after this priest’s name must mean—Satan’s
joker.
The filthy questions priests must ask females in the confessional,
on sexual and erotic dreams and thoughts and acts, and about things
too horribly vile and impossible, are of such a revolting nature they can-
not be hinted. No English publisher would stand god-father for an
expo|s£ in the vernacular; it be an indictable offence to do so.
But they can be found in Dens the priests’ guide to knowledge and lust.
—Chiniquy.
The real Virgin Mary is never gibed at in this work. The Romish
goddess of that name is a myth. She has the attributes of the houris;
she is Venus masquerading as Diana, is identical with the Greek
Aphrodite, with Astarte of Syria, and with Aehfcsroth. of the Hebrews.
The Pope is Pontifex Maximus in direct succession, and chief of
the pagan rites, and vicar of Jove. A Christian cloak hides the ancient
office. .
“ The priest cannot throw a stone over the poorhouse wall without
hitting one of his children,” is an old saying in Ireland.


The Southern Cross is attended by a seeming dark cloud—the coal
sack—a vacant space in the Galaxy, the few stars therein are far away
beyond visual ken.
The littorals of the bayoux on the southern coast of North America
sometimes float on the surface of waters.
Jesuits by agents influence anarchists to “ remove ” rulers.
“ Look at this picture, and look at that.”
Canadian backwoodsmen assemble in “ bees ” and gratuitously
assist the immigrant “ with axe and plough to bring the desert in.”
The Australian bushmen lurk round the new-chum’s farm and
“ best ” him out of his little capital, unless he is wise enough to deal
with all men as rogues.
My purchased farm was coveted by the Vampires, but they were
too mean to pay the vendor’s fair price. I came along and secured it.
Acting as blind but willing tools of the Jesuits, they attacked and
attempted to ruin and to oust me off the land for a God’s sake price;
I was to give the fine house I built, for nothing, and take less for the
land than it cost me. I showed fight and gave them “ what for. ”
Holy Water for the laity is brine, for holiness without salt will not
keep it from stinking.
Priest’s brew, price one shilling the bottle, repels the ruck of evil
spirits and washes sins away.
Bishop’s concoction, price half-a-crown the bottle, scares top-
sawyer fiends.
Cardinal’s brand, price five shillings the bottle, appalls the Devil
himself.
Holy water for priests’ private use is compounded as follows:
Aqua pura torridus .60, plus usquebaugh .25, plus Xeres vinum .05,
plus sakchar .09, plus citrus pelis .01. = 100.
Amalgamate in a hot crystal bowl with a hot silver pestle. Imbibe
slowly in an atmosphere redolent of nicotine and vibrating with vocal
symphonies, accompanied by the osculant tintinnabulations of feminine
lips.
Those sacred mysteries are named—High Mass.
Black Mass is a revolting orgy, lust gone mad, the Devil is made
from bread by the priests and placed upon the altar. Then rites such as
the Apostle Paul alludes to in the first chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans are practised, as well as the natural vices with nuns and with
school girls, often protestants.
Squeamish protestant writers will not tell the Plain Man, whose
vote rules the empire, the horrors of Romanism in understandable
words, so he puts the euphemism and goody-goody cant down as mere
bigotry.
How different to their lame and impotent platitudes is the report of
Colonel Lemanoir to Marshal Soult of what occured and was seen at
the destruction of the buildings of the Inquisition at Madrid in 1809.
A clear decent statement, in virile language, without an atom of the
usual protestant baby-talk.
British protestants in a superior tone talk of “ The Spanish
Inquisition ”;*they can match it at home.
Programme of the Inquisition.
In the small hours of the night four masked men wearing the
dread garb of the familiar knock at the doomed one’s door. Demand
the young wife, or the daughter. She is led away, for refusal would
be worse than useless.
«■'Brought before the Fathers, abject submission alone can save, and
that seldom. If not to be released on payment of a fine, she is stripped
stark naked by the familiars, and in that condition placed on trial and
condemned.
If young and beautiful, she is ravished by the priests, and then
Handed over to the soldiers to satiate their lu9t. When the poor creature


is half demented by ill-usage, she is stretched on the rack by the
torturers, while the priests cross-question her ’till the confession wanted
is elicited.
The inquisitors then hand her over to the executioner, who cuts out
her tongue, pours hot lead into places that cannot be named, tears out
her nails, teeth, etc., etc., finally roasting to death over a slow fire.
All men and women of all ages and degrees were liable, the countess
as well as the kitchen-maid, the baron as well as the groom.
Those horrors obtained in Spain ’till the second decade of the nine-
teenth century, when they were suppressed by the civil power, despite
protest from the Pope.
Irish protestants were done to death in the massacre of 1640 by
no more merciful methods; and Annie Askew’s torturing in London
was no better—semper idem.
The Inquisition still exists in Rome, having half a million agents
all over the globe, and is feared even by the Jesuits. There are more
ways of torturing and killing than fire, steel, water, or rope.
Essay on Jesuitry.
Everyone is aware Jesuits are an order of popish priests, and that
their name is a synonoym for low-cunning, hypocrisy, and rascality.
Founded by Loyola in the dark ages’ last gasp, for the ostensible purpose
of working for the greater glory of God—Ad majorem Dei gloriam—this
cant being used to cloak the real object aimed at —universal rule by
trickery and fraud and the extinction of heresy. To be attained by their
SYSTEM.
The future is secured by controlling the education of the rising
generation, and inflicting a brutalizing curriculum strangling the reason-
ing faculty as Bhowanee’s thugs strangled the body, destroying will,
thought, and intelligence, leaving the living “ corpse ” an abject super-
stitious slave in the hands of priestoraft. Every vestige of self-respect
and honour eradicated by teaching obscene and wicked maxims as true
religion. But if destined for membership of the Order, the will alone
is suppressed, leaving the ability merged in the personality of the Com-
pany, which absorbs many bright intellects to cast a lurid light on
noisome paths of crime and guile.
The old plan—allowing the poor classes to grow up illiterate, as
in Spain to-day, not being legal by civil law.
The astute Jesuit no longer assails protestants en masse, and alludes
to them kindly, if Laodiceans, as non-Cafholics. Individuals are selected
and inveigled into the fold. The elderly person with money alone in
the world, the person of any age who may be easily led, are marked
down as prey and netted by The Friend.
The obnoxious are persecuted, hunted down, and injured in busi-
ness and character, and if possible destroyed.
What injures one avails not against another, what lures one repulses
another, but they keep on setting traps ’till they succeed.
THE POLICY OF THE JESUITS.
Professing liberal views, and concealing their infernal maxims and
designs, thev worm themselves into popularity .amongst the shallow, the
non-religious, and the ignorant. They attack the credit of the active
and the influential opponent, mostly by stabs in the dark, and when
assailed in turn, resort to falsehood, sophistry and formula.
“ The malignant brotherhood pass not by the righteous man, with-
out imputing to him what is infamous,” wrote Shaikh Saadi in his
“ Gulistan,” proving there is nothing new in such methods.
With noiseless hands they place their tools in posts of power, using
those instruments to crush the victims in the dark, and to pervert public
opinion—vox populi vox asinus. So this band of Thugs become dictators
of the Press, of law courts, of police, of society, and of governments.


Even the British Constitution will be destroyed at the bidding of the
nominees of their Irish Provencial, who is now (1910) de facto ruler of
the empire. Wherever they come they ring-bark the tree of liberty,
venal protestants, to keep office, or to get money, being their willing
This Satanic Order place their interests above all law Divine or
human, even the Pope’s Bulls are evaded by sophistry. Their casuists
sanction the most infamous crimes for the greater glory of God, for the
end will justify the means, by private persons as well as by the Company.
The passive and absolute obedience required, was ordained by
Loyola on his death-bed: “ Every Jesuit must be a dead body in the
hands of his superior,” were the last words of that malignant genius.
Their system of espionage is superior to that of any detective police-;
none can escape. .
When a victim is marked down a spy is attached to him or her in
any possible capacity, friend, business acquaintance, or servant, who
influences as directed, the apparently devoted friendly and disinterested
advice concealing hellish and perfidious plots and snares lures to destruc-
tion. . , , , . x • .
All sayings and doings are reported and recorded in a register.
Having thus got the quarry’s measure, a suitable scheme can be con-
cocted to serve the desired end.
This übiquitous spy system keeps them well informed on all private
family affairs, gliding stealthily around the domestic hearth as house-
maid, or governess, or friend, as doctor, or lawyer, any employee, or
guest, the blood relation, and even the wife or child, for a Jesuit disowns
his native land and all human kinship; and a Jesuitess is more malig-
nant than the male members of the dark brotherhood to which she is
affiliated.
W T oe to many who fall under the Ban. Sooner or later, directly or
indirectly, they receive an unerring stab in the dark which appears to
be a decree of fate. An EVIL SPIRIT DOGS THE STEPS, everything
goes wrong and fails. Whatever their position may be the blow falls,
seriously injuring in character, impoverishing or irremediably destroying,
dealt by an occult, impalpable, übiquitous, incorporeal foe, whose actions
are ruthless, invisible, inscrutable, noiseless, tireless, spirit-like, terrible,
continuous, diabolical, incomprehensible and latent, a predominant power
which invisibly ruins everything that makes life worth living, eventually
driving the doomed one to destruction.
Foreign travel will not avail. To escape from the argus eyes is
impossible.
The victim is shadowed on board ship, where he is watched by a
tool, who hands him over to other tools at the port of disembarkation.
Rome’s evil-eye is constantly upon him, her curses are hurled at
his head, he is opposed, slandered, ridiculed, and harassed, by jackals,
so withers ere his time. Financial ruin is mostly aimed at, for money
is a sword and shield.
Success or failure depends on the person attacked, and on the
environment. A London business man cannot be injured, the same man
in Cork would be ruined; a shrewd man is safe if he knows the ropes;
a free-spoken careless man is in great danger; the cocksure are duped
to ruin; so is one easily led.
The mental agony and intolerable strain on the nerves, which is
the result of an elaborate system of petty persecution and untiring
espionage, cannot be realized by those who lack the experience. The
majority attacked give in and pay blackmail to be let alone, the rest go
under the sod, martvrs as surely as if they died at the stake.
The late Lord Justice Keogh of the Irish Bench, was hunted to
insanity and death by those methods.
In Dublin many a time when I was leaving the Rathmines Orange
Lodge, or the Committee Room of the Primrose League, the shadower
used to shout at me:—“ You’ll be served like Judge Keogh ”; the threat
was Greek to me then, but well I see it now.


I bus in Ireland, Italy, Spain, and all priest-ridden countries; in
more enlightened lands the attack may be lived down; in Australia I
lmd the Law, i.e., Queanbeyan Justice, is the thing to fear; or murder
by accident.
The strain on the nerves vanished in the bush, and baffling the
plots is a pleasant mental exercise. The matchless power of Rome
counts me a foeman worthy of its steel, a thing to be proud of: Mickey,
the priest is kissing your wife.
I he methods employed are very numerous and are always nicely
adapted to the circumstance of the victim. The ramifications of this
Order extending all over the earth, and permeating all classes of society
from the prince to the peasant, espionage is a matter of little difficulty.
J here are hundreds of innocent victims of Jesuits’ plots, expiating
offences of which they are guiltless, in convicts’ chains, or broken in
mind, in body, or in estate, socially ruined, suffer unmerited odium
buried beneath a dunghill of lies circulated by papists and protestant
jackals and imbeciles.
The dastardly lies circulated by Jesuit agents about King George V.
of Britain, to terrorize him into a party tool, i.e., to force the guard of
the House of Lords, so that Ireland can be placed under the heel of
Rome, proves my statements.
If a great monarch is attacked, what chance has a poor subject ’
Many of the murders, fires, and supposed accidents and suicides
are the works of this Murder League’s emissaries. Such methods are
used when the system fails to prove effective; to kill one man they will
not hesitate to sink a ship with a thousand passengers on board; to
wreck a train; or to fire a coal mine, for the end will justify the means.
Ihe system, influencing the passions, defeats itself when known,
for the quarry will not follow the advice. The spy can be made a
counter tool of to fool the Jesuits, bv misleading as to intentions and
not allowing him to infer his game is .detected.
. Methods involving violence are avoided when possible, the system
being, to. inveigle, to worry, or to influence into a net. For generations
those priests have, studied human nature, recorded in registers their
observations, experiences, successes, and failures. They are aware men
are governed by their fears, hopes, and passions, never logical, and that
the greatest events originated in trifles: e.g., Troy’s destruction: the
Moors Conquest of Spain; the victory of Actium; Tarquin’s expulsion;
Joan of Arc s dreams: Strongbow’s invasion of Ireland: Jenkin’s ear:
imposing a duty on tea: Eve’s taste in fruit and blarney: I will add, the
fall of feudalism in Ireland, which is traced to Davit’s ejection from a
farm, and mav lead up to. the expulsion of English rule in Ireland, which
no one can say is a blessing, but it prevents hell, of two evils, etc.
d he manipulation of this natural law is the secret of their power.
The average man will gratify the passion of the passing hour, without
a thought, whether or not, such act may forge a link in the chain the
Dark Fiends are winding around him, even if he were aware the hell-
hounds were on his trail, which as a rule he is not.
A war of wiles cuts deeper than the sword.
All crimes committed for the good of the Church are lawful, and
when absolution is given, may be denied on oath without sin, indeed,
an oath on a protestant bible is no more binding on the conscience of a
papist than an oath on the Highgate Horns.
The Jesuits’ maxims and deeds fully entitle them to the sobriquet—
Satanites I have coined, it is no doubt severe on the Devil, to whom
I apologise.
CONCESSIONS ARE EXTORTED FROM GOVERNMENTS
THIS WAY.
The spy and register system informs them a cabinet minister erst-
while committed a crime against the code of honour, or may be against
the law, or placed himself when young and wild in a false position with


a girl; a tool threatens exposure unless a demand is granted—’tis yielded.
A young man’s folly with a wench may be the fulcrum by which modern
Archimedes overturns an empire; no man is too highly placed to be thus
attacked and bent. Well is known, what none would print, except
erst a low rag in Dublin, and another in Australia, and how it bent to
the very ground. I wonder if an erstwhile ruined maid is at the bottom
of Home Rule ?
The “ Grand Old Man’s ” ( ?) sudden surrender to a party he justly
stigmatized: “ Associates of assassins; steeped to the lips in treason;
who are marching through murder outrage and rapine to the disintegra-
tion of the empire,” showed he was under the Jesuits’ whip.
A Dublin Home-Rule-rag had a cartoon showing him drafting his
Irish land confiscation act with a typical Irishman holding a big stick
over his head. The Irish sav—sheer personal fear caused by the Phoenix
Park murders and the dynamite outrages in London, which are politely
called Fenianism, is the secret of the truckling of both political-parties
to Rome.
The Indians and the Egyptians have learned the lesson—the first
step is yielded.
The Jesuits can make tools of everyone, they can bend everyone
if they can find a fulcrum for a lever; they can beguile to ruin everyone
who cannot control the passions, and the easily led; they can make an
Ishmaelite of everyone if environments and circumstances favour their
trickery; they muzzle the police and the Press and make tools of them;
they can find tools who will take life for pay; they can lure Jo crime;
they can poison justice at its source; they can make an individual and
the public believe any tale, even an obvious lie and contradictory state-
ments.
Their traps are legion, a few drawn from personal experience will
suffice.
When a victim is marked down as “dangerous,” an atmosphere
of probability is created by canards, the business, the moral, or the
mental character is destroyed.
Quarrels backed by slander are fomented between him and his
friends and relations, papists dissemble appearing friendly. Agents
environ and influence as desired. If this obsession fails, some person
is influenced to inflict an injury. The victim is then lured into saying
or writing something tho’ true, yet of a slanderous nature, the words
are drawn by leading questions about the opponent. If he is wary and
will not speak about the matter before witnesses, an agent entices him
into some place where thev are apparently alone, eaves-dropners lurking.
The quarry is invited to join in conviviality, and while off his guard,
the subject is insidiously broached, and by leading questions and sugges-
tions he is enticed into saying something that can be twisted into a
slander by perjury.
Letters containing leading ouestions, the renlv being defamatory,
are sent by friends who have been bribed to trap.
Attempts are made to entangle in ruinous law suits, he cannot win
as a tool would be engineered on the jury; or a nopish judge sent to try
the case; -and his solicitor terrorized into conducting the case so as to
lose it.
If the quarry is in business, he can be influenced into losing specu-
lations and blunders which involve pecuniary loss, and boycotted more
or less.
Girls and women are very efficient trappers, the one that, gets a
man caught in a compromising position with her; the pretty wife who
is a decoy for the Hawk, her husband; the adventuress who wants a
husband—or breach of nromise case; and many more, as an ill-assorted
marriage; a liaison with a married woman, etc.
The quarry is decoyed into doing a proper and harmless act, which
is the first step on the road to ruin.
An attempt was made to get me to accept the Commission of the
Peace, but fearing gifts from the Greeks, I required a scrutiny of the


N.S.W. law pertaining to Magistrates before accepting. Therein I
saw, if I made a mistake in the law, I could be sued for damages in
the High Court, and if I refused to act, a mandamus at my cost could
be obtained against me in the same quarter—so I declined the doubtful
honour of being one of the administrators of Queanbeyan justice.
One of the foulest acts of the protestant jackals was of the latter
kind—to get me to explain to them the underground working of the
Jesuits, and while in the heat of the exposition, attempt to fix the names
of local persons to my general remarks, so as to give a base for a
slander action.
This is Rome’s plan to terrorize those who know into silence.
A Devilish Trap.—A. told me a defamatory story about 8., who had
had done me an injury, suggesting I ought to ask C. and D. about it.
If I had done so all three would swear I had originated the lie, as,
indeed, I would have done in law.
The same man made a business appointment with me at his house
on a fixed day; en route I noticed the tracks of a buggy going the same
way, also those of three horsemen who did not ride in company. Fear-
ing a perjury trap, I turned round and went home. It came to my know-
ledge afterwards that ten persons were at this man’s house to swear a
slander lie against me.
Persecution is applied in various ways, what will destroy one, to
another will be innoxious; the great are above it, public men with a
stained past excepted, and the vast majority are not worth the trouble,
and if it became common it would not be effective; the dangerous are
assailed, and the weak with money which is coveted.
Groundless low abuse, pig’s-wit, lies, calling names, slander, shout-
ing at, talking at, and terrorizing, are some items of the Jesuits’ stock-
in trade. The terrorism is nicely adapted to environment.
When I lived in towns it was applied by shouting at me or making
a noise as I walked about and round my abode, dogging, espionage,
mobbing, etc. To rouse from sleep in the night by noises or loud talk
was a favourite form; this gets on the nerves. Posting tools to obviously
shadow my place of residence, etc.
Those games could not be practised continuously when I retired to
my own house and land in the wilderness; yet I was followed and
annoyed now and then, ’till the retort:—“ Go home, the priest is kissing
your wife,” was hit on. Knowing I was armed, violence was not
attempted.
Tools then fired guns around my boundary fence, the squatter finds
the money, he is told—l am afraid, and will sell my land to him for
God ’s-sake.
The Jesuits think the fusillade will get on my nerves and I will
commit myself; an idea worthy of a priest or an old woman.
Ex-lion hunters and ex-buffalo hunters are not built that way.
“ We be the boys, as fears no noise.”
During absence, the semblance of a grave was formed in front of
my house with a legend on it—“ In memory of H.Ff.G. R. I. Pieces,”
the dog-Latin threat proves the priest was its author. A gang of twenty
men were mustered up one Sunday, like Lars Porsena’s following, and
marched silently round my house, on my land. Reports to the police
stopped this ruffianism, coupled with my threat of using a rifle, when
the police said “ they would not protect me, and to give my land away
for nothing.” A murder threat is implied, but it is a brutum fulmen,
Queanbeyan Justice is the only danger.
This persecution commenced in New Castle, County Dublin, and
in Dublin City, in A.D. 1892, the present date is A.D. 1914, so that
I write from experience, cannot be controverted.
By trickery my life has been attempted several times by Jesuit
tools. The gun-firing is going on as I write.
Protestants sell themselves secretly to Rome to serve the private
end; the Jesuits play off one against the other, and win without showing
their hand.


The only effective way of stopping the persecution is to hit back
at the priests; the formula: “ Go home, the priest is kissing your wife,”
will shut up the protestant jackal as well as the papist. The Ancient
Pistol plan of attacking when the retort is not admissible viva voc6, can
be defeated by getting the mot printed on cards and leaving a few about.
They will let sleeping dogs lie—if the dogs bite a few times.« These
snares are personal experiences, in Ireland, London, Australia, everyone
as stated; they all failed as I am not “ that sort,” and am too wide
awake to give a colourable! base.
THE MONEY GRUB AND HOLD FAST ESTATE.
The following precis illustrates the working of the Jesuit system.
The Chiefs of the Order become aware through the spy methods,
that a very large fortune will eventually fall to a poor Romanist, a boy
of tender years, provided several intervening lives can be “ removed,”
a jesuitical euphemism for murder. All their casuists authorize them to
acquire wealth by fair or foul means (per fas aut nefas). These lives
being heretics’, who have no rights the Faithful are bound to respect,
murder will be clearly justifiable. The matter is placed in the hands
of a Mastermind.
This Old Man of the Mountain is watched by a socius, a spy
attached to him in a menial, or confidential, capacity, with authority
to supersede in case' of an error of judgment. Those transient aberra-
tions of reason which cause others to wreck their commands are pro-
vided against by the far seeing company.
The Hassan ben Sabbah sitting in an obscure house in Rome, holds
the guys of a net in his hands, whose meshes, like the Norse Serpent
of Ocean, encompass the earth; commanding legions of assassins drunk
with the hashish of superstition.
The ultimate life is first secured.
An Irish boy residing near Cork, being a papist, is received as an
eleve into a Jesuit seminary, and influenced to join the Order, who thus
become remainder-men.
The next life, a Ritualistic Yorkshire shopkeeper, must be assured,
as it will not do to risk the coveted gold on a hazard.
A Church of England rector, who is a Jesuit in disguise, exchanges
livings with the Ritualist’s rector. This divine undermines what little
is left of protestantism in his parishioner’s faith; while The Friend, a
Jesuit of the short robe, or lay brother, the usual spy placed as per
system to watch and report the words and the actions of a marked down
prey, advises a consultation with Father Lupus, S.J.
His reverence expounds the errors of the protestant faiths. A
sojourn in a “ retreat ” being suggested as the first step in the right
direction.
Those retreats are sponging-houses and seducing-houses kept by the
priests, and hiding places where they get cured of venereal diseases.
Retreats for married women, with nuns as chaperons “ for
dacency,” are also held. A large crop of babies results, which proves
the great efficacy of holy water.
The moth is caught by the glare. “ Think not, reason not, live
not, but commit thy fate into the hands of a superior, who will think
and reason for thee,” cite the reverend Lupus. The retreat is entered.
A fatal step. A hebetatic drug is incorporated with the food, keeping
the prey in a state of mental torpor, though harmless in its physical
effects; the demeanour and the actions of the fly being watched by the
spiders through a judas-hole. The environments are skilfully arranged
to depress the mind, ’till the heart beats languidly, the soul is frozen,
and the nerves unstrung. The poor wretch being terrified, by verbal
pictures of Hell, from which nothing but Masses of the priests, price
half-a-crown each, can save him. Volition and reason having flown,
the “ corpse ” is received into the arms of the only true church—over
the left.


The Friend watches o’er him, ’till accomplished the ante penulti-
mate “ removal.” The handle of a file used by him on a hobby is then
with a Borgian compound envenomed, and the pervert dies of a Latin
jaw-breaker—say the doctors. . , ..
The Mastermind “ removes ” the other intervening lives as tollows.
by acting on the human passions, if possible, and failing, by murder,
which always appears to be either an accident or a suicide.
One group of lives comprise a Wesleyan missionary and family
stationed in China. _ ,
Instructions are sent in oryptic characters by the hands or a trusty
estafette, to a Jesuit chief in the Flowery Land, directing him to. say
six masses weekly for the conversion of the heathen in the district
where the missionary is diffusing the light. A very praiseworthy thing
to do, even an Orangeman should admit if the rescript fell into the hands
of one able to decipher.
The Jesuit is deadly when he speaks fair and smiles.
The missive bore a mark whose imnort is known only to the
Tallest Poppies—The Death Warrant of the Order.
In a few weeks’ time Chinese fanatics murder the foreign devils.
The destruction of heretics being a meritorious aot agreeable to the
Most High; for it is better that a few cunning persons should be elimi-
nated, than the vile things should corrupt the heathen with blasphemous
doctrines. The blessed flames of the stake not being now advisable,
“ when the lion’s strength fails, he must make use.of the cunning ot
the fox,” Lysander and Loyola agree upon this maxim.
The priests aver, they have the right to kill heretics, but it is not
always advisable to do so ... . . ,
The next victims —a New York stock-broker, married to a gay and
handsome young wife. She is seduced and elopes. The husband in
despair plunges wildly, is ruined, becomes insane and shoots himself.
An only son is kidnapped and brought up. a papist under a false name.
To save a soul from perdition is a just deed, even if the means
employed involves the “ removal ” of heretical parents. The Jesuits
never call a crime by its right name. , ,
Another life is that of an Australian farmer named de hfreyne-
Guillmayne. , , . , . T
The usual petty tricks will serve. Quarrels are fomented. A Jesuit
emissary calling at the new homestead remarked: “ That patch of dry
ferns is dangerous so near the tent; you ought to burn it off no
sooner said than done. . ~ ~ . .
That night the tool set the bush on fire, causing considerable injury
to the squatter’s run. , , c
Suborned witnesses, protestants, swore the running bush nre was
traced to the fern patch set alight by de Ffreyne-Guil mayne. Result,
he was mulct in damages, and a pretty quarrel started as described in
“ The Satanites,” the fifflit lasting several years, and is still kept up by
coups de plume. Scores of plots designed for his destruction being
baffled by de Ffreyne-Guillmayne,. who knew the ropes from previous
experiences in Italy, in England, in France, and in Ireland.
Several murderous attempts were made on his life. .
A wire was placed across the road of access to his farm, designed to
trip his horse when returning home after dark.
A crippled snake was made fast to the hasp of his gate, so that it
may bite him when opening it on a moonless night. .
The shaft-bolt of his buggy was partly filed, twice, so that it might
break and cause a fatal “ accident,” but caution rendered the villainy
A false charge was concocted, but the bungling tools while working
up the atmosphere of probability disclosed the scheme to de Ffreyne-
Guillmayne, who blocked it by advertising full particulars, sans names,
in a local newspaper. , . „ ~ ..
“ ’Tis all imagination,” said the papists; Yap, yap! said the
protestant jackals and imbeciles. The ad. served its end, for all that.


A deeper game was then played.
The owner (now dead) of the Rag was bribed by the Jesuits (the
protestant squatter found the money) to publish a libel paltering in a
double sense—escobarderie. Jesuit tools made the public believe that
de Ffreyne-Guillmayne had offered a bribe to the Rag’s owner to pub-
lish a shocking libel on highly respectable girls. The truth being, an-
other advertisement exposing Jesuit trickery was sent in the usual way
of business by de Ffreyne-Guillmayne, and the Rag printed:—“ We have
been offered nothing less than a bribe to publish a charge of evil in the
town.”
. De Ffreyne-Guillmayne from motives of chivalry wrote to some
people contradicting the infamous “ cardinal,” stating: “ The Rag
owner (naming him) is a scoundrelly liar.” One of the letters was
treacherously given to the Rag owner, who brought an action for libel
against the writer. .
The truth was a libel at that time in N.S. Wales.
De Ffreyne-Guillmayne countered.
The protestant judge got leave, and a Romanist judge was sent to
try the cases; Jesuits’ engineering. The individual jurymen on the
panel, previous to the trials, were privately terrorized by Jesuit agents,
e.g.: “If you do not give verdicts against de Ffreyne-Guillmayne, a
Catholic will never enter your shop, your business will be ruined.” De
Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s solicitor proved a rotten-stick, he had been
terrorized, and suppressed the plea of justification so as to bar appeal
(N.S.W. law).
The Papist Judge charged the jury—“ that it was no libel to pub-
lish an infamous lie, but it was a serious libel to contradict it.” The
costs and damages vsere considerable; ruin only averted by one juryman
who refused to give an exorbitant amount.
The Rag’s owner was struck dead in the printing-house, not long
after, by paralysis, in the prime of life; and the informer died suddenly
the year following—poetic justioe.
Like tigers who had tasted blood, ere the quarry recovered from
the blow, a large moiety of respectable protestants, papists were not
spoken to, attempted to entrap into slander at law about the tools of
Rome who had worked the plot for plunder (in places where the walls
had ears). Fearing perjury de Ffreyne-Guillmayne advertised in a
newspaper warning all persons, especially protestants, not to call at his
house, or accost him, to prevent false charges being made. This suc-
ceeded, although many attempts were made to force the guard by offering
good business. This plan was the boycott reversed.
Those statements are absolutely true, and the Author’s experiences
of Queanbevan justice.
To worry to death by neurotic bane—the Jesuits’ game—failed.
Nothing short of murder could remove this impediment, so the crime
was arranged to apoear an accident.
A tumbler was concealed under the lower sheet in a bed engaged
at an hotel by him; he received some fearful gashes, which were poisoned
in the hospital, and he dies. The hotel-keeper, a papist who had laid
the murder-trap by the priests’ orders, swore at the inquest, the deceased
had retired drunk, taking, with him a tumbler of whisky. To give colour
to the statement, a pint of the Devil in solution had been spilt in the
bed before inspection by the police.
De Ffreyne-Guillmavne’s depositions being looked upon as the
romancing of an eccentric hermit-poet, who sooner live alone in the
wilds, than be bored with crude banalities; and was contept to live on
his income instead of grubbing money with “ haves ” and “ besting,”
showing an utter lack of “ savvey ” by speaking the truth and refusing
to fawn on popery or wealth.
It is a fact, the author found a tumbler so placed to injure him.
A Scottish laird with wife and grown-up family bar the onward
march to the golden goal. Secretly influenced to travel, they voyage to
the Land of the Midnight Sun.


On board the steamship step two Jesuits. In their cabin stands an
innocent looking portmanteau, perdue therein lurks the spirit of destruc-
tion. Lonely looms the North Cape.
Undefinable eeriness begrips the tourists, they are fey.
Low in the midnight sky rolls the sleepy sun —the last they e’er
shall see on earth.
The doomed re-embark—where are the Jesuits.
Away glides the yacht.
A terrific report, the ship’s side is blown out. The clockwork had
exploded the infernal machine in the Jesuits’ portmanteau.
All hands to the boats; the oars impel clear of the vortex.
The captain on the bridge disappears in the swirling wave, like a
British tar, at his post he died.
Baffled are the Jesuits.
The Laird and family are in the lifeboats.
Cries of distress, sections of the planking in every boat had been
sawn loose, they fall out. The Angel of Death rides upon the waters.
Edina no more.
Devil-craft, thy name is priest.
Petty cunning settled the next obstacle.
A clerk in a London merchant’s office. Cash missing from time to
time. Marked coin placed to trap. Stolen by a Jesuit tool, and placed
in the po«ket of said clerk’s overcoat hanging on a peg.
Detectives appear and search, cash found. Clerk arrested. Sen-
tence, five years.
Died in prison.
The Romanist warder was promoted, thig-an-though ?
Next in order, a Captain in a British regiment, he can’t be “ got at,”
murder would be dangerous. Are the Jesuits non plussed ? Not likely!
Their tools foment disturbances on the Indian frontier; other tools
in the War Office contrive to influence those who control the roster.
The Captain sent to the front falls in the first engagement. The medico
notes, the bullet entered from the back, though he was facing the foe
when he fell.
The Assassin-in-Chief smiles grimly when he reads the wire:—
“ Indigo rising,” received from Bombay, saying to his socius: “ Mac-
Bravo must be promoted in the British Army to commissioned rank.”
An extract from the Jesuits’ registers depicts another victim: “ Eva
Fitz Norman will be twenty-one years old on the 31st of January, 1903,
tall, dark, handsome, of a dreamy and affectionate disposition, clever,
well educated, and debonair, very circumspect in behaviour. Resides
with a married lady-cousin, whose husband is Eva Fitz Norman’s guar-
dian, at Blank Villa, Richmond-on-Thames, England. Inherits a con-
siderable fortune from her father, the late Colonel Fitz Norman, and is
in the direct line of succession to the Money Grub and Hold Fast Estate.
Must be removed.”
“Rather difficult to manage,” meditates the Mastermind, “dis-
appointed love may act on such a fine nature, but those English Meess
are too well-bred and too cold for a vulgar suicide; she would be more
likely to marry the other fellow out of pique, than die of a broken heart.
* The cold in clime are cold in blood, their love can scarce
deserve the name,’
Milor Byron tells us, but la grande passion unrequited will be a plausible
cloak for mur—ahem —.removal.”
The Jesuits’ agents seek and find a dashing baronet; he is intro-
duced to Miss Fitz Norman. They fall in love. An engagement follows,
which is allowed to continue for a few weeks.
Another beau, a lay Jesuit disguised as a protestant is then intro-
duced to the young lady. This emissary acts in such manner and darkly
hints to his friends of bonnes fortunes so as to compromise the victim.
Calumny assiduously asserted circulates the slander, and anonymous


letters convey the libel to the baronet.
He surprises the pair walking together in the villa harden, a very
harmless and usual thing, ’tis true, but the green-eyed monster is not a
reasonable fiend .
The surprise had been plotted by the Jesuits, and their Tool was
bending over the fair Eva with a well assumed air of enraptured devo-
tion, seemingly confirming the epistles.
Miss Fitz Norman being innocence personified, and ignorant of the
absurd rumours as odious as they were improbable, takes no measures
to avoid giving colour to Loyola’s machinations, falls an easy prey.
Her consternation is extreme on receiving a letter from her fiancee,
stating: “ I decline the honour of an alliance.”
Melancholia supervenes. She is found dead floating In the Thames.
Her hat, in which is placed a letter: “ I prefer death to a life of despair,”
is found on the bank. . This being an obvious case of suicide, the verdict
of the coroner’s jury is in accordance with the evidence.
Miss Fitz Norman had been lured to the river bank by a forged
letter, purporting to be a contrite olive-branch from her false lover, and
was knocked on the head with a sand-club, a weapon that leaves no
mark.. The decoy.letter was then removed from the corpse: Jesuits leave
no trail. Instructions to their tools are always sent by messenger, never
written, unless in the Order’s cipher.
. Such methods .are lawful. The Pope is monarch of the earth by
divine right; is entitled to levy war against his enemies, the Heretics,
who have no rights. Not being in a position to use the material sword,
he resorts to the weapon of the mind, eliminating the foe and annexing
their assets; and God will help his officers the priests in the lawful war.
The next on the Black List, an Irish landlord; his tenants refuse
to pay their rents; ejectments are issued and bad blood fomented; a
bullet fired from behind a hedge finds its billet. The Romanist police
cannot find the murderer, and try to make out the deceased committed
suicide., or that the crime was the work of an Orange agent provocateur,
who killed him to bring discredit on the Home Rule movement.
A Boer Commandant must be got rid of, his late mother, an English
woman, having had a claim on the estate.
Jesuit tools influence a meretricious British statesman to pick a
casus belli with the Sons of the Veldt.
The burgher is egged on to burn farmhouses and to wreck trains,
lawful acts of war for the British, but outrages when done by the Boers
—vide the British Press.
Betrayed into the hands of the Philistines by an Anglo-Dutch
Delilah, he is placed on. “ trial ” with a foregone result.
The man in possession of the Money-Grub and Hold-Fast Estate is
a London merchant, middle-aged and married, having a young family;
a cool and shrewd John Bull. A hard nut to crack—nothing of the sort.
When the end is worth the trouble, the Jesuits can always succeed
provided the quarry has not a good knowledge of the System, and
cannot realize if he has.
A female Jesuit, the spy, is engineered into the merchant’s employ-
ment as nursery governess. While taking the children for a walk, she
is accosted by a friend, who informs her that her brother wants to speak
to her on business at No. 8, Blank Street, just round the corner. She
calls. The children are sent to play in a vacant room while the inter-
view lasts. This room is an infected death-chamber. They contract a
fatal disease, and perish together with their mother.
The father drowns his sorrows in the flowing bowl, as deadly an
enemy as the boon-companion, a lay Jesuit, who, while condoling,
insidiously encourages the drink-fiend’s rule. That cacodemon claims
his due by and by.
The Ritualist, as before stated, is then “removed.”
Loyola’s Sons annex the estate, being assignees of the only remain-
ing heir who wears the Order’s gown.


“ Such service done in fervent zeal,
The Church will pardon and conceal.”—Scott.
SUMMING-UP.
Worshipping a dead woman, and a live man, and a bit of bread, is
a form of idiocy not affecting non-Romanists. All religions as such are
free. Puritanism as a political force is dead.
The voter must be taught—popery is a secret political and social
league, interfering with mundane interests. Justice and virtue are
polluted; politics influenced for evil; other creeds undermined; private
rights, and character, and the salt of life on earth, property and liberty,
assailed in the dark. By an impalpable and an inscrutable system,
which taints and destroys without noise or sign. # .
The Jesuit will help his enemy to success (not being anti-papal) if
by so doing he can help his own cause.
The Puritan, or other protestant, will suppress and destroy his
friend, rather than let any method be practised other than his own, and
for the private end. Goody-goody baby talk will not influence nowa-
days; the public are not children.
MORAL OF THE WORK.
Never wrong a man .by word or deed—for then
He will bide his time, and pay you back again.
First blood in battle staunch foemen never bend,
No surrender wins the contest in the end.


Glossary.
4
Absintha, the principle of sleep—Sanskrit.
Alannah, my little dear—Gaelic.
Barricking, to eulogise—Aus. slang.
Bhowanie, the goddess of the thugs.
Ada-Lampoer, the passing of evil-spirits in the air—a Javanese
myth.
Bunyip, a chimera, pronounced—bun-yeep—Aus. myth.
Bill-&-bong, a small pond—Aus. ab.
Billy, a tin cooking pot—Aus. slang.
Bush, the country or forest—Aus.
Cockatoo, a yeoman—Aus. slang.
Cardinal, a lie, coined in Sydney, N.S.W.
Colleen das, dark-haired girl—Gaelic.
Cornstalk, a white native of N.S. Wales.
Fire-drake, a fire-work.
Ghyll, a ravine, same as gill—lcelandic.
Humpy, a mean hut—Aus. slang.
Hassan-ben-Sabbah, the Old Man of the Mountain; the Assassin,
nick-name for the General of the Jesuits.
Hashish, the juice of the Indian hemp—Arabic.
Jackaroo, a colonial experience young man—Aus.
Khelt, or ghelt, money—Boer.
Larrikin, a rough, an ill-bred man—Aus. slang.
Lag, a convict, to convict—Aus. slang.
Mick and Mickey, half contemptuous name for papists—Aus.
Tid-bin-bil-la, aboriginal name.
Mafada, to charm with the eyes—Gipsy.
Mavourneen acushla machree, my darling, thou pulse of my heart—
Gaelic.
Moonlighting, Irish desperados on the warpath by night, a rappa-
rees’ raid.
Slantha, ma boughil, your health, my boy—Gaelic.
Racca, a term of extreme contempt—Syriac.
Satanites, the author’s name for the Jesuits.
Swagman, a tramp—Aus. slang. -
Rouseabout, a generally useful man—Aus. slang.
Swag, a tramp’s kit—Aus. slang.
Shout, to call for drinks at a bar.—Aus. slang.
Roorback, a campaign lie—from the Baron.
Tucker, food—Aus. slang.
Toff, a rich man, a top-sawyer—Slang.
Tracker, a black policeman—Obvious.
Station, a squatter’s house—Aus.
Thig-an-though ? do you understand—Gaelic.
Push, a clique—Aus. slang.
Thuggee, practises of the thugs.
Tramontano, a strong gusty wind in N. Italy.
Jackal, a protestant tool of Rome—H. de F. G.
White-man, honest man—Aus. slang.
Wallaby-track, any road, and travelling away from home, touring—
Aus. slang.
Tid-bin-bil-la, land of mountains.
HISTORY OF THIS WORK.
The first copy .of MS. was sent to Trapman & Co., a “ sporting ”
London publisher, who agreed to issue the work on commission, being
his usual way of doing business.
On receipt of bank draft to pay the printer as agreed, he refused
to proceed for less than four times the amount. This respectable pub-
lisher refused to return the money or the MS. The London police said:
—“ A trade dispute, not a police matter.”


Another copy was sent to Barabbas & Son, well known in the pro-
testant book line. They got me to sign an agreement, “at my entire
risk thinking that meant libel and breach of copyright, I signed it.
They then faked over one hundred illiterate “ gags ” into the text, which
they called “ improvements,” maliciously rendering the edition unfit for
sale; the agreement, “ my entire risk,” covered the fraud.
Both of these “ haves ” were bribed by the Jesuits.
Revised printed copies sent to well known American firms, were
returned to me by the P.O. marked, “ refused,” “ not known.” Jesuit
tools there had blocked delivery.
A few copies were then sent to well known London publishers
through an agent there, from letters and reports received, I draw the
inferences stated in the verses anent.
Two were kind enough to advise, a toning down of some parts, to
suit the English taste, and then they would issue the work; which has
been partly done.
The statements herein are absolutely true, and under-drawn.
Henry de Ffreyne-Guillmayne.
12/12/10.
THE JACKAL’S REVIEW.
A flamboyant work, of style familiar in our younger day,
Now obsolete. The jests about “ priests’ nieces ” are over gay.
The poet makes believe, he’s casting an up-to-date searchlight,
On fearful blood-curdling villainy, of the fell Jesuit.
His imagination revels in bogey-men invented;
But it can’t be averred, the ideas are by him patented.
If he were well advised, he would not priests’ characters so stain;
Better hush it up and wink the eye, than give the good men pain.
The usual protestant pictures, to fright babes in swaddling-clothes;
With a hunted victim of priest-craft, who hath unnumbered woes.
Tho’ with the horrors of Rome’s past admitted, his pages teem,
De Ffreyne-Guillmayne’s denunciations, are for this age extreme.
In his next essay let us hope, o’er he’ll turn a brand new leaf,
Select less polemical theme, nor cause good priests heart wringing grief.
The author’s reply:—“ When firing a .577 express bullet at a man-
eating tiger, I am not concerned about his feelings.”
TELOS.


L’ Envoy.
BY HENRY DE FFREYNE-GUILLMAYNE.
CURSORY NOTES.
The Jesuits having discovered by espionage and deducing from
data, that I was about to send a revised copy of this work to London,
made several attempts to prevent me going to Sydney to post it at
the G.P.O.
Terrorism and agents to provoke, as usual, failing, a very well laid
plot to seize the handbag containing the MS. at the Queanbeyan railway
station was devised, and detected and baffled.
The Mickeys in the know had beaming smiles as I drove past them
en route for the toils, spread at the hotel; but looked disconcerted a
few days after on my way back. They are always cocksure, every new
trap will snap home, though I have been foiling similar snares for
fifteen years.
The local priest then wired my departure to the Sydney Jesuits,
who had an emissary to meet the train and shadow me to my hotel.
Travelling all night caused me to retire earlier than customary in a
city which Loyola’s Brood foresaw. They provided a German band to
serenade me, and the usual agents to provoke; but I laughed myself to
sleep amidst the foolery, for this petty persecution now rolls off like
dewdrops on an eagle’s wing.
Ihe next plot to block the publication of this work was nothing
less than an attempt at murder. Nine rifle shots were fired at me
in quick succession, when walking on the public road in front of
Tidbinbilla Station, on a star-light night. Full particulars were sent
to the police, who took no notice. I then wrote to the Minister for
Justice as follows:
*' £ ir >—9 n April the tenth, 1911, I reported to the police that on
April the third, nine rifle shots were fired at me, and that I can swear
to the would-be murderer.
•i, “ no^ce having been taken, I have the honour to request you
will inform me—-if the New South Wales police are in the pay of
criminals ? and if it is their duty to shield wealthy criminals and their
tools from justice? They cannot be such utter idiots as not to know
what ( everyone here is aware of—that my land is Naboth’s Vineyard.
Since the rejx>rt made, the pals of the police set an infernal wire
trap on the road of access to my land, to throw my horse and kill me
This letter forced the police to act. The local Tall Poppy was
removed and promoted. The trooper, a lance-corporal, was promised
promotion (this he let slip to me) and sent round to my popish enemies
to fake up spme excuse for the neglect of duty.
He admitted to me—the highest probity was allowed by those foes,
but I saw the enquiry was a farce, and refused to name the would-be
assassin, to baffle the plot—an action for slander; an alibi would be
purchased. This trooper said to me beforer You will not £jet any
protection frorn the police; give your land away.”
Criminals in this country have unique privileges, they are prose-
cuted, as well as tried—by their peers.
On second consideration, I apologise to—the criminals. Most of
the honest folk are in the jails, they were not rogues enough to keep out.
The rifle firing round my boundary fences obtains, in vain hope to
terrorize me out of my coign of vantage at a nominal price; the shooters
take care to keep out of range of my tongue: “ The priest is kissing
your wife,” are words of power.
What chance of living in peace and of justice would Irish protes-
tants have under a priest-ridden Home Rule Government, when the
Jesuits can make an outlaw of an obnoxious person in “ free Australia”?
The political situation in the Homeland is hit off in the following
squib:—


The Arch-Traitor’s Song: A Type.
1
In good Victoria’s days I wasn’t much; in Edward’s shoved along;
And now I am the Tallest Poppy, in story and in song.
I’ll break the British constitution, and put the roughs in power:
And pave the way to civil-war, aye, to hold my place one hour..
This is law, I will maintain—let treason and let rapine boss,
I’ll keep my bit of salary, out my principles I’ll toss.
2
I eat the leek and turn my cheek, crouch to every Irish Mike
Whose vote can lose my salary, fawning like a rated tyke.
No lie, no fraud that I will flinch, and no trickery too low,
To wrest the wrong to right, for I fear the kicking out boot-toe.
But this is law, I will maintain, tho’ the empire may go smash,
I’ll keep my bit of salary, for aught else to me is trash.
3
My trade has failed, so I must live on the political job;
’Tis fine to have a country, and aristocracy, to rob.
Let hell loose in Ireland, aye,~and let the Devil have his fling;
Uproot our ancient landmarks, who cares for any blooming thing I
But this is law I will maintain, tho’ wild chaos comes amain,
I’ll keep my bit of salary, and I’ll turn my coat again. *
Mr. denounced Home Rule in A.D. 1909 or thereabouts; in
A.D. 1911 “ by fraud ” attempts to sneak it into being.
The despicable low-cunning Jesuitic trickery advocated in the
“ R_ of R— ” (London) to abolish the Lords’ veto, requires no com-
ment, for it is the “ nathur of the baaste ”; but the masked treachery
of the Unionist Press is appalling.
That’s a Jesuitic Trick.
If you want a handy name to call a trick, a trick that’s low and vile;
A trick that makes the angels weep; and a trick that makes the devils
smile;
A trick a dog would shame to own; and the foulest trick of bloody Rome;
A trick to bolster up the case of fraud, noxious as the serpent’s foam;
A trick that reeks of the charnel vaults, and savours of the ghastly
ghoul;
A judas trick of the darkest hue; a trick to compass murder foul,
The blackest crime upon the calendar, that the swords of Justice smite,
You cannot find a better name for it, than the one that I indite.
A trick that Satan’s self would scorn to work, aye, too low for hottest
hell;
I will brand the name with infamy, for by experience I can tell
Low-cunning’s dastard treacheries, and have baffled many in time s
nick;
Avert the head and with contempt’s mien, say:—
That’s a jesuitic trick.
On Queanbeyan.
Experience of false men I’ve had, yet cannot recall to mind
One utter loathsome miscreant, as those libels on mankind
I’ve met, since drifting to this country, who path for ill,
A crawling soulless crew, fitting soil for Jesuits to till.
I wonder! are they sample of the crowd ? are all low and vile ?


Why should basest of the human race, upon this dunghill pile?
There is nothing here but cheatery, the meanest of gold greed,
Where the flower of honesty should be, there grows fraud’s baneful
weed.
I did not make those data, and from my sad experience write,
A judas to be shunned like death, the venal Queanbeyanite.
The Best Reason for Home Rule.
When Tim, M.P., was expelled from the House of Commons for
rousing a ruckshion, he retired to his ancestral mud cabin in Bally-
whackeeley.
The Old Woman met him at the door. Quoth she: “ Arrah! Tim,
my bhoy! we’ll get the Home Rule now for sartin.”
“ How do you make that out, Mother ? ” said Tim.
“ Shure! Tim, you knows, the rael gintlemin over there in parlymint
will not be after sittin’ down forenint the likes of you and your sort
for long,” replied the stay-at-home.
That was before William Ewart Gladstone turned his coat again,
and became the associate and the tool of the dependants of assassins—
the Assassin of the Empire. Parliament is the last refuge of a failure.
The Radical way of uniting the empire is—to break it in pieces
first, and then to tie them together with rotten string called “ federa-
tion ” charlatans destroy what statesmen and warriors built.
The Press tells us: “ M. Briand (the ex-Prime Minister of France)
was “ strong ” enough to allow religious teaching in schools (contrary
to law); the truth being, he was weak enough to bend to terrorism, one
assault and a shot did the trick.
The machinations by which the Jesuits influenced the House of
Lords to its doom, to clear the road for Rome rule in Ireland, and ruin,
bankruptcy and civil war are worthy of Belial.
The line in this work: “ The great betrayal yet will come, and Ulster
forced to draw the sword,” was written twelve years ago when the
wise men in England were spouting—“ Home Rule is dead ”; a lively
corpse, in sooth.
Lady Wylde’s prophecy: “The Return of the Heraclidae,” may
come to pass, and the Irish when trained to arms declare their independ-
ence—so treachery will have its due, the treacherous betrayal of Irish
orotestants into the hands of their enemies; no nation has been guilty
of similar infamy.
A Spicy Story.
Erstwhile when young, arrayed in a monkish hooded brown over-
coat, I strolled into a popish masshouse in Port Elizabeth, S.A. “ Good
morning, your reverence,” louted a Biddy fresh from the Bogs. Acting
on the hint, I pulled the hood over my head and entered the priests’
part of the confessional box, and spoke to a fair penitent through the
grille.
She confessed—oh ! such naughtiness! _ Then penance was ordained,
and I proceeded to give her absolution in jocular French (as my Latin
was scanty), but the dame understood.
“You are an impostor,” quoth she; “ I will denounce you to the
people about.” “If you dare,” retorted I, “ I will tell your husband.”
That’s all.
The priest decreases the liberty, and increases the family, an
apophthegm giving the pith of this work.
Appendix.
The super-infernal Jesuits made a devilish attempt in Tanuary,
1912, to oust me from my. coign of vantage, Tidbinbilla Glen, and force
me to sell it to the Vampire Squatter for a God’s sake price:: the mis


creant squatter finds the money to pay for their rascality and expects
to be reimbursed thus.
The bush was ignited at the back of the Peak so that the fire would
come over the crest and down the glen upon my land, thus burn me out.
The neighbours were ready to extinguish the blaze when it had
swept my country, being cocksure they could control it.
The fire-fiend proved a Frankenstein and refused to obey. As it
crept along the back of the range away from my land, gathering force
as it grew, the weather got dry and sultry, o’er the mountain’s brow,
down the fiery tongues came on the lands of the conspirators, licking
up grass and fences. The fire-fighters then blocked it on the cleared
country and sent it up the mountain-range in front of my homestead,
where it raged for a week and passed on, leaving a wide strip of un-
burned bush along my fence. My land being Naboth’s Vineyard, a spy
then called at my homestead on a specious pretext to see if my nerves
were shaken, and if I were prepared to sell out to the Vampire Squatter
for a song, and was told to go to—another blaze.
The bush fire was shortly afterwards re-kindled and engineered
along the unburned strip over my farm. I saw the incendiary at work.
Strange to say, no harm was done excepting to an old fence.
The usual “ try-ons ” followed. Emissaries attempted to lure me
to accuse the arson-mongers by name; and a stringent bovcott prevented
the repairs necessary in the boundary-fence, without which the farm
would not be tenable.
I put the fence up myself, and replaced the burned grass with pur-
chased hay, completely confounding the conspirators.
; Twenty years’ fighting with the Jesuits’ low cunning trickery has
made me a master of their system; knowledge, discretion and courage
are an over-match for the best of it, provided always strong drink is
eschewed; scrupulosity anent money matters and the fair sex is main-
tained; indeed, I laugb at it now. Such is the power of knowledge.
E.g.— When the bush-fire was coming close, I placed my personal
effects in a wagonette and drove away, it looked like suicide to fight the
demon single-handed, not one of the neighbours came to help, though
offered one £ per day. En route I met the Vampire and his son
coming to buy out for a song a panic-stricken enemy as he thought
from the representations of his fool-rogue tools.
“ Go on, you arrant scoundrel,” quoth I to my horse; the Vampire
donned the cap. So the shot went home on the safe side of the law.
A Roland for an Oliver was not long forthcoming. A few weeks
after this episode a nicely dressed, well mannered and well-spoken nine-
teen-year-old girl called alone at my house where I live a le hermit,
alleging she “ was lost in the bush, being a guest at T (mentioning
the Vampire Squatter’s station), had come to the wilds for a ramble,
and got separated from her companions.”
Not a little risky thing to happen in Australia, and the scoundrels
who induced her to adventure:, measured me with their own bushel.
Miss Delilah was treated with most respectful courtesy and guided
to the nearest house more than a mile away through the forest.
Australians are mistaken thinking well-born and well-bred men
from overseas are as yile as themselves, men who paid their own passage
and whose fathers did not meet with fatal accidents on scaffolds when
talking with clergymen, like the “ true patriot ” progenitors of their
nation.
So the Vampire’s revenge for the opprobrious epithet left Bayard’s
shield unstained, sans peur et sans reoroche.
Australian girls seem to be of opinion: “ It is not good for man to
live alone,” and small blame to the darlings for that same.
The Jesuits’ tools made a few attempts to test my commercial
honesty and found it sound; this did not surprise me, for they are
excellent judges of the low type of human nature around, but know
nothing of the characteristics of the gentleman.
Once beautiful Tidbinbilla Glen is completely devastated and for


evermore, not a vestige remains of the lovely underwood and rare ferns,
even the roots and the humus are reduced to ashes; the beauty of form
alone remains.
’Tis sad to look on the desert to which this once pleasant spot is
reduced by droughts, rabbits, fire, foxes and rabbit poisoning: the
climate has changed from sufficient rain to aridity, so the lovely atmos-
pheric effects have ceased; the poetry has vanished.
The Fire-Fiend.
Come, fearless pen, ban Belial’s Brood, who hazarded the Fire-Fiend
free;
To serve the private end destroyed the growth of many a century.
But let that pass. What boots it now to curse the crime with tongue
or pen,
Anathemas won’t renovate the wreck of Tidbinbilla Glen.
Jessamine vines no longer twine, beautiful nameless shrubs to me
Are vanished quite, that erewhile decked the sward, under the green-
wood tree.
The hickory flower will bloom no more; the she-oak defunct for ever;
The grotesque blackthorn-bush no bees can feed; will they revive? oh!
never!
For root and branch are sapless now, for aye the vital force has fled,
So all the verdant foliage of yore, is numbered with the dead.
The demon came like the lava’s deluge, when Etna eruots death;
And went like the poisonous desert wind, the Simoom’s baleful breath.
He crept thro’ the grass, and roared thro’ the bracken, tinted green
and gold; # _ •
Hunted the lyre-bird from covert snug, in the fair sequestered wold..
He withered the wattle; fordone e’er more, fronds of the maiden-hair;
Twisted the tree-fern’s graceful plumes, as he hissed thro’ the murky
air.
The fern flecked banks of the brook were swept bare, remorselessly
tho’ slow,
By the fiery fork’d jets of flame; and the fells where the wild flowers
grow.
He murdered the musk-tree, leaped upwards mid eucalypt’s boughs on
high,
There like the flag of Erebus, flaunting fierce defiance to the sky.
Then hour by hour he inward ate, unto the forest giant’s core,
Until a ringing crash proclaims, the woodland monarch’s reign is o’er.
Above settled lands the smoke-cloud hung, an eerie funeral pall,
Harbinger of sorrow to hard-won homes, ruin ready to fall.
The merciful rain then shed a tear, and the Fire-Fiend fled Below;
If there he were bound for a thousand years, it would be well, I trow T
So passed the sylvan loveliness for aye, so nature’s pride is o’er;
Amongst the musk-trees’ fragrant leaves, I’ll roam the rugged glens
no more.
left’s hope that Kismet will grip hard the crew, who wrought so foul
a deed,
Consumed the glamour of the lone hill side, to pander to low greed.
May merited misfortune overtake the Vampire Squatter’s push,
Aye, let them feel the vengeance, of the despoiled Spirit of the Bush.
*****
For the last two years the Jesuit tools are trying to lure by example;
they commit illegal acts, some apparently lawful but not so in fact, for
me to copy: defamatory general statements are made to me to repeat
so as to give a colourable base for a perjury plot, which scheme I blocked
by making a report of it to the police, as the local newspapers refuse
my advertisements. Murder-traps are set on the by-road leading to mv
homestead.


The cocksure smile of coming triumph has lately been replaced by
the scowl of hate, the hate of the beaten scoundrel: “ You know how
things are done,” remarked one of them to me.
When attacking the priests and their tools, a local group of persons
must not be indicated by occupation, residence or otherwise; e.g., it is
lawful to say, “The Irish priests are immoral,” but ’twould be libel
to say: the priests of Ballyvenus suffer from the Irish toothache.”
I he remark must be general.
The Sons of Loyola are now up against a dead-wall of failure,
after twenty years of intrigues; but the traps obtain; ceaseless vigilance
is the price of safety. Low blackguardism by agents is the favourite
last resort.
There is nothing strange or rare about those experiences; thou-
sands of Jesuits’ victims yearly sink in the dark.
The Bloody Hand still clutches the dagger and stabs in the back.
. our Australian and about forty London publishers have refused
to issue this book for any money; two reputable London firms took
cash and swindled me by fraudulent trickery: literary agents refused
to handle: editors, priest-fighters, protestant societies, publishers’ readers
lied to influence me not to print. Why ? “A fellow feeling made them
wondrous kind,” they saw their own pictures herein.
. Several issue prose Anti-Papal publications in which are statements
similar to those in my verses: from which I deduce, the average man
has not intellect sufficient to understand metrical construction.
The work is issued by the author and sold by an agent.
Another attempt to burn me out was made in 1913; the fire stepped
on the previously burned land, and swept back over the enemies’
country.
The wreck of Tidbinbilla Glen proving a dreary abode: the cease-
less toils, with a girl at one end, a lawyer at the other end, and a priest
in the background pulling the strings, became monotonous (an un-
fathomable contre-temps preventing other purpose) the place was offered
for sale or lease, but the Jesuits blocked. So a man was put in charge,
and I departed, leaving the land in an agent’s hands for sale.
This way out of the wood did not strike the conspirators; ‘ I would
be a serf bound to the soil for life, or sell it “at his own price,” to the
Vampire Squatter,’ was the cocksure programme.
Ere leaving the Jesuits were advised:—“ If they shadowed and
molested, cards charged with the legend: ‘ Papist, the priest is kissing
your wife,’ would be distributed ”; so I was not molested further.
The Vampire’s Death.
He’s gone f yesterday his gold could buy the soul;
Where bides his spirit ? where ?
Evil shadows from Monaro seem to roll;
I feel the clearing air.
He joins his girl victim—or infernal band—
Beyond aerial main;
And ere long the socialist will till the land,
He lost his soul to gain.
To his greedy heir, he leaves a plenteous store;
To melt in hands of knave;
What buys his wealth for him ? not one iota more
Than the unhonoured grave.
Though gloze sycophants, the time is drawing near
The white-wash brush won’t ply,
Pilloried his every cunning grab, sans fear,
For his gold won’t buy a lie.
The Vampire-Squatter’s name bedaubed with grime,
Will long be tossed on tongues of future time.


The Sirens of the Surf.
I strolled along the Manly sands, saw Sydney by the ocean wave,
Where her daughters in the rolling breakers’ brine, their lovely charms
lave.
The Sirens of the Surf mingle on the beach, ’mongst admiring crowd;
Nor spare the blushes of Rome’s holy men, who chastity have vowed.
The college stands for callow priests, hard by upon the rocky hill;
Tabooed the sandy shore to them, for there romp “ Lilith’s nymphs of
ill.” (?)
The scantly costumed lasses, display to view all the undraped limb,
The thin robe shows the figure’s contour, be it plump, or be it slim.
They court the gaze of men, who come afar their frisky forms to see:
Changed standard doth decree—half-nakedness is not immodesty.
Not that I set up as a moralist, to bathers mete out blame,
It is the fashion, so ’tis proper to be a scantly vested dame.
It is very kind of the damsels fair, Co give the men a treat,
As we lounge along the beach, and the lightly costumed sirens meet;
It is quite distracting at first view, but in time seems just the thing;
Tastes differ, but I would not deem that is the way to win the ring.
Tho’ there are many caught by unveiled charms, and principles give o’er.
’Twould quench the virtue of an anchorite, to haunt that Lesbian shore.
The limbs are, oh ! so ravishing, set the bachelors’ hearts in a flutter;
The figures can’t be expressed, they’re quite too unutterably utter.
Musing ’mongst the throng of sirens, apropos it occured to me—
‘ Erroneous is the Holy Writ, and the translation is too free.
“ Now woman was more subtle than the Serpent, the evil avatar;
And by her enchantments and allurements, beguiled the Morning-Star.
‘ This apple is far sweeter, darling,’ to the Serpent whispered Eve,
Than the lost joys of Paradise, so taste, my love, and do not grieve.’ ”
1 Thus Satan fell the second time, alas! just like a mortal man;
And here she’s at the same old game again—mv meditations ran.
Many sirens have a face and form refined, not the common class;
’Tis so distracting, to meet them half-naked romping o’er the grass;
When roaming in a retired nook, my word ! the coldest heart is fired,
Watching the languorous abandon, as they pose to be admired.
They make the blood surge wildly in the veins, like the first kiss of love;
Deem Grecian nymphs and naiads come again, this mundane sphere
to rove.
Cynicism and philosophy take wing, when Eros grips the helm,
Flung to the winds and waves, aye, by the sagest Nestor in the realm.
Byron’s saying: “Woman once beguiled, and evermore beguiling,”
Remembers, as watched the play, bright eves and lovely features smiling.
I met with the maiden of bashful fifteen, no reason to doubt her,
A rosebud fair, but no bash or much else of a robe was about her.
Beautiful the damsel looked, clothed in a ribbon and a smile,
Edenic innocence, ere woman fell to Serpent’s specious wile.
Then I met with the full-blown peony, a dame ’twas said of note,
Her charms are so exuberant, she ought to wear a petticoat.
I met with the maid with the bosom of snow, arms fit for H6b4,
Thighs a goddess would envy, for no draping to vision said nay.
Another as brown as a berry, closing rent tights with her fist,
Cheeks glowing, blooming and bronzed, the bright sun of Australia
oft kissed.
I met with the lassie plump as vou please, emerged from the billow;
Another the Graces might match, lithe as the wand of the willow.
Girls romping in the rippling shallows, seemed all jovs of life to quaff,
Sweet sounds music o’er the waters, so floats their thoughtless merrv
j laugh.
Doubtless, many just as good and modest, as are the sour-faced prudes;
’Tis very kind of them to entertain, the sober-sides and dudes.
Tt is the spirit of the age, all the worn out customs to oppose;
Vet. ’twould be onlv comely, for ladies not to wear transparent clothes.


Between decollate at the ball, and delegette at the sea,
Pr^^h are ‘vf muC r °j beauty’s graces by veiling held in secrecy,
fond and free; the Spanish glide would make your
The lovely eyes of Italy, are far beyond my muse to tell;
Rn? fi 6. UreS are - SO ravi , they’ll give you the heartache;
c •, gS * and , COnCOmitants there > the Sydney girls take the cake.
Horn spit qui mal y pense, so what odds! when beauty displays free?
Tantalizing, forbidden fruit, in Eden’s Garden by the sea.
r£;^ g r ttin - g ' to primitive conditions, ’mongst the Sydney girls,
Living Grecian statuary, bestrew the seaside path with perils;
Some shreds of clothing, picturesque are worn, not to be quite shocking,
And a modest miss or two may wear a garter and a stocking.
re i Ca^ C6ly at , al !’ for the y damsels in the surf,
And hide the figure from the lads, when basking on the sands and turf.
Some well bred lasses shun the sunshine, and the garish ray of noon,
And in the chic Canadian costume, bathe by the light of the moon:
Deemmg they re prodigal enough in half veiled beauty ’neath the stars,
£ od Z- f*** 1 S^ le , to show .too much, to “ all-sorts ” larrikins and tars.
surf in loose attire, and are all that modesty can wish;
Howe er your taste may be in love, you’ll find a very dainty dish.
Ihe alleged want of courage ’mongst the ladies, surely can’t be true;
ror Death is hovering o’er the breakers, and victims often rue.
Gallant rescues are quite common,men risk, and lose, their lives to save
Lovely forms are snatched by virile hands, from the fell devouring wave’
paot with earthly life for ever, dragged down by the undertow,
Drifting in the backwash eddies, to the rocks where the lost ones go
1 hey re tosst upon the tumbling waters, to the North Head’s rugged
Wh< the deep ° f 1116 breakers 80110(1 their dir £ e > <>’<* the graveyard of
Tangled tresses, dark or gold, upon the angry surges fall and rise;
nxed, al a s. m the stare of nothingness, are erewhile vivacious eyes.
Tu y Ju a !u - eft this world of care and sorrow, in Elysium are at rest,
though their mortal moulds are tossing wildly, on the troubled ocean’s
breast.
Tis the toll of the surf, tax levied by Death, for his Kingdom—the grave,
Un all who adventure on untrammelled sea, his javelin to brave,
they are someone’s darlings, someone’s dearest, the loss will break
some heart;
Yet, others sport the jocund hour along, and act the destined part,
bo doth afflicted soul repine, while the unwounded merry play
hor some mus t weep, while others laugh, so runs life’s little span away,
bharks do not bite the. Sydney girls, when on the billows’ bosom rocked,
May be tis from admiration, or may be ’tis they are so shocked.
I he maid was prodigal galore, who undraped her charms to the moon,
r? i i C r oriao times, now all may gaze, in the blazing ray of noon.
DolcS far mente I must quit, loitering .on this Lesbian shore
And with a parting couplet (only chaff) my truthful lay is o’er.
Ihe sirens strip from year to year, an inch or two of dress send packing
Lets hope when they get to lost Eden’s robe, the fig-leaf won’t be
lacking.
After Thoughts.
The sirens of the block are vicing, with their sisters of the surf;
£ od JVJ*® race-course there they are again, beguiling on the turf.
Ihe full blown rose, the lily fair, the bud of many a varying flower,
Are flaunting in the grace of nature, thro’ the glorious sun-lit hour:
bkirt slashed above the knee, and corsage open scantly to the waist,
Is fetching in a certain way, but scarcely shows the modest taste;


And if you want it extra fast, as rapid as was ever seen,
You’ll find it in the rising generation, the flippant of fifteen.
Tho’ ’twould be extra proper on the strand, where white-capped billows
roll,
For there the costumes are ethereal, to display the naked soul.
Sweeter far the modest violet, reposing in the leafage green,
The perfume of the guileless mind, the witching of the soft eyes sheen.
Tempus fugit! Kismet calls ! blue-peter summons to embark—l go,
And quit for aye those sunny southern lands—and the Sydney beauty
show.
S.S. “ Afric ” at sea,
Where wild waves wanton free.
Margate Mermaids.
This annexe is inspired, by things seen upon the Margate sands;
Equal to spicy bits I left behind, in far off southern lands.
Is she Lurline ? or a Grecian naiad? or nymph of ancient Rome?
O ! no! just Miss Blank from All-street, who left her petticoats at home.
In transparent skin-tight-robe, a la Palm Bay, saunters on the beach,
The Margate mode for demoiselles, while they the arts of love will teach.
Up and down the chalk bound realm of Neptune, aye, ’tis no matter
where,
Woman’s wanton beauty is bewitching, it melts and haunts men there.
The ladies like to show most everything, aye, shocking ’tis to note,
Gone the glamour of romance, gone the mystery of petticoat.
Such display is overpowering, the ravished sight is almost dazed,
As when I looked upon the sun’s face, when the Austral moontide
blazed.
The beau admires the snowy arms, around which twines the nut-brown
hair,
Mentally commenting, and looking: “ Oh ! what it is to be there !”
Ladies in a short transparent skin-tight robe, court the publjc eyes,
’Tis very very naughty of them, and man’s virtue serious tries.
“Woman is the gate of Hell,” said the Saint, “to perdition luring
men
If he could walk the Margate sea side, I wonder! what he would say
then ?
Why all this fuss about a girl’s figure, because the skin is white ? >
The dress of Eden is quite common, where they are as black as night.
“ ’Tis a way we have in the ’Vqrsity, to drive dull care away
“The angels once,” the Bible saith, “ were smitten by the maids of
clay.”
I espied, a le flaneur, a popish priest, nathless his disguise,
Say! what was his reverence doing there? basking in the ladies eyes:
When a mermaid emerged from the sea-foam, he made a careless halt,
Twas naughty for a celibate —celibate ! pass a pinch of salt!
Tis perfectly amazing, this scarce clad style of the lasses fair; _
Tho’ I don’t predicate, they are not charming, chaste, and debonair.
Tis dangerous for the callow youth, who, maybe, not vainly sighs,
Philosophy looks on the scene —too cold, and wise for woman’s eyes.
“The more you show, the more you go,” I’ve heard it said, the ladies
say,
“ To show a leg,”* commendable, but not just in the Margate way.
Ere many years elapse, roving sea-side thoughts well may be expressed:
“ How very odd ! look a-down the promenade, there’s a woman dressed.”


Reverting to the days of not so long ago, when girls wore clothes;
Edenic costume is the fashion now, where soft the sea breeze blows.
Now beauty is in full attire (thou modest mankind, whisper! hush!)
Apparelled in a little pearl powder, and semblance of a blush.
For “ beauty unadorned, (with a petticoat), is adorned the most,”
The poet tells us, but I doubt he meant that its dress should be a ghost.
The cold in blood and clime, may careless gaze upon the siren bands;
But in sultry summer of the sun; Eros on men lays his hands;
While Lesbian lasses lavish fling their beauty o’er enchanted lands,
Changing to Cytherean promenades, the tide washed silver sands.
Now I will cease my treatise, on some Lesbian fashions of the dav,
For my sojourn by the seaside, by lapse of time has passed awav;
And War’s black shadow falls athwart the sky, like blast of the simoom,
The amenities of life evanish, as darker grows the gloom.
THE e/d.
Printed ahd published by j?he Carlton/Co.,
7, Bellevue Road, Friern Barnet, Lodaon, N.
Telephonist*
Telegrams, “ Kamacjfe N^wsouth London.”
Busines^by
dW/'.








