

Reprinted from
IW. XIII., “ Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science.
AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF
WILLIAM FARRER’S WORK IN CONNECTION
WITH HIS IMPROVEMENTS IN WHEATS
FOR AUSTRALIAN CONDITIONS
By W. S. CAMPBELL
Late Director of Agriculture, New South Wales
W. E. Smith Limited, Bridge Street, Sydney.




I.—AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF WILLIAM FARRER’S WORK IN
CONNECTION WITH HIS IMPROVEMENTS IN WHEATS FOR
AUSTRALIAN CONDITIONS.
By W. S. CAMPBELL, late Director of Agriculture, New South Wales.
I met the late William Farrer about 36 years ago, and from that
time until his death enjoyed his friendship and confidence. Shortly
before meeting him he had published an article of considerable
interest, and exceptionally well written, called “ Grass and Sheep
Farming,” a paper speculative and suggestive. He explained in
his introduction that “ the following paper is in a great part theo-
retical, but as far as possible theory has been made dependent upon
practice and has been guided into what it is hoped may prove
useful channels. Those who affect to despise theory will do well to
recollect that a function of theory is to examine the foundations of
practice and by this means to modify it and extend it advan-
tageously.”
He was at that time either directly or indirectly interested in
pastoral matters, and one object, he told me, in publishing the
article was to have a dig at Mr. J ohn Robertson’s Free Selection
Land Act, which encouraged selectors to take up poor land in
tableland districts which nature had evidently intended for pastoral
purposes only. He enjoyed this “ dig,” as he termed it, and in
talking about his article to me laughed heartily over some of his
remarks.
It appears from the pamphlet that he had, even at that distant
period, observed the great losses sustained by settlers in conse-
quence of the spread of rust amongst their wheat crops, and it
gradually dawned upon him that he might possibly be able to find
or devise some means of checking its attacks, or perhaps for eventu-
ally stamping it out of the country.
After sustaining heavy losses in mining ventures, he studied
for the profession of surveyor, and obtained his license. He
occupied himself for some years at his profession in the field, and
Then settled down on a conditional purchase of his own, near the
.little village of Tharwa, some few miles south of the town of
Queanbeyan. He suffered a good deal at times from ill health, and
the climate of the district in which he settled suited him admirably.
Here he set to work practically and energetically to solve the pro-
blem of making new wheats, of good milling qualities, to resist the


attacks of the pernicious rust parasite, his object being neither for
fame nor for gain, but for the sole benefit of his fellow beings in
Australia.
At that time the wheats in general cultivation were notoriously
weak, or low in their gluten contents, but no attempts whatever, so
far as I can discover, had been made to improve them before Mr.,
Farrer began the work.
Being fully aware of the remarkable differences which exist in
the climates and soils of the various districts and localities of the
Colony, he aimed at making wheats of the desired qualities for the
several wheat-growing districts. He obtained from various parts of
the world varieties of wheats for the purposes of experiment and
observing their pecularities, to select those which showed desirable-
qualities and to cross them with Australian wheats, or to make
crosses amongst themselves. His correspondence became ex-
tremely voluminous, and the task he set himself, although congenial,
became a heavy one, and became more so as the years passed on.
In 1889 the effects of rust attacks on wheat crops were dis-
astrous in New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria and Queens-
land. It was estimated that the losses sustained in South Aus-
tralia amounted to £1,500,000, Victoria £200,000, New South Wales
£lOO,OOO, and Queensland £lO,OOO, totalling about £2,500,000'
altogether.
In consequence of this alarming state of affairs the Govern-
ments of the various colonies decided that a conference of officials,,
experts and others, should be held, and in 1890 a start began in
Melbourne. The questions of cure and preventions were discussed,,
and plans proposed for investigations and so on, to be made in the
various Colonies.
Next year a conference was held in Sydney, which Mr. Farrer
attended as one of the New South Wales delegates, and he was able
to supply much valuable information relating to experiments he
had initiated many years previously, and which were in progress,,
and his experience enabled him to express something definite as to
the best means of treating the pest. He said ;
“ That after having for many years given much thought to the rust-pest
as it affecis the wheat-plant in this country, I have been led to the conclusion
that the best manner of combating the pest appears to be to give special
attention to the securing and creating of resistant varieties of the plant of
such a character as our special requirements demand. — arieties possessing
together with high milling quality, such a measure of physical and constitu-
tional resistance to the pest as to have great value on that account. According
to my belief the contagion of rust is generally—to all intents invariably—
conveyed to the wheat-plant through the air in which the germs are always,
present during the warmest months of the year. It matters comparatively
little whether the contagion is more or less abundant. If it be present at all,,
as it practically always is during the hot weather, infection is pretty sure
to take place if the plant be susceptible to it. We may indeed do something
to diminish the contagion ; but according to my views, and I hope to be able-
to show in this paper, we are likely to be able to do far more towards diminish-
ing the susceptibility of the plant to the contagion and to work with greater


effect for specifically directing our efforts in that direction. ... I
cannot think also that any curative agent could be applied so thoroughly
on a large scale and so inexpensively as to be of any practical value.”
I shall give one more quotation from this valuable paper (the
whole of which deserves republication), and that is in connection
with the necessity that exists in wheat soils of an abundance of
vegetable or organic matter. He invariably and consistently
advocated the addition of this when deficient.
" In well drained and porous soils the wheat plant seldom receives a
severe check to its growth from drought, for a slight deficiency of moisture is
more favourable to its health than an excess. The absorption of such (hygro-
scopic) moisture can be further increased very materially in most soils by
making them richer in humus or decayed vegetable matter. This can be
done by green manuring and ploughing in vegetable matter. So valuable
do I consider vegetable matter to be for this purpose that I have come to
regard as friends rather than as foes the great majority of our weeds, which
can also be made to perform other important functions in the economy of
the farm.”
Another conference was held the following year, but in the
meantime Mr. Farrer had invited to his farm the pathologist of the
Agricultural Department, Dr. Cobb, and the artist, Mr. Grosse, to
enable them to make microscopical investigations and drawings of
rust-affected wheat plants ; and there Mr. Farrer afforded them
every facility possible, with the result that a vast amount of in-
formation respecting the parasite was obtained.
At the conference held in 1892 in South Australia, the informa-
tion Farrer had supplied to the previous conference was supple-
mented to a considerable extent by him. Referring to the
physical qualities which enable wheats to offer resistance to rust,
he said :
" The work, then, which lies before us is to combine in one variety, in
as high a degree as is found to be necessary, the above three qualities together
with the other qualities of a good wheat ; and how to do this in the
best manner is the subject to the consideration of which I shall now devote
a few words. The most obvious manner in which we should set about effecting
this object is, first, to find out what varieties possess in the highest degree
one or more of the resistance-giving qualities we are seeking to secure ; and
next, to cross them in such a manner as to combine these qualities with
the other qualities which give value to a wheat, paying special attention in
the first instance to resistance giving qualities. In regard to choosing the
parents for crossing, I myself am minded to mate varieties of distinct types.
By following this course at first I would expect to get a greater number of
types to select from, some of which would possibly combine, in as high a degree
as either parent, the special good qualities of both parents, on account of
which each of them was selected. Breeding up, comprehending the elimina-
tion of undesirable qualities and the higher development of desirable ones,,
would be effected in the best manner by mating varieties of the same type
and by line-breeding. Amongst the qualities, the importance of which it
would appear to be impossible to over-rate, is that of making the chaff hold
the grain firmly and well. I draw special attention to this quality, because
all of the highly resistant varieties I have come across, with the exception
of Ward’s Prolific, and its probably more valuable strain, Marshall’s White,,
shell too easily. I also attach additional importance to this quality in view
of the fact that it has now been satisfactorily proved that it is more profitable
to the farmer to allow his wheat to become ripe before harvesting it.


” There are still other methods,” he continued,” of getting rust-resistant
-wheats and resistant strains of existing varieties. The first end can be secured
by looking out in rusty crops for plants that have remained entirely clean.
Such entirely clean plants can occasionally be found in crops of a variety
"that is still young and has not lost the liability to spot, and less frequently
in crops of an old variety. By following this system, as I have been doing
for some years, I have become possessed of several strains of varieties which
•differ so widely from the parent varieties in their deportment towards rust
and in offering resistance to it as themselves to constitute distinct varieties.
That young varieties are the most likely to supply us with such spots has
been proved by my own experience, as all the sports I have obtained in
This manner, with the exception of one, have been produced by varieties
which I know to be young and probably had not been firmly fixed.
“ I may also note that the first suggestion that I ever threw out in
•connection with combating the rust-pest was that this method should be
bred. This was in the year 1882, and the suggestion was made in view of
the fact that the Indian wheats which were then being tested by Dr. Bancroft
(in Queensland) had fallen short of being rust-proof. My simple suggestion
was unfavourably criticised by the Australasian, and the controversy which
ensued from this criticism led me to think that nothing systematic had ever
really been done to combat the rust-pest, and that a legitimate field of
inquiry was open to me.
” Resistant strains of existing varieties could doubtless be made by
simply selecting seed from those plants which are in the least degree affected
by rust, and by following up this system for a number of years ; such strains,
however, could not, in my opinion, be considered to constitute distinct
•varieties, but would be no more than resistant strains of the parent variety,
and would only retain the quality of resisting rust so long as the same care
•continued to be given to them as was used in establishing that quality.
■Qualities, I hold, that are given to va ieties by selection of this kind are
of little or no permanent value to the practical farmer, and do not become
valuable until they have been fixed by cross-breeding and made normal
■characteristics of a distinct variety.”
“ It would appear that many varieties which have been put forward
as having claims to be resistant, and have really been valuable from being
resistant of Puccinia graminis have been condemned when they have been
"tried on account of having been affected by Puccinia rubigo-vera. It is
important I think that our farmers should be able to distinguish betv een
these two rusts and know that the rust which appears as small spots on the
leaves and sheaths, but mostly on the leaves, is Puccinia rubigo-vera, and is
•consequently harmless, and that the more fatal rust, Puccinia graminis, is
known from appearing as larger and longer streaks, and patches, quite as
frequently on the sheaths and stalks as on the leaves, and that these two
iforms of rust are as distinct as are wheat and rye.
I should like to invite particular attention to the remarks
which followed the above :
” A fact which is being continually brought before us is, that while
■certain wheats are, in their own and even in many other districts uniformly
resistant, they seem to lose that quality when they are grown in certain other
places. This seems to be the case with Blount’s Lambrigg and with the
various wheats of the Fife family of which Blount’s Lambrigg is one when
they are grown near the coast in our climate. . . . This is a difficulty
which has had large influence in causing resistant wheats to be discredited.
The fact is that although we may succeed in making varieties which possess
as normal characteristics all the physical qualities which give protection
against the rust fungus, we must not expect such varieties to prove equally
resistant under all conditions of environment. We must constantly keep in
mind that in dealing with the wheat plant we are dealing with a living
■organism —with a subject which possesses, associated with the indefinable
.attribute of life other equally indefinable attributes, and that one of these


latter attributes is a constitutional fitness or unfitness for the environment
in which it may be placed. So powerful in their influence are environment-
conditions which without being unsuitable for the growth of wheat are
uncongenial to the constitutional characteristics of a variety that some
wheats, which M. H. L. Vilmorin received from Tashkend in Turkestan, were
so severely affected by rust when they came to be grown in France as after
two or three years to refuse to produce seed which would germinate.” . .
“ It is for the purpose of filling the requirements of our different districts
that I am not proposing to breed and myself fix varieties in the expectation
that the possession by them of all the physical qualities which give to a
wheat the power of resisting rust which will cause such varieties to be
valuable everywhere. I propose rather to confine myself almost entirely
to the breeding which will possess all the physical qualities I have ’already
enumerated as being specially resistance-giving, and to send to the different
districts of Australia heads produced by plants of the first generation which
have been so bred. By following this plan it will be possible for those types
to be selected from the produce of such heads, and fixed as varieties within
the district itself as may show themselves to possess, associated with all
the physical qualities which give resistance to rust that indefinable attribute
which we call constitutional fitness for the particular district in which they
are fixed.”
I may mention here that some years afterwards, as soon as I
could obtain particulars of the recently unearthed Mendelian law
of heredity, I sent the information to Mr. Farrer, who, although
very much interested in the matter, was prevented, owing to
pressure of work, from making any experiments in connection with
this law, and hesitated in expressing any decided opinion as to its
practical application to the work of making wheats.
Mr. R. H. Biffin, 8.A., of the Agricultural Department, Cam-
bridge University, who seems to have been engaged for some time
in following in Mr. Farrer’s footsteps, to make wheats resistant of
rust and of high milling qualities, appears to consider, according to
his article on “ Studies in the inheritance of disease resistance ” 1
that the only certain means of effecting this is by working on
Mendelian principles, and in order to emphasise his views, he refers
to an article read by Mr. Farrer before this Association on January,
10th, 1898, and wrote as follows :
In some countries a careful search has already been made for rust-
resistant varieties, but, on the whole, with comparatively little success from
the economic point of view. This partial failure has not been due so much
to the difficulty of finding relatively immune varieties, as to the difficulty
of finding immunity in combination with other features essential for the
profitable cultivation of the crop. . . . The researches of the late William
Farrer may be quoted as an example. The problem has proved an excep-
tionally difficult one, and even Farrer’s patient work has not met with the
success one hoped it would. Now, however, we are in the possession of
the broad outlines of the inheritance of the more important characteristics
of wheat, the attempt to combine in one variety such features as quality,
proper time of ripening, cropping power, and so on, together with immunity
to the commoner rusts may profitably be made. Such attempts will have
to be made in each country where wheat is cultivated ; for wheats suitable
for English conditions will certainly find no favour in Canada or Australia,
for instance.”
1 Journal of Agricultural Science, Vol. 11., part 11., 1907.


It seems strange that such an erroneous conclusion was arrived
at by Biffin, and notwithstanding the following paragraph by
Farrer in the paper referred to :
" I think from these data we may safely draw the conclusion that the
making of varieties possessing suitability for our climate in conjunction with
sufficient ability to resist the summer rust for our crops to be safe from
serious for indeed from any) injury by it is an easy matter, and only waits
for its completion a few moist seasons, even if the next rusty season does
not show it has actually been accomplished already.”
It should be understood that every season in Australia is not
generally a “ rusty season,” and hence Mr. Farrer’s difficulty in
thoroughly testing his varieties of wheats as rust resisters.
A considerable difficulty presented itself to Farrer in deter-
mining the values of his wheats for milling purposes, and the values
he was able to assign to them were to a great extent arrived at, to
all intents and purposes by guesswork ; but after consultation
with Mr. Guthrie, who was attached to the Agricultural Depart-
ment, as analytical chemist, both gentlemen very strongly urged on
me the desirability of obtaining a small hand flour mill, by means of
which wheats could be tested by manufacturing commercial flour,
by baking, and so on, in the Department. Approval was given by
the Minister for the purchase of a mill, and one was obtained. It
seems to me only proper and fair to Mr. Guthrie to say, and I do
not think this has been properly recognised, that without his
enthusiastic efforts in co-operating with Farrer, the complete
success of the latter gentleman’s work would not have been attained.
As soon as the flour mill was put into working order Guthrie
lost no time in perfecting himself in the manufacture of commercial
flour, in bread making, in testing the colour of flour and other
technicalities ; and then there were chemical investigations to be
made. This wheat-testing business became one of the most
interesting and important branches of the Department.
The value of Guthrie’s assistance was fully recognised and
appreciated by Farrer, who in December, 1897, wrote to me :
‘‘lam glad to see that new interest is being taken in the intrinsic milling
value of wheats. Guthrie’s work has done no end of good in that direction
and is destined to do still more, not only in this colony and in Australia,
but the world over. His is the best and most practical work that has yet
been done anywhere, and it will be supplemented by much that will be
done elsewhere. Some years ago Dr. Cobb sent me the proof of the
descriptions of wheats which he published in the Gazette originally, when
I sent back the corrections to him I told him bluntly thatjmeither he nor I
knew anything about the milling qualities which he proposed to give, and I
recommended him to leave out all mention of them, as well as some other
matter the soundness of which I doubted. I recommended him, in fact, to
confine himself in that regard to what he was certain of. He did not follow
my suggestion, with the result that all he said about the milling qualities was
found to be incorrect.”
In 1898 an opportunity occurred to appoint Farrer Wheat
Experimentalist to the Agricultural Department, where it was


thought his scope would be extended and his opportunities im-
proved for carrying on the work which he had hitherto performed
privately and entirely at his own expense in a most generous and
unselfish manner, giving away to anyone he considered trust-
worthy the results of a vast amount of thought and also of expense.
This appointment, it was considered, might be some little acknow-
ledgment and recognition of his efforts.
He prepared a scheme of work, which included the breeding
and crossing of wheats at Lambrigg, his headquarters, and supplying
the different experiment farms with seeds of entirely unfixed and
partially fixed crossbreds for the purpose of making at the farms
varieties which are suitable to the districts of which they (the
farms) are severally representative.
A number of experiments, having an important bearing on
the wheat-growing industry, he proposed should be taken in hand
as his work proceeded.
During his second season he had a good opportunity of
observing the results of the planting of his wheats at Wagga farm.
He wrote, “ Beyond all doubt it is not sufficient (as I had hoped
rather than expected it might be the case) to produce and fix
wheats at Lambrigg alone in order to supply other parts of the
colony with new varieties for their climates and soils.”
He then adopted the system of carrying out the process of
fixing his young varieties at different farms.
He met, unfortunately, many unexpected difficulties, which
not only impeded his operations but affected his health to a con-
siderable extent. These numerous “ flies in the ointment,” how-
ever, were neutralised considerably by many pleasing encourage-
ments ; and a great deal of enthusiasm in his work was forth-
coming to encourage his efforts.
Much discontent was expressed from time to time at the slow
progress of his experiments by those in authority, who really had
no conception of the necessity for the utmost care and patience
necessary, or of the injury to the Department which might arise
from incautiously distributing new wheats, the proper values of which
had not been proved. He found it necessary to publish in the
Agricultural Gazette the following note ;
“ Some misapprehension seems to exist in regard to the rapidity with
which new varieties can be made by means of cross-breeding. It is true that
the work can sometimes be done quickly. In a few cases, indeed, I have
found as little as four years to suffice for becoming possessed of a fixed type,
while in others (and they are the great majority) much longer is required.
Also after a fixed type has been secured much more remains to be done before
the new variety can be distributed. It has first of all to pass an examination
at the mill, and this is an ordeal which leads to the rejection of the greater
number of those which are subjected to it, and few are the new varieties
which are found to satisfy the requirements which a high standard of milling
excellence demands of all the qualities—(l) strength, (2) colour, (3) yield of
flour ; as well as (4) of gluten content; and (5) ease of milling. Moreover,
alter all these tests have been satisfied and the economic value of the new
variety has been established, three years (at least) is needed to enable a
sufficient stock of seed to be grown for a fairly wide distribution of it.”


The selecting of the best strains, after testing them, of old
varieties of wheats occupied some time, as he considered it advisable
that good old strains should not be lost. These wheats were also
tested by Guthrie to ascertain their milling qualities.
Few persons have any conception of the enormous amount of
work which Farrer carried on personally. All his experiments and
his crosses and the pedigrees of the hundreds of new wheats made
by him were carefully recorded, as well as their peculiarities and
qualities. A hard day’s work in the blazing sun in the field was
not infrequently followed by a sleepless night, for his active brain
kept working out intricate problems for future developments. In
April, 1902, he wrote to me :
“ In order to get away to the farms I have for months been working
all the time I can get out of each day, getting up at six and beginning work
at 6.30 a.m. The result is that I feel myself in such a condition of staleness
that I can hardly struggle on to the finish. The additional amount of detail
work which the new bunt departure has necessitated is very great. I feel
impatient most of all at these incessant fights with . The fights them-
selves I do not mind, there is some entertainment and fun to be got from
them, but there ought to be no necessity for them, the removal of the necessity
of these fights is what we have a right to expect.”
The “ bunt departure ” alluded to meant the experiments he
had begun, to make bunt as well as rust-resisting varieties of
wheats—a highly desirable aim in view of the enormous losses
which often resulted from the bunt parasite. This work, I need
hardly say, necessitated great care and attention, and it is pleasing
to know that Farrer succeeded almost beyond his expectations in
producing new varieties of wheats practically bunt-resistant, and
paved the way for future work by others ; and all this in spite of
ridicule and freely expressed opinions as to the absurdity of the
idea.
Most fortunately for Farrer’s future work the Government
determined upon establishing a farm near Cowra, the centre of
an important wheat-growing district; and upon Farrer’s strong
recommendation it was decided to set that farm apart for experi-
mental purposes only, and chiefly for experiments in connection
with wheats and the growing of them under various methods of
cultivation, as well as trials of various kinds of manures, and so
on, under the control of the wheat experimentalist. I can hardly
express the satisfaction and relief this afforded Farrer. He at
once formulated a scheme of work for making the best use of
the 200 acres it was decided to clear of timber and put under culti-
vation. At this farm he would have an opportunity of producing
pure seed of the varieties he considered were the best suited to
grow on other experimental farms and to distribute to farmers.
And to his further great relief he was able to obtain the services
of G. L. Sutton, who had for years taken a keen interest in
Farrer’s work, and who had thoroughly qualified himself for
conducting all the trials and experiments required by Farrer at
Cowra, from whom I received a letter saying :


“ You know I have long regarded the experimental work of the farms
as the most important, and when things have been set going I shall do all
I know to make this farm a success, and with Mr. Sutton as working co-
operator I shall be badly disappointed if the success of it is not distinct.”
In connection with the Cowra farm it was arranged that a small
farm at Coolabah, in the dry West Bogan district, about 400 miles
west of Sydney, should be devoted mainly to the testing of wheats
for semi-arid districts and for trials in various methods of ploughing,
cultivating soils, and conservation of soil moisture, the work being
conducted under Sutton’s supervision, assisted by Farrer’s advice.
At this farm a great deal of valuable information has been gained,
which may result in wheat-farming being carried on profitably
much further to the west than is at present supposed to be prac-
ticable.
Farrer expected that the Durum or Macaroni wheats (Triticum
durum) might be found to succeed well at Coolabah. In an article
on Macaroni wheats, published November, 1903, he said :
" Bread wheats are already being grown in parts of New South Wales
which are almost certainly too dry to allow them to be profitable,
while it is not improbable that if they (the farmers) change to macaroni
wheats they will come out all right.”
He quoted extensively from Mr. A. Carleton, Cerealist of the
Department of Agriculture, United States of America.
‘‘ Mr. Carleton insists,’ he wrote, ‘on the necessity of the soils
for macaroni wheats being of the character of the Chernozem soils of Russia
for the production of good grain. My experience with these wheats leads
me to doubt whether this is the case. I myself have been growing them
experimentally for fully 15 years, and have found that even here at Lambrigg
on quite shallow soils I can grow at least as good grain as any that I have
ever had sent to me from any other country, but in such cases I have always
dressed the soil, which is naturally exceedingly poor in nitrogen, with a
nitrogenous manure.’
“ The objection to the use of the grain of these wheats for bread arise?
mainly from the yellow colour of the loaf. The preference for white bread
is of the character of a prejudice, or is a mere matter of taste. The yellowness
of the bread made from macaroni wheats probably comes from their greater
richness in gluten, and is in reality indicative of their superior nutritive
qualities.”
I may mention that the Durum wheats are in high favour at
the present time in the United States of America for growing in
dry country, where they are found to thrive admirably. According
to the Agricultural Year Book of 1905 the Durum wheats were
first introduced from East and South Russia in 1899. Next year
a considerable quantity of seed was imported, and in 1901 as much
as 50,000 bushels of Macaroni wheat were produced in the United
States. The production kept on increasing so much that in 1905
it was estimated that the yield was 20,000,000 bushels, and a con-
siderable portion of this found a satisfactory market in Europe.
The question of marketing that kind of wheat was settled.
The last published Year Book (for 1909) shows that it is
estimated that the yield of Durum wheats that season would


approximate 60,000,000 bushels. The Secretary for Agriculture
in his report says that; —
“ Durum wheat has now made its place as a semi-dry land crop in the
middle Great Plains region, and is being rapidly extended into the inter-
mountain dry-land districts.”
A number of stations had been established in the dry country
where experimental work is carried on, and according to the
Secretary “ the experimental work at each station is under the
charge of men specially qualified along the lines of grain improve-
ment and familiar with the territory in which the station is located.
. . . It is found that many of the farmers in this region who
are planting cereals grow mixed varieties. This alone has probably
as much to do with the low average yield per acre in the United
States as any other factor. One of the objects of the work in
question is to enable farmers to obtain pure seed of drought-
resistant kinds of wheats adapted to particular districts.” I
think I need hardly say that the growing of pure seed wheat for
the supply of farmers was considered of the highest importance
by Mr. Farrer, and he worked hard to accomplish that object.
The question as to manuring wheats was one about which
Farrer was much concerned, and plans were formulated for
making field experiments at Cowra.
Quite recently some references were made in the press con-
cerning objections made by wheat buyers to one of the best known
and most popular of Farrer’s wheats —Federation —which was
considered by these buyers to be of low milling quality, but in
other parts of the country no such objections seem to have been
made.
Referring to this wheat, in a letter to me dated 6th January,
1905, Farrer wrote :
“ A curious and interesting apparent indication of the poorness of plant-
food, at anyrate in nitrogenous plant-food, of the wheat paddock in which
last year’s wheats were grown at the Wagga farm came under my notice
only the other day. Federation grown at Wagga last year gave only 6| per
cent, of gluten ; grown at Wagga on my plots in 1901 it contained 11-3 per
cent, not far off twice as much. It looks as if it may be that wheats
which possess the quality (like the French “ Ble siegle ” or rye wheat) of
thriving in poor soil do so because they can do with a less amount of plant-
food than can others, and that those which need soil such as Farmers’ Friend
and Hudson’s Early Purple Straw cannot do without plenty of nitrogenous
food. In view of what may be a lowness in albuminoids the flour of Federa-
tion is weaker than usual, owing to lack of nitrogen.”
Shortly before sending me the above information Farrer had
written ;
“ I have it in my mind to write to the Daily Telegraph pointing out that
if farmers were to get their wheats tested before they sold them they would
put themselves in a position to get good value for them, and that if some
system of selling wheats according to their intrinsic value were established
a force would be put into operation by means of which the improvement
of wheats for economic purposes would become progressive. This is a
subject I want to work at.”


Pitsi Ekdam
Imported Grain
Gluten. Strength.
Same Grain grown at Lambrigg.
Gluten. Strength.
9-61
50-8
12-94
47-4
Muzafifar Nagar (bald wheat)..
10-29
61-2
15-50
62-8
,, ,, (bearded wheat)
Huzar
6-07
57-0
13-72
61-2
7-24
55-2
14-25
48-0
I do not think he ever found sufficient leisure to take this
matter in hand, but he foreshadowed what must eventually and
as certainly be brought about as probably the bulk-handling of
wheats will be.
Federation was made to take the place of Steinwedel, a variety
selected in South Australia and valuable for yielding well in dry
districts, but having an objectionable habit of shelling out its
grain before harvest.
“ As Federation,” said Mr. Farrer, " ripens at the same time as Stein-
wedel, and is much less rust liable and holds its grain satisfactorily,
it is possible that it may replace that variety with advantage as a producer
of grain, but the shortness of its straw unfits it for a hay-wheat.”
In an article, Milling Notes on the Lambrigg harvest, 1897-8,
by Messrs. Guthrie and Gurney (.Agricultural Gazette, N.S.W.’
September, 1899), the effects or probable effects of manuring on
the gluten of wheats are referred to thus :
“ The most striking feature in the present batch of results is the high
percentage of gluten in the flour. This increase of gluten has been associated
with weaker flour-strength. Mr. Farrer says that the wheats were all manured
with sulphate of ammonia and bone-dust, and it is possible this excessively
nitrogenous manuring may have been responsible for the result.”
“ Some of the differences are very striking, for instance in the Indian
grown wheats. Some of these were examined in 1896. They were grown
in India and imported. The difference between the glutens and strength
•of these wheats and the same grain after being grown at Lambrie-g is shown
in the following table :
In the same way the sample of Purple Straw is extraordinarily high in
gluten for this variety, previous samples which have been examined never
going above 9 or 10 per cent, and being usually between 8 and 9.”
The results of manuring experiments carried out by Mr. Guthrie
more recently at Wagga and Bathurst are interesting in connection
with the gluten contents of the wheats sown.
“In the Wagga results 1901,” wrote Mr. Guthrie, “ the effect of the
•ordinary dressing of sulphate of ammonia appears to be about nil both upon
the gluten content and the strength.”
“ When this is combined with superphosphate and potash salts, however,
the benefit both in strength and gluten content is marked, and the effect
•of increasing the sulphate of ammonia is very marked.”
“In 1902 harvest the same condition of things was noticeable. Dried
blood, though apparently without action on the gluten content, increases
the strength of flow in a striking manner.
“ At Bathurst, on the other hand, where nitrogenous manure had been
found to directly increase the yield, the results show that it has an appreciable
and favourable effect on the gluten. These notes are of a preliminary nature,
and are to be received with caution. ”
The experiments, which promised most valuable results, were
discontinued, unfortunately, for reasons which it is unnecessary
to refer to here.


The continuous use of superphosphate alone, which was
becoming general before Mr. Farrer’s death, caused him a con-
siderable amount of anxiety as to the collapse which seemed to
be most probable ; and he particularly desired to demonstrate
the value of green manuring and of other manures for wheats, and
probably Mr. Sutton may throw some light upon results obtained
in the paper which I understand he will read before this Conference.
The testing of wheats in Sydney had necessitated the use of
water and, afterwards, electric power for working the flour mill,
and the increased testing of wheats necessitated the purchase
of a much larger mill, but even with such an addition the require-
ments of millers and others, together with the Departmental tests,
increased the work so considerably that unavoidable delays some-
times occurred. Referring to this, Farrer wrote to me :
“ I think the time has come for the Sydney millers to organise means
of testing their wheats and flours themselves instead of throwing the doing
of them on us.”
Towards the end of his life Farrer was clearly overtaxing his
strength, notwithstanding many remonstrances and warnings. On
the 6th January, 1906, he wrote: “My body is too tired every
night for office work ; the red-tape about engaging men worries
me, and I am unable to muster energy to pen a memo.” ; and on
the 9th March, not long before his death, he wrote : “ You see,
therefore, how in reality matters stand, and what the forces are
I am having to contend against ; but I feel I am in the right so
far as the real interests of the Department are concerned, and I
mean to win.”—And he won.
national
LIBRARY OF AUSI HAI 'A


o OH £££oo SOS I £


