

DOUGLAS PRICE MEMORIAL LECTURE, No. 2
PSYCHOLOGY AND RELIGION
BY
ELTON MAYO,
Professor of Psychology and Philosophy
in the University of Queensland.
MELBOURNE
MACMILLAN & CO. LTD.
Head Office: LONDON
1922




DOUGLAS PRICE MEMORIAL LECTURE, No. 2
PSYCHOLOGY AND RELIGION
BY
ELTON MAYO,
Professor of Psychology and Philosophy
in the University of Queensland.
MELBOURNE
MACMILLAN &- CO. LTD.
Head Office; LONDON
1922


INTRODUCTION.
The second Douglas Price Memorial Lecture was de-
livered in the Albert Hall, Brisbane, on Wednesday, 21st
September, 1921, in the presence of a large audience. The
chair was taken by the Hon. T. L. Jones, M.L.C. Professor
Elton Mayo’s lecture was preceded by a short tribute to
the life and work of Douglas Price, which was given by
Mr. H. A. Longman. The meeting terminated with a vote
of thanks to the lecturer, proposed by Mr. 6. Pearce, and
seconded by Mr. A. Ealston.
To ensure a continuance of these lectures, the Trustees
of the Fund will welcome further subscriptions from sympa-
thisers. Contributions may be forwarded to the Hon.
Treasurer, Mr. A. Ealston, Box 301, G.P.0., Brisbane.
The Trustees of the fund are as follows :—Mrs. H.
White, Hon. T. L. Jones, M.L.C., Eev. Geo. Neal, and Messrs.
H. W. Jenkins, Heber A. Longman, and A. Ealston.
Copies of the first Douglas Price Memorial Lecture,
“The Place of Ethics and Eeligion in Education,” by Pro-
fessor Meredith Atkinson, M.A., may be obtained through
booksellers, or on application to Mr. A. Ealston, Box 301,
G.P.0., Brisbane. Cloth, two shillings; paper, one shilling.


CONTENTS.
I. Religion and Belief
11. What is Religion ?
111. Religion and Life




PSYCHOLOGY AND RELIGION
I.—RELIGION AND BELIEF.
“The word ‘religion,’ as ordinarily used, is
equivocal . . . when we hear the word ‘religion’
nowadays, we think inevitably of some ‘church’ or
other: and to some persons the word ‘church’
suggests so much hypocrisy and meanness and ten-
acity of superstition that in a wholesale undiscern-
ing way they glory in saying that they are ‘down’
on religion altogether. Even we, who belong to
churches, do not exempt other churches than our
own from the general condemnation.
“But in this course of lectures, ecclesiastical in-
stitutions hardly concern us at all. The religious
experience which we are studying is that which lives
itself out within the private breast.” (James,
“Varieties of Religious Experience,” p. 335).
There is small doubt that the crusade against
“religion” conducted by the physical scientists and
biologists of fifty years ago was largely inspired by
passionate resentment of various kinds—resentment
of authoritative assumptions, of ‘ ‘ inspired ’ ’ irration-
ality, of ecclesiastical class distinctions. Twenty
years ago in London a working man said to me, with
a concentrated intensity of bitterness, that he was
“an atheist.” On examination, the motive of this
assertion showed itself to be no carefully considered
philosophy, but a definite and very human hatred of
the rector of the parish. But, although his “athe-
ism” originated thus, the consequences for the in


dividual extended far beyond his original dislike.
The rector’s beliefs and practices were, for this
worker, subject to anathema; they were banned from
his life scheme. His authorities were Huxley, Bar-
win, Ingersoll and Karl Marx.
The echoes of the great Science and Religion
controversy have, in these days, almost died away.
Passionate resentment of church authority has al-
most disappeared. It is easier for us than it was
for our fathers to look at religion as a human fact
and to make some attempt to assess the value of
religious practices. Above all, it is easier for us
to disentangle religion itself from questions of phil-
osophical or theological belief. This last distinction
has, indeed, become explicit in the churches them-
selves. It is evidenced in the insistence of “High
Church” Anglicans upon the value of religious
practices as compared with religious discussions;
also, in their teaching that the “proof” of the truth
of Christianity is to be found, not in deductive or
inductive logical processes, but in the personal ex-
perience of religious ecstasy. The latter contention
is occasionally expressed in a form that would have
startled a previous generation of Christians.
Recently a Free Church divine of Melbourne, in
private conversation, asserted that speculations as
to the divinity of Christ were of no importance what-
soever as compared with the necessity of providing
the ordinary man with a religious weapon with
which to fight the temptations of the world, the
flesh, and the devil. ;
Startling as this assertion seems, it nevertheless
expresses with some accuracy the historic attitude
of the churches to questions of doctrine and belief.


Considered as social institutions, the churches have
never sought to interest the general public in ab-
struse philosophical or theological speculations.
Theological discussion there has been, and some-
times the bitterest controversy. But such discussions
have never been taken to the general public, except
by accident; they appertain to the esoteric, and not
to the exoteric, form of religion. The general
public has been asked to accept religion by faith
on the authority of a special revelation; the in-
dividual has been asked to believe that knowledge of
God comes by way of religious practices, and not
as the conclusion of a logically reasoned argument.
The claim of the churches is that the individual, by
whole-hearted participation in the performance of
certain specific rituals, is thereby enabled to achieve
an experience of “union with the universe” which
is of the highest value for social progress and per-
sonal morality. Viewed from a merely historical
standpoint, this claim finds much to substantiate
it; the churches of Christendom have unquestionably
brought peace of mind and high ideals of living to
scores of generations of men and women.
“Faith,” however, is a term that has of late be-
come increasingly ambiguous. A century ago, faith
and belief in certain “fundamental” doctrines were,
and had always been, identical for the Christian of
average knowledge and capacity. In recent years,
scientific thought and the higher criticism have
achieved a right to make pronouncements upon the
sources and authority of the happy Christian folk-
lore. And this extension of the area of discussion
has been mainly responsible for a change of attitude
in the churches themselves. The Bible js no longer


regarded as the product of “literal inspiration,”
the close kinship between early Christianity and
other primitive religions is openly recognised, doubts
are freely expressed as to the necessity of doctrines
formerly regarded as an integral part of “the faith
once delivered to the saints.” To understand the
general trend of Christian apologetics, one has only
to recall the controversy, “Jesus or Christ,” which
dominated the pages of the Hibbert Journal a few
years ago. This controversy originated in an article
in which the writer (Eev. R. Roberts) maintained
that the conception of an ethical Christ is more
important to Christianity than the conception of an
historical Jesus.
But the general effect of this upon the churches
has been to confuse the issue very considerably.
Formerly, the act of faith, the unreserved acceptance
of Christianity, was the first step towards member-
ship of the church. This first step, in actual fact,
consisted chiefly in the achievement, usually during
adolescence, of the definitive religious experience.
It was, however, followed immediately, and the
churches had doubtless empirically discovered the
necessity of this second step, by religious instruction
in the doctrines of the church. So far as the in-
dividual was concerned, the religious instruction
served to rationaHse for him his religious experi-
ences, to explain why religious practices should de-
velop in him a new, and sometimes overwhelming
emotion. First, the experience, and second, its ex-
planation. The unreserved abandonment to the
ritual produced the religious “fact;” the subsequent
instruction placed the experience in a doctrinal set-
ting which made it so far intelligible. So much for


former times: in these days the churches are facing
a task of much greater difficulty. The explanations
which previously satisfied the true believer are no
longer accepted easily, even by the churches. The
religious emotion is still to be achieved by those
who give themselves up to the inspiration and sug-
gestion of a stately ritual; hut the number of those
who are willing to perform this act of faith, or are
even capable of doing it, is steadily diminishing.
Broader conceptions of the place of humanity in the
scheme of things are gaining ground. Society at
large is setting a higher value upon social, and a
lower value upon merely personal, salvation.
The churches have thus been compelled to dis-
tinguish between the act of faith and the act of
belief, the religious practice and its philosophical
explanation. In the outcome, they have lost ground,
rather than gained it. For the most part, they con-
tinue on their historic way, apparently regardless
of the fact that humanity seems to be slipping away
from their control. Doctrines are still preached
that once roused men to action, or terrified them
into penitence. By the more stableminded members
of the community, they are now heard, if they are
heard at all, with a good humoured toleration; they
rouse and terrify no longer. Social position and
respectability unenthusiastically “support” the
churches, but where the desperate upward urge of
humanity is most felt, there are the churches least
regarded. This cannot be thought to be a generally
desirable condition, or a symptom of social stability;
the church is the proper guardian of past and future
human values. It would seem that the churches,
over-fearful of losing hold of past values, have


actually lost their vision of the present. What they
are most in need of is what a scientist would term
“research.” The church is a human institution, a
human, and historic, endeavour to understand and
control the facts of the life spiritual. The mere
fact that the life spiritual is its chief concern does
not emancipate the church from the need of active
investigation. The leaders of the church must under-
stand, not only the apostolic Fathers, but also the
human material with which they deal; in the alter-
native, there is danger that humanity will push the
churches aside. Religion cannot build the life spirit-
ual except upon a human foundation. The older
generalisations as to “original sin,” a personal
devil, and the essential iniquity of man, are no longer
adequate descriptions of human nature. These
doctrines are no more than crude expressions of a
half-truth, and he who rests content with the primi-
tive expression of a half-truth has, in effect, aban-
doned the spiritual battle.
II.—WHAT IS RELIGION ?
Two studies of man and human nature have
developed very rapidly in the years since the last
echoes of the Science and Religion controversy died
down. These are the sciences of Psychology and
Anthropology. No one can pretend that the ap-
pearance of such books as Frazer’s “Golden
Bough,” James’s “Varieties of Religious Exper-
ience,” and Freud’s “Totem and Taboo,” have not
extensively altered our method of stating the in-
dividual and social problems of religion. Psycho-
logists have undertaken the most intimate and in-
teresting studies of religious experience, anthropo


legists have shown how such experiences inspire
tribal and national folk-lore. It is the former of
these researches which holds the most immediate
and obvious interest for us. The churches indicate
the act of faith and its accompaniment of ecstasy as
the central fact of religion. What can the psycho-
logists tell us of this fact f
Professor E. D. Starbuck published in 1900 a
book, entitled “The Psychology of Religion,” in
which he gives a detailed empirical examination of
the facts of religious conversion. His statistics and
conclusions are based on the study of 1265 cases,
of whom 254 were females and 1,011 males. These
cases represented a variety of vocations, churches,
and localities; records were obtained, for example,
from the students of a theological seminary, and
also from two regiments of soldiers. The first in-
teresting fact ascertained by Starbuck was that
“conversion is a distinctively adolescent phenom-
enon.” Conversions “begin to occur at 7or 8 years,
and increase in number gradually to 10 or 11, and
then rapidly to 16; rapidly decline to 20, and gradu-
ally fall away after that . . ” (p. 28, “The Psycho-
logy of Religion”). He concludes that conversion
“belongs almost exclusively to the years between
10 and 25.” Subsequent investigations by other
psychologists have all tended to confirm the con-
clusions drawn by Starbuck from the evidence he
had gathered; James, for example, asserts that
“conversion is a crisis of puberty and adolescence.”
(“Varieties of Religious Experience,” p. 10). There
is, indeed, in these days a large and growing litera-
ture which goes to prove that this is not only a fact
of our time, but is also historically true. “Religious


conviction came to St. Thekla at the age of 18, to
St. Agnes at 13, St. Anthony at 18, Martin of Tours
at 18, Euphrasia at 12, St. Bernard at 12, St. Dom-
inic at 15, St. Collette at 20, St. Catherine at 7, St.
Teresa at 12, St. Francis of Sales at 11 (“Religion
and Sex,” Cohen, p. 174). Anthropology has also
many interesting and relevant observations to con-
tribute; there are few primitive people without a
ceremony of initiation in which adolescents are sub-
jected to a ritual involving a deliberately aroused
emotional stress as a precedent to admission to adult
membership of the tribe. These facts must not be
supposed to imply that conversion is no more than
a manifestation of the awakening sexual life. Ad-
olescence is a period of growth in which the intel-
lectual and emotional powers of the individual
undergo a general and marked development; pub-
erty is one aspect of such development.
The churches do not teach that a condition of
“mystical” ecstasy is a distinctively adolescent ex-
perience; nor do they believe that “saintliness” is
due to the persistence in adult maturity of an adol-
escent character. None the less, they so far recog-
nise this fact in that they all alike make a special
endeavour to rouse the adolescent to a sense of
spiritual values. Some churches seek to induce
“conversion;” others impose a “confirmation” ritu-
al, in which the individual re-affirms baptismal vows
made on his behalf in infancy. Whatever the
method of procedure, there is an implied recognition
of the fact that the youth of 15 or 16 years is not
merely specially amenable to religious influences,
but is also likely to sespond strongly to a religious
stimulus. He who fails to achieve full membership


of his church in adolescence is unlikely to support
it when he has become an adult. Partly, no doubt,
for this reason, but mainly in order to rouse the in-
dividual to a sense of the spiritual significance of
life, the majority of the churches deliberately en-
deavour to provoke a spiritual crisis in the adoles-
cent. Whether this is always wisely done is a
question which calls for subsequent discussion.
William James, in his Gifford Lectures (pub-
lished as “The Varieties of Religious Experience,”)
distinguishes clearly between the religion of con-
version and that of non-conversion. In this, he be-
lieves himself to be merely echoing Starbuck, where-
as he goes, in reality, much farther. Starbuck
suggests the possibility of certain conclusions;
James brings further evidence to bear upon the
question and makes the conclusions inevitable. The
question may be put in the form of an inquiry as to
what we mean by religion. Do we mean a religion
that reveals itself mainly in conduct, or one that
leads its votary to withdraw from the world in
order to luxuriate in ecstatic emotions? This anti-
thesis would seem upon the first glance to be an un-
fair dichotomy. It is not, however, a logical dis-
tinction, but empirical; upon the whole it seems
to describe the facts.
James comes gradually to the topic of eonrer-
si<*n. He begins by discussing the religion of non-
conversion or healthy raindedness. “In many per-
sons,” he says, “happiness is congenital and irre-
claimable. I mean those who, when unhappiness is
offered or proposed to them, positively refuse to
feel it, as if it were something mean and wrong.”
To such eminently normal religionists, James points


out, ill thoughts of God or man are impossible; in
them “religious gladness, being in possession from
the outset, needs no deliverance from any antece-
dent burden.” (Op. cit. pp. 78, 80). “God has two
families of children on this earth,” says Francis W.
Newman, “the once-born and the twice-born.”
James proceeds to illustrate the attitude of the
“once-born” religious by quoting the answer of Dr.
E. E. Hale, a well-known Unitarian preacher, to one
of Starbuck’s questionnaires:—“l observe, with pro-
found regret, the religious struggles which come into
many biographies, as if almost essential to the for-
mation of the hero.” Individuals of this once-born
type do not suffer during adolescence the extreme
“storm and stress” which Starbuck finds so charac-
teristic of the conversion type, the twice-born. On
the contrary, their powers unfold gradually, they
develop without disintegrating crises. Sometimes,
as in the case of Dr. Hale, the once-born achieve
definitely religious emotions; but such emotions can-
not be described as ecstasy. Sometimes healthy-
mindedness tends to repudiate religion altogether,
conceiving it to be indicative of abnormality. To
Starbuck s questions, another individual, a man of
business, replied:—“Religion means nothing to me;
and it seems so far as I can observe, useless to others
praying, singing of hymns and sermonizing,
are pernicious—they teach us to rely upon some
supernatural power, when we ought to rely on our-
selves. I greatly enjoy nature, especially fine
weather .... I never go to church, but attend
lectures when there are any good ones. All of my
thoughts and cogitations have been of a healthy and
cheerful kind, for instead of doubts and fears, I see


things as they are .... ” This individual evident-
ly has very little in common with the religious ecsta-
sies of the “converted” devotee.
Having discussed the religion of normality,
James proceeds to consider the religious experiences
of the twice-born and the facts of conversion. At
once he points out that conversion is always pre-
ceded by a condition of mental abnormality. There
is a period of mental sickness, the self is in a con-
dition of disharmony, divided against itself. This
condition may endure for a long or short period of
time; while it lasts, life is unendurable, and charac-
terised by mental suffering which may be extreme.
“Everything went wrong with me, it seemed like
Sunday all the time. ” “ Before conversion my mind
was in a state of great anxiety. The fleshly mind
was all aflame, and my guilt was hideous to me.”
“Conviction became torture, yet I could not yield.”
(p. 61). Such expressions of acute suffering abound
in the data collected by Starbuck. While this con-
dition of mind lasts, the sufferer obviously cannot
live a normal life of work in association with his
fellows. Finally, however, a “point of transition”
is reached, “and lastly, joy and peace.” The in-
cident or experience which marks the climax is
usually extraordinarily vivid and may or may not
be accompanied by visions. After the climax, a
condition of relative mental serenity supervenes in
the more normal of these cases—a fact which serves
to distinguish between religious conversion and the
alternating phases of the manic-depressive psychosis.
So far we have considered the phenomena of
conversion from outside the individual; we have
still to enquire as to the inner significance of the
experiences which characterise the pre-conversion


period. Starbuck finds a general identity in vari-
ous individuals in respect of these. There is first,
an overwhelming conviction of sin and of need for
forgiveness which cannot be obtained. This symp-
tom may attach to memories of particular delin-
quencies, but, if so, the attachment must be regarded
as accidental. The conviction of sin is no less in
those who have been guilty of only minor delin-
quencies. In addition to this, there is a general
feeling of incompleteness and imperfection, a feeling
which gives rise to a sense of insecurity and un-
reality with regard to the individual’s social and
material environment. This leads in turn to moods
of brooding, depression and morbid introspection.
For the time being, the individual is so intensely
occupied with his own inner problem that he is
unable to show any real interest in his social sur-
roundings. An intense preoccupation with self
blinds him to his fellow-man and to the universe.
The beliefs of childhood no longer suffice; doubts,
fears, and, sometimes, the dread of eternal punish-
ment discolour the sufferer’s existence. The moment
of transition comes when the individual—by means
unknown to himself—is suddenly enabled to readjust
his orientation to the world, and to transfer the
locus of his interest from within himself to the world
outside. All the various expressions which are com-
monly used to describe the emotion of transition
from morbid introspection to happy serenity—all
these expressions convey the idea of casting the self
out into the universe, beyond the limits of the indi-
vidual personality. The adolescent self has been its
own universe; it comes to maturity by “submitting
self to God,” that is. by realising its function as a


small part of a wider whole. ‘ ‘ Faith is the next step
after self-surrender, or even the accompaniment of it.
The full assurance never comes until everything—
old attachments, affections, animosities, any cling-
ing to the old life, is given up . . . Then faith comes
in, which means that the soul is in a receptive atti-
tude, that it is left open so that the new currents of
mental activity may flow together into one great
stream.” (Starbuck, p. 117).
Neither James nor Starhuck allow any impor-
tance to be attributed to the characteristic convic-
tion of sin, considered as such. For both these
psychologists the conviction of sin, like the typical
anxieties and fears of adolescence, is merely a symp-
tom, a symptom of conflict in the self. It is the
inner lack of harmony, the personal disintegration,
which finds expression as fear of the environment,
and a sense of unreality and guilt. James speaks
of the “sick soul,” “the divided self.” Starbuck
regards the conflict as being due to the acquisition
in adolescence of new powers and interests, which
necessarily seem to lie “outside” the childish self,
since the infantile circle of ideas has made no pro-
vision for such desires and interests. James’s dis-
cussion suggests that so violent a disruption of the
childish self to make way for the adult personality
is abnormal and unnecessary; Starbuck tends to
regard it as a more or less normal phenomenon of
the transition to maturity. Those students of psy-
chology who are familiar with the work of Janet add
Morton Prince on alternating and dual personality
will find an interesting analogy between hysteria
of the type described by these writers and the mental
stress of the pre-conversion period.


Now, at this stage of the discussion, it may
seem to the audience that the intention of this lec-
ture is to condemn all religious emotion as mental
abnormality. That this is not so, the conclusion of
the lecture will show. The chief utility of psycho-
logy in an investigation such as this is that it aids
us to distinguish what is mentally sound and right
from that which is mentally abnormal and wrong.
It has for long been a serious defect of institutional
religion that it has worked without the aid of such
criticism. As a result, many of the official exponents
of spiritual values have, ignorantly and unintention-
ally, done much to provoke mental abnormality and
have been powerless to handle it except by general-
ised or ritual methods which may possess small in-
dividual value. As an instance of failure to apprec-
iate accurately the psychological issues involved, the
attitude of many churches to an individual convic-
tion of sin may be cited. The value of religion to
mediaeval and primitive man was not that it accentu-
ated, but rather than it abolished, this generalised
feeling of guiltiness and failure. This point, how-
ever, is of such importance that it calls for more
detailed discussion. I
When Starhuek first began to publish the results
of his researches into the nature of religious con-
version, several medical and scientific critics, writing
in technical journals, pointed out that the sense of
sin is a well known symptom of- certain mental dis-
orders. Invariably present in melancholia, it is
often found also in mania and in the less acute forms
of “nervous breakdown.” It tnay even be the chief
symptom of mental fatigue due to overwork in a
mind that is otherwise normal. In the years that


stretch between 1900 and 1921, a very large amount
of psychological research has been accomplished
which bears directly on this question. It cannot
be claimed that the mental causation of hysteria,
anxiety neurosis, and compulsion neurosis is as yet
completely known. But it is certain that psychology
has come to know the causes which lead to “nervous
breakdown” far more extensively and accurately
than did James and Starbuck, twenty years ago.
Now the special interest of this modern research is
not merely that it confirms the view that the char-
acteristically generalised conviction of sin is always
a symptom of mental abnormality. In addition to
this, psychology has learned how to trace the causes
of such abnormality. This has led to the further
discovery that the feeling of guilt is not due to what
used to he termed “an evil conscience,” but results
from failure on the part of the sufferer to achieve
a normal relation to his world. The “breakdown”
does not actually attack the victim suddenly, it is
the final manifestation of what might be described
as a continuously mistaken education. Nor is the
content or meaning of the guilty feeling, as experi-
enced by the individual himself, any indication of
the actual abnormality. It may provide the psy-
chiatrist with a clue to the actual ill, just as the
delusions of conspiracy which are so typical of
paranoia may suggest directions of enquiry to the
expert. But neither the guiltiness nor the delusions
of connpiracy are amenable to normal or rational dis-
cussion ; the conviction of sin is essentially one
amongst other irrational delusions. The question as
to whether the patient has led what is termed a
“moral” or an “immoral” life is irrelevant. The


distinguishing feature of such mental states is that
they are not to be influenced or affected by ordinary
discussion; the delusion persists as a black and over-
whelming fact, even when the sufferer clearly real-
ises that the idea is logically untenable and absurd.
The normal person, may, of course, experience an
accentuated remorse for a particular action or
actions; it is a symptom of abnormality when the
conviction of sin attaches itself to everything in
general and nothing in particular. Starbuck shows
that during the pre-conversion period, the efforts of
the sufferer are mainly directed to elimination of
the sense of sin. It is this rather than an attempt to
achieve righteousness which is chiefly characteristic.
Conversion follows on mental conflict, but the vari-
ous mental factors which are in conflict remain un-
known to the individual. He is aware only of the
results or symptoms of the struggle.
Now, the “compulsion neurosis,” a form of so-
called “nervous breakdown” which is all too com-
mon in these days, would seem to be a later or re-
newed form of the adolescent “religious” struggles.
Starbuck places the age of the crises of conversion
between the ages of 10 and 25. The age of incidence
of compulsion neurosis lies usually between 25 and
40. The characteristic symptoms are agonies of in-
decision, compulsive actions, such as frequent wash-
ings and apparently meaningless ceremonials, and
melancholic crises accompanied by fits of weeping.
These symptoms are based on feelings of loss of rela-
tion to the world, of fatigue and of generalised fear
and anxious premonition. The agonies of indecision
are really agonies in spite of the fact that the matter
to be decided seems often to the uninitiated observer


to be a triviality. In one case a patient lay in bed
rigid and unsleeping from midnight until eight in the
morning because he could not decide whether to
leave the hospital or to remain there. In another
case, a woman walked round and round a small park
for several hours because she could not decide to go
out through the gate. The passage of the gate seem-
ed to possess some terrible significance for her which
she could neither explain nor understand. Still,
another patient had suffered long years of insomnia
because she could not decide the problem of “de-
terminism and free-will.” She had an extensive ac-
quaintance with the religious literature of the sub-
ject, but was unable to discuss the problem on ac-
count of the terrifying emotions it aroused.
These instances are typical. Every one of us is
acquainted with the milder forms of this disorder;
there are few social groups in which there are no in-
dividuals who display such symptoms. The fact
of special interest for us at the moment is, however,
that in every compulsion neurotic, we find in the
immediate mental hinterland a barely repressed con-
viction of sin. It is this conviction which, though the
individual does not realise it, “rationalises” his
symptoms. He is undecided, because to make a
decision might involve him in sin. The patient
who was unable to leave hospital was also habitually
unable to keep an appointment or to walk in a
given direction. He had to be able to feel that all
the lesser decisions which make up life were made
by chance, or some factor other than himself. So,
when he came to diverging roads, he invariably ‘ ‘ let
Ms feet decide;” he did not know which direction
he would take until it was already taken. The bur


den of decision is the burden of possible sin. An-
other patient, a woman, was unable to buy domestic
necessaries at the nearest shop. The moment of in-
decision caught her at the shop door, and she would
frequently walk miles from her home to make a
purchase she could have made a few yards from
her door. Sometimes the indecision would beset her
inside the shop; she would see the article she wanted,
and yet would be unable to decide to buy it. The
first step in the psychological analysis of such cases
is accomplished when the patient is brought to
realise that the eccentricities which he suffers are
induced by a repressed conviction of sin. As a gen-
eral rule, this revelation is convincing and affords
some relief.
The compulsion neurosis is obviously closely akin
to the pre-conversion crisis of adolescence. The in-
cidence of the latter is usually confined to the years
between 10 and 25, of the former to the years be-
tween 25 and 40. “Conviction of sin” is an explicit
character of the adolescent disorder; in the disorder
of maturity it is repressed. The very differences are
similarities and suggest a continuity. If the burden
of sin is not lightened by conversion, one would ex-
pect the compulsion neurosis to follow the storm and
stress of the adolescent struggle. But the compul-
sion neurosis is not cured by conversion; it demands
a more radical enlightenment.
Freud, in his earliest work, described the com-
pulsion neurosis as a “defense” against some desire
or disposition of the mental hinterland. It is inter-
esting to observe the defensive attitude which com-
pulsion neurotics adopt towards religious practices
and ideas. From empirical observations, one would


be inclined to specify two classes. The first consists
of those who defend themselves against religious
fears by the careful performance of religious rituals,
devised often by themselves, and carried into the
most trivial affairs of life. The second class consists
of those who defend themselves by endeavouring to
repress religion altogether. As an instance of the
first type, the case may be quoted of a patient who
was unable to complete the dusting or sweeping of a
room because she might not have “done it with her
might.” She had to continue sweeping until physi-
cal fatigue and mental stress combined to produce a
collapse. This same patient had in the course of
years of misery evolved a long list of promises to
God, promises quite impossible of performance. In
self defence she had devised a ritual by which she oc-
casionally obtained a species of “holiday” from the
operation of such promises. It was her custom to
bring this period of release to a conclusion by ut-
tering the words “I promise.” The effect of this
was to bring the pledges into operation again, and
the patient immediately collapsed. The “God” of
neurotics such as this is always fashioned out of their
own mental conflict and suffering; he is invariably
a devil whose only activity is the torture and punish-
ment of miserable sinners. As an instance of the
second type of compulsion neurotic, the case may be
quoted of a patient who was unable to go to church,
who invariably crossed the road to avoid meeting a
clergyman, and whose various symptoms were al-
ways accentuated on Sundays. This patient had
passed through an extremely religious phase in adol-
escence, but obviously without finding a solution of
the internal conflict. The former of these types


provides the psychologist with some understanding
of the religious “taboos’' of the savage; the latter
suggests a possible explanation of the unnecessarily
bitter hostility to religious institutions which is oc-
casionally encountered. A repressed conviction of
sin is far more widely operative in our civilization
than is commonly suspected.
The special Interest of modern psychological in-
vestigation of disorders of this type lies in the fact
that the conviction of sin has been discovered to
be a relatively superficial manifestation of a deeper
mental ill. The followers of Freud attribute the
symptoms of the compulsion neurosis to repressed
sex perversion—Oedipus complex, Electra complex
or, possibly, some variant of inversion. These “com-
plexes ’ ’ are sometimes encountered in Australia as in
Europe, but the point need not be laboured since
causes such as these are merely instances of a group
of causes that can be more generally describ-
ed. It is true that the compulsion neurotic
invariably represses sex thoughts and desires
with the utmost severity, but such repression
is usually a product of the morbid fear of
sin. The essential similarity in all the
various personal histories may be described as a
failure to escape sufficiently early from the influence
of the home. Now this must not be supposed to be
an attack, overtly or by implication, upon home in-
fluences. The home is probably the most important
factor in the education of the young for “character”
and happiness. But the child, like the adult, re-
quires two spheres of social interest-—the home and
the wider social group outside the home. When
either of these interests is lacking, the result is cer


tain to be harmful. The identity in respect of
the personal history of compulsion neurotics
is often surprising—no school life before the
age of twelve, solitary childhood, much associa-
tion with adults, and so on. W. A. White, one of the
most eminent psychiatrists of the United States, de-
scribes the situation thus:—“ln the life history of
every individual who grows to adulthood, there
comes a time when he must emancipate himself from
the thraldom of the home. He must break away
from his infantile moorings, go forth into the world
of reality and win there a place for himself. By
this I do not mean a mere circumstantial leaving of
the home, but an actual growing away from it in
feeling, so that there remains no crippling attach-
ment to interfere with personal freedom of expres-
sion. He must leave it in his feelings, he must put
aside his childhood, put aside his infantile attach-
ments, and conquer his own world. While this is
necessary for the fullest development it is extremely
painful and many persons never accomplish it at all
They are the future neurotics.” (“Mechanisms of
Character Formation,” p. 147). The child who,
during infancy has not associated with other children
beyond the four walls of home, and learned to hold
his own with them, is unequal to the task of associat-
ing with them on terms of equality in adolescence
and maturity. This is the situation of the compul-
sion neurotic; he faces the adult world with an in-
fantile mind. And yet his mind is not really infan-
tile, for in adolescence new powers and desires, in-
tellectual and social, have sprung to life —powers
racially designed to manifest themselves in social
intercourse. This leads to internal mental conflict.
He has been trained to obey, to take no responsibility.


Consequently the newly manifested, and strongly
felt, desires are experienced by him only as tempta-
tions to sin. He resists and endeavours to repress
the unruly impulses, and so initiates a struggle
which leads through an unhappy youth to its cul-
mination in a neurotic maturity. The retention of
an infantile ideal of right behaviour makes it impos-
sible for the compulsion neurotic to discriminate
between right and wrong in adolescence. All his
new powers are felt as impulses to sin, yet at the
same time he is actually aware of the incompleteness
and abnormality which follows his inability to take
charge of himself and assume responsibility. The
compulsion neurotic refuses to “grow up,” and his
adult powers manifest themselves in an overwhelm-
ing conviction of sin and in mental disintegration.
All this new work unquestionably throws light
on the investigations of Starbuck. During the pre-
conversion period, the individual suffers from a sense
of sin, a feeling of incompleteness, a morbid preoc-
cupation with himself—all of which symptoms
take their rise, according to Starbuck, in
the necessity for adapting infantile disposi-
tions and ideas to adult capacities and
interests. But this struggle is not characteristic
of every adolescent, nor even of the majority of ad-
olescents. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that
conversion symptoms manifest themselves only in
those adolescents whose infantile development has
been abnormally restricted.
III.—RELIGION AND LIFE.
So far the results of our inquiry have been main-
ly negative; we have discovered what religion is
not, rather than what it is. The psychologist looks


with suspicion on any attempt to define religion, or
God, in terms of “sin” and “forgiveness.” x\ gen-
eralised conviction of sin is characteristic of the im-
properly educated and the mentally abnormal. Con-
version is occasionally followed by the achievement
of a high mental serenity, as in the case of Francis
of Assisi, or George Muller of Bristol; but conver-
sion cannot be regarded as normally necessary to
the achievement of such serenity. The pre-conver-
sion crisis occurs only in those whose infantile life
has not prepared them for the wider social and in-
tellectual interests of adolescence. The study of
conversion phenomena, therefore, does not take us
very far towards understanding the nature of re-
ligious experience, properly so called. We come
closer to such understanding when we consider the
part played by religion in the personal development
of the individual of average mental normality. Coe
quotes an American pastor, who was accustomed to
distinguish two types of Christian in his congrega-
tion—those who “rushed” the penitent form on all
occasions, and those others who loyally supported
the church, but never manifested in public any
symptoms of penitence. The pastor added that he
did not know which was the more religious, but
he knew which was the better companion in an open
boat.
Mental normality is, of course, an ideal; no one
is perfectly normal. It is, however, possible to dis-
tinguish broadly between those whose development
tends towards normality and those others whose
method of living, if constantly pursued, leads inevit-
ably to some form of mental “breakdown.” A
“neurotic” disorder is always a consequence of an


abnormal method of living; a failure to come into
relation with his environment expresses itself in
the form of neurotic conflict and disintegration in
the individual. The man of average normality is,
therefore, a man who has more or less successfully
brought his racial and instinctive capacities into
some sort of working relation with his social and
material environment.
At this point we have to make an important dis-
tinction. All that we call civilisation is of the
nature of a psychological discovery; the savage is
incapable of achieving even “average normality.”
Civilised man has learned that the primitive indul-
gence of instinctive impulses is destructive of mental
capacities and of mental normality. It is the failure
to achieve a higher, and social, expression of racial
impulse which makes the life of the savage “soli-
tary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.” Civilisation
is based on the “sublimation” of primitive instincts,
on their development from a crude and egoistic to
an intellectual and social expression. We cannot,
therefore, make primitive man an ideal of normal-
ity. The savage is essentially a person who has
failed to achieve sanity. The life of the savage is
ruled by “taboos” and prohibitions, his religion is a
religion of fear, it is a ritual of propitating an angry
god. The mental condition which conceives the
universe thus is obviously closely akin to compulsion
neurosis. Civilisation shows itself, first, in an in-
creased capacity to control the material environ-
ment ; it shows itself, also, in a heightened capacity
for self-control.
It is the former of these which is more obviously
significant. The essential difference in respect of


mental calibre between the savage and the civilised
man is that, whereas the savage is content with
conditions of natural plenty, the civilised man rises
insurgent against merely natural conditions of liv-
ing. The savage is apparently content to find a suit-
able locality and to live there a monotonous life in
the service of his instincts. The civilised man seeks
to impose his purposes upon the world. This in-
volves him in a struggle, an active effort to under-
stand and control the material conditions of living;
but he welcomes this need for effort, he resents noth-
ing so strongly as monotony. A civilised differs from
a savage life, then, in that it cannot be spent in a
serial round of instinctive gratifications; a “trans-
valuation of values” is demanded. Instinctive im-
pulses must be curbed, not merely for the sake of
repression, but in order to “fund” the energy that
would otherwise be uselessly squandered. An ex-
plorer has said that the sexual excesses of certain
African tribes leave them without the mental energy
necessary for intellectual and social advancement.
Man cannot, therefore, give himself to one task
without undertaking the other; control of environ-
ment involves control of self. Civilised man’s atti-
tude to himself is similar to his attitude to his en-
vironment. Just as he finds material forces in the
world without and endeavours to bend them to his
purposes, so he finds himself endowed with inherited
mental capacities and endeavours to develop them
into an organic unity of purpose. That is to say,
man endeavours to be individual; civilisation is
a struggle for individuality and control. This is not
accidental or the result of choice, it is a fundamental
necessity of human nature. The savage, like the


neurotic, is an individual who has failed to find
himself in living—and suffers in consequence a feel-
ing of incompleteness and a sense of sin.
We may summarise by saying that progress in-
volves, first, a development of the racial impulses
man has inherited, and second, a control of such
development by personal ideals of intellectual and
practical achievement. For the individual, import-
ant consequences follow. The latent individuality
which man finds in himself leads him, and necessar-
ily, to seek a correspondent latent unity in the uni-
verse about him. Civilised man cannot view objects
in the surrounding world as being merely so many
separate things. The unity he finds in himself he
must read into the world; he is compelled to assume
that every separate thing is an aspect of a total uni-
verse. Finally, as his intelligence and power of con-
trol develop, he cannot avoid subsuming himself
under this totality; he must conceive himself as the
particular manifestation of an energy which is uni-
versal. This leads to a mental conflict which is
specially characteristic of the civilised thinker.
Civilised man has to separate out, as it
were, his individuality from the racial mat-
erial of which it is constructed. Having
in part accomplished this, he is immediately
compelled to merge the new-found self in the uni-
verse again. It matters little whether the universe
is conceived as spirit or as material; this problem
affects all philosophies alike. It is in thought and
feeling of this order that the religious experience,
properly so-called, takes its rise.
The path by which man travels from religious
fear to religious serenity in clearly shown in the


sacred books of the East. Religion proper finds its
first recorded expression in the Upanishads, the
philosophic exposition of the Brahmanistic creed.
Professor R. E. Hume, in a recently published work
(“The Thirteen Principal Upanishads,” R. E. Hume)
points out that the Upanishads expound the ideas
which became dominant in the third period of Hindu
philosophic development, six centuries before Christ.
In the first two periods the Hindu religion was poly-
theistic ; a multiplicity of gods were worshipped and
the worship consisted of sacrifice to appease their
anger or to obtain their favour. In the third period
—that of the Upanishads—the gods disappear and
in their place we find a philosophy which insists on
the unity of the universe as a whole and the identity
of the individual thinker with the universe. There
is a world soul (Atman) which includes the human
soul (atman) and is identical with the universe
(Brahma). The religion of the first two periods
was obviously based on a conviction of sin and ideas
of atonement and forgiveness. The religion of the
third period pushes these notions on one side and
finds serenity in a deliberate identification, by the
individual, of himself with the universe.
The doctrine of the Upanishads is usually des-
cribed as a philosophical pantheism; its human sig-
nificance becomes plainer if we consider its psycho-
logical rather than its philosphieal import. Viewing
the problem thus, we can see that in the first two
periods the Hindu religious has failed to find him-
self. He is in the position of Kipling’s newly built
ship (“The Ship that found herself”), his various
racial instincts all speak with separate and indepen-
dent voices. By consequence, his universe is poly


theistic and a chaos; the various desires or fears are
deified. But, just as the separate mutterings of the
parts die down when the ship finds herself, so, when
man’s latent individuality begins to emerge, does the
polytheistic cosmogony become irrevelant and un-
satisfactory. Unity in the self implies unity in the
universe. The Upanishads abound in discussions of
the nature of the mysterious unity which man finds
in himself.
But the Upanishads were not merely a phil-
osophy ; with the theory of the unity of the universe
was combined religious instruction to the disciple
as to the way he was to follow. This instruction
was based directly on the new found religious en-
lightenment. If the universe is one, why do we see
it as many? “Indra by his magic powers goes
about in many forms” (R. E. Hume). The answer
which these philosophers gave to this question was
that behind all the apparent multiplicity of forms
which surround us there lies the enduring unity
of, the universe. To the sage of the Upanishads, it
was this unity alone which was real. The practical
instruction to the disciple follows as a necessary
inference. To merely intellectual understanding,
the world must appear as a manifold; it is in the
mood of meditation that we can have direct experi-
ence of the world as one. The affairs of this w»rld
are described as Maya—illusion; those who partici-
pate in such activities are blinded by “the red mist
of doing,” they are enslaved by minor activities—
‘ ‘ bound to the wheel. ’ ’ The duty of the true believer
is to cultivate his capacity for meditation and the
mystical experience of oneness with the universe.
His aim must be to break free from the small inter


ests which crowd in upon and cramp his soul; he
must learn to let the world pass by unheeded.
The effect of the Hindu philosophy in India
itself was not altogether fortunate. The life of the
man of affairs was so widely sundered from the life
spiritual that the instruction of the Upanishads
could hardly be held to have any application to the
major portion of humanity. The new gospel had
the effect of taking fear out of religion; it was a
far loftier expression of human thought and feeling
than creeds based upon the conviction of sin. But
it tended to put everyone but the devotee outside
the domain of religion, and therefore, to permit
licentiousness, for example, in those whose feet were
not “upon the way.” The merit of Christianity, by
comparison, was that it preached the joys of an
‘ ‘ other-worldly ’ ’ life to those who lived in this world
It did away with the great gulf which the Hindu
philosophers had fixed between the religious devotee
and the man of affairs. The defect of the Hindu
religion was that it overvalued meditation and con-
sequently undervalued the knowledge we achieve by
direct investigation of the world about us. Christ-
ianity, in effect, insisted on the necessity of a right
relation between the two kinds of thinking—the
meditation which widens our mental horizons and
gives us vision and the concentration which gives us
knowledge of lesser detail. We must live in the
world, but must look beyond it to the universe. It
is the serene “acquiescence” which characterises
this attitude to life which is actually the religious
experience, properly so-called. That it is a necessary
factor in human advancement is clearly evidenced
by the mental condition of those who are unable to


look beyond the immediate circumstances of their
lives. The man of forty who has lived a life of con-
centration upon problems which are petty, when
viewed sub specie aeternitatia finds that his custom-
ary pursuits lose interest and that for this loss of
interest there is no remedy. He is out of relation
with the universe, his orientation to life is defective.
The seer of the Upanishads would have said, and
rightly, that the vision of such a man is obscured by
the “red mist of doing,” by an egoistic absorption
that can only make him miserable.
There is small doubt that this particular type
of misery is widely characteristic of the civilisation
of to-day. “Democratic” theories of politics and ec-
onomic science have maintained, for a century at
least, that the ultimate human motive to collabora-
tion is the desire to obtain pleasure and to avoid
pain. This is still the libel on human nature that
it always was, but there is danger that individuals
and groups are beginning to adopt it as a social
creed and to include it in their social “programme.”
The consequent increase of unhappiness, “nervous
breakdown,” and social and individual “unrest,”
is an index of the extent to which the enduring
of civilisation are becoming obscured by the
“red mist ofvdoing,” by a miserable self-absorption.
And, side by side with this, the influence of the
churches has steadily diminished.
It seems to be unfortunately true that the
churches considerably misconceive their high office.
Far too often they are anxious to gain adherents
for a creed rather than to give the people that vision
without which they must perish. They allow them


selves to threaten, to rule by fear, and generally to
exploit the conviction of sin. In so far as a church
adopts these expedients it is inculcating devil-wor-
ship and is doing active harm to the cause of true
religion and civilisation. If it is the churches ’ func-
tion to help man, irrespective of doctrine and creed,
to see the universe beyond the narrow circumstances
of his daily life, then it behoves the leaders of the
church to understand something of the general ideas
which hold men’s minds at present. To hurl the
conceptions of several centuries ago at the general
public of to-day is a singularly futile, and somewhat
lazy, proceeding. It is interesting to observe that
certain religious sects of modern origin seem to un-
derstand their human duty better than the historic
churches. There are sixteen Christian Science
churches in Chicago, each one of which is invariably
attended by massed congregations. The reason for
this, from a psychological standpoint, is not that
the doctrines offered are attractive, for, far from
being compelling, they are poverty-stricken and con-
fused; the reason is that every individual member
has been “worked over” by a “healer” with two
objects in view, first, to free him from conviction of
sin and, second, to give him a wide and living con-
ception of the universe. The practical success thus
achieved shows that humanity has retained the cap-
acity to respond, immediately and strongly, to the
inspiration of a normal religious experience.
For the most part, the churches seem to be afflic-
ted with an incapacity to prosecute sufficiently far
the inquiry into the nature of religion which they
have themselves proposed. The attitude of the Ang-
lican High Churchman and of the Free Church


divine suggests a view-point freely expressed by
James in a letter written at the time of his Gifford
lectures. In this letter he defines the aim of his in-
vestigation thus; “First, to defend ‘experience’
against philosophy as being the real backbone of the
world’s religious life . . and, second, to make the
hearer or reader, believe, what I myself most
invincibly do believe, that, although all the
special manifestations of religion may have
been absurd (I mean its creeds and theories)
yet the life of it as a whole is mankind’s
most important function.” “The Letters of
Wm, James,” edited by H. V. Knox). James’s
teaching was always that the religions experience
is the fundamental fact and “all theologies and all
ecclesiasticisms are secondary growths superim-
posed.”
It is the custom of the churches to claim that
their Christian doctrine is based upon this fact of
experience. Yet they do not see as clearly as did
James the consequences of this claim. For most of
them the fact of religion is inextricably entangled
with some human doctrine or interpretation of com-
paratively recent origin. Religion, in this human
sense, appeared in India six centuries before the
birth of Christ and gave rise to the philosophical
mysticism of the Upanishads. It is not, and never
has been, the private property of those who expound
the dogmatic prepossessions of a sect.
“Yet the life of it as a whole is mankind’s most
important function; ’ ’ there can be no doubt as to the
necessary part religion in the true sense has still
to play in the development of civilisation. The
scientist looks beyond his particular investigation


to the universe, but his universality is a matter of the
intellect and does not necessarily include the man.
The religious devotee is one who has cast himself
upon the wide universe, careless of what happens to
him, so be it that the universal scheme is thereby
fulfilled. His attitude is not merely intellectual;
the whole man is involved. “Nothing is good for
me that is not good for thee, 0 universe.” The
civilisation that cannot number amongst its leaders
men such as this is surely doomed. Vision is the
mental quality which inspires man to achieve know-
ledge and to construct a social order. And it is
by reason of lack of vision in their leaders that the
people of to-day are like to perish.
B. G. Gillies & Co. Ltd., Printers, 149 Elizabeth Street, Brisbane.
