

METHODIST UNION
rUCtouS ffiiMP. fl
...
AN! OB|ECt-ISSSOR
Wesleyan Methodist Book Depot, King William -
Primitive Methodist Book Depot, Leigh Street.
Bible Christian Book Depot, Flinders Street.




METHODIST UNION
CANADA:
AS OBJBCT-IHtOK
AUSTRALASIAN METHODISM.
THE
KEY. W. F. JAMES,
Author of “Seven Years’ Pioneer Mission Work in Cardiff.”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
JUklaide:
Wesleyan Methodist Book Depot, King William Street.
Primitive Methodist Book Depot, Leigh Street.
Bible Christian Book Depot, Plindees Street.
L* f 0


TO THE
anb people
OP EVERY NAME
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALASIA
THIS PAMPHLET
AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED
THE AUTHOR.


PREFACE.
The meeting of the joint committee on Methodist Union, in
Adelaide, November 27, 1891, resolved to “ use all proper means
to further the cause of Methodist Union.” As Secretary of the
meeting, I felt bound to assist in carrying out the resolution.
Having heard and read much in a discursive way about the results
the Union in Canada, it seemed to me important to get official and
consecutive information. Many pertinent questions, approved by
leading men of different Methodist sections, were sent to the Gene-
ral Superintendent of the Canadian Methodist Church. Copies were
forwarded to two other prominent ministers of that Church. The
answers agreed; they were considered valuable, and are embodied
in the following pages, with other significant facts respecting
Methodism and its union in Canada.
The chapters on the Dominion, and the various sections which
united there, were written to excite additional interest in the
union. The last chapter, on Union in Australasia, was called forth
by its obvious need and the growing desire for it. May the four
branches of Methodism in these colonies learn the Canadian lesson,
and speedily become one organically, as they are now one in
doctrine, in heart and general characteristics.
W. F. JAMES.
Bible Christian Manse,
Goodwood, South Australia,
July 9th, 1892.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
The Dominion of Canada ... ... Page 4.
Natural Features—School System —History —Confederation—Popu-
lation.
CHAPTER 11.
CHAPTER 11.
Historical Sketch op Canadian Methodism Page 8.
1. Methodism in the Eastern Provinces.
2. Methodism in Upper and Lower Canada.
3. The Methodist Episcopal Church.
4. The Methodist New Connexion.
5. The Primitive Methodist Church.
6. The Bible Christian Church.
CHAPTER 111.
CHAPTER 111.
Methodist Union in Canada ... ... Page 18.
1. Process toward Union —Toward tire partial Union of 1874, and the
complete Union of 1883 —A striking scene.
2. Testimony of leading Canadian ministers , with summary —Predeter-
mining causes of Union —Legislative aspect, surplus property, <fec.
—Laymen and reservation—Transfer of ministers —Superannua-
tion Fund —Surplus ministers —Conditions of membership —A
happy coalition—Union a grand success.
3. Further statement of results —Growth in large towns —Missionary
progress—Higher education—Methodist literature and Sunday-
schools —Increase of members.
CHAPTER IY.
CHAPTER IY.
Methodist Union in Australasia ... ... Page 32.
1. The different sections—Numbers, &c.
2. Various efforts for Union —The movement of 1883 —Resolution of
General Wesleyan Conference, 1884 —Attempt at Union between
the Primitives and Bible Christians, S.A.—The Crystal Brook
committee.
3. Present position of the question —Resolutions of S.A. Wesleyan and
Bible Christian Conferences, and Goulburn Wesleyan District
Meeting, 1891—The Adelaide meeting and its echoes —S.A. Con-
ferences, 1892 —Revived effort in Victoria, and Wesleyan Con-
ference resolution—Fourteen Conferences for Union.
4. A plea for Organic Union —Manifestly needed —Common likeness a
reason for Union —Success of Union elsewhere an argument for
Union here—Difficulties not insuperable —Amalgamation in the
spirit of Canadian Union would secure like results.


METHODIST UNION IN CANADA:
AN OBJECT-LESSON FOR AUSTRALASIAN METHODISM.
CHAPTER I.
THE DOMINION OP CANADA
comprises an area of three million and a half square miles. It is about
the size of the United States, including Alaska, and somewhat larger
than Australia. It lies north of the great Republic, extends from the
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, and a railway runs through it. It con-
tains the following provinces:—Ontario and Quebec —often called
Upper and Lower Canada—Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, British
Columbia, Manitoba, and the north-west territories. The Dominion
thus includes the whole of British North America, except Newfound-
land and Prince Edward Island.
Ontario, though more fertile than Quebec, is less romantic and
picturesque. “ The features of the latter are varied and grand,
consisting of boundless forests, magnificent rivers and lakes, bold
rocky heights and foaming cataracts, diversified by cultivated fields,
pretty villages and settlements, some of them stretching along the
mountains; fertile islands, with neat white cottages, rich pastures and
well-fed flocks.”
“Earthquakes have been frequent in Canada, some of them of
considerable violence. The most tremendous on record commenced
February 5, 1663, and is said to have continued at intervals for six
months. Earthquakes of a less violent character, but of force suffi-
cient at times to split walls and throw down chimneys, are frequent
on the shore of the estuary of the St. Lawrence.”
Some of the best iron has been found in abundance in Canada; gold
and silver, in small quantities; lead, tin, and copper in several places.
Petroleum wells have been sunk in various parts. “In 1866 a
remarkable phenomenon was observed at Bruce Spring. When the
well had been sunk to a depth of 237 feet, the gas suddenly forced
out the pump that was being used, and during 40 hours a jet of oil
ascended into the air to the height of seven or eight feet. For a con-
siderable period the spring yielded 7,000 barrels of oil daily. The
Canadian petroleum, especially the so-called Ontario petroleum, is
regarded better than the Pennsylvanian, because it has more illumi-
nating power and does not explode.”


The heat of summer and the cold of winter are much greater
than those in corresponding European latitudes. “The azure of the
Canadian skies is remarkable for its purity and transparency, while
fogs are almost unknown.” The air is salubrious, and conduces to
longevity. Up to 60 degrees north latitude the climate is singularly
favourable to the growth of wheat, oats, maize, barley, &c. An
immense area of splendid wheat-growing land has been opened in
Manitoba of late years. Farms and towns now stud the prairie
region. There is still ample room, and Michael Davitt, in a recent
number of the Nineteenth Century , pleaded for the emigration of
200,000 English labourers to this part of Canada.
There are many kinds of trees in the country. “Flowers of great
beauty and variety abound —the woods in summer being crowded with
them.” Nearly all the vegetables and fruits of England thrive in
Canada. Animals, birds, and fish are numerous and varied. Most of
the Dominion trade is with Great Britain and the United States.
“Wood and bread-stuffs form the principal articles of export to the
United Kingdom.”
The people of Ontario are chiefly of British blood; the majority in
Quebec are of French origin. The first educational Act in Ontario
was passed in 1807, when a grammar school was established in each
of the eight districts of the province. “In 1816 the first law relating
to common or primary schools was passed, but the present system
dates from 1844. The townships are divided into sections, each of a
suitable extent for one school, and three trustees are appointed to
manage school affairs. In towns the schools are managed by a board
elected by the ratepayers; the schools are supported by voluntary
taxation and a legislative grant.”
“The Executive Government is vested in the Sovereign of Great
Britain and Ireland, and is carried on in her name by a Governor-
General appointed by the Crown. The legislative authority rests
with a Parliament, consisting of two Houses, the Senate, and the
House of Commons. The senators are nominated by the Crown.
Each must be a born or naturalised subject, above 30 years old, and
possessed of real or personal property to the value of £BOO or upwards,
in the province for which he is appointed. Members of the House of
Commons are elected by the people for five years. Ottawa is the
capital. “Each province has a Lieutenant-Governor appointed by the
Governor-General in Council, and separate Executive Councils and
Legislative Assemblies.”
Canada has its name from the native word “ Kanata , signifying a
collection of tents, and which the early European discoverers mistook
for the name of the country.” Sebastian Cabot is said to have dis-
covered it in 1497, but the first European settlement was made in
1541. A permanent French settlement was made on the present site
of Quebec city. The French continued to occupy the country until
1759, when General Wolfe captured Quebec. All other places in
Canada were surrendered to the British the next year, and the French
power ceased there. Twenty-one years later Canada was divided into
two separate provinces. Dissension and insurrection sometimes
appeared the next 50 years; and, in 1840, the provinces were


re-united. Nine years after Toronto was made the seat of
Government alternately with Quebec. After that, nothing noteworthy
occurred in Canadian history until the agitation for the union of the
British North American provinces began. The subject, after being
considered for some years, was brought more prominently forward in
October, 1864, at a meeting of delegates from Upper and Lower
Canada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, and Prince
Edward Island, when a scheme intended for a basis of union was
drawn up. “The 72 resolutions, in which the scheme proposed by the
Conference was embodied, were then submitted to the Legislative
Assemblies of the different provinces, and received the sanction of the
Legislature of the two Canadas, of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia
at different dates in 1865 and 1866. The question was then taken up
by the British Parliament, by which, on the 28th of March, 1867, the
Act of Confederation was passed. The four provinces, which had
accepted the proposals of the Conference of 1864, were united into one
Dominion, and provision was made for the entry of the other
provinces whenever they chose to do so.”
The population, which had grown to about 3,600,000 in 1871,
increased to some 4,500,000 the next ten years, and numbered a little
over 5,000,000 in 1891. The inhabitants of Lower Canada are chiefly
Roman Catholics. Protestantism prevails elsewhere, the Anglican,
Presbyterian, and Methodist, being the principal Churches.


CHAPTER 11.
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF CANADIAN METHODISM *
I.—Methodism in the Eastern Provinces.
Methodism in British North America began with William Black, a
young man of rare gifts and fervour. He preached his first sermon
in Nova Scotia, Sunday, May 26, 1782. From the Atlantic to the
Pacific, throughout the whole region now called Canada, there was
not another Methodist minister on that memorable Sabbath. Many
heard the word and good was done. Black formed an immense cir-
cuit, extending from the Atlantic to the mouth of the St. Lawrence,
and laboured abundantly. Immigrants increased the population and
the cause advanced.
At Birchtown, among a community, mostly liberated slaves and
refugees, there was a wonderful display of divine power. Many peo-
ple were converted and fourteen classes formed. At length the
Government shipped most of the families to the western coast of
Africa, where “ they furnished the nucleus of the first Methodist
Mission to the Dark Continent.”
Black’s zeal and energy led him to think of extending his labours
beyond the eastern provinces, but “ Wesley reminded him that Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, and Newfoundland were sufficient for one
circuit.”
In 1784, Black attended the Christmas Conference at Baltimore,
appealed for missionaries, and secured the appointment of Freeborn
Garrettson and James 0. Cromwell. “ His enthusiasm fired also the
soul of Dr. Coke (the President) with a missionary zeal, which soon
flashed into the brightness of holy and unexampled enterprise, and
which continued to bum with pure and ceaseless flame until he found
a grave in the eastern seas.”
Garrettson laboured heroically in Nova Scotia. “He visited all
parts of the province, traversing mountains and valleys, threading
Indian paths up and down through the wilderness, where it was not
expedient or practicable to take a horse ; wading through morasses,
satisfying hunger and thirst from knapsack and brook by the way;
while at night he had sometimes to rest his weary limbs on a bed of
forest leaves.” He witnessed triumphant scenes of saving mercy;
and “ in 1785, Nova Scotia found a place in the Minutes of Wesley’s
Conference.”
In the three provinces the work proceeded with energy air.d dili-
gence. The first church was built at Sackville, New Brunswick,
* For the material in this chapter I am largely indebted to the “ Centennial of
Canadian Methodism.”


1790. Preaching was begun on Prince Edward Island, the gem of
the eastern provinces, in 1792. Forty years later the Bible Christians
began to work there, and faithfully continued till the union in 1883.
This was the only other form of Methodism ever established in the
lower provinces.
In 1799 a mission was started in Bermuda, West Indies, by John
Stephenson, who laboured with apostolic zeal, “ was imprisoned six
months and fined £5O for preaching the gospel to African blacks and
captive negroes. The work ceased for eight years, when Joshua
Marsden recommenced it. Conversions took place, churches were
built, circuits formed, and much useful work done.
Until 1855 the work in the Eastern Provinces was managed by the
London Wesleyan Missionary Committee. The missions were then
organized into an affiliated Conference, and the following numbers
were returned: —88 ministers, 13,136 members, 9,111 Sunday scholars.
“ Untrammelled action led to a new sense of responsibility. An im-
pulse was given to aggressive enterpriseand when the affiliated
dispensation closed, with the union of 1874, the ministers numbered
204 and the members 20,000.
In 1840 the Book-room business began in a room of a parsonage,
with “ credit for capital.” The work thus started “ has been the
means of circulating an ever-broadening stream of pure literature,
and proved a right arm of strength to maratime Methodism.” Sack-
ville Academy was begun the same year. Higher educational work
went on; and, in 1890, in the Academy, Ladies’ College, University,
and Theological departments, there were 290 students.
2.—Methodism in Upper and Lower Canada.
The first Methodist preachers in Upper and Lower Canada were
military officers. One began to preach at Quebec in 1780, the other
on the Niagara frontier in 1786. The first regular Methodist itinerant
in these parts was William Losee, who was appointed by the New
York Conference in 1790 to form a circuit in Canada. As early as
1778 Paul and Barbara Heck, their three sons, and others formed a
class at Augusta. Two more classes were formed thirteen years later,
and a fourth the day John Wesley died. The first church was built
at Hay Bay, the second at Ernestown. At the Conference of 1792
Losee reported 165 members. “Methodism had taken root and the
tree was rising.”
Darius Dunham was next appointed to Canada. He and Losee
pursued their work with unwearied zeal and activity. “ The moral
destitution of the country was great, for, in the two provinces, there
were only seven or eight ordained ministers to care for the entire
Protestant population. These gospel rangers had to endure unspeak-
able hardships, traversing forests, crossing streams and rivers, making
their way over almost impassable roads, while as to worldly support,
they asked only to subsist; but they itinerated in the power of the
Spirit, and at the end of the year” the members numbered 349.
Other pioneers followed, and seven years later the members had
increased to 1,000. The work was heroically continued, and the mem-
bers trebled the next ten years.


In 1811 the venerable Bishop Asbury, who lived to see the members
in the United States increase from 3,000 to 175,000, paid his first
visit to Canada, and felt his soul much united to the Methodists there.
The war of 1812-15 greatly damaged the work. “Along the frontier
were invasion, bloodshed and plunder.” The membership was
reduced by one-half. “The American preachers were all withdrawn,
several others located, and when the Genesee Conference resolved to
go on with the work it was renewed at serious disadvantage.”
The first Methodist church of any pretension in Canada was built
in Montreal, and opened in 1809. It was a stone structure, and a
parsonage erected with it. The expense being too great for the con-
gregation help was sought from Upper Canada, the United States
and England. Within ten years the congregation overflowed the
building, and a church to seat 1,200 people was built at a cost of
£4,550. “This time-honoured sanctuary gave place in 1845 to a still
more stately edifice, fragrant with still more hallowed associations, a
church inseparably linked with the history of Methodism in the
commercial metropolis of Canada —the rallying place of Protestantism
in Quebec —and now succeeded by a church, the stateliest in Method-
ism, and one of the most splendid ecclesiastical edifices in the Pro-
testant world.”
The first Methodist service in Toronto was held in 1818. A society
was formed and a church erected. That wooden, barn-like structure,
was the forerunner of the 30 tasteful and commodious churches which
now adorn the capital of Ontario.
The great work of Indian evangelization began in 1822. Two
years later the first Indian church was built. Day and Sunday-
schools were established, and a splendid work was wrought. William
Case, who directed it, was a worthy successor of the apostolic Elliot
and Brainerd.
The “ Clergy Reserves ” agitation consumed much time and energy.
“ These Reserves consisted of one seventh of all the surveyed lands of
Upper Canada, which had been set apart by the Constitutional Act
of 1791, for the support of a Protestant clergy. The Church of Eng-
land claimed that the Protestant clergy were the clergy of that church
alone. . . . The noxious system involved, not merely the support of
the Church of England as the State church in Canada, but the exter-
mination of the other Protestant bodies, particularly the Methodist
Church. ... In 1827 Archdeacon Strachan furnished the Colonial
Department with an ecclesiastical chart and letter, purporting to give
correct information respecting the state of the churches in Upper
Canada. The letter represented the Methodist ministers as exercising
an influence hostile to British institutions. The publication of this
letter and chart roused such indignation throughout the province that
the Legislative Assembly was petitioned to ask for an investigation.
A select committee was appointed, more than 50 witnesses were
examined, and the committee embodied the results in a report, in
which they bore powerful testimony to the political integrity and
loyalty of Methodist preachers and to the beneficial influence of their
labours.” The report is before me, and I never read a finer tribute
to the noble character and work of a body of Christian men. But the


agitation lasted 25 years. Then “ the Canadian Legislature passed
an Act by which the Clergy Reserves were finally alienated from
religious to secular purposes. In this long struggle other Protestant
denominations took an important part; but the Methodist Church
was the most effective promoter of civil and religious liberty and
equality for the entire country.” Dr. Ryerson, the first editor of the
Christian Guardian , established in 1829, was the great leader of public
opinion on the subject. This was the great work of his life, but “he
also planned and perfected for Ontario a national system of education,
which is unsurpassed, if, indeed, it is equalled by any other public
school system in the world.”
Over 12,000 members were reported at the Conference of 1830,
when a seminary of learning was decided upon. Next year the minis-
ters pledged their marriage fees to further the erection of an academy
at Cobourg. Revivals prevailed and 3,714 were added to the church.
For many years the peace of Methodism was disturbed by internal
strife. There was trouble between the British and American Con-
ferences about the work in Upper Canada. Litigation, extending
over two years, ensued, re the ownership of church property. There
was also great friction between the British and Canadian elements in
the church. “ The evils of division were manifest everywhere. Inex-
tinguishable discord prevailed. The bitter waters penetrated into
domestic circles and separated members of the same household; they
flowed into the Indian wigwam and made confusion among the child-
ren of the bow and arrow.” But wiser counsels began to prevail.
Re-union took place, and there was lasting harmony. The church
developed rapidly in spiritual activity, church building, missionary
enterprise and education. In 1847 the members numbered 25,000.
Seven years later the cause was further consolidated by the union of
the Eastern District Meeting with the Canadian Conference. “The
two sections in Upper and Lower Canada now gave a total of 36,333
members, with a ministerial strength of nearly 200. The standard of
personal and family piety was raised to a higher level. All the
resources of the church were actively developed.” Men rich in gifts
and piety entered the ministry. There was a yearly increase of
members, the Sunday-schools advanced in numbers and efficiency.
The appointment of English ministers, with commanding gifts and
influence, to preside at the Annual Conferences, was a great help.
Dr. Punshon’s five years’ work “elevated the tone of the entire Cana-
dian pulpit,” and promoted every department of churclujenterprise.
“To his interest and exertion was largely due the erection of the
Metropolitan Church in the city of Toronto, the building of which
gave such an impetus to church improvement throughout Canada.”
During the fifty years following the establishment of the Conference
the Church advanced from 36 ministers, with 21 wooden places of
worship and 6,150 members, to 718 ministers, 1,800 churches, and
76,455 members. “ The church had exchanged weakness for strength,
poverty for wealth, the plain meeting-house for the costly temple.”
3. —The Methodist Episcopal Church.
The early history of this church blends with that sketched in the


previous section. The first Methodist missionaries in Canada were
sent by the Methodist Episcopal Church of the United States. “In
1824 the work, which had previously been first a part of the New York
Conference, then of the General Conference, was organized as an
Annual Conference,” which comprised 36 ministers and 6,150 mem-
bers. The cause advanced through grievous civil disabilities, but
fresh difficulties arose. The Wesleyan Methodists revoked the decision
to abstain from work in Upper Canada, where the Methodist Episcopal
Church prevailed. Serious collision followed. Then a union was
formed, but it seemed more like an absorption into the Wesleyan
Church. Some of the Methodist Episcopal people, preferring their
own polity, formed the Methodist Episcopal Church in Canada. John
Reynolds was elected bishop. The ministers numbered 21, the mem-
bers 1,243, and the first Conference was held at Belleville in 1835.
“Without churches or parsonages, and with a widely scattered
membership,” the work was carried on under great difficulties. Liti-
gation with the Wesleyan Church stirred much bitter feeling. But
heroic zeal was shown, and the cause prospered. The Canada Christian
Advocate was started in 1845, and circulated with good results for
nearly 40 years, when it merged into The Christian Guardian. A
seminary for the higher education of both sexes was established at
Belleville in 1857. “In 1860 it was affiliated with the Toronto Uni-
versity as Belleville College, the ladies’ department taking the name
of Alexandra College. In 1866 a Charter of Acts was procured, con-
stituting the institution a University, enlarged in 1870 to all the
faculties, in which capacity it did invaluable service to both the
church and the country.”
From the small beginning mentioned, the church made such progress
that, when the union took place in 1883, it embraced 228 ministers,
25,671 members, 23,968 Sunday scholars, over 100,000 adherents, and
£300.000 worth of property, mostly freefrom debt. “At no time in her
history was the M.E. Church better prepared to maintain her position
and advance her growth than when, in the providence of God, and we
believe for the best interests of both Methodism and Canada, the
wounds of division were healed,” and union was consummated.
4.—The Methodist New Connexion Church.
The Methodist New Connexion, established in England in 1797,
opened a mission in Ireland in 1824. Before the latter date “there
was a strong conviction in the Conference that Canada should be
included in its missionary operations. Mr. W. Ridgway, a wealthy
and influential layman, visited this country and was convinced that
it had strong claims upon the sympathies of British Christians.
Shortly afterwards one of the ministers, who had retired from the
active work, settled in Canada, that he might preach to the people so
far as his strength would permit. In 1832 Mr. Clementson, a local
preacher, being in Toronto on business, visited some parts of the
country, preached to the people, and upon his return to England,
represented them as being in many localities destitute of the ordi-
nances of religion. Accordingly, the Conference of 1837 determined
to open a mission in Canada, and appointed the Rev. John Addyman”


to the work. Rev. Henry 0. Crofts went to assist him two years later.
When war broke out between Great Britain and the United States
Canada became the battle-field. As many of the early missionaries
had come from the United States, and were appointed by a Conference
of that country, prejudice was excited against them, and every
American missionary was ordered to leave Canada. Henry Ryan,
then Presiding Elder over the Upper Canada District, remained, rallied
his men, carried on the work as best he could, and kept the societies
from being scattered. After much strife “Elder Ryan and others
sought for separation and independence,” and, in 1829, they formed
the “Canadian Wesleyan Methodist Church.” Its polity was liberal
and provided for lay representation in all its courts. The new church
had much difficulty, which was increased by Ryan’s death four years
later. Some of the ministers joined other churches, others followed
secular work during the week and preached on Sundays. “But a
devoted few pursued their sacred calling with undivided attention and
untiring energy, and were rewarded by success.” In 1841 this
church, with its twenty ministers, 42 local preachers, and nearly 2,000
members, united with the Methodist Hew Connexion. In 1843 the
latter united with the Protestant Methodists of Eastern Canada,
whose members numbered 550. This accession, with a numerical
increase for the year of 1,576 greatly cheered the church; it was
justly regarded as a special indication of the smile of providence upon
the union, and as a pledge of future prosperity.
The Conference of 1844 decided to publish a connexional organ
called The Christian Messenger , and resolved “that all political
discussions and controversial matter be excluded from its pages; also
that every minister on probation write an original article for the
Messenger at least every six months,” a rule which aided the mental
development of the young ministers, and gave freshness to the paper.
In 1854 this organ was followed by the Evangelical Witness, which
continued its useful career under able editors until it was emerged in
the Christian Guardian at the union of 1874.
At an early date “a Theological Institute was organized; the Rev.
W. McClure was appointed tutor, and an educational board elected to
co-operate with him. Mr. McClure filled this important position with
great efficiency till his lamented death, and at one time 30 young
men, in different stages of their probation, were under his instruction.”
He was the forerunner of Canadian Methodist theological schools.
Many other men of mark served - the connexion in Canada, and the
following figures will indicate the progress made. From 1842 to 1872
the ministers increased from 20 to 117, the members from 2,482 to
8,312, the missionary income from £154 to £1,670. At the latter date
there were over 20,000 scholars in the Sunday-schools, and the value
of the church property was £57,668. With the union of 1874 the
history of the Methodist Hew Connexion in Canada ended as a distinct
organization. “Communities may disappear, and men may pass away,
but principles never die. So the great principle of lay representation
lives in the Methodism of Canada, and the Methodism of the world; and
men are learning that in the Church, as well as the State, all righte-
ous government is ‘o/the people, by the people, and for the people.’”


s.—The Primitive Methodist Church
was commenced in Canada by Mr. William Lawson, a local preacher
from Brampton, Cumberland, England. Reaching Toronto in June,
1829, he began to preach in the open-air, and so continued until Octo-
ber, “ when a small school-house was secured for the services. In the
first class-meeting three worthy laymen were present —Messrs. Law-
son, Walker, and Thompson —and from that day to this the families
they represent have been well reported of in the Methodism of the
land.”
The Church grew rapidly, the need of a regular ministry was felt,
and, in August, 1830, Rev. R. Watkins arrived. He opened several
places in the surrounding country. But his stay was short, and Rev.
Mr. Summersides succeeded him. From the following entry in his
journal, February 2, 1832, the name of the latter might well have been
Wintersides : —“The last thirteen days I have preached sixteen times,
led two classes, ridden 50 miles and walked 70. The cold has been
severe. At night everything around has been frozen, and the white
rime and frost have lain very thick upon the beds in the morning.”
At the March quarterly meeting there were 12 local preachers, 20
preaching places and 132 members.
The General Missionary Committee had not then been organized.
The stronger English circuits took the missions under their charge
and the Canadian Mission was placed under the care of Hull Circuit
which helped it with men and means for twelve years. In October
1832, a church to seat 600 persons was opened in Toronto. Nearly
one-third the outlay was raised ; and, though the heavy debt involved
a great struggle, it was ultimately overcome by the generosity of the
people. A large and beautifulf church, which took the place of the
first, was destroyed by fire in 1873, and was succeeded by a still better
church, costing £lO,OOO. The sum of £1,200 was paid for the organ,
and the large school-rooms attached were pronounced by Rev. Dr.
Rice “the best arranged for their purpose of any in Canada.” Mr.
Robert Walker remained in unbroken membership with the Toronto
Church for 55 years.
The place of the tent was enlarged, the curtains were stretched
forth, the cords lengthened, the stakes strengthened, and the Con-
nexion broke forth right and left as the country opened up. In 1843 the
Canadian P.M. Missionary Society was formed, and it did good work.
The venerable Hugh Bourne, one of the founders of the denomination,
visited Canada in 1844, and did not spare himself. January 1, 1845,
he wrote:—“l rose at four and set off without breakfast, walked
eleven miles to Lambton, and took breakfast; then eight miles to
Toronto—nineteen miles in all.” On his own responsibility, Mr.
Davison, one of the ministers," commenced a monthly paper, The
Evangelist , which had a good circulation. Eleven years later it was
merged in The Christian Journal , which continued for 24 years,
when it was amalgamated with The Christian Guardian.
A Conference was formed in 1854. The want of an educational
establishment to train young ministers was keenly felt, and Rev.
Thomas Crompton began a Theological Institution in a humble way;


but, after doing good work a few years, it was given up. When the
Jubilee of the Connexion was celebrated, in 1860, Canada joined in
the movement, and devoted the monetary proceeds chiefly to begin-
ning a new work, called the Jubilee Mission, which developed into
three circuits. The Jubilee of the introduction of the Connexion into
Canada was held in 1879, and “several thousand dollars was raised
for the assistance of burdened trusts and to assist in building new
churches and parsonages.”
When the union occurred in 1883 the returns were —98 ministers,
214 local preachers, 299 class-leaders, 231 churches, 50 parsonages,
8,090 members, and 9,065 Sunday scholars. The value of the church
property was £BO,OOO, with a debt of £12,000; and the Connexion
contributed £3,800 “ to enable the ministers of the body to be put on
a level with those of the older branch of the church, in their claims
on the superannuation fund and their property in the Book-room
establishment.”
6.—The Bible Christian Church
originated at Shebbear, Devon. England, in 1815, and was called to
begin mission work in British North America “by a few godly mem-
bers who had emigrated from the west of England, and the urgent
need of evangelistic labour in the newly-settled country.” The appeal
was met by the Conference of 1831. The members then numbered
6,650, the missionary income was only £lO4, and there was a debt of
£66 upon the Missionary Society. But two ministers were set apart
for the new world, and the confidence in God and in the people was
honoured. The receipts of the next year were £264, which paid the
debt and current expenses.
John Glass went to Canada West, and Francis Metherall to Prince
Edward Island. The former was soon discouraged; he left the work
and John Hicks Eynon succeeded him. Nine years self-denying
service in England prepared Francis Metherall for more self-sacrific-
ing labour in his new sphere, and he was faithful. At the close of two
years he returned 36 places and 60 members. Philip James went to
assist him, and the work continued on the island until union made
Canadian Methodism one.
Eynon began his work at Cobourg. He “first preached in the open-
air, then in the gaol, then in a dwelling-house, and there organized the
first society, consisting of four persons, all of whom were faithful unto
death. His work soon extended north, and west, and east, until it took
in a circuit of nearly 200 miles. His first quarter’s receipt was an
English half-crown. Mrs. Eynon took work as regularly and success-
fully as her husband. God blessed their labours, and at the end of
the first year 88 members were returned. The country over which
they travelled, though now one of the richest sections of Canada, was
then a vast forest, with small and scattered clearings and log houses,
and many discomforts and privations.” Money was very scarce. The
wife of a leading member told a missionary “that she had then on her
feet the second pair of shoes that she had ever worn.” One of the
missionaries, having no money and nothing to trade with, became his
ibwn tailor, and when the front of his pants was worn out, ripped them


carefully and turned sides with them, and wore them again as if they
were new.”
The first church was opened at Cohourg in 1836. It was twice en-
larged and then superseded by a better and larger brick church.
Other missionaries followed, and in 1844 John Brown Tapp, brother-
in-law of Rev. J. Bickford, of South Australia, increased the number
to seven, and the work was divided into four stations. The word was
preached with power in all sorts of places, and as many as twenty
found peace at one service. John Edwards preached in the bar-room
of an Irish tavern-keeper by the road-side, “and presently the tavern-
keeper and all his family became converted. The tavern was changed
into a house of God, the family became active workers in the cause of
religion and temperance, and a society of 46 members was formed, all
of whom became total abstainers.”
The cause was extended to the United States, where a District was
formed and much good work done. The church building era fairly
began in 1845. In the same year the first missionary meeting was
held at Cobourg. Eynon, Hurley, James, Tapp, and Green gave
addresses. “ One who was present says they spoke like seraphs, and
the collection was £6.” Other meetings followed with blessed results.
Missionary enthusiasm and liberality remained striking features of
the Connexion to the close of its history. During the above year
Eynon drove 600 miles to ascertain the religious needs of new settle-
ments in Western Canada. For many years latterly the missionary
receipts were over £3,000 per annum.
From 1852 the Connexion ceased to draw financial aid from Eng-
land. A Conference was formed in 1855, and one-tenth of the missionary
receipts was remitted to England for ten years, when the Conference
assumed the financial responsibility of Prince Edward Island District.
At this time there were 21 ministers, 51 churches, 104 other preaching
places, and 2,186 members. There were still many hardships and
difficulties. The preachers “had often to make their study in the
woods, and find a place for their devotions under the shadow of a
great tree, and many a time had to rise from prayer swollen and
almost blind from mosquito-bites or a plague of black flies. Yet their
expositions of truth were clear, forcible, and exhaustive; while as
painstaking, visiting, praying pastors, they were models to be devoutly
copied to this day.” They maintained the temperance traditions of
the Bible Christian ministry, and were all total abstainers, and,
throughout the history of the Church, not one was expelled for
preaching false doctrine.
Ixr 1851 the Book-room business began at Bowmanville, the Con-
nexional metropolis in Canada, and did good service for 32 years.
The Observer, a weekly paper, was started in 1866. It was edited by
Cephas Barker for fourteen years, and by H. J. Nott for three years.
They were able men and did their work well. The former was one of
the ablest and most effective speakers I ever heard. “The tone of the
paper was good, elevated, Christian,” and it ran a useful career until
it was merged in the Christian Guardian.
During the year 1873 517 members were lost to the Connexion by
removing beyond its bounds. The experience was repeated, and it


awakened deep concern. To prevent such loss, and to aid in spreading
vital godliness, great efforts were made to extend the cause. Mani-
toba was entered in 1879, and missions were established there. These
efforts increased the missionary debt to £II,OOO. An earnest appeal
was made to the friends in 1880, and £6,000 raised in a few months.
The annual missionary receipts so increased that the remaining debt
was lessened yearly. In the year of the union there were 80 ministers,
168 local preachers, 7,400 members, 9,624 Sunday scholars, 30,000
adherents, 181 churchesiand 55 parsonages, valued at £BO,OOO, with
a total debt of £IO,OOO or one-eighth of its value. The Connexion
stood well, with a most hopeful outlook.


CHAPTER 111.
METHODIST UNION IN CANADA.
I.—Process toward Union.
Three cases of union have already been mentioned —the union of the
Wesleyan with the Methodist Episcopal Church in 1833, the union of
the Methodist New Connexion with the Canadian Wesleyans (the fol-
lowers of Ryan) in 1841, and with the Protestant Methodists of
Eastern Canada in 1843. All succeeded well, and the secession from
the first might have been prevented “if the same prudent methods
had been adopted which were observed in the union of 1883.”
In 1863 Rev. J. H. Robinson, in course of an editorial in the organ
of the Methodist New Connexion, in relation to a general union, said:
“If we cannot at once or soon unite, let us each work as we are doing
for awhile, and under the same name and British relations, having as
now our Annual Conferences, and establish a General Conference, to he
held every four years. The first of these General Conferences would
be for neutral brotherly intercourse and interchange of sentiment,
rather than for any legislation. We should thus become better
acquainted. Christian hearts are ever sympathetic, and sympathy
would ripen into brotherly love and attachment, and facilitate our
ultimate amalgamation.” From year to year the Methodist New
Connexion Conference continued to pass resolutions favourable to
union, and appointed committees to meet those appointed by the other
Methodist Churches; but, for a length of time, no practical results
followed. “About the year 1870 Methodist union became a vital
question. The British provinces had been consolidated into the
Dominion of Canada, and confederation furnished new opportunities
for the spread and progress of Methodism throughout the Dominion.”
In the Methodist Recorder, a daily paper, issued during the Wesleyan
Conference at Toronto that year, Dr. Dewart, the editor, “ after a
general view of the tendencies toward union,” said, “ Under these
circumstances is it not high time that Canadian Methodism was taking
steps to present an unbroken front to the enemy P There are, doubt-
less, hindrances and difficulties in the way of such union; but if they
are ever to be overcome, the sooner they are looked in the face the
better. The main practical difficulties will be found in determining
what portion of the distinctive peculiarities of each body is to be
incorporated in the united Methodism of the future.” A few repre-
sentatives of the different Methodist churches met in Dr. Dewart’s
house some time later. Two results ensued—(l) A grand union tea
meeting in Toronto, the next January, followed by a large public
meeting, addressed by leading men of different Methodist bodies.
Though union was not formally discussed, the meeting gave an im-


pulse to the union spirit. Similar meetings were held in different
parts of the country. (2) It was agreed to secure an early meeting
of the union committees.
“ From this time forward the subject of union was more or less
discussed in the Methodist papers, sometimes adversely by indi-
viduals, but on the whole the discussion gave evidence of a growing
union sentiment. Some rather sharp passages-at-arms took place
between the opponents and the advocates of union. The Guardian
stood firmly for organic union of all Canadian Methodists, on the basis
of equal lay and ministerial representation in the General Conference.”
In March, 1871, the union committees met to discuss the terms of
union. The younger Wesleyans and the representatives of other
bodies were strongly in favour of a large measure of lay delegation.
The basis of union agreed upon was submitted to the next Wesleyan
Conference, when “ tbe principle of union was unanimously adopted.”
The introduction of lay representation evoked some difference of
opinion. An amendment was finally passed, which recommended that
the question of lay representation in the General Conference be sub-
mitted to the quarterly meetings for their decision, before any further
action be taken in the matter by the Conference. The quarterly
meetings were strongly in favour of union on the terms proposed.
But the Methodist Episcopal, Primitive Methodist, and Bible Christian
Churches, apparently not being yet ripe for union, withdrew from the
negotiations, which were continued between the Wesleyan and New
Connexion Churches alone. After some modifications the basis
prepared by these two bodies was adopted by their respective
Conferences in 1873. The basis was also adopted by the Wesleyan
Methodists of the eastern provinces. In 1874 representatives of the
three bodies met in the first General Conference, and the union -was
formed. The Conference met in the Metropolitan Church, Toronto,
and the venerable Dr. Ryerson presided. The event was specially
significant because two of the bodies united “had for many years
occupied the same field,” and the result was eminently satisfactory.
The united church was named “The Methodist Church of Canada.”
The influence of the General Conference reached from the Atlantic
to the Pacific. Six Annual Conferences were formed to promote the
work, and great prosperity followed. From every quarter came news
of marked success growing out of the union. “A large number of
elegant and commodious churches were erected.” The Book-room
business largely expanded. A new hymn-book was published and a
large missionary debt paid. The establishment of the “Woman’s
Missionary Society” “developed sympathy and liberality beyond
what could have been anticipated,” and missions were opened in
Japan and other places. Extensive revivals occurred throughout all
the Conferences. Within nine years the members increased from
over 101,000 to above 128,000, and the Sunday-scholars from 101,000
to 132,000 —the former by 3,000, and the latter by 3,400 a year. The
practical success of the union of 1874 largely silenced objectors, and
prepared for the union of 1883.
Still there were four separate Methodist bodies in the Dominion,
and their union was required to stop the waste of men and means, and


fit Methodism for her great mission in the land and to the heathen
world. All branches of Canadian Methodism wore represented at the
Ecumenical Conference in London, in 1881; and ‘’there is good reason
to believe that the meeting of these representatives drew them closer
together, and helped to promote a desire for the organic union of all
the branches of Canadian Methodism. This result did not so much
follow from anything that was said or done at the London Conference
as from the association and Christian intercourse that took place
during their stay in London.”
Complete union was discussed at the Conference of the four Metho-
dist Churches the following year, and all appointed committees to
consider a basis of union. The joint committee met in the Primitive
Methodist Church, Toronto, and Bishop Carman presided. “There
was the evident presence of the Divine Spirit inducing a spirit of
fraternity, before which all obstacles disappeared. A basis of anion
was agreed upon, conceding to each denomination in a fair degree the
central principle of its polity. The basis was subsequently submitted
to the quarterly official boards throughout the Dominion, and with
remarkable unanimity was by them approved.” It was then sub-
mitted to the higher courts of the contracting bodies, approved and
consummated at the General Conference in Belleville, during the fall
of 1883. “It did not take effect, however, until July 1, 1884, it being
thought incompetent for this body to convey the property of the
various churches to the united body, inasmuch as the constitution of
neither of the contracting bodies provided for its own dissolution, and
therefore dangerous to attempt it in view of possible, litigation. In
the meantime the matter was laid before the several provincial Legis-
latures and before the Dominion Parliament, thus giving to any
persons who might be opposed to the union an opportunity to appear
before these bodies in defence of their rights. No such opposition
was made, and therefore the necessary Acts of Parliament were
passed, and the union legally consummated.” The united church
contained 1,663 ministers, 3,159 churches, 877 parsonages, 169,803
members (including those on trial), 172,052 Sunday-scholars, and the
value of tbe church property was nearly £2,000,000.
The first General Conference was memorable. “Men who had
strenuously opposed union, and men who had vigorously advocated it,
were upon the floor with a purpose to make it successful. Men who
did not want to take the responsibility rejoiced that others had done
so. The opening prayers by Dr. Gardiner, who had promoted the
movement, and Dr. Williams, who had earnestly resisted it, were
attended with great power, and all hearts were melted in the over-
flowings of divine love. Devotion to God and His church, and what
is now the best thing for the common Methodism, was evidently the
pervading and ruling thought of the Conference. Differences sank
out of sight; and while principles were guarded and maintained, when
mutual concessions could open the way to brotherliness, peace, and
spiritual power, they were, as a rule, cheerfully made. This very
peace was a realization of the Saviour’s promise to His people, was
regarded as a divine approbation of the union so happily consum-
mated, and a pledge of better things to come. Where there had been


forebodings of ill and great fears tbe spirit of consecration came upon
the church, and the cheering outlook of faith and hope.”
The success of the union is indicated in the following sections.
2.—Testimonies op leading Canadian Ministers.
In December, 1891, a list of questions about the union in Canada
was sent to Rev. A. Carman, M.A., D.D., General Superintendent of
the Methodist Church there. Copies were sent to Rev. E. H. Dewart,
D.D., editor of the Christian Guardian, and Rev. G. Webber, an
Ex-President of the late Bible Christian Church in Canada. The
questions with triple answers were as follows: —
I.—What were the predetermining causes of union P
Dr. Carman. —(1) The inspiration and direction of the Holy Spirit.
To God be the glory, for none but our God could have done so great
and good a work. These Methodists were not bought, driven, or
flattered into union, but the love of Christ constrained us. (2) The
manifest disadvantages of our divisions, in waste of men and money,
we thought offensive to God. (3) The multiplication of rival institu-
tions, agencies, associations, &c., and their consequent contention. (4)
The folly of setting up rival causes in weak mission fields, perpetuat-
ing home strife. (5) The positive conflicts, jealousies, and oppositions
with three or four weak causes in home circuits. (6) The alienation
of families and many of our youth from Methodism. (7) The laxity
of discipline through bidding for one another’s members, or those pro-
posing to become members. (8) Undue taxation and press upon
pastorate in travelling over unnecessarily large fields at waste of time
and insufficient support. (9) Constant irritation and ill-feeling
among our previous Methodist peoples. (10) The Ecumenical of
1881 turned the attention of Canadian Methodism more directly to
union. (11) Example of our Presbyterian brethren. (12) Weakness
in all regards through our divisions. (13) Scandal of Christianity
before the world.
Dr. Dewart.—The evident importance of stopping the waste of men
and money, and the rivalry and sectarian strife caused by division,
and the conviction that our divisions were not justifiable.
Mr. Webber. —The waste of men and means through rival churches.
The need and demand by the country of a closer union.
11. Did one legislative Act serve for conveyance of properties to the
united church in all the provinces P
Dr. Carman. —One legislative Act by our Dominion Parliament and
one by each of our provinces, since each had its own jurisdiction.
Dr. Dewart. —We had a general Dominion Act, but, to be sure, we
had Provincial Acts passed in each province.
Mr. Webber. —We had to obtain both provincial and Dominion
legislation. It was easily obtained.
111. Did the arrangement named in section 111. paragraph 2, of basis
(church property) answer well in deciding what properties
should be retained and what sold ?
Dr. Carman. —Fairly well. But it would have been an improvement
to put the President of Conference, or General Superintendent, on
every committee to look after connexional interests.


Dr. Dewart.—Yes, but with some friction in a few places, which
was of no importance.
Mr. Webber.—Yes.
1. Were the changes effected immediately or gradually ?
Dr. Carman.—Gradually; and to be properly done it must be
gradual. Hasten slowly. The people must have time to look at
matters and have their say.
Dr. Dewart.—There was a time fixed when the union Acts went
into operation, but no attempt was made to force things soon.
Mr. Webber. —Gradually and, on the whole, wisely.
2. How did you manage with debts on buildings no longer used, and
which could not be sold P
Dr. Carman. —When local trusts could not handle them by sale or
otherwise —which they did in most cases —we had a fund raised for
the special purpose of relieving in whole or in part, as a careful super-
vision determined.
Dr. Dewart. —Formed a relief movement for these cases, which,
however, did not prevent some cases of pressure.
Mr. Webber. —We formed a Union Church Relief Fund, which met
the difficulty.
3. Had you any cases in which trustees refused to relinquish their
hold upon properties no longer required ? And, if so, how did you
manage in such cases ?
Dr. Carman. —All our churches voted upon the basis of union in
their constitutional methods. Hence the property, being connexional,
went duly and fully under the votes, and subsequently under the
legislation. We are not Congregationalists.
Dr. Dewart. —I think there were two or threee such cases, not of
much importance. The Acts would cover such cases by settling the
title clearly.
Mr. Webber. —No.
IY. Did ministers and people of the four uniting churches happily
coalesce ?
Dr. Carman. —With very, very few exceptions, most happily, and
why not ? They were in a larger and better Methodist Church, with
all rights guarded, annuities and privileges secured, Ac.
Dr. Dewart. —Yes, generally. There may have been some delay in
uniting congregations, and some jealousy, which soon died out. But
there was no serious failure to coalesce. In fact, all lines of division
soon became effaced.
Mr. Webber.—Yes, beyond our expectation.
Y. How did laymen of the churches, which permitted them to share in
all the business of District Meetings and Annual Conferences,
take to the arrangement reserving questions of ministerial
character, Ac., to be dealt with by ministers only ?
Dr. Carman. —Raised no substantial or persistent objection, but
accepted heartily, and so to this day.
Dr. Dewart. —Generally amicably. In fact, laymen do not wish to
be detained by that business at Annual Conference or District Meeting.
Mr. Webber.—There is no special objection raised to the reservation.


VI. Were there any surplus ministers when the union was consum-
mated ? If so, how many ? And how did you arrange for them ?
Dr. Carman. —Yes. Say 50 or 60; possibly a few more. A few
superannuated. Divided circuits, and enlarged home mission fields.
Extended foreign mission work. ' Some w T ent to the United States,
ever calling for men. In three years we were calling for more men
ourselves, especially for Manitoba and the north-west.
Dr. Dewart.—At first there was a little difficulty in stationing, but
hardly any were sent adrift. Some went to the United States.
Mr. Webber. —Some were superannuated, but in three years all were
needed and more.
VII. Did application of the principles re superannuation fund, in
Section IV. (church funds), secure satisfactory adjustment of
the fund for ministers of the four churches P
Dr. Carman.—Fully satisfactory, under a just and careful adminis-
tration now, with God’s help, in progress.
Dr. Dewart.—Yes, it was accepted, and I do not remember any
opposition.
Mr. Webber. —Yes, on the whole.
1. Was much money paid toward placing ministers of the Methodist
Episcopal, Primitive Methodist, and Bible Christian Churches, on
equality with those of the Methodist Church of Canada ?
Dr. Carman.—The Methodist Episcopal Church paid say 26,000
dollars, and the others in proportion.
Dr. Dewart.—A proportionate amount was paid into the superan-
nuation fund.
Mr. Webber.—Yes.
2. How was the money raised P
Dr. Carman. —What an appeal to the people did not raise was fur-
nished by the ministers themselves, and much to their own interest.
It cost the ministers of the Methodist Episcopal Church less than
60 dollars each.
Dr. Dewart. —It was raised mainly by special effort in the uniting
bodies. But some ministers gave notes and paid it personally.
Mr. Webber.—ln the Bible Christian Church it was raised by the
ministers themselves. In the Primitive Methodist Church the mem-
bers made up the larger part.
VIII. Had you difficulty in connection with the transfer of ministers
from one Conference to another when union took place ?
Dr. Carman.—Our General Conference simply ordered that every
minister belonged to the Conference within whose bounds he fell in
the work, June 1, 1883. Then our transfer accommodates as we can,
keeping up equality of Conferences.
Dr. Dewart.—No special difficulty at the time of the union, but
always found some difficulty to make transfers satisfactory to all.
Mr. Webber. —No.
1. Upon what principle, or by what method, do you effect such
transfers now ?
Dr. Carman. —We have a transfer committee, composed of Presi-
dents of Annual Conferences and the General Superintendent, with


full powers, but in their practice they overcrowd no Conference, while
accommodating ministers and quarterly official boards as best they can.
Dr. Dewart.—A small committee, representing all the Conferences,
is empowered to transfer. We have modified it once or twice. XovV,
the Presidents and General Superintendent constitute it. Men are
transferred on request of circuit or on personal request —scarcely
without. (This answers 1 and 2.)
Mr. Webber.—By a transfer committee, consisting of the Presidents
of the Annual Conferences, who meet for the purpose once a year.
2. How does it answer ?
Dr. Carman. —It serves an excellent purpose, though perhaps it
could be improved in both efficiency and economy. Legislation from
Quadrennium to Quadrennium must determine that.
Mr. Webber. —Hot too well.
IX. What majorities were required at the quarterly meetings of the
several churches in favour of the basis submitted P
Dr. Carman. —Three-fourths in some courts, two-thirds in others,
others simple majority ; either three-fourths or two-thirds in quarter-
ly meetings.
Dr. Dewart.—Two-thirds of the quarterly meetings and a majority
of the Annual Conferences in the Methodist Church of Canada.
Mr. Webber. —A two-thirds was secured, but a majority was what
was asked for.
X. What has been the effect of the union ?
Dr. Carman.—Thank God, very satisfactory.
Mr. Webber. —Good every way.
1. Upon the churches generally ?
Dr. Carman.—(a) Constant increase of membership ; increase in all
funds; (b) Strength and growth of institutions, —press, educational,
Sabbath-school, Epworth League, &c., &c.
Mr. Webber. —Prosperity, power, unity, and much success.
2. Upon Missions ?
(a) Home Missions.
Dr. Carman. —Greater peace, unity, and efficiency.
Mr. Webber.—Many have become self-sustaining, and a number of
new fields opened.
(b) Foreign Missions.
Dr. Carman.—Having, by the grace of God, well sustained our
Japan and Indian Missions, we have felt enabled to go forth into
China. Contention having ceased at home, we can the better and
more largely work abroad.
Mr. Webber.—Extension and better support.
3. Upon higher educution on Christian principles ?
Dr. Carman.—ln this the union has helped, though we are starting
upon a policy that has yet to demonstrate and justify itself. Still it
is a policy of such scope and possibilities that divided we should
hardly have undertaken.
Mr. Webber. —We have helped to liberalize the old Wesleyan and
Episcopal element, and have secured an extension of Christian but
undenominational lines.


4. Upon the spread of Methodist literature P
Dr. Carman.—Our Book-room and periodical growth is unprece-
dented in our history and perfectly satisfactory. The circulation of
Sabbath-school literature is inspiring.
Mr. Webber. —Good every way.
5. Upon Book-room business ?
Dr. Carman.—Stimulating, cheering, and so far, thank God, solid.
Mr. Webber. —The business of the Book-room is immensely in-
creased beyond all expectation.
Dr. Dewart. —To all parts of the general question, he says, “ In all
these the result has been beneficial, and we are one for everything.”
XI. What are your conditions of membership ?
Dr. Carman.—“ Desire to flee from the wrath to come, and to be
saved from their sins,” evidenced as in our general rules. These rules
are to be understood as forbidding neglect of duties, sinful words,
buying, selling, or using intoxicating liquors as beverages, dancing,
games of chance, horse-races; contributing to support of church, &c.
Discipline is not more lax than before union. Class meeting is not a
test , but any or all the ordinances are the test.
Dr. Dewart. —All our members are expected to meet in class, but
the class meeting is virtually on the same plane as other means. The
increase reported is on as solid a basis as at any former time, probably
more so.
Mr. Webber. —Same as before ; no change.
The following extracts from the letters sent with the answers may
be inserted here: —
Dr. Carman. —“In reply please find your list of questions answered
not so much with statistics as statements that statistics would justify.
Our membership, increasing every year , has gone up from 160,000 at
union to well nigh 250,000 now. The Book-room capital has largely
increased, mission contributions, fields, &c. Sabbath-schools all
growing in a percentage above that of our population. We think God
has wonderfully owned and blest the union, and we are striving to
use its advantages to His glory.
I pray very sincerely that you also may be led of the Holy Spirit in
this great matter. We felt we could not attack our north-west in
fragments and detail; much less the solid heathendom of earth. May
you, in united phalanx, be fully prepared for your glorious vantage-
ground for Jesus on that side of the globe. We have other and
larger problems that I am confident will not be solved without further
and larger unions. The great God lead us on, the Cross, the Gross,
the battle call.”
Dr. Dewart.—“lf on any point there was a little friction it was
scarcely large enough to make an impression on my memory. In one
respect we had a difficulty that you have not. We had Episcopal
Methodists, strongly attached to that form, and bound to have it in
some shape. A concession was made in the General Superintendent.
The Wesleyans (Methodist Church of Canada) were nearly three
times as many as all the others, but we treated all the negotiating


bodies as equals. When the spirit of union gets strong difficulties
will vanish.
The great advantage of union is that it heals breaches and sectarian
strife, economizes resources of men and money, and unites solidly for
every good purpose the scattered divisions that hold the common
faith. As a country gets settled, and the pioneer work is succeeded
by the pastoral and educational work, small bodies have not the
resources to compete with larger churches and hold their own.
I rejoice in the movement you have inaugurated, and hope God may
enable you to carry it out successfully.”
Mr. Webber.—“l have answered your questions as desired. In the
brevity of a written answer I have not gone into detail as one would
in conversation. Union is a great success. It is much best for the
country, for the church, and for men generally. It has worked well.
God is honoured, truth is advanced, the church stands forth a great
and leading power in the land, and much ill feeling and unhealthy
rivalry changed.”
The answers of these eminent men agree as truly as do the four
gospels. In the mouth of three witnesses of the highest authority
every word is established. With one accord they pronounce the
Canadian union a great success, and the unity of their testimony is
all the more striking because each wrote independently.
To present the substance of this testimony in better sequence, and
make it more readable, the following summary is added.
SUMMARY.
Predetermining Causes.
The union is attributed to the inspiration and direction of the Holy
Spirit. Divided Methodism involved waste of men and money, lax
discipline, needless travelling, and insufficient support; the alienation
of families and many youths from Methodism; constant irritation,
jealousy, and opposition at home; and these evils were perpetuated
by the setting up of rival causes in mission fields. All this presented
a scandal of Christianity before the world, and seemed offensive to
God. The example of the Presbyterians, who united to advantage,
was useful. The Ecumenical Conference of 1881 turned the attention
of Canadian Methodism more directly to union; and, constrained by
the love of Christ, the various sections amalgamated.
Legislative Aspect, Surplus Property, &c.
Various majorities in favour of union were required in the different
churches. Two-thirds of the quarterly meetings and simple majori-
ties of the Annual Conferences, were the order in “ The Methodist
Church of Canada,” the largest of the four bodies.
To give legal effect to the decision of the various churches, Domi-
nion and Provincial Acts were applied for and easily obtained.
The property, being connexional, went duly and fully under the
votes of the various bodies, and subsequently under the legislation.
In the settlement of over 4,000 estates, there were only two or three
cases in which trustees refused to relinquish their hold upon proper-


ties no longer required; but the legislative Acts covered these by
settling the title clearly.
“A committee, consisting of the District Superintendent, two minis-
ters and two laymen,” was appointed in every District where required,
to “act conjointly with the trustees on each circuit in determining
what property shall be retained for use and what shall be sold.” The
arrangement worked eo well that there was no friction of importance.
But it would have been better if the President of the Annual
Conference, or General Superintendent, had been on each committee to
look after connexional interests.
A time was fixed w hen the union Acts should come into operation;
but no attempt was made to quickly force the changes effected. They
were made gradually, so that people had time to look at matters and
have their say.
In most cases where buildings with debts were no longer required,
they were disposed of, and the liabilities discharged with the proceeds.
When local trusts could not manage in this way help was given by a
Union Church Relief Fund, as a careful supervision determined; and
this met they difficulty, though it did not prevent some cases of pres-
sure.
Laymen and Reservation.
The laymen of the Primitive Methodist and Bible Christian Churches
did not specially object to the arrangement by which questions of
ministerial character, &c., were dealt with by ministers only in the
District Meeting and Annual Conference. Laymen do not wish to be
detained by that business. They accepted the reservation heartily
and continue to do so.
Transfer of Ministers.
There was no special difficulty at the time of the union in connection
with the transfer of ministers from one Conference to another. The
General Conference simply ordered that every minister belonged to
the Conference within whose limits he was found June 1, 1888.
There is a transfer committee, composed of Presidents of the Annual
Conferences and the General Superintendent, with full powers; but
in their practice they overcrowd no Conference, while accommodating
ministers and quarterly meetings as best they can. The committee
serves an excellent purpose; but some difficulty has always been found
to make transfers satisfactory to all.
Superannuation Fund.
The “basis of union” provided “that no change shall be made in
regard to the claims of any minister holding a permanent super-
annuated relation at the present time (1882); and they shall receive
on the basis of their present claims as far as the annual income will
allow.” Also that “so soon as the Methodist Episcopal, Primitive
Methodist, or Bible Christian Churches shall furnish an amount of
capital equal in proportion to that now held by the Methodist Church
of Canada, the superannuated ministers of such uniting churches, and
those who may become superannuated after union, shall have a claim
on the proceeds of the whole invested capital in common with those
who are now ministers of the Methodist Church of Canada.”


The arrangement proved satisfactory under a just and careful
administration. A proportionate amount was paid into the superan-
nuation fund. The Methodist Episcopal Church paid some £5,000.
What the people did not raise was furnished by the ministers them-
selves —some gave notes and paid. The ministers of the Methodist
Episcopal Church paid about £lO each. In the Primitive Methodist
Church the members made up the lai’ger part. In the Bible
Christian Church it was raised by the ministers.
Surplus Ministers.
There were about 60 surplus ministers when the union took place.
Hardly any were sent adrift. At first there was a little difficulty in
stationing. A few men were superannuated. Some went to the
United States, ever calling for men. Circuits were divided, home
missions enlarged, and foreign work extended. In three years all
were needed and more.
Conditions of Membership,
The conditions of membership in the united church are as strict as
they were in the separate churches. The increase reported is on as
solid a basis as at any former time —probably more so.
A Happy Coalition.
With very few exceptions the ministers and people of the uniting
churches most happily coalesced. There may have been some delay
in uniting congregations, and some jealousy, but it soon died out. All
were in a larger and better Methodist Church, with all rights guarded,
annuities and privileges secured. There was every reason for a happy
coalition, and no serious failure to secure it. All lines of division soon
became effaced, and the happiness of the union was beyond expectation.
The Union a Grand Success.
The effect of the union has been very satisfactory. There has been
a constant increase of all the institutions and funds. The Sunday-
schools have grown faster than the population. There is greater
peace, unity, and efficiency in home missions; many have become
self-sustaining, and many new fields opened. Having sustained
the Indian and Japan missions, the church has gone forth into China.
Contention having ceased at home the church can the better and more
largely work abroad. The members have increased more rapidly
since the union than during the previous ten years, though the popu-
lation has not grown half so fast—they have advanced from 160,000
to nearly 250,000 in nine years.
The union has liberalized and extended higher education upon
Christian but undenominational lines, and helped to start a policy of
such scope and possibilities that it would hardly else have been under-
taken.
The growth of periodical literature is unprecedented in the history
of the church, and perfectly satisfactory. The circulation of Sunday-
school literature is inspiring. The Book-room business is solid. The
capital has largely increased, and the business grown beyond all
expectation. The church being one for everything, everything
prospers.


3. —A Further Statement of Results
is given in the “Centennial of Canadian Methodism,” recently pub-
lished by direction of the General Conference. The book was written
by thirteen of the ablest ministers in the church. They were chosen
from various sections; they deal with the history of those sections,
and different aspects of Dominion Methodism; and no control was
exercised on the expression of individual opinion. In reference to
certain events in previous history they express variety of judgment;
but regarding the benefits of the union they are a solid unit, and
many striking evidences appear in their pages. Let the facts under
the following headings suffice.
Growth in Large Towns.
The evangelization of large towns is a difficult problem. Method-
ist union has helped to solve it in Canada. In Ottawa, London,
Guelph and Belleville the membership has nearly doubled since the
union; in Kingston, Hamilton, and Toronto it has more than doubled,
and almost trebled in Victoria. In Montreal, the capital of a Roman
Catholic province, there is an increase of over 800. The increase in
sixteen of the principal towms is 15,000. Toronto now contains 30'
churches, 10,000 members, and a Methodist population of 30,000.
Missionary Progress.
The union of 1874 “extended the home missions by consolidating
the forces east and west, thus covering the whole of the Dominion,”
and from that time the work was carried on without financial aid
from England. The formation of the Woman’s Missionary Society,
1880, “marks the beginning of what promises to become one of the
mightiest forces in Methodist mission work.” In accomplishing the
difficult task of blending the interests of the four churches which
united in 1883 mission work “was a prime factor, for it served by its
magnitude and importance to turn the attention of ministers and
people from old differences, and to fix it upon a common object.”
What the old “society did for one part of the church the woman’s
movement did for another. Just at the right moment the devoted
women of Methodism in all the uniting churches joined hands in an
earnest effort to carry the gospel to the women and children of
heathendom, and in that effort they mightily aided to consolidate the
work at home.” The income of the woman’s fund increased from less
than £6OO in 1882 to over £5,100 in 1890. The last union gave
home mission w T ork a strong impulse. Nearly 400 ministers are now
employed, there is a membership in the missions of 40,000, and “the
opening up of the magnificent north-west, with a teeming population
in prospect, presents a grand field for remunerative mission work,’ r
which the united church can do infinitely better than divided Metho-
dism could have done it. There is now a mission among the French-
speaking people of Quebec, “who are adherents of the most solid,
thoroughly organized, and aggressive type of Romanism in the world,”
and good is being done. The Indian and Japan work prospers, and a
new mission is opened in China. “The missionary spirit has been
greatly intensified, and the church is looking for new fields and wider
conquests.”


Higher Education
was promoted by the union. “The advance of the whole Methodist
people in liberal appreciation of their educational work has been since
that date one of the greatest triumphs of the church.” The Methodist
Episcopal University at Belleville has been affiliated to the Victoria
University, to their mutual advantage. The various Methodist Col-
leges of the Dominion have become increasingly useful. The system
of education “places the church in closest contact with the whole
range of educational work and influence in every part of the country,
and is, perhaps, the most complete found in any part of the Anglo-
Saxon world. With 19 professors and 327 students in the University
faculties of arts, 11 professors and 144 students in the faculties of
divinity, and 1,262 students in the various academies, a noble work is
now being done, and with the nearly one-and-a-half millions (dollars,
I presume, which mean £300,000) of resources which are to-day being
placed in hand for this work, the responsibilies and opportunities for
the future far surpass those of the past.”
Methodist Literature and Sunday-schools.
The Christian Guardian, which had run a good course for fifty years,
as a river is swollen by tributaries, became more useful than ever
after the organs of the other Methodist bodies were merged into
it at the union. “Ho periodical in Canada stands so high as an
exponent of Christian thought and culture.” The development of the
Sunday School Banner and Sunday School Advocate has been remark-
able since the union. Those serials have more than doubled their
size and greatly improved in mechanical make-up and illustration.
There is scarcely a hamlet or neighbourhood in the English-speaking
parts of the country where they do not circulate, and they aid scores
of thousands of Sunday-school teachers. In eight years their circu-
lation increased from 103,729 to 324,350. “The Canadian Methodist
Magazine, devoted to religious literature and social progress,” followed
the union of 1874. Over half a million numbers, of 100 pages each,
have been distributed in the Dominion. It is read in nearly every
one of the United States, in the British Isles, and more distant lands.
The Sunday-school Extension Fund also followed union. Each school
makes a yearly collection for it. Grants of books, &c., are made
to establish new schools, and through it nearly 500 new schools were
opened from 1886 to 1890. The schools grow faster than the popu-
lation, and the scholars numbered 226,050 in 1890. The profits of
the Toronto Book-room were nearly £50,000 the last four years.
Hew premises, costing £23,000 have been built, and about 200 persons
are employed in the business. There are also Book-rooms at Montreal
and in Hew Brunswick.
The Increase of Members
since the union has been at the rate of about 10,000 a year, making
some 90,000 in nine years. The number is soon read; but that
increase means more than six times the combined Methodist member-
ship in South and West Australia, double the Wesleyan membership
of Australia, Tasmania, and Hew Zealand, more than the whole mem-


bership of the Wesleyan Church in Australasia and the South Sea
Islands ; and the Canadian population is only one-third more than
these lands contain.
Writing me last December, Rev. George Brown, D.D., General
Secretary of the Australasian Wesleyan Church, says, “When I was
in Canada a few years ago I made very particular enquiries as to the
results of union there, and in every case I was assured that it was a
grand success. Dr. Antliff, of Montreal, assured me that in the work
of adjustment, which they feared would be full of very serious diffi-
culties, they had found little or no difficulty. He said that ministers
and people were all unanimous now in the opinion that the union was
a complete success, and that the fears excited in the hearts of some
had proved to be utterly groundless. I was told that ‘you would not
find a sane man in Canada who would wish for the old state of affairs
again.’ ”
Subsequent years have brought the wisdom and advantages of the
union into bolder relief. There was but one voice on the subject at
the Ecumenical Conference last October. The testimony is confirmed
by Chief Justice Way, D.C.L., Revs. H. W. Horwill, M.A., W. Lee,
and others, who have since been through the Dominion. The success
of the union is demonstrated. Dr. Buckley, editor of the New York
Christian Advocate , pronounces Canadian Methodism the finest in the
world. “As a better England has been made by Britons, Romans,
Saxons, Danes, and Normans, in combination, than either of those
races would have produced,” Canada has formed a superior Methodist
Church, by blending the excellencies of several Methodist Churches;
and her experience specially teaches the divided Methodism of Aus-
tralasia to “go and do likewise.”


CHAPTER IV.
METHODIST UNION IN AUSTRALASIA.
I.—The Diffeeent Sections.
Methodism obtains in all the colonies of Australasia. There are four
sections —the Wesleyan Methodist, Primitive Methodist, United
Methodist Free Church, and Bible Christian. The Wesleyan Church
is represented in all the colonies; the Primitive Methodist in all save
Western Australia; the United Methodist Free Church in New South
Wales, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania, and New Zealand; the Bible
Christian in South Australia, Victoria, Queensland, and New Zealand.
The latter has several churches in New South Wales, but being res-
pectively connected with the South Australian and Victorian Confer-
ences they are reckoned with those colonies. The four sections are
represented in Queensland, Victoria, and New Zealand; three
in New South Wales, Tasmania, and South Australia. The Wesleyans
are numerically strongest in Victoria, and, in proportion to the popu-
lation, weakest in Queensland, where their ministers, local preachers,
and members are outnumbered by those of the Primitive Methodist
Church. The Primitives have most members in Victoria, but are
relatively strongest in South Australia. The U.M. Free Church is
strongest in Victoria, and the Bible Christian in South Australia.
The Wesleyans have 8,231 members in New South Wales, 1,848
in Queensland, 19,286 in Victoria and Tasmania, 7,774 in South
and West Australia, 8,319 in New Zealand—total 45,458, making,
with 33,257 in the mission field, a grand total of 78,715. The Primi-
tives have 2,070 members in New South Wales, 1,867 in Queensland,
4,028 in Victoria and Tasmania, 2,832 in South Australia, and 1,298
in New Zealand —total 12,095. The U.M. Free Church has 355 mem-
bers in New South Wales, 352 in Queensland, 1,816 in Victoria and
Tasmania, and 891 in New Zealand—total 3,414. The Bible Christ-
ians have 2,994 members in South Australia, 2,454 in Victoria, 100
in Queensland, and 300 in New Zealand—total 5,848. The adherents
total about as follows:—Wesleyan Church, including 112,176 in the
mission field, 433,070; Primitive Methodist, 55,114; U.M. Free
Church, 14,552 ; Bible Christian, 24,820. Thus the Wesleyans have
a total of 78,715 members, 433,070 adherents ; and the other sections
20,586 members and 94,486 adherents; the grand total being nearly
100,000 members and over 520,000 adherents. The Wesleyan mem-
bers have increased over 16,000, and those of minor Methodism nearly
7,500 the last ten years, making a total increase of some 23,500 for
the decade.
The estimated value of the Wesleyan Church property in Australia,


Tasmania, and New Zealand is *£1,959,216, with an aggregate debt
of £564,322. Minor Methodist Church property is reckoned worth
£526,885, with a total debt of £175,557. Total value of Methodist
property in Australasia, £2,486,101. Total debt, £739,879.
The Wesleyan Church has missions in Tonga, Samoa, Fiji, New
Britain and New Guinea, where 37 English and 77 native missionaries
are employed, with a membership of 33,257 and 112,176 adherents.
The other sections have no missions to the heathen, but the Bible
Christians aid the Connexional Mission in China, and two of their
number are accepted as agents for it.
The Wesleyans have “for the general education and theological
training of students for the ministry, four provisional institutions,
with 25 students, besides 13 in training for the Maori work. For the
higher education of youth there is Queen’s University College in Vic-
toria, with 30 students in residence; four colleges for boys and three
ladies’ colleges, with 1,205 students.” The Bible Christians have a
college for boys, with 150 students; and provision is made to train
young men for the ministry.
Further statistics of the four sections are given in the table on the
next page.
2. —Various efforts for Union.
The union of the Primitive Wesleyans with the Wesleyan Method-
ists in Ireland, in 1878, and the union between the Wesleyan and
Methodist New Connexion Churches in Canada, six years later,
favourably impressed the Methodist world. The first Ecumenical
Conference in London, in 1881, strikingly evinced the underlying
unity of Methodism. It led to complete union in Canada and drew
all Methodist Churches more closely together.
Within the next three years the subject was discussed in many
Australasian Conferences, which passed resolutions favourable to
union. Many letters appeared in different papers. They expressed a
variety of opinion, but were chiefly for union. The Victorian and
Tasmanian and New Zealand Wesleyan Conferences of 1882 appointed
committees to confer with those of the other sections on the subject,
and in each case a basis of union was adopted. The General Wesleyan
Conference of 1884 earnestly debated the question and passed the fol-
lowing resolution: —“ That this Conference, recognizing the desirability
of the union of the Methodist Churches throughout Australasia, and
believing that the basis of the union that has taken effect in Canada
will be found generally suited to the circumstances of Methodism in
these colonies, commends the subject to the favourable consideration of
the Annual Conferences, directs them to open communications with the
other branches of the Methodist family in their respective colonies, to
take such other steps as may appear advisable to bring about Method-
ist union on the general principles of that basis, and to report to the
next General Conference.”
This deliverance of the “supreme legislative court” of the principal
Methodist Church in these lands gave great encouragement to the
numerous friends of union, and the consummation seemed in the near
# For South Australia simply the original cost is reckoned.


gfafisfics of Australasian 1892.
Colonies.
Sections.
Churches.
Ministers.
Local
Preachers.
Members.
Sunday
Scholars.
Adherents,
including Mem-
bers and
iNew bouth Wales
Wesleyan Methodist
Primitive Methodist
United Meth. Free Church
886
77
10
131
29
6
452
150
30
8,231
2,070
355
26,790
6,678
1,056
71,571
10,818
1,765
Totals
478
166
632
10,656
24,523
84,154
Queensland
W esleyan Methodist
Primitive Methodist
United Meth. Free Church
Bible Christian ...
77
80
5
5
33
38
3
3
116
149
12
11
1,848
1,867
352
100
7,159
5,432
417
280
14,730
9,166
1,121
480
■ Totals
167
77
308
3,167
13,288
25,497
Victoria and Tas-
mania...
Wesleyan Methodist
Primitive Methodist
Bible Christian ...
UnitedMeth. Free Church
675
134
119
58
177
51
41
27
970
297
157
67
19,286
4,028
2,454
1,816
64,048
8,309
6,685
3,725
127,992
16,365
10,593
7,357
Totals
986
296
1,491
27,584
71,767
162,307
bouth and West
Australia
Wesleyan Methodist
Primitive Methodist
Bible Christian ...
275
117
138
75
31
39
440
196
212
7,774
2,832
2,994
22,299
6,059
6,561
51,440
12,342
12,549
Totals
530
145
848
13,600
34,919
76,331
New Zealand ...
Wesleyan Methodist
Primitive Methodist
UnitedMeth. Free Church
Bible Christian ...
217
42
23
14
85
22
12
7
397
108
29
40
8,319
1,298
891
300
19,469
3,446
2,527
600
65,163
6,042
4,309
1,200
Totals
296
126
574
10,808
26,042
66,714
ooutn oeaIslands' Wesleyan Meth. Missions
1,062
114
2,987
33,257
42,754
112,176
Grand Totals
3,514
924
6,804 '
99,072
213,293 '
527,179


distance. Alas ! it receded as months and three years went by. The
words of a well-known Wesleyan minister in reference to the New
South Wales Conference may be applied to each of the Annual Con-
ferences: —“During these three years the Conference failed to carry
out the expressed direction of the General Conference, namely, to ‘open
communication with the other branches of the Methodist family.’ ”
But it should cot be forgotten that the membership question and the
Tonga Mission trouble were absorbing matters at this period.
Despairing of full Methodist union, the Primitive Methodist and
Bible Christian Churches of South Australia considered the question
of union among themselves. Their Conferences, in 1887, affirmed the
desirability of such union, and appointed committees to ascertain if
it were practicable. Their resolutions were expressly framed to admit
of the committees being joined by that of any other Methodist Church
in the colony. The Methodist New Connexion Church so understood
the matter and appointed a committee accordingly. The joint com-
mittee’s proceedings were earnest and harmonious; mutual concessions
were heartily made, a basis was unanimously adopted, the desire for
a larger union was evinced repeatedly, and the hope expressed that
the union in view would prove a step toward the amalgamation of all
the Methodist Churches throughout Australasia.
Circuits representing three-fifths the membership of the Churches
named declared in favour of the proposed union, but the desire was
not considered wide and deep enough to effect it. However, the move-
ment brought into bolder relief the desire for full Methodist union,
and, in February, 1888, the joint committee adopted this minute:—
“In examining the returns we find that many of the circuits in our
respective bodies have,'unasked, expressed a unanimous desire for the
union of all the Methodist Churches in the colony. We believe that
such a union, if arranged upon terms mutually honom’able, would be
generally approved by our ministers and people and prove of immense
advantage in dealing with .great social questions and the spread of
Christ’s kingdom.” I find the following also recorded in the minute-
book ; —“ Twenty-seven circuits spontaneously voted for the union of all
the Methodist Churches, and no minister or circuit (of minor Method-
ism) in South Australia is known to be opposed to it.” Experience
in this movement, as one of its secretaries, taught me that nothing
short of the union of all the Methodist Churches in these lands would
suffice, and inspired the resolution to seek that henceforth.
Though the attempt to secure minor union failed, the work was not
in vain. The Primitive Methodist brethren consented to an equal
number of ministers and laymen in the Conference, and to the super-
intendent minister being chairman of all official meetings in his
circuit, thus disposing of difficulties which the left wing of Methodism
presented to union. It also brought the Methodist New Connexion
Church in Adelaide more closely into contact with the Bible Christian
denomination, and prepared for its affiliation therewith.
Years rolled by and the prospect of union appeared dim, but its
ardent friends encouraged one another with hopeful words, and felt
assured the right sentiment was quietly growing. Deploring the evils
of division, and thinking ministers less interested in union than they'


should be, a number of leading laymen, belonging to three Methodist
sections at Crystal Brook, S.A., formed a committee to further the
cause. They met many times, passed a number of resolutions,
appealed to all the quarterly meetings of the colony, received nume-
rous replies, mostly favourable, and thus fostered the union sentiment
in the province.
3. —Present Position op the Question.
The S.A. Bible Christian Conference of 1891 passed a resolution
expressing the conviction that “the organic union of all the Methodist
Churches Australasia would remove the cause of ranch friction and
waste, and further the evangelization of these colonies,” and appointed
a committee “to watch the course of events in the interests of the
denomination, with liberty to confer with any committees appointed
by other Methodist Churches with the object indicated.” The S.A.
Wesleyan Conference reciprocated by appointing a “committee to
confer with committees appointed by other Methodist Churches on
the subject of the union of the Methodist Churches in Australasia,
and to co-operate with them on such subjects as Sabbath observance,
temperance, and other public questions of common interest.” The
Primitive Methodist Conference, which was held before the other two,
did not pass any resolution on the subject, but some of its leading
members united in the movement which followed.
Soon after representatives of the three bodies met to consider moral
politics in connection with the approaching election to the Legislative
Council. Resolutions on local option, Sunday-closing, cup-day holi-
day, the totalizator, and the extension of divorce laws were passed.
A copy of the resolutions, with questions thereon, was sent to each
candidate, and many useful answers were elicited.
The Goulburn Wesleyan District Meeting, New South Wales, in
October, 1891, unanimously passed a series of resolutions expressing
the opinion “ that the time is at hand when the various branches of
the Methodist Church should be united,” and earnestly recommending
Conference “to appoint a committee to investigate the subject, and
confer with any committee of kindred churches in reference to the
question.”
November 27, 1891, a memorable joint committee meeting was held
in the Wesleyan Lecture Hall, Pirie-street, Adelaide. The following
were present:—From the Wesleyan Church—Revs. J. Nicholson
(President of the Conference), H. T. Burgess (Ex-President), R. S.
Casely, C. H. Goldsmith, J. Allen, C. T. Newman, Hon. Alfred Catt,
M.P., and Messrs. T. Hack, M.P., D. Nock, J.P., F. Chappie, 8.A.,
B.Sc. (Head Master of Prince Alfred College); from the Primitive
Methodist Church—Revs. J. G. Wright (President of the Conference),
S. Wellington, J. Goodwin, J. H. Williams, and Mr. W. Diment, J.P.;
from the Bible Christian Church—Revs. J. Dingle (President of the
Conference), T. Piper (Ex-President), W. F. James (Secretary), E.
Gratton, 0. Lake, and Mr. J. Ashton, J.P. Rev. J. Nicholson was
elected chairman and Rev. W. F. James secretary.
Union was discussed for five hours in an excellent spirit. Only one
of the twenty-two present failed to see that union was desirable.


Some thought the Wesleyan view of the pastorate might prove a great
impediment; but, after brethren of the three churches had spoken, it
was clear the question could be satisfactorily settled. The more union
was considered the more desirable and practicable it seemed. Many
spoke strongly in its favour, but none more so than Wesleyan breth-
ren. I never knew a meeting with a happier blending of frankness,
mutual respect and brotherly love. A series of resolutions, moved by
Rev. H. T. Burgess and seconded by Rev. O. Lake, was adopted with
great heartiness ; no hand was raised against one of them. The reso-
solutions of the meeting expressed “its firm conviction that the organic
union of all the Methodist Churches in Australasia is desirable in the
general interests of the work of God,” and the belief “that there is a
growing desire throughout the churches in the colony for efforts being
made with a view to organic union being brought about;” it considered
“the time had come for practically dealing with the subject; that by
following the leadings of divine providence all difficulties will be
overcome, and the feasibility of such union will become increasingly
apparent;” it resolved “to use all proper means to advance the cause
of Methodist union,” and requested “the S.A. Annual Conferences to
earnestly consider the matter, and to appoint members of a council
which may prepare a basis of union, &c., and report to the Conferences
of 1893 for further consideration.”
The meeting was followed by hallowed memories. Its report was read
with deep interest throughout the colonies, in England and Canada,
and its echoes have been sounding ever since. It was noticed by over
20 Australian journals. Many of them published articles on union.
The Christian Weekly, while recognizing the difficulties, asked, “What
has either body to lose? (by union) and adds, “We emphatically
answer nothing that is essential to the honour or prestige attaching
to them, nothing of social influence or religious usefulness; but all
will be gainers.” The Christian Colonist said, “There is a general
feeling that there is no sufficient reason, particularly in Australia,
why religious bodies which have so much in common should any
longer remain apart.” The Spectator published two articles in the
same issue, one warmly favoring union; the other, though admitting
the desirability of it, might he entitled “Caution” and evidently
wished it deferred sine die. The Weekly Advocate said, “ The sooner
the whole of the colonies follow in the wake of South Australia the
better.” Glad Tidings believed “in the providence of God no greater
blessing could happen to the Churches concerned than the much-to-
be-desired result.” The S.A. Advertiser observed, “To the general
public Methodists of all denominations appear pretty much alike.
Why in the world there should he two or three distinct congregations
in a country township, where one would hold all the people, is a con-
stant puzzle to the uninitiated. We suspect the greatest hindrance
to any change is the vis inertias of use and wont. To some people the
fact that things are is a sufficient reason for their continuing to be.”
The Laura Standard said that some opposing difficulties, formerly
considered insuperable, appear to be approaching vanishing point.”
The Border Watch declared that “union must eventuate some day, if
not on religious, certainly on economic grounds.” The Barrier Miner


dealt with the “shameful multiplication of church buildings, the con-
tinuous waste of energy” in small places, through divided Methodism,
and warmly advocated union. The only discouraging article I have
seen on the subject since November is the one already mentioned in
the Spectator, and that w r as well answered by Revs. Dr. Wat kin and
T. Copeland.
Spontaneously the matter was discussed in dozens of the December
quarterly meetings, and nearly all favored union. So did the five
Bible Christian District Meetings, which followed. After long and
earnest debate, resolutions in its favour were almost unanimously
passed by the three S.A. Conferences of 1892. The discussion in the
Wesleyan Conference lasted many hours. Twenty-three members
took part in it. The great majority spoke for union—only one layman
opposed it. I was present the last three hours. There was a full
Conference. Many eager spectators viewed the proceedings, and
thousands more were present in spirit. Enthusiasm prevailed. The
scene from the platform, where a seat was given me, was deeply
interesting, and the forest of hands raised for the resolution made one
of the most impressive votes I ever saw.
During the debate His Honour Chief Justice Way, D.C.L., Bible
Christian delegate to the Ecumenical Conference, gave an “At home”
at his charming residence, and invited the members of the three Con-
ferences. The company was large; refreshments were served in a
marquee ; the and the surroundings were delightful; a string
band discoursed sweet music; and His Honour made everyone feel
at home. The chief topic of conversation was Methodist union, w hich
was talked over in a cordial and hopeful spirit. Two photographic
groups were taken. The brethren heartily sang—
Blest be the tie that binds
Our hearts in Christian love;
The fellowship of kindred minds
Is like to that above;
and the occasion recalled the memorable words —“ Behold how good
and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.”
Revived effort for union appeared in Victoria near the close of 1891.
Fearing the Wesleyan Church was not ripe for it, the minor bodies
discussed the subject of union among themselves as offering “few r er
obstacles to a speedy consummation.” Some 50 leading ministers and
laymen of the Primitive Methodist, Bible Christian, and U.M. Free
Churches, met in Melbourne in December and January. Gracious
influences prevailed, and the following general principles were unani-
mously accepted:—“An equal number of laymen with ministers in
Conference;” “the appointment of a chairman to each District;”
“that the superintendent minister preside over each official meeting
in his circuit;” that “Local Churches beat liberty to elect repre-
sentatives, other than officers, to the quarterly meeting;” that “The
class meeting be retained as of vital importance;” and “that holiness
be made more prominent in preaching and teaching.” The matter
came before the minor Methodist Conferences. All of them favoured
union, but two of them expressed preference for a “complete unifica-
tion of Australasian Methodism.”


Union was long and warmly discussed in the Wesleyan Conference
of Victoria and Tasmania. Some 20 members spoke. A dozen pleaded
for the resolution favouring union. Several went for an amendment
which indicated a circuitous process to “prepare the way for union.”
Rev. Gi. Daniel said that when he moved a resolution in favour of
union “25 years ago he failed to find a seconder. It was gratifying to
him to have the Conference declaring itself almost unanimously in
favour of organic union.” The resolution carried was as follows: —
“1. That considering (a) the doctrinal unity and substantial resem-
blance of the discipline of the various Methodist Churches in Victoria
and Tasmania; (b) the unnecessary competition and waste of labour
and money caused by our separate Church operations; and (c) that a
united Church could much more effectively provide the country dis-
tricts with religious ordinances and the city populations with evan-
gelistic agencies; this Conference is of opinion that the glory of God
and the extension of Christ’s kingdom will he promoted by the organic
union of the Methodist Churches in Victoria and Tasmania. 2. That
this Conference appoint a committee to confer with similar committees
of other Methodist Churches upon the desirability and practicability
of organic union. 3. That such joint committee prepare a basis of
union, and also a scheme indicating how, if union be effected, circuits
can be re-arranged so as to provide appointments for all ministers;
and, also, how satisfactory arrangements can be made with regard to
connexional funds and property. 4. The recommendations of such
committee to be submitted to the September quarterly meetings of
1892, who shall report to the Conference of 1893.”
Resolutions favouring union were also passed by the Wesleyan
Conferences in New South Wales and Queensland and New Zealand;
also by Primitive Methodist and U.M. Free Church Conferences
for those colonies. Thus fourteen Methodist Conferences in Aus-
tralasia have this year pronounced in favour of union. This unprece-
dented expression may be taken to indicate the “present position of
the question,” and helps to justify the prediction of Chief Justice
Way at the Ecumenical Conference, last October, that “before many
years are over” a union like the Canadian will be accomplished in
Australasia.
4. —A Plea for Organic Union.
It is manifestly needed. There is unholy rivalry and waste in hun-
dreds of Australasian towns and districts through divided Methodism.
At the Ecumenical Conference of 1881, Dr. George, of America, men-
tioned a city in his land, containing less than 10,000 people. Five
Methodist sections had churches in it, a sixth strove to plant a cause
there, and the doctor pronounced it “ waste and wickedness .” If he had
seen the many instances here, where several Methodist Churches are
represented in towns with less than one thousand people each, he would
have been horror-stricken. There are 35 shire towns in Victoria, with
a gross population of 6,216. They contain 103 churches, with an
average of 60 persons for each —say 20 adults and 40 children. The
same kind of thing exists in the other colonies. There are “many
villages where four men are stationed to do the work that one man


could do better than the four. It is as though four large cannon were
loaded to the muzzle and turned upon a single point to blow down a
child’s windmill.” As the Daily Telegraph put it, “Every little village
in the land must contain a whole hierarchy of separate Churches.
The village, perhaps, has material enough for one or two strong
Churches, but instead of these it has probably six, all weak, all bur-
dened with debt, and all engaged in a fierce struggle for existence.”
Look at that picture and on this. In the province of Yunnan, Western
China, where the Bible Christians have a mission, there are five mil-
lion people, with only twelve agents among them. If there were but
one minister in South Australia, one in Queensland, one in Western
Australia, two in Hew South Wales, Victoria, and Hew Zealand, res-
pectively, with Tasmania marked one to be sent , Australasia would be
as well supplied, according to numbers, as that province. This sort
of thing is heart-breaking to missionaries. Divided Methodism is
largely responsible for it. Will she continue much longer to share
that awful responsibility ? Certainly not, in these lands, at any rate.
But the waste is not all. The then Bible Christian President, at
the Adelaide meeting in Hovember, said “he had repeatedly seen bad
feeling engendered when a second Methodist Church was planted
where there was only room for one.” The bitterness with Methodists
in rivalry is more intense than that between other Churches in rivalry,
as civil wars create worse feeling than foreign wars. I have seen
enough to warrant the assertion that Methodist rivalry often causes
the very evils that the Gospel exists to destroy. Glad Tidings says,
“The rivalries, heartburnings, and jealousies of separate Methodist
agencies in small townships, where only one strong Methodist Church
can live with something like dignity of operation, are unjustifiable
and censurable from a common-sense and business point of view. Such
a state of things can only indicate the worst kind of demoninational
pride—the pride of wishing to exist for the sake of existing. Ho
earthly use can be served in such an arrangement but to perpetuate
the spirit of feud, contention, and estrangement, which produces or is
followed by separation.” Rev. Dr. Hoss said, at the recent Ecumenical
Conference, that “when any Methodist denomination goes into a little
village in which there is already a Methodist Church of another
demonination, and builds a house and sends a pastor, it makes it
absolutely unnecessary for the devil to be personally present in that
village.” Alas ! there is too much truth in the words. Such mischief
will go on while Methodism remains divided. Organic union is needed.
The common likeness of the Methodist Churches is a reason for their
union. Their doctrine is one. There has never been a secession in
Methodism on doctrinal grounds. There is no doctrinal reason for
division now. There is no more theological difference between any
two of the sections than between one Wesleyan minister and another.
“The differences between Methodist bodies are for the most part mere
matters of church polity, and in many cases of microscopic dimen-
sions.” The sections have been traversing converging lines. Every
one of the four points that led to the first secession in Methodism has
been conceded by the Wesleyan Church. The various bodies have an
identity of historical type. “The historical justification of their


separate existence no longer exists.” The itinerancy, lay preaching,
the Conference, and the various means of grace peculiar to Methodism
obtain in all. Socially and educationally the different sections have
become more and more alike; and the resemblance in this respect is,
perhaps, greater in Australasia than in any other part of the world.
This common likeness makes everybody outside wonder why the
sections remain apart. The people within have begun to wonder why
—they wonder more and more. “The other Sunday morning,” says
Rev. Charles Garrett, “four Methodist superintendents walked to a
village, four miles from the circuit town, to preach to congregations
that would have barely filled one of the chapels. All these ministers
were one in name, one in doctrine, and one in heart: to make the
matter more monstrous I don’t believe there was a single person in
either of the chapels that could give an intelligent reason why he was
not in one of the others.” Mr. W. Diment, J.P., a man of mature
character and keen observation, told the Adelaide meeting that
through force of circumstances he had been connected with the Bible
Christian, Wesleyan, and Primitive Methodist Churches “and could
never understand why the Methodist bodies remained apart.” I am
not sure that all the people realize the names of the particular sections
to which they belong. The late census returns favour the misgiving.
For instance, the number of persons set down for the U.M. Free
Church in Victoria is one-half the actual number of the members and
Sunday-scholars.
The success of the union elsewhere is an argument for union here. The
union of the two Presbyterian Churches in England succeeded
admirably. A thanksgiving fund realized an immense sum (I think
£250,000), and the good work advanced more rapidly than ever.
Presbyterian union in Australia has been a great boon. The example
of its success in Canada was one of the predetermining causes of
Methodist union there. The union of the Wesleyan Reform and
Association bodies in England succeeded well. Rev. James Donnelly,
Secretary of the Irish Conference, gives me the following facts about
the union of the Wesleyan Methodists and Primitive Wesleyans in
Ireland. “There has been perfect harmony since. The chief advan-
tage is the clearing of the ground for work by a united ministry in
the absence of the apparent friction and opposition which used to
exist. There has been no large increase of members. But, while
the population has decreased from 5,174,836 in 1881 to 4,706,162 in
1891, and all other denominations lessened in number, the Methodist
people increased from 47,679 to 55,235.” The population decreased
seven per cent., and all other bodies shared the decrease, but Method-
ism increased thirteen per cent.
The union of the Methodist New Connexion with the Bible Christian
Church in Adelaide has been amply justified. It gave general satis-
faction. Many leading citizens, including the Governor, expressed
their pleasure. A Presbyterian gentleman wrote me a letter full of
kind feeling, and sent £5O toward the debt on Franklin-street Church.
The blending of New Connexion elements with the Bible Christian
Church made it stronger, and great success has been realized.
Every union in the Protestant world for the last generation has


been a success. But the most striking results have followed Method-
ist union in Canada. All, and especially the latter, furnish good
reason for believing that glorious success would follow Methodist
union in these colonies.
There is a strong and wide desire for union. The tendency of the age
is toward unity and co-operation. The first number of the Review of
the Churches “furnished striking evidence of the extent to which the
forces which make for unity have triumphed over dissident influences
in modern church life.” Pan-Anglican, Presbyterian, and Congrega-
tional Conferences are evidences of this tendency. The first Methodist
Ecumenical Conference created a strong desire for union. The second
made the desire stronger and wider. The third day, which was devoted
to unity and co-operation, witnessed the most remarkable expression
of desire for Methodist union that ever appeared. The pastoral address,
sent to Methodists throughout the world, was immediately telegraphed
for publication in 800 newspapers. It hailed the growing spirit of
unity, and said; —“ Our ecclesiastical principles are not so various as
the forms in which they are accidentally embodied.” It counselled
closer co-operation and stated that “before the eyes of many of us passes
the delightful vision of a time when, in each land where it is planted,
Methodism shall become, for every useful purpose, one, and the
Methodism of the world shall be a close federation of Churches for
the spread of the kingdom of Christ.” All this has told upon the
Methodist world, especially upon the Australasian sections, and
fourteen Conferences have pronounced in favour of union.
I might fill chapters with the indications of wide-spread desire for
union which have reached me from various colonies, but let the fol-
lowing suffice. The Hon. P. W. Holder, M.P., a distinguished Wes-
leyan, and now Premier of South Australia, says, “I have for years
believed that union would multiply our joys and our capacity for
work and would divide our burdens and difficulties —those that did
not disappear with rivalries then no more. I have a wide acquaintance
with the laymen of all the Methodist bodies and believe that, as a rule,
the desire for union is in proportion to the vigour of the spiritual life.
I think the time has come for a step in advance.” These words were
written in January before any of the Conferences met.
Four years ago the conveners of the minor Methodist committees
in S.A. stated, in a joint letter to the Christian Weekly, their conviction
that if representatives of the Wesleyan Church had been present with
the other committees, the Canadian basis of union, with slight modi-
fications, would have been accepted. There is equal readiness for
union in the minor bodies of this colony now, and there is good reason
to believe the minor bodies in the other colonies are also ready. From
all I can learn, there is wide and strong desire for union in the Wes-
leyan Church. I believe a great difficulty is the conservative element
in two or three Conferences. But that element will not prevent the
consummation so devoutly and generally desired. The sentiment of
the people is waiting to be shaped by their representatives. Brethren!
“Close your ranks and advance ten steps forward.” Lead the divided
sections of the great Methodist army to union and victory !
There are difficulties to he overcome; and they are neither few nor


small. Bat nothing worth doing can be accomplished without diffi-
culties. Christianity was established with difficulty, and difficulties
have attended its whole course. There was never a church built, an
extension made, or a mission planted without difficulty. Gigantic
difficulties have challenged the course of Methodism in Australasia —
one of the most diligent, popular, and useful of its ministers only
received a crown at one quarterly meeting—but it has overcome them
and done good work. It would be strange if there were not difficulties
in the way of union. They are no argument against it. They exist
to be overcome; they are the statesman’s opportunity. None of the
difficulties in the way of union are insuperable. Similar and even
greater difficulties were overcome in Canada. Methodism was more
composite there than it is here. There had been more bitter contention
than Australasia has witnessed. There was a strong section in favour
of episcopacy and bound to have it in some form. We have no such
difficulty here. The difficulty of getting the principle established of
laymen in the General Conference —a serious one in Canada—is already
embodied in the constitution of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. The
greater difficulties being overcome in the Dominion, lesser difficulties
can be mastered here. Experience in connection with the meetings
of three joint committees on Methodist union leads me to express the
assurance that, if the leaders of the different bodies meet in a loving
spirit and with a genuine desire for union, many of the apparent diffi-
culties will be found to be more imaginary than real, and a solution
will be found for every difficulty.
Bishop Foster said at the late Ecumenical Conference:—“lf organic
union were possible the power of Methodism would be increased ten-
fold.” Organic union is possible in Australasia, and the power of
Methodism may be increased immensely. All the sections have been
useful here, but their progress has been impeded, and is seriously
impeded now through their divided condition; and I believe the fric-
tion, the overlapping, and waste will continue until organic i\nion be
formed.
Let union be effected in the spirit of the Canadian union and like
results will follow. Friction and waste will cease in town and country,
and a higher standard of piety will prevail; all the members being in
a larger and better Church, Connexional sentiment will be broader
and stronger; the Methodist papers will increase in excellence and
and circulate more widely; a distinctively Australasian Meth xlist
Magazine could be established; educational appliances will receive
fuller support and become more useful. There will be more concen-
trated effort to spread Christ’s kingdom throughout the colonies, and
Methodism will be prepared for her mission to the heathen world of
Asia. Her triumphs in Fiji are the admiration of Christendom ; but,
in view of the future of humanity, what are they compared with the
triumphs which a united and consecrated Methodism may win in
India, China, and Japan ?
Throughout the last May missionary meetings in London there was a
golden thread of conviction that a great awakening will speedily occur
in heathen lands. Divided Methodism cannot do her part in this
movement. I know of persons to-day on the altar for China; but


been a success. But the most striking results have followed Method-
ist union in Canada. All, and especially the latter, furnish good
reason for believing that glorious success would follow Methodist
union in these colonies.
There is a strong and wide desire for union. The tendency of the age
is toward unity and co-operation. The first number of the Review of
the Churches “furnished striking evidence of the extent to which the
forces which make for unity have triumphed over dissident influences
in modern church life.” Pan-Anglican, Presbyterian, and Congrega-
tional Conferences are evidences of this tendency. The first Methodist
Ecumenical Conference created a strong desire for union. The second
made the desire stronger and wider. The third day, which was devoted
to unity and co-operation, witnessed the most remarkable expression
of desire for Methodist union that ever appeared. The pastoral address,
sent to Methodists throughout the world, was immediately telegraphed
for publication in 800 newspapers. It hailed the growing spirit of
unity, and said: —“ Our ecclesiastical principles are not so various as
the forms in which they are accidentally embodied.” It counselled
closer co-operation and stated that “before the eyes of many of us passes
the delightful vision of a time when, in each land where it is planted,
Methodism shall become, for every useful purpese, one, and the
Methodism of the world shall be a close federation of Churches for
the spread of the kingdom of Christ.” All this has told upon the
Methodist world, especially upon the Australasian sections, and
fourteen Conferences have pronounced in favour of union.
I might fill chapters with the indications of wide-spread desire for
union which have reached me from various colonies, but let the fol-
lowing suffice. The Hon. F. W. Holder, M.P., a distinguished Wes-
leyan, and now Premier of South Australia, says, “I have for years
believed that union would multiply our joys and our capacity for
work and would divide our burdens and difficulties —those that did
not disappear with rivalries then no more. I have a wide acquaintance
with the laymen of all the Methodist bodies and believe that, as a rule,
the desire for union is in proportion to the vigour of the spiritual life.
I think the time has come for a step in advance.” These words were
written in January before any of the Conferences met.
Four years ago the conveners of the minor Methodist committees
in S. A. stated, in a joint letter to the Christian Weekly , their conviction
that if representatives of the Wesleyan Church had been present with
the other committees, the Canadian basis of union, with slight modi-
fications, would have been accepted. There is equal readiness for
union in the minor bodies of this colony now, and there is good reason
to believe the minor bodies in the other colonies are also ready. From
all I can learn, there is wide and strong desire for union in the Wes-
leyan Church. I believe a great difficulty is the conservative element
in two or three Conferences. But that element will not prevent the
consummation so devoutly and generally desired. The sentiment of
the people is waiting to be shaped by their representatives. Brethren!
“Close your ranks and advance ten steps forward.” Lead the divided
sections of the great Methodist army to union and victory !
There are difficulties to he overcome; and they are neither few nor


small. Bat nothing worth doing can be accomplished without diffi-
culties. Christianity was established with difficulty, and difficulties
have attended its whole course. There was never a church built, an
extension made, or a mission planted without difficulty. Gigantic
difficulties have challenged the course of Methodism in Australasia—
one of the most diligent, popular, and useful of its ministers only
received a crown at one quarterly meeting—but it has overcome them
and done good work. It would be strange if there were not difficulties
in the way of union. They are no argument against it. They exist
to be overcome; they are the statesman’s opportunity, hlone of the
difficulties in the way of union are insuperable. Similar and even
greater difficulties were overcome in Canada. Methodism was more
composite there than it is here. There had been more bitter contention
than Australasia has witnessed. There was a strong section in favour
of episcopacy and bound to have it in some form. We have no such
difficulty here. The difficulty of getting the principle established of
laymen in the General Conference —a serious one in Canada —is already
embodied in the constitution of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. The
greater difficulties being overcome in the Dominion, lesser difficulties
can be mastered here. Experience in connection with the meetings
of three joint committees on Methodist union leads me to express the
assurance that, if the leaders of the different bodies meet in a loving
spirit and with a genuine desire for union, many of the apparent diffi-
culties will be found to be more imaginary than real, and a solution
will be found for every difficulty.
Bishop Foster said at the late Ecumenical Conference:—“lf organic
union were possible the power of Methodism would be increased ten-
fold.” Organic union is possible in Australasia, and the power of
Methodism may be increased immensely. All the sections have been
useful here, but their progress has been impeded, and is seriously
impeded now through their divided condition; and I believe the fric-
tion, the overlapping, and waste will continue until organic hnion be
formed.
Let union be effected in the spirit of the Canadian union and like
results will follow. Friction and waste will cease in town and country,
and a higher standard of piety will prevail; all the members being in
a larger and better Church, Connexional sentiment will be broader
and stronger; the Methodist papers will increase in excellence and
and circulate more widely; a distinctively Australasian Meth Mist
Magazine could be established; educational appliances will receive
fuller support and become more useful. There will be more concen-
trated effort to spread Christ’s kingdom throughout the colonies, and
Methodism will be prepared for her mission to the heathen world of
Asia. Her triumphs in Fiji are the admiration of Christendom; but,
in view of the future of humanity, what are they compared with the
triumphs which a united and consecrated Methodism may win in
India, China, and Japan p
Throughout the last May missionary meetings in London there was a
golden thread of conviction that a great awakening will speedily occur
in heathen lands. Divided Methodism cannot do her part in this
movement. I know of persons to-day on the altar for China; but


they cannot be sent through lack of means. They could be sent, and
scores more, immediately, if the money wasted in rivalry were avail-
able. United Australasian Methodism could, within twenty years,
send hundreds of agents to heathen lands, wdn a multitude for Christ
and prepare for grander effort to save mankind. The nineteenth
century is closing with Methodist union established in Canada and
bearing blessed fruit from the Atlantic to the Pacific. May the twen-
tieth century dawn upon a united Australasian Methodism, taking its
full share in the evangelization of the world.
G. Hassell, Printer, Franklin-street, Adelaide.




BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
SEVEN YEARS’ PIONEER MISSION
WORK IN CARDIFF.
T H lIR, ID EDITION.
150 Phgetf, pektly got up. Clotlj Covei% levelled
O-ilt s<dges, Is. 6d.
This book gives the story of a Mission, which began with seven
persons, led to the formation of six Churches, the building of ten
thousand pounds worth of trust property, and over a thousand con-
versions. It has been most favorably reviewed in Britain, America,
and the Colonies, hundreds have 'testified to its interesting
character and usefulness.
FROM REVIEWS.
Cardiff Banner.
“The record of a great work carried on amid circumstances that needed the courage
of a hero, the patience of a jhartyr, and the faitli of an apostle.”
The Ouserver, Canada.
“The lights and shadows of missionary work are graphically set forth.”
The Dai lx Chronicle.
“Abounding in lessons derived from experience.”
South Australian Advertiser.
Racy and entertaining; cannot be read without deep interest.”
The Southern Cross.
“ Very stimulating and helpful to Christian workers.
Christian Record, New Zealand.
It should serve as a stimulus to religious pioneer work in this colony.
Christian Advocate, California.
“A profitable study for anyone.”
London:
Bible Christian Book Room, 26 Paternoster Row, E.C.
Adelaide:
Bible Christian Room, Flinders Street.
W. F. James, Goodwood, South Australia
Copies sent, post free, on receipt of published price; and the profits will'aid Good-
wood Bible Christian Church.
