

Notified in
Army Orders for
November 1941
110
General
6104
THE WAR OFFICE
REGULATIONS
FOR THE
AUXILIARY TERRITORIAL
SERVICE
1941
LONDON
HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
Price 1s. 6 d. net


110
General
6104
Notified in
Army Orders for
November, 1941
THE WAR OFFICE
REGULATIONS
FOR THE
AUXILIARY TERRITORIAL
SERVICE
1941
Issued pursuant to Regulation 7 of
The Defence ( Women's Forces ) Regulations, 1941
Crown Copyright Reserved
1941
Price is 6d. net
LONDON
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses;
York House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2; 120 George Street, Edinburgh 2;
39-41 King Street, Manchester 2; 1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast ;
or through any bookseller


By Command of the A Army Council,
[?]
The War Office,
30 th November, 1941.


CONTENTS
Section I. Status, Organization, Administration,
Precedence and Employment
o, , Paras.
I • ota/tus • • .. , 13
2. —Organization . . . , . (
3. —Precedence .. .. . . ] ' ' ’ ’
4. —Duties of Inspectors . . ’ * ’ ' ‘ ' jq
5. —Administration . . . . . . ' ' 21_14
6. —Employment .. .. , _ 15-19
Section II. —Duties of Officers, Orders and
Audit Board
1 • —Duties of Officers ~ .. . . 20-29
2. —Orders . , , . qX
3. —Audit Board . . , . ’ 31
Section 111. Officers : Appointment, Promotion
Resignation, Records and Confidential Reports
1. Appointment . . .. .. 32-36
2. —Promotion .. . . .. 31
Acting Rank .. . . , ’ ’ ' gg
Temporary Rank .. .. ’' 39
War Substantive Rank .. . ’ 40-42
3. —Resignation .. .. .. . ’ « r fl
4. —Retirement ~ .. ..
5. —Records .. ~ ~ ’ ' 52-57
6. —lnterviews at the War Office ' ’ ’' 5 8
7. —Confidential Reports. .. .. 59-63
8. Unemployed List (Officers) !! ’ ’ _ 64
Section IV. Auxiliaries : Enrolment, Discharge
Unemployed List (Other Ranks), Records, etc.
1. —Enrolment—
General Instructions . . . , . . 65-76
2. Promotion . , . . .. ’ ’ 77 o 9
3‘ Discharge . . .. i.’ 83 1 85
Character in Testimonial Form on Discharge 86-91
4. Unemployed List (Other Ranks)—
General .. .. .. _ 4 _ 92
Unemployment Insurance and National
Health Insurance Cards .. . . 93
Auxiliaries Failing to Obey Orders of Recall . . 94
5. Y" List .. . . .. .. ’ 93


Section IV. —Auxiliaries, etc. — continued.
Paras.
6. Records i09 _ 105
7. Good Conduct Badges
8 Forfeiture of Good Conduct Badges .. lUb-l 1U
Reserved •• •• U1 - 116
Section V. —Discipline
1.—Power of Command
2 General . . • • • • • ■ • • 12U-loU
3. How Punishments may be Awarded--Application
of the Army Act .. •• •• 131-136
4. Arrest—
General 13 iPi
Officers and Warrant Officers .. • • 141
Non-commissioned Officers and Privates . . 142
5. Delivery of Charge . . • • • • • •
6. Arrest in Cases of Drunkenness .. •• •• J"
7. Investigation of Charges 45 icq
8. Summary Punishments
Non-commissioned Officers .. • •
Privates
9. —Charges by Civil Power IbU 152
10. —Absence without Leave — ,
Procedure on an Auxiliary reported Absent ibb
Absentee Recruits .. • • • • • • • 164 ‘
Method of Dealing with Absentees after Arrest
by the Civil Power .. .. • • • • 165
11. Court-Martial— . n . x , , _. ,,
Punishments that may be inflicted by h leld
General Court-Martial .. .. ••
12. General .. ’ 167 “
13. Summary of Evidence ••
14. Evidence ■ 174-1/3
15 —Forfeiture of Seniority of Rank or Service —
Officers • 177
Warrant Officers .. •• •• L//
Non-commissioned Officers . . . • o!
1Q,—Promulgation of Court-Martial Proceedings 182-184
17. Redress of Grievances .. . • • • • •
18. —Praise or Censure of Superiors, Testimonials, etc. 18b
19. —Character and Conduct of Officers .. ••
20—Communication of Military Information 188-189
Section VI.— Training
General, Specialist and Non-Technical .. 190-196


Section Vll.—General Duties : Leave, Marching-In
and Marching-Out Inspections, Fires, Courts of
Inquiry, Messes etc.
Paras.
1. Leave 197-204
2. —Army Savings Scheme . . .. . . ~ 205
3. —Divine Service ~ .. .. ~ , > 206
4. —Military Funerals .. . . . . .. ~ 207
5. —Sanitation .. .. .. .. .. 208-210
6. —Marching-in and Marching-out Inspections 211-214
7. —Monthly Inspections .. ./ .. .. 215
8. —Precautions against Fire . . . . .. 216-217
9-—Courts of Inquiry on Fires . . . . 218-219
10. —Courts of Inquiry on Accidents and Injuries .. 220
11. —Officers’ Messes .. .. .. .. 221-225
12. —Serjeants’ Messes ~ . . . . .. 226-227
13. —Rank and File Messes . . .. .. 228-229
14-—Canteens ... .. ~ .. .. # # 230
15. —Permanent Sleeping-out Passes .. ~ ~ 231
16. —Servants and Servant Allowances ~ ~ 232
Section Vlll.—Dress, Clothing and Equipment
1. Dress, etc 233-244
2. —Decorations and Medals .. .. .. .. 245
3. —Officers’ Uniform .. . . . . . . 246-248
4. —Camp Kit and Bedding . . . . . . ~ 249
5. —Other Ranks’ Clothing . . . . . . 250-253
6. -Passive Air Defence .. .. .. ~ 254
7- Accounting ' .. .255-263
8. —Recovery of Public Claims . . . . .. 264
9. Washing .’.265
10.—Allowance for Toilet Articles, Cleaning Materials
and Haircutting , , .. .. _ 4 266
Section IX.—Finance : Pay, Allowances, National
Health etc. Insurance Schemes
1. —Pay—Officers .. .. .. .. 267-270
2. —Pay—Other Ranks—
General 271-272
Tradeswomen .. .. .. .. 273-274
Additional Pay . . . . .. .. _ 275
Proficiency Pay .. . . . , . . 276-282
Increments of Pav . . . . ooq
War Pa y 284
Voluntary Allotments of Pay .. . . .. 285


Section IX.—Finance, me—continued.
Paras.
3. —Allowances —
Ration, Lodging, Fuel and Light Allowance . . 286
Travel Allowance , , ,, • • 287-289
Income Tax ,, ,. . • • • * • 290
Field Allowance ,, • * • r < • 291
Colonial Allowance ,, .. .. * • 292
Contingent Allowance .. ,. •, < • 293
Dependants' Allowance and War Service
Grants .. .. •, .. • • ■ • 294
4. National Health, Widows’, Orphans’ and Old
Age Pensions and Unemployment Insur-
ance-
Officers —
National Health Insurance and Widows’,
Orphans’ and Old Age Contributory
Pensions Acts • • • - «- - • 295
Unemployment Insurance . • •. • • 296
Other Ranks—
National Health Insurance and Widow’s
Orphans’ and Old Age Contributory
Pensions Acts . . . . • • • • 297
Unemployment Insurance .. .. • . • 298
5. —Maternity Benefit .. .. .. • • ■ • 299
6. Disability Awards .. .. . • < • • • 300
7. —Recovery of Public Claims . . . • • • 301
Barrack Damages .. • • • • • • 302
Section X.—Medical Attendance, Hospital Treat-
ment, Surgical Appliances, Dental Treatment and
General Instructions
1.—Attendance and Admission to Hospital • • 303
Officers .. . • • ■ •• •• 304-306
Auxiliaries . . ■ • • • • • 307-308
.. 2.—Surgical Appliances .. .. • • 309-310
3. —Spectacles —
Officers .. .• • • • • > • •• 311
Auxiliaries .. .. . • - • 312-313
4. Dental Treatment and Dentures —
Inspections .. • • .. • • 314-315
Dental Treatment and Supply, Renewal and
Repair of Dentures . . . . • * • • 316
Dental Treatment on Leave ., . . 317
5. —General Instructions .. . ■ • • 318-325
6. —Medical History Sheets ., .. • • • • 326


Section X.—Medical Attendance, etc.— continued.
,, Paras.
7. —Medical Boards .. .. . . 327
8. —Vaccination and Inoculation . _ 32g
9- Notification of Infectious or Contagious Diseases
etc. • • ■ 1 .. , _ 329
10-—Discharge for Pregnancy .. ,. .339
11. Courts of Inquiry—Accidents and Injuries ., 331
Section XI. Correspondence, General Instructions,
Orders, Records, Documents etc.
1- —General Instructions on Correspondence.. 332-341
2- Secret, Security and Confidential Documents 342—347
3. Records 348-352
4. —Enquiries regarding Auxiliaries 353
5. —Records—Officers’ Services ..
6. —Returns—
Monthly Return of Officers . . . . 355
Monthly Return of Cadets . . . . 353
Strength Returns .. .. .’ ’ ’ 357
7. —Auxiliaries’ Services .. ., 358—359
8. —Soldiers’ Service and Pay Book (A.B.64) .. 360
9-—Medical History Sheet . . . . . . _ 331
10. —Dental Treatment Cards .. .. .. 362-363
11. —Offence Reports .. .. , . . . 334
12. —Field Conduct Sheets—
Officers .. .. , ( _ 333
Auxiliaries ,. .. .. , _ 366-369
10. Piocedure for Dealing with Casualties from
Enemy Action ., . . ,. _ _ 373
14. Registration of Deaths from other Causes than
Enemy Action .. ., .. _ _ 372
15. Declaration of Courts of Inquiry into Illegal
Absence .. ,, , 372
Section XII, and Salutes
1 • —General Instructions ,, .. , . 373-385
2. —Compliments on the March . . . . 386
3. —Guards of Honour .. . . _ 387—389
4. —Inspections .. . . . . # _ 303


APPENDICES
Page
Appendix I.—(i) Royal Warrant—Formation of the
Auxiliary Territorial Service .. 100
(ii) Defence Regulations —Emergency
Powers (Defence) Womens
Forces .. • • • • • • 134
(iii) Army Council’s Instructions apply-
ing the Army Act ~ • • 136
(iv) Women’s Forces (Officers’ Com-
missions) Order, 1941 .. .. 141
II. —Ranks and Appointments in the
Auxiliary Territorial Service .. 143
111. —Basic Establishments . . • • 144
IV. —Duties on which Employed .. .. 150
V Form of Recommendation for Can-
didates for Officer Cadet Training
Units 151
Vl.—Discharge Tables
~ VII. —Inventory of Kit .. • • • • 137
Vlll—Officers’ Uniform 159
IX.—Scales of Pay I®o
ti X. —Trade Groups . . . . • • • ■ 164
(i) Trade Groups
(ii) Employer’s Certificate of Pro-
ficiency .. •• •• 165
XI. —Army Dependants’ Allowance .. 166
’’ XII. —Examples of Part I and Part ‘II Orders
Headings for Part II Orders .. 168
XIII. —Army Books and Forms .. .. 171
” XlV.—Form “T” .. 1 76
XV.—Pro-forma for release to the Unem-
ployed List .. . . • • • • 177


DEFINITIONS
1. The term “ military,” e.g. military officer, military unit,
is used to differentiate between an army officer and an A.T.S.
officer, or an army unit and an A.T.S. unit.
2. The term “ area ” refers to the sub-division of a command.
3. The expression " unit ” means a group, training estab-
lishment, independent company or the A.T.S. personnel in
a mixed A,A. regiment.
4. The expression “ sub-unit ” means a company (other
than an independent company), or platoon, or the A.T.S.
personnel in a mixed A.A. battery.
5. The expression “ group commander ” means the com-
mander of the A.T.S. in a division or area ; this expression
where it occurs is also applicable to the senior A.T.S. officer
at regimental headquarters of a mixed A.A. regiment.
6. The term “ auxiliary ” includes a warrant officer, N.C.O.
or private and is used in a similar manner to the expression
“ soldier ” in King’s Regulations and in these Regulations.
7. The term “ subaltern ” includes second-subaltern except
when the context requires otherwise.
1*—(1744)


EXPLANATIONS OF ABBREVIATIONS
A.A. . . . . Anti-Aircraft.
A.B. .. .. Army Book.
A.C.I. ~ .. Army Council Instruction.
A.D.A.T.S. .. Assistant Director Auxiliary Territorial
Service.
A.D.M.S. .. Assistant Director of Medical Services.
A.D.O.S. . . Assistant Director of Ordnance Services.
A.F. . . . . Army Form.
A.T.S. . . . . Auxiliary Territorial Service.
C.B. . . . . Confinement to Barracks.
C.O. .. . . Commanding Officer.
C. . . .. Chief Ordnance Officer.
D. A.D.O.S. .. Deputy Assistant Director of Ordnance
Services.
D.A.T.S. . . Director Auxiliary Territorial Service.
D.D.A.T.S. . . Deputy Director Auxiliary Territorial
Service.
D.D.M.S. .. Deputy Director of Medical Services.
F. .. Field General Court-Martial.
G. . . General Officer Commanding-in-Chief.
i/c .. .. In charge of.
M. .. .. Medical Officer.
N. .. Navy, Army and Air Force Institute.
N. .. . . Non-commissioned officer.
O. .. . . Officer Commanding.
O. . . Officer Cadet Training Unit.
Para. . . . . Paragraph.
P. . . . . President of the Regimental Institute.
Q. .. Queen Alexandra’s Imperial Military
Nursing Service
R. .. . . Royal Engineers.
R.A.O.C. . . Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
Note.—Officer i/c A.T.S. Records is referred to throughout
as Officer i/c Records.
A.T.S. Regimental Paymaster is referred to throughout as
Regimental Paymaster.


REGULATIONS FOR THE
AUXILIARY TERRITORIAL SERVICE
SECTION I.—STATUS, ORGANIZATION, PRECE-
DENCE, ADMINISTRATION AND EMPLOYMENT
1. STATUS
1. The formation of the Auxiliary Territorial Service was
authorized by Royal Warrant dated 9th September, 1938, to
provide for an organization whereby certain non-combatant
duties in connection with the military forces could be performed
by women voluntarily enrolled. (See Appendix I (i).)
2. The Defence (Women’s Forces) Regulations, 1941
(Statutory Rules and Orders No. 581 dated 25th April, 1941),
declared women enrolled in the Auxiliary Territorial Service
To be members of the Armed Forces of the Crown and so
eligible for employment on combatant duties. (See Appendix
I (ii)). The aforesaid regulations further provided for the
application to such women of the Army Act with such adapta-
tions and modifications as might be specified, and the manner
in which the Army Act applies is defined in the Army Council
Instructions operating from Ist July, 1941, reproduced in
Appendix I (hi).
3. The Auxiliary Territorial Service is composed of women
and is provided with a special organization. It is part of the
Armed Forces of the Crown, and its personnel are charged
with essential duties in replacement of men. Subject, there-
fore, to the provisions set out in these regulations, military
formation commanders are responsible for the discipline
generally and welfare of A.T.S. personnel, as for all other
personnel under their command. Military officers command-
ing formations and units to which A.T.S. personnel are attached
will give all assistance in their power to A.T.S. officers in order
that the fullest co-operation and efficiency may be maintained.
The Auxiliary Territorial Service has a special status by
reason of its composition. It is essential that the well-being
of the women, i.e. their conditions of living and employment,
shall be supervised by women officers.
Throughout the A.T.S. organization, therefore, A.T.S.
officers have a right of direct appeal through A.T.S. channels


on questions affecting the well-being of A.T.S. personnel.
This right of appeal will not be exercised until every effort
has been made to remedy matters by direct approach to the
military officer concerned at each stage of the upward ■journey
of the appeal.
If the right is exercised, the A.T.S. officer who initiates the
appeal and those subsequently dealing with it will inform the
military officer concerned at each stage of the substance of
the appeal. This will be done in writing.
2. ORGANIZATION
4, The Auxiliary Territorial Service consists of:—
[a) General Service personnel liable for service at home
and abroad.
(b) Local Service personnel only liable for service in the
locality in which their homes are situated.
5, The A.T.S. is organized (a) in entirely A.T.S. units on a
platoon, company and group basis, dependent on local require-
ments ; and (b) in mixed military and A.T.S. units, such as
heavy A.A. regiments and batteries. The extent to which
the A.T.S. may be employed in lieu of or in addition to soldiers*
is decided by the Army Council.
6, The nomenclature of units of the A.T.S. is based on the
following principles ;—■
(а) Platoons.
Platoons raised in peace retain, as far as possible,
the county designations originally allotted.
Platoons raised on and after mobilization of the
Regular Army are normally designated according
to the military command in which they are formed ;
e.g. 3rd Eastern Platoon, Ist Northern Platoon.
A territorial designation may, however, be allotted
to a newly formed platoon which possesses a definite
territorial connection ; e.g. when all or the majority
of its original members have been enrolled from one
locality.
(б) Companies.
Each company within an A.T.S. group will be
designated by a letter in alphabetical sequence.
If a company comprises the whole of the A.T.S.
personnel serving in a division or area, and does not
form part of a group, it will be known as the
“ Blankshire ” Area Company, 12th A.A. Division
Company, etc. . . .


(c) Groups.
A group will be co-extensive with the division
or area which it serves and will bear the same
designation ; e.g. North Midland Group, Ist A.A.
Group, etc. . . .
This nomenclature will not apply when the A.T.S. personnel
form part of a mixed unit having a separate military designa-
tion, e.g. mixed heavy A.A. battery, R.A,
7. ( a ) As local requirements vary considerably, the estab-
lishments of A.T.S. units call for a considerable degree of
elasticity. The basic establishments given in Appendix 111
show the A.T.S. personnel required for different types of units.
Authority for these establishments is issued by the War
Office on recommendations made by the Commander-in-Chief
or the G.0.C.-in-C. Establishments are the authority for
rank and numbers and no alterations to them are permitted
without reference to higher authority.
(&) A platoon of approximately 23 to 75 all ranks is com-
manded by a subaltern or second-subaltern. Two platoons
form a company under a subaltern or second-subaltern. A
company of three or more platoons is commanded by a junior
commander. 251 to 1,000 all ranks form a group commanded
by a senior commander ; a group exceeding 1,000 is com-
manded by a chief commander.
When the number of A.T.S. personnel in a division or area
falls below 251, they will form a company commanded by a
junior commander, i.e. an independent company.
(c) The numbers for cook-houses and messes and the scale
of N.C.Os. are laid down in Appendix 111.
(d) Special establishments, based on the nature of the duties
and the numbers employed, are authorized for command
and other headquarters, and other military units such as
record offices and ordnance depots, and are shown in their
respective War Establishments.
3. PRECEDENCE
8. The approved ranks and appointments of the A.T.S.
with the appropriate badges applicable thereto, are shown in
Appendix 11.
9. (a) The A.T.S. will take precedence in the table set out in
King’s Regulations, 1940, para. 928, immediately after the
Territorial Army Nursing Service.
( b) A.T.S. personnel will rank as juniors of their rank when
serving with military personnel, or with members of
Q.A.I.M.N.S. or the Territorial Army Nursing Service.


(c) The precedence of A.T.S. personnel amongst themselves
will be determined by the highest rank (substantive, war
substantive, temporary, acting or local) they hold, and between
personnel holding the same rank by the date of their appoint-
ment or promotion thereto. In the case of officers holding the
same rank, and appointed thereto on the same day, precedence
will be determined by the order in which their names appear
in the Army List.
4. DUTIES OF INSPECTORS
10. ( a ) It is the duty of an inspector to visit all units of the
A.T.S. in Great Britain and Northern Ireland within her pur-
view, and to inspect the general administration, discipline
and welfare of their members. She will bring to the notice
of local A.T.S. commanders any points which need attention.
(b) She will investigate the working conditions of A.T.S.
personnel, and, in consultation with the military commander
concerned, arrange for any improvements which can be made
in local working' conditions. She will ensure that personnel
are not overworked, and also that they have sufficient to do.
(c) She will investigate the establishment of A.T.S. in units
which she visits and will report on cases in which she considers
that an increase of A,T.S. can be absorbed, and also on cases
in which she considers the duties to be of a kind unsuited for
A.T.S. personnel.
(d) She will look for potential A.T.S. officer material and
after consultation with the unit commander, will bring such
personnel to the direct notice of the D. A.T.S.
(e) She will consider questions of dress and equipment, and
will make such recommendations as she considers desirable.
(/) After each tour or visit, as convenient, she will report
in writing to the D.A.T.S. and otherwise as instructed within
the War Office. Copies of reports will be sent to the G.0.C.-
in-C. the command concerned, by name,
(g) Inspectors will make arrangements for visits with the
command, or direct with the division or area in which the unit
they are visiting is situated ; in the latter case they will inform
command headquarters.
{h) The inspector A.T.S. will visit all units of the A.T.S. in
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. She will see that non-
technical training is carried out in accordance with orders.
She will also inspect the recruiting organization. She will
investigate and report whether A.T.S, are being employed in
addition to men and not in lieu of them. Where she considers
special investigation by other A.T.S. inspectors is required,


she will notify the inspector concerned. She will send copies
of her reports to the Civil Member and the Adjutant-General.
(i) The Inspector of Quarter-Master-General Services A.T.S.
will report on accommodation and messing, R.A.O.C. services,
R.A.S.C. services and barrack services as affecting the A.T.S.
She will report to the appropriate director under the Quarter-
Master-General to the Forces, as well as to the D.A.T.S., in
each case.
5. ADMINISTRATION
11. {a) The technical training of A.T.S. personnel is under
the Chief of the Imperial General Staff.
(6) The responsibility for the administration, organization,
general training and discipline of A.T.S. personnel rests with
the Adjutant-General to the Forces.
(c) The accommodation, rationing and clothing of A.T.S,
personnel are under the Quarter-Master-General to the Forces.
(d) The D.A.T.S. is responsible to the Adjutant-General to
the Forces for the basic training, discipline, well-being and
general efficiency of the A.T.S. and for the Military Secretary’s
duties in connection therewith.
( e ) The Director of Organization is responsible to the
Adjutant-General to the Forces for the organization and
administration of the A.T.S.
(/) The A.T.S. Council js advisory to the Adjutant-General
to the Forces. It consists of :
Chairman. The Director, A.T.S.
Members. Deputy Director, A.T.S.
Deputy Director of Organization, A.T.S.
The Inspector, A.T.S.
The Inspector of Quarter-Master-General
Services for the A.T.S.
The Woman Medical Adviser R.A.M.C.
The heads of A.T.S. War Office branches.
12. Commanders-in-Chief and G.Os/C.-in-C. Commands, are
responsible, subject to instructions concerning the A.T.S.
issued by the War Office, for the following matters in relation
to A.T.S, personnel located within the boundaries of their
command ;
(i) Accommodation.
(ii) Provision of clothing and equipment.
(iii) Transport.
(iv) Medical attention.


(v) Pay.
(vi) Discipline generally.
(vii) Cross postings of other ranks within the command.
13. A senior officer of the A.T.S. is posted to the head-
quarters of each command to act as a staff officer to the
Commander-in-Chief or G.0.C.-in-C. on all matters connected
with the administration, training and well-being of A.T.S.
personnel in the command.
Os.C. A.T.S. units are responsible to the divisional or area
commander for the efficiency of A.T.S. personnel under their
command.
A group commandant, or a company commander i/c a
divisional or area company, will be under the immediate orders
of the military divisional or area commander on matters
affecting A.T.S. personnel under his command. To facilitate
this the headquarters of the group or company will be located
near the headquarters of the division or area. The right of
direct appeal on matters of well-being through A.T.S. channels
laid down in para. 3 rests with all A.T.S. officers.
14. Commanders-in-Chief and G.Os.C.-in-C. will put forward
to the War Office any views or suggestions they deem desirable
in relation to any matters affecting A.T.S. personnel.
6. EMPLOYMENT
15. The employments envisaged for A.T.S. personnel are
shown in Appendix IV. War Establishments are, however,
the only executive authority for such employments, unless
other specific War Office authority is given.
16. In view of the long hours and heavy nature of some of
the duties, five auxiliaries may be detailed to discharge duties
carried out by four soldiers on authorized military establish-
ments. In order to effect the maximum economy in adminis-
trative personnel and for the purpose of convenience, small
A.T.S. detachments serving with different military units are
combined, where practicable, into platoons. These will be of
whatever type is appropriate to the numbers involved {see
Appendix III).
17. The normal ratio of replacement in military establish-
ments such as pay and record offices and generally in respect
of clerks, is one auxiliary to one soldier, but where more than
a 54-hour week on duty is involved or the nature of the duties
is exceptionally heavy, the ratio of five auxiliaries to four
soldiers may be sanctioned by the War Office,


18. The primary function of A.T.S. personnel is to replace
soldiers in employments authorized by the Army Council.
They are not intended as additions to military establishments
which are at full strength. Whenever auxiliaries are posted
to a military unit or formation, a compensating decrease will
be effected in the strength of soldier personnel.
19. No dismissal of civilians can be permitted in order to
make room for auxiliaries. If, however, suitable posts in the
military establishment previously held by civilians fall vacant,
these vacancies may be filled by auxiliaries provided that
civilians are not discharged in order to create vacancies for
auxiliaries.
SECTION II.—DUTIES OF OFFICERS, ORDERS AND
AUDIT BOARD
1. DUTIES OF OFFICERS
20. An officer in command of a unit or sub-unit is responsible
to the King for the well-being, training, discipline, efficiency
and proper system in the unit under her command. While
she will supervise and control all duties for which she is
responsible, she will be careful not to disturb in any way the
work of the military unit with which her women are employed.
This will in no way relieve her of the responsibility of bringing
to the notice of the military officer concerned, anything which
appears to her to conflict with these regulations.
21. Officers will pay particular attention to the preservation
of the health of the women under their command. The re-
sponsibility for efficient supervision and for reporting sanitary
defects rests on the O.C. the unit, and, through her, on sub-
ordinate commanders.
22. An. officer will, by advice and timely intervention,,
endeavour to promote a good understanding and to prevent
disputes. She will discountenance any disposition to extrava-
gance. If any difficulty requiring her intervention arises, she
will record the manner in which it was disposed of, and will
submit a report through the usual channels.
23. (a) An O.C. a unit or sub-unit is responsible for the
systematic training and efficient instruction of officers and
N.C.Os. under her command in all professional duties.
(6) All officers when first appointed will be trained in the


routine of the orderly room and quarter-master’s office, and will
also take a practical course of instruction in the cook-house.
(, c) Junior officers will be trained in the interior economy
and discipline of the unit, in order to fit them for promotion.
{d) Junior officers and N.C.Os. will occasionally be given
the opportunity of exercising a command superior to their own.
24. It is the duty of a unit or sub-unit commander to bring
to the notice of the military or A.T.S. officer inspecting the
unit any officers distinguished for proficiency in their duties.
She will also bring to notice those who, from incapacity or
apathy, are deficient in knowledge of their duties. Who do not
afford her the support which she has a right to expect, or who
conduct themselves in a manner injurious to the efficiency or
credit of their Service.
25. An officer in temporary command of any unit or sub-
unit will not issue any standing orders, or alter those at the
time in force, or authorize the application of funds to any
purpose other than the ordinary current expenditure, without
reference to the permanent commander or to a senior officer.
On the other hand an officer while absent from, and not in
the exercise of her command, cannot issue orders relating to
such command.
26. ( a) Every officer, even if the appointment which she
holds is only temporary in its nature, is charged with the
equipment, clothing and public stores appertaining to the
appointment and is accountable for them to her C.O.
(b) She is responsible for the women’s messes being properly
run. She will pay attention to the cleanliness of the women
and of their clothing and quarters. She will take charge of
all public money, etc., received by her, and is responsible for
the safe custody of such money, and for its being expended in
conformity with regulations, and with due regard to the
interests of her women.
(c) An officer entrusted with public money will keep a
precise record of her cash transactions in a form complying
with any relevant regulations or instructions.
(d) She may delegate the duty of writing up such cash
records to a subordinate officer or to a warrant officer, but she
will still exercise a direct supervision over all money trans-
actions and will not be relieved of financial responsibility for
any losses that may occur in connection with her accounts.
She is personally responsible for the correctness of amounts
authorized by her to be paid by a subordinate officer or warrant
officer to whom the duty is delegated, and the cash book, etc.,
and cheque book will be kept in the personal custody of one
or the other.


27. Every officer or warrant officer charged with the issue
of cash will either make the payments herself or see that they
are made in her presence.
28. A N.C.O. or private will not be subjected to the risk of
financial loss by having public money, whether in the form of
cash or otherwise, placed in her hands, except for such purposes
as may be specially authorized by the Army Council by regula-
tion or special instructions ; nor will she be charged with the
custody of forms of authority for the issue of money ; e.g.
drafts, cheques, money orders, postal orders, postal drafts,'
etc.
29. Any officer or auxiliary i/c public stores of any kind
is strictly forbidden to lend any article under her charge for a
purpose not sanctioned by her C.O.
2. ORDERS
30. (a) All officers will acquaint themselves with regulations
and orders. All orders specially relevant to N.C.Os. and
privates will be read and explained to them immediately after
such orders are received. Ignorance of orders published and
lead as above will not be admitted as an excuse for their
non-observance.
(b) An officer who has been on leave of absence will, on
rejoining, make herself acquainted with all orders issued in her
absence, The unit commander will cause every order issued
for general information and guidance either to be republished
in company orders of the companies affected, or otherwise
circulated to all in the unit whom it may concern.
3. AUDIT BOARD
31. (a) As soon as the required accounts for the quarter are
ready, the unit commander will assemble an audit board con-
sisting of three officers selected from those present in the unit.
One of the officers not below the rank of junior commander
will be elected president. The accounts of the officers’ mess,
serjeants’ mess, P.R.I. and company funds, and all sports]
amenities charitable and other funds will be laid before
them by the officer responsible for the accounts. The board
will examine all vouchers, and will satisfy themselves that
liabilities are not omitted from the balance sheets, that assets
are not over-estimated and that the cash credits are actually
available. The unit commander, or in the case of an isolated
company, the company commander, is responsible for obtain


ing from the bank .each quarter a certificate of the balance
held on each account at the close of business on the last day
of each quarter. This certificate will be handed direct to the
president of the audit board to assist the board in their check,
and will subsequently be attached to the proceedings. The
balance of the funds will be entered in the proceedings, which
will be made out on A.F. A 2, and the board will record thereon
that these instructions have been carried out.
(&) The proceedings will be laid before the unit commander
for approval, and placed before the divisional or area com-
mander under whom the unit is serving.
(c) The responsibility for this procedure in the case of an
independent company rests with the company commander
concerned.
SECTION III.—OFFICERS: APPOINTMENT, PRO-
MOTION, RESIGNATION, RECORDS AND CON-
FIDENTIAL REPORTS
1. APPOINTMENT
32. Ail commissions will be emergency commissions in the
Auxiliary Territorial Service. The form of commission is
defined in the Women’s Forces (Officers’ Commissions) Order,
1941, dated 30th May, 1941, (see Appendix I (iv).)
33. An auxiliary attending a course at an O.C.T.U. will be
placed on the strength of the training unit and her documents
will be sent to the O.C. training unit. On her satisfactory com-
pletion of the course, she will be discharged (see Appendix VI,
Table of Discharge, para. 8), and be granted a commission as
a second-subaltern. Should she fail to pass the course satis-
factorily, she will be re-posted by the Officer i/c Records under
instructions issued by the War Office. Newly appointed
officers will be on probation for three months.
34. ( a) Candidates for commissions will normally be
selected after a period of service in the ranks.
(b) The A.T.S. section of the Army Officers’ Emergency
Reserve for direct commissions is open to women with special
qualifications, such as previous service with the forces,
university degrees, diplomas, etc. The conditions for the
grant of a commission through the Army Officers’ Emergency
Reserve will be governed by the conditions relating to men, so
far as they are applicable.


(c) The names of candidates from the ranks will be sub-
mitted as prescribed in Appendix V, through the usual
channels to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office,
No candidate from the ranks will be recommended unless the
unit commander or other senior officer under whom she is
serving certifies that her knowledge of the Service, mental
capacity and moral qualities are such as to justify her being
recommended for training as an officer, and also that the unit
commander concerned would be willing to accept the candidate
in her unit after a course at an O.C.T.U. She must be physic-
ally fit for service. All candidates will be interviewed and, if
suitable, passed by the Auxiliary Territorial Service Interview
Board.
35. An alien, whether allied, neutral or enemy, provided
that she is in every way suitable, and has been passed by the
Interview Board, after a period of service in the ranks, may
be recommended for a course at an O.C.T.U. with a view to
the grant of a commission.
36. If an officer holding a commission on probation is
reported on, within the probationary period prescribed, as not
fitted to retain her commission, it may be terminated at any
time, whether before or after the expiration of the probationary
period {see para. 60 (c)). If she is adjudged unsuitable for
reasons other than misconduct, she will, as she chooses, either
leave the Service or will return to the ranks in any substantive
or war substantive rank she held when she proceeded to the
O.C.T.U.
2. PROMOTION
37. There will be no substantive promotion.
Promotion in war will be carried out in accordance with
paras. 38-42.
Acting Rank
38. [a) In war, officers who are called upon to perform duties
of a rank or appointment higher than their substantive rank will
be granted appropriate acting rank.
(b) An officer granted acting rank shall not be eligible for
the pay of that rank until the rank has been held for 21 con-
secutive days, when the pay of the acting rank may be issued
retrospectively from the date of the grant of the rank. She
shall have no claim to the pay of such acting rank beyond the
date on which she ceases to perform the duties of that rank or
appointment.


(c) Acting rank will be granted to fill vacancies in approved
War Establishments.
[d] All promotions to acting rank and relinquishments
thereof will be published in unit orders and in the appendix
to orders issued by command headquarters. Separate notifica-
tions will be required on the appointment of an officer to
unpaid acting rank and on her subsequent appointment to
paid acting rank after 21 consecutive days in that rank.
Temporary Rank
39. (a) An officer performing the duties of a higher rank in
war shall be granted temporary rank after holding paid acting
rank for the following qualifying periods, which shall be reckoned
cumulatively :
Up to and including chief commander . . 3 months.
Controller and senior controller .. .. 6
Chief controller .. .. •. 1 year.
(&) An officer granted temporary rank shall have no claim
to the pay of such temporary rank beyond the date on which
she ceases to perform the duties of that higher rank.
(c) An officer holding temporary rank may be required to
relinquish that rank ; e.g. on the return of an officer within the
establishment whose war substantive rank is the same as the
temporary rank held by the former officer, on the orders of her
C.O. or other superior officer. She will then revert to her war
substantive rank.
War Substantive Rank
40. ( a ) A second-subaltern will, after 18 months’ service, in
this war, be promoted to the war substantive rank of subaltern,
unless a’recommendation to the contrary is submitted by her
C.O. In reckoning such service for promotion to the rank of
subaltern, time served in a warrant rank, and half of any time
served in a rank below warrant rank shall be allowed to count,
provided that in no case, as a result of reckoning such service,
shall the date of promotion to the rank of subaltern be earlier
than 24th April, 1941. No arrears of pay in consequence of
such promotion shall be issuable in respect of the period
before 24th April, 1941.
(6) Once temporary rank has been granted, and provided
that her services are satisfactory, an officer will not, for the
duration of the war, be required to revert to a rank lower than
one grade below the highest temporary rank held. This rank
will be known as “ war substantive rank ” and will be tenable
for the duration of the war. Thus, war substantive subaltern
“ X ” who has held the acting rank of senior commander for
the necessary qualifying period for confirmation into tern


porary rank will, at the same time as she is made a temporary
senior commander, become war substantive junior commander
a rank which she will hold for the duration of the wTr unless
promoted to a higher war substantive rank.
41. Promotions to temporary and war substantive rank
will be carried out at the War Office and notified in War Office
Urders.
42. ( a) Except for promotion from second-subaltern to
subaltern the selection for promotion of A.T.S. officers up to
and including the rank of senior commander is dealt with bv
the Auxiliary territorial Service Selection Board The
Selection Board consists of :
Director A.T.S Chairman
Deputy Director A.T.S " Deputy Shairman.
Assistant Directors A.T.S. of commands Members.
(h) Commanders-in-Chief and G.Os.C.-in-C. will submit the
names of officers suitable for promotion to the War Office in
ma l be considered by the Selection Board.
Ihe War Office notifies commands of those officers passed by
the Selection Board as fitted for promotion, and the officers
nominated will be held ready and available for posting when
occasion arises. Officers up to and including the rank of
junmr commander will be posted by the Commander-in-
Uuef or G.0.C.-in-C. within his command. Posting orders
for officers above the rank of junior commander are issued
by the War Office.
a me R^ ommeadations for the selection and promotion of
A '.'; j officers above the rank of senior commander are sub-
mitted by D.A.T.S. to the Adjutant-General who will forward
them as necessary to the Civil Member
3. RESIGNATION
43. An officer shall not be allowed to resign her commission
Council 6r resi £ nat * on as been permitted by the Army
44. An officer who has been allowed to resign her com-
mission for an approved reason may, subject to the approval
of the Army Council, be re-appointed to a commission in the
rank of second-subaltern, and may simultaneously be granted
hdd S by her 1^6 rank e( l ulvalent to an Y suck rank previously
45. If an officer desires to be appointed to another service
she will make application through the usual channels. She


will be required to resign her commission in the A. I S with
effect from the date of her new appointment. If applied tor,
full information as to her record of service will be given to
the officer of the other service authorized to deal with the
transfer.
46. An officer may make application to resign her commis-
sion on compassionate grounds. The written application,
together with the recommendation of the G.0.C.-m-C. con-
cerned will be forwarded through the usual military channels
to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office, for decision.
47. la) An application to resign a commission on com-
passionate grounds will be forwarded with a statement showing
whether :
(i) all A.T.S. claims have been paid,
(ii) there is any outstanding public claim,
(iii) there is any objection to the resignation being
sanctioned.
lb) A certificate as regards (ii) will also be obtained from
the command paymaster, who will be responsible for ascertain-
ing whether the regimental paymaster has any claim against
the officer (or other person who signed the undertaking on
AF E 51Id in the case of an officer who was a minor when
appointed). This certificate will be transmitted to the War
Office with the application. If, however, the certificate
cannot be forwarded at the time, the application to resign
should not be withheld. ' , , ,
(c) The unit commander will satisfy herself, before an
officer leaves her command, that all records and financial
affairs are in good order.
Id) An officer leaving her appointment or being posted
elsewhere will require the officer taking over her command to
sign a certificate to the effect that she has satisfied herself that
stores records and finances of the unit or sub-unit are in a
satisfactory state. The certificate will be retained by the unit
concerned.
48. Officers who are medically unfit for service will go
before a medical board, the findings of which will be forwarded
to the War Office for the decision of the Army Council. ( See
para. 327.)
49. An officer for reasons other than misconduct may at
any time be called upon to resign her commission should the
case in the opinion of the Army Council require it.*
* See Royal Warrant dated 3rd July, 1941, published as Army Order 109
of 1941.


50. (a) An officer who under para. 49 or 60 is called upon to
submit an application to resign her commission may, should
she so desire, also include therein a request to be accorded an
interview with a member, or a deputy of a military member, of
the Army Council, in order that she may have an opportunity
of further stating her case. The D.A.T.S. will act as a deputy
to the Adjutant-General to the Forces for this purpose.
( b ) If, as a result of such interview, it is decided that the
decision under the paragraphs quoted shall stand, the resigna-
tion will have effect from the date on which it would have been
effective if the officer had not requested an interview.
4. RETIREMENT
51. ( a ) Retirement shall be compulsory at the following
ages, unless in any particular case, in the opinion of the Army
Council, the officer’s retention beyond the age limit in question
is in the public interest: —
Chief Controller ~ . . .. .. 57 years.
Controller .. .. .. .. 55 ~
Chief Commander ~ .. .. 50 ~
Senior Commander, and officers below the
rank of senior commander .. ~ 47
(&) When it is considered that an officer should be recom-
mended for retention beyond the approved age limit of her
rank, the necessary recommendation should be submitted in
sufficient time to permit of its consideration before the due
date for retirement.
5. RECORDS
52. A careful record of the services of each officer of a rank
below and including that of controller will be maintained on
A.F. B 199 a, but confidential entries will not be made on this
army form. The original A.F, B 199 a will be held and kept
up-to-date at the War Office, and the duplicate at the head-
quarters of the unit on the strength of which the officer
concerned is borne.
53. ( a) When an officer is posted from one unit to another,
her documents corrected to date will be passed by her unit
commander to the commander of her new unit. Where an
officer is detached from a unit or admitted to hospital, her
A.F. B 199 a will remain with the unit to which she is posted.
(6) If the posting is to another command any relinquishment
of acting rank will be published in the appendix to the orders


of the command which the officer is leaving, and promotion to
acting rank will be published in the appendix to the orders of
the command to which she is going.
54. When an officer attains a rank above that of controller,
dies, retires, resigns or is removed from the A.T.S., her docu-
ments will be forwarded to the War Office.
55. [a) To ensure the accurate maintenance of A.P. B 199 a,
unit commanders will report to the Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office, by means of Tart 11 Orders (Officers), twice
weekly on Tuesdays and Fridays, all casualties affecting
officers of their unit as they occur. Each issue of Part II
Orders (Officers) will be numbered consecutively. A new
series will begin annually in each unit oh Ist January in each
year.
(6) The following are the classes of casualties to be entered in
Part II Orders (Officers) :
Joinings.
Attachments and detachments.
Postings.
Promotions (acting, temporary, local, war substantive).
Deaths, either of the officer or her husband.
Marriages, with change of name, if any.
Births and deaths of children.
Changes of next-of-kin.
Changes of home address of of address of next-of-kin.
Courses of instruction attended.
Placing of officers on the lodging list (authority of officer
i/c barracks to be quoted where necessary, and a copy
attached to the paymaster’s copy of the Part II Order).
Billeting of officers.
Grant of ordinary leave.
Absence due to sickness.
Absence on or return from temporary duty.
Grant of ration allowance.
Any other information that may involve an entry or
correction on the officer’s record of service.
(c) In order to avoid omissions in reporting changes in the
officer’s record, the unit commander will be responsible that
every officer scrutinizes her A.F, B 199 a every six months,
and initials all alterations. These records will also be examined
by inspecting officers. •
( d ) When an officer marries she is responsible for forwarding
a copy of her marriage certificate to the unit commander for
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.


56. An officer proceeding overseas will take her duplicate
A.F. B 199 a and other documents with her and hand them over
to the O.C. her new unit on arrival, for onward transmission
to the 2nd Echelon, where a 2nd Echelon exists.
57. [a) An officer will be struck off the strength of her unit
on the day on which she ceases to do duty, if she is absent on
leave, sick leave, courses, etc., provided that the absence is
expected to last more than 21 days. If the absence is expected
to last 21 days or less, but in fact lasts longer, she will be
struck off the strength on the twenty-second day of absence,
or on such earlier date as it is known that she is to be away
for more than 21 days,
(6) An officer will not be struck off the strength of her unit
when proceeding on leave, sick leave, courses, etc., for a period
of 21 days or less, or on temporary duty for which an authorized
war establishment does not exist.
(i c) The striking off the strength of an officer will be notified
to the War Office by the quickest possible means, giving the
personal number, rank, name and initials of the officer con-
cerned, and the reason for the action taken.
6. INTERVIEWS AT THE WAR OFFICE
58. [a) Serving officers may interview the D.A.T.S., or her
representative at the War Office, on personal questions
relating to appointments, promotions, etc. In such cases no
permission is necessary, but it is advisable for officers desirous
of an interview to write direct to the Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office, in order that the date and time may be
arranged.
(b) An officer is forbidden to write private letters to officials
at the War Office on official personal matters, such as promo-
tion, appointment, posting, etc.
(c) Except as stated in [a), a serving officer is forbidden to
ask for an interview with any official at the War Office on
purely personal matters, unless she has previously obtained
from the divisional or area commander written permission
to do so. If the facts are considered good and reasonable,
the application, which must state the purpose of the interview
desired, will, in the first instance, be forwarded to the Under-
secretary of State, The War Office, so that an appointment
may be made with an official of the department chiefly con-
cerned, The written permission from the War Office for the
interview will be brought to the War Office by the officer
seeking the interview.
{d) Attempts to obtain favourable consideration of any
application by the use of outside influence are forbidden.


7. CONFIDENTIAL REPORTS
59. Confidential Reports are .only required under the
following headings :
A.F. B 194 d. Recommendation for an advancement or
promotion.
A.F. B 194 e. Special Report.
A.F. B 194 f. Recommendation for change of employ-
ment.
A.F. B 194 d
{a) This form will be used for recommending an officer for
an advancement or promotion. It will not be initialled by the
officer reported on.
(6) It should be borne in mind by officers initiating the report
that this is to enable a record to be kept at the War Office,
of officers fitted for higher appointments. The recommenda-
tions contained therein will not necessarily be carried out at
once.
(c) If an officer is recommended both for the command of a
unit and for advancement on the staff, the report will be
forwarded to the War Office in duplicate.
(i d) It is emphasized that if the standard of work of an
officer recommended for promotion or advancement is not
maintained after the submission of a report, the fact must be
reported to the War Office and the recommendation cancelled.
This must be communicated to the officer concerned.
[e] A recommendation may be submitted at any time, but
in any case a list of names of all officers who have previously
been reported on will be submitted quarterly to reach the War
Office on 31st March, 30th June, 30th September and 31st
December, respectively.
60. The following points will be observed when completing
A.F. B 194 e
{a) A report on an officer must be initiated by the C.O.
of her unit. Commandants of schools initiating
a special report on a student will communicate
their opinions to the O.C. the student's unit for
such action as she deems necessary.
{b) The officer’s exact rank will be stated on the first line
of the report, e.g. subaltern (W.S.), junior com-
mander, T/senior commander.
(c) This form will be used to recommend the non-
confirmation of a commission of an officer during
the three months’ probation ( see para. 36).
Id) The C.O. will personally show her report to the officer
concerned and point out to her that the final


decision will rest with the Army Council. The
officer will initial the report and may make notes
of it, but she will in no circumstances be given a
copy. The initialling of a report does not mean
that an officer agrees with it, but only that she is
aware of its contents. If she does not agree with
the report, she can exercise the rights given her in
sub-paras, (e), ( h ), (i), below.
(e) An officer will be told of her rights of appeal under
Section 42 of the Army Act by the officer initiating
the report. She will be informed of the necessity
for submitting her appeal, should she decide to
do so, to the initiating officer, so that it may
accompany the A.F. B 194 e to the War Office.
She will also be informed that an appeal to the
Army Council does not include the right of a
personal hearing by the Army Council, but takes
the form of a written document containing all the
facts relevant to the case in as concise and brief a
form as possible. She will be given a reasonable
time in which to prepare and submit her appeal.
Such an appeal must state clearly that it is sub-
mitted under Section 42 of the Army Act. She
will be further informed sof her right to make a
representation not amounting to an appeal. A
representation, not containing an appeal under
Section 42 of the Army Act, will be commented
upon and forwarded direct to the War Office by
the commander authorized to forward such reports
if not containing an appeal under section 42 of
the Army Act.
(/) Whenever the remarks and recommendations of a
superior reporting officer are more adverse than
the original report, they must be shown to and
initialled by the officer concerned.
( g ) An officer initiating a report and all superior officers
through whom an appeal or protest passes will
forward their comments on it. A definite recom-
mendation should be submitted by all reporting
officers ; e.g. “ I do not consider that any further
action is necessary ”, or, “I have called for special
report in—months ”, or, “ I recommend that this
officer should (or should not) be called upon to
resign ”.
( h) If the resignation of a commission is recommended,
the officer reported on will always be interviewed


by the commander next superior to the initiating
officer.
Ah officer has no right to claim an interview
with any other superior officer except as stated
in sub-para, [i) below. The interviewing officer
should preserve an impartial attitude towards an
officer adversely reported on, and give a sympathetic
hearing to anything the officer may have to say on
her own behalf. The interviewing officer will
record a definite recommendation in the army
form.
( i) Officers will be informed that the right of an interview
with a member of the Army Council or a deputy
of a military member of the Council (see para. 50
of these regulations) can only be exercised by an
officer who has been called upon, and has submitted
her application to resign her commission. Requests
for interviews should be submitted to the Under-
secretary of State, The War Office. If the inter-
view reveals new points, which were not before
the Army Council when they made their decision,
the record of the interview will be submitted to
them for re-consideration of the case. Otherwise
the case will not be re-submitted. Expenses in
respect of an interview with a member of the Army
Council, or a deputy of a military member of the
Council, will not be permitted as a charge against
public funds.
(;') An Officer should be informed that, when the Army
Council calls upon her to resign her commission,
she must do so at once, even though she intends to
appeal or ask for an interview. Failure to do this
may result in her name being published in the
London Gazette as ceasing to hold a commission.
It should be made clear to the officer that the fact
that she has applied to resign her commission in
such circumstances, will in no way prejudice her
chance of re-instatement, should her appeal
succeed.
[k) An officer holding temporary or acting rank will not
be reported on as recommended for reversion to her
war substantive rank. This will be effected
within the unit in which she is serving, under the
provisions of para. 39 (c).
[l) An officer reported on and recommended to resign
her commission will remain with her unit, except
in very special cases when the retention of such


an officer would have a seriously adverse effect
upon the unit. In such cases the G.0.C.-imC. will
grant leave while her case is under consideration,
(w) The rights of an officer to put forward representations
on a report or a decision made on her case may be
summarized as follows -
(i) She may submit an appeal under Section 42
of the Army Act with the report.
(ii) She may make a representation not amount-
ing to an appeal under Section 42 of the
Army Act.
(hi) If called upon to resign she may apply for
an interview with a member, or deputy of
a military member, of the Army Council,
under para. 50 of these Regulations.
(iv) She may make an appeal under Section 42
of the Army Act against a decision of the
Army Council that she be called upon to
resign. This appeal should be submitted
to her former C.O.
61. A.F, B 194 f will only be used in reporting on an
officer who is misplaced, and not in cases of neglect of duty,
avoidable inefficiency or misconduct.
62. (a) Reports will be rendered through the usual channels
to the War Office.
{b) When a report recommending an officer’s resignation of
her commission is despatched to the War Office, the fact will be
reported to the War Office by telegram giving the rank, name
and personal number of the officer.
63. It is emphasized that all confidential reports are
confidential and privileged documents and in no circumstances
will copies be supplied or disclosures made therefrom, except
as provided in these regulations.
8. UNEMPLOYED LIST (OFFICERS)
64. (a) For adequate compassionate reasons, an officer may
be placed by the War Office on the Unemployed List for such
period as may be decided, but in any case this period will not
exceed 12 months. While on the Unemployed List she will
not receive pay or other emoluments from army funds.
(b) The officer who makes application will also state the
period for which she wishes to be placed on the Unemployed
List. The maximum period granted at any one time will be


three months. An officer who requires an extension should
apply-in writing direct to the Under-Secretary of State, The
War Office, 14 days before this period is due to expire. An
officer will notify the Under-Secretary of State, The War
Office, 14 days before the expiry of her leave, of her readiness
to return to duty. She will be re-employed only if and when
a suitable vacancy occurs.
(c) Applications from officers serving overseas should be
forwarded to General Headquarters, Force Headquarters or
Command Headquarters concerned.
(, d ) The pro-forma shown in Appendix XV amended as
necessary will be completed in duplicate by an officer when
she requires to be placed on the Unemployed Uist (Officers).
One copy will be sent with her documents to the War Office,
and the other handed to the officer.
[e) The period on the Unemployed List will not be reckoned
as service for the purpose of any gratuity or other emolument
which may be granted in respect of full-time service. Relega-
tion to and re-joining from the Unemployed List will be
recorded in the Part II Orders (Officers) of the unit concerned.
Free travelling facilities will not be granted in respect of
unpaid leave, unless the officer is entitled to such free travelling
facilities under para. 289. A railway concession rate may be
obtained for the journey (see para. 288 (c)).
SECTION IV.—AUXILIARIES: ENROLMENT, DIS-
CHARGE, UNEMPLOYED LIST (OTHER RANKS),
RECORDS, ETC.
1. ENROLMENT
General Instructions
65. {a) With the exceptions mentioned in paras. 67 and 76,
the minimum age of enrolment will be 18 years. The maxi-
mum age limit will be as published from time to time. The
age according to the date of birth declared by a recruit on
the second page of her enrolment form will be taken to be her
correct age, provided that if she has enrolled more than once,
the age on her first enrolment into the A.T.S. will be taken to
be her correct age. In the case of a woman who enrols after
having been discharged owing to a mis-statement of age, that
shown on her birth certificate will be taken to be her correct


age. In cases of mis-statement of age on enrolment, discharge
will be effected ( see Appendix VI.)
(b) Except as indicated above, records regarding age cannot
afterwards be corrected and an auxiliary who has made a mis-
representation will not be entitled, on subsequent disclosure
of the true facts, to demand the correction of errors due to
her own mis-statements. This will be fully explained to her
by the enrolling officer, who will carefully record the date of
birth on the form of enrolment, A.F. Esl Ip. The term of
service will be for the period of the present emergency.
66. Medical and physical standards will be laid down in
Recruiting Instructions from time to time. When enrolment
is desired, in view of special qualifications, of women below
these standards, the army recruiting officer will state the
qualifications on A.F. B 203, and will forward the army form
direct to the War Office for consideration. If it is desired to
accept a woman who has been discharged from H.M. Forces
with an indifferent character ( see para. 70), the case will be
submitted by the A.T.S. recruiting officer concerned, on
A.F. B 203 to the Officer i/c Records for consideration, together
with particulars of the woman’s former service. In no case
should the woman be enrolled pending authority being received
from the Officer i/c Records for her re-enrolment.
67. A girl between the ages of 17J and 18 years, who is
otherwise qualified, may be accepted for enrolment into the
A.T.S. provided that both her parents or her guardian consent
to such enrolment. This consent must be obtained in writing
on A.F. ESllo before enrolment is proceeded with. A girl
so enrolled will have full auxiliary status.
68. Every woman offering herself for enrolment will be
served with a notice paper, A.F. E 51 Iq.
69. A recruit on being enrolled will be required to state her
religion, which will be notified on the second page of
A.F. ESIIP.
70. The following classes will not be allowed to enrol or
re-enrol in the A.T.S. ;
(a) Women belonging to the Women’s Royal Naval
Service, the Women’s Auxiliary Air Force, or the
Reserves, if any, of these services.
{b) Women who have been discharged from the above-
mentioned services—
(i) As unfit for further service.
(ii) For misconduct.
(iii) With a bad or indifferent character. {See
para. 66.)
2— (1744)


(c) Women who have been convicted of a serious offence
by the civil power.
(i d) Women with disability pensions.
(e) Women covered by the “ Schedule of Reserved
Occupations ”.
71. Women who have been discharged from the A.T.S. as
medically unfit, but whb are subsequently pronounced by the
medical authority (having complete knowledge of the cause of
discharge), to be fully fit for service in the A.T.S. may be
enrolled again, provided that their character on discharge
was at least “ fair ”, and that they fulfil all requirements
regarding age and suitability. „
72. Women who have held commissions in the A.T.S. may
enrol in the ranks, provided that they have been allowed to
resign their commissions. Applications for ex-officers to
enrol into the ranks of the A.T.S. must, without exception, be
submitted to the War Office on A.F. B 203 through the usual
channels.
73. (a) Form of enrolment (A.F. E Slip) and medical history
sheet (A.F. B 178) will be prepared by the recruiting officer
for each recruit enrolled. The officer carrying out enrolment
will dispose of these documents in accordance with Recruiting
Instructions issued from time to time.
(fe) Final approval will be carried out by officers designated
for the purpose in Recruiting Instructions from time to time.
The officer carrying out the final approval will forward
A.F.ESIIPto the Officer i/c Records.
74. ( a) If the officer carrying out the final approval, before
approving an enrolment, should find the recruit unfitted to
serve on other than medical grounds, she will discharge her as
“ enrolled but not finally approved” and will despatch her
form of enrolment and other documents to the Officer i/c
Records, the following entry being made on page 4 of the
document: —
Discharged, having been enrolled but not finally approved.
Place
Date Signature
A recruit so discharged will be provided with a discharge
certificate (A.F. E 51 lx) by the Officer i/c Records, on which
the cause of discharge, as indicated above, will be entered. ( See
Appendix VI.)
( b) For instructions regarding discharge on medical grounds,
see para. 327. .
75. Applicants for enrolment into the A.T.S. who have
previously served in the Women’s Royal Naval Service or the


Women’s Auxiliary Air Force, will be eligible for enrolment, if
their previous service has been satisfactory. A record of their
previous service will be obtained from the record officer
concerned.
76. Women who served during the War of 1914-1918 in
Naval, Army or Air Force Nursing Services, or Voluntary
Aid Detachments, if attached to military hospitals, the
Women’s Royal Naval Service, Queen Mary’s Army Auxiliary
Corps, Women’s Legion (Motor Transport Section, attached to
H.M. Forces), Women’s Forage Corps, Women’s Royal Air
Force, or First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (attached to H.M.
Forces) may be enrolled into the A.T.S. up to the. age of
50 years.
2. Promotion
77. The designation of a warrant or non-commissioned
officer of the A.T.S. will be that authorized for a soldier of
equivalent rank. This will be understood in any reference to
pay, promotion, etc., in these regulations.
78. Promotion will be governed by the following considera-
tions :
(a) Promotion will depend on the individual’s qualifica-
tions to fulfil efficiently the r6le required of her in
the higher rank. She should set an example in
smartness, devotion to duty and good conduct;
she should be able to exact strict discipline, com-
mand respect and supervise the duties of her
subordinates.
(b) Promotion will not be given to an auxiliary, however
good her work, if she has not attained a level of
discipline appropriate to the rank under considera-
tion.
{c) Other things being equal, consideration will be given
to the seniority of the auxiliary.
[d) (i) Promotion of a tradeswoman to the rank of
corporal and above will only be permitted when
she has attained Class I in her trade (Class II in
* the case of a group Dor group E trade), except
with special authority.
(ii) Promotions will be effected on the authority of
the O.C. unit and confirmed by the Officer i/c
Records.
79. (a) There will be no substantive promotion in war.
All promotion will be to acting or war substantive rank.
Promotion to acting and war substantive rank will be in


For war substantive
rank of
Requisite period of paid acting rank
Corporal
3 months as corporal.
Serjeant
6 months as serjeant.
Staff-serjeant
6 months as staff-serjeant.
Warrant officer, Class II ..
9 months in an appointment carrying rank
of warrant officer, Class II.
Warrant officer, Class I ..
12 months in an appointment carrying rank
of warrant officer, Class I.
accordance with the table set out below. It will be granted on
the authority of the O.C. unit.
Promotion will only be made when there is a vacancy on
the authorized establishment. On receipt of Part II Orders
notifying a promotion to unpaid acting rank {see para. 350), the
Officer i/c Records will take immediate steps to verify that a
vacancy exists on the establishment of the unit or sub-unit
concerned, and should no vacancy exist, will at once notify
the unit commander concerned, in order that unpaid acting
rank shall not be converted into paid acting rank at the expiry
of the requisite 21 days.
{b) An auxiliary granted acting rank or appointment shall
not be eligible for the pay of the higher rank or appointment
until it has been held for 21 days when the pay of the acting
rank or appointment may be issued retrospectively with effect
from the date of the grant of the rank or appointment.
(c) Paid acting rank will be converted into war substantive
rank after it has been held for the periods set out below
80. (a) For the purpose of calculating the total periods of
acting rank required for the grant of war substantive rank, all
approved periods of paid acting rank {i.e. periods of 21 days
and over) will be reckoned cumulatively, except as provided
in sub-para. (6) below.
(6) No period of paid acting rank which has been relin-
quished on account of inefficiency or misconduct will be allowed
to count towards the total requisite period of acting rank
required for the grant of war substantive rank.
For example, if an acting serjeant is required to relinquish
the acting rank of serjeant and revert to private on cffccount of
inefficiency or misconduct, no portion of such acting rank will
count towards the qualifying period for war substantive rank,
but, if she is required to revert otherwise than for misconduct
or inefficiency to the acting rank of corporal, the period served
as acting serjeant may be reckoned towards the qualifying
period for the war substantive rank of corporal.
(c) In cases where paid acting rank is relinquished for


reasons specified in para. (&) above, Os.C. units will cause an
entry to be made in Part II Orders to the effect that the period
of paid acting rank which is terminated by such relinquishment
shall, or shall not, be reckoned towards the total period
required for war substantive rank.
81. (a) In order to avoid unnecessary disappointment to
individuals, no grant of war substantive rank will be entered
in unit Part II Orders if any doubt exists regarding the
eligibility of the individual for such rank. In all cases of
doubt, the Officer i/c Records will first be consulted.
( h) The greatest care must also be taken by Os.C. units to
ensure that all appointments to, or relinquishments of paid
acting rank are recorded in Part II Orders, A.F. B 103 and
A.B. 64.
82. (a) For the purposes of this regulation, one month shall
be reckoned as 30 days.
(6) For instructions with regard to the publication of pro-
motions in Part II Orders see para. 350.
3. DISCHARGE
83. (a) The various causes of discharge, which competent
officers may authorize, carry out and confirm, and the special
instructions regarding the cause of discharge are given in
Appendix VI. The words shown in column lof that appendix
will be used for recording the cause of discharge.
(6) A discharge is complete as soon as.it has been confirmed
by the competent officer. ,
( c) 14 days’ terminal furlough will be granted to all auxiliaries
on being discharged except: —
(i) Those discharged on medical grounds who are granted
28 days’ terminal furlough with effect from the date
on which the approved proceedings of the Medical
Board (A.F. B 179) are received by the Officer i/c
Records from the company commander.
In the event of an auxiliary being retained in
hospital for further treatment, she will be dis-
charged as stated above, and after the date of
discharge will, if necessary, be retained in hospital
for further treatment as a civilian patient.
(ii) Those discharged under Appendix VI, paras. (1), (5),
(6). (8) and (10).
(iii) Those discharged under Appendix VI, sub-para. (9)
who are women over 41 years of age with a bad
criminal record, or those who are discharged for the
purpose of enrolment into another service.


{d) The 15 days’ notice referred to in A.F. E Slip will run
concurrently with the 14 days’ terminal furlough for those
eligible as shown above.
84. For disposal of uniform and provision of plain clothes
for auxiliaries on discharge, see War Clothing Regulations.
85. (a) On discharge, other than on medical grounds,
A.F. W 3149 will be completed in respect of every auxiliary.
(6) Each auxiliary on discharge will be furnished with
a discharge certificate (A.F. E 51 lx) by the Officer i/c Records,
through the company commander (or O.C. hospital in special
cases). In the case of an auxiliary who has not delivered up
her uniform, etc., the company commander may retain the
certificate, pending the return of the uniform, etc., for a period
not exceeding 14 days, but this will not affect the date of
discharge.
[c] No such certificate, however, will be necessary when
a woman is discharged on appointment as an officer in the
A.T.S.
Character in Testimonial Form on Discharge
86. ( a ) The object of giving auxiliaries a character in
testimonial form is to assist them to obtain civil employment
when they leave the Service. This character should consist
of a comprehensive statement of the salient points of the
auxiliary’s qualifications, and should be so worded that
employers of labour can readily estimate the true worth of
the woman. The testimonial will be in the handwriting of
the unit commander and will be issued to the auxiliary free
from erasure.
( b) The character in testimonial form will be based on the
unit commander’s personal knowledge of the auxiliary and
on information supplied by officers under whom she has
served ; from the records of her general or practical education
and trade qualifications in the Service, and after a careful
study of her documents.
(c) The testimonial should contain any information that
will show what qualifications an auxiliary possesses as regards
civil employment and should refer to anything which might
tell in her favour with a prospective employer; e.g. trust-
worthiness, reliability, sobriety, tact, intelligence, proficiency
in games.
(d) It is desirable to have a uniform system for estimating
an auxiliary’s military conduct while serving with the forces
and a separate assessment of her military qualifications and
conduct will be made by the unit commander in the following
terms and entered on A.F. E 511 t on discharge :


(i) Exemplar}^.
(ii) Very good.
(hi) Good.
(iv) Fair.
(v) Indifferent.
(vi) Bad.
(vii) Very bad.
( e ) An assessment of “ exemplary ” for military conduct is
the highest that can be given to any auxiliary. It will be
reserved for an auxiliary with not less than three years’ service,
calculated from the date of enrolment.
(/) In assessing an auxiliary’s character, entries in A.F. B 122
will be taken into account.
87. (a) The unit commander is the sole judge as to whether
an auxiliary should be awarded the assessment of “ exemplary ”
for military conduct.
( h) If an auxiliary whose conduct is otherwise exemplary,
has not had sufficient service to make her eligible for the
award of " exemplary ”, after the words “ very good ” in
the assessment of military conduct the following words will be
inserted : —“ Qualified by her conduct to have received an
award of ‘ exemplary ’ for military conduct, but ineligible
because she has not completed three years’ service”.
(c) For the purposes of the award of an assessment of
‘‘very good ”, as a general rule two years’ service may be
considered necessary to enable an auxiliary’s conduct to be
properly tested. In cases, however, where an auxiliary has
less than two years’ service but otherwise merits the award
of “ very good ”, her military conduct should be qualified
by the following words : —“ During her . . . months’ ”, or,
“ year and . . . months’ service with the Forces ”,
88. Where an assessment of military conduct more favour-
able than “ fair ” cannot be awarded to a N.C.0., the reasons
will be briefly recorded on a separate paper and forwarded with
A.F. E 51 It on discharge.
89. If an auxiliary has been specifically mentioned ’in
brigade or superior orders or in despatches, a note of the fact
will be entered in A.F. E 51 lx.
90. Should a certificate be lost, a prospective employer
may, with the written consent of the woman concerned, refer
to the Officer i/c Records, who will supply information regard-
ing her conduct and character as recorded in A.F. E 51 lx.
91. In no circumstances should A.F. Esllx be issued to
the auxiliary unless page 2 of that form is entirely free from


erasure. Unused space will be neatly ruled through in such
a manner as to render impossible the addition of entries after
issue to the auxiliary.
4. UNEMPLOYED LIST (OTHER RANKS)
General
92. {a) An auxiliary of good conduct may be released, at
her own request, from service to the Unemployed List for a
period of not more than three months. This period may be
extended for a further month :
(i) On the ground of family needs and other urgent reasons.
(ii) If the auxiliary having held a key position in industry
is required for instructional purposes.
(b) A period up to three months on the Unemployed List
may be granted during the first year of marriage, or when a
husband in the Services is posted where his wife can join
him for a time.
[c] Release to the Unemployed List will be authorized by
the unit commander, confirmed by the Officer i/c Records,
and carried out by the company commander. In cases of
special urgency the auxiliary may be sent on leave, pending
the completion of this procedure. She will be medically
examined immediately before leaving her unit and a report
will be entered on A.F. B 178 (Medical History Sheet). On
release to the Unemployed List, A.F. W 3149 will be com-
pleted in respect of every auxiliary. She will receive a railway
warrant to her home. Unless suitable arrangements have
already been made at the time of release, an auxiliary released
to the Unemployed List will be supplied by the sub-unit
commander with a military leave or duty ration card (R. 8.8)
which will cover the ensuing period of 14 days from the date
of release. After the expiration of that period responsibility
for making provision under any food rationing scheme then
in force will rest with the auxiliary concerned. She will be
issued with A.F. W 3044, to which A.F. W 3045 will be
attached, both suitably amended by the deletion of the words
“ Class W Royal Army Reserve ” and “ Class W (T) T.A.
Reserve,” and the substitution of the words “ Auxiliary Terri-
torial Service Unemployed List,” and will be instructed by
her platoon commander that it will be necessary for her to
produce this to the local food committee before a civilian
ration book can be issued to her. She will retain her uniform,
except steel helmet and respirator, and will be responsible
during her period of release for maintaining her uniform in


good order. Her A.B. 64 will be endorsed showing that no
pay or allowances are due to her while on the Unemployed
List, and her A.F. W 3044 will state the period for which she
is released from service.
(« i) All documents held by the unit or sub-unit in respect
of auxiliaries on the Unemployed List will be sent to the
Officer i/c Records.
{e) The auxiliary will be struck off the strength of her unit
in Part II Orders. She will be liable to recall and will also
be instructed to notify the Officer i/c A.T.S. Records, The
Barracks, Winchester, should she wish to return before her
period on the Unemployed List is completed. If she is a
N.C.O. she will return in her substantive or war substantive
rank. If there is no vacancy, she will be held supernumerary
to establishment or will replace another auxiliary holding
acting rank. Whenever possible she will be returned to the
company or platoon in which she was serving before her
release, after the unit commander has been consulted.
.(/) In respect of applications for discharge from the Unem-
ployed List on compassionate or other grounds, an auxiliary
will be in the same position as during normal service, but she
will submit any application she may find it necessary to make
to the Officer i/c Records.
( g ) When the recall of an auxiliary from the Unemployed
List is ordered or authorized, the Officer i/c Records will send
a special letter to her ordering her to rejoin for duty. This
letter will state the precise details of the station, unit, date
and time at which she is required to report, and will also
draw attention to the enclosures and to the fact that the
postal order represents an advance of pay. The enclosures
to the letter ordering auxiliaries to rejoin will consist of :
(i) A railway warrant for the journey.
(ii) A postal order for ss.
A copy of the above-mentioned letter will at the same time
be despatched by the Officer i/c Records to the Regimental
Paymaster and to the commander of the unit which the
auxiliary is ordered to rejoin. The Officer i/c Records will
also send the auxiliary’s documents to her place of re-joining.
(h) The period on the Unemployed List will not be reckoned
as service for the purpose of any gratuity or other emolument
which may be granted in respect of full-time service. Release
to and rejoining from the Unemployed List will be recorded
in the Part II Orders of the unit concerned.
(i) The pro-forma shown in Appendix XV should be com-
pleted in duplicate by the auxiliary when she requires to be
placed on the Unemployed List (Other Ranks). One copy
2*— (1744)


should be sent with her documents to the Officer i/c Records,
and the other handed to the auxiliary.
Unemployment Insurance and National
Health Insurance Cards
93. The following procedure will be adopted with regard to
the Unemployment Insurance and National Health Insurance
cards of auxiliaries released to the Unemployed List :
(a) It will be made quite clear to all auxiliaries going on
the Unemployed List that from the date of their release no
further contributions towards their insurance will be made
from army sources.
( b) (i) A.F. O 1845 a as regards National Health Insurance
and Pensions Insurance will be rendered by the Officer i/c
Records to the Ministry of Health in respect of the auxiliary
on the date on which she is released. This form will be
amended by the substitution of “ date of release to the Unem-
ployed List ” for “ date of discharge.”
(ii) On an auxiliary returning from the Unemployed List,
Form N.S. 124 will be rendered afresh to the Ministry of
Health, and the words " date of enrolment ” in Part B of
the form will be amended to read “ date of rejoining from the
Unemployed List.”
( c ) (i) As regards Unemployment Insurance, Form U.I. 3XS
will be rendered to the Ministry of Labour and National
Service, on receipt of which that Ministry will issue an Unem-
ployment Insurance book to the auxiliary concerned.
(ii) On return to duty this book will be surrendered to the
O.C, the unit which the auxiliary rejoins, and returned to the
Ministry of Labour and National Service.
( d ) If during release the auxiliary falls sick, she will, whether
in civil employment or not, be eligible to receive the ordinary
degree of sickness benefit to which at the time she is entitled
by part contribution, even though when she falls sick she is
neither paying contributions nor having them paid for her.
( e) If in certain circumstances the auxiliary registers for
employment, she may, if possessing the requisite number of
contributions to her credit and satisfying other statutory
conditions, draw unemployment benefit.
Auxiliaries failing to obey orders of recall
94. When an auxiliary, who has been released to the Unem-
ployed List, fails to return to duty on the due date or to
obey an order of recall issued by the Officer i/c Records, action
will be taken as follows :
(a) The company commander will write a letter as follows


to the woman at her last known address, giving her 96 hours
in which to reply, and will if necessary issue a new travelling:
warrant ;
"You have failed to rejoin on as required
by the order of recall issued to you by the Officer i/c Records
on If you are unable to report
owing to illness, please send to me at once a medical cer-
tificate stating the nature and probable duration of your
illness. No expenses in connection with such illness will
be admissible against public funds. If your failure to report
is due to some reasonable cause other than illness, please
send to me at once a full explanation of the circumstances.
Should you have no reasonable excuse to offer for your
failure to report you will join at the above address forth-
with, or you will be dealt with under the Army Act as an
absentee without leave, as you are a person subject to
Military Law.
" An addressed envelope is enclosed for your reply, which
must reach me within four days of the date of this letter,
if you have not joined this unit in the meantime.’’
Signature of Company Commander.
{'b ) (i) If the woman gives a reasonable excuse for her failure
to report as ordered ( e.g . sickness or urgent domestic affairs),
the company commander will put the matter before the
O.C. the unit, who may at her discretion grant deferment
of rejoining up to a maximum period of 28 days.
(ii) If a woman is unable to report owing to sickness or
disability which is likely to be of long duration,
the O.C. the unit at the expiration of 28 days will
submit to the headquarters of the command in
which the woman is residing a request for her to
be medically examined, with a view to ascertaining
when she is likely to be fit for duty. The D.D.M.S.
of the command concerned will arrange for a
medical examination to be carried out, and the
C.O. the unit will be informed of the result through
the usual channels. If the M.O. is of the opinion
that the woman will be permanently unfit for duty,
the woman will be discharged ; if considered tem-
porarily unfit, she will be given an extension of the
period of release by the Officer i/c Records, such
extension to be in accordance with the recom-
mendations of the M.O.
(iii) If the urgent domestic affairs which prevented her
rejoining are still in operation at the end of 28


days, discharge under Appendix VI, para. 3, may
be granted.
[c] If the company commander receives no reply to her
letter at the expiry of 96 hours, or if the woman has replied
and the O.C. the unit has not*granted her deferment of rejoin-
ing, and the woman having been so informed has failed to
report at the expiration of a further 96 hours, the company
commander will communicate with the police of the district
in which the woman is residing. She will inform the police
of the circumstances and will furnish a descriptive return
(A.F. B 124). She will ask the police to make enquiry, and
either to render a report if the woman is considered to have
reasonable cause for failure to report as ordered, or to take
such action as is considered necessary.
[d] If the woman is apprehended by the police, action will
be taken in accordance with the instructions contained in
para. 165.
[e] The company commander will send copies of her letters
to the Officer i/c Records.
5. “Y” LIST
95. (a) General Service personnel after 21 days in hospital
are.posted to the “ Y List with pay, and taken on the strength
of the “Y ” List by the Officer i/c Records. Detailed pro-
cedure with regard *to the administration of the “ Y ” List is
laid down in A.C.Is. from time to time.
( b ) For disciplinary action with regard to personnel on the
“ Y ” List, see para. 324.
6. RECORDS
96. The procedure with regard to the preparation, main-
tenance and custody of documents is laid down in paras.
358-363. After final approval [see para. 73), the enrolment
form (A.F. E 51 Ip) will be forwarded to the Officer i/c Records
for retention.
The Officer i/c Records will be responsible for recording
variations of service, etc., in the enrolment form from Part I
and Part II Orders [see paras. 348-352).- Company com-
manders will maintain a similar record on A.F. B 103 and
A.B. 64.
The following documents will be attached to the enrolment
form ;
A.F. E 51 lo—Consent of parents for enrolment of a girl.
A.F. E 511b —Two references (if obtained).
A.F. B 203—Special enrolment, if necessary.


A
B
Nature of casualty
Enrolment form etc.
(i) Death .. .. .. .. 'j
(ii) Struck off strength of unit for
All documents will be forwarded to
absence.
Officer i/c Records who will pre-
(iii) Discharge
serve them with those in his
(iv) Discharge on being commis-
possession.
sioned as an officer.
(v) Discharge preceding enrolment
All documents to Officer i/c Records
in W.R.N.S. or W.A.A.F.
who will then forward a state-
ment of services to the service
concerned, as required.
(vi) Recruit discharged not finally
To be retained by O.C. Training
approved.
Centre for one year, and then
destroyed.
97. A.Fs. E5l Ip are filed in A.B. 404 (binders) by Officer i/c
Records. When an enrolment is taken from the portfolio
for any purpose, A.F. B 198 will be prepared and sent with it.
This form, after being signed by the recipient, will be returned
to its place in the portfolio instead of the enrolment. When
the enrolment form is returned, A.F. B 198 will be re-trans-
mitted to the officer who signed the receipt thereon.
98. Should the enrolment form be lost or become so injured
as to render it useless, a certified copy of the form will be
substituted for it. An entry as follows will be made in red
ink at the top of the first page of the copy :
Copy Enrolment Form
Substituted for enrolment form in accordance with A.T.S.
Regulations, 1941, para. 98.
Signature of Company Commander
or Officer i/c Records.
Station
Date
99. All matters affecting an auxiliary’s pay and service will
be published in Part II Orders (see para. 350.)
100. A field conduct sheet (A.F. B 122) will be held for
every auxiliary by the company commander.
101. (a) When an auxiliary becomes non-effective, her
enrolment form and other documents will be dealt with as
follows :
( b ) Medical history sheets will be sent with the other docu-
ments to the Officer i/c Records. In the case of auxiliaries dis-
charged under Appendix VI, para. 4, the Officer i/c Records will
forward the medical history sheet to the Ministry of Pensions
for retention.


7. GOOD CONDUCT BADGES
102. (w) A good conduct badge will be conferred on an
auxiliary under the rank of corporal and will be worn on the
left arm. Such badges carry no financial reward.
(b) Good conduct badges may be granted after the following
periods of mobilized service :
One badge after 2 years’ service.
Two badges after 5 years’ service.
Three badges after 12 years’ service.
(c) A good conduct badge shall be awarded to an auxiliary on
completing a “ term of good conduct ”, i.e. a period of two
years during which no entry has been made in her A.F. B 122.
In case of an entry in A.F. B 122, the “ term of good conduct ”
will be reckoned from the date on which the punishment was
awarded.
103. (a) Service in Queen Mary’s Army Auxiliary Corps,
or in the Women’s Royal Naval Service or the Women’s Royal
Air Force during the war of 1914-1918 may be reckoned as
qualifying service, unless any record of unsatisfactory conduct
is known to exist. With regard to the length of such service,
information may be obtained regarding Queen Mary’s Army
Auxiliary Corps from the Under - Secretary of State (R.
Records), The War Office, and regarding the Women’s Royal
Naval Service and the Women’s Royal Air Force from the
Director of Navy Accounts, Branch 3, The Admiralty, Foxhill
Hutments, Combe Down, Bath, and the Officer i/c R.A.F.
Records, Ruislip, Middlesex, respectively.
(. b) In regard to other qualifying service previous to the
present war, enquiries accompanied by full particulars should
be addressed to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office ;
when the enquiry relates to service in a Voluntary Aid Detach-
ment, the type of hospital in which the member was employed
should be stated.
104. [a) The second' or later badge shall not be granted until
the badge or badges previously awarded have been held through
a complete “ term of good conduct ” immediately preceding
the date of the grant.
(p) A good conduct badge shall not be awarded to an
auxiliary if, on completion of a “ term of good conduct ”, she
is absent or is awaiting disposal for an offence ( see para. 110).
105. An auxiliary reduced from a higher rank to a rank
in which she would be eligible for a good conduct badge, shall
be granted at once such badges as she would have been eligible
for under para. 102 in the lower rank, regard being had to
entries on her A.F. B 122. Any remaining badges shall be
awarded to her under the conditions of para. 104,


8. FORFEITURE OF GOOD CONDUCT
BADGES
106. One badge held by an auxiliary shall be forfeited for
each entry in A.F. B 122 {see para. 367.)
107. An auxiliary sentenced by a civil court to a term of
imprisonment exceeding six months shall forfeit all good
conduct badges held by her without power of restoration, and
shall be placed in the same position as regards badges as an
auxiliary to whom the badge has never been awarded.
108. The forfeiture of a good conduct badge shall be
reckoned from the date on which punishment has been
awarded,
109. An auxiliary who forfeits a good conduct badge,
except in the circumstances defined in para. 107, shall regain
it on completing a “ half term of good conduct ”. If she
has lost more than one badge she shall complete a “ half
term of good conduct ” from the date of losing the last badge
forfeited, before one lost badge is restored, and shall complete
another “ half term ” before the second badge is restored and
so on.
110. No good conduct badge shall, however, be restored
if, on the completion of a “half term of good conduct”, the
auxiliary is absent or awaiting disposal for an offence which is
subsequently entered in the field conduct sheet, or is absent-
under conditions which afterwards entail such an entry.
111-116. Reserved for future entries.
SECTION V.—DISCIPLINE
1. POWER OF COMMAND
117. The power of command to be exercised by officers of
the A.T.S. will extend over ail officers of the A.T.S. who are
junior to them in rank, or in seniority, and over all warrant
officers, N.C.Os. and privates of the A.T.S.
118. [a) Direct command over all ranks of the A.T.S. will
be exercised by the Commander-in-Chief and G.0.C.-in-C.,
and by all corps, divisional, district, and area commanders.


(6) Military officers subordinate to the commanders men-
tioned are responsible generally for the discipline of A.T.S.
personnel attached to or serving in the units under their
command. (See also para. 120 (a).)
( c ) Such military officers are directly responsible for the unit
training of A.T.S. personnel attached to or serving in the
units under their command.
(d) Subordinate military officers have direct power of
command over such officers and auxiliaries as may be specially
placed under their orders from time to time, by any superior
military or A.T.S. authority. Conversely, when they are
normally employed on those duties for which they have been
detailed to serve with troops, officers of the A.T.S. have power
of command over such military officers and soldiers as may be
specially placed under their orders from time to time by any
superior military authority. Provided that in no case shall
the superior military authority or the superior A.T.S. authority
be of rank below field rank, or its equivalent rank in the
A.T.S.
( e ) In no other circumstances will an A.T.S. officer have
power of command over other than A.T.S. personnel.
(/) The right of direct appeal on matters of well-being
through A.T.S. channels, laid down in paras. 3 and 13, rests
with all A.T.S. officers.
119. When, in the circumstances defined in para. 118 ( d ), a
military officer or a soldier is specially placed under the
command of an officer of the A.T.S., the officer of the A.T.S.
becomes the “ superior officer ” of that officer or soldier within
the meaning of Sections 8 and 9of the Army Act. In no other
circumstances will an officer of the A.T.S. be the “ superior
officer ” of a military officer or soldier within the meaning
of those sections.
2. GENERAL
120. (a) The expression “ commanding officer ” as used in
this section of these regulations, means the officer in command
of a unit, as defined in these regulations, or of an independent
company (see para. 7 (&)).
(6) A C.O. can only exercise the full powers of summary
punishment (see paras. 153-156) if she is of rank equivalent
to field rank, or, if under such rank, when she has been
authorized in writing so to do by the divisional or area com-
mander, provided that she is of the rank of junior commander.


( c) A C.O. may delegate in writing to any officer (not being
of lower rank than junior commander) under her command
and in charge of a detachment full power to dispose sum-
marily of any offence with which she may herself deal under
paras. 153-156.
A C.O. may delegate to Os.C. companies and subalterns in
charge of detached units the following restricted powers :
Confinement to barracks for seven days (neither more
nor less); extra duties ; admonition. •
[d) If a C.O. delegates full powers of summary punishment
to an officer under her command, the latter must refer to the
C.O. any case for trial by F.G.C.M.
120 a. Administration of Discipline in Mixed Units. — [a) The
O.C. a mixed establishment is responsible for the discipline
of all ranks under his command. But his powers as C.O. are
limited by these regulations as regards officers and other ranks
of the A.T.S. as indicated below.
(6) The senior officer of the A.T.S. will take disciplinary
action as regards offences committed by any woman under
her command in accordance with the powers vested in her by
these regulations, and by her C.O. in the A.T.S. Immediately
she has done so she will report the action taken to the O.C.
the unit.
(c) Where her powers of punishment do not permit her to
dispose of a case she will refer the case to her C.O. in the
A.T.S. and will at the same time report the fact to the O.C.
the unit.
{d) Breaches of discipline on the part of A.T.S. personnel
which may come to the notice of military officers or N.C.Os.
will be reported by them to the O.C. the unit, who will notify
the senior A.T.S. officer so that the necessary disciplinary
action may be taken.
[e) In all matters of internal administration and discipline,
the O.C. the unit will interfere with the A.T.S. contingent as
little as possible, consistent with the discipline and welfare of
the unit as a whole. He will at all times afford officers of the
A.T.S. the benefit of his advice and support.
(f) If the O.C. the unit should find it necessary to report
upon or make any recommendation with regard to the A.T.S.
personnel attached to his unit, he will address such report or
recommendation through the usual channels to the divisional
or area commander concerned, who will ensure that the com-
munication is brought to the notice of the group commander,
A.T.S., for any necessary action.
121. A military officer who is not satisfied with the work
performed by A.T.S. personnel employed in his formation or


unit, will refer the matter to the O.C. the A.T.S. unit con-
cerned, and if necessary will make a report in writing to his
superior authority.
122. A C.O. is responsible for the discipline of all the per-
sonnel in her command.
123. An officer is at all times responsible for ensuring that
good order and the rules and discipline of the Service are main-
tained. She will offer the utmost aid and support to her C.O.
It is her duty to notice, repress and instantly report, any
negligence or impropriety of conduct on the part of all junior
officers, warrant officers, N.C.Os. and privates, whether on or
off duty, and whether the offenders do, or do not belong to
her own unit.
124. A C.O. is responsible for ensuring'that all persons under
her command are acquainted and comply with the provisions
of the Official Secrets Acts, 1911 and 1930, together with the
paragraphs of these regulations bearing on the same subject
{see paras. 342-347).
125. A C.O. will use every effort to prevent crime and to
suppress any tendency to screen its existence. For first
offences, not of an aggravated character, admonition is the
most suitable treatment. Other punishment should be
resorted to only when admonition has failed to have effect.
126. Officers, warrant officers and N.C.Os. will adopt towards
subordinates such methods of command and treatment as
will not only ensure respect for authority, but also foster the
feelings of self-respect and personal honour essential to
military efficiency. They will avoid intemperate language or
an offensive manner.
127. An officer will not reprove a warrant officer or N.C.O.
in the presence or hearing of privates.
128. A C.O. should impress on all under her command, the
importance of courtesy in dealing with all ranks and classes of
society, and should particularly caution them to pay deference
and respect to civil authorities.
129. Warrant officers and N.C.Os. are forbidden to borrow
money from privates.
130. Smoking in the streets is forbidden.
3. HOW PUNISHMENTS MAY BE AWARDED—
APPLICATION OF THE ARMY ACT
131. The Army Act, so far as it is capable of such applica-
tion, applies to officers and auxiliaries as if they were part of
the Regular Forces.


132. Of Sections 4-41 of the Army Act (which relate to
offences against that Act), only Sections 15 and 40 as modified
and set out below, apply to offences committed by officers and
auxiliaries.
Section 15, Army Act. A woman who absents herself without
Absence from duty leave shall be guilty of an offence
without leave. against the Act.
Section 40, Army Act. A woman who is guilty of any act,
Conduct to the conduct, disorder or neglect, to the
prejudice of disci- prejudice of good order and disci-
pline. pline shall be guilty of an offence
against the Act.
133. ( a ) An officer is liable to trial by F.G.C.M. For
punishments that may be awarded see para. 166 [a).
(■ b) An officer below the rank of senior commander may be
dealt with summarily under Section 47 of the Army Act.
(ic) An officer may, at any time, be removed or called upon
to resign her commission for misconduct ( see also para. 49).
(i d) An officer has no right to claim a court of inquiry in
any circumstances, nor trial by F.G.C.M., except in the circum-
stances mentioned in Section 47 (3) of the Army Act.
134. ( a) A warrant officer is liable to trial by F.G.C.M.
For punishments that may be awarded see para. 166 (6).
{b) A warrant officer may be dealt with summarily under
Section 47 of the Army Act, but not by her C.O.
( c ) A warrant officer may be reduced by the competent
authority under Sections 182 and 183 of the Army Act. Any
reduction under these sections necessitates a reference to the
divisional or area commander.
(i d) A warrant officer cannot be dealt with summarily by
her C.O.
(e) A warrant officer has no right to claim a court of inquiry
in any circumstances, nor trial by F.G.C.M., except in the
circumstances mentioned in Section 47 (3) of the x\rmy Act.
135. [a) A N.C.O. is liable to trial by F.G.C.M. For
punishments that may be awarded see para. 166 (&).
{b) Subject to her right to elect, previous to the award, to
be tried by F.G.C.M., a N.C.O. may be dealt with summarily
by her C.O. ( see paras. 153-155).
( c) A N.C.O. may be reduced by the competent authority
under Section 183 of the Army Act. Any reduction under this
section necessitates a reference to the divisional or area
commander.
136. A private must be dealt with summarily by her C.O.
{see para. 156) subject to her right to elect trial by F.G.C.M.


{see para. 153). She cannot be tried by F.G.C.M. unless she
elects trial. For punishments that may be awarded by a
F.G.C.M. {see para. 166 (c)).
4. ARREST
General
137. Under Section 45 of the Army Act, any person subject
to military law, when charged with an offence punishable under
the Army Act, may be placed under arrest.
138. There is only one form of arrest which will be carried
out as laid down in para. 141 as regards an officer or warrant
officer, and para. 142 as regards a N.C.O. or private.
139. The power of an officer, warrant officer or N.C.O. to
place an offender under arrest is defined in Section 45 of the
Army Act, as also are the circumstances in which an officer,
warrant officer or N.C.O. may be placed under arrest.
140. When an officer or auxiliary is under arrest, her case
will be disposed of at the earliest possible moment.
Officers and Warrant Officers
141. ( a) An officer or warrant officer will not ordinarily be
placed under arrest by an authority other than her C. 0., unless
the needs of discipline so require. She will not be kept under
arrest unless her C.O. is satisfied, on investigation, that it will
be necessary to proceed with the charge. The C.O. will then
without delay, report the matter to superior authority, who
will, generally, be the divisional or area commander.
(b) An officer or warrant officer under arrest, will be placed
under the charge of an escort consisting of another officer or
warrant officer of the same rank, if possible, and will not leave
her quarters except to take such exercise, under supervision,
as the C.O. may determine. She will not perform any duty
other than such duties as may be necessary to relieve her from
the charge of any cash, equipment, stores, accounts or office
of which she may have charge, or for which she may be
responsible.
( c) Whenever possible, the sanction of the highest authority
to whom the case may have been referred, should be obtained
before an officer or warrant officer is released from arrest.
{d) When an officer is remanded for trial by F.G.C.M. the
officer ordering the trial will cause a notification of the fact to
be transmitted to the War Office by letter, in case of commands
at home, who will notify the Officer i/c Army Pay Office
(Officers’ Accounts), Stockport Road, Manchester.


Non-commissioned Officers and Privates
142. (a) A N.C.O. or private may be placed under arrest
by the authority laid down in Section 45 of the Army Act on
the commission or discovery of a serious offence. If the
offence alleged is not of a serious nature, the offender should
not normally be placed under arrest, but should be informed
of the charge and ordered to attend the orderly room at a
specified time.
(b) A N.C.O. or private under arrest may be ordered at the
discretion of the C.O. to attend parades and perform all such
duties as may be required of her. When not on parade, she
will remain in her quarters under the supervision of the orderly
or other N.C.O.
(c) A N.C.O. or private under arrest will not go outside the
precincts of the barrack or camp, nor will she appear in any
place of amusement or entertainment or at public meetings.
(d) When a warrant officer or N.C.O. has occasion to place
an auxiliary under arrest, she will obtain the assistance of one
or more privates to conduct the offender to her quarters and
will avoid coming into personal contact with her, unless it is
essential to obviate the escape of an offender in a serious case.
(e) Except in cases of personal violence, or when on detached
duties, a lance-corporal will not place a private under arrest,
but will report the offence to the orderly N.C.O. who will act
as the circumstances require.
(/) When an accused person is remanded for further investi-
gation, or for trial by F.G.C.M. (whether on her own election
or not), the C.O. will decide whether the accused may be
released, without prejudice to re-arrest, until trial or further
orders.
(g) After trial by F.G.C.M. an accused person will be kept
in arrest at the discretion of the C.O. until the proceedings are
promulgated.
5. DELIVERY OF CHARGE
143. ( a) A charge report is prepared on A.F. B 252. The
charge must be worded in such a manner as to disclose an
offence under Sections 15 or 40 of the Army Act, e.g. :
Absent without leave from to (Army Act,
Section 15).
Disobeying an order given by a N.C.O. (Army Act, Section 40).
(6) It is the duty of an officer, warrant officer or N.C.O. who
commits any person into arrest, to deliver at the time, or as
soon as practicable, and always within 24 hours, to the officer
or other person into whose custody the offender is committed,


an account in writing (A.F. B 252) signed by herself, of the
offence with which the person so committed is charged.
(c) If the charge report is not received within 24 hours, the
officer or other person into whose custody the offender is
committed will report the circumstance to the C.O.
(i d) If the charge report (A.F. B 252) or other evidence
sufficient to justify the continued arrest of the offender is not
forthcoming within 48 hours from the time of committal, the
C.O. will order the release of the person in custody (without
prejudice to her re-arrest).
{.e ) If this has not already been done (see sub-para, {b) above),
it is the duty of the orderly N.C.O. to render on A.F. B 252
the number, rank, name and offence of every person received
into arrest, and the rank and name of the person by whom she
is charged.
(/) The orderly N.C.O. will, on the request of any person
received into custody, inform her of the rank and name of the
person preferring charges against her or ordering her arrest,
and give to her a copy of A.F. B 252 as soon as she herself
receives it.
(g) Where the accused has not been put under arrest for an
offence, she will be warned by the orderly N.C.O. to attend at
the orderly room and told the offence with which she will be
charged.
6. ARREST IN CASES OF DRUNKENNESS
144. [a] An auxiliary who is drunk will be placed under
arrest. She will not be brought before an officer for investiga-
tion until 24 hours have elapsed.
(6) An auxiliary suspected of being drunk will not be put
through any drill or test for the purpose of ascertaining her
condition. She will be put to bed in a room where she will be
alone, if possible. She will be visited by the orderly N.C.O.
at least every 2 hours and her condition ascertained. Should
any symptoms of serious illness be observed, a M.O. will be
sent for forthwith.
7. INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES
145. Any charge made by a military officer of the rank of
captain or above, against A.T.S. personnel employed with a
military formation or unit, will be investigated by the O.C.
the A.T.S. unit.
146. (a) Charges against auxiliaries will be disposed of
daily ; and, when practicable, in the morning.


{b) Every charge against an auxiliary will be investigated
without delay, in her presence. The investigation of charges
will be carried into effect in the manner prescribed in Rules of
Procedure 2, 3 and 4.*
(c) Every charge against an auxiliary should be investigated
in the first instance by the company commander or the
subaltern to whom powers have been delegated (see para.
120 (c)), and will be held at such hour as to allow of an
auxiliary remanded for disposal by the C.O. being ready to go
before her at the appointed time. She will be marched in
before the officer having power to dispose of the case summarily,
with the escort and witnesses.
147. A private will be deprived of her cap and of any
articles that she can use as missiles during the investigation of
offences and during her trial.
148. (a) Charges will be dealt with as follows:
(i) A.F. B 252 will be placed before the company com-
* mander investigating the case. If she disposes of
the case, she will enter her award on A.F. B 252;
if she remands the case for the C. 0., she will enter
“ remanded for C. 0.” on A.F. B 252. In both
cases she will sign the army form.
(ii) Those cases remanded for disposal by the C.O. will
be entered on A.F. B 2069 before the hour fixed for
the disposal of auxiliaries by the C.O. After she
has dealt with the case, the C.O. will sign A.F.
B 2069. If the accused elects trial, the fact will
be entered on the army form. A.Fs. B 2069,
» serially numbered, will be sent every Monday to
Officer i/c Records, through the unit commander,
a certified copy being retained by the unit. For
the information of the C.O. and the Officer i/c
Records, those cases which have been dealt with
by the company, etc. commander will also be entered
on A.F. B 2069.
(iii) All entries affecting an auxiliary’s pay, etc., will be
published in Part II Orders.
(h) A company commander who has reserved a case for the
award of the C.O. will always attend, with the A.F. B 122
(Field Conduct Sheet) before the C.O.
(c) If an auxiliary is remanded for further enquiry, her case
will be brought under review daily, and the order for remand
* For methods of investigation by company commanders, see Notes on
Administration of Discipline, 1941 (Notified in A.C.I. 266 of 1941).


will be entered daily in A.F. B 252 or A.F. B 2069, by the in-
vestigating officer.
149. ( a ) The C.O. will refer in writing to the divisional or
area commander all serious offences alleged to have been
committed by an officer or auxiliary, stating the circum-
stances of the case, and will enclose the field conduct sheet of
the accused.
(6) The military commander to whom such a case has been
referred will determine whether the case shall be dealt with
under military law or whether it shall be reported to the civil
police with a view to civil proceedings being instituted.
The military commander will inform the C.O. of his decision
and will if necessary himself inform the civil police of the facts
of the case.
150. ( a) When proposing to deal with a case summarily, a
C.O. will satisfy herself that the evidence produced before her
is sufficient to disclose the exact nature of the offence. If she
is not so satisfied, she should remand the case for further
enquiries, so that the offence as entered in A.F. B 2069 may be
substantially the charge on which the accused would be
arraigned in the event of her electing to be tried by F.G.C.M.
{see para. 153).
(&) When once an accused auxiliary has elected to be tried
on the charge as read out to her, from A.F. B 252 or B 2069, it
should in no circumstances be added to or increased in gravity,
unless facts subsequently appear which disclose a more grave
offence or offences. These facts must be set out fully when
application is made for the convening of the court-martial.
151. If, on investigation of a charge, sufficient evidence is
not forthcoming as to whether the accused has or has not*
committed the offence, and there is no opportunity of carrying
the investigation further at the time, the accused, if the offence
charged is serious, may be released from arrest and ordered to
do duty, without prejudice to her re-arrest when further
evidence is forthcoming, and the matter can be further
enquired into. If, however, the offence is not serious, and
there is no probability of sufficient evidence being obtainable
within a reasonable time, the case should be dismissed.
152. [a) When an auxiliary elects to be tried by F.G.C.M.
{see para. 153) her C.O. may, if she thinks that the circum-
stances of the case warrant it, release the accused from arrest
(without prejudice to re-arrest) pending trial.
{b) An auxiliary who has elected to be tried by F.G.C.M.
will, on the following day, be given an opportunity of recon-
sidering such decision.


8. SUMMARY PUNISHMENTS
153. [a) An auxiliary charged with any offence which affects
her pay, or which causes any automatic forfeiture of pay for
absence or stoppage under the Army Act, or when the officer
having power to dispose of her case summarily, intends to
make an award which will involve her pay, must first be asked
by the officer having power to dispose of her case summarily :
“ Will you take my award or do you elect to be tried by
court-martial ? ”
[h) When an officer having power to dispose of the case
summarily, intends to award, in the case of a N.C.0., severe
reprimand, reprimand or admonition, or in the case of a
private, “ C. 8.,” extra duties or admonition, and the auxiliary
concerned does not, for the offence, have to forfeit pay for
absence (see para. 156 ( d )), or suffer stoppages under the Army
Act, she may make her award without giving the auxiliary the
■opportunity to elect trial.
Non-commissioned Officers
154. [a) A C.O. may, subject to the right of the N.C.O.
to elect, previous to the award, to be tried by F.G.C.M. (see
para. 153), award any deduction from the ordinary pay of a
N.C.O. allowed to be made by a C.O. under Section 138 of
the Army Act.*
(6) A C.O. may also inflict on a N.C.0., subject to the right
of the N.C.O. to be tried by F.G.C.M. [see para. 153), the
following punishments
(i) Severe reprimand or reprimand.
(ii) Admonition.
155. A N.C.O. or private holding a lance appointment may
be deprived of her lance appointment by her C. 0., but she will
not be awarded, for the same offence, any other punishment
in addition.
Privates
156. ( a) A C.O. may, subject to the private’s right to elect,
previous to the award, to be tried by F.G.C.M. (see para. 153),
inflict on a private the following summary punishments :
(i) Any deduction from In the case of ah auxiliary who
ordinary pay allowed to by neglect or culpable mismanage-
be made by a C.O. under ment, loses or damages any article
* Deductions will be awarded as “ stoppages ” of the specific amount
assessed for the loss or damage and will not be awarded as “ forfeitures ”
or “ stoppages ” of pay for any number of days.


Section 138 of the Army
Act.*
(ii) Forfeiture of all
ordinary pay for a
period beginning on the
day of award and not
exceeding 14 days.
(iii) Confinement to bar-
racks for any period
not less than 7 days nor
more than 14 days.
of her personal equipment, or
other Government property, the
approval of the divisional or area
commander must be obtained if
the amount proposed to be re-
covered from any auxiliary ex-
ceeds
A company commander shall
not have power to award for-
feiture of pay for any period.
A private awarded " C. 8.” is
termed a “defaulter". De-
faulters will be required to answer
to their names at uncertain hours
throughout the day, and will be
employed on fatigue duties to the
fullest practicable extent, with a
view to relieving well-conducted
auxiliaries therefrom.
Defaulters will attend parades,
and take all duties in regular turn.
When the fatigue duties required
are not sufficient to keep the
defaulters. fully employed, the
O.C. the unit may order them to
attend extra drill, which will be
limited to one hour a day, and will
include some form of useful in-
struction. /
In the case of scattered units
living in billets, or hutments,
where the routine for defaulters
outlined above cannot be properly
carried out, the O.C. the unit will
bring the defaulters into unit head-
quarters, or, if this cannot be
done, will apply as much of the
punishment as may be practicable
in the circumstances.
Defaulters undergoing “ C. 8.”
will forfeit all privileges.
* Deductions will be awarded as “ stoppages ” of the specific amount
assessed for the loss or damage, and will not be awarded as “ forfeitures ”
or “ stoppages ” of pay for an)' number of days.


(iv) Extra duties.
(v) Admonition.
The punishments referred to above may be awarded
severally or conjointly.
(c) In dealing summarily with cases of absence without
leave, the officer having power to deal summarily with the
case, will have regard to the place of the auxiliary’s surrender
or apprehension, the circumstances of her absence, and the
period passed in custody. Absence without leave will be
reckoned to terminate when the auxiliary is apprehended or
surrenders. The officer having power to deal summarily
with the case should make allowance for any unusual delay
in the disposal of the case.
[d) All ordinary pay for every day of absence * shall be auto-
* The following are the rules for calculating a period of absence
(1) Six hours is the minimum period of absence that will count as a
day of absence unless two conditions are fulfilled :
(a) that the absentee was prevented, by the absence, from
fulfilling a duty ; and
W that the duty was thrown upon some other person.
(2) Six clear hours must elapse, and they must be reckoned con-
secutively.
(3) The period of absence must be reckoned is from the time the
absence began.
(4) If the period does not amount to six hours, or over, no pay is
forfeited, except as in (1) above, in which case the absentee
would forfeit a day’s pay, no matter how shorther absence might
(5) If the absence amounts to six but not to 24 hours, one day’s
pay is forfeited, whether the absence falls wholly on one natural
day (reckoned from midnight to midnight) or partly on one
natural day and partly on another.
(6) If the period of absence exceeds 24 hours, the number of days’
pay forfeited will be the period in hours divided by 24 any
fraction over being counted as an additional day.
For instance, if an auxiliary absented herself from 0900 hours
on 2nd October, and returned at 1445 hours on 2nd October, she
would forfeit no pay, as her absence did not amount to six
hours or over, but if she had been warned for a duty and, in
consequence of her absence, some other auxiliary had to perform
that duty, then she would forfeit one day’s pay. The charge
might then read : “ Having been warned for duty as orderly in
the dining-room at 1300 hours 2nd October, she absented herself
from 0900 hours 2nd October until 1445 hours 2nd October ”.
Again, if an auxiliary absents herself at 2200 hours on the 2nd
October and remains absent until 0400 hours on the 3rd October,
she would forfeit one day’s pay, and if she remained absent until
0200 hours on the 10th October, she would forfeit eight days’
pay, for in the latter case she would be 172 hours absent, or
seven full days of 24 hours each, and an additional period of
four hours for which one day’s pay will be forfeited, making
eight days’ pay in all.
(7) In all cases, the auxiliary must be found guilty of the absence
either by court-martial or on summary disposal, before forfeiture
of pay for such absence can be enforced.


matically forfeited. The officer dealing summarily with the
case, therefore, does not make an award of such forfeiture.
She will inform the auxiliary of the number of days’ pay she
so forfeits and at the same time make a record (“ Forfeits
. . . days’ pay for absence ”) in the remarks column of
A.F. B 252 or A.F. B 2069, as the case may be. If it is an
aggravated case of absence, the C.O. may, in addition, under
her powers of punishment, award a further forfeiture of pay.
(e) When the punishment awarded involves an entry in
the field conduct sheet (see para. 367) and the accused is in
possession of a good conduct badge, she will forfeit the good
conduct badge and will be so informed, and the officer dealing
with the case will enter in the column of remarks on A.F. B 252
or A.F. B 2069 “Forfeits one good conduct badge’’, (see paras.
106-110).
157. (a) A private undergoing “ C.B. ’’ may for a fresh
offence be awarded further “ C. 8.” from the termination of
the previous award, provided that the whole extent of the
consecutive punishment does not exceed 14 days.
(6) A defaulter is not required to make good any “ C. 8.”
that may have elapsed by reason of her being in hospital,
under sentence or employed on duty.
158. Recoveries from auxiliaries on account of damage,
through negligence or carelessness, to mechanically-propelled
vehicles, will, when dealt with by C.Os., be governed by the
instructions contained in para. 156 ( a ) (i). Any such recovery
will form part of the disciplinary action taken in such cases.
159. An officer will not introduce or adopt any system of
punishment that is in any respect at variance with these
regulations.
9. CHARGES BY CIVIL POWER
160. ( a ) When an auxiliary receives, otherwise than through
her C. 0., a summons issued by a civil court, in respect of an
offence, she will at once report the matter to her company
etc., commander direct, in order that arrangements may be
made for her attendance before the magistrates and for the
provisions of para. 161 to be complied with.
(5) The standing orders of every unit will contain an order to
the above effect.
161. (a) When an auxiliary is charged with an offence
before a civil court, near the station where her unit or sub-unit
is quartered, an officer will be detailed from the unit to attend
arid to watch the proceedings. An officer having personal


knowledge of the accused will be detailed for that duty, if
any such officer is available. If the prosecution takes place
at a distance, the case will be submitted to the divisional or
area commander, who will decide whether it is advisable for
an officer to be present, and, if so, whether the officer shall be
detailed from the auxiliary’s unit or from some other unit near
the place of trial. In the latter case, the O.C. the auxiliary’s
unit will communicate with the O.C. of the unit from which the
officer is to proceed, forwarding all necessary information and
documents for the use of the officer attending the court.
(b) The officer attending to watch the proceedings, will, if
required by the court, give all information in her possession
regarding the auxiliary’s character, and full particulars of
any previous convictions, by a civil court or by a court-
martial, of' an offence under the Army Act, but not of offences
of a purely service and minor character, unless specially
required by the court to do so, as the nature of these offences
is apt to be misunderstood, to the prejudice of the prisoner.
For the same reason she should not take with her the auxiliary’s
field conduct sheet, A.F. B 122, but should furnish all the infor-
mation with regard to the auxiliary’s general character that
is within her personal knowledge, or has been communicated
to her by officers of the auxiliary’s unit. The officer will be
prepared to state the rate of pay to which the offender is
entitled, together with any deductions or compulsory stoppages
to which it is subjected, and will inform the court accordingly
in cases in which the magistrates signify their intention of
imposing a fine.
( c) Attention is directed to the provisions of Section 138 (7)
of the Army Act. The officer detailed to watch the proceed-
ings will take with her a sum of money in order that she may
pay on behalf of the accused, any fine imposed by the magis-
trates. If, however, the fine imposed is such that in the
ordinary course, recovery could not be effected from the
auxiliary’s account within a period of six months, or if she is
due for discharge before the fine can be recovered, the circum-
stances should be represented to the magistrates, and no steps
should be taken by the officer to pay the fine or any part of it.
The amount paid will be charged against the auxiliary’s
account, as laid down in the Pay Duties Manual. Where
damages, compensations or costs in respect of an offence are
awarded against an auxiliary, and the accused is not in a
position to pay at once, arrangements may be made, in
suitable cases, for recovery to be effected by deductions from
her pay, but payment of sums to an aggrieved person in this
respect, will only be made as and when recovered from the
auxiliary’s pay.


( d) Attention is also directed to the provisions of Section 164
of the Army Act, and in particular to the note thereto in the
Manual of Military Law, relating to the procedure to be
followed in order to obtain certificates of conviction on
indictment at assizes or quarter-sessions in England and
Wales.
162. When a N.C.O. is convicted by the civil power of any
offence, the case will be reported to the divisional or area
commander. Should the O.C. the unit consider it desirable
to recommend the reduction of the offender, the matter will
be reported to competent authority under Section 183 (2)
Army Act. Discharge, if considered necessary, will be effected
in accordance with Appendix VI, paras. 5 or 9.
10. ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE
Procedure on an Auxiliary reported Absent
163. (a) As soon as it is known that an auxiliary has
absented herself without leave, the O.C. the sub-unit will order
her personal equipment, clothing, necessaries and any
additional articles with which she may have been issued,
to be placed in safe custody at once, and an inventory of these
articles to be taken as soon as practicable (see Appendix VII).
For assessing their value, see War Clothing Regulations.
(6) When there is good ground for supposing that an
auxiliary who has absented herself without leave, has no
intention of returning, the company commander will, within
24 hours, send a descriptive report (A.F. B 124) of the absentee
to the civil police of the place where the absentee has her
home, or of the place to which it is supposed she may have
proceeded. In no case will a company commander delay the
despatch of A.F. B 124 beyond five days.
(c) On the eighth day of absence, the name of the absentee
will be notified in Part II Orders. If absent for 21 consecutive
days, the name will again be notified in Part II Orders. If
absent on the last day of the month, the name will be notified
on the first day of the next month.
(, d) When an auxiliary has been absent for 21 clear con-
secutive days, excluding the day the absence began and the
day on which the court sits, a court of inquiry under Section 72
of the Army Act will be held to inquire in the prescribed
manner respecting the fact of such absence, and the deficiency
(if any) in the auxiliary’s personal equipment, clothing,
necessaries and &ny additional articles with which she may
have been issued, and if satisfied that the auxiliary has
absented herself without leave or other sufficient cause.


the court shall declare such absence and the period thereof,
and the said deficiencies (if any). The O.C. of the absent
auxiliary will enter in A.B. 161 a record of the declaration
of the court (see para. 372). A court of inquiry will be held
.in accordance with Rule of Procedure 125 —see Manual of
Military Law. The court will consist of a president and two
members, all of whom will be A.T.S. officers and will be
convened by the O.C. the unit. For ■ inventory of kit (see
Appendix VII).
(e) If the auxiliary is still absent and has been declared
an absentee by a court of inquiry after a period of 21 days,
then her particulars will be sent by the Officer i/c Records
to the Editor of the Police Gazette, New Scotland Yard,
London, S.W.I on A.F. B 124, and she will be struck off the
strength of the unit with effect from the date of the declaration
of the court, but not before.
(/) When an auxiliary who has been advertised in the
Police Gazette as an absentee without leave, rejoins or ceases
to be liable to apprehension, the Officer i/c Records will
immediately inform the editor, quoting the date of the Police
Gazette and the “ Office No ” of the entry.
Absentee Recruits
164- If a recruit does not report at the training centre on
the date on which she is instructed to report, action should be
taken as follows :
(a) The O.C. the training centre will immediately write an
official letter as follows to the recruit, giving her 96
hours in which to reply thereto, and will enclose a
railway warrant :
You have failed to report for training on . . .
as instructed on A.F. Esllr. If you are unable
to report owing to illness, please send to me at
once a medical certificate stating the nature and
probable duration of your illness. Your civilian
doctor will be entitled to claim Is. in respect of the
medical certificate furnished by him, and his
claim should be sent to me. No expense in
connection with such illness, except the charge
for the medical certificate, will be admissible
against public funds.
If your failure to report is due to some reasonable
cause other than illness, please send to me at once
a full explanation of the circumstances.
Should you have no reasonable excuse to offer
for your failure to report, you must join at the


above address forthwith, or you will be dealt with
under the Army Act as an absentee without leave,
as you are now a person subject to Military Law.
An addressed envelope and a railway warrant
are enclosed. Your reply must reach me within
four days of the date of this letter, if you have not
joined this unit in the meantime.”
(&) If the woman'gives a reasonable excuse for her failure
to report as ordered, the O.C. the unit may, at
her discretion, grant deferment of joining the unit
up to a maximum of 28 days.
(c) At the expiration of this period, if there are good
compassionate grounds, the woman may be
released to the Unemployed List (Other Ranks),
from which she may be discharged if the com-
passionate grounds continue operative.
(d) If the woman has been granted deferment of joining
through illness, and is not fit for duty at the
expiration of the 28 days, the O.C. the unit will
complete A.F. A 204 as far as possible, and send it
to the headquarters of the command in which the
woman is residing. The D.D.M.S. of the command
will arrange for the medical examination to be carried
out, and the form will be completed by the M.O.
and returned to the unit through the usual channels.
If the M.O. is of opinion that the woman will be fit
for duty in a reasonable time, she will be released
to the Unemployed List (Other Ranks) and reposted
to her unit from the date she joins for duty. If the
M.O. considers that the woman will bw permanently
unfit, she will be discharged.
(e) If the O.C. the unit receives no reply to her letter
at the expiry of 96 hours, or if the woman has
replied, and the O.C. has informed her that she
has not been granted deferment of joining, and
the woman still fails to report, the O.C. the unit
will then notify the police of her absence, sending
a descriptive report (A.F. B 124) in accordance
with para. 163 (&).
(/) On surrender or apprehension, the recruit will be
dealt with by the O.C. the unit under the instruc-
tions laid down in these regulations.
(g) Pay is inadmissible in all such cases before the date
when the woman concerned actually joins for duty.


Method of Dealing with Absentees after Arrest by the
Civil Power*
165. (a) The civil police alone have authority to arrest an
A.T.S. absentee. On receipt of A.F. B 124 (see para. 163 (&))
the civil police will ascertain whether the absentee is at the
address given, or whether it is possible to discover her where-
abouts. If she is found, they will endeavour to persuade
her to return to duty, pointing out to her her liability to
arrest. They will furnish a report on the action taken by them
to the O.C. the unit of the absentee. If after a week from the
receipt of the report from the police the absentee has failed
to rejoin her unit, the O.C. the unit will request the police to
apprehend the absentee.
(6) When notice has been received that an absentee is
arrested or has surrendered herself to the civil police, the
O.C. the unit will communicate with the O.C. the group,
or training centre, whose headquarters are situated nearest
to the police station at which the absentee has been detained.
This officer will provide the necessary escort to attend the
magistrate’s court or police station as may be directed by the
police.
The O.C. the unit will at the same time notify the police
of the name, address and telephone number of the group, etc.
headquarters from which the escort may be obtained.
(A list will be in possession of all unit commanders,
showing the location of all group or training centre head-
quarters.)
(c) The escort of a private will, normally, consist of one *
N.C.O. and one private, and the N.C.O. will take with her an
order (Form T, see Appendix XIV), signed by the O.C. the
group or training centre concerned. This order will be handed
to the clerk of the court or to the police as the case may be.
The N.C.O. will be instructed to obtain A.F. O 1618 or A.F.
O 1617 (a descriptive return giving particulars of arrest, and
certificate of surrender, respectively, furnished by the police)
before leaving the court or police station. In the case of
N.C.O. absentees, the conducting N.C.O. will be of equal or
higher rank.
[d) The unit commander to whose custody the absentee
has been handed over by the civil power will be responsible
fpr mating the necessary arrangements for the return of the
absentee to her unit.
* For the purposes of this paragraph the words “ O.C. unit” will be
understood to mean “ company commander
3 —(1744)


11. COURT-MARTIAL
Punishments that may be Inflicted by Field General
Court-Martial
166. Punishments that may be inflicted in respect of offences
committed by persons subject to Military Law and convicted
by F.G.C.M.
{a) In the case of an officer :
(i) Dismissal from His Majesty’s Service.
(ii) Forfeiture of seniority of rank, or in the case of an
officer whose promotion depends upon length
of service, forfeiture of all or any part of her
service for the purpose of promotion.
(iii) Severe reprimand.
(iv) Reprimand. ,
(v) Stoppages.
(6) In the case of warrant officers and N.C.Os.: —
(i) If a warrant officer, dismissal, or if a N.C.0., dis-
charge, from His Majesty’s Service.
(ii) Reduction to a lower grade or to the ranks.
(iii) Forfeiture of seniority of rank.
(iv) Severe reprimand.
(v) Reprimand.
(vi) Forfeiture of all ordinary pay for a period begin-
ning on the day of the sentence and not exceed-
ing 28 days.
(vii) Stoppages.
(c) In the case of a private, having elected trial; —
(i) Forfeiture of all ordinary pay for a period begin-
ning on the day- of the sentence and not
exceeding 28 days.
(ii) Stoppages.
(iii) Confinement to barracks for not less than 7 days
and not more than 14 days,
12. GENERAL
167. It is important that all necessary steps ( e.g . attendance
of witnesses, preparation of summary of evidence, application
for trial), for bringing an accused to trial by F.G.C.M. are taken
without delay.
168. If for any reason the application for trial is not made
within eight days after the accused has been charged with
the offence, a special report of the necessity for further delay


will be made by the O.C. the unit to the divisional or area
commander. A similar report will be furnished every eight
days until the court-martial is assembled.
169. When an officer, warrant officer or N.C.O. is remanded
for trial by F.G.C.M., or when an officer (under Section 47
of the Army Act), or an auxiliary elects trial by F.G.C.M.,
application in writing for a court to be convened, with the
summary of evidence and charge sheet, will be forwarded to
the convening authority, who will usually be the divisional
or area commander.
170. If the accused has elected to be tried instead of sub-
mitting to a summary award, it should be so stated (in red
ink) at the top of the charge sheet, which must be signed by
the officer in actual command of the unit to which the accused
belongs and should state the place and date of signature.
171. {a) At an officer’s trial the court will consist of the
president, and four members, two of whom will be A.T.S.
officers. If the accused is of the rank of senior commander,
•or above, the rank of the A.T.S. officers will be not less than
that of junior commander.
(b) At the trial of an auxiliary the court will consist of
the president and two members, one member to be an A.T.S.
officer.
172. A.T.S. officers will not sit as members, or attend under
instruction, for the trial by court-martial of persons other than
those mentioned in Regulation 3 of Statutory Rules and Orders
Na. 581 of 1941 (see Appendix I (ii). They may attend a
court-martial on a military officer or on a soldier as members
of the public. In such cases their instruction will be confined
to what happens in “ open Court.” The procedure in “ closed
Court ” will be conveyed to them by other
means.
13. SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE
173. (a) If a C.O. remands a case for trial by F.G.C.M.
or when an officer (under Section 47 Army Act), or an
auxiliary elects trial by F.G.C.M., the C.O. will adjourn the
case and will apply to the divisional or area commander for
a suitable officer to be placed at her disposal for the purpose
of taking a summary of the evidence. The officer appointed
must not have given material evidence in the investigation.
( b) If the C.O. so directs, or if the accused so demands,
the evidence will be taken on oath.
The form of oath is set out in the Manual of Military Law.


Ic) The evidence of the witnesses who were present and gave
evidence before the C. 0., whether against or for the accused,
and of any other person whose evidence appears to be relevant,
shall be taken down in writing in the presence of the accused,
by the officer taking the summary of evidence. Great care
is necessary to ensure that the words used by the witnesses
or the accused, shall as nearly as possible be taken down,
and the summary should be free from any expression of
opinion, and from matter not bearing on the case.
( d) The accused may put questions in cross-examination
to any witnesses, and the questions with the answers shall
be added in writing to the evidence taken down.
{e) The evidence of each witness, when taken down, shall
be read out to and signed by the witness.
if) (i) When all the evidence for the prosecution has been
taken, the accused, before she makes any statement, must
be formally cautioned, in the words prescribed in Rule of
Procedure 4 (E).* “Do you wish to make any statement
or to give evidence upon oath ? You are not obliged to say
anything or give evidence unless you wish to do so, but what-'
ever you say or any evidence you give will be taken down in
writing, and may be given in evidence
(ii) The fact that the accused was duly cautioned as pre-
scribed in Rule of Procedure 4 (E).* should be recorded in the
summary.
(hi) After being cautioned, the accused may make a state-
ment, not upon oath, or, if she wishes, give evidence on oath.
She may call witnesses on her behalf ; the statement of evidence
of the accused and the statement of her witnesses must be
taken down. The accused must not be cross-examined.
(g) The summary of evidence should follow normally
the form outlined below.
SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE
in the case of
No Private JONES A. B.
No. 6 Platoon Company Group A.T.S.
Ist witness No Serjt. BROWN W. states (or being
duly sworn states) :—Begin by recording the
place and date (and time, if material) to which
the evidence refers.
Cross-examined by the accused, or accused
declines to cross-examine.
(Read over and signed by witness.)
* See Manual of Military Law.


2nd witness —as above—
3rd witness. —as above—
Ihe accused having been duly cautioned, as
prescribed in Rule of Procedure 4 (E), elects
to make a statement or to give evidence on
oath.
(In either case there must be no cross-
examination) .
The accused calls the following witnesses on her
behalf :
Taken down by me this day of 194
Rules of Procedure 4 (C), (D) and (E) have
been complied with.
. Signed
Rank.
14. EVIDENCE
174. All officers should study the Manual of Military Law,
Chapter VI (particularly those paragraphs relating to the
rules as to relevancy, best evidence, hearsay and opinion,) and
Section 163 of the Army Act.
175. The summary of evidence having been taken, will be
put before the C. 0., who, after reading it, will consider
whether she can dispose of the case summarily. If she con-
siders that there should be trial by F.G.C.M. application for
trial will be made in writing to the convening officer. Par-
ticular attention is drawn to the memoranda in the Manual of
Military Law, for guidance of officers concerned with courts-
martial.
15. FORFEITURE OF SENIORITY OF RANK OR
SERVICE
Officers
176. (a) A F.G.C.M. may award forfeiture of seniority of
rank in the A.T.S. or in the case of an officer whose promotion
depends upon length of service, forfeiture of all or any part
of her service for the purposes of promotion.
(6) When a military authority who has power under
Section 47 of the Army Act to dispose summarily of a case
against an officer below the rank equivalent to field rank,
decides to award forfeiture of seniority of rank or service, the


forfeiture in either case should not exceed 12 months’ seniority
of service, as the case may be. . . *
(c) An officer sentenced to forfeiture of seniority of rank or
service, may also be sentenced to be severely reprimanded or
reprimanded.
Warrant officers
177. (a) A warrant officer may be sentenced by F.G.C.M. to
forfeiture of seniority of rank, and for the same offence may
also be severely reprimanded or reprimanded.
(b) The military authority who has power under Section 47
of the Army Act to dispose summarily of a case against a
warrant officer, may award forfeiture of seniority of rank, and
also severe reprimand or reprimand.
Non-commissioned officers
178. A N.C.O. may be sentenced to forfeiture of seniority
of rank by F.G.C.M. and for the same offence may also be
sentenced to be severely reprimanded or reprimanded.
179. Temporary rank is a “rank” and not merely an
appointment. The substantive or war substantive rank is
not merged in the temporary rank and a court-martial can
order loss of seniority in either or in both of the ranks.
180. [a) When a F.G.C.M. or an officer dealing summarily
with a charge under Section 47 of the Army Act, desires to
sentence an officer to forfeit seniority of rank, the form of
punishment shall be that she takes rank and precedence in
the A.T.S. as if her appointment to the rank or ranks held by
her, and specified in the sentence, bore the date of some day
or days specified in the sentence and later than the actual
date of her said appointment, or, that she takes precedence
in the A.T.S. as if her name had appeared a specified number
of places lower in the list of the A.T.S.
(6) When a F.G.C.M. for the trial of a warrant or non-
commissioned officer, or an officer dealing summarily with a
charge against a warrant officer under Section 47 of the Army
Act, desires to award the sentence of forfeiture of seniority
of rank, the form of punishment will be that she takes rank and
precedence as if her appointment to the rank held by her,
and specified in the sentence, bore the date of some day specified
in the sentence and later than the actual date of her said
appointment.
(c) The effect of this forfeiture in the case of a warrant
officer and N.C.O. is that the seniority in the rank which she
holds, alone is affected. Thus, if a serjeant who was pro


moted to that rank on the 19th August, 1940, was sentenced
to take rank and precedence as if her appointment to that
rank bore date the 21st January, 1941, she would, on the
latter date, while having only one day’s service to count for
seniority, still count continuous service for all other purposes
in rank of serjeant from 19th August, 1940.
181. The Army Council may restore the whole or any part
of any lost seniority or forfeited service in the case of an
officer or auxiliary who may perform good aftd faithful service,
or who may otherwise be deemed by the Army Council to
fnerit such restoration.
16. PROMULGATION OF COURT-MARTIAL
PROCEEDINGS
182. (a) In the event of a court-martial resulting in a
conviction on all, or any, of the' charges against the accused,
the proceedings of the court, including the charges, finding,
sentence and confirmation or non-confirmation, will be
promulgated in all cases by oral communication to the accused ;
promulgation will only be effected by the above particulars
being read out on parade in those cases in which the confirming
authority specially directs that this shall be done.
(b) The results of all courts-martial will be published in the
orders of all formations in which the notice of the convening
of the court appeared. In every case such results will be
published in the orders of the unit concerned, in Part I Orders
for officers, and in Part II Orders for auxiliaries.
183. If, subsequent to conviction, but before promulgation
can be effected, an accused absents herself, and a declaration
by a court of inquiry under Section 72 of the Army Act is
made in respect thereof, or in the case of an officer, if the C.O.
furnishes a certificate (to be annexed to the court-martial
proceedings), that the accused has been absent without leave
for a peiiod of 21 clear days, the proceedings of the court-
martial may be promulgated by the publication of the fore-
going particulars, for an officer in Part I Orders, and for an
auxiliary in Part II Orders of the unit. They will, however,
forthwith be communicated to the accused on her apprehension
(if liable for further service) or surrender.
184. After promulgation, the following shall be written on
the proceedings :
“ Promulgated and extracts taken at
this day of 194 .
(Signature of officer in charge of documents.)


17. REDRESS OF GRIEVANCES
185. The manner in which an officer or auxiliary should
proceed to obtain redress for any grievance under which
she conceives herself to be suffering, is prescribed in Sections
42 and 43 of the Army Act, and the notes thereto in the Manual
of Military Law. An officer or auxiliary may also make any
complaint to a military or A.T.S. officer who is inspecting the
unit, and she will be given an opportunity to do so. These
methods of complaint will alone be recognized, and an officer
or auxiliary is forbidden to use any other method of obtaining
redress for a grievance, real or supposed. When claims are
advanced by an officer or auxiliary, they will be fully and
distinctly stated, and such explanations will be annexed as
may be practicable. Anonymous complaints are strictly
forbidden.
18. PRAISE OR CENSURE OF SUPERIORS,
TESTIMONIALS, ETC.
186. (a) Deliberations or discussions by officers or auxiliaries
with the object of conveying praise, censure or any mark of
approbation towards their superiors, or any others in His
Majesty’s Service, are prohibited.
(b) A C.O. will refuse to allow subscriptions for testimonials
in any shape to a superior leaving her unit or sub-unit, and an
officer accepting presents will be held personally responsible.
(c) Officers and auxiliaries are forbidden to accept presents
jji money from public bodies or private individuals in recog-
nition of services rendered in the performance of their duty.
19. CHARACTER AND CONDUCT OF OFFICERS
187. (a) Every officer whose character or conduct as an
officer has been impugned, must submit the case within a
reasonable time, to her C. 0., or other competent military
authority, for investigation. Pending the investigation, an
officer may be suspended from duty, in which case she will be
placed under the same restrictions as an officer in arrest.
(b) If an officer, by bankruptcy, liquidation, composition
or other legal proceedings, finds herself unable to meet her
engagements, she will at once notify the fact to her C.O.
The latter will report the circumstances to the War Office,
through the usual channels.
(c) Serving officers and auxiliaries must be scrupulously
careful in their relations, and must have no private dealings


with army contractors, their agents or employees. They are
also forbidden to furnish testimonials to any company, firm
or person, in respect of the quality of the commodities supplied
for military purposes. If they have occasion, in the course of
their duty to come into contact with any matter concerning
the business organization in which they have an interest, they
will disclose that interest to their superior officer, and ask that
some other person may deal with the case. They should not
be permitted to deal with the case without the sanction of the
Army Council.
20. COMMUNICATION OF MILITARY
INFORMATION
188. (a) An officer or auxiliary is forbidden to publish
in any form whatsoever, or communicate, either directly or
indirectly, to the Press, any service information or her views
on any service subject, without special authority. She will
be held responsible for all statements contained in communica-
tions to her friends, which may subsequently be published in
the Press, or otherwise.
(■ b ) Any information of a professional nature that she may
acquire While travelling or employed on duty, will be regarded
as the property of the War Department, and will not be
published in any form without the previous sanction of the
Army Council. • The Crown copyright of all official Govern-
ment publications including maps, and of all photographs
taken for official purposes, or taken unofficially with Govern-
ment materials, is vested in the Controller of His Majesty’s
Stationery Office. His permission is necessary for the re-
publication or reproduction, of such publications, photo-
graphs or extracts therefrom, in any book, periodical, journal,
lantern slide or other form whatsoever.
(c) When application is made for permission to publish
any article, deliver any lecture or wireless address, etc., the
text will be either typewritten or in proof form, and will be
submitted in duplicate direct to the Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office. A statement will be enclosed from the
authority (if any), under whom the applicant is immediately
serving, that such authority has no objection to permission
being applied for. One of the copies will be retained at the
War Office for reference. Permission to publish will apply
only to the article, etc., as submitted, and no additions
thereto, except of a purely editorial nature, may be made
subsequently without the authority of the Army Council.
(d) The foregoing rules do not apply to communications
3* —(1744)


to the Press of the nature referred to in para. 189 or to broad-
cast “ interviews ” with officers and other ranks, which may
be permitted, provided that they are directed by, and at the
discretion of C.Os.
189. Any communications affecting the A.T.S. that it may
be considered desirable to make to the Press, will be made by
the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office. In com-
mands, communications to the Press may only be made when
they affect solely the command concerned, and in this case
they will be communicated by command headquarters, all
applications by Press representatives being referred to an
authorized staff officer.
SECTION VI.—TRAINING: GENERAL,
SPECIALIST AND NON-TECHNICAL
190. Training of A.T.S. personnel is of four types :
(i) General training under the D.A.T.S.
(ii) A.A. training under the Director of A.A. and Coast
Defence.
(hi) Training of cooks under the Director of Supplies and
Transport.
(iv) All other technical training under the Director of
Military Training.
191. General training includes :
{a) Refresher courses for staff and administrative officers.
(&) Courses for officer cadets at the Auxiliary Territorial
Service Officers’ Cadet Training Units.
(c) Courses for warrant and non-commissioned officers at
the Auxiliary Territorial Service N.C.Os. School.
(i d ) Basic military training of recruits and training in non-
technical employments. Such training takes place
at the Auxiliary Territorial Service Training
Centres.
192. After enrolment the recruit is called up to an A.T.S.
training centre, and during the first month receives her basic
training. She then completes her specialist or non-technical
training.
193. Those selected for specialist training proceed as
follows :
(To an Emergency Cookery Training
Cooks .. . . .. < Centre under the Director of Sup-
[ plies and Transport.


Height finder numbers 'j
Identification telescope ITo a heavy A.A. Training Regiment
numbers f under the Director of A.A. and
Operators fire control | Coast Defence.
Predictor numbers .. J
CTo an A.T.S. Motor Transport Train-
Drivers I.C. . . .. < ing Centre under the Director of
\ Military Training.
' „.. , , ,fTo an A.T.S. Signal Training Centre
Operators Switchboard] un der the Director of Military
Operators Keyboard Training.
'To Clerical Training Centre under
the Director of Military Training.
Clerks . . . . . . unless already sufficiently skilled
to complete their training* at the
- A.T.S. Training Centre.
194. Women selected for non-technical employment com-
plete their training at the Training Centre under the D.A.T.S.
195. Certain other types of tradeswomen receive training
after posting. These include R.A.O.C. storewomen, driver-
mechanics, technical mechanical transport clerks, draughts-
women.
196. A limited number of officers, warrant officers and
N.C.Os. attend courses at the School of Military Administra-
tion under the Director of Military Training,
SECTION VII.—GENERAL DUTIES: LEAVE,
MARCHING -IN AND MARCHING-OUT IN-
SPECTIONS, FIRES, COURTS OF INQUIRY,
MESSES, ETC.
1. LEAVE
197. ( a ) Leave with pay, including compassionate leave and
compassionate leave as the result of enemy action, may be
granted in accordance with the leave regulations at the time
in force. All officers and warrant officers will acquaint them-
selves with these regulations..
Leave will be authorized for officers by the unit commander
after consultation with the C.O. of the military unit to which
the officer’s company or platoon is attached, or under whom the


officer is working. For other ranks, leave is authorized by the
company commander, with the concurrence of the officer under
whom the auxiliary is working.
Leave on short pass may be granted to officers at the
discretion of the unit commander, and to auxiliaries at the dis-
cretion of the company commander, provided always that if
the officer or auxiliary is employed in a military formation the
C.O. has approved.
(6) Leave of absence pass (A.F. B 295) will be issued to all
auxiliaries preceding on duly authorized leave away from
their stations, and must be shown on demand to any person
authorized to demand or examine it.
198. (a) Officers recommended for sick leave will proceed
on leave on the day such recommendation is made, under the
au thorny of any one of the following officers :
(i) The' O.C. the hospital or the medical practitioner i/c
the case.
(ii) The O.C. the unit in which the officer is serving, if at
duty.
(iii) The president of the medical board which recom-
mends the sick leave.
( p ) If leave has been authorized under (i) or (ii) above,
Part I of A.F. B 175 will be completed by the M.O. and the
form handed to the officer concerned, who will complete
Part II of the form and forward the form to the O.C. the unit.
199. [a) Sick leave for auxiliaries is recommended by the
O.C. hospital or by the M.O. or in certain circumstances by a
civilian medical practitioner, and authorized by the unit or
sub-unit commander.
(b) Where an auxiliary is recommended for sick leave by a
civilian medical practitioner, such recommendation (if in
excess of seven days) should be brought to the notice of the
A.D.M.S. by the unit commander.
200. ( a ) Sick leave for officers is granted under the same
regulations and subject to the same rules as those laid down
for serving military officers.
(&) Applications from officers to be placed on the Un-
employed List on grounds of pregnancy will be supported by a
medical certificate but will not be regarded as applications for
sick leave. Such applications will invariably be granted.
201. Special consideration will be given to applications
from an officer or auxiliary supported, when appropriate, by a
medical certificate, for leave on the grounds of the sickness of
a husband, child or dependent relative, or of the special needs
of young children. Should such applications occur more than


once in the same year, the unit commander will consider
whether it is in the interests of the Service that the officer or
auxiliary should remain in the A.T.S.
202. Embarkation leave of the husband or child (including
step-child or adopted child) who is serving in H.M. Forces,.
of an officer or auxiliary, or the return from a theatre of war
of a husband or child, on leave, sick or wounded, or as an
escaped or repatriated prisoner of war, is grounds for the
grant of immediate leave. If the husband or child is on privi-
lege leave, the leave authorized for the officer or auxiliary
should be of corresponding length. Leave so granted will be
in lieu of ordinary privilege leave which is, or is about to
become due. Officers and auxiliaries whose husbands or
children are serving should be encouraged to accumulate
privilege leave for this purpose, and should be permitted to
do so. Officers and auxiliaries whose husbands and children
are serving in this country will be allowed to go on leave
simultaneously with them.
203. All officers and auxiliaries proceeding on leave will
furnish their unit headquarters with an address to which com-
munications should be sent while they are on leave.
204. (a) Leave begins from the date on which an officer or
auxiliary is struck off duty.
(&) An officer or auxiliary will be present with her unit on
the day on which her leave terminates. On rejoining, she will
make herself acquainted with all orders issued during her
absence.
2. ARMY SAVINGS SCHEME
205. The savings scheme notified in Army Order 108 of
1930 may be adopted by units of the A.T.S. Os.C. A.T.S.
companies will give every encouragement to the auxiliaries
under their command to take advantage of this scheme.
3. DIVINE SERVICE
206. All officers and other ranks, unless granted special
leave or prevented by military duty, will attend divine service,
but no officer or other rank will be obliged to attend the service
of any religious denomination other than her own. They will
be marched to and from their place of worship.
4. MILITARY FUNERALS
207. (a) Military funerals will be accorded to deceased
officers and auxiliaries who at the time of their death were on


the active list, and who are buried within the district where
they were serving.
(6) The procedure will be that detailed in King’s Regulations
and the salutes laid down will not be exceeded. Escorts will
be found from personnel of the A.T.S. Firing party and
bearers will, if possible, be found from the military unit with
whom the A.T.S. unit or sub-unit concerned is working.
(c) Free rail travelling facilities will be granted for relatives
attending funerals of serving officers and auxiliaries in the
United Kingdom, as laid down in Regulations for the Allow-
ances of the Army.
5. SANITATION
208. Officers will pay particular attention to the health of
the personnel under their command. A C.O. will ensure that
all under her command, including those employed on special
duties, are paraded for medical inspection when required.
The responsibility for efficient supervision and for the remedy-
ing of sanitary defects rests on Os.C. units, and through them
on subordinate commanders. M.Os. are charged with the
responsibility of advising C.Os. who will incur grave responsi-
bility if such advice is neglected without adequate reason.
209. A M.O. will inspect the whole of the barracks or
quarters at least once a month. At such inspections he or she
should be accompanied by an A.T.S. officer and N.C.O. The
N.C.O. will make notes of all the defects observed. The M.O.
will report verbally to the O.C. the unit any defects noticed,
and will make all necessary arrangements for remedying them.
The hygienic defects found and the recommendations made to
the O.C. the unit will also be recorded in a sanitary diary
(A.B. 39) which will be passed to the officer concerned, who,
after recording in it the action taken, will return it to the M.O.
A.Ds.M.S. will examine and sign the diary at their inspections.
210. Dogs will not be kept except by permission of the O.C.
the unit, and, if such permission is granted, they must be kept
under proper control.
6. MARCHING-IN AND MARCHING-OUT
INSPECTIONS
211. (a) To save time and labour, marching-in and march-
ing-out inspections will, whenever possible, be combined.
( b) The O.C. the unit or sub-unit will arrange with an officer
of the R.E. and the officer i/c barracks, or through the sub-area


quartering commandant (in the case of requisitioned buildings),
for all buildings, fixtures and furniture allotted for the use of
troops, to be inspected (if possible before the arrival or imme-
diately after the departure of the troops), to ascertain their
condition. This inspection will be carried out on behalf of the
A.T.S. unit by an officer not below the rank of junior com-
mander, or by the quarter-master.
212. (a) To facilitate the taking and handing over of build-
ings on a change of station by an A.T.S. unit, advance and rear
parties will be detailed as necessary, under arrangements to be
made between the military commands or formations concerned.
( b ) When necessary the movement of the parties will be
arranged by movement control.
213. (a) An officer taking over barracks on behalf of an
A.T.S. unit will at the time of taking over, initial and date each
inventory before leaving the room or quarter. She will, at the
same time, if relieving another unit, make out a list of any
articles requiring exchange or replacement.
( b) As soon as possible after marching-in, the O.C. the
unit or sub-unit will sign a certificate, in duplicate, on A.F.
G 1062.
214. ( a ) When troops are ordered to hand over a building,
the O.C. station will give the R.E. officer and the officer i/c
barracks or the sub-area quartering commandant concerned
(in the case of requisitioned buildings), the earliest possible
intimation of the hour and date at which the buildings will be
vacated, in order that arrangements may be made for the
marching-out inspection.
( b) At this inspection, the officer of the vacating A.T.S. unit
or sub-unit before leaving such room or quarter, will attest
by her signature in the notebooks of the R.E. and barrack
officers, whether the damages or deficiencies noted therein are
correct, or object on the spot, to any charge against which
she wishes to appeal.
7. MONTHLY INSPECTIONS
215. During the first week of every month, the C.O. at a
station, or an officer or warrant officer deputed by her, will
make an inspection of the buildings, stores and bedding in
possession of the troops. She will note repairs to be made and
stores to be replaced, and see that the articles of bedding agree
with the number shown as issued. After these monthly
inspections the C.O. will forward an indent on A.F. F 765 for
articles to be replaced or exchanged and submit A.F. K 1308
to the R,E, for necessary engineer’s repairs.


8. PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE
216. ( a ) Regulations for the precautions to be taken against
fire are contained in Regulations for Army Fire Services and
Notes for Guidance on Army Fire Services, copies of which will
be kept by every unit.
(b) A.F. G 936 will be displayed in orderly rooms and on
notice boards. A.F. G 933 showing the action to be taken
on discovering an outbreak of fire, should also be displayed.
217. An officer or auxiliary is liable to make good damage
done to Government property by fire which is the result of her
own neglect, but, in view of the large sum to which liability
may extend in such cases, the amount to be recovered will
usually be limited to the equivalent of a fortnight’s pay of the
individual who is held responsible.
9. COURTS OF INQUIRY ON FIRES
218. Whenever a fire, explosion or similar occurrence in-
volving the destruction of public property takes place in any
barrack or other military building, or in any building, tent or
store occupied by the War Department for any purpose what-
soever, a court of inquiry, to include a R.E. officer, will be
immediately assembled to investigate the cause and to report
on the various points detailed in Regulations for Army Fire
Services.
(&) Notice by telegram will always be sent to the War
Office, except in the case of small and insignificant fires, and
will invariably be sent where incendiarism is suspected.
(c) The proceedings of Courts of Inquiry are privileged, and
no disclosures will be made therefrom without War Office
authority.
219. An estimate from the C.R.E. of the cost of structural
repairs will be attached to the proceedings of the court. The
proceedings will be sent to the G.0.C.-in-C. of the command
concerned.
10. COURTS OF INQUIRY ON ACCIDENTS AND
INJURIES
220. For instructions regarding courts of inquiry on acci-
dents and injuries, see para. 331.
11. OFFICERS’ MESSES
221. ( a ) The C. 0., guided by King’s Regulations, will lay
down regulations for the officers’ mess. She will also ensure


that the mess is conducted without unnecessary expense or
extravagance, and by her personal example and advice will
encourage economical habits and careful management. The
cost of living in the mess will be that which obtains throughout
the service generally.
(6) Extra charges and unauthorized subscriptions are not
allowed. The O.C. the unit or sub-unit will be held responsible
that every charge is shown in the official mess accounts, which
will be produced at the inspection of the brigade or equivalent
commander.
222. Every officer will pay to the mess president her mess
bill and all authorized subscriptions on or before the 7th of each
month, and the president of the mess committee will report in
writing to the O.C. the unit or sub-unit any cases of omission
to do so. The officer concerned will then be called upon for
an explanation. If the result be unsatisfactory, and the
account is not settled by the 14th of the month, the circum-
stances will be reported to higher authority.
223. Officers are permitted to drink the King’s health in
water or other non-alcoholic beverage.
224. If a member of the mess wishes to ask into the mess a
relative or friend, who does not belong to the services, per-
mission must first be obtained from the mess president or senior
member present.
225. A mess meeting will be held once a quarter. The
votes of the officers will be taken on any proposition on which
a difference of opinion exists, and the point will be decided by
the majority of votes, provided the O.C. the unit or sub-unit
concurs. The proceedings of the quarterly audit board
referred to in para. 31 will be laid before this meeting.
12. SERJEANTS’ MESSES
226. When practicable a serjeants’ mess will be formed.
The O.C. the unit or sub-unit will be responsible that it is
conducted with economy, regularity and order. The second-
in-command will be charged with its supervision. Cash
balances will be kept as low as possible,, consistent with
solvency.
227. The following are the regulations for serjeants’
messes :
(i) Every warrant officer and serjeant (including a paid
lance-serjeant) will be a member of the serjeants’
mess of her unit. In the case of an unpaid lance-
serjeant, membership will be optional.


(ii) When detached from their units or headquarters, the
personnel referred to in sub-para, (i) above will be
temporary members of the mess at the station at
which they are temporarily serving.
(iii) A monthly subscription may be charged not exceed-
ing two shillings.
(iv) Mess meetings, at which all members will attend, will
be held monthly. The senior warrant officer or
N.C.O. will preside. Minutes of the proceedings
will be recorded and submitted for the approval of
the O.C. the unit or sub-unit.
(v) The management of the mess will be conducted by a
committee, the president of which should not be
below the rank of warrant officer, Class 11, if avail-
able, with two serjeants as members. If no
warrant officer, Class 11, is available, the senior
serjeant will be president. The committee will be
appointed quarterly at a mess meeting, subject to
the approval of the O.C. the unit or sub-unit. The
committee is responsible for the management of
the mess, and has power to authorize all ordinary
expenditure, but exceptional outlay will not be
incurred without the previous sanction of a mess
meeting, and the approval of the O.C. the unit or
sub-unit. Temporary members will not take part
in the management of the mess,
(vi) A serjeant, not a member of the mess committee, will
be selected by the O.C. to act as caterer. Her tour
of duty will not exceed three months, unless
specially sanctioned by the O.C. the unit or sub-
unit. She will be exempt from other duties (except
in small units where it is not possible to make the
services of a full-time caterer available), and will
take charge of all stores of eatables and liquors, and
receive from members the amounts due from them.
All liquor and other articles purchased must be
paid for in cash on the spot. All money taken for
the sale of liquor, cigarettes, or other articles pur-
chased will be handed over daily to the treasurer.
The caterer has no authority to make purchases or
to select tradesmen without the sanction of the
committee. The mess will obtain all its wines,
spirits, beer and other supplies through firms or
tradesmen approved by the O.C. the unit or sub-
unit.
(vii) The daily rate of messing, if sanctioned, will not
exceed 9 d. Beer or spirituous liquor will be sold


only during the hours appointed by the O.C. the
unit or sub-unit, and will not in any circumstances
be sold to a private, or to a N.C.O. who is not a
member or temporary member of the mess, nor to
any civilian.
(viii) A serjeant will be appointed by roster to act as
treasurer for the quarter. The treasurer will
furnish the O.C. monthly with a statement showing
the amount due from members for messing and
subscriptions. The treasurer will hand over to the
second-in-command all receipts from the bar daily.
Special arrangements will be made by the O.C. the
unit or sub-unit where detached personnel are at a
distance from headquarters. The O.C. will ensure
that the treasurer has satisfactory means for safe-
guarding the cash. A statement of accounts
prepared by the treasurer and signed by the
president, will be submitted at the quarterly mess
meeting for approval and will subsequently be laid
before the O.C. the unit or sub-unit. It will be
audited by the unit’s quarterly audit board.
(ix) An entertainment will not be given unless with the
concurrence of two-thirds of a general meeting and
with the sanction of the O.C. Hospitality should,
as a rule, be limited to offering to serjeants of units
joining or quitting the station, the use of the mess
as honorary members. The drinks, etc. consumed
on these occasions will not be charged against the
mess fund.
(x) The senior warrant officer or N.C.O. present in the
mess is responsible for the maintenance of good
order and for the observance of the rules of the
mess.
(xi) Each mess may draw up rules on matters of detail,
which will be submitted for the approval of the
O.C. the unit or sub-unit.
(xii) The whole of the property of the mess will be insured'
against fire, the premiums being charged against
the mess fund.
(xiii) All treating between auxiliaries in the same mess is
prohibited.
13. RANK AND FILE MESSES
228. It is the duty of the O.C. the unit to see that the
auxiliaries’ meals are properly and sufficiently provided : that
all transactions in connection with supplies, purchases and


cash income and expenditure are regularly recorded : that the
provisions of para. 26 are carried out, and that all bills in
connection with messing are paid within 14 days from the end
of the usual monthly accounting period.
229. A second-cook will be trained at the School of Cookery
for every unit entitled to have a serjeant cook, with a view to
her being available, when required, to replace the serjeant cook
or to succeed to her appointment, or to superintend the cooking
for detached personnel. When not employed in any of these
capacities, the second cook will do duty in the ranks. Expense
will not be entailed by the appointment of second cooks,
beyond that incurred in their travelling to and from the School
of Cookery.
14. CANTEENS
230. In the case of units or sub-units which are not provided
with a N.A.A.F.I. service and in consequence conduct their
own institute service, these should be conducted as far as
possible in accordance with the Rules for the Conduct of
Garrison and Regimental Institutes. The Os.C. units or sub-
units will ensure that the arrangements for safe custody of
the cash are satisfactory, and will issue orders for its disposal.
15. PERMANENT SLEEPING OUT PASSES
231. Auxiliaries whose husbands are resident in the same
locality may be allowed by the O.C. the unit a permanent pass
to sleep out of quarters, provided that the military exigencies
render this practicable, and that the auxiliary is still available
for all duties. This privilege will be withdrawn from any
individual should the O.C. the unit consider it necessary.
16. SERVANTS AND SERVANT ALLOWANCES
232. Servant allowance will in no circumstances be issued
to officers. The employment of privates as officers’ servants
may be allowed as a privilege, provided that they can be found
from within the approved establishments of units, and in no
such case will the following scale be exceeded :
[a) 1 servant for each officer of and above the rank of
chief commander.
( p) An average of 1 servant for every 3 officers below the
rank of chief commander.


SECTION VIII.—DRESS, CLOTHING AND
EQUIPMENT
1. DRESS.
233. An officer is forbidden to introduce or sanction for
experimental or other purposes, any unauthorized deviation
from the sealed pattern of dress, clothing, equipment and
badges, nor will any alterations be made to articles issued by
the R.A.0.C., except such as may be necessary to ensure a
correct fit. No badges other than those authorized may be
worn. An officer will be responsible for the cost of replacing
or restoring to the approved pattern, any articles worn on her
authority that are not in conformity with regulations.
234. (a) Uniform must be correctly worn. The uniform
jacket will not be worn unbuttoned, but when permission is
given, may be taken off, e.g. when working in an office.
(6) Overalls will be worn at recruits’ drill and on all fatigues
in barracks or camp, and on those occasions authorized by the
O.C. the unit or sub-unit, when their use will save the auxiliary's
clothing. In cold weather overalls may be worn over, and in
warm weather without the service dress.
235. An officer or auxiliary will not leave her quarters
unless properly dressed.
236. ( a) Make-up, if used, will be inconspicuous ; highly-
coloured nail varnish will not be used.
(i h ) Hair will be neat and will be kept well above the collar.
(i c) The strap will be worn below the cap badge, except in the
case of drivers, who will wear it over the head or under the
chin to fix the cap.
237. (a) Greatcoats or raincoats will be worn by officers on
parade only when auxiliaries parade in them. An officer will
allow greatcoats or raincoats to be worn when necessary.
( b ) Officers and other ranks walking out in uniform will not
carry handbags, umbrellas or canes.
( c ) Gloves will not be tucked into the belt or under the
shoulder strap.
238. No unauthorized ornament or emblem will be worn so
as to be visible with uniform, except wedding, engagement and
signet rings.
239. (a) Spectacles may be worn by all ranks.
( b) It is the responsibility of the individual officer, requiring
glasses for use on duty, to provide herself at her own expense


with spectacles, having the approved type of flattened sides
which do not interfere with the wearing of a respirator.
240. The service dress cap will be placed evenly on the
head. The field service cap will be worn diagonally across the
head, the front resting on the top of the forehead one inch
above the right eye.
Caps will be removed indoors when the wearer is not on
duty, e.g. on entering a mess. They will not ordinarily be
worn at work in cook-houses, orderly rooms or stores.
241. The standard regimental or corps badge or button may
be worn at the upper edge of the flap of the upper left-hand
pocket of the jacket, by all ranks of the A.T.S. for
duty to a particular military unit. The following conditions
will in every case be observed :
(i) That authority to wear the badge is given in writing
by the C.O. of the military unit.
(ii) That concurrence is expressed in writing by the
group commandant concerned.
(hi) That no expense to the public is involved.
Group commandants will inform the War Office, through the
usual channels, of every case in which badges are thus author-
ized, giving the name of the regiment or corps, and of the
A.T.S. company or platoon concerned.
242. ( a) All ranks, when not on duty, are permitted to wear
a national flower or emblem on their uniform head-dress on the
days specified :
St. George’s Day (Rose) English platoons.
St. Andrew’s Day (Thistle) Scottish platoons.
St. David’s Day (Leek) Welsh platoons.
St. Patrick’s Day (Shamrock) Irish platoons.
The emblem may also be worn by English, Scottish, Welsh and
Irish personnel serving in other units. On Armistice Day the
poppy may be worn by all ranks.
( b) Flags or emblems which are sold by charities on author-
ized flag days may be worn over the right breast pocket by all
ranks when not on duty, should they so desire, provided that
when so worn they are of reasonable dimensions.
243. ( a ) When attending military funerals or memorial
services connected therewith, officers and warrant officers will
wear a mourning band of black crepe 3J inches wide round the
left arm well above the elbow. It will not be worn at cere-
monies such as the unveiling of memorials and Armistice Day
celebrations.
(6) An officer or warrant officer in private mourning may,
when in uniform, wear a mourning band as described above.


A N.C.O. or private may similarly, whether in private mourn-
ing or at a military funeral, wear a mourning band as above,
should she wish to do so.
244. Civilian clothes may be worn under the following
circumstances, by an officer or auxiliary :
[a) All ranks, when on leave away from their stations,
may, at their own discretion, regard the wearing
of uniform as optional, except when on leave in
Eire or a foreign country, when plain clothes must
be worn.
An officer or auxiliary is regarded as on leave
away from her station even if the friends or rela-
tions with whom she stays when on leave for
24 hours or more live in the neighbourhood of her
unit.
{ b) All ranks, whether on leave or at their station, are
permitted to wear civilian clothes, for the purpose
of athletic exercises for which a special dress is
necessary.
2. DECORATIONS AND MEDALS
245. ( a ) During war, ribbons will be worn instead of medals
and decorations.
(&) The issue, loss, replacement, forfeiture and restoration of
decorations and/or medals, will be dealt with in accordance
with King’s Regulations.
3. OFFICERS’ UNIFORM
246. ( a ) Service dress, which shall be in accordance with
the sealed pattern, is the obligatory uniform for officers.
(6) The following rules will govern the issue of outfit allow-
ance to women granted commissions in the A.T.S. on or after
Ist July, 1941.
247. [a) The normal grant will be and will be issuable
to all officers, for the provision of the articles of uniform laid
down in Appendix VIII, except as otherwise provided by
regulations. This amount will be subject to review by the
Army Council from time to time. If the requirements for
uniform are altered the amount of the normal grant will be
reviewed.
(b) An officer who has ceased to hold a commission or
ceased to serve in an appointment in respect of which an
outfit allowance was admissible, and is then re-employed will


be eligible for uniform grant in accordance with the regulations
at the time in force.
248. (a) An officer who, except by reason of ill health cer-
tified by a medical board, death or such special circumstances
as the Army Council may decide, does not serve for three
years from the date of her appointment to a commission,
will be required to refund the outfit grant issued to her, unless
she was a minor when she applied for a grant, in which case
the person who signed the undertaking on A.F. E 51 Id, and
not the officer, will be required to refund. An officer will be
allowed to retain one-third of the total grant admissible for
each completed year of commissioned service.
( b) No officer will be eligible for a grant under para. 247
unless she is found medically fit for service on joining for duty
as an officer.
(c) Claims for outfit allowance will be made on A.F. E 51 Id
and will be forwarded to the Officer i/c Army Pay Office
(Officers’ Accounts), Stockport Road, Manchester, 13.
(d) Except in such exceptional circumstances as may be
approved by the Army Council or any officer duly authorized
by them, no claim for outfit allowance will be admitted if not
submitted within 12 months of joining for duty as an officer.
4. CAMP KIT AND BEDDING
249. (a) If an officer is required to use camp kit it will be
issued in land from the R.A.O.C.
(&) An officer is entitled to a free issue of three blankets
on first joining for duty.
5. OTHER RANKS’ CLOTHING
250. Provision of all articles of clothing and stores will be
made by the R.A.O.C. Os.C. units and sub-units of the
A.T.S. will be responsible for the issue and maintenance of
accounts in respect thereof.
251. Auxiliaries will be provided with a free initial outfit of
clothing, necessaries and personal equipment which will be
maintained in accordance with War Scale of Clothing, Neces-
saries and Personal Equipment for Personnel of the Auxiliary
Territorial Service, which should be read in conjunction with
War Clothing Regulations and Equipment Regulations,
Part I.
252 . The initial outfit will normally be issued at the depot or
training centre at which the auxiliary joins. Before receiving
the initial outfit, each auxiliary will be required to sign


A.F. E 51 lu by virtue of which she accepts responsibility for
the care and due return, when called upon, of all articles of
uniform and personal equipment issued to her during her
service.
253. [a) Badges and chevrons of rank as detailed below
will be worn on both arms of jackets and greatcoats, and on
the right arm only of overall;—
Warrant officer. Class I—badge, Royal Arms on the forearm,
the lower edge 6£ inches from the bottom of the sleeve.
Warrant officer. Class II —badge, arm crown, in wreath,
worsted, S.D., on the forearm, the lower edge 6J inches
from the bottom of the sleeve.
Staff-serjeants —small crown above chevrons.
Serjeants—chevrons, worsted, S.D., 3 bar, on the upper arm,
the point 10 \ inches from the top of the sleeve.
Corporals—chevrons, worsted, S.D., 2 bar, on the upper arm,
the point 9|- inches from the top of the sleeve.
Lance-corporals—chevron, worsted, S.D., 1 bar, on the
upper arm, the point 8| inches from the top of the sleeve.
(6) The alterations to uniform necessary on promotion will
be made at the public expense; subsequent renewals of
clothing will be supplied complete with the authorized badge
of rank.
6. PASSIVE AIR DEFENCE
254. No specific provision has been made for clothing for
the use of A.T.S. personnel after decontamination. To enable
such personnel to reach the place where their own change of
clothing is, they will be clothed for the journey from the stock
of clothes held for males, under War Office Pamphlet, Pro-
tection Against Gas and Air Raids, Appendix X, page 107,
and Pamphlet No. 3, Passive Air Defence, 1939. Os.C. units
will ensure that this clothing is available should it be required.
7. ACCOUNTING
255. (a) The normal accounting unit will be the company,
but where companies are concentrated, accounting may be
carried out by groups, subject to the concurrence of the
financial adviser and auditor of the command.
(fe) A.T.S. training centres are separate accounting units.
(c) The compilation and rendering of formal clothing and
equipment accounts by units for audit at home, and at certain
overseas stations, is at present suspended, but this does not


relieve C.Os. of their responsibility for public stores entrusted
to their care. In order to maintain a check on stores, it is
necessary to have within the unit an administrative- record
of all transactions. The following forms and books will be
used to maintain such a record :
A.B. 165. Record of clothing, equipment, etc., held on
charge and receipts and issues.
A.F. G 1033. Issue and receipt voucher to and from other
units, Ordnance, etc.
A.F. H 1179. Monthly indent for personal clothing and
necessaries, free issues to recruits.
A.F. Hi 179 b. Monthly indent for personal clothing and
necessaries, free issues to personnel other
than recruits.
A.F. H 1181 c. Issues of necessaries on payment.
A.F. P 1925. Stores paid for or expended by the unit.
A.F. P 1954. Charges for losses or damages.
A.F. H 1157. Transfer clothing statement {see para. 258).
Signatures should be obtained for all items of clothing and
equipment issued to auxiliaries.
256. In the event of personnel proceeding overseas, any
articles which are taken by the auxiliary will be recorded in
the administrative record referred to in para. 255, as issued,
the order for the move being quoted as the authority.
257. Any item of clothing or equipment in the possession of
auxiliaries transferred from one accounting unit to another
will be vouchered on A.F. G 1033. A.F. H 1157 (Transfer
clothing statement) will accompany the voucher.
258. (a) A transfer statement of clothing and necessaries
(A.F. H 1157) will be prepared in the following cases of
transfer of personnel:—
(i) When recruits are despatched from a training centre
to join a unit or station at home.
(ii) When auxiliaries are posted from one unit to another,
either at home or overseas, where neither unit
forms part of an expeditionary force.
(iii) When auxiliaries are posted from a hospital to a train-
ing centre or depot, or to a unit not forming part
of an expeditionary force.
The form will be forwarded at once to the O.C. the unit to
which the auxiliary is sent. No duplicate is necessary.
(&) A transfer clothing statement need not be prepared :
(i) When auxiliaries proceed to join an expeditionary
force unit.


(ii) When auxiliaries are posted from one expeditionary
force unit to another.
(iii) When auxiliaries are posted from an expeditionary
force, either as invalids or for further service at
home or overseas.
(iv) When auxiliaries are sent direct from hospital to an
expeditionary force.
( c) In the cases referred to in sub-para. ( a ) (i) and (ii), the
transfer clothing statement will be certified “ complete to the
(home, overseas, etc., as the case may be) scale of personal
equipment, clothing and necessaries, and additional clothing,
except for the undermentioned deficiencies ”. A.F. H 1157
will show in detail each article of personal equipment and
clothing in possession of personnel referred to in sub-para.
{a) (iii), but in the case of necessaries, it will be sufficient to
note the articles required to complete the kit to the appropriate
scale.
259. ( a ) Auxiliaries transferred from an expeditionary
force (other than as invalids) for further service at home or
overseas, will be considered to have left their units in possession
of kit complete to the Active Service scale, unless the C.O. has
good reason to believe that deficiencies in this scale arise
through no fault on the part of the auxiliary, when such
deficiencies may be completed as a free issue.
(6) The transfer clothing statement will be retained in
support of any free issues that may be due to complete the
auxiliary’s outfit. A fresh transfer clothing statement will be
prepared on each occasion of posting.
260. Instructions regarding the disposal of clothing, etc.,
handed in to stores on discharge will be found in War Clothing
Regulations.
261. Articles of clothing and necessaries which have been
replaced free owing to fair wear and tear, will be periodically
and carefully examined by a board to see that they are com-
pletely unserviceable. In exceptional circumstances, when a
board of survey cannot be assembled owing to insufficient
officers or warrant officers being available, the duties of the
board will be carried out by the O.C. the unit or sub-unit, who
will attach to the proceedings a statement showing the cir-
cumstances in which the board could not be held. Con-
demned clothing will be dealt with in accordance with War
Clothing Regulations.
262. ( a) Accommodation stores will be issued as detailed in
War Accommodation Schedules of Furniture and Accommoda-
tion Stores for Hutments. These stores will normally be held


on inventory from the officer i/c barracks, except those in
requisitioned buildings in certain commands where they are
held on unit ledger charge in A.B. 165. Where the stores arc
recorded in A.B. 165, a distribution list, in duplicate, will be
compiled if any stores are held by detachments stationed
away from headquarters. These lists will be agreed with the
senior member of the detachment who will sign both copies,
one copy to be retained in the detachment and the other with
A.B. 165. The totals of each item shown on the various dis-
tribution lists, together with any similar stores held at com-
pany headquarters, should agree with the total shown in
A.B. 165.
(6) These distribution lists will be kept up to date and the
stores will be verified on change of command of a detachment.
On change of station, A.B. 165 should be handed over to the
incoming unit with the stores (see paras. 211-214).
263. ( a ) Except as otherwise provided in these regulations,
the clothing and equipment of A.T.S. personnel will be dealt
with generally on the lines laid down in War Clothing Regula-
tions and Equipment Regulations.
(6) Should any difficulty arise in carrying out these account-
ing instructions, reference will be made to the financial adviser
and army auditor of the command concerned.
8. RECOVERY OF PUBLIC CLAIMS
264. Attention is drawn to the provisions of para. 301.
9. WASHING
265. ( a ) Contracts for washing of underclothing, etc., of
personnel are made by tender by the O.C. the unit or sub-unit.
Copies of the form of tender should be in possession of all
Os.C. units and sub-units and are obtainable from the Army
Forms Depot. The standard bundle which is the basis of all
contracts is made up as follows :
Underclothing.
Handkerchiefs (three to count as one article).
Shirts.
Stockings.
Towels.
Pyjamas (one suit to count as one article).
(6) No articles in excess of the numbers authorized will be
included in the standard bundle. Any additional articles
which the individual may desire to have washed, will be


enclosed in a separate bundle, to be washed under separate
arrangements at the expense of the individual.
[c) Overalls will in no circumstances be included in the stan-
dard bundle. They will be washed as and when their condition
requires it, having regard to the particular duties of the
individual concerned, and will be sent to the laundry packed
separately from the bundles.
{, d) Os.C. will be responsible for ensuring that a suitable
record is maintained of articles sent to and returned from
contractors.
10. ALLOWANCE FOR TOILET ARTICLES,
GLEANING MATERIALS AND HAIRGUTTING
266. The amount of the special allowance for haircutting,
purchase of toilet articles and cleaning materials and for main-
tenance of the cleaning and toilet brushes (including cleaning
brass and hair comb), included in the kit of necessaries, will
be 3 d. a week in respect of every complete week of full time
service. This allowance will not be credited in respect of any
period of absence without leave for which the pay is forfeited.
In the case of incomplete weeks, the allowance will be credited
at the rate of \d. for each day of actual service.
SECTION IX.—FINANCE: PAY, ALLOWANCES,
NATIONAL HEALTH, ETC., INSURANCE
SCHEMES
1. PAY—OFFICERS
267. ( a ) All officers appointed to the Service will be entitled
to receive the rate of pay appropriate to their rank and appoint-
ment with effect from the date of assuming duty in such rank
or appointment. An officer shall have no claim to pay beyond
the last day on which she serves.
( h) Scales of pay for officers vary according to the service
obligations undertaken by them; i.e. General Service or Local
Service. These scales are laid down in Appendix IX.
(c) Pay will be issued monthly in arrear as under :
(i) For officers serving in
the United King-
dom or with Forces
in adjacent islands.
By the Officer i/c Army Pay
Office (Officers’ Accounts),
Stockport Road, Manches-
ter, 13.


(ii) For officers serving
overseas other than
in India, Burma, or
islands adjacent to
the United King-
dom.
By the command paymaster
of the command or force in
which the officer is serving
or by the Officer i/c Army
Pay Office (Officers’ Ac-
counts) Manchester, as the
officer may elect.
268. A cadet recommended for appointment as an officer will
receive an advance of pay of £6 on the day she leaves the
cadet wing. This will be recovered from the first issue of
pay made to the officer. This advance of pay is compulsory
in all cases, and no further advance can be claimed.
269. Staff pay is admissible for officers of the A.T.S. as
laid down in Appendix IX. The grant of staff pay will be
admissible to all officers of and below the rank of chief com-
mander filling appointments referred to in the Pay Warrant,
1940, Articles 219-267, except where otherwise stated. The
general conditions of issue will be those laid down for military
officers.
270. Corps, engineer or signal pay shall be admissible to an
officer under the following conditions :
(i) ( a ) She must possess the full qualifications for
drawing the higher rate of corps, engineer or signal
pay required in the case of a military officer
normally eligible for this emolument.
{b) She must be posted to fill an appointment either
in replacement of, or comparable to, one filled by
a military officer entitled to draw such pay either
at the higher or lower rate applicable to him.
(ii) The general conditions of issue of corps, etc., pay will
be those laid down for military officers.
2. PAY.—OTHER RANKS
General
271 . ( a) All auxiliaries will be enrolled in the rank of private
and will be entitled to receive the normal ( i.e . non-trades-
woman) rate of pay with effect from the date of enrolment.
(&) Pay will be admissible for all days on which duty is
performed and for duly authorized leave.
(c) Pay will be issued weekly in arrear.
(i d ) An auxiliary shall have no claim to pay beyond the last
day she serves.
(e) For regulations regarding forfeiture of pay for absence
without leave, see para. 156 ( d ).


272. Scales of pay for other ranks (non-tradeswomen) are
laid down in Appendix IX.
Tradeswomen
273. (a) Auxiliaries qualified as tradeswomen will, if filling
a vacancy in the authorized establishment of their trade, be
entitled to receive the rate of pay appropriate to their trade
grading and rank, with effect from the date of passing the
trade test. When no vacancy exists for a tradeswoman in the
establishment, an auxiliary who has qualified as a trades-
woman will receive only the normal rate of pay, until she is
mustered into a trade vacancy.
Scales of pay for other ranks (tradeswomen) are laid down
in Appendix IX.
(b) The authorized list and grouping of approved trades are
as shown in Appendix X (i). No modification either to the list
of trades or to the trade tests as published will be made without
the prior sanction of the War Office.
(■ c ) Trade testing will be carried out by the O.C. the unit
in which the auxiliary is serving and her certificate of pro-
ficiency (A.F. B 197), will be endorsed by the O.C. the unit to
the effect that the classification awarded is given under the
conditions of Regulations Governing the Issue of Tradesmen’s
Rates of Pay.
274. Each tradeswoman recruit will be required to produce
from her civil employers, if any, a certificate in the form shown
in Appendix X (ii). The unit commander will examine the
certificate, and, having satisfied herself that the recruit’s civil
trade is included in a recognized army trade, for which there
is a vacancy in the unit to which the recruit will be posted, will
question the recruit (or, if necessary and desirable, carry out
an actual test) to ascertain how her qualifications compare
with those required for Class I, Class 11, Class 111 or Group E
(if applicable) tradeswomen’s rates of pay.
Additional Pay
275. (a) Additional pay will be issuable only for the days
on which an auxiliary is actually employed on the duties for
which such additional pay is authorized.
(i h ) Additional pay will not be issuable for days on which
ordinary pay is forfeited.
(c) Scales of additional pay and conditions of issue are
shown in Appendix IX.


Proficiency Pay
276. War-time proficiency pay will be issuable to non-
tradeswomen auxiliaries at the following rates and under the
conditions prescribed below.
277. The daily rate of war-time proficiency pay for non-
tradeswomen auxiliaries eligible to receive such pay is Ad.
278. War-time proficiency pay will be issuable to auxili-
aries up to and including the rank of lance-serjeant who are
drawing non-tradeswomen’s rates of pay (other than those
drawing such rates while learning a trade), who fulfil the
following conditions
(a) Have completed six months’ full paid service rendered
after 3rd September, 1939.
( b ) Are certified by the O.C. the unit, who will attach the
written concurrence of the employing military
officer, to be in all respects trained and efficient
auxiliaries. (This qualification will include pro-
ficiency in the specific duties performed in the unit
concerned).
(c) Are physically capable of performing the duties of
their rank which they are required to perform by
the O.C. the unit.
279. Steps will be taken by all Os.C. units to classify
auxiliaries for war-time proficiency pay under the provisions
of para. 278. Those who can be certified to be qualified may be
awarded the emolument as from the date on which they become
fully qualified.
Notifications of the awards will be published without delay
in unit Part II Orders, and issues of the emolument, together
with any arrears involved, may be made forthwith after the
award has been published.
280. The daily rate of special. proficiency pay for non-
tradeswomen auxiliaries eligible to receive such pay shall be 2 d.
281. Special proficiency pay shall be issuable to auxiliaries
who fulfil the following conditions :
{a) Have completed three years’ full paid service.
(j b) Are in receipt of war-time proficiency pay.
(c) Are paid lance-serjeants, corporal’s or lance-corporals
and are recommended for special proficiency pay
by the O.C. the unit, with the written concurrence
of the employing military officer, or,
{d} As privates or unpaid lance-corporals are specially
recommended by the O.C. the unit, with the written
concurrence of the employing military officer,


because of their specialist qualifications, ability,
and general aptitude above the standard required
for war-time proficiency pay.
282. [a) The continuance of war-time and special proficiency
pay is dependent on the maintenance by the recipient of the
prescribed standard of efficiency. If in the opinion of the unit
commander, with the written concurrence of the employing
military officer, an auxiliary falls below that standard at any
time, it is incumbent upon the O.C. the unit concerned to
withdraw the emolument, which may, however, be restored
with effect from the date of re-attaining the prescribed
standard.
[h) War-time and special proficiency pay are not issuable
for days on which pay is forfeited.
Increments of Pay
283. Increments of pay after completing 3 years’ paid
service as a N.C.O. and after completing 1, 2 and 3 years’ paid
service in the case of privates (these increments are shown in
Appendix IX), are issued in general conformity with the grant
of similar increments to soldiers under the conditions set out
below :
(i) Increments of pay will be automatically issuable on
completion of the requisite period of service, unless,
in the case of auxiliaries of the rank of private, the
O.C. unit concerned publishes in Part II Orders
the fact that a satisfactory state of military conduct
has not been attained.
(ii) All full paid service rendered since 3rd September,
1939, will be allowed to reckon for the purpose of
grants of increments of pay to privates and lance-
corporals.
War Pay
284. War pay at the daily rate of 4 d. will be issued from
the date of enrolment to all auxiliaries under the same con-
ditions as, and in addition to, their ordinary pay.
ft
Voluntary Allotments of Pay
285. Voluntary allotments from the pay of auxiliaries may
be made under the same rules as apply to soldiers. (Pay
Warrant, 1940, Appendix V). The minimum allotment which
may be made under that will be 6d. a day. An
allotment must be made to one relative only and must not
exceed' three-quarters of the pay including proficiency pay,
4 —(1744)


additional pay, etc., if any, of an auxiliary below the rank of
serjeant, and two-thirds of the pay of a serjeant or higher rank.
An auxiliary wishing to make an allotment will notify her C.O.
of the amount she desires to allot. A.F. O 1796 a, after being
signed by the auxiliary, will be transmitted to the regimental
paymaster. A.F. O 1796 a will be prepared to show the
allotment as beginning from a Monday, as payment is made
weekly in advance on that day.
3. ALLOWANCES
Ration, Lodging, Fuel and Light
286. {a) General Service personnel will normally draw
rations in kind. Ration, lodging, fuel and light allowances
may be issued, when in the opinion of the unit commander it
is impossible for the officer or auxiliary to liye in mess. The
issue of lodging allowance requires the approval of the officer
i/c barracks.
(&) Local Service officers and other ranks will not be pro-
vided with rations in kind. They will be entitled to the issue
of ration allowance in lieu at the rate laid down from time to
time.
(c) During leave of absence, the leave rate of ration allow-
ance for A.T.S. personnel, whether General or Local Service,
will be as published from time to time.
{d) Lodging and fuel and light allowances will be paid to
A.T.S. personnel at the rates and under the conditions laid
down in Allowance Regulations or other special instructions
issued by the Army Council, for single military personnel of
equivalent rank.
(e) Entitlement to ration, lodging, fuel and light and field,
etc., allowances will be reported in Part II Orders (Officers)
as indicated in the pamphlet Officers’ Pay and Allowances,
Procedure for Notifying Entitlement to Emoluments in Part II
Orders (Officers), 1941, notified in A.C.I. 1897 of 1941.
Travel
287. Travelling allowances will be at the same rate and under
the same conditions as laid down for military personnel of
equivalent rank.
288. {a) When officers necessarily travel by rail on duty in
uniform, Ist class fare is admissible.
An officer when in uniform not on duty is permitted to travel
3rd class. When travelling at the public expense, and not
in uniform, 3rd class only is admissible for officers of and below
the rank of chief commander. Railway warrants (A.B. 205,


officers ; A.B. 422, officers and other ranks) are issuable to
cover rail and cross-channel steamer travel at public expense.
(6) Baggage consignment notes (A.F. P 1904) for rail
conveyance of the balance of the individual’s entitlement of
baggage, after deducting the weight allowed by the railway
company to be conveyed free with the passenger (for entitle-
ment, etc., see Allowance Regulations), are issuable, provided
that the owner is a rail passenger; {i.e. does not proceed by
air or road). Normally such balance will proceed by goods
and not by passenger train.
(c) When proceeding on leave at their own expense officers,
on the production of their identity certificate (A.F. B 2606),
and other ranks, on the production of their leave pass, at the
railway booking office, will be enabled to purchase tickets at
concession rates.
289. (a) General Service personnel are allowed a railway
warrant at the public expense four times in 12 months for the
purpose of travelling from their duty stations to their destina-
tions on leave, when entitled by leave regulations (see para. 197).
(6) A free return railway warrant (in addition to four free
warrants referred to in sub-para, (a)) may be granted, in order
to enable personnel proceeding on sick leave to reach their
homes. These will only be granted when the M.O. concerned
has ordered a period of sick leave to be taken otherwise than
in hospital or convalescent depot and has certified :
(i) That sickness has arisen from causes not within the
patient’s control.
(ii) That accommodation with which the patient is
ordinarily provided is unsuitable for her to occupy
during a period of sick leave.
(c) When free travel on leave is authorized a railway warrant
will be issued ; the cash equivalent cannot be claimed for
the use of alternative forms of transport, e.g. road or air,
except where railhead is five miles or more from leave destina-
tion, when amount of fares by public road transport is recover-
able. A refund of the return bus journey should be made from
the unit or sub-unit Imprest Account, which will be supported
by A.F. O 1771, giving details of bus journey performed and
proof of payment.
Income Tax
290. All pay, less an allowance to officers of £\s a year for the
upkeep of uniform, is liable to tax, which is deducted monthly
before pay is credited, to avoid a heavy tax once a year.
Allowances are not liable to tax.


Field Allowance
291. Field allowance at the rate of Is. a day is issuable
to officers of the A.T.S. under the conditions laid down for
military officers in Allowance Regulations.
Colonial Allowance
292. A.T.S. personnel when serving abroad are eligible for
colonial allowance, subject to the provisions of Allowance
Regulations as follows :
Officers The rate for single military officers.
Other ranks. The rate payable to single soldiers of
corresponding rank.
Contingent Allowance
293. Contingent allowance is admissible in respect of A.T.S.
pei'sonnel at the same rates and under the, same conditions as
those laid down for soldiers in Allowance Regulations. In
determining the average daily strength of rank and file, only
General Service personnel who are accommodated as soldiers
will be included.
Dependants’ Allowance and War Service Grants
294. [a) Persons dependent upon General Service personnel
of the A.T.S. may be granted ordinary Dependants’ Allowance
under the same conditions and at the same rates as apply to
dependants of men serving in the Army (see Regulations for
Army Dependants’ Allowances in Time of National Emergency),
with the following modifications to provide for the cases of
those auxiliaries whose rate of pay is below the minimum rate
of the soldier.
If the auxiliary is in receipt of a rate of pay less than
2s. 6 d. a day (including war pay) the contributory allotment
and the special rate of dependant’s allowance will be as
follows :
Contribution by the auxiliary Bd. a day, i.e. 4s. Bd. a
week.
Contribution by the State.
If the average net weekly con-'
tribution towards support of
the dependant during the 2s. KM. a week making a
six months preceding the ► total allowance of 75.6 d.
beginning of her service ex- a week,
ceeded ss. but did not exceed
9s.


( b) General Service personnel may be considered by the
War Service Grants Advisory Committee of the Ministry of
Pensions for grants of special assistance in respect of serious
financial hardship arising through their service, under the
same conditions as are applicable to soldiers (see Regulations
for Army Dependants’ Allowances in Time of National
Emergency).
(c) General Service auxiliaries will be given the opportunity
of making application for Dependant’s Allowance and/or War
Service Grants at the time of enrolment. The officer carrying
out the enrolment will be responsible that the necessary form
for Dependant’s Allowance [see Appendix XI), or War Service
Grant, on form M.S.A.C. 21 or W.S.G. 21 is completed at the
time of enrolment.
The officer carrying out the enrolment will despatch imme-
diately the claim for Dependant’s Allowance and/or claim for
War Service Grant to the area office of the Assistance Board
nearest to the recruiting office.
Where a claim for Dependant’s Allowance and/or War Service
Grant is made after enrolment, the claims should be despatched
to the Regimental Paymaster, A.T.S., Nottingham.
(d) Applications for officers under sub-para. ( b ) above should
be forwarded direct to the War Services Grants Advisory
Committee, Ministry of Pensions, Heyhouse Lane, Lytham
St. Annes, Lancs.
All claims will be subject to investigation.
(e) Indents for supplies of forms M.S.A.C. 21 or W.S.G. 21
should be submitted to the Regimental Paymaster as required.
4. NATIONAL HEALTH, WIDOWS’, ORPHANS’
AND OLD AGE PENSIONS AND UNEMPLOY-
MENT INSURANCE
295. The following will be the procedure in connection with
the insurance of officers and other ranks :
Officers
National Health Insurance and Widows’, Orphans’ and
Old Age Contributory Pensions Act
[a) The insurance of officers under the above Acts is
governed by Army Order 45 of 1941, and the procedure is as
set out below.
Under the terms of this Army Order, the only officers com-
pulsorily insurable are those who were insured to any extent
under the above Acts in civil life immediately before enrolling
in the A.T.S., whether directly as officers or in the ranks.
Personnel of the A.T.S. who enrol in the ranks are compulsorily
insured during service in the ranks, but are, when promoted


to officer status, and provided that they were not insured
before enrolling in the ranks, permitted to exercise an option
of either continuing to be insured as officers, or of ceasing to
be insured.
{b) Where an officer enters the A.T.S. direct and not through
the ranks, but was insured under the above Acts in civil life,
or is promoted to officer status after enrolment in the ranks,
a statement in the form prescribed in Part I of the Appendix
to Army Ord.er 45 of 1941, should be completed in respect of
that officer as soon as possible after she joins for duty, and
should be forwarded by her C. 0., together with any Health
Insurance or Pensions cards handed in by the newly joined
officer, to the Ministry of Health, Insurance Dept., Blackpool,
Lancs. If the Ministry of Health decides that the officer con-
cerned is compulsorily insurable during her service as an
officer, that Ministry will issue appropriate instructions regard-
ing the deductions of contributions from the officer’s pay to the
paymaster through whom her pay is issued. Such deductions
will continue until service with the A.T.S. is terminated. Cards
will not be stamped, but at the conclusion of service with the
A.T.S. a notification will be sent to the Ministry of Health on
A.F. O 1845 a by the paymaster, which will secure the re-issue
of contribution and medical cards to the officer concerned.
If found to be compulsorily insurable during service as an
officer in the A.T.S. the total weekly deduction from the pay of
the officer in respect of National Health Insurance and Widows’,
Orphans’ and Old Age Contributory Pensions will be 11 d.
(i c ) If an officer of the A.T.S. is promoted to officer status
after originally enrolling in the ranks, and was not insured
under the above Acts in civil life before enrolling, and she
wishes to exercise her option of discontinuing to be insured, a
statement in the form prescribed in Part II of the Appendix
to Army Order 45 of 1941 should be prepared by her as soon
as possible after her service as an officer begins, and forwarded
by her C.O. to the Ministry of Health, Insurance Department,
Blackpool, Lancs. The Ministry of Health will subsequently
notify the paymaster through whom the officer draws her
pay as to whether the officer is to continue in insurance or not,
and if she is to continue to be insured, deductions from her
pay as an officer will be as in sub-para. (&) above.
Unemployment Insurance
296. An officer will be insured under the Unemployment
Insurance Acts for a period not exceeding four months from
the date of her beginning her service as an officer, provided
that she was normally in insurable employment before enrolling
in the A.T.S. Her Unemployment Book, if in her possession,


should be forwarded by her to the paymaster through whom she
is to draw her pay. If the book is not in her possession, she
should obtain it as soon as possible, or, if it is unobtainable,
procure a temporary book from the Ministry of Labour and
National Service. Whichever book is obtained, it will be for-
warded to the paymaster concerned. If the officer has been
promoted from the ranks, and is therefore not in possession of
an Unemployment Book, the paymaster will receive an Un-
employment (Arrears) Book in respect of her from the Ministry
of Labour and National Service. The rates at which books
will be stamped are as under : —-
For Officers other than those Normally Employed in
Agriculture
Officers aged 21 years or over.
Employer’s share . . .. . . 9 d. a week.
Employee’s share .. .. .. ,,
Officers between the ages of 18-21 years.
Employer’s share . . . . Sd. ~
Employee’s share .. . . .. B d. ~
For Officers Normally Employed in Agriculture
Officers aged 21 years or over.
Employer’s share .. .. .. Sd. a week.
Employee’s share .. . . .. 3 d. ~
Officers between the ages of 18-21 years.
Employer’s share . . . . . • 2 \d. ~
Employee’s share . . 2 \d. ~
In each case the employee’s share will be deducted from the
officer’s pay, while the employer’s share will be borne by the
Army Council. Officers normally in insurable employment
but holding certificates of exemption, will possess exempt
persons’ books, and these will be stamped at the usual exempt
persons’ rates: —
For Officers not Normally Employed in Agriculture
Officers aged 21 years and over .. 9 d. a week.
Officers between 18-21 years . . .. B d. ~
For Officers Normally Employed in Agriculture
Officers aged 21 years and over . . 3 d. a week.
Officers between 18-21 years . . .. 2 \d. ~
No part of these contributions will be deducted from the pay
of such officers, but will be borne in their entirety by the Army
Council.


Other Ranks
National Health Insurance and Widows’, Orphans’ and
Old Age Contributory Pensions Acts
297. {a) All personnel serving in the ranks of the A.T.S. are
compulsorily insurable under the above Acts, irrespective of
whether they were so insured or not in civil life before enrol-
ment. Save in the case of recruits not finally approved, no
cards will be stamped during service in the ranks of the A.T.S.,
and no deduction for Health Insurance will be made from the
pay of such personnel. A special contribution will be paid in
respect of them direct to the Ministry of Health by the Army
Council. A deduction of s d. a week will, however, be made
from the pay of other ranks of the A.T.S. in respect of insurance
under the Widows’, Orphans’ and Old Age Contributory
Pensions Acts.
( b ) When a recruit is enrolled in the ranks of the A.T.S. the
recruiting officer carrying out the enrolment will ensure that
Part A of Form NS. 124 is completed in respect of, and signed
by her. Any Health and/or Pensions cards handed in by the
recruit (and the recruiting officer should take all possible steps
to ensure that the recruit hands in her cards to him), should
be enclosed in the form (which is of an envelope type), and
the form then forwarded by the recruiting officer, through the
zone recruiting officer, to the O.C. the training unit to which
the recruit is posted. If the recruit is finally approved, the
form, with insurance cards still enclosed, will be forwarded
by the O.C. the training unit to the Officer i/c Records, who,
after completing Part B of the form will forward it, together
with insurance cards, to the Ministry of Health, Insurance
Department, Blackpool, Lancs. If the Officer i/c Records
fails to receive form NS. 124 in respect of any recruit whose
entry into the service is approved and notified, he should,
without delay, request the enrolling recruiting officer con-
cerned to forward NS. 124 in respect of the recruit in question,
with Part A of the form completed as far as is practicable.
If the recruit is to be discharged as not finally approved, the
O.C. the training unit should extract the insurance cards from
Form NS. 124, and, after stamping the contribution card,
should hand this card, together with any other enclosed in
Form NS. 124, to the recruit before she leaves the unit. If,
despite the fact that it is shown in Part A of the form that the
recruit was insured under the National Health Insurance and
Widows’, Orphans’ and Old Age Contributory Pensions Acts
before enrolment, no contribution card is enclosed in the form
when received by the O.C. the training unit, the O.C. should
request the recruit to obtain immediately, and before she


leaves the unit, a temporary contribution card from the nearest
post office, and, when obtained, this card should be stamped
as already directed and handed to the recruit.
Unemployment Insurance
298. {a) All personnel of the A.T.S., irrespective of whether
they were normally in insurable employment or not, will,
while serving in the ranks, be insured under the Unemploy-
ment Insurance Acts in accordance with the terms of Army
Order 5 of 1940. Save in the case of a recruit not finally
approved, unemployment books will not be stamped, but if a
book is in the possession of a recruit at the time of her enrol-
ment, she should hand it in to the recruiting officer. The
recruiting officer will attach the book to Form NS. 124 so
that the book will accompany other documents relating to the
recruit when they are forwarded by the recruiting officer,
through the zone recruiting officer,'to the O.C. the train-
ing unit to which the recruit is posted. If the recruit is
finally approved, the O.C. the training unit will, at the
same time as she forwards Form NS. 124 to the Officer i/c
Records, return the unemployment book either to the Employ-
ment Exchange shown on its cover, or alternatively to the
Employment Exchange nearest to the unit. If a recruit is
to be discharged as not finally approved, the O.C. the train-
ing unit should stamp the book and return it to the recruit
before she leaves the unit. If the recruit states that she was
insured under the Unemployment Insurance Acts before
enrolment, but did not hand in an unemployment book at the
time of her enrolment, and has not since furnished it, she should
be requested by the O.C. the training unit to obtain a
temporary book immediately, and before leaving the unit,
from the Employment Exchange nearest to the unit. When
obtained, this book should be stamped and handed back to the
recruit before she leaves the unit. In all cases where recruits
are not finally approved, the O.C. the training unit should
return -Form NS. 124 (after first extracting any insurance
cards originally enclosed in, or unemployment book attached
to it, either or both of which should be handed to the woman),
to the recruiting officer carrying out enrolment, along with
other documents returned for him to retain for the prescribed
period.
(6) All finally approved personnel will, while serving in the
ranks, have credited to them under the Unemployment Insur-
ance Acts, a contribution at the appropriate rate in respect of
every week for which they receive pay from army funds. No
part of this contribution is deductible from the pay of such
personnel. When a member of the A.T.S. serving in the ranks
4* —(1744)


is discharged either to civil life or-to officer rank, Form U.I/3Xs
will be rendered to the Ministry of Labour and National Service
in respect of her by the Officer i/c Records.
(c) It is emphasized, in connection with A.T.S. recruits who
are not finally approved, that no effort should be spared to
ensure that the insurance formalities detailed in the foregoing
instructions, are completed before a recruit leaves the training
unit, in order that subsequent complications, probably involv-
ing reference back to the unit, may be avoided.
5. MATERNITY BENEFIT
299. Officers on the Unemployed List [see para. 64) and
auxiliaries discharged under Appendix VI, para. 11, are eligible
for maternity benefit, provided that they have been insured
for the requisite period and the requisite number of contri-
butions has been paid for them.
6. DISABILITY AWARDS
300. An auxiliary who is certified to be disabled by a disa-
bility attributable to military service in the war, may be
granted a disability pension at the appropriate rate as shown
in the Ministry of Pensions Royal Warrant (June 1940).
7. RECOVERY OF PUBLIC CLAIMS
301 . The pay, non-effective pay, and all other emoluments
granted to an officer or auxiliary shall be held liable to be
stopped to meet any public claim that may be made against
her, any regimental debt or any debt to the N.A.A.F.I. that
may be due from her, provided that restrictions of cash issues
are governed by the following rules
[a) If an auxiliary is in debt either through her own mis-
conduct or by incurring stoppages due to the pubhc, e.g.
through loss or destruction of clothing or equipment, the
issues of pay shall be restricted, she is left with
a residue of s d. a day.
(i b ) Where an auxiliary’s account is in debt through no
fault of her own [e.g. by excessive issues of pay accepted in
good faith), the issues of pay shall be restricted, provided that
she is left with a residue of Bd. a day. In such cases, should
she incur further debts through her own misconduct, etc.,
as in sub-para, (a) above, issues of pay shall be further re-
stricted provided, however, that she is left with a residue of
s d. a day.


(c) In the case of an auxiliary who voluntarily allots an
amount which entails taking part of the War Pay admissible,
and whose account becomes in debt through no fault of her
own as in sub-para. \b) above, the issues of pay shall be re-
stricted, provided that she is left with a residue of Ad. a day,
in addition to the unallotted balance of her War Pay. Should
she incur further debt, through her own misconduct, etc., as
in sub-para. ( a ) above, issues of pay shall be further restricted
provided that she is left with a residue of sd. a day.
Barrack Damages
302. A N.C.O. i/c a room or quarter will bring to notice
at once, any losses or damages occurring to any premises in
which auxiliaries are quartered, so that responsibility may be
placed on the individuals liable. (Army Act, Section 138 (4).)
Where it is not possible to assess against an individual the
amount of damage or losses, a general charge will be made
against the auxiliaries concerned. (Army Act, Section 138
(4a).)
The procedure for effecting recovery when a general charge
is made is as laid down in A.C.Is, A C.O. will at once give
notice to the assessing authority of any items against which
it is intended to appeal. If the charges are maintained by the
assessing authority and the C.O. wishes to appeal further, the
case will be submitted through the usual channels to higher
authority.
SECTION X.—MEDICAL ATTENDANCE, HOSPITAL
TREATMENT, SURGICAL APPLIANCES, DEN-
TAL TREATMENT, GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
1. ATTENDANCE AND ADMISSION TO
HOSPITAL
303. The medical treatment of serving officers and auxiliaries
will be governed by Regulations for the Medical Services of
the Army, Section 111.
Officers
304. Officers may receive any necessary medical attention
or hospital treatment available from military sources, or from


civil hospitals under the Ministry of Health Emergency
Scheme, or corresponding schemes in Scotland or Northern
Ireland, subject to the recovery of hospital charges as laid
down in Allowance Regulations. Where for any reason such
treatment is not available, the officer may claim a refund of
reasonable and necessary expenses privately incurred, only
if the disability in respect of which treatment was obtained,
is accepted by the War Office as attributable to military service.
305. Where an officer who is suffering from an infectious
malady is admitted to a civil hospital (military hospital
accommodation not being available), in order to obviate
danger to other officers, auxiliaries or other military personnel,
the cost of her treatment and maintenance may be defrayed
by the public, subject to the recovery of hospital charges as
laid down in Allowance Regulations.
306. When an officer at a station employs a civilian medical
practitioner to attend on an auxiliary, she will at once report
the circumstances (forwarding a certificate regarding the
nature of the illness), for the information of the unit com-
mander and of the officer in medical charge. The M.O. of
the unit is authorized to visit all cases of sickness occurring
in a unit, to enable him or her to take the necessary sanitary
precautions.
Auxiliaries
307. Auxiliaries are eligible at all times to receive medical
attendance or hospital treatment at the expense of public
funds, subject to the recovery of hospital charges in such cases
as are provided in Allowance Regulations. They will normally
be treated from military sources, or in a civil hospital under
the Ministry of Health Emergency Scheme.
308. Where treatment from military sources or from a
civil hospital under the Ministry of Health Emergency Scheme
is not available, a reasonable cost of necessary treatment from
another civil hospital or civilian medical practitioner will be
met from army funds. Auxiliaries should be warned that the
cost of treatment on a higher standard ( e.g . in a private
nursing home), than would be provided for an auxiliary of
corresponding rank in a military or military families’ hospital,
will not be regarded as reasonable. In every case where
treatment is obtained from civil sources, the auxiliary con-
cerned should show her pass to the civil medical practitioner
concerned, and should report the fact to her C.O. at the first
opportunity; the C.O. will report immediately, through the
O.C. the unit to the D.D.M.S. of the command in which the


treatment is being given, in order that arrangements may be
made for the Army to undertake responsibility for such treat-
ment at the earliest opportunity.
2. SURGICAL APPLIANCES
309. An officer who requires a surgical appliance (including
an artificial- limb), may be supplied with it under the same
conditions as are laid down for officers of the Army, in Regula-
tions for the Medical Services of the Army. Adjustments,
repairs or replacements will be effected under the same con-
ditions.
310. Auxiliaries who, in consequence of disabilities which
are regarded by the War Office as attributable to military
service, require surgical appliances, will be supplied with them
in accordance with the provisions laid down for a regular
soldier in Regulations for the Medical Services of the Army.
Adjustments, repairs and replacements will be effected under
the same conditions.
3. SPECTACLES
Officers
311. In no circumstances will officers be supplied with
spectacles at the public expense.
Auxiliaries
312. Auxiliaries will be eligible for the supply, repair or
replacement of spectacles at the expense of army funds, under
the same conditions as are laid down for soldiers in Regulations
for the Medical Services of the Army. The effect of these
regulations is to allow two pairs of spectacles in Mark 111 frames
to be supplied to all auxiliaries who need them. The provision
of spectacles is subject to the condition that the auxiliary’s
vision can be so improved by their use as to render her an
efficient auxiliary.
Where spectacles are accidentally broken or damaged on
military duty, they may be replaced or repaired at the public
expense, but where the need for repair or replacement arises
in circumstances due to the auxiliary’s own fault, the C.O.
will be responsible for placing the auxiliary under stoppages
of pay to meet the cost, if she considers the circumstances
justify such action. (Cases should be dealt with under
Section 138 (4) of the Army Act.) New lenses will also be
issued when these become necessary owing to the unsuitability
of those originally issued.


313. Demands for spectacles from the Optical Appliance
Depot are made on A.F. I 1240 (War). Demands for spectacles
from the local representative of the National Eye Service are
made on A.F. I 1214 (War). It is essential that on completion
A.Fs. I 1214 (War) are forwarded to the War Office at once.
4. DENTAL TREATMENT AND DENTURES
Inspections
314. Os.C. units receiving recruits direct on enrolment, are
responsible that all recruits, with their medical history sheets,
are sent to the dental officer for inspection within one week of
their joining the unit. For instructions with regard to dental
treatment cards (A.F. I 5033), see para. 362.
315. The attention of all ranks should be drawn to the
necessity for taking the greatest care of the teeth, in order to
avoid needless suffering and inefficiency. Dental officers will
instruct other ranks in the care of the mouth and teeth, both
by lectures and demonstrations, when they come up for
inspections and treatment. Where a dental officer is of the
opinion that an auxiliary is not taking sufficient care of her
teeth, he will bring the matter to the notice of the O.C. the
unit to which the auxiliary belongs, who will take steps to see
that the neglect is remedied.
Dental Treatment and Supply, Renewal and Repair of
Dentures
316. (a) Officers and other ranks will be eligible for dental
treatment, and for the supply, renewal or repair of dentures
at the expense of army funds, under the same conditions as
are laid down in Regulations for the Medical Services of the
Army, for officers and soldiers.
(6) The effect of these regulations is to allow officers and
other ranks to receive all necessary dental treatment (other
than in the case of officers, the supply, renewal or repair of
dentures), free from army sources, but in the event of treatment
from army sources not being available for an officer, a refund
of expenses privately incurred, will be admissible only where the
dental disability is attributable to military service, the decision
as to attributability being made by the War Office. Where
artificial dentures are necessary for efficient mastication, they
will be supplied, renewed or repaired for other ranks, at the
public expense, provided that the other rank’s services are
being retained and that the dental condition has not been
brought about through her own fault. Approval, to be
obtained by a dental officer, is necessary in all cases.


Dental Treatment on Leave
317. An auxiliary on leave, who requires emergency dental
treatment, must, whenever practicable, apply to the nearest
Military, Naval or Royal Air Force hospital or dental centre.
If she resides more than two miles from such hospital or dental
centre, she may apply to a civilian dental practitioner, to whom
she will show her pass ; the dental practitioner will be paid only
for strictly emergency treatment and at the rates admissible
under the National Health Insurance Act (Dental Benefit
Regulations). An auxiliary will at once report the employ-
ment of the civilian practitioner to her C. 0., and the practi-
tioner will submit his claim for payment on A.F. O 1667, and
forward it to the D.D.M.S. of the command in which the
auxiliary is temporarily residing. In no other circumstances
will expenses of dental treatment privately incurred be defrayed
from army funds.
5. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
318. M.Os. or civilian medical practitioners will be detailed
for A.T.S. units, sub-units or detachments as considered
necessary by D.Ds.M.S. of commands.
319. Daily sick parades will be held at an hour to be
arranged mutually between the M.O. and the O.C. the unit or
sub-unit concerned.
320. Where a medical inspection room is provided, officers
and auxiliaries reporting sick, as well as those requiring
examination for other purposes, will be examined there. If
on detachment where no medical inspection room is available,
or if the officer or auxiliary is too unfit to go to the medical
inspection room, she will be visited under arrangements made
by the M.O.
321. All cases of injury or sickness will be entered in the
“ Sick Report ” (A.F. B 256), which will be prepared in
duplicate. "Both copies will accompany the officer or auxiliary
to the medical inspection room, or be made available, should
the officer or auxiliary be on detachment.
The M.O. in charge will decide how the case is to be disposed
of, e.g. by being sent to hospital or treated in quarters. The
M.O. will, in all cases, complete A.F. B 256 and forward it
immediately to the C.O. of the officer or auxiliary.
A.B. 27 (admission and discharge book) will invariably be
maintained at the medical inspection room with the details of
all cases reported or treated. If the disability is temporary
and can be adequately treated by the M.O. at the station, it


will be dealt with there. If hospital treatment is necessary,
the case will be sent to a military or military families’ hospital,
if accommodation for female patients is available therein, or
to the nearest civil hospital which is functioning under the
Emergency Medical Scheme of the Ministry of Health.
322. (a) Auxiliaries sent to hospital will be accompanied
by a N.C.O. of their unit, who will take with her A.F. B 256.
{b) An auxiliary admitted to hospital will take with her,
in addition to the clothing which she is wearing, her A.B. 64,
her devotional books, hair brush, comb, face flannel, tooth
brush, blacking brushes, clothes brush, canvas shoes, great-
coat, respirator and steel helmet. The remainder of her kit
will be taken into store by her unit or sub-unit, and monies
due to her will be credited to her account.
323. While in hospital, auxiliaries are paid by the hospital
authorities. When the hospital is situated in the same military
area or division as the unit, auxiliaries in hospital will be
visited once a week by an officer of the unit to which they
belong. The visiting officer will ascertain that the patient is
receiving the pay to which she is entitled. An officer will be
allowed access at a suitable time for this purpose.
324. In order to deal with cases of auxiliaries sick in
hospital (or in hospital on the “ Y ” List), requiring disciplinary
action while in hospital, the divisional or area commander,
under the direction of command headquarters will provide for
the affiliation of hospitals to the most convenient A.T.S.
company. The divisional or area commander will inform
hospitals of the name and address of the A.T.S. company
selected for this duty. Applications to these A.T.S-. companies
will be made by the hospitals direct. A.T.S. officers carrying
out disciplinary action with regard to “ Y ” List personnel
will inform the Officer i/c Records of any action taken and of
any charge not dealt with at the time of the auxiliary’s
discharge from hospital.
325. (a) A M.O. may employ on light duties without extra
pay, patients whom he or she considers able to aid the hospital
establishment.
(6) When an auxiliary temporarily employed in a hospital
commits an offence, the O.C. the hospital will at once report
the case to the O.C. the unit or sub-unit concerned for
disposal.
6. MEDICAL HISTORY SHEETS
326. For medical history sheets (A.F. B 178 a), see para. 361.


7. MEDICAL BOARDS
327. (a) The instructions contained in Regulations for the
Medical Services of the Army, 1938, Section IX, and in King’s
Regulations, with regard to invaliding, the disposal of mental
cases and of cases of tuberculosis, as amended from time to
time, will apply to officers and auxiliaries of the A.T.S.
{b) Officers and auxiliaries will be brought before medical
boards when this course is necessary, in the same way as
military officers and soldiers. If available, a woman medical
officer of the Royal Army Medical Corps will be a member of
the board. The attention of unit commanders is drawn to
paras. 208 and 209 defining the responsibility of Os.C. units
and M.Os. in these matters.
8. VACCINATION AND INOCULATION
328. Vaccination and protective inoculation against tetanus
and the enteric group of fevers is on a voluntary basis, but
Os.C. units, educational and training establishments, and
medical officers i/c troops, will at all times impress upon
officers and other ranks the importance of these measures.
Every endeavour will be made to ensure that, as far as possible,
all ranks serving at home and abroad receive protection against
these diseases.
9. NOTIFICATION OF INFECTIOUS OR
CONTAGIOUS DISEASES, ETC.
329. A notice will be posted where it can be read by all
ranks, to the effect that the following conditions will be imme-
diately notified by auxiliaries to their platoon commander
(i) Suspicion of contagious or infectious diseases.
(ii) Contact with contagious or infectious diseases.
(iii) Pregnancy.
(iv) Accidents occurring on or off duty, however trivial
they may appear.
10. DISCHARGE FOR PREGNANCY
330. [a) Auxiliaries becoming pregnant will be discharged on
family grounds as soon as possible after the pregnancy is three
months advanced. The discharge will in all cases be supported
by a medical certificate from a R.A.M.C. officer or from a
civilian medical practitioner employed as officer in medical


charge of troops. Examination by a woman officer will be
arranged if the auxiliary so desires.
The certificate will be in the following form :
I have to-day medically examined (Coy Group)
and certify that she is pregnant. In my opinion the pregnancy
is about weeks advanced and the probable date of
confinement is
Date of Enrolment
(Signature M. 0.)
An auxiliary who shows evidence of pregnancy but refuses
to consent to a medical examination may be ordered to
undergo such an examination. In no circumstances should
the question of pregnancy be raised when ordering the auxiliary
to undergo medical examination. Should she persist in her
refusal the auxiliary may be discharged forthwith “ services
no longer required ”,
(b) Auxiliaries who, at the time when they are ascertained
to be three or more months pregnant or to have been recently
confined, are suffering from a disease or disability which would
have led to their discharge on medical grounds, will be dealt
with under the ordinary discharge regulations as though
they were not pregnant, or had not recently been confined.
11. COURTS OF INQUIRY—ACCIDENTS AND
INJURIES
331. (a) When an officer or auxiliary, whether on or off
duty, is injured (except by wounds received in action), a
certificate on A.F. B 117 will be forwarded by the M.O. i/c the
case, to the injured person’s C.O. as soon as possible after the
date on which the patient is placed on the sick list, whether in
quarters or in hospital. In the case of injuries which are
immediately fatal, a report of the court of inquiry proceedings
referred to in sub-para, (c) below will take the place of
A.F. B 117.
[h] If the M.O. certifies that the injury is of a trivial
character, unlikely to cause permanent ill effects, no court of
inquiry need be held, unless considered necessary under sub-
para. ( c ) (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v). In any event, however,
A.F. B 117 will be completed and, in the case of officers,
forwarded through the usual channels to the Under-Secretary
of State, The War Office, a copy being retained at unit head-
quarters. For an auxiliary, A.F. B 117 will be forwarded to
the Officer i/c Records for custody with the enrolment form,
after the necessary entry, stating whether she was on duty,


and whether she was to blame, has been made by the C.O. in
the medical history sheet.
(c) In the following circumstances, a court of inquiry will
be assembled to investigate the circumstances :
(i) If the injury is fatal or certified by the M.O. to be of
a serious nature. Where an inquest is held, a copy
of a newspaper report of the proceedings will be
attached to the court of inquiry proceedings.
(ii) If, in the opinion of the C. 0., doubt exists regarding
the cause of the injury.
(iii) If, in the opinion of the C. 0., doubt exists whether
injured person was on or off duty at the time she
received the injury.
(iv) If, for any reason, it is desirable thoroughly to
investigate the causes of the injur}? - .
(v) If the injury was caused through the fault of some
other person.
The court will consist of one officer as president, with two
warrant officers or senior N.C.Os. as members.
(i d) The court of inquiry will not give an opinion, but the
C.O. of the injured person will record her opinion on the
evidence, stating if the injured person was on duty and whether
she was to blame. When no evidence of the circumstances
attending the injury, beyond that of the injured person, is
available, it should be so stated in the proceedings. The
proceedings will be sent to the divisional or area commander
for confirmation. After confirmation the M.O. will, in all
cases of accident and injury to officers, record his or her
opinion in the proceedings as to the effect of the injury on the
officer’s service. The proceedings will then be forwarded by
the C.O. through the usual channels to the Under-Secretary of
State, The War Office, a copy being retained at unit head-
quarters. For an auxiliary, a record will be made in the
medical history sheet (A.F. B 178 a) by the C. 0., that a court
of inquiry has been held, and will record if the auxiliary was
on duty and whether she was to blame. The medical history
sheet will then be passed to the M. 0., who will record his or her
opinion of the effect of the injury on the auxiliary’s service.
The proceedings of the court of inquiry will be forwarded
to the Officer i/c Records for enclosure with the auxiliary’s
enrolment form (A.F. E Slip), except in the case of a court of
inquiry under sub-para, (c) (v) when the proceedings, together
with a copy of the medical opinion regarding the effect of the
injury on the woman’s service, will be' forwarded without
delay to the War Office in the first instance.
(e) When an officer or auxiliary, not on duty, is injured in


any way, by or through the fault of a civilian or civilians, and
receives compensation from such civilian or civilians, in lieu
of any further claim, this will be recorded in the proceedings
of the court of inquiry.
(/) The proceedings of courts of inquiry are privileged and
no disclosures will be made therefrom, without War Office
authority.
SECTION XI.—CORRESPONDENCE, GENERAL
INSTRUCTIONS, ORDERS, RECORDS, DOCU-
MENTS, ETC.
1. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS ON
CORRESPONDENCE
332. (a) An officer will only in exceptional circumstances
refer to higher authority matters with which she has power to
deal. Senior officers will impress on their subordinates the
desirability of dealing promptly with correspondence, and will
suppress any tendency to unnecessary correspondence.
( h ) An officer is responsible for the accuracy of documents
submitted by her. When corresponding with higher authority
she will satisfy herself from her local knowledge that the facts
as stated are correct, and she will add any observations she
considers necessary to enable a decision to be reached. In
those cases where it is required she will record her definite
opinion and recommendation.
333. (a) Correspondence will usually be dealt with as
indicated below :
(i) Important matters, requiring the individual opinion
of every officer comprised in the chain of command,
will be passed through sub-unit commanders to
unit commanders and through divisional and area
commanders to the G.0.C.-in-C., and, if necessary,
to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office,
(ii) Routine matters, where the intermediate officers
need not be informed, and on which direct com-
munication is authorized, will be sent direct to the
authorhy who has power to dispose of the case,
(iii) Instructional units and A.T.S. training centres will
communicate directly with the Under-Secretary


of 'State, The War Office, on matters connected
with training. Administrative matters will go
through the usual channelf.
(b) As no rules can be laid down classifying correspondence
under (a) (i) and (ii), above, the responsibility for deciding the
course to be adopted will rest with the officer originating the
correspondence.
334. ( a ) The A.T.S. sub-unit commander will submit
recommendations in respect of leave, promotion, posting,
good conduct badges, proficiency pay, discharge, release to
the Unemployed List (Other Ranks), muster, change of
employment or any other questions affecting the military
duty of women serving in a military formation to the O.C. the
military unit to which the woman is attached. The O.C.
the military unit will forward recommendations which cannot
be dealt with on the spot, or in respect of which his view differs
from that of the sub-unit commander, through the usual
military channels, with his remarks.
(b) If a recommendation on one of the above-mentioned
subjects is initiated by the O.C. the military unit, he will
obtain the written recommendation of the sub-unit com-
mander, and if the subject is one which cannot be dealt with
on the spot or in respect of which their views differ, he will
forward his recommendations through the usual military
channels, and will attach the remarks of the sub-unit com-
mander.
(c) If the recommendations concern promotion, discharge
or release to the Unemployed List (Other Ranks), or if the
views of the O.C. the military unit and the A.T.S. sub-unit
commander differ, the matter will not be settled without
reference to a formation at which an A.T.S. officer of a rank
corresponding to field rank is serving.
(d) Questions affecting the moral and physical well-being
of A.T.S. personnel will pass from sub-unit commanders to
unit commanders A.T.S., and thence by normal military
channels to command headquarters or to the War Office.
335. (a) “ Protected ” documents (see para. 342) and
registered letters received by a unit or sub-unit will be opened
by an officer, and other official letters will, as a rule, be opened
by an officer, but may be opened by a warrant officer or senior
N.C.O. so authorized by the commander concerned.
(b) A.B. 193 (Register of Letters) will be maintained by all
units and sub-units. An accurate filing system will also be
maintained in every office.
336. (a) Letters will be as brief as possible, and will, so far
as practicable, be answered on the day of receipt. In any


event, action will be taken on the day of receipt, to enable any
communication to be replied to at an early date.
(6) Each subject will* be treated in a separate letter, the
subject being briefly indicated in the upper left-hand corner
of the letter, thus : discipline, equipment, transfer, etc.
Paragraphs will be numbered. If documents are to be sent
with the letter, the expression “ attached ” will be used, and
the attached documents fastened to the letter.
(c) In order to avoid delay in dealing with the posting of
auxiliaries, all correspondence relating thereto, will give the
number, rank, name, employment and grade (if any) Of the
auxiliary concerned.
(i i) The communication to which a reply is being sent will
be referred to by its reference number and date.
337. (a) Letters will be in memorandum form, as shown in
the following example :
Subject Office ref. No
The Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office,
Whitehall, S.W.I.
With reference to War Office letter No dated
Place Signature and rank.
Date Appointment.
(&) Correspondence addressed to individuals unconnected
with the Army will be dealt with as in civil life.
( c ) A memorandum from a unit to a higher authority will
be signed by the O.C. the unit or her deputy in her absence.
338. Personal documents such as enrolment forms, medical
history sheets, will be despatched by registered post, and an
acknowledgment of receipt on A.F. B 198 should be obtained.
339. All envelopes containing periodical returns will be
inscribed “ returns ” in the top left-hand corner.
340. Envelopes enclosing letters for command, divisional
or area headquarters, or for heads of services whose offices are
affiliated to these headquarters will be addressed as below, and
not to a specific branch :
Headquarters,
Northern Command,
Home Forces.
341. Demands, indents and correspondence dealing with


the subjects mentioned below will be addressed direct as
shown
Food.
Fuel and light.
Transport.
Custody of buildings.
Appropriation of buildings.
Equipment of buildings.
Contingent allowance.
Clothing, equipment and
stores.
To Officer i/c Supplies.
Officer i/c Barracks.
Officer i/c Transport.
Officer i/c Barracks.
Officer i/c Barracks, or
Sub-area Quartering
Commandant (S. A.Q.C.),
in the case of requisi-
tioned buildings.
Officer i/c Barracks.
Command Paymaster.
A.D.0.5., D.A.D.O.S. or
C. 0.0.
2. SECRET, SECURITY AND CONFIDENTIAL
DOCUMENTS
342. Documents containing information which, for military
or administrative reasons, it is desirable to safeguard will be
regarded as protected documents and will be classified, accord-
ing to the degree of protection required, as “ most secret ",
“ secret ”, “ security ”, “ confidential ” or “ not to be
published ”, and marked accordingly. The term “ document ”
includes books and pamphlets, proceedings, records, notes and
reports, lists and catalogues, correspondence, maps, plans and
diagrams.
343. Officers are personally responsible for the grading of
protected documents ; grading too highly results in over-
stocking categories and lessens the value of the grading.
Instructions regarding the type of documents to be included
in each category and the methods of handling protected
documents are contained in A.C.I. 1579 of 1941 and General
Staff pamphlet “ Instructions for the Security of Documents,
Information, etc.”.
344. ( a) “ Most secret ” and “ secret ” documents sent by
post or by messenger outside a military office will be enclosed
in two envelopes, the inner envelope only being wax sealed.
The outer envelope will contain only the address and will
not be marked with the category of the document. The inner
envelope will be marked “ most secret ” or “ secret ” as the
case may be. ” Security ” and ” confidential ” documents
will also be enclosed in two envelopes which need not be wax
sealed. The inner envelope only will be marked " security ”
or “ confidential ” as the case may be.


( h) “ Most secret ”, “ secret ”, ” security ” and “ con-
fidential ” documents sent by post will be registered, but
" confidential ” correspondence of a personal or disciplinary
nature need not be registered unless the sender considers it is
necessary.
[ c ) A receipt form (A.F. Al6or if more convenient a detach-
able slip at the foot of the document), will be enclosed with
every “ most secret ” document for completion by the
addressee and returned to the sender. Receipts for “ secret ”
documents will only be required when it is important to know
that the addressee has received the documents without delay.
Receipts for “ security ” and “ confidential ” and " not to be
published ” documents will not normally be required.
[d) When a “ most secret ” document is sent by messenger
a temporary receipt will be obtained in A.B. 432. A temporary
receipt in A.B. 432 will also be obtained for “ secret ” docu-
ments sent by a messenger in cases where a receipt on A.F. A 16
or on a printed slip is required by the sender.
[e) “ Most secret ”, “ secret ”, “ security ” and confidential
documents will be registered in a separate A.B. 193 (Register
of Letters) which will be kept under lock and key. Reference
numbers and dates of issue and receipt will be entered in
A.B. 193, but the subject of the protected document will not
be entered.
345. ( a ) Information contained in a protected document
will only be disclosed to those whose duties it affects. Pro-
tected documents will never be studied in the presence of
persons not entitled to see them, nor will they be left exposed
during the absence of the holder.
(6) A protected document will not be quoted or referred to
in any document of a lower classification than itself, except
that a receipt referring to the code reference number only need
not be given any protected category.
(c) Protected documents will not be copied, nor will extracts
be made therefrom without the prior written authority of the
initiating or issuing authority.
346. ( a) “ Most secret ”, " secret ” and " confidential ” docu-
ments will be regarded as on the personal charge of the officer
to whom issued or reported. She will be responsible for their
safe custody and for seeing that the appropriate circulation
is given to the document amongst those under her.
( b) “ Security ” documents will be regarded as on the charge
of the officer i/c the formation, establishment or unit to
which issued, and she will be responsible for their safe custody
and for seeing that the appropriate circulation is given to the
document amongst those under her.


347. (a) The loss of any protected documents, other than
“ not to be published ” documents, must immediately be
reported in writing, direct to the Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office, and also through the normal channels to the
G.0.C.-in-C.
(6) In no circumstances whatever will a protected document,
other than “ not to be published ” documents, be destroyed
unless and until instructions have been received from the
issuing authority for this to be done.
(c) When protected documents, other than " not to be
published ” documents, are to be destroyed, they will be
burnt under the supervision of the responsible officer, and
a certificate of destruction will be rendered to the issuing
authority.
3. RECORDS
348. The orders of a unit will be divided into two parts,
Part I and Part II : Part I Orders will deal with training,
parades and matters which do not affect an auxiliary’s pay,
service or documents, except that the award and forfeiture of
good conduct badges to which pay is not attached, will be
published in Part I Orders.
349. (a) Part I Orders are published by a unit daily, or as
necessary. Copies should be available in the officers’ mess, the
orderly room, the Serjeants’ mess, other ranks’ mess, the
recreation rooms and for all outlying detachments. Each
issue of Part I Orders will be numbered consecutively,
beginning on Ist January of each year, and each item will be
given a serial number. An example of Part I Orders is to be
found in Appendix XII.
( b ) After a lapse of one year, any unit order of a per-
manent nature may be removed from the file of Part I Orders,
and entered in the permanent order book (S.O. Book 127).
These permanent orders will, if it is considered necessary, be
incorporated in Standing Orders, the original unit order being
destroyed.
350. (a) Part II Orders will be headed either Part II Orders
(Officers) or Part II Orders (Other Ranks). For instructions
with regard to Part II Orders (Officers) see para. 55.
(&) Part ll* Orders (Other Ranks) which are published as
and when necessary, deal with matters which affect an
auxiliary’s pay, service or documents, and will be framed in
the words in which the entry is to be made on her record of
service. Every circumstance that affects an auxiliary’s
service or pay, including proficiency or tradeswomen’s rates


of pay, will be published in Part II Orders, immediately.
Names of auxiliaries will be published in alphabetical order
under each sub-heading in Part II Orders.
(c) Four copies of Part II Orders (Other Ranks) will be
sent to the Officer i/c Records, and three copies will be sent to
the Regimental Paymaster, as and when issued.
(d) Any casualty affecting an auxiliary who is attached to
another unit, will be published in that unit’s Part II Orders,
and a certified extract will be forwarded to the O.C. the unit
on whose strength the auxiliary is actually held, for republica-
tion in Part II Orders of the latter unit. Similarly, a certified
extract of any casualty published in Part II Orders of the
auxiliary’s parent unit [e.g. promotion) will be forwarded
to the O.C. the unit to which the auxiliary is attached, for
publication in Part II Orders of that unit.
(e) Each issue of Part II Orders will be numbered con-
secutively, beginning on the Ist January of each year, and the
number and date of issue of the previous Part II Order will be
entered on the following issue.
351. Each item in Part II Orders will be given a serial
number, and, as far as possible, entries will be grouped and
published under appropriate sub-headings. All copies of
Part II Orders will be signed in manuscript by an officer.
352. Officers must realize the importance Of accuracy in
compiling their Part II Orders. On the correct information
supplied to the Regimental Paymaster and the Officer i/c
Records depends the correct issue of pay to the auxiliary
by the Paymaster, and the accurate recording of her service
by the Officer i/c Records. Examples of entries to be made in
Part II Orders will be found in Appendix XII.
4. ENQUIRIES REGARDING AUXILIARIES
353. ( a ) The address of a serving or discharged auxiliary,
or her place of service, will not be furnished to any civilian
unless required in due course of the law. All applications for
addresses will be forwarded to the Officer i/c Records.
( р) Enquiries from relatives or friends regarding the state
of health of a serving auxiliary will be replied to without delay
by the responsible officer, who will give the best available
information, but the nature of the illness will not be stated
if it is such that the auxiliary might reasonably wish it not to
be disclosed.
( с) If the auxiliary enquired for belongs to another unit,
the application will be forwarded without delay to the O.C.
the unit concerned, and the applicant informed accordingly.


(d) Should the auxiliary enquired for be dead, the date and
place of death may be given. As in the case of illness [(b)
above), discretion should be exercised in disclosing the cause of
death.
(e) An extract from her official records will not be furnished
to a discharged auxiliary, except under instructions from the
War Office.
5. RECORDS. OFFICERS’ SERVICES
354. Each officer, on appointment to a commission, will
complete A.F. B 199 a in duplicate, will sign both copies and
hand them to her C.O. The original copy will be forwarded
to the War Office, where it will be kept up-to-date. The
duplicate copy will be retained and kept up-to-date by the
O.C. the unit on the strength of which the officer is borne (see
paras. 52-57).
6. RETURNS
A.F. B 158 (War) Monthly Return of Officers
355. A nominal roll of all officers who have been on the
strength of, or attached, to an A.T.S. unit during the month,
will be prepared on A.F. B 158 (War) up to 1200 hours on the
last day of each month, and despatched by 1700 hours on the
same day—one copy direct to each of the following :
(i) The Under-Secretary of State, The War Office (A.G. 16),
Gloucester Road, Cheltenham.
(ii) Command Headquarters.
(iii) Divisional or Area Headquarters.
A.F. B 158B Monthly Return of Cadets
356. A strength return of cadets in training will be pre-
pared on A.F. B 158 b monthly, up to 1200 hours on the
Saturday nearest the last day of the month (actual dates for
compilation will be notified from time to time by the War
Office, A.G. Stats.), and despatched by 1700 hours on the
same day, by the 0.C., O.C.T.U.—one copy direct to each of
the following :
(i) The Under-Secretary of State, The War Office (A.G.
Stats.) Gloucester Road, Cheltenham.
(ii) Command Headquarters.
(iii) Divisional or Area Headquarters.


Strength Returns
357. [a) Strength returns of all units will be rendered in
the form required by the Officer i/c Records by Os.C. units
weekly, in accordance with instructions issued by the command
concerned and by the Officer i/c Records.
(6) All training units will render weekly a strength return
up to 1200 hours on Saturday on proforma A.T.S. R.D.l —one
copy to each of the following :
(i) The Under-Secretary of State, The War Office (A.G. 1 B),
Gloucester Road, Cheltenham.
(ii) The Under-Secretary of State, The War Office (A.G.
Stats.), Gloucester Road, Cheltenham.
(iii) The Under-Secretary of State, The War Office (A.G. 16),
Gloucester Road, Cheltenham.
(iv) Command Headquarters.
(v) Officer i/c Records.
(vi) Regimental Paymaster.
7. AUXILIARIES’ SERVICES
358. An auxiliary when finally approved and enrolled will,
on being posted to a training centre, be assigned an army
number by the Officer i/c Records. She will retain the army
number originally allotted to her throughout her service in
the ranks, irrespective of any subsequent posting, etc. An
ex-auxiliary on re-enrolment, will resume the army number
which she previously bore. In all documents and corre-
spondence relating to an auxiliary her army number will pre-
cede her name. An auxiliary promoted to warrant rank will
retain her army number.
359. The service of each auxiliary will be recorded on her
original enrolment and on A.F. B 103 (service and casualty
sheet). The original enrolment will be retained by the
Officer i/c Records and kept up-to-date from information
supplied in Part II Orders {.see para. 350). A.F. B 103 will
be retained by-the unit or sub-unit commander, and will be
kept up-to-date by her from entries published in Part II
Orders. When an auxiliary is posted or attached to another
unit, the following personal documents will be forwarded
by her unit or sub-unit commander to her new unit ;
Service and Casualty Sheet—A.F. B 103.
Field Conduct Sheet—A.F. B 122.
Medical Flistory Sheet—A.F. B 178 a.
Dental Treatment Card —-A.F. I 5033.


8. SOLDIERS’ SERVICE AND PAY BOOK
(A.B. 64)
360. This book is divided into two parts. Part I and Part 11.
It will be issued to an auxiliary on joining the A.T.S., and
Part I will be completed. It will always be in the auxiliary’s
possession, whether at home or abroad. The entries in A.B. 64
Part I will be verified annually as soon after Ist January as
possible, with A.F. B 103. Any alteration that only appears
in A.B. 64 will be checked and, if found correct, will be imme-
diately published in Part II Orders and entered in A.F. B 103
of the auxiliary concerned. All entries in Part II of A.B. 64
must be initialled by the officer making the payment or
stoppage of pay.
9. MEDICAL HISTORY SHEET
361. ( a ) A medical history sheet (A.F. B 178 A) will be
held for every auxiliary. The following entries in the medical
history sheet will be made by O.C. unit or sub-unit : —Army
number, date and place of employment, records of court of
inquiry on injuries.
( b) Medical history sheets will be kept in the medical
inspection room ; where there is no medical inspection room,
they will be kept in the military hospital.
(c) When an auxiliary is posted to unit, her medical
history sheet, which will be obtained from the medical in-
spection room or hospital, will accompany her documents.
{d) Medical history sheets are confidential and privileged
documents ; no disclosures will be made therefrom without
War Office authority.
10. DENTAL TREATMENT CARDS
362. (a) Dental treatment cards (A.F. I 5033) will be
kept at the dental centre at which the auxiliary attends
for inspection and treatment.
(&) On the posting of an auxiliary to another station, the
O.C. the unit will obtain the dental treatment card from the
dental officer and place it with the auxiliary’s other documents.
On the auxiliary’s arrival at the new station, the dental
treatment card will be sent to the dental officer responsible
for the dental treatment of the A.T.S. at that station ; or
where there is no dental officer appointed for the purpose, it
will be attached to the auxiliary’s medical history sheet.


363. On the promotion to commissioned rank, discharge,
absence without leave in excess of 21 days, or death of an
auxiliary, the O.C. the unit will send the auxiliary’s medical
history sheet to the dental officer, who will complete Table VIII
of that sheet and return it, together with the dental treatment
card attached.
11. OFFENCE REPORTS
364. {a) Offence reports (A.F. B 2069) and charge sheets
(A.F. B 252) showing the disposal of an accused auxiliary by
the C. 0., and by company, etc., commanders, respectively,
will be preserved. Offence reports will be pasted as necessary
into a guard book (A.B. 22).
(6) Entries in A.Fs. B 252 and certified copies of A.Fs.
B 2069 will be compared weekly with the entries in the field
conduct sheets. When the entries in A.Fs. B 252 have been
checked with the field conduct sheets {see para. 368 (/)) Os.C.
units may authorize the destruction of A.Fs. B 252 and copies
of A.Fs. B 2069, provided that they are more than a year old.
12. FIELD CONDUCT SHEETS
Officers
365. When an officer has been convicted by court-martial
or awarded a summary punishment under Section 47 (2) of the
Army Act, a field conduct sheet (A.F. B 122) will be prepared
for her and the necessary entry made therein. Any entry
will be initialled by the officer making it. The A.Fs. B 122 for
officers will be kept as confidential documents, and when an
officer is posted to another unit, will be sent to her new C.O.
Auxiliaries
366. (a) A field conduct sheet (A.F. B 122) will be prepared
and maintained by a unit or sub-unit commander for every
auxiliary under her command. If an auxiliary is posted away,
her field conduct sheet will be sent to her new unit with her
other documents.
(&) Field conduct sheets of warrant officers will be maintained
as confidential documents, and will be used only for recording
conviction by court-martial, or by civil courts, awards under
Section 47 (2) of the Army Act, reversion from warrant rank
(Section 183 (2) of the Army Act) for an offence, but not for
inefficiency, and any special act of gallantry or distinguished
conduct, including an act of courage.
(c) The field conduct sheet of a staff-serjeant will be kept as a


confidential document. Those of other auxiliaries will be kept
with their documents in A.F. B 278.
{d) All entries {see para. 367) will be made in the field
conduct sheet (A.F. B 122) of the auxiliary concerned, and
initialled by an officer.
367. {a) Entries will be made in field conduct sheets as
follows :
(i) Every conviction by court-martial. The statement
of the charge as set forth in the charge sheet will
be entered. The date of the original sentence
will be recorded in the column “ date of award ”
with the word “ confirmed ” and the date of con-
firmation immediately below it. No entry will
be made of any charge where a finding of “ not
guilty ” has been recorded.
(ii) Every conviction by a court of ordinary criminal
jurisdiction or by a court of summary jurisdiction.
Certified copies of all convictions by the civil
power will be annexed to the field conduct sheet.
(iii) Every severe reprimand or reprimand of a N.C.0..
(iv) Every case of reduction of a N.C.O. to lower rank
or to the ranks, or deprivation of lance stripe for
an offence, but not for inefficiency.
(v) Every award by the C.O. of forfeiture of pay.
(vi) Every award of C.B.
(vii) Every instance of drunkenness.
(viii) Every offence entailing automatic forfeiture of pay.
(ix) Any special act of gallantry or distinguished con-
duct (including an act of courage). These entries
will be made in red ink right across the sheet.
(fe) The following punishments awarded to an auxiliary
will not be entered :
(i) Admonition, except in cases of drunkenness and for
an offence involving automatic forfeiture of pay.
(ii) Extra duties.
(iii) Deduction of pay awarded by a C.O. under Section
138 of the Army Act, unless accompanied by a
punishment higher than admonition.
368. (a) Each entry will be initialled by the C.O. or
adjutant in the “ Remarks ” column. The signature in full
will be appended to court-martial entries.
(6) Vague entries such as “ improper conduct ” will be
avoided.
(c) The following abbreviations will be used •
Confinement to barracks. C.B.
Deprived of lance stripe. Dpd. Lee. stripe.


(■ d) Forfeiture of pay or good conduct badge will be noted
under the heading of “ Remarks ” as :
Forfeits . . t days’ pay ; or, Forfeits . . .G.C. badge.
( e ) Every act of drunkenness committed by an auxiliary
will be entered in black ink, and numbered consecutively in
red ink in the column set apart for the purpose.
(/) All entries in field conduct sheets will be compared
weekly by the O.C. the unit or sub-unit, or an officer deputed
by her, with the awards recorded in A.F. B 2069 or A.F. B 252.
369. If a field conduct sheet is lost, the C.O. will assemble
a court of inquiry to investigate the circumstances and obtain
evidence regarding the entries contained in the lost sheet.
The C.O. will then order a new sheet to be drawn up and
substituted for the lost sheet, an entry in red ink “ sub-
stituted for original, lost ” with the date and the C.O’s.
signature, being made in front of the number of the sheet.
13. PROCEDURE FOR DEALING WITH
CASUALTIES FROM ENEMY ACTION
370. The pamphlet Procedure for Dealing with Casualties,
etc., at All Stations, other than Theatres of Operations notified
in A.C.I. 1377 of 1940, should be in the possession of all
A.T.S. officers i/c units or • sub-units. The procedure for
reporting strength and casualties at home in the event of
active operations is laid down in A.C.I. 565 of 1941 (The
Hobart System), and will be brought into force on receipt of
instructions from the War Office.
14. REGISTRATION OF DEATHS FROM OTHER
CAUSES THAN ENEMY ACTION
371. (a) When deaths occur at stations at home or at places
abroad where casualties are not notified through a 2nd Echelon,
A.F. B 2090 will be forwarded immediately by the O.C. unit
etc., direct to :
The Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office (C. 3 (A.L.) ),
Cheltenham, Glos., in the case of deceased officers.
The Under-Secretary of State,
The War Office,
Blue Coat School,
Church Road,
Wavertree, Liverpool, in the case of deceased
auxiliaries.


(b) The death of a serving officer or auxiliary will be notified
to the registrar of births and deaths for the sub-area in which
the event occurred, by the commanding or other officer under
whom the deceased was serving. The particulars required
to be registered are as follows : —date, place and cause of
death ; service, surname, Christian name(s), age, rank and
employment.
15. DECLARATION OF COURTS OF INQUIRY
INTO ILLEGAL ABSENCE
372. (a) A record of the declaration of a court of inquiry
held to record the illegal absence of an auxiliary (see para.
163 ( d ) ), will be entered by the C.O. in a regimental book
(A.B. 161) kept exclusively for such records. The entry will
be vouched by the C.O’s. signature after the ranks, names and
corps of the president and members of the court have been
inserted. A copy of the declaration on A.F. B 115 certified
by the officer responsible for the custody of A.B. 161 will at
the same time be prepared and filed with the auxiliary’s
papers. When the record on A.B. 161 has been duly made,
the C.O. will destroy the original proceedings of the court of
inquiry (A.F. A 2.)
(b) A.B. 161, or a certified copy of the entry therein will, on
the trial of the auxiliary, be admissible as evidence of the
offence therein stated. Any copy required as a voucher to
army accounts will be prepared on A.F. B 115 certified as
above.
SECTION XII.—HONOURS AND SALUTES
1. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
373. The importance of the salute should be impressed
upon all recruits. It is a military method of greeting a
superior; it is not a servile act. It is an outward sign of the
inward spirit of discipline and respect for superiors.
374. For the purposes of this section the terms “ officer ” or
“ officers ” shall apply only to officers of the A.T.S.
375. Auxiliaries will salute commissioned officers of the
A.T.S. whom they know to be such, whether in uniform or not.
Officers will return the salutes of auxiliaries.
5 (1744)


376. Officers and auxiliaries will salute with the right hand.
Where, owing to incapacity, this is not possible, they will
salute with the left hand.
377. All officers will salute their seniors before addressing
them, on duty or on parade. Officers will return the salutes
of junior officers. A salute made to two or more officers will
be returned by the senior only. When not on duty or parade,
but in uniform, officers under the rank of field officer will
salute all officers of field rank and upwards, or their equivalent
in other services. Officers of field rank will salute their
superiors in rank.
378. Whenever the National Anthem is played, all ranks in
military uniform not on parade, will stand at attention ;
officers, warrant officers and N.C.Os. saluting. When on
parade, officers only will salute and then only if ordered to by
the O.C. the parade. When in church, officers and auxiliaries
will stand at attention and not salute.
379. Officers and auxiliaries boarding any of His Majesty’s
ships or a foreign man-of-war will salute the quarter-deck.
380. Officers and auxiliaries passing a funeral cortege will
salute the body.
381. N.C.Os. and privates will address warrant officers
in the same manner as they do officers, but wall not salute
them.
382. When an auxiliary passes an officer she will salute
on the third pace before reaching him or her, and lower the
hand on the third pace after passing him or her.
383. An auxiliary, if sitting when an officer approaches,
will stand at attention facing the officer, and salute with the
hand. If two or more auxiliaries are sitting or standing
about, the senior warrant officer, N.C.O. or private will face
the officer, call the whole to attention, and alone will salute.
384. An auxiliary without her cap or when carrying some
article, will not salute, but will, if standing still, come to
attention when an officer passes. If walking, she will turn her
head smartly towards the officer in passing her, keeping her
arms steady by the side.
385. ( a ) The rider of a bicycle (pedal or motor) or driver
of a mechanical vehicle, will not salute when the vehicle is in
motion.
{b) When the vehicle is stationary, she will salute by turning
her head smartly towards an officer passing her, but will not
remove her hands from the handlebars or steering wheel.


2. COMPLIMENTS ON THE MARCH
386. (a) Bodies of A.T.S. troops will be ordered to march
at attention by the commander of a unit or detachment when
passing :
(i) A member of the Royal Family.
(ii) Bodies of A.T.S. troops on the march commanded by an
officer.
Compliments will be paid by platoons, or by companies if
the companies are too weak to parade in platoons, the com-
mand “ Eyes right " or “ Eyes left ” being given by the platoon
or company commander. All officers will salute, and if the
platoon is commanded by an auxiliary, she will salute.
(6) Small parties not commanded by officers will pay com-
pliments to A.T.S. officers.
(c) When in command of a party, an officer will salute any
officer in uniform she passes of a rank senior to herself.
(d) Bodies of troops on training will only pay compliments
to higher A.T.S. commanders once a day. At other times,
the commander only will salute her senior.
(e) When persons entitled to salutes approach from the
rear, compliments will not be paid, but officers will salute.
In the case of members of the Royal Family, troops will be
ordered to march at attention.
3. GUARDS OF HONOUR
387. Guards of honour will only be mounted when ordered
by the divisional or area commander.
388. The honours and salutes to be given by guards of
honour are as follows :
{a) To the King, the Queen and Queen Mary.
Royal Salute. The band will play the whole
of the National Anthem. In the case of parades
held to commemorate the birthday of the King,
the same honours and salutes will be accorded as
if His Majesty were present.
(b) To other members of the Royal Family.
Royal Salute. The band will play the first
six bars of the National Anthem.
(c) To other distinguished personages.
A general salute. If a band is in attendance,
they will play the first part of a slow march in
place of the National Anthem.
389. 1. (a) A guard of honour for personages mentioned
at para. 388 (a) and ( b) above will consist of one senior
commander or junior commander, one subaltern, one second-
subaltern, two warrant officers, Class 11, two serjeants and


100 rank and file. It will be accompanied by the band, if any.
The guard will be formed into two platoons, each platoon
being sub-divided into two sections.
In cases referred to at para. 388 (c) a guard of honour will
consist of two officers and 50 (or less) rank and file, as the
G.0.C.-in-C. shall order.
(6) Before the arrival of the personage, the guard of honour
will be sized and will take open order.* Where possible, it
will be formed up facing the direction from which the personage
for whom it is mounted will approach. The band will be in
rear of the centre of the guard, if space permits ; otherwise
they will be on the flank.
2. The posts of the officers, warrant officers and N.C.O.s
will be as follows, when the guard is in line :
{a) Officers. The commander six paces in front of the
centre of the guard, the subaltern three paces in
front of the second file from the- right, the second-
subaltern three paces in front of the second file
from the left.
(6) Warrant officers and N.C.Os. The senior will be the
right guide, the next senior left guide, the third
senior will be right guide of the second platoon,
and the junior left guide of the first platoon.
3. On the approach of the personage, the commander will
call the guard to attention. When the personage reaches the
centre, the commander will salute, the other officers taking
their time from her. If a band is in attendance, officers will
remain at the salute until the conclusion of the playing of the
National Anthem. If there is no band, the commander and
officers will remain at the salute for a brief period, the officers
taking their time from the commander.
4. When the guard is inspected the commander will in-
variably accompany the personage for whom it is mounted,
walking next to him or her, on the farther side from the rank
being inspected, round the ranks.
4. INSPECTIONS
390. The honours and salutes on parade will be the same
as given by guards of honour, if the parade is for any of the
personages mentioned in para. 388. If the parade is for the
G.0.C.-in-C. or other general officer or inspecting officer below
the rank of general officer, honours and salutes will be as in
para. 388 (c).
* Taking open order: —On the command “Open order march”, the
front rank will take two paces forward, and the rear rank two paces back.
The guard will then be dressed on completion of the movement.


APPENDIX I (i)
Army Order 199 of 1938
ROYAL WARRANT
FORMATION OF THE AUXILIARY TERRITORIAL
SERVICE
GEORGE R.I.
Whereas We deem it expedient to provide an organization
whereby certain non-combatant duties in connection with
Our Military and Air Forces may from time to time be per-
formed by women ;
Our Will and Pleasure Is that there shall be formed an
organization to be designated the Auxiliary Territorial
Service ;
Our Further Will and Pleasure Is that women may be
enrolled in this Service under such conditions and subject to
such qualifications as may be laid down by Our Army Council
from time to time.
Given at Our Court at St. James’s this 9th day of September,
1938, in the 2nd year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty’s Command
LESLIE HORE-BELISHA.


APPENDIX I (ii)
Statutory Rules and Orders, 1941, No. 581, as amended by
Statutory Rules and Orders, 1941, No. 1781
EMERGENCY POWERS (DEFENCE) WOMEN’S
FORGES
THE DEFENCE (WOMEN’S FORCES)
REGULATIONS, 1941
At the Court at Buckingham Palace, the 25th day of
April, 1941
Present,
The King’s Most Excellent Majesty in Council
His Majesty, in pursuance of the Emergency Powers
(Defence) Acts, 1939 and 1940, and of all other powers
enabling Him in that behalf, is pleased, by and with the
advice of His Privy Council, to order, and it is hereby
ordered that the following Regulations shall have
effect:—
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Defence
(Women’s Forces) Regulations, 1941.
2. The Interpretation Act, 1889, shall apply to the
interpretation of these Regulations as it applies to the
interpretation of an Act of Parliament.
3. All women who—
{a) are employed with the Royal Army Medical
Corps or The Army Dental Corps with rela-
tive rank as officers ; or
(fe) are enrolled in Queen Alexandra’s Imperial
Nursing Service or the reserve thereof ; or
(c) are enrolled in the Territorial Army Nursing
Service or the reserve thereof ; or
[d) are enrolled in the Auxiliary Territorial Service ;
not being, in any of the said cases, women whose en-
rolment or other undertaking to serve was for part-time
service only or for service without remuneration, are
hereby declared (whether their enrolment or other under-
taking to serve was before or at or after the date of the
making of these Regulations) to be members of the
armed forces of the Crown.
'■ 4. All women who —
(a) are employed with the Medical Branch or the
Dental Branch of the Royal Air Force with
relative rank as officers ; or
(, b) are enrolled in Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force
Nursing Service or the reserve thereof ; or
Short title.
Interpretation.
52 & 53 Viet,
c. 63.
Membership of
armed forces of
women enrolled
for service or
employed with
the army.
Membership of
armed forces of
women enrolled
for service or
employed with
the Royal Air
Force.


(c) are enrolled in the Women’s Auxiliary Air*
Force; *
not being, in any of the said cases, women whose en-',
rolment or other undertaking to serve was for part-time
service only or for service without remuneration, are
hereby declared (whether their enrolment or other under-
taking to serve was before or at or after the date of the
making of these Regulations) to be members of the
armed forces of the Crown.
5. During the continuance in force of the two .last
preceding Regulations, such of the women therein
specified as are selected by His Majesty to serve as
officers may be granted, and may hold, commissions.
6. Until such dates as may be specified in instructions
of the Army Council or the Air Council, as the case may
be, the Army Act and the Air Force Act shall apply in
relation to women who are members of the armed forces
of the Crown as they applied before the making of these
Regulations : and on or after the dates so specified,
the said Acts shall respectively apply in relation to them
in such manner, to such extent and subject to such
adaptations and modifications as may be specified in
those or any subsequent instructions of the Army Council
or the Air Council as the case may be.
7. Subject to the provisions of the last preceding
Regulation :
(а) in relation to the women members of the armed
forces of the Crown specified in Regulation
three of these Regulations, His Majesty and
the Army Council; and
(б) in relation to the women members of the armed
forces of the Crown specified in Regulation
four of these Regulations, His Majesty and
the Air Council,
shall have the same powers respectively of making orders
and Regulations as they have in relation to the Army
and the Royal Air Force.
8. Subject to the provisions of the two last preceding
Regulations, so much of any enactment as relates or
refers to any of the armed forces of the Crown or any
of the members thereof, shall apply in relation to
women who are members of the armed forces to such
extent and in the same manner only as it would have
applied if these Regulations had not been made.
Officers.
Application of
Army Act and
Air Force Act.
Power to make
orders and
regulations.
Application of
other
enactments.
RUPERT B. HOWORTH.


APPENDIX I (iii)
Statutory Rules and Orders, 1941, No. 856, as amended by
Statutory Rules and Orders, 1941, No. 1840
EMERGENCY POWERS (DEFENCE)
WOMEN’S FORCES
The Army Council’s Instructions, dated June 19, 1941,
under Regulation 6 of the Defence (Women’s
Forces) Regulations, 1941, applying the Army Act
to certain women.
In exercise of the powers conferred on them by Regulation
six of the Defence (Women’s Forces) Regulations, 1941, the
Army Council issue the following instructions :
1. Subject to the provisions of these instructions, on and
after the first day of J uly, nineteen hundred and forty-one, the
Army Act shall, so far as it is capable of such application, apply
in relation to women mentioned in Regulation three of the
Defence (Women’s Forces) Regulations, 1941, as if they were
part of the regular forces.
2. References in the Army Act to ranks of the army shall be
deemed to include references to the relative ranks, as laid down
by King’s Regulations, of the said women.
3. Of sections four to forty-one of the Army Act (which
relate to offences against that Act) only sections fifteen and
forty shall apply to offences committed by the said women,
and those sections shall have effect in relation to them as set
out with adaptations and modifications in the Schedule to
these instructions.
4. —(1) The provisions of this paragraph shall have effect
in relation to offences committed by the said women against
either of the said sections fifteen or forty in lieu of the pro-
visions of section forty-four of the Army Act.
(2) A woman on conviction by court-martial for such an
offence as aforesaid shall be liable to any one or more punish-
ments according to the scales following, that is to say,
(a) in the case of an officer :
(i) dismissal from His Majesty’s service ;
(ii) forfeiture of seniority of rank ; or, in the case of
' an officer whose promotion depends upon length


of service, forfeiture of all or any part of her
service for the purposes of promotion ;
(iii) severe reprimand ;
(iv) reprimand ;
(v) stoppages ;
[b) in the case of a warrant officer or a non-commissioned
officer :
(i) if a warrant officer, dismissal, or if a non-com-
missioned officer, discharge, from His Majesty’s
service ;
(ii) reduction to a lower grade or to the ranks ;
(iii) forfeiture of seniority of rank ;
(iv) severe reprimand ;
(v) reprimand ;
(vi) forfeiture of all ordinary pay for a period com-
mencing on the day of the sentence and not
exceeding twenty-eight days ;
(vii) stoppages;
(c) in the case of a woman not being an officer, warrant
officer, or non-commissioned officer ;
(i) forfeiture of all ordinary pay for a period com-
mencing on the day of the sentence and not
exceeding twenty-eight days ;
- (ii) stoppages ;
(iii) confinement to barracks for not more than four-
teen days and not less than seven days.
5.—(1) Where the case of any of the said women, not being
an officer or warrant officer, is dealt with summarily by her
commanding officer under section forty-six of the Army Act,
subsection (2) of that section shall not apply, but all or any of
the following punishments may be awarded :
{a) the offender, if a non-commissioned officer, may be
severely reprimanded or reprimanded ;
(b) the offender may be ordered to suffer any deduction
from her ordinary pay authorised by the Army Act
to be made by the commanding officer ;
(c) the offender, if not a non-commissioned officer, may be
ordered to forfeit all ordinary pay for a period com-
mencing on the day of the sentence and not exceed-
ing fourteen days ;
(' d ) the offender, if not a non-commissioned officer, may
be awarded confinement to barracks for not more
than fourteen days and not less than seven days ;
(e) the offender, if not a non-commissioned officer, may be
ordered to perform extra duties ;
(/) the offender may be admonished :
5* (1744)


Provided that, unless the commanding officer is of a rank
equivalent to field rank or is authorised in that behalf by the
officer in command of a division or area, the only punishments
which she may award shall be :
(i) confinement to barracks for seven days (neither more
nor less) ;
(ii) extra duties ;
(iii) admonition.
(2) For the purposes of the application of subsection (8) of
the said section forty-six to the case of any of the said women
who is a non-commissioned officer, the reference to “ one of the
minor punishments referred to in this section ” shall be con-
strued as a reference to severe reprimand, reprimand or
admonition.
(3) The said subsection (8) of section forty-six shall not
apply to the case of any of the said women who is not a non-
commissioned officer, but a commanding officer shall deal
with the case of any such woman summarily, unless both the
ollowing conditions are fulfilled, namely :
[a] that the award or finding involves a forfeiture of
ordinary pay, or she proposes to award a forfeiture
of, or deduction from, ordinary pay ; and
(b) that the woman charged (who shall be informed by
the commanding officer of her right under this sub-
paragraph to be tried by field general court-martial)
elects to be so tried ;
and, if ip any such case the woman, so elects, the commanding
officer shall take steps for bringing her to trial by a field general
court-martial.
(4) Subsection (9) of the said section forty-six shall not
apply to the case of any of the said women, but the power of
dealing summarily under that section with a case may be
delegated by the commanding officer to any officer under her
command:
Provided that where the officer to whom the said power is
delegated is a subaltern or second subaltern, the only punish-
ments which she may award shall be :
(a) confinement to barracks for seven days (neither more
nor less) ;
( b ) extra duties ;
(c) admonition.
6. The said women shall not be tried by general or district
courts-martial and accordingly an officer authorised under
section forty-nine of the Army Act to convene a field general


court-martial may convene such a court-martial for the trial of
an offence by a woman notwithstanding that it would be prac-
ticable for the offence to be tried by an ordinary general court-
martial, and references in any provision of the Army Act
which is applicable to any of the said women, to a court-
martial of whatever nature, shall be construed as references
to a field general court-martial.
7. The expression “ commanding officer ” as used in the
sections of the Army Act relating to “ courts-martial ” and to
the “ power of commanding officer ”, or the provisions sub-
stituted by these instructions therefor, and in the provisions
consequential thereon, means, in relation to any woman enrolled
in the Auxiliary Territorial Service, the officer in command of
the unit or detachment in which she is for the time being
serving.
8. —(1) The manner in which forfeiture of seniority of rank
may be awarded by a field general court-martial or under
section forty-seven of the Army Act shall, in the case of any
of the said women, be such as may be prescribed by the Army
Council.
(2) The preceding provisions of these instructions relating to
punishments are without prejudice to the power of the com-
manding officer under proviso (c) to section one hundred and
eighty-three of the Army Act to order acting non-commissioned
officers to revert to their permanent grades or, as the case may
be, to the ranks.
9. — (1) The reference in section ninety-one of the Army Act
to an attestation paper shall, in the case of any of the said
women, be construed as a reference to an enrolment form.
(2) Part II of the Army Act, except the said section ninety-
one shall not apply to the said women.
10. Subsection (7) of section one hundred and eight A of the
Army Act (being a special provision relating to the billeting of
women which these instructions render unnecessary in the case
of women to whom these instructions apply) shall cease to have
effect in relation to any of the said women.
11. Subsection (1) of section one hundred and thirty-six of
the Army Act (which prohibits unauthorized deductions from
pay) shall not apply to any deduction made from the pay of any
of the said women, on the order of the Army Council, to meet
any public claim, any regimental debt or any debt due to the
Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes that may be due from her,
or any regimental claim, or any claim by the Navy, Army and
Air Force Institutes that the Army Council may direct her to
pay.


12. The expression “ regimental ” in the Army Act and in
these instructions means, in relation to the said women, con-
nected with .the corps with which they are employed, or with
the service in which they are enrolled, or with any sub-division
of that corps or service.
By Command of the Army Council,
P. J. GRIGG.
The War Office,
19th June, 1941.
SCHEDULE
15. A woman who absents herself without leave
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.
40. A woman who is guilty of any act, conduct'
disorder or neglect to the prejudice of good order
and discipline shall be guilty of an offence
against this Act.
Absence from
duty without
leave.
Conduct to
prejudice of
discipline.
Note.- — These Instructions are dealt with in detail in these
Regulations, Section V,


APPENDIX I (iv)
WOMEN’S FORCES (OFFICERS’ COMMISSIONS)
ORDER, 1941
At the Court at Buckingham Palace the 30th day of May, 1941
Present,
The King’s Most Excellent Majesty in Council
HIS MAJESTY is pleased, by and with the advice of His
Privy Council, to order, and it is hereby ordered, as follows :
1. A commission issued to a woman who, being such a
member of the armed forces of the Crown as is mentioned in
Regulation three of the Defence (Women’s Forces) Regula-
tions, 1941, receives an appointment as an officer shall be in
the form set out in the Schedule to this Order.
2. Where a woman has received such a commission, a further
commission shall not be issued to her on her future appoint-
ment as an officer, whether by promotion, exchange, transfer
or otherwise, so long as she remains such a member of the
armed forces of the Crown as is specified in the said Regulation
three.
3. The granting and relinquishment of commissions and
appointments of officers shall, in the case of such members of
the armed forces of the Crown as are mentioned in the said
Regulation three, be notified in the London Gazette or in such
other manner as the Army Council may direct.
4. This Order may be cited as the Women’s Forces (Officers’
Commissions) Order, 1941.
RUPERT B. HOWORTH.
SCHEDULE
George, by the Grace of God of Great Britain, Ireland and
the British Dominions beyond the Seas King, Defender of the
Faith, Emperor of India, etc..
To our trusty and well beloved
Greeting !
We, reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Loyalty,
Courage, and good Conduct, do by these Presents Constitute


and Appoint you to be an Officer * from the
day of 19 .
You are therefore carefully and diligently to discharge your
Duty as such in the Rank of. or in such other Rank
as We may from time to time hereafter be pleased to promote
or appoint you to, of which a notification will be made in the
London Gazette, or in such other manner as may for the time
being be prescribed by Our Army Council, and you are in
such manner and on such occasions as may be prescribed by
Us to exercise and well discipline in their duties women
serving under your orders, and such officers and soldiers as
may be placed under your orders from time to time, and to
use your best endeavours to keep them in good Order and
Discipline. And We do hereby Command them to Obey you
as their superior Officer, and you to observe and follow such
Orders and Directions as from time to time you shall receive
from Us, or any of your superior Officers, according to the Rules
and Discipline of War, in pursuance of the Trust hereby
reposed in yqu.
Given at Our Court at the day of
19 ,in the Year of Our Reign.
BY HIS MAJESTY’S COMMAND.
* Insert
(а) employed with Our Royal Army Medical Corps ;
(б) in Our Queen Alexandra’s Imperial Military Nursing Service ;
(c) in Our Queen Alexandra’s Imperial Military Nursing Service
Reserve ;
(d) in Our Territorial Army Nursing Service ;
(e) in Our Territorial Army Nursing Service Reserve ;
(/) in Our Auxiliary Territorial Service.


(a) Officers for special duty.
Chief Controller
Senior Controller ..
Ranks with ;—
Major-General.
Brigadier.
Rank Badges
Corresponding mili-
tary badges of rank.
(6) Senior Officers.
Controller v ..
Chief Commander ..
Senior Commander
Colonel.
Lieutenant-Colonel.
Major.
»
(c) Junior Officers.
Junior Commander
Subaltern ..
Second-Subaltern ..
Captain.
Lieutenant.
Second-Lieutenant.
n
{d) Warrant Officers.
Warrant Officer—
Class I
Class II ..
Corresponding mili-
tary rank.
»
,e) N.C.Os.
Staff-serjeant
Serjeant
Lance-serjeant
Corporal
Lance-corporal
Private ...
>>
' I
APPENDIX II
RANKS AND APPOINTMENTS IN THE AUXILIARY
TERRITORIAL SERVICE


Detail
Number
(i) Platoon Headquarters.
(a) To he employed when the platoon is isolated.
Subaltern or Second-subaltern..
1
Serjeant ..
1
Total all ranks
2*
[b) To be employed when platoon forms part of a con-
centrated Company.
Subaltern or Second-subaltern..
1
Private (clerk) ..
1
Total all ranks
2*
(ii) Sections and sub-sections.
N.C.Os. are appointed from among the auxiliaries in the platoon on
the following scale : —
I Serjeant per 25 auxiliaries.
1 Corporal per 12 auxiliaries.
1 Lance-corporal per 10 auxiliaries.
No. 2. A Company (2 Platoons), not forming part of a
concentrated group.
Detail
Number
Company Headquarters.
Subaltern or Second-subaltern . .
1
Company-serjeant-major . . .. ..
1
Serjeant .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
1
Private (clerk)
1
Total all ranks ..
4*
APPENDIX III
BASIC ESTABLISHMENTS
The ranks allowed by the basic A.T.S. establishments which
follow are included primarily for the domestic, disciplinary
and administrative purposes of the A.T.S. unit. Where A.T.S.
personnel holding those ranks are actually employed in offices,
etc., in replacement of soldiers, of corresponding rank, the
ranks they hold will count against the military ranks allowed
by the War Establishments of the particular office, etc., in
which they are employed.
No. 1. A Platoon (minimum 23 all ranks).
Consisting of —Platoon Headquarters and sections (each of
2 sub-sections).
* Cooks and orderlies for the platoon will be added in accordance with
the authorized scale. See Basic Establishment No. 9.


Detail
Number
Company Headquarters.
Junior Commander ,. ' • •
Company-serjeant-major
Serjeant
Private (clerk)
Total all ranks ..
4*
Detail
Number
Company Headquarters.
1
1
1
1
1
5*
Junior Commander
Company-serjeant-major
Serjeant
Corporal (for pay duties)
Private (clerk)
Total all ranks
Detail
Number
(i) Group Headquarters (to be employed when all the
platoons are concentrated).
Senior Commander
Subaltern or Second-subaltern (adjutant)
1
Subaltern or Second-subaltern (Quarter-master)
1
Company-serjeant-major
Serjeant
Corporals —Clerk for pay duties
Orderly corporal
Private (clerk) .. .. • • • • • • •
Total all ranks
8 (a)
No. 3. A Company (3 Platoons), not forming part of a
concentrated group.
No. 4. A Company (4 Platoons), not forming part of a
concentrated group.
* Cooks and orderlies for the company will be added in accordance with
the authorized scale. See Basic Establishments Nos. 7-9.
Medical orderlies for the company will be added on the authorized
scale :—
Strength of Unit No. of orderlies
40-100 1 (lance-corporal)
101-300 2 (I lance-corporal and 1 private)
301-500 3 (1 lance-corporal and 2 privates)
No. 5. A Group (comprising companies with a total strength
of between 251 and 1,000 all ranks).


Detail. #
Number.
(11) Group Headquarters (to be employed when platoons i
the group are dispersed).
Senior Commander
Privates—Clerk
Driver I.C.
Total all ranks
Vehicles—Car, 4-seater ..
n
1
1
1 (b)
3 (c) (d)
1 (b)
(iii) Company Headquarters (to be employed with each 4 or
part of 4 platoons concentrated in a group of 6 or
more platoons).
Junior Commander
Private (clerk) .. •. .. .. " ]'
Total all ranks
1
1
2(a)
Detail
Number
(i) Group Headquarters (to be employed when all the
platoons are concentrated).
Chief Commander
I
Junior Commander (Adjutant) ..
1
Subaltern or Second-Subaltern (Quarter-master)
1
Company-serjeant-major
1
Serjeant
1
1
Corporals'—Clerk for pay duties
Orderly corporal
1
Privates (clerks) ..
2
Total all ranks
9(a) (6)
(ii) Group Headquarters (to be employed when platoons
n
the group are dispersed).
Chief Commander
1
1
Junior Commander (Adjutant) . .
Privates —Clerks
2(d)
1 Ich
5 [a)(b)(e)
1 (c)
Driver I.C.
„ Total all ranks
Vehicles—Car, 4-seater ..
{a) Cooks and mess orderlies will be added in accordance with the
authorized scales, see Basic Establishments, Nos. 7-9.
(b) To be provided only when specially authorized by War Office.
(c) When a group consists of 18 or more platoons one Serjeant (clerk)
and two privates (clerks) will be allowed. When a group consists of 25 or
more platoons 1 serjeant-major (clerk), 2 privates (clerks) and 1 private
(orderly) will be allowed.
{d\ In groups containing more than 8 platoons, a Subaltern will be
provided.
No. 6. A Group (comprising companies with a total strength
exceeding 1,000).


Detail.
Number.
(iii) Company Headquarters (to be employed with each 4 or
part of 4 platoons in a concentrated group of 6 or
more platoons).
Junior Commander
1
1
Private (clerk)
Total all ranks
2 (b)
Numbers in mess
Cooks
Mess orderlies
Total
3-12
1
1
2
13-18
1
2
3
19-24
1
3
4
25-30
2
3
5
31-36
2
4
6
37-42
2
5
7
4-3-48
2
6
8
49-50
2
7
9
51-54
* 3
6
9
55-60
3
7
10
61-66
3
8
11
67-72
3
9
12
73-75
3
10
13
76-78
4
9
13
{a) When the total strength of the group exceeds 1,250 all ranks, a
Senior Commander will be allowed in addition to the Chief Commander.
(b) Cooks and mess orderlies will be added in accordance with the
authorized scales, see Basic Establishments, Nos. 7—9.
(c) To be provided only when specially authorized by War Office.
(i d) When a dispersed group consists of 13-18 platoons one may be a
corporal.
(e) When a group consists of 18 or more platoons 1 serjeant (clerk) and
2 privates (clerks) will be allowed. When a group consists of 25 or more
platoons 1 serjeant-major (clerk), 2 privates (clerks) and 1 private (orderly)
will be allowed.
No. 7. Scale of cooks and mess orderlies for officers’
messes.
A mess may be formed for three or more officers.
And thereafter 1 mess servant for every 6 or part of 6 officers in the mess.
Notes. —1. When 3 cooks are admissible, 1 will be a corporal.
2. When a mess consists of 15 or more officers, 1 of the mess
servants will be a mess steward ; i.e. a serjeant.


Numbers in mess
Cooks
Mess orderlies
Total
6-10
1
_
1
11-20
1
1
2
21-24
1
2
3
25-30
2
1
3
31-40
2
2
4
41-50
2
3
5
51-60
3
3
6
61-70
3
4
7
71-74
3
5
8
75-80
3
5
8
Numbers in mess
Cooks
Mess orderlies
Total
1-25
1
1
2
26-50
2
2
4
51-75
3
3
6
76-100
4
4
8
101-125
5
5
10
126-150
5
• 6
11
No. 8. Scale of cooks and mess orderlies for serjeants’
messes (in units with 6 or more warrant officers and N.C.Os.).
And thereafter 1 additional mess servant for every 10 or part of 10 in
the mess.
Notes. —1. Where 3 cooks are admissible, 1 will be a corporal.
2. When a mess consists of 15 or more warrant officers or
serjeants, 1 of the mess servants may be a mess caterer;
i.e. a serjeant.
No. 9. Scale of cooks and orderlies for rank and file messes
And thereafter on the scale of 1 additional cook for every 50 in the mess
and 1 additional orderly for every 25.
When in addition to employment as mess orderlies A.T.S. personnel are
also employed as bath, sanitary or room orderlies, an addition of 1 private
to every 100 or part of 100 personnel served will be made to the numbers
of orderlies.


Total number of
A.T.S. cooks
Ranks authorized
Serjeants
Corporals
Privates
1
_
1
2
—
—
2
3
—
1
2
4
1
3
5
—
1
• 4
6
—
1
5
7
1
1
5
8
1
1
6
9
1
1
7
10
1
2
7
11
1
2
8
12
2
1
9
13
2
1
10
14
2
1
11
15
2
1
12
16
2
1
13
17
2
2
13
18
2
2
14
19
2
2
15
20
* 2
2
16
No. 10. Scale of A.T.S. ranks for cooks and mess orderlies.
{a) Only qualified cooks may be promoted to the rank of
corporal or serjeant. The ranks so admissible
will be :
(b) Of every 12 mess orderlies employed 1 may be a
corporal and, in addition, 1 of every 25 may be a
serjeant.


APPENDIX IV
DUTIES ON WHICH A.T.S. MAY BE
EMPLOYED
OPERATIONAL DUTIES
Height finder number.
Identification telescope num-
ber.
Operator fire control.
Operator, kine-theodolite.
Predictor number.
Radio mechanic.
Wireless merchanic.
NON-OPERATIONAL DUTIES
Baker.
Chiropodist.
Clerk (for all types of clerical
duty).
Cook.
Cook, hospital.
Cycle repairer.
Draughtswoman,
Driver I.C.
Driver mechanic.
Equipment repairer.
Hairdresser.
Instrument mechanic.
Linguist.
Machinist metal.
Mess steward.
Modeller camouflage.
Motor cyclist.
Operator, cipher.
Operator, comptometer.
Operator, keyboard.
Operator, special (R. Signals).
Operator, switchboard.
Orderly.
Painter and decorator.
Photographic developer.
Plasterer camouflage.
Projectionist cinema.
Storewoman(R.A.O.C. duties).
Tailoress.
Telephone orderly.
Textile refitter.
Tinsmith and whitesmith.
Turner.
Vulcanizer.
Watchmaker.
Wood turner and machinist.


Qualities
Grading
Remarks
Power of Leadershp
APPENDIX V
(See para. 34 (c).
RECOMMENDATION FORM FOR CANDIDATES FOR
OFFICER CADET TRAINING UNITS, A.T.S.
PART 1
Surname Army Number
Christian Names
Rank Date of Promotion
Unit Date of Joining
Date of Enrolment Date of Birth
Civil Occupation
Languages or Technical Qualifications
(Grading to be indicated by A, B, C or D : A = Excellent;
B=Good; C = Fair; D= Unsatisfactory.)
No. W/ Rank Name
is recommended/has applied and is recommended/has applied
and is not recommended/for an officer appointment. (Cross
out whichever are not applicable.)
Signed Rank
O.C Company Group


I certify that I shall be willing to accept No. W/
as an officer under my command on her
satisfactory completion of a Course at an Officer Cadet
Training Unit.
Signed Rank
O-C Group Command
PART II (To be completed by Interviewing Board.)
1. Remarks as to suitability as an officer (NOT from a
technical point of view).
2. Interviewing Board, [a] President
(6) Members
Date Signature of President


Causes of Discharge
Competent Officer to
Special Instructions
Authorize
Discharge
Carry out
Discharge
Confirm
Discharge
1. Having been enrolled
but not finally approved.
Commandant,
Training
Centre.
Commandant,
Training
Centre
Commandant,
Training
Centre
Applies only to recruits while still at the
Training Centre (see para. 73).
2. Termination of period
of enrolment.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Applies to auxiliaries enrolled for 4 years on
A.F. E511 and to those enrolled on
A.F. E Slip on demobilization.
3. On compassionate
grounds.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Applies to auxiliaries whose request for dis-
charge discloses the existence of urgent
family obligations, or other exceptional
circumstances by reason of which retention
in the service would entail undue hardship.
The auxiliary may be sent home at once.
The effective date of discharge will be the
last day of her terminal furlough.
4. ( a ) Physically unfit for
further service.
(6) Physically unfit for
further service in her
calling.
President,
Standing
Medical Board,
or
O.C. Military
or
Military Fami-
lies Hospital
Company
Commander.*
Officer i/c ,
Records.
Before a woman is discharged under sub-
headings (a) or (b) she will be examined by
a medical board to ascertain whether her
disability is in any way attributable to
service. Sub-heading (b) applies to an
auxiliary physically unfit for the duties' for
which she was enrolled, and who is not
recommended for, or desirous of employ-
ment in any other calling.
* In special cases the O.C. hospital will carry out discharge.
APPENDIX VI
TABLE OF DISCHARGE


Causes of Discharge
Competent Officer to
Special Instructions
Authorize
Discharge
Carry out
Discharge
Confirm
Discharge
5. Having been convicted
by the civil power.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
The Group Commandant will decide in each
case of a conviction if the offence is suffi-
ciently grave to justify discharge. Due
regard will be given to the nature of the
offence and to any sentence of imprison-
ment awarded. Where retention in the
A.T.S. is not desirable by reason of civil
convictions on technical offences, considera-
tion will be given to the possibility of dis-
charge under para. 9 [i.e. Service no longer
required)..
6. (a) Misconduct, or
(b) Breach of conditions
of enrolment.
Army Council
or G.O.C.-in-C.
when specially
authorized by
the Army
Council.
At home.
Company
Commander.
Overseas.
See final
column.
Officer i/c
Records.
Auxiliaries will not be discharged under these
headings without the authority of the Army
Council or of a General Officer authorized by
the Army Council.
Cases at home will be reported through the
usual channels for decision of the G.O.C.-in-
C. concerned, and after action has been
taken will be reported to the War Office
for confirmation.
Cases abroad will be dealt with by the
G.O.C.-in-C., who will return the auxiliary
APPENDIX VI
TABLE OF DISCHARGE —continued


to Home Establishment for discharge with
full particulars of the case.
Note. —Cause of discharge written in red ink.
7. Discharge, a claim for
her services as a “ Key
Worker ” by a firm en-
gaged in work of national
importance having been
submitted.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Such claims should be supported by the
recommendation of the government de-
partment concerned.
8. For the purpose of being
appointed to a commis-
sion.
O.C. Cadet
Training Wing,
or Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Applies to auxiliary appointed as an officer ia
the A.T.S. or whose release has been
approved for the purpose of appointment
as an officer in the W.R.N.S. or W.A.A.F.
The entry in the London Gazette will be
quoted as the authority for discharge under
this heading.
9. Her service being no
longer required.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Applies to an auxiliary who cannot be dis-
charged under any other paragraph, and to
those who are discharged on reduction of
establishment. In the latter case the words
“ Owing to reduction of Establishment ”
will be added to the cause of discharge.
At least 15 days’ notice in writing will be
given by the sub-unit commander to the
auxiliary before discharge under this head-
ing is carried into effect (see para. 83 (d)).
The cause of discharge under this paragraph
will be amplified in cases where it will benefit
the individual concerned, e.g. reduction of
i establishment, transfer to another service,
j .etc.


Causes of Discharge
* Competent Officer to
Authorize
Discharge
Carry out
Discharge
Confirm
Diecharge
Special Instructions
10. Mis-statement of age on
enrolment.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Applies to auxiliaries who were under age of
18 years on enrolment, or, being over \1\
years and under 18 years, had enrolled
without completion of A.F. E 51 lo.
Applies also to auxiliaries who were over the
approved age on enrolment.
11. For family reasons.
Group
Commandant.
Company
Commander.
Officer i/c
Records.
Applies to auxiliaries who are discharged for
pregnancy or recent confinement. In cases
discharged under this authority, a con-
fidential communication will be addressed
to the Officer i/c Records stating whether
the woman is married or single. Where the
auxiliary is considered suitable for re-
enrolment the discharge certificate will be
endorsed “ suitable for re-enrolment.”
In the event of the auxiliary’s condition not
having been notified until after the con-
finement, she will be compulsorilv dis-
charged forthwith.
(See para. 330).
APPENDIX VI
TABLE OF DISCHARGE —continued


Articles
Scale
Hand-
ed
into
store
Deficiencies
Remarks
Necessaries—-
Badge, cap .. ' ..
Bag,-tJvit
Belts, corset
Brassieres, A.T.S.
Brass, cleaning
Brushes —
Button, brass
Hair
Shoe, polishing
Tooth
Cap-comforter
Comb, hair .. .. ;.
Discs, identity
Dressing, field
Fork
Gloves
Housewife, A.T.S.
Jersey, woollen, A.T.S.
Knickers, A.T.S.
Knives —
Clasp, with lanyard
Table
Laces, boot or shoe, pairs
Lanyard
Pantees, A.T.S.
Protectors, ear
Shirts
Stockings, A.T.S.
Spoon, N.S. dessert
Ties, A.T.S.
Titles, with plates, pins
Towels, hand, Turkish
Vests, A.T.S.
Clothing—
Boots, motor driver, A.T.S.
Breeches, motor cyclist,
A.T.S. ..
Cap .. 1 ..
Cape, anti-gas
Gloves, M.T., A.T.S.
Greatcoat ..
Helmet, crash, despatch
rider
•
APPENDIX VII
Inventory of the kit of No of Platoon
Company, Group, who
on day of 19 .


Hand
Articles
Scale
ed
into
Store
Deficiencies
Remarks
Clo thi n g— continued —
Jacket
Jerkin, A.T.S. .
Knickerbockers
Overalls—
Combination, A.T.S.
Women workers
Puttees, pairs
Shoes —
A.T.S
Canvas, pairs
Skirts, serge, A.T.S.
Trousers
Equipment —
Bags, ration
Blanket
Bottles, water, Mk. VI
Braces, without buckle
Carriers, waterbottle, O.S.
Covers, mess-tin, rect-
angular ..
Haversacks, O.S.
Helmets, steel
Mugs, drinking
Sheet, ground
Thongs, whistle
Tins, mess, rectangular
Whistles
Anti-Gas Stores —
Respirators, anti-gas
Containers
Facepieces
Outfits, anti-dimming ..
Haversacks
Ointment, anti-gas
Eyeshields, anti-gas
Detectors, gas spray
Wallet, anti-gas
Additional—•
Armlets, signal
Boots, rubber knee
Goggles, with case
Slacks, A.T.S.
Sou’westers, oilskin
Trousers, serge • ..
Kerchiefs, cook’s
Overalls, cook’s
Coat, oilskin
Socks, worsted .. ..


APPENDIX VIII
OFFICERS’ UNIFORM
(See para. 247)
2 Service dress caps • with badge.
2 Service dress jackets, similar to Army officers’ pattern,
buttoning on right side with 4 buttons ; cloth belt
attached to jacket at back with metal buckle in front.
Skirt of jacket to be 13 in. for a wearer 5 ft. 9 in. in
height, and to vary in proportion to the height of the
wearer.
2 Service dress skirts of the same material as the jacket,
hanging 16 in. from the ground and amply wide to
allow of free movement. These should have a 3-in.
hem.
2 Drab shirts.
4 Drab collars.
1 Pair brown gloves.
1 Drab tie.
1 Greatcoat.
2 Pairs brown shoes or boots; brown or drab gaiters
may be worn if desired.
4 Pairs drab stockings.


{a) Officers
Daily rates of pay
Chief Controller "]
f (At rates to be laid down
Senior Controller V
. . from time to time by
Controller J
[ the Army Council.)
Chief Commander
285.
8d.
Senior Commander
19s.
0 d.
Junior Commander
11s.
0 d.
Subaltern
8s.
8 d.
Second-Subaltern
7,s.
Ad.
( b ) Auxiliaries
(i) Non-tradeswomen
Daily rates of pay
Warrant officer, Class I
8s.
0 d.
Warrant officer, Class II
5s.
8d.
Staff-serjeant
5s.
Ad.
Serjeant Cook
4s.
Ad.
After 3 years’ service as above 4s.
8 d.
Serjeant
4s.
0 d.
After 3 years’ service as above 4s.
Ad.
Lance-serjeant
3s.
2d.
Corporal
. . 2s.
8 d.
After 3 years’ service as above 2s.
10 d.
Lance-corporal . .
2s.
2d.
, After 3 years’ service
2s.
Ad.
Private ..
Is.
Ad.
After 1 year’s service
Is.
6d.
,, 2 years’
• ■ Is.
8 d.
„ 3 „ „ . .
.. . 2s.
0 d.
APPENDIX IX
SCALES OF PAY
(1) General Service Officers and Auxiliaries


(ii) Tradeswomen
Daily rates of pay
Group A
Group B
Group C
Group D
Group E
Warrant officer, Class I
9s.
4 d.
05.
id.
9s.
id.
05.
id.
9s. id.
Warrant officer, Class II
7s.
2d.
7s.
2d.
7s.
2d.
7s.
2d.
Is. 2d.
Staff-Serjeant
6s.
6 d.
6s.
3d.
6s.
3d.
65.
3d.
6s. 3d.
Serjeant ..
5s.
3d.
55.
3d.
5s.
3d.
55.
3d.
5s. 3d.
Lance-serjeant .. ..
5s.
2d.
5s.
3d.
45.
3d.
4s.
3d.
3s. 3d.
Corporal
After 3 years’ service as
4 s.
3d.
is.
id.
3s.
10 d.
3s.
id.
3s. 2d.
above
3s.
3d.
3s. id.
Lance-corporal ..
4s.
0 d.
3s.
10 d.
3s.
id.
2s.
10 d.
2s. 3d.
After 3 years’ service..
Private—
3s.
3d.
2s. 10 d.
Class 1
3s.
id.
3s.
3d.
2s.
3d.
—
After 3 years’ service
3 s.
10 d.
3s.
3d.
3s.
2d.
—
Class II
2s.
6 d.
2s.
id.
2s.
2d.
2s.
3d.
—
After 1 year’s service
2s.
8 d.
2s.
3d.
2s.
id.
2s.
2d.
—
,, 2 years’ ,,
2s.
10 d.
2s.
8 d.
2s.
3d.
2s.
id.
—
„ 3 „
3s.
id.
35.
2d.
3s.
3d.
2s.
10 d.
—
Class III
2s.
2d.
25.
3d.
15.
10 d.
Is.
8 d.
Is. 3d.
After 1 year’s service
2s.
id.
2s.
2d.
2s.
3d.
Is.
10 d.
Is. 3d.
,, 2 years’ „
2s.
6 d.
2s.
id.
2s.
2d.
2s.
3d.
Is. 10 d.
„ 3 „
3s.
0 d.
2s.
\3d.
2s.
8 d.
2s.
3d.
2s. id.
(2) Local Service Officers and Auxiliaries
( а ) Officers Daily rates of pay
Chief Commander .. . , 21s. B d.
Senior Commander . . . . 14s. 6d.
Junior Commander ... .. Bs. 6d.
Subaltern. . .. . . . . 6s. 1 Id.
Second Sulbaltern .. . . ss. KM.
(б) Auxiliaries
(i) Non-tradeswomen Daily rates of pay.
Warrant officer, Class I . . 6s. 6d.
Warrant officer, Class II . . 4s. Bd.
Staff-serjeant . . . . .. 4s. s d.
Serjeant Cook .. . . . . 3s. Bd.
After 3 years’ service as above 4s. (M.
Serjeant . . . . ~ 3s. Ad.
After 3 years’ service as above 3s. B d.
Lance-serjeant ~ . . . . 2s. B<L
Corporal . . . . . . 2s. 2d.
After 3 years’service as above 2s. Ad.
Lance-corporal .. . . . . Is. KM.
After 3 years’ service . . 2s. CM.
Private . . .. . . . . Is. o d.
After 1 year’s service . . Is. 2d.
~ 2 years’ ~ . . Is. Ad.
„ 3 „ „ .. Is. Bd.
6 (1744 )


(ii) Tradeswomen
Daily rates of pay
Group A
Group B
Group C
Group D
Group E
Warrant officer, Class I
7s.
10 d.
7s.
\0d.
7s. 10 d.
7s.
10 d.
7s.
lOd.
Warrant officer, Class II
6s.
2d.
6s.
2d.
6s. 2d.
6s.
2d.
6s.
2d.
Staff-Serjeant
5s.
Id.
55.
Id.
5s. Id.
OS.
Id.
5s.
Id.
Serjeant ..
4s.
10 d.
45.
10 d.
As. 10 d.
4s.
10 d.
4s.
10 d.
Lance-serjeant ..
45.
8 d.
4s.
6d.
4s. 0 d.
3s.
6d.
3s.
2d.
Corporal ..
45.
0 d.
3s.
10 d.
3s. Ad.
2|.
10 d.
2s.
8 d.
After 3 vears’ service as
above
—
3s.
0 d.
2s.
10 d.
Lance-corporal ..
3s.
8 d.
3s.
6d.
3s. 0 d.
2s.
3d.
2s.
Ad.
After 3 years’ service ..
—
2s.
8 d.
2s.
3d.
Private—
Class I
3s.
0 d.
2s.
8 d.
2s. 2d.
After 3 years’ service
3s.
6 d.
3s.
2d.
2s. 10 d.
Class II
2s.
2d.
2s.
0 d.
Is. 10 d.
15.
8 d.
After 1 year’s service
2s.
Ad.
2s.
2d.
2s. 0 d.
Is.
10 d.
,, 2 years’ ,,
2s.
6 d.
2s.
Ad.
2s. 2d.
2s.
0 d.
„ 3 „
3s.
0 d.
2s.
10 d.
2s. 8 d.
2s.
3d.
Class III
15.
10 d.
15.
8 d.
Is. 6 d.
Is.
Ad.
15.
2d.
After 1 year’s service
2s.
0 d.
15.
10 d.
Is. 8 d.
Is.
6 d.
15.
Ad.
,, 2 years’ ,,
2s.
2d.
2s.
0 d.
Is. 10 d.
15.
8 d.
15.
3d.
„ 3 „ „
2s.
8 d.
2s.
6 d.
2s. Ad.
2s.
2d.
2s.
0 d.
WAR PAY
(a) War pay at the rate of Ad. a day is issuable in addition
to the above daily rates (see para. 284).
[h) War-time proficiency pay at the rate of Ad. a day is
issuable under the conditions laid down in paras. 276-
279 and 282.
(c) Special proficiency pay at the rate of 2d. a day is issuable
under the conditions laid down in paras. 280-282.
STAFF PAY
(i) Officers of the rank of Chief Commander, Senior
Commander or Junior Commander . . 3s. Ad.
Officers below the rank of Junior Commander Is. Bd.
(ii) Officers of the rank of Chief Commander or
below holding appointments in the War
Office for which special rates of pay are not
provided, in addition to staff pay under
sub-para, (i) above . . . . .. Is. Ad.
(For conditions of issue of Staff Pay, see para. 269.)


CORPS, ENGINEER AND SIGNAL PAY
Chief Commander .. . . .. . . 2s. Qd.
Senior Commander . . . . . . 2s. o d.
Junior Commander .. . . . . Is. 3 d.
Subaltern ... . . . . . . . . 9 d.
Second-Subaltern . . . . .. .. 9 d.
(For conditions of issue of Corps, Engineer and Signal Pay,
see para. 270.)
ADDITIONAL PAY
Additional pay at the following daily rates shall be admis-
sible to auxiliaries :
(a) Cooks
An auxiliary drawing pay on the non-tradeswomen’s
scale who is employed within the authorized establishment
of cooks :
(i) If qualified as a Class I non-tradeswoman cook . . Qd.
(ii) If qualified as a Class II non-tradeswoman cook 4 d.
(iii) If not qualified as a cook under (i) or (ii) , . 2d.
The qualifications and conditions of issue of additional pay
for other ranks of the A.T.S. will be as laid down from time to
time by the Army Council.
(fe) Auxiliaries Employed at Proof and Experimental
Ranges
An auxiliary employed at a proof or experimental range or
establishment :—-
Warrant officers Not exceeding Bd. a day.
N.C.Os. . . Not exceeding 4 d. a day after 6 months’
service as a paid N.C.O. in an Ex-
perimental Establishment.
Not exceeding Qd. after 12 months’
service as above.
Not exceeding B d. after 2 years’ service
as above.
Privates .. Not exceeding Ad. after 6 months’
satisfactory service at an Experi-
mental Establishment.
Not exceeding Qd. after 2 years’ such
service.
The general conditions of issue of additional pay to auxiliaries
of the A.T.S. will be those applicable to Army warrant officers,
N.C.Os. and the men employed at Proof and Experimental
Establishments.
(For conditions of issue of additional pay, see para. 275.)


Group A
Group B
Group C
Group D
Cook (Hospital), Class I.
Draughtswoman
(Architectural).
„ (Mechanical)
,, Topographical).
Instrument Mechanic.
Radio Mechanic.
Turner.
Wireless Mechanic.
Cook.
Cook (Hospital).
Machinist Metal.
Modeller Camouflage.
Operator Keyboard.
Operator, Special (R. Signals
duties).
Photographic developer.
Watchmaker.
Woodturner and Machinist.
Baker.
Clerk, General duties.
Clerk, Technical Mechanical
Transport.
Clerk, R.A.P.C. duties.
Painter-decorator.
Projectionist Cinema.
Storewoman Technical Duties.
(R.A.O.C. duties).
Tailoress.
Textile refitter.
Tinsmith and Whitesmith.
Chiropodist.
Cycle repairer.
Driver Mechanic.
Operator, Switchboard Tele-
phone (R. Signals duties).
Vulcanizer.
APPENDIX X (i)
TRADE GROUPS (A.T.S.)


APPENDIX X (ii)
EMPLOYER’S CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY
has applied to be rated
for tradeswoman’s pay as a
Would you be good enough to reply below to the questions
asked ? ~ ,
(1) In what capacity was she employed by you .
(2) What was her ordinary rate of pay without bonus or other
additions ?
a week of • .hours.
(3) Do you consider her a good *
fair *
or indifferent worker at her trade ? *
(4) What was her position in your employ ?
Signed
* Cross out those which do not apply.


APPENDIX XI
ARMY DEPENDANTS’ ALLOWANCE
Application by General Service Auxiliary of A.T.S.
It is important that the portions of this form which apply in
your case should be carefully and fully completed, otherwise
delay is bound to occur.
The particulars given by you will be subject to investigation,
and any false statement may lead to serious consequences.
PART I
Auxiliary’s surname (in Block Letters)
Auxiliary’s Christian names
Auxiliary’s Army number
Auxiliary’s full home address
Date of joining for Service (to be inserted by Regimental
Paymaster)
PART II
1. I hereby apply for the grant of a Dependant’s Allowance
to the undermentioned person on the ground that for the last
I have contributed regularly towards
{State period)
the cost of his (her) maintenance, apart from any payment for
services rendered to me.
2. I agree that, whether Dependant’s Allowance is granted
or rejected, an allotment at the rate required by the regula-
tions * for the grant of the allowance be deducted from my
pay.
3. I declare that the particulars given by me on this form
are true and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Date Signature
PART 111
4. Full name and postal address of dependant
4s. 8 d. a week for an auxiliary on a rate below 2s. 6d. a day and
increasing with higher rates of pay.


5 Dependant’s relationship to auxiliary
6. [a) Average rate of auxiliary’s payment to dependant
during the six months before joining the colours.
jet weeK
[State amount) \a month
(6) Was the auxiliary residing in the same household as the
dependant ?
(c) Are you married or single ?
d) If married, was payment to dependant made from your
own resources or your husband s
7. (a) Name and Address of auxiliary’s employer m civil
life
(b) Occupation and check number (if any)
K / a week
(c) Auxiliary’s wages or salary m civil life mon th'
(d) Auxiliary’s other income in civil life . .
( e) Amount under ( c) and/or ( d ) continuing during Army
completed by the company, etc., commander when
the claim is made by the auxiliary after enlistment.)
8. Regimental Paymaster, A.T.S., Nottingham.
The restriction of cash issues by the amount of the appro-
priate contributory allotment, viz a day, has
been noted in A.B. 64, Part 11.
Date Signature


Army No.
Rank and Name
Platoon
Particulars of
Casualties and
date
1. Posting-in
W/2793 ..
Private Smith, E. I.
10th Kent.
Posted from 41st
(Orderly).
Essex Platoon
•
•
“ C ” Coy. Which
Group A.T.S.
w.e.f. 31.12.40.
Authority: i/c
Records A.T.S./
Post/7339 dated
25.12.40.
APPENDIX XII
EXAMPLE OF PART I ORDERS
Unit. “A’’Company, “ Blank ” Group, A.T.S., No. 1.
Daily Orders—Part I Date, Ist January, 1941.
1. Meals
Meals will in future be at the following times :
Breakfast . . . . . . ~. 0730 hours.
Dinner 1245 „
Tea 1730 „
2. Church Parade
All other ranks off duty will parade on Sunday, 3rd January,
at 1000 hours. They will fall in on the road outside “A ”
Block.
J. J. Smith,
Junior Commander,
Comdg. A Coy., Blank Group A.T.S.
EXAMPLE OF PART II ORDERS
Unit. “B ” Company, “Blank” No. 1 Group, A.T.S.,
Southern Command.
Serial No. 1 Date, Ist January, 1941.
Daily Orders—Part II
{Other Ranks)
Last Part II Orders Published,
No. 287. Dated 30th December, 1940.


Army No.
Rank and Name
Platoon
Particulars of
Casualties and
date
2. Leave
W/41657 ..
Corppral Jones, J. P.
(Clerk).
15th Kent.
Privilege leave
with H.R.R.A.
from 1.1.41 to
8.1.41.
3. Hospital
W/21793 ..
Serjeant Brown, M.
15 th Kent.
Adm. A.T.S. Recep-
(Cook).
tion Station w.e.f.
1.1.41.
J. J. Smith
Junior Commander,
Comm. B Coy. Blank Group A.T.S.
HEADINGS FOR PART II ORDERS
Headings Remarks
Enrolments . . . . Date and place to be stated.
Embodied .. . . Date must he stated.
Final approval . . Date must be stated.
Allotment of army When notified by Officer i/c Records,
number.
Employment .. (If not a tradeswoman.)
Mustering .. . . If trade tested ; classification to be
stated.
Promotions and ap- Date of effect to be quoted,
pointments.
Reversions of rank . , In cases of reversion “at own re-
quest ” certificate to this effect
signed by the auxiliary concerned,
to be forwarded to Officer i/c
Records.
Tradeswomen . . Class and/or grade in which employed
to be stated. Certificate of pro-
ficiency to be forwarded to Officer
i/c Records. New rate of pay to
which entitled to be stated, and the
date from which entitlement begins.
Remustering . . From one trade to another after
testing.
Attachments . . Full details to be published; i.e.
for pay, rations, accommodation,
discipline. If attached to military
unit or formation for duty, full
details to be stated.
Absence without leave See para. 163 (c).
6* —(1744)


Headings Remarks
Postings .. . . Date and authority to be quoted. It
should be noted that postings from
one company to another, within a
group, should be designated “ Inter-
Group Postings”. Postings are
movements of personnel between
groups.
Name, change of . . Details to be stated.
Address, change of .. Details to be stated. Applies to Local
Service personnel only.
Next-of-kin, change of Relationship to be stated.
Next-of-kin, change of Details to be stated,
address.
Courses of Instruction Authority for course to be stated and
result. If “ Qualified to instruct ”
this should be stated.
Hospital .. . . Nature and date of injury (if any) to
be stated and proceedings of Court
of Inquiry to be forwarded to Officer
i/c Records. Nature of illness for
which a member is admitted to
hospital will not be stated.
Civil Convictions . . Date of arrest and conviction and
sentence to be stated.
Leave of Absence .. Whether privilege, compassionate or
sick leave and period granted to be
stated.
Release to Unem- Date and period to be stated. To be
ployed List (Other struck off strength of unit.
Ranks).
Proficiency Pay . . Date it began to be stated.
Increments of Pay . . Date increment began to be stated.
Change of Conditions {a) From local to general service
of Service.
(&) From one employment to another,
other than recognized trades.
Accommodation . . Accommodation, in receipt of rations
in kind or ration allowance, fuel and
light allowance to be stated.
Discharge . . . . Date, paragraph of regulations and
sub-paragraph of appendix and
authority for discharge to be
stated.
Death . . '. . Date, place and cause of death to be
stated. Also, if death was or was
not attributable to military service.


APPENDIX XIII
ARMY FORMS AND BOOKS
Applications for array forms and books should be addressed
to the appropriate Army Forms Depot, on A.F. L 1350.
Indents should not be rendered in duplicate.
Applications from formations, units and establishments in
the several commands will be addressed as follows :
Command Army Forms Depot
Southern . . . . Chalford, Near Stroud, Glos.
Northern, Scottish and
Western . . . , St. Aidan’s School, Widnes, Lancs.
Other Commands .. Wandsworth, London, S.W. 18.
Supplies of Unemployment Insurance Forms (U.I. 3/X.S.)
should be demanded from the Ministry of Labour and National
Service, Montague House, Whitehall, S.W.I.
Plain ruled books which bear numbers with the prefix
“ S.O.’' are a stationery supply, and should be indented for on
A.F. L 1391.
The term “ stationery ” should not be applied to army forms
and books ; its use causes delay in tracing demands.
The undermentioned forms and books should where necessary
be adapted for the use of the A.T.S.
Army Form
No.
A 2. Board of Officers or Court of Enquiry, Proceedings
of.
A 16. Receipt Form (pads of 100).
B 103. Service and Casualty Form.
B 115. Court of Enquiry on Illegal Absence of a
Soldier, Declaration of.
B 116. Court-Martial, Application for.
B 117. Report on Injuries (other than wounds received in
action).
B 122. Field Conduct Sheet. (Loose or in Cases of 150.
Also empty cases.)
B 124. Descriptive Report of Deserter or Absentee for
Police Gazette.
B 158. Nominal Roll of Officers ; All Arms Monthly.
(War.)
B 158 b. Return of Officer Cadet Training Units.


Army Form
No.
B 173. Leave of Absence, Officers’, Application for. .
B 175. Leave, Sick, Officer’s, Application for.
B 178. Medical Examination Record and Medical History
Sheet (B 178 a in lieu).
B 179. Medical Report on a Soldier.
B 194 d. Recommendation for Advancement or Promotion
of an Officer.
B 194 e. Special Confidential Report on an Officer.
B 194 f. Recommendation for Change of Employment of
an Officer.
B 197. Trade Proficiency of Men tested in a recognized
Army Test, Certificate of.
B 198. Soldier’s Documents, Receipts for.
B 199 a. Record of Service of Officers.
B 199 b. Instructions for compiling A.F. B 199 a.
B 203. Special Enlistment, Application for, with Descrip-
tive Return.
B 204 a. Application for Transfer to T.A. Reserve.
B 252. Charge Report.
B 256. Morning Sick Report; Medical Inspection Report.
B 265. Weekly Bill of Fare.
B 278. Cover for Duplicate Attestation (suspended in
War).
B 295. Soldier’s Pass (pads of 50).
B 295 a. Soldier’s Furlough (pads of 50).
B 2069. Offence Report (pads of 50).
B 2606. Identity Card (pads of 25).
E 511. A.T.S. Attestation.
E 511 b. A.T.S. Reference Form.
E 511 c. A.T.S. Medical Certificate.
E 51 Id. A.T.S. Officer’s Outfit Grant.
E 51 le. A.T.S. Identification Certificate.
E 51 Ih. A.T.S. Notice to Join.
E 51 10. Consent of parents for enrolment of a girl.
E 511 p. A.T.S. Duration Engagement Attestation.
E 51 Iq. A.T.S. Notice Paper, Duration Engagement.
Esllr. A.T.S. Calling-up Letter.
E 51 Is. A.T.S. Payments on Enrolment.
E 51 lx. A.T.S. Discharge Certificate.
E 51 lu. A.T.S. Equipment and Clothing Receipt.
E 51 Iz. A.T.S. Statement of Qualification.
F 704 Bedding dirty (barrack) certificate of exchange for
clean.
F 709. Contracts, Acceptance of Tender.
F 727. Fuel, Light and Paillasse Straw Account.


Army Form
No.
F 739. Record of By-Products.
F 757. Indent for Rations.
F 765. Requisition for Barrack Stores to be Exchanged or
Replaced.
G 936. Precautions against Fire (Poster).
G 982 d. Voucher for stores.
G 985. Discrepancy Report, Stores Charged and Received
(pads of 100).
G 998. General Equipment, etc., Lost or Damaged, List
of (pads of 100).
G 1033. Issue and Receipt Voucher (pads of 150). ~ • .
G 1062. Quarters, Rooms, etc.. Certificate of Unit being in
possession of.
G 1063. Hastener for Supply of Ordnance Stores (pads of
50).
H 1119 a. Special Size Roll.
H 1119 b. Special Size Roll (Breeches).
H 1157. Transfer Clothing and Equipment Statement.
H 1172. Condemned Public Clothing for Disposal.
H 1179. Personal Clothing and Necessaries, free issue to
Recruits, Monthly Indent.
H 1179 b. Monthly Indent for Clothing and Necessaries (free
replacement issues) to Soldiers.
H 1181 b. Necessaries issued on Payment, Summary. (In
lieu of A.F. H 1181 a for War use.)
H 1181 c. Necessaries issued on Payment, Monthly Indent.
(In lieu of A.F. H 1181 for War use.)
I 1214. Ophthalmic examination of and Provision of
(War). Spectacles to a potential recruit by National
Eye Service.
I 1240. Prescription for Spectacles (pads of 100).
I 5033. Dental Treatment Card.
K 1306. Urgent repairs necessary through fair wear and
tear, Requisition for.
K 1308. Repairs and minor maintenance services necessary
through fair wear and tear, Requisition for
monthly.
L 1350. Army Forms and Books, Supplementary Indent for.
N 1483. Application for Particulars of Soldier’s Rate of
Pay and Balance (pads of 50).
N 1487. Cash, Requisition for.
N 1499. Statement of Pay, etc., issued Monthly by Re-
cruiting Officers to Recruits.
N 1501. Paymaster’s Balance Sheet and Statement of
Liabilities and Assets.


Army Form
No.
N 1503. Paymaster’s Notification of Adjustments in
Account.
N 1508. Copy of Cash Book to be rendered with the Dupli-
cate Imprest Account.
N 1513/ Acquittance Roll. (This Roll is issued in pads,
1531 a. each consisting of 50 copies of A.F. N 1513 and
4 copies of A.F. N 1531 a. The cover for these
forms is A.B. 6.)
N 1513 c. Home Acquittance Roll.
N 1514. Regimental Funds—Account and Balance Sheet.
N 1518. Regimental Paymaster’s Notification of Adjust-
ments to be made in Company Accounts.
N 1531 a. Sub-Accountants, Sums Received and Expended
by (pads of 50) (see A.F. N 1513).
O 1667. Medical Attendance, Civilian Medical Practi-
tioner’s Bill.
O 1771. Travelling Expenses, Claim for.
O 1796 a. Voluntary Allotment of Pay, Application by a
Soldier to Commence, Re-coramence, Reduce,
Stop or Transfer.
O 1809. Notification by Officers Commanding of Par-
ticulars of Accounts of Soldiers Transferred, Re-
posted, Discharged or Relegated to Reserve.
O 1845 a. National Health Insurance ; Card to be completed
(War.) in cases of death, desertion, discharge or relega-
tion to the Reserve by Officer i/c Records.
P 1904. Baggage ; Railway Consignment Note.
P 1922. General Service and Bill for Stores, Materials and
Supplies purchased and for Hired Transport ;
Contractor’s Bill.
P 1925. Expense Voucher, General Service ; Articles struck
off charge.
P 1934. Lodging, Furniture, Fuel and Light Allowance,
Claim for.
P 1940. Postage, Telegrams, Money and Postal Orders,
Monthly Certificate in support of Charges for.
P 1954. Stoppages for (1) Articles of Clothing and Neces-
saries Lost; (2) Equipment Lost, etc., Soap
issued on Payment, Return of.
W 3017. Hospital Admission Report.
W 3044. Certificate of Relegation to Reserve.
W 3045. Change of Address of Reservist.
W 3149. Medical Report on soldier relegated to Reserve or
discharged otherwise than on Invaliding.


Army Book
No.
27. Hospital Admissions and Discharges.
39. Hospital Diary.
55. Indent for Rations.
64-1. Soldier’s Pay Book, Part I.
64-2. Soldier’s Pay Book, Part 11.
69. Cash Book, Squadron, Battery or Company.
123 m. Paymenf for billeting (War.)
161. Courts of Inquiry ; Records of Declaration.
165. Equipment Ledger, Blank Headings—for miscel-
laneous Stores.
193. Letters, Register of.
205. Officers’ Railway Warrant Book.
395. Regimental Funds —Combined Cash Book and
Ledger.
397. Regimental Funds, P.R.l.’s Cash Book.
422. Railway Warrant Book, Other Ranks.
431. Receipts for Documents delivered by Hand.


APPENDIX XIV
Form T
(Adapted for use by the A.T.S.)
Order for the Removal in Military Custody of an Absentee
without Leave, awaiting Escort.
To the Court of Summary Jurisdiction or Police Officer
concerned at
Whereas (No Rank Name!!!..!!!! .),
of the (insert unit), is now in your
custody as an absentee without leave awaiting escort, I, the
undersigned, being the competent authority, do hereby order
you to deliver the said prisoner to the escort producing this
authority.
Signed at this day of , 19 .
(Signature)
O.C. Unit. ’ *


APPENDIX XV
Application for Release to the Unemployed List
Part I
In accordance with A.T.S. Regulations, 1941, para. 92, I
beg to make application for release from A.T.S. duties and’to
be placed on the Unemployed List for a period of
(not to exceed three months) on the following grounds *
{see notes below).
Date
Signature and rank of Applicant.
Authority for release O.C. Unit {see “ Defini-
tions ” A.T.S. Regulations)
Confirmed by Officer i/c Records.
Part II
(To be completed if release is approved)
1. I hereby acknowledge that I have retained the under-
mentioned items of uniform on proceeding to the Unemployed
List. I undertake not to wear them while on the Unemployed
List, to keep them in good order, and return them in good
order when called upon to do so, or to make good the value
of articles not so returned.
2. While on the unemployed List I understand that no pay
or allowances are due to me and that such period will not be
reckoned as service for the purpose of any gratuity or other
emoluments which may be granted in respect of full-time
services.
3. Being subject to Military Law as a member of the Armed
Forces of the Crown, I undertake to return to duty on the
expiry of the period granted under Part I above, and to hold
* Notes. —
(a) State whether on ground of family needs and other urgent reasons, or
( b ) if having held a key position in industry you are required for in-
structional purposes.
(c) other reasons.


myself at all times available to return immediately to duty
if and when so ordered. I also undertake not to leave the
United Kingdom without the permission of the Officer i/c
Records.
Signature and rank of Applicant.
Unit.
Date
(Release will be carried out by the Company Commander
concerned.)


INDEX
. A
PARA.
Absence without leave—
apprehension of absentee, termination of absence .. .. .. 156
court of inquiry on . . .. .. . . . . .. . . 163
declaration of court of inquiry on .. .. .. . . .. 372
entry in, field conduct sheet .. .. .. .. .. .. 367
escort for absentee .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 165
forfeiture of pay for .. .. .. .. .. .. 156
inventory of clothing, etc., to be made in case of .. .. .. 163
notification in regimental orders .. .. .. .. .. 163
order for removal of absentee, escort to be provided with .. .. 165
police, report to, of absentee .. .. .. . . .. .. 163
procedure, with regard to .. .. • • • • • • 163, 164
record of, declaration of .. .. .. .. . • .. 372
rules for calculating .. .. .. .. .. .. ..156
subsequent to conviction by court-martial . . . . . . .. 183
surrender of absentee, termination of absence . . . . .. 156
termination of .. .. .. .. .. • • ■ ■ ■ • 156
Absentee recruits, method of dealing with .. . . . . .. 164
Accommodation stores, issue of .. .. .. .. . • •. 262
Accounts —
Army, audit of .. .. .. • • ■ • • • • • • • 51
bank balance, C.O. to obtain certificate each quarter . . .. 31
Accidents, notification of .. .. • • • • • • ■ • 329
~ and injuries, courts of inquiry on .. .. .. 331
Additional pay, when issuable, see “ Pay.”
Address of auxiliaries, enquiries for .. .. .. .. .. 353
Administration, general, how carried out .. .. .. 11-14
Administrative services, command and training .. .. 11-14
Admonition —
awarded to N.C.Os. and privates .. . . • • ■ • 154, 156
non-entry in conduct sheet . . .. • • . . •• _ • • 307
power of C.O. to award .. • ■ • • • • • • 154, 156
Age limit of officers .. .. . • ■ • • • • • • • 51
Aliens, employment of as officers . . • • • • •• • • 35
Allotments of Pay, voluntary .. .. .. • • • • • • 285
Allowances—
colonial .. . * . ■ ■ • • • - • • • • • 292
contingent .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • 293
dependants’ .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • 294
field .. .. • • ■ • • • • • • • • • 291
ration, lodging, fuel and light . . .. .. • • • • 286
toilet articles, cleaning materials and haircutting 266
travelling .. .. .. • • • • • • ■ • 287, 289
Anniversaries, ornaments and emblems worn on .. .. .. 242
Applications from officers for interviews .. .. . • • • 58
Appointment, first commissions, see “ Commissions.”
Approval, final, carried out .. .. .. • • • • • • 73
~ ~ not carried out .. .. ... .. •• •> 7 4
Arm}', savings scheme .. .. .. . • • • • • • • 205
Army Act—
application of .. .. .. • • • • • • • • ■ •
sections relating to A.T.S. .. .. . • • • • • ■ • 132


PARA.
Army number, allotment of .. .. .. .. .. .. 358
Arrest —
charge report, delivery of .. .. .. 143
duties, performance of, while in .. .. .. .. .. 142
general instructions regarding .. .. .. .. 137-140
in cases of drunkenness .. .. .. .. .. .. 14-^
N.C.Os. and privates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 142
officers and warrant officers .. .. .. .. .. .. 141
release from, on remand .. .. .. .. .. 142, 151
~ ~ on electing to be tried by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. 152
„ „ when evidence insufficient or not forthcoming .. 151
Audit board, duties of .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Auxiliary Territorial Service —
administration of .. .. .. .. 11-14
authorization of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
enrolment in .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65-76
function of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
supervision and training, responsibility for .. .. .. 11-14
Auxiliaries—
acting rank .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
addresses enquired for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 353
discharge of .. .. . . .. .. .. . . 83-85
enrolment of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65-76
failing to obey orders of recall .. .. .. .. .. 94
promotion of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 78-82
records of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96-101
war substantive rank, periods for attainment .. .. .. 79
B
Badges—
good conduct, see “ Good Conduct Badges.”
of rank, auxiliaries .. .. .. .. . >. ... .. 253
wearing of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 233
„ when authorized .. .. .. .. .. 241
Barrack damages .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 302
Barracks, marching in and out inspections . . . . . . 211-214
Birthday, The King’s, salutes on, see “ Salutes.”
Blankets, issue of, to officers, with camp kit .. .. .. .. 249
Boards—
audit .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. 31
of survey for clothing .. .. .. .. .. .. ..« 261
Books, Army, used in A.T.S. .. .. .. .. .. App. XIII
Borrowing, money from privates by warrant officers and N.C.Os. .. 129
C
Cadets—
advance of pay to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 268
grant to, for outfit.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 248
Camp kit, allowance for .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 249
Canteens .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 230
Casualties, procedure for dealing with .. .. .. .. .. 370
Caterer to be appointed to serjeant’s mess .. .. .. .. 227
Censorship .. .. .. .. .. ~ . . .. .. 188
Censure of superiors forbidden .. .. .. .. . . 186
Ceremonial .. .. .. ~ .. . , .. 373-390
Certificate of Discharge, see “ Discharge.”
Character of officer impugned .. ~ .. .. .. 187


Charge— para.
delivery of .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 143
investigation of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145
disposal of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148-152
Civil authorities, deference to be paid to .. .. .. 128
„ courts, see “ Courts, civil.”
Civil employment—
release to Unemployed List to return to key position in .. .. 92
certificate of employer in respect of ~. .. .. .. .. 274
~ ~ qualifications for .. .. .. .. .. 86
Civil power, charges by, instructions with regard to .. .. 160, 161
„ ~ N.C.O. convicted by, case to be reported .. .. 162
Civilian employees, replacement of .. .. .. .. .. 19
Claims, public, recovery of .. .. .. .. .. .. 301
Cleanliness, auxiliaries, clothing, etc., officers to attend to .. .. 26
Clothing—
accounting for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 255-263
condemned .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 261
disposal of on discharge .. .. .. .. .. .. 260
documents relating to .. .. .. .. /.. .. .. 255
loss or deficiency of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 259
~ ~ stoppages for .. .. .. .. 264, 301
provision of .. .. .. .. .. .. .'. 250-252
~ for Passive Air Defence.. .. .. • .. .. 254
transfer of . . .. .. .. . . .. .. 257-259
washing contracts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 265
Colonial allowance, see “ Allowances.”
Command-
chain of, for correspondence .. .. .. .. .. .. 333
general rules .. .. .. .. .. •. .. 117-119
method of, by officer towards subordinates .. .. .. .. 126
temporary powers .. .. .. .. • • • • .. 26
warrant officers and N.C.Os., method of .. .. .. 126
Commanders, military, responsibility of .. .. .. .. 12
Commanding officer —
definition of .. .. .. •• •• •• •• , ■ 120
detachment, powers of .. .. .. .. .. 120
duties and responsibilities of .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Official Secrets Acts, etc., responsibility for compliance with .. 124
powers of command .. .. .. .. •• .. 117-119
punishments by, delegation of powers .. .. .. .. 120
report to inspecting officer as to conduct and knowledge of officers 24
Commissions —
appointment .. .. .. ... • • • • • • 33
candidates for . * .. .. .. .. . • • • • • 34
form of .. .. .. .. .. . • • • .. 32, App. IV
officer called upon to resign .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
Communication —
direct with War Office of certain units .. .. .. .. 333
Company, designation of .. .. . • • • • • • • 6
Company, etc., commander —
attendance of, when charge reserved for C.O.’s award .. .. 148
awards by, entry of .. .. .. • • • • • • ..148
delegation of power to, by C.O. .. .. .. . • .. 120
independent company, powers of .. .. . • •. .. 120
investigation of charges by .. .. .. .. •• •• 146
powers of, as to punishments .. .. .. .. •. .. 120
Company independent, definition of .. .. .. .. ■ • 7


PARA.
Complaints of officers and auxiliaries .. .. .. .. .. 185
Compliments, on the march .. .. .. .. .. .. 386
Conduct—
badges, see “ Good Conduct Badges.”
distinguished, entries in documents .. .. .. .. .. 367
Confidential—
documents .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 342-347
reports .. . . . . .. . . .. .. .. 59-63
Confinement—
to barracks, how carried out .. .. .. .. .. .. 156
to barracks, limits of, extent .. .. .. .. . . . . 157
Contingent allowance, see “ Allowances.”
Contract, washing . . .. . . . . . . .. . . 265
Conviction—
by civil power, entry in Field Conduct Sheet .. .. .. 367
by civil power of N.C.0., to be reported .. .. .. .. 162
by F.G.C.M., entry in Field Conduct Sheet .. .. ~ . , 367
Cooking-
officers to undergo course of instruction in cookhouse .. . . 23
training for .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 193
Correspondence—
general instructions .. .. .. .. .. .. 332-341
to whom addressed .. .. .. .. .. .. ..341
Court of inquiry-
absence, illegal, on .. .. .. .. .. .. ..163
accidents and injuries, on .. .'.. .. .. .. 331
assembly, composition, etc. .. .. .. .. .. 163
declaration of, on illegal absence . . .. .. .. ~ 372
fire in barracks, on .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 218
injuries, on .. .. .. .. . . .. .. ~ 331
Courts, civil—
charges before, attendance of officer at .. .. .. .. 161
conduct sheets, entries of convictions by . . .. .. .. 367
Courts-martial —
accused, escort for .. ~ .. .. .. • .. .. 165
attendance of officers at .. .. . . .. .. 172
charges, investigated before arraignment . , .. .. 146, 150
composition of, for trial of an—
auxiliary .. .. i. .. . . .. .. .. 171
officer .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 171
conduct sheet, entry of conviction in . . , . .. ~ 367
convening authority .. .. .. .. . . .. 169
delay in .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 167
entry of, in field conduct sheet of an—
auxiliary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 367
officer .. . . .. .. . . . . . . .. 365
not to be delayed .. .. .. .. .. .. ..167
officer remanded for trial by, report to War Office. . .. .. 141
proceedings, promulgation of .. , . .. .. . . 182-184
punishments that may be inflicted by .. .. .. 166
release from arrest —-
on electing to be tried by .. , . .. .. . . . , 152
on remand for trial by .. .. .. .. .. , . 142
pending promulgation . . . . . . . . . . 142
report of delay in application for .. .. .. .. .. 168
right of auxiliary to elect trial by, and to reconsider .. .. 152
Crown, Royal salute to, see “ Salutes.”


D PARA.
Damages, recoveries on account of . . . . .. .. 301
Deaths—
inquests .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 331
registration and notification of .. .. .. .. 371
reports, casualties in theatre of war .. .. .. .. .. 370
Debts —
officers unable to meet, procedure .. .. .. .. 187
Declaration —
illegal absence, see “ Courts of Inquiry.”
Defaulters—
attendance at parades, duties, etc. .. .. . . , . 156
fatigues to be performed by .. .. .. . . .. 156
not to undergo punishment which has lapsed . . . . . . 157
Deficiencies, clothing necessaries, etc. .. .. .. . . . . 259
Delegation of powers—
C.O. to company commander .. .. .. .. .. 120
Dental treatment —
cards .. .. .. ... .. .. . . . . 362, 363
general instructions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 316
inspections .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... 314
insufficient dental care to be brought to notice of C.O. .. . . 315
on leave .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. _ .. 317
Dependent’s allowances, see “ Allowances.”
Disability awards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 300
Discharge—t
authorization and grounds for . . .. .. .. App. VI
certificates, in testimonial form .. .. .. .. .. 86
~ lost, application to be made to officer i/c records .. 90
~ mentioned in despatches .. .. . . .. 89
~ preparation of .. .. .. .. .. 86-91
civil employment, after, qualifications to be recorded .. .. 86
documents, disposal of .. .. .. .. .. 101
enrolled, not finally approved .. .. .. .. .. 74
leave, before .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83
medical board .. .. . . .. . . .. .. .. 327
notice to run concurrently with leave .. .. .. .. 83
pregnancy, for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 330
publication in orders .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 350
misstatement of age .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65
unemployed list, while on .. .. . . . . . . .. 92
Discipline—
responsibility for .. .. .. .. .. .. 122, 123
warrant officers and N.C.Os. .. .. .. .. .. .. 126
Disease, notification of .. .. .. .. .. .. 329
Disposal of charges .. .. .. .. .. . . 148-152
Distinguished conduct, entries of .. .. .. .. .. 367
Divine service, attendance at .. . . .. .. .. .. 206
Documents —
auxiliaries, disposal of .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
~ ~ on becoming non-effective .. .. .. 101
discharge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • ■ 101
officers, disposal of .. .. .. .. .. . . 53, 54
personal, to be registered when sent by post .. .. .. 338
protected, loss of .. . . .. .. .. .. 347
„ method of despatch .. .. .. .. .. 344
~ security of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 335
release to Unemployed List, disposal of .. .. . . • • 92
secret, security and confidential, general instructions .. 342-347


Y-v . t . PARA.
Dogs in barracks or quarters .. .. . . .. # . . . 210
Dress, see also “ Uniform.”
general instructions ... .. .. .. 233-244
civilian clothes, when worn .. . . . . . . 244
mourning bands .. .. .. ” ’ ’ “ ‘' 243
Passive Air Defence, see “ Clothing.”
Drill, extra as punishment .. .. .. .. 156
Drunkenness—
arrest, in cases of .. .. .. .. .. _ 144
conduct sheets, entry in .. .. .. ’" ’' ’' 357
Duties—
arrest, officers and warrant officers under arrest, not to perform.. 141
~ persons in, to perform if required .. .. .. .. 142
general responsibility for public money and stores .. 26
~ supervision of by C.O. .. .. .. ’ '' 26
performed by A.T.S “ ‘ ’ App jy
professional instruction of officers by C.O. .. .. * ’ _ 23
E
Emblems, national wearing of, see “ Uniform.”
Employment, civil, see “ Civil Employment.”
Emergency reserve of officers 34
Employments, Table of ’ ’ ’ ’ A nn TV
Equipment, list of ’/ Add VII
Escorts—
absentees, rules as to .. .. .. .. .. 105
funerals, military .. .. .. \ [ ’ ’ '' '' 207
Establishments—
basic App. 11l
general instructions .. .. .. .. _ _ 7
vacancies on for—
promotion ~ .. .. .. .. _ 7 g
tradeswomen .... .. " " “ *' 97 0
Enrolment—
girls under age .. .. .. .. .. 67
ex-officers .. - .. .. ;. * ’ '' '" ''
recruits .. .. .. .. ~ ’ ’ ' ’ ‘' '' gg
women having previous service .. ~ ’' ’' '' 7 g
~ with special qualifications .. .. ‘ 66
Evidence—
necessity for complete .. .. .. .. 150
on oath 1 7 3
rules for .. .. .. ]' ‘ * ‘' ‘' ‘V
summary of, see “ Summary of Evidence.”
„ to convening authority of F.G.C.M. .. 169
Extra duties, defaulters to perform .. .. ’ ” 156
Extravagance to be checked by C.O. . . .. . ' \\ “ 2 2
F
Field allowance, see “ Allowances.”
Field conduct sheets—
entries in .. .. .. > _ gg 7
~ forfeiture of good conduct badge .. .. .. 156
instructions, other ranks .. .. .. ' ’ ’ 356
- »r officers ~ ~ _ _ 365
lost .. .. .. .. .. .. _ 369
Field general court-martial, election to be tried by, right of .! 153


Fire — PARA.
precautions against .. .. .. .. .. ~ _ < 216
liability to make good damage caused by .. .. .. .. 217
Forms, Army used in the A.T.S. . ’ App. XIII
Fuel and light—
allowance .. .. .. .. .. .. 286
~ applications with regard to ... .. . ".341
Funds, audit boards with regard to .. .. .. ~ .. 31
Funerals—
escorts and attendants at .. .. .. .. .. 207
saluting of ", ! .. 380
Furniture, barrack, issue of .. .. .. .. .. .. 262
G
Gallantry, entry in field conduct sheet 367
Good conduct badges—
forfeiture of 106-110
issue of 102-105
publication of awards, etc., in orders . . .. . . .. 348
recommendation for .. .. .. .. .. . . " ’ 334
restoration of .. .. .. .. .. . '.llO
Grievances, redress of .. .. .. .. 185
Groups, formation of .. .. .. .. .. . . ] 8
Guards of honour—
composition of and when detailed .. .. .. .. 387-388
salutes by, .. .. .. .. .. .. 339
H
Health, responsibility of officers for .. .. .. .. 21 208
Hearsay, rules regarding .. .. .. .. ~ .. ' 174
Honours and salutes, see “ Salutes.”
Hospitals—
, auxiliaries sent to .. .. .. .. .. .. 322 323
employment of auxiliaries while in .. .. .. .. ’ 325
offences by auxiliaries while in .. .. .. . , . _ 324
I
Income tax .. .. .. .. .. _, . _ 290
Independent companies .. .. .. .. . , .. ’ 7
~ powers of C.O. .. .. .. .. , . 120
Increments of pay, see “ Pay.”
Information, communication of military .. .. ~ .. 188
Injuries, courts of inquiry on .. .. . . . . , . 331
Inoculation and vaccination .. .. . . .. .. ’ " 328
Inquiry, court of, see “ Court of Inquiry.”
Inspecting officer, grievances may be brought to notice of .. 185
Inspections—
by medical officers .. .. .. .. .. _, _ _ 209
complaints brought forward at .. .. .. .. .. 185
officers brought to notice at .. . . .. .. ' ’ '' 24
marching-in and marching-out .. .. .. ’' 2 i 1-214
monthly .. .. " " ..215
salutes at .. .. .. .... .. 390
Inspectors, A.T.S., duties of .. .... . ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ 10


Interview — para.
officers at War Office .. .. .. .. • • '• • • ■ 58
~ with member of Army Council . . .. • • . ■ 50
Invaliding, instruction regarding .. . . . . . . 327
Investigation of charges .. .. .. .. . • • • • • 145
K
King, the, royal salutes to, see “ Salutes.”
Kits, list of clothing, necessaries and equipment .. . . App. VII
L
Lance appointments —
reduction from .. .. .. ■ • - • ■ ■ • • 15a
~ ~ entry in conduct sheet .. .. .. . . 367
Leave of absence —
address while on .. .. .. • • • • ■ • • • 203
beginning and end of .. .. .. . • • • • • ■ • 204
compassionate .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 201
free travel on .. .. .. . • • • • • • • 289
instructions .. . . . . . • ■ • • • • • 197-204
medical treatment while on .. .. .. .. .. .. 308
plain clothes, while on .. .. .. . ■ ■ • • • 244
recommendations for .. .. .. . • • • ■ ■ • • 334
sick, authority for .. .. .. .. .. •. 198, 199
~ recommendations for by civilian medical practitioner .. 199
Letters—
form of .. .. . ■ • • ■ • • • • ■ • • • • 337
registered .. ... .. ... •• •• •• •• 335
subject of, to be stated .. .. .. .. ■ • • • 336
Lodging allowance, see “ Allowances.”
M
Marching-in and marching-out inspections .. .. .. 211-214
Marriages, certificates of .. .. , .. .. • • .. .. 55
Maternity benefit .. .. .. • ■ • • ■ • • • 299
Medical boards .. .. .. .. ■ • • ■ ■ • • • 327
„ history sheets .. .. .. . . • • • • • • 361
~ officers, detailed for duty .. .. .. •.. .. 318
Medical treatment —
general instructions . . . . . . • ■ • • • • 303 -308
officers . . . . .. ■■ • • • • • • • ■ 304-306
other ranks . . . . . . • • • • ■ • •• 307-308
Mental cases, instructions regarding . . . . . . . . . . 327
Mess —
officers —
accounts, balance and audit of .. .. .. • • • • 225
bills, monthly payment of .. .. .. ■ • • ■ • • 222
C.O. responsibility . . . . . . • • • • • • 221
entertainment, private friends . . . . . . . . . . 224
mess meetings . . . . .. • • • • • ■ • • 225
subscriptions .. .. .. .. • ■ ■ • ■ • ..221
rank and file —
general instructions . . . . .. . ■ • • 2-8, 229
responsibility for .. .. .. .. • • •• * • • 26


Mess-— continued.
serjeants— para.
accounts, submitted for audit .. .. .. .. 227
caterer .. .. .. .. .. .. ’ ’ ’ 227
honorary members .. ~ .. .. .. .. ’ ’ 227
meetings .. .. .. . . . ’ 997
. rules ‘ ‘ ] 926, 227
Misconduct, reduction of warrant officer or N.C.O. for ififi
Money—
borrowing from privates forbidden .. .. .. .. . . 129
public, recovery of .. .. .. .. .. .. _ 301
~ responsibility for .. .. .. .. .. ’ 26
Muster, recommendation for .. .. .. .. .. 334
N
National anthem, when to be played at salutes . . ~ .. 388
National Health Insurance —•
cards to auxiliaries on Unemployed List .. .. . . ~ 93
procedure with regard to .. .. .. .. .. 295 297
Necessaries—
deficiencies in, responsibility for .. . , . . .. .. 301
list of, issued .. .. .. .. .. .. .. App. VII
Nomenclature of units .. .. .. .. .... . . 6
Non-commissioned officers—
arrest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..142
borrowing money from privates forbidden .. .. . . . . 129
conduct sheets, entries in .. .. .. .. .. . , 367
conviction by civil court .. .. .. .. .. .. 162
instruction to .. .. . . .. . . . . .. 126
lance appointment, deprivation of .. .. .. ..155
liability to trial by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. .. .. ..135
punishments, summary, liability to .. .. .. .. .. 154
~ by F.G.C.M., liability to .. .. .. .. 166
ranks of App. II
reduction of .. .. ~ .. .. .. . . .. 135
removal from lance appointment .. .. .. .. .. 155
reprimand in field conduct sheet .. .. .. .. ; ’ 367
reproof of, in public .. .. .. .. .. .. ..127
responsibility for money .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
Notice paper (ESIIq), recruit to be served with . . .. .. 68
Notification of infectious diseases .. .. .. .. .. 329
O
Oath, evidence may be taken on .. .. .. .. .. .. 173
Offences — ;
first, treatment of .. , . .. .. .. .. . _ 125
grave, reference to superior authority .. .. .. .. 149
hospital, while in .. .. .. .. .. .. 324 325
investigation of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ’ 145
Offence reports .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 364
Officer i/c Records—-
returns of strength to be made to .. .. .. .. .. 357
Part II orders to be rendered to .. .. .. ~ .. 350
Officers —
age limit of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
appointment to another service .. .. .. .. .. 45
appointments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32-36
arrest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 141


Officers — continued. para.
bankrupt, etc. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • .. 187
character impugned . . . . . . ■ • • • • • ■ • 187
charge against, arrest of .. .. • • • • •• •• 141
command, exercise of temporary . . .. . . . ■ ■ • 25
conduct of, report by C.O. .. .. .. . . . ■ ■ • 24
court-martial on, ranks of members .. .. .. .. • • 171
dismissal from service recommended, report to War Office . . 62
duties of .. .. .. .. ... • • • • • • 20-29
efficiency, report on by C.O. .. .. .. .. ■ • • • 24
emergency reserve of .. .. .. .... .. .. 34
ex-officers allowed to enrol in ranks .. .. .. .. 72
extravagance, C.O. to discountenance . . . . .. .. 22
grievances, ventilated at inspections . . . . . . .. 185
health of the troops to be preserved by .. .. .. .. 21
inspection of barracks, attendance at .. . . .. .. 209
instruction of, responsibility for .. .. .. .. 23
interviews at War Office .. .. .. .. .. 50, 58
liability to trial by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. .. .. .. 133
marriage certificate to be forwarded .. .. ■ ■ ■ ■ .. 55
medically unfit .. .. .. . . • • • • . . 48
medical treatment of .. .. .. .. .. ' .. 304-306
money and stores public, responsibility for .. .. .. 26-29
not to reprove warrant officer’s or N.C.Os. in public .. . . 127
on probation, adversely reported on .. .. .. .. .. 36
Part II orders, instructions with regard to .. .. . . .. 55
precedence of .. .. .. .. .. 9
promotion .. . . . . . . .. • • ■ . 37-42
promotions, notification in War Office Orders .. .. .. 41
re-appointment of .. .. .. .. • • .. .. 44
recommended to resign their commissions ; report to War Office 62
records of .. .. .. .. .. .*. .. .. 55
report by C.O. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. 24
report, confidential .. .. .. .. .. .. 59-63
resignation of .. .. .. .. .. . . 43-50
~ ~ on compassionate grounds .. _.. .. 44,46
~ ~ for reasons other than misconduct . . . . .. 49
responsibility of —
for Part II Orders .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 352
for protected documents .. . . .. .. .. 343
officers in general as regards discipline .. .. .. .. 123
retirement of .. .. .. . . .. . . .. 51
salutes to .. ... .. .. .. .. .. 375-377
servants .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 232
struck off strength when absent from unit .. .. .. .. 57
superiors, praise or censure of forbidden .. .. ~ .. 186
unemployed list .. .. .. .... .. .. 64
0.C.T.U., procedure after course at .. .. .. .. .. 33
Official —
documents, method of dealing with “ protected ” ~ .. 342-347
~ not to be published .. .. .. .. .. 188
information not to be given to the press .. .. .. .. 189
Orderly room, disposal of offenders .. .. .. .. .. 148
Orders—
court-martial results, published in .. .. . . 182
Part I Orders .. .. .. .. ... 348, 349
Part II Orders (officers) .. .. .. .. .. .. 55
Part II Orders (other ranks) .. .. .. .. .. .. 350
scrutiny of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30


P PARA.
Parades, salutes on .. .. .. .. .. 3gg
Pass—
leave of absence .. .. .. .. .. .. jgy
sleeping out .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ '' 231
Pay—
additional .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • 275
advance of for cadet .. .. .. .. .. .. ’ ’ 268
corps, engineer and signal .. .. .. .. .. ’ * 270
deduction from .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 154 153
for absentee recruits, inadmissible .. .. .. .. .. ’ 164
forfeiture of for absence .. ’ .. .. .. .. ..156
„ entry in conduct sheet .. .. .. .. .. 367
hospital, while in .. .. .. .. .. ~ . ’ 323
increments of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 283
issue and rates—
officers.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 267
other ranks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 271, 272
proficiency, issue of .. .. .. .. .. .. 276-282
recoveries of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 158, 301
staff, issue of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ’ 269
tradeswomen, conditions and rates of .. .. .. .. 273
voluntary allotment of .. .. .. .. .. .. 285
war, issue of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 284
Platoons", formation of .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Police—
description of absentee, sent to .. .. .. .. 163
notification of absentee, from .. .. .. .. .. 165
prosecution by .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 160-162
Posting—
individual auxiliaries, responsibility for .. .. .. .. 12
recommendations for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 334
Powers of Command .. .. .. .. • .. 117-119
Precedence— *
general .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 9
on forfeiture of seniority .. .. .. .. . . ..180
ranks and appointments .. .. .. .. .. App. II
Pregnancy, discharge for .. .. .. .. ..' .. .. 330
Press—
communications to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 188
relations with, responsibility for .. .. ; .. 189
Private—
arrest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..142
liability to trial by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. .. .. 136
summary punishments .. .. .. .. .. ..156
punishments that may be inflicted by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. 166
Proficiency pay and special proficiency pay—
qualifications necessary to obtain .. .. .. .. 276-281
withdrawal and restoration .. .. .. .. .. .. 282
Protected documents, instructions regarding .. .. .. 342-347
Promotion—
confidential reports on fitness of officers for.. .. .. .. 59
notification in War Office Orders .. .. .. .. .. 41
recommendations for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 334
rules for, auxiliaries .. .. .. .. .. .. 78-82
~ ~ officers .. .. .. .. .. .. 37-42
second sabaltern to subaltern .. .. .. .. .. 40
standard of qualification .. .. ~ .. .. .. 78
Public claims, recovery of .. .. .. .. .. 301


Punishments— para.
conduct sheets, entry in .. .. .. .. .. .. 367
liable to be awarded by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. .. .. 166
N.C.Os 154, 166
officers .. .. .. .. .. • ■ ■ • • • • • 166
powers of commanders in regard to summary . . . . .. 120
privates .. .. .. .. .. • • ■ • • ■ 156, 166
summary .. .. .. .. . • • • • • 154-156
system of, not to be varied by officers .. .. .. .. 159
warrant officers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 166
R
Rank —
acting, officers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
~ auxiliaries .. .. . . .. .. .. 79, 80
temporary, officers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
~ is rank and not merely appointment .. .. .. 179
war substantive, auxiliaries .. .. .. .. .. 79, 80
~ ~ officers .. .. .. .. .. .. 40
Ranks and appointments .. .. .. .. .. App. II
Railway warrants —
issue of .. .. .. .. • • • • .. • • • • 289
to auxiliary returning from Unemployed List . . . . . . 92
Ration allowance, see “ Allowances.”
Ratio of employment .. .. .. .. .. .. 16, 17
Records—
auxiliaries .. .. . . .. .. .. 96—101, 358—363
officers .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 52-57, 354
Recruits—
dental inspection .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 314
discharge, causes, authorization . . .. .. ~ .. 83
~ not finally approved . . .. .. .. .. 74
general instructions .. .. .. .. - .. .. 65-76
training .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 192-196
Reduction —
conduct sheet, entry in .. .. .. .. .. .. 367
N.C.O. by F.G.C.M 166
~ on conviction by civil power .. .. .. .. 162
warrant officer .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 166
Registration of death .. .. .. .. .. .. 371
Regulations, officers to acquaint themselves with .. .. .. 30
Religion to be stated by recruit .. .. .. .. .. 69
Remand for further enquiries .. .. .. .. .. 150
Reports —
absentees, descriptive of .. .. . . .. . . 164
confidential, special .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 60
~ general instructions . . . . . . . . 59-63
Reprimand-
entry in conduct sheet of .. .. .. .. .. . . 367
power of C.O. to .. .. .. .. • ■ .. 154
Resignation of officers —
application for interview .. .. .. .. .. 50, 58
„ for 43-49
compassionate grounds .. .. .. . . . . .. 46
information to be forwarded with application . . .. .. 47
Retirement of officers —
compulsory .. .. .. .. •. .. .. .. 51
interview with member of Array Council .. .. . . .. 50
Rings, wearing of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 238


s PARA.
Sanitation 208-210
Salutes—
birthday of Sovereign, etc. .. . . .. .. . . .. 388
general instructions .. .. .. .. .. . , 373-385
guards of honour ' ’ 387-389
inspecting officers .. .. .. .. .. .. _ 390
march, compliments on the .. .. .. .. .. ’ ] 333
method of saluting .. .. .. . . .. .. 375 332
„ ~ when riding or driving .. . . .. ’ 335
National Anthem, played at .. .. .. ■ . . . . ’ ’ 373
N.C.Os. and privates, by . . ~ , . , , ’ ’ 375
officers by .. .. . . .. * .. .. . , ' 377
~ commanding a party .. . . .. ~ .. ’ 333
on boarding ship .. .. .. .. .. .; ‘ ‘ 379
Royal .. !388
„ Family to 386
Seniority—
forfeiture of, general instructions . . .. . . . . 176-180
restoration of .. .. , . . . . . 131
Serjeants’ mess ■ 226 227
Service and casualty sheet .. .. . . . . . . ’ 359
~ „ pay book (auxiliary’s) .. .. .. . . ’' 339
Sick—
leave 198, 199
parades 319, 320
report ..321
Smoking in streets forbidden .. .. .. .. .. ..130
Spectacles—
repair and replacement of .. .. .. .. .. .. 312
supply of .. .. *3i2-313
Staff officers .. .. . . . . . . .. . . ’ j 3
Stoppages—
to be awarded .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 153 J 33
limited to £4, unless higher authority is obtained .. .. .. ’ 156
Stores, accommodation, issue of .. .. .. .. .. 262
Strength returns, to records .. .. *.. .. .. _ [ 357
Subaltern—
delegation of powers to .. .. .. .. .. ..120
promotion to .. .. .. .. .. ; 40
Subscriptions to testimonials prohibited .. .. , . ~ 186
Summary of evidence—
general instructions .. * .. .. .. .. t . _ _ 173
to go to convening authority of F.G.C.M y . ’’ J 39
Summary punishments .. .. .. .. .. .. . _ 153
Surgical appliances, supply and maintenance of .. .. 309, 310
T
Terminal leave .. .. ’ .. .. ~ .. 33
T estimonials—
issue of •.. .. .. .. .. .. . _ 33
to superiors forbidden .. .. .. .. .. _' ! ! 186
Trade tests .. .. .. .. , . .. .. ’ 273
T rades women—
certificate of civilian employers as to qualifications .. .. 274
rates of pay .. .. .. .. .. .. _ _ 273
Training, general information .. .. .. .. .. 190-196


PARA.
Training Centres, recruits at .. .. ... .. .. .. 192
Transfer clothing statement, preparation of .. .. 257-259
Travelling allowance, see “ Allowances.”
Tuberculosis, treatment of, instructions regarding .. .. .. 327
U
Unemployed list, Officers .. .. .. .. .. .. 64
~ ~ other ranks —
discharge from .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 92
instructions regarding .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 92
issue of unemployment and N.H.I. cards to reservists .. .. 93
recommendations for relegation to .. .. .. .. 334
return from .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 92
„ of N.C.O. from 92
Unemployment Insurance—
cards to reservists .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 93
procedure with regard to .. . •• .. .. .. 296, 298
Uniform-
accounting for .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 255-263
~ ~ on change of station .. .. .. .. 257-259
alteration to, on promotion .. .. .. .. .. .. 253
badges, not to be worn .. .. .. .. .. .. 233
~ wearing of when authorized .. '.. .. .. ..241
caps, wearing of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 240
disposal of on discharge .. .. .. .. .. .. 260
emblems and ornaments ' .. .. .. .. .. .. 238
grant for outfit of officers .. .. .. .. .. 246-248
„ refund of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 247, 248
issue of, to other ranks .. .. .. .. .. 250-252
medals and decorations, wearing of .. .. .. .. .. 245
national flower and flags, wearing of .. .. .. .. 242
to be correctly worn .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 234
V
Vaccination and inoculation .. .. .. .. . . .. 328
Vouchering of clothing on change of unit .. .. .. 257-259
W
War Office Orders, promotions, notified in .. .. .. .. 41
Warrant officers —
arrest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. 141
borrowing money from privates forbidden .. .. .. .. 129
instruction to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 126
liability to trial by F.G.C.M. .. .. .. .. .. .. 134
punishments that may be awarded . . .. .. .. .. 166
Warrants, railway, issue of .. .. .. .. .. .. 289
Washing, contracts to be made .. .. .. .. .. 265
Welfare, questions relating to .. .. .. .. .. 334
Y
“ Y ” list ■.. .. 95
Printed under the Authority of HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
by William Clowes & Sons, Ltd., London and Beccles.
(1744) Wt. 22289—8843. 16,500. 12/41. W. C. & S., Ltd. Gp. 395.
S.O. Code No. 57-568




