





NEW SOUTH WALES
CONSTITUTION BILL.
THE
SPEECHES,
IN THE
iUgislattlJc Council of Ncto Sotufj Smalts,
ON THE SECOND READING OF
THE BILL FOR FRAMING A NEW CONSTITUTION
FOR THE COLONY.
EDITED BV
EDWARD KENNEDY SILVESTER.
PRINTED BY THOMAS DANIEL, YORK STREET, AND SOLD BY
ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1853.




INTRODUCTION.
In the second Session of the first Representative Legislative Council of
New South Wales, it began to be felt by the leading members of the
House, that certain grievances existed in *the Constitution of the colony,
the redress of which were essential to its political freedom.
Although then there was little apparent chance of the immediate
redress of such grievances, a firm, grave, and resolute demand for what
the Council considered the rights of the colony commenced.
These grievances naturally divided themselves into two classes : the
first class relating to the sale, and disposal otherwise, of waste lands of
the colony, and the control and distribution of the revenue arising there-
from ; and the second, to those restrictions on constitutional freedom,
enjoyed by the subjects at home, but denied to the colonists.
The work of reform, for both these classes of grievances, commenced
almost simultaneously; and accordingly, on the 3rd of May, 1844,
Mr. Cowper, member for the metropolitan county of Cumberland, moved,
“That a Select Committee be appointed to inquire into, and report upon,
all grievances connected with the lands of the territory; and that it be an
instruction to the Committee to distinguish between the grievances which
can be redressed m the colony, and those which cannot.”
The motion having been carried, a Committee was appointed, con-
sisting of Charles Nicholson, William Bradley, Robert Lowe, George
Phelps Robinson, Major Wentworth, and Richard Windeyer; which
brought up an elaborate report, in which the following recommenda-
tions are made as to the land grievances existing, which could not be
redressed in the colony.
The Committee recommended, first, the total and immediate repeal of
the sth and 6th Victoria; being an act to regulate the sale of Crown
lands, and fixing the minimum price of all Crown lands at one pound
sterling per acre. Second, the repeal of that part of the 29th section of
oth and 6th Victoria, cap. 76, which excludes the Council from interfering
in any manner with the sale or other appropriation of the lands belonging
to the Crown, within the said colony, or with the revenues thence
arising. Third, the investiture in the Governor and Legislative Council of
the colony with the management of Crown lands, and the revenue arising
therefrom, by an act of the Imperial Parliament.
On Friday, the 21st of June, 1844, Mr. W. C. Wentworth, senior
member for the City, moved, “ That a Select Committee, consisting of
ten menbers, be appointed to inquire into, and report upon, all grievances


not connected with the lands of the territory; and that it be an instruction
to such Committee to distinguish between those grievances which can be
redressed in the colony, and those which cannot.”
The motion was carried, and a Committee appointed, consisting of
W. C. Wentworth, Dr. Lang, William Bradley, Captain Duraaresq,
William Lawson, Francis Lord, Sir T. L. Mitchell, W. H. Suttor,
Richard Windeyer, and the Attorney-General.
The recommendations in the report of the Committee, in respect to
the grievances requiring redress from the Crown, or from the Imperial
Legislature, were as follows :
First.—That the schedules annexed to the sth & 6th Vic., cap. 76, be repealed, and the
whole control of the General Revenue placed in conformity with the provisions of the Declaratory
Act, 18 Geo. 3. cap. 12. sec. 1, under the control of the Governor and Legislative Council.
Or, if those schedules be persisted in, that the Act 5 & 6 Vic , cap. 76, be amended, so that
the ■whole of the hereditary revenues of the Crown be surrendered as an equivalent for the Civil
List, and placed at the disposal of the Local Legislature in like manner as they have been in
Canada.
Second.—That so much of the same Act, 5 & 6 Vic., cap. 76, as relates to the establishment
of District Councils, be repealed.
That the grievance connected with the Police, Gaol, and Judical Expenditure be adjusted on
the terms prayed for in the Address to Her Majesty, and the Petitions to both Houses of
Parliament, prepared by your committee, and recommended to your adoption.
Fourth. —That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, beseeching her Majesty to
direct that the Government of this Colony be henceforth conducted on the same principle of
responsibility, as to Legislative control, which has been conceded in the Canadas, and that a
tribunal for impeachments be established by law.
Fifth.—That an Act be introduced to enable persons having claims of any description against
the Local Government to sue the Colonial Treasurer, or other public officer, as a nominal
defendant, under such limitations as may be necessary to prevent frivolous and vexatious suits.
Sixth.—That an humble address be presented to Her Majesty, praying that Her Majesty will
be graciously pleased to place the Judges of the Supreme Court on the same tenure of office, and
security of salary, as belong to the Judges in the Mother Country, and thus effectually prevent
the purity of the administration of justice from being hereafter subjected to any suspicions or
doubts in the minds of Her Majesty’s subjects in these Colonies.
These recommendations were embodied in resolutions, which were
assented to by the Council, and were forwarded home in addresses to the
Queen and both Houses of Parliament.
They recieved, however, little attention from the Minister of the day up
to the year 1850, when the Act, conferring the present constitution, was
passed by the Imperial Parliament, containing a clause empowering
the Legislative Council of the colony to make such alterations in the
Constitution (subject to the assent of Her Majesty in Council) as might
seem meet.
On the proclamation in the colony of this Act, the Council was
dissolved; but previously to its dissolution, Mr. Wentworth moved peti-
tions to Her Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, which had been
prepared by a Select Committee, protesting, insisting, and declaring as
follows:
“ ‘ We, the Legislative Council of New South Wales, do accordingly hereby solemnly pro-
“ ‘ test, insist, and declare as follows :
1 st—“ ‘ That the Imperial Parliament has not, nor of right ought to have, any power to tax
“ ‘ the people of this Colony, or to appropriate any of the moneys levied by autho-
“ * rity of the Colonial Legislature ;—that this power can only be lawfully exercised
“ ‘ by the Colonial Legislature ; —and that the Imperial Parliament has solemnly
“ ‘disclaimed this power by the 18 Geo. HI., cap. 12, sec. 1, which Act remains
“ 1 unrepealed.


the Council “ are prepared, upon the surrender to the Colonial Legislature of the entire ma-
“ nagement of all our Revenues, Territorial as well as General, in which we include Mines of
“ every description, and upon the establishment of a Constitution among ns similar in its out-
“ lines to that of Canada, to assume and provide for the whole cost of our Internal Government,
“ whether civil or military, the salary of the Governor-General only excepted, and to grant to
“ Your Majesty an adequate Civil List on the same terms as in Canada instead of the sums
“ appropriated in the Schedule and the Imperial Act 13 and 14 Victoria}, cap. 59;” and in
conclusion humbly prays that her Majesty will be graciously pleased to cause such measures to
be adopted as may be necessary to give early effect to this proposal.
3. I have already in my Despatch, No. 69, of the 12th April, 1850, expressed my opinion
on the principal points now submitted for -Her Majesty’s consideration ; but I deem it right to
add, that when the motion upon which the petition was adopted was brought before the Council
it was carried (after a division which was called for by the Colonial Secretary, on the part of the
Government), by a majority of 21 to 8, the minority consisting entirely of the Official Nominee
Members, with the exception of one Non-official Nominee Member, Mr. Parker.
4. It is also proper that I should state my conviction that the desire to have a Constitution
conferred upon the colony, agreeing in its principles with that applied for in the Petition, is not
confined to the Legislative Council alone, or to a party in the colony, but that it is support ed by
the general opinion Of the most loyal, respectable, and influential members of the community.
I have reason to believe, however, that neither the Council nor the public are anxious for
Responsible Government to the extent that now exists in Canada, as it must be evident to every
unbiassed person conversant with the subject, that although there are probably in this Colony
more talented and educated gentlemen than are to be found in any one other British Colony,
there are not, as yet, a sufficient number in it so independent in their fortunes as to be prepared
to hold office under an administration depending upon the precarious tenure of being able to
command a majority of the popular branch of the Legislature.
In the Session of 1852, a Select Committee was appointed (16th June,
1852) to prepare a Constitution for the colony, pursuant to the powers
conferred on this House by the 13th and 14th Victoria, cap. 9; and the
draft Bills for this purpose were brought up, and laid on the table of the
House, The following is an abstract of their provisions :
The Colonial I legislature to consist of a Legislative Council and Assembly, to be styled,
collectively, “ The Parliament of New South Wales.”
The Legislative Council to consist of not less than twenty-one persons, appointed by letters
patent under the Great Seal of the Colony. Two-thirds of these appointees shall consist of
persons who shall have served in one of the Legislative Councils (as at present constituted) or in
t!io Assembly. Appointments not to be made until after the return of the first writs for
members of the Legislative Assembly. If a sufficient number of persons who have served in the
Legislative Council or Assembly cannot be found willing to fill these appointments, any others
may he. appointed.
Members of the Legislative Council who have served in the Legislature in its present form,
or in the Assembly, to hold office for life. Other members to hold office during Her Majesty’s
pleasure.
President of the Legislative Council to he appointed by the Governor, and to have the right
of taking part in the debates.
Legislative Assembly to consist of seventy-two members, chosen by the following classes of
doctors:—every natural born or naturalized subject of Her Majesty having a freehold of £lOO,
or a household of £lO per annum, within the district for which he votes, and held for six months
before registration ; and every person holding within such district a depasture license, or having
a leasehold of £lO per annum with not less than three years to run at the time of registration.
Provisoes that no man shall vote who shall have been attainted, Ac., or unless he shall have
served his prescribed term of punishment, or have been pardoned, nor any person who shall have
omitted to pay all taxes, &c. chargeable npon him in respect of his freehold or leasehold, &c.
Any person qualified to vote may become a member of Assembly, unless specially disqua-
lified. The disqualified persons are ministers of religion, and those holding offices of profit, <fcc.
under the Crown ; an exception, however, being made in favour of naval and military officers,
and of those holding the following appointments for the time being:—The Colonial Secretary,
Colonial Treasurer, Collector of Customs, Auditor - General, Postmaster-General, Attorney-
General, Solicitor-General, Inspector-General of Police, Surveyor-General, and Chief Com-
missioner of Crown Lands.
Assembly to endure for five years, unless sooner dissolved by the Governor,


2nd —“ ‘ That the Revenue arising from the Public Lands, derived, as it is, mainly from
“ ‘ the value imparted to them by the labour and capital of the people of this
“ ‘ Colony, is as much their property as the Ordinary Revenue, and ought there-
“ ‘fore to be subject only to the like control and appropriation.
3rd—“ ‘ That the Customs and all other Departments should be subject to the direct
“ ‘ supervision and control of the Colonial Legislature, which should have the appro-.
“ ‘ priation of the gross Revenues of the Colony, from whatever source arising
“ ‘ and as a necessary incident to this authority, the regulation of the salaries of
“ * all Colonial Officers.
,4th—“ ‘That offices of trust and emolument- should be only on the settled
“ ‘ inhabitants, the office of Governor alone excepted ; that this Officer should be
“ ‘ appointed and paid by the Crown ; and that the whole patronage of the Colony
“ ‘ should be vested in him and the Executive Council, unfettered by Instructions
“ ‘ from the Minister for the Colonies.
sth—“ ‘ That plenary powers of Legislation should be conferred upon, and exercised by,
“ ‘ the Colonial Legislature for the time being ; and that no Bills should be
“ ‘reserved for the signification of Her Majesty’s Pleasure, unless they afiect the
“ ‘ Prerogatives of the Crown, or the general interests of the Empire.
In the first Session of the new Legislative Council, on the sth De-
cember, 1851, this Petition and Remonstrance was formally adopted in
the following terms :
“ ‘ Solemnly protesting against these wrongs, and insisting upon these our undoubted
“ ‘ rights, we leave the redress of the former, and the assertion of the latter, to the
“ ‘ people whom we represent, and the Legislature which shall follow us.’
“ That we, the succeeding Legislative Council, do accordingly present, to your Honourable
“ House, our affirmation of the same grievances : all of which, with a slight modification in the
“ patronage of the Customs’ Department, by no means commensurate with the rights in the said
“ protest and declaration insisted upon, remain unredressed.
“ That these grievances having formed the subject of repeated representations and com-
“ plaints from the former Legislative Council, all of which have met with neglect or disregard
“ from Her Majesty’s Colonial Minister, we owe it to ourselves and our constituents, to denounce
“to your Honourable House, as the chief grievance to which the people of this Colony are sub-
“ jected, the systematic and mischievous interference which is exercised by that Minister even in
“ matters of purely local concernment.
“ That whilst we are most anxious to strengthen and perpetuate the connexion which still
“ happily subsists with our Father land, we feel it a solemn duty to our Sovereign and our fellow
Countrymen in the United Kingdom, to warn them that it will be impossible much longer to
“ maintain the authority of a Local Executive which is obliged, by its Instructions, to refer all
“ measures of importance, no matter how great the urgency for their immediate adoption, for
“ the decision of an inexperienced, remote, and irresponsible Department.
“ That in order, however, that Her Majesty’s Confidential Advisers may have no excuse for
“ the continuance of these abuses, we unhesitatingly declare that we are prepared—upon the
“ surrender to the Colonial Legislature of the entire management of all our Revenues, Territorial
*• as well as General, in which we include Mines of every description, and upon the establishment
“ of a Constitution among us similar in its outline to that of Canada—to assume and provide for
“ the whole cost of our Internal Government, whether Civil or Military, the salary of the Gover-
“ nor-General only excepted, and to grant to Her Majesty an adequate Civil List, on the same
“ terms as in Canada, instead of the sums appropriated in the Schedules to the Imperial Act 13
“ and 14 Victoria, chap. 59.
In the first Session of the New Legislature, this petition and remon-
strance was again adopted; and, in forwarding it to the Secretary of
State, His Excellency the Govornor-General writes:—
2. Your Lordship will observe that the Petition commences by adopting the Declaration and
Remonstrance 'entered on the Minutes of the Proceedings of the late Legislative Council on
the eve of being dissolved, a copy of which was transmitted in my Despatch, No. 105, of the
18th June last. It states that the complaints therein referred to, and which have formed the
subject of repeated representations from the former Legislative Council, remain unredressed, and
it proceeds to declare that, in order to afford no excuse for the continuance of these complaints


In a despatch, dated 15th October, 1852, in answer to that of His
Excellency the Governor-General, Sir John Pakington, then Secretary
of State for the Colonies, in a general way concedes the whole of the
demands made in the petition and remonstrance; and in a despatch from
his successor in office (the Duke of Newcastle), dated January 18th,
1853, is the following passage :
One of the first subjects which engaged my attention on being entrusted with the Seals of
this Department, was that Petition, and my Predecessor’s Despatch of the 15th of last month
relative to its contents. Recent, therefore, as has been my accession to office, lam thus in a
condition to accompany the acknowledgment of the Despatch now before me with a commu-
nication of the deliberate views entertained by Her Majesty’s Government on that question
which commands so wide a concurrence of opinion throughout the community of New South
Wales.
I have to state, then, that my colleagues and myself cordially adopt the conclusions of Her
Majesty’s late Government respecting the future administration of the Waste Lands of the
Crown. You inform me that a Committee of the Council is engaged in the preparation of
a scheme for the amendment of its constitution. As such a measure is impending, it is only
necessary for me now to inform you, that as soon as it has passed the Legislature of the Province,
and received the approval of Her Majesty, the disposition of the Waste Lands, and the appro-
priation of the fund arising out of their sale and management, will be placed without reserve
under the supervision and control of the Legislative authority in the Colony. This policy
would, of course, be inoperative, without legislation in this country; and it will'be necessary to
invite Parliament to empower Her Majesty to make the proposed transfer of the functions at
present vested in the Crown.
I am ignorant of the shape which the project under the consideration of the Committee of
the Council may eventually assume. The Legislative Council, indeed, in the Petition before
adverted to, favoured a Constitution similar in its outline to that of Canada. It would be
premature for me, without materials for forming a judgment, to pass an opinion upon the policy
of totally reconstructing the frame of Government recently established ; but I may state that I
have always thought it probable that the experience and wisdom of the Council would dictate
better provisions than Parliament for securing good Government in New South Wales, and
promoting harmony in the connexion subsisting between Great Britain and this important
Province of the Empire.
In the early part of the Session of 1853, on the motion of Mr.
Wentworth, a second Select Committee was appointed, to prepare a Con-
stitution, and the report, and draft Bills brought up by that Committee
are subjoined.


ERRATA.
Page 77, line 38, first column, for natural read national.
42, second column, dele to.
78, 35, first column, for abrogation read abnegation.
48, first column, for European read British.
79, 51, first column, for that read this.
81, 52, second column, for unmature read immature.
82, 50, first column, for fair read far.
11 and 12, second column, for anticipation read anticipations.
13, second column, insert not after doubt.
83, 45, second column, for declaration read declamation.
84, 50, first column, for allowed read allotted.
second column, for any read every.
85, 13 and 14, first column, for deliberating read deliberately.
19, first column, for wise read noisy.
27 and 28, first column, for legislation read legislative.
86, 6, first column, for legislative read legislation.
39, first column, for worst read best.
89, 21, first column, for experiences read experience.
98, 4, second column, for purposed read proposed.
99, 45, first column, for are read is.


REPORT FROM THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
NEW CONSTITUTION.
The Select Committee of the Legislative
Council, appointed on the L'Oth of
May, 1853, to prepare a constitution
for this colony, and having had the
despatches from Sir John Pakington
and the Duke of Newcastle, relative
to such constitution, referred to them,
bring up a bill and the draft of a pro-
posed Act of the Imperial Parliament
which will be necessary to give it
legal validity, with the following re-
port ;
In submitting the bill “ to confer a
constitution on this colony, and to grant
a civil list to her Majesty,” for the adop-
tion of the house the committe appointed
this session have found it necessary to
suggest some alterations in the measure
brought up by the committee of last
session, though they fully concur not
only in the scheme of legislation recom-
mended by that committee, but also for
the most part in the provisions of the
proposed Act of Parliament, and the bill
to be appended to as a schedule, by
which unitedly this new Constitution is
to be legalized and established.
The most important alterations that
have been made in the measure recom-
mended by the committee of last session,
relate to the constitution of the Legisla-
tive Council, and the civil list to be
granted to her Majesty upon the sur-
render to the colony of the waste lands
and royalties which are at present vested
in the crown.
As regards the constitution of the
Legislative Council, your committee
consider that—not only by the terms of
their declaration and remonstrance of
the sth December, 1851, but by the
letter of agreement to those terms of
Sir John Pakington, of the 15th Decem-
ber, 1852, the house is pledged to a
constitution “ similar in its outline to
that of Canada.” The subsequent de-
spatch of his successor, the Duke of
Newcastle, appears indeed to admit of
some latitude of discretion on this most
important subject. But your committee
are of opinion, that the offer contained
in their declaration and remonstrance
necessarily included a nominated Legis-
lative Council in the first instance, and
from this offer, independently of the
question whether they are strictly bound
by it or not, they see no reason to depart.
They desire to have a form of govern-
ment based on the analogies of the Bri-
tish constitution. They have no wish to
sow the seeds of a future democracy;
and until they are satisfied that the
nominated, or the future elective Council,
which they recommend, will not effect
the object they have in view, of placing
a safe, revising, deliberative, ahd con-
servative element between the Lower
House and her Majesty’s Representative
in this colony, they do not feel inclined
to hazard the experiment of an Upper
House, based oq a general elective fran-
chise. They are the less disposed to
make the experiment as such a frau-.


chise, if once created, will Be difficult to
be recalled.
Actuated by these views your com-
mittee have introduced into the bill “to
confer a constitution on the colony, and
to grant a civil list to her Majesty,” two
clauses, which, to a certain extent, are
framed in accordance with analogous
clauses to be found in the Imperial Act,
31 Geo. 111, c. 31, “for making more
effectual provision for the government of
the province of Quebec.” That act
authorizes the crown, whenever it thinks
proper, to confer hereditary titles of
honor, rank, or dignity, to annex thereto
an hereditary right of being summoned
to the Legislative Council. Your com-
mittee are not prepared to recommend
the introduction into this colony of a
right by descent to a seat in the Upper
House; but are of opinion that the
creation of hereditary titles, leaving it
to the option of the crown to annex to
the tide of the first Patentee a seat for
life in such house, and conferring on the
original Patentees and their descendants
inheritors of their titles a power to elect
a certain number of their order to form,
in conjunction with the original Paten-
tees then living, the Upper House of
Parliament, would be a great improve-
ment upon any form of Legislative
Council hitherto tried or recommended
in any British colony. They conceive
that an Upper House framed on this
principle, whilst it would be free from
the objections which have been urged
against the House of Lords, on the
ground of the hereditary right of legis-
lation which they exercise, would lay the
foundation of an aristocracy, which,
from their fortune, birth, leisure, and
the superior education these advantages
would superinduce, would soon supply
elements for the formation of an Upper
House, modelled, as far circumstances
will admit, upon the analogies of the
British constitution. Such a house will
be a close imitation of the elective por-
tion of the House of Lords, which is
supplied from the Irish and Scotch peer-
age ; nor is it the least of the advantages
which would arise from the creation of a
titled order, that it would necessarily
form one of the strongest inducements
not only to respectable families to remain
in this colony, but to the upper classes
of the United Kingdom and other coun-
tries who are desirous to emigrate, to
choose it for their future abode.
In the bill proposed for adoption, your
committee, it will be seen, have recom-
mended a very large extension of the
elective franchise. They are of opinion
that, in addition to the franchise esta-
blished by the 13 & 14 Viet., c. 59, the
right of voting for the election of mem-
bers of the assembly should be given to
all persons having a salary of £lOO a
year, and to all occupants of any room
or lodging paying £4O a year for their
board and lodging, or £lO a year for
their lodging only. It is conceived that
this enlargement of the franchise in
combination with the franchise now ex-
isting, will be a very close approxima-
tion to universal suffrage.
Your committee have also recom-
mended that the number of members
forming the assembly should not exceed
the number of the present Legislative
Council; and that the eighteen addi-
tional elective members, who will be
substituted for the nominees, should be
distributed among the electoral districts
constituted by the Electoral Act of
1851, in strict accordance with the
principle of distribution established by
that Act; which, it will be recollected,
was settled after the most careful consi-
deration, aud with a view to a fair and
just representation of all colonial inte-
rests then' subsisting. Your committee
,are of opinion that the working of this
Act, and the result of the divisions on
all the leading constitutional questions
which have since arisen, have justified
the most sanguine anticipations of its
supporters.
Your committee, while on this subject,
beg also to call the attention of your
honorable house to the 17th clause of the
bill, which contains a power to alter the
present electoral divisions, as well as the
apportionment of representatives to be
chosen by each, whenever there shall be
the concurrence of a majority of the
Upper House, aud of a majority of two-


thirds of the Lower House of the future
Parliament, in favor of any such altera-
tion. It is conceived that this provision
is ample to meet any possible require-
ments of this kind that may from time
to time arise among the various consti-
tuencies of the colony.
It will be seen, also, that the 40th
clause of the bill reserves a full consti-
tuent power to alter the proposed form
of constitution, whenever there shall be
a majority of two-thirds of both Houses
of Parliament in favor of any such
alteration ; reserving to her Majesty the
right of assenting to or dissenting from
any bill for this purpose that may be
presented for the signification of her
Majesty’s pleasure thereon.
The civil list which your committee
propose to grant to her Majesty is
£24,700 less than the civil list recom-
mended by the committee of last session,
and £10,200 less than the Parliamentary
grant for that purpose, contained in the
first, second, and third parts of Schedule
A. appended to 13 and 14 Vic., c. 59.
The cause of this great apparent reduc-
tion is to be found in the elastic and
rapidly expanding character of the
colony, which, in fact, proves that any
fixed provision for the various depart-
ments of goverment must soon become
inadequate, however liberal it may ap-
pear at present. Your committee have,
it will be observed, in all cases made
the same provision for the salaries of the
judges and other high officers of the
srown which is to be found in the before
mentioned schedule to the present Act
of Parliament, and in some cases, where
it was thought just and expedient, have
recommended an increase of salary.
Your committee trust that this fact, and
the explanation already given of the
reasons which have led them to assign
io permanent fund for the departmental
expenses of the higher offices of the
irown, leaving them to be provided
tor in the same way as the ex-
penses of all other departments are,
viz., by annual vote—will be deemed
satisfactory by her Majesty’s advisers.
Your Committee cannot, however, take
leave of this subject without the expres-
sion of a hope that the liberal provision
which your Honourable House has just
made for the public service will abun-
dantly shew “ that as long as the repre-
sentatives of the people are entirely free
to grant or refuse according to their de-
liberate views of the exigencies of the
public service, her Majesty’s faithful
Commons in this colony can never arrive
at any other conclusion, than that it is
the soundest policy, as well as the truest
economy, to maintain that service in the
utmost efficiency.”
Among the grants enumerated in the
civil list, is a fund for pensioning off
those officers who now hold offices which
may be considered as the responsible
offices of the Government, and in which
vacancies will probably occur as soon as
responsible Government, properly so
called, is introduced among us. Now,
as there can be no doubt the moment the
consolidated revenue of the colony is
placed at the disposal of a Legislative
Assembly, consisting entirely of members
elected by popular constituencies, that
responsible Government will take effect,
and that one of the first measures under
such a new order of things may be to
displace the actual incumbents of those
responsible offices—the question arises,
what is the nature and amount of the
compensation to which these displaced
functionaries will be entitled, and
whether they are to be entitled to such
compensation only when so displaced, or
at once and at their own option, the
moment their tenure of office is changed,
as it will be, from a tenure dependent on
the pleasure of the Crown to a tenure
practically dependent on the pleasure of
the Legislative Assembly ? It appears
to your committee if the offices held by
these functionaries are, as they contend,
to be considered as abolished offices, and
upon that ground entitling the holders
of them to the full compensation which
is usual in such cases in the mother
country, that at all events the abolition
of these offices is not to be deemed com-
plete until the holders of them are actu-
ally displaced, and that even then the
pensions to be assigned to them as an
equivalent are to be continued only so


long as they are not in receipt of any
other salaries under the Crown. When-
ever any of them accept a new appoint-
ment, the pension thus assigned to them
by the colony should, in the opinion of
your committee, merge, or be reduced
pro tanto, according as such salary or
emoluments are of greater or less
amoun;. Acting on these principles,
your committee have inserted in the civil
list to be granted to her Majesty, an
adequate fund for pensioning off, at their
present* rates of salary, all the higher
functionaries of the Government who
may be displaced by the new order of
things likely to arise when responsible
Government takes effect among us.
Another grant in the civil list to her
Majesty is a fund for pensioning the
Judges of the Supreme Court. It is
proposed, in analogy to the provisions
made in England, Ireland, and Scotland,
that in all cases of permanent disability
or infirmity, or after fifteen years’ ser-
vice, a pension amounting to seven-
tenths of the Judges’ salary shall be de-
mandable as of right. It is considered
that no more effectual mode of ensuring
the independence of the Judges, and ren-
dering their offices objects of ambition
to the bar, could be devised than a pro-
vision limiting their period of judicial
service, and ensuring them a handsome
competency for the remainder of their
lives.
Your committee are of opinion that
the power in several instances exercised
by the Crown to create banking and
other corporations In this colony, is one
utterly inconsistent with that full local
control which the colonial Government
ought to jiossess, and are glad to find
that her Majesty’s ministers have ex-
pressed their intention to exercise this
power no longer without the concurrence
of the local authorities. Your committee
are disposed to look upon this as a prac-
tical abandonment of an injurious prero-
gative, which cannot fail to give general
satisfaction.
One of the more prominent Legisla-
tive measures required by this colony,
and the colonies of the Australian group
generally, is the establishment at once
of a General Assembly, to make laws iu
relation to the inter-colonial questions
that have arisen, or may hereafter arise,
among them. The questions which
would claim the exercise of such a juris-
diction appear to be as follow
Ist. Inter-colonial tariffs, and coast-
ing trade.
2nd. Hallways, roads, canals, &e,,
running through any two of the
colonies.
3rd. Beacons and light-houses on
the coast.
4th. Inter-colonial penal settle-
ments.
sth. Inter-colonial gold regulations.
Gth. Postage between the said colo-
7th. A general court of appeal from
the courts of such colonies.
Bth. A power to legislate on all
other subjects which may be sub-
mitted to them by addresses from
the Legislative Councils and As-
semblies of the other colonies ;
and to appropriate to any of the
above objects the necessary sums
of money, to be raised by a per-
centage on the revenues of all
the colonies interested.
As it might excite jealousy, if a juris-
diction of this importance were to be in-
corporated in the Act of Parliament,
which has unavoidably become a neces-
sary part of the measures for conferring
a constitution on this colony, in conse-
quence of the defective pow'ers given by
Parliament to the Legislative Council,
your committee confine themselves to a
suggestion that the establishment of
such a body has become indispensable,
and ought no longer to be delayed ; and
to the expression of a hope that the
minister for the colonies will at once see
the expediency of introducing into Par-
liament, with as little delay as possible,
a bill for this express object.
W. C. WENTWORTH, .
Chairman.
Legislative Council Chamber ,
Sydney, 28th July, 1863.


17 Victoria, 1853.
A Bill to confer a Constitution on New
South Wales, and to grant a Civil List
to Her Majesty.
Whereas by the thirty-second clause of
the Imperial Act, passed in the Session
holden in the thirt< enth and fourthteenth
years of the reign of Her present Majes-
ty, intituled '‘An Act for thebetter Govern-
“ rnent of Her Majesty’s Australian Colon-
ies,” it was among other things enacted,
that notwithstanding anything therein
before contained, it should be lawful for
the Governor and Legislative Council of
this colony, after the separation there-
from of the colony of Victoria, from time
to time, by any Act or Acts, to alter the
provisions or laws for the time being in
force under the sa : d Imperial Act or
otherwise, concerning the Election of
the Elective members of such Legislative
Council, the qualification of Electors and
Elective members, or to establish in the
said colony, instead of the Legislative
Council, a council and a House of Re-
presentatives, or other separate Legisla-
tive Houses, to consist of such members,
to be appointed or elected by such persons
and in such manner as by such Act or
Acts shall bo determined, and to vest in
such Council and House of Representa-
tives, or other separate Legislative
Houses, the powers and functions or the
Legislative Council for which the same
may be substituted : And whereas it is
expedient that the powers vested by the
said Act in the said Governor and Legis-
lative Council should be .exercised, and
that a Parliament, consisting of a Legis-
lative Council, and Assembly, should be
substituted for the said Legislative
Council, with the increased powers and
functions hereinafter contained : Be it
therefore enacted, by His Excellency the
Governor of New South Wales, with the
advice and consent of the Legislative
Council thereof, as follows
I. There shall be in place of the
Legislative Council now subsisting one
Legis'ative Council and one Legislative
Assembly, to be severally constituted and
composed in the mannerhcreinafter pre-
scribed, which Legislative Council and
Assembly shall be called “ The Parliament
of New South Wales and within the
said colony of New South Wales, Her
Majesty shall have power by and with
the advice and consent of the said Par-
liament to make laws for the peace,
welfare, and good Goverment of the said
colony, in all cases whatsoever ; and all
such laws being passed by the said Par-
liament, and assented to by Her Majesty,
or assented to in Her Majesty's name by
the Governor of the said colony, shall be
valid and binding to all intents and pur-
poses within the said colony: Provided
that all/Bills for appropriating any part
of the surplus of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund, or for inposing any new
rate, tax, or impost, subject always to
the limitation contained in clause fifty-
three of this Act, shall originate in the
Legislative Assembly of the said colony,
and further that all bills affecting any
imperial subject may be reserved in the
discretion of the Governor for the time
being for the signification of her Ma-
jesty’s pleasure thereon, and if assented
to by such Governor in the first instance,
on behalf of her Majesty, may be disal-
lowed by her Majesty in the manner
and within the period hereinafter
limited.
11. The bills on imperial subjects
which may be reserved for the significa-
tion of her Majesty’s pleasure, or which,
after being assented to by the Governor
in her Majesty’s name, may be after-
wards disallowed by her Majesty within
the period hereinafter specified, are as
follow ; that is to say :
1. Bills touching the allegiance of
the inhabitants of this colony to
her Majesty’s Crown.
2. Bills touching the naturalization
of aliens.
3. Bills relating to treaties between
the Crown and any foreign
power.
4. Bills relating to political inter-
course and communications be-
tween thi s colony and any officer
of a fon ign power or depend-


5. Bills relating to the employment,
command, and discipline of her
Majesty’s sea and land forces
within this colony, and whatever
relates to the defence of the
colony from foreign aggression,
including the command of the
municipal militia and marine.
6. Bills relating to the crime of
high treason.
111. Whenever any question shall arise
as to the right of the Governor to reserve
any bill for the signification of her Ma-
jesty’s pleasure thereon, or as to the
right of her Majesty to disallow any
such Bill, the same shall be determined
by the judicial committee of the Privy
Council, and in no other manner except
by the consent of the said Parliament of
New South Wales, and such question
shall be raised by an address to her
Majesty in her Privy Council by both
Houses of the said Parliament, setting
forth the question so to be determined :
Provided, that all such bills shall be ab-
solutely in abeyance pending any such
determination, and that they shall be
afterwards submitted for the significa-
tion of her Majesty’s pleasure thereon,
or remitted to the colony for the exer-
cise of the Governor’s discretion, accord-
ing to the decision of the judicial com-
mittee in each such case.
IV. For the purpose of composing the
Legislative Council of New South Wales,
it shall be lawful for her Majesty before
the time to be appointed for the first
meeting of the said Legislative Council
and Assembly, by an instrument under
the Sign Manual, to authorize the Go-
vernor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, in her Majesty’s name, by an
instrument under the Great Seal of the
said colony, to summon to the said Le-
gislative Council of the said colony, such
persons, not being fewer than twenty, as
her Majesty shall think fit, and it 'shall
aiso be lawful for her Majesty from time
to time to authorize the Governor in like
manner to summon to the said Legisla-
tive Council, such other person or persons
as her Majesty shall think fit, and every
person who shall be so summoned shall
thereby become a member of the Legis-
lative Council of the said colony : pro-
vided always, that no person shall be
summoned to the said Legislative Council
who shall not be of the full age of twenty-
one years, and a natural born subject of
her Majesty, or naturalized by an Act of
the Imperial Parliament, or by an Act
of the Legislature of the said colony :
provided also, that no Judge of the Su-
preme Court of the said colony appointed
during pleasure, nor any Judge of the
same court, or of any other court within
the said colony, who may be hereafter
appointed a Judge quamdiu se bene ges-
serit, shall be eligible to be summoned to
the said Legislative Council; nor shall
any prelate, priest, deacon, or minister
of any religious denomination, whatever
may be his title, rank, or designation, be
so eligible.
V. Whenever her Majesty, her Heirs,
or Successors shall think proper to confer
upon any subject of the crown of Great
Britain, by Letters Patent under the
Great Seal of the said colony, any here-
ditary title of honor, rank, or dignity of
such colony, descendible according to any
course of descent limited in such Letters
Patent, it shall be lawful for her Majesty,
her Heirs, or Successors to annex thereto
by the said Letters Patent, if her Ma-
jesty, her Heirs, or Successors shall so
think fit, a right to each original pa-
tentee to be summoned to the Legisla-
tive Council of the said colony ; and
every person on whom such right shall
be so conferred, shall thereupon be en-
titled to demand from the Governor his
writ of summons to such Legislative
Council, subject nevertheless to the pro-
visions hereinafter contained.
VI. Whenever the number of persons
to whom such hereditary titles shall have
descended shall, together with the ori-
ginal patentees then under summons to
such Legislative Council, amount to fifty
or upwards, the Legislative Council so
denominated as aforesaid shall cease and
determine ; and such original patentees,
together with all such persons to whom
such descendible titles shall have come,
being of the full age of twenty-one
years, and not having taken any oath of
allegiance or obedience to any foreign


prince or power, and being duly re-
quired by the proclamation of the Go-
vernor to be published in the Government
Gazette at least one calendar month pre-
viously to the day to be therein named
for the election of members to serve in
the said Legislative Council shall assem-
ble together at such place as shall be
directed in the said proclamation, and
the major part of the persons so assem-
bled, after appointing a chairman for
the occasion by a majority of the
votes of the persons present, shall pro-
ceed to elect twenty from the whole
number then existing of persons to whom
such descendible titles belong, and it
shall thereupon be the duty of the
chairman so appointed to return,
within three days at the latest, to the
Governor, the names of the persons so
elected to serve as members of the said
Legislative Council; and the twenty
members so elected, together with the
original patentees then summoned or
thereafter to be summoned to the said
Legislative Council, shall form thence-
forward the Legislative Council of the
said colony : Provided always, that when-
ever any vacancy or vacancies shall
occur, from any of the causes in this Act
specified, in the number of persons so
elected to serve as members of the said
Legislative Council, then, and in every
such case, the like proclamation or pro-
clamations mutatis mutandis shall be
issued by the Governor, and the like
proceedings mutatis mutandis be had and
taken in regard to any such election to
fill up any such vacancy or vacancies as
are hereinbefore directed in regard to
the first or original election under this
Act: Provided always, that when the
names of the persons or person so elected
to serve as members or a member of the
said Legislative Council are or is re-
turned to the Governor as hereinbefore
is directed, the same shall be published
in the Government Gazette .
VII. Every member of the Legislative
Council of the said colony who shall be
so summoned, whether nominated by the
Governor, with the advice of the Execu-
tive Council, or appointed as such origi-
nal patentee by the Crown, or elected
from the persons so having such de-
scendible titles as aforesaid, shall hold
his seat therein for the term of his life,
hut subject, nevertheless, to the provi-
sions hereinafter contained for vacating
the same.
VIII. It shall be lawful for any mem-
ber of the Legislative Council of the said
colony to resign his seat therein, by a
letter to the Governor, and upon the re-
ceipt of any such letter by the Governor
the seat of such Legislative Councillor
shall become vacant.
IX. If any Legislative Councillor of
the colony of New South Wales shall,
for two successive sessions of the Legis-
lature of the said colony, fail to give his
attendance in the said Legislative Coun-
cil, without the permission of her Ma-
jesty or of the Governor of the said
colony, signified by the said Governor to
the Legislative Council, or shall take
any oath or make any declaration or ac-
knowledgment of allegiance, obedience,
or adherence to, any foi'eign prince or
power, or shall do, concur in, or adopt,
any act whereby he may become a sub-
ject or citizen of any foreign state or
power, or whereby he may become en-
titled to the rights, privileges, or immu-
nities of a subject or citizen of any
foreign state or power, or shall become
bankrupt, or take the benefit of any law
relating to insolvent debtors, or become
a public contractor, or defaulter, or be
attainted of treason, or be convicted of
felony, or of any infamous crime, his
seat in such Council shall thereby be-
come vacant.
X. Any question which shall arise re-
specting any vacancy in the Legislative
Council of the colony of New South
Wales, on occasion of any of the matters
aforesaid, shall be referred by the Go-
vernor of the colony of New South Wales
to the said Legislative Council, to be by
the said Legislative Council heard and
determined; Provided always, that it
shall be lawful either fy the person re-
specting whose seat such question shall
have arisen, or for Her Majesty’s Attor-
ney General for the said colony, on Her
Majesty’s behalf, to appeal from the de-
termination of the said Council in such


case to Her Majesty, and that the judg-
ment of Her Majesty, given with the ad-
vice of Her Privy Council thereon,, shall
be final and conclusive to all intents and
purposes.
XI. The Governor of the colony of
New South Wales shall have power and
authority, from time to time, by an in-
strument under the Great Seal of the
said Colony, to appoint one member of
the said Legislative Council to be presi-
dent of the said Legislative Council, and
to remove him and appoint another in
his stead; and it shall be at all times
lawful for the said president to take part
in any debate or discussion which may
arise in the said Legislative Council.
XII. The presence of at least one-
third of tho members of the said Legis-
lative Council, exclusive of the president,
shall be necessary to constitute a quorum
for the despatch of business; and all
questions which shall arise in the said
Legislative Council shall bo decided by
a majority of votes of the members pre-
sent, other than the president, and when
the votes shall be equal the president
shall have the casting vote : Provided
always, that if the whole number of
members constituting the said Legisla-
tive Assembly shall not be exactly divi-
sible by three, the quorum of the said
Legislative Council shall consist of such
"whole? number as is next greater than
one-third of the members of the said
Legislative Council.
XIII. For the purpose of constituting’
the Legislative Assembly of the said
colony, it shall be lawful for the Go-
vernor thereof, for the time being’,
within the time hereinafter mentioned,
and thereafter from time to time, as
occasion shall require, in Her Majesty’s
name, by an instrument or instruments
under the Great Seal of the said colony,
to summon and call together a Legis-
lative Assembly in and for the said
colony.
XIV. The Legislative Assembly shall
for the present (insist of fifty-four mem-
bers, to be elected by the inhabitants of
the said colony, having any of the fol-
lowing qualifications, that is to say :
Every man of the age of twenty-one
years, being a natural born or natu-
ralized subject of Her Majesty, or legally
made a denizen of New' South. Wales,
and having a freehold estate in posses-
sion, situate within the district for which
his vote is to be given, of the clear
value of one hundred pounds sterling
money, above all charges and incum-
brances in any way affecting the same,
of or to which he has been seised or en-
titled, either at law or in eqqity, for at
least six calendar months next before
the date of the writ of such election, or
in case a. registration of electors shall be
established next before the last registra-
tion of electors, or being a householder
within such district, occupying any
house, warehouse, counting-house, office,
shop, or other building of the clear an-
nual value of ten pounds sterling mobey,
and having resided therein six calendar
months next before such writ or registra-
tion as aforesaid, or holding at the date
of such writ, or at the time of such re-
gistration, a license to depasture lands
within the district for which his vote
is to be given from the Government of
New South Wales, or having a leasehold
estate in possession, situate within such
district, of the value of ten pounds ster-
ling money per annum, held upon a lease
which at the date of such writ, or at the
time of registration has not less than
three years to run, or having a salary of
one hundred pounds a year, or being the
occupant of any room or lodging, and
paying for his board and lodging forty
pounds a year, or for his lodging only at
the rate of ten pounds a year, and hav-
ing occupied the same room or lodging
for six calendar months next before such
writ or registration as aforesaid, shall be
entitled to vote at tho election of a mem-
ber of the Legislative Assembly : Pro-
vided always that no man shall be en-
titled to vote who has been attainted or
convicted of treason, felony, or other in-
famous offence, in any part of her Ma-
jesty’s dominions, unless he have received
a free or conditional pardon for such
offence or have undergone the sentence
passed on him for such offence: and
provided also, that no man shall be en-
titled to vote, unless at the time of such


election or registration of electors (as
the' case may be), he shall have paid up
all rates and taxes which shall have
become payable by him as owner or lease-
holder in respect of such estate, or as
occupier in respectmf such occupancy, or
as the holder of such license in respect
of such license, except such as shall
have become payable during three ca-
lendar months next before such election
or registration respectively.
XV. Where any premises are jointly
owned and occupied, or occupiedyvithout
being owned, by more persons than one,
each of such joint owners, occupiers, or
leaseholders, shall be entitled to be re-
gistered as a voter and to vote in respect
of the said premises, in case the whole
value of such premises when divided by
the number of such joint owners or occu-
piers as aforesaid, shall yield for every
such joint owner, occupier, or leaseholder
a sum which separately considered would
under the three first provisions of the
last preceding section, entitle such owner
occupier, or leaseholder to be registered
as a voter and to vote : provided how-
ever, that in case such joint owners,
occupiers, or leaseholders shall own or
be Interested in such premises in unequal
shares or proportions, no such joint
owner, occupier, or leaseholder shall be
entitled to be registered as a voter or to
vote unless his share or proportion shall,
regard being had to the total value of
the premises, yield a sum entitling him
to qualify.
XVI. Until further provision shall be
made by the legislature of the said co-
lony, all the provisions contained in the
Electoral Act of one thousand eight
hundred and fifty-one, passed by the late
Legislative Council in the fourteenth
year of her Majesty’s reign, numbered
forty-seven, except so much of the first
clause thereof as relates to the number
and constitution of the present Legisla-
tive Council, and so much of the third
and other clauses thereof as is repugnant
to this act shall be in force and apply to
the election of members to serve in the
Legislative Assembly constituted under
this act, except as follows :—.
First, —The electoral districts of East
Camden and West Camden shall each
return two members instead of one
member to serve in the said Legisla-
tive Assembly ; the electoral districts
or the united counties of Cook and
,Westmoreland, and of Murray and
Saint Vincent, and of Roxburgh and
Wellington, shall each return two
members instead of one member; the
county of Cumberland shall be divided
into two ridings, to be called the
North'and South Ridings; the North
Riding commencing where the Great
Western Road crosses Johnstone’s
Creek, and bounded on the south by the
centre of that road bearing westerly
to where it crosses the southern boun-
dary of the electoral district of Parra-
matta, near Beckett’s Bridge ; thence
by part of the southern, by the eastern,
northern, and western boundaries of
the said electoral district, to the Great
W’estern Road, near the toll-bar:
thence again by the centre of that
road bearing westerly to Emu Ferry
on the Nepean River ; on the west and
north by the Nepean and Hawkesbury
Rivers to Broken Bay ; and on the
east by the sea coast and the southern
shores of Port Jackson to Johnstone’s
Creek, and by Johnstone’s Creek to
the point of commencement, exclusive
of the Hamlets of St. Leonards and
Balmain, and also excluding so much
of the Cumberland Boroughs as is
embraced by the towns of Windsor
and Richmond : and the South Riding,
commencing where the Great Western
Road crosses Johnstone’s Creek, and
bounded on the north by the centre of
that road bearing westerly to where it
crosses the southern boundary of the
electoral district of the town of Parra-
matta, near Beckett’s Bridge; thence
by part of the southern boundary of
the said electoral district, bearing
westerly to the Great Western Road,
near the toll-bar; thence again by the
centre of that road, bearing westerly
to Emu Ferry on the Nepean River;
on the west by that river upwards to
the confluence of the Cataract River ;
on the souch by that river upwards to
its source, and thence by a line bearing


east twenty degrees south to the coast
at Bulli, being the southern boundary
of the county of Cumberland ; on the
east by the sea coast to Port Jackson;
and again on the north by the southern
shores of Port Jackson to Johnstone’s
Creek, and by Johnstone’s Creek to
the point of commencement, exclusive
of the city of Sydney, and the hamlets
of Paddington, Surry Hills, Redfern,
Chippendale, O’Connell Town, Cam-
perdown, and Glebe; and also ex-
cluding so much of the Cumberland
boroughs as is embraced by the towns
of Liverpool and Campbell Town;
and each of the said ridings shall
return two members ; the united coun-
ties of Northumberland and Hunter
shall return three members instead of
two; the county of Durham shall
return three members instead of two ;
the city of Sydney shall return four
members instead of three ; the Sydney
hamlets, the town of Parramatta, the
Northumberland boroughs, and the
Stanley boroughs shall each return
two members instead of one member;
the electoral districts of the pastoral
districts of the Murrumbidgee, of the
Lachlan and Lower Darling, of Li-
verpool Plains, and the Gwydir, and
of New England and the McLeay,
shall each return two members instead
of one member to serve in the said
Legislative Assembly as aforesaid.
Second, —The new electors entitled to
vote by this act at the election of
members of the Legislative Assembly,
shall be inserted in the electoral lists
appointed to be made by “ the Elec-
toral Act of 1851,” in the electoral
districts in which they shall be respec-
tively resident; and all such lists shall
continue to specify, as at present, the
Christian and surnames of all the
electors (including those of such new
electors), the nature of the qualifica-
tion and the place where they respec-
tively reside ; and all such lists shall
be signed, delivered, printed, and
hung up for public inspection by the
persons and in the way in the said act
is prescribed, and shall be subject to
the like claims and notice from any
person whose name shall have been
omitted therein, and to the like objec-
tions and notice as to the names of
any person inserted therein, and to the
like modes of altering, amending, or
continuing any such lists as are in
these said several respects provided
for in the schedules C, D, E, F, and
G, to “ the Electoral Act of 18.51”
annexed, or in schedules to the like
effect as nearly as may be consistently
with the rights of such new electors.
XVII. It shall be lawful for the legis-
lature of the colony of New South Wales
by any act or acts to be hereafter passed,
to alter the divisions and extent of the
several counties, districts, cities, towns,
boroughs, and hamlets, which shall be
represented in the Legislative Assembly
of the colony of New South Wales, and
to establish new and other divisions of
the same, and to alter the apportionment
of representatives to be chosen by the
said counties, districts, cities, towns,
boroughs, and hamlets respectively, and
make a new and different apportionment
of the number of representatives to be
chosen in and for the colony of New
South Wa ! es, and in and for the several
electoral districts of the same, and to
alter and regulate the appointment of
returning officers in and for the same,
and make provision in such manner as
they may deem expedient for the issuing
and return of writs for the election of
members to serve in the said Legislative
Assembly, and the time and place of
holding such elections : provided always
that it shall not te lawful to present to
the Governor of the colony of New South
Wales, for her Majesty’s assent, any bill
of the Legislative Council and Assembly
of the said colony by which the number
of representatives in the Legislative
Assembly may be altered, unless the
second and third reading of such bill in
the Legislative Council and the Legisla-
tive Assembly shall have been passed
with the concurrence of a majority of
the members for the time being of the
said Legislative Conncil, and of two-
thirds of the members for the time being
of the said Legislative Assembly; and
the assent of her Majesty shall not be


given to any such bill unless an address
shall have been presented by the Legis-
lative Assembly to the Governor, stating
that such bill has been so passed,
XVIII. Any person absolutely free
(except as is hereinafter excepted) who
shall be qualified and registered as a
voter in and for any electoral district
within the said colony, shall be qualified
to be elected a member of the Legisla-
tive Assembly for any electoral district
within the said colony.
XIX. Any person holding any office
of profit, or having a pension from the
crown during pleasure, or for term of
years, shall be incapable of being elected
or of sitting or voting as an elected
member of the assembly in any assembly
which may be hereafter convoked and
holden*unless he be an official member
of the government for the time being,
holding one of the following offices :
Colonial Secretary, Colonial Treasurer,
Collector of Customs, Auditor-General,
Postmaster-General, Attorney-General,
Solicitor-General, Inspector-General of
Police, Surveyor-General, and Chief
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
XX, If any elected member of the
said assembly shall accept of any such
office of profit or pension from the crown
during pleasure, or for term of years,
his election shall be thereupon and is
hereby declared to be void, and a writ
shall forthwith issue for a new election
as if such member were naturally dead :
provided that nothing in this act con-
tained shall extend to any person in
receipt only of pay, half-pay, Or a pension
as an officer in her Majesty’s navy or
army, or who shall receive any new or
other commission in the navy or army
respectively, or any increase on such
commission, or to any such official member
of the government or Executive Council
promoted to any higher office.
XXL No person shall be capable of
being elected a member to serve in the
said assembly, and of sitting and voting
therein, who shall be a minister of the
Church of England, or a minister, priest,
ecclesiastic, or teacher, either according
to the rites' of the Church of Rome, or
under any other form or profession of
religious faith or worship.
XXII. Any person who shall directly
or indirectly himself or by any person
whatsoever in trust for him, or for his
use or benefit, or on his account, under-
take, execute, hold, or enjoy, in the
whole, or in part, any contract or agree-
ment for or on account of the public
service, shall be incapable of being
elected or of sitting or voting as a mem-
ber of such assembly during the time he
shall execute, hold, or enjoy any such
contract, or any part or share thereof,
or any benefit or emolument arising from
the same : Provided always, that nothing
herein contained shall extend to any con-
tract or agreement made, entered into,
or accepted by any incorporated com-
pany or any trading company consisting
of more than twenty persons, where such
contract or agreement shall be made,
entered into, or accepted, for the general
benefit of such incorporated or trading
company: Provided also, that if any
person, being a member of such Assem-
bly, shall enter into any such contract or
agreement, or having entered into it,
shall continue to hold it, his seat shall
be void.
XXIII. If any person by this Act dis-
abled or declared to be incapable to sit
or vote in any assembly hereafter to be
summoned and holden shall nevertheless,
after the dissolution or determination of
this present Legislative Council, be
elected and returned as a member to
serve in the said assembly for any elec-
toral district, such election and return
are hereby declared and enacted to be
void to all intents and purposes whatso-
ever ; and if any person so elected and
returned contrary to the provisions of
this Act shall presume to sit or vote as
an elected member of the said assembly
in any session to be hereafter summoned
and holden, such person shall forfeit the
sum of five hundred pounds, to be re-
covered by any person who shall sue for
the same in the Supreme Court of New
South Wales, or in any other court of
record in the said colony having compe-
tent jurisdiction.
XXIV. It shall be lawful for the Go-


vernor of the colony of New South Wales
for the time being to fix such place or
places within any part of the colony of
New South Wales, and such times for
holding the first and every other session
of the Legislative Council and Assembly
of the said colony, as he may think lit,
such times and places to be afterwards
changed or varied as the Governor may
judge advisable and most consistent with
general convenience and the public wel-
fare, giving sufficient notice thereof;
and also to prorogue the said Legislative
Council and Assembly, from time to
time, and to dissolve the said assembly
by proclamation or otherwise, whenever
he shall deem it expedient.
XXV. There shall be a session of the
Legislative Council and Assembly of the
colony of New South Wales once at least
in every year ; so that a period of twelve
calendar months shall not intervene be-
tween the last sitting of the Legislative
Council and Assembly in one session and
the first sitting of the Legislative Coun-
cil and Assembly in the next session;
and every Legislative Assembly of the
said colony, hereafter to be summoned
and chosen, shall continue for five years
from the day of the return of the writs
for choosing the same, and no longer,
subject nevertheless, to be sooner pro-
rogued or dissolved by the Governor of
the said colony.
XXVI. The Legislative Council and
Assembly of the said colony shall bo
called together for the first time at some
period not later than six calendar months
next after the proclamation of this Act
by the Governor of the said colony.
XXVII, The members of the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the colony of New
South Wales shall, upon the first assem-
bling after every general election, pro-
ceed forthwith to elect one of their
number to be speaker; and in case of
his death, resignation, or removal by a
vote of the said Legislative Assembly,
the said members shall forthwith proceed
to elect another of such members to be
such speaker ; and the speaker so elected
shall preside at all meetings of the said
Legislative Assembly.
XXVIII, The presence of at least
twenty members of the Legislative As-
sembly of the colony of New South
Wales, exclusive of the speaker, shall bo
necessary to constitute a meeting of the
said Legislative Assembly for the
despatch of business ; and all questions
(except as herein is excepted) which
shall arise in the said Assembly, shall be
decided by the majority of votes of such
members as shall be present, other than
the speaker, and when the votes shall be
equal the speaker shall have the casting
vote.
XXIX. It is declared, that if it shall
so happen that no candidate or candi-
dates shall be proposed or seconded at
any time duly appointed for the election
of a member or members to serve in any
electoral district of the said colony, it
shall be the duty of the returning officer
to notify the fact to the Governor, who
shall announce to the speaker of the said
Legislative Assembly the electoral dis-
trict or districts in which no election
shall have taken place ; but no such re-
fusal or failure to elect in any electoral
district or districts shall be deemed or
taken to make the Legislative Assembly
incomplete, or to prevent it from meeting
and dispatching business, so long as
there shall be a quorum of members
present.
XXX. No member, either of the Le-
gislative Council or of the Legislative
Assembly of the colony of New South
Wales, shall be permitted to sit or vote
therein until he shall have taken and
subscribed the following oath before the
Governor of the said colony, or before
some person or persons authoxized by
such Governor to administer such
oath :
“ I, A. 8., do sincerely promise and
swear, that I will be faithful and bear
true allegiance to her Majesty Queen
Victoria. So help me God I”
XXXI. Every person authorized by
law to make an affirmation instead of
taking an oath, may make such affirma-
tion in every case in which an oath is
hereinbefore required to be taken.
XXXII. It shall be lawful for any
member of the assembly, by writing
under his hand, addressed to the speaker


of the said house, to resign Iris seat
therein, and upon the receipt of such re-
signation, by the speaker, the seat of
such member shall become vacant.
XXXIII. If any member of the assem-
bly shall for one whole session of the
Legislature, without the permission of
the assembly, entered upon its journals,
fail to give his attendance in the said
house, or shall take any oath or make
any declaration or acknowledgment of
allegiance, obedience, or adherence to
any foreign prince or power, or do or
concur in or adopt any act whereby he
may become a subject or citizen of any
foreign state or power, or become en-
titled to the rights, privileges, or immu-
nities of a subject of any foreign state or
power, or shall become bankrupt or an
insolvent debtor within the meaning of
the laws in force within the said colony
relating to bankrupts or insolvent
debtors, or shall become a public de-
faulter, or be attainted of treason, or be
convicted of felony or any infamous
crime, his seat in such assembly shall
thereby become vacant.
XXXIV. When and so often as a
vacancy shall occur as aforesaid, upon a
resolution by the assembly declaring
such vacancy and the causes thereof, the
speaker shall cause a writ to be issued
for supplying such vacancy; Provided
that the speaker may issue such writ
when the assembly is not in session.
XXXV. The said Legislative Council
and Assembly, at the first sitting of each
respectively, and from time to time after-
wards as there shall be occasion, shall
prepare and adopt such standing rules
and orders as shall appear to the said
Council and Assembly respectively best
adapted for the orderly conduct of such
Council and Assembly respectively, and
for the manner in which such Council
and Assembly shall be presided over in
case of the absence of the speaker, and
for the mode in which such Council and
Assembly shall confer, correspond, and
communicate with each other relative to
votes or bills passed by or pending in
such Council and Assembly respectively,
and for the manner in which notices of
bills, resolutions, and other business in-
tended to be submitted to such Council
and Assembly respectively, at any session
thereof, may be published in the Govern-
ment Gazette or otherwise, for general
information,' for some convenient space
or time before the meeting of such
Council and Assembly respectively, and
for the proper passing, entitling, and
numbering of the bills to be introduced
into and passed by the said Council and
Assembly, and for the proper presenta-
tion of the same to the Governor for the
time being, for her Majesty’s assent; all
of which rules and orders shall, by such
Council and Assembly respectively, be
laid before the Governor, and, being by
by him approved, shall become binding
and of force : Provided that no such rule
or order shall be of force to subject any
person not being a member or officer of
the Council or Assembly to which it re-
lates, to any pain, penalty, or forfei-
ture.
XXXVI, It shall and may he lawful
for the Governor to transmit by message
to tire said Legislative Council or As-
sembly, for their consideration, the draft
of any laws which it may appear to him
desirable to introduce; and all such
drafts shall be taken into consideration
in such convenient manner as shall, in
and by the rules and orders aforesaid,
be in that behalf provided.
XXXVII. Every bill which has been
passed by the Legislative Council and
Assembly, whether with or without
amendments, shall be presented for her
Majesty’s assent to the Governor of the
said colony, and the Governor in all bills
relating to the local or municipal affairs
of the said colony shall declare at once
according to his discredon that he
assents to such bill in her Majesty’s
name, or, that he withholds her Majesty’s
assent; and in all bills touching or
affecting any imperial subject, the Go-
vernor shall declare according to his dis-
cretion, but subject nevertheless to the
provisions contained in this Act, and to
such instructions as may from time to
time be given in that behalf by her Ma-
jesty, her heirs, or successors, that lie
assents to such bill in her Majesty’s
name, or that he withholds her Majesty’s


assent, or that he reserves such bill for
the signification of her Majesty’s plea-
sure thereon.
XXX\ 111. Whenever any bill affect-
ing any imperial subject which shall
have been presented for her Majesty’s
assent to the Governor of the said
colony, shall by such Governor have been
assented to in her Majesty’s name, the
Governor shall by the first convenient
opportunity transmit to one of her Ma-
jesty’s principal secretaries of state, an
authentic copy of such bill so assented
to ; and it shall be lawful at any time,
within one year after such bill shall have
been so received by the secretary of
state, for her Majesty by order in Coun-
cil, to declare her disallowance of such
bill, and such disallowance, together with
a certificate under the hand and seal of
the secretary of state, certifying the
day on which such bill was received as
aforesaid, being signified by the Gover-
nor to the Legislative Council of the
said colony, by speech or message to the
said Council, or by proclamation in the
New South Wales Government Gazette,
shall make void and annul the same from
and after the day of such signification.
XXXIX. No bill which shall be so
reserved for the signification of her
Majesty’s pleasure thereon, shall have
any force or authority within the said
colony until the Governor shall signify
either by speech or message to said Le-
gislative Council and Assembly, or by
proclamation, that such bill has been
laid before her Majesty in Council, and
that her Majesty has been pleased to
assent to the said bill, and an entry
shall be made in the journal of the said
Legislative Council and Assembly of
every such speech, message, or proclama-
tion, and a duplicate thereof, duly at-
tested, shall be delivered to the registrar
of the Supreme Court, or other proper
officer, to be kept among the records of
the said colony ; and no bill which shall
be so reserved as aforesaid, shall have
any force or authority in the said colony
unless her Majesty’s assent thereto shall
have been so signified as aforesaid, with-
in the space of one year from the day on
which such bill shall have been pre-
sented for her Majesty’s assent to the
Governor as aforesaid.
XL. Notwithstanding anything here-
inbefore contained the legislature of
the said colony as constructed by this
act shall have full power and authority
from time to time, by any act or acts, to
alter the provisions or laws for the time
being in force under this act or other-
wise, and to repeal any act or acts of the
Imperial Parliament which it may be
necessary to repeal in order to give effect
to any such act or acts for altering the
provisions or laws for the time being in
force under this act or otherwise con-
cerning the Legislative Council, the
nomination or election of another Legis-
lative Council, or of a separate Legisla-
tive House, to consist respectively of such
members to be appointed or elected
respectively by such person or persons,
and in such manner as by such act or
acts shall be determined, and to vest in
such new Council and the Legislative
Assembly for the time being, or in such
other Legislative House, the powers and
functions of the Parliament of this
colony for which such Legislative House
may be substituted : provided always that
it shall not be lawful to present to the
Governor of the said colony, for her
Majesty’s assent, any bill of the Parlia-
ment of the said colony by which any
such alteration in the constitution of the
said colony may be made, unless the
second and third reading of such bill
shall have been passed with the con-
currence of two-thirds of the members
for the time being of the said Legisla-
tive Council and of the said Legislative
Assembly respectively: provided also
that every bill which shall be so passed
for any of such purposes, shall be re-
served for the signification of her Ma-
jesty’s pleasure thereon, and a copy of
such bill shall be laid before both houses
of the Imperial Parliament for the period
of thirty days at the least before her
Majesty’s pleasure thereon shall be sig-
nified.
XLI. It shall be lawful for her Ma-
jesty, with the advice of her Privy
Council, or under her Majesty’s signet
and sign manual, through one of her


principal Secretaries of State, from time
to time to convey to the Governor of
New South Wales such instructions as to
her Majesty shall seem meet for the
guidance of such Governor in the exer-
cise of the powers hereby vested in him
of assenting to or dissenting from, or for
reserving for the signification of her
Majesty’s pleasure, bills to be passed by
the said Legislative Council and Assem-
bly, affecting any imperial subject, and
so that such instructions do not in any
way fetter the Governor’s discretion in
giving or refusing her Majesty’s assent
to bills of mere local or municipal con-
cernment.
XLIL The appointment to all public
offices in the colony hereafter to become
vacant or to be created (other than Cor-
porate Offices) whether such offices be
salaried or not, shall be vested in the
Governor, with the advice of the Execu-
tive Council.
XL 111. The commissions of the present
Judges of the Supreme Court of the said
colony, and of all future Judges thereof,
shall be, continue, and remain in full
force during their good behaviour, not-
withstanding the demise of her Majesty,
(whom God long preserve) or of her
heirs and successors, any law, usage, or
practice to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding.
XL IV. It shall be lawful, nevertheless,
for her Majesty, her heirs and successors,
to remove any such Judge or Judges
upon the address of both houses of Par-
liament.
XLV. Such salaries as are settled
upon the Judges for the time being by
Act of Parliament, or otherwise, and
also such salaries as shall or may be in
future granted by her Majesty, her heirs,
and successors, or otherwise, to any
future Judge or Judges of the said
Supreme Court, shall in all time coming
be paid and payable to every such Judge
and Judges for the time being, so long
as the patents or commissions of them or
any of them, respectively, shall continue
and remain in force.
XLVI. All laws, statutes, and ordi-
nances which, at the time of the passing
of this Act, shall be in force within the
said colony, shall remain and continue to
be of the same force, authority, and
effect, as if this Act had not been made,
except in so far as the same are repealed
or vaCried by this Act, or in so far as the
same shall or may hereafter by virtue
and under the authority of this Act be
repealed or varied by any Act or Acts
of the Legislature of the said colony.
XLVII. All the courts of civil aud
criminal jurisdiction within the said co-
lony, and all charters, legal commissions,
powers, and authorities, and all officers,
judicial, administrative, or ministerial,
within the said colony respectively, ex-
cept in so far as the same may be
abolished, altered, or varied by or may
be inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, or shall be abolished, altered,
or varied by any Act or Acts of the Le-
gislature of the colony, shall continue to
subsist in the same form and with the
same effect as if this Act had not been
made.
XLVIII. And whereas the Legisla-
tures of the said colony have from time
to time passed enactments which were to
continue in force for a certain number
of years after the passing thereof, and
from thence to the end of the then next
ensuing session of the Legislature, in
which the same were passed, whenever
the words “ and from thence to the end
of the then next ensuing session of the
Legislature,” or words to the same effect,
have been used in any such temporary
Act, which shall not have expired before
the passing of this Act, the said words
shall be construed to extend and apply
to the next session of the Legislature, to
be constituted under this Act.
XLIX. It shall not be lawful for the
Legislature of the colony of New South
Wales to levy any duty upon articles im-
ported bond jide for the supply of her
Majesty’s land or sea forces, nor to levy
any duty, impose any prohibition or re-
striction, or grant any exemption from
any drawback or other privilege upon
the importation or exportation of any
articles, nor to enforce any dues or
charges upon shipping contrary to or at
variance with any treaty or treaties con-


eluded by her Majesty •with any foreign
power.
L. Subject to the provisions of this
Act, and notwithstanding any Act or
Acts of the Imperial Parliament now in
force to the contrary, it shall be lawful
for the Legislature of the colony of New
South Wales to impose and levy such
duties of customs as to them, may seem
fit, on the importation into the colony of
any goods, wares, and merchandise what-
soever, whether the produce of or ex-
ported from the United Kingdom or any
of the colonies or dependencies of the
United Kingdom, or any foreign
country: Provided always, that no new
duty shall be so Imposed upon the im-
portation into the said colony of any
article the produce or manufacture of, or
imported from, any particular country
or place which shall not be equally im-
posed on the importation into the said
colony of the like article the produce or
manufacture of, or exported from, all
other countries and places whatsoever.
LI. For the purpose of this Act the
boundaries of the colony of New South
Wales shall not be curtailed on the
north within the twenty-sixth degree of
south latitude, and they shall be on the
south and the south-west a straight line
drawn from Cape Howe to the nearest
source of the River Murray, and thence
by the course of that river to the eastern
boundary of the colony of South Aus-
tralia ; on the east the one hundred and
sixty-second degree of east longitude;
and on the west the one hundred and
forty-first degree of east longitude,
reckoning from the meridian of Green-
wich.
LI I. No alteration shall take place in
the boundaries of tFie respective colonies
of New South Wales, Victoria, or South
Australia, unless the assent of the colony
losing any portion of its territory by
such alienation shall be expressed in
some Legislative provision of such
colony.
LIII. And whereas the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, consti-
tuted under the Imperial Act passed in
the Session holden in the thirteenth
and fourteenth years of the reign of
her present Majesty, intituled, “An Act
for the hatter Government of Her Ma-
jesty’s Australian Colonies,” are desirous
that her Majesty should owe to the
spontaneous liberality of her people in
this colony such grant by way of civil
list, in lieu of the provision contained
in the schedule to that act, as shall be
sufficient to give stability and security
to the civil institutions of the colony,
and to provide for the adequate remu-
neration of able and efficient officers in
the executive, judicial, and other de-
partments of her Majesty’s colonial
service ; the granting ■ of which civil
list belongs constitutionally only to her
Majesty’s faithful people, through their
representatives in the said Legislative
Council; and her Majesty’s most dutiful
and loyal subjects, the members of the
said Legislative Council, in Council
assembled, being desirous that a certain
competent revenue for the purpose may
be settled upon her Majesty (to whom may
God grant a long and happy reign) as
a testimony of their unfeigned affection
to her Majesty’s person and govern-
ment, have accordingly freely resolved,
in lieu of the atoresaid statutable pro-
vision for the like purpose, to grant to
her Majesty a certain revenue payable
out of the consolidated revenue fund
of this colony : be it therefore enacted
as follows:
LIV. All taxes, imposts, rates, and
duties, and all territorial, casual, and
other revenues of the crown (including
royalties) from whatever source arising
w'ithln this colony, and over which the
present or fu'ure legislature has or may
have power of appropriation, shall form
one consolidated revenue fund, to he
appropriated for the public service of
this colony, in the manner and subject
to the charges hereinafter mentioned.
LV. The consolidated revenue fund
of this colony shall be permanently
charged with all the costs, charges, and
expenses incident to the collection, ma-
nagement, and receipt thereof, such
costs, charges, and expenses being
subject nevertheless to be reviewed and
audited in such manner as shall be di-
rected by any act of the legislature.


LVI. There shall be payable in every
year to her Majesty, her heirs and suc-
cessors, out of the Consolidated Revenue
Fund of this colony, the several sums not
exceeding- in the whole, the sum of sixty-
three thousand and three hundred pounds,
for defraying the expenses of the several
services and purposes named in the first,
second, and third parts of schedule A, to
this Act annexed;.the said several sums
to be issued by the Colonial Treasurer in
discharge of such warrant or warrants as
shall be from time to time directed under
the hand of the Governor; and the said
Treasurer shall account to her Majesty
for the same through the Lords Com-
missioners of her Majesty’s Treasury, in
such manner and form as her Majesty
shall be graciously pleased to direct.
LVI I. It shall be lawful for the
Governor to abolish any of the offices
named in the second part of the sche-
dule, or to vary the sums thereby appro-
priated to such purposes connected with
the administration of the government of
this colony, as to her Majesty, her heirs,
and successors, shall seem fit; and ac-
counts in detail of the expenditure of the
several sums expended under the autho-
rity of this Act, shall be laid before both
Houses of the Parliament of New South
Wales within thirty days from the be-
ginning of the session next after such
expenditure shall be made.
LVIII. The said several sums men-
tioned in the first, second, and third
parts of the said schedule A, shall be
accepted and taken by her Majesty, her
heirs, and successors, by way of civil
list, instead of all territorial, casual, and
other revenues of the crown (Including
all royalties) from whatever source aris-
ing within the said colony, and to the
disposal of which the crown may be en-
titled either absolutely or conditionally,
or otherwise howsoever.
LIX. Not more than four thousand
five hundred and fifty pounds shall be
payable at the same time for pensions to
the judges of the Supreme Court, out of
the sum set apart for pensions in the
first part of the said Schedule A; and
not more than five thousand nine hun-
dred pounds shall be payable in the
whole by way of pension or retiring
allowance for the present incumbents of
any office or department mentioned in
the first and second parts of the said
Schedule A, who, on political grounds,
may be removed from any such office or
department; Provided always, that pen-
sions shall be demandable by such judges,
to the amount of seven-tenths of their
actual salaries, on permanent disability
or infirmity or after fifteen years service
in this colony : Provided also, that the
officers so liable to removal shall be the
Attorney and Solicitor General, the Co-
lonial Secretary, Colonial Treasurer, and
Auditor General, and upon the removal
from office of any of the present officers,
they shall be entitled by way of pension
or retiring allowance to the full amount
of the salaries respectively received by
them at the time of the passing of this
Act: Provided also, that if after the
assignment of any such pension or re-
tiring allowance, any of such judges or
officers shall accept any new appointment
under the Crown, then and in every such
case the pension or retiring allowance of
any such judge or officer shall merge or
be reduced, pro tanto, according as the
salary or emoluments of any such new
appointment are of greater or less amount
than the pension or retiring allowance of
such judge or officer.
LX. Not more than two thousand
five hundred pounds shall be payable at
the same time for pensions to super-
annuated officers out of the sums set apart
for such pensions in the second part of
the said Schedule ; Provided always,
that the amount of all such pensions for
such superannuated officers shall be ac-
cording to the several scales and rates
fixed by the Superannuation Act of the
Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland,
passed in the session of the fourth and
fifth years of the reign of His late Ma-
jesty King William the Fourth, and that
a list- of ail pensions granted under this
act, and of the persons to whom the same
shall have been granted, shall be laid, in
every year, before both Houses of the
said Parliament.
LXI. Subject to the provisions herein
contained it shall be lawful for the Le-


gislature of this colony to make laws for
regulating the sale, letting, disposal, and
occupation of the waste lands of the
Crown within the said colony.
LX 11. After and subject to the pay-
ments to be made under the provisions
hereinbefore contained, all the Consoli-
dated Revenue Fund, arising from taxes,
duties, rates, and Imposts, levied by vir-
tue of any Act of the Legislature of the
colony, and from the disposal of the
waste lands of the Crown, under any such
act, made in pursuance of the authority
herein contained, shall be subject to be
appropriated to such specific purposes as
by any act of the same-Legislature shall
be prescribed in that behalf: Provided
that the consolidation of the revenues of
this colony shall not affect the payment
of the annual interest, or the principal
sums mentioned in any outstanding de-
bentures or other charge upon the terri-
torial revenue, as such interest, principal,
or other charge severally becomes due,
nor shall such consolidation affect the
payment of any sura or sums heretofore
charged upon the taxes, duties, rates, and
imposts, now raised, levied, and collected,
or to be raised, levied, and collected, to
and for the use of this colony, for such
time as shall have been appointed by any
acts of the Legislature by which any
such charge was authorized.
LXIII. It shall not be lawful for the Le-
gislative Assemb'y to originate or pass any
vote, resolution, or bill, for the appro-
priation of any part of the said Consolid-
ated Revenue Fund, or of any other tax
or impost to any purpose which shall not
have been first recommended by a mes-
sage of the Governor to the said Legis-
lative Assembly, during the session in
which such vote, resolution, or bill, shall
be passed.
LXIV. No part of her Majesty’s Re-
venue in the said colony, arising from any
of the sources afersaid, shall be Issued, or
shall be made issuable, except in pursu-
ance of warrants under the hatid of the
Governor of the colony directed to the
public Treasurer thereof.
LXV. This Act shall be proclaimed
in New South Wales hv the Governor
thereof, within one calendar month after
a copy of such Act shall have been re-
ceived by such Governor, and shall take
effect within the said colony from the
date of the proclamation thereof.
LXVI. The proclamation of this Act
and all proclamations to be made under
the provisions thereof, shall be published
in the New South Wales Government
Gazette.
LXVII. In the construction of this
Act, the terra “Governor” shall mean the
person for the time being lawfully admin-
istering the government of the colony of
New South Wales,
LXVII 1. The foregoing provisions
of this Act shall have no force or
effect until so much and such parts of the
Act of the parliament of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
passed in the thirteenth and fourteenth
years of her Majesty’s reign, intituled,
“An Act for the better Government of the
“ Australian Colonies,” and the first,
second, and third parts of the Schedule
A therein referred to, and of another
Act passed in the fifth and sixth years of
her Majesty’s reign, intituled, “An Act
“for the Government of New South 1 Vales
“ and Van Diemen’s Land,” and of an-
other Act passed in the said fifth and
sixth years of her Majesty’s reign, inti-
tuled, “An Act for regulating the Sale of
“ Waste Ijands belonging to the Crown in
“ the Australian Colonies,” and of another
Act passed in the eighth year of her
Majesty’s reign, intituled, “An Act to
“ clear up doubts as to the regulation and
“ audit of the Customs of New South
“ Wales,” and of another Act passed in
the same year* intituled, “An Act to
“ explain and a,mend the Act for the
“ Government of New South Wales and
“ Van Diemen s Land,” and of another
Act, passed in the ninth year of the
reign of his late Majesty King George
the Fourth, intituled, “ An Act to provide
“for the Administration of Justice in New
“South Wales and Van Diemen's Land,
“ and for the more efficient Government
“thereof, and for other purposes relating
“thereto,” and of another Act passed in
the ninth and tenth years of her Majesty’s
reign, intituled, “An Act to amend an
\ “ Act for Regulating the sale of Waste


“ Land belonging to the Crown in the Au-
strolian Colonies, and to make further
“provisions for the management thereof '’
as severally relate to the colony of New
South Wales and as are repugnant to
this Act, shall have been repealed; and
the entire management and control of
the waste lands belonging to the Crown
in the said colony of New South Wales,
and also the appropriation of the gross
proceeds of the sales of any such lands,
and of all other proceeds and revenues of
the same, from whatever source arising
in the said colony, Including all Roval-
ties, mines, and minerals, shall be vestecl
in the legislature of the said colony :
Provided that nothing herein contained
shall affect or be construed to affect any
contract, or to prevent the fulfilment of
any promise or engagement made by or
on behalf of her Majesty, with respect to
any lands situate within the said colony
in cases where such contracts, promises,
or engagements have been lawfully made,
before the time at which this Act shall
take effect within this colony, nor to dis-
turb or in any way interfere with or pre-
judice any vested or other rights which
have accrued or belong to the licensed
occupants or lessees of any Crown lands
within or without the Settled Districts,
under and by virtue of the aforesaid Act
of the Parliament, passed in the ninth
and tenth year of her Majesty’s reign,
intituled, “ An Act to amend an Act for
regulating the sale of Waste Land be-
“ longing to the Crown in the Australian
“ Colonies, and to make further provision
“for the management thereof' or any
vested or other interest or right which
has accrued or arisen by virtue of any
order or orders of her Majesty in Council,
issued in pursuance thereof: Provided
also that if the legislature of the colony
should at any time hereafter deem it ex-
pedient that any such vested or other
right or interest should be abridged or
abrogated, any law authorizing or en-
acting any such abridgement or abroga-
tion, shall be wholly void and inoperative
unless it contain an effectual provision
awarding full compensation to all parties
injuriously affected by such law : Pro-
vided that all parties who may bo dls-
satisfied with any su;h award may appeal
to the Supreme Court, which shall direct
an issue to be tried before any one of the
judges thereof, and a special jury of the
said colony, in order to fix the amount of
damages to which such dissatisfied par-
ties may be respectively entitled.
SCHEDULE A.—Part I.
To be placed at the disposal of Her
Majesty, for the Salary of the
Governor General, if Her Ma-
jesty see fit; otherwise to revert
to the Consolidated Eevenue
Fund
One Chief Justice
Three Judges, including one for
Moreton Bay
Master in Equity and Curator of In-
testate Estates and Chief Com-
missioner of Insolvent Estates
Attorney General
Solicitor General
Pensions for Judges, on their ceas-
ing to hold office
Chairman of Quarter Sessions and
Commissioner of Crt. of Requests
a> -u 52 i
a ” g i 2
,c ® 'g
’3 3
® 3 5 3c
3 2 = H
3 o ¥ oi
Q <U
ftgg °g&
•» » B "o
*■< o 3 c
g & d g 5 £
0 ® .3 c c £
g - s £a
«!j +* •" -< H
£ £
7.000 7,000
2.000 2,000
4.500 4,500
1,000
1.500 1,500
1,000 1,000
4,550 4,550
800
i 800
22,350; 20,550
SCHEDULE A.—Part II
Colonial Secretary 2,000 j 2,000
Governor’s Private Secretary .... 400 400
Colonial Treasurer 1,250 1 250
Auditor General 900 900
Pensions to Officers of G (ivern rn ent,
not liable to removal 2.500 2,500
Pensions to existing Officers of
the Government, liable to re-j
tnoval. (Upon the demise of
these latter Officers, their re-!
spective Pensions to revert to,
the Consolidated Revenue Pund)| 5,900]
TaTOGO
SCHEDULE A.—Part 111.
Public Worship | 28,000| OQ q
RECAPITULATION.
Schedule A — Part I 22,360 20,550
„ „ Part 11. 12,950 7,050
,; „ Part 111 28,000 28,000
63,300 55,600


17 Victoria, 1853.
An Act to authorize her Majesty to Assent
to a Bill of the, Legislative Council of
New South Wales, and to repeal so
much and such parts of divers Acts of
Parliament therein enumerated as re-
late to the Colony of New South Wales,
and as are repugnant to the said Bill.
Whereas the Legislative Council of the
colony of New South Wales, constituted
and assembled by virtue of and under
the authority of the Act of Parliament
passed in the Session holden in the tenth
and eleventh years of her Majesty’s
reign, intituled, “ An Act for the better
Government of the Australian Colonies.”
did in the year one thousand eight hun-
dred and fifty-three, pass a Bill, inti-
tuled, “ An Act to confer a Constitution
on Neio South Wales, and to grant a
Civil List to her Majesty,” of which a
copy is contained in the schedule to this
present Act annexed : And whereas the
said Bill was presented for her Majesty’s
assent to the then Governor of the said
colony of New South Wales, and the
said Governor did thereupon declare that
he reserved the said Bill for the signifi-
cation of her Majesty’s pleasure thereon :
And whereas it is by the final provision
of vhe said reserved Bill provided, that
the foregoing provisions thereof shall
have no force or effect until so much and
such parts of the said recited Act of
Parliament, and of another Act passed
in the fifth and sixth years of her Ma-
jesty’s reign. Intituled, “ An Act for the
Government of New South Wales and
Van Diemens Landf’ and of another
Act, passed in the said fifth and sixth
years of her Majesty’s reign, intituled,
“ An Act for regulating the Sale of Waste
Lands belonging to the Crown in the Aus-
tralian Colonies ,” and of another Act
passed in the eighth year of her Ma-
jesty’s reign, intituled, “ An Act to clear
up doubts as to the regulation and audit
of the Customs of New South Wales,” and
of another Act, passed in‘the same year,
intituled, “ An Act to explain and amend
the Act for the Government of New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land,” and of
another Act, passed in the ninth year of
the reign of his late Majesty King
George the Fourth, intituled, “An Act
to provide for the Administration of Jus-
tice in New South Wales and Van Die-
mens Land, and for the more efficient Go-
vernment thereof, and for other purposes
relating thereto,” and of another Act
passed in the ninth and tenth years of
her Majesty’s reign, intituled, “An Act
to amend an Act for regulating the Sale of
Wade Lands belonging to the Crown in
the Australian Colonies, and to make fur-
ther provision for the management thereof,”
as severally relate to the colony of New
South Wales, and as are repugnant to
the said reserved Bill shall have been re-
peal.d; And whereas it is not compe-
tent to her Majesty to assent to the said
reserved bill without the authority of
parliament for that purpose, inasmuch as
the said bill is in certain respects repug-
nant to the said several recited acts of
parliament; And whereas it is expedient
that her Majesty should be authorised
to assent to the said reserved bill, and
that so much and such parts as aforesaid
of the said recited acts should thereupon
be repealed : Be it therefore enacted by
the Queen’s most excellent Majesty, by
and with the consent and advice of the
lords spiritual and temporal, and com-
mons, in this present parliament assem-
bled, and by the authority of the same
as follows ;
I. It shall be lawful for her Majesty,
with the advice of. her Majesty’s Privy
Council, to assent to the said reserved
bill, anything in the said recited Acts of
Parliament, or any law, statute, or usage
to the contrary in anywise notwithstand-
ing.
11. If her Majesty, with the advice of
her Privy Council, shall assent as afore-
said to the said reserved Bill, so much


and such parts of the said recited Acts
as in any way relate to the colony of
New South Wales, and as are repugnant
to the said reserved Bill, or as in any way
relate to the control and management of
the waste lands of the crown, or to the
appropriation of any revenues of the
crown thence or otherwise arising within
the said colony, and also the first, second,
and third parts of the schedule A to the
said first recited Act mentioned or re-
ferred to in the final provision of the
said reserved Bill, shall be repealed upon
and from the day on which the said re-
served Bill (being first so assented to by
her Majesty in Council) shall take effect
in the said colony.
111. This Act may be amended or sus-
pended by any Act to be passed in this
Session of Parliament.


DEB A T E
IN THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
ON THE
SECOND HEADING OF THE CONSTITUTION BILL,
August 1 Qth, 1853.
Mr. DARVALL presented the fol-
lowing petition, signed by 2630 of the
inhabitants of the city of Sydney :
To the Honorable the Legislative Council of
New South Wales, in Council assembled. The
humble Petition of the undersigned inhabi-
tants of the colony of New South Wales,
Humbly Shewkth,
That in the opinion of your petitioners the
proposed Constitution Bill now before your Ho-
norable Council is radically defective and opposed
to_ the wishes and interests of the inhabitants of
this colony, who believe that a Representative
Legislature, consisting of two Elective Chambers,
will alone possess that stability, energy, and use-
fulness which are maintained by public confidence,
and without which no government can perma-
nently exist.
That your petitioners earnestly remonstrate
against any attempt, in the hasty manner now
proposed in the Legislative Council, to impose a
Constitution on the colony which is framed in
direct opposition to the wishes of the people.
That the proposed alteration of the Electoral
Act is calculated to increase that inequality in
their representation of which the colonists have
so justly complained, which inequality, instead of
being increased, ought now to be rectified, and
the representative system established on a just
and satisfactory basis.
That your Honorable Council having been elected
without reference to the proposed change of Con-
stitution, the colonists are entitled to demand the
interposition of such delay between the first and
second readings of the" proposed Bill as will
enable them to express their views fully on this
momentous question.
Tour petitioners therefore pray that your Ho-
norable Council will be pleased to postpone the
f irther consideration of the measure in question
for at least one month, in order to give the colo-
nists at large the opportunity of expressing their
sentiments on the subject.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will
ever pray.
The petition was received.
THE SECOND READING.
On the order of the day being called
for the second reading of the Constitu-
tion Bill,
Mr. WENTWORTH rose, Mr.
Speaker, I am not sorry after all the ob-
loquy which has beep attached to my
name in connexion with this measure,
the second reading of which it is now
my duty to move, to have an opportunity
of explaining to this House and the
country at large the principles which
actuated me in the course I have taken
in the Select Committee appointed to
prepare it. It may, however, be well
that I should, before entering into any
discussion of the measure itself, in the
first place show the utter fallacy of one
of the main propositions, of that which
was in fact the substantial basis of the
petition which had been agreed to at a
public meeting yesterday, and which has
been presented to the House this night
by the lion, and learned member for
Cumberland. That proposition is, that
the House consists of members who have
been elected without reference to the
proposed changes of the constitution.
Now, a more fallacious, a more erro-
neous, a more unjust and false charge,
was never made. 8o far from this being
the case, I brondly assert the present
Legislative Council was elected chiefly
in reference to this very purpose. Aye,
I will go further, and aver that amongst
all those who have any real knowledge
of the political position of the colony, it
was elected exclusively with reference to
this very object—(cheers)—that the sole


function for which they were and ought
to have been elected, was to frame the
Constitution, which for the first time the
Minister and Parliament of Great Bri-
tain had given them power to make for
themselves. (Cheers.) I believe the
minister who bestowed upon the repre-
sentatives of the people in this colony
the power to exercise th’s function, be-
lieved that the attention of the Council,
elected under the present constitution,
would in the first instance he turned to
it alone. And I further believe that the
mind of that minister must be filled with
astonishment to find that three years
have been allowed to elapse without any
fruit having been matured from the great
o
and important power bestowed upon us.
(Cheers.) I contend, therefore, that
there is not the shadow of foundation
for this proposition in the petition ; but
tha ~ on the contrary, it was to this body,
this very Council, that the duty of fram-
ing a Constitution has been exclusively
entrusted: and that it was with the
knowledge that the Council had to per-
form the greatest and highest functions
ever entrusted to them that its present
members have been returned by the
constituencies throughout the country.
(Cheers.) The whole tenor of the peti-
tions and speeches which have been made
against the Electoral Act under which
the Council has been elected, and also
agalnstthe Bill now under consideration,
is plainly that they both went to further
the private interests of a party who were
inimical to the welfare of the country, or
who were prepared to sacrifice that wel-
fare to their own personal aggrandise-
ment, or the furtherance of their private
ambition. I repudiate the gross asper-
sion, not only for myself, but for every
hon. member of this House. I fling it
back to its vile and contemptible authors
with indignant scorn. (Loud cheers.)
I assert, and before I sit down I will
prove to the satisfaction of every calmly
reflecting man, that it has been the most
anxious desire of the Committee en-
trusted to frame this measure, to take
the sense of the country upon the Con-
stitution to be adopted—to obtain the
real sense of the country, and, having
obtained the sense of the people, to give
it a local habitation and a name.
(Cheers.) It is perfectly easy to show
that the Committee and the Council
have never had any feeling inimical to
the rights and privileges of any class in
the community. The Council, I repeat,
under the Constitution of 1850, was
elected for the express purpose of fram-
ing a Constitution for this colony.
Well, what did it do in its first session ?
It simply did nothing in the matter but
re-anirm the petitions and remonstrance
of the previous session. And how was
this deference to the opinion of this
country met ? Not a single voice was
heard to offer a suggestion. The result
of the delay was nothing but universal
silence. (Cheers.) And what conclu-
sion, I ask, had this Council a right to
draw—were, I contend, compelled to
draw—from this universal silence ? Why,
that the country had the fullest confi-
dence in the Legislative Council ; that
they believed the representatives they
had elected, in discharging the great
duty cast upon them by the Parliament
of Great Britain, would fulfil that duty
conscientiously to themselves, and satis-
factorily and beneficially to the public
at large. It evinced, also, that the
opinions of the constituencies of the co-
lony remained the same as they were
some four or five years ago, when, with
one voice echoing throughout the length
and breadth of the land, they repudiated
the proposition of Lord Grey of a Con-
stitution based on this very principle of
doub'e election now so loudly but so
rashly demanded. The moment that
mischievous proposition was published,
the toscin of alarm was sounded through-
out the colony. Never before, never
since, had there been so great a mani-
festation of political feeling as took place
on that occasion. Sydney, the metro-
polis of the colony, took the lead in the
movement; but throughout the towns,
the small remote inland towns of the
colony, the feeling extended, until every
. district had spoken out unmistakably that
the people of New' South Wales would
not have this mischievous principle in-
troduced into their civil government, but


that they would have a constitution assi- j
jnilated, as nearly as circumstances would j
allow, to the glorious constitution of I
their Father Land. (Great applause.)
That was the opinion declared by the
people of Sydney then, reiterated through-
out the colony, and echoed, 1 believe,
from the heart of every colonist.
(Cheers.) This was four years ago, and
there had been no expression of public
opinion since to show that any reaction
had taken place, or that the feeling of
the country had changed in any way ;
and seeing this, the committee that
framed this measure, and the House
which appointed that committee, have a
right to believe that it is the feeling j
still. (Cheers.) Now the next step j
taken by the Council in the performance
of this duty, thrown expressly upon them
by the Act of Parliament, and to per-
form which they had been elected by the
country, was taken by myself. In the
second session of Council under the Con-
stitution of 1850, I, thinking it necessary
and desirable that the Council should
adopt some measure to take advantage of
the boon conceded to them, and about
which the great body of the people
seemed so apathetic, moved for a select
committee to inquire into and report
upon the form of Constitution best suited
for this colony. That committee sat for
some months, anxious to receive all the
opinions and information that could be
afforded from out of doors. On the 17th
Sept, it brought up its report, and a Bill,
embodying its recommendations, which
were in favour of a double legislature,
consisting of a Representative Assembly
and an Upper House nominated by the
Crown, not, I admit, in the same form
as is proposed by the present Bill, but in
principle exactly similar. This report
and Bill were published; and on the
28th September—again in deference to
public opinion, to give time for approval
of, or dissent from, the substantive pro-
position then brought before them—the
House adjourned till November. This
adjournment was made for the express
purpose of eliciting the opinion of the
country on the Bill prepared by the for-
mer committee. And the period of the
adjournment passed away not only with-
out the slightest opposition, but without
the slightest expression of .opinion from
any section of the community. (Cheers.)
If those who framed that Bill had been
actuated by the sinister and selfish mo-
tives which had been so broadly imputed
to them, they had, when the House met,
the most glorious opportunity ever offered
to evil-minded men to carry out sinister
and selfish designs. (Cheers.) Why, if
I had chosen to have done so, I could
have carried that Bill, which so far as
the elective principle is concerned was
quite as objectionable as the present one,
through the House triumphantly. There
would have been no one to oppose it.
(Cheers.) But at the suggestion of my
honourable and learned friend the mem-
ber for Cumberland (Mr. Darvall) who
acted with me on that occasion, I con-
sented to withdraw the Bill for the Ses-
sion, in order to give still further time
for the expression of public opinion, and
to allow the measure to be more exten-
sively discussed by the press. I was
further induced to this course, because I
thought it was prudent that we should
wait until we were made acquainted with
the fate of our petition of rights and our
remonstrances, forwarded to the Queen
and Parliament. In our then state of
ignorance as to what concession the
Minister of England was prepared to
make, it w r as difficult, if not dangerous,
for us to proceed with the measure ; and
for this reason, and for the pm pose of
giving further time for the expression of
public feeling, the subject was allowed,
as the wisest and most patriotic course,
to stand over till this session. But
again, the same universal silence pre-
vailed. There was no feeling displayed
of opposition to the Bill, which in prin-
ciple I again contend was identical with
that which is now before us. The
public had only a right to expect that
the same measure would be re-intro-
duced. The Council had given them no
anticipation that' further enquiry and de-
liberation would take place on the sub-
ject, but the Impression out of doors
must have, been, that as no opposition
had been manifested against it, it would


be again brought in and adopted. They
had no right to think anything else—to
imagine there would be any difference
between the bill of last session and that
of the present; but till the beginning of
the present session the public out of
doors has been silently acquiescent in the
proceedings of the Council, and in the
constitution proposed for them, which, I
again repeat, was identical in principle
Avith the present measure. (Cheers.)
How could the House avoid coming to
the conclusion, under circumstances such
as these, that the nominative principle
contained in both bills met the approba-
tion of the country ? We found that it
was in accordance with the spirit of those
petitions sent to the foot of the Throne,
four years ago, from all parts ot the
colony. V\ e had heard of no alteration
in the opinions of the people ; we had
waited patiently for the country to say
what it would have; we had submitted
a constitution which had neither been
rejected nor opposed; and what course
was open for the Council but the conti-
tinuance of that course which had so
constantly met the silent acquiescence of
the country ! (Great cheering.) If there
were any blame to attach to the produc-
tion of this measure, it fell not upon the
members of the committee, nor upon any
member of this House, or on any mem-
ber of the Government, but on those only
Avho, having all along failed in their
duty, became noAv the impuguers, not
only of our measures but of our motives.
(Loud cheers.) I do not know whether
it is Avorth my while to refer at all to the
proceedings out of doors yesterday in re-
gard to this question. But I cannot help
expressing my deep regret that so many
members of this House should, by taking
part in .these proceedings, have forgotten
alike Avhat was due to themselves and
to the dignity of the Council. (Cheers.)
I feel that by the part they have
taken in this matter, they have de-
stroyed the freedom of the representa-
tives of the country : they have de-
graded the position which the Legisla-
ture of the country ought to occupy ;
and I lament much to see .some hon.
members, my friends, and who have on
most occasions acted with me, consent to
sink from the rank of representatives to
that of mere miserable delegates, (Loud
applause, and “ no, no,” from Mr. Uar-
vall.) My honorable and learned friend
says No, no; but I ask the House can
any hon. members who have Identified
themselves with the proceedings of yes-
terday act in this House as free agents ?
(Cheers.) Why, if the arguments they
have put forward were refuted to their
OAvn absolute conviction—if the decla-
mation and reasonings, if they could be
called such, used at that meeting, could
be utterly demolished—blown into thin
air—if it could be proved to demonstra-
tion that the Constitution this Bill offered
was calculated to secure on the most per-
manent basis the free institutions, and
the moral, social, and material interests
of the colony, they could not now sup-
port it. They had become the delegates,
the pledged delegates of a noisy and in-
temperate faction, and they must con-
tinue in that degraded position to the
end. (Cheers.) But, feeling all this
deeply, I have also another duty to per-
form—l have to express my gratitude to
the hon. and learned member for Cum-
berland (Mr. Darvall), for the chivalrous
defence he made of the purity of my
motives, at the meeting yesterday. I
feel the hon. gentleman is the more en-
titled to my gratitude, because I am quite
sure the generosity he displayed must
have exposed him to considerable obloquy,
and considering the parties he had around
him, I have little doubt to some personal
risk. (Laughter and cheers.) I can
assure the hon. and learned member the
good intention he exhibited of creating
a favorable impression in my behalf in
the minds of my constituency will be of
no avail, for long before I shall stand
before that constituency again, all that
my hon. and learned friend has said in
my behalf will be unsaid by somebody
else who for the moment may be the
oracle of the mass. (Cheers.) Ido feel
regret, however, of no common kind,
that the hon. and learned member should
have committed himself in a manner so
inconsistent with constitutional freedom,
and that he should have descended from


his high estate to degrade himself to the
rank of a mere delegate. (Cheers.) I
will now proceed to advert to the much
abused measure which I have had the
honor to bring up, and to explain some
of the principles on which it is founded.
In doing this I sh 11 not consider it my
duty to take the course which is gene-
rally followed in reference to Bills at this
stage, of drawing attention to a 1 its im-
O " O
portant clauses. I shall not advert to
those clauses which, not having been
opposed out of doors, may be taken to
have met with general assent. It will
be enough for me to state briefly that
these clauses embody the following great
principles. Entire freedom on the part
of the colony from taxation by the Bri-
tish government —a repudiation of the
schedules reserved by act of the British
Parliament —the entire disposal of all
the revenues of the colony, whether ordi-
nary, casu .1, or territorial—the control
of the customs department, with the
power, as it were, to use the pruning
knife in cutting down that department—
the Investment of all colonial patronage
in the Governor for the time being and
the Executive Council—the plenary
power of legislation so long contended
for by the Council, and the want of
which has so often impeded the passing
into law of measures which were essen-
tial to the welfare of the country, and as
a necessary consequence of these, respon-
sible government; and in consideration
of all these privileges gained by the
colony, the Bill gives to her Majesty a
civil list securing certain fixed salaries to
the different heads of departments of the
public service. To these rights and
these concessions there did not seem to
b§ any opposition, either in the House
or out of doors, and I shall therefore
proceed at once, and confine myself
to those clauses only the introduction
of which into the Bill has subjected
me to so much obloquy and abuse.
These are simple and few in number,
and involve, first, the principle that
the Constitution to be fixed by the
measure shall not be altered, except by a
majority of two-thirds of the members of
both houses of the Legislature; second,
the distribution of the eighteen repre-
sentative members required to bring the
number of the House of Representatives
up to its present number, when the eigh-
teen members who now hold seats as
nominees ate taken away ; and third, the
composition of the upper house, which
the 4th and sth clauses of the Bill pro-
posed to erect. These three points, I
take it, are the battle field of this ques-
tion, and it is therefore unnecessary for me
to refer to any thing else. On the first
of these points, in respect to which so
much clamour has been made, I will state,
in passing, that there is not a single pal-
try joint stock corhpany in the colony
in which the same principle is not intro-
duced. But, passing over this, I will
turn for a precedent and authority for it
to the constitution of those model States
which seemed to be adopted as the climax
of all that is excellent in constitutional
freedom by the most vehement opponents
of this measure ; those States the name of
which was in every man’s mouth in refer-
ence to the constitution fitted for this
colony: I mean the United States of
America. 1 find that this same principle
prevails in their Constitution. The fifth
article of that Constitution provides—
Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses
shall deem it necessary, shall propose amend-
ments to the constitution , or, on the application
of the of two-thirds of the several,
States, shall call a convention fur proposing
amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid
to all intents and purposes, as part of this consti-
tution, when ratified by the legislature of three-
fourths of the several States, or by conventions
in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the other
may be proposed by Congress ; provided that no
amendment which may be made prior to the
year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall
in any manner effect the first and fourth clauses
in the ninth section of the first article; and that
no State, without its consent, shall be deprived of
its equal suffrage in the senate.
Now from this it will be seen that I have
not adopted the power of impeding or-
ganic changes in the Constitution of this
colony, which exists in the Constitution
of the United States. If I had done so it
would have been necessary that all such
changes should have been agreed to by
three-fourths, while in this bill the ma-
jority required is reduced to two-thirds.


lut I will proceed still further to quote
rom a book of high authority on this
loiut, —the work of one of the most wise
nd d : stinguished of American statesmen
—I allude to Mr. Calhoun. Speaking
f the power of the Legislature to modify
he Constitution, Mr. Calhoun says—
That it still continues to exist in the several
Itates, in a modified form is clearly shown, by
he fifth article of the Constitution, which pro-
ides for its amendment. By its provisions,
Congress may propose amendments, on its own
uthority, by the vote of two-thirds of both
ouses ; or it may be compelled to call a conven-
ion to propose them by two-thirds of the legis-
iture of the several States : but, in either case,
hey remain, when thus made, mere proposals of
o validity, until adopted by three-fourths of the
tates, through their respective legislatures; or
y conventions called by them for the purpose.
Now I will ask whether these are not
high authorities in support of the prin-
ciples of the bill—a principle which if
:here were no precedents at all, is, I
lelieve, absolutely necessary in a Bill like
:his. Can it be ri - ht, can it be rational,
[ would ask, that organic changes should
)e made in the Constitutions of great
iountries by bare majorities ? (Cheers.)
It was the object of the committee who
ramed this Bdl to frame a Constitution
in perpetuity for the colony—not a con-
stitution which could be set aside, altered
and shattered to pieces by every blast of
popular opinion. What community of
men could, I ask, be brought to live to-
gether under such a government as this
would be ? What security for person or
the rights of property, or the adminis-
tration of the law, or social order, would
there be under such a Constitution ? It
lias been argued against this clause, that
:here was no such principle as it contains
oi the British Constitution. This I admit
:o be true ; but it arises out of circum-
stances entirely different from those which
obtain here. The British Constitu-
tor! contains an original and inherent
oower of legislation. Our power, on the
contrary, is merely derivative. It is
oot in the power of Parliament to make
such a provision, and even were it made
t would not be binding on any subsequent
Parliament. That is the reason why no
such provision is to be found in the En-
glish Statute-book. And in fact all the
more important measures carried through
Parliament of late years, such as the
Test and Corporation Act, the Catholic
Emancipation Bid, and the Reform Bill,
have been carried by very slender ma-
jorities. Yet slender as these majorities
were, the House must recollect that
these great measures, so essential to
the freedom and advancement of the
people, were only carried after con-
siderable impediments and delay had
been interposed by the great Con-
servative principle of the constitu-
tion. This great principle, though
sometimes obstructive in a certain sense,
has been productive, upon the whole, of
the utmost good, and I confess-that it
is the object of my veneration. And I
am of opinion, that no modification of
the British constitution will be perfect
without it. I shall not adduce any fur-
ther authorities in support of this clause
of the bill ; enough has been said to
show that those rapid and empty de-
claimers who are ready to pick a hole in
any man’s jacket (a laugh), and w r ho op-
posed this necessary provision, neither
understood the principles or the practice
of the belauded model about which they
talk and prate so much. (Lau liter.)
Such people are constantly setting up
the constitution of the United States as
a model, but in reality they are not aware
of its fundamental articles. It must be
very evident to all, that these people
know very little about what they are
speaking or petitioning. I have adduced
these authorities as a conclusive argu-
ment of the ignorance of the whole
bunch of them—(laughter), and I con-
gratulate my lion, friend, the member
for Cumberland, on the intelligence of.
his lately-gained friends (laughter), as
well as on the very reputable cause to
which he has lent his ability and elo-
quence. (Laughter.) Having examine d
objection No. 1, I will now proceed to
objection No. 2, relating to the distribu-
tion of the additional representative
members. A great d.al of ridicule and
abuse has been cast on the measure be-
cause of this clause, and also on the ex-
isting Electoral Act, because it is urged,


it gives a preponderance in the Legis-
lature to one class. It may, perhaps,
be satisfactory to some of those who
have so bitterly abused me on account
of my connexion -with that class, to
know that I can now be said hardly to
belong to it. But although this is the
o o #
case, I will avow that my opinion of the
principle on which the Electoral Act is
based is unchanged : and I can assure
my friends the squatters that never with
my consent shall that principle be abro-
gated. It was to my supposed great in-
terest in squatting pursuits that I owe
much of the obloquy which has been
heaped upon me. Being a squatter, the
belief has grown among the deluded and
ignorant mass that I cannot be a patriot,
—that it was being a squatter which had
caused the dereliction from what were
termed the liberal and constitutional
predilections of my former years, and
which have made me a leading member
in what it is popular to call the squato-
cratic oligarchy. (Loud cheers.) I hope
I shall at least show, in the course I in-
tend to take in this bill, that I am nei-
ther going to desert the squatters, nor
the opinions I have previously formed ;
for I trust 1 shall never become one of
those weathercock politicians, of whom I
see so many now around me. (Laughter
and cheers.) The principal of the Elec-
toral Act has perhaps been more un-
sparingly attacked than any thing which
has proceeded from the Legislature of
the country. It was not, however, a
measure passed by this Council, but was
the last act of the last Council. I admit
having taken an active part in the pass-
ing of that measure, but my honorable
friend, the Colonial Secretary, took a
much larger part in it than I did. It
was not a measure emanating from any
individual member. It was a Govern-
ment measure, and it ought to have
been so. It was natural and right that
such a measure should originate with the
Government. It was conducted through
its different stages by the honorable the
Colonial Secretary, and I lent him my cor-
dial support and assistance, agreeing, as
I still do, entirely in the principle of the
measure. I am firm in the conviction,
that the representation of the country
should be based on, or proportioned to,
not the mere population, but the great
interests of the country ; and it should
be so proportioned that no one interest
shall have a preponderating influence
over any other. Now, I contend,
that the pastoral interest under the
Electoral Act has no such preponderating
influence. That interest is incompara-
bly the largest, the most important in-
terest in the country, and I hope it
will continue so for ages. (Cheers.)
I am quite confident, if the country is to
continue to grow great and wealthy, this
great interest must continue to flourish.
It is for pastoral purposes alone that we
can ever turn to successful account the
illimitable wilds which exist in the inte-
rior of the colony, and which are under
the system so much and so falsely cried
down, producing annually millions of
income to the colony. (Cheers.) Dis-
continue this system, give up pastoral
pursuits, and this enormous amount of
income will be simply destroyed. This
would be a policy so preposterous that
even the wildest democrat, if he under-
stood the practical bearing of the ques-
tion, would denounce it. The clamour
which has been raised against the squat-
ting system, and the distribution of the
waste lands of the colony arose from
those who have been deluded and misled.
I repeat what I have said fifty times
before, that a vast proportion of the
waste lands of the colony are not and
never can be made fit for anything but
pastoral purposes,—-that they have no
value at all except that arising from the
herbage by which they are covered.
(Cheers.) And seeing that if these lands
are to be of any value to the colony the
squatting system must be preserved, then,
I contend, that there is no preponderance
given to the squatters under the Electoral
Act, but that this great and leading in-
terest of the colony has not its fair share
in the representation of the colony. I
find that the colony possesses eight mil-
lions of sheep, and one and a half million
of cattle; that the income derived from
these, by wool, tallow, and meat for food,
certainly does not amount to less than


two millions annually. (Cheers.) Now
in regard to the production of gold, this
new branch of Industry, or rather I
would say this branch of anarchy and
discord, it yields after all only about the
paltry sum of £500,000 annually. Be-
sides, in the course of years the pastoral
interest must and will go on increasing,
while the gold Interest will in all proba-
bility, and I sincerely hope my prophecy
will be fulfilled, be on the decline. It
now yields only one quarter of the wealth
of the colony which is derived from the
pastoral pursuits. (Cheers.) With re-
gard to agriculture, too, I find that the
income derived from this interest also is
only about one-fourth of that derived
from pastoral pursuits, and 1 regret to
find further that this branch of industry
is rapidly on the decline. Though there
are some other branches of industry—a
few manufactures, for instance—it is not
necessary for me to emer into a detailed
account of them, as they, at least, in
proportion to their importance to the
colony, are sufficiently represented. To
come more immediately to the seat of
discontent in regard to the Electotal Act
of 1851, namely, the amount of repre-
sentation of the city of Sydney, I find
that Sydney returns three members and
the Hamlets one. Now the present bill
virtually gives Sydney two more mem-
bers, for it gives one additional member
to the City and one to the Hamlets, and
the Hamlets and the City are virtually
the same. The representation thus given
is in reality a part of the representation
of the city, so that Sydney virtually
returns six members. Now, this is a
great bone of contention, it being con-
tended that the representation of the
city ought still to be increased; I believe
however, that if we were to give half
the representation of the country to
Sydney the parties who now clamour
would still complain. I think the House,
therefore, should pay but little attention
to querulous and exacting complaints,
and rather consider calmly whether the
representation which is given to Sydney
under the Bill is not sufficient. Now, for
my own part, I think this representation
is much too large, and see no reason why
the City of Sydney has any right to
claim to be represented at all, except
that there is a large mass of people con-
gregated together in it. What interest
does the population of Sydney represent?
True there are hosts of people in the
city calling themselves merchants, and I
admit these give employment to a large
number of others of lower degree.
These merchants, however, are simply
engaged in exchanging one commodity
for another—the sending the produce of
the colony home, and getting out the
goods of foreign countries instead. But
they as a class, with the exception of ;he
ship owners, arS productive of abso-
lutely nothing to add to the real wealth
of the colony. There is no urgent
necessity for them—the colony could
do without them : all that this class of
people have done for me, for instance, I
could have done for myself. I could have
sent abroad for the tea, the sugar, the to-
bacco, the silks, the wine and spirits,
and other articles I might require, and
have obtained them just as well without
the instrumentality of the merchants ;
and what I could thus have done, any
other person might have done also. I
cannot see, therefore, what claim the
city of Sydney has to any representation
at all, except to represent that single in-
terest which it contains, the right of
labour. The wealthy class of the city
consists chiefly of these men of business
—these lords of the Exchange as they
call or think themselves. (Great laugh-
ter.) There is my honourable friend
from Darlinghurst (Mr, Barker), who is
a manufacturer in a certain sense ; he
manufactures flour out of grain. My
honourable friend the member for the
Sydney Hamlets (Mr. Smart), is in the
same position. Then there are some
leather manufactories, one or two
brewers, an iron founder or two, and
these 1 believe, with some trifling excep-
tions, are all. There is really nothing
to represent here except a large mass of
labour. (Great laughter.) Now, I dare
say I am playing the game of my hon-
ourable and learned friend the member
for Cumberland (Mr. Darvall) in making
these observations, which I am very well


aware will be very unpopular out of
d )ors. The honourable an ! learned
member appeal's to be ambitious to step
into my shoes as the representative of
the city. (Laughter.) If such be bis
object, I can assure him that 1 shall soon
gi e him an opportunity; and I will
further tell him, that if his ambition be
gratified, he will have for his consti-
tuents the most vacillating, ignorant,
and misled body of people in the colony.
And here again, in reference to this re-
presentation of large and crowded cities,
as the party opposed to the Bill is so
fond of American precedents, I will
quote another passage from Mr. Cal-
houn’s work—a work which I will say
has great authority in America. Per-
haps before quoting the passage it might
be well to say who Mr. Calhoun was—or
rather what he had been, for that great
luminary was dead. He was a man who
would have been elected President of the
United States had it not been for the
part he took in the great nullification
question which was commenced by South
Carolina. As it was he was appointed
at one time Vice-President of the United
States, and at another time President of
the American Senate. These offices,
great as they doubtless were, and show-
ing as they did the very high estimation
he was held in by his own country, could
however, add nothing to the lustre of his
genius, the depth of his wisdom, or the
loftiness of his patriotism. I will now
quote this great mans opinions as to
what the representation of cities should
be. The passage is a remarkable one,
for it shows if even they had ever so
many manufactories, to what proportion
of the representation of the country the
cities could really and justly lay claim.
I will invite the attention of t’.e House
to the passage, as it appears to me to be
conclusive that the amount of representa-
’tion proposed to be given to the city of
Sydney is too much. Speaking of the
numerical majority of the constituencies
of the cities, which was the principle on
which these demagogues who clamoured
O O
against the Electoral Act insisted on,
Mr. Calhoun goes on to say—
Indeed, the numerical majority often fails to
I accomplish that at which it professes to aim—to
I take truly the sense of the majority. It assumes
that, by assigning- to every part of the State a
representative in every part of its government,
in proportion to its population, it secures to each
a weight in the government, in exact proportion
to its population, under all circumstances. But
such is not the fact. The relative weight of po-
pulation depends as much on circumstances as on
numbers. The concentrated population of cities, |
for example, would ever have, under such a dis- j
tribution, far more weight in the government
than the same number in the scattered and scarec
population of the country. One hundred thousand
individuals concentrated in a city two miles
square, would have much more influence than the i
same number scattered over two hundred miles
square. Concert of action and combination of
means would be easy in the one, and almost ira- j
possible in the other ; not to take into the esti-
mate the great control that cities have over the
press, the great organ of public opinion. To
distribute power, then, in proportion to popula-
tion, would be, in fact, to give the control of tbe
government in the end, to the cities ; and to
subject the rural and agricultural districts to that
description of population which usually congre-
gate in them, and ultimately, to the dregs of their
population. This can only be counteracted by
such a distribution of power as would give to the
rural and agricultural population, in some one of
the two legislative bodies or departments of the
government, a decided preponderance. And this
may be done, in most cases, by allotting an equal
number of members in one of the legislative
bodies to each elective district; as a majority of
the counties or election districts will usually have
a decided majority of its population engaged in
agricultural or other rural pursuits. If this
should not be sufficient, in itself, to establish an
equilibrium,—a maximum of representation might
be established, beyond which the number allotted
to each eleoftion district or city should never ex-
tend.
Now, I think the maximum of repre-
sentation which any city in the country,
however large its population may be,
should not be greater than that which
was proposed in this measure for Sydney.
In fact, I repeat, it is too great; for al-
though, in deference to the opinion of
the majority of the Committee, I con-
sented to give in the present bill what
is really an addition of two members to
Sydney, I think it was quite sufficiently
represented under the present Act. Now
this population principle, which is so
much talked about, and which in fact is
the stock in trade of these agitators, was
certainly not acted upon in the Reform
Bill, which at all events must be ad-
mitted to have been a popular measure.


To prove this, it is only necessary for
me to recur to the greatest and most
populous city in the world—l mean the
(Jity of London. In that city there are
altogether two millions and a half of
inhabitants ; and it must be remembered,
too, that in many departments it is the
most extensively manufacturing city.
The number of the members of the
H ouse of Commons was 654, and the
number of members returned for London
is only 18. Now if this population
principle had been introduced into the
Reform Bill, London would return 55
members ; and if the same mischievous
principle were applied here, Sydney
would return 17. But in passing the
Reform Bill, this principle was wisely
thrown overboard, and the example was
followed irl the Electoral Act of this co-
lony, passed in 1851. Another reason
why I do not think that Sydney should
have an additional representation is,
that it is the seat of Government; and
that to grant the amount of representa-
tion contended for, will be highly inex-
pedient and dangerous. The members
for the city would then be strong enough
to take Government House by storm, as
was once done or attempted to be done
by my present honourable colleague (Mr.
Campbell), and the party to whom he
belonged. (Great laughter.) They would
possess a dangerous power of coercing
the Government, whilst the Government
might also have a dangerous power of
influencing them. I believe, if Sydney
had not one member, that it would still
always be substantially represented, and
its interests adequately supported by the
officers of the Government, and those
members elected by other constituencies,
but wffio oHinarily resided in the city.
J think I have now sufficiently vindicated
the principle of this principle, by the
arguments I have used, and the autho-
rities 1 have quoted. The distribution
it involves of the representation of the
town population is, 1 think, amply suffi-
cient. But I cannot see how we could
consistently have taken any other course
than that which the committee has
adopted. So long as the Electoral Act
of 1851 remained on the statute book,
we have no right to depart from the
principle of that bill. I repeat, I took
an active part in that bill, and from the
experience we have had of its working,
I am convinced it was one of the wisest
measures the Legislature have ever
passed. (Cheers.) It has worked most
beneficially ; it has proved that it was
quite fitted to insure a fair representation
of all the interests of the country in
the House. The principle of providing
the representative faculty contained in
that bill has given us a Legislature
fitted, and with full power and autho-
rity from the country to frame a con-
stitution for the colony. Therefore,
seeing that the bill has worked well, it
will take a great deal more argument
than I have yet heard to induce me to
depart from the principle contained in
this clause, and to adopt another which I
believe to be as unjust as it is dangerous.
(Cheers.) This brings me to those
clauses of the bill, which, out of doors,
were more immediately the cause of the
opposition against the measure, and which
are the main subject matter of grievance
in the petition which has bee» presented
this afternoon. These are the clauses
which provide for the composition of the
Upper House, and which had raised an
unexpected clamour against the Bill out
of doors. The fourth clause of the Bill
enacted—
IV. For the purpose of composing the Legis-
lative Council of New South Wales, it shall be
lawful for her Majesty before the time to be ap-
pointed for the first meeting of the said Legis-
lative Council and Assembly, by an instrument
under the Sign Manual, to authorize the Go-
vernor, with the advice of the Executive Council,
in Her Majesty’s name, by an instrument under
the Great Seal of the said colony, to summon the
said Legislative Council of the said colony, such
persons, being not fewer than twenty, as Her
Majesty shall think fit, and it shall be lawful for
Her Majesty from time to time to authorise the
Governor in like manner to summon to the said
Legislative Council such other person or persons
as Her Majesty shall think fit, and every person
who shall be so summoned shall thereby become a
member of the Legislative Council of the said
colony: Provided always, that no person shall be
summoned to the said Legislative Council who
shall not be of the full age of twenty-one years,
and a natural born subject of Her Majesty, or
naturalized by an Act of the Imperial Parlia-
ment, or by an Act of the Legislature of the


said colony : Provided also, that no Judge of the
Supreme Court of the said colony appointed
during pleasure, nor any Judge of the same
Court, or of any other Court within the said co-
lony, who may be hereafter appointed a Judge
quandiu se bene gesserit, shall be eligible to be
summoned to the said Legislative Council; nor
shall any prelate, priest, deacon, or minister of
any religious denomination, whatever may be his
title, rank, or designation, be so eligible.
Now in the observations I shall address
to the House, T shall confine myself to
this clause, as being the only one refering
to the appointment of a Nominee Coun-
cil. With the exception of the two
provisoes against the nomination of any
judge of the Supreme Court, or any
minister of religion, the House thus to
be erected, is identical in spirit with
the act now in force for the government
of the United Canadas. I am not cer-
tain whether the committee were unani-
mous or not in the opinion, that in this
proposal to assimilate the constitution
they had to frame in its outline, to the
constitution of Canada, they were not
free agents; but I must state, that when
I remember that in our petitions and
remonstrances we stated our readi-
ness on the concession of the redress of
those grievances of which we have so
long complained, to form a government
similar to that of Canada, the House will
do well vei'y seriously to consider whether
it was not bound by that offer. That
offer was made in these terms :
That in order that Her Majesty’s confidential
advisers may have no excuse for the continuance
of these abuses (alluding to the grievance before
set out) we unhesitatingly declare that we are
firepared, upon the surrender to the colonial legis-
ature of the entire management of all our reve-
nues, territorial as well as general, in which we
include mines of every description, and upon the
establishment of a constitution among us similar
in its outline to that of Canada, to assume and
provide for the whole cost of our internal go-
vernment, whether civil or military, the salary of
the Governor-General only excepted; and to
grant to your Majesty an adequate civil list on
the same terms as in Canada, instead of the
sums appropriated in the schedules to the Im-
perial Act 13 and 14 Victoria, chap. 59.
I know not whether the House, or a ma-
jority of the House will say that they
are bound by that offer; but when I
moved for the committee at the com-
mencement of the session, I distinctly
told the House and the country that, in
my belief and judgment, we were bound
by that compact ; and on that occasion I
believe my honorable and learned friend
the member for Cumberland agreed with
me. (Cheers.) If the House and the
country thought I was wrong in holding
this opinion—if they thought that the
condition made by one Minister and ab-
rogated by another, released them from
this compact—if they disapproved them
from the open avowal I made of my
feelings on this subject, how was it that
the committee, during all its tedious
sitting, did not receive some intimation
of such disapproval ? The committee
undertook its duties with the announce-
ment on my part at least that I consi-
dered the Compact binding; and I must
say that it is too bad at this, the eleventh
hour, to say that the measure is inimical
to the interests of the colony ; that it is
hampered by conditions, not imposed by
the ministers, and that it will be disas-
trous to the liberties of the country. I
think the committee, the house, and the
country has great cause to complain, not
of those who have brought up the Bill,
but of the standing aloof of those who dis-
sent from the principle I asserted, and
left us in the belief that we were fram-
ing a measure in accordance with the
general voice of the country. (Cheers.)
No doubt you will hear to-night a great
deal about the conversions which have
recently taken place among statesmen in
England—of the changed opinions of
Earl Grey, the Duke of Newcastle, Mr.
Gladstone, and others, and also of those
who ought to be really and essentially a
conservative body, the members of the
Privy Council. But conservative as that
body ought to be, it seems that they veer
and twist about pretty much as the Minis-
ter of the day wants them. No doubt Earl
Grey continued to infuse his opinions
into the Privy Council to induce them to
support his constitution for the Cape of
Good Hope, in the same way as he di-
rected their Councils when he proposed
his famous constitution for this colony.
The opinions of the Privy Council on
both occasions were but the echo of the
opinion of the Minister, and they will


continue to be but an echo of the opinion
of the Minister again. But with the
sanction of these converted statesmen
the experiment of a constitution at the
Cape is now being tried—is now at
work ; and how is it found to answer ?
Why if you will take the trouble to read
the Parliamentary papers which are in
our own library, and which consist of a
report of the proceedings and remon-
strances at the Cape of Good Hope,
which preceded the working of this con-
stitution—this model experiment—you
will find that nearly the whole of the
influential colonists are opposed to and
complain of it. We find that it is
leading them to all sorts of political
danger,—that it subjects their legislation
in all its branches to the caprice and do-
mination of even the colored and de-
graded races. And what is the principle
af that constitution ? It is that every
man who has a freehold worth £25, or a
leasehold property worth £5, and every
person receiving, a salary of £SO a year,
and every servant earning wages of £25
a year, with board and lodging, shall
vote for the election of members of both
bouses. I ask, when these two Legisla-
tive Chambers Were elected on the same
principle, and by the same constituents,
what can they be but mere duplicates
af each other ? How can either of the
douses so constituted possess a particle of
the conservative element ? The result
will be at length to give the numerical
majority to the lowest classy, to the va-
gabond Hottentots, and the most igno-
rant and violent of the community, until
the complete domination of the govern-
ment is obtained by the class who have
in equal right, an equal voice in the
representation of the country with all
others, as soon as they can accumulate
the paltry sum of £25. God forbid that
?nch a miserable form of representation
should be sanctioned here! The very
minister who proposed it for the Cape,
idmitted in a despatch to the Governor
)f this colony that the Legislative Council
)f New South Wales was a more compe-
tent authority than Parliament itself to
rame a constitution for the colony. Why
liter such an admission has the, noble
Secretary taken it upon himself to frame
a constitution for the Cape? Why has
he not given to the people of the colony
a duty, for which, from its peculiar cir-
cumstances, they alone were fitted to
perform ? The descendants of Dutch
burghers at the Cape were not likely, if
left to themselves, to choose the form of
constitution adopted in other British
colonies. They most probably, inherit-
ing the habits of Dutchmen, would prefer
looking to the father-land for the basis
of their constitution, and it would not
have been, if left to themselves, assimi-
lated in any way to one adapted for a
purely British colony. As it was, the
new constitution framed at home, and
thus forced on the colonists of South
Africa by the Colonial Minister and the
Governor of the colony, throws the
greatest amount of power into the hands
of the lowest and most degraded portion
of the community; and what can be
predicted of such a form of government
but unbridled anarchy ? Thus the white
races, the brave and noble fellows who
have resisted the bloody Invasions of the
colored tribes, are now to be governed
by a system originating in the dictation
of Exeter Hall, whilst they are engaged
in deadly struggles to preserve their
lands from pillage and their wives and
children from frightful outrage. (Hear.)
What must be the inevitable result ?
They must rise up against such a consti-
tution and put it out of the colony !
(Loud cheers.) I believe that in the
whole range of the British colonies this
new constitution of the Cape is the sole
instance of the elective principle ruling
in the constitution of an upper house.
(Hear.) Let those who now advocate
that principle for Australia look to the
early history of the American States.
They would see nominated councils in
some overridden by similar councils in
England, in others nominated councils,
but in all some power of legislation origi-
nating in and deriving its authority from
the king. All worked well to a certain
extent; no objection was made to the
nominee principle, until the appointment
of the Secretary of State to the colo-
nies, and the objectionable right of veto,


and the Interferences of the crown were
resorted to. The precedents which those
colonies afford are of the utmost con-
sequence for a British colony to attend
to, because they refer to the acts of Bri-
tish colonists placed in circumstances of
extraordinary interest. Surrounded by
hostile tribes, with interminable forests
to clear, foreign and adverse people and
tribes, ever in their neighbourhood, these
dauntless pioneers of civilization pursued
their arduous course, and under a form of
government now decried by a section in
this colony, grew up to be a powerful, to
be a moral, to be a religious people.
(Hear.) Their form of government they
cherished to the last moment of their
connection with England, and some of
those communities cherished it even now
with the same reverence. hear.)
These are historical fac% which ought
to weigh much more than a million theo-
ries propounded by a Gladstone. (Hear.)
Indeed I am at a loss to know how the
statesmen of England can acquire the
knowledge of what is required by the
colonists so well as they themselves.
How could they know their
objects and their wants ? What expe-
rience has England of the real position,
the w r ants, and wishes of New South
Wales? If English statesmen were
anxious to obtain information, where (in
the absence of any work of high autho-
rity) could they seek for it except from
the most erroneous and polluted sources ?
(Hear, and oh.) 1 emphatically repeat
my question, “ Where, except from the
most polluted sources ?” (Loud and pro-
longed cheers.) Look to certain books
and brochures lately given to the British
public under a name not necessary to
mention in this Council, and I will ask
honorable members to say whether infor-
mation could he sought from a more de-
praved and polluted source ? (Hear,
hear, hear.) I will ask this Council
whether the statements contained in
those books are true or false; and
whether any minister of the crown or
any other individual seeking information
as to the real state of this colony could
rely upon any assertion contained in them.
(Hear, hear.) The anarchist whose name
is affixed to them has set forth that the
only constitution which the colonists of
New South Wales will accept, which they
are resolutely demanding 1 , and which they
are determined to obtain, or else “ cut
the painter” from England, is a consti-
tution similar in all its provisions to that
of the United States, viz,, a federal go-
vernment. He describes them as de-
manding a great federation of all the
colonies of Australia, of New South
Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and South
Australia; each state to have a separate
local government, and sending members
to Congress to form a great central go-
vernment. (Shouts of laughter.) Ab-
surd as is this notable scheme, treated as
it would be, if only propounded here, by
the utter derision of the people, the writer
has had the audacity to describe it as pe-
remptorily demanded by the colonists ;
the penalty of their refusing it being,
their cutting the painter. (Derisive
laughter.) Now supposing that any mi-
nister of the day could be so weak as to
place reliance on such abominable trash
as this, what must be the inevitable re-
sult? (Loud cries of hear,) lam afraid
I shall weary the Council by the remarks
and the numerous authorities to which I
am desirous to refer, in regard to the con-
struction of the upper house. (Cries of
no, no, and loud applause from all
sides.) The question before the Council
is so momentous a one, so important
in its results to generations to come,
that I know the House will deem no
deliberation too careful, no discussion
too long. (Hear.) I sincerely hope
that the constitution the Council is about
to frame will be a constitution that wall
be a lasting one—a conservative one—
a British, not a Yankee constitution.
(Loud and prolonged cheers.) I hope
that it will be one under which in all
times to come the people of New South
Wales will repose in safety and security,
and that it will assimilate in every possi-
ble respect with the constitution of the
glorious father-land. (Loud cheers.)
Seeing that the measure before the House
is based on the high principles to which
I have alluded, I do not think it would
be decent to confine my remarks to rn


own private opinions, nor to tire opinions
of those who have assisted to frame the
Bill; I will therefore go to the most
eminent authorities on constitutional his-
tory, to those who have treated of the
constitution of Great Britain, and to
those who have treated of the constitu-
tions of British colonies and of the
United States. It is only by carefully
drawing contrasts between the working
and the results of all, that the Council
can form a just conclusion in deciding on
the form of constitution to be adopted
here. I have read with much attention
the speeches of Mr. Gladstone on the
structure of an Upper House ; and I
find that in the preference given by the
right honourable gentleman to the intro-
duction of the elective principle in the
Canadian Upper Chamber, he was guided
by the fact that the desire for its intro-
duction there had not emanated from the
democratic, but from the conservative
party of Canada. But the circumstances
of that possession of the Crown and of
this are widely different. Two races
there have long contended for the supre-
macy ; and when some twelve years ago
the two legislatures were combined in one,
it was found that after a contest of fifty
years between the French and English
parties, the former obtained the majori-
ties in both houses. How this was
effected, whether by superior combina-
tion or dexterity, it is needless to inquire,
but the result :has been thslt the British
party, disgusted at the measures taken
successfully to swamp it, and finding the
nominee principle working in their dis-
favour, by reason of the tactics of their
French rivals, have petitioned to have
the present Upper House abolished and
a new Chamber elected. (Hear, hear,
from Mr. Darvall.) However, the dif-
ferences and successful or unsuccessful
manoeuvres of those divided races can
form no reasonable precedent for the one
united race of this colony ; and the pro-
ject of an elective Upper Chamber for
Canada was only a proposition, now cer-
tainly favourably considered by some
parties in England, but one which I very
much doubt can be carried out. At all
events, it can form no precedent for us.
(Loud cheers.) Whilst on this topic, I
will observe that honourable members
have doubtless, with myself, seen lately
in several numbers of the Sydney press
some very able articles taken from recent
American journals, which showed that
the question of a nominated upper cham-
ber was growing into favourable con-
sideration with a large and influential
portion of the thoughtful citizens of the
United States. They could not but re-
flect upon the scramble for places, the
jobberies of office, and the various other
notorious evils, which were the conse-
quence of the ele'ctive principle ruling
throughout their system of legislation ;
and conclusions as to the superiority of
the form of the Canadian constitution
were drawn by some of their ablest men.
(Hear.) If the Council would look to
the whole range of the British colonies—
throughout the West Indies and British
America—and if it were considered that
the nominee principle was universal
throughout this extensive range—that
it has ruled for nearly two centuries in
some, for a great length of time in all—
that, so far as can be collected from the
best authorities on colonial matters, from
the opinions of the local press, a single
objection has never been raised against
it; surely these are facts which ought to
have great weight here. (Hear, hear.)
I believe that, except in the peculiar case
of Canada, no objection has ever been
expressed, or ever existed; and lam of
opinion, that the great prosperity en-
joyed by the West India colonies (Ja-
maica especially), before the abolition of
the slave trade, was enhanced by the
justice and wisdom of the local Legisla-
tures. I will here observe, that a cer-
tain Sydney agitator, who sets himself
up as knowing every thing, has denied
that Jamaica has an upper house, but
that the second chamber there is called
the Privy Council, and has no power of
legislation. Now this is not the case.
In the first instance, the body in ques-
tion was certainly only constituted as a
council of advice; but it soon, in its
deliberations, usurped the functions of
legislation, and ever since has exercised
the powers of an upper house of the le-


gislature—powers which have never been
questioned nor opposed. (Hear.) See-
ing, therefore, that the form of consti-
tution now proposed for New South
Wales exists, and has long existed, in
the wide range already mentioned, that
no complaints (excepting those arising
from the jealousies of antagonistic races)
have been made against it, I would ask
the Council, whether this colony is now
to give up the great boon which it so
earnestly prayed for four years ago ?
(Hear, hear.) And when it is remem-
bered that this boon was desired because
the colonists expressed their wish to be
under a form of government which should
assimilate as nearly as possible to the
British Constitution, can we now adopt
any other precedent than a nominated
Upper House? (Loud and continued
cheers.) We have then deliberately
chosen the best model, and if we now
deviate from that great landmark most
assuredly we shall fail into a fatal error.
(Hear, hear, hear.) The noble institu-
tions of our British forefathers were
wisely adopted two centuries ago by
British colonists ; and I sincerely hope
that their example will be followed, not
only by a great majority of the House,
but that it will be cordially approved of
by a great majority of thinking and re-
spectable people out of doors. (Loud
applause.) And this brings me to the
important principle involved in the here-
ditary clauses of the bill. As the report
of the Select Committee states, they are
framed to a certain extent in accordance
with analogous clauses to be found in the
Imperial Afct 3 George HI., c. 31, for
making more effectual provision for the
government of the province of Quebec.
The principle of conferring an hereditary
right of being summoned to the Legisla-
tive Council, upon those upon whom the
Sovereign might confer hereditary titles,
rank, or dignity, is therein set forth,
and was maintained by Pitt, Burke, Wil-
berforce, and all the great statesmen of
that day, except Fox, whose attempt to
defeat the measure failed, and the clauses
were carried, enacting that the Sovereign
might confer hereditary titles upon the
colonists of Quebec, coupled with seats in
the Upper House, which were to descend
to their sons. The design of Pitt was to
establish an hereditary class in Quebec,
upon the same principle as that which
rules in the case of the peerage of Eng-
land. But in this age of the world, the
committee were prompt to see that this
hereditary right to seats in the Council
couhknot be maintained, for it very often
happens that the most brilliant fathers
have the most stupid sons ; and as talent
and ability are not naturally hereditary,
it could not for a moment be proposed,
that the seats of those upon whom here-
ditary titles might be conferred, should
descend to those who should come after
them. But the committee did set forth
their opinion that the creation of here-
ditary titles, leaving it to the option of
the crown to annex to the titles of the
first patentee a seat for life in the Upper
House, and conferring on the original
patentees and their descendants, inhe-
ritors of their titles, a power to select a
certain number of their order, to form in
conjunction with the original patentees
then living, the Upper House of Parlia-
ment, Avould be a great improvement on
any form of legislative council hitherto
tried or recommended in any British co-
lony ; and they expressed their belief
that an Upper House framed on this
principle, whilst it would be free from
the objections which have been urged
against the House of Lords, on the
ground of the hereditary right of legis-
lation which they exercise, would lay the
foundation of an aristocracy which from
their fortune, birth, leisure, and the su-
perior education which these advantages
would superinduce, would soon supply
elements for the formation of an Upper
House, modelled, as far as circumstances
will admit, upon the analogies of the
British constitution. Now it must be
borne in mind, that the principle of
electing a portion of the Upper House
from those holding hereditary titles
is one which cannot be carried into
practice for the next forty or fifty
years ; it is to be seen therefore that the
committee proposed to sow the seed of
an institution which will have ample time
allowed it to grow to maturity. (Cheers.)


And it is also to bo remembered that this
principle of forming 1 a house, the one
portion patented by the Sovereign, and
the other elected by those holding here-
ditary rank, obtains at present in the
House of Lords in the case of the elec-
tion of Scotch and Irish peers, upon
whom no hereditary right of legislation
is conferred, but only the hereditary right
of election. (Hear.) When a genera-
tion having this hereditary right amongst
them arises here, I (recalling the menaces
of a certain portion of the colonial press,
its tendencies to democracy, its reckless-
ness of consequences) predict that it will
be found a good and stable bulwark,
necessary for the defence of good govern-
ment and conservative institutions. A
powerful body will be formed of men of
wealth, property, and education—men
not raised from any particular section of
the community, but from every class that
has the energy to aspire to rank and
honor. (Hear.) The want of an in-
centive to a laudable ambition which the
prospect of obtaining a title affords, is
declared by almost all who have considered
the subject, to be one of the greatest
blemishes in the American constitution.
(Hear, hear, hear.) It is well known
that the great Washington had anxiously
contemplated the introduction of a titled
order into the constitution of the States,
but it was an Incident in the career of
that illustrious man that he lived to be-
come an object of suspicion to the un-
grateful country he had served so faith-
fully and so long. (Hear, hear.) True,
posterity has done justice to his memory
and fully recognised his exalted patriot-
ism, his noble virtues, his eminent ser-
vices, the purity of his intentions; but
in his lifetime he was doomed to find how
shallow and transient is popular favour.
(Loud cries of hear.) In reference to
the hereditary clauses I would observe,
that they have been adverted to out of
doors as if they only were intended to
include one class. This is a mistake ;
and no man, however humble, can be
debarred from aspiring to see his children
educated and looking forward to achieve
a position of rank and honor, and occu-
pied in tar higher pursuits than the
money-making schemes of this filthy,
lucre-loving community. (Loud cheers
and laughter.) What incentive is there
now held out to those who, having ‘made
fortunes here, desire to see their sons
occupied in higher pursuits than those of
trade ? Here are no poor, no middle
class, in the sense in which these words
are used at home ; all are rich ; yet what
do people aspire to here, who having
accumulated perhaps £50,000 or £IOO,OOO
do not care to pursue the drudgery of
money-making any longer ? I will tell
the Council: they aspire to a speedy mi-
gration to other lands, seeing it is better
for themselves and families to build up
homes where the democratic and levell-
ing principles so rapidly increasing here
are scouted ; and where there are high
and honourable pursuits and distinctions
to which the children of the prudent may
aspire. (Loud and prolonged cheers.)
Who would stay here if he could avoid
it ? Who, with ample means, would ever
return, if once he left these shores, or
even identify himself with the soil, so
long as selfishness, ignorance, and de-
mocracy, hold sway ? (Renewed cheers)
And yet what a glorious country would
this be to live in if higher and nobler
principles prevailed; blessed with the
most bounteous gifts of Providence, it
affords in its rich and illimitable tracts
happy homes for millions yet unborn.
(Hear, hear.) With regard to the clauses
in question, I know not the opinions of
honorable members, but I can only say
that if they be not adopted, the colony
will be virtually disfranchised. (Loud
cries of hear from all sides.) Why, I
ask, if titles are open to all at home,
should they be denied to the colonists?
Why should such an institution as the
House of Lords (which is an integral part
of the British constitution) be shut out
from us ? I cannot now “ pause for a
reply,” but I nevertheless should like to
hear my honorable and learned friend
(Mr. Darvall) answer that interrogatory.
(Hear, hear, hear.) A great deal of
ridicule has been cast on these hereditary
clauses ; but those who cast it knew very
little of those who proposed them. (Hear)
They had been twitted with attempting


to create a mushroom, a Brummagem, a
bunyip aristocracy ; but I need scarcely
observe that where argument fails ridi-
cule is generally resortedfor aid. I
seldom care to allude to personal attacks
upon myself, and if I allude to some
which have been recently made, it is but
to express my utter contempt for the
vagabonds who made them. I am not
the man to be deterred from pursuing the
course which I conscientiously believe to
be the right one, I may be mistaken in
my opinions; but lam assured tbat in
'no wise have I forfeited the confidence
and respect of those who well know the
principles which have ever guided me
in my public career. (Loud applause
from all sides.) The paltry efforts of
my dirty rev Hers therefore do not affect
me. If it be true that there is any blot
on my escutcheon (if I have one), which
has not been of my handiwork, what
blame on that account can attach to me.
(Loud cries of hear.) I deem it sufficient
to answer for myself alone. I submit
my whole public life to the severest scru-
tiny, and if it will bear that test I do not
see on what principle I can be blamed,
or in any way held responsible for acts
which it has not been in my power to
prevent, nor in my choice to rectify.
(Cheers.) I speak for myself alone;
and, in the language of Pope, will say—
Honour and shame from no condition rise,
Act well your part; there all the honour lies.
(Loud applause.) This is my reply to
the revilings of the dirty ruffians who
have cast them. (Hear, hear.) I have
been taunted with entertaining a desire
to be one of the hereditary legislators of
the colony. Whether I do or do not en-
tertain that desire is a matter of very little
moment; but admitting that 1 do, is it
an improper object of ambition ? or am
I to be denounced for cherishing the
hope that some son of mins will succeed
me in the councils of my country. (Loud
cheers.) If such an ambition were felt
by some 50 or 60 other gentlemen of this
colony, from whom ultimately might
spring an honorable, wealthy, and educa-
ted aristocracy, I would ask are those
mischiefs to be avoided, or ends to be
desired and consummations devoutly to
be wished for? Having thus adverted
to the main principles ol the bill, I will
invite the attention of the Council to the
constitutions of various States of Ame-
rica, and take opinions which have been
furnished by the most eminent autho-
rities, both British and foreign, as to
their present and future tendencies, and
their ultimate results. ■ I would, with this
view, in the first place, call the attention
of the House to the Constitution of Con-
gress. From the American Almanac of
1852 I proceed to read a description of
what the Congress of the United States
is.
The Congress of the United States consists
of a Senate and House of Kepresentatives, and
must assemble at least once every year, on the
first Monday of December, unless it is otherwise
provided by law.” The Senate is composed of
two members from each State, and of course the
regular number is now 62. They are chosen by
the legislatures of the several States for the term
of six years, one-third of them being elected
biennially. The Vice-president of the United
States is the President of the Senate, in which
body he has only a casting vote, which is given
in case of an equal division of the votes of the
senators. Jn his absence a President is chosen
pro tempore by the Senate. The House of Re-
presentatives is composed of members from the
several States, elected by the people, for the term
of two years. The representatives are apportioned
among the different States according to popula-
tion. The thirty-second Congress is chosen ac-
cording to the Act of Congress of 1842, the ratio
being “one representative for every 70,680 per-
sons in each State, and onq additional representa-
tive for each State having a fraction greater than
one moiety of the said ratio, computed according
to the rule prescribed by the Constitution of the
United States.” The law of 1842 also requires,
that the representatives of each State “ shall be
elected by districts composed of a contiguous ter-
ritory, equal in number to the number of repre-
sentatives to which the said State may be en-
titled, no one district electing more than one
representative.” The present number of repre-
sentatives is 233, and there are four delegates,
one each from Oregon, Minesotah, Utah, and
New Mexico, who have a right to speak, but not
to vote. Since the 4th of March, 1817, the
compensation of each member of the Senate and
House of Representatives has been eight dollars
a day, during the period of his attendance in
Congress, without deduction in case of sickness,
and eight dollars for every twenty miles’ travel
on the usual road in going to and returning from
the seat of Government. The compensation of
the President of the Senate, pro tempore, and
the Speaker of the House of Representatives is
sixteen dollars a day.


I will next invite your attention to a
brief analysis of some of the leading
provisions in the constitutions of the
several states which compass this great
federation :
Ist. Qualification of Voters. There are pro-
perty qualifications in Connecticut, Virginia,
North Carolina, and South Carolina. Payment
of taxes and citizenship required in the aforesaid
states, and in New Hampshire, Vermont, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Georgia, Loui-
siana, and Ohio. Citizenship and residence in
the State for three months, in Maine, Maryland,
Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Ten-
nessee, Indiana, and Michigan. Right of voting
limited to the whites in all the States except the
six States of New England, Pennsylvania, and
Georgia. In New York coloured persons may
vote if they possess a freehold of 250 dollars or
more. 2nd. Qualification of members of State
legislatures. Freehold or property qualification
on thirteen States, viz , New Hampshire, Massa-
chussets, Connecticut, New York (for senators),
New Jersey, Delaware, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi, Louisana,
and Tennessee. Payment of taxes in four States,
viz., Missouri, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Citi-
zenship and residence of various terms, in all the
foregoing and in Maine, Vermont, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, and
Michigan. The legislative body is styled the
‘ General Court” in Maine, N + ew Hampshire, and
Massachussets. The legislature in New York,
and in all others, * General Assembly.’ The
lower branch is elected for one year in fifteen
States: for two years in Delaware, North Caro-
lina, South Carolina, Mississippi, Louisana, Ar-
kansas, Missouri, Tennessee, and Illinois. The
Senate or Upper House is selected for four
years in New York, Virginia, South Carolina,
Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Ken-
tucky, and Illinois; for three years in Alabama
and Indiana ; for two years in Ohio and Michi-
gan ; for five years in Maryland; *and for one
year in all the others. 3rd. The Executive—
to wers and mode of' election:—The Governor is
chosen by the people annually in the six states of
New England; by the people for two years in
eight states, viz., New York, North Carolina,
Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, Ohio,
and Michigan ; by the people for three years in
two states, Pennsylvania and Indiana; by the
people for four years in five states, Delaware,
Arkansas, Missouri, Kentucky, and Illinois. By
the legislature or assembly for one year in New
Jersey and Maryland ; by the legislature for two
years in South Carolina ; and for three years in
Virginia ; and in Louisiana, by the assembly, for
four years, from the two candidates having the
greatest number of votes, from the people.
There are certain restrictions on the re-election
of the Governor in Maryland, Virginia, North
Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi, Missouri, Ken-
tucky, Tennessee, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
The Governor has the pardoning power, either
alone, or with his Council, in all the States, ex-
cept Rhode Island, where he has only a vote in
Council; he has official patronage alone -in
Maine, New Hampshire, Massachussets, New
York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, and
Louisiana, and with the Senate in Missouri, Ken-
tucky, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan ; he has a
qualified negative, or power, of vetoing the Acts
of the Legislatures, unless re-enacted by a two-
thirds vote, in Maine, New Hampshire, Massa-
chussets, Vermont, Connecticut, New York,
Pennsylvania, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Kentucky, In-
diana, Illinois, and Michigan. 4th. The judi-
ciary is tli us appointed. By the Governor and
Legislature, or Senate, or Council, in Maine,
New Hampshire, Massachussets, New York,
Maryland, Louisiana, Missouri, Indiana, and
Michigan. By the legislature alone in Vermont,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey, Virgi-
nia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,
Alabama, Arkansas, Tennessee, Ohio, and Illi-
nois. By the Governor alone in Pennsylvania,
Delaware, and Kentucky. By popular vote in
Mississippi. The term of office of the superior
judges is* for life (or during good behaviour.)
In Massachussets, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Mary-
land, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Louisiana, Kentucky, and Illinois ; until 70 years
of age, in Maine, New Hampshire, Connecticut;
until 65 years of age in Missouri; until 60
in New York. From periods varying from two
to twelve in New Jersey, Georgia, Alabama,
Mississippi, Arkansas, Tennessee, Ohio, Indiana,
and Michigan, and for one year in Rhode Island
and Vermont. They are removable by impeach-
ment in sixteen states ; by conviction of mis-
conduct in a court of law in Maryland ; by joint
resolution of senate and two-thirds of assembly
in New York ”
I will now proceed to quote various
passages from the very celebrated work
of M. de Tocqueville, who was himself
a democrat, at one time connected with
the provisional 1 government established
in France under the administration of M.
Lamartine. Consequently he was a man
likely to regard democracy with a fa-
vorable eye, and to see no faults in it but
such as were undoubted and palpable.
The first passage I will quote will
show M. de Tocqueville’s opinion as to
the effects of this system of democracies
on the social condition of the people of
Amercia. The first and most baneful of
its effects, according to this author, is
that it excludes from power the upper
and best educated classes, and throws the
government of the country completely
into the hands of the lower classes. On
this point the author writes,


It sometimes happens in a people amongst
which various opinions prevail, that the balance
of the several parties is lost; and one of them
obtains an irresistible preponderance, overpowers
all obstacles, harasses its opponents, and appro-
priates all the resources of society to its own
purposes. The vanquished citizens despair of
success, and they conceal their dissatisfaction in
silence and in a general apathy. The nation
seems to be governed by a single principle, and
the prevailing party assumes the credit of having
restored peace and unanimity to the country.
But this apparent unanimity is merely a cloak to
alarming dissensions and perpetual opposition.
This is precisely what occurred in America;
when the democratic party got the upper hand, it
took exclusive possession of the conduct of affairs,
and from that time the laws and the customs of
society have been adapted to its caprices. At
the present day the more affluent classes of
society are so entirely removed from the direc-
tion of political affairs in the United States, that
wealth, far from conferring a right to the exercise
of power is rather an obstacle than a means of
attaining to it. The wealthy members of the
community abandon the lists through
ness to contend, and frequently to contend in
vain against the poorest classes of their fellow-
citizens. They concentrate all their enjoyments
in the privacy of their homes, where they occupy
a rank which cannot be assumed in public ; and
they constitute a private society in the State,
wdiich has its own tastes and its own pleasures.
They submit to this state of things as an irre-
mediable evil, but they are careful not to show
that they are galled by its continuance; it is
even not uncommon to hear them laud the de-
lights of a republican government, and the ad-
vantages of democratic institutions when they
are in public. Next to hating their enemies,
men are most inclined to flatter them. Mark,
for instance, that oppulent citizen, who is as
anxious as a Jew of the middle ages to conceal
his wealth. His dress is plain—his demeanour
unassuming ; but the interior of his dwelling
glitters with luxury, and none but a few chosen
"■nests, whom he haughtily styles is equals, are
allowed to penetrate into this sanctuary. No
European noble is more exclusive in his pleasures,
or more jealous of the smallest advantage which
his privileged station confers upon him. But the
very same individual crosses the city to reach a
dark counting house, in the centre of traffic,
where every one may accost him who pleases.
If he meets his cobbler upon the way, they stop
an d converse. The two citizens discuss the
affairs of the State, in which they have an equal
interest, and they shake hands before they part
But beneath this artificial enthusiasm, and these
obsequious _ attentions to the preponderating
power, it is easy to perceive that the wealthy
members of the community entertain a hearty
distaste to the democratic institutions of their
country. The populace is at once the object of
their scorn and of their fears. If the mal-
administration of the democracy ever brings
about a revolutionary crisis, and if monarchical
institutions ever become practicable j n the
United States, the truths of what I advance will
become obvious. The two chief weapons which
parties use in order to ensure success are the
public press and the formation of associations.
One of the most disastrous conse-
quences of this state of things, in the
opinion of this author, is that the most
talented individuals are rarely if ever
now placed at the head of the Govern-
ment, and that as a necessary result the
best educated and most distinguished
men in America take no part in public
affairs. He says—
Many people in Europe are apt to believe
without saying it, or to say without believing it,
that one of the great advantages of universal
suffrage is that it entrusts the direction of public
affairs to men who are Worthy of the public con-
fidence. They admit that the people is unable to
govern for itself, but they aver that it is always
sincerely disposed to promote the welfare of the
State, and that it instinctively designates those
persons who are animated by the same good
wishes, and who are the most fit to wield the su-
preme authority. 1 confess that the observations
1 made in America by no means coincide with
these opinions. On my arrival in the United
States, 1 was surprised to find so much distin-
guished talent among the subjects, and so little
among the heads of the Government. It is a
well authenticated fact, that at the present day
the most talented men in the United States are
rarely placed at the head of affairs ; and it must
be acknowledged that such has been the result in
proportion as democracy has outstepped all its
former limits. The race of American statesmen
lias evidently dwindled most remarkably in the
course of the last fifty years. Several causes may
be assigned to this phenomenon. It is impossi-
ble, notwithstanding the most strenuous exertions,
to raise the intelligence of the people above a
certain level. Whatever may be the facilities for
acquiring information whatever may be the
profusion of easy methods and of cheap science,
the human mind can never be instructed and
educated without devoting a considerable space of
time fo those objects. The greater or the icsser
possibility of subsisting without labour is, there-
fore, the necessary boundary of intellectual im-
provement. This boundary is more remote in
some countries, and more restricted in others ;
but it must exist somewhere as long as the people
is constrained to work in order to procure the
means of physical subsistence; that is to sav, as
long as it retains its popular character, it is
therefore quite as difficult to imagine a state in
which all the citizens should be very well in-
formed, as a state in which they should be all
wealthy ; these two difficulties may be looked
upon as correlative, it may very readily be ad-
mitted that the mass of the citizens are sincerely
disposed to promote the welfare of their country ;
nay, more, it may even be allowed that the lower


classes are less apt to be swayed by considerations
of personal interest than the higher orders ; but
jt is always more or less impossible for them to I
discern the best means of obtaining the end
which they desire with sincerity. Long and pa-
tient observation, joined to a multitude of dif-
ferent notions, is required to form a just estimate
of the character of a single individual; and can
it be supposed that the vulgar have the power
of succeeding in an enquiry which misleads the
penetration of genius itself? The people have
neither the time nor the means which are essen-
tial to the prosecution of an investigation of this
kind. Its conclusions are hastily formed from a
superficial inspection of the more prominent fea-
tures of a question. Hence it often assents to
the clamour of a mountebank, who knows the
secret of stimulating its tastes, whilst its truest
friends frequently fail in their exertions. More-
over, the democracy is not only deficient in that
soundness of judgment which is necessary to select
men really deserving of its confidence, but it has
neither the desire nor the inclination to find them
out. It cannot be denied that democratic insti-
tutions have a very strong tendency to promote
the feeling of envy in the human heart; not so
much because they afford to every one the means
of rising to the level of any of his fellow citizens,
as because these means perpetually disappoint
the persons who employ them. Democratic in-
stitutions awaken and foster a passion for equa-
lity which they can never entirely satisfy. This
complete equality eludes the grasp of the people
at the very moment at which it tldnks to hold it
fast, and ‘ flies,’ as Pascal says, ‘ with eternal
flight.’ I he people is excited in the pursuit of
an advantage, which is the more precious because
it is not sufficiently remote to be unknown, or
sufficiently near to be enjoyed. The lower orders
are agitated by the chance of success; they are
irritated by its uncertainty, and they pass from
the enthusiasm of pursuit to the exhaustion of ill
success, and lastly to the acrimony of disappoint-
ment. Whatever transcends their own limits
appears to be an obstacle to their desires, and
there is no kind ot superiority, however legiti-
mate it may be, which is not irksome in their
sight. It has been supposed that the secret in-
stinct which leads the lower orders to remove
their superiors as much as possible from the di-
rection of public affairs, is peculiar to France.
This, however, is an error; the propensity to
which 1 allude is not inherent in anv particular
nation, but in democratic institutions'in general ;
and although it may have been heightened by
peculiar political circumstances, it owes its origin
to a higher cause. In the. United States the
people is not disposed to hate the superior classes
of society ; but it is not very favourably inclined
towards them, and it carefully excludes them
from the exercise of authority. * It does not en-
tertain any dread of distinguished talents, but it
is rarely captivated by them; and it awards its
approbation very sparingly to such as have risen
without the popular support. Whilst the natural
propensities of democracy induce the people to
reject the most distinguished citizens ns its
rulers, these individuals are no less apt to retire
from a political career in which it is almost im-
possible to retain their independence or to ad-
vance without degrading themselves. This
opinion had been very candidly set forth by
Chancellor Kent, who says, in speaking with
great eulogiums of that part of the constitution
which empowers the Executive to nominate the
Judges— ‘ It is indeed probable that the men who
are best fitted to discharge the duties of this
high office would have too much reserve in their
manners, and too much austerity in their prin-
ciples, for them to be returned by the majority at
an election where universal suffrage is adopted ’
Such were the opinions which were printed with-
out contradiction in America in the year 1830 !
I hold it to be sufficiently" demonstrated that
universal suffrage is by no means a guarantee of
the wisdom of popular choice ; and that whatever
its advantages may be, this is not one of them. ,
The next quotation I shall make shows
M de Tocqueville’s opinion of the effects
of this democracy on the constitution of
the supreme legislature of America. Its
effects on the constitutions of the several
state legislatures may be collected from
the revolting scenes which are continu-
ally recorded iu the daily press of
America, and which shew that even in
the midst of the deliberations of these
bodies, the bowie knife and revolver are
frequently resorted to by members of
these bodies with deadly effect. M. de
Tocqueville, says—
There are certain laws of a democratic na-
ture which contribute, nevertheless, to correct, in
some measure, the dangerous tendencies of de-
mocracy. On entering the House of Representa-
tives of Washington, one is struck by the vulgar
demeanour of that great assembly. The eye fre-
quently does not discover a man of celebrity
within its walls. Its members are almost all
obscure individuals, whose names present no as-
sociations to the mind; they are mostly village
lawyers, men in trade, or even persons belonging
to the lower classes of society. In a country- in
which education is very general it is said that the
representatives of the people do not always know
how to write correctly. At a- few yards distant
from this spot is the door of the Senate, which
contains within a small space a large proportion
of the celebrated men of America. Scarcely an
individual is to be perceived in it who does not
recall the idea of an active and illustrious career.
The senate is composed of eloquent advocates,
distinguished generals, wise magistrates, states-
men of note, whose language would at all times
do honour to the most remarkable parliamentary
debates of Europe. What then is the cause of
this strange contrast, and why are the most able
citizens to be found in one assembly rather than
in the other ? Why is the former body remark-
able for .its vulgarity and its poverty of talent,


whilst the latter seems to enjoy a monopoly of
intelligence and sound judgment ? Both of these
assemblies emanate from the people; both of
them are chosen by universal suffrage ; and no
voice has hitherto been heard to assert, in Ame-
rica, that the Senate is hostile to the interests of
the people. From what cause, then, does so
startling a difference arise ? The only reason
which appears to me adequately to account for it
is, that the House of Representatives is elected
by the populace directly, and that the Senate is
elected by elected bodies. The whole body of
the citizens names the legislature of each State,
and the federal constitution converts these legis-
latures into so many electoral bodies, which re-
turn the members of the senate. The senators
are elected by an indirect application of universal
suffrage, for the legislatures which name them
are not aristocratic or privileged bodies which
exercise the electoral franchise in their own right,
but they are chosen by the totality of the citi-
zens ; they are generally elected every year, and
new members may constantly be chosen who will
employ their electoral rights in conformity with
the wishes of the public. But this transmission
of the popular authority through an assembly of
chosen men, operates an important change in it,
by refining its discretion and improving the
forms which it adopts. Men who are chosen in
this manner accurately represent the majority of
the nation which governs them ;■ but they repre-
sent the elevated thoughts which are current in
the community, the generous propensities which
prompt its nobler actions, rather than the petty
passions which disturb, or the vices which dis-
grace it. The time may be already anticipated
at which the American Republics will be obliged
to introduce the plan of election by an elected
body more frequently into their system of repre-
sentation, or they will incur no small risk of
perishing miserdbly amongst the shoals of de-
mocracy. And here I have n'o small scruple in
confessing that I look upon this peculiar system
of election as the only means of bringing the ex-
ercise of political power to the level of all classes
of the people. Those thinkers who regard this
institution as the exclusive weapon of a party,
and those who fear, on the other hand, to make
use of it, seem to me to fall into as great an
error in the one case as in the other.
I will iu the next place refer to the
mutability of the American laws ; to the
causes of it according to the opinions of
this author, and to the admissions both
' of Hamilton and Jefferson, two of the
staunchest supporters of the American
constitution : and, I may add, two of the
most distinguished statesmen America
has yet produced. He writes—
When elections recur at long intervals, the
State is exposed to violent agitation every time
they take place. Parties exert themselves to
the utmost in order to gain a prize which is so
rarely within their reach; and as the evil is
almost irremediable for the candidates who fail,
the consequences of their disappointed ambition
may prove most disastrous, it, on the other
hand, the legal struggle can be repeated within
a short space of time, the defeated parties take
patience. When elections occur frequently, their
recurrence keeps society in a perpetual state of
feverish excitement, and imparts a continual in-
stability to public affairs. Thus, on the one
hand, the state is exposed to the perils of a re-
volution ; on the other, to perfect mutability—
the former system threatens the very existence
of the Government, the latter is an obstacle to
all steady and consistent policy. The Americans
have preferred the second of these evils to- the
first; but they were led to this conclusion by
their instinct much more than by their reason ;
for a taste for variety is one of the characteris-
tic passions of democracy. An extraordinary
mutability has, by this means,, been introduced
into their legislation. Many of the Americans
consider the instability of their laws as a ne-
cessary consequence of a system whose general
results are beneficial. But no one in the United
States affects to deny the fact of this instability,
or to contend that it is not a great evil. Ham-
ilton, after having demonstrated the utility of a
power which might prevent, or which might at
least impede, the promulgation of bad laws,
adds : * It may, perhaps, be said that the power
of preventing bad laws, includes that of prevent-
ing good ones, and may be used to the one pur-
pose as well as to the other. But this objection
will have little weight with those who can pro-
perly estimate the mischiefs of that inconstancy
and mutability in the laws which form the
greatest blemish in the character and genius of
our government.’— Federalist , No. 73. And,
again, in No. 62 of the same work he observes,
‘ The facility and excess of law-making seem to
be the diseases to which our governments are
most liable * * * * * The mischievous
effects of the mutability in the public councils
arising from a rapid succession of new members
would fill a volume ; every new election in the
State is found to change one-half of its repre-
sentatives. From this change of men must pro-
ceed a change of opinions and of measures,
which forfeits the respect and confidence of
other nations, poisons the blessings of liberty
itself, and diminishes the attachment and re-
verence of the people towards a political system
which betrays so many marks of infirmity.’
Jefferson himself, the greatest democrat whom
the democracy of America has yet produced,
pointed out the same evils. ‘The inability of
our law's,’ said he, in a letter to Madison, ‘ is
really a very serious inconvenience. I think
we ought to have obviated it by deciding that
a whole year should always be allowed to elapse
between the bringing in of a bill and the final
passing of it. It should afterwards be discussed
and put to the vote without the possibility of
making any alteration in it; and if the circum-
stances of the case require a more speedy deci-
sion, the question should not be decided by a


simple majority, but by a majority of at least
two-thirds of both Houses.’
Sir, I admit, that while M. de Toc-
queville speaks as it will be seen in the
most disparaging terms of some of the
more prominent tendencies of these
novel democratic institutions ; whilst he
proves conclusively that the lower houses
of legislature throughout the whole ex-
tent of the Union are composed of the
coarsest and most unpolished materials,
he draws a very different and highly
flattering picture of <the Senate at Wash-
ington, as compared with the House of
Representatives. I consider it but
fair, therefore, to those who are in favor
of an elected Upper House, that I should
give, at length, as I have done in one of
the foregoing extracts, his account of
the remarkable difference in the elements
of those two bodies, and the causes which
he assigns for the unmistakeable supe-
riority of one over the other. Sir, ac-
cording to this author, another of the
bad consequences of the American de-
mocracy is, that it opens out no career to
public men of great note and talent, and
that, a§ a necessary consequence of this
great want, public offices are for the
most part filled with corrupt and incom-
peient functionaries. He says—
In nations in which the principle of election
extends to every place in the State, no political
career can, properly speaking, be said to exist.
Men are promoted, as if by chance, to the rank
which they enjoy, and they are by no means sure
of retaining it. The consequence is, that in
tranquil times public functions offer but few
lures to ambition. In the United States the
persons who engage in the perplexities of poli-
tical life are individuals of very moderate pre-
tensions. The pursuit of wealth generally di-
verts men of great talents and of great passions
from the pursuit of power; and it very frequently
happens that a man does not undertake to direct
the fortune of the state until he has discovered
his incompetence to conduct his own affairs. The
vast number of very ordinary men who occupy
public stations is quite as attributable to these
causes as to the bad choice of the democracy.
In the United States I am not sure that the
people would return the men of superior abilities
who might solicit its support, but it is certain
that men of this description do not come
forward.
Sir, another tendency, and I consider
it a very injurious one, of this democracy
is its extreme parsimony to its principal
officers. The salaries of these, as a
general rule, seem to decrease in propor-
tion to the increase in their authority
and responsibility ; while, on the other
hand, the pay received by inferior officers
of all grades is greater than that received
by similar subordinates under any of the
old states of Europe. De Tocqueville
on this point says ;—•
It must, however, be allowed, that a demo-
cratic State is most parsimonious towards its
principal agents. In America, the secondary
officers are much better paid, and the dignitaries
of the administration much worse than they are
elsewhere. These opposite effects result from the
same cause: the people fix the salaries of the
public officers in both cases ; and the scale of re-
muneration is determined by the consideration of
its own wants. It is held to be fair, that the
servants of the public should be placed in the
same easy circumstances as the public itself; but
when the question turns upon the salaries of the
great officers of the State, this rule fails, and
chance alone can guide the popular decision.
The poor have no adequate conception of the
wants which the higher classes of society may
feel. The sum which is scanty to the rich, ap-
pears enormous to the poor man, whose wants do
not extend beyond the necessaries of life; and,
in his estimation, the governor of a State, with
his two or three hundred a year, is a very fortu-
nate and enviable being. If you Undertake to
convince him that the representative of a great
people ought to be able to some show
of splendour in the eyes of foreigm nations, he
will perhaps assent to - your meaning ; but when
he reflects on his own humble dwelling, and on
the hard-earned produce of his wearisome toil,
he remembers all that he could do with a salary
which you say is insufficient, and he is startled,
or almost frightened, at the sight of such un-
common wealth. Besides, the secondary public
officer is almost on a level with the people,
whilst the others are raised above it. The for-
mer may therefore excite his interest, but the
latter begins to arouse his envy. This is very
clearly seen in the United States, where the sala-
ries seem to decrease, as the authority of those
who receive them augments.
Sir, if we were to infer that the differ-
ent democracies which form this Corpo-
ration were a cheap government, we
should jump to an erroneous conclusion ;
for niggardly as are the salaries they pay
to their president and the other high
officers of the State, they are munificent
in all those branches of expenditure
which concern the public. Munificent,
I repeat, for two reasons; because the
expenditure is directly or indirectly be-
neficial to themselves, and because for


the most part the taxation of the
country which applies to it is de-
rived from the rich. Monsieur de Toc-
queville endeavours in vain to arrive
at data which might enable him to draw
accurate conclusions as to the compara-
tive expenditure of America and the
principal governments of Europe. But
it appears there are no official statistics
in America which could guide him in this
research to any very accurate determina-
tion. The result, however, of his in-
quiry was, that the Government of the
United States, with its four budgets,
if I may so term them, the budget of its
general government, the budget of its
state government, the budget of its
counties, and the budget of its towns,
is not upon the whole economical, but
the very reverse. This opinion, and the
reasons of it, are summed up as follows:
It is by examining what actually takes
place in the Union, and not by comparing the
Union with France, that we may discover whe-
ther the American Government is really econo-
mical. On casting my eyes over the different
republics which form the Confederation, I per-
ceive that their Governments lack perseverance
in their undertakings, and that they exercise no
steady control over the men whom they employ.
Whence I naturally infer that they must often
spend the money of the people to no purpose,
or consume more of it- than is really necessary to
their undertakings. Great efforts are made in
accordance with the democratic origin of society,
to satisfy the exigencies of the lower orders, to
open the career of power to their endeavours,
and to diffuse knowledge and comfort amongst
them. The poor are maintained, immense’ sums
are annually devoted to public instruction; all
services whatsoever are remunerated, and the
most subordinate agents are liberally paid. If
this kind of government appears to me to be use-
ful and rational, I am, nevertheless, constrained
to admit that it is expensive. Wherever the
poor direct public affairs and dispose of the
national resources, it appears certain that as
they profit by the expenditure of the State, they
are apt to augment that expenditure. 1 conclude,
therefore, without having recourse to inaccurate
computations, and without hazarding a compari-
son which might prove incorrect, that the demo-
cratic government of the Americans is not a
cheap government, as is sometimes asserted ; and
I have no hesitation in predicting, that if the
people of the United States is ever involved in
serious difficulties, its taxation will speedily be
increased to the rate of that which prevails in
the greater part of the aristocracies and the
monarchies of Europe.
Now, sir, whilst it thus appears that
the form of government in America is
not less, if indeed it be not more, ex-
pensive than any form of government
existing in the older governments of Eu-
rope ; it would also seem that this de-
mocracy is not less—that it is more cor-
rupt than any aristocracy in Europe that
can be mentioned against it. It may he
that in aristocracies, rulers sometimes
endeavour to corrupt the people ; but it
is equally certain that in democracies,
rulers frequently show themselves to he
corrupt. But this sort of corruption—
I mean the corruption of the heads
of the government itself, is infinitely
more pernicious to the morality of the
governed than any direct bribery to
which any portion of the people could
be subjected. On this point De Tocque-
viile writes:—
A distinction must be made, when the aristo-
cratic and the democratic principles mutually in-
veigh against each other, as tending to facilitate
corruption. In aristocratic governments the in-
dividuals who are placed at the head of affairs
are rich men, who are solely desirous of power.
In democracies, statesmen are poor, and they
have their fortunes to make. The consequence
is, that in aristocratic states the rulers are rarely
accessible to corruption, and have very little
craving for money; whilst the reverse is the case
in democratic nations. But in aristocracies, as
those who are arriving at the head of affairs are
possessed of considerable wealth, and as the num-
ber of persons by whose assistance they may rise*
is comparatively small, the Government is, if I
may use the expression, put up to a sort of auc-
tion. In democracies, on the contrary, those who
are covetous of power are very seldom wealthy,
and the number of citizens who confer that
power is extremely great. Perhaps in democra-
cies, the number of men who might be bought is
by no means smaller, but buyers are rarely to be
met with ; and besides, it would be necessary to
buy so many persons at once, that the attempt is
rendered nugatory. Many of the men who have
been in the administration in France during the
last forty years have been accused of making
their fortunes at the expense of the state or of
its allies ; a reproach which was rarely addressed
to the public characters of the ancient monarchy.
But in France, the practice of bribing electors is
almost unknown, whilst it is notoriouslv and pub-
licly carried on in England. In the United
States, I never heard a man accused of spending
his wealth in corrupting the populace ; but I have
often heard the probity of public officers ques-
tioned ; still more frequently have I heard their
success attributed to low intrigues and immoral
practices. If, then, the men who conduct the go-
vernment of an aristocracy sometimes endeavour to
corrupt 1 the people, the heads of a democracy are


fliemsel ves corrupt. In the former case the morality
)f the people is directly assailed—in the latter,
in indirect influence is exercised upon the people,
which is still more to be dreaded. As the rulers
of democratic nations are almost always exposed
to the suspicion of dishonourable conduct, they,
in some measure, lend the authority of the go-
vernment to the ialse practices of which they
are accused. They thus afford an example
which must prove discouraging to the struggles
of virtuous independence, and must foster the
secret calculations of a vicious ambition. If it
e asserted that evil passions are displayed in all
anks of society ; that they ascend the throne by
ereditary right; and that despicable characters
re to be met with at the head of aristocratic
nations, as well as in the sphere of a democracy ;
this objection has but little weight in my estima-
tinn. The corruption of men who have casually
risen to power has a coarse and vulgar infection
in it, which renders it contagious to the multi-
tude. On the contrary, there is a kind of aris-
tocratic refinement, and an air of grandeur in the
depravity of the great, which frequently prevents
it from spreading abroad. The people can never
penetrate into the perplexing' labyrinth of court
intrigue, and it will even have difficulty in de-
tecting the turpitude which lurks under elegant
manners, refined tastes, and graceful language*
But to pillage the public purse, and to vend the
favors of the State, are arts which the meanest
villain may comprehend, and hope to practice in
his turn. In reality, it is far less prejudical to
witness the immoralities of the great than to
witness that immorality which leads to greatness.
In a democracy private citizens see a man in their
own rank in life, who rises from that obscure
position, and who becomes possessed of riches
and of power in a few years. The spectacle ex-
cites their surprise and their envy, and they are
led to inquire bow the person who was yesterday
their equal, is to-day their ruler. To attribute
his rise to his talents or his virtues is.unpleasant,
for it is tacitly to acknowledge that they are
themselves less virtuous and less talented than
he was. They are therefore led (and not unfre-
quently their conjecture is a correct one) to im-
pute his success mainly to some one of his de-
fects ; and an odious mixture is thus formed of
the ideas of turpitude and powder, unworthiness
and success, utility and dishonour.
Sir, while this form of democratic go-
vernment stands thus pre-eminent over
my other in its corrupting influences
upon society, its inherent defects are
still more apparent in the conduct of its
Foreign relations. Its inefficiency abroad
is not less demonstrative than its tendency
;o corruption at home. It is equally inca-
oable of devising or of persevering in
my great scheme of foreign policy. It
cannot look, as it were, before its nose,
ft is true, indeed, that no very palpable
instances have yet been given of its in-
herent and necessary inferiority in this
important consideration, to governments
in which the monarchical or aristocratic
elements preponderates ; but the time
cannot be very remote when this ten-
dency will be made patent. The seed of
this infirmity is in the nature of this
constitution, and must germinate. M.
de Tocquevllle thus speaks of it: —■
It is therefore very difficult to ascertain, at
present, what degree of sagacity the American
democracy will display in the conduct of the
foreign policy of the country ; and upon this
point the adversaries, as well as its advocates,
must suspend their judgment. As for myself,
I have no hesitation in expressing my convic-
tion that it is most especially in the conduct of
foreign relations that democratic governments
appear to be decidedly inferior to govern-
ments carried on upon different principles. Ex-
perience, instruction, and habit, may almost
always succeed in creating a species of
practical discretion in democracies, and that
science of the daily occurrences of life, which
is called good sense. Good sense may suf-
fice to direct the ordinary course of society;
and amongst a people whose education has
been provided for, the advantages of democratic
liberty in the internal affairs of the country
may more than compensate for the evils in-
herent in a democratic government. But such
is not always the case in the mutual re-
lations of foreign nations. Foreign politics
demand scarcely any of those qualities which
a democracy possesses : and they require, on the
contrary, the perfect use of almost all those
faculties in which it is deficient. Democracy is
favourable to the increase of the internal re-
sources of a state; it tends to diffuse a moderate
independence ; it promotes the growth of public
opinion, and fortifies the respect which is enter-
tained for law in all classes of society ; and these
are advantages which only exercise an indirect
influence over the relations which one people
bears to another. • But a democracy is unable
to regulate the details of an important under-
taking, to persevere in a design, and to work
out its execution in the presence of serious ob-
stacles. It cannot combine its measures with
secrecy, and it will not await their consequences
with patience. These are qualities which more
especially belong to an individual or to an ari-
stocracy ; and they are precisely the means by
which an individual people attains to a predomi-
nant position. If, on the contrary, we observe
the natural defects of aristocracy, we shall find
that their influence is comparatively innocuous in
the direction of the external affairs of a state.
The capital fault of which aristocratic bodies
may be accused is, that they are more apt to
contrive their own advantage than that of the
mass of the people. In foreign politics it is
rare for the interest of the aristocracy to be in


any way distinct from that of the people. The
propensity which democracies have to obey the
impulse of passion rather than the sugges-
tions of prudence, and to abandon a mature
design for the gratification of a momentary
caprice, was very clearly seen in America on
the breaking out of the French Revolution. It
was then as evident to the meanest capacity
as it is at the present time, that the interests
of America forbade them to take any part in
the contest which was about to deluge Europe
with blood, but which could by no means injure
the welfare of their own country. Nevertheless,
the sympathies of the people declared themselves
with so much violence in behalf of France, that •
nothing but the inflexible character of Washing-
ton, fand the immense popularity which he en-
joyed, could have prevented the Americans from
declaring war against England; and even then
the exertions which the austere reason of that
great man made to repress the generous but im-
prudent passions of his fellow-citizens, very
nearly deprived him of the sole recompense
which he had ever claimed—that of his country’s
love. The majority then reprobated the line of
policy which he adopted, and which has since
been unanimously approved by the nation. If
the constitution and the favor of the public had
not entrusted the direction of the foreign affairs
of the country to Washington, it is certain that
the American nation would at that time have
taken the very measures which it now condemns.
Almost all the nations which have ever exercised
a powerful influence upon the destinies of the
world, by conceiving, following up, and execut-
ing vast designs—from the Romans to the Eng-
lish—have been governed by aristocratic institu-
tions. Nor will this be a subject of wonder
when we recollect that nothing in the world has
so absolute a fixity of purpose as an aristocracy.
The mass of the people may be led astray by
ignorance or passion; the mind of a king may
be biassed, and his perseverance in his designs
may be shaken ; besides which a king is not im-
mortal ; but an aristocratic body is too numerous
to be led astray by the intoxicating influence of
unreflecting passion : it has the energy of a firm
and enlightened individual, added to the power
which it derives from its perpetuity.
I have now directed the attention of
the House to most of the great consi-
derations which should influence us in
framing a future constitution for this
colony. I have already quoted from an
author whose early and present prejudices
are in favor of democracy, because he
cannot but be to some extent a partial
witness in its favor, and because if his
candour compel him to bear testimony
against this form of government, we
may fairly infer that he has made out for
it the best case he can. (Cheers.) It
is important therefore that we should
hear what he has to say as to the admin-
istration of justice among’ the people of
these States. This is confessedly, or at
least ought to be, the end and aim of
all government; and governments are
either good or bad, in proportion to the
general security which they afford in
their judiciary to the persons, property,
and character of their subjects ; in other
words, in proportion to the purity of the
administration of justice. As it is im-
portant to ascertain what have been the
effects of a government based on uni-
versal suffrage, on this most important
particular, I invite, Sir, the attention of
the House to the testimony of this
author. He says—
I am therefore of opinion that some one social
power must always be made to predominate over
the others; but 1 think that liberty is endangered
when this power is checked by no obstacles,
which may retard its course and force it to mode-
rate its own vehemence. Unlimited power is in
itself a bad and dangerous thing ; human beings
are not competent to exercise it with discretion ;
and God alone can be omnipotent, because his
wisdom and his justice are always equal to his
power. But no power upon earth is so worthy
of honor for itself, or of reverential obedience to
the rights which it represents, that I would con-
sent to admit its uncontrolled and all-predomi-
nant authority. When I see that the rights and
the means of absolute command are conferred'
upon a people, or upon a king, upon an aristo-
cracy or a democracy, a monarchy or a republic,
I recognise the germ of tyranny, and I journey
onwards to a land of more hopeful institutions.
In my opinion the main evil of the present demo-
cratic institutions of the United States, does not
arise, as is often asserted in Europe, from their
weakness, but from their overpowering strength ;
and lam not so much alarmed at the excessive
liberty which reigns in that country as at the
Very inadequate securities which exist against
tyranny. When an individual or a party is
wronged in the United States, to whom can he
apply for redress? If to public opinion, public
opinion constitutes the majority; if to the legis-
lature, it represents the majority, and implicitly
obeys its injunctions ; if to the executive power it
is appointed by the majority, and remains a passive
tool in its hands ; the public troops consist of the
majority under arms ; the jury is the majority in-
vested with the right of hearing judicial cases;
and in certain states even the judges are elected
by the majority. However iniquitous or absurd
the evil of which you complain may be, you must
submit to it as well as you can.
A note on this authority shows the
operation of these influences. It goes
on to say,


A striking instance of the excesses which may
>e occasioned by the despotism of the majority
incurred at Baltimore in the year 1812. At that
,ime the war was very popular in Baltimore. A
ournal which had taken the other side of the
piestion excited the indignation of the inhabi-
tants by its opposition. The populace assembled,
moke the printing presses, and attacked the
muses of the newspaper editors. The militia
vas called out, but no one obeyed the call ; and
,he only means to save the poor wretches who
vere threatened by the frenzy of the mob was to
Trow them into prison as common malefactors.*'
But even this precaution was ineffectual. The
mob collected again during the night; the ma-
gistrates again made a vain attempt to call out
die militia: the prison was forced; one of the
newspaper editors was killed upon the spot, and
die others were left for dead. The guilty parties
were acquitted when they were brought to trial.
M. de Tocqueville goes on to say—
If on the other hand a legislative power could
be so constituted as to represent the majority
without being necessarily the slave of its* pas-
sions ; an executive, so as to retain a certain
degree of uncontrolled authority, and a judiciary
so as to remain independent of the two other
powers; a government could be formed wdiich
would thus be rendered democratic without any
risk of incurring tyrannical abuse. Ido not say
that tyrannical abuses frequently occur in America
at the present day; but 1 maintain that no sure
barrier is established against them, and that the
causes which mitigate the government are to be
found in the circumstances and the manners of
he country more than in its laws.
Sir, while such are the baneful in-
fluences which these democracies exercise
over the interest of justice, it is curious
to mark their equally tyrannical domina-
tion over public opinion. In America,
when the majority has once irreversibly
decided a question, all public discussion
ceases ; lor all further discussion is pro-
scribed. As this, Sir, is a branch of the
subject into which the question of the
liberty of the press, and the natural right
which belongs to every man within cer-
tain limitations enters, I consider that
M. de Tocqueville’s chapter on the sub-
ject is most important for the considera-
tion of the country, and particularly for
the consideration of that portion of the
public press which is desirous of forging
similar chains for itself and for the
country, I therefore quote it entire :
It is in the examination of the display of public
opinion in the United States that we clearly per-
ceive how far the power of the majority surpasses
all the powers with which we are acquainted in
Europe. Intellectual principles exercise an in-
fluence which is so invisible, and often so in-
appreciable, that they baffle the toils of oppres-
sion. At the present time the most absolute
monarchs in Europe are unable to prevent certain
notions which are opposed to their authority
from circulating in secret throughout their do-
minions, and even in their courts. Such is not
the case in America ;as long as the majority is
still undecided, discussion is carried on; but as
soon as its decision is irrevocably pronounced, a
submissive silence is observed, and the friends,
as well as the opponents of the measure, unite in
assenting to its propriety. The reason of this
is perfectly clear; no monarch is so absolute as
to combine all the powers of society in his own
hands, and to conquer all opposition with the
energy of a majority which is invested with the
right of making and of executing the laws.
The authority of a king is purely physical, and
it controls the actions of the subject without sub -
duing his private will; but the majority possesses
a power which is physical and moral at the same
time ; it acts upon the will, as well as upon the
actions of man, and it represses not only all con-
test, but all controversy. I know no country in
which there is so little true independence of
mind and freedom of discussion as in America.
In any constitutional state in Europe, every sort
of religious and political theory may be advocated
and propagated abroad; for there is no country
in Europe so subdued by any single authority as
not to contain citizens who are ready to protect
the man who raises his voice in the cause of
truth from the consequences of his hardihood.
If he is unfortunate enough to live under an
absolute government, the people is upon his side;
if he inhabits a free country, he may find a
shelter behind the authority of the throne, if he
require one. The aristocratic part of society
supports him in some countries, and the de-
mocracies in others. But in a nation vjhere de-
mocratic institutions exist, organized like those
of the United States, there is but one sole ele-
ment of strength and of success, with nothing
beyond it. In America the majority raises very
formidable barriers to the liberty of opinion.
Within these barriers an author may Write what-
ever he pleases, but he will repent it if he ever
step beyond them. Not that he is exposed to
the terrors of an auto-da-fe , but he is tormented
by the slights and persecutions of daily obloquy.
His political career is closed for ever, since he
has offended the only authority which is able to
promote his success. Every sort of compensation,
even that of celebrity, is refused to him. Before
he published his opinions, he imagined that he
held them in common with many others, but no
sooner has he declared them openly, than he is
loudly censured by his overbearing opponents,
while those who speak, without having* the cou-
rage to speak like him, abandon him in silence.
He yields at length, oppressed by the daily
efforts he has been making, and he subsides into
silence as if he were tormented by remorse for
having spoken the truth. Fetters and headsmen
were the coarse instruments which tyranny for-
merly employed ; but the civilization of our age


has refined the arts of despotism, which seemed
however to have been sufficiently perfected before.
The excesses of monarchical power had devised a
variety of physical means of oppression ; the de-
mocratic republics of the present day have ren-
dered it as entirely an affair of the mind, as that
which it is intended to coerce. Under the abso-
lute sway of an individual despot, the body
was attacked in order to subdue the soul; and the
soul escaped the blows which were directed
against it, and rose superior to the attempt;
but such is not the course adopted by. tyranny in
democratic republics ; there the body is left free,
and the soul is enslaved. The sovereign can no
longer say, “ You shall think as I do on pain of
deathbut he says, “ You are free to think
differently from me, and to retain your life, your
property, and all that you possess; hut if such
be your determination, you are henceforth an
alien among your people. You may retain your
civil rights, hut they will be useless to you, for
you will never be chosen by your fellow-citizens
if you solicit their suffrages ; and they will affect
to scorn you if you solicit their esteem. You
will remain among men, but you will be de-
prived of the rights of mankind. Your fellow-
creatures will shun an impure being; and those
who are most persuaded of your innocence will
abandon you too, lest they should be shunned in
their turn. Go in peace ! I have given you life,
but it is an existence incomparably worse than
death.”
1 hope, Sir, that the passages I
have quoted from this author, so
deeply as he is imbued with demo-
cratic prejudices, will be sufficient to
impress upon this House, and upon
the country at large, the conviction at
which I myself many years ago arrived,
that this co-operation, which was in-
tended to secure the liberties of the peo-
ple of the several states' which compose
it, has not yet answered its ends, but has
in fact established a tyranny infinitely
more degrading. Humanity has hut one
consolation to look forward to, and that
is, the hope that it involves so many seeds
of violence and decay,—that it cannot,
in the nature of things, be long-lived,
but must perish, sooner or later, by the
abuse of its power, and the anarchy
which must be the consequence. On
this point M. De Tocqueville has this
prediction, which it will be seen is con-
curred in by two great American states-
men, Hamilton and Jefferson, to whom
X have'already referred. He says :
If ever the free institutions of America are
destroyed, that event may be attributed to the
unlimited authority of the majority which may
at some future time urge the minorities to despe-
ration, and oblige them to have recourse to phy-
sical force. Anarchy will then be the result,
but it will have been brought about by de-
spotism. Mr. Hamilton expresses the same
opinion in the Federalist, No. 51:—“It is
of great importance in a republic not only
to guard society against the oppression of its
rulers, but to guard one part of the society
against the injustice of the other part. Justice
is the end of government. It ever has been and
ever will be pursued until it be obtained, or until
liberty be lost in the pursuit. In a society, under
the forms of which the stronger faction can rea-
dily unite and oppress the weaker, anarchy may
as truly be said to reign as in a state of nature,
where the . weaker individual is not secure
against the violence of the stronger. And, as in
the latter state, even the stronger individuals are
prompted by the uncertainty of their condition to
submit to a government which may protect the
weak as well as themselves; so, in the former
state will the more powerful factions be gra-
dually induced, by a like motive, to wish for a
government which will protect all parties, —the
weaker as well as the more powerful. It can he
little doubted that if the state of ’Rhode Island
was separated from the confederacy and left to
itself, the insecurity of rights under the popular
form of government within such narrow limits
would he displayed by such reiterated oppressions
of the factious majorities, that some power alto-
gether independent of the people would soon be
called for by the voice of the very factions whose
misrule had proved the necessity of it.” Jefferson
has also thus expressed him self in a letter to Maddi-
son: “ The executive power of our government is not
the only, perhaps not even the principal, object
of my solicitude. The tyranny of the legislature
is really the danger most to he feared, and will
continue to be so for many years to come. The
tyranny of the executive power will come in its
turn, but at a more distant period.” I am
glad to cite the opinion of Jefferson upon this
subject rather than that of another, because I
consider him to be the most powerful advocate
democracy has ever sent forth.
Sir, I will now bespeak the attention
of hon. members to what I consider to
have been one of the inevitable evils of
the democratic constitution. Its strong
tendency to corruption has been strongly
put in various of the passages I have
quoted from De Tocqueville, but I do
not recollect that he has adverted to the
fact that this constitution has been actu-
ally set aside with a view to give this
corrupting influence full play. Since
this fundamental alteration the contests
of parties have become mere struggling
for place and for a division of the
spoils. Since General Jackson’s pre


sidency the practice has grown up, on
each contest for the presidential chair,
of a division among the victorious party
of all the offices worth mentioning in
the gift of the executive ; and the result
is, that at each succeeding election of a
president there is a general turn out and
displacement of officers, almost from the
highest to the lowest grade. The way
in which this great innovation on the
original constitution of the United States
took place is thus described by Calhoun,
as well as the gross system of corruption
which it has engendered. He says :
The two elements in this department are
blended into one when the choice of a President
is made by the Electoral College, which, as has
been stated, gives a great preponderance to the
element representing the federal population of
the several States over that whicli represents
them in their organized character as govern-
ments. To compensate this, a still greater pre-
ponderance is gained to the latter in the eventual
choice by the House of Representatives. Rut
they have in neither case a veto upon the acts of
each other, nor any equivalent means to prevent
encroachments in choosing the individual to be
vested for the time with the powers of the de-
partment ; and hence no means of preserving
the equilibrium, as established between them by
the Constitution. The result has been, as it ever
must be in such cases, the ascendancy of the
stronger element over the weaker. The incipient
measure to effect this was adopted at an early
period. The first step was to diminish the num-
ber of candidates from which the selection should
be made, from the five to the three highest in
the lists; and, in order to lessen the chances of
a failure to choose by the Electoral College, to
provide that-the electors, instead of voting for
two, without discriminating the offices, should
designate which was for the President and which
was for the Vice-president. This was effected in
the regular way by an amendment of the Con-
stitution. Since then the Constitution, as amend-
ed, has been, in practice, superseded by what is
called the usage of parties ; that is, by each se-
lecting informally persons to meet-at some cen-
tal point to nominate candidates for the pre-
sidency and vice-presidency, with the avowed
ffiject of preventing the election from going into
he House of Representatives ; and, of course,'
jy superseding the eventual choice on the part
)f this body to abolish in effect one of the two
dements of which the government is constituted,
m far at least as the executive department is
joncerned. As it now stands, the complex and
•efined machinery provided by the Constitution
or the election of the president and vice-pre-
sident is virtually superseded. The nomination
)f the successful party by irresponsible indivi-
luals makes, in reality, the choice. It is in this
vay that the provisions of the Constitution,
which intended to give equal weight to the two
elements in the executive department of the go-
vernment, have been defeated, and an overwhelm-
ing preponderance given to that which is repre-
sented in the House of Representatives over that
which is represented in the Senate.
And again the same author has the
following remarks :
Another of its effects has been to engender
the most corrupting, loathsome, and dangerous
disease that can effect a popular government;
I mean that known by the name of “ The Spoils.”
It is a disease easily contracted under all forms
of government; hard to prevent and most diffi-
cult to cure, when contracted; but of all the
forms of governments, it is by far the most fatal
in those ot a popular character. The decision,
which left the president free to exercise this
mighty power, according to his will and plea-
sure, —uncontrolled and unregulated by Con-
gress,—scattered broadcast the seeds of this dan-
gerous disease throughout the whole system. It
might be long before they would germinate;—
but that they would spring up in time, and if
not eradicated that they would spread over the
whole body politic a corrupting and loathsome
distemper, was just as certain as any thing in
the future. To expect, with its growing in-
fluence and patronage, that the honours and
emoluments of the Government, if left to the
free and unchecked will of the executive, would
not be brought in time to bear upon the presi-
dential election, implies profound ignorance of
that constitution of our nature which renders
governments necessary to preserve society, and
constitutions to prevent the abuses of govern-
ments.
While such, Sir, has been the corrupt-
ing and demoralizing effects of the ex-
ercise of the patronage vested in the
President of the United States, it is a
material part of this argument to ascer-
tain what have been the results in the
British Constitution of the vastly supe-
rior patronage which is vested in the
Crown, but dispensed in reality by its
responsible ministers. I need not refer
you for information on this vital part of
the question to any British authority ;
for Mr. Calhoun, in the brilliant com-
parison which he has drawn between the
Homan and the British empires, has this
remarkable, and to my mind, conclusive
passage :
But the British Government is far superior to
that of Rome, in its adaptation and capacity to
embrace under its control extensive dominions
without subverting its constitution. In this re-
spect the Roman Constitution was defective, and,,
in consequence, soon began to exhibit marks of


decay, after Rome had extended her dominions
beyond Italy ; while the British holds under its
sway, without apparently impairing an empire
equal to that under the weight of which the con-
stitution and liberty of Rome were crushed.
Thid great advantage it derives from its different
structure, especially that of the executive de-
partment, and the character of its conservative
principle. The former is so constructed as to
prevent, in consequence of its unity and heredi-
tary character, the violent and factious struggles
to obtain the control of the Government, and
with it the vast patronage which distracted, cor-
rupted, and finally subverted the Roman re-
public. Against this fatal disease the latter had
no security whatever; while the British Go-
vernment, besides the advantages it possesses in
this respect from the structure of its executive
departments, has, in the character of its con-
servative principle, another and powerful security
against it. Its character is such, that patronage,
instead of weakening, strengthens it: for, the
greater the patronage of the Government, the
greater will be the share which falls to the estate
constituting the conservative department of the
Government; and the more eligible its con-
dition, the greater its opposition to any radical
change in its form. The two causes combined
give to the Government a greater capacity of
holding under subjection extensive dominions
without subverting the Constitution or destroying
liberty than has ever been possessed by any
other.
I feel, Sir, that I have wearied the
House in the long 1 and numerous quo-
tations which I have given from these
two celebrated writers ; but though I
know that these proofs of the different
working of the British Constitution
which I advocate, and of the American
model, which some people among us
would copy, but which I must say I
heartily despise, are not necessary for
the information and enlightenment of
this House, I believe them to be indis-
pensable for the information and en-
lightenment of the country at large;
and it is with this conviction that I have
been induced to trespass so largely on
your patience and attention, (Loud
cheers.) Though I have omitted many
arguments that I might have urged,
these doubtless will be brought forward
by some of the many gentlemen in
this house whose concurrence and sup-
port I depend upon ; and if not, I shall
have again to throw myself, at the last
stage of this discussion, on the courtesy
and attention of the House, whilst I en-
deavour to supplement what I have now
offered with any important arguments
which have escaped my recollection, and
which those who follow me may perhaps
fail to use. (Cheers.) As regards the
United States of America, it may be
difficult to predict the period of the dis-
solution of that great federation; but
nothing can be clearer to my mind, than
that, when that country shall be, as it
soon will be, completely demoralized by
the necessary presidential elections—
when opposite parties shall no longer be
equally poised, when one party shall have
obtained a decided majority, the inevita-
ble consequences Mull be that this party
will become permanently dominant—that
the election of President, instead of be-
ing as it now is, for four years, will end
in being an election for life, and a des-
potism will be established that will mo-
nopolize the revenues of the country,
and squander and lavish them in paying
and rewarding those who have contri-
buted to the elevation of the despot.
(Hear, hear.) It is clearly shown in the
works that I have quoted from, that the
germs of such a despotism have been
sown, and that the consummation cannot
be very remote. (Loud cheers.) I think,
Sir, I am now in a fair position to ask
the House and the country to make
choice between the American constitu-
tion and the constitution of our father
land. (Cheers.) Let every man, both
in and out of the House, ponder well
upon it before he makes his election.
The first question every man should put
to himself should be, What do I want ?
Do I want the American constitution, or
do I want the constitution of England ?
(Cheers.) That is the question which
every man out of the House, in particu-
lar, should put to himself. Because, Sir,
it is evident that if, notwithstanding all
that has been shown of the defective
constitution of America if, notwith-
standing the evident disease which per-
vades the body politic there—if that
man deliberately arrived at the opinion
that the American model is better than
ours, he must be consistent in voting for
an elective President, as well as an elec-
tive Upper House. (Loud cries of hear,
hear.) Ex necessitate, he must vote for


a President—he cannot stop short of
overturning- the Throne. (Renewed cries
of hear.) This, I fear, was the tenor of
the observations addressed by my hon.
and learned friend the member for Cum-
berland to the public meeting yesterday.
(Cheers.) Now, Sir, I should hope that
whatever may be the opinion entertained
by persons out of doors—and I confess I
think that opinion is confined to but a
few—(Oh, from Mr. Darvall) —at all
events, it is not so wide spread as my
hon. friend’s oh! would imply. No
doubt there is a mass of heterogeneous
people pouring in upon us—Americans,
Germans, Californians, Chartists, and
Socialists, and all manner of undesirable
people—(Oh)—and no doubt my hon.
and learned friend will soon have a good
tail after him. (Mr. Darvall: A Chinese
tail—laughter.) Still I believe that the
opinions of the people of this colony and
of this House are not in favour of Ame-
'iean institutions. (Cheers.) But if
:hey were, this would be the most con-
clusive argument in favour of a constitu-
;ion which is framed with the express
object of arresting the inflow of demo-
iracy (loud cheers), or at all events of
)pposing a bulwark against it, and of
hemming the tide we may not stop : of
cecping it from the portals of the con-
stitution, and preserving intact the glo-
’ious fabric of our fathers. (Cheers.)
Sir, this naturally brings me to the con-
sideration of the petitions which have
seen presented to this House, and espe-
cially to the petition presented to-day
sy my hon. and learned friend (hear,
rear), and I must say, that although I
selieve that petition is not a reflex of
3ublic opinion—(oh ! oh ! —)although I
cannot believe, after the declarations of
opinion, four or five years ago, that such
i change can have come over those
>pinions ; —notwithstanding, as I said
before, that the public have had full,
imple, unexampled opportunities, of ex-
aressmg their wishes and desires—not-
withstanding all this, Sir, I should be
s'ery unwilling that that petition should
ae totally disregarded. (Hear, hear,
iear.) I know that to defer this bill
nay be in effect to abandon it; and
though my honorable and learned friend
does not see the drift of those mischiev-
ous people who have set him in motion,
I do not hesitate to express my convic-
tion that their object is to defeat this
measure altogether—(hear, hear)' —to
defeat it until my honourable friend the
Colonial Secretary and I shall have left
the country, and then they think they
shall have it all their own way. (Hear,
hear.) But, Sir, lam not to be cheated
by such shallow politicians as these.
(Cheers.) I will not fall into the trick,
the delusion, the snare, (Cheers.) But
to take away all pretence of opposition
to this measure, lam willing, after this
debate shall have concluded, that this
Bill should be read a second time, upon
the understanding, however, that the
second reading shall only be taken to
affirm the principle that we are to have
two houses, leaving it still an open ques-
tion as to whether the Upper House shall
be elected or nominated. (Hear, hear.)
Sir, I am willing that the public should
have three months to consider this
measure, instead of the one month they
ask for, lam willing that this House
should be adjourned till the 20th Novem-
ber. (Hear, hear; and no, no, from
Mr. Darvall.) No doubt my honourable
and learned friend does not want so lonar
. O
an adjournment; it would suit his game
better that the country gentlemen should
be away. But it will not suit the game
of the country; and I hope that in mak-
ing this proposal I shall have the con-
currence of the House, (Cheers.) And
I also hope, that when everything has
been said upon this great subject that
can be said, and when public have
had an opportunity of hearing both sides
of this question, and are no longer
blinded by the ex parte statements of
those who are at the head of this agita-
tion; I say, Sir, when the country at
large shall know our motives, and when
it shall see the grounds on which I have
brough# this measure forward, I say I
hope, Sir, that if any petitions do come
in upon us from the country, those peti-
tions will not be in favour of an elective
Upper House, but in favour of a British
Constitution, in all its plentltude, as far


as the circumstances of the colony will
admit of its application. (Loud cheer-
ing.) I hope this concession, which is
much larger than the concession asked
for, will satisfy the country at large that
my honourable friends and myself have
no sinister motives in bringing forward
this great measure, that we have no in-
tention of purloining the liberties of the
country—that we have no personal or
private views to forward, no mean and
selfish end to attain; but that we have
brought forward this measure believing,
in our conscience, that it will be condu-
cive to placing the public weal on a firm
and a solid basis. With these observa-
tions, Sir, I now beg to move that this
Bill be read a second time.
The honourable and learned gentle-
man resumed his seat amid loud and pro-
longed cheering, and was warmly greeted
by nis friends.
Mr. JAMES MACARTHURseconded
the motion.
Mr. DARVALL moved the adjourn-
ment of the debate to the following
Tuesday. Carried.
Mr. DARVALL : Having moved the
adjournment of the debate on a former
occasion, it is my duty now to address
the House on the very important matter
under discussion. And in doing so I
feel that I labour under great disad--
vantage in addressing honourable mem-
bers who are, to some extent, pledged to
a course diametrically opposite to that
which I now take, and under the further
disadvantage of following after one of
the most able and eloquent speeches to
which this House has ever listened. I
feel that, undbr these circumstances, I
shall not appeal in vain to your indul-
gence while I endeavour to put before
you my own views on the question we
have now to deal with. I will first say
that I should approach this subject with
despair if I believed that the final de-
termination of the measure rested with
this House as at present constituted.
I rejoice to know that this is not the
case; and I further rejoice to believe
that, however earnestly the promoters of
this bill may desire to force this mea-
sure upon the country, that their at-
tempt will be met with the hearty and
unanimous opposition of every consti-
tuency in the land (hear, hear, and
cheers) ; and that the united expression
of public opinion will be bached up by
a liberal and enlightened Government at
home. Weighty as may have been the
arguments of my honourable and learned
friend, 1 have no hesitation in accepting
the challenge offered, and taking up the
gage. And I cannot but look with re-
gret at a portion of my honourable
friend’s speech, which, while it is calcu-
lated to damage the reputation of the
speaker, could never have advanced the
object it proposed in any society or com-
munity, even in a comparative state of
barbarism—l allude to those forcible but
ill-timed expressions which he felt him-
self justified in making in allusion to the
conduct of honourable members of this
House. (Hear, hear.) Had that casti-
gation been confined to myself person-
ally, I would have submitted in silence.
I would not have presumed to occupy the
time of the house to relieve myself from
a groundless charge ; but when I find
that those aspersions attack not only
myself, but all public free discussion, I
feel it both my right and my duty to
answer the accusation. In a community
of this kind every thing will be conceded
to argument, to reason, to precedents—
but nothing to violence ; and it certainly
argues a feeling of weakness in my
honourable friend to seek to aid his own
arguments, not by information, by logic,
by precedent, or by reason, but by endea-
vouring to degrade the characters of
those who differ from him, whose rights
are as valuable, as legitimate, as his
own—rights which he should be the last
to tamper with, having been the first in
former years to assert them. I shall
not follow such an example ; I shall not
attempt to deprecate the public services
of my honourable friend, who even now
has great claims on the gratitude of the
colonists ; but believing that my honor-
able friend has been mistaken, I shall en-
deavour to refute his pi’opositions. The
honourable and learned member has
thought it necessary to stigmatise as


conduct unbecoming a representative of
die people, and lowering and degrading
;o the legislative dignity, for a member
if this House to give to the public his
ipinion on the matter now under dis-
;ussion. But in making this assertion he
las displayed his want of knowledge of
vhat has always been the custom in free
countries. The honourable member
should have recollected that in all the
popular struggles on great constitutional
questions in England, members of Par-
iament, of the highest character and
influence, have habitually mixed them-
selves up with large gatherings of the
aeople, when it became necessary that
diose who had well considered the ques-
:ions should be heard. I cannot under-
stand that because I am sent to this
House by a constituency of the colony,
therefore I am to forfeit my rights as a
citizen ; 1 will never shrink from giving
a public opinion when I think I shall be
able to guide others in forming their
judgment in a reasonable manner ; I will
always mix freely with those who have
sent me here, though, at the same time,
I will not be controlled by them in con-
travention of the dictates of my own
reason. (Hear, hear.) It is right and
proper that a member should cherish
after election that free communication
with his constituents that he did before.
It may be very well for my honourable
friend, who contemplates the creation of
irresponsible authority, and who con-
siders himself neither responsible to the
present generation, nor amenable to
posterity, whom he would endanger by
the proposed unwise measure, and by all
the attendant evils of class legislation
(ironical cheers.) —it may be very well
for him to shut himself uji within h’S
own impenetrable dignity, and shrink
from all intercourse with his fellow citi-
zens, But I feel too highly the honour
and distinction of popular election ever
to shrink from a full and perfect under-
standing with my constituents on all
matters of public importance, and more
particularly on a question of this im-
portance, now for the first time agitated.
For though it is to some extent true that
this Council was formed with a view of
preparing a constitution for the colony,
still at the time that the present mem-
bers were elected the particular form
which this constitution should assume was
not submitted to any constituency.
Neither I, nor any other honourable
member, stated on the hustings that we
were favorable to a nominee Upper
House. This question was not raised.
Certainly the honourable and learned
member for Sydney did not then pro-
pound this principle; it would have
clashed too violently with his former oft
repeated exclamations—“ Gentlemen, the
nominees are intolerable—an intolerable
nuisance—they must be got rid of.”
(Cheers and laughter.) I look back with
some astonishment at the career of my
honourable friend; I can recollect the
period when he was a nominee member
of this House, and on hearing the
threats of his honourable friend that he
would drive the nominee members out of
the House, I shrunk behind the larger
proportions of my honourable friend the
Colonial, Secretary (a laugh), lest that
threat should be carried into execution.
The hard words then uttered against
nominee members by my honourable
friend are fresh in my recollection ; how
we were told that we had no right to in-
terfere—that we were sent here by no
constituency, but were merely the crea-
tures of a tyrannical government. With
these anathemas in my remembrance I
much wonder how the honourable and
learned gentleman can now propose to
construct an Upper House of the mate-
rials he once so heartily despised.
(Cheers and laughter.) In those days,
when the colonists had no power to
shake off the nominees,’ I opposed the
unreasonable suggestions of my honor-
able friend; but now the times are
changed, and the colony is in different
circumstances. I feel great pleasure in
giving that course my hearty though
feeble support. But what a change has
come over the sentiments of the honour-
able and learned member; forgetting all
his former protestations, he now com-
plains that I withdrew the support I once
gave, and was the first to prefer the
charge of inconsistency. It is right that


I should give an account of this pre-
sumed change; it is right, if I deserve
it, that I should suffer. But this is
the actual case ;■—lmpressed with the
conviction, some four or live years ago,
that the retention of nominees in this
House would be detrimentary to the in-
terests of legislation, and agreeing with
those who desired the removal of the
nominees from the Lower House, and
conceiving that any larger concession by
the home Government would not be
granted, I did concur, in the year 1849,
in a memorial to the English Minister—
a memorial which was only disfigured by
one proposition—namely, that for mak-
ing the second house a Nominee House.
But I find great satisfaction in the recol-
lection that this memorial, Imperfect as
it was, was the first embodiment of
those righteous demands which became
irresistible by their inherent justice.
The demands we then made were de-
clared to be but as a step in the pro-
gress of constitutional reform; and it
would be doing injustice to any one who
signed that memorial to say that it was
considered a final measure of reform.
I did sign that memorial, having as-
sisted in its preparation; and lam now
satisfied, after the best consideration that
years of interval has enabled me to be-
stow on the subject, that the course then
suggested was not such as could now be
safely pursued. The circumstances on
which that memorial was founded had
entirely changed, and I now feel that it
would be dangerous and unwise to impose
on this country a nominee house ; and I
am the more satisfied in arriving at this
conclusion, because I believe that the
Government at home are as willing to
concede the privileges we claim on our
framing an elective Upper House, as
they would on our agreeing to a nominee
Council. I see clearly, that by yielding
to these modifications of opinion which
the advancing circumstances of the
colony necessitated, I have subjected
myseli to a charge of inconsistency;
but if I must submit to a charge of
misconduct, I must feel glad that the
charge can be so easily explained ;if I
am to be condemned, I will take care
that it shall not be for doing anything
discreditable, or for adhering obstinately
to opinions after I have satisfied myself
that they are unsound. (Hear, hear.)
Not .that I undervalue consistency in
political principles, when once deliber-
ately formed ; but I have a higher duty
to perform than to adhere unhesitatingly
to all that I have said and done through-
out my life; I have always suggested
what I believe best to be done under the
circumstances of the time, and which
of my opponents can safely taunt
me with any change that the altered
condition of political affairs may have
occasioned in my political opinions ?
Why, in the progress of the committee
on the present measure, I have heard
various schemes propounded by the
honourable and learned member for
Sydney—at some times with approval,
at others with disapproval—his mind
having experienced a number of revolu-
tions before arriving at his present con-
clusions. (Hear, hear.) But I should
not dream of taunting my honourable
friend with inconsistency—whose simple
object, and I hope, also, the simple
object of this House, was to erect a form
of government that should be the most
conducive to public stability and happi-
ness. 1 hope we shall cordially join in
this one object, even if those who sup-
port my honourable friend should
have to work with the prospect of
being beaten—for beaten they will be
(laughter), if not in this House, yet by
the public sense out of doors. It might
be necessary, in that event, for his Ex-
cellency to send honourable members to
their constituencies (ironical cheers);
but without that alternative, I hope that
the services and great talents of my ho-
nourable friend may be retained, to
remodel the Constitution now brought
up, in a manner that would be more
suitable to us, and more creditable to
himself. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) My
honourable friend has charged me with
the desire of supplanting him in the ho-
nours of the metropolitan representation.
I never for one moment entertained the
thought of contesting an election with
my honourable friend. I deem the repre-


sentation of the county of Cumberland
amply sufficient for my ambition in
elective matters, and I have no more
earnest wish than that the country may
still enjoy the assistance in this House of
my honourable friend, whom I would
rather now see changing his opinions
than deserting the service of his coun-
try. (Hear, hear.) Another charge
that has been made against me is that
I have publicly expressed a preference
for a republican form of government.
Such a charge demands a full explana-
tion. I venerate, above all forms of
government of which I have ever read,
the Constitution under which I have the
happiness to live, and under which I
hope to live and die. But looking to
the far future—to the period when this
country might cease to have any con-
nexion with Great Britain—which may
God long avert—(hear, hear) —our task
is to secure such a Constitution for this
empire as shall then make her transition
safe and prosperous. And in looking
back through the past history of nations,
to aid us in considering our present
coußse, we have no instance of a free
people settling down by their sponta-
neous choice into a limited hereditary
monarchy. We have instances without
end of countries adopting wild republics,
which were succeeded by general anar-
chy, and terminated in despotic govern-
ments (hear, hear); and after years of
civil strife, they may regain their liber-
ties, bit by bit, and may at length re-
duce a military despotism to a limited
monarchy. But there is no precedent
in the political annals of the past, of an
enlightened nation arriving at that pe-
riod of its history when it had to choose
its own form of government, arriving at
such a consummation without going
through the first stages of confusion and
disorder. But I will say that, at what-
ever conclusion these deliberations should
arrive, I have so much reliance on Anglo-
Saxon courage, integrity, and wisdom,
and belief in their power of good self-
government, that whatever form of
government they may adopt, they will
acquit themselves well. I will appeal to
the histories of the two greatest and
most enlightened powers of the Anglo-
Saxon race—the one retaining a monar-
chical, the other adopting a republican
form of government—and from these
precedents I feel justified in predicting
that the Anglo-Saxon race will, if left
to themselves, always come safely out of
any difficulties in which they may be
involved. And, so far am I from de-
siring that republican institutions should
supersede the power of the Queen, that
I hope the crown of England will long
maintain and protect the various colonies
of the British empire. I will say no
more on the personal bearings of this
discussion. I shall studiously avoid say-
ing any thing in the least discourteous
to or disparaging of my honourable
friend, but I shall not show this respect
to the arguments adduced ; and though
I do not wish to possess my honourable
friend’s scalp, or raise the hair of his
head, unless in fair debate (a laugh), I
will proclaim war to the knife against a
principle which condemns free public
discussion of public measures. (Hear,
hear.) It will now be my duty to enter
more closely into the consideration of
the measure before the House, and in
doing so I will chiefly confine myself to
the principal objections to it: first, to
the proposal of a nominee Upper House ;
and secondly, to the revision (or rather
the un-revision) of the Electoral Act.
It is with the first of these that it will
be my duty chiefly to deal. In listening
to the eloquent speech of my honourable
friend in introducing this measure, I
looked in vain for the enunciation of any
one principle of government. Remote
analogies were attempted, quotations
without end were made, and propositions
were affirmed, apparently without founda-
tion ; but no fixed principle of govern-
ment w'as attempted to be laid down.
And before he (Mr. Wentworth) could
claim the adhesion of the country, oy
the concurrence of this House, he must
show in what manner are to be laid the
foundations of that veneration and re-
spect which alone can secure the sta-
bility of the Constitution he proposed.
The honourable gentleman seemed to
feel that a great deal of obloquy had


attached to his name for his connexion
with this measure, and therefore at-
tempted a laboured justification of his
conduct. And it could well be under-
stood that he should be impressed with
this feeling-; for he must have felt that
the course he was now taking was dia-
metrically opposed to the consistent desire
he formerly manifested in his arguments
and speeches in that House, It is impos-
sible for any one to look back on the
honourable member’s career and not
admit the truth of this—that his denun-
ciations of the nominees in that House,
up to the most recent period, were un-
ceasing and most violent; and yet he
had not told the House why it was pro-
bable that an element which, when limi-
ted as it then was, was deemed so mis-
chievous, should, when uncontrolled, prove
advantageous and satisfactory. The only
supposition could be that the honourable
gentleman had thought the analogy be-
tween a nominee Upper House and the
Bi’itish House of Lords so completely
made out, that because the latter ob-
tained a certain influence at home, there-
fore a House of nominees here would
possess the same influepce. In arguing
this point the honourable member made
frequent quotations from the celebrated
writers Tocqueville and Calhoun. Now
the opinions of the French author were
entitled to just as much weight as those
of any well educated French gentleman
would be, as to how far the institutions
of the United States attracted his notice
favourably or unfavourably. But if the
honourable gentleman relied on the poli-
tical bias of the French traveller for any
support in his views, he must feel him-
self leaning on a very feeble prop. I
believe that this gentleman did not hesi-
tate to take office under a government
remarkable for its despotic tendency.
The honourable and learned member
also alluded to an American writer of
great eminence; but it happened that
the arguments throughout that book
were strongly in favour of the American
Senate—an elective Senate. (Ilear,
hear.) It is very true that when that
writer drew a comparison between the
Upper and the Rower House of America,
he spoke disparagingly of the Lower
House ; but did the honourable member
mean to infer from this that the same
author would necessarily speak dispara-
gingly of this Council, if it were com-
posed of men of character and ability,
and fairly represented the whole commu-
nity, simply because it was a popular
House ? 4nd would it then deserve the
remarks that were quoted of the vulgar
demeanour and discourteous conduct of
the American House of Representatives ?
But if not so, of what value is the quo-
tation ? It is all in favour of an elec-
tive Senate, which we desire to have, and
not in favour of a nominated Upper
House, which we do not desire to have.
My honourable friend either throws dirt
at the embodiment of popular represent-
ation in this Council, or throws overboard
his principle of a nominee Upper House
altogether. (Hear, hear.) But I would
remind the House that Mr. Calhoun was
the proprietor of large slave plantations,
and would naturally dread the power that
might make that organic change in the
government of the United States, and
would speak favourably of a proviso
which required a majority of three-
fourths of the Senate to make any alter-
ation in the constitution. I believe that
these opinions of Mr. Calhoun were the
only blots on that great man’s character,
and that the sentiments he enunciated
were those which his own countrymen
disowned. (Hear, hear.) The honour-
able and learned member w.ext appealed
to the early charters of the colonies
which now formed the United States.
But to what purpose were these quoted ?
Does not the honourable gentleman
know how these colonies came to be
founded—that it was to avoid civil and
religious persecution, that the unhappy
settlers first left their own country ?
Was it to be believed that a large mea-
sure of civil liberty would be dealt out
to these early colonists by the same
oppressors who had crushed them at
home ? And are we to look for prece-
dents of constitutional freedom in the
reign ot one of the most bigoted and
tyrannical kings that England has ever
been ashamed of ? And is it at this


advanced period of the world’s history
that we should be driven back to those
days of violence and oppression to look
for a model government or a chartered
constitution ? These charters were in
many instances liberal, but they became
so from having been fought for inch by
inch. The freedom of these States might
have been maintained without the shed-
ding of English blood ; and had such
enlightened statesmen been in power
then as now constituted the British
cabinet, instead of such liberal politicians
as the honourable and learned member
for Sydney, America might now have
formed with Great Britain the great
united empire of the world. But yet it
was to this dark age, disfigured as it was
by bigotry and cruelty, that the honour-
able gentleman would drive us rather
than permit an appeal to those enlight-
ened statesmen who are prepared to deal
with us as freemen and not as slaves.
But the honourable and learned gentle-
nan has altogether mistaken and mis-
stated the case of the early colonists.
Ihey were in the first instance chartered
vith an amount of freedom which he
seems entirely to have forgotten. After
shat, by degrees they asserted their right
so a fuller measure of liberty, and finally,
vith one accord, before the war of inde-
oendence took place, they asserted a
principle which the honourable gentle-
nan denies ever to have been ' main-
sained. In confirmation of this I will
read a short extract from an almost ele-
mentary work on colonial law. [The
extract then read by the honourable and
[earned member showed that in these
charters the Governor was appointed by
[he people, except in some cases by
special reservation, when this privilege
was vested in the Crown. The people
moreover elected a House of Represen-
tatives, from which body the Council
was chosen, thus involving the principle
cf double election.] Now' I could hardly
believe my ears wdxen the honourable and
learned member emphatically told the
House that, in these early colonies, where
the results of freedom and national pro-
gress are so magnificently developed,
they had all agreed to one form of go-
vernment, which was nothing short of a
nominee Council, and that it was left to
us to be the first to assert this thoroughly
elective principle. Now I will refer the
honourable gentleman to another short
passage, which I think will convey a use-
ful lesson to the honourable member and
others who heard him. The circumstance
referred to happened in the State of New
Hampshire, where, by a singular coinci-
dence, the people were plagued by a
wicked Governor, sent out apparently to
rob them of the small measure of freedom
conceded to them, of the name of Went-
worth. (Loud laughter.) It was a most
singular coincidence, and it shows how
little there is in a name, for in all other
circumstances these gentlemen were en-
tirely dissimilar. (A laugh.) He how-
ever was a very bad Governor; and
when the people proposed that they
should have an elective Upper House, he
did all he could to thwart the attempt.
He dispersed the people by military
force, drove away their delegates, and
dissolved the Council of representatives.
The New Hampshire Legislature, at a late
session, in spite of Wentworth’s attempts to pre-
vent it, had appointed a committee of corre-
spondence, in consequence of which he had dis-
solved them. A meeting of the committee, held
at Portsmouth, to appoint delegates to Congress,
was dispersed hy Governor Wentworth and the
Sheriff; but the business was completed by a con-
vention of delegates, which met at Exeter.
I will continue this quotation to show
how greatly my honourable friend is
mistaken in stating that an elective
Upper House w r as never heard of before ;
as well might he assert that the prin-
ciple of no taxation without representa-
tion was one derived nobody knew from
where. I hope the imputation of this
principle being a modern invention will
not be tolerated, but that it will still be
insisted on in this colony. These dele-
gates came to the conclusion that their
government wmuld be imperfect if they
submitted to taxation or legislation ex-
cept by a representative body.
A committee of two from each province re-
ported, in the form of a series of resolves accepted
and adopted by the Congress, a ‘ Declaration of
Colonial Rights.’ The enjoyment of life, liberty,
and property, were claimed in this declaration as
natural rights. The privilege of being bound by


no law to which they had not consented by their
representatives, was claimed for the colonists in
their character of British subjects.”
Now, did I hear my honourable friend
aright when he said that an elective
Upper House was now asked for the
first time, and was previously unheard of
—something to be laughed and sneered
at ?
The sole and exclusive power of legislation
for the colonies was declared to reside in their
separate Assemblies, reserving to Parliament the
enactment of such laws only as might be essen-
tial to the bond fide regulation of trade, but ex-
cluding all taxation, internal or external. (Hear,
hear, from Mr. Wentworth.) The common law
of England was claimed as the birthright of the
colonists, including the right of trial by a jury of
the vicinage, the right of public meetings, and
of petitions.”
Now, is the honourable gentleman wil-
ling to give this colony common law,
and insure the people that there shall be
no taxation without representation ?
Why, where is the community of free
Englishmen that would submit to be
taxed without at the same time being
represented ? Why give exclusive rights
to minorities, and why enforce taxation
from any portion of the community by
a branch of the legislation in which
they are to have no voice ? In these
days, if Englishmen were called upon to
frame a constitution in a new country,
would a man be listened to who should
propose the hestowment of hereditary
honours, or to confer on an irresponsible
minority the right of framing laws by
which the whole community should be
bound ? Every man who is bound by
the laws is entitled personally, or by
delegates, to assist in making those laws ;
and the attempt to deprive him of this
right is a cruel injustice. Why, honour-
able members would seem to entertain
the opinions expressed by an old martyr
—that God Almighty intended a parti-
cular class to ride booted and spurred on
the rest of the community, who were
created with saddles on their backs to
ride upon. (Laughter.) To return to
the quotation—
A protest was made against standing armies
maintained in tbe colonies without tbeir consent,
and a similar protest against legislation by Coun-
cils dependent on the Crown —this last in allusion
to the Quebec Act. All immunities hitherto en-
joyed in the colonies, whether by charter or cus-
tom, were claimed as established rights, beyond
the power of the mother country to abrogate.
Eleven Acts of Parliament, passed since the ac-
cession of George 111., the Sugar Act, the Stamp
Act, the two Quartering Acts, the Tea Act, the
Act suspending the New York Legislature, the
two Acts for the trial in Great Britain of offences
committed in America, the Boston Post Bill, the
Act for regulating the Government of Massa-
chusetts, and the Quebec Act, were enumerated
in conclusions, as having been passed in deroga-
tion of the rights of the colonies.
Wentworth, Governor of New Hampshire, hav-
ing lost all control over that province, shut him-
self up in the fort at Portsmouth, whereupon his
house was pillaged by a mob. He prorogued
the Assembly, now in session for the last time,
and presently retired to Boston for safety, leaving
the political control of the province in the hands
of the Provincial Congress and the Local Com-
mittees.
This was the result of an attempt! to
thwart the constitutional demands of a
comparatively uneducated people, not so
advanced as we are in knowledge of po-
litical liberty by many years. I hope
that the Government, in this matter,
will stand neutral, and that those gentle-
men who, by universal consent, will
shortly be removed from this House, will
take little or no share in the dicussion.
I further hope that no part in this dis-
cussion will be taken by any nominees—
(hear, hear, and oh ! oh !) —Why ! this
was but an echo of a proposition made
many times by the honourable and learn-
ed member for Sydney. These gentle-
men should be urged now, as formerly,
not to meddle with matters which did
not concern them; they represent no
body, and have no right to form laws for
the government of the people. I have
no doubt that the Government of this
country are sufficiently wise to make this
matter an open question; and if it should
appear that a majority of the elective
members of this House are in favour of
the measure, I hope that then the
Government will dissolve the present
Council, and, have another elected for
the very purpose of determining on this
matter. The honourable and learned
member has been singularly unlucky in
the reference he made to the history of
the United States; for whatever views
the colonists who ultimately resolved
themselves into the United States might


iave had of nobility, no single rag has
>een left to show their desire for such an
irder. The honourable gentleman was
nuch mistaken, if he supposed that any
jody of Englishmen would consent to
institute a minority as a superior or
irivileged race with hereditary legis-
ative power. It would be an odious
jffort of tyranny ; not endured by any
me who could resist it, but laughed at
rom one end of the world to another.
Che honourable gentleman, in dwelling
10 long on charters conferred by bad
dugs, altogether lost sight of the earlier
\nglo-Saxon institutions. If he would
•efer to them, he would find, that in
matters of local detail, the principles of
election and of .double election were pur-
sued, even in the smallest country matters,
beginning with tithings and hundreds,
and providing for the election of free-
men, liverymen, aldermen, and so on.
These elective institutions have been en-
tirely overlooked, and attention was di-
rected to the case of the people driven out
sf their country by tyranny, and obliged
to yield to fresh tyranny, in the land of
their settlement, until they shook the in-
tolerable yoke from off their necks. Al-
lusion has also been made to the House of
Lords, as being of great advantage to
the British nation. lam unwilling to
question that advantage, and it would,
perhaps, now be dangerous to subvert
that institution, which was, however,
never voluntarilyiraposedupon themselves
by the people of England. It was now
only perhaps submitted to, because its
removal might cause greater evil than
was now suffered by its continuance.
The glorious revolution would not have
been consummated if the House of Lords
sould have had their will; and the only
praise they were entitled to for that act
was, that they resisted all appeals to
their reason, even the most unanswerable
arguments, and yielded to intimidation
an assent which conviction could not
ring from them. Another revolution
ould have occurred when the Reform
fill was introduced, had not the Peers
bdicated their functions. And even if
i analogy could be made out between
ie House of Peers and our nominee
Upper House, should we desire the ex-
istence of such a body—a body that
would enjoy class privileges, and in re-
turn for these, impede the march of free-
dom, and the progress of reforming-
legislation ? Even could such a House
obtain the influence enjoyed by the
House of Lords, I should still hesitate to
recommend the adoption of such a
course. The investing of executive
power in one responsible hereditary
hand would be a sufficient check against
the encroachments of those democratic
principles which the honourable gentle-
man so dreads. A nominated body
would not seek to represent the people,
but their own peculiar interests. What
voice had the people in the matter when
they were conquered by foreign invaders,
who thrust upon them the lords of the
territory, the fathers of a future aristo-
cracy ? (Hear, hear.) England has
arrived at her present form of govern-
ment, not by original concessions to
them, but by her own exertions; for
the people had not, in the first instance,
the power of electing their rulers, or of
limiting their authority. If carried
through this House, I am sure there will
still be a corrective power out of doors,
supported by an enlightened govern-
ment at home, to avert this calamity.
There exists no analogy whatever to
justify the creation of such a body. The
history of the nominee portion of the
Legislature is sufficient to deter them
from creating any such Legislative
Chamber. Possessing no power in the
House, the nominees are contemned out
of doors. Whatever may be the cha-
racter of any gentleman for probity and
independence, the moment he accepts a
seat on the nominee benches, he ceases
to possess the least influence with the
public—he becomes an object of sus-
picion. We have seen that it has here-
tofore been almost impossible for a
nominee to obtain a seat in the House
by the votes of the people. I believe
my own election was a rare exception to
the general rule in this matter. (“No,
no ; there were two others.”) I am re-
minded of the fact, that two of the late
members for Sydney had been nominees.


I ask, by what means did they obtain
their seats ? Was it by declaring to the
electors, that the nominee system was
good or desirable ? I do not think
the late member for Sidney (Mr. Lamb)
would say any thing of the sort. So
much with regard to the honourable
member’s arguments in favour of a no-
minee element. With regard to the
manner in which it is proposed to con-
stitute the proposed Upper House, what
analogy, I would ask, does there exist be-
tween the plan suggested, and the mode
in which occasional additions are made
to the ranks of the nobility in England ?
Who in this colony is entitled by his
public career, or his public acts, to such
a distinction as that proposed? There
exists not a single man whose superior
merits entitle him to be thus placed in
a position to sway, without restraint, the
destinies of his fellow-citizens. , Why,
then, should the people of New South
Wales submit to any such creation ?
The honours of the peerage were in
general, in England, bestowed on men
who have distinguished themselves by
their public services. I would be glad
to hear my honourable friend mention
any gentleman in this country who, by
such means, has rendered himself de-
serving of such distinction. (Hear,
hear.) But, admitting that there are
such men in this community, is there
no other way of rewarding merit, with-
out tampering with the liberties of the
country ? By ail means, let my honour-
able friend, or any other gentleman, re-
ceive from her Majesty the honours to
which he or they are entitled ; but let
him not seek for legislative powers to
which he is not entitled. (Hear, hear.)
These are honours which can only be
conferred by his fellow-citizens. In re-
ference to the supposed stability which
would result from the proposed Consti-
tution, I deny that any Government can
be strong which does not ground its au-
thority on the respect and confidence of
the people. My honourable friend has
been singularly unsuccessful in his at-
tempt to support the arguments which
he has advanced ; he first referred to
the Quebec Act, from which he pro-
ceeded to the Cape Act. Admitting, as
my honourable friend did, that some-
thing was to be said in favour of this
latter measure, he overcame the difficulty
by saying that it was intended for a
different kind of people—that the Cape
colonists were a mixture of Dutch and
English. Now I think it a very poor
compliment to the people of this country
to say that they are less qualified for
self-government than Dutch boors. The
honourable member, when he denounced
the opinion that had been expressed by
the members of her Majesty’s govern-
ment, as having been derived from pol-
luted sources, did little justice to the
arguments on which it rested. I be-
lieve that opinion has been arrived
at after great consideration ; it was the
result of long experience, and had the
advantage of being the opinion of men
who had the opportunity of calmly wit-
nessing from a distant point the working
of various forms of colonial government.
I believed it was to his honourable
friend’s own vigorous' and forcible argu-
ments that the feeling was so prevalent
against a nominee Upper House. The
long agitation in which he had been en-
gaged had not been without its effect.
He had taught the colonists to scout the
idea of nominees. But now his princi-
ples had undergone an entire change,
now he asserted that this colony was not
fit to govern itself, but must submit to
this pretended compact of third persons.
However consonant it might be with the
wants and requirements of the inhabi-
tants of the Cape, this country was en-
tirely unfit for self government, and
must be thrown back upon the charters
of the James’s and the Charles’s, in the
darkest days of English liberties. But
he Would not succeed, and I think he
ought to be congratulated that he will
be unable to eradicate the principles he
himself has instilled, for then and then
only will he be able to cancel the debt of
gratitude which is owed to him by the
people of this country. I believe the
people of this country will always obey
the law, because they are convinced that
it is right and reasonable, and I do not
fear that in this measure the same good


feeling will actuate the community that
has hitherto prevailed. I have always
said, and I always feel what I say, that,
thanks to a liberal Governor, and to a
prudent Colonial Secretary, the course
of Government here has been free from
any great objection, and rather than
accept the change that is offered us,
clogged by the condition that accompa-
nies it, I would rather we should remain
as we are at present; for under the pre-
isent system we have some control over
the nominee element, which, with the
form of constitution proposed by my hon.
friend, we should be altogether deprived
of. I regret to have to confine so much
of my arguments to answering those of
my learned friend, but I must allude to
them, as my hon. friend was placed in
the van of the battle, and to all that he
said, so much weight is attached both
in the House and out of it. He had
stated that there was no precedent for
an elective Upper House, and I must
say I was much surprised when I heard
him say so. He must have known that
one of the best governed countries in
Europe, Belgium, was an example to the
contrary. The Belgians were a people
notoriously difficult to govern, until their
right to an elective Chamber was given
to them ; and what has been the conse-
quence of that concession ? That country
has remained quiet amidst all the revo-
lutions of Europe, although its frontier
was exposed along its whole length to
the continual influx of exciting and re-
volutionary spirits. What had pre-
served that country amidst such dangers ?
Why, nothing but form of govern-
ment very similar to that w r e propose to
establish here. It was formed under the
auspices of England, and it had had the
effect of rendering that country, instead
of the battle field of Europe, the protec-
tion of the peace and good order of its
inhabitants. My honourable friend’s re-
mark that there was no precedent for
such a form of government, must be
allowed to be fallacious in the face of
such an example. Here was an elective
Upper House which has worked well up
to the present time. I will read to the
House the 2nd article of the constitution,
which defines the rights of the people.
It began with these words : —“ All
power emanates from the people.” 1
wish my honourable friend would take
that sentiment for his motto, then we
should find his natural good sense have
its full play, and his sense of justice
allowed its reign. I will now ask my
honourable friend if there be no example,
no model that he might fodow. But it
might be said, Oh ! that is too good a
form of constitution for you, that is
adapted for Belgians, we are not -worthy
of so much liberty as they. If my hon-
ourable friend’s researches in history
have borne him no better fruit than he
exhibited the other night, I think they
have been of little use to him. The pro-
gress of opinion in all free countries has
been in one direction—that of enlarging
the basis of government. My honour-
able friend’s progress seems to be back-
wards, if I may say so. (A laugh.) My
honourable friend has taunted me with
Inconsistency; I do not deny the fact,
but my inconsistency has been in for-
saking error to follow the path of truth ;
my views are changed I believe for the
better, while my honourable friend’s me-
tamorphosed in search of wisdom from
the eagle to Minerva’s favourite bird.
(A laugh.) I must say that my honour-
able friend, in his quotations, has argued
most unfairly ; he has given a promi-
nence to certain arguments which seemed
to help his views, which the authors
themselves never intended them to bear.
He had, for instance, cited largely from
De Tocqueville sentences derogatory of
the constitution of the United States,
and in the selection of his quotations he
had artfully distracted the attention of
the Council from the points which De
Toqueville really approved, and fixed it
upon other topics, upon which all were
agreed. For instance, he had quoted
several long passages in favor of
the proposition that universal suf-
frage was a very undesirable thing. I
am prepared to grant that proposition.
I do not know any one that upholds the
principle, nor have I heard that any body
has asked for it; but my honourable
friend raises up a bugbear out of his


own imagination, and then assails it with
a battery of quotations. Again he in-
veighs against those extremely inconve-
nient changes that take place in the
United States at every change of the
Presidency. The changes of judicial
and ministerial officers, which have
opened the way to so much abuse, and
are found to be surrounded with so much
inconvenience to the State ; against this
he directs the indignation of the House,
but I would say that he is only intimi-
dating us with imaginary evils. There
are no such changes contemplated by
those who oppose this bill. They are
quite as alive to the evils the honourable
gentleman would warn them against, as
he is himself. Again he alluded to the
provision in the American Constitution,
that there should be no organic change
without the concurrence of two-thirds of
the members of the Upper House, and
he designated this as a wise provision,
but I wish to know by what power we
could control a power that we had once
committed to such a body as is now con-
templated. We are now about to con-
cede a certain degree of control to an
Upper House, and I will remark it is a
matter of the most serious consideration
as to the check we should retain over
the power of this House. I am quite
prepared to admit that an organic
change should take place but by the
vote of a large majority ; but which ever
way this Council may determine the
Upper House shall be formed, the force
of public opinion must exercise a con-
trolling power if violence is to be
resorted to. The honourable member
has also favoured us with some allu-
sions to the Slave Trade ; he had re-
ferred to that dark blot on the escutcheon
of the United States ; his eye seemed to
have a natural facility for picking out
the spots on the sun, and he washed
them to infer, that the form of constitu-
tion of that country had brought into
existence the Slave Trade, and because
the slave trade existed under the Senate
of that country, and was upheld by that
Senate, he deprecated the establishment
of an elective Upper House here. Now,
if this argument be good for anything,
let him follow it out. Has my honour-
able friend forgotten that the slave trade
was established in England, under Eng-
land’s greatest Queen, except the present
Queen ; does he remember that it was
established in her reign as a government
monopoly ? and does he regard that fact
as an argument against monarchy ? It
is true that blot has been removed ; un-
der an extended elective principle the
interests of freedom have triumphed;
and Britain, at the sacrifice of millions
of treasure, has wiped this reproach
from her annals. (Hear, hear.) The
argument which my honourable friend
seeks to draw against American institu-
tions from the existence of slavery might
just as fairly be deduced from the allow-
ance of slavery at some previous period
in the history of England against mo-
narchy. Again, my honourable friend
attacks the mischievous principle of an
elective executive government, but I
quite agree with the honorable member,
and I am not aware that any opponents
of the bill wish for an elective execu-
tive government, and I think it most
unfair that such bugbears should be
raised on purpose to stigmatise the op-
ponents of this measure. They do not
demand it. Why should it be attributed
to them ? But it is only an evidence that
my honourable friend has ceased to re-
present the opinions and the wishes of
the mass of the constituency—it must
be taken that he really does not know
what they did wish for. They had not
gone too forward in their demands, but
the honorable member had lagged behind
the spirit of the age. Again, my honor-
able friend quoted a most eloquent pas-
sage which we all know almost by heart,
about the tyranny of a bare majority ; in
this respect I quite go along with him,
and I would again assert my conviction,
that only on the approval of a consider-
able majority would I consent to any
radical and organic change in such a
measure as the constitution of the go-
vernment. I am not prepared for elec-
tive officers of the government, and
judges, and in this my honourable friend
makes the greatest mistake; there is
the greatest difference between an elected


Upper House and an elected Executive
Government. As an additional argu-
ment, he referred to some riots that took
place at Baltimore, where some printers
were ill-used, and this he held up as an
argument against free institutions. But
let my honourable friend go back into
the history of his own country. Let
him regard the judicial murders that
were committed during the reign of the
James’s and the Charles’s, or to come to
a more recent period of our history, let
him remember the riots of Westminster,
Edinburgh, Bristol, and of Birmingham ;
or, he was sorry to say, let him look now
to the condition of Ireland, where mur-
der stalks at mid-day in the land ; where
landlords are shot in the presence of
hundreds of spectators, the law is para-
lysed, and the murderer escapes. Would
it be fair to argue that the political state
of England is rotten on account of
such instances ? I assert that it would
be quite as equitable as to pick out some
miserable riots in Baltimore, and make
them a peg on which to hang abuse of
American institutions. (Cheers.) Indeed,
I need not have gone so far for examples
of the unfairness of such a course of
argument; under our own Government
a case happened only a little while ago;
in this city two soldiers, unarmed, unre-
sisting, were struck down with deadly
weapons and slaughtered in the streets,
and the wretches that perpetrated the
murder (for murder he would call it) had
never expiated their crime with their
lives, because the identity of the assassin
could not be established. But because
that murder has never been punished,
can it be pretended that the Government
was powerless or the law badly adminis-
tered ?
The SOLICITOR-GENERAL; The
learned Judge, in his charge to the jury
in the case referred to by the learned
member, laid it down that it was not
murder.
Mr. DARVALL resumed : It was in
his judgment a shocking murder, and so
the Attorney General put it to the jury,
but justice failed to overtake the
offender, from no fault in the law, the
judge; or the jury, but through some
want of identification. There was no
doubt the crime was committed, but
would it be fair, on such a fact as this,
to urge an argument like that which my
honourable friend had founded on the
riots at Baltimore ? Another argument
my honourable friend urged with great
force was the vulgarity of the American
House of Assembly, and he indulged in
a solemn warning against suffering their
body to descend so low in the scale of
manners and intelligence. But I imagine
that this argument, if it has any force
at all, would apply more forcibly to the
Lower House, which the honourable
member himself proposes to have elected.
It cannot apply to the Senate, for the
writer that he quotes bears testimony to
the dignity and efficiency of that body.
Indeed all writers concur in stating that
the American Senate is bqual to any le-
gislative body whatever. It is the re-
sult of a double election, and such a
double election as it is very easy to have
recourse to here, and I should like to be
informed what difficulty exists in this
country that does not exist in America,
to render it an impossibility for New
South Wales to have an equally good
Senate with America? As a proof of
the character of that House, I will read
the House an extract from a recent book
of travels, entitled Mack ay’s Western
World. The author is a highly edu-
cated gentleman, wdiose opinions may
be taken with great confidence. He
says :—•
The cotip dceil of the Senate is striking. In
all that enters into our conception of a delibera-
tive assembly, it is as far before the House of
Lords as the House of Commons is before the
House of Eepresentatives.
They are, generally speaking, an intellectual
body of men—gentlemanly in their mutual inter-
course, and courteous in their deportment to-
wards each other.
The Senate takes a just pride in its own good
character, and the Americans are justly proud of
the Senate.
The Senate is the truly conservative feature of
the constitution. It is the balance wheel, by
whose action the whole federal system is kept
from resolving itself into its original atoms. It
is to it that the country looks for salvation, when,
for a season, the democracy may have run mad.
It has more than once preserved the integrity of
the Union, by its calm and resolute intervention
between the country and destruction.


Such was the case when it steadily placed
itself between the other House of Congress and
the precipice to which it was rushing, when, by
an overwhelming majority, that House adopted
the warlike Oregon resolutions. Calm and dig-
nified, regardless of menace, and unmindful of
everything but its duty, it rejected them at its
leisure, and so modified them that their adoption
in their altered form, became as necessary to the
maintenance of peace, as, in their original
shape, they would have been the certain prelude
to war.
A bellicose house and a warlike administration
were thus bearded and successfully defied by the
Conservative Chamber; and the United King-
dom and the United States, and indeed the
whole world, remained at peace. As soon as it
was suspected that the Senate would reject the
resolutions of the House, the cry of “ Look to
the Senate!” was raised throughout the land,
with a view, if possible, to create such a pres-
sure from without as would compel it to accede
to them. “ Look to the Senate !” was written on
every wall in Washington, and as you walked the
streets the menace stared you, from the brick
pavements, in the face. But instead of a threat,
“ Look to the Senate !” at last became a cry of
hope, the friends of peace taking it up as a cry
ominous of good. It was well for all parties that
they did not look to the Senate in vain. It was
well for the United States—for the next greatest
calamity to an unsuccessful war with Lngland
that could befal them, would be a successful
one.
To one in the habit of regarding the distribu-
tion of power between the different branches of
the legislation in this country, the great influ-
ence of the Senate in the American system is a
matter of some 'surprise. We are accustomed to
look upon a resolute House of Commons as an
overmatch for its colleagues in legislation. It is
not often that the House of Lords resists its
voice ; it never ultimately succeeds when it does
so. But the Senate feels itself to be in all res-
pects, the co-equal of the other House of Congress
and frequently beards it so as to defeat its all
unanimous purposes. The solution ot this dif-
ference is to be found in the different constitu-
tion of the two bodies. The strength of the
House of Commons is without; its foundation
lies broad and deep in public opinion ; it repre-
sents the people, and is irresistible. _ The Lords,
on the other hand, represent but their own order,
whose interests are supposed to be in antagonism
with those of the masses. It is enough that they
resist the House of Commons in a favourite mea-
sure, to raise a cry, and direct the whole force ot
public opinion against them. Occupying but a
narrow basis, they cannot long resist, and the
House of Commons is omnipotent
Not so the House of Representatives. It has
its match in the Senate, which springs from fhe
same source, and has a footing as broad and as
deep as itself. When the two Houses at Wash-
ington disagree, the people only see the two
classes of their own representatives in conflict.
A victory by the one or the other is a triumph
neither for nor against the people, it is only the
success of the one set ot delegates against the
other. The contest does not, as too often with
us, assume the odious form of class ag’ainst class,
when the peers are coerced into acquiescence,
that the people may not be roused to frenzy by
defeat. The Senate is as strong out of doors as
its rival. It is otherwise with the House oi
Lords.
The author also alluded to some ridi-
culous specimen of legislation which he
had witnessed in the House of Lords,
when but two or three members of that
body were in attendance, and he con-
trasted it with the conduct of the Ame-
rican Senate, who always attend fully,
and frequently adjourn if only two or
three members are absent. In the face
of such a testimony to the value of an
elective House, effn the honourable mem-
ber suggest nothing but a nominee Upper
House; can our brethren of America
succeed so well, where we, it is alleged,
must fail ? I am astonished at my
honourable friend that he should seek
to force such an institution upon an un-
willing people. It can only prove a
continual sore, and fret until it becomes
intolerable, when amid convulsions and
confusion of the worst kind, it will be
done away with. Then the paltry at-
tempt to justify it, on the plea that if it
did not answer the expectations formed
of it, it might be changed. What a
pitiful argument was this. It could only
proceed from men utterly ignorant of
what were the real wants of the people,
who sought to make a temporary shift.
In fact, the elective Senate was the
true Conservative body ; instead of yield-
ing, to every breath of public opinion
like the House of Lords, they took their
stand on their popular basis, and were
enabled to stem the tide of democracy,
which seems so desirable a course in the
eyes of my honourable friend. In fact,
conceding what is not true, but for sake
of argument, allowing that it is possible
to build up a nominee House of the best
materials, yet in comparison with a House
formed on such a basis as the Senate of
America, it would prove a house of cards,
which would be blown away at the first
collision with public opinion. The ho-
nourable gentleman would learn that the


>eople of this country had not been born,
saddled and bx-idled for other people to
fide whithersoever they pleased. (Hear,
tear.) In another part of the same
tvork from which I last quoted, a work
which I will say was written under no
appearance of excitement, but in a very
?alm and dispassionate manner, the au-
thor seems to regard the Constitution of
England as not conferring on the people
such free institutions as are their un-
doubted right, and as are enjoyed by
their brethren in America ; but looking
at the different modes by which they
tiave arrived at their relative degrees of
freedom, he clearly points out the danger
of England attempting, by sudden means,
to reach such a pitch of freedom as that
enjoyed by America. But that argu-
ment does not apply here, where this an-
cient and artificial state does not exist.
But it is unnecessary for me to pile up
mthorities ; there is one authority that
finds an echo, I believe, in every heart—
it is the conviction that legislation and
taxation ought to rest upon representa-
tion.
Mr, JAMES MACARTHUR would
wish his honourable friend to explain,
before he sat down, in what manner he
would form an Upper House in con-
formity with the Senate of the United
States ?
Mr. DARVALL ; I am not prepared
to do this at present, for very manifest
reasons; but I will say that I consider
the principle is so good that it is desirable
that it should be tried here. The
opinions which I have just read are en-
titled to greater weight than any .argu-
ments which I can offer. I perfectly
concur with the necessity of having
distinctions in every country; but lam
of opinion that none'but those who have
distinguished themselves by extraordi-
nary actions, or those whom public
opinion point out as possessing unusual
merit, should be rewarded by the dig-
nities in the gift of the Sovereign. In
any new country I should be sorry to see
any honour rendered hereditary. I
should be sorry to see a state of things
existing, in which the honour deservedly
conferred on a father might be turned
into ridicule by being transmitted to an
unworthy son. (Hear, hear.) If honours
are to be conferred, as I sincerely hope
will be the case on those who deserve, at
the hands of the Sovereign, I should
prefer seeing them conferred only for
the life-time of the individual. But dis-
tinction and legislative privileges are to
be regarded as altogether different
things. The latter, which is now sought
for, would give to the favoured per-
sonages the privilege of making laws for
their fellow-citizens, with the power of
transferring that power to their children.
Now, while conceding that merit should
be rewarded, I see no necessity or reason
whatever why it should be rewarded by
a seat in the Legislative Assembly.
(Hear, hear.) Under no circumstances
should a man be placed where he would
be liable to be looked upon by his
fellow-citizens as an object of suspi-
cion—and such would be the result of
creating a nominee Assembly. It is de-
sirable that merit should be liberally re-
warded, and on any one deserving of
reward, I should like to see the highest
honours in the gift of the sovereign con-
ferred ; but I should not wish to see any
such honour or distinction a mere colo-
nial one, like our colonial currency, not
to pass current beyond the Heads of Bo-
tany Bay. (Hear, hear, and laughter.)
Let not the distinction, whatever it may
be, to be received at the hands of the
Queen, be a mere license to carry about
in this colony an honour which would
be regarded as spurious in any other
country. (Cheers and laughter.) The
proposal to create a nobility should not,
in fact, have anything whatever to do
with an Upper House. The attempt to
connect them was ridiculous. There
existed, as a matter of simple necessity,
a right to transfer property from father
to son, and from man to man; but
Heaven forbid that in this country we
should ever have the right of transferring
legislative privileges established or sanc-
tioned. (Cheers.) My honourable friend,
in the climax of his zeal to vindicate
hereditary honours, urged that it would
be a disgrace to the country not to have
them established, and asked who would


live in a country where a nominee House
of Legislature did not exist. (Laughter.)
Now, after an attentive consideration of
the present position and future prospects
of the colony, I feel that it is possible
for the country to go on for all time to
come without such an Upper House.
(Hear, hear.) If the people of Great
Britain had an opportunity of recon-
structing their constitution, there is
every reason to think that they would
get rid of the House of Lords, as at
present constituted. If the nominee
principle were in every part of the world
to be consigned to the grave, I feel
that although, on the one hand, there
would be a little mourning, on the other
side there would be a very large amount
of joy. (Cheers and laughter.) I for
one would never obey any laws which I
did not help in making. I would never
have anything to do with a Legislature
composed of men who were responsible
to no authority. (Hear, hear, hear.)
The fear of the laws is calculated to
keep bad men from committing crime ;
the fear of the people keeps bad legisla-
tors in check; but what, I would ask,
what is there to keep a nominee Legisla-
ture in check? (Hear, and cheers.) It is
to be feared that the violence of an out-
raged people would ultimately check the
proceedings of such an assembly by its
destruction. (Hear, hear.) They had
very strange notions of the people of this
country, who thought with the honour-
able member for Sydney that they would
regard it as the highest bliss to live
was not so much to be wondered at,
when it was considered that it was logi-
cally sequential on the former assertion.
I would, however, ask what is the ob-
ject of representation at all ? Who made
Legislatures ? Who gave to legislatures
the powers which they exercise ? Are
not all Legislatures supposed to repre-
sent the people ? Ido not mean to say
that mere numbers should alone be taken
into account, but when my honourable
friend goes so far as to say that Sydney
does not require to be represented, I am
surprised that his perverted line of rea-
soning did not lead him to go further
and say that it should not be represented
because it contained so many people.
(Hear, and laughter.) It was said by him
that Sydney was composed of merchants,
shopkeepers, and traders, with a few ma-
nufacturers ; it was also alleged that it
was the seat of Government. From
these two circumstances it was argued
that the population of the city was sure
to make itself sufficiently heard in the
Legislature of the country. It was also
said that this city, being the seat of Go-
vernment, the people had the power of
intimidating the Governor. If so, remove
the seat of Government to some more
favoured constituency, in the event of
any difficulty arising between the people
and the Executive, but don’t disfranchise
one-third of the population of the colony.
(Hear, hear.) These are the argu-
ments adduced by his honourable friend,
i (Hear, hear, and No, no.)
Mr. WENTWORTH : Not exactly.
under the sway of a nominee House. Mr. DARVALL : I appeal to the
(Laughter and cheers.) Those persons |
might go further, and suggest that it
would be better to have a despotic auto-
crat than a limited sovereign. No doubt
the atmosphere of a court, composed of
su<jh an autocrat and a nobility enjoying
such privileges as those proposed, would
be acceptable to my honourable and
learned friend, but to very few else.
(Hear, hear, and cheers.) After asking
who would live in a country which did
not possess a hereditary nobility, my
honourable friend next asks what right
has Sydney to be represented ? (Ironi-
cal laughter.) Now this latter doctrine
House to say whether or not what I ad-
vance is correct; whether my honour-
able friend did not contend that popula-
tion was of little moment compared with
class interests. I would ask if the hon-
ourable member had kept in view the
“ greatest happiness of the greatest
number.” Now, if that doctrine is to
be considered sound, it follows that re-
presentation should be in fair proportion
to population wherever the capacity for
self-government is admitted. While I
do not go so far as to say that particular
classes and interests should not be re-
presented, I would ask, is it reasonable


sr not to say, that the largest constitu-
mcy in the colony should be disfran-
chised, because it is the seat of Govern-
nent ? My honourable friend’s falla-
cies are, in fact, without end. (Hear,
lear, and disapprobation.) I am happy
o have given an honourable member an
»pportunity of expressing his weariness.
No, no, from the Government benches.)-
However, I feel I am performing a pub-
ic duty from vdiich no consideration
hall deter me. (Hear, hear.) My
lonourable friend has asserted that it is
. matter of royal prerogative to appoint
nembers of Council. Now, putting
side the desire which all colonists should
eel to limit as much as possible the pre-
ogative of the Crown (hear, hear,) and
he fact that in England that preroga-
ive is now limited to a few trifling
natters, this argument of ray honourable
riend is utterly unfounded. Whence,
would ask, is such a precedent
Irawn ?To say that the Crown has
he power of appointing the members of
he legislature, is openly to say that
axation and legislation might proceed
vithout representation. (No, no, from
he Government members.) The Crown
lominees and the elected members
v6uld have concurrent powers of legis-
ation and taxation. What community
would willingly yield acquiescence to the
aws of any other body than their repre-
sentatives? (Hear, hear.) I contend
that my honourable friend was wrong
when he said that it was a matter of
royal prerogative to make legislators.
The danger of admitting such a princi-
ple is only another reason why the
colony should have nothing to do with
nominees. I find on reference to the
language of some of the ministers of the
Crown, that no such principle was even
suggested. It has been declared more
than once, and among other noblemen,
by Lord John Russel, that the Crown
possesses no such prerogative. (Hear,
hear.) Now, are the colonists bound
voluntarily to invite an evil which Par-
liament has not sought to force upon
them ? (Hear, hear.) The next pro-
position of a dangerous nature which
my honourable friend has advanced was,
that the colony was bound by a contract
to accept of a nominee House. Now
how did the matter stand. (Hear,
hear, from the Government benches.)
I Avill admit that we have proposed to
accept a constitution similar to that of
Canada. Ido not see, however, how a
bargain can be said to have been made
when no terms have been finally agreed
upon, nor any part performance on either
side. What has been done for the
country that they should be bound by
such a propopositlon ? (Hear, hear.)
I would like to hear my honourable
friend explain to the House by what
principle of law or common sense we
are bound by any compact in this
matter. (Hear, hear.) As the matter
at present stood, the thing could be
withheld. (Hear, hear.) And what, I
would ask, had the Imperial Govern-
ment surrendered, or the colony gained ?
(Hear, hear.) The argument tended to
destroy the value of experience. A
number of gentlemen had, a few years
ago, proposed to accept a form of con-
stitution which th6y now felt to be
dangerous. It was as much their duty
to consider the matter now, as it was
then. It was monstrous to talk about
being bound to accept a bill before it
was even read a second time. Such
arguments might, perhaps, be used to
gag those in this House who are op-
posed to the measure, but how are they
to satisfy the country on the question ?
How can we dare to impose on the co-
lonists such a form of government when
we know that a better can be obtained ?
(Hear, hear.) Compact indeed ! I will
say that if any such exists, it is dis-
graceful to require that the country is
thus to be sold. (Cheers.) If personal
discredit be necessary, it would be
better to submit to it, and to the charge
of inconsistency, than to accept such a
constitution. (Hear, hear.) I may
quite agree that the question hereafter
be, whether to have a republican or mo-
narchical form of government. (Hear,
hear, and no, no.) In either case what
ought to be the basis of the government ?
That obedience, respect, and support,
which is indispensable to every govern-


ment, and which can never be secured
except by a purely representative legis-
lature, by which alone good government
and continued loyalty to the sovereign
will be secured, and not by a nominee
legislature, although it has been said
that the country would never be happy
without one. (Laughter.) Ido not
think, moreover, that the loyalty of the
Colonists will be suspected even if they
should say that they will have no such
principle. (Hear, hear.) But if the
people were forced to submit to the
hybrid constitution which it is sought
to impose upon them, it is to be
feared they will not long remain sub-
missive to such injustice. (Hear,
hear.) I deny that the power to
make laws exists any where else than
with the people. As bearing on this
matter, I will refer to the opinions of a
colonial minister of great experience—
Earl Grey; and even if Earl Grey’s
opinion will not be conclusive as to the
formation of a second Chamber here
—which, it is admitted, is experi-
mental—(hear, hear) —still it is valuable
as regards the working of nominee
houses in general, as his experience has
been practical and extensive. In quoting
Earl Grey’s words, I would remind you,
that that nobleman has rarely changed
his colonial theory, and that, therefore,
his condemnation of nominee houses is
of greater significance. After reading
the following extract, I feel that it would
be idle for us to insist on the prerogative
of the Crown. I trust that the opinions
therein expressed will have the effect of
changing the mind of my honourable
and learned friend on the matter re-
ferred to. (Laughter, and hear, hear.)
Earl Grey says—
The attempts hitherto made to create in the
colonies a substitute for the House of Lords, have
been attended with very moderate success. Le-
gislative Councils, composed of members ap-
pointed by the Crown, have in general had little
real influence over public opinion, while they
have been attended with the great disadvantage
of rendering the Assembly less efficient, by with-
drawing from the scene where their services must
be the most valuable, some of the persons best
qualified, by the enjoyment of a certain degree
of leisure, by their character and ability, to be
useful members of the popular branch of the
J-zegislature.
I trust that my honourable friend, the
Colonial Secretary, will ponder upon the
extract, and that he will ascertain whe-
ther or not its doctrines are in accord-
ance with those of the present ministers,
seeing that it is the duty of the nominees
on all occasions to support the views of
the Home Government, (Laughter.)
Passing from Earl Grey’s opinion, I will
refer to another, and, if possible, an
opinion of greater importance than the
former. The extract which I read is
taken from the Report of a Committee
of the Privy Council, appointed to con-
sider the Constitution for the Cape of
Good Hope. It is the expression of
opinion of some of the wisest and best
men of the day, and, as would be seen,
is not more favourable to nominee houses
than the former
It is on all bands admitted, that it is highly
desirable that there should be a second branch
of the Legislature, less easily swayed by the
popular feeling of the moment, than the Repre-
sentative Assembly, and capable of acting as a
check and counterpoise to that body, in order to
guard against hasty legislation, without requiring
the too frequent interference of the Governor or
of the Crown. But in order to perform these
functions with effect, it is necessary that the
Legislative Council should be a body of real
weight and influence, commanding the respect
and confidence of the public.
Now we must all irresistibly come to the
conclusion, that a Nominee Council is
not the one which in England is con-
sidered likely to possess the confidence
and respect of the public. (Hear, hear.)
I do not wish to be understood by these
remarks, that the Committee recom-
mended an Elective Upper House, be-
cause they are in reality in doubt as to
whether a second House is at all de-
sirable. (Hear, hear.) But if a second
Chamber be established, they are then
of opinion that it should be elective.
(Hear, hear, hear.) The Report? again
says -
In stating their reasons for advising that a
Representative Legislature should be established
in the colony of the Cape of Good Hope, the very
able and experienced servants of the Crown who
were consulted by the Governor have unanimous-
ly expressed the strongest opinion, that the ex-
isting Legislative Council does not command the
confidence of the inhabitants of the colony, and
has little influence on public opinion. But the


composition of the existing Legislative Council
is practically the same with that which is recom-
mended for the body which, under the same de-
signation, is proposed to he joined with a Repre-
sentative Assembly in the work of legislation;
it consists of official members, and of members
not holding any office in the public service, who
owe their seats to the nomination of the Crown.
We cannot believe that the character of this body
could be essentially altered by increasing the
proportion of unofficial to official members, or by
making the life-tenure of their seats to depend,
not on a usage which is practically almost in-
variably followed, but on the law; nor have we
any reason to believe that it would be in the
power of the Governors of the colony in time to
come, to make a more careful and judicious
selection of members to be appointed to the
Council than that which has been made by their
predecessors. On the contrary, we are persuaded
that, after the establishment of a Representative
Assembly, that body will have so much more real
authority than a Council nominated by the
Crown, that seats in the former will be a greater
object of ambition than those in the latter, and
it will thus become impossible to obtain the ser-
vices in the Legislative Council of gentlemen of
so much weight and influence with their fellow-
citizens as those who have been heretofore ap-
pointed.
The inference, we think, is irresistible, that a
body which even while it exercised the whole
power of' legislation has little hold over public
opinion, will cease to have any real weight or in-
fluence when it comes to be overshadowed by so
substantial a power as that of an Assembly
elected by the people. Hence, we concur with
the Chief Justice of the colony in believing, that
if it is desired to give to the Legislative Council
strength to act in any degree as a balance to the
Assembly, the elective principle must enter into
its composition.
Now, the only logical conclusion we can
draw from the extracts just read, is that
the nominee principle is found to be in-
efficient. In this House, we all know
that the nominee element possesses very
little power or importance ; out of the
House it enjoys less. The nominee
benches have, at different times, been
filled by men of the greatest ability and
the highest integrity ; but remove them
from private life into this assembly, and
place them in a position where they
may be liable to be cajoled by the
Governor, and they at once lose all pub-
lic confidence. (Hear, hear.) I will not
at this hour trouble the House with any
remarks on the elective franchise, espe-
cially as other honourable members will
have an opportunity of speaking on the
subject. 1 freely accept the challenge
to appeal to the people on this great
question. It is my desire to adhere to
the principles of the British Constitu-
tion ; but I will not sanction the estab-
lishment in this country of a defective
principle, which in England has been
found too deeply rooted to be eradicated.
(Hear, hear.) When vindicating the
representative principle, I feel that I am
vindicating the principle which has
maintained the British Constitution in
peace and security, when all the Govern-
ments of the Continent of Europe were
shaken. (Cheers.) What was it pre-
served that Constitution when the King
fled and when the Lords abdicated their
functions, when they left to other hands
the duty which they felt unwilling to
perform ? (Cheers.)' But for the re-
presentative principle, the British Con-
stitution would have been long since in
ruins. In imitating that Constitution,
it behoves us not to follow shadow’s, by
which we should only be deluded, but to
cling to the substance ; if we require
something new, we must beware how we
depart from the representative principle,
if the obedience of the people is to be
insured : for Englishmen are to be influ-
enced by respect, and not to be governed
by fear. (Cheers.) Every man should
feel that he submits to laws made by
representatives, who are not to be re-
moved by a revolution, but by electing a
better man on a future occasion. (Hear,
hear.) There is no analogy between the
House of Lords and a nominee Chamber.
Admitting that a second Chamber is de-
sirable, it would be very easy to arrive
at a representative Upper Chamber.
Look at Belgium. There the only dif-
ference between the Upper and Lower
Houses is that the members ol the former
are all elected by larger constituencies,
and for a greater number of years. I
believe the qualifications of voters is the •
payment of a certain amount of taxation.
What could be more simple than this ?
Let a general election take place ; at
the same time that the people return
their representatives, let them elect a
body of deputies, whose function it would
be to elect the members of an Upper
Senate. Here we should have perfect


simplicity ; we should have a body of
men elected to perform a particular duty,
and consequently unbiassed by factious
feeling or prejudices. By this process
of double election, an Upper House
would be created; and I would ask,
where was the difficulty in the way of
such a plan ? It should be remembered
that our old Saxon institutions were re-
plete with this principle of double elec-
tion. It is only reasonable to suppose
that the deputies elected would perform
their duty faithfully and well. But if
this scheme be not approved of, there
is nothing to prevent the members of
the Upper House from being elected by
the members of the other body, or by
the electors generally. (Hear, hear.)
Here, however, we- are met by the fan-
ciful objection, that then the one assem-
bly would only be a reflection of the
other, whereas the natural tendency
would be antagonism. I deny that men
known to profess violent politics would
be likely to obtain seats in the Upper
House by election. I am very willing to
see an Upper House created for the pur-
pose of checking hasty or inconsiderate
legislation, but I should be sorry to see
imaginary difficulties cause them to give
the go-by to all that is worth retaining
in the Constitution. No British commu-
nity, we may feel assured, will ever
permit one class to be invested with the
odious power of making laws without re-
sponsibility to the people whom those laws
are to bind, I thank the House for the
patience with which they have listened
to me. I feel that the cause I have ad-
vocated does not receive justice at my
hands : but if men would only take
counsel with their own consciences—
with their common sense—and with the
history of their own country—that cause
would have little to dread. (Hear, hear.)
If a nominee House were demanded by
the people, as good citizens, they would
all be bound to acquiesce. But until
then, I feel it to be my duty to resist the
measure at every stage. Even if a fresh
election is not to take place, still I
hope that time will be given for a full
consideration of the question by the colo-
nists. At all events, time should be
afforded to elicit the opinions of a clear
majority of the people in reference to
the measure before the House ; I shall
therefore move that the Bill be read
again that day six months.
Mr. MARSH : Mr. Speaker, I have
the less difficulty in attempting to an-
swer the speech of my honourable and
learned friend who has just sat down
(Mr. Darvall), because I know he will be
so ably answered by my honourable and
learned friend the member for Sydney,
and I shall leave a great many of his
fallacies to be answered by him, for I am
sure he will take great pleasure in doing
so. And, Sir, there is another reason
also why I feel the less difficulty in re-
plying to the speech of the honourable
and learned member for Cumberland,
namely, because to a certain extent he
has answered himself. My honourable
and learned friend has searched all the
world over for constitutions, and he has
chiefly recommended us to copy the
great American luminary, but in that
luminary I think my honourable and
learned friend the member for Sydney
has shown so many spots that we are not
likely to adopt it here. He has then
gone to the Cape—to the Cape Boers
for a constitution ! and last of all, being
very hard up indeed, he has gone to Bel-
gium ! Who, Sir, has not heard of Bel-
gium ? Who has not heard of its
people ? Are we to go there for con-
stitution ? To perhaps the most profli-
gate, the most degraded, and the newest
country in Europe ? Shall we send our
sons and our daughters to Belgium to
learn morality ? Or our soldiers to learn
military tactics, or more properly speak-
ing, the art of running away? for it is well
known that Belgian soldiers have long
been famous for that accomplishment.
(Laughter.) Sir, the history of Belgium,
from the beginning to the end, is a most
disgraceful history ; whilst their neigh-
bours, the Dutch, were fighting gloriously
for seventy years, and carrying on a war of
extermination for their religion and their
freedom, what were the Belgians doing ?
Succumbing shamefully to the power of
Spain, and showing that from first to
last they have been the basest people


that have existed in Europe to the pre-
sent day. Certainly the Belgian Go-
vernment is now a tolerably good one,
but that has nothing to do with the
[natter. It depends a great deal on the
King, who is an excellent man, and it
bas become finally settled because the
people are industrious and not so apt to
be following after revolutions as some of
their more volatile neighbours. Sir, let
as not go to Belgium for a constitution.
But opposite the coast of Belgium there
is an island—an island favoured and
good in every way ; there is a people,
14 great, glorious, and free there is a
constitution which has lasted for ages, and
proved itself the best in the world, and let
us go there for a constitution. (Cheers.)
We came here to be English, and Eng-
lish we will be, in spite of those Yankee
notions now agitated and maintained in
certain quarters. (Cheers and laughter.)
In Hungary, and in other places, there
are many good fields for immigration ;
and I believe, even at this moment, that
sheep-farming would pay better at
Odessa than it does here. No one can
leny that the valleys of the Missouri and
he Mississippi are more fertile than
hose of the Hunter and the Hawkes-
)ury. But we came here because we
vere determined not to live undet a des-
potism on the one hand, or the tyranny
of a mob on the other. We have chosen
this country, because here we can enjoy
our British freedom. Let those who do
not like it, leave it. (Laughter.) Cali-
fornia is within a few weeks’ sail, and
there they can enjoy all the advantages
of the American institutions they praise
so highly. But, Sir, why does every
ship that comes from California bring
back to this colony two or three hundred
passengers ? The reason is that they do
not like to live under those institutions.
They prefer to return to a country in
which they can enjoy the freedom of a
Briton. And when I use that term let
me not be misunderstood. I do not
mean to confine it even to the whole
United Kingdom, but I apply it to the
Anglo-Saxon subjects of the Queen
throughout the whole empire, for I can-
not believe that soil or climate can have
any deteriorating influence on that race
of freemen—
Unmanly thought! What season can control ?
What fancied zone can circumscribe the soul ?
Which, conscious of the source from which it
springs,
By reason’s light, or resolution’s wings,
Spite of her frail companion, dauntless goes
O’er Lyhia’s deserts, and through Zembla’s snows.
(Cheers.) Why, Sir, should we not have
the same institutions as those of our
father land ? If we have not got them,
we can make them. When we came
here we had not the vine and the olive,
the orange and the fig-tree, but we
planted them, and they grew, and
brought forth fruit abundantly. And
can we not then introduce the same in-
stitutions as those of our father land ?
It is a general notion to suppose that
there is a great difference between an
old country and a new one. But this
difference is not so great as might be at
first sight supposed. A former Governor
of Canada, going from Canada to Eng-
land, observes that everywhere he went
there appeared to be something new.
He had thought he was going to an old
country, but he found that he was in,
what was to him a new country. Here
was a new railway, there a new town,
and wherever he went, he goes on to say,
he found that all was neAv until he came
to the colonial office, and there he found
old ideas, old men, and old women.
(Laughter.) That observation might be
called unjust, for even then the colonial
office was much changed from what it
had been ; but at all events, now, it has
taken upon it that newness which we see
pervading England everywhere. Any
of my honourable friends who may go to
England will see vast changes. They
will be whirled in a railway over swamps
that have been reclaimed and rendered
fertile; they will see new towns that
have risen up in every place. Nor is the
moral atmosphere of the country less
changed than the physical. Not many
years ago the vices of drunkenness,
gambling, and debauchery, were tole-
rated among the greatest men of the
day—were even practised by such men
as Charles James Fox and Richard
Brinsley Sheridail. But now t|ie case is


far different. The political state of the
country is no less changed. Only a
quarter of a century ago, a very large
portion of the people of the United
Kingdom were debarred from all rights,
honours, and emoluments, because they
would not forsake the faith of their
fathers—not because they were bad men,
but because they were good. Now they
can exercise those rights, and seek those
honours and emoluments equally with
their fellow subjects. Nor were the
changes brought about by the Reform
Bill less than those brought about by
Catholic Emancipation. Scotland, before
that time, was one rotten borough, and
her people, among the most educated and
intelligent in the world, and who are
capable of pushing their own interest in
every direction, were, in fact, almost
wholly unrepresented. As regards the
great question of the day—the constitu-
tion of the Upper House—it appears to
me that whatever we do, the Upper
House can onl_y be considered as a drag,
something to prevent hasty legislation
—something to intervene between the
Government and the Lower House. But
1 do not consider that it should be some-
thing which should stop legislation alto-
gether. The House of Lords, with all
its prestige, cannot do that; and whe-
ther we have our Upper House elected
or not, nothing of that sort can be ac-
complished here. That House of Lords
is truly a great institution—great in its
history, and great in its present stand-
ing. Whether we look back into the
long past centuries, when the flower of
chivalry led the' sturdy yeomanry of
England to the defence of their coun-
try, or to seek for honour and fame on
the battle field—or when the Barons as-
serted the Rights of Man on the green
sward of Runnymede, and for ages
ready maintained the liberties of Eng-
land—(cheers)—of if we look at it at
the present time—we must in any case
confess its grandeur. He, Sir, can only
truly judge of what it is, who has p .ssed
from the stormy and powerful debate,
the convincing oratory, and the stern
practical wisdom of the Commons, to
the calm dignity and graceful and ac-
complished eloquence of the Lords—he
who may have listened to the voice of
such men as the late Earl Grey, ever
foremost in the furtherance of the great
object to which he had devoted his life,
till the morning sun glistened on the
tapestry of the ancient walls—he, Sir, I
say, he alone can judge of what that
House is now, w T ith all the prestige of its
heraldry, and the wonderous host of talent
produced by the new creations. (Cheers.)
Or if w r e look forward to its influence on
the destinies of England in an unknown
future—to a time when the sons of the
great, or even the sons of the lowest in
the land, may take their seats in that
House, and may reap those honors de-
servedly won, either by great legislative
capacity in the Lower House, or by
bravery and skill on the field of battle
and of glory—look at it which way we
will, it is an assembly, august indeed.
We cannot make our Lpper House what
the House of Lords is. But if we make
it elective* we shall make it what the
House of Lords is not. If we make it
elective by the class of people who elect
the Lower House, there will be no dis-
tinction between it and a democracy.
(Cheers.) If we make it elective by
another and a higher class, we shall
make it an oligarchy. (Cheers). In
either case it would come to a dead lock,
some w r ay or other ; and in either case it
would rob the Lower House of its best
members, which would be fatal to good
government, for in a good Lower House
we shall always find our greatest secu-
rity. Now, Sir, as to the distribution of
the electoral districts. If all people
were equally wise in politics—if all
studied aright the beautiful fable of the
belly and the members—if the laborer
knew, as he ought to know, that the
accumulation of capital is beneficial to
him as well as to the capitalist, inas-
much as the interest of that capital,
when created, must be spent, and chiefly
in the products of labour—if all people
were equally wise and good, then we
might distribute the elective franchise
equally, and give it to all according to
their numbers. At present we can do
no such thing. We must be content to


rule by antagonism, if I may be allowed
the expression—to balance the power of
different classes and different interests,
and not rate people as if they were cat-
tie, to be numbered by their heads, or as
a tribe of savages; but as constituting a
society and a social system which has
been the work of ages, and which I hope
will last for ever. This being the case,
we must take care that every class is
equally represented, and properly repre-
sented if represented at all. It is
equally necessary that they should be
substantially represented by practical
men, or it is worse than useless. But
et us see what sort of men are chosen
when masses of people are associated
together for the purpose of electing re-
presentatives. Let us go through the
great towns, and see the sort of persons
they select. Let us begin with London,
It is wmll observed by the Times , that in
hardly any instance has it brought forth
any real talent or any person of emi-
nence—any person above the station of
a mob orator or a paving-board politi-
cian. It is remarkable that the inhabi-
tants of great towns generally choose
not only persons unfit to represent them,
but often persons of bad character.
(Laughter.) On one occasion it was
said .of a member for the great Borough
of Finsbury, when he was heading the
poll, and in allusion to a certain charge
against him, that he was getting on like
a house on fire. This surely is lamenta-
ble. But let us go on to Birmingham,
and see whom the people there elect.
Now, perhaps, the real intelligence of
Birmingham is above that of every
other place in the world, when we con-
sider the beautiful things they Invent,
and the extraordinary skill displayed in
their manufacture. Sir Robert Peel has
told us that of that class of persons
there are upwards of twenty men who
began life as day laborers and ended
with £IOO,OOO, and this not by the
slippery path of trade, but by honest in-
dustry and successful application. Out
of this class sprang our Stephensons’
and our Faradays’, to span the Menai
Straits by a tubular bridge, and by
combining magnetism and electricity, to
use the lightning flash as easily as the
powers of a child. But these people,
with all their vast intelligence,.are sorry
politicians. It has been said, and is so
to the present day, that no man could be
selected for that town unless.he took
what is called a Brummagem view of
the currency question, which, if it means
anything, means that sixpence is to be
made to pass for a shilling, and the re-
sult would be that half the debts in the
world, the National Debt included,
would be wiped away. And it is a
scheme which might afford endless
amusement, because, if sixpence could
be made to do the work of a shilling,
threepence might be made to do the
same, so that “ the view might grbw
small by degrees and beautifully less,”
but never nothing. It would afford
amusement, and perhaps instruction, to
the pupils of the Birmingham school,
until they might become in their riper
years full currency doctors. From Bir-
mingham let us proceed northward to
Nottingham. There the late member
was not accused of setting his own house
on fire, but he was accused of x’obbing the
mail. Now we do not know for certain
that he did not rob the mail, but he,
(Feargus O’Connor,) did afterwards rob
the poor Chartists most unmercifully by
his land scheme ; and after committing
many political vagaries he is now in a
mad-house, where, perhaps, he had better
always have been before the ugly story
about the mail, or before the poor
Chartists were defrauded. From Not-
tingham let us go further north to the
manufacturing districts of Yorkshire.
Perhaps the intelligence of these people •
is as great as that of the people of Bir-
mingham ; and they are certainly their
superiors in morality. They make the
most beautiful machinery that can be
conceived, and they have succeeded in
every possible way. And though York-
shiremen are generally considered very
’cute, yet, perhaps, no people have ever
been so cajoled, so bamboozled. They
have been led astray by Tory mounte-
banks, Radical mountebanks, Anti-poor-
law mountebanks, Antl-papisticalmounta-
banks. Every sort of cajolery has been


exerted upon them, and most success-
fully. . From thence let us go to Liver-
pool, and there we find an extraordinary
case. TRey had two very good members,
and they turned them out, and what for ?
Because they would not vote against the
Pope ! (Laughter.) If we go on to
Edinburgh it is just the same, and they
have only lately redeemed their fame by
again electing the eloquent historian and
accomplished orator, Macaulay. And if
we pass over the Channel to Paris, to
say nothing of the wretches elected
during* the first Revolution! what
did they do at the last ? The
man placed at the head of the Go-
vernment (Lamartine) had tried his
hand at history and poetry with little
success, and he now came forward to
try it at politics with still less. And the
last person who has been elected for the
city of Paris was the extravagant So-
cialist writer of an obscene novel. But,
Sir, to come nearer home, if Sydney
wants more members, let the people set
their own house in order. (Laughter.)
Let them do something with the Corpo-
ration. Let them show that they can
do something there, and then, perhaps,
when they can prove they are able to
govern themselves, we shall give them a
little greater share in governing other
portions of the country* Sir, there is
one point which has scarcely been touched
upon; I mean the Civil List proposed
to be granted instead of the Schedules.
It certainly is a very large Civil List,
not to say any thing of the £28,000 a
year for Public Worship, which is a
question in itself.. But it seems to me
that it would have been wiser to have
allowed the New Legislative Assembly,
to be elected under this Bill, to have
passed this Civil List. I am much afraid
the same war will be waged in that
Assembly against this Civil List that
has been here waged against the Sche-
dules of the Imperial Parliament. My
own notion certainly is, that the Governor
and the Judges should be entirely inde-
pendent of an annual vote, and that their
pensions should be independent also;
but I am not prepared to say that I will
go any greater length in the way of
rendering the salaries of public officers
independent of the votes of the Assembly.
I do not see, for instance, why the
Attorney General or the Master in
Equity should have fixed salaries, parti-
cularly as they have not those fixed sala-
ries at home. And with regard to pen-
sions, I have again to warn this House,
as I have once done before, against ex-
travagance. Extravagance at any time
is a great evil. It may not happen that
our funds will always be in such a
flourishing condition as they are at pre-
sent. Perhaps our produce may not
always obtain as high rates as it does
now in the English market; and if those
rates should fall, then our revenue must
suffer. The sum appropriated by this
Civil List is a very large sum Indeed ;
and I feel that I cannot forbear to warn
this House against what I conceive to be
an extravagant appropriation of our
funds. The report of the Constitution
Committee says that they have no wish
to sow the seeds of a democracy. But
let them bevvare, Sir, that by a Civil
List like this they do not sow these
seeds. An extravagant expenditure of
the public finances, by inducing the ne-
cessity of increased taxation, tends per-
haps more than anything else to excite
the feelings of the people. It gives to
those demagogues, who are ever ready
to take the opportunity of grievances
real or supposed, a powerful and just
cause of agitation. And when once ex-
cited the passions of a democracy are not
easily allayed. It was the extravagance,
with regard to the public money, which
prevailed in the palaces of the Kings and
courtiers of France, that raised up the
demon of the first French revolution.
The minor grievances of the Pension List
in England had the greatest share in the
agitation which led to the passing of the
Reform Bill. And I warn the House
not to proceed in the same path of extra-
vagant expenditure, lest they also raise
the whirlwind of democracy. (Hear,
hear.) Sir, I crave the attention of the
House whilst I propose a plan by which
the services of those of my honourable
friends on the Government benches, who
might lose their places under a responsi-


}le government, may be secured to do
jood to the country, instead of allowing
:hera to pass their lives as pensioned
dlers. It is obvious, that when the new
Council comes to be elected, few, pro-
bably none, of the members of the pre-
sent Government may be elected to seats
in it; and if they are to be pensioned off
at their full salaries, the probability is
that they would not try to be elected.
Now I wish to keep their services, but at
the same time to establish a system of
responsible Government. There are two
plans which might be proposed to this
end. One plan is the French plan—
which I do not however approve of—that
is, that the members of the Government
should have seats and voices, but not
votes, in the Legislative Assembly. This
system has certainly worked well in
France, and has produced some great
men. But the plan I propose is some-
what different. It is, that the members
of the present Government should keep
their places and their pay, and that it
should be in the power of the Governor
to select out of the Legislative Assembly
such members as would advise with him
and carry on the Government business in
the House. Call them a Privy Council,
or what you like, but let them be unpaid.
The real labour of preparing the Go-
vernment measures could then be done
by the paid officers, while the business of
passing them througtx the Legislature
could be done by the unpaid privy coun-
cillors, selected as I have said. I am
quite satisfied we shall not be able, for
some time to come, to get a good respon-
sible Government in any other way As
the Governor has said, in one of his
despatches, the difficulty is to find people
of leisure in this country who would de-
vote their whole time to the management
of the Government on so uncertain a
tenure as that of immediate responsibility
to the popular assembly. But under the
plan I propose, the duties of the persons
selected to carry on the Government
business would be so light, and almost
entirely confined to the Session, that I
have no doubt there are many who would
do ity and who are eminently adapted for
it. Sir, there are those who think this
measure had better be put off for some
years longer—who think that we had
better wait till the medley of strangq
population, now flocking to our shores,
has settled down quietly. There may be
those who, like Frankenstein, are afraid
of a picture of their own creation. But,
Sir, I have no such misgivings. 1 have
boundless faith in the power of our race
to rule themselves, wheresoever they may
be, or under whatever circumstances.
(Cheers.) To us it has been given to
subdue and replenish the earth, to rescue
from the hands of the oppressors, and
to civilize the dusky nations of the
earth, and to fill the wilds of the West
and South with the fair and manly race
of the Northern Isles. It would seem as
if we were one and all bound up in one
great conspiracy for this great work.
The humblest mechanic plays his part as
well as the conqueror of a province ; and
the poorest amongst us, who, by honest
industry, improves his condition, may be
proud to take his seat by the man who
passes a useful life in social and political
reforms. Perhaps it is not too much to
trace the fall of nations and the ruin of
empires to their having lost sight of the
great principles of freedom and self-
government. The States of Greece,
placed on the lovely shore of the inland
sea, where the fancy of the poet vied
with the eloquence of the statesman, and
the graphic delineations of the historian
—with courage that could resist the bar-
barian hordes of Asiatic conquerors—
have passed away. The mighty rule of
Rome, which extended over the fairest
portion of the earth, and was founded
on the public and private virtues of her
citizens—virtues which we even now ad-
mire, though blessed with the higher
good of Christianity, and a more com-
plete civilization has passed away.
They have both passed away ; because
the popular assemblies of Athens and of
Rome gave up the power of self-govern-
ment, misled by the noisy tongues of de-
magogues, or dazzled by the splendour
of usurpers. Sir, it is not, I imagine,
to be supposed that this is a final measure,
but rather that we should go on con-
tinually improving; and I hope, as a


sincere reformer of all pro red abuses, to
see the day when, from the increase of
education and intelligence, the electoral
districts may be distributed more accord-
ing to numbers. (Cheers.) But, Sir,
it is a penalty we pay for the inestimable
privileges of freedom, that they create
agitation—agitation which fans its flame,
and prevents it from degenerating. If
the voice of freedom, and, perhaps, of
discord, could not sometimes be heard,
instead of the healthy stream of the
rushing torrent, the stagnant lake would
reflect nothing but the image of idle-
ness and solitude, (Cheers.)
1 Mr. MARTIN moved the adjournment
of the House.—Carried.
Mr. MARTIN: I beg to move now,
as an amendment on the motion of my
honourable friend, the member for Syd-
ney, the following resolutions :
1. That in order to enable the Upper House of
Legislature to exercise an efficient check upon the
Lower, it is necessary that such Upper House
should possess, above all things, that weight and
consideration which popular election only can give
it; and without which, no amount of character,
intelligence, or ability, in the individuals com-
posing it, can enable it, in times of great political
excitement, when its intervention will most be
required, to exercise in any sense, or to anv ex-
tent, the functions of a Truly conservative insti-.
tution.
2. That in order to prevent the Upper from
being a mere duplicate of the Lower House, it
should be elected by larger constituencies, with a
different franchise; and that, as it is desirable
that there should be a representation of interests
as well as of numbers, such larger constituencies
should consist exclusively of the freeholders of
the country.
3. that to give stability to the Upper House,
and to make a seat in it an object of ambition to
those most competent to guide the public coun-
cds, its members should continue in office for
twice the period allotted to the members of the
Lower House.
4 - That the foregoing resolutions be referred
to the Committee of the whole House for its
guidance when taking the before-mentioned Bill
into consideration.
The SPEAKER; I would suggest to
the honourable member, that it would be
more convenient that his resolutions
should be moved after the first amend-
ment—that of the honourable and learned
member for Cumberland—has been dis-
posed of.
Mr. MARTIN : It is a matter of very
little moment to me whether the amend-
ment which I have proposed be mpved
now or after the amendment of the ho-
nourable and learned member. The ob-
ject which I had in view in placing a
notice of motion on the paper, was one
which I believed would facilitate this
discussion, by enabling the House to de-
cide at onqe upon the main principle of
the Bill. Honourable members must be
aware, that it would have been quite
competent for me to have moved these
resolutions without any notice whatever;
or, when the house was in Committee, to
have proposed the introduction of clauses
into the Bill which would have carried
into effect the principle embodied in my
resolutions. But my object was to elicit,
at as early a period as possible in the
progress of the Bill, an expression of the
opinion of honoux-able members, and if
possible, a final decision of the House
with reference to the leading principle
involved in the new Constitution
namely, whether the Upper House should
consist of an elected or a nominated
body. I thought that the most proper
period for such a discussion would be on
the second reading of the Bill, and my
object in throwing the resolutions into
the form in which I have submitted
them was to prevent the necessity of a
second debate upon this one point, and
to avoid encumbering the business of the
House, when in Committee on the Bill,
with the discussion of a principle like
this. I also desired to take advantage
of the very full House which is now
assembled. Very shortly, the country
members will, doubtless, return to their
various avocations, and I wished the
principle embodied in my resolutions to
be adopted or rejected by a decisive ma-
jority of the House, so that the question
might, so far as the Council is concerned,
be at once definitively disposed of. With
this view I have purposely so framed my
resolutions that they abstain entirely
from matters of detail, and refer only to
the one great and important question,
whether or not we shall create an elected
or a nominated Upper House? That
question I hope the Council will finally


decide at the close of this debate. I feel
that, in approaching this subject, I am
placed in a position of very considerable
embarrassment; because, though I agree
with almost every argument which has
been urged by my honourable and learned
friend the member for Sydney (Mr.
Wentworth), I differ from him in some
of his conclusions; at the same time,
while I agree with some of the conclu-
sions at which the honourable and learned
member for Cumberland (Mr. Darvall)
has arrived, I feel compelled to dissent
from almost all the arguments and pre-
mises on which these conclusions are
founded. I feel that this is a peculiar
position to be placed in ; but I trust that
before I sit down I shall be able to ex-
plain it in such a way that it will be un-
derstood by the House. I hope that I
am prepared to approach this question
with a proper degree of diffidence, and
with a full sense of its importance. I
believe that no person with any adequate
comprehension of the subject can ap-
proach it without feeling that it is one
of extreme difficulty, and that though
every honourable member has a right to
hold and express his opinions upon it
with freedom, they are all bound to
exercise the greatest possible candour in
dealing with the opinions of others dif-
ferent from their own. I believe that
no question which has ever been brought
before this Council has been half so im-
lortant as this. Doubtless there have
been, and there will be in years to come,
many questions of high naturaljzoncern-
ment brought under the consideration of
the Council; but I do not believe that
in all time it will have any measure so
fraught with the future destinies of the
country submitted to it for decision as
tl*it which is now occupying our atten-
tion. I believe that this is the first time
in the history of colonization—at all
events in the history of British coloniza-
tion—that the right to frame a Con-
stitution for itself has been conceded to
any colony by the parent state. It is
the first time that any colonial Legisla-
ture has met for the purpose of framing
such a constitution. The greatness of
the occasion cannot, therefore, be over-
estimated. The subject of framing con-
stitutions is one which has occupied the
attention of statesmen, philosophers,
historians, and lawgivers in all ages.
On this subject the master-minds of
former days have left for our guidance
the result of their experience and their
researches. This is a great advantage
to us; for in addition to the valu-
able lessons which history lays be-
fore us, w T e have the profound re-
flections of the many great philoso-
phers who have discussed the principles
of government ,to instruct us in our de-
liberations. For myself I will say that
1 have endeavoured, to the utmost of my
ability, to avail myself of this advantage.
I have endeavoured to make myself ac-
quainted with the works of the great
writers upon government, and by a
careful examination of their arguments
and their conclusions, to find some*assist-
ance in the attempt to discover that form
of constitution which will be most likely
to secure the permanent welfare of the
country. Whether the conclusions at
which I have arrived are erroneous or
otherwise, I trust that the House will
give me credit for a sincere desire to take
that course which will best promote the
public interest, and to exercise, with re-
ference to this bill, a strictly impartial
judgment. I will here at once most em-
phatically deny that I for one am ac-
tuated on this occasion by any desire to
favor any class, or to legislate with a
view to the aggrandisement of any sec-
tion of the community. On this question
I, at all events, am not Influenced either
by prejudices or partialities. I am ac-
tuated by no class feeling, nor do I
believe, however much to the contrary
may have been asserted out of doors,
that any member of this House
has the slightest desire to create a
dominant class in the community. The
only object which I believe the house
has—the only object which it ought to
have in view—is to give govern-
ment to the colony. If we want to attain
this object, it is our duty to approach
this discussion in a calm, fair,,and candid
spirit. The task which we are now called
upon to perform is one which has not


been assumed by us. It has been ex- '
pressly delegated to this House by the i
supreme authority in the empire—the
authority of the Imperial Parliament. |
But notwithstanding this express dele-
gation of authority, we are met on the
very threshold of this discussion by a
question of jurisdiction. We have been |
told that this House has not been elected |
with a view to the framing of a consti-
tution for this colony, although the very
Act of Parliament which called it into
existence has conferred on it the most j
extensive and unprecedented powers for j
that express object; and although at !
the last general election the attention of |
the various constituencies was repeatedly
called to that circumstance. It has been '
said by speakers at public meetings, and
by writers in various newspapers, who
have put forward their own views upon
the subject with much confidence, but
who do not appear to know by what
authority the House is acting, that this
is a question which can only be legally
and constitutionally settled by a conven-
tion. Now I would ask the persons who
take such ground as this—who arrogate
to themselves the right to dictate to this
House, what it shall and what it shall not
discuss, whether they know what they
are doing ? Do they know that the
calling of a convention is the resolution
of society into its elements ? Without
the entire abrogation of all government,
they could hohFtro such convention as is
proposed. Under the government of the
United States conventions are provided
for—in times of revolution in other
countries conventions have been held,
but no such thing as a convention is
known to the British Constitution. The
British Constitution recognises an un-
controlled and permanent authority in
the Imperial Parliament, hnd in the
various legislative bodies which it has
created, and throughout the wide limits
of the European empire, no right is con-
ceded to any tumultuous gathering of
self-constituted reformers, to assume to
themselves any legislative powers. The
duty of settling the form of our consti-
tution has not been entrusted by parlia-
ment to any convention of the people.
It has been entrusted to this House, and
I hope that that duty will be honestly
and fearlessly discharged, and that no
attention whatever will be paid to the
attempted interference with our func-
tions. 1 trust that in the discharge of
this duty we will show manliness suffi-
cient to resist every species of dictation.
For my own part I shall treat all such
dictation with the most supreme con-
tempt, because I know of nothing more
unconstitutional or more absurd. We
have been told that we are bound to pay
respect to the enlightened expression of
public opinion, but for that expression of
opinion I for one do not look to such
meetings or writings as those to which I
have alluded. On me at all events they
will exercise no influence. I do not say
this, because I have any desire to check
discussion out of doors, or with any in-
tention to provoke hostility. I wish as
much as any man to obtain the good
opinion of my fellow citizens, and least
of all do I desire to see this Council
brought into collision with large masses
of the people. But I feel that I should
be unworthy of a seat in this House if I
did not most emphatically deny the right
of any public meeting, or any number of
public meetings, to usurp its functions.
I deny as emphatically the right of this
House in any way to resign those func-
tions, or any part of them, to other
hands; and I repeat that, legally and
constitutionally, under the authority of
Parliament, in this Council, and in this
Council alone, can this measure be deter-
mined. We have been told by the hon-
ourable and learned member for Cum-
berland (Mr. Darvall), that if this mea-
sure be not defeated by honourable mem-
bers in the House, it will be defeated at
all events by the people out of the House.
I must say that, in my opinion, that was
not language which ought to have been
addressed to this Council by one of its
members, respecting any of its proceed-
ings. The power of the people out of
doors ought not to be held in terrorem
over the heads of honourable members.
I do not know what notion the honour-
able and learned member entertains of
the powers of public meetings and self-


styled conventions, but I for one do not
recognize the right of any public meet-
ing to sit in revision upon the acts of this
Council. We have been sent here in-
vested with all the powers of legislation,
and I know of no right possessed by any
portion of the public to amend, reject, or
sanction any of our acts. Here, and here
only, I repeat, does there rest the power
to decide the question of the constitu-
tion ; and any assertion to the contrary,
no matter by what numbers it may be
sanctioned, can inspire no other feeling
than contempt. And where, let me ask,
could the power to frame a constitution
for the colony have been more appropri-
ately placed ? Without any desire or
intention to Indulge in self laudation, I
will say that I do not think it would be
easy to pick out fifty-four gentlemen in
the colony more competent to discuss the
real merits of the question than those I
am now addressing. And here I cannot
but remark how extremely curious it is
that those very individuals, who so loudly
deny the right of this House to frame a
constitution, have usurped that right for
themselves. I have stated already that
the task which this House is now dis-
charging has been Imposed upon it by an
Act of Parliament; but those persons,
against all law, without any right, with-
out any authority whatever, have assumed
authority to frame a constitution which
they declare that this House has no au-
thority to form. In this most important
political question, these noisy politicians,
elected by no one, representing no one,
have nominated themselves into a body
to prepare a constitution in which the
principle of nomineeism is to have no
place, and have now the presumption to
attempt to dictate a course which, right
or wrong, according to the honourable
and learned member for Cumberland,
must eventually be adopted. I repeat
that I treat with the most supreme con-
tempt this attempt at dictation—this
most absurd and ridiculous usurpation of
a power which, under the constitution of
the colony, no body of people but that
Council can possess. Much has been
said of the imposing and enthusiastic de-
monstration which has recently taken
place. But I would remind the House
that there is nothing easier than to get
up large meetings in large cities—no-
thing easier than to procure a large at-
tendance of street idlers on any occasion
when a little amusement is expected—
nothing easier than to get up enthusiastic
cheering for any speaker who may choose
to find fault with all that is solid and
valuable in government, or to indulge in
any amount of vindictive and malicious
and scurrilous abuse of individuals—
nothing easier than to get up loud
plaudits for men who revile those whose
motives they misrepresent, and whose
arguments they cannot understand. This
is a matter of constant occurrence both
here and in the mother country. I am
willing to attach as much importance to
the late demonstration as it deserves, but
I cannot recognize the right of the persons
who took a part in that demonstration to
characterize their individual opinions as
the general opinion of the people of New
South Wales. I will even go further.
I deny the right of those persons to
put forth their opinions as the opinions
of the people of Sydney alone. I do not
believe that the opinions expressed at
that meeting were the opinions of the
people of Sydney. I deny that the two
thousand persons who are said to have
assembled on that occasion, in any way
represented any section of the community.
I do not believe that even a majority of
the persons present at that meeting gave
their assent to the various resolutions
that were adopted, or cared in the least
whether they were carried or rejected.
The greater portion of them went there
to be amused, and took no interest what-
ever in the proceedings. The resolutions
arrived at are not, in my opinion, entitled
to be regarded otherwise than as the re-
solutions of the half-dozen self-constituted
agitators by whom the meeting was got
up. For the honourable and learned
member for Cumberland to hold up those
resolutions as the exponents of public
opinion, appears to me therefore to be
pre-eminently ridiculous. If, however,
that meeting had in reality expressed the
opinions of the citizens of Sydney, that
would be no reason why it should influence


the House, for Sydney is not New South
Wales. Those who have paid much
attention to European politics know
well how great an influence the capital
of any country is capable of exerting.
In all the changes of government
which have taken place in France, the
mobs of Paris have controlled the
rest of the community. From the
facility with which multitudes may be
collected in densely populated cities, and
the ease with which noisy and ignorant
demagogues may sway them, the ex-
ample of those cities in great political
crises is almost invariably the worst that
can be followed. The moral Influence
of large masses collected together, even
though those masses be made up of ma-
terials the most worthless and contempti-
ble—carried to the remotest corners upon
the wings of the Press, with all their
deformities obscured by distance, gives
to the example of a capital a great con-
trolling power. But whatever may have
taken place in older countries; however
truly it may be said that Paris is France,
I hope and trust it may never be said
with truth of this colony, that Sydney is
New South Wales. The honourable and
learned member for Cumberland has
taken occasion to complain, in the course
of his address, of the censure which has
been cast upon him by my honourable and
learned friend the member for Sydney,
for the part which he took at the late
public meeting, and has taunted him
with his ignorance of the practice of
members of Parliament in such matters.
Now I fully admit the right of members
of this legislature, on ordinary occasions,
to take a part in public proceedings. I
know that nothing is more common than
to find members of Parliament taking
such a part. But I deny that it is the
practice of the leading members of Par-
liament to attend public meetings called
for the purpose of considering measures
then before the legislature—to take a
part, as the honourable and learned
member has done, in the discussion be-
fore a public meeting, of a measure just
on the point of being decided by the
House. I dispute, altogether, the pro-
priety of the honourable and learned
member expressing his opinions on the'
present bill before a public meeting,
when by waiting, a day or two at the
farthest, he would have had an oppor-
tunity of expressing those opinions before
the members of this House. I deny the
right of any honourable member who
may be in a minority in this House, or
who may feel that his opinions are not
likely to be acceptable here, to strive to
shelter himself under the shadow of ap-
plause out of doors—to endeavour to
enforce attention to his views by first
procuring the sanction of them by a
public meeting—to go to such a meeting
and appeal to it for assistance to enable
him to defeat a measure under the de-
liberation of this house—to seek, in fact,
to overawe this house, containing the re-
presentatives not of Sydney only but of
the colony at large, by the exhibition of
a large crowd of people liable to be led
any way by the merest accident of the
moment. This is the dangerous course
which was taken in France at the com-
mencement of the great revolution, and
we all know with what disastrous results.
Members of the assembly and of the con-
vention, who found that they could not
carry their measures in the legislative
body, rushed at once to their clubs, and
there sought for sympathy and support.
1 hus, by the side of the constituted legis-
lature a rival and voluntary legislature
sprang up ; and thus was it, that in the
course of time the Jacobin Club became
powerful enough to rule the country.
Now I do not mean to compare the late
meeting at the theatre to the meetings
of the Jacobins in all respects. But it in
some points resembles them. Its object
was to override the deliberations of this
legislature, and to claim for a mere casual
gathering the supreme power in the
community. The effect of such proceed-
ings, if frequently adopted, would be as
in hrance—to bring the legislature into
contempt, and to create a new power self-
constituted ever changing, and com-
pletely irresponsible. This council is an
institution which it is of the utmost con-
sequence should be looked up to with
respect, but let those meetings be coun-
tenanced by persons of respectability, let


them be called not fox’ the purpose of re-
monstrance, of petition, or of advice, but
of dictation and intimidation, and then
this bouse must soon fall into contempt;
and when such a calamity falls upon any
legislative body, no matter what may be
its intelligence or public spirit, its useful-
ness is gone. But, admitting the pro-
priety of the course taken by the honour-
able and learned member (Mr. Darvall),
admitting the right of a few self-elected
individuals I do not believe their
number exceeds thi'ee or four—to frame
a constitution for the colony—to put
forth their opinion, as the voice of the
public, do we find anything in their pro-
ceedings, which by their gravity, their
ability, or their wisdom, should induce
this House to pause. I have read their
manifestoes and their speeches, but I can
find in them no such evidence of states-
manship as to induce me to pay any re-
spect whatever to their opinions. On
the contrary, I find displayed at their
great meeting, the same inconstancy—
the same virulence—the same want of
bought-—the same desire to check im-
partial discussion—which characterize
ery mob, It was all very well for the
movable and learned member for Cum-
berland, when addressing that meeting,
to say that “ he congratulated the colony
on the in provfement which he saw that
day manifested by the vast assemblage
of those, without whose voices, no altera-
tions in the constitution and laws of the
country could ever be carried into effect.”
These observations are repoi’ted to hare
been received with cheei-s ; and no doubt
the two thousand who were assembled,
cheered this allusion to their Importance
immensely. But if those people who so
cheered the honorable and learned gen-
tleman, had asked themselves soberly,
what authority they had’to make a con-
stitution, or to disallow or sanction laws,
they would rather have laughed at him
than cheered him. Th honorable and
learned member then went on to say:—
“ Let them not tarnish by any display of
ill feeling, the fair fame of their achieve-
ment. He said achievement, because
carry the measures which it proposed,
that meeting unquestionably would. (En-
thusiastic cheers.)” Let the House mark
the expression which the report states
was received with enthusiastic cheers.
What it is that this meeting has achieved
I really do not know. The honorable
and learned gentleman assured the meet-
ing that it would carry its point. Now
I do not believe that this meeting will
carry its point, for I cannot conceive
that this House will be swayed by any
determination which may be arrived at
by any unreflecting multitude, such as
that meeting was composed of. Nor do
I believe that the proceedings of that
meeting will have any greater weight
with the imperial authorities, but, on the
contrary, I feel persuaded that the de-
cision of this great measure will be left
with this House, as at once the most
competent and constitutional authority
to which it can be referred. The ho-
norable and learned member then asks ?
“ Had any one of all those then assem-
bled any personal end in view, or was
any individual actuated by any other mo-
tive than the good of his country.”
Now, I do not believe that any one who
was then present, except the small knot
of demagogues who originated the move-
ment, went there with any other object
in the woi’ld than to be amused. As to ;
any serious thought about the framing
of a Constitution, or promoting the good
of the coiintry in any way, I do not be-
lieve that any one present entertained
any such idea. The honorable and
learned gentleman then, in a spirit of
extreme candour, alluded to the opinions
previously expressed by him, in opposi-
sition to the views which he was then ad-
vocating, and asked with great pro-
priety, “ What was the use of experience
but to cox-rect the errors of youth.”
This is not all. “It was the work of
manhood to correct the errors of child-
hood.” So that the honorable and
leaxmed member, whose conversion, dated
from a very recent period, would have us
x’egard the opinions expressed by him
three or four years ago, as juvenile in-
discretions, or (what is still better), as
the unmature ideas of childhood. Again,
the honorable and learned member having
apparently exhausted all his arguments.


informed that intelligent and influential
meeting, that:—■“ In their efforts to ob-
tain the blessings of a sound and good
principle of government, he felt that that
most significant meeting would carry
great weight with the Council in Mac-
quarie-street, where individual pleading
would be of little avail, and the least
result would be, that they would obtain
more time for deliberation.” Now, I can
assure the honorable gentleman, that
although more time will be conceded to
them for deliberation than they have
asked for themselves, that concession has
not been .proposed to be made in conse-
quence of any expression of opinion
emanating from that meeting. The only
reason for the delay of three months
which my honorable and learned friend
has stated his intention to propose, is to
prevent those noisy declaimers reiterat-
ing their assertions, that there is any
desire on the part of the Council to push
on this measure with unseemly haste ;
and not because my honorable friend
imagines for one moment that much light
will be thrown upon the principles of
constitutional government by anything
which they may say or do in the interval.
The honorable and learned gentleman
next proceeded to discuss the relative
merits of republican and monarchical
institutions, but when he observed that,
“ he, however, feared that it would
be impossible to establish in this
country a republican government,” he
was met with cries of question. I am
afraid, after all, that the honourable
gentleman is not considered quite so
much of a republican as that meeting
would desire. He has, however, even
within these walls, given utterance to
sentiments which throw much doubt upon
his attachment to monarchical institutions.
In the course of his address last night he
called upon us to frame our bill, with a
view to the probability of this colony
some day or other becoming a republic.
He urged us to take what he termed a
fair view of the requirements of the
country—to look forward to a period,
perhaps very distant, when this colony
would be separated from the mother
country. I trust that that period is very
distant—l trust that the view described
by the honourable gentleman is a far
view indeed. The honourable gentleman
asked us to consider whether, if we were
an independent community, the form of
government which we would be likely to
choose would be monarchial or republican.
I hope that the house will not speculate
upon the necessity of making any such
election. I hope that these considera-
tions, however well founded the antici-
pation of the future independence of this
country may be, which I doubt they
are ; I hope I say, that those considera-
tions will not influence the discussions of
this house now, but that honourable
members will limit their views to those
questions, which it becomes them as
members of the British Empire to con-
sider. It will be quite time for the people
of a future age to discuss the question
of monarchial or republican forms of
government. Do not let us anticipate
those questions, but let us 'endeavour to
act in accordance with the principles of
the British constitution. The honour-
able and learned gentleman next told the
meeting that, “in order to act rightly
they should appeal not alone to their own
judgment and passions, but that they
should take precedents from history, and
acting fearlessly on the convictions so
formed they should decide.” Now I
would like to know as matter of curi-
osity, how many of the two thousand
people present at that meeting had
ever looked into history for pre-
cedents—or for any other purpose—l
would like to know how many even of the
self-elected committee itself had done so,
although certainly they may know a
little more of the matter than the great
bulk of the meeting. As to the sage
advice that they should not appeal to
their passions—?the conduct of the meet-
ing showed how faithfully that advice
had been followed. The honourable
gentleman next proceeded to suggest to
the meeting a course of action which he
| said “ would meet their present difficulty.
That course was, to petition the Gover-
nor-General to dissolve the Legislative
Council.” This was received with
1 *’ tremendous cheering and cries of out


with Wentworth.” But it appears that
the honourable gentleman did not tvish
Wentworth to be out. He thought his
friends were going too far, and therefore
he immediately added, “ If the council
were dissolved twenty times he considered
Mr. Wentworth the man to be there
still.” The report shows how this course
of action was received by this highly
dispassionate and respectable meeting.
I am not surprised, however, that the
honourable gentleman should have
adopted this course—nor that, with that
anxiety to please all parties which dis-
tinguishes him, he should next proceed
to compliment the Governor-General.
But that meets with great disapprobation.
Such is the dispassionate and dignified
conduct of those two thousand statesmen,
to whose hands a few insignificant de-
magogues of Sydney would confide the
framing of a constitution for this great
colony. No mention of the past services
of my honourable and learned friend
(Mr. Wentworth) would for one moment
be listened to, even from the honourable
gentleman; but the mere mention of his
name was drowned in tumultuous groans
and hisses, and cries of “ out with Went-
worth.” The honourable gentleman next
favoured the meeting with the opinion of
some unknown correspondent, who had
stigmatized the bill under discussion as
“ unconstitutional and disreputable.”
Now, I should like to know how this
correspondent had arrived at such a con-
clusion, and why we are to have the
ipse dixit of this unknown person set up
in opposition to the careful and deliberate
report of a select committee of this house.
The whole of the proceedings at this
meeting only afforded another instance
of the wretched inconstancy and in-
gratitude of all popular assemblies. In
conclusion, the honourable gentleman
assumed the tone of a cabinet minister,
although 1 am not aware that he is as
yet entrusted with any office in the
government, and told the meeting that
“he felt no doubt that a proper repre-
sentation to His Excellency, showing the
propriety of dissolving the council, would
be attended to.” I will undertake to
give the honourable gentleman and his
friends an assurance equally well founded,
and that is—that His Excellency, the
Governor-General will do nothing of the
sort. I will not trouble the house by
going through the speeches of the other
gentlemen who addressed the meeting,
but there is one passage in the address
of the next speaker to which I will take
the liberty to advert. That gentleman
is reported to have said, that “he had
the highest respect for their represent-
ative, Mr. Wentworth.” This was re-
ceived with “ groans,” and some further
observations respecting my honourable
and learned friend were met with hisses,
groans, and cries of “ down with Went-
worth.” The speaker then reminded the
meeting, that “ it should be remembered
that it was to him they owed the right
of assembling there that day. Nothing
was to be gained by ingratitude,” which
immediately elecited cries of “question.”
Such was the dispassionate impartiality
of those self-appointed members of the
convention. Ingratitude is the peculiar
characteristic of every mob, whether that
mob be composed of the respectable in-
habitants or of the lowest classes of the
community. No matter what services a
man may have rendered to the public—
no matter how much the cause of public
freedom may be indebted to his exer-
tions—no sooner does he differ in opinion
from the ignorant and deluded masses,
than all his services are at once forgotten,
and he is stigmatized as the blackest of
tyrants or the worst of turncoats. I
repeat, that I can see nothing in this
gathering to distinguish it from a mob.
I look upon it as a mob, and I hope and
believe a large majority of the House
will join with me in so considering it,
and that they, and all reflecting persons
out of doors, will agree with me in the
conviction, that the empty declaration,
and the wild hooting which it exhibited,
are a sufficient guarantee that it in no
way represented the intelligence of the
people of this country. There is a passage
in one of the speeches delivered at the
meeting, which refers to myself, and
which I may as well advert to. The
speaker stated, “ that at an early meet-
ing of the Committee, when there were


six members present besides the Chair-
man, it was decided that the constituency
of Cook and Westmoreland should not
have an additional member, there being
one (Mr. Martin) for the proposition, and
five against it. This was the solemnly
resolved decision of the Committee. But
observe what followed. At the very next
meeting they granted to the constituents
in question, in the teeth of their own
decision, an additional member.” After
denouncing what he was pleased to term
“ the present unjust and wicked distri-
bution of the representation,” he then
proceeded to inform the meeting, that
“ he had found a cue to the wonderful
change in the opinions of the Committee
as to whether Cook and Westrporeland
should have another member, —the pre-
sent member for which constituency was,
doubtless, repaid by this means for his
readiness in proposing that the City of
Sydney should have only an additional
member.” Now, I will briefly explain
to the House how the decision was
arrived at, and what was the real version
of this alteration in the opinion of
the Committee. When the matter was
first’ considered, the Committee did
not then determine upon the number of
members of which the new assembly
was to consist; but proceeded by a
comparison of the number of inhabitants
and electors in each constituency, to as-
certain by those tests to what constitu-
ency additional members might be given.
Going over the matter in this way, the
Committee did not think Cook and
Westmoreland entitled to an additional
member. At a subsequent meeting it
was determined that the assembly should
consist of fifty-four members; and as
there were then eighteen new seats to
distribute—a number which was not
contemplated before—they then found,
applying the tests before mentioned,
that the constituency which I have the
honor to represent was entitled to
another member, and they accordingly
allowed it. This is the whole history of
the bribe which is stated to have been
given to me. I have mentioned the
matter, not because it is of any moment,
but to show the utter recklessness of
these people in imputing motives, and
their total want of candour in dealing
with public questions. The same dema-
gogue then, amidst loud cheering, ex-
claims, “ Whatever decision we might
come to to-day, w r e must meet again
and again, and insist upon a constitution
being formed with, or without, the con-
currence of the Legislative Council.”
Now I would be glad to know how this
gentleman intended to form a constitu-
tion without the concurrence of this
House, unless, indeed, he is prepared,
like Cromwell, to come up here with his
fellow patriots, and turn us out of doors.
I am convinced that the Imperial Parlia-
ment, which he referred to as likely to
espouse their cause, will never recognize
that meeting as having any authority
whatever in reference to this'question.
The Parliament of England will have
sufficient discrimination to judge between
the calm and deliberate acts of this
House, and the absurd conclusions of
such a casual, incapable, and unreflect-
ing mob as that. It will easily perceive
the thoroughly insignificant nature of
the present agitation. In fact, it is
only by continual puffing and advertizing
on the part of some half dozen members
of a self-elected Committee, that the
agitation is kept alive at all. This re-
| doubtable body, it appears, have set
i themselves to the task of framing a
constitution. Let them by all means
proceed with it. I am quite certain
that a majority of this House will pay
no attention whatever to their plans, but
will decide this question without any re-
ference to them. We are told, indeed,
that we have no right to set ourselves
up in opposition to the opinions of the
people. But what is meant by the word
“ people.” Why there is no word in the
English language more generally mis-
understood. In the estimation of the
present agitators, “ the people ” includes
only the lower and unsducated classes—
those whose ignorance renders them, at
all times, the ready dupes of any worth-
less demagogue. But I do not recog-
| nize these classes as the “ people.” That
j term is associated, in my mind, with
i something far more dignified, and far


more comprehensive. In that term I
include all the higher classes as well as
the lower—the labourer, the trader, the
mechanic, the professional man, the
merchant—all the wealth and intelli-
gence, as well as all the poverty
and ignorance of the community—
and the voice of that people I take
not from the large mass of stupidity
which degrades, but the far smaller por-
tion of intellect which ennobles it.
When I find the people, in the sense in
which I understand the terra, delibe-
rating, expressing a strong and decided
opinion, then, and then only, shall I feel
myself bound to regard it. But I will
never regard the opinion of any mere
miserable section of the community,
however wise, whose honesty, intelli-
gence, and judgment, my own intelli-
gence forbids me to respect. Now,
having said thus much with reference to
the meeting, I will address myself to the
main question before the house. The
first point for consideration in the con-
struction of our new Constitution is,
whether we shall have one house of legis-
lation, or two. I should not have con-
sidered it necessary, however, to discuss
this question at all, were it not that a
petition, praying the Council to esta-
blish only one house, was presented a
few evenings since. As this petition
may be the precursor of other petitions
to the same effect, I trust the house will
forgive me if I devote a few moments to
the consideration of this question. Had
it not been for this petition I should
scarcely have believed that two opinions
could exist with reference to this matter.
The whole experience of mankind tends
to prove that two houses of legislature
are desirable. Whether we refer to the
experience of antiquity, or of modern
times, we find that those governments
which consisted of a double legislature
have been the most stable, the most
solid, the most enduring; while those
which possessed only a single house of
legislature have been ever subject to
continual vacillation. The governments
of Athens, of Sparta, and of Rome,
have ever been regarded as the most
successful of ancient times. In all of
them the system of a double legislature
was established. Sparta and Rome had
their Senates, and Athens its Areopagus ;
and to these, above all other nations of
antiquity, must we look for models of
wise and stable government. Coming
down to more recent times, we find ex-
amples of a contrary character in the
numerous Italian republics which sprang
up in the middle ages. In the whole of
these republics the government consisted
of a single legislature, and nothing in
the history of government is more mise-
rable than their career. One by one
they lost their liberty—their free insti-
tutions were swept away and their
places were supplied, without exception,
by irresponsible despotisms of various
kinds. In still more recent times, we
have the example of France at the out-
break of the old revolution. Among her
public men at that period were to be
found some of the first statesmen of their
time—men of illustrious reputation—of
great experience ; great capacity ; great
acquirements ; but they fell into the fatal
mistake of establishing a single legisla-
ture—a mistake which, in spite of the
noble energy and the commanding elo-
quence of the young deputies of the
Gironde—in spite of all the intellect of
a great and civilized nation, resulted in
the reign of terror—a reign to be sub-
verted at length by a military despotism.
But I need not go to foreign countries
for examples. I can find one more sig-
nificant than them all in the history of
our own. I can refer to the example
of the long Parliament of England—
the greatest legislative body that ever
sat at any time, or in any country. It is
to the labours of that Parliament that
we and the people of America owe the
foundations of our liberty. From every
country where free institutions flourish
at this day, a deep debt of gratitude is
due to that great assembly. Yet that
Parliament, with all its patriotism—with
all its wisdom—voted itself perpetual.
Now, if such a body were found capable
of such an extreme abuse of power, even
though checked by another body pos-
sessed constitutionally of equal autho-
rity, what guarantee for freedom and


stability can vve hope to find under any
constitution in which the principle of a
single legislature is established ? Let us
now turn to the history of the United
States. Throughout the whole of them
the powers of legislature . are vested in
two houses. In their national legisla-
ture the same principle is carried out.
This great principle therefore pervades
the Union. In practice it has been found
the great safeguard of the country. On
many occasions of great national peril,
the Senate of the United States, in the
face of the wildest democracy in the
world, has proved itself to be the main-
stay of the constitution—the one great
authority to which the friends of peace
and order must look in every storm. But
I will take another and a nobler in-
stance—the Senate of our own country
—the House of Lords—a Senate which
(the opinion of Mr. Mackay notwith-
standing) I will venture to call the
greatest and the wisest the world has
ever seen. Great in intelligence, great
in dignity, great in practical wisdom,
great in patriotism and love of public
liberty—to that Senate we owe a large
share of all the greatness of our nation.
On this principle of a double legislature,
therefore, do I desire to base our consti-
tution. That principle has received the
sanction of the greatest authorities, and
among them that of Burke, Montesquieu,
Story, and many others entitled to equal
respect. On every ground, therefore, of
experience, reason, and authority, we
cannot but arrive at the conclusion that
a double legislature is the worst form of
government that can be adopted. This
brings me to a consideration of the objects
for which an Upper House of legislature
should be established, The self-elected
committee to which I have had occasion
to refer so often, have put forth a state-
ment to the effect, that such a House is
required merely to act as a mediator be-
tween the Executive Government and the
representatives of the people. Now, in
all the researches which I have been able
to make, I can find no authority for this
position. Those profound statesmen who
framed the American constitution estab-
lished their Senate on no such principle
as that. They considered that in repub-
lican, though in a less degree than in
other governments, legislators are liable
to forget their obligations to their con-
stituents, and that therefore a second
branch of the legislature, dividing power
with the first, but distinct from it, would
interpose a salutary check, and render
sinister combinations difficult, if not im-
possible. They knew the nature of po-
pular assemblies, and that the immediate
dependence of their members upon their
constituents render them peculiarly open
to be influenced by every change of po-
pular opinion, and that there is a pro-
pensity in all numerous assemblies to yield
to sudden impulses, and be led by party
feeling, and under the influence of factious
leaders into intemperate resolutions.
In all such large assemblies it is easy
for mere agitators to obtain a paramount
control. Consequently, they thought it
advisable to establish a less numerous
and more dignified body; less liable than
the other to dangerous influences, either
from within or without. Again, in bodies
composed of large numbers, and holding
office but for a short period, there is
every probability that the majority will
be made up of men possessing a com-
paratively small amount of legislative
talent, and hence arises a necessity for a
body of superior endowments, with a
larger tenure of power to review every
act of legislation. These, and the various
other equally cogent reasons, which led
to the formation of the American Senate,
will be found detailed at length in the
pages of Story, but it will not be found
anywhere among them that the Senate
was deemed necessary as a mediator
between the President and the House of
Representatives. I come now to the
formation of the Lower House, and the
first question which arises for determina-
tion is, the number of members of which
that House ought to consist. This point
has not been touched upon by any of the
previous speakers, but as it may be made
a subject of comment during the re-
mainder of the debate, I will take leave
to say a few words in reference to it
now : The principle by which I think
we ought to be guided in this matter is


this, namely, that the Lower House
should be sufficiently numerous to pre-
vent improper combinations being easily
formed, but not so numerous as to throw
impediments in the way of calm and
rational discussion. It is impossible to
fix upon any arbitrary number that can
be positively said to suit these two
essential conditions. In America tho
number first fixed upon was sixty-five.
But this is no guide for us, as the deter-
mination of such a question must in all
cases depend upon local circumstances
and conditions. Here the best guide is
experience. The present House of fifty-
four members has been found, in the
respects to which I have alluded, to work
well, and the Committee I think have
acted wisely in retaining that number.
There are many persons I know who
doubt whether so large a number of
competent persons can be found in this
colony, willing to undertake the duties of
legislation ; but I do not share in their
doubts. In the first instance, perhaps
there may be S9me difficulty of this de-
scription, but the advance of the country
in'importance is so rapid, and so great
an increase of wealth, and its consequent
leisure and intelligence may reasonably
be looked forward to, that those diffi-
culties in my opinion must speedily
vanish. The next question is, the dura-
tion of the Lower House. It is proposed
by the Committee to retain the present
term of five years. No doubt if we are
to follow American precedents, or yield
to the advice of those who are such
strong admirers of American institutions
in all their integrity, we should feel our-
selves bound to limit the duration of the
Lower House to a single year; but, as has
been well said by Mr. Justice Story,
there can be no good reason why the
annual return of the seasons, or any other
arbitrary period, should determine the
existence of the legislature. The guiding
principle for us should be to fix the dura-
tion of our House of Assembly at a
period sufficiently long to enable it to
understand its functions, but not long
enough to remove it from a due sense of
responsibility. In former times English
Parliaments were triennial. By statute
the period of three years was extended to
seven. Since the passing of the Sep-
tennial Act, however, attempts have been
made from time to time to procure its
repeal, but hitherto without success.
Either by accident or design, the exact
mean between these two periods of three
and seven years, has been fixed upon for
the continuance of this Council, unless
previously dissolved. This term of five
years has been found to work well, and
there is, therefore, no good reason why
we should change it. The next and
most important question of all, with re-
ference to the Lower House is, —by
whom are the representatives to be
elected ? And this involves two questions,
namely :—where are we to fix the limit
of the suffrage, and how are we to group
the voters ? If we are to place any re-
liance upon the opinions of the Radicals
and Chartists, and admirers of the
American Constitution, we should adopt
the principle of equal electoral districts
and universal suffrage. This view indeed
is not confined to the Radicals and the
Chartists. I find that it is adopted by
the honourable and learned member for
Cumberland, who, in his speech last
night, laid down the doctrine, that
“ every man who breathes the air has a
right to share in legislation, either per-
sonally or by representative.”
Mr. DARVALL : I beg leave to cor-
rect the honourable member, I never
stated anything of the sort.
Mr. MARTIN : I do not think that I
am in error; but if the honourable
member says positively, that he made no
such statement, then I must be mis-
mistaken.
Mr, DARVALL : I will submit to the
House, whether or not I used such
language. If I did I will be very glad
to be set right on the point.
Mr. MARTIN : I will submit to cor-
rection if 1 am wrong, but 1 certainly
took a note of the words, and I quoted
them now, because 1 was proceeding to
call the attention of the House to a sub-
sequent statement of the honourable and
learned member, to the effect, that he
did not desire universal suffrage a
statement which I considered rather re-


markable after the expression of such a
doctrine as, that every man who breaths
the air is entitled to a vote. The honour-
able and learned gentleman certainly did
say this—“ Why should any man give
rights in which he is not to share.” Now,
if this is not advocating universal suf-
frage, I am at a loss to know what is.
Those who are in favour of universal
suffrage have one great difficulty to get
over before they can expect their ideas
to be received with any favour by persons
of real intelligence. They must estab-
lish the right to have a direct voice in
the choice of representatives to be one
of the original inherent rights of man.
Unless they can make this out clearly
and indisputably they must fail to estab-
lish their case, and the franchise must
be regulated upon some principle of ex-
pediency by those in whose hands the
chief power may happen to be placed.
Now, what are the natural rights of man ?
He has a right to personal liberty—he
has a right to personal security—he has
a right to the enjoyment of his property —
he has a right to do as he likes, so long
as by so doing he does not trespass on
the rights, or interfere with the liberty of
others. Governments are established to
protect and secure those rights, and for
no other purpose. If human nature Avere
perfect—if all men would spontaneously
abstain from interfering with each other’s
rights—government would then be un-
necessary. But the fallibility and perver-
sity of human nature are such, that men
will not respect each others rights unless
they are coerced by some superior power.
Government, therefore, is a matter of
necessity. And it follows from this that
all that has to be considered in the
formation of a government is,—in what
way the natural rights of man can be
best protected. Whatever government
is best calculated to protect those rights ;
that is unquestionably the best form of
government —no matter whether it be
based on universal suffrage, or limited
suffrage, or no suffrage at all. The
rights of suffrage are a means, and not
an end ; and they have been so regarded
by every eminent man who has entered
upon the consideration of this question.
The right to elect representatives is no
original right of man, because it is a
thing unknown to man, except in civil
society. It arose from the necessity of
imposing checks upon those entrusted
with the preservation of man’s rights,
and it can be carried no further than
the exigency of the case requires.
There is no record in history to show us
how society was first organized. How
the fabric of government was first raised
is a matter of pure speculation. It
cannot be supposed that any number of
persons met together, and formed them-
selves into a community at once. It
is more reasonable to imagine that the
first regular government had its origin
in a usurpation—in a despotism wherein
a single individual, taking advantage of
some superiority displayed by him in
Avar or commotion of some kind, seized
upon the supreme authority. There can
be little reason to doubt that such Avas the
origin of government. Experience,
hoAvever, would soon teach the people
under such a rule, that although one
despot might be Avise'and beneficent,
his successor might be the reverse—that
the same government, which in the
hands of one man might be the best,
in the hands of another might become
the Avorst. Thus constitutional checks
of some kind Avould come to be sought
for, and obtained, one by one, not as
rights, but as necessities for the preser-
vation of rights. Under the feudal sys-
tem, which pervaded Europe after the
doAvnfall of the Homan Empire, each
separate community was governed by a
number of petty chieftains. One chief-
tain gradually managed to raise himself
to authority over the rest, and under the
title of King exercised irresponsible
poAver over the people. This was the
case in England as Avell as elseAvhere.
Arbitrary exactions of one kind or an-
other led to the interpositon of checks,
first by the chiefs and warriors—next by
the common people. After centuries
of oppression representative institutions
arose, not because the people had any
right to representation, but because
Avithout representation they felt they
could enjoy no rights at all. So far,


then, as it is necessary to protect the
rights of man, so far should the princi-
ple of representation be extended, but
no farther ; for it should ever be recol-
lected that the rights of man need to be
protected more from the people than
from the sovereign—and that by giving
uncontrolled power to the masses, you
give them the means, not of protecting
their rights, but of violating all rights,
including their own. It is our duty,
therefore, in the formation of a govern-
ment, to select that constitution which
will be the most likely to secure the best
administration—which will be most
likely to place the powers of legislation
in the hands of the wisest, the most up-
right, and the most impartial men in the
community. We should examine into
the history of the past—we should look
to the experiences of the mother country,
and the experiences of other lands, and
by applying those experiences to our
own condition, endeavour to ascertain
what suffrage will be best calculated to
place our government, at all times, in
the hands of our best men. That it
will universal suffrage, or anything
approaching to universal suffrage, we can
have no warrant for believing. But
whatever it may be, let us never forget
that that suffrage is the best calculated
to carry out the ends of government
which will not only best protect the
people from the injustice of their rulers,
but also do that which is, perhaps, the
most important function of government
—protect the people from themselves.
These, it should be borne in mind, are
not my individual opinions—they are
the deliberate opinions of men uni-
versally regarded as the highest autho-
rities on the subject. These are the
words of one—the most illustrious of
them all;
Far am I from denying in theory, full as far is
my heart from withholding in practice (if I were
of power to give or to withhold), the real rights
of men. In denying their false claims of right,
I do not mean to injure those which are real, and
are such as their pretended rights would totally
destroy. If civil society be made for the advan-
tage of man, all the advantages for which it is
made become his right. It is an institution of
beneficence, and law itself is only beneficence
acting by a rule. Men have a right to live by
that rule ; they have a right to do justice, as be-
tween their fellows, whether their fellows are in
politic function or in ordinary occupation. They
have a right to the fruits of their industry, and
to the means of making their industry fruitful.
They have a right to the acquisitions of their
parents ; to the nourishment and improvement of
their offspring; to instruction in life, and to conso-
lation in death. Whatever each man can sepa-
rately do, without trespassing upon others, he
has a right to do for himself; and he has a right
to a fair portion of all which society, with all its
combinations of skill and force, can do in his
favour. In this partnership all men have equal
rights, but not to equal tilings. He that lias
but five shillings in the partnership has as good
a right to it as he that has five hundred pounds
has to his larger proportion. But he has not a
right to an equal dividend in the product of the
joint stock ; and as to the share of power, au-
thority, and direction which each individual
ought to have in the management of the State,
that I must deny to be amongst the direct origi-
nal rights of man in civil society, for I have in
my contemplation the civil, social man, and no
other. It is a thing to be settled by conven-
tion.
If civil society be the offspring of convention,
that convention must be its law—that convention
must limit and modify all the descriptions of con-
stitution which are formed under it. Every sort
of legislature, judicial, or executory power, are
its creatures. They can have no being in any
other state of things ; and how can any man
claim, under the conventions of civil society,
rights which do not so much as suppose its exis-
tence—rights which are absolutely repugnant to
it ? One of the first motives to civil society, and
which becomes one of its fundamental rules, is, that
no man should be judge in his own cause. By this
each person has at once divested himself of the
first fundamental right of uncovenanted man—
that is, to judge for himself, and to assert his
own cause. He abdicates all right to be his own
governor. He inclusively, in a great measure,
abandons the right of self-defence, the first law
of nature. Men cannot enjoy the rights of an
uncivil and of a civil state together. That he
may obtain justice, he gives up his right of de-
termining what it is in points the most essential
to him. That he may secure some liberty, he
makes a surrender in trust of the whole of it.
Government is not made in virtue of natural
rights, which may and do exist in total inde-
pendence of it, and exist in much greater clear-
ness, and in a much greater degree of abstract
perfection ; but their abstract perfection is their
practical defect. By having a right to every-
thing, they want everything. Government is a
contrivance of human wisdom to provide for hu-
man wants. Men have a right that these wants
should be provided for by this wisdom. Among
these wants is to be reckoned the want, out of
civil society, of a sufficient re-restraint upon
their passions. Society requires not only that
the passions of individuals should be sulnccted,
but that even in the mass and body, as well as in


the individuals, the inclinations of men should
frequently be thwarted, their will controlled, and
their passions brought into subjection. This can
only be done by a power out of themselvee, and
not, in the exercise of its function, subject to that
will and to those passions which it is its office to
bridle and subdue.' In this sense the restraints
on men, as well as their liberties, are to be
reckoned among their rights. But as the liber-
ties and the restrictions vary with times and cir-
cumstances, and admit of infinite modifications,
they cannot be settled upon any abstract rule ;
and nothing is so foolish as to discuss them upon
that principle.
These are the opinions of one who, to
use his own memorable language, had
been no tool of power; no flatterer of
greatness—of one, almost the whole of
whose public exertion had been a
struggle for the liberty of others—of
one, in whose breast no anger, durable or
vehement, had ever been kindled, but by
what he considered as tyranny—of one
who desired honors, distinctions, and
emoluments but little, and who expected
them not at all—of one, who, I’will take
the liberty of adding, was the great vin-
dicator of Indian wrongs, and the great
advocate of American freedom- These
are the opinions of one who was the
great defender of the rights of the colo-
nies—of one who, though we are told by
a friend who knew him well, and valued
him highly—more, I believe, in joke
than in earnest, that
he narrowed his mind,
And to party gave up what was meant for man-
kind j
yet at the close of a long life, after
five-and-twenty years of public service,
did not hesitate to sever himself from
all his party ties—to sacrifice the inti-
macy of his dearest personal friends—to
isolate himself from those whose society
he most deeply valued, because he felt
himself bound to advocate a line of
policy which, however unpopular at that
day, he felt was deeply interwoven with
the freedom and the happiness of man-
kind. In reply to the accusations which
were poured in upon him for his sup-
posed abandonment of the cause of po-
pular rights, he wrote his memorable
appeal from the new Whigs to the old
ones. Time has now enabled him to
appeal to a still greater tribunal—to the
tribunal of posterity. That tribunal has
pronounced in his favour, and among
men of all parties, and in all countries,
where the English language is spoken,
his memory is reverentially cherished
as the most illustrious of all our states-
men. It is unnecessary that I should
name him. He must be recognised at
once by all who hear me. On an occa-
sion like the present, I do not feel myself
bound to submit implicitly to the judg-
ment of any man. But if I must bow
down before authority, it shall not be
before any ignorant and noisy rabble,
however numerous, but before some such
noble and commanding genius as this.
I have cited to the House the opinions
of a great statesman, living under a mo-
narchy ; I will now quote the opinions
of an almost equally great authority,
living under a republic :
To whom ought the right of suffrage, in a free
government, to be confided, or, in other words,
who ought to be permitted to vote in the choice
of the representatives of the people? Ought
the right of suffrage to bo absolutely universal ?
Ought it it to be qualified and restrained ? Ought
it to belong to many or few ? If there ought to
be restraints and qualifications, what are the
true boundaries and limits of such restraints and
qualifications ? These questions are sufficiently
perplexing and disquieting in theory; and in the
practice of different states, and even of free
states, ancient as well as modern, they have as-
sumed almost infinite varieties of form and illus-
tration. Perhaps they do not admit of any
general, much less of any universal answer, so
as to furnish an unexceptionable and certain
rule for all ages and all nations. The manners,
habits, institutions, characters, and pursuits of
different nations ; the local position of the terri-
tory, in regard to other nations ; the actual or-
ganizations and classes of society ; the influences
of peculiar religious, civil, or political institu-
tions ; the dangers as well as the difficulties of
the times ; the degrees of knowledge or ignor-
ance pervading the mass of society; the national
temperament, and even the climate and products
of the soil; the cold and thoughtful gravity of
the North ; and the warm and mercurial excita-
bility of tropical or southern regions; all these
may, and probably will, introduce modifications of
principle as well as of opinion, in regard to
the right of suffrage, which it is not easy either
to justify or to overthrow. The most strenuous
advocate for universal suffrage has never yet
contended that the right should be absolutely
universal. No one has ever been sufficiently vi-
sionary to hold that all persons of every age,
degree, and character, should be entitled to vote
in all elections of all public officers. Idiots, in-
fants, minors, and persons insane or utterly
imbecile, have been, without scruple, denied the


right, as not having the sound judgment and dis-
cretion tit tor its exercise. In many countries,
persona guilty of crimes have also been denied
the right, as a personal punishment, or as a
security to society. In most countries females,
whether married or single, have been purposely
excluded from voting, as interfering with sound
policy and the harmony of social life. In the
tew cases in which they have been permitted to
vote, experience has not justified the conclusion
that it has been attended with any correspondent
advantages, either to the public or to themselves.
And yet it would be extremely difficult, upon any
mere theoretical reasoning, to establish any satis-
factory principle upon which the one half of every
society has thus been systematically excluded by
the other half from all right of participating in
Government, which would not, at the same time
apply to and justify many other exclusions. If it
|be said that all men have a natural, equal, and
inalienable right to vote, because they are all born
free and equal, that they all have common rights
and interests entitled to protection, and therefore
have an equal right to decide, either personally
or by their chosen representatives, ujon the
laws and regulations which shall control, measure,
and sustain those rights and interests; that they
cannot be compelled to surrender, except by their
free consent, what, by the bounty ana order of
Providence, belongs to them in common with all
their race ;—what is there in these considerations
which is not equally applicable to females as free,
intelligent, moral, responsible beings, entitled to
equal rights and interests and protection, and
having a vital stake in all the regulations and
laws of society ? And if an exception, from the
nature of the case, could be felt in regard to per-
sons who are idiots, infants, and insane, how can
this apply to persons who are of more mature
growth, and are yet deemed minors by the munici-
pal law? w r ho has an original right to fix the time
and period of pupilage, or minority? Whence was
derived the right of the ancient Greeks and
Romans to declare that women should be deemed
never to be of age, but should be subject to per-
petual guardianship ? Upon what principle of
natural law did the Romans, in after times, fix
the majority of females, as well as of males, at
twenty-five years ? Who has a right to say, that
in England it shall, for some purposes, he at
fourteen, for others at seventeen, and for all, at
twenty-one years; while in France a person
arrives, for all purposes, at majority, only at
thirty years ; in Naples at eighteen ; In Holland
at twenty-five? Who shall say, that one man
is not as well qualified as a voter at eighteen
years of age, as another is at twenty-five, or a
third at forty; and far better than most men
are at eighty? And if any % society is invested
with authority to settle the matter of the age
and sex of voters, according to its own view of
its policy, or convenience, or justice, who shall
say, that it has not equal authority, for like rea-
sons, to settle any other matter regarding the
rights, qualifications, and duties of voters? The
truth seems to be, that the right of voting, like
many other rights, is one which, whether It has
a fixed foundation in natural law or not, has
always been treated in the practice of nations as
a strictly civil right, derived from, and regulated
by, each society, according to its own circum-
stances and interests. It is difficult, even in the
abstract, to conceive how it could have otherwise
been treated. The terms and conditions upon
which any society is formed and organized must
essentially depend upon the will of those who are
associated, or at least of those who constitute a.
majority actually controlling the rest. Origi-
nally, no man could have any right but to act
for himself, and the power to choose a chief ma-
gistrate or other officer ; to exorcise dominion or
authority over others as well as himself, could
arise only upon a joint consent of the others to
such appointment, and their consent might be
qualified exactly according to their own interests,
or power, or policy. The choice of representa-
tives to act in a legislative capacity is not only a
refinement of much later stages of actual asso-
ciation and civilization, but could scarcely occur
until the society had assumed to itself the right
to introduce such institutions, and to confer such
privileges as it deemed conducive to tiie public
good, and to prohibit the existence of any
other. In point of fact, it is well known that
representative legislative bodies, at least in the
form now used, are the peculiar invention of mo-
dern times, and were unknown to antiquity. If,
then, every well-organised society has the right
to consult for the common good of the whole, and
if, upon the principles of natural law, this right
is conceded by the very union of society, it seems
difficult to assign any limit to this right, which
is compatible with the duo attainment of the end
proposed. If, therefore, any society shall deem
the commom good and interests of the whole
society best promoted, under the particular cir-
cumstances in which it is placed, by a restriction
of the right of suffrage, it is not easy to state any
solid ground of objection to its exercise of such
an authority. At least, if any society has a (dear
right to deprive females, constituting one-half of
the whole population, of the right of suffrage,
(which, with scarcely an exception, has been
uniformly maintained) it will require some astute-
ness to find upon what ground this exclusion can
be vindicated, which does not justify, or at least
excuse, many other exclusions. Government (to
use the pithy language of Mr. Burke) has been
deemed a practical thing, made for the happiness
of mankind, and not to furnish out a spectacle of
uniformity to gratify the schemes ox visionary
politicians.
These are the opinions of, perhaps, the
greatest judge, not only in the United
States, but the greatest judge who has
presided in any court known to the pre-
sent generation. It should, moreover,
be borne in mind, that these opinions
were delivered (originally as lectures,
I believe) before an American audience,
and were intended for circulation through-


out the United States. They form a
portion of Mr. Justice Story’s Com-
mentaries on the American Constitution,
which has ever been the great constitu-
tional text-book of the Union. If such
opinions can be promulgated there by a
great judicial functionary, with the uni-
versal approbation of the enlightened
portion of his countrymen, with how
much greater reason and propriety may
they be promulgated in a dependency of
the British Empire. How important,
then, are these opinions when taken in
connection with the opinions of Burke.
It will be found, on examining the Ame-
rican constitution, that its framers did
not resort to the principle of universal
suffrage. They left the franchise of
each state just as they found it, and con-
ferred upon the electors under that ex-
isting franchise, the right of voting for
representatives for the Lower House of
Congress. This franchise differs widely
in different states. In some states the
payment of a certain amount of taxes
constitutes a qualification. In others,
all the inhabitants of a certain standing
are entitled to vote. In Virginia, the
freeholders only. Thus it will be seen
that the founders of the American con-
stitution established no uniform plan.
Where then, let me ask, are the argu-
ments and precedents in favor of uni-
versal suffrage to be found? When
people talk so loudly of what they term
the inalienable rights of man—when
they assert that taxation and representa-
tion should be co-extensive, we are en-
titled to ask for their arguments and
their authorities. But the advocates of
universal suffrage do not deal in argu-
ments and authorities ; they deal only in
assertions. Their assertions may obtain
the applause of those who cannot or will
not measure their value, but they can
have no weight with this House. I be-
lieve that this Council possesses consti-
tutionally the right to fix the franchise
where it may think proper. The whole
question of the franchise is a mere matter
of expediency, and of that expediency
this House is the appointed judge It
may be that, after the most mature con-
sideration, after all our ingenuity, has
been exhausted in the endeavour to
fix the franchise at those limits which
will best secure a wise and solid govern-
ment, we may fail in the attempt, but
we, and we only, are the persons autho-
rized to make the experiment. We are
now called upon to adopt a franchise,
and that franchise we should adopt, not
in accordance with the wild and extrava-
gant theories of the ill-informed and un-
reflecting demagogues of the hour, but
with a view to the great ends for which
any franchise whatever is given; and
among the most important of those ends
must be ranked the necessity of impos-
ing a strong check upon the arbitrary
will of the multitude. The honorable'
and learned member for Cumberland has
told us that by the common law, taxa-
tion and representation should go to-
gether. I was surprised to hear that
statement. What is the common law?
A collection of principles and precedents
dating from the beginning of what is
termed legal memory, interpreted and
applied by the general rules of reason
and cpfnmon sense. Parliament is a part
of tins common law. The House of
Lords springs as much from the common
law as the House of Commons. The
crown derives its authority from the
same source. They are all equally
common law institutions. But ail of
them are inconsistent with the principle
of universal suffrage. At no period of
our history has such a principle been
applied to any part of the constitution.
How then can it be said that the common
law recognizes universal suffrage ? In
all its changes the House of Commons
has had no such principle identified with
it. With respect to the distribution of
the representation, to which, in principle,
all that has been said about the right of
suffrage equally applies, let us enquire
in what manner it has been settled
in England by the Reform Bill.
Let us see whether by that measure—
carried, as it was, after so much agitation
and so much discussion, after the display
of so much energy and so much ability
by the ablest of England’s statesmen—
the principle of universal suffrage and
equal electoral districts has been recog-


nized. For this purpose I will cite a
few of the anomalies existing in the re-
presentation of the mother country. I
am reading from an article in the West-
minster Review, written for the purpose
of showing the unequal way in which the
representation of the country has been
allotted. This article deals mainly with
this inequality, but I am citing it as ap-
plying equally in principle to the suf-
frage ; for the right to universal suffrage,
and the right to equal electoral districts
stand upon the same basis. They are
corollaries of each other—
Of the 56 boroughs totally disfranchised, the
population of the largest, Downton, was 3961.
Of the 30 boroughs which it reduced to a single
representative, the population of the smallest,
Petersfield, was 1423. The smallest new borough
which was to return a single member was Whitby,
with a population of 10,399. The largest old
borough retaining a single member was West-
bury, with a population of 7,324 ; the largest new
borough in the same class being Salford, with a
population of 50,810, Thetford retained its two
members, with 146 electors ; the Tower Hamlets
gained only two for its 25,000,
Now what weight, I would ask, can be
attached to the argument that Sydney,
independent of the Hamlets, should have
six members, when it is here shown that
a constituency in the mother country,
with only 146 electors, is represented in
the same ratio as one with 25,000, Now,
although the would-be reformers are
anxious to have it believed that this state
of things is attended with grievous re-
sults, I know of no particular hardship
arising from it. I know of no tyranny
or injustice which it originates or pro-
tects. I know of no grievance, public
or private, which it in any way makes
it difficult to redress. Why, then, should
we be asked here to frame a constitution
in which the representation should be
placed on a different basis. If it be
found that under this seemingly unequal
system of representation, no rights of
the people, no rights of the Government
are endangered, I think the Council
will agree with me in believing that the
inequalities of the British constitution
are far superior to the equalities of other
states. Let us for a moment compare
the House of Commons, an assembly
elected on this unequal plan, with an-
other body, the House of Representatives
in America, elected strictly on the prin-
ciple of equality, and how different do
we find the characters of the two, how
immensely inferior in every w r ay, the
latter to the former. Can any Legisla-
tive body stand lower in public estima-
tion than the Lower House of Congress ?
Have not its incapacity, its vulgarity, its
corruption, become a bye-word through-
out the universe P And yet it is a body
elected by the intelligent people of a
great nation, on the principle of equal
electoral districts. To preserve this
equality, the electoral system undergoes
a revision every ten years ; and if, in
the intervening period, any district has
increased in population, the number of
its representatives is increased in propor-
tion. And yet what is the result ? Why,
that in that assembly there is scarcely to
be found a man of respectable education
or position in society. The entire body
have become the opprobrium of their
country, and a disgrace to the very name
of representation. Had it not been for
the countervailing influence of the Se-
nate, they would have long since shat-
tered the constitution of their country to
atoms. Now when we find these two
systems in two countries of the same
blood, the same language, the same
literature, leading to such widely dif-
ferent results, can it be a matter of
doubt in this House which example we
ought to follow ? The House of Com-
mons, even in the days of triennial par-
liaments and rotten boroughs, always
found within its walls a large majority
of educated, intelligent, and influential
men. From the days of the great re-
bellion, down to the present time, that
assembly has maintained the character
of being the most distinguished of repre-
sentative institutions. It is so still.
And it will continue to preserve that
high character so long as it remains
based upon the true principles of the
British constitution. When the prin-
ciple of election comes to be the same in
England as in the United States, the
glory and dignity of the House of Com-
mons will be gone for ever. Yet igno-
rant agitators clamour here for the


American constitution as a model, and
denounce those who, like myself, ask
that the example of the House of Com-
mons, rather than the example of the
Lower House of the American Congress,
may be followed. Those eminent men
who settled the principle of representa-
tion in England at the passing of the
Reform Bill, were aware that interests
as well as numbers ought to be repre-
sented. Finding society composed of a
variety of classes, having different in-
terests, and pursuing different avoca-
tions, they saw that it was necessary to
prevent any one class trampling on an-
other, and they accordingly gave to
each a fair share in the representation.
Thus, what appears to be an inequality,
has brought about a really equal and
just representation of every section of
the community in the House of Com-
mons. In this colony we find, as in all
other civilized countries, and in all ages,
two great leading interests existing—-the
trading and manufacturing on the one
hand, and the producing on the other.
All sections of the community may be
classed under the one or the other of
these heads. The men engaged in trade
form a class which, in addition to many
evils, confer also many benefits on the
community. They are not, ho we per, the
section to which the greatest attention
should be paid. The class on whom
the prosperity of every country depends
are the producers. Whether they be
squatters or agriculturists, that class is
of infinitely more value than the com-
mercial. Let the producing interest be
destroyed, and the entire fabric of society
must crumble into ruins. It is the
fashion to estimate the value of our pro-
ducing classes by the extent of our ex-
ports. But the amount of our exports,
princely as it is, forms but a small por-
tion of the produce of our soil. It is
almost insignificant compared with the
enormous quantity consumed as food, and
in various other ways, throughout the
country. People are not aware of the
extent to which they are dependent upon
the producing classes, because they have
no returns showing the value of our own
produce used by ourselves. I am no ad-
vocate for class distinctions. lam not
accustomed to seek to encourage class
interests in the community ; but looking
at the immense value to this country of
the producing classes in our rural dis-
tricts, I feel it my duty to warn this
House and the country of the danger of
allowing the trading classes to obtain a
preponderating influence in the Legisla-
ture. These classes, as everybody knows,
live for the most part in the towns—the
majority of them in Sydney. They are,
therefore, possessed of far greater facili-
ties for combination than people in the
country. This circumstance, combined
with their greater command of money as
bank directors, and persons supported
by banks, enables them to make a vigor-
ous demonstration whenever their inte-
rests are affected. They can always be
got together with the greatest ease for
strong and united action, and there is
never any want of demagogues to infuse
excitement into any of their public de-
monstrations. So far as protecting their
own interests, or attacking the interests
of others is concerned, they have there-
fore very peculiar advantages. If we
were to give Sydney no share whatever
in the representation, its population
would still exercise a great influence
over the affairs of the country. Look
for instance to the effect which the mere
report in the newspapers, of 2000 people
having assembled, at a public meeting
in the Victoria Theatre, would have
throughout the rural districts. With re-
ference to the influence exercised by the
inhabitants of towns and cities over the
people in the country, I will cite an
almost republican authority to show that
I am not singular in the views which I
have been expressing. This is the lan-
guage of Sir James Mackintosh, himself
a leading reformer
The labouring classes are in every country a
perpetual majority. The diffusion of education
will, doubtless, raise their minds, and throw open
prizes for the ambition of a few, which will
spread both activity and content amongthe rest
but in the present state of the population am
territory of European countries, the majority o
men must earn their subsistence by daily labour
Notwithstanding local differences, persons in thh
situation have a general resemblance of eharac
ter, and sameness of interest. Their interest


or what they think their interest, may be at vari-
ance with the real or supposed interests of the
higher orders. If they are considered as forming,
in this respect, one class of society, a share in
the representation may be allotted to them—
sufficient to protect their interest, compatablv
with the equal protection of the interests of all
other classes, and regulated by a due regard to
all the qualities which are required in a well
composed Legislative Assembly. But if repre-
sentation be proportioned to numbers alone,
every other interest in society is placed at the
disposal of the multitude. No otner class can
be effectually represented; no other class can
have a political security for justice ; no other
about two-elevenths of the people of England, in-
habit towns which have a population of 10,000 souls
or upwards. A body so large,strengthened bv
union, discipline, and spirit, would, without
difficulty, domineer over the lifeless and scat-
tered peasants. In towns, the lower part
of the middle classes are sometimes tame,
while the lowest class are always susceptible
of animation. But the small free-holders,
and considerable farmers, acquire an
independence from their position which makes
them very capable of public spirit, while the
classes below them are incapable of being per-
manently rendered active elements in any poli-
tical combination—the dead weight of their for-
can have any weight in the deliberations of the mal suffrages would only oppress°the independent
legislature. No talents, no attainments, but such | votes of their superiors. All active talent would
as recommend men to the favour of the multi-
tude, can have any admission into it. A repre-
sentation so constituted would produce the same
practical effects as if every man, whose income
was above a certain amount, were excluded from
the right of voting. It is of little moment to
the proprietors whether they be disfranchised or
doomed, in every election, to form a hopeless mi-
nority. Nor is this all. A representation
founded on numbers only would be productive of
gross inequality in that very class to which all
others are sacrificed. The difference between the
nle of the country and those of towns is at-
ed with consequences which no contrivance
of law can obviate. Towns are the nursery of
political feeling. The frequency of meeting,
the warmth of discussion, the variety of pur-
suit, the rivalship of interest, the opportunities
ot information, even the fluctuations and extremes
of fortune, direct the minds of their inhabitants
to public concerns, and render them the seats of
republican governments, or the preservers of li-
berty in monarchies. But if this difference be
considerable among educated men, it seems im-
measurable when we contemplate its effects on the
more numerous classes. Among them no strong
public sentiment can be kept up without numerous
meetings. It is chiefly when they are animated by
a view of their own strength and numbers—when
they are stimulated by an eloquence suited to
their character, and when the passions of ea6h are
strengthened by the like emotions of the multi-
tude which surround him, that the thoughts of
such men are directed to subjects so far from
their common callings as the concerns of the com-
monwealth. All these aids are necessarily want-
ing to the dispersed inhabitants of the country,
whose frequent meetings are rendered impossible
by distance and poverty—who have few opportu-
nities of being excited by discussion or declama-
tion, and very imperfect means of correspondence
or concert with those at a distance. An agri-
cultural people is generally submissive to the laws,
and observant of the ordinary duties of life, but
stationary and stagnant, without the enterprise
which is the source of improvement, and the
public spirit which perserves liberty. If the
whole political power of the state, therefore, were
thrown into the hands of the lowest classes, it
would be really excercised only by the towns;
in such a case fly to the towns, where alone its
power could be felt. The choice of the country
would be dictated by the cry of the towns wher-
ever it was thought worth while to take it from
the quiet influence of the resident proprietors.
Perhaps the only contrivance which can in any
considerable degree remedy the political infe-
riority of the inhabitants of the country to those
of towns has been adopted in the English Con-
stitution, which, while it secures an ascendant of
landholders in the Legislature, places the dis-
posal of its most honoured and envied seats in
the hands of the lowest classes among the agri-
cultural popidation, who are capable of employ-
ing the right of suffrage with spirit and effect.
They who think representation chiefly valuable
because whole nations cannot meet to deliberate
in one place, have formed a very low notion of
this great improvement. It is not a contrivance
for conveniently collecting, oriblindly executing
all the pernicious and unjust resolutions of igno-
rant multitudes. To correct the faults of demo-
cratical government is a still more important ob-
ject of representation than to extend the sphere
to which that government may be applied. It
balances the power of the multitude by the in-
fluence of otner classes; it substitutes skilful
lawgivers for those who are utterly incapable of
any legislative function; and it continues the
trust long enough to guard the Legislature from
the temporary delusions of the people. By a
system of universal suffrage and annual elections,
all these temperaments would be destroyed. The
effect of a crowded population, in increasing the
intensity and activity of the political passions,
is extremely accelerated in cities of the first class.
The population of London and its environs is
nearly equal to that of all other towns in Eng-
land of or above ten thousand souls. According to
the principle of universal suffrage, it would con-
tain about two hundred and fifty thousand elec-
tors, and send fifty-five members to Parliament.
This electoral army would be occupied for the
whole year in election or canvass, or in the end-
less animosities in which both would be fertile.
A hundred candidates for their suffrages would
be daily employed in inflaming their passions.
No time for deliberation—no interval of repose,
in which inflamed passions might subside, could
exist. The representatives would naturally be


the most daring, and for their purposes the
ablest of their body. They must lead or overawe
the Legislature. Every transient delusion or
momentary phrenzy, of which a multitude is sus-
ceptible, must rush with unresisted violence into
the representative body. Such a representation
would differ in no beneficial respect from the
wildest democracy. It would be a democracy
clothed in a specious disguise, and armed with
more effective instruments of oppression, but not
wiser or more just than the democracies of old,
which Hobbes called “an aristocracy of orators,
sometimes interrupted by the monarchy of a
single orator.”
These are the opinions of one of our
great reformers, not led away by his
passions, but guided by his reason ; and
earnestly do I beg of the Council to con-
trast them with the opinions so reck-
lessly expressed by the self-elected com-
mittee, styling itself constitutional, which
is now presuming to dictate to this House
and to the country. It will be unneces-
sary for me to trouble the House with
any observations on the working of the
constitution of the United States. My
honourable and learned friend, the mem-
ber for Sydney, has fully occupied that
ground. He has shown, in a masterly
manner, that the democratic element
in that constitution has proved a
total failure. Nothing but the con-
servative power of the Senate daily
growing weaker has preserved the
Union so long. The merest accident
may at any moment dissolve the confede-
ration. This brings me to the considera-
tion of the distribution of the eighteen
additional members ; and, as one of the
Constitution Committee, I will here state
that every portion of the plan of distri-
bution recommended by the committee,
and proposed in the Bill, meets with my
entire concurrence. I believe that six
members are quite sufficient for Sydney
and the hamlets. Seeing the great po-
litical advantages which this city pos-
sesses—advantages of which the remote
parts of the colony are destitute—consi-
dering too that Sydney is the seat of go-
vernment—that a large number of the
representatives of county constituencies
are residents of Sydney—that during a
considerable part of the year the county
members reside in it, I for one have made
up my mind not to consent to the conces-
sion of any greater number of members
to the metropolis than I have mentioned.
With regard to the distribution of the
other additional members, nothing is
more absurd than to say that the squatt-
ing interest has received more than its
fair proportion. That class is the
greatest producing class in the country,
and I perfectly agree with my honorable
and learned friend, the member for
Sydney, in the opinion which he has ex-
pressed, that the gold is not to be com-
pared with it. The produce of the one
must year by year diminish, while the
produce of the other must year by year
increase. The value of the squatting
interest must be estimated not alone by
the quantity of wool annually produced,
but also by the food consumed by the
inhabitants of the colony. No calcula-
tion has ever been made of this latter
item, but in the event of a scarcity, the
inhabitants of towns would soon find
cause to feel its great value. Hitherto
1 have agreed in all respects with my
honorable and learned friend, the member
for Sydney. I come now to that part of
the question in which I differ from him.
With reference to the constitution of the
Upper Chamber, I will state my reasons
for disagreeing from my honorable and
learned friend, and those who formed
the majority of the committee. The
committee, in their report, have dwelt
upon an alleged compact between the
Council and the Home Government,
with respect to the framing of a consti-
tution for New South Wales, similar in
its outlines to that of Canada. They
say —“ As regards the constitution of
the Legislative Council, your committee ■
consider, that not only by the terms of
their declaration and remonstrance of the
sth December, 1851, but by the letter of
agreement to those terms, of Sir John
Pakington, of the 15th December, 1852,
the House is pledged to a constitution
similar in its outline to that of Canada.”
Now, I deny both the fact and the in-
ference, I deny, in the first place, that
any such compact has ever been made ;
and in the next I deny, if it has been
made, that it ought to be adherered to.
I admit that an understanding existed to


-the effect, that IF certain concessions
were made, we would accept a specified
constitution. But I deny that those ‘con-
cessions have been made. The crown
has not yet fulfilled its part of the com-
pact, and therefore, by no principle of
justice or morality are we bound to per-
form ours. But I deny that the Council
was at all justified in making such a
compact. Because, if the Council
should, on consideration, find the consti-
tution agreed to by that compact a bad
one, it -would betray its duty by adapting
it. Such a compact cannot be regarded
in the mere light of a mercantile bar-
gain, in which men buy and sell. I deny
the right of any man, or body of men,
to barter away the rights and liberties
of their country. I maintain, that if any
honorable member conscientiously be-
lieves that he is bound by that assumed
compact, although fully persuaded it is
not a proper one—that it is not a com-
pact calculated to confer good on this
community, it is his duty to resign his
seat. If any honorable member feels
himself in such a position that he is
bound to support any such compact
against his better judgment, he ought at
once to vacate that position. I am not
in favor of the proposed hereditary le-
gislature, but I by no means join in the
senseless outcry raised against those by
whom the clauses proposing such a crea-
tion have been introduced into the bill.
On the contrary, I give all the members
of the committee credit for desiring only
to establish a good and efficient Upper
Chamber—an Upper Chamber which
will best answer every purpose for which
such an institution is designed. That, I
am sure, was the sole object which the
committee had in view in sanctioning
the proposal. But if this be doubted, it
is sufficient to know that the committee
have, in this particular, fdflowed great
and respected precedents—that their
plan is sanctioned by the illustrious
names of Pitt, and Burke, and Wih
berforce—with whose cordial concur-
rence and support the Quebec Aet,
referred to by my honourable and learn-
ed friend the member for Sydney,
was passed by the Imperial Parliament,
To those great authorities the utmost
respect is due; and they who differ
from those eminent statesmen, are
bound to approach the Question with
less of the headlong recklessness evin-
ced by the clap-trap orators of the Vic-
toria Theatre. But although the Quebec
Act was thus sanctioned, and thus sup-
ported—although it was carried by large
majorities—majorities of two to one in
both the House of Lords and the House
of Commons the hereditary clauses
were never acted on, and have remained
a dead letter in the statute book to this
day. 1 his I look upon as a very sig-
nificant fact. I take into consideration,
moreover, the fact, that although this
hereditary scheme received the sanction
of the great men whom I have mentioned,
it met in all its stages with the deter-
mined opposition of statesmen of equal
eminence: Mr. Fox being among their
number. That great constitutional
authority opposed the bill in its second
reading—he opposed it on going into
Committee—he divided upon it when in
Committee, and put forth all his strength
to defeat it. Viewed, therefore, in what-
ever light it may be, the Quebec Act is
not a measure which can be safely re-
garded as a precedent for New South
Wales. Deeply valuing Conservative
Institutions as I do, I would propose,
instead of an hereditary body, that the
Upper Chamber should be chosen by the
large freeholders of the country—men
who possess so great an interest in it,
that it will be next to impossible for
demagogues to impose upon them. I
believe that this plan would call into ex-
istence a thoroughly Conservative In-
stitution, and one winch would carry
with it general confidence and esteem.
It may be all very well, as a matter of
antiquarian research, to endeavour to
trace back the House of Lords to its
origin, and ascertain when and how its
hereditary legislative power began, but
it is obviously impossible to introduce
such a body here. The prestige—the
influence of that body cannot be trans-
planted; Its power and authority can
never be obtained by a newly created
similar institution, Burke has said, that


he would not advise any colony to attempt
to institute a body like the House of
Lords. The House of Lords has proved
itself to be of inestimable value in
England, but its existence at the present
day is in a great measure to be attributed
to the disinclination of the people to
change any institution which has long
existed, and has upon the whole, well
performed its functions. But I believe,
that if that House were once abolished,
it would not be now created anew. I do
not believe, that if a portion of the
British peerage were to establish them*
selves in this colony, they would have
much weight—for an Upper House to pos-
sess weight in any community, it must be
not only wise, learned, and dignified, but
it must also possess the confidence and
respect of the people, and have root in
their habits, their prejudices, and their
affections. But by making an Upper
House consist of the representatives of
those who are large landed proprietors, Ave
would enable that House to command the
confidence of the country. It should also
be borne in mind, that the constituents
of the Upper House would be among the
most influential electors of the Lower
House, and that circumstance would
powerfully contribute to promote unity
of action between the two. It is true,
that many of our large landed proprietors
are not very fit by education, to exercise
the best judgment in the choice of
senators, but with the possession of pro-
perty there springs up a Conservative
tendency, Avhich removes the possessors of
that property from the influence of de-
magogues. I think, therefore, that my
proposal for an Upper House is better
than that of my honourable and learned
friend, the member for Sydney. Under
my honourable friend’s bill it is stated,
that the hereditary clauses cannot come
into operation for some time—perhaps
not for fifty-years, and in the mean time,
the Upper House is to consist of nomi-
nees. For my part, I cannot see on what
ground the nominee principle can be de-
fended. 1 can very well remember what
a blessing was thought to have been con-
ferred upon the colony, when the nominee
members were amalgamated with twice
the number of elected ones—and a pow(
was thus gi\ r en at any time to swamp tl
nominee element in the legislature. An
yet it is now purposed by this measure t
separate the nominees from the electc
members, and give them equal pow<
with the representatives of the people,
do not count this a Consen'ative step,
is a retrograde movement in every wa;
I do not believe that such a propos
will give general satisfaction. Ido m
believe that the leading men of tl
colony will consent to be placed i
a nominated House, such as is pr<
posed. In these days we should fori
our institutions, not for any class, bi
for the benefit of all the varied interes
of the country; and I believe this sy
tern of nomination would give no oth<
government than the government of
clique. We cannot safely vest tl
power of creating legislators in th
hands of any man. We may be toll
that it is impossible to suppose that tl
members of the present governmei
could make an improper selection. W
ought not to be asked to confide such e;
traordinary power, because the propose
depositaries of it are wise and uprigl
men. It is by that argument that evei
despotism is attempted to be justifiei
It is true, there is a clause in tl
proposed measure, which will give tl
power of coercing this nominated Uppi
Chamber. But by coercing you d
grade. A body that exists only to I
coerced, must of necessity be despisei
In England the threat of a wholesa
creation is enough to coerce the Houj
of Lords, should they place themselvi
in strong and unreasonable opposition 1
the views of the House of Common
backed up by the force of public op
nion. The Peers of England have
just pride in their hereditary rank, an
the social distinction which that ran
confers. They have a pride in the pr
vileges of an oi’der, winch has lasted fc
a thousand years, and with which s
much glory and greatness are intei
woven. A threat, therefore, to adopt
course which will cheapen, and thus dc
grade the honors of the peerage, mus
of necessity be efficacious. But the cas


is widely different with a house of un-
titled crown nominees appointed for
life. They would have no rank, no pri-
vilege, no historic prestige to preserve.
No threat of adding to their number
could operate on them. Additional no-
minees must therefore be appointed on
every collision between the two Houses,
until in the long run the house of nomi-
nees would be inevitably swept away.
But it is not because I am opposed to
this portion of the Bill, that I do not see
the great advantages which would spring
from the creation of titles in this colony,
to which those w r ho deserve distinction
may aspire. Ido not agree with those
levelling democrats who think those dis-
tinctions foolish, and who speak of them
as the relics of a by-gone age. The
desire of distinction is natural to the
human mind. Distinctions, however in-
trinsically worthless they may appear,
have in every country been eagerly
sought after. They have ever been one
ff the chief inducements to the pursuit
ff excellence, and the desire to earn
ffiis honorary reward has, in our parent
;ountry, been the mainspring of the
mblest military achievements, and the
nost brilliant intellectual triumphs. It
s, therefore, in ray opinion, very desira-
)le that these distinctions should be in-
rod uced into this colony, in order to
mcourage a spirit of honorable emula-
ion. We are rapidly increasing in
vealth, and it is most important that
mr institutions should be such as to che-
rish tastes of a higher and more inte-
ectual hind than have hitherto prevailed
iere. We shall soon have a numerous
dass of people in this colony, with large
neans, ample leisure, and superior edu-
ction, untramelled by those money-
naking occupations to which the atten-
ion of all our colonists are now turned,
tnd for them such distinctions will hold
mt incentives to high personal character
nd intellectual elevation. These distinc-
ions, vain as they may seem to some,
ave exercised a power over the mind in
rery age and in every country. In
emocratic America, popularly decried
id ridiculed as they are, there is
greater desire for them than in
the most aristocratic states. It is,
in my opinion, deeply to be deplored,
that the Imperial Government did
not long before the present day per-
ceive the wisdom of introducing titled
orders into the colonies. Such a course
would nave bound the colonies to the
parent state by strong and graceful ties.
It is all very well for the trading philo-
sophers of the present day to smile at
what they term those imaginary honors ;
but while they smile they bow before
I them. Human nature is too strong for
I speculative theories. Nature has fixed
the desire for these distinctions ineradi-
cably in the mind, and that desire is as
strongly manifested in the feather which
adorns the head of the savage, as in the
coronet of the earl. The distinctions
given by these insignia are different—
they are sought for on different grounds
—with different aims—but the desire to
possess them is of the same origin. I
trust, therefore, that the House will pay
little attention to the objections and the
ridicule with which the proposal to intro-
duce these distinctions has been met.
The formation of a class possessing such
distinctions would be of the greatest
benefit in creating a valuable standard
of manners, taste, and refinement, which,
unfortunately, does not at present exist
to any great extent in any of the colonies.
I therefore, agree altogether with my
honourable and learned friend, the mem-
ber for Sydney, in recognizing the benefit
that must arise from bestowing rank and
honours on colonists worthy of them, but
I differ from him in wishing in any way
to connect the hereditary principle with
the legislature of the country. I will
now proceed to another part of the
measure, to which no reference has been
made during the debate. I mean the
civil list, and the proposal, that on the
establishment of responsible government,
certain members of the present govern-
ment, who may be compelled to give up
their offices, shall be allowed pensions
equal to the full amount of their salaries.
With regard to the civil list, I am not
one of those who tnink that we have
done very wisely in providing it for her
Majesty, Nor do I think that we are


in any way bound to make any such j
provision. If we are entitled, as amatter j
of right, to the concessions that have j
been made to us, then it is but just and
proper that we should have the full con-
trol of all our revenues, from whatever
source collected, without check or con-
dition of any kind. I think too, that by
this time the British Government must
have had sufficient experience of this
legislature, to be aware that there is no
likelihood of this House, or any House
that may succeed it, refusing to provide
the funds necessary for all the purposes
of government. But I quite agree with
that part of the measure which provides
pensions for the retiring officers of tlje
government equal to their full salaries, I
think it is the more particularly im-
portant that this provision should be
made at a lime when we are on the point
of having responsible government con-
ceded to us. We will do well, in making
provision for the exercise of this system
at the outset, to adopt that large liberality
which has always distinguished the go-
vernment of England, and given it that
power and stability which makes it
honoured all over the world, instead of
imitating the narrow-minded parsimony
which characterises some republican go-
vernments. I have had the misfortune
on many occasions to differ from those
gentlemen who have hitherto conducted
the government of this colony. I have
some times thought, and do still think,
that the interests of the country have
suffered in their hands, but it is not this
that shall prevetit me from doing those
gentlemen, who may shortly be called
upon to give up their offices, strict and
liberal justice. It is by this just and
liberal spirit that we alone can obtain
that respect with wdileh the government
of the mother country is regarded. It
is not the extent of the taxation of that
country; it is not the amount of its
wealth—for other countries have perhaps
larger revenues; but what gives Great
Britain her proud position among the
countries of the world, is the credit that
the name everywhere carries with it. It
is the conviction, that whatever she has
promised, that will she perform—that go
VjT 1 1 H
from the farthest east to the remotest
west—the engagement of the most sub-
ordinate officer of the British Govern-
ment in any country will be faithfully
and honourably carried out. This is the
bright, the high and lofty character
which has made England pre-eminent
among the nations of the earth. Tc
imitate this great example should be out
desire, —if we would earn for ourselves a
like position, and deserve like respect
This is the example, which now, in estab-
lishing free self-government among us
we should take for our guide and out
model. Such, sir, are the views which ;
entertain, such the principles on which .
intend to act. I desire to blend, if pos-
sible, the opposite elements of llbert’
and restraint in one consistent whole—
to secure at once, and permanently, fo
the people of this country that imperiun
et Übertatem which constituted the me
morable feature of perhaps the greates
reign on record. No man can forese'
the mighty consequences which ma;
result from the decision at which thi
Council may arrive on this great ques
tion. Unborn myriads may have t
curse or bless the labours of this House
accordingly as we transmit to them th
seeds of anarchy or the seeds of ordei
Heirs of the British constitution ouii
selves, it should be our pride as we
as our duty to hand down our nobl
inheritance intact, undimmed, undin
inished, undegraded, in all its full an
unclouded splendour to our posterity
But while preserving its spirit, let us n<
be too tenacious of its forms. Let us no
while aiming at conservatism, fall ini
the wildest democracy. Let our checi
and balances be real and powerful, bi
elastic. So shall we lay the foundatu
of a nation, not only speaking tl
language and imbued with the literatur
but in every w r ay worthy of that gre
people who first taught the lesson
freedom to mankind.
The honourable member, who was r
peatedly cheered throughout his addre:
sat down amid repeated cheers from ;
sides of the House, and was persona
greeted by a large number of member


The ATTORNEY-GENERAL, in
rising to address the House after the
splendid speech which has just been ad-
dressed to the House—a speech as able
as any which has ever been heard in the
Council—a speech distinguished not less
by its historical than its legal research,
and the sentiments and principles of
which throughout do equal honour to
the heart as to the head of the honour-
able gentleman—a speech which is a
credit to this House as a popular and
deliberative body, and which 1 hope will
have its effects, not only on honourable
members but on the country at large—
I cannot but feel the great disadvantage
under which I labour. After the hon-
ourable member’s eloquence, I feel that
I ought to plead for the patient courtesy
of the House while it listens to my dull-
ness. (Cheers.) I could have wished
that some honourable member, who was
more opposed to the views of the last
speaker, had risen to follow him, as it
would have been more in the usual order
of debate, for 1 am bound to say, that in
most of the arguments of the honourable
member I entirely agree, whilst the
points on which I differ from him are
very few; and I am glad to hear the
honourable member admit, in the course
of his that in a complicated
question of this nature the best inten-
tioned men may differ ; and I for one
most heartily concede to the honourable
member, in the points on which I differ
from him, the fullest credit for honesty
and sincerity of purpose. (Cheers.) Be-
fore I go into the main question, how-
ever, I would refer to a remark made by
the honourable and learned member for
Cumberland, yesterday afternoon, in
that lengthy address in which he spoke
so *much and said so little. (Cheers and
laughter.) The honourable and learned
member said that the officers of the Go-
vernment in the House ought not to take
any part in. this debate ; and the same
sentiment was expressed at the
public meeting the other day by one of
the new allies of the honourable and
learned gentleman. (Laughter.) But
however much it might suit the honour-
able gentleman and his friends out of
doors to dictate to any members of this
House the course they ought to pursue,
I for one will act on my own judgment
in the performance of my duty. (Cheers.)
And on an occasion so important as the
present, I feel that I should fail in that
duty if I did not express my opinions on
the question before the House. (Cheers.)
The measure which is under discussion
may be divided into two parts. The
first and most important applied to that
portion of it which referred to those fun-
damental principles and provisions on
which the constitution must be based;
the other referred more to the details of
the measure for working out that consti-
tution. The construction of two houses
instead of one was one of these funda-
mental principles—the greatest and most
Important contained in the measure.
The distribution of members elected to
serve in the Lower House, though highly
important, is not a fundamental principle
of the bill, and I shall not therefore
refer to it. And as an officer of the
Government 1 might be thought to
have some personal interest in the pro-
visions respecting the schedule and civil
list,'! shall not say one word about them.
(Cheers.) In fact, in my mind, these
are the least important parts of the Bill.
While they might be swept away alto-
gether, or, if adopted, will leave no
traces in the stream of time, the funda-
mental principle alluded to will remain
for ever, for the good or for the evil, the
happiness or the misery, of the people of
this great country. And when I think
of this, I ask am I to be told by any ho-
norable member, either in or out of this
House, that I am, in these momentous
circumstances, not to have the common
right of passengers and crew, of calling
out “ Breakers ahead !” (laughter) when
danger is near ? 1 consider I should be
guilty of dereliction of duty if I did not
warn the House against the breakers
that I can so easily foresee. (Hear,
hear.) Nor is. the duty which I
feel imperative upon me to take part
in this discussion a new light that has
broken in upon me. When another
question, almost as important as this, was
before the House (I allude to the ques-


tion of transportation) although every
other member of the government de-
clined to take part in the discussion upon
it, I felt it my duty to express my opi-
nions. No doubt my hon. colleagues in
the government thought the course pur-
sued by them on that occasion was the
right one, but I have never since felt
that the part I took in that question was
wrong. I took that course because, in
ray conscience, I believed it to be my
duty to do so, though the opinions I
expressed were not very likely to be very
palatable to the minister of the day. I
can not, therefore, be charged with
having been actuated on that occasion
by any desire to forward my own inte-
rest. And if we are to believe whatwe
have heard of the opinions of the gen-
tlemen who are now at the head of the
government of England, in respect to
this question of a constitution, namely,
that they were opposed to an Upper
House of nominees, the views to which
I am now about to give expression
would certainly be opposed to them.
The opinions of Mr. Gladstone, and the
Duke of Newcastle, if they were em-
bodied in the Cape of Good Hope con-
stitution, are certainly not shared in by
me, and therefore in this instance also,
in adopting the course I do, lam not
merely looking to my own personal in-
terest. I will now go to the question,
and I will say that, in considering the
measure I have gone to all the sources
of information that were within my
reach. I have searched much into the
history of ancient and modern govern-
ments, and in going through that search
I must confess my feelings, leanings, and
inclinations, were very much in favor of
the elective principle. But when I came
to dive into the great principles of the
British Constitution, and when I re-
flected on the certain results which the
history of all governments furnished ; I
found that I could not agree with the
last honorable speaker in the plan of an
elective Upper Chamber, which he pro-
pounded. The honorable member has
urged with unanswerable force the ad-
vantages of a double legislature. On
this point all parties seem agreed. We
have had no petitions presented against
this principle of the measure, and we
have heard no opposition to it in the
House. When the legislature of a
country is composed of a single House,
it is always in a state of great danger.
At the period of the French Revolution,
when all that was conservative in the
state was broken up, this experiment
was tried. During the government of
’9l, a single house was established, and
though all the great and distinguished
philosophers—the shining lights of the
day—sat in it, in one single year it was
swept away. Others succeeded, but with
no better fate. There is no security,
no permanency in any such legislature ;
and at the present day it is no longer
thought of in any country. With the
celebrated men who sat in the Council
which raised up the admirable fabric of
the American Constitution, many sug-
gestions were made for the establishment
of a single House, but none of the States,
with the single exception of Pensylvania,
vested all the legislative power in a
single body, and even that State soon
found out her error, and corrected it.
However, some celebrated writers (among
whom are Monsieur Turgot and Dr.
Price,) still advocated a single House,
and distributed their writings plentifully
through the country. To answer these
writings, Mr. John Adams, Vice-Pre-
sident, and afterwards President of the
Republic, published a work in three
volumes, to convince the country of the
shallowness and the peril of the opinions
thus circulated. Some speeches lately
made, and articles in certain newspapers,
were calculated to excite the same feel-
ings, the same instrumentality to work
on those feelings as prevailed in America
then. (Oh! oh! from Mr. Darvall.)
The honourable member for Cumberland
says oh! but if he had taken the trouble
to study Mr. Adams’s book, I think the
House would have been spaced much of
the speech he made yesterday. Mr.
Adams conclusively pointed out the
shoals and quicksands on which govern-
ments'had split,and having examined every
constitution from the earliest ancient
Republics, and contrasted and compared


their principles with that of America,
explained all the vices and follies which
had led to their decay. It is to be
deduced from all history and all ex-
perience, that nothing 1 is more true
than that the rights and liberties of the
people will never be safe without the
existence of a strong executive, and of two
other independent powers. (Hear, hear,
from Mr. Darvall.) This is the
principle sought to be introduced by this
bill, a balance which will preserve the
dignity, and ensure the safety of the
whole state and the whole government.
I find in an old book, the writings
of Polybius, translated into English—for
I presume it would be not more ac-
ceptable to the House than it would have
been to the public meeting, which was so
often spoken of, to quote from the original
Greek-*-! find that the same ideas were
entertained by the Greek statesmen and
philosophers, as had actuated the Ameri-
cans in settling their present form of
government. The following, which oc-
curs in the first chapter of the sixth
book, and extract the first, is a curiosity
in its way, and is the probable origin of
subsequept notions of sound govern-
ment :
Among those, then, who have treated of these
matters in the way of science, the greater part
distinguished civil government into three several
kinds, royalty, aristocracy, and democracy. But
it may -be very reasonably demanded of these
writers, whether they speak of these as the only
kinds, or simply as the best. In either case, in-
deed, they must be charged with error. For first,
that kind of government is undoubtedly to be
esteemed the best which is composed of all the
three now mentioned. The proof of this is evident
from experience and from fact, as well as reason.
Such, for example, was the system first invented
by Lycurgus, and established by him in Sparta.
This classic author afterwards proceeds
to particularise the vices and peculiara-
ties of the form of government established
by Lycurgus, which are well sketched
in the following passage :
This legislator, then, having considered with
himself that, according to the necessity and es-
tablished course of all things, the several acci-
dents and changes that have now been mentioned
were inevitable, formed this conclusion :—That
every simple and single kind of government was
insecure, on account of its proneness to degene-
rate into that more vicious kind, which was most
nearly allied to it by nature. For as rust is the
in-bred bane of iron, and worms of wood ; and as
these substances, even though they should escape
all external violence, at last fall a prey to the
evils that arc, as it were, congenial with them ;
in the same manner, likewise, every single kind
of government breeds within itself some certain
vice, which is attached by nature to its very form,
and which soon causes its destruction. Thus
royalty degenerates into tyranny; aristocracy
into oligarchy; and democracy into savage
violence. Nor is it possible, as we have already
shown, that in the course of time these conver-
sions must be thus produced. Lycurgus, there-
fore, forseeing this necessity, instead of adopting
either of the single forms of government, collected
what was excellent in them all; and so joined
together the principles that were peculiar to each
several form, that no one of them might be ex-
tended beyond proper bounds, and slide into the
evil to which it was inclined by nature ; but that
each separate power, being still counteracted by
the rest, might be retained in due position, and
the whole government be preserved in equal
balance; as a vessel, when impelled to either side
by the wind, is kept steady by a contrary force.
Thus the people, to whom a certain share was
allotted in the government, restrained the ex-
cesses and abuse of royalty. The people, on the
other hand, was maintained in a due submission
to the Kings, by their apprehensions of the power
of the Senate. For the members of the Senate,
being all selected from the best among the citi-
zens, were always ready to support the cause of
justice; and, by throwing their own weight into
the scale, when either side was in danger of being
oppressed by the other, to give such strength to
the weaker party, as the Constitution of the State
required. By these means the Lacedsemonians
preserved their liberty entire, for a much longer
time than any other people. And thus it was
that Lycurgus, having been taught by reason to
foresee a certain train of causes and events, was
able to give a lasting strength to his establish-
ment. The Komans, on the other hand, though
they arrived indeed at the same perfection in the
Constitution of their State, w r ere not led to it by
foresight or by reason. But, during the course of
many contests and disorders in which they were
engaged, having been careful always to adopt,
upon every change, such improvements as the
occasion itself suggested to them, they at last
obtained the same end, likewise, as that which
Lycurgus had proposed ; and completed the most
beautiful frame of government of all that are in
our times known.
This very book was quoted by John
Adams, and suggested the frame of
American Government, as it is consti-
tuted at the present day, and in that
government the whole aim is to establish
such a balance of power to prevent it
from falling to pieces. It has been well
stated by my honourable and learned
friend, the member for Sydney, that it


In the first place, antecedent to the' Declara-
tion of Independence, none of the colonies were,
or pretended to be, sovereign States, in the sense
in which “sovereign” is applied to the States.
The term “ sovereign” or “ sovereignty” is used
in different senses, which often leads to a confu-
sion of ideas, and sometimes to very mischievous
and unfounded conclusions. By sovereignty in
its largest sense is meant supreme, absolute, un-
controllable power, the jus summi imperii, the
absolute right to govern. * * * * * And
was the Senate that preserved the balance
of that constitution. But it was curious
to observe that, although the creation of
our House of Lords and of the American
Senate flowed from the opposite ex-
tremes, in reality they were identical in
their nature. For the Senate of the
United States was not elected by the
people in the American or in the consti-
tutional sense of the word; it was ap-
pointed by the sovereign states, in their
capacity as sovereigns, just as an appoint-
ment by a king or queen. (“ Oh ! Oh!”
from Mr. Darvall.) Honourable mem-
bers say “ Oh, Oh,” but I can prove to
the satisfaction of any man, whose mind
is open to conviction, that what I state
is borne out by authority. In the appor-
tionment that was made at the time of
the Union in America, the larger states
were not entitled to a greater influence
in the Senate than the smaller ones ; we
find that the State of Delaware has just
the same power as the State of New
York. Thus the members of this House
are on a footing of perfect equality, like
a Congress of sovereigns or ambassadors,
or like an assembly of peers. I will
quote in support of this a short extract
from Judge Story’s Commentaries on
the Constitution ; and, as lawyers gene-
rally do, 1 will quote the volume and the
page. The following passage will be
found in volume 2, pages 174—176 :—.
In Congress the single State of Delaware pre-
vented an embargo at the time when all the other
States thought it absolutely necessary for the
support of the army. In short, the Senate will
have the power by its negative of .defeating all
laws. If this plan prevails, seven States will
control the whole; and yet these seven States
are, in point of population and strength, less than
one-third of the Union, so that two-thirds are
compelled to yield to one third. * * * * *
Whatever basis is assumed for one branch of the
Legislature, the antagonist basis should be as-
sumed for the other. If the House is to be pro-
portional to the relative size and wealth, and
population of the Stales, the Senate should be
fixed upon an absolute equality, as the representa-
tive of State sovereignty.
I will also quote from the same learned
author the manner in which the claim of
sovereignty to these States was justified.
This quotation occurred in the account
of the revolution, and will be found in
the first volume and the 191st page :
it is wholly immaterial what is the form of the
Government, or by whose hands this absolute au-
thority is exercised. It may be exercised by the
people at large, as in a pure democracy ; or by
a select few, as in an absolute aristocracy; or by
a single person, as in an absolute monarchy.
I consider this high authority shows
that these appointments were made by
the States in their sovereign capacity,
and not as a collective body of the
people; and this was the distinctive fea-
ture between the Senate and the other
Legislatures. I therefore say again,
that though the House of Lords and the
American Senate apparently sprung from
the opposite extremes, they are in both
cases the true preservers of the balance,
the keystones of the constitutional arch.
(Cheers.) I am sorry, in alluding now
to that portion of the observations of the
honorable member who spoke last, to
have to differ with him totally as to the
means of carrying out the same object.
I do not believe that an elective Upper
House would effect that balance which
the constitution requires. In the United
States, the elective principle was neces-
sary, because no appointing power ex-
isted, and they, not being walling to
entrust the power to an elective Presi-
dent, are compelled first to create a sove-
reign power by wdnch the Senate can
be appointed. Experience has proved
the wisdom of the great men who con-
trived this noble constitution. I say this
noble constitution, for I am not of those
who condemn wholesale the principles
of that great confederacy—a confederacy
which is the greatest of modern times,
and whose constitution approaches
more nearly to the British con-
stitution than any that has ever
been devised. (Hear, hear.) It is the
greatest experiment that has been made
in modern days; it is great because it


approaches the British Constitution more
nearly than any other form of govern-
ment has ever approached it. It is the
offspring of our constitution, and has
attained that greatness which no other
modern nation has been able either to
attain or preserve. (Hear, hear, and
cheers.) But the great men who made
this constitution did not appeal to public
meetings. (Cries of hear, hear.) They
sat for months, nay for years, with closed
doors. (Loud cheers.) They examined
every precedent of antiquity ; they did
not appeal for the approval of the po-
pular voice. (Hear, hear, from Mr.
Wentworth ) But when they had agreed
upon a scheme of constitution which
they considered the best which human
ingenuity could devise, they promulgated
that constitution by authority, and it
was accepted. (Loud cheers.) My hon.
and learned friend opposite (Mr. Dar-
vall) states that the constitution of the
United States is nearly the sam£ now as
it was before the revolution—that they
had an elective second chamber.
Mr. DARVALL : I said the colonies
were unanimous in their demand for
elective chambers.
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL: 1
am sorry I have not this day’s Herald at
hand. Possibly the reporters might
have misrepresented my hon. and learned
friend; but I question much whether it
is not more likely that my hon. friend,
not having any fixed principles in his
head, they had got out of it. (Laughter.)
I was under the impression, until now,
that the reporters had correctly reported
him on this point. But there was a part
of his speech at the public meeting
which I do trust the reporters have mis-
represented ; although it is a singular
fact that the Herald and Empire agreed
entirely. That part was, where the hon.
and learned gentleman was reported to
have expressed his indifference as to
whether he lived under a republican Pre-
sident or under her Majesty the Queen.
Y esterday, Indeed, he had explained that
he only referred to futurity; but I was
indeed, shocked to see such expressions
coming from a gentleman who had so
recently nearly obtained the appoint-
ment of a Judge of the Supreme Court
in Victoria. (Hear, hear.) It shocked
all my feelings of loyalty, and all my
notions of propriety ; and I should be
glad to hear the hon. and learned gen-
tleman had done himself the justice to
say that he had made a slip of the
tongue. It is due to the house and to
his friends, that this explanation should
be made, and that he should declare that
such were not his principles. For if
they were, I believe they would come
within the meaning of that oath which
is taken by all magistrates and persons
in authority, “to discover and make
known all traitorous conspiracies against
the Queen’s Majesty, and to put them
down.” (Loud cheers.) I should be
glad therefore that my hon. and learned
friend had been misreported in this
matter. I will now return to what I was
saying. The hon. and learned member
has said the hon. and learned member
for Sydney was wrong in stating that
there was no precedent of an elective
Upper House in any British colony, and
has quoted from “ Clarke's Colonial
Law”—
Mr. DARVALL: I beg to set my
hon. friend right. I said the hon, and
learned member was wrong in stating
that there was no precedent of an elec-
tive house having been demanded.
Mr. WENTWORTH: What I said
was that there was no precedent for an
elective Upper House in any British co-
lony.
, After some explanations between the
Attorney-General and Mr. Darvall,
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL re-
sumed: I find from Clarke that the
American colonial constitutions were di-
vided into provincial, proprietary, and
chartered. In the first, the appointment
of Governor and his Council was made
by the King. In the second, the proprie-
tors were feudal lords, with feudal
powers; and the third were chartered
Governments, mere corporations, and the
Government was actually administered
in England by a general Court, The
towns in the colony of Virginia were the
first that sent representatives ; but until
this there was no representative govern-


ment at all, and representation, when
obtained, was taken as a great boon.
(Hear.) I will not, however, labour this
point. It is a matter of history. But I
assert that the elective principle in an
Upper House is not congenial to the
British constitution, and that it is now
proposed for the first time. As a mem-
ber of the committee, I went fully with
my honourable and learned friend in
those portions of the present bill which
have been borrowed from the Quebec
Act, 31 Geo. 111., ch. 31. As to the in-
troduction of titles of honour—whether
the notion has been spread abroad for
the purpose of exciting the multitude, I
know not; but I can state that no mem-
ber of the committee ever intended that
they should be brought into operation at
present. I never intended they should
come into operation for at least twenty-
five years, or even fifty years, when the
colony may be fit to receive them. There
can be no wish to force them on the people,
and possibly they might never be brought
into operation at all; but the scheme
has been devised as the nearest approach
to the institutions of our father-land,
and with the view of sowing that good
seed which may perhaps spring up in
its own good time. (Cheers.) And the
more I reflect upon it the more I feel
convinced that it was the duty of the
committee to do what they have done.
The report of the honourable and learned
gentleman’s speech to the public meeting
is now going on the wings of the
Press to all parts of the world, wherein
he has stated that it was indifferent to
him whether he lived under a President
or the Queen ;—and the publications of
Dr. Lang were calculated to impress the
English public with the idea, that the
colonists were desirous of, and ready for,
the introduction of republicanism—than
which, nothing can be more untrue. It
is, however, high time for the com-
mittee, so far as they are concerned, to
show that there is no mistake in what
they desire—namely, to sow the seeds
of a monarchy. They desire to place
the public mind on a right basis ; and as
people are congregating here from all
parts of the world, and chiefly from re-
publican states, and as it is natural
they should prefer the institutions under
which they were born, it is the more
imperative that the monarchical princi-
ple should be emphatically proclaimed,
and that there should be no mistake
whatever on that point, (Cheers.) I
believe the colonists have no desire for a
republic—they wish to stick to their mo-
narchy (hear, hear), and I cannot con-
ceive how monarchy can exist with an
elective Upper House. An Upper House
appointed by the Crown is as conso-
nant with monarchy, as an elective House
is calculated to lead to democracy and
to violence and faction. I will repeat,
that I never intended those clauses re-
specting “ titles,” to come into operation
for a considerable time, but only to draw
a marked line of distinction between mo-
narchy and republicanism ; nor do I look
upon those clauses as a fundamental part
of the measure. (Hear, hear, from Mr.
Wentworth.) The bill would be complete
with or without them, and I have no
doubt it will tend to preserve to all time
our glorious Constitution. But, besides,
it must not be forgotten that the bill
contemplates the introduction of respon-
sible Government in the fullest sense of
the word (hear, hear), and that the Go-
vernment of this colony must necessarily
be far more democratic than the Govern-
ment of England. (Hear, hear.) We
know that notwithstanding the beauty
and glory of the British Constitution, it
is only recently that great stains and
blots upon it washed away.
(Hear, hear, from Mr. Darvall.) The
House of Commons, until lately, was not
the faithful representative of the people,
and it may be questioned if it be so, even
since the passing of the Reform Bill.
Any one who has read Macaulay’s History
of England must know that until recently
some of the principal towns were almost
entirely unrepresented; and that the
representation of the people did not keep
pace with the changes of time ; and it
is notorious that some of the members
of the Lower House are returned by
members of the Upper House. These
are heavy drawbacks upon popular
liberty in England, which cannot exist


at all here—(hear, hear) —and if this bill
be carried out in its fulness, the colony
will enjoy representative Government
without any of these drawbacks. (Hear,
hear.) Representatives will be sent from
all parts of the colony, through whom
grievances and complaints may be made
known; every class will be represented;
the wants and wishes of the whole com-
munity will be faithfully reflected in
the proper mirror, and a general life and
energy will doubtless pervade the whole
Government. Such a responsible Go-
vernment could scarcely appoint members
of the Upper House, who had not the
confidence of the people. (Hear, hear.)
And the Upper House being appointed
by a Government responsible to the
people, would add solidity and strength
to that Government. It is unfair to
compare that future Government, and
which it is the main object of this bill to
create, with the one we have now, in
which the popular voice was not so
blended ; and whether the Upper House
members were titled or not, I believe
they would, under such a Government as
I have referred to, command the con-
fidence of the country far more fully
than an elective House would. (Cheers.)
The honourable and learned member’s
speech at the public meeting was no
doubt characterized by great tact, and
great show, and great eloquence. He
told them that they should have the
whole Government of the State, that no
laws should be made without their con-
sent, and that they should not be taxed
mless they were represented. Why, one
would suppose, from this, that in England
io laws were made without representa-
;ion in both Houses, that only one House
jxisted there. It is true the House of
Commons has the purse-strings in its
lands, and can alone originate money
Jills ; but then the Lords, and the Queen,
;00, have something to say in the passing
)f those bills, as well as the representatives
)f the people ; and to tell the people
hat there should be no taxation but by
heir representatives is absurd. Why
my student of law, any man the least
icquainted with constitutional history,
vould be astonished at the solemn face
j with which my honourable friend has
1 gravely told us that. (Cheers and
| laughter.) I now beg to remind the
House that it has been laid down by the
best American writers, as well as our
own, that the legislative power is the
most encroaching of all—the most am-
bitious, and the most unruly. It is to
guard against that spirit of encroach-
ment that the Senate of the United
States was appointed as it 'was ; and I
| would ask the House to consider well
this point. It might be all very well
while the breezes blew gently, whether
from the Duke of Newcastle, or from the
Port of Newcastle, it might be all very
well to carry a great deal of sail, but it
was not for calms, but for storms and
tempests that the wary mariner trimmed
his bark. (Hear, hear.) So, if we had
| an elective house, I believe it might be
| all very well in quiet times, but in storms
| and perils we should soon find out that
| we carried too much sail for our ballast.
(Cheers.) Now this bill extended the
franchise very considerably more than it
! was extended in England. It placed it
on the broadest basis. In England re-
presentation has never been disassociated
from property; but here it is proposed
to be extended to lodgers and others,
and the result will be vastly to increase
the power of the Lower House. (Hear,
hear.) Now both Storey and Chancellor
Kent, sie most eminent of American
jurists, complained that the great vice of
American legislation was over law-mak-
ing—making of laws on the spur of the
moment, just as the passion or the interest
of the moment might suggest. And this
we ourselves already complain of; and
with a second Elective Chamber there
would be no effectual check to hasty law-
making. The same impulses would in-
fluence it, as the House of Assembly,
whatever kind of election may be resorted
to, for the same feelings pervade all the
classes in the Colony ; for, unfortunately,
the distinctive marks brought about in
other places by education and knowledge,
are not (as yet, at least) observable
among any large body of the people.
One great desideratum in the members
of an Upper House was, that they should


possess knowledge and experience. This
was one of the chief characteristics of
the House of Lords, where retired, and
chief Judges, and men of mature acquire-
ments sat and voted, who had made it
their business during their lives to pre-
pare themselves for those duties. (Cheers.)
It is necessary that the members of an
Upper House should understand the laws,
and the policy of the state, in order to
guide it safely in every respect. It is
obviously wise to prevent too great a
mutability in our laws ; for nothing can
produce greater want of public confidence
than instability in legislation; and if both
Houses depend on election there must be
a constant change of men, and of course
a constant change of measures, whicji
will have the effect of diminishing the
security of property, and damping the
ardor of industry and enterprise. I
contend, that stability in our laws and
political institutions, ought to be in-
sured as far as human sagacity can
guarantee it. (Cheers.) Now is this
to be better obtained by nomination or
election ? Surely under a responsible
government, and a Governor’s advisers
liable to impeachment for corruption,
this would be more safely attained by
nomination. A Governor, with his Exe-
cutive Council, responsible to the people,
would be much more likely to select
properly qualified individuals out of the
whole country, than the large farmers of
a country would be. If the Upper House
be elected by the large farmers, as the
honourable gentleman opposite pro-
posed, the country must be divided into
districts, in order to the exercise of this
power, and there must consequently be
district elections. Where there wete
these elections there would be a canvass
for votes, and where there was such a
canvass, there would, as in all other
popular elections, be corruption. The
man who spent the most money, and made
the most promises, would be the most
likely to succeed, without reference to
his qualifications (Cheers) ; and it was
the ntost crafty and Unprincipled knave
who would promise most largely. The
farmers, honest themselves, and believing
everybody else to be so, would be the
victims of imposition. (Hear, hear.) The
senators of the United States are those
who have distinguished themselves in the
several legislatures of that country.
Here, also, after the first few years, the
persons appointed by the Government to
seats in the Upper House would be those
who had distinguished themselves in the
Lower one. Thus, ultimately, they would
have the best men from among the re-
presentatives themselves. (Hear, hear.)
But some of the very best men were those
who would not be induced to go through
a contested election, and run the risk of
being disgraced by some contemptible
candidate, who could canvass better,
achieving a victory over him. (Hear,
hear.) 1 hope I shall not act improperly
in mentioning a name, but there is one
gentleman who distinguished himself
as an excellent Judge on the Bench,
both here and at Madras, who might
be expected to settle among them—he
meant Sir William Burton. This gentle-
man will be peculiarly fitted for a seat
in the Upper House, and yet would
never submit to the risk of being abused
and beaten by going before a constitu-
ency. (Hear, hear.) It was not fox the
mere present that we are legislating.
It is a matter of very little consequence
whether this Llouse lasts some years
longer or not. It is better, Indeed, that
it should so last than that we should sow
seeds which would bring forth bad fruit.
(Cheers.) We are legislating for a
community which, to use the language
of the honorable member opposite (Mr.
Wentworth), is being “precipitated
into a great nation,” and we must legis-
late with reference not only to its present,
but to its future condition. Arid if it
be known that members of the higher
classes, competent by education and
position, can look forward to the
honours of a seat in an Upper House,
without the ordeal of a popular election,
I cannot but think that this would be an
Inducement to those classes to come here.
(Cheers.) This, however, has been so
well put by the honorable and learned
member for Sydney, that I will not go
over the same ground lest I should
weaken the arguments of that gentle-


man. I will refer again to that noble
confederacy, the United States. If the
honourable and learned member for
Cumberland had looked more closely
into the constitution of that country, he
would have seen that the Upper [louse
was not created off hand and left with-
out check. Many safeguards had been
found necessary. There were councils
of revision to guard against bad legisla-
tion. It was found that these Upper
Houses could not be trusted without the
interposition of such a power. (Hear,
hear.) There was formerly the same
safeguard in connection with the federal
government, although it is true it had
been withdrawn lately from a fear that
the judges, by whom chiefly this power
was exercised, might lose the weight and
influence properly attaching to their
offices, by being drawn into politics ; and
there is, instead, an understanding that
these officers, as well as various heads of
the departments, should be consulted by
the head of the Government, although
the confirmation or rejection of a mea-
sure was nominally his own act. Under
the British Government we have no such
restrictions. Every Englishman knows
that no laws can be passed imposing tor-
ture, and the whole spirit of the consti-
tution is so strikingly a spirit of freedom,
that slavery, in any shape, cannot
* exist, or be recognised under it.
(Cheers.) But with these principles
kept in view the powers of legislation
are unbounded. It is not so in the
United States. Every State has its
constitution, and the powers of its legis-
lature written down. When acts are
passed by these legislatures; the question
of the power of the legislature to pass
certain laws is liable to be raised before
the Judges ; and if they be found re-
pugnant to the constitution, or ip excess
of the legislatorial powers which it con-
ferred, they are declared void. (Hear,
he'ar.) If such precautions are neces-
sary under these republican govern-
ments, they would be equally necessary
here under a similar state of things.
Myself and my honorable colleague
(the Solicitor-General) who perform here
the duties of the Court of Revision, feel
most painfully the difficuties of the task,
even with the laws which are passed, in
reference to the present condition of the
community ; and it is hardly necessary
to refer to samples of hasty and ill-
advised measures constantly hurried into
laws. Much more difficult, nay, impos-
sible, would be the task when more
numerous and more complicated enact-
ments are rendered necessary by its
progress in wealth and importance.
(Hear, hear.) In the glorious model
which we have before us, the House
of Lords'was the only check upon
legislation, and the only equipoise be-
tween all the powers of the state.
(Cheers.) The formation of a republic
has been attempted in England, but it
has proved a complete failure. I will
read a short passage on this sub-
ject from Ue Lolme on the British Con-
stitution.
The royal power being thus annihilated, the
English made fruitless attempts to substitute a
republican government in its stead. “It was a
curious spectacle,” says Montesquieu, “to behold
the vain efforts of the English to establish among
themselves a democracy.” Subjected, at first, to
the power of the principal leaders in the Long
Parliament, they saw that power expire only to
pass without bounds into the hands of a Pro-
tector. They saw it afterwards parcelled out
among the chiefs of different bodies of soldiers ;
and thus, shifting without end from one kind of
subjection to another, they were at length con-
vinced, that an attempt to establish liberty in a
great nation, by making the people interfere in
the common business of government, is, of all
attempts, the most chimerical; that the autho-
rity of all, with which men are amnsed, is in
reality no more than the authority of a few
powerful individuals, who divide the republic
among themselves; and they at last rested in
the bosom of the only constitution which is fit
for a great state and a tree people ; 1 mean that
in which a chosen number deliberate, and asingla
hand executes : but in which, at the same time,
the public satisfaction is rendered, by the general
relation and arrangement of things, a necessary
condition of the duration of government..
If republican institutions could have been
dovetailed into the British Government
the change would have been effected at
that time; but all efforts failed ; and
after these attempts, which were ridi-
culed by Montesquieu, they were com-
pelled to fall back upon limited monarchy.
(Hear, hear, hear.) I will quote
another passage from Judge Story, who.


as a jurist and a philosopher, was one of
the first men of the age.
The future is that, which may well awaken the
most earnest solicitude, both for the virtue and
the permanence of our republic. The tate of
other republics, their rise, their progress, their
decline, and their fall, are written but too legibly
on the pages of history, if indeed they were not
continually before us in the startling fragments
of their ruins. They have perished ; and pe-
rished by their own hands. Prosperity has ener-
vated them, corruption has debased them, and a
venal populace has consummated their destruc-
tion. Alternately the prey of military chief-
tains at home, and of ambitious invaders from
abroad, they have been sometimes cheated out of
their liberties by servile demagogues ; sometimes
betrayed into a” surrender of them by false pa-
triots; and sometimes they have willingly sold
them for a price to the despot, who has bidden
highest for his victims. They have disregarded
the warning voice of their best statesmen, and
have persecuted, and driven from office their
truest friends. They have listened to the fawn-
ing sycophant, and the base calumniator of the
wise and good. They have reverenced power
more in its highest abuses and summary move-
ments, than in its calm and coftstitutional energy,
when it dispensed blessings with an unseen, but
liberal hand. They have surrendered to taction
what belonged to country. Patronage and party,
the triumph of a leader, and the discontents of a
day, have outweighed all solid principles and in-
stitutions of Government. Such are the melan-
choly lessons of the past history of republics
down to our own. * * * *
In the first place, it cannot escape our notice,
how exceedingly difficult it is to settle the founda-
tions of any government which do not admit of
controversy or question. The very elements out
of which it is to be built are susceptible of in-
finite modifications ; and theory too often deludes
us by the attractive simplicity of its plans, and
imagination by the visionary perfection of its
speculations. In theory, a government may
promise the most perfect harmony ot operation
in all its various combinations. In practice,
the whole machinery may be perpetually re-
tarded, or thrown out of order, by accidental
mal-adjustment. In theory, a government may
seem deficient in unity of design and symmetry
of parts; and yet, in practice, it may work with
astonishing accuracy and force for the general
welfare. Whatever, then, has been found to
work well in experience, should be rarely ha-
zarded ujion conjectural improvements. Time,
and long and steady operation are indispensable
to the perfection of all social institutions. To
be of any value they must become cemented with
the habits, the feelings, and the pursuits of the
people. Every change discomposes for a while
the whole arrangements of the system. What is
safe is not always expedient; what is new is often
pregnant with unforeseen evils, and imaginary
good.
There is in these observations a fund of
wisdom, which the House would do well
to pause and reflect upon. (Hear, hear.)
There was a Constitution Committee
par excellence sitting outside the House,
and, instead of finding fault with this
Committee, I am exceedingly pleased to
find them taking this trouble upon them-
selves. But these gentlemen will find, as
all have found who have taken the labour
of constitution-making in hand, that the
task is a most difficult one. (Hear,
hear.) If a constitution should be
framed outside of the House better than
that which is devised inside, I should
not consider it at all humiliating to
adopt the former constitution in prefer-
ence to the latter. (Hear, hear, from
Mr. Wentworth.) But every man’s
crochet is being put forward, and there
is one plan—as clumsy a contrivance
as can be well imagined, put forward
in the papers this morning with the ap-
parent stamp of authority. Among so
many suggestions something good might
be hit upon ; but the task of constitu-
tion-making is one in which many of the
greatest philosophers have so signally
failed as to be exposed to the ridicule of
posterity. The plan of a Common-
wealth put forth by Hume, the historian,
has been characterized by an American
commentator as “ a splendid absurdity.”
The plan of the poet Milton was still
more absurd. Locke, too, had not only
devised a constitution, but had attempted
to carry it out in Carolina, and a more
complete failure never was known.
Bearing in mind those failures, I am
afraid nothing very brilliant is to be
expected from the Constitution Com-
mittee. (Hear, hear, and laughter.)
But this is too serious a matter to joke
upon. History informs us that every
constitution is an experiment. The in-
stitutions of Lycurgus, which lasted the
longest of all, endured for 700 years.
Those of another famous constitution-
maker "of old, Solon, were swept away
in a century. I will remind the House
that the experiment of making a consti-
tution is not like an experiment by our
friend Professor Smith, of the Univer-
sity, in his laboratory, of which the re-


suit can be immediately, or almost im-
mediately seen. The result of a con-
stitution cannot be seen until a long
lapse of years, or perhaps centuries.
(Cheers.) But if we desire the constitu-
tion which we have devised should be of
an enduring nature, what better model
can we have than the constitution of
that land, “ whose flag has braved a
thousand years the battle and the
breeze.” (Cheers.) My honourable and
learned friend, the member for Cumber-
land, who has misquoted history so
largely, has spoken much of the old
Saxon institutions ; but if that gentle-
man had read the last pages of Sir J.
Stephen’s work on the History of France,
or glanced into Miller on the British
Government, he would have found that
those institutions which he alluded to
were, substantially, though under differ-
ent names, the same as those of the pre-
sent day. (Hear, hear.) The Govern-
ment of Great Britain has not been
made up for a day, but for all seasons,
and can we hope for a better model to
guide us. (Cheers.) There is one re-
ference in the speech of the hon. and
learned member to which I desire to direct
the attention of the Council. Speaking of
the murders at Baltimore in 1812, he
observed that such outrages frequently
occurred in other places, in England, in
Scotland, in Ireland ; and he then had
gone on to say that a murder had re-
cently taken place in Sydney under the
most aggravated circumstances, and yet
that no adequate punishment had fol-
lowed. To that statement I do refer
with pain and surprise. No greater im-
putation could be made against the Go-
vernment or the majesty of the law.
But what is the case ? A drunken
brawl had’arisen in a public house in
Sydney between some soldiers and civi-
lians ; two of the former were killed
under circumstances which compelled
me to regard the case as one of murder.
I, in my capacity of public prosecutor,
placed the parties implicated upon their
trial for murder; but the honorable and
learned member, as counsel for one, or
more, of the prisoners, in not such a
long, but a more effective speech than
he had addressed to that Council on the
previous evening, had satisfied his honor,
the Chief Justice, that the evidence
against the first prisoner who was ar-
raigned, was not sufficient to convict
him of murder; and the crime was re-
duced to manslaughter. Mr, Justice
Dickinson and Mr. Justice Therry agreed
with the Chief Justice, and a verdict of
manslaughter was returned in the rest of
the cases ; and this as far, as it effected
the argument, went to show that in this
country what was ruled to be the law of
the land was respected, however strong-
might be the excited feelings in so me-
lancholy a case as that referred to; whilst
in America the law was powerless, be-
cause the mob was its superior. (Hear,
hear.) -It was with much regret that I
saw the name of my venerable and re-
spected friend, Archdeacon M'Encroe,
as one among the orators at the Victoria
Theatre ; but that reverend gentleman’s
sayings on that occasion, only proved
that a very excellent and good priest
might be a miserably bad politician.
(Loud cries of hear.) And I dis-
tinctly deny that the rev. gentleman,
in taking the part he had, was represent-
ing the opinions of the archbishop, or of
any of the educated members of the Ca-
tholic community, (loud cries of hear,)
and I regret to say that the respect
which attended him in his clerical cha-
racter does not follow him in his politi-
cal one. That his residence in America
for some years had prepossessed Arch-
deacon M‘Encroe in favor of the Ameri-
can people was not surprising, but still I
can hardly believe that my very rev.
friend can have a prepossession for a
\aukee constitution. Did not my reve-
rend friend remember the burning in
some of the United States of religious
houses and when no prose-
cutions ensued, or convictions were had,
though the perpetrators were all well
known, because no one dared to prose-
cute, for Judge Lynch was paramount ?
(Loud cries of hear.) [Having described
the levelling to the ground of the Con-
vent of Mount Benedict, the hon. and
learned member proceeded to show that
in a country where it was proclaimed


that every man was at liberty to worship
God in the manner that he pleased, the
most violent persecution, and aggression
on the property of Homan Catholics,
was notorious ; and where the constitu-
tion declared that every man was free,
the whole confederation was branded
with slavery on its forehead.] To an ex-
tract from the memoir of Dr. Chan-
nlng, I would request the attention of
Archdeacon M‘Encroe and the Council:
In the autumn of 1837, on the 7th of No-
vember, the Rev. Elijah P. Lovejoy, editor of the
Alton Observer, in Illinois, was shot by one of a
mob, while defending the building containing his
press. This event, so fitly consummating the
long series of outrages committed or tolerated
against the-*Abolitionists excited a profound sen-
sation. Even those whose caution, social connec-
tions, and business interests, had hitherto made
them hostile to the anti-slavery movement, were
startled, and the occasion seemed the tight one,
therefore, to arouse the people to a consciousness
of their duties as freemen. In a conversation
with a friend, Dr. Channing suggested the plan
of a meeting of the citizens of Boston in Faneuil
Hall, to protest against the lawless violence which
had at length resulted in the destruction of life.
A petition to the city Government was accord-
ingly got up for the use of Faneuil Hall, and,
having been headed by Dr. Channing, and the
requisite number of signers obtained, was pre-
sented. It was immediately followed by a counter
petition, numerously signed. In this dark day
the taint of “Abolitionism” was so much dreaded,
especially in large trading communities, that in-
fluential men readily came forward to oppose even
an expression of indignant remonstrance against
the violence under which the Abolitionists had
suffered. Under their influence the Hall was re-
fused, and thus an issue was made for freedom of
speech and the supremacy of the law, in which
Dr. Channing found himself most unexpectedly
involved as a principal. On the 2nd of the
following December, Dr. Channing published an
appeal to the citizens of Boston, in the colums of
the Daily Advertizer, subjoining the petition
which himself and friends had presented to the
Mayor and Aldermen of the city of Boston, re-
questing the use of Faneuil Hall.
I will not weary the House with read-
ing the whole of the extract, but I will
state that Dr. Channing wrote a splendid
arffewer to that refusal, and aroused many
of his friends to get up a meeting. A
crowded and enthusiastic meeting took
place, and an eloquent address was de-
livered by Dr. Channing, in which he
says, speaking of the murder of Mr,
Lovejoy—“ Nor icas this a solitary act of
violence; he came forward to protest
against it in the name of American freedom,
and to throw a shield over the menaced
liberties of the State.”
The vast multitude seemed to be of one mind,
and all signs betokening a meeting in the highest
degree honourable to the old “ Cradle of Liberty.”
But the powers of evil proposed otherwise. The
respectful order was but a delusive calm. One-
third of the persons assembled, perhaps, were
Abolitionists, or freediscussionists ; the one-third
were curious on-lookers, eager chiefly for excite-
ment’, and swayed to and fro by every speaker;
but there was also a party gathered there at once,
from counting rooms and cellars, who were deadly
foes to the Anti-slavery movement, and only
waiting a fit chance for an outbreak.
Resolutions were proposed, but who
would the Council guess, now started on
to the platform ? I do not bejieve my
honourable friend, Mr, Darvall, would
succeed in guessing—Why, no less a
person than the Attorney-General of the
State. Yes, the Attorney-General of
Boston. (Loud laughter.)
He pronounced the resolutions to be “ abstract
propositionssaid that it would be idle and
useless to call this great meeting of citizens
together, merely to affirm by solemn vote what
nobody would have the hardihood to denyde-
manded to know how Mr. Lovejoy had merited the
distinction ol being thus commemorated; accused
him of exciting the slaves to rise upon their
masters; compared the slaves to wild beasts
thirsting for blood; asked whether “ that man
had not died as the fool dieth likened the mob
of Alton to the fathers of the revolution; and
wound up by saying “to sympathise with those
who have been mobbed, and whose own rashness
and imprudence have incited the mob, is not the
best way to put down mobs.”
Thus was the excellent Dr. Channing
met upon the platform by the first law
officer of the state ; not with apologies
for the insufficiency of the law, but with
the expressions of insolent triumph that
the law had been defeated. (Loud
cries of hear.) And without exaggera-
tion it might be said that the Attorney-
General of that state, by his conduct on
that occasion, only proved that the
voice of the populace overrode the law
in that particular state of the union ;
hut as far as I can ascertain, the law
was equally powerless in almost all the
states. (Hear, hear.) All serious con-
vulsions are carried out by dema-
gogues ; as a boiling cauldron throws its
scum to the top, so in all social coa-


vulsions unworthy persons will be sure
to get to the top, and betray the people
for their own selfish purposes. (Hear,
hear, hear.) The people left to them-
selves, and uncontrolled, wonld be hur-
ried on to ruin by the ruffians who made
them their dupes. Let the colonists of
New South Wales look to the pages of
history for proof of this; and if they
did not regard those pages as an almanac,
let them learn wisdom therefrom. In
approaching this question I have no in-
terest to serve but that which every
goad citizen ought to study—an earnest
desire to live under the best government.
(Loud cheers.) All my readings, and
my study, have inspired me with the
greatest veneration for the noble consti-
tution of the United Kingdom. I be-
lieve it to be the most excellent, of
human institutions. It is no matter of
theory or speculation, it is not a work of
yesterday, that may be amended to day,
and changed to-morrow ; it is composed
of many wheels, springs, and balances,
of counteract! ng, and co-operating powers,
all dovetailing in each other; and each
of its parts so fitted for the test,
that to unsettle is to destroy. Every
change proposed in it should bear the
strongest marks of necessity. It is not
enough that any change should be good
in design, but it should be clearly shewn,
that it is safe by its agreement with all
the other parts. (Cheers.) I approach
that venerable fabric with the same re-
verential awe that I would the sepulchres
of the illustrious dead in Westminster
Abbey. I regard it as the best shield
against oppression of every kind, and the
best safeguard of rational liberty. It
appears to me that the genius of liberty
himself has there secured a refuge, where
he might rest secure on the one side,
from despotism, and on the other, from
licentiousness. I warn the House to
pause, before they interfere with it, and
adopt in its place the theories of those, of
whom it might be said, “ That fools rush
in where angels fear to tread.” [The
honourable and learned member resumed
his seat amid applause.] %
On the motion of Mr. COWPER, the
House adjourned.
Mr. COWPER : Often as I have had
occasion to address this House since it
was first called into existence, never have
I felt so much the necessity of its indul-
gence as on the present occasion. I feel
how great the importance of the sub-
ject, I feel also my inability to do jus-
tice to it, and I do implore, therefore, the
forbearance of the Council while I en-
deavour to the best of my humble powers,
to enter into this question. I agree
with all honourable members who have
preceded me, that it is indeed a most
momentous questionl agree with many
of them that it is the most momentous
question which has ever been brought
under the notice of this House. 1 shall
therefore endeavour to approach the dis-
cussion of it in a proper spirit, and to
treat, with both candour and temperance,
the opinions of those who happen to
differ with me upon it. It is with deep
regret that I have observed, on the part
of some honourable members in this
House, a disposition to adopt foregone
conclusions—to misconceive, if not to
misinterpret, the opinions of those who
are opposed to them. It is heartless
work to discuss any great question under
such circumstances ; and it does appear
that the majority in the House, are de-
termined to give neither to other honor-
able members in this House or people
out of doors, any fair chance or any can-
did consideration. I must therefore en-
treat honourable members to extend to
those who differ from them some little
charity, for the majority of the House
seem indisposed to allow any measure of
reason or common sense to those who
took that side of the question on which
he now rose. They contend that nothing
but anarchy and confusion must result
from our views, and that these therefore
must necessarily be our object. But I
do not think that any such opinions are
warranted either by justice or by the
arguments of those wdio are opposed to
us. The opinions I have adopted on this
question are shared at least by a con-
siderable number, if not a majority of
those who are the present Ministers of
her Majesty, and seeing this I do not
think that I, and those who think with


me, ought to bo taunted Avith holding
views perfectly inconsistent with the
supremacy of the British Government in
tills colony. The honourable and learned
member for Sydney, and those who acted
with him, said that the opposite party,
the opponents of the Bill, asked for
something different from the British
constitution, and that what they asked
for was not desired by the colonists ge-
nerally, ‘Now I deny this. I contend
that what the opponents of this bill ask
for is something more analagous to the
British constitution, more kindred with
and congenial to its spirit than that
which the present measure contemplates.
And if the colonists generally agree
with the Bill, why should the views put
forward by the honourable and learned
member for Sydney, and his friends here,
have been so strongly denounced out of
doors ? And 1 would here refer to some
observations which have been made by
the honourable and learned member for
Sydney (Mr. Wentworth) in the course
of his speech. The honourable and
learned member had stated, almost at the
outset of his address, that the present
Council was not only possessed of the
power, hut was elected expressly to frame
a constitution for the colony, and he
laboured hard' to prove that the people
had encouraged them by a silent assent
to frame a constitution of this na-
ture. He went back a little further
than the alteration of the constitution of
] 850, and appealed to the movement
which took place throughout the colony
on Earl Grey’s proposed constitution,
which he said was repudiated by the
whole colony, and which, he stated, was
so repudiated, mainly because it was
based on the principle of double elec-
tion. But if 1 understood the hon. and
learned member aright, the views which
he took of the expression and opinion on
the part of the people on that occasion
were very different from those which were
taken by her Majesty’s Ministers. Before
I sit down I hope I shall be able to con-
vince the house that the minister of that
day, when he withdrew his own views of
the constitution of this colony, did not
,do so because he contemplated the erec-
tlon of a nominated Upper House. Th®
lion, and learned member, advancing- a
step further in the argument, stated that,
in the last session of the Council, the
proposed form of constitution which was
then submitted to the house, met almost
the unanimous concurrence of the house,,
and that the proposal of a nominated
Upper House met with no opposition out
of doors. I think this was hardly a fair
statement of the question, and in sup-
port of this view I will refer to the re-
port of the Select Committee on the
subject last Session. This report was a
very meagre document, and it was not
opposed out of doors, because it was be-
lieved that the bill would have been
brought before the house and be sub-
jected to discussion, during which the
country would have had the opportunity
of speaking out. The adjournment of
the whole matter came upon the country
by surprise. I for one had no idea of it,
and, in fact, on the very day on which
the adjournment was moved, 1 had a con-
ference with my late hon. colleague as
to the steps to be taken in reference to
it. Had the bill gone on, it was in-
tended to have got up an agitation
against it, but no opportunity was
afforded of so doing; but this was no
ground for asserting that the country
agreed in the principle of the bill, and
I will read a paragraph from the report
of the committee of last session, which
shows the House that the question then
had not assumed that finality which was
argued for it by the hon. and learned
member for Sydney. The report stated,
The principal difficulty your Commitfce have
had to contend with has been to devise a scheme
of a Legislative Council which, in its working,
may prove an effectual check on the democratic
element in the assembly, and at the same time
be competent to discharge with efficiency the re-
vising, deliberative, and conservative functions
which will devolve on it. Some portion of the
Committee have thought that these ends would
be most effectually attained by leaving the nomi-
nation of this body wholly to the local Executive,
with an understanding that no more than oue-
third of the Council should hold offices of emolu-
ment. Another portion of the Committee have
preferred a Council wholly elective—some with a
high property qualification, and limitation as to
age; others, again, without any restriction in
cither of those particulars ;■ and another portion


of the Committee have advocated, as a middle
course between these extremes of pure nomination
on the one hand, and pure election on the other,
that the Governor should have the nomination for
life of two-thirds of the members of the Legisla-
tive Council, out of persons who have been elective
raerpbers of the last or present Council, or who
may be elected to any future Assembly, the other
third holding office during pleasure. The bill
which relates to this subject is presented to the
House with a clause embodying this principle,
but with a distinct understanding that in its pro-
gress though the House this question is to be as
o|>en to the objections of members of the Com-
mittee as of any other member of the House.
I would draw attention to the wording
of this paragraph, to shew that when in-
sinuations are thrown out about weather-
cock politicians and Inconsistency, they
are not justified or borne out by the facts
of the case. As a member of the com-
mittee of last session I invariably ex-
pressed myself in of the elective
principle, hut I admit that I advocated
that opinion somewhat cautiously. I
had then considerable diffidence on the
subject, but the more I have reflected,
the more I have read upon the subject,
the more I have made myself acquainted
with the opinions of those in England
best qualified to decide on the question
—the more I have become convinced that
no constitution will ever give satisfac-
tion in this colony which is not based on
the elective principle. Nor can I admit
that those with whom I haveactedare open
to the charge of trying a novel experi-
ment in constitution making on the prin-
ciples thus proposed, any more than the
hon. and learned member for Sydney, in
the scheme which he proposes. Why
should the legislature of this colony, at
tills time of the day, when we are
allowed to frame a constitution conso-
nant to the opinions and acceptable to
the wishes of the colonists, adopt one
which is denounced every where, and
which has never in any single instance,
and never can work satisfactorily in
any British colony. (Oh, oh,. from Mr.
Wentworth.) The hon. and learned
member says Oh ! oh ! but before I sit
down, I trust I shall show satisfactorily,
by indisputable authority, that the pro-
posed form of constitution, or anything
approaching to it, wherever it has been
tried, has been proved a failure. Nor is-
that part of the proposed Bill which in-
volves the principle of hereditary titles
altogether a novelty—although it is as-
sumed to he so by the hon. and learned
member. The principle, or one very
nearly assimilating to it, was tried in the
Quebec Act, but that constitution has
not yet given satisfaction, and I have
the opportunity of knowing from a person
in the confidence of the present British
Government, that it is the intention to
alter that Act, and to make the tipper
House in Canada elective. As this is
the case, as these changes are found
necessary in other climes, why should
not we, now that we have the oppor-
tunity of making a constitution for our-
selves, avoid those dangers which have
produced inconvenience in other colo-
nies, and frame for ourselves a constitu-
tion freed from those defects which
in other dependencies require the in-
tervention of the Queen to reform ?
The opinions of those British statesmen
who have most carefully considered the
subject are all opposed to a nominated
Upper House. Earl Grey, whose long
experience in this matter must give his
opinions weight, with many other gentle-
men of great political influence, have
arrived at this, conclusion. Earl Grev,
in his book, lately published, on this sub-
ject, says—
If an Upper Chamber should be constituted in
such a manner as to have substantial weight and
authority, and to be thus capable of exercising Z
salutary check upon the Representative Assembly,
while at the* same time effectual provision were
made against the machine of Government being
brought to a stand by the differences between
these two bodies, the advantage of such a con-
stitution of the Legislature could not well he
contested. But to accomplish this is a problem
not yet solved by any colonial Constitution of
which I am aware.
Now this is the opinion of a man of
larger experience in colonial matters than
almost any other man ; and it is not his
opinion alone, but that of those with
whom he was associated in matters of
colonial government. I fear that the
time is about to arrive, when, after
having obtained from the home govern-
ment redress for our grievances,, we are
about to. introduce internal dissension.


If these measures are not discussed In a
better spirit than has hitherto been dis-
played, inconveniences of no small mag-
nitude will no doubt be created, (Hear,
hear, hear.) It is a matter of great con-
gratulation that two successive Secreta-
ries of State should have written to
us despatches in so conciliatory a tone
as pervades the despatches of the present
Colonial Minister and his immediate pre-
decessor. I refer particularly to Sir
John Pakington’s despatch of Ist De-
cember, 1852. In that despatch it is
stated that
They, her Majesty’s Ministers, have been fully
impressed with a sense of the importance to be
attached to that petition, not only as proceeding
from a great majority of the Legislature of the
Province, but as reiterating that statement of the
causes of discontent felt by the community, which
had been deliberately urged by their predecessors
upon the attention of her Majesty’s then Govern-
ment ; a statement, moreover, which was accom-
panied by your assurance that its sentiments were
shared by the most loyal, respectable, and in-
fluential members of the community.
But they are influenced, in addition, by con-
siderations arising from those extraordinary dis-
coveries of gold which have lately taken place in
some ot the Australian colonies, and which may
l*e said to have imparted new and unforeseen
features to their political and social condition.
They are sensible that they have now to con-
sider the prayer cf the petition thus laid before
her Majesty with reference to a state of affairs
which has no parallel in history, and which must,
in all human probability, stimulate the advance
of population, wealth, and material prosperity,
with a rapidity alike unparalleled.
Her Majesty’s Government have observed with
a degree of satisfaction, which it is impossible to
express too strongly, the general order and good
conduct whioh have distinguished the multitudes
attracted to the gold deposits. And thev have
had the additional good fortune of being able to
approve of the general firmness and good judg-
ment displayed by the local authorities, under
circumstances so strange and difficult.
And with the evidence thus before them, they
cannot but feel, that while it has become more
urgently necessary than heretofore to place full
powers of self-government in the hands of a people
thus advanced in wealth and prosperity, that
people have on the other hand given signal
evidence of their fitness to regulate their own
affairs, especially under legislative institutions,
amended in the manner which the council itself
has pointed out in the concluding part of this
petition.
I draw attention to the words of this
despatch, because is has been broadly
asserted that the people of this colony
have no right to interfere with reference
to a measure, prepared by this House
under the authority of the Imperial Par-
liament. But the Council acted in its
representative capacity, and surely the
people whom we represent have a right
to express their opinions by petition, and
to meet for the purpose of doing so.
(Hear, hear.) It has generally been
deemed an advantage to have the assist-
ance of petitions and of expressions of
opinion from without. It is a matter
deeply to be regretted, that when this
measure has roused a community most
difficult to be roused—when it has drawn
forth a general expression of opinion in
which some of the most respectable men
in the community took part—that this
movement, and those who took part in it,
should have been made the subject of
such abuse in this House. (Hear, hear.)
The terms paltry ruffians, low vagabonds,
and filthy community, have been used
by the honourable and learned member
for Sydney. (Hear, hear.) I heard this
language with very deep regret, and ray
regret was still greater on hearing ex-
pressions almost equally abusive cheered
on by honourable members opposite, both
official and unofficial. (Hear, hear, and
no, no.) A more respectable public
meeting than the one so often alluded to
has never been held in New South
W ales. Persons who never were in the
habit of mixing in politics came forward
with the best intentions, when they found
the rights of their country involved.
Many who had no desire to aid in any
agitation, doubtless came forward with a
view to lend their countenance to this
movement, and to check the proceedings
of others who might be less moderate in
their views. The character of this meet-
ing was very fairly stated at the opening
of the report in the Sydney Morning
Herald —
On the stage were assembled a large number of
the most respectable and influential of the in-
habitants of Sydney; amongst whom might be
conspicuously remarked the leading merchants of
the city, who have hitherto studiously abstained
from interference in political matters.
The chairman of the meeting was a mer-
chant of the highest standing, and all


who took an active part in its proceed-
ings were gentlemen of unquestionable
respectability. T. he first resolution was
moved by my honourable and learned
friend the member for Cumberland, who
had a perfect right, I maintain, to take
a part in this movement, although that
right has been questioned. (Hear, hear.)
I was invited to attend, but did not do
so, because I was a member of the Com-
mittee, and because, having been in op-
position to the present report, it might be
said that I was getting up a party outside
the House to support my opposition
within. But I would distinctly state ray
intention to identify myself with the
movement that has been thus initiated.
One of the speakers was Mr. Alderman
W who has recently performed an
act which entitled him to the very highest
commendation. (Loud cheers.) There
was nothing in the course of the proceed-
ings at this meeting of which any one
need be ashamed ; and if in the heat of
debate some expression might have been
used, or if something offensive had been
spoken from the pit of the theatre in
which the meeting was held, that was no
reason why abuse should be poured upon
the whole meeting. (Hear, hear.) One
of the chief points of objection against
the bill Is, of* course, the proposed con-
stitution of the Upper House. I also am
opposed to it, because, as we cannot have
the British institution in its integrity,
I think the next best thing to it
would be the formation of an elective
upper chamber. It has been answered
by the honourable and learned member
for Sydney that the House is pledged by
its petition to the sanction of the nominee
principle. But whatever may have been
the understanding of the honourable
member, such was not the understanding
of those who had the petition in charge.
I will fpiote the words of Lord Monteagle
to prove this—
If there was one prayer which ran through the
whole of the petitions and memorials he had pre-
sented, it was that their institutions should be
assimilated to those of the mother country. They
seemed—and long might they preserve the feel-
ing ! —they seemed still desirous to cherish an
unbounded attachment to the mother country, an
unshaken loyalty to the Crown. He did not think
that mistrust and discontent would be called forth
by the establishment of such a double chamber as
ho would recommend. He proposed that the
Upper House as well as the Lower House, should
be elective, the members being of a graver age,
and elected for a longer period than the members
of the second chamber ; in that way they would
obtain a real conservative but, at the same time,
a popular chamber. He, therefore, called on their
lordships to weigh well the importance of this
question, and secure to the people of Australia
the blessings of the constitution under which the
mother country had flourished.
It was clearly no t the opinion of this
nobleman that an elective Upper House
would let loose the floods of democracy
which have been talked about. It is
equally clear that we are not open to the
taunt of having' changed our views, and
sought something different to that which
we formerly prayed for. Earl Grey was
equally strong in his expression of opinion
as to the impossibility of forming an
Upper House at all analogous to the
House of Lords. He said—
The noble Lord had said, “ Introduce into these
colonies our own institutions." This was very
fine, but happily it was impossible to do so. A
House of Lords existed in this kingdom, but it
existed nowhere else on the face of the earth. It
had grown up from the time of the Conquest, but
it was an institution which they could no more
create than they could create one of the magnifi-
cent oak trees which had been planted at the
Conquest, and which were now crumbling into
dust.
Lord Wodehouse also, on this same oc-
casion, spoke as follows :
The noble Earl (Earl Grey), in support of this
measure, had alleged that the Australian coloniea
were so fond of their present form of Constitution,
that it would be quite gratuitous on the part of
their Lordships to make any alteration in it, as
such alteration must prove highly disagreeable to
the inhabitants of those colonies. Now, whac
were the real facts of the case? Erom the papers
which had been laid upon their Lordships’ table
it appeared that they were simply these : In the
year, 1847, the noble Earl, the Secretary for the
Colonies, proposed to introduce into New South
Wales an entirely new Constitution, similar, or
very nearly so, to the Constitution which had
been given to New Zealand ; and the consequence
was such as might be imagined. A storm of
indignation arose in the colonies, and remon-
strances were sent to this country against the
Government measures. They prayed that they
might not be subjected to crude experiments.
They objected to two chambers ; but it must be
borne in mind that it was not to the principle of
two chambers that they objected, but simply to
two chambers, one of which would be entirely


by the Crown. The colonies never bad
the simple question, whether two elective
chambers were better than one, brought before
them. The only question which they had to con-
sider was, how they could place the nominees of
the Crown in such a situation that they should be
the least possible obstruction to the elective mem-
bers. The colonies required very naturally that
the, nominees should be mixed up with the re-
presentatives of the colonists, and that they should
not form a separate chamber of themselves, as
they would thereby be enabled to place a veto
on the proceedings of the representatives of the
people. The colonists did not object to the principle
of a second chamber ; on the contary, they dis-
tinctly prayed that their Constitution might be
as nearly assimilated, as their circumstances would
permit, to the constitution of this country And
were not two elective chambers, representing the
wants of the people "in different ways, a much
nearer resemblance to the spirit of the British
constitution, than this anomalous single chamber.
But then their lordships, had been told, “Oh, all
that is very true, but it was necessary that these
colonies should have been trained to the exercise
of representative institutions before you confer
upon them the privilege of a double chamber.”
It was also objected that there were no materials
in these colonies for two chambers ; but if there
were not materials for a second chamber, how
could they find materials for nominees ? How
could they find persons of such influence as to be
fitted, on, the bare nomination of the Government,
to control the votes of their elected colleagues in
the same chamber ? And it should be recollected,
that in the United States of America representa-
tive institutions had been granted to colonies of
far less importance in population and wealth than
the colonies in question. By the ordnance of
1787, for establishing a government in Ohio
(which had been the basis of legislation on this
subject ever since), it was provided, that as soon
as in any territory there should be 5000 male
inhabitants of full age, there should be established
a legislature consisting of two elective chambers.
And if their lordships would take one of the latest ;
examples, they would find that to the district of |
Oregon, by no means the most civilized portion
ot the United States, two chambers of legislature
bad been given, the first consisting of 9 elective
members, and the other 18 representatives of the j
people. And were they to be told that there was I
such a moral and intellectual inferiority in a |
colonial population, that the backwoodsmen of |
Oregon could afford materials for a senate, and j
they were not to be found in New South Wales, |
which in 1848, exclusively of Port Phillip, had
170,000 inhabitants. As to the objection that I
such a senate would be too small for practical j
pur|H>ses, he need only point to the State of
Delaware, where the Senate consisted of only five
members, of Now Hampshire, where it had twelve,
as a refutation of their argument. He did not,
however, agree with those who wished to establish
an aristocracy in the Australian colonies ; he did
not think it likely that aristocratical institutions
would take root there ; they were the' result of
long habit and old association ; but the necessity
of a second chamber did not rest on these grounds.
To prevent hasty legislation—to provide a nucleus
of experienced members, and to combine together
those conservative elements always found in all
populations, were the legitimate objects of a
second Chamber, which he thought might be
attained by its members being few in number,
with a higher property qualification, of greater
age, and holding their office for a long period.
I will now quote authorities to show
that this system has proved a failure in
other colonies where it had been
adopted; and why, I would ask, should
they introduce here that which' has
failed elsewhere ? If there is to be an
experiment, I would rather see that plan
tried which many eminent men have
asserted to be sound and practicable. On
the motion for leave to bring in a bill to
grant a Representative Constitution to
New Zealand, Mr. Adderly said —
In the first place he concurred in the observa-
tions of the honourable baronet (Sir W. Moles-
worth) with regard to the composition of the
Upper Chamber of Legislature—that that branch
should be composed of nominees of the Crown
appeared to him a great blot in the measure, for
honourable members knew very well how these
nominees stunk in the nostrils of every colony in
which the system had ever been tried. He objected
to the nominee Chamber, because it was a carica-
ture of the House of Lords—these nominees were
not in the independent position which belonged
to the House of Lords in this realm ; they were
merely tools of the Crown, carrying on through
an additional department of the Legislature that
which pervaded too exclusively all our colonial
constitutions, namely, the Crown and nothing but
the Crown.
On the motion for the second reading of
this same bill, there were also the follow-
ing expressions of opinion from Mr.
Gladstone:—•
The Legislative Council ought to be elective.
(Cheers.) Those cheers came from the Liberal side
of the House—it is on that side that the elective
principle finds favour. Now, let me illustrate
this state ot opinion here, by a reference to what
is taking place in the British North American
colonies. If you trace the present areals of
Canada you will find that there have been, at
more periods than one, several energetic move-
ments made to get rid of nomination in the elec-
tion of the Legislative Council. These movements
have, however, always been defeated. And how
have they been defeated ? These movements have
been all made by the Tory or Conservative party
in the colony, and they have all been defeated by
the Liberal party in the colony. And why?
Not because the Liberal party were opposed to


the principle of election : quite the contrary ; but
because the Liberal party have, durin«- those
periods, been in a position of power, they—with-
out opposing the principle of the change, which,
on the contrary, they, I believe, commended—
have acted on the familiar and well known
principle—“ Let well alone.” When they came
into power, they bad an intractable Legislative
Council, composed of nominees, to deal with, and
bow did they proceed ? To use a homely phrase,
which all of us understand, they swamped it, bv
procuring the appointment of a large number of
persons of Liberal principles. Thus the majority
was converted into a minority, and the minority
into a majority, and the Council, by this process,
was brought into harmony with the Assembly.
But it is the Conservative party in Canada, the
party which is opposed to rapid and incessant
change, and which wishes to introduce a principle
of stability and continuity into the institutions of
the province, that desires to abolish the system
of nomination. The same thing has occurred
within the last few months in Nova Scotia, where
there has been a great struggle of parties, and a
division of opinions exactly similar. The liberal
party has there, too, succeeded in maintaining
the principle of a nominated Legislative Council
against the Conservative party, which is in favour
ot an elective Council, but the victory has been
gained by a majority of only one. Such is the
division of parties on this question; but how
does "this system work,? What light do we
obtain from experience ?
The further we go Into the matter 'the
more confirmation do we find of the truth
of what I have stated—that the colonists
have no faith in this system of nomina-
tion. When the same bill was dis-
cussed in committee, the following
opinions were expressed:—
Mr. Mowatt thought that hy far the most ob-
jectionable part of the hill was that which pro-
vided for the nomination of nlembers by the
Crown. Now, it was a fact incontestably estab-
lished by experience, that however valuable those
men might be before their nomination, their
selection by the Government at once destroyed
their character. If the Government desired to
have a second Chamber, they should make it
elective, and dependent upon the choice of the
people also, without which choice it would never
jK)ssess their confidence The Government should
elevate the standard of qualification so as to make
the office desirable to the most worthy inhabitants
rf the colonies.
Sir W illiam Molesworth said, that the great
ibject was to obtain a conservative element, of a
■haracter to gain and deserve the respect of. the
>eople. The only way to make the Upper House
■ffective was having it elective by the people, and
illowing its members to sit for a longer period
ban those of the lower. There was a strong
eel mg against nominees every where—in New
Zealand as in Australia. Take the most popular
man and make him a nominee of the Crown, and
he at once ceases to he popular; he is considered
a mere tool of the Government. He protested
against this nominated second chamber, as being
contrary to that sound principle of balance of
power which he thought ought to exist in every
government, formed on an analogy to the con-
stitution of England or the United States.
Mr. S. Carter hoped the honourable Baronet
(Sir W Molesworth) would divide the Committee
upon this question, because he regarded it as the
most important clause in the bill. It was an
attempt to establish a bungling imitation of the
House of Lords in a new settlement, or what
was worse, to create an oligarchy of fifteen in the
colony. The most effective and satisfactory way
of proceeding would be to make thd members of
the Upper Chamber elective.
Mr. Forster said he must express his concur-
rence in the views which had been stated by pre-
vious speakers, with reference to the injurious
effects of t.ie nominee system. He had rather
have the sole responsibility of the Governor, than
that of the nominee Upper Chamber, which was
generally used merely as a screen for the exercise
of his authority ; he believed that the clause, as
it at present stood, would have a most mischevious
effect in the colony, and would give great dis-
satisfaction.
Mr. F. Peel; It was not true that there had
been no disposition in Jam lica to make the
Upper Chamber elective. When, two or three
| years ago, the Retrenchment Bill, which passed
the House of Assembly, was rejected by the
Legislative Council, the former body passed a
resolution, declaring that the latter did not pos-
sess the confidence of the country or of the House
of Assembly, because it was nominated; and
although their constitution had been in existence
200 years, they addressed the Crown, praying
that it might he altered, and that the I .legisla-
tive Council might be made elective; nor, in
fact, did the people in our North American co-
lonies so entirely acquiesce in a Legislative
Council appointed by the Governor, or consider
it so serviceable to good government as the right
honourable gentleman had represented. Only
last year the House of Assembly at New Bruns-
wick passed a resolution to address the Crown to
make the Upper Chamber elective, and the Go-
vernor bad proposed a measure for carrying out
that object, and had laid it before the Legisla-
tive Council. That body had postponed the
consideration of it to the present year, but what
course the Legislature of thy colony had taken
with respect to it this year he was not aware.
Newfoundland has also last year addressed the
Crown, asking for partly responsible government,
and that the Legislative Council might be made
elective. Every one, too, who knew the history
of Canada, knew that there had been a constant
struggle and antagonism between the two Cham-
bers in that country.
Mr. Adderley maintained that every precedent
in English colonial history was in favour of an
elective Upper Chamber. If he refused to take
the United States for the model of an English


colony, let him go back to those states when they
were not only the finest colonies of England, but
the finest colonies that the world had ever seen:
a division of the Legislature into two Chambers
had always been found necessary in New Eng-
land, and in every case both Chambers were
elective. He thought, when the honourable
baronet had said he would not take a lesson from
the United States, he was carried away by forms
And names, and had lost sight of the spirit and
essence of the thing; and when he referred to
the case of Canada, let him bear in mind that
those who were there agitating for such a change
in the constitution as would render the Upper
House elective were the conservatives.
Mr. Vernon Smith : The elective principle was
the One advocated by almost every colony. * *
* * * * Instead of a House of Lords, they
were to hate sixteen gentlemen nominated by the
Governor of the colony for life ; but it would re-
quire the fancy of the noble lord who had just
sat down to discover any analogy between the
two bodies; all they wanted was a double
chamber for the purposes of deliberation, that
was to say, that every question should be sub-
mitted twice for consideration; and if they elected
that second body with a different qualification,
and a different term of duration, they had all
that was wanting for deliberative consideflt-
tion.
Mr. Walter; He for one entertained the
strongest objections to this clause, and he could
not imagine a greater libel upon British institu-
tions than the attempt which had been made to
compare this nominee chamber with the British
House of Lords.
We are all agreed that this Upper
House should be of a conservative cha-
racter ; but the question is, how that
character is to be given to it, and whe-
ther the desired end will not be more
surely gained by the adoption of the
elective principle ? It has been said
that the terms on which we applied, and
the terms on which Sir John Pakington
replied to our application, were such as
to preclude us from raising the present
question, and bound us down to the ac-
ceptance of a Nominee Upper House,
such as had existed in Canada. But I
cannot admit this. When the petition
was drawn, those who drew it did not
exactly know what the constitution in
Canada really was, and the honourable
and learned member for Sydney was
groping about for information respect-
ing it.
Mr. WENTWORTH: I deny this.
I had known what the constitution of
Canada was for the last twenty years.
Mr. COW PER: That might be, but
he would repeat his assertion.
Mr. WENTWORTH would not dis-
pute but that the honourable member
himself might have been ignorant as to
what was the constitution of Canada.
Mr. COWPER: I believe I was as
correctly informed respecting the consti-
tution as the honourable and learned
member himself; but the Information of
which the House is in possession at the
present time, with reference to this mat-
ter, had not been received at the time
this petition was drawn up. I have no
predilection in favour of any particular
kind of constitution. All I desire is
to have something that will work well,
and tend to the good government and
prosperity of the country. If, there-
fore, I could be satisfied that the scheme
before the House would work well,
nothing would give me greater pleasure
than to withdraw my opposition to it.
But for the reasons already given, I am
satisfied that this could not be the case.
I should be glad to see the scheme ot
1843 adopted, and the nominees of that
House separated from the representative
members, but I do see how their in-
terference with votes relative to taxation
can be warranted. It has been sug-
gested that they should be asked to walk
out when the estimates were under dis-
cussion. This could not be very gra-
ciously done; but nevertheless I observe
that a principle analogous to that of
“ walking out” is obtaining much
favour in Europe—the principle of
allowing ministers to be present, and to
give their opinions, but to have no right
of voting. In a recent number of the
Edinburgh Review it has even been pro-
posed to make an alteration of this
nature in the constitution of Great Bri-
tain. In still further proof of the
opinions held by British statesmen, upon
the subject of colonial constitutions, I
will quote the following remarks, which
were made by the present Secretary of
State, and Earl Grey, on the second
reading of the New Zealand Bill in the
House of Lords.
The Duke of Newcastle: He believed that
the Bill of his noble friend (Earl Grey) adopted


the principle of an elective Upper Chamber, The
present government had introduced a change in
this respect, and he could not help thinking that
the noble Earl at the head of the Government
should, for many of the reasons which induced
him to omit the nominee representatives from
the local assemblies, have also omitted them from
the Upper Chamber. The results of that no-
minee system had often brought legislation to a
dead lock in the colonies, and, to use a term which
had obtained great currency, the Upper Cham-
ber had been frequently, as the only remedy,
“swamped” by the Governor. Could any one,
he would ask, maintain tor a moment, that that
was not a danger that ought to be avoided ? The
result of that system invariably led to remon-
strances from the* colony to the Government at
home. The theory of a nominee Upper House
arose from the old notion of Imperial Government,
and from an idea that it was necessary to bind
the colonies and the mother country together by
some means other than those of mutual interest,
—that while it may be desirable to give the
colonists a representative body to attend to their
interests, they must, at the same time, appoint a
nominated body to attend to the interests of the
mother country. Now, it appeared to him that,
in following this old-fashioned notion, the Go-
vernment were, in this instance, and in others
since their accession to power, pursuing the sha-
dow instead of the substance of a conservative
principle. They were pursuing the shadow of a
conservative principle in appointing a nominee
chamber of an imperial character, while they
were dropping the substance of the really con-
servative measure, of making the body elective,
and thereby introducing into it men who had
an interest in the colony, and in the preservation
of all that concerned its welfare, which a no-
minee body seldom had, and which he believed
they never could possess. But then they were
told they must endeavour to assimilate the Upper
Chamber to the House of Lords in this country.
Talk of a House of Lords being made in the
colonies out of the nominee elements of the
Crown; —why it was really laughable to maintain
for one instant that there would be any similarity
between such a body and the House of
Lords in the mother country. Their lord-
ships must deal with these matters as they found
them. They found no element in the colonies to
correspond with the House of Lords ; and although,
perhaps, in appearance the appointment by the
Crown of representatives of the Crown might look
rather more like a House of Lords than a body
elected by the people, yet if their Lordships came
practically to examine that appearance, they
would see how shadowy and unreal the wdiole
theory was. Did any one suppose that if tbit
assembly which he was now addressing were swept
away, and a nominee Chamber appointed in its
stead, that the nominee Chamber would possess
the moral influence which their lordships pos-
sessed, and which he trusted they would long
retain ? —The thing was impossible. Let them in
any way provide for the sujterior influence of the
members of an elective Upper Chamber; let
them insist upon a higher qualification, either of
elected or electors ; let them give them a longer
tenure of their seats, or make the areas of repre-
sentation more extensive; but let them notengraft
upon this measure of freedom and contentment to
the colony, a scheme which must end in disap-
pointment, and be the cause of future quarrel.
Earl Grey: He came next to the question of
the constitution of the general legislature, and
he was prepared to say, from the experience of
more than twenty years, during which he had
closely attended to the affairs of the colonies,
both in and out of office, that the most defective
part of the colonial constitutions, in the North
American colonies, was the Legislative Council.
By the old form of the colonial constitutions,
which had prevailed up to 1791, the Legislative
Council was put, not upon the footing of a second
and independent chamber of the Legislature : it
was the same body which advised the Governor,
consisting of a very small number of persons, for
the most part holding high offices in the colonial
Government. To this day, in Jamaica, the
Council was styled her Majesty’s Privy Council
for Jamaica, and claimed no power of originating
measures of legislation : not merely money bills,
but bills of any kind, it was beyond its power to
originate: it merely had the power of amending
or rejecting bills sent from the Assembly, The
tenure of their office as Legislative Councillors''
was always formerly during the pleasure of the
Crown, but by the Act of 1791 the Councillors of
Canada were appointed for life. The noble Duke
had most justly remarked on the perfect absurdity
of talking of a nominee Legislative Council as an
imitation of that House. It had not the most
distant or faint resemblance to the House of
Lords. The House of Lords was an institution
altogether peculiar to this country, that Parlia-
ment could no more create than they could create
a full-grown oak. It had grown up as part of
our institutions from the earliest times, and was
like no other body in any country in the world,
and no imitation of which had ever been in the
slightest degree successful.
Now, I ask, whether these high par-
liamentary authorities do not afford a
fair justification of the efforts of those
who do not wish to see introduced into
this colony a system of legislation which
has not worked well any where else—
(hear) —but who, on the contrary, desire
to have a system which, whilst it will
be conservative, will also be popular,
(Cheers). Why, the news brought only
now by the Victoria steam-ship, shows
that in Jamaica the government has
nearly come to a dead-lock in conse-
quence of the dissensions between the
two houses, that are constituted somewhat
on the principle so stronply advocated
by the supporters of the bill before the


•Council. (Hepr.) Whilst at the Cape,
a constitution has been lately granted on
the general terms now sought for by the
people of New South Wales without the
walls of the Legislative Council, and for
whose good working at the Cape the
most sanguine expectations have been
■expressed. (Hear.) I candidly admit
that the introduction of a new constitu-
tion is to be regarded as an experiment,
and one the success or failure of which
may be a question to be debated in very
different terms by the best intentioned
men. (Hear.) Great stress has been
laid upon the expediency of introducing
an order of hereditary titles, because it
would form a conservative element; but
then the hon. and learned member for
Sydney has suggested that these titles
are to be matters of the future ; whilst
I would ask why, if these titles are to
have the conservative power expected
from them, are they not to come into
operation at once ?
Mr. WENTWORTH; The honora-
ble member has quite misunderstood me.
What I did say was this—the hereditary
and elective principle proposed in the
bill could not come into force for the
next thirty or forty years ; but it never
was suggested by me that the hereditary
titles could not be conferred at ance.
Mr. COWPER resumed; My hon.
and learned friend, the member for Cum-
berland, has been twitted by the hon.
member for New England with having
(he being hard up for a constitution)
gone to the Dutch Boers of South Africa
for one. (A laugh.) But the excellent
constitution lately granted to the Cape
of Good Hope originated, not with
the Boers, but with her Majesty’s
Privy Council—(hear) —an authority
which I think would be a very good one
for the colonists of New South Wales to
refer to and abide by, if in framing their
new constitution they could not agree
among themselves, (Hear, hear.) With
regard to the vaunted Canadian consti-
tution, I would invite particular atten-
tion to a significant fact. In September
last a member of the Canadian govern-
ment had drawn the attention of the
legislature to the mischievous tendencies
of the present constitution, and in a
speech of considerable ability, to which
I earnestly recommend the careful con-
sideration of the Council, he had ex-
plained the alterations and modifica-
tions which he signified his intention of
proposing during the present year. The
speech, as reported, was as follows;
Mr. Morin begged leave to call the attention of
the House to a subject of much importance—of
so much importance that he did not desire the
Assembly to take action on it immediately, but
merely to give the resolutions he would introduce
some degree of attention, and then allow them to
lie over until next year. He proposed this course
because it would be highly inexpedient, at the
present moment, to proceed with anything like
haste, for although the subject had been long
agitated in this province—and although at one
time it received the unanimous approbation of
the inhabitants of Lower Canada—the change in
the form of the provincial Government has
brought about a corresponding change in public
opinion It is well known, that under the old
constitution, a certain number of persons, closely
connected with the Executive branch of the Go-
vernment, and entirely free from the influence of
public opinion, formed the Legislative Council;
and that, as they formed also the Executive
Council of the Governor, they were stronger than
the popular branch of the Legislature, and in-
terfered materially with the action of that body.
The annoyance at length became so aggravated
that the people of Lower Canada looked on the
Legislative Council as the root of all their ills ;
and they therefore desired, by petition, atditferent
times, that the elective principle should lie ap-
plied to that body. Since that time a new con-
stitution was formed—the constitutional action
of the popular branch was recognized, and the
two chambers were placed on an equality in re-
spect of power. This being the case, much less
inconvenience has been experienced under the
present system than under the old, because under
the old system the Legislative Council was an
obstacle permanently and decidedly opposed to
public opinion, whereas under the existing system
it is not opposed to popular opinion, and has
never been so. Nevertheless, there are peculiar
inconveniences, owing to the formation of that
body. As there are but few persons in this
country whose fortunes would enable them to
take a position analogous to that of the Lords in
England, the body does not possess that weight
which it was intended to have. He did not mean
anything which might be constructed into a want
of respect for its members. Many of them enjoy,
deservedly, the confidence of the people of the
country, and in point of talent they stand on an
equality with the members of the House of As-
sembly. He rendered to them that homage to
which, individually and collectively, they were en-
titled ; but he was of opinion that some change was
necessary to render it an efficient working body.
The means of the population of this province are


boiinded ; and although there are some gentlemen
of great wealth holding seats in either branch of
the Legislature, it necessarily follows that some
indemnity should be paid to the members of the
Legislative Council, in order to secure a full at-
tendance. If that body were rendered elective,
then the gentlemen composing it could very pro-
(icrly be indemnified. This subject had occupied
ns attention as well as that of the other members
of the Government, and he had resolved upon
submitting a series of resolutions for the purpose
of rendering it elective, but, he repeated, he did
not desire that the House should act with preci-
pitation. Public opinion is not sufficiently de-
fined to act at once in a decisive manner ; and it
would be better to temporize until a clear and
unmistakeable expression of that opinion could be
obtained. During a recent discussion the inten-
tion of the Government had been in part ex-
plained ; and he would say, in reference to one
idea put forward by the member for Montmo-
renci, that he was utterly opposed to the plan of
having only one Legislative Chamber. He be-
lieved that two chambers were necessary, to pre-
vent errors in legislation, to revise and correct
the details of a measure which may have passed
one House. These are two of the reasons why he
was in favour of having two chambers, and he
thought it must be apparent that a great many
errors would be allowed to pass unnoticed through
a body composed of a large number of persons,
whilst a smaller body would be enabled to exa-
mine those measures with more deliberation.
Being thus in favour of having two Chambers,
he thought some difference ought to be made in
the manner of constituting them. Therefore, if
the representatives of the people in the Lower
House were increased to 120 in number, for the
two sections of the province, he thought that
there should be sixty members of the* Council.
The country would thus be divided into 120 ter-
ritorial divisions, and two of those divisions would
unite together. He believed it would be better
to elect the members of the latter body for a
I)eri od of nine years, a certain proportion retiring
iy rotation at the end of three years. People
mi wht ask, who are to be the electors ? He w ould
reply, that the Government had not thought fit
to express the opinion that there should be any
difference between the electors for the two
branches, as persons qualifying as electors for a
member of the House of Assembly, would assert
that they were also qualified to vote for a
member of the Legislative Council; and thus,
although there might be a difference in theory,
there would be none in practice, and the attempt
to distinguish between tne two classes would only
lead to confusion. The Government had been
asked whether it was their intention to establish
a property qualification for the Legislative Coun-
cillors—he would say that he did not consider it
a point of great importance ; but he did not
think that their choice should be left entirely un-
limited. There is a class of persons in the
country sufficiently numerous to select from them
sixty Legislative Councillors, and composing a
class which has already enjoyed the confidence of
the country in a high degree. He referred to
those persons who now hold, or who may have-
held seats in the Legislative Council, or the
House of Assembly, wardens of the counties, and
mayors of cities. As to the manner of working
out such a constitution, he did not see any diffi-
culty whatever—the Crown should have the
power of dissolving either or both of the Cham-
bers. If there should be any difficulty between
the two branches, the Crown, from its highest
position, would be enabled to decide which ac-
corded best with the state of public opifiion, and
dissolve the other. He also proposed that the
Legislative Council so constituted should possess
the power of trying high public functionaries
charged with misdemeanours. He had no fear
that a position of this kind would be unaccept-
able to the Government of England, because she
is indisposed to interfere in the internal affairs of
any of the colonies, and because she has already
granted similar constitutions to other colonies.
He concluded by moving that the House do go
into Committee of the whole on these resolutions
on Friday next.
I am the more solicitous to secure the
attention of the house to this speech of
Mr. Morin, because it was delivered in
the Canadian Legislature, and proved
beyond all doubt that, in the colony
whose institutions the supporters of the
Constitution Hill before the Council
sought to copy, it was the opinion of
high authorities that great changes were
necessary. I contend, therefore, that
this was of itself a strong reason why
the Council should pause before it
adopted a system here which, as re-
garded Canada,might have been changed
by the Imperial Parliament before the
present bill arrived in London. (Hear.)
The hon. and learned member for Sydney
has expressed his earnest wish that the
constitution now to be framed for New
South Wales should be a permanent one.
Now I desire to live under permanent
institutions as much as any man, but I
feel assured that, with the rapid changes
which this colony is undergoing yearly,
it will be found necessary, in the course
of a few years, to make many modifica-
cations in any form of constitution '
which may be adopted—excellent and
perfect soever as it may now appear.
(Hear,) Indeed, I could have ardently
desired that the question of the new
constitution had been postponed for ano-
ther year; for now the colonists are
ignorant of what may be the high state


of their prosperity and wealth, and are
also unaware what changes may have
taken place in the Canadian constitu-
tion. Supposing that when the present
bill reaches England, and it is found
that the present constitution of Canada
has been upset, and a new one substi-
tuted, would it not be inconsistent,
Indeed childish, for this Council to re-
cant, and to say, “ Give us Canada’s
new constitution in place of the old one
which we have so ardently prayed for ?”
(Cheers.) With regard to the preserva-
tion in the Constitution Bill of the prin-
ciples of the Elective Act of 1851, I
desire to say a few words. In his speech
in Council on the 11th of April of that
year, the Colonial Secretary said,
I am prepared with irresistible evidence to
show that property had entered very largely into
the settlement of the electoral system embodied
in the Reform Act; and, although it is true that
sixty boroughs, previously returning 119 mem-
bers,], were entirely disfranchised, and one mem-
ber taken from each of forty-seven others, it is
yet abundantly evident that a regard to popula-
tion had not led to this result. And it is fitting
1 should here say a few words in reply to an ar-
gument used by some honourable members, who
have advocated the population basis, Failing
altogether to discover anything in the provisions
of the Reform Act, that it was intended as a final
measure ; and it may be remarked, in evidence of
its finality, that no succeeding ministry has at-
tempted to unsettle the system of representation
affirmed by it. I am, therefore, I think, fully
justified in describing it as a final measure—final
at least as regarded the circumstances then under
consideration —and final, as far as finality can be
said to attach to any political arrangement under
the elastic principle of the British constitution,
which happily and wisely adapts itself to the pro-
gress and exigencies of society.
Now I not only differ from ths Colonial
Secretary in respect to the Electoral
Act affording a just representation of
the people, but 1 also conriier that the
defence of that act by the hon. gentle-
man and others, on the ground that it
was based on the Reform Act of 1832,
which, being a final measure, was one
upon which it was safe to base ours, was
a line of defence which could not be
sustained. It was unfortunate for the
arguments of those who defended the
Electoral Act on the ground that the
scheme of electoral divisions contained
in the Reform Act was a final measure,
that by the time our Electoral Act
reached London, Lord John Russell
had notified his intention to bring in a
bill to reform the Reform Act. (Loud
cries of hear.) It is clear also, that
before very long such a measure of re-
form is sure to be brought under the
consideration of the British Parliament,
for on the 11th of February last, his
lordship, in describing the course which
the government intended to pursue in!
the selection and order of public busi-
ness, said—
There is one subject upon which I have no
doubt lam expected to say something—l allude
to the important subject of the amendment of
the representation of the people in Parliament.
(Cries of hear.) My noble friend at the head
of the government has already stated that the- 1
amendment of representation was a part of the
measures which were in his contemplation. I
beg the attention of the House while I say a
few words with respect to the question. In the
years 1849, and 1850, and 1851, ther government
over which I had the honor to preside considered
this question, and hoped to be able to introduce
a bill on the subject. But the government over
which I presided shortly after dissolved. It was
then reported that I bad said I w-ould introduce
a more comprehensive measure than has been
hitherto contemplated. That statement was
utterly unfounded. I neither stated that I would
bring in a more comprehensive measure, nor that I
would bring in any measure at all. What I stated
was, that I was quite ready to consider the sub-
ject. Now, the question to be considered by the
sresent5 resent government was, whether it was their
uty to propose that the subject of amending the
representation should be thrown aside for the
present session, in order that other pressing
matters, might be legislated upon, or whether
they should, endeavour to effect a renewal of the
Income-tax for the present year, without any ob-
servation or discussion whatever, in order that
they might devote the whole of their time to
that one subject of Parliamentary Reform ? I
need not say that it is impossible to appoint a
time for the introduction of a Reform Bill. The
subject requires considerable preparation, if it
be really intended to pass a measure that shall
prevent for many years to come, the necessity of
again legislating upon it. Considering, there-
fore, the deliberation that would be necessary;
considering the enquiries that would be requi-
site to perfect any measure that should have a
permanent effect, her Majesty’s government are
of opinion that the subject of amending the re-
presentation ought not to be introduced in the
present session of Parliament. By acting in
accordance with that opinion, I believe they are
consulting both the public interest and the ulti-
mate success of the measure itself. I believe,
that if we were to give up the consideration of
all other measures for the sake of devoting our-


that I should not be far out in assuming
the following to be
an approximation to
the distribution:—
13 districts of the old counties, sav.. 90,000
8 pastoral districts
81,000
City of Sydney ..
60,000
Sydney Hamlets ..
10,000
Boroughs
25,000
206,000
Well, this population is to be represented
thus ;—
Population.
Members.
90,000 .. ..
26
31,000
12
50,000 .. ..
4
10,000
2
‘25,000 .. ..
10
*ekes extensively to this subject of Reform, we 1
should neither be consulting the interest of the
public nor the completeness of the measure we !
are seeking to accomplish. I believe that it
would be far better that we should have further
information and further deliberation on this 5m- |
portaut question ; that it would be advantageous
to postpone settling it, even for a considerable I
time, rather than legislate upon it prematurely
and without sufficient preparation I think,
however, that immediately after the commence-
ment of the next session of Parliament it will
be the imperative duty of the government to in-
troduce a measure upon this important subject.
(Cheers).
It is thus made clear, that in whatever
light the noble author of the Reform
Act viewed it as a final measure in 1852,
he entertained very different opinions in
1853: and 1 feel assured that no person
who had ever calmly considered that
great constitutional measure had ever
regarded it as a final one. What I de-
sire to impress upon the Council is, that
in this colony there are no vested inte-
rests which can be damnified by a system
of representation, whose basis is popula-
tion rather than property; and in dis-
cussing the principle by which repre-
sentation should be guided, I have never
been-wholly satisfied with any other than
that of population. In the quotation
made by the Colonial Secretary from the
speech of Mr. Macauley on the Reform
Bill, the following quotation is to be
found :—“ Ours is not a government on
the principle of property; it is only a
government founded on some fragments of
property, and no principle whatever pre-
sided over its formation. It had been
said that it was never better than at pre-
sent ; but the House was there to enquire
into what it ought to be, not what it had
been; they were legislators—-not antiqua-
rians.” I quite agree with the right
hon. gentleman, and as the Council is
assembled to enquire into the best system
of representation for the colonists, I ask
why not have that one which would be
most generally approved, and which
from its popularity promised to work
well ? There is one feature in the pro-
posed electoral division to which I
strongly object, namely, the undue pre-
ference given to the squatting interests.
Out of 54. members the pastoral districts
are to have 12 members, the counties
26, and Sydney, and the Hamlets, and
Boroughs 10. This is the scheme
proposed in the bill; for East Cam-
den, West Camden, Cook and West-
moreland, one additional member each
for Cumberland, two additional; for
Durham, Murray, and St. Vincent;
Northumberland and Hunter; Philip,
Brisbane and Bligh; Roxburgh and
Wellington; Murrumbidgee; Lach-
lan and Lower Darling ; Liverpool
Plains and Gwydlr, New England and
M‘Leay, Sydney, Sydney Hamlets, Par-
ramatta, Northumberland Boroughs,
Stanley Boroughs, one additional mem-
ber each. So that in this addition of
the 18 new elective members to the pre-
sent 36, it would be seen that it is pro-
posed to give to Sydney, Sydney Ham-
lets, and the populous boroughs, only
five additional members, whilst four are
added to the pastoral districts, and nine
to the counties. I believe that the popu-
lation of the colony may be fairly esti-
mated at about 206,000; and I think
Was this, I ask, a fair system of repre-
sentation ? (Hear.) It will be answered,,
that population was not the only element
to be taken into consideration; but I
believe that in this colony, property and
population go very nearly together, and
that, if the various electoral districts were
carefully analysed, it would be found,
that, as regarded their property, every
8000 or 4000 of the colonists might bo-
justly, said to be entitled to one repre-
sentative. (Hear.) With respecj; to thb


opinions of the highest authorities in
England, as to the fairest system of re-
representation, I would refer to the report
of the Privy Council on the Constitution
of the Cape of Good Hope. They in
the most enlightene 1 spirit said—
With regard to the number of members of
which the Assembly should consist, and the prin-
ciple upon which the division of the colony into
electoral districts should be made, we are disposed
generally to concur with Mr. Montagu, the
Colonial Secretary. We consider it to be an im-
]K)rtant and valuable suggestion that the towns
and the rural districts should be separately repre-
sented in the manner recommended by Mr.
Montagu; we do not, however, concur with him
in thinking that it would he expedient altogether
to reject the principle of making some allowance
for the extent as well as the population of a dis-
trict, in determining its share of the representa-
tion, on the plan which is adverted to in the
despatch of Lord Stanley we have already quoted,
as having been in some cases adopted in North
America. No doubt if that principle were carried
to the extent which has been supposed by Mr.
Montague, in the case he has put in illustration
of its probable operation, it would lead to very
inconvenient results ; but we apprehend that this
has never been contemplated: and, on the other
hand, if the inhabitants of Cape Town, who are
said to constitute one-fifth of the whole population
of the colony, were on that account to return so
many its a fifth of the members of the Assembly,
there can be no doubt that the power of joint and
combined action, which they would enjoy from
their residing within so limited a space, and with
such facilities for communicating with each other,
would give them far more than a proportionate
weight in the Legislature with the same number
of inhabitants scattered over a wide extent of
territory, and that the more remote and thinly
populated districts would be deprived of that
siiare of influence, which, in fairness, they ought
to possess. Hence we would recommend that a
rule should be adopted, by which the strict
numerical porportion between the number of the
population and that of the members they.should
be entitled to return, should he somewhat qualified j
in favour of the more thinly-peopled districts.
To this extract from a most valuable
document, drawn up in the most liberal
and enlightened spirit, I desire to direct
the attention of those who propose to set
aside the principle of numerical propor-
tion altogether, and to consider the in-
terests of property alone. The question
as to the preponderance asked to be given
to the squatting interests is a very
serious one ; and I would express my
entire concurrence in the opinions which
1 have heard the Attorney-General him-
self express, that the greatest caution
would be requisite to guard against
abuses creeping into the Legislature,
whenever the disposal of the waste lands
of the colony might be given to that body.
(Hear, hear.) Now, with 12 members
in the Council representingthe squatting
interests, and 26 the landed interests,
would not a question of lands be dis-
cussed with a fearful disproportion of
numbers, when the towns and boroughs
were represented but by 16 2 (Loud
cries of hear, hear.) lam not disposed
to refer with disrespect to a most valuable
class of the colony’s producers ; nor am 1
inclined to sound an unnecessary note of
alarm; yet Ido feel that If ever serious
dissensions enter hereafter into the dis-
cussions of the local legislature, they will
arise upon this very point of the squatters’
undue supremacy. (Hear.) It is not to
be forgotten that when, in 1851, the
Colonial Secretary urged the claims of
the squatters to a large share in the re-
presentation, he urged that they a
specially taxed class, paying a large
annual assessment, and so contributing
very considerably to the public revenue ;
but this assessment has since that time
been done aw r ay with, and there cannot
now be any reason why four members
should be added to the eight who at
present represent this powerful and in-
fluential class. These four members
might surely be divided among other
interests ; hut really upon the question
of interests the Committee seem to have
but little sympathy. The first proposition,
to give an additional member to a district
on account of its gold interest was lost
in the committee, although Bathurst may
have been to a certain extent entitled to
that boon, and would have obtained it, if
class interests had not weighed with the
committee. There are minor features in
the bill to which I do not think it
necessary to refer at this stage. I must,
however, advert to the manner in which
the bill has as yet been discussed in this
House, and observe, with, pain, that I do
not conceive it has been discussed with
impartiality. (Loud cries of hear). I
am not at all surprised at the feeling in
regard to the progress of this debate
which has been manifested out of


ioors. In this House, all the speakers
n favour of the measure have been
tinted with loud and unusual applause,
hiist marked coldness, or derisive cheers,
ave been the lot of those who have
stated their conscientious objections to
principles which they believe are fraught
with mischief to the colony. This con-
luct has given rise to a general opinion
tut of doors, that there is a conspiracy
n this House against the liberties of the
tolony. (Hear, hear, hear.) And Ido
tot shrink from expressing my fears that
some of the proceedings of this Council
jive a colour to that opinion. (Hear,
sear.) What are honourable members
tut representatives of the people ?
Have they not, then, a right, and is it
tot their duty, to listen fairly and dispas-
sionately to what those whom they repre-
sented have to say ? Therefore, when
tur opponents would not listen, but brow-
teat and bully those who address them in
-lie language of earnest, yet respectful,
■emonstrance, can they be surprised that
hey themselves are brow-beaten and
milled in return ? As to the cry of
.■becking the progress of democracy,
ind fearing the great influx of American
epublicans and other persons, who are
ireaded as such dangerous visitors, I
:an only say for myself I have no such
ears. I have seen a very great influx
jf strangers to these shores, and I
toped to have seen a much greater one.
t\s to the suggested misconduct of the
people, has not Sir Charles Fitz Hoy ex-
tressed to the Secretary of State, his un-
qualified admiration of the conduct of
die mining population under the sudden
excitement of our gold discoveries ?
WH has it not been a matter for warm
congratulation on the part of the Home
Government, that New South Wales has
so proudly distinguished herself in the
exciting days of her golden prosperity ?
Loud cheers.) In alluding to this gi all-
ying feature of our social and moral
condition, the Colonial Minister has ex-
pressed his opinion that the people of
diis colony are quite fit for self-govern-
nent; and yet language has been
Jttered in this Council deploring the
dtered character of the colony ! (Hear.)
I have travelled much through the vari-
ous rural districts, and Ido not believe
that there is the slightest fear of anv
social disorganization. In fact, it is
really a matter of wonder and amaze-
ment to find that in a gold country, with
arrivals of gold seekers from all parts of
the world, so small an amount of crime
has arisen. (Hear.) But if crime do
increase, are not the powers of the focal
Government most ample ? Has not this
Council always evinced the utmost readi-
ness to arm the Executive with sufficient
power to keep good order? (Hear.)
I foresee no danger; but if danger be
feared, then it is the more incumbent to
adopt a form of popular government
which will be held in respect and
affectioh by the people. (Hear, hear.)
Very sorry have I been to hear in this
House so many expressions of distrust of
the people, for assuredly it will do this
Council no good in the eyes of the
authorities at home. (Hear.) It is
possible that the bill before the House
may be read a second time—that its
supporters may persist in carrying it
through without either modification or
amendment ; but if so, I shall deeply
lament it, because I know well how such
a result will be reviewed throughout the
colony. The honorable and learned
mover of the bill has talked about
checking the growth of democracy, but
I entreat this House not to, sow the
seeds of anarchy. (Hear, hear.) De-
pend upon it, when the people oi this
colony are made fully aware how gene-
rally the opinions they have expressed on
the proposed constitution are shared in
by the people of England, they will
view with feelings far removed from
favourable the determination to press on -
a measure which cramps the powers of
this community, at the very moment it
is the avowed desire of the Imperial
Government to increase them. (Hear.)
As to the assertion that the colony de-
sires “ separation” from the parent
state, I believe that I speak the language
of the colony, when I deny that any
feeling exists for throwing off the sway
of the Jmperial Government, and of her
Majesty’s mild and benignant adminis-


tration. (Loud cheers from all parts of
the House.) Long may this colony con-
tinue in connexion with the British
Crown ; but it is not treasonable to look
through a long vista of years and fore-
see the time when the day of peaceful
and friendly separation may arrive.
(Hear, hear.) In the words of Sir Ro-
bert Peel, upon the Canadian question,
it is to be hoped that when we do part
we may part on good terms. (Cheers.)
1 hope that neither myself nor my
children will live to see that day ; yet
bad may be the effect on the people of
the colony if • the discussions of this
Council are continued in the same spirit
as heretofore. I have said enough to
show that, although in the first instance
the Council have asked for a constitution
similar in its outline to that of Canada,
yet we are not pledged to adopt that
form, nor to carry it out when, after care-
ful deliberation, we believe it to be
wrong. Looking at the Various de-
spatches of Sir John Pakington and the
Duke of Newcastle, it is quite clear that
every latitude on that point is given to
the Council, who are bound to take that
latitude and comply with the earnest de-
sire of this community, and with the
opinions expressed by leading members
of Parliament, as well as by ministers of
the Crown. Holding these opinions, I
shall vote for the amendment of the
honourable and learned member for
Cumberland ; and when the discussion is
resumed, I trust it will be marked with
less of partiality titan heretofore. A
better spirit will, I sincerely hope, be
evinced by those who are evidently the
majority ; and I trust that in the end a
constitution will be obtained calculated
to produce
Kind equal rule, the government of laws,
And all-protecting freedom, which alone
bustains the name and dignity of man !
The honourable member resumed his
seat amidst loud applause.
Mr. JAMES MACARTHUR—Sir,
I concur with the hon. gentleman who
last spoke, that this is a question which
no member of this house can approach
without a sense of responsibility amount-
-ng almost to awe. It is the most mo-
mentous and difficult question that any
legislative body can be called upon to
determine, and I quite agree with him
that it ought to be discussed with as little
as possible of bias or party spirit. But
I entirely disagree with him as to the
assertion (which he stated had been made
without these walls, and which he coun-
tenanced by repeating it) that this house
is engaged in a conspiracy against the
liberties of the country. Most emphati-
cally do I deny the imputation (hear,
hear), and I challenge him to adduce any
thing in support of it. (Cheers.) The
hon. gentleman must know the course
that had been pursued by the Constitu-
tion Committee, of which he was a
member; he well knew that there was
no foundation whatever for such a charge.
The hon. member went on to state, that
a large portion of the members of this
house entered upon this discussion, under
the influence of foregone conclusions.
But I will ask him, whether he also has
not arrived beforehand at certain fixed
opinions. (Hear.) Why, it is impossi-
ble, Sir, that on such a question there
should not be diversity of opinion—that
there should not be two parties with con-
flicting views, and upon some points dia-
metrically opposed to each other, though
both may be anxious to attain the same
end, namely, a good form of government
for the colony. (Cheers.) Ido not for
one moment deny that the hon. gentle-
men, whose views are opposed to mine,
may have that object at heart, but I
cannot persuade myself that the course
they are pursuing will achieve that result.
(Cheers.) The hon. gentleman seemed
particularly sensitive about the word
weathercock politician. Now, I really
do not recollect such an expression being
used, but if used, it did not necessarily
refer to the hon. gentleman, who has, I
believe, for some time past, been in favor
of two Elective Houses. If, however,
we look back a few years, there does
seem to be some ground for a charge of
inconsistency against him, because a
former member of that house, Mr. Lowe,
with whom the hon. gentleman was
closely allied, had very strongly advo-
cated the principle of a nominated Upper


House; and in one memorable instance,
the hon. gentleman (Mr. Cowper) had
voted with Mr. Lowe in support of that
principle, which the latter continued to
advocate so long as he was a colonist,
and responsible to the people of the
colony for his public opinions. (Cheers.)
But even in this view of the case, the
term weathercock could scarcely he
applied to the honorable member for
Durham. Every member of this house
has, I think, a perfect right to modify,
or even entirely to change his opinions,
if he see sufficient ground for doing so ;
hut when gentlemen take a conspicuous
part in the promulgation of opinions out
of doors, as w’ell as in this House, adverse
to the opinions they had, up to a recent
period, avowed, and directly opposed to
the course they had previously advocated,
I do think they are hound to show very
strong reasons for such a change. (Hear,
hear, from Mr. Darvali.) I refer par-
ticularly to the honourable arid learned
gentleman who says hear. That honour-
able gentleman was a party to a memorial
addressed, in 1850, to the Secretary of
State, which recommended a Constitution
for the Colony, to consist of a Governor
appointed by the Crown, an Upper
House, nominated in the same manner,
and a House of Assembly representing
the people. In his observations the other
night, upon that memorial, he dwelt with
apparent complacency upon the form of
Constitution which it proposed,' being
suggested merely as “ a step” in the
progress of Constitutional Government;
and argued that the having joined in
that recommendation by no means pre-
cluded him from advocating the farther
“ step” of an Elective Upper House.
But ingenious as was this construction,
and satisfactory as it might appear to
the honourable and learned gentleman,
to me it seems most inconsistent; for
what affinity is there between the two
principles of election and nomination, as
applied to the formation of an Upper
House ? They are in fact antagonistic.
The farther “ step” to which the memo-
rial of 1850 referred was, according to
riiy recollection, not an Elective Legis-
lative Council, but responsible Govern-
ment, for which neither the honourable
and learned gentleman, nor I, thought
the colony prepared at that time. (Hear,
hear, from Mr. Darvali.) lam glad to
find by that cheer that I am right in this
view of the matter. But to come nearer
to the present time, on the 28th May last,
the honourable and learned gentleman
made a speech in support of a vote of
thanks to Sir J. Pakington, the Duke of
Newcastle, and the Governor General,
for the part taken by them with reference
to the claim of this colony for self-
government. If I am not greatlv mis-
taken, he then if he did not
express, the same strong predilection for
a nominated Upper House. I particu-
larly remember one eloquent passage in
his speech in support of that motion, in
which he inveighed against democratic
opinions and Influences. How he can
reconcile that passage with “ the steps”
he has lately taken, I am at a loss to
divine. I hope they have not been steps
into the mire—(hear, hear, and laughter)
—that “ congenial mire” to which, on the
28th May, he consigned those with whom
he is acting in concert now—choosing
the theatre as the arena for proclaiming
his newly adopted opinions—scattering
poisoned arrows among the crowd, and
disseminating political principles the
most disastrous to the character of the
colony. (Cheers.) I agree with my
honourable and learned friend, the At-
torney General, in what I consider his
just censure of such conduct; nor do I
think the explanation, which the honour-
able and learned member for Cumberland
has offered to day, by any means a justi-
fication, He is one of the last from
whom such conduct could have been ex-
pected. From his position as a member
of that House, and an English barrister,
he ought to have been the last to put,
even hypothetically, in such a place as
the theatre, the possibility of this colony
being governed by an elective President*
in lieu of a constitutional Monarch.
(Cheers.) Was this a fit suggestion—
more especially on such an occasion, and
before such an audieuce ? With reference
to the epithets which have been applied
to. members of this House, we can


well afford to laugh at them. I am sorry
that they should have given rise to any ]
thing in the shape of recrimination—as |
to angry feeling I do not believe that it I
exists. But the blame is theirs who cast ;
the first stone. (Hear, hear.) No doubt j
the right of petition is sacred and inalien- i
able, —so likewise that of open and public
discussion, and on such occasions the nice ■
rules of debate, which govern legislative I
assemblies, are not to be expected. 1
Coarse expressions are to be looked for ,
—but insinuations against private
character, and offensive personal attacks,
such as have been made, are not to be
justified. If the parties wished their
representations to carry weight, they !
should have abstained from such a i
course. How had the meeting treated i
the mention of my hon. friend, Mr.
Wentworth’s claims upon the colonists ;
and who, I would ask, had a higher
claim ? And yet, at that meeting, the
mention of his name had been the signal
for clamour, opprobious exclamations,
and yells that were disgraceful to the
first British city in the southern hemi-
sphere. The hon. member for Durham
has said, to-night, that this house treated
the representations of the citizens with
contempt. How was this made out ?
They asked for a month’s delay—the
house was ready to grant three months.
Did this evince contempt or a disposition
to conspire against their interests?
(Cheers.) Did it not shew a desire, on
the contrary, to ascertain what is really
the public opinion of the colony ? (Hear,
hear.) It has also been asserted,
that we are exceeding our legitimate
functions in legislating upon this matter.
But so far from this being the case, the
Act of Parliament specially empowers
us to deal with this question. The
powers vested in this house have been re-
peatedly alluded to, not only in the former
Council, but in the newspapers, and at
the elections. In my own county, I dis-
tinctly stated the views I entertained,
and referred to the memorial of 1850, in
which I had, as already stated, taken
part, in concert with the honorable and
learned member for Cumberland, and
some other members of this house, as
containing a general outline of them.
Those views and opinions, I hold now,
and must continue to hold, because they
are, as far as circumstances permit, in
accordance with English constitutional
principles (which, I believe, to be of all
others the best suited for the government
of this colony), as laid down by the
highest authorities. It is true the hon.
gentleman who preceded me this evening,
read over a string of quotations from
the speeches of members of both Houses
of Parliament in support of an Elective
Upper House. Amongst these were Mr.
Adderley, Sir W. Molesworth, Mr. Glad-
stone, Lord Grey, and the Duke of New-
castle. But after all, what did these
opinions go for ? What practical know-
ledge of colonies did those who expressed
them possess ? It was merely a theory
which they put forward ; and upon the
subject of colonization, some of these
gentlemen are arrant theorists. Not
many years since, if not at the present
time, Sir William Molesworth held the
most republican notions as to the govern-
ment of colonies, and thought that they
should be legislated for with a view to the
eventual establishment of republican go-
vernment. Now, I entirely dissent from
this view of the question. I can see no rea-
son why the government of this colony, at
all events, should become republican ; but
the contrary, and such I am sure is the
general sentiment of this community.
(Hear.) Mr. Adderley has been referred
to as having stated, that the constitutions
of the early North American colonies
contained provisions for two Elective
Houses. In the charter governments, no,
doubt, there were Elective Councils, and
sometimes even the office of Governor
was elective. But this was in the early
stages of the existence of those colonies,
when they were but insignificant, and
not at all to be compared with this cc-
lony. They were then in fact mere
corporations, under the control of a
Proprietary Court in London, whose de-
cisions again were subject to revision by
the Board of Plantations, so that their
local administration might be better com-
pared with that of the Australian Agri-
cultural Company, than with the govern-


ment of a colony like this. (Hear, hear,
and laughter.) But at a more advanced
stage of their history, shortly before
their separation from England, they did
assume the form of government, gene-
rally speaking at least, which we are
now advocating. In proof of this, I will
refer .to the work of Mr. Chalmers, en-
titled “ Politicdl Annals of the American
‘Colonies,” a book of high authority, and
which should have far more weight than
the opinions expressed in Parliament by
modern statesmen, who had no practical
experience on the subject. In the con-
cluding chapter, having previously traced
the history of the several colonies from
their outset, he gives a summary of their
political and social state, just priop to the
war of independence. From this chapter
the following passages are quoted:—
Vain is it to search ancient or modern annals
for examples of provincial constitutions, so liberal
or salutary as those which England gave to her
colonies. She conferred on them a counterpart
of that mixed form which she herself *enjoyed
which had engaged the attention and procured
the panegyric of nations. The Governor repre-
sented the King, and performed his functions ;
the Council acted as the aristocratic branch,
and answered its uses; the delegates formed the
democratic part of the system, and gave a kind
of energy to the acts of the whole, because they
declared the assent of the governed. * 0
The Councillors were extremely analogous to the
Peers, though their office was not descendible,
since it was defeasible. As Privy Councillors of
the Governor, they were hound by instructions, by
the laws. As the Court of local appeals, they
were governed in their decisions by the principles
of the common law, by territorial regulations, by
their own customs ; but an appeal lay from their
judgments, because they were not supreme. As
a constituent part of the Legislature their power
was only limited by the good of their country, by
the maxims of their connexion with the state,
with the parent country. The principal difficulty
has arisen with regard to the powers and preten-
sions of the delegates, though during" the fore-
going period both were extremely limited when
compared with those they afterwards acquired,
for they claimed, though they did not always ex-
ercise, all the privileges of the Commons. As an
essential branch of the provincial Legislature,
they possessed fully all the authority of the
councillors, but they could rightfully claim no
more.
And again—
Wherein is the pertinency of your claiming
privileges, for no other reason but that they are
exercised by the Commons of England—a sove-
reign power, and you are only a subordinate
body, the delegates of an inconsiderable district . 1 ?
Demonstrate your supremacy, and we shall freely
admit the validity of your pretensions ; With tile
superaddition of the Governor, what do we all
form but a local Legislature, whose laws reach
not beyond our boundaries, whose powers must
be limited since they are not supreme, whose au-
thority is circumscribed by the nature of our in-
feriority, by the principles of our relation to a
great empire, by the common laws of the state.
J.t is easy to perceive that the delegates, in order
to have answered these reasonings with tolerable
accuracy and candour, must have used topics
w’bich necessarily lead to independence. As,
however, the counsellors enjoyed a judicial au-
thority, the delegates properly exercised the
power of complaining of grievances, because their
constituents possessed the same right, and might
transfer their immunities to their representatives.
But they could not impeach, because there existed
no -authority that could properly decide : they
could not punish, because they could not regu-
larly enforce their judgments should they be op-
posed, And as they were the general protectors
of the privileges of the people, they could easily
remove officers, and even the Governor himself,
by those arts which popular assemblies so well
know how to use, to promote the interests of free-
dom, or to answer the purposes of faction. The
rights of the Governor, the Council, and dele-
gates, when convened in assembly as one Legis-
lature, were .founded on similar principles ; the
Legislativepporerw r er must have been necessarily
directed by its nature and use. If it was merely
local, its jurisdiction could extend no farther than
the limits of the soil. If it was subordinate, its
could not he supreme.
The latter passages, ;it will be ob-
served, not only established the fact of
the Council or Upper House being nomi-
nated, but it also strongly supports the
view which was so well expressed by my
honourable friend, the member for Cook
and Westmoreland, as to opr authority
being merely derivative from, and subor-
dinate to, the Imperial Legislature and
the incompatibility of a power to frame a
constitution existing in, or derived from,
conventions of the people of the colony,
with our continuing to be a dependency
of the Crown. And I will here observe
upon the extract from Clarke’s Colonial
Law, ; read the other night by the
honourable and learned member for
Cumberland, that if he had quoted more
fully,-—I will not say more fairly,—he
would have found that the colonies which,
are designated “provincial” (to which
class this colony belongs), in contradis-
tinction to “ chartered and proprietary ”


settlements, enjoy a form of constitution,
modelled as closely as circumstances per-
mit, upon that of England—namely, a
Governor appointed by the Crown; a
Council, or Upper House of Parliament,
nominated also by the Crown ; and a
H ouse of Assembly elected by the peo-
ple : in short, just such a form of go-
vernment as the present measure is
intended to introduce. And what says
Mr. Burke on this question ? The fol-
lowing passage, in reference to the form
of government that prevailed in British
America, prior to the war of Inde-
pendence, is from the speech of that
great statesman on “ American Taxa-
tion ;
She had, except the commercial restraint (from
which we, Sir, are released), every characteristic
mark of a free people in all her internal con-
cerns. She had the image of the British Con-
stitution. She had the substance. She was
taxed by her own representatives. She chose
most of her own magistrates. She paid them
ail. She had, in effect, the sole disposal of her
own internal government. This whole state of
commercial servitude and civil liberty, taken
together, is certainly not perfect freedom ; hut,
comparing it with the ordinary circumstances of
hitman nature, it was a happy and liberal con-
dition.
Here, then, are two eminent autho-
rities, Mr. Chalmers and Mr. Burke,
who, on constitutional principles, at least
to those who revered the monarchical
form of Government, would have more
weight than a whole host of modern
theorists—both in favour of the prin-
ciples we are seeking to perpetuate. The
honourable member for Durham has
also referred to Earl Grey, as upon his
side, on this question. It is a rather
remarkable, and certainly does not seem
a very happy conjunction between the
noble lord and the honourable member.
I trust, Sir, it may not be ominous of
evil; but, remembering how loudly and
consistently the policy of Earl Grey has
ever been denounced by the honourable
member, it is one of the last things I
should have speculated upon. (Hear,
hear.) It is true Earl Grey has a great
deal of what might be termed Dowuing-
street, or “ mother-country” experience
in colonial affairs. No doubt, too, he
has been much plagued by the dissensions
in Canada. But would he not have
been as much plagued—would he not
have been plagued a great deal more—.
if the'Canadian Upper House had been
elective. (Cheers.) If the elective
form of constitution, which the right
honourable nobleman is now 7 supposed to
prefer—supposed, I say,' —for the hon.
member w r as not very explicit on this
point,—had been given to Canada, the
plagues of office would long ere this
have come to a close by the separation
of that magnificent province from the
parent state. (Oh, oh ! and cheers.)
This is what must have taken - place,
what must be the inevitable result of two
elective houses in any colony of suffi-
cient magnitude. Such a constitution
must terminate in the erection of an in-
dependent state. (Oh, oh! from Mr.
Darvall.) The honourable and learned
member said “oh, oh!” but I repeat
that such must be the result—perhaps,
indeed, not immediately, but after a
series of dissensions and unhappy com-
motion, such separation must infallibly
take place. (Cheers.) I may be told
that this is a mere speculative opinion.
It is, however, a speculation founded
upon the natural sequence of cause and
effect; but, admitting it to be merely
speculative, why should we rashly try an
experiment fraug-ht with peril, while we
have the experience of centuries to guide
us on a track which is safe ? Because
some faults have been found in the
working of the Council in Canada;
because there it has mot, under the
peculiar circumstances of a society com-
posed of tw 7 o races, intolerant and jealous
of each other, been found uniformly to
w r ork well, are we to cast aside all pru-
dential considerations, to abandon past
experience, and, actuated by an unthink-
ing, inconsistent, and irrational desire
for change, to adopt an untried scheme
for the sake of its novelty ? 1 am satis-
fied the Council will not follow so dan-
gerous, so unwise, so un-English a course,
but will take its stand upon the rock of
constitutional safety, and erect institu-
tions worthy of the great nation to which
we belong. By rearing up the insti-
tutions of Great Britain, in this our
infant state, let us prepare for that time,
w hich must come, when the colony will


be called on to decide whether it will
abide by the principles of the English
Monarchy, or of the American Republic.
(Cheers.) It is argued that the nominee
House would not have the prestige which
the Elective House would why not?
Why should more confidence or respect
attach to a Council, consisting of members
selected by the landholders of the colony,
than to a Council appointed under the
responsibility of the Executive. The
latter w-as, at least, as likely to choose
men capable of serving their country,
and acquiring the respect and confidence
of the public. Another feature which
has not as yet been alluded to in the
debate was, that under the new form of
Government the Upper House would
be nominated by responsible ministers,
answerable to the country, as well for
this, as for any other of their acts.
(Cheers.) The House thus appointed
would, therefore, in fact approach, as
nearly as circumstances permitted, to the
Upper House of Parliamant in England,
and to the Senate of the United States.
My honourable and learned friend, the
Attorney General, truly stated, that the
members of that Senate were appointed
by the different states, in their sovereign
capacity. In that capacity, each state
sent two members to the Senate ; and
these two members were elected by the
separate estates in each individual state.
(Cheers.) But I would ask, if we are to
have an elected Upper House, how is
responsible government to be worked,
without depriving the Upper House of
that permanence, that stability, and dig-
nity which it ought to possess, and which
can alone make it effective for good?
(Cheers.) Why with every change of
ministry it must be dissolved, and be
elected again. (Cheers.) I put it to
the ingenuity of the honourable and
learned member for Cumberland to show
how this difficulty can be got over; it
will puzzle even his legal acumen to
escape from this dilemma. But perhaps
he does not nojv want responsible Govern-
ment. He may still entertain the opinions
which I believe him to have held a short
time ago, namely, that the colony is
not yet fit for responsible government.
(Cheers.) This was my own opinion a
year cr two since, but 1 now think
that it ought not any longer to be
put off. And, while on the subject, I
will explain how responsible government,
will, in my opinion, grow up here. Ido
not suppose that there will, at once, be
two parties of the “ ins and the outs,” as
in England—(hear, hear, and laughter)—
one set on the treasury benches, and
another set on the opposition benches.
Such a state of things as this will not
exist for years. It will not exist until
we have in the country, and in the
legislature, a number of men trained to
public business, and able to form separate
administrations, —divided on public ques-
tions hereafter to arise, in colonial poli-
tics. But the way in which responsi-
ble government will be introduced
will be this—while the entire govern-
ment will not be broken up, unless on
some extraordinary occasion, no govern-
ment will be able to stand which does
not call into its ranks the active business
talent of both houses. A firm and effi-
cient administration must enlist the dis-
tinguished men of both bodies in its
ranks. (Hear, hear.) This, I believe,
will be the natural growth of this
system of government; for to Imagine
that the Colonial Parliament could sud-
denly, and at once, jump into two great
contending parties, is absurd. Re-
sponsibility must come gradually, and by
slow steps, if we would have it for its
use, and not for its abuse. (Hear, hear.)
I trust, Sir, that party distinctions may
not too speedily grow up here. They
have not always worked for good in En-
gland ; they are now the bane, and in
the end will probably be the destruc-
tion of the American Republic, some ot
whose institutions have so captivated the
hon. and learned member for Cumber-
land. It is not for party ascendancy
we should legislate, but for the good of
the country alone. (Cheers.) It is
painful to witness attempts which
have been made by that hon. and learned
member, and some of those with whom
he is now associated, to depreciate the
character of the great American states-
man, Mr. Calhoun, whose treatise upon


government has been quoted by my bon.
and learned friend, the- member for
Sydney. If the former hen. and learned
gentleman had read that work with the
attention it deserves, he would probably
have taken a very different view of this
question. As, however, in the capacity,
to use the language of the law, of lead-
ing counsel for the opponents of this
measure, he has challenged its supporters
to produce American authorities on their
side, other than Mr, Calhoun, the im-
portance and weight of whose opinions
it has been attempted to depreciate, on the
ground of his having been a slaveholder
and an advocate for slavery, I will,, with
the permission of the house, refer to a
recent number of the North American
Review, published at Boston in April last,
which contains an article on Mr. Cal-
houn’s work. This periodical is, I am
informed, Sir, in extensive circulation,
and of high repute, in America. The
reviewer says—
The style of this work (Calhoun’s Essays on
Government) is characteristic, and its literary
merits are considerable. The author was too
much in earnest, and too severe a reasoner, both
in his speeches and his writings, to pay much
attention to the mere garb of his thought.
“ The eloquence of Mr. Calhoun,” said Mr. Web-
ster, in a manly and feeling speech which he
made in the Senate of the United'States, on the
day when the decease of his colleague was an-
nounced, “the eloquence of Mr. Calhoun, or the
manner in which he exhibited his sentiments in
public bodies, was part of his intellectual dia-
meter. It grew out of the qualities of his mind.
It was plain, strong, terse, condensed, concise;
sometimes impassioned, still always severe. Re-
jecting ornament, not often seeking far for illus-
tration, his power consisted in the plainness of
his propositions, in the closeness of his logic,
and in the earnestness and energy of his manner.”
To this felicitous description of the manner of
his great rival, Mr. Webster added a just and
noble tribute to the uprightness and purity of
Ids public character. “Mr. President, he had
the basis, the indisputable basis of all high cha-
racter ; and that was unspotted integrity and
nnimpeached honor. If he had aspirations,
they were high, honorable, and noble. There
was nothing grovelling, or low, or meanly selfish,
that came near the head or heart of Mr. Cal-
houn. Firm in his purpose, perfectly patriotic
and honest, as I am sure he was, in the prin-
ciples he espoused, and in the measures that he
defended, aside from the large regard for the
species of distinction that conducted him to emi-
nent station for the benefit of the republic, I do
not believe he had a selfish motive, or a selfish
feeling. However he may have differed from
others of us in his political opinions or his politi-
cal principles, those opinions and those principles-
will now descend to posterity under the sanction
of a great name. He has lived long enough, he
has done enough, and he has done it so well, so
successfully, so honorably, as to connect himself
for all time with the records of his country. He-
is now an historical character.. The se of us who
have known him here will find that he has left
upon our minds and our hearts, a strong and
lasting impression of his person, his character,,
and his public performances, which, while we live,
will never be obliterated. We shall, hereafter,
lam sure, indulge in it as a grateful recollec-
tion, that we have lived in his age, that we have
been his contemporaries, that we have seen him,
and heard him, ami known him. We shall de-
light to speak of him to those who are rising up
to fill our places. And when the time shall
come, that we ourselves must go, one after ano-
ther, to our graves, we shall carry with us a deep
sense of his genius and character, his honor and
integrity, his amiable deportment in private life,
and the purity of his exalted patriotism.”
Such is the description iby the late Mr.
Webster, of him who has left Jiis Trea-
tise upon Government, as his last legacy
to his country. The reviewer, however,
does not concur in all the opinions of Mr.
Calhoun : particularly does he object
to the preference which Mr. Calhoun
evinces for the British Constitution over
that of America, Many of the evils
attaching to the American Constitution,
as described by Calhoun, are doubtless
fully admitted in the review. The
striking passage cited by my hon. and
learned friend, Mr. Wentworth, in re-
ference to the operation of that “ loath-
some disease,” “ the spoils,” is quoted;
and the reviewer says, “ the picture thus
drawn by Mr. Calhoun is by no means
too strong.” The pernicious effects of
this wholesale system of corruption are
described as being felt through the whole
body politic.
Though‘these two parties (the whig and demo-
crat) had other objects in view when they were
first instituted, they have long since lost sight of
them, and now continue to exist apparently for
the sole purpose of obtaining a monopoly of the
state patronage. We do not mean that they are
conscious of this alteration of purpose. Most of
those who quietly allow themselves to be counted
as whigs and democrats, though they never do
duty in that capacity, except on voting day, and
not always then, have a vague apprehension,
founded on the recollection of old contests, when
principles and measures were really at stake, that


the Government would be more safely placed in
the hands of their own party than in those of
their opponents. A good deal of discontent has
existed among “the rank and file,” as to the
conduct and management of their self-appointed
commanders, the office-seekers. Those who have
nothing to do but vote, have begun to be worried
by the incessant solicitations of their leaders not
to omit the performance of this very patriotic
duty, in which about as much liberty of choice
is left to them as is given to the convict who is
permitted to say whether he will be shot or
hanged. In spite of repeated assurance that “to
throw away one’s vote,” by casting it for the
man whom one really prefers, is a crime little
short of treason, it frequently happens that
nearly half the population do not vote at all, and
many others are tempted to exclaim, with honest
Mercutio, “ a plague on both your houses.”
( Cheers. )
So much for the liberty of suffrage in
that land of freedom which the honour-
able and learned member for Cumberland
admires so greatly. I beg to remind
him that I am now quoting a Boston Re-
view, and not the speeches or writings of
a slave-owner. I must apologize to the
House for wearying it with extracts;
but having been challenged to produce
American authorities, I would crave in-
dulgence. The review r er goes on to
describe the party divisions which exist
in this model Government—the Spoils
being the grand object. Under these
sinister and debasing influences, even
the Senate is prostrated, and falls to
assert its power, by declining, as it ought,
to ratify, by its sanction, the appoint-
ments made by the incoming President
as the price of his election. The inter-
position of such a veto by the Senate
might have the salutary effect of check-
ing this wholesale system of public
plunder, and restoring the practice of
the Government to that standard which
the framers of the American Constitu-
tion intended. But even the high indi-
vidual character of its members is insuffi-
cient to enable the Senate to rise superior
to the debasing spirit of partizanship,
and to stem the tide of general corrup-
tion.
The welfare of party is thus established as the
sole rule of conduct; and highminded men be-
come disgusted, and refuse even to enter the
arena where so miserable a conflict is waged.
Politics have already become a dishonoured pro-
fession in our land, and the most intelligent and
virtuous citizens refuse to expose themselves to
its contamination. The most eminent and de-
serving find that the vigour of their character,
and the splendour of their abilities, are the only
insuperable obstacles to their success in the
general scramble for power. They must be
passed over, because their merits have been great
and their lives conspicuous, in order that some
candidate may be found whose career has been so
obscure that nothing can be said against him.
We do not fear that this language will seem too
strong. There is hardly a citizen of the republic
who does not now sincerely grieve that the three
great statesmen (Clay, Webster, Calhoun,) whom
the country has recently lost, were not rewarded,
in turn, with the highest honours in her gift.
The loss was not theirs, but ours. Widely as
they differed from each other in their political
views and tendencies, all parties will now admit,
not merely that each of them had fairly earned
the Presidency, but that the administration of
one and all of them would have been an honour
to the country, and would have cast new lustre
upon our republican institutions. All will admit,
also, that the present organization of parties in
the Union was the only insuperable obstacle to
their rise to power.
I have now, Sir, I submit, fairly met the
challenge to produce some other Ameri-
can authority than that of a slaveholder.
And while on the subject of authority, I
would allude to an extraordinary mistake
made by the honourable and learned
member for Cumberland in his speech
the other evening. In alluding to the
Quebec Act, which he said was so dis-
tasteful to the colonists of America, the
honourable and learned member had con-
founded the Act of 1774 with the Act of
1791. (Cheers.) Now the Act of 1774
repealed the Habeas Corpus Act, substi-
tuted the civil law of France for that of
England, established a nominee Council,
not for life, but dlsraissible at any
time by the Governor; and, in fact,
was of so despotic and unconstitu-
tional a nature that it was met by
the strongest opposition in both Houses
of Parliament. If the honourable and
learned member had paused to icflect,
he must have remembered that in 1791
the American provinces were no longer
colonies, but independent states. (Mr.
Wentworth : and had been for 13 years.)
(Mr, Darvall : I said the American
Colonies had petitioned the Imperial
Legislature for a r j peal of the Quebec
Act, and against nominated Councils.)-
Mr. Macarthur resumed tAs the honour-


able and learned member seems still un-
convinced, I refer him to the 18th volume
Of the Parliamentary History ; he will
. there find, that in May, 1775, within a
few days of the debates on Lord Camden’s
Bill to repeal the Quebec Act of the pro-
ceeding session, on the ground of its un-
constitutional and despotic character,
petitions were presented to Parliament
from the ■General Assembly of New York,
complaining, amongst other grievances,
of the Quebec Act, and praying for
redress, as stated in the passage which
the honourable and learned member
quoted from Hildreth’s History of the
United States. It is obvious that ho has
fallen into what I must term a gross
historical blunder, in confounding these
two Acts of 177*1 and 1791 with each
other. lam astonished that gentlemen
can argue a question such as this,
without having made themselves ac-
quainted with those historical facts which
bear upon it. (Cheers.) We have been
told by the honourable member for
Durham (Mr. Cowper), that the Com-
mittee appointed to prepare the Con-
stitution Bill, actually did not know what
the existing Constitution of Canada was,
although they asked for a Constitution
similar in its outlines. My honourable
and learned friend (Mr. Wentworth) put
iu his emplatic disclaimer when the asser-
tion was made. I now beg to do the
same ;-r-Sir, to be ignorant of a great
Colonial Constitutional precedent, such
as that in question, in a discussion like,
this, is unbecoming a member of this
House. (Cheers.) The honourable and
learned member for Cumberland, in
his admiration of the American Senate,
(an admiration in which I participate,
though not to the extent of preferring it
to the House of Lords, like the honour-
able gentleman,) observed that the House
of Lords was an obstructive body, and
that if the people of England had to
frame a constitution now, they would not
establish any such institution.
Mr. DARVALL corrected the honour-
able member as to what he did sav r .
Mr. MACARTHUR; I really see no
substantial difference in what the honour-
able gentleman now says. If he means
that England would be satisfied, with any
constitution in which the House of Lords
did not form a part, I differ from him
entirely. But the honourable and learned
member has said more. He said that
in 1688, as well as in 1832, the Lords
had abdicated their functions, because '
they found they were of no avail against
the popular, or representative portion of
the Legislature. But this was not the
case. On the contrary, after considera-
tion and due discussion, they threw their
weight into the popular scale. The
honourable and learned member is fond,
I believe, of reading Macauley, and I will
just remind him of the account which
that historian gives of this matter. In
the summary of the proceedings of the
House of Lords in 1688, he says:—•
When the question was put, whether King
James had abdicated the Government, only three
Lords said not content. On the question whether
the throne was vacant, a division was demanded.
The contents were G 2 ; the non-contents 47.
On this point there was some demur,
because of the well known principle of
the English Constitution, that the
throne should not be vacant. The
historian goes on :
It was immediately proposed and carried, with-
out a division, that the Prince and Princess of
Orange should be declared King and Queen of
England.
Where then was the abdication of func-
tions on this occasion ? I will now
turn to what Mr. Hailam says on this
subject:—
In this conference, however, if the Whigs had
every advantage on the solid ground of expediency,
or rather political necessity, the Tories were as
much superior in the mere argument, either as it
regarded the common sense of words, or the prin-
ciples of our constitutional law. Even should we
admit that an hereditary king is competent to
abdicate the throne in the name of all his pos-
terity, this could only he intended of a voluntary
and formal cession, not such a constructive
abandonment of his right, by misconduct, as the
Commons had imagined. The word “ forfeiture”
might better have answered this purpose ; but it
had seemed too great a violence on principles
which it was more convenient to undermine than
assault. ISor would even forfeiture hear out by
analogy the exclusion of an heir, whose right was
not liable to be set aside at the ancestor’s pleasure.
It was only by recurring to a kind of paramount,
and what I may call hyper-constitutional law, a
mixture of force and regard to the national good,


wbicb is the best sanction of what is done in re-
volutions, that the vote of the Commons could be
defended. They proceeded not by the stated
rules of the English Government, but the general
rights of mankind. They looked not so much to
Magna Cliarta as the original compact of society,
and rejected Coke and Hale for Hooker and
Harrington.
The reference at the conclusion is to
that general right, under the original
compact of society, which in 1688, to
some extent, overrode the ordinary prin-
ciples of the Constitution. But this was a
revolution, and our present position, in
this colony, can bear no analogy what-
ever to such a state of things. The power
we possess, to amend our form of govern-
ment, is derivative, and not original.
To assume an original right, as argued
by some of the enlightened statesmen
out of doors, is tantamount to a declara-
tion of independence. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Hallam afterwards explains, the pro-
visions and principles of “ the declaration
of rights,” which he says was “ presented
to the Prince of Orange by the Marquis
of Halifax, as Speaker of the House of
Lords, in the presence of both Houses on
the IBth of February— both haring joined
in it and it “ was some months after-
wards confirmed by a regular Act of the
Legislation in the ‘ Bill of Rights/ ”
The government of England was always a
monarchy limited by law, though it always, or at
least since the admission of the commons into
the legislature, partook of the three simple forms,
yet the character of a monarchy was evidently
prevalent over the other parts of the Constitution.
But since the revolution of 1688, and particularly
from thence to the death of George 11., it seems
equally just to say that the predominating charac-
ter has been aristocratical.
To lessen this preponderance of the
aristocratic element, and redress the ba-
lance, was the object of the Reform
Bill of Lord John Russell. The con-
duct of the House of Peers, with refer-
mce to that measure, was not such
as to subject it to the charge urged
against it by the honorable and learned
member. Fears had, indeed, been en-
tertained that it would be necessary to
swamp the House ot Lords. But the
majority of that august body, with true
patriotism, prevented the necessity. A
very interesting account of this is given
by Lord Brougham In a little brochure
to which I would refer the honourable
and learned member. The House of
Lords had not then abdicated its func-
tions, either in i 832 or in 1688, and the
honorable and learned gentleman was
about as happy in his allusion to those
eventful periods of English history, as in
his reference to the constitution of
Canada. I beg to call his attention to
one passage more from his favorite
author, Macaulay, because it is illustra-
tive of the feeling entertained by the
British Parliament, as well as by that
eminent writer, in regard to members
abdicating their proper sphere of action,
and joining with the multitude, out of
doors, for the purpose of obtaining an
influence, by intimidation, which they
could not obtain by legitimate means.
Crowds assembled in the Palace Yasd, and
held threatening language. Lord Lovelace, who
was suspected of having encouraged these as-
semblages, informed the Peel's that he was
charged with a petition, requesting them in-
stantly to declare the Prince and Princess of
Orange King and Queen. He w r as asked by
whom the petition was signed. “ There are no
hands to it yet,” he answered ; but when I bring
it here next there shall be hands enough.” His
manner alarmed and disgusted his own party.
The leading Whigs were, in truth, even more
anxious than the Tories that the. declarations of
the convention should be perfectly free, and that
it should not be in the power of any adherent of
James to alledge that either house had acted
under force. A petition, similar to that which
had been entrusted to Lovelace, was brought
into the House of Commons, but was contemptu-
ously rejected. Maynard was foremost in pro-
testing against the attempt of the rabble in
the streets to overawe the estates of the realm.
Nothing in the history of our Revolution is
more deserving of admiration and of imitation
than the manner in which the two parties in
the convention, at the . very moment at which
their disputes ran highest, joined like one man
to resist the dictation of the mob of the
capital. (Loud cheers.)
Sir,. I feel assured that this house, in the
deliberate exercise of the high functions
which devolve upon it, will not be swayed
by such external influences, but that the
members will use their own sound discre-
tion, and while they pay due attention
to proper representations from without,
will never degrade themselves to the po-
sition of delegates (hear, hear, hear) ;


that they will never become mere agents
to carry out the crude schemes of self-
appointed and irresponsible constitution
mongers. Good suggestions might spring
from without, and those should be care-
fully weighed and considered; but such
suggestions must be dealt with solely ac-
cording to their own merits. My hon.
and learned friend, the Attorney-Gene-
ral, quoted a very remarkable passage
the other night from Polybius, shewing
the advantage of a limited government,
in which the three elements of Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, were com-
bined in just equipoise. I will now refer
briefly to the same writer in illustration
of the danger of a deeply rooted, sordid
love of gain, becoming the prevailing
character of a community, and obtaining
undue influence in the public councils, as
was the case in Crete, where, according to
Polybius, this spirit was “ so deeply im-
planted in the manners of the people, that
they alone, of all mankind, think nothing
sordid or dishonorable, that is joined with
gain.” “In this island,” he goes on,
“All the public offices are constituted in a manner
democratical—the laws of this community are bad,
the manners of the people corrupt and vicious,
and the whole government contemptible.”
From the authorities cited, the house
must be sensible of the evils engendered
by this spirit in America, tinder its de-
basing influence, true patriotism, high
and generous sentiments, right motives,
are almost driven from public life, and
the most eminent citizens, under the
ban of a political ostracism, are pre-
cluded from using those powers which
God-and nature have given them, in the
sendee of their country. (Loud cheers.)
In America, too, as in Crete, the insti-
tutions are democratic. I trust de-
basing influences such as these will never
be suffered to become paramount here,
though I cannot but notice with appre-
hension the tendency in that direction,
especially of late. I hope, Sir, that I
am not uncharitable in attributing to
such influences—l mean a democratic
spirit, conjoined with a sordid love of
gain—much of the opposition which this
great measure of constitutional freedom
is now encountering from the dema-
gogues of the passing hour. (Hear, hear,
and oh, oh.) Nevertheless, this clamour
must not be taken for the expression of
the public opinion of this colony. To
those noisy clamourers who are now seek-
ing to mislead the multitude, and who
vociferate that they are “ the people” of
this colony, may well be applied the
metaphorical description, by Burke, of
the agitators of his day—“ Because half
a dozen grasshoppers, under a fern, make
the field ring with their importunate
chirp, whilst thousands of quiet cattle
reposed beneath the shadows of the
British oak, (meaning figuratively the
British Constitution,) chew the cud, and
are silent, do not imagine that those who
make the noise are the only inhabitants
of the field—that of course they are
many in number—or that after all they
are other than the little, shrivelled,
meagre, hopping (though loud and trou-
blesome) insects of the hour.” 1 must,
once more, refer to Polybius to show
that it was the Patrician Senate of Rome
which, by the wisdom of its counsels,
and its lofty patriotism, prevailed
over the Carthagenlans, in which latter
nation, on the other hand, the love of
gain, and the fickle fluctuating turbu-
lence of democracy exercised undue sway
in all public matters. I feel, Sir, that I
am drawing largely on the patience of
honourable members; but considering
the extreme importance of placing the
subject in its true light before the
country, I am desirous to cite a few brief
passages from “ Essays on the Philosophy
of Government,” by the late M. de Sis-
mondi. This distinguished author has
achieved a world-wide reputation. He
possessed the most profound and exten-
sive knowledge of European history. Fie
had studied the institutions, laws, social
relations, customs, and opinions of dif-
ferent nations, but more especially of
Switzerland, his native country, of Eng-
land, France, and Italy—and I may par-
ticularize his great historical work on
the Italian Republics. His knowledge
of those countries, of their commerce,
manufactures, and agriculture, was de-
rived from personal observation and
practical experience, so that he possessed


a fund of information not easily attain-
able by men of letters. His mind was
imbued with an intense desire to pro-
mote the happiness of mankind. Born
in a republic, he was the historian of re-
publics. Living during the French re-
volution, exposed to its vicissitudes, and
personally known to many of the most
distinguished men of that eventful pe-
riod, he gathered wisdom from what was
occurring around him, as well as from
the records of the past. M. de Sismondi
was a native of Geneva, where at one
period of my life it was my good fortune
to become acquainted with him, and to
hear him illustrate in conversation the
principles of Government, which were
his favourite study. Of democracy, M.
de Sismondi writes as follows :
The ancients had much more experience than
we have in free governments, and in all repub-
lican forms. Those who appeal to their autho-
rity in support of what they call principles, great
principles, must be astonished if they should ever
open not only Aristophanes, but Plato, or Aristotle,
to see them declare themselves so strongly
against pure democracies. All the Greek philo-
sophers who had seen tnem in action had re-
marked the constant increase of the dominion of
the retrogade over the progressive principle,
of the low tone of the greater number over the
virtue and knowledge of the smaller. They had
seen the habitual oppression of the minority by
the majority, the harshness of masters towards
their subjects when the city commanded the
countrv; or when democracy was supreme, po-
pular favouritism not less formidable than that
of courts, and the rapidity of revolutions pro-
duced by the violent but fugitive enthusiasm of
the multitude. We shall not stop to discuss
their testimony, but w r e cannot help asking, with
astonishment,* the partizans of universal suffrage
not where is their experience, but where is their
theory ? They reject what is old : they would
change the face of the earth : ano they not only
do not bring forward a legislator, but not even a
philosopher, a wise man, a great writer, who has
admitted and developed what they call their
principles. For ourselves, when we look round,
there is no want of examples, even in our own
times, to show us the retrogade spirit of the
masses.
In the centre of Switzerland, the three little
cantons of Uri, Schwil*, and Underwalden are
pure democracies; it is really a will ot their
own, which the citizens of these little cantons
express ; but this will is constantly retrogade.
In spite of their confederates, in spite ot the
clamour of Europe, they have continued the use
of torture in their tribunals ; and these men, so
proud, and so jealous of their liberty, are the
most eager to sell themselves to despots, to en-
able them to keep other nations in chains ; every
year, in short, and at every diet, they solicit
their confederates to proscribe the liberty of the
press. We must not suppose, however, that
there are not in Urs,'Schwitz, and Unterwalden,
men whose enlightened intellect, whose more
elevated character, recoils from torture, trading
in men, and the censorship of the press; no
doubt they would form public opinion if time
were given them ; but, before every discussion,
universal suffrage decides by a majority in favour
of the gross ignorance of the great number
against the virtuous intelligence of some few.
The following passage confirms the
principle laid down by Calhoun and De
Tocqueville, which was referred to by my
honourable and learned friend, the mem-
ber for Sydney, and again brought under
the notice of the House in the able ad-
dress of my honourable friend, the mem-
ber for Cook and Westmoreland.
With respect to popular elections, we must not
speak of the right of every citizen, of every in-
dividual, to be represented, but of the right of
every individual to be well governed ; of the
interest of the community, that in every case the
best possible choice should be made; of the right
also of every individual to be respected, to have
entrusted to him by the community some parti-
cipation in political power, which may servejhini,
as if it were a defensive arm, without exposing
him to too’much danger from his inexperience or
his imprudence. In fact, political institutions
are only good in as far as they attain this end.
It is not, however, only poor and obscure citizens
who require to be furnished with defensive powers
to protect their rights—all classes, every fraction
of society, should possess them. Those publicists
who have founded universal suffrage on the sove-
reignty of the people, forget that there is no pre-
existing contract by which the minority are
bound by the will of the majority. This rule
for deliberations has been introduced into the
laws as expedient, by virtue of precise stipula-
tions in different constitutions ; it may easily be
changed into a frightful tyranny, and examples
of this are not wanting in countries which con-
sider themselves free.
The principle of double election which
the honourable and learned member for
Cumberland said prevailed through-
out the Anglo-Saxon institutions, an
assertion which I was astonished to hear
from him, and which is not borne out by
any authority that I am aware of, is that
treated of by Sismondi in reference to
its operation in France—
By looking at the system of elections which
has been adopted in France, we may discover how


incapable even the most profound thinkers have
been of forming a judgment beforehand as to the
effect of the sanctions which they introduced into
the constitution. After the revolution, the
French legislators wished at first to make all the
nation concur in the nomination of its representa-
tives ; it gave to primary assemblies the nomina-
tion of electors, who, collected in electoral assem-
blies, were to choose the members of the Legisla-
ture.' They thought that by thus doing they
preserved the whole severe gnty of the nation.
The citizens, much better informed, soon per-
ceived that the deputies named by them in this
way were strangers to them, had neither respect
nor gratitude for them ; that their wishes had no
influence on the will of the Legislature ; that
their share of the sovereignty, which at the most
could only be estimated at a six millionth part
for ea h citizen of an age to judge, was really re-
duced to nothing. They did not come to those
primary assemblies, and the elections fell into
the hands of a small number of intriguers.
Why, Sir, this is the very same principle
of double election which drew forth, but
a few years since, the opposition of the
whole colony, and caused an universal
demand that a really English system
should be substituted for the specious
counterfeit which had proved so signal a
failure in France. (Hear, hear.) if such
a system should be introduced it would
lead to the worst consequences, and be a
bane to the country by conferring power
without responsibility. *Yet those who
advocate an elective Upper House, pur-
pose, iu defiance of the unanimous con-
demnation of double election by the
country, again to have recourse to that
exploded and mischievous principle;
merely substituting for the people and
the District Councils, as proposed by
Earl Grey in 1848, the people and the
Governor-General, as now proposed by
the constitution committee, out of doors.
(Cheers.) I would next beg to call the
particular attention of the honourable
member for Durham (Mr. Cowper), who
spoke in condemnation of the English
principle of representation, as carried
out in the Reform Act, to the following
passage, which may enlighten him on
this subject, and convince him of the
fallacy of his supposition that Lord John
Russell (who evidently contemplates no-
thing beyond some amendments of de-
tail,) meditates the destruction of that
fundamental and distinguishing principle
which we have followed out in our elec-
toral divisions in this colony, and which
it is proposed to perpetuate by the Con-
stitutional Bill now under discussion.
That principle consists in the distribu-
tion of representation according’ to
classes and interests, and not according
to mere numerical proportion ; or, in
other words, it consists in representative
Government, by the constitutional , and
not by the numerical, majority. M. de
Sismoudi, it will be observed, notices this
as peculiarly an English principle, and
speaks of it with marked approbation—
When the English still more recently were oc-
cupied in reforming their electoral system, the
simple, equal, regular system of the classification
in France was put in comparison on both sides
the Channel with the ancient English system,
both before and after the Reform Rill, as being
more rational, more perfect. It is by use only
that it has begun to be perceived that the multi-
form system of the English, in spite of its rights
being subject to litigation—in spite of the flag-
rant irregularity between one citizen and another,
between one town and another—connects the na-
tional representation with all classes of the
nation ; and that the French system, in spite of
its simplicity and equality, left the population,
and especially national intelligence, out of the
representation, and ended by exciting universal
censure.
An unfair attempt has been made to
shake the arguments and to weaken some
part of the authorities of my honourable
and learned friend the member for Syd-
ney, upon this important point, by the
unfounded assertion that these authori-
ties apply only to universal suffrage,
and not to the principle of representa-
tion, according to classes and interests,
in preference to representation on the
basis of mere numbers. This truly Eng-
lish and enlightened principle is one
of the distinguishing features of the
measure we advocate a measure so
creditable to my honourable and learned
friend, and which, whatever may be
its Immediate fate—whatever may be
the abuse of it at public meetings, where
angry passions are so easily excited
(hear, hear) —whatever may be the
view taken of it by those who care not
how they trample upon the true inter-
ests of the community, so that they ex-
alt themselves, will redound to his


honour, and exercise a salutary influ-
ence on the destinies of his country.
(Cheers, and oh, oh, oh!) Those who
cry “oh!” if they mean that such
feelings do not now exist, know but
little of the construction of the human
mind (hear, hear). Despising past ex-
perience, buoying themselves up on fal-
lacious notions of the superior intelli-
gence and wisdom of the present age,
they blind themselves to the truth.
Notwithstanding the greater diffusion of
education and general intelligence, hu-
man nature is still the same, and human
beings will always be subject to the
same influences, the same passions, the
same impulses, which history records for
our warning or our guidance (hear,
hear). God forbid that the public
councils of this country should be tainted
by class interests, or selfish motives—
though individuals, using “ lowliness as
young ambition’s ladder,” may seek to
climb to eminence, in order that (to fol-
low up the metaphor of my hon. and learn-
ed friend, the Attorney General), they
may catch the first breath of the courtly
breeze from Newcastle or from Lyttelton
(hear). Many members of this house,
and a vast majority of those who have a
settled interest in the country—those es-
pecially whom I am proud to call my
countrymen —those, in short, who re-
gard this country with feelings of
affection, and look to it as the perma-
nent home of their families, participate
in the sentiments which I now express,
i The House should pause and weigh well
jthe inevitable consequence of suffering
imere transient clamour to influence its
decision (hear, hear). The honourable
member for Durham (Mr. Cowper) has
alluded to the opinions of Earl Grey.
Now I have not had the advantage of
reading the noble lord’s book, but, if I
mistake not, one great object of it was
to throw the blame of the failure of his
.dministration of colonial affairs off’ his
own shoulders. Nor was this unnatural,
or in any respect discreditable. Much
as I may differ from the noble lord in
his opinions of this country, or colonial
government, 1 can never forget, that
some years ago, when an attempt was
made, within the precincts of the House
of Commons, to render me instrumental
in attaching disgrace to the name of
Australian—an attempt which I spurned
then, as 1 trust I ever shall spurn such
attempts, from whatever quarter I
found a prompt and generous ally in
Earl Grey (hear, hear). The honourable
member for Durham has asserted, that
the pastoral interest is not a perma-
nent one. Now, if the pastoral interest
is not permanent, I should like to
know which is ?Is it the agricultural
interest, now languishing from the want
of labour ?,Is it the commercial in-
terest ? Is it the gold interest ?
We are told that it is a great
grievance, that the people at the gold
fields do not possess the elective fran-
chise ; but I would ask, why do they
not become resident householders ?
(Hear.) Are we to depart from esta-
blished principle, merely to satisfy
people scrambling for gold P Surely
that cannot be called a' permanent
interest. I can quite understand that
other interests will be created, and that
the gold discovery may be the means of
attracting population, which hereafter
may be concentrated in mining enter-
prise—either quartz crushing, or work-
ing the rich deposits of copper, lead,
and iron, existing in various places;
but so far as regards the surface dig-
ging for gold, Ido not believe that it
has been, or ever can be, beneficial to
the morality, or to .the real prosperity
of the country ; for that prosperity is
not to be attained by the accumulation
of gold in the coffers of speculators, who,
when they have amassed enough, will,
to use a fashionable phrase, “ cut the
painter,” and take the gold away to be
spent in other lands. Look at its re-
sults as exemplified in our domestic ma-
nufactures. I have endeavoured, Sir, to
obtain information on this. point, and
I find that our master tradesmen have
been compelled, in a great measure, to
give up making the articles of their
trade, and to obtain necessary supplies
—such as shoes, harness, and various
other things of daily ware, which we
ought to make at home—by importation


from abroad ; the enormous rise in wages
rendering it impossible to make them up
here without loss. Hence, apprentice-
ships must become fewer, and many
outlets for native industry must be
stopped, which in the end will bring
about the wretched state of things
which has characterized Brazil, and
from which she is on'y now emerg-
in 2r. 'ihese are the inevitable effects
O # #
of gold discoveries, as is shown by
Hobertson and Southey, in their his-
tories of America and Brazil. Now, if
we refuse to avail ourselves of the
lessons and experience of the past, of
what use is education ? Of what use
are printing presses and books ? We
are the seniors of the world; but un-
less we use the accumulated knowledge
of past ages, and apply to our
own case the practical conclusions of
philosophers and statesmen, instead of
merely theorising, of what avail is our
seniority and superior knowledge? This
is especially applicable to political
science, in which every ignorant pre-
tender assumes a right to dabble—a
propensity pourtrayed by Burke, with his
wonted felicity, in the following pas-
sage :
This British Constitution has not been struck
out at a heat by a set of presumptions men,
* * * *
’Tis not the party product of a day,
But the weil-ripen’d fruit of wise delay.
It is the result of the thoughts of many minds,
in many ages. It is no simple, no superficial
thing, nor to be estimated by superficial under-
standings. An ignorant man, who is not fool
enough to meddle with his clock, is however suf-
ficiently confident to think he can safely take to
pieces and put together, at his pleasure, a moral
machine of another guise, importance, and com-
plexity, composed of far other wheels and springs,
and balances, and counteracting and co-operating
powers. Men little think how immorally they
act in rashly meddling with what they do not un-
derstand. Their delusive good intention is no
sort of excuse for their presumption. They who
truly mean well must be fearful of acting ill.
The British Constitution may have its advantages
pointed out to wise and reflecting minds; but it
is of too high an order of excellence to be adapted
to those that are common. It takes too many
views, it makes too many combinations, to be so
much as comprehended by shallow and superficial
understandings. Profound thinkers well know it
in its reason atjd spirit. The less inquiring re-
cognise it in their feelings and their experience.
They will thank God they have a standard, which,
in the most essential point of this great concern,
will put them on a par with the most wise and
knowing. If we do not take to our aid the fore-
gone studies of men reputed intelligent and
learned, we shall be always beginners. But men
must learn somewhere ; and the new teachers
mean no more than what they effect, as far as
they succeed, —that is to deprive men of the
benefit of the collected wisdom of mankind,
and to make them blind disciples of their
own particular presumption. Talk to these
deluded creatures (all the disciples, and most
of the masters,) who are taught to think
themselves so newly fitted np and furnished,
and you will find nothing in their houses but the
refuse of Knaves’ Acre; nothing but the rotten
stuff, worn out in the service of delusion and
sedition in all ages, and which being newly fur-
nished up, patched, and varnished, serves well
enough for those who, being unacquainted with
the conflict which has always been maintained
between the sense and nonsense of mankind,
know nothing of the former existence and the
ancient refutation of the same follies. It is
nearly 2000 years ago since it has been observed
that these devices of ambition, avarice, and tur-
bulence, were antiquated. They are, indeed, the
most ancient of all common-places; common-
places, sometimes of good and necessary causes,
more frequently of the worst, but which decide
upon neither.—‘ Eadem semper causa, libido et
avaritia, et mutandarum rerum amor Ceterum
libertas et speciosa nomina pretexuntur; nec
quisquam alienum servitium, et dominationem
sibi concupivit, ut non eadem ista vocabnla
usurparet.’ Rational and experienced men tolerably
well know, and have always known, how to dis-
tinguish between true and false liberty ; and be-
tween the genuine adherence and the false pre-
tence to what is true; but none, except those
who are profoundly studied, can comprehend the
elaborate contrivance of a fabric fitted to unite
private and public liberty with public force, with
order, with peace, with justice, and, above all,
with the institutions formed for bestowing per-
manence and stability, through ages, upon this
invaluable whole.
I have now, Sir, at the risk of fatiguing
the House, gone at too much length, 1
fear, into authorities, to which, it seems
to me desirable to invite the attentior
of the public, because they support anc
illustrate the principles of Consitutiona
Government which we consider best foi
the country, and point out the dangerous
tendencies of the principles we oppose
I have to thank honourable members foi
the kindness and forbearance they have
extended towards me. A few con-
cluding remarks are all that I have
more to offer. Sir, the constitution we
are seeking to establish, does, I believe,


as nearly resemble the British constitu-
tion, as the circumstances of the country
will admit. It contemplates the esta-
blishment of three estates—the Governor
representing the Sovereign, a House of
Assembly elected by the people, and an
Upper House discharging functions
similar to those of the House of Peers.
I fully admit it is impossible at once to
form a. House which would have the
prestige of the House of Lords. lam
well aware that there exist few circum-
stances in this colony analogous to
those which has given rise to, and pecu-
liarly belong to, that great assembly.
But t if we cannot at once raise the
Oak in its full strength and Majesty, we
may plant the Acorn. (Hear, hear.)
One day it may even rival the parent
tree. It is ‘said, indeed, that the Oak
will not flourish ; hut this is mere as-
sertion ; and even were it true, have we
not indigenous trees which may equally
serve as emblems of our firmness and
stability ? Let us do what, in our con-
science, we believe to be right, and the
result cannot fail to be satisfactory.
(Cheers.) Much has been said in depre-
ciation of what it is the fashion to call,
the hereditary clauses of the bill; but, as
regards the present time, these clauses
do not necessarily apply, and for all
immediate and practical objects, the
measure would be as good without them.
To the principle that the Upper House
should be nominated for life, I adhere
strongly. But with reference to the
hereditary clauses, we all acknowledge
—all true Englishmen at least—that the
Queen is the fountain of honour : and if
ter Majesty choose to confer honours on
,ny inhabitants of this colony, who
hall gainsay it ? Why should we
lebar ourselves from such honours ?
Vhy place our country on a lower foot-
ng than the other portions of the ens-
ure ? Why should we degrade ourselves
nd our children, and be content to
>ccupy an inferior position ? All the
Bill says, is, that whenever the number
)f titled persons shall exceed fifty—that
s the number named, but this is
nere matter of detail—they shall elect
;wenty of their number to sit in the
Upper House ; but the seat is not to
he hereditary, though the rank is.
And, besides, the Executive will always
have the power ot nominating an unli-
mited number of members of the Upper
House for life. The scheme appears to
me to be a very happy adaptation of the
hereditary principle to the circumstances
of the colony, whilst it avoids the crea-
tion of an hereditary right to legisla-
tion, which only appertains to the Peers
of England, and not to those of Scotland
or Ireland, who are elected members of
the House of Lords. Another fallacy,
used to run down and stigmatise the
Bill, is, that it is intended to create
an hereditary caste. But this is an-
other perversion.' What is there in
the Peerage of England which resembled
a caste ? Let us hear Macauley upon
this subject—
A peculiarity equally important, though less
noticed, was the relation in which the nobility
stood here to the commonalty. There was a
strong hereditary aristocracy, but it was of all
hereditary aristocracies the least insolent and ex-
clusive. Jt hud none of the invidious character
of a caste. It was constantly receiving members
from the people, and constantly sending down
members to mingle with the people. Any gen-
tleman might become a peer. The younger son
of a peer was but a gentleman. Grandsons of
peers yielded precedence to newly-made knights.
The dignity of knighthood was not beyomi the
reach of any man who could, by diligence and
thrift, realise a good estate, or who could attract
notice by his valour in a battle or siege. It was
regarded as no disparagement for the daughter
of a duke, nay, a royal duke, to espouse n dis-
tinguished commoner. Thus, Sir John Howard
married the daughter of Thomas Mowbray, Duke
of Norfolk. Sir Hichard Dole married the Coun-
tess of Salisbury, daughter of George, Duke of
Clarence. Good blood was indeed held in high
respect; but between good blood and the pri-
vilege of peerage there was, most fortunately for
our country, no necessary connection. Pedigrees
as long, and scutcheons as old, were to be found
out of the House of' Lords as in it. There were
new' men who bore the highest titles. There
were untitled men well known to Li descended
from knights who had broken the Saxon ranks at
Hastings, and scaled the walls of Jerusalem.
There were Bohung, Mowbrays, De Veres, nay,
kinsmen of the House of Plantagenet, with no
higher addition than that of esquire, and with no
civil privileges beyond those enjoyed by every
farmer and shopkeeper. There was therefore no
line like that which in some other countries
divided the patrician from the plebeian. The
yeoman was not inclined to murmur at dignities


to which his own children might rise.' The
grandee was not inclined to insult a class into
which his own children must descend.
Now these were the characteristics of the
British nobility: and all that we can do
is, to endeavour to imitate its best fea-
tures. It must be borne in mind, too,
that there are in the Bill causes of dis-
qualification not necessary now to enu-
merate, which apply not only to the
nominees for life, but to the patentees
holding life seats with hereditary titles.
I would venture to throw Out a sugges-
tion, that the like causes of disqualifica-
tion ought to void the title as well as
the seat. This is a mere suggestion
which may possibly be acted on. I am
of course aware that this is a matter
which belongs to the prerogative of the
Crown, and on which we cannot legis-
late. I may here notice, as an illustration
of my argument, that there is in the
peerage of England, at this time, a dis-
tinguished individual, Lord Truro, whose
father once occupied the compara-
tively humble position of clerk of the
peace in New South Wales. (Hear,
hear.) Lord Truro, too, as in the in-
stances cited by Macaulay, is now
allied by marriage to the Royal Family,
having married a daughter of Lady
Augusta Murray. Rank, according to
the English system, is not invidious,
because it is not exclusive. The
grandson of a Duke may be a
commoner. It is not held derogatory
to him to engage in commercial or
other pursuits. He is a gentleman,
and nothing more. Now this, Sir, is
what we wish to see reproduced here
—a real aristocracy, uniting rank with
merit. As to the ridicule that has
been attempted to be cast on some
portion of the committee, by represent-
ing them as anxious to be created Dukes
and Marquises, it recoils on those who
stooped to such weapons, while conscious,
as they must be, that no member of the
committee was actuated by any such
object. Those, Sir, who know me best,
smile, as well they may, at the idea of
my coveting titular distinction ; while,
as regards the chairman of the com-
mittee, my honourable friend needs no
title to hand his name down with
honour to posterity ; for in the annals
of Australia, in the foremost rank, will
be found the name of Wentworth.
(Loud cheers.) It has been my fortune,
on more than one occasion, to be opposed
to my honourable friend ; but ours, Sir,
has been an honourable warfare. It has
not descended to the pitiful level of
personality. My honourable friend would
not demean himself by such low, gro-
velling notions. Those who represent
him as being now actuated by acrimon-
ious feelings towards the opponents of his
bill, or by views of personal aggrandise-
ment, either mistake, or wilfully pervert
the truth. Sir, my honourable friend is
incapable of such conduct. In framing
a constitution for our common country,
he has at heart the promotion and security
of its best interests. To attain this, he
has devoted to the task, with that zeal
and ardour which characterise him, his
talents, his best energies, every generous
impulse of his nature, united and
controlled by a deeply seated and
fervid love of country. (Cheers.) It was
the force of this feeling which led him
to beat down opposition by the light-
ning of his eloquence, or to seek to crush
it in the grasp of his strong sense.,
(Cheers.) In their calmer moments, when
they shall cease to be excited by mistaken
views of passing events, when no longer
the dupes of speculative theorists, or un-
scrupulous demagogues, the people of this
city will wonder at their temporary blind-
ness, and with one voice award to their
distinguished representative his true
desert. (Hear, hear.) It is because, in
common with him, I believe the measure
we now propose to be the nearest possible
approach, in its main principles, to the
mixed form of the British constitution ;
and because 1 believe it will be a barrier
against republicanism and democracy—
that I support it, and oppose to the
utmost the untried project of two elective
houses, which does appear to me to be
fraught with peril. Let us never forget
that within the last few years, when the
Continent of Europe was rocked to its
foundations by the prevailing genius of
democracy—when the floodgates of anar-


chj were unclosed, and the landmarks of
civilization in danger of being over-
whelmed by the devastating torrent, Eng-
land presented a picture the very reverse.
There was then no need for cannon, for
bristling bayonets, or the stern array of
armed battalions. (Loud cheers.) Then
the civil authority, armed with the simple
baton of the constable, maintained se-
curity and peace. (Renewed cheering.)
England’s noblest son—now alas no
more—the warrior, the statesman, the
true hearted citizen, the greatest man
(looking at his whole career) of an age
fertile in greatness—as he calmly sur-
veyed the peaceful triumph of the law,
rejoiced that his veteran arm was not
required, and felt a higher pride in the
institutions and character of his country
(Loud cheers.) And are we to forego the
advantage of this glorious model—this
matchless form of government —for an
ignis fatuus, a Will-o’-the wisp ? Shall
we quit the safe and beaten path of con-
stitutional precedent, to follow in the
train of those who covet power for their
own ends, or who would risk all in the
visionary hope of theoretical perfection ?
If so, we shall find, when it is too late,
that we are seeking what cannot be at-
tained, at the hazard of all that is most
valuable in life. (Cheers.) For there
is something beyond even liberty itself,
liberty is only to be prized, when it
secures those greater blessings which
constitute the true happiness of man.
If it be suffered to run wild, and to de-
generate into licence, the object is lost,
anarchy ensues, and the strong arm of
power can alone arrest the evil, and
restore the equipoise of society. (Hear,
hear.) It has been stated to-night, by
the honourable and learned member for
Cumberland, in explanation of a recent
allusion to a democratic form of govern-
ment, that that allusion was only hypo-
thetical .I am glad to find it so. But in my
opinion, Sir, this is neither a sufficient
excuse nor a legitimate basis for argu-
ment in a British province. (Hear,
hear.) This colony is part and parcel
of the Empire, and he who, at a public
meeting, puts forth such a doctrine as the
possibility of our becoming a Republic,
even hypothetically, is doing a mighty
mischief. 1 may personally respect the
individual who advances such opinion,
but as a British subject I decline to
argue with him. (Loud cheers.) Ours
is the glorious monarchy of England,
and we will maintain it to the death.
(Renewed cheers.) I know well the
feeling of the people of this colony. I
know the character of my countrymen.
I am satisfied that even fifty years hence,
or at any imaginable future time, they
wdll retain those feelings and that cha-
racter, and refuse to bow down to the
worst, the most degrading of all ty-
rannies—the tyranny of the multitude.
Sir, I have confidence in the fortunes of
this great country, I entertain a firm
reliance that it is reserved to Australia,
under the auspicious shelter of that con-
stitutional form of government, with
which will be connected a name not
unknown to history (Cheers, and “Oh,
oh ! ”), to rear a power on this shore of
the Pacific, which shall extend, through-
out the numerous islands that stud its
broad expanse, a benign influence ; which
shall curb the encroaching spirit of de-
mocracy, and display, in all their at-
tractions, the claims of English society,
and arts, and literature, with our own
beautiful language in its full richness
and purity. (Cheers.) Thus will this
Australian province be amongst the
proudest adjuncts of the sovereignty of
England, and one of the brightest jewels
of her crown. She will be looked upon
with admiration by the nations of the
earth, and history will point to her pros-
perous career as combining the blessings
of good order and undisturbed tran-
quillity, with that of true, moderate, and
rational liberty. (Loud cheers.) It is
the more necessary that we should im-
plant and instil into the minds of our
children, and our children’s children, the
true constitutional maxims of our father-
land, as they will have to carry on this
contest—l pray that it may be a bloodless
one—between reason and the principles
of the British constitution on the one
side, and democracy and the principles of
the American republic on the other.
(Loud cheers.) But we shall be tri-


umphant in this encounter, for “ Reason
and England will prevail against De-
mocracy and America.” The honour-
able gentleman resumed his seat amidst
loud applause.
Mr. CAMPBELL: I will beg the
indulgence of the House in rising
to address it on this most import-
ant measure, feeling that I do not
possess those high abilities and powers
of oratory that have distinguished the
speeches of those who have addressed
the House on this question. I will
speak my sentiments on this matter with
bluntness, and will endeavour not to
tire the House with lengthy remarks. I
feel that the discussion of this question
will affect the future liberties of the
country, and that the dearest privileges
of a future people are bound up in it.
It is on this ground that, looking at the
measure now before, the House, I consi-
der that the opening thus given to a full
extension of the suffrage, demand my
co-operation and approval. And how-
ever stigmatized the people of Sydney
may have been by the promoters of this
measux-e, I feel sure that they do not de-
serve the epithets applied to them. They
possess the same right of freedom of dis-
cussion as is demanded by members of
this House. The measure introduced by
my honourable and learned colleague
will have the effect of uniting the
colonists in one federal bond, so that they
can claim their rights as subjects of a
British monarch. The honourable mem-
ber will receive the honour of this result,
while he will, at the same time, x-eceive
the dishonour for the manner in which
he has vituperated those who differ from
him during the course of this debate.
And, however the honourable member
for Camden may praise that honourable
and learned gentleman, lasting dishonor
will attach to his name for the use of
such epithets as “ dirty paltry ruffians.”
The SPEAKER : I suggest that the
epithets complained of have not been
applied indiscriminately to the people
generally, but only to a certain section
of the community to whom it was be-
lieved that the remarks would apply.
Mr. CAMPBELL continued: These
abusive words have been referred to by
the honourable and lea’rned member for
Cumberland, and the honourable and'
learned member for Sydney did not rise
to contradict them. Yet, certainly, if the
obvious interpretation of these phrases
be the true one, it became the dignity
of his honourable colleague to rise up
and explain them. It is not right that
the people of Sydney should be called
the dregs of society, ruffians, and vaga-
bonds.
The SPEAKER : It may prevent un-
necessary discussion, if the honourable
and learned member for Sydney will ex-
plain to the house the use he intended
of the epithets x-eferred to.
Mr. WENTWORTH ; I will accede
to this suggestion, though I did not think
it worth my while to answer the question
before. The particular expression that I
did make use of was, that this was a filthy
lucre-loving country. (Hear, hear.)
Of course I did not mean by this, that
the country itself was filthy (loud
laughter), but the people were filthy
and lucre-loving.
Mr. CAMPBELLL resumed : Now,
as far as I have read, I see nothing to
draw down on the people of this colony
the extreme taunts of this House. What
do we see on inferring to this Bill ?
Why, that some of the clauses are repug-
nant to the principles of the British
Constitution. In one of these clauses
the ministers of religion are restricted
from entering this House (hear, hear),
and in another the Judges of the land
are not allowed to sit in the Legislature.
(Hear, hear.) Thus these two clauses
are contrary to the spirit of the British
Constitution. (Cries of “no no.”) The
citizens are not justly taxed with the
odium that has been cast upon them;
their forbearance and bearing at the
public meeting was that of orderly
people. I will now support the second
reading, on the principle that it will ex-
tend the franchise of the people, and I
hope before I die to see every honest man
in the colony possess this inalienable
x'ight. In the discussions that have taken
place recently in the House of Commons,


Sir James Graham and the Duke of New-
castle told the people that the time had
now come when their suffrages could with
justice be extended. I shall support the
second reading of the Bill, but still there
is much in it to excite the jealousy of
the people outside. Especially is that
monstrous proposal which requires the
votes of two-thirds of the Legislature to
make any alteration in the form of govern-
ment ; and I hope that, in the course of
the Bill through Committee, this clause
will be omitted. The clause for pro-
hibiting ministers of religion from the
Council, is particularly reprehensible.
However other honourable members may
think on the matter, I contend that it
was doing dishonour to the religion we
profess. Why it may be that this House
may come to be sunk so low that
the ministers of religion will be sent
goes into Committee such alterations-will
be made as will render it more palatable
to the people. I hope that under this
Act the people will acquire great liberty
ami power. For, if this proposed Con-
stitution be carried out, and we have a
Lower House fairly representing the
the people I care not how the Upper
House is constituted—(hear, hear) —if we
could not by this means resist oppression
and control corruption, it is the people’s
fault. (Loud cheers.) The democratic
principle must prevail wherever the
British Constitution is carried out •
and I will defy any lover of his
kind to think meanly of even the
humblest of his fellow-creatures. It
would be a wretched thing for us
to imitate jthat avaricious that selfish-
nay come to be sunk so low that man, who destroyed his brother,
die ministers of religion will be sent and then said, <• Am I my bro-
tn to reform the corrupt body, (Cries of ther’s keeper?” If the good of the
ah, oh, and laughter.) It is also pre- greatest number is not made our object
posterous to prohibit the Judges from of what value are our political institu-
jtfmo* in fho t-iAiioA . • a 1
fitting in the House.
Dr. DOUGLABS; Where do you find
;hls in England ?
Mr. CAMPBELL; In the second
House ; the Judges sit there by virtue of
fiieir appointments.
Mr. NICHOLS No, they don’t.
Mr. CAMPBELL continued : There
ire other defects in this Bill. The
iquatting interest, which before was re-
presented by only eight members, is now
-o have thirteen. Additional members
ire to be given to the districts repre-
sented by the framers of this measure.
Fhe constituency of Camden is to have
lenceforward four members instead; of
;wo ; Bathurst is to have four instead of
(even ; and the county of Cumberland
hirteen instead of eight.. The town of
'’arramatta will have two members
nstead of one. The Hamlets will have
tn additional member ; and Sydney
ny native city—(a laugh)—only four
nembers altogether ! Honourable mem-
»ers may laugh, but had I sufficien
ibility and eloquence I would, in defendt
ng my country from the libels cast upon
ler, make honourable gentlemen laugh
he wrong side of their cheeks. (Loud
aughter.) I trust that when the Bill
tions ? This debate has already lasted
several nights. At one time the honor-'
able member for Cook and Westmore-
land rose and opposed^the honorable and
learned member for Cumberland, and
cut him completely to pieces (loud laugh-
ter), speaking,, for three hours in favour
ol the British Constitution, and ending
with proposing that the Upper House
should be elective. (Loud laughter.) As
a lawyer should do, the honorable mem-
ber made out a distinction where there
was- no difference (a laugh), and at- ,
tempted to show that the producers and.
consumers had two different interests.
I cannot but believe that what is the
interest of one is the interest of all,
(Hear, hear.) It may be found that the
offer of the suffrage made in this mea-
sure is only intended as a snare to en-
tice the assent of the people to its ac-
ceptance. - I would recommend, that in-
stead of fighting over the old bones of
the senate, (laughter), we should, at once
unite to get this house free of the Grown,
nominees. In this way we should be ad-
vancing our own interests and the inter-
ests of the country. (The honorable
gentleman then, proceeded to dissect the
Electoral Act of 1851, and showed,- that


in the proposed addition of new members,
only those parts of the country that were
in the favour of the Executive Govern-
ment had been considered worthy of an
additional member, and in some cases
the boon had been granted out
of compliment to the sitting members
—as Durham, for instance—and then
for Brisbane, where that great battle
was fought which freed this country
from the curse of convictism ; they pro-
posed no additional member at all for
Brisbane, where Dr. Lang had brought
the 408 emigrants, and for which he had
never been paid a farthing by the Govern-
ment, by that Government which at first
opposed the great measure that Brisbane
had so ably assisted to forward, and
which Government at last came forward
and said, when they found the will of
the people too strong for them,
that they were in favour of.) I am
convinced that, if the unanimous wish of
the people be that the Governor should
dissolve the Council, we ought not to
resist—the Council ought to be ashamed
of itself, if it attempts to pass this mea-
sure contrary to the desire of the people.—
we ought manfully to go before our con-
stituents, and bide the issue. As to my-
self, I have no hesitation in giving my
opinion upon the whole matter before
the house, I shall not hesitate in doing
it, but before doing so, I shall refer to a
remark which has been made upon the .
contemptible aspect of the House of Lords,
# at the passing of the Reform Bill. I can
conceive nothing grander than the conduct
of some of the members of that body—atv
the solicitation of the Ring of England,
and to save the dignity of the Crown,
rather than sacrifice their own ideas, they
walked out of the House, I will now
observe, that it behoves the people of this
colony not to step too far in their demands,
.and that whilst contending for an elec-
tive Lower House they should not meddle
with the Upper—whilst I, a democrat, as
the House may call me (laughter), stand
here contending for universal sufferage,
1 feel that the people should allow the
Upper House to be nominated by the
aristocracy; they should not interfere,
for it has been proved by experience,
that the liberties of the people have never
been tampered with by such a creation.
While I contend for universal suffrage
as the birthright of every Englishman, I
would equally contend that the nomina-
tion of an Upper House should be left in
the hands of those to whom it properly
belongs. It belongs to the aristocracy,
whether that aristocracy be one of birth,
of talent, or of wealth. The members
of this Upper House should represent
their order, as the tribunes of the people
represented theirs. (Hear, hear.) His-
tory showed that this independence of
the House of Lords, so far from having
any oppressive tendency, has been the
means, on many occasions, of preventing
the people from being tyrannized over.
(Hear, hear.) This Upper House should,
I think, be elected independently both of
the Crown and the people. If the mem-
bers are mere nominees, it is impossible
that they can be independent; but all
difficulty may be got over by introducing
the elective principle, and allowing the
members of the aristocracy to elect their
representatives. This, too, may get over
the difficulties and disputes between the
advocates of the elective and nominee
principles. With these sentiments I
have no hesitation in going once more
before my constituents, should I be called
upon to do so by the dissolution of the
House ; and if, from prejudice or any
other cause, I should be excluded
from the representation, I readily retire
into private life, from which I have only
emerged from a strong feeling of public
necessity. (Cheers.) The sentiments to
which 1 have given utterance have been
used by many highly gifted men. I have
read an extract, from a newspaper, which
will show that aristocratic, connection is
not a bar to the advocacy of popular and
constitutional rights—
At Huddersfield election, Lord Goderich, i
young nobleman, whose sympathies are with tin
people, was returned by a large majority, In th«
course of his speech on the day of nomination, h(
said he “ would promote progress and reform, be.
cause he believed they would thus best maintaii
all that was valuable in the constitution. Mud
had been said to the men of Huddersfield con-
cerning the extreme nature of his opinions. Hi
had endeavoured to judge for himself. He hat


endeavoured to study men and the country in
which he lived as to arrive at the wisest conclu-
sion. And in so doing he had at least laid aside,
so far as he was able, the prejudices which might
be supposed to belong to his class. Certain per-
sons nave alleged against me something worse
than hay being only 25 years of age —it is this,
that I have had too much sympathy with the
working classes, and because of my position I can
have no sympathy with you. If 1 am to choose
between the two accusations, I would rather have
the wildest imaginable sympathy with you, and
be supposed to be a fanatic overturning society
for your benefit, than I would be accused of being
a man without sympathy for my fellow country-
men.”
I feel equally strong- as to the excellence
of the British Constitution, with an emi-
nent French professor, M. Deli lie, who
has concluded a recent lecture in these
terms—
After considering the customs and manners of
other countries, I turn to England with a rejoic-
ing look and confident heart: it contains in its
established institutions, its domestic habits, and
its long tried comforts, the greatest amount of
happiness which, in this world, it is our portion
to enjoy; and had I the eloquence equal to the
intense power and intense sincerity of the con-
viction which is excited in me, and the feelings
which such sentiments create, it would be to con-
vey to the youth of England that their attach-
ment to their country cannot be too great, for as
it grows with them, and unites in the maturity
of manhood, with soundness of judgment, it will
secure and maintain for the future that noble dis-
tinction which for ages has characterized the
British empire in the glorious annals of European
civilization. (Cheers.)
Dr. DOUGLASS moved the adjourn-
ment of the debate. Carried.
Dr. DOUGLASS : I may safely say
that never have I risen to address this
House under a deeper sense of the mag-
nitude of the question in which the
House is involved, or of the eloquence of
the speeches which has already been ad-
dressed to the House upon it. I feel, so
far as the merits of the question are
concerned, that I might leave the matter
as it rests, on the arguments and autho-
rities contained in those speeches. I
feel, after the addresses of my honour-
able and learned friend the member for
Sydney, the honourable member for
Cook and Westmoreland, and the honor-
able and learned member the Attorney-
General, that there is little, if anything,
to be said by other speakers in support
of this measure. It is, however, thought
advisable that each representative, par-
ticularly those representing large con-
stituencies, should express their opinions
on this question : and 1 have, therefore,
risen to state my views ; and I must add
I am the more tempted to address the
House because the opinions expressed in
the speech of the hon. and learned mem-
ber for Cumberland (Mr. Darvall), in
reference to the superiority of American
political institutions, are, I believe, if car-
ried out, calculated to sap the foundations
of society at large, and to that I would
chiefly address myself. The honourable
member, in the views he has expressed
on this question, began with America ;
his speech was all America, and nothing
but America, going through the history
of America from the arrival of the May
Flower at New Plymouth, until the
establishment of the Senate and House
of Representatives. It was a long and
tedious journey, and occupied an im-
mense period of time. Since, however,
the honourable member has led the way,
it will not be amiss for us to follow him
and see how far he has realized his own
opinions. He has described the origin
of the settlement in America as being
the result of the arbitrary power of the
Crown in Great Britain ; but he forgot
to show that these first settlers themselves
were far more arbitrary than any of the
monarchs of Great Britain, or any insti-
tution established under them. The
rock on which they first set foot at New
Plymouth, was much sneered at by the
wits in Boston, who called it the “ Blar-
ney Stone” of America. This stone
exists to the present day, and, amongst
other purposes, has served that of the
honourable and learned gentlemen. The
honourable and learned member (Mr.
Darvall) stated that these first settlers
were driven from their homes by the op-
pression and tyranny of the English Go-
vernment, and had resorted to this laud
in order that they might enjoy a fuller
measure of liberty, civil and religious,
than was allowed to them in their own
country. In order to feel confident that
these early settlers deserved the credit
awarded to them by the honourable and


learned member, I must consider how far
.they used the same authority, the abuse
of which had driven them from the land
of their birth. Now it was in the year
■ tpV (he quoted from a work entitled,
The English in America) that these
first respectable settlers landed at
New Plymouth, and afterwards re-
tained possession of it. The first
thing they did after landing was to
frame certain rules, by which it was pro-
vided that no person who was not of
them, that is to say, not of their reli-
gion, should abide among them. This
was their democracy—(a laugh)—their
ultra republicanism (a laugh). Thus it
was shown that these people, who were
republicans in politics, were also fanatics
in religion. The author of the work he
had aiiuded to described their proceed-
ings as follows ;
An English dissenter of the name of Black-
stoue, whom they found living at Boston, and
■claiming it by virtue of his discovery and pos-
session, was soon made to feel the difference be-
tween republican and royal compulsion, and
on quitting the community remarked, in the
bitterness of disappointed "feeling, “that he had
left England because he did not like the Lord
Bishops, but that he should now leave them, for
he could not stand the Lords Brethren.”
Blaekstone found that he had left Eng-
land because the Lord Bishops oppressed
him, and he went to America to find that
the Lords Brethren did the same thing.
The author went on to describe the rules
laid down by this republican and puri-
tanic body, and he said—
they, therefore, at this early date, 18th May,
1031, enacted, “in order that the body of the
Commons might be preserved of good and
honest men,” that no person should be admitted
to the freedom of the Company but such as were
members ot some of the churches established
by law. So effectually did this check the intro-
Anotion of Episcopalians, that during the whole
continuance of the Charter not a single congre-
gation was collected in all Massachusetts.
'! his bold attempt at exclusive sovereignty is
thus lamented by Leechford. “ None may now
he a freeman of that company unless he he a
Church member among them. None have voice
in elections of governor, deputy, and assistants;
none are to he magistrates, officers, or jurymen,
grand or petit, but freemen. The ministers give
their votes in all elections of magistrates. Now
the most of the persons at New England are not
admitted of their Church, and therefore are not
■freemen ; and when they come to be tried there,
be it for life or limb, name or estate, or what-
soever, they must be tried .and judged too hr
those of the Church, who are in a sort their ad-
versaries.” How equal “that hath been or may be,
seme by experience do know, others may judge.”
Another law was passed in the vear 17C7, having
in view the same object—“ That none should be
received to inhabit within jurisdiction but such
as should be allowed by some of the magistrates,”
and it was fully understood that differing from
the Churches established in the country was as
great a disqualification as any political opinions.
In defence of this order, it is advanced that the
apostolic rule of rejecting such as brought not
the true doctrine with them was as applicable to
the Commonwealth as the Church, and that even
the profane were less to be dreaded than the able
advocates of erroneous tenets. Complaints they
could not prevent, nor could the right to petition
the wrown be openly impugned but by creating
a new offence, that of accusing the brethren ; no
one could petition without being guilty of this
crime. They therefore forbore to press a man to
trial for memorialising the King in Council, but
they charged him with slandering the brethren,
and held him liable to fine, imprisonment, or cor-
poral punishment, or all three, for this petty
treason. J
This was the beginning of the liberties
of America—of that America whose rise
and progress in the constitutional prin-
ciples of freedom have been so boasted
of by the honourable and learned mem-
ber for Cumberland (Mr. Darvall). But
these oppressions were not of individual
character; they extended to every one
who dared to infringe on the rules or on
the prejudices of the early settlers. We
find in the same book, that a man of the
name of Waterman had determined, in
accordance with the customs of his
country, to put up his Maypole. He did
so, and the consequence was he was
seized, put in the stocks, and transported
to England for the offence. (Laughter.)
In addition to this the writer goes on to
state—
The Governor, affecting to espouse the cause of
an Indian, who disputed his right to the pos-
session of a canoe, arrested him,"burned down his
establishment, and confiscated his estate, to pay
for the expense of conveying him to England.
In London he was joined by two other victims of
their cruelty and oppression, Sir Christopher
Gardner and Philip Eatcliffe, who united with
him in petitioning the King for redress. The
former had been sent out by Sir Ferdinando
Georges, as his agent, for the protection of a
large territory he had purchased adjoining that
of the colony of Massachusetts. Whatever his
religion may have been, one thing was certain—


he was not a Puritan As a stranger, wholly
unconnected with the colony, it was not a ques-
tion for their consideration whether he was a
Eomauist or a Churchman ; but they assumed
the fact that he was a Papist, and ordered him to
be arrested.”
And continuing—.
The other complainant was Philip Ratcliffe.
He had been a servant of Craddock, the first
Charter Governor, and falling ill in his employ,
on his recovery demanded wages from the agent
of his master for the time he had been disabled.
Disappointed in his expectations, he made some
disparaging remarks about a people whose con-
duct so little comported with their professions.
For this offence he was fined forty pounds, se-
verely whipped, shorn of his ears, and banished
forthwith out of the jurisdiction.
This was the commencement of that po-
litical and religious liberty which has
been so highly vaunted of by the honour-
able and learned member, Mr. Darvall.
Mr. DARVALL: What I said was
in effect, that it was not likely that those
who had been driven from their own
homes by prosecution and oppression,
should in the first instance behave very
liberally to those who differed from
them.
Dr, DOUGLASS: The honourable
and learned member at all events spoke
of the excellencies of the American Con-
stitution from the commencement. At
the period of which I speak, a man com-
mitted an offence (the murder of an
Indian), for which he was ordered to be
hanged; but as he happened to be the
only cordwainer of the place, it was
found that he could not be spared, but
for the ends of justice it was deemed
necessary that somebody should be
hung in his stead, and accordingly an
old bed-ridden pauper, of no use to any
one, was hung up in his place. This
was the policy, the justice, of the early
settlers in this laud ol liberty. (Laugh-
ter and cheers.) In relation to this
circumstance the following verses in
Hudibras referred:
That sinners may supply the place
Of suffering saints, is a plain case:
Justice gives sentence many times
On one man for another’s crimes !
Our brethren of New England use
Choice malefactors to excuse,
And hang the guiltless in their stead —
Of whom the Churches have less need —
As lately ’t happen’d. In a town
There lived a cobbler, and but one,
That out of doctrine could cut, use.
And mend men’s lives as well as shoes.
This precious brother having slain,
In times of peace, an Indian,
The mighty Tottypottymoy
Sent to our Elders an Envoy,
Who called upon the saints to render
Into his hands, or hang, th’ offender.
But they maturely having weigh'd
They had no more but him o’ the trade,
Resolv’d to spare him; —yet to do
The Indian, Hogam Mogam, too
Impartial justice, in his stead did
Hang an old weaver who was bed-rid.
This is one of the little anecdotes of
which, when this country begins to think
of the prestige of American freedom,
the people will do well to ponder over.
Nor do I think, when we come to consider
what has been the growth of that liberty,
we shall find that there is much to desire
or much to imitate. The present Con-
stitution of America is the expansion of
the first constitution proposed, and which
has been hedged in and surrounded with
every possible safeguard against popular
intrusions. Witness that novel and
singular power of the judiciary against
any sudden or violent change in the con-
stitution—which power was created by
the greatest democrats, from fear of the
consequences of the form of Government
and political institutions which they
themselves had founded. It is the very
reverse of that expansive power which is
the inherent quality of the British Con-
stitution ; but yet it is praised by the
honorable and learned member. The
honorable and learned member (Mr. Dar-
vall) has compared the senate of the
United States to the House of Lords,
and has said it is superior to the latter
body. It is necessary, in the comparison,
to see what the Congress of the United
States really is, and how it is estimated
in America; and I find, in an article in
the Westminister Review, April, 1853,
a description of the Lower House of
Congress. It sets out that the members
of Congress shall be of the Christian
religion, that they shall be sworn on the
i Gospel of God, with some other forms.
The article then gops on—
There is yet a mnnant of good men in Con-
gress, but they are hopelessly overjbwcied ; the


virtue may remain, but their courage is withered.
They have no effective influence, not even the
slightest pretence of it. The greater number
laugh in derision at the idea that, honesty and
patriotism should have any sway in Congress.
Every measure of a general nature, designed for
the public benefit, is scouted; and the member
who ventures to speak on such subjects, or to urge
such legislation, unless he is known to have some
special private end in view, is regarded as super-
servieable, over-righteous, and eminently verdant.
They pity, if they do not despise, all such as attempt
to acquit themselves of thedutios of their station,
and their oath of office. There runs not in Cortgress,
then, the slightest perceivable current of legisla-
tive morality, or wisdom, or public virtue. The
members have substantially repealed their oath
of office, and resolved Congress i-nto a grand
agency of the various political parties, which
manage the elections, and aim at the control of
the offices, the power of the country, the treasury,
and the national domain.
He goes on to detail circumstances which en-
tirely harmonise with such a character for cor-
ruption as he thus attributes to Congress. Scarcely
a member but will take a bribe for his vote.
These “congressional brokers” may be numbered
by “scores or hundreds.” They fill a great
variety of grades, “ from those who offer to pro-
cure special legislation tor one, two, or three
hundred thousand dollars, to the humbler police
of this hungry pack, whose office it may be to
keep members in their seat at the hour of voting,
or to keep them away, or to lead them to the
gaming table to win tbeir money.” The favours
of the Congress are “struggled for on the floor of
the Capitol.” Congress is as bad as our own
chancery. “Claims of undisputed justice, some
of them as old as the Eevolution, are besieging
the justice of Congress for nearly half a century.”
A debt due to certain citizens of the United
States by France, was acknowledged by Louis Phil-
lipe, who paid the money into the treasury of the
United States, where it remains, through the re-
fusal of the Congress to order it to be paid to its
rightful owners.” Some of these owners have
.passed tbeir lives in fruitless application,” “their
widows and orphans have grown old in poverty j
and suffering,” urging their claims. There is
more work, it would appear, for Mrs. Julia Tyler
and the American ladies than the emancipation
of Uncle Tom. We suspect that the author is a
disappointed printer, with some rejected esti-
mates in his band, so strongly does lie condemn
the way in which .the public printing is executed.
Moreover, “ thrice too much is paid for it, and the
whole is a job reeking with corruption.”
This was merely the . Congress of the
Lower House. But I will now refer to
the Congress of the Senate, and the
honorable and learned member will
scarcely say that he has been misrepre-
sented in the public press, in the warm,
and glowing eukigium which he has
passed on the Senate of the United States.
But I will read the character of that
Senate from one of the greatest and most
popular statesmen America ever posses-
sed ; the announcement of whose death
was, through the length and breadth of
the land, considered a popular bereave-
ment ; and for whom, wherever the
announcement of his decease was made,
there was scarcely a dry eye in any place.
Let us see what he said of this body.
We find that Mr. Webster, not speaking
to a popular meeting, not writing a news-
paper diatribe, but addres sing the Senate
itself, made the following observations.
I ask the particular attention of the house
to this passage, as 1 do not wish to have
American Republican institutions forced
down the throats of Australian colonists.
He said,
As far as I remember, Sir, after the early part
of Mr. Jefferson’s administration, hardly an in-
stance occurred for thirty years ; if there were
any instances, they were few. But at the com-
mencement of the present administration, the
precedent of these previous cases was seized on,
and a system, a regular plan of Government, a
well-considered scheme for the maintenance of
power, by the patronage of office; and this pa-
tronage, to be created by general removal, was
adopted, and has been carried into full operation.
Indeed, before General Jackson’s inauguration,
the party put the system into practice. In the
last session of Mr. Adams’ administration, the
friends of General Jackson constituted a majority
in the Senate; and nominations, made by him to
fill vacancies, which had occurred in the ordinary
way, were postponed, by this majority, beyond
the 3rd of March, for the purpose, openly avowed,
of giving the nomination to General Jackson. A
nomination for a Judge of the Supreme Court,
and many others of less magnitude, were then
disposed of. And what did we witness, Sir, when
tlie administration actually commenced in the
full exercise of its authority? One universal
sweep, one undistinguished blow, levelled against
all who were not of the successful party. No
worth, public or private, no service, civil or
military, was of power to resist the relentless
prejudices of proscription. Soldiers of the late
war : soldiers of the revolutionary war, the very
contemporaries of the liberties of the country, all
lost their situations. No office was too high, and
none too low; for office was the spoil—and all the
spoils, it is said, belong to the victors ! If a man,
holding an office necessary for his daily support,
had presented himself covered with the scars of
wounds received fn every battle, from Bunker-
hill to Yorktown, these would not have protected
him against their reckless rapacity. Nay, Sir,
if Warren himself had been among the living,


and had possessed any office under Government,
hi'di or low, he would not have been suffered to
hold it a single hour, unless he could show that
lie had strictly complied with the party statutes,
and had put a well marked party collar round his
own neck. Look, Sir, to the case of the late
venerable Major Melvill. He was a spirit of
1776, one of the very first to venture in the
cause of liberty. He was of the Tea party—one
of the very first to expose himself to British
power. And his whole life was consonant with
this its beginning. Always ardent in the cause
of liberty ; always a zealous friend to his country ;
always acting w'ith the party which he supposed
cherished the genuine republican spirit most fer-
vently ; always estimable and respectable in
private life —he seemed armed against this miser-
able petty tyranny of party, as far as a man could
be. But he felt its blow, and he fell. He held
an office in the Custom-house, and had holden it
for a long course of years; and he was deprived
of it, as if unworthy to serve the country which
ie loved, and for whose liberties, in the vigour of
iis early manhood, he had thrust himself into
die very jaws of its enemies. There was no mis-
take in the matter. His character, his standing,
iis revolutionary services, were ail well known,
mt they were known to no purpose.; they weighed
mt one feather against party pretensions. It
lost no pains to remove him; it cost no com-
mnction to wring his aged heart with this retri-
mtion from his country, for his services, his zeal,
md his fidelity. Sir, you will bear witness that,
vhen his successor was nominated to the Senate,
,nd the Senate was told who it was that had been
emoved to make way for that nomination, mem-
lers were struck with horror. They had not con-
eived the administration to be capable of such a
hing ; and yet they said, what can we do ? The
can is removed ; we cannot recall him : we can
nly act on the nomination before us. Sir, you
nd 1 thought otherwise ; and I rejoice that we
id think otherwise. We thought it our duty to
esist the nomination to a vacancy thus created.
Ve thought it our duty to oppose this proscrip-
ion when and where, and as we constitutionally
ould. We besought the Senate to go with us,
nd to take a stand before the country on this
Teat question. We invoked them to try the
cliberate sense of the people ; to trust them-
elves before the tribunal of public opinion ; to
emst at first, to resist at last, to resist always,
he introduction of this unsocial, this mischiev-
us, this dangerous, this belligerent principle,
ito the practice of the Government. Mr. Bresi-
ent, as far as I know, there is no civilized
ountry on earth in which, on a change of rulers,
here is such an inquisition for spoil as we have
dtnessed in this free republic. The inaugural
ddress of 1829 spoke of a searching operation of
iovernment. The most searching operation, Sir,
f the present administration has been its search
jr office and place. Whenever, Sir, did any
higlish minister, whig or tory, take such an in-
uest ? When did he ever go down to low water
lark, to make an ousting of tidewaiters ? \\ hen
id he ever take away the daily bread of weighers,
and gaugers, and measurers ? Or when did he go
into the villages to disturb the post offices, the
mail contracts, and everything else in the re-
motest degree connected with Government? Sir,
a British minister who should do this, and should
afterwards show his head in a British House of
Commons, would be received by an universal hiss.
When the honourable and learned mem-
ber compared the Senate of the United
States with the House of Lords, and
sought, from this comparison, to raise in-
ferences to the disadvantage of the latter,,
he stood back from the bar, and raised
his arras, as if he expected to draw down
cheers from both sides of the House.
None, however, were heard except the
chirp of one solitary cricket, who seemed
to delight in the prospect of the flood of
democracy being let loose on his little
northern rivulet. (Laughter.) The
honorable and learned gentleman was
equally unhappy in his reliance upon the
institutions of Belgium ; and if he had
read more closely the authorities to which
he had referred, he could not have failed
to discover this error. He would have
found, that instead of justifying the
elective principle, as applied to both
branches of the Legislature, the Con-
stitution of the kingdom in question
would leave a very different impression—
The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies of
Belgium are both elected. The country is divided
into electoral districts containing 40,000 persons;
each such district returns one member to the
Chamber of Deputies, and two of them one mem-
ber of the Senate. The Deputies are elected for
four years, one-third retiring every two years.
The Senators are elected for eight years, one-half
retiring every four years. The franchise which
qualities an elector is the same both for the
Chamber and the Senate, viz., the payment of a
direct tax of £1 l&s. 6d. a year, which is derived
mostly from land; and the operation of it is,
that the urban representatives are returned by a
body of electors numbering not quite 31 in every
1000 persons, and the rural members by only 14
in every 1000 persons, or by an average of about
21 in every 1000 of the whole population. No
property qualification beyond that necessary for
an elector is requisite for a Deputy, but a Senator
is required to have paid in direct taxes upwards
of £B3 a year, so that a very small number of
persons can qualify for the Senate.
The King can dissolve both the Senate and the
Chamber at any time, either collectively or
separately.
By the Bill before the House it Is pro-
posed to give nearly every person a


voice. (Oh, oh.) The provision for
household suffrage, and the other qualifi-
cations, by which, according to this Bill
the franchise is conferred are, I will
maintain, as near an approach to uni-
versal suffrage as is practicable, wfithout
an actual resort to that measure in its
entirety. (Hear, hear.) The King too,
in the Belgium Constitution it will be
observed, has power to dissolve one or
both of the chambers at his pleasure;
and I would ask honourable members
what form of Government is that in which
such a pewer is given to the head of the
State ? Is it monarchical? In another
part of his speech, the honourable and
learned gentleman contended that the
present feeling of the British colonists
was so strongly in favour of elective
institutions, that in any case where they
had the power to create a new form of
Legislature they would invariably pro-
nounce in favour of these Institutions.
Now it happens that the very newspaper
which contained a report of the honour-
able gentleman’s speech—a speech which
he would no doubt cause his children to
get off by heart, (laughter,) contained a
report of the people of South Australia, —
a British colony—having agreed to the
establishment of a nominated Upper
House. (Hear, hear.) But there is one
part of the honourable gentleman’s ad-
dress, which I regard with far different
feelings, and conceiving that there must
have been some error in the reported
versions of those remarks, I allude to
them with a hope that the honorable
gentleman will correct this mistake, and
set himself right with this House and the
country. I allude to those remarks in
which the honourable member, in con-
trasting the state of the law and the
general obedience to it, in the United
States and this country, has maintained
that murder of the most horrible kind
has been allowed to pass unpunished here,
and that although some of the guilty
parties were convicted of manslaughter,
and sentenced to various periods of
punishment, the justice of the case was
not met, as they, or some of them, ought
to have been hanged. Now, in what
position is the honourable and learned
gentleman, as the advocate of some
these parties, with reference to wh(
he made this assertion ?
Mr, DARVALL ; Did the honourabb
member mean to say that he had eve:
complained that men found guilty o
manslaughter had not been hanged)
Such a complaint would have been absurd
and he certainly had never made it.
Mr. CAMPBELL rose to order. Tin
honourable and learned gentleman, as at
advocate for these parties, had simpb
done what was considered his duty ii
endeavouring to make that which wai
wrong appear right. (Laughter.) Tin
allusion to his position in this respect is
I consider, both irregular and unjust.
The SPEAKER ; It is competent foi
any honourable member to deal with th<
arguments of another during the cours<
of the debate, and if in so doing there i:
any misrepresentation, the gentlernai
misrepresented has a right to explain.
Dr. DOUGLASS: The opinion ha:
gone abroad, and has made much im
pression, that the honourable and learnec
gentleman, who was the advocate foi
those parties, thought they ought to hav<
been hanged. Instead, therefore, o
getting into a rage, the honourable anc
learned member ought to have been glac
to have an opportunity of setting him
self right.
Mr. DARVALL : I have never said
nor has any report represented me a:
having said, what is alleged. What !
did say was, a cruel murder had beei
committed, and that whoever had actualb
committed it deserved hanging, but in
one suffered the extreme penalty of th(
law on account of it. Will the honorabh
member point out the passage ?
Dr. DOUGLASS : I will read tin
passage. “ Men had been strucl
down and hilled in an affray in such {
manner, that the act was clearly ‘murder’
and yet the murderers had escaped. H(
saw the Attorney-General who conductec
the case looking up, but the fact was so.’
The hon. member for Cumberland, in th<
course of his speech, had alluded to th(
hereditary clauses of the Bill. No om
is more opposed to the scheme of here-
ditary lawgivers thari myself. It is mosi


snfortunate that it has ever been intro-
duced into the Bill, for if it had not
>een so introduced there never would
have been all this disturbance about it.
It arose from an idea of Mr. Pitt, in
framing the Canada Act, with the view
of assimilating the constitution of that
province as nearly as possible to that of
Great Britain; and accordingly, a clause
was introduced to that effect in the 31st
Geo. 111. c. 31. ; but the power has
never been exercised. It has been justly
observed that these honours might be
very proper, and of great utility in
countries where they have existed by
long custom, but they are not fit to be
introduced where they have no original
existence ; where there is no particular
reason for introducing them, arising
from the nature of the country, its ex-
tent, its state of improvement, or its
peculiar customs; and where, instead of
attracting respect, they might create
envy. Lords, it is said, might be given
to the colonies, but there was no such
thing as creating that reserve and respect
for them, on which their dignity and
weight, in the view of both the popular
and monarchical part of the constitution,
must depend, and which can alone give
them that power of control and support
which are the objects of their institu-
tion. I cannot but think that the hon.
and learned member for Sydney, in
drawing this report, must have over-
looked the objectional parts and conse-
quences of these hereditary clauses.
They are unnecessary to carry out the
principle. True nobility is independent
of mere hereditary rank. There is no
need of an hereditary title to hand down
to posterity the fame of the honourable
and learned member himself. I know
Time has a wallet at his back, in which
lie puts alms for oblivion. But the un-
ceasing exertions of my honourable
friend will not be classed amongst those
good deeds past, devoured as soon as
made, forgot as soon as done. In future
ages, when in this great land is esta-
blished an empire of the south corre-
sponding in greatness with the parent
empire of the north, the student, with
glistening eyes, will read the record in
history of my honourable friend’s acts,
and will be moved with admiration and
envy—admiration of the man, and envy
of those who, living in the same age,
had an opportunity of contemplating his
career. A similar meed of fame will be
awarded in history to him who, during
a time of great trial, when the country
w'as passing through a crisis of unpre-
cedented difficulty, had had the chief
responsibility of advising the Govern-
ment. These are the true hereditary
honours for which we must all strive.
The honourable gentleman has spoken
of the nominees in this House as a class
of gentlemen who would find it difficult
to procure their election if they appealed
to a constituency. The honourable gen-
tleman forgets that he has himself been
a nominee, and has nevertheless been
elected by two constituencies. He for-
gets, also, the examples of Mr. Lamb,
and of the honourable and gallant mem-
ber for Gloucester, Captain King, R.N.,
and of the present member of Parliament
for Kidderminster. (Hear, hear.) If
previous selections have been thus happy,
it is probable that the future selections
will be equally so; and that men will be
chosen for a seat in the Upper Chamber
who could appeal successfully to a con-
stituency. (Hear, hear.) The honour-
able gentleman has alluded to the no-
minees of Canada; but it would be
better to go to Canada itself for au-
thority upon this point; and I will set the
honourable member right by a quotation
from the report of Lord Aylmer.
It would be difficult, perhaps, to find in any
British colony a legislative body more inde-
pendent of the Crown than the Legislative Coun-
cil of Lower Canada; and so far am I from
possessing, as the King’s representative, any
influence there, that t will not conceal that I
have on more than one occasion regretted the
course adopted by the-Council.
Any organic change in the Legislative Council
must be well considered, before it is granted, in
two distinct and separate bearings : first, as it
affects the connexion with this country; and
secondly, as it affects the interests of the colo-
nists themselves. The avowed object of the
Assembly, in advocating this change, is to pro-
cure an identity of views in the two branches,
which would be effected by their being elected by
the same persons, or, which is the same thing,
by the same influences. Were this to take place,


it would be a duplicate of the House, registering
its acts, but exercising no beneficial legislation
upon them. A difference of opinion then, when-
ever it occurred, would not be between the two
Houses, but between them and the Governor,
and it is easy to conceive how untenable his po-
sition would soon become. At present, although
possessing a veto, and forming a constituent, he
can hardly be said to be a deliberative branch of
the Legislature ; but by this change, either such
duties must necessarily devolve upon him, and
occasion the exercise of incompatible power, or
in every instance where he differed in opinion,
die would be compelled to resort to a rejection of
the measure.
The honorable and learned gentleman
has also spoken of Jamaica. Now, I will
quote an article from the Economist of
June 18, to show the condition of the
Legislative Assembly in that country,
and how such assemblies are apt to lose
sight of the public good for the grati-
fication of mere personal feeling, if there
be no check upon their proceedings.
But some years since the House of Assembly
proposed to do something towards equalising
revenue and expenditure, and for this purpose
enacted a bill for a reduction of official salaries,
varying from 10 per cent, on the smaller to S 3
per cent, on the higher amounts. This bill was
rejected by the Legislative Council. It has been
sent up to them repeatedly, and repeatedly re-
jected. At length the House of Assembly,
baffled in their attempt to pass their bill as a sub-
stantive measure, have so curtailed, and so appro-
priated their supplies for the year as to effect the
same object by a side wind— i. e., they have voted
supplies minus the amount of the desired dimin-
ution of salaries. The Legislative Council have
refused to be thus reduced to a nullity, and have
rejected the mutilated taxes thus assigned. Many
of the taxes and import duties have thus ceased ;
goods are being imported freely, and a great por-
tion of the revenue is thus sacrificed to a dispute
between the two branches of the Government.
Such is the case on behalf of the Assembly,
and at first sight it seems but reasonable that the
representatives of an impoverished island should
not be checked in their desire for retrenchment;
that the attempt to equalise revenue and ex-
penditure is a laudable one; and that public officers
should be willing to bear their share in the com-
mon poverty. But this, as we shall now show, is
a very imperfect and deceptive view of the whole
case. Two or three facts will suffice to give a
totally different aspect to the transaction. In the
first place, the proposed reduction would involve
a flagrant and and unprecedented breach of public
faith. Most of the official salaries which it is
intended to curtail were fixed by permanent acts
of the Legislature, and at no distant date. The
present holders of them accepted them on the
understanding of their permanence, and in one
instance, at least, a larger income than the one
conferred was relinquished by the individua
appointed. Nearly half the whole reduction, tod
would have fallen upon about twelve persons —al
high judical functionaries, whose offices it ii
peculiarly important to have filled by the ablesl
men who can be chosen, and where, therefore, as
illiberal parsimony is peculiarly misplaced.
Secondly, the proposed retrenchment is known to
have originated out of a feeling of hostility to the
Home Government, and a desire to retaliate upon
their nominees for what was deemed the injurious
and unkind legislation of the mother country.
The idea of stopping the supplies (it appears be-
yond a doubt from Sir C. Grey’s despatches,)
was suggested to the colonists by a party in the
mother country, whose object was to embarrass
the Ministry then in power, and, if possible, com-
pel them to abandon their free trade policy, or,
at least, to pause in its application to the
produce of the sugar islands. The purpose
of the House of Assembly was, at first, to deter
us from adopting the system of unrestricted com-
merce, and at last to punish us for having
adopted it. Thirdly , the animus which moved
the Assembly is sufficiently indicated by the sig-
nificant fact, that they had expressly exempted
from the proposed reduction the salaries of their
own Speaker, Clerk, and Sergeant-at-Arms.
Fourthly, that a genuine equalisation of revenue
and expenditure was not the real aim of the As-
sembly, was shown by the consideration that the
whole amount of the proposed saving was only
£14,000 upon a total of £375,000 ; and that far
more effectual means of restoring the finances
than a meagre and shabby measure of confisca-
tion against a few individuals, were urged upon
them and rejected by them. For it should be
known that the powers of the House of Assembly
in Jamaica are, in some points, far more extensive
than those of the Imperial House of Commons,
and those of the Governor are far more limited
than those of our Cabinet. The Assembly is in
a great degree an Executive as well as a Legis-
lative body, It has unbounded control over the
finances. It, not the Government, initiates pro-
posals of expenditure and taxation; it, not the
Government, collects the revenue; it, not the
Government, audits the public accounts. The
Government has nopporerw r er of correcting jobs.
Every member of Assembly proposes any vote
which he considers advisable; nor is there any
person responsible, like our Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, for preparing an estimate of the proba-
ble receipts and expenditure of the colony, and
taking care that the latter shall be covered by
the former “It is too commonly the practice
for each member of the Assembly to push for-
ward every grant for objects interesting to him-
self or his constituents, without much regard to
the amount or comparative urgency of other
claims upon the public purse: so that the appro-
priaton of the revenue comes to be determined
rather by a kind of scramble amongst the mem-
bers of the Legislature than by a careful consi-
deration of what the public interest requires!’
Thus the Assembly has entire power over the
finances, and therefore is entirely responsible for


them. Well, at the very time when it was urg-
ing on the Governor and Council its paltry mea-
sure of reduction, the ifeceiver • General (one of
its own members) died, leaving a large deficiency in
the Treasury, and the Governor could not induce
or compel the Assembly to take prompt steps for
examining into his accounts, or recovering the
deficiency from his securities. The taxes, too,
were very irregularly collected, the largest
arrears being due, it was alleged, from those best
able to pay them. Yet the Governor had no
power to rectify this abuse himself, and he could'
only represent it to the Assembly, who neglected
and resented his interference. He showed them
that there had been no falling off in the revenue
which might not be accounted for either by in-
judicious reduction of duties, or by the lax,
imperfect, and negligent collection of the taxes.
The Assembly, however, turned a deaf ear to all
these representations, and concentrated their
whole zeal on their own ineffective scheme of
aggressive and retaliating retrenchment. The
Governor therefore, backed by the authorities at
home, firmly, and—as we think, and as we are
satisfied our readers will agree with us—justly
refused to allow the Assembly to atone for a
neglect of their own duties by an injustice com-
mitted against others ; or to permit himself and
his Council to be put aside and reduced to abso-
lute impotence by sanctioning a measure which
in another and more avowed form they had three
times deliberately rejected.
The consequence must inevitably fall upon the
Assembly and its constituents themselves ; and
these consequences may be very serious. The
salaries which it is proposed to reduce, being
secured by legislative enactments for a fixed term
of years, will, if not paid, still remain a recover-
able debt on the finances of the island; and while
duties and taxes are suspended, a large revenue
will be sacrificed. The police force will have to
be reduced or disbanded, and many of the most
essential functions of Government must be sus-
pended. Men of property will be the chief
sufferers. The folly of the Assembly is the more
unpardonable, inasmuch as they have the example
of Guiana before their eyes, where a few years
since exactly the same game was played, for the
same purpose, and with utter and mischievous
failure. In a fit of irritation, arising out of their
commercial distress, which they attributed to the
legislation of the mother-country, the members
of the Combined Court of British Guiana refused,
to vote the supplies without accompanying the
measure by a reduction of 25 per cent, in the
guaranteed salaries of many public officers. The
Governor very properly refused to sanction such
a measure, and a large part of the revenue lapsed
in consequence. The collection of the principal
taxes was suspended for eleven months. The
Governor was instructed still to withhold his
assent from an unjust and illegal proposal, but to
announce that anv prospective retrenchment in
civil salaries would be favourably entertained.
He was informed that he must strictly confine
himself to his legal powers, and must make no
attempt to raise funds by irregular methods;
“ and that those public sendees for which ho
was refused the means of providing must be dis-
continued, even if this involved disbanding the
police and shutting up the hospitals, and an in-
terruption of the regular administration of jus-
tice; and that if the usual colonial allowances
were not paid to the officers of Her Majesty’s
troops serving in the colony, the troops would be
withdrawn.” This firm and consistent attitude
had its effect. Within a year the planters came
to a more sensible view of their position ; and
the dispute was satisfactorily arranged, after the-
sacrifice of £150,000 of revenue, and the con-
traction of a debt of £40,000.
The dispute in Jamaica must terminate in a
similar manner; for it is utterly impossible that
the Home Government can give its consent to a
clear violation of public faith—at once uncalled-
for, impolitic, and ineffective. But there can be
no security against the recurrence of similar
conflicts, except in an entire revision of the
constitution of the colony, which shall assimilate
it to that of Canada, where responsible govern-
ment prevails, and where the representative body
stands in the same relation to the executive as in
the mother country. In what manner this de-
sirable and needed change can be effected—
whether it must be left to the local legislature,
or can be enforced by the authority of Great
Britain, we are not prepared to say ; but we
think it impossible that a constitution so full of
anomalies, and so productive of mischief, can be
tolerated much longer. Jamaica seems now to
l*e the only West Indian island which shows no
sign of vigour or revival; and the interests of
the planters themselves should make them
anxious for the introduction of a better system,
on more than one account. Lord Grey observes
i—“ Under the law as it stands, the Negroes
must soon acquire a predominant power in the
assembly. Looking then at what the constitu-
tion of Jamaica is, and to the state of things
which is likely to arise, when the assembly, txis-
sessing, as it does, such large powers by law,
shall represent those who also possess an over-
whelming superiority of physical force, and who
will not, I fear, be guided by much knowledge or
judgment, or have a very kindly feeling towards
the absentee proprietors, I am at a loss to under-
stand how toe latter can have been so blind to
their own interests as not to avail themselves of
the power and influence they still possess in the
local legislature, for tha purpose of co-operating
with the Crown to introduce the many reforms
which are wanted, and the neglect of which,
during these precious years, may be productive
of so much danger.”
I am not desirous to trespass further on the
House. I think I have fully answered and
refuted all the arguments and statements of
the honorable and learned gentleman; but
I may be permitted to say, that whilst f
give the greatest credit, and estimate at
tfye highest point the commericial enter-
prises, and many of the social institutions


—particularly the strenuous efforts in the
invaluable cause of national education
made by the American States, and which
deserve all praise, it is owing to the in-
troduction of their political principles
and institutions into this Colony that I
would offer my most decided opposition.
It, in my remarks relative to the speech
of the honorable and learned member for
Cumberland, I have said anything which
is not borne out by fact, the honorable
member will have an opportunity of
affording any explanation. I now come
to look into the matter of the Bill, which
may be divided into two parts : that rela-
tive to the first, and that relative to the
second chamber. lam well aware that
the people must govern in all cases:
without the consent of the people no
Government could go on. But so far as
regards the Lower House, this Bill
places the people on the most favourable
tooting. It gives thenva suffrage which
is next to universal; the suffrage will
include every interest,, except perhaps
that of the gold miners but how is it
possible to, give the franchise to a class
of people who have no local habitation.
(Hear, hear.) A people who are in a
transition state ? Hereafter, when they
settle down, the franchise may be ex-
tended to them, but at present it is im-
possible. But the honorable members
for Durham and for Sydney find fault
with the distribution of the franchise un-
der this Bill, and want it to be made more
general. Now I acknowledge that the
distribution in a few particular instances
is unjust, but speaking generally, I
believe it is not. When in Com-
mittee I moved that Sydney should have
six members, but only on condition that
each wardshould be made a separate electo-
ral district, and I will tell the House why.
I found that two of the wards would have
the power of swamping the rest. (Oh,
oh.) It is a fact, and if honorable mem-
bers will look to the electoral roll they
will find that one of the wards had
2000 electors, whilst another has only
750. (Oh, oh.) and therefore 1 am de-
sirous that the wards should be separate
electoral districts. I confess lam imbued
with conservative opinions, and I wish to
j see the principles of population and pro-
| perty combined in the distribution of the
franchise. (The honorable member here
quoted from a recent review, showing the
relative weight of urbane and agrarian
i representation under the Reform Bill.)
Those ‘are shallow politicians indeed who
fancy that the various interests are opposed
to one another. In fact they are all
dovetailed together—the squatting inter-
est is identical with that of the towns.
I would ask the honorable member for
Sydney (Mr. Campbell), who is so bitter
against the squatters, supposing all the
sheep in New South Wales were driven
into South Australia, were would the ex-
port trade of Sydney be ? (Hear.) I now
come to the question of the second Cham-
ber. Out of the House great stress has
been laid upon the second Chamber, and
it is merely a question, in my mind,,
between an elective and a. nominated
Chamber; for I do not believe that the
hereditary principle can be maintained.
But it is most extraordinary that those
who are so clamorous for an elective
Chamber do not see that a nominated
Chamber will be much more favour-
able to democracy. (Hear, and oh, oh.)
If the plan of the honourable member
for Cook, and Westmoreland be adopted,
what is to be done in ease of a collision
between the two elective Houses ? There
will be no possibility of bringing about
an arrangement. But in a House nomi-
nated by the Crown there will always be
a power to prevent a dead lock, by the
nomination of additional members.
(Hear.) It may be objected that this is
too great a power to give to the Crown ;
but who in fact would excercise that au-
thority under a system of responsible
government ? Why the Minister of the
Crown in the Lower House! The Go-
vernor nominally, but really the respon-
sible minister in the Lower House, who,
as a representative of the people, would
be the leader of that House. This prin-
ciple being understood, I cannot conceive
on what ground an elective Upper House
is preferred, against which there would
be no redress. Moreover, I consider it
is wrong in principle to set class against
class, which must be the effect of the


establishment of two Houses elected by
different suffrages. I have now tres-
passed longer upon the attention of the
House than I intended. But there is
te point to which I would call the at-
trition of the House. It refers to the
head of the future Executive of this
country ; a point which has not yet been
mentioned by any previous speaker.
Her present most gracious Majesty, who
is without doubt the most constitutional
nonarch that ever sat on the British
Fhrone, has a numerous family, whom
;he is rearing in all the paths of honour
ind political liberty. I hope there are
nnongst those who hear me, many who
hall see one of those cherished sous of
England placed here as chief magistrate,
basing his position on the time-honoured
institutions of the land he came from,
hemmed in and supported by an attached
and loving people, whose rights, liber-
ties, and privileges, are unassailed and
unassailable. In those days every man
shall eat in safety what he plants, and
sing the merry song of Peace to all his
neighbours. God shall be truly known,
and all throughout the land shall read
the perfect ways of honour; and by
those, claim their greatness, and not by
blood. (Cheers.)
Mr. GEORGE MACLEAY: The
honorable member for Northumberland
has dwelt very fully on the early history
of North America. I will not touch, Sir,
upon that extensive ground, but endea-
vour to confine my remarks to that episode
in the history of New South Wales which
is now under consideration. Plunging
|then in medias res, I must express my
Surprise at the tone of indignation as-
sumed by the honorable members for
Durham and Sydney (Messrs. Cowper
and Campbell), when speaking of the
opinions put forth in this house, with
reference to the language used at the
late meeting at the Victoria Theatre.
Really, Sir, the fa'ble of the wolf and the
lamb presented itself to my mind when
I heard these lamentations of wrong done
to the orators of that memorable assem-
bly. (Cheers and laughter.) But, Sir,
while those extraordinary sentiments, re-
ported to have fallen from the honorable
and learned member for Cumberland,
and the atrocious expressions used by
others at that meeting, are still ringing
in our ears, I will ask if this House is to
stand by with bated breath, and refrain
from calling things by their right
names ? (Hear, hear.) If honorable
members had so refrained, they would
have been wanting in respect to their
constituents, and in their duty to their
country and their Queen. (Loud and
prolonged cheers.) I am fully aware.
Sir, that that meeting, as has been stated,
was attended by many most respectable
men—gentlemen for whom I have a high
esteem ; but they only illustrate the ob-
servation of my honourable friend the
Attorney-General, when he said “ that a
man may be most estimable in his legiti-
mate capacity and yet make a very sorry
politician.” (Hear, hear.) It is with
great regret, Sir, that I see these gentle-
men, whose motives are above suspicion,
mix themselves up with others who, it is
clear, have very different ulterior views
from those whom they have cajoled into
joining them. (Hear.) They have
been, I sincerely believe, entrapped un-
wittingly into this alliance with chartism,
Langism, or whatever the leaders of the
movement choose to call it; but they
must not be surprised at the mortifying
result, for “ those who touch pitch must
be defiled.” (Hear, hear.) The flimsy
veil which covered the designs of the
arch-conspirators has now, however, been
withdrawn, and with its withdrawal it is
to be hoped that the gentlemen, whom I
am alluding to, will withdraw also.
(Loud cheers.) If not, they may rest
assured, that they will not be exempt
themselves from those terms of contempt
which have been applied to them as
signing leaders. (Hear.) The absence
from that meeting of my honourable
friend, the member for Sydney, (Mr.
Campbell,) is a significant fact. I beg
to congratulate my honorourable friend on
that absence. I will say of him as Lady
Fairfax said of her husband when his
name was called over, “He had too
much wit to be there.” (Cheers and
laughter.) I congratulate my honourable
friend on the change which appears to be


coming over him—upon his casting off
the white wash of democracy, which has
so ill suited him, and appearing once more
in his true and proper colours. I am so
pleased, Sir, at this transformation, that
I can quite forgive my honourable friend
his attacks upon the squatters. These
attacks have, at no time, been very for-
midable, and, on this occasion, have been
confined to a stricture upon the share it
is proposed to give them in the new
scheme of representation. I will not
follow, Sir, the honourable member into
this matter, which, I think, had far bet-
ter be left for consideration in committee;
but will merely observe that though I am
not prepared to say, that I will not vote
for one more member for the city of Syd-
ney than it is proposed at present to
give, 1 most assuredly will not consent
that such additional member shall be
taken from the four new representatives
assigned to the squatting districts.
(Hear, hear.) The honourable member
for Durham (Mr. Cowper) has also ex-
pressed a great deal of virtuous indig-
nation on the apportionment of the re-
presentation ; but he might have spared
the House its utterance, for he, as a
member of the Committee, knows very
well that it is a mere sketch, to which no
man in the committee is pledged, and
which every member of the committee
is prepared to see modified. On this
comparatively unimportant matter, I
certainly have heard the honourable
member for Durham express himself
before, and therefore have not felt much
interest in what has now fallen from him
on the subject; but on the leading points
of the Bill, I admit I have had much
curiosity to learn what the honourable
member’s views really are, for in com-
mittee the honourab’e gentleman exhi-
bited a reticence on these matters, which
no entreaties of the chairman could
overcome. This crfriosity, Sir, was en-
hanced by the mystery assumed by the
honourable member also out of doors; for
though expected to make his appearance
on the boards of the Victoria, he only
lent the self-called Constitutional Com-
mittee his name, favouring them neither
with his countenance or his tongue.
(Hear, hear, and laughter.) I have
spoken, Sir, of the honourable gentle-
man’s views, but I find that they are his
views by adoption only, for they are
avowedly merely the echo of the sen-
timents expressed by those members of
the two Houses of Parliament, whose
speeches the honourable member has so
copiously cited ; yet he might have re-
membered that one of the most eminent
of his authorities, the present Secretary
of State.for the Colonies, has empha-
tically declared that he offered his opi-
nions upon this great colonial question
with diffidence and reluctance, because
he felt that the legislature of the colony
was far more competent to give an
opinion upon it than legislators at a
distance. (Loud cheers.) Yet not ad-
vancing any original opinion of his own,
the honourable member for Durham asks
this House to be guided by the reluct-
antly-expressed opinions of those very
distant legislators ! (Hear, hear.) The
most extraordinary authority, however,
which is relied upon by the honourable
member, is Earl Grey (Derisive cheers),
a nobleman who, having signally failed
in his administration of colonial affairs,
sits down in his forced retirement to
write a book, which is to enlighten the
world as to the merits of his colonial
policy. (Loud laughter.) When the
noble Earl was in office, the honourable
member always professed himself a ve-
hement opponent of his measures ; but
now he stands forward as a convert to
his Lordship’s opinions, and asks this
Council to join him in his admiration
of the minister whose acts he has so
long denounced. (Hear, hear.) I should
like to know, Sir, from the honourable
member, if, on the question of trans-
portation, he has also become a convert
to Lord Grey’s policy ? (Loud cries of
‘•hear!”) “Misery,” it is alleged,
“ makes us acquainted with strange bed-
fellows;” so also it maybe said that a
bad cause makes us acquainted with
strange authorities. (Hear, hear.) If
the honourable gentleman had read in
full the speeches of those statesmen upon
which he so confidently relies—if, indeed,
any impartial person were so to read


them, I think the conclusion must be
arrived at, that, though they nearly all
speak in favour of an elected rather than
a nominated Upper Chamber, this form
of constitution is advocated not so much
from a conviction that it would be the
best, but because i't is believed that the
colonists themselves think that it would
be the best; that, in fact, his advocacy
is the result of a feeling of concession—
a desire to yield to the wishes of the
colonists. (Hear, hear.) I think Sir,
that there can be little doubt that the
views of these honourable gentlemen
have been influenced by the very strong
feelings of disapprobation which have
been expressed throughout the colony, at
the amalgamation of the representative
and nominee elements in one • and the
same house. (Loud cries of “ hear,
hear.”) These feelings of disapproval
have been manifested in a very marked
manner throughout the length and
breadth of the land ; and I am not
surprised at it. But, Sir, does it follow
that because we object to the intro-
duction of a principle where it ought
not to be found, we should therefore be
opposed to its application in its own
proper sphere ? Certainly not. And I
feel satisfied that a large majority of
those who now disapprove of the no-
minee principle in the present Council,
are yet desirous of seeing it when its
presence would be legitimate. From
the passage quoted by the honourable
and learned member for Cumberland from
Lari Grey’s having reference to
the New Constitution for the Cape, it
is evident that his Lordship has not been
able to see this difference; and 1 am
satisfied that he is equally in error when,
dwelling on the unpopularity of noml-
neeism under their present constitution,
he says that no gentleman of standing
in tjiat colony will be willing to accept
a seat in a nominee Upper House. I
feel convinced, Sir, that no such reluc-
ance will be found to exist in the class
•eferred to, either at the Cape or in
Mew South Wales. It is further laid
iown by some of the speakers, from whom
he honourable member for Durham has
sorrowed so largely, that no colony can
have a House of Lords, inasmuch as no
colony possesses the material for the
! creation of so dignified a body. But
; what do they propose in its place ?
Why, an Upper House, to be composed
of members elected by freeholders of a
higher qualification than those who are
to vote for the Assembly—a body, in
fact, which would bear the same relation
to the members of the Assembly that the
knights of the shire in England do to
the burgesses. Now, Sir, English wis-
dom has taught them in England to
place these two classes in one and the
same House, inasmuch as their interests
are found to be identical. And surely a
little consideration might have shown
these statesmen that the same complete
sympathy may be looked for between the
analogous classes here; yet they all,
Earl Grey included, speak of the neces-
sity for the existence of an Upper House
and this not as has been said by
others, for the sake of revision only, for
ample provision for this purpose may be
secured in one House, like the present,
simply by making it imperative to read
every Bill six or twelve times over in-
stead of reading it thrice, but as a check,
as a cushion, as it were, to prevent the
immediate contact of the monarchical
with the democratic element of the com-
munity. It being admitted, Sir, by these
authorities, that the Upper House should
thus act as a check upon the Lower,
surely it ought to have occurred to them
that the Executive, which is directly
Interested in obtaining a fair equipoise to
the democratic power, would be more
likely to select a proper body for that
purpose, than that democratic power it-
self, whose interests, we are told, He the
other way. These British statesmen
might, moreover, have considered that
such a House would have influence, not
according to the mode of their election,
but in proportion to their intrinsic me-
rits, their tdlents for business, and their
general respectability. (Hear, hear.)
But perhaps, Sir, it is not so much of a
want of consideration as of misconception
that we have to complain on the part of
leading men at home; and when I call
to mind the infamous works lately pub-


lished in England about the colony, d,nd
the language occasionally used in the
colony itself—by those, too, who wish it
nothing but well, lam not surprised that
it should be misunderstood. I must ad-
mit, Sir, that, even within the walls of
this House, language has sometimes been
used a great deal too strong—and though
very energetic expressions may have been
deemed, or really may have been neces-
sary to procure effect at so great a dis-
tance, yet the consequence of their use
has been, that, by many in England,
Australia is regarded as an embryo
America. This misconception working
upon the spirit of concession, which at
present characterizes the home govern-
ment, has no doubt, Sir, led in a great
measure to that expression of opinion
which has been made use of by the
honourable member for Durham; and
for my part, I cannot hdp feeling that
the concessions which the present Minis-
try are thus disposed to make, will,
by a strange reaction, bring about the
very effect which they themselves depre-
cate. (Cries of hear, hear.) This mis-
conception, Lord Grey shares in more
largely than any of the others ; he can-
not comprehend how we, as Englishmen,
when we cross the ocean, manage to carry
with us our political principles, our pride,
and our prejudices ; he seems rather to
regard us as a new race—a race whose
moral sensibilities and political principles
are not yet fully developed, and there-
fore good material for his peculiar ingen-
uity to operate upon. (Hear, hear.) how,
Sir, can anything be more detestable
than this official empiricism ? Political
liberty is.not a matter of theory—it is
a question of facts, like questions of
natural philosophy, to be tested only by
reasoning founded on experience ; and I
will ask, what is the result of experience
as to the constitutional schemes to which,
through his Lordship’s agency, we have
already been subjected. Take that under
which we at present sit. The honour-
able member for Gook and Westmore-
land has described the terrible evils which
resulted from a similar form of govern-
ment in another country ; and he did this
:6o fullj that it is unnecessary‘for me to
go over the same grounds—it is sufficient
to advert to the fact, that we, ourselves,
in this country, had reason to feel at
one time that we were treading on the
thin crust of a volcano ; and that we
were only saved from breaking through
it by assistance which we had no right
to look for, by causes, in fact, merely ac-
cidental. Nor need I, .Sir, trouble the
House with any allusions to His Lord-
ship’s second scheme—that of District
Councils—involving the pernicious princi-
ple of double election. Our experience
of that precious plan was, that it was at
once scouted by the whole community.)
(Loud cries of hear, hear.) So much, Sir,
for the past and present—now for the
schemes held out in prospect; and first, the
proposition that the Upper House should be
elected by the same class of electors who
are to return the members of the Lower.
It is clear that such an Upper House
would be a mere reflex of the other, the
sympathy between them would he com-
plete, it would not act as a check, and
therefore would be mere surplusage ;
moreover, before the influence of the two
Houses united, no government could
stand. Next let us take the proposal of
the honourable member for Cook and
Westmoreland, a plan which seems to
tally with that shadowed out by Lord
Grey and the other statesmen to whom
1 have referred—to have the Upper
Chamber elected by a higher class of
freeholders—large landed proprietors.
I believe, Sir, as I have already said,,
that the interests of this class would
be found to be the same as those
holding the lower qualification, and,
thereiore, that their political feeling
would be identical; but take the honour-
able member’s own view, namely, that
they would entertain very different senti-
ments on public matters. If disputes
were now to arise, the very knowledge
that there would be no means of cor-
recting the evil, would lead to more
marked antagonism—class would be
arranged against class. The Lower
House might stop the supplies, indeed,
but the. consequences of such a step
would be felt less by the landed proprie-
tors than by any other class of the corn-


raunity. No legitimate political artillery
could be brought to bear upon them.
The government must stand by powerless
during the struggle, which must end (for
I can see no other remedy) in a revolution
(Hear, hear.) And now, Sir, for the
several schemes so kindly offered for our
choice by the honourable and learned
member for Cumberland, for like the
Abbe Sieyes, he comes down with his
pocket full of constitutions. He first prof-
fers for our adoption the constitution of
Belgium, but the honourable member for
Northumberland has this evening thrown
a new light upon this much vaunted
constitution, so that 1 apprehend it will
not be further pressed upon our attention;
if, however, my honourable and learned
friend should Insist upon our taking this
form of government in its integrity, it
appears to me that we shall be rather
puzzled to base a qualification for the
members of our Upper Chamber, as in
that country, on the amount of taxation
paid. In this colony, where there is no
direct taxation, but the public revenue is
derived from the duties on tobacco and
spirits, such a qualification for a mem-
ber of the Upper Chamber could only be
tested by the amount such member might
consume in the coarse of the year of
these dutiable articles ; and the records
of a House composed of such members
might.be expected to resemble the entries
mentioned in Knickerbocker’s description
of the New York Council, such as “ Met
again to-day and smoked.” (Laughter.)
The honourable member’s scheme,. No.
2, is to elect with the representatives for
the Lower House, by each constituency,
a delegate or deputy, to whom is to be
confided the duty of selecting the choice
and best men in New South Wales to
form the Upper House, Now, Sir, if
this plan were adopted, I presume each
constituency, for its own sake, would
send its best and ablest man as its repre-
sentative to the Lower House, and its
second best, at least so I should imagine,
would be named as its delegate, so that
the choice man for the Upper House
would be, after all, but the third in
quality. But, I will ask, is it certain, or
even likely, that these delegates would
select senators who would rank so high
as third-rate men ? What, for instance,
might be expected from the delegates
from the Lower Darling or Maranoa
districts ? Why, that they would name,
as their choice men, the Sydney agents-
in whose books they stood the deepest.
But, Sir, it we are to have recourse to
delegation, let us, instead of committing
this great trust to delegates, who would
be irresponsible, place it in the hands of
the Governor and the Executive Council,,
who, under the new order of things, will
be directly responsible to the people’s re-
presentatives. (Loud cheers.) The third
plan proposed by the honourable and
learned member is, that the Upper House
should [)e elected from the Lower. In
that case either the best, or the middling,,
or the worst, would be chosen. If the
best men should be elected, the .Lower
House would be emasculated. If the
middling or the worst, then the Upper-
House would be confessedly inferior to
the Lower, and all its utility of course be
lost. In fact, Sir, all these plans, pro-
posed by the opponents of the Bill now
before the House, will be found, on exa-
mination, to be utterly impracticable ;
and the only way I see to extricate our-
selves from these difficulties—and i
admit, Sir, that in this matter we are
surrounded by difficulties,-—to cut the
Gordian knot, is to have recourse to a.
nominated Upper House, the members
of which, being appointed for life,, will
be independent both of the Crown and
of democratic influence. The principal
objection to this scheme, in my eyes, is
that the members, even though named
for life, might be suspected to be influ-
enced, to a certain extent, by a feeling
of gratitude towards the power from
which they derived their authority.—it
is to guard against this suspicion, that
the hereditary and elective principle has
been proposed in those clauses of my hon-
ourable and learned friend’s Bill, against
which so much cavil has been raised.
On these clauses,. Sir, I will not dwell ;
they having been very fully explained by
the honourable members who havetpre-
ceeded me, I will merely observe,, that if
it be considered, desirablej and 1 consider


it most desirable, that this perfect inde-
pendence on the part of members of the
Upper House should be obtained, it is
clear that those in whom the hereditary
right of electing the members from
among themselves is vested, must be dis-
tinguished by some particular name or
title ; and I will here take the liberty of
saying, that though 1 most fully ap-
proved in committee of these now much
abused clauses, it never entered into my
head that I was likely to come within
the category of those they might call
into existence. As to the abuse, the
violent outcry that has been raised out of
doors against titular distinction, I agree,
Sir, fully with the honourable member
for Cook and Westmoreland, that nothing
can be more vulgar and unphilosophical
than such a clamour. The love of dis-
tinction is inherent in mankind; im-
planted in us for the wisest purposes.
It has existed from the first, and will
exist to the end of the world, in Republics
as well as Monarchies. (Hear, hear.)
Let us, Sir, look at France, where, after
all that has been said in favor of
egalite,” the desire for distinction and
love of title are as fresh as ever, and are
now as marked as they were in the old re-
gime or the first empire. (Hear, hear.)
Even in the model republic, titular dis-
tluction is greedily coveted, and by those
too who have not a shadow of claim to
it. The difference between England and
America in this respect is this, that while
in England the humbler classes, when a
title is conferred upon one of the people
as his sovereign’s recognition of his
merit, are prompt to do him honor ; in
America the lower orders denounce the
idea of their superior being distinguished
by titles, although they themselves are but
too ready'to assume them. Thus, when re-
cording their suffrages for a President,
every tinker or tailor votes for plain Mr.
Polk or Mr. Fillmore, while he enters his
own name as a General or Colonel at the
least, (Hear, hear, and laughter.)
And so in Sydney, the very tradesmen
v/ho now profess so much indignation at
the 4dea of any title being conferred
upon the members of the Upper House
of Legislature, would be exceedingly
wrath if their customers were not to
address them as “ Esquires,” a distinction
to which they have as much legal right
as they have to that of “ grand-duke.”
(Loud laughter.) And here, Sir, I must
express my regret at a remark which fell
from the honourable and learned member
for Cumberland, when he too joined in
the cry against titular distinctions ; he
Sir, summed up his denunciation by,
saying, that whatever view might be
taken of their expediency in this Colony,
at any rate there will be no men fit
to receive them. The honorable mem-
ber’s, shield it is true, is as blank as
my own ; it has been his misfortune, as it
has been mine, never to have met with
an opportunity of distinguishing himself
in the service of his sovereign or his
country; but, Sir, does this give him
the right to make such a remark ? I say,
Sir, that there are men on both sides of
this House, who have had this high privi-
lege, denied to the honourable merntier,
and whose investiture with title, as pro-
posed by the Constitution Bill, would be
regarged as an honor rendered where it
was justly due. (Hear, hear.) I say, Sir,
that there are men in this Colony whose
gallant services are recorded in their
country’s annals, as well as men whose
scientific acquirements, both in the field
and the closet, have procured them an Euro-
pean celebrity, the recognition of whose
merits by their sovereign would be a
matter of gratification to the whole
colony. (Cheers from both sides o? the
House.) The question, Sir, before this
House has, in the course of its discussion,
assumed a more enlarged character than
It at first possessed. The question now
really is, whether we are to pursue aline
of policy which will ensure the perma-
nence of the connection between the
colony and the glorious mother country,
or whether we shall adopt a course which
must end in making this country a second
America. (Hear, hear.) Now, Sir, I
have read much of manners and men in
America, I have conversed a good deal
■with men of observation who have tra-
velled in that country, and from all that
I have gleaned, from what I have read
and heard, I am satisfied that there is


perfect truth in the saying repeated by
Lord Carlisle in a lecture delivered by
him in Birmingham on the United States,
and which he had from a distinguished
American statesman—Mr. Daniel Web-
ster I believe—to the effect “ That if
there be less misery in America than in
other countries, so there is also less hap-
piness.” (Cheers). This comparative
absence of misery in America is to be
attributed no doubt to its possessing am-
ple room for all, and to its teeming soil.
(Hear, hear.) Now surely the same
blessed exemption exists in Australia;
here there is ample room for all comers,
as ample as that which America affords,
a soil as rich, a climate far superior ; and
I do think, if instead of moiling perpetu-
ally after wealth, or dabbling in the soul-
contracting pursuit of petty politics like
the Americans, the people here would
adopt an English constitution, and follow
good old English domestic habits, there
would not only be an unusual absence of
social misery, but a larger share of social
happiness than exists in any other part of
the known world. (Cheers.) Let us then,
Sir, go for our model, not to America,
but to the noble country from whence
we derive our origin. But why do I
speak of America? It really does not
appear to me that the parties who are
now playing this noisy part out of doors
would be satisfied with the institutions
of that country. They wish, Sir, to
produce a state of things that would
drive even the Americans from our
shores in disgust. They are arriving at
the removal of all those drags and checks
which the constitution of that Republic
provided, and the taking away of which
would cause society to rush down hill
with a velocity which would shock the
most democratic American. Instead of
introducing a state of things like that
which exists in the United States, these
persons seek to bring us into a condition
analogous to that which prevails in the
so-called Governments of Mexico and
Buenos Ayres, where, on the average,
a revolution takes place every three
years. (Cheers.) This, Sir, as English-
men and loving England, as Australians
and loving Australia, it is our solemn
duty to prevent; and I heartily trust,
however loud may be the clamour out of
doors against us, that this House will
faithfully .perform this duty. I well
know, Sir, that my feeble advocacy can
be of very little advantage to the good
cause; but it is a satisfaction to feel
that further assistance is not needed,
inasmuch as the arguments that have
already been adduced by my honourable
friends, who have preceded me, are incon-
testable. These arguments, Sir, have
been advanced in speeches which have
not only furnished the fullest informa-
tion on the all-important subject under
discussion, but have been marked by an
amount of eloquence and general ability
which cannot fail to raise the character
of this House in the estimation of all
thinking persons, both here and in Eng-
land. The truth then, Sir, and the
argument, being both on our side, I feet
satisfied that in the end success will be
found there also, (Loud cheers.)
The COLONIAL SECRETARY : I
rise for the purpose of expressing my
opinions upon the very great and im-
portant question before the House, and I
do so notwithstanding the advice whicßhas
been given to me by my hon. and learned
friend the member for Cumberland (Mr.
Darvall.) I prefer rather to follow the
example of my honourable and learned
friend, the Attorney General, and to
come forward and give, as far as my
ability will allow, free from all prejudice
and from all control, a fair and manly
statement of my views. (Cheers.) Having
too, taken a large part in the discussions
on almost every subject of importance
which has occurred in this Council, I do
believe I should not be doing my duty if I
were to remain silent on an occasion like
this. I hope, however, that I shall ap-
proach this discussion with all due mode-
ration ; and it will be my endeavour not
to enter at all on those controversial and
personal matters which have excited so
much warmth, both in the House and out
of doors, but to confine myself strictly to
the great principles of the measure which
I believe are necessary for the basis of a
government which will be conducive to
the welfare 'of the country. (Cheers.) If


the Bill before the House had not ap-
peared to me to be a liberal measure,
while it was at the same time a conser-
vative one, I should not have been found
in the rank of its supporters ; but I hope,
before I sit down, to be able to prove that
it is both liberal and conservative in its
tendencies. (Cheers.) I do not mean
to say that I approve of the Bill in its
entirety, nor is it to be expected that any
measure could be drawn which would, in
ail its clauses, all its provisions, all its
details, command universal assent; and I
for one am prepared, and I believe the
House is prepared with me, to give all
that attention to the public voice, in the
consideration of this measure, which the
public voice is fairly entitled to receive.
(Cheers.) The discussion of this Bill,
and the great principles and provisions it
embodies, have not, I think, been brought
so fully before the House as they ought
to have been. In fact, the discussion has
been very partial and limited. It has
been confined almost entirely to those-
points on which agitation and difference
<>t opinion prevail out jof doors, whilst
there are many other important points
which ought not to have escaped attention.
I think, too, that out of doors, many of
the most important provisions of the Bill
have been overlooked, in the discussion
ot the three principal points which had
occupied public attention ; first, as to the
mode of constituting an Upper House ;
second, the distribution of members in
the representation of the country ; and
tnirdly, the salaries and pensions to be
allowed to the officers of the Govern-
ment. As far as I can judge, from the
course the debate Ims taken, with the
exception of these three points, the
House is unanimous in its approval of
the measure. Now, what are the great
leading provisions of the Bill ? In the
first place, it proposes to give full power
to the Legislature of the colony, to make
laws for all domestic or local purposes,
without let or hindrance from any
authority whatever. (Cheers.) If con-
ceded, as I have no doubt it will be, the
Council will possess an unrestricted
power of legislation, without the assent of
the Queen, on all matters which imme- \
diately concern themselves ; and I think
the thanks of the country are due to the
honourable and learned framer of the
Bill for the way in which he has carried
the principle out in the measure now'be-
fore the House. It will be remembered
by the House, that in a despatch in an-
swer to a demand from the Legislature
of the colony, for the concession of this
power, Earl Grey has expressed his
willingness to concede to it, if any satis-
factory method could be found of distin-
guishing clearly between matters of local
and of Imperial legislation. Earl Grey
found, what every one must admit, that
this was a matter of much difficulty and
intricacy ; but I believe this difficulty has
been overcome, that the object desired
has been successfully and admirably ac-
complished by my honourable and learned
friend in the measure before the House,
and all opposition to the accomplishment
of this object will therefore be obviated.
The bills to be reserved for the consider-
ation of the Crown are few in number.
The first class consists of—l. Bills
touching the allegiance of the inhabitants
of this colony to her Majesty’s Crown.
2. Bills touching the naturalization of
aliens. 3. Bills relating to treaties be-
tween the Crown and any foreign power.
4. Bills relating to political intercourse
and communications between the colony
and any officer of a foreign power or
dependency. 5. Bills relating to the em-
ployment, command, and discipline of
her Majesty’s sea and land forces within
this Colony, and whatever relates to the
defence of the 'colony from foreign ag-
gression, including the command of the
municipal militia and marine. 6. Bills
relat'ng to the crime of high treason.
There are also some few other reserva-
tions, in respect to the rights of preroga-
tive, with which it would not have been
proper to interfere, although it is pro-
bable they will seldom affect the-Colony.
Such are the first great principles upon
which the measure is founded, and they
are well worthy of special* notice. The
next important principle of the Bill is the
extension of the franchise, and this also
is one which should not be passed over.
By this extension a great advantage will


be afforded, seeing that it will give to j
many educated and deserving persons the '
light to vote, a new and important i
feature in the measure, which I be-
lieve will be received with favour by
the community. The next point is
t ie most important in the whole Bill,
being, as it is, the very keystone of
the constitution. It secures to the repre-
sentatives the full and uncontrolled
management of all the revenues of the
colony, whether territorial or otherwise,
including royalties of every kind.
(Cheers.) The ramifications into which
this power must extend penetrate through
the whole constitution. It is a power
which must give the Legislature the com-
plete controul of the government.
(Great cheers.) It is the way in which
responsible government must be intro-
duced, and under such a power responsible
government can alone exist. It is useless
to say, as some honourable members in
the House, and some people out of the
house do, that the time for responsible
government has not yet come, and that
the colony is not yet fitted for it; but,
however, I do not for one moment dis-
guise the fact from myself, that as
soon as this power is granted, respon-
sible government must take place ; and
my honourable colleagues in the go-
vernment are as well assured of this as
I am myself. If, therefore, I give
my support to this Bill my conduct in
the matter must be considered dis-
interested, for if this power be conceded,
it will in all probability be the signal
of my separation from official life in this
colony. There may, no doubt, be some
inconvenience at first, for official ex-
perience, like all other, requires an ap-
prenticeship, but I believe the longer
this power is delayed the more difficult
it will be to exercise it, and the* more
difficult also will it be to find competent
persons to enter on office. (Cheers.) The
next power conferred by the Bill is -also
very important ; it is that the Legisla-
ture of the country alone shall have the
power of making laws for the letting or
sale of Crown lands. I for one have no
fault to find with the present law for the
sale of Crown lands, which I believe
works well, and I have had a very largfe
experience of its operation. There is
only one exception to this beneficial
working, which is in relation to the upset
price. In saying this, however, I would
not advise or wish that all lands should
be sold at the minimum price, for even
among the pastoral land, 1 think there
are some worth more, and some better
not sold at all. But I agree that tlure
are other tracts of land that are not
worth more than ss. an acre. It has
been said that in the upset price of land
I have wished to favour the squatting
interest, but this accusation cannot be
maintained. (Cheers.) The effect of this
reduction will be entirely the other way.
If the squatters wish to keep possession
of their runs, the best way to enable
them to do so is to fix an impossible
price for the land ; for if the price be
reduced it will be open for any one to
come in and force the squatter to pur-
chase or to give up his run. (Hear,
hear.) This is a most important consr-
j deration, and the exercise of this power,
j which this Bill now proposes for the first
I time to grant, may probably hereafter,
| as suggested by the honourable member
for Cumberland, furnish the subject of
much political discussion. The next pro-
vision of the Bill is the investiture in the
Governor of the whole of the patronage
of the co'ony—a right which has long been
sought, and which I believe will be con-
sidered a boon by the colonists. (Cheers.)
Another point, which has not been al-
luded to at all in the debate, is the
securing to the Judges of the land per-
fect independence of the Crown, in the
same manner as that independence has
existed in England for years past, and
which has made the bench of England
the admiration of the world. I think,
also, that the provision of retiring pen-
sions for these functionaries, at an early
period, when perhaps their powers, either
mental or physical, begin to decline, is
well calculated to insure the efficiency of
the Bench in this colony. Another
matter, which has been the subject of
much remark out of doors, is the grant-
ing' of a Civil List to Her Majesty, pro-
viding for the salaries of the high


officers of the Government. But I be-
lieve this will be found a very necessary
and proper provision. It would be both
ridiculous and improper that the sa-
laries of the chief officers of the
Government should be submitted annu-
ally .for revision and discussion. But
while these principal salaries are secured,
a new principle is introduced, under
which the departments of these offices
will be submitted each session to the con-
sideration of the House. This is rendered
necessary from the great extension of the
business of the country in many of its
branches ; and it is a most inconvenient
plan to allow that business to fall into
arrear, or to bring up a supplementary
estimate for extra departmental assistance.
But even if there were not these strong
reasons for the granting of such a Civil
List, we could not avoid it, as this is one
of the conditions on which the land reve-
nues are to be surrendered to us. (Cheers.)
We are pledged to grant this Civil List,
and we are bound in honour to fulfil this
pledge ; and indeed, unless it be fulfilled,
I believe the surrender of these revenues
will not be made. Another great point
contained in the Bill, which it is necessary
I should notice, and which has excited
some opposition, is in reference to the
reservation of the constitutional power.
A great deal has been said by many
writers and statesmen as to the safe-
guards by which it is necessary to sur-
round the constitution of a state ; but
. the principle laid down in this Bill has
been most ably defended in this respect
by its honourable and learned framer. It
is also borne out by the precedents of
other countries ; and I am one of those
who think that constitutions established
after mature consideration should not be
easily upset. I therefore concur with
thp provisions in the present Bill, that all
alterations of the constitution should be
passed by a majority of two-thirds of both
Houses. It is true that there is no such
provision as this in the British constitu-
tion ; but, as has been well explained by
the honorable and learned member for
Sydney, this is because the constitution
of England is an inherent right, and no
such provision could be made by Parlia-
ment, while the right of framing a con-
stitution for ourselves here is only a deri-
vative right. (Cheers.) It is therefore
desirable, for the interests of the country,
for the stability of its peace and welfare,
that the constitution should be surroun-
ded by such safe-guards. (The honour-
able Colonial Secretary here quoted from
the constitution of California, to show
tliatsimilar but more stringent safeguards
were adopted there.) It will be seen,
therefore, that in,the United States the
sanction of two-thirds of both Houses is
required before any change can be made.
Although 1 have instanced California, I
believe the same rule applies in most of
the other states ; and therefore the Com-
mittee did riot arrive at this conclusion
without sufficient precedent. The next
point 1 desire to bring under the notice
of the House, is the form of constitution
recommended in the Bill. It is for the
iirst time proposed to introduce a con-
stitution consisting of two Houses, and
I believe on this point there is no
division of opinion. It is generally ac-
knowledged that two Houses are desira-
ble, in order to check hasty legislation:
for although at present the precaution is
taken of referring all Bills to the law
officers of the Crown before the Gover-
nor General’s assent is given ; yet I ap-
peal to my honourable and learned
friends whether they do not feel that this
duty is a very unsatisfactory one ; and to
the House, whether that duty could not
be much more satisfactorily and more
constitutionally performed by an Upper
House of Legislature ? (Hear, hear.) In
adopting that form of constitution, more-
over, we should be adopting one strictly
analogous to the British Constitution and
the British Parliament. Now, it is
remarkable from how early an age this
double form of legislation has existed.
I know that the House has been troubled
with many extracts already ; but as this
is a very important occasion, it is more
desirable to refer to authorities whose
weight is acknowledged, than to rest con-
tent with new opinions of individual
members. In Milford’s History of Greece,
I find the following passage :
The Greeks distinguished, at least in theory,


six simple forms—-four legal and admitted, two
aoc of acknowleged legality, but generally sup-
ported by violence. The legal were monarchy,
oligarchy, aristocracy, and democracy : theillegal,
tyranny, and assumed or tyrannical oligarchy,
lint absolute monarchy, as we have already oh-
was unknown among the Greeks as a legal
Constitution. The title of king, therefore, im-
plied with them, as with us, not a right of abso-
lute power, but a legal superiority ot dignity and
luthority in one person above all the others in
the state, and for their benefit The peculiar
ind most indispensible rights of royalty were re-
ligious supremacy and military command. In
She early ages kings almost commonly exercised
judicial authority. But legislation seems never
to have been regularly within their single prero-
gative. After the general abolition of monarchy
in Greece, if a citizen of a commonwealth, through
whatsoever means, acquired monarchical power,
tis government was entitled tyranny, and himself
; rant, mines which seem not to have been origi-
nally terms of reproach : though such monarchy
was generally very deservedly reprobated. A
listinetion of families into those of higher and
ower rank appears to have obtained very early
hroughout Greece; and nowhere more than at
Vthens ; the Eupatrids, or nobly lorn, like the
hitricians .of Rome, formed a distinct order of
he State, with great privileges. With the down-
all of monarchy, however, hereditary nobilitv
eerns to have declined everywhere ; and though
amily was considered, yet wealth becajne the
irinciple criterion of rank. But daily experience
moiig the Greeks proving that military force
lay always command civil authority, the two
ere in all their republics united in the same per-
ons, every citizen being bound to military ser-
ice. Equally then, the necessity of the com-
lonwealtb, and the choice of the individual,
ould decide that the rich should serve on horse-
nek ; and thus was created in the principal re-
ubiics a rank of citizens determined by their
bility to serve in war on horseback at their own
xpeuse. Such was the origin of knighthood in
lome, and since in the feudal kingdoms of Fu-
jpe. in many Grecian sta es, however, the
oble, or the rich, or both together, held exclu-
veiy the principal authority, and the govern-
lent was then denominated Oligarchy, meaning
government in which the supreme power is
ested in a Few. Where the Few, as they be-
tme emphatically called, remained content with
le prerogatives of the ancient hereditary kings,
■aving rights to the people, so established as to
■cure an impartial administration of equal law,
was deemed a just and constitutional oligarchy,
ut where contests arose, as it often happened,
Jtween the Few and the Many, (which became
le distinguishing appellation of the lower ]>eople)
id the Few obtained the superiority not without
olence, and perhaps a bloody struggle, they
ould not always, and sometimes could not safely,
} moderate in the exercise of power. Thus arose
yraimical Oligarchy. Aristocracy, signifying
overnment by the better people, was a phrase
more dubious import, inasmuch as the question
would always remain, Who are the bettor people t
The Few, whether legally or by violence, or not
af. all established in power, commonly assumed
the titles to themselves, and gave that Aristocracy
to any Government in which they, or persons of
their sort, held the principal power. Among the
moderns generally the term of Aristocracy has been
used ns equivalent to Constitutional Oligarchy ;
an application of it apparently first proposed by
Aristotle, on account of the discredit which the
frequency of tyrannical assumption of power by
the few, brought upon the name of Oligarchy.
But both before and after that philosopher, Bu-
torin Aristocracy was more received among the
Greeks, as the proper appellation of those Govern-
ments in which the supreme authority was com-
mitted by the people themselves, to persons
elected for their merit, Oligarchy remaining
always the ordinary Grecian term for Govern-
ments, in which the noble or the rich presided, as
a separate order of the state. Democracy signi-
fied government by the people at large; all tho
freemen of the state in assembly forming' the
Legal Sovereign, absolute and uncontrollable. But
as Democracy was, beyond all other governments,
subject to irregular, improvident, and tyrannical
conduct, where, unchecked by some balancing
power intrusted to a few, it became distinguished
by the opprobrious title of Ochlocracy, mob-rule.
The states of Greece, whose government was in
any degree settled, hud mostly some mixture of
two or more of these forms. A simple monarchy
indeed' would he despotism and tyranny ; a simple
oligarchy but the tyranny of an association, in-
stead of the tyranny of an individual, and a
simple democracy scarcely above anarchy; yet
these evils we frequently find existing among the
Grecian cities. From the various mixtures, how -
ever, of these simple forms, decided whether by
accidental custom or by the various prevalence of
various interests, arose new distinctions, and
sometimes new names The mixture of oligarchy
and democracy, in which the oligurchal power
was superior, yet the democratical sufficed to
secure freedom and equal right to the people,
might, according to Aristotle, be properly dis-
tinguished from simple oligarchy oy the more
honourable title of aristocracy. That mixture
where the democratical power prevailed, yet was
in some degree balanced by authority lodged iit
steadier hands, is distinguished by the same great
author by the name of Polity ; and, according to
Polybius, a due blending of the three powers,
monarchical, aristocratical, and democratical, was
necessary to constitute what might properly be
termed a kingdom. It may here, perhaps, he a
digression neither in itself absolutely improper,
nor entirely useless for illustration of the subject
before us, to observe that the British Constitution
is a conqiositiou of all the legal simple forms ac-
knowledged by the Greeks, monarchy, oligarchy,
aristocracy, and democracy. Monarchy with us
perfectly accords with the Grecian idea of kingly
government. The Lords of the oligarchy part of
the constitution ; and the House of Common*,
projterly the aristocratical, being comjKised of
persons elected by the people to legislative au-


thority for merit, real er supposed. The demo-
cratic principle, equal law, or, in the great term
Isondmy, singularly pervades the whole-, the pri-
vilege of the peer extending in no degree to his
family, and the descendants even of the blood
royal being- people subject to the same laws, and
the same judicature with the meanest citizen.
Rights of election, trial by jury, and provincial
offices, together with the right of addressing and
petitioning either the Executive or any branch of
the Legislature, form a large democratical power,
more widely bounded, notwithstanding some de-
fects, than in any other Government that ever
existed.
The union of liberty with order, then, is the
last stage of civilization, and the perfection of
'•civil society. It is in proportion as these two
qualities are combined that the merit and value
of different Governments are to be estimated;
the larger portion they have of both, the more
a lapted are they to diffuse happiness among their
subjects. Thus in Athens, when liberty was the
chief object of the constitution, order was no
better observed than in the absolute Government
of France, and the democracy there were often to
the full as tyrannical as Richelieu. On the other
hand, Venice, which professed to be a free Go-
vernment, kept admirable order, hut to obtain
this point it sacrificed liberty, and was, in its
way, perfectly arbitrary. Thus, whichever wav
the balance is overthrown, the interests of the
community suffer, and freedom itself is impaired
—tor a {fee man ought to he able both to do all
that is not forbidden by the laws, and to he en-
abled by those laws to do all that it is not abso-
lutely necessary for the welfare of society he
should be restrained from doing; nor does it
matter whether the Government is called despo-
tism, or monarchy, or republic—wherever arbi-
trary power exists, there is tyranny. For this
reason it was that Mr. Fox said, in the height of
the French Revolution, “I dislike absolute mo-
narchy, I dislike absolute aristocracy, I dislike
alisolute democracy.” All these kinds of govern-
ment leave the passions of man their full sway,
and are consequently marked with injustice and
oppression towards individual members of the
community.
The most celebrated governments of ancient
and modern times, which have succeeded best in
combining liberty with order, are Sparta, Rome,
and England. Of those 1 have no hesitation in
•saying England, since 1688, is the most perfect.
Indeed, it is evident to any one who reads the
history of Sparta and Rome*, that their institu-
tions were intended for small communities, con-
ta ned in the neighbourhood of a single city, and
that the very force and strength which their form
of government produced, tended, by increasing
the commonwealth, to destroy the laws and man-
ners which gave them birth. Not so with Eng-
land ; she does not reject wealth ; she does not
reject commerce ; she does not even reject ex-
tended empire from the plan of her con-
stitution ; she rejects nothing but continental
greatness and an overgrown military establish-
ment.
The foregoing- extracts plainly show tha
the constitution of* England is foundet
upon ancient experience. Now, assum
ing that it is acknowledged that tw«
Houses are desirable, I will proceed ti
offer a few observations to the House <*
what I conceive should be the constitu
tion of the upper branch of legislature
Before I do ,so I will quote from tin
standard work of Lord John Russell oi
the constitution of England ; but, per
haps, it will be well that I should firs
call attention to one or two points. Thi
first question is, what is the object o
ail government? It is evidently t(
secure the utmost enjoyment of liberty
to every individual, consistent with tin
maintenance of public order and publn
interests ; and, in order to do this, it i
necessary to guard both against tin
despotism of the ruling power am
against the hostility of class. (Hear
hear.) This last is a most importan
point, and I hope it will be borne ii
mind in respect of those observation;
which will be made on the system o
representation both here and in ever]
free country. The following extrac t
from Lord John Russell I will now reac
to the House :
A complete definition of liberty is, perbap
impossible. Nor is liberty all of one kind. .
nation may have one kind, and be quite deprive
of another. The greatest advantages, howevei
which a community can procure to itself, b
uniting under one Government, may, perhaps, 1
comprehended under the titles of Civil Libert;
Personal Liberty, and Political Liberty.
By civil liberty 1 mean the power of doin
that, and that only, which is not forbidden h
the laws. This definition comprehends th
security of person and of property.
By personal liberty I mean the power of doin
that which in itself is harmless, as speaking c
writing, and of which the abuse is only crimina
Eligibility to office may also be comprehende
under this bead.
By political liberty I mean the acknowledge
and legal right of the people to control tht
government, or to take a share in it.
Each of these kinds of liberty should
allowed to exist in as great a proportion as pc
sihle. They were all eompreliended by Cror
well’s representative under the names of “pea
and security, the rights and privileges of t
people.”
In Parliament, composed of kings, lords, ai
commons, resides the supreme government
this nation ; the two Houses of Parliament co


stitute the great council of the King ; and upon
whatever subject it is his prerogative to act, it is
their privilege, and even their duty, to advise.
Acts of executive government, however, belong
to the King ; and should Parliament not inter-
fere, his orders are sufficient; in legislation
nothing is valid, unless by the concurrence of all
three.
The three branches of the legislature formed
what has been called the balance of the consti-
tution ; it would have been more just to have
compared them, to what is called in mechanics,
combination of forces ; for the combined impres-
sions received from the three Houses decide the
direction of the whole.
The House of Commons, as it has before been
olmerved, was intended to represent the people at
large; and up to the time of the Revolution, they
had been found to do so sufficiently well. Even
the pensioned Parliament of Charles the Second
bad, in its last days, spoken fairly the sense of
the people. At this time, therefore, the House
of Commons may be considered as a just repre-
sentative of the nation.
Now, it ought to be the endeavour to
copy these institutions, and I feel assured
that every tnember of the committee has
kept this object in view. (Hear, hear.)
Before I proceed further I will read a
passage from Lord John, relative to the
functions of the House of Lords, which
I believe it is most necessary to under*
stand in framing an Upper Chamber.
The next element of the legislature was the
House of Lords. The Peerage serves two great
purposes in our constitution. First, it is a great
aad splendid reward for national services, whe-
ther by sea or land, in the King’s Council, or on
the Judges’ Bench ; it placed a stamp upon ex-
cellent merit, and constitutes the posterity of
the ennobled person a perpetual image of his
achievements and their recompense. Secondly,
the House of Peers collectively form a Council
for weighing, with greater caution and delibera-
tion. the resolutions of the House of Commons.
If this more popular assembly is sometimes led
away, as it is natural it should, by sudden im-
pressions or temporary clamour, this hereditary
senate may interpose its grave and thoughtful
opinions to suspend the effect of an intemperate
vote. In the possession of such an assembly,
indeed, consists the difference between a consti-
tution of pure democracy, and one of mutual
control. Korth America, therefore, which is
strictly a government of mutual control, is not
without its Senate, as well as its House of Re-
presentatives.
Now I acknowledge that on this sub-
ject I have been much anticipated
by what has fallen from other honour-
able members; but I must say I fully
concur in the remarks of the honour-
able member for Northumberland, as to
the constitution of an Upper House. It
must be perfectly clear that, when the
power of the purse strings is in the
Lower House, no ministry can be ap-
pointed which does not command a
majority of this House (hear, hear) ;
and, assuming that representation is fixed
upon a just and equitable principle, the
Lower will be a reflex of public opinion.
It is therefore evident that, under a systern
of responsible Government, there can
be no reasonable objection to give the
Governor and his Executive Council the
power of nominating to the Upper House;
for it is impossible to conceive that a
responsible ministry would select indi-
viduals for the Upper .House who were
obnoxious to the public, and who did not
possess their confidence. (Hear, hear,
from Mr. Wentworth.) And if this be
true, is it not a far more constitutional
mode than that of electing the Upper
House ? The Upper House will not be
indeed directly, but it will be indirectly,
appointed by the people. (Hear.) But,
being once appointed, it is desirable, if
it is to perform functions similar to
those of the House of Lords, that it
should become independent, both of the
Crown and of the people ; and the only
way in which it could become inde-
pendent, will be to give members their
appointment for life. (Hear, hear.) It
will then become a large and impor-
tant body, controlling both the people
and the executive, and I have no doubt
it would exercise its functions to the
satisfaction of both. And I believe the
post would be an object of ambition to
the better class of colonists. There
would be attached to a seat in the Upper
House the designation of “ honorable,”
as is the practice in other colonies ;
and I do not agree with those who say
that no wish exists on the part of the
colonists for personal distinctions. On
the contrary, they are sought after with
avidity—(hear, hear); and I need only
Instance the strong desire which exists,
and which is daily manifested by the
colonists, to obtain even appointments to
the commission of the peace. (Hear,
hear.) No doubt the same feeling would


actuate them in desiring to obtain seats
in the Upper House. Now, I do feel
that all this shows, notwithstanding the
great array of authorities which have
been adduced from persons now in high
station against it, that the proposed bill
is more analogous to the British Constitu-
tion, and more suited to the circumstances
of the colony, and that there is a better
safeguard in it, than can be found in any
other proposal. (Hear, hear.) And I
have no doubt, when the people of the
colony have heard the reasons in favour of
the bill, they will be satisfied with it,
and the Upper House thus constituted
will not be distasteful to them. Now,
there are two models before us. The
New Zealand Constitutional Act and the
Cape Constitution, which differ materially.
In the New Zealand Act the same princi-
ples prevail as in the bill before the
House. In the Cape Constitution, the
Upper House is made elective. I will
venture to explain to the House the
particular features of that Constitution.
In the second section it is enacted, that
the Chief Justice and fifteen members
shall constitute the Legislative Council,
But although there is a distinct qualifi-
cation for members of the Legislative
Council, they are to be elected by the
same franchise; and what will be the
result ? Looking at the division of the
colony into two separate districts, I do
not hesitate to say that the towns will
entirely swamp the country interests,
(hear, hear,) and the result will be, that
thfe Upper House will be more democratic
still than the lower. (Hear, hear.) I
predict that this must be the result; and
how, therefore, can the Upper House in
that colony be a safeguard against hasty
legislation by the Lower House ? It
will be a mere duplicate, a mere reflex of
it, and can never act in a constitutional
manner; the object of its existence will
be missed. The qualification established
for the Upper House is, that a candidate
should be a registered voter, thirty years
of age, and be possessed of unencumbered
freehold property to the value of £2,000 ;
or if mortgaged, then that he should be
possessed of property, real and personal,
to the extent of £4,000 above his
legal debts. Now this would make the
Upper House exclusively one of land-
holders ; and it does not appear to me
that, in this colony at all events, any
such House would give satisfaction,
(Hear, hear.) Why should not mer-
chants and professional men, who are
qualified—why should not bankers, whose
monetary experience would be of the
greatest value, be eligible for the
Upper House ? Nothing can be more
unwise than this exclusive system ; no-
thing, I will venture to say, more unac-
ceptable to the colony. The House is
aware what differences of opinion exist
out of doors on the subject of an elective
house. No sooner is any one asked what
his notions are, than he is thrown upon
his back. The proposition of the hon,
member for Cook and Westmoreland has
not been received with any degree of
favour, either in the house or out of it.
Besides, there is another objection to
this elective house. Its independence
will be entirely obliterated by the power
of the Governor to dissolve it. (Hear,
hear.) It cannot be independent of the
Crown; and what I want to see is a
house equally Independent of the Crown
and of the people. Such a bouse will be
the only one analogous to the British
House of Peers, and the only one which
can perform its functions to the satis-
faction of the country. (Hear, hear.)
On the subject of the distribution of the
electoral districts, I think it desirable to
read a few more extracts from Lord
John Russell, who must be regarded as
the best constitutional authority on the
subject—who has, in his discussion on
the Reform Bill, proved his anxiety, on
the one hand, for the maintenance of
perfect freedom, and, on the other, for the
maintenance of constitutional principles.
First—All parts of the country, and all classes
of the people, ought to have a share in elections.
If this is not the case, the excluded part or class
of the nation will become of no importance in the
eyes of the rest; its favour will never be courted
in the country, and its interests will never be
vigilantly guarded in the legislature. Conse-
quently, in proportion to the general freedom of
the community will be the discontent excited in
the deprived class, by the sentence of nullity and
inactivity pronounced upon them. Every system
of uniform suffrage, except universal, contains this


slot. And universal suffrage, in -pretending to
ivoid it, gives the whole power to the highest
ind lowest, to money and to multitude, and thus
lisfranchises the middle class, the most disinte-
rested, the ntfost independent, and the most un-
prejudiced of all. It is not necessary, however,
although every class ought to have an influence
n elections, that every member of every class
should have a vote.
t will now briefly advert to the observa-
;ions which have been made by the
lonourable member for Durham (Mr.
Cowper) yesterday, who quoted from the
speech delivered by me in 1851 on the
Electoral Acts, The honourable mem-
ber stated, that so far from the principles
of the Reform Act being considered
final, its very authors had since proposed
amendments in it; and he quoted from
my speech to show that I had said no
such changes were contemplated. The
truth is, however, that great changes
have been brought about in England
since the establishments of railroads, and
many re-arrangements of matters of de-
tail have become necessary ; but Lord
John Russell has distinctly stated that
he has no intention to change the prin-
ciple of the Bill, nor to alter the balance
of representation. (Hear, hear.) [The
honourable gentleman here quoted from
Lord John Russell’s speech on the pro-
posed Reform Bill last year.] In the
speech which has been referred to by
the honourable member for Durham, he
has shown that in the representation of
Bridgeuorth and the Tower Hamlets,
both of which are placed upon an equal
footing, the proportion of the population
is as 200 of the latter to one of the
former. In the Electoral Act of 1851,
there is no such enormous discrepancy
as this ; the greatest disproportion not
being more than three to one. (Hear,
hear.) It has been broadly asserted that
the pastoral districts have received, by the
Act of 1851, too large a share in the
representation. I can only say that, in
giving my concurrence to this measure,
1 have been .actuated by an anxious
desire that each class should be fairly
represented (hear, hear) : and if any one
can show logically and conclusively that
any one class has a preponderating in-
fluence given to them, I shall be quite
ready to lend my most zealous assistance
in procuring a reform. But how stands
the fact ? By this Act the towns have
11 members and the counties 17 mem-
bers, whilp the pastoral districts send but
8 representatives to the House. There are
therefore 28 to 8 against the latter class
of representatives, a difference quite suffi-
cient, I should imagine, to guard against
their exercising any undue influence.
The idea that the pastoial interests are
more fully represented than the towns
and counties has, 1 believe, chiefly arisen
from the fact that the most influential
member of this House, the honourable
and learned member for Sydney, was for-
merly largely connected with that in-
terest.
Mr. WENTWORTH : That objection
has been got rid of.
The COLONIAL SECRETARY re-
sumed : By the measure before the House
it is proposed to supply the vacancies
created in this House by the exclusion of
the eighteen nominees, and by the addition
of eighteen members apportioned in ex-
act accordance with the principles of the
existing Electoral Act. This will increase
the number of representatives for the
towns to sixteen ; of the number of re-
presentatives for the counties to twenty-
six ; and the number of representatives
of the pastoral districts to twelve. The
proportion, therefore, in the representa-
tion of the pastoral districts to that of the
towns and counties will be twelve to forty-
two, or in the ratio of three and a-half to
one. (Hear, hear.) This appears con-
clusive ; but I am not wedded to the ex-
isting scheme. If it be found necessary,
members may be added to increase the
representation of Sydney. 1 have already
expressed that opinion in committee, and
I will repeat it in the House. There is
no particular magic in the number of
fifty-Lour, and this number may be easily
increased if it be deemed advisable, for
the purpose of equalising the representa-
tion. In expressing these opinions I
desire to have it distinctly understood
that this is not a government measure.
(Hear, hear.) Every officer of the go-
vernment is at perfect liberty to speak
and vote according to his own unbiassed


judgment. No measure of such impor-
tance must be carried by any influence of
this description. (Hear, hear.) I am
aware that such a measure cannot be
carried unless it is acceptable to the peo-
ple at large ; and I am glad, therefore,
that it is proposed to allow time for fi’ee
and ample discussion. I feel sure the
more the matter is sifted and considered,
the more the general propositions of the
committee will be approved. (Hear,
hear.) It is clear that the proposition
for the establishment of hereditary titles
is distasteful. And as this portion of the
report, can be carried out without legis-
lating upon it at all, there can be no
need to press it in the face of any such
opposition. It is in the power of
Her -Majesty to confer titles upon
any colonist, and the colonist who may
be thus distinguished, will at the same
time be eligible to a seat in the Upper
House, if he be acceptable to the ex-
isting administration. (Hear, hear.) I
trust that this measure will not be al-
lowed to lie over for another session.
To myself, indeed, this would be a matter
of indifference, but its passing would be
the means of conferring upon the colony
so many important boons, which have
been long struggled for by my honourable
and learned friend, and those who have
acted with him, that I do not think these
boons should be longer delayed. The
honourable gentleman has now cast open
to us the garden of the Hesperides, and
off ered us the golden apple; shall we at
this eleventh hour refuse to accept it.
(Hear, hear ) Great differences gf
opinion have arisen with reference to
this measure. I hope that, by discussion,
all these differences of opinion will be re-
conciled ; and f feel sure that the time will
come when all will join in appreciating
the services of the honourable and
learned member for Sydney, and in
awarding a due meed of praise to bis
coadjutors of the committee. I have not,
from motives of delicacy, touched upon
onq point, which is in a great degree per-
sonal to myself, I allude to- the subject
of pensions. In a great measure like
this, for the benefit of the country, some
sacrifices must be made; and if these
sacrifices are of a pecuniary nature, so
far as myself and my cblleagues are con-
cerned, we shall be quite willing to trust
wholly to this House and to .the public,
feeling assured that our services will be
duly considered, and that full justice will
be rendered to them. (Hear, hear.) This
Bill will confer upon the colony a greater
measure of liberty than has been ever
before conceded to any dependency of the
Crown. The colonists have already had
secured to them the full liberty of the
press, complete religious equality, and an
unimpeachable administration of justice.
By this bill they will have full political
liberty, with only such safeguards as are
absolutely necessary while the colony re-
mains a British dependency. In aiding
the supporters of this measure I have but
one single purpose in view—an anxious
desire to see the colony advance in social
and political greatness, and possess insti-
tutions worthy, in their freedom and
stability, of the glorious parent land
from whence it sprung. (Loud cheers.).
Mr. BLIGH; I will not, at this ad-
vanced stage of the debate, detain the
House by a lengthened speech. I must
express my regret, however, that certain
honourable members, in speaking of the
meeting at which I expressed opinions
which I should not hesitate to express in
this House, have thought proper to apply
such abusive epithets. A more respect-
able and influential meeting was never
held in this city, and for its orderly cha-
racter it has never been surpassed. If,
during the discussion, or by the excita-
tion of some of the auditors, anything
distasteful was uttered, it was scarcely
worth while on this account to level such
sweeping condemnations at the whole
meeting. These expressions were not
participated in by the meeting as a
whole. (Hear, hear.) The honourable
and learned member for Sydney, know-
ing how distasteful the measure with
which he was identified was to the citi-
zens generally, ought not to have been
surprised at the expressions of strong
feeling in discussing’ it. None were
more sensible than himself of the great
obligations which the colony owed to the
honourable and learned gentleman, and


his feeling was participated inbynumbors
vho assisted at the meeting; but when
hey disagree from the honourable gan-
leman on a subject of this vital import-
nee, they must have leave to express
heir opinions. Gentlemen of the high-
St respectability, who were not in "the
abit of interfering in any way with
olitlcal questions, came forward on this
ccasion, moved not only by its great im-
ortauce, but by a desire to convince the
louse that this was not a movement by
he mere rabble, but one in which ail
lasses of the community were repre-
ented. (Hear, hear.) It is a matter of
eep regret that a petition thus got up,
nd bearing 3000 signatures, should
ave been treated in this House with
ontempt. (Hear, hear.) The honour-
hle member for Cook and Westraore-
pid has disputed the right of the
eople to assemble and canvass this
measure. If such be the tone and
pirit of that House as it would
eem to be from the cheers with which
his argument was received—the House
dll soon cease to possess the confidence
t the colony, and will, consequently,
ose its influence. If the people are
reated with derision and contempt when
hey approach this House, constitution-
-liv, by petition, they will cease to apply
o the House at,all, and it is probable,
ven now, that it will be thought ad-
isable, under the circumstances, to apply’
Isewhere. (Hear, hear.) The honour -
,ble and learned member for Cumber-
aad has been greatly attacked, because
le was formerly in favor of the nominee
irinciple. That gentleman has shown
ar better sense than those who assault
dm now in arriving at a conclusion that
lomineeism cannot be supported in the
'ace of popular feeling, (Hear, hear.)
f the honourable mover of this bill
Ireads the current of democracy, about
vhich he had spoken so much, he has
■ertainly taken the very course most
ikely to strengthen those currents.
Hear, hear.) Had he consulted the
wpular feeling in preparing his measure,
ic might have had all the credit which
he honourable and learned member for
Cumberland now deservedly had for op-
| posing it. The great objection to a
nominee House is, that it will be wholly
irresponsible in its character, and, not-
withstanding the lengthy speaking, and
the voluminous quotations which we have
heard on this subject, my views respect-
ing it remain unchanged. lam still
unconvinced that the system of nomina-
tion will give the Upper House a really
conservative character. In fact, the
honourable member for Cook and West-
moreland has himself shown conclusively
that this cannot be the case, -It
l is clear, when we have responsible go-
vernment this House will acquire some-
j thing of an independent character ; but
I the ti rst Upper House will be nomi-
nated, not by the responsible ministry,
but by the irresponsible executive, which
' existed prior to the appointment of this
ministry, and these appointments to the
Upper House would be for life. It has
been asked whether some honourable
members are charged with conspiring
to destroy’ popular ng'hts ? I do not
mean to make any accusations of con-
spiracy’ ; but when I see a disposition to
favour one class, and to extend the re-
presentation at the expense of other
classes—when I see a desire to protect
the vested rights of this class, even
against any interference under a re-
j sponsible government—and when I re-
member that the interests of this class
are generally regarded as opposed to
| those of the great mass of the people, I
cannot but feel some suspicions. (Hear,
hear.) There are many objections which
might he urged against the details of
; this measure ; hut as the present dis-
cussion is with reference only to its
general principles, I shall content myself
for the present with this record of my
objections against those principles (hear,
hear).
The SOLICITOR-GENERAL moved
an adjournment of the debate.
The SOLICITOR-GENERAL: I
rise with much hesitation, and with no
little diffidence, to address the House on
this very momentous occasion. When I
consider how deeply the question we
have now to decide involves the future


destinies of the country, and reflect on
the responsibility of my own position,
in being called upon to take his part in
the decision of that question, I confess
myself impressed with a feeling akin to
awe; and the diffidence caused by this
feeling is increased by my having heard
the eloquent and masterly speeches
which have been already made by other
honourable membei’s, in the course of the
debate. Gladly, under these cli’cum-
stances, would I have spared the House,
if my duty had permitted, an address
from me—gladly would I have saved
myself from the comparisons which must
be made. But as I have been in the
habit of taking a part in the debates in
the House, on questions of minor im-
portance, I feel that to give a silent vote
on this, the incomparably most important
question which has ever come under the
attention of the legislature of the
colony, would be to lay myself open to
the suspicion that my views and opinions
on this great question are not clear and
distinct. (Cheers.) I may too, per-
haps, be allowed to indulge the hope
that some additional light may be
thi’own upon the question by my observ-
ations, however small that addition may
be (Cheers.) I feel the difficulties
which beset the question. I feel that
its solution does not lie on the surface,
and that it may even elude the grasp of
the wisest, who search for it most faith-
fully and most profoundly. The ques-
tion befoi’e us is a speculative one, as all
questions of political science must be.
It is a question that no man, however
learned, can possibly determine ; it is j
one, I freely admit, upon which men equal
in ability, and in honesty of purpose, ;
may differ as widely as the poles. It is I
a question which can be solved only by
the future. It is equally impossible to |
know what colour luturity can give to
our present determination ; it is equally (
uncertain what influence our present de- \
termination may have on that futurity. |
(Cheers,) I am conscious that the i
opinions I now hold, and which I am i
prepared to express, may be wrong—
may, in the future, be pi’oved to be
wrong, and therefore I approach the
n subject in no presumptions spirit ; but ]
i, am not the less impressed with the firrr
n arid deliberate conviction that thosx
s opinions are right. (Cheers.) Ido noi
0 intend to follow the example of previous
s speakers, and to inflict many quotations
1 on the House. I believe the House has
s had enough of extracts—not that I
r the value of those which have been quoted,
e or the right of honourable members tc
- bring prominently forward before the
, public opinions which might generally
3 be received as wiser than their own,
1 and which they themselves esteem to be
t so. But these opinions have been suffi-
? ciently cited, and, with the exception of
i one single autority on a point not
- hitherto alluded to in the debate, I shall
j refrain from extracts altogether. I have
t already said that this question is a specu-
; lative one ; and that, in regard to it, it
; is impossible to foretel what the future
» may determine. But in endeavouring
i to determine aright for the good of the
i colony in days to come, we must not fly
wildly into the regions of theory, but
must be guided by the lights we have.
We have a right to be guided, in legis-
lating for the future, by the history of
the past; and, changing as human events
are—-mutable as all human systems have
more or less proved, we ought, above
all, as far as our limited philosophy
allows us, to lay the foundations of our
' system deep in those principles of human
nature which is the same in all their
leading features, from the first Adam to
the present generation. (Cheers.) We
should look to this immutable ele-
j ment with which we have to deal,
and endeavour to make the most
Iwe can of the virtues of mankind,
I and eveii to turn its vices to purposes of
j utility. (Cheers.) I will first allude to
the pledges, by which it is said by some
that the Council are bound. And here
I will state that 1, at least, am bound by
none, —that I have not pledged myself
to x’eceive the constitution of Canada.
Had that form of constitution been really
submitted to the House at the time when
the grievance resolutions wei’e adopted,
1 should have opposed the acceptance of
any constitution, without the matter


having first been subjected to the fullest
discussion, as on this occasion. But the
question was not discussed at all; the
House was carried away by a sense of
what it thought to be the grievances
of the colony, and assented to the petition
without any discussion as to the proposed
constitution, and I voted against the
whole of the resolulons. As I have
therefore been no party to the pro-
position to accept the constitution of
Canada, I am entirely free from that
pledge. And I further admit, to the
fullest extent, the arguments of those
who urge that even assuming that
any pledge has been made, yet if the
convictions of the House, or of honorable
members, have since changed, and they
think the constitution of Canada is not
fitted to this colony, it is not only their
right, but it is their bounden duty to give
their vote as their conscience at present
prompts them to do, for the promotion of
the interests of their country. (Cheers.)
Another thing, from which I believe I
may say I am entirely free, is the charge
against some honourable members, of
favoring class interests. It was with
deep regret that I heard, during the de-
bate, observations made which gave foun-
dation to this charge, and perhaps might
have the effect of setting class against
class. There is no desire on my part to
give supremacy to any order in the com-
munity ; and I may say, if I know
myself, that there is no such thing as
class-feeling in my mind. With refer-
ence to the great objects of the bill we
have now met to discuss, I admit no
superiority in one class over another—
none in the producer over the merchant
or manufacturer—none in the squatter
over the tradesman. . (Cheers.) In the
order of Providence, all these classes, in
their several positions, are equally neces-
sary for building up the great fabric of
society ; all of them are mutually de-
pendent—mutually useful to each other.
But for the same reason for which I
would deny an undue influence to any
class, I would not give to the popular
element that preponderance of power
which would disturb the just equipoise
of the State. In fact, I do not know
whether the extent or value of particular
interests, or the numerical proportions of
particular classes, ought to be allowed to
affect this question in any considerable
degree. The producer and the manu-
facturer, the squatter and the tradesman,
are equally fit to take part in the duties
of government; and it is for the advan-
tage of society that each should have
such influence and power as may best
serve to keep the balance of the State
true. Therefore, any legislation con-
ferring special favor to particular classes
by ray fellow subjects I wholly and
heartily repudiate. Under these feel-
ings it was with regret that I heard the
observations of one honourable and
learned member, who, in advocating
class-influence, has impaired the lustre of
his address, and has thus opened to his
opponents weak points of attack in a
fortress which would otherwise have
been impregnable. (Cheers.) I fully
admit also the right, which has almost
seemed to be questioned, of the public to
express their opinions on all questions of
legislation affecting them ; and, further,
that great deference ought to be paid to
public opinion. But then the question
arises, what is public opinion ? (Cheers.)
It is not that ephemeral opinion which is
the growth of an hour, or a day, or a
week, but it is the silent growth of years,
the combined consolidated sense of the
people: in short, public opinion, as I re-
gard it, may in general be called the
voice of public reason. (Loud cheers.)
The people had a right to meet and dis-
cuss a measure like this; nay, it is
greatly to be desired that they should
do so. But I will say, if those who
attend such meetings assume to be the
masters of the Council, then I will resist
them. (Cheers.) If they appoint con-
ventions which they have no legal or con-
stitutional power to appoint, to frame a
constitution according to their own pecu-
liar views and interests, and seek to dic-
tate its adoption to this House, or even
assume an equal and co-ordinate au-
thority, they exceed their constitutional
privileges, and must be firmly resisted ;
but if they met only to express their
opinions, and to petition to have their


views carried out, then I will acknow-
ledge to the fullest extent their right
and power to do so. (Cheers.) But sup-
posing those who style themselves the
people should be unanimous in their
opinions as to what the constitution
should be, should that necessarily bind
this Council ? (Cheers.) The “ people”
are only one estate; and it is for the
Council to decide on the opinions so ex-
pressed, not in reference merely to the
wishes of the people, but according to
what we believe will be best for the wel-
fare of the whole community, having re-
ference always to the constitution of the
monarchy under which we live. I shall
say but very little as to the attendance
of members of this House at such meet-
ings ; but I will say, if the precedent be
followed it will lead to most dangerous
results. What has been the course pur-
sued in thismatter ? A change of con-
stitution was proposed in this Council,
on which the power to make such
change had been conferred by the Im-
perial Legislature. A committee of the
House was appointed by ballot to frame
one. Those members who did not ap-
prove of that which was adopted, finding
they were in a minority, fled from the
Council, and appealed to another and
lower authority to assist them in over-
awing the majority of the House. What
must the result be? To injure the
character of this House, to deaden its
weight and Influence in the country, and
in the end absolutely to destroy its in-
dependence. As if with the design of
creating distrust of, and animosity
against, the Council, it has been insi-
nuated, not charged, that the Council
is engaged in a conspiracy, against the
people. It is not charged, I repeat,
but insinuated, lag’o-like, against us
that we are in a conspiracy, because,
forsooth, the great bulk of the members
of the House coincide in opinion on a
political question on which it is our
duty to form a judgment. To be in a
majority is to conspire it seems against
some imagined majesty of the people!
Even the cheers with which certain ]
speeches have been received in this
Louse are hinted at as overt acts of
treason ! I admit that lam myself a con-
spirator, if to join with others to work
out, to the best of my ability, the
welfare of this country is cons ir icy.
But let no one dare charge me wi h
conspiring against the public good or
the people’s just rights. I am here
to do my best for the country, and I have
a right to do so according to my con-
sceiuce, without fear and without favour.
(Cheers) The main questions for our con-
sideration are, whether there shall be a
Legislature of one or two Houses ; and
if the latter, what shall be the character
of the Upper House ? But, before con-
sidering these questions, there are two
points to which 1 desire briefly to refer.
The first of these is the question of the
Civil List. 1 am not about to touch
upon any matter personal to myself or
my office, but I will merely allude to the
objections which have been taken to the
alleged extraordinary amount of this re-
servation, Now, the term Civil List is
perhaps an unfortunate one, and its true
nature is very generally misunderstood.
To show what is the nature of the Civil
List in England, 1 will read a short pas-
sage from Stephen’s Commentaries, the
only authority with which I mean to
trouble the House during my address—
Tins is an annual sum granted by Parliament
at the commencement of each reign, for the ex-
pense of the Royal household and establishment,
as distinguished from the general exigencies of
the State, and is the provision before stated to be
made for the Crown, out of the taxes, in lien of
its proper patrimony, and in consideration of the
assignment of that patrimony to the public use.
This arrangement has prevailed from the time of
the Revolution downwards, though the amount
fixed for the Civil List has been subject in dif-
ferent reigns to considerable variation. At the
commencement of the present reign a Civil List
was settled on her Majesty for life, to the amount
of £385,000 per annum, payable quarterly, out of
the Consolidated Fund, of which the sum of
£60,000 is assigned for her Majesty’s privy purse ;
in return for which grant it was provided, that
the hereditary revenues of the Crown (with the
exception 8f the hereditary duties of excise on
beer, ale, and cyder, which were to be disconti-
nued during the present reign,) should, during
tiie present Queen’s life, be carried to, and form
part of, the Consolidated Fund,
In this country, the civil list may per-
haps include something more, when a
settlement is being made upon a sur-


render to the Legislature of a branch of
revenue which has hitherto been vested
solely in the Crown, or legislated for
only by the Imperial British Parliament.
Still there are many things included in
the Schedule to this Act which do not
belong to a civil list. Of this character
(for example) are the reservations for
public worship, and the salaries and pen-
sions of the Judges. In England these
latter are provided for by Act of Par-
liament, and are in fact permanent
appropriations of the revenue, but do not
form part of the civil list; and as re-
gards the sum reserved for public worship,
1 would remind the House that it isplaced,
in certain proportions, at the disposal of
the various religious bodies—given, in
fact, to the masses of society, and in no way
available for the support of the Execu-
tive Government, or practically subject
to its control. We might with equal
justice charge upon the civil list the
permanent grant of £SOOO a-year to the
University, and our other votes for edu-
citional purposes. (Hear, hear.) The
salaries of the Judges, being fixed and
permanent, and their pensions also, should
be provided for by statute. Indeed, all the
items of expenditure to which 1 allude
are unquestionably necessary, and should
be put upon a permanent footing, but
they do not belong properly to the civil
list; and if they were .excluded from the
consideration of it, the real amount, it
would be seen, was very small. (Hear,
hear.) The second point, on which I
will touch very lightly, is the question of
electoral divisions. As to the main prin-
ciple there is no dispute. None in this
House have gone the length of contending
that population should be the sole basis
of representation, while all admit that it
should form one of the chief elements.
The question in dispute is, therefore,
only one of degree, and one consequently
which can be more properly disposed of
when the Bill gets into committee than
in the debate upon its second reading.
(Hear, hear.) I will not trouble the
House by going into the question as to
whether the Legislature should consist
of one or two chambers, since it is con-
ceded on all hands that there should be
two. I will proceed, therefore, to ex-
press the opinions which I have arrived
at, after the best consideration which I
have been able to give the question, as
to what should be the constitution of the
Upper House. I concur with the under-
stood majority of this House in the
opinion that the members of the Upper
Chamber ought not to hold their seats
by virtue of popular election ; and con-
sider that the hereditary principle is in-
admissible. The members ought, I con-
ceive, to be nominated for life ; their
number should be unlimited; and the
appointments should be made by the
Governor and Executive Council, that
Executive Council being composed of the
responsible ministers for the time being,
(Hear, hear.) This would be, I think,
in as strict analogy to the British Con-
stitution as the circumstances admit of.
We have heard a great variety of sug-
gestions, both in the House and out of
the House, as to what should be the
constitution of an Upper Chamber.
Within the House we have five classes
of suggestions. First, it is proposed
that the members should hold their seats
by hereditary right; secondly, it is
suggested that they should be nominees,
either for life, or for some specific term
of years; thirdly, -it is proposed that
they should be elected by the freeholders ;
fourthly, that they should be elected by
the ordinary class of electors ; and fifthly,
there has been dimly shadowed forth a
plan bearing some supposed analogy
to the constitution of the American
Senate. Out of doors the suggestions
were so numerous that their name
is Legion. Not only every paper,
but nearly every column, contained
some new device. One honorable mem-
ber—he who insinuated the charge of
conspiracy against those who differed
from him—had himself spoken of this
elective plan as an “ experim jnt.” 1
like not the idea of experimentalizing
on such a matter ; but I would urge
upon the country, that if an experiment
is, indeed, to be tried, we should try
that in which it may be possible to re-
trace our steps; not that which must
be irrevocable without a revolution


Nomination may be abandoned in favor
of the elective principle, if experience
should show the latter to be preferable;
bat let election by the masses be once
conceded, no experience will induce our
future statesmen to revert to nomination.
If there be a doubt as to what principle
is best for the country’s welfare, I would
say to the country, hold fast by the Bri-
tish constitution, and adopt the form the
most analogous to it. By that constitu-
tion each of three estates possesses, in
theory, an absolute and equal veto. But
in practice there is a mode in which the
popular voice can be made paramount
whenever that voice makes itself heard,
not by the mere ebullition of a day, but
by the result of deliberate consideration.
The right of refusing the supplies gives
the people.the means of checking the
power of the Crown, and compelling the
reform of abuse, while if the House of
Lords resists any great measure of re-
form which the nation calls for, it
can be swamped by new creations. It
is true that this power of swamping the
House of Lords can be exercised only
by the Sovereign, but the power of the
purse strings gives the people a control
over the Sovereign, and hence, indirectly,
over the lords. Yet the exercise of this
paramount power is to be so regulated and
checked, that ample time and opportunity
may be given for the nation to recover its
equilibrium, if at first carried away by
passion. The control of the people is in
a healthy, natural action—not impulsive
and irregular. If the lords and com-
mons differ, the nation hears and pon-
ders on the debates in each House;
and if at last its will is unmistakedly
declared against the lords, they grace-
fully bow their heads, and the storm
passes over, and does no mischief in its
course (hear, hear.) There can be no
doubt that it is these constitutional
powers of compelling reforms, which
after due and careful deliberation are
judged necessary by the people, which
have been the safety valve of the British
nutkm, and have preserved it from revo-
lutions such as have torn and distracted
the other countries of Europe (hear,
hear.) How any revolution in England
might have ended it is impossible to
determine. It would have been quite as
likely to end in Royal tyranny as in the
tyranny of the people, and either of
these would have been enormous misfor-
tune. With but one exception the House
seems unanimous in thinking that it
ought to adopt a constitution analagous to
that of Great Britain, though we differ as
to the analogy of different systems. The
one honourable gentleman who enter-
tains a different view has drawn com-
parisons between the British House of
Lords and the American Senate, with a
view of showing the disadvantages of the
former, and the excellency of the latter.
He has taken us back to the times of
villenage, and of lordly tyranny in Eng-
land ; be has told us of the alleged abdi-
cation of its functions by the House of
Lords on one occasion, as proof of our
uselessness in times of difficulty ; and he
had said, that if the British Constitution
were to be formed anew no House of
Lords would be heard of. The Senate
of America, on the other hand, he main-
tains to be all that is excellent; and
he has asked us, as it were, to look upon
this picture, and on that, and to say
which of them, as painted by himself, is
the best. I will not speak dogmatically,
and perhaps, therefore, the honourable
member may be right, but I cannot think
so. lam not prepared to look so far
ahead as some honourable members pro-
pose to do, who see republicanism in
the distance, and seem anxious to pre-
pare for its reception. lam content to
look to the present time, and to so much
of the future as is within the visible
horizon. If honourable gentlemen are
desirous of recording tbeir opinions as to
what form of government they should
have w r hen this colony shall become an
independent country, 1 would advise them
to write a book upon the subject, and
leave it for posthumous publication by
their grand-children. (Hear, hear, and
laughter.) lam content to legislate for
the present condition of the country, as
an integral portion of the British empire,
and subject to the Queen of England;
and I would leave to those who may live
in the far distant days of Australian in-


dependence, to frame such constitution as
may be suited to.their times and circum-
stances. (Hear, hear.) We have been
asked whether the British people would
have a House of Lords if called upon to
make a constitution now. That question
may be answered in the negative, or in
the affirmative, according to what is
considered the people. If we regard,
in this lipht, hastily got up and excitable
public meetings, at which villienage and
other such inflammatory staples of mob-
oratory, should be largely spoken of,
and at which the great deeds of those
who formed the ancestry of the present
Peers should be forgotten, and the fre-
quent championship of the House of
Lords for the people’s rights and liberties
kept out of view, then there would doubt-
less be a cry to get rid of this branch of
the Constitution. But if by the people
be meant our assembled representa-
tives, deciding upon careful deliberation,
and giving only a due influence to the
cry from without, or the nation at large
expressing its calm and deliberate choice,
then I am confident that the Constitution
as at present formed ‘will be affirmed.
(Hear, hear.) But suppose that it were
destroyed. This would not prove that
the Constitution is in itself bad. Would
it not rather prove that those who did
away with a Constitution that has stood
so successfully the test of time, and has
such an unparalleled amount of political
freedom, and so much of national great-
ness, were unfit to deal with such a
question. I will now examine separately
the various proposals which have been
made for the establishment of an Upper
House. And first, as to an hereditary
House. From the very commencement of
this matter I have looked upon the estab-
lishment of an hereditary Upper House
as an impossibility. However much 1
might have desired to see something cor-
responding with the House of Lords in
this colony, I am well aware that almost
all the essentials of such a house are
wanting. But there is another obstacle,
which is quite beyond the regions of
speculation. It will be remembered that
in the British Constitution there is the
safety-valve before alluded to, by which
effect can be given to the popular will,
without destroying the institutions of
the country. But if an hereditary house
be established here, that safety-valve
cannot be available unless the po»ver of
appointing peers be local. Now such
a power has never existed in a British
colony—
Mr. WENTWORTH : Yes. In the
settlement of Maryland, Lord Baltimore
was expressly empowered to create peer-
ages ; which shows that power can be
delegated bv the Crown.
The SOLICITOR-GENERAL : It
appears I am mistaken as to the facts;
but practically the power has not been
exercised, and certainly it would not be
delegated now. But if the power he
not local, what would occur in case of a
collision between the hereditary and the
popular House ? Why, the responsible
minister of the Crown in the colony
would have to appeal to the Queen, or
rather to the minister of the day, who,
not being liable to a stoppage of the
supplies, or otherwise dependent upon
the representatives of the colonial people,
would be practically irresponsible. So
that if the Upper House were to resist
with obstinacy the popular will, and a
revolution were consequently to become
imminent, there would practically be no
safety valve whatever, and the institu-
tions of the state would run the greatest
risk of destruction. These considera-
tions alone, I think, present an insuper-
able objection to the establishment of an
hereditary House. Then, a proposal
has been made by an honourable mem-
ber to have an Upper House elected by
the large freeholders. That proposition
has not met with any support in the
House, notwithstanding the able and
masterly speech in which it was intro-
duced. Very little indeed has been said
either one way or the other in reference
to it, except by my honourable friend
the Colonial Secretary last night. But
I will state the objections I see to this
proposal. In the first place, it would
have the effect of setting class against
class ; and it would create for one class
of the community a superiority over the
others. That class would have, besides


the common right of electing the Lower
House, the exclusive right of electing
the Upper House, which I need scarcely
point out would be apt to lead to the
most serious jealousies and most deplor-
able antagonism (hear, hear) —particu-
larly as that antagonism would not pro-
bably exist on the majority of topics,
but precisely on those which specially
affect the interests of each class,
( Cheers.) In all the fallacies of general
legislation, it is only too probable that
both the Houses would be identical;
whilst the most dangerous differences
would occur upon questions of class, such
for instance, as those which are likely to
arise between freeholders and Crown
leaseholders ; and as the Houses would
be co-ordinate and independent, without
any safety-valve, the danger would be in
the obstinate resistance of the Upper
House to the will of the more numerous
class represented by the Lower House.
(Hear’ hear.) 1 come now to the next
proposition, which is that the Upper
House should be elected by the same
franchise as the Lower. lam unwilling l
to repeat the arguments which have been
addressed to show' that these two Houses
can only be duplicates of each other.
I feel that it would be impertinent in me
to trouble the House with a repetition of
arguments, on a matter which is so self-
evident. But. there is one observation
which L would make. Almost all the
arguments which go to show the neces-
sity for separate Chambers, equally prove
the necessity for their being elected or
appointed by different powers. (Hear,
hear, hear.) For if they were both
elected by the same franchise, there can
be no doubt that on all popular questions
they would be unanimous. Possibly, as
a mere revising body, the Upper House
might be of some use as an occasional
check upon hasty legislation ; but on all
great popular questions it would be
simply and purely a reflex of the Lower
House, and the government would be-
come a pure and simple democracy.
(Hear, hear.) In point of fact, it would
be nothing more than an assertion of the
divine right of the numerical majority to
govern without check or control; a doc-
trine to which I will never subscribe.
The Senate of the United States has
been held up as a model for imitation,
and has been contrasted with the House
of Lords ; but if the matter is to be
determined by contrast, I think a com-
parison of the American Senate with
the elective Upper House, which is
here proposed, would exhibit a contrast
quite as marked and more unfavourable
to the former. The Senate of the United
States is entitled to all laudation, as
being the most conservative body that
circumstances would admit of. I believe
it to be an admirable institution. Its
foundations are deeply laid in the virtues
as well as in the vices of human nature.
The Senate is elected by the States;
being chosen in the majority of the
States by separate votes of the two
Houses of legislature, and in some States
by a concurrent vote of both houses, and
so far as is possible it is conservative.
Indeed, the great men who laid the
foundation of that institution well knew
the foibles of men as well as their vir-
tues ; and they calculated wed, when
they foresaw that, from its very composi-
tion, the Senate, composed as it would
be of the representatives of Sovereign
States, would be inclined to carry its
authority with a high hand, and to form
a bulwark against the tyranny of demo-
cracy. They knew that the greatest
men men of the highest character,
ability, and probity—would, for the sake
of each electing State, be selected.
Moreover, they knew the effect of po-
sition upon human character—they knew
that the pride of place—that each mem-
ber’s reflection that he was in his own
person an embodiment of the will and
power of a Sovereign State, and the
guardian of its dignity and rights
would give them a lordly tone, and make
them abundantly conservative. This is,
I suppose, what the founders of the Ame-
rican Senate calculated on. (Cheers.)
But in what respect would the proposed
elective house resemble that Senate ? I
can conceive no one point of resemblance.
It is proposed that the members should
have a higher property qualification ;
and should hold their seats for a son.e-


what longer term than the members of
the Lower House; but the House well
knows what these conditions amounted
to in such a country as this. The
House well knows that the posses-
sion of a little less, or a little more
money—or the possession of place for
a little less or a little more time,
will have no real effect. (Cheers.)
One of the arguments advanced in sup-
port of such an elective house by one
honourable member is, that there should
be no taxation or legislation without re-
presentation. That honourable member,
lam sure, must see his mistake. I
should have supposed, if I had not
known my honourable and learned friend
too well, that he really believed the con-
currence of two of the legislative estates,
to be sufficient for the enactment of any
law, or the imposition of any tax. I
know that such a notion has been
adopted by one person, of whom I will
not say whether he is a member of this
House, or whether he is a supporter of
the elective principle forthe Upper Cham-
ber, and I feel that the argument is one
calculated to catch and mislead the
ignorant and unreflecting; and on that
ground that it calls I'or a degree of notice
which it does not of Itself deserve. Is it
not sufficient, to save the principle that
there shall be no taxation without repre-
sentation, that one House should be re-
presentative ? Can a single sixpence be
expended, or a single law, great or
small, be passed, without the consent of
the Lower House ? Why, in England
the principle of representation applies
only to the Lower House ; yet no one
objects to the House of Lords having a
voice in the imposition of taxes. An-
other honourable member has advanced
other arguments —if arguments they
may be called—which I scarcely know
how to deal with. That honourable
member acknowledges himself, that he
has only recently come to the conclusion
that an Elective House would be desira-
ble ; and his conclusions are founded,
not on his own opinions, but on certain
speeches, delivered some time ago, by
various individuals in England. I confess
when I saw my honourable friend (Mr.
Cowper) take up one little piece of printed
paper after another, I asked myself what
on earth my honourable friend would
have done without his scissors ? (Roars
of laughter.) Now I have no intention
of detracting from the authority of Lord
Grey and the other lords and gentlemen
whose speeches have been quoted; but,
after all, much as lam disposed to re-
spect those opinions, lam not quite pre-
pared to concede to those individuals
any superiority over this House, in
ability to decide this matter. (Hear,
hear, from Wentworth.) They might
bring greater talent and a higher posi-
tion to bear upon their arguments ; but
they have not the actual local experience
which we possess ourselves; they can
be but theorists, whilst w r e have to
practically with the question. (Cheers.)
And, after all, Ido not see that their
opinions so very clearly supported the view&
in support of which they were quoted, or
in what way they were more weighty than
those of lords and gentlemen who took
the opposite view of the question. Some
of the noble lords, indeed, have derided
the idea of establishing anything like
a House of Lords in a colony. But
their lordships have their faults as well
as other men, and, perhaps, some pride
and some exclusiveness entered into that
derision. (Cheers.) Again, some have
declared that nominee houses have uni-
formly failed. But what kind of nomi-
nees ? Such nominees as we have the
honor—or, perhaps, the misfortune—to
be: Nominees mixed with representatives
of the people in the same house, and owing
their seats to an Irresponsible executive
—a system which leads to a constant
and irritating species of antagonism,
and, perhaps, to rather more obloquy
than the nominees really deserve.
(Hear, hear.) But where is there an
instance of nominees having failed when
combined with responsible government ?
I will assume that Canada, perhaps,
may be adduced as an instance. But
then, in Canada, there are two antago-
nistic races, constantly struggling for the
ascendancy over one another—one ot
which, however amiable and intelligent,
has never been remarkable for political


sagacity. (Hear, hear.) But in this
colony, where the people are essentially
British and essentially one, I fear no
such result. I am, in fact, at a loss
to discover upon what principle the pro-
posal of an elective house is based, unless
it is intended to throw the whole power
of the state into one class. We have
often heard “ the right divine of Kings
to govern wrong” questioned; but now
it appears to me that they who reject
that dangerous doctrine, as applied to
Kings, contend for the right divine of
the people to govern wrong. I acknow-
ledge no right to govern, in the ma-
jority, as such. 1 will only admit that
power should be extended to the people
as far as it is for the benefit of the com-
munity as a whole ; in fact, for their
own benefit. I will admit, as the past has
shewn it to be safe and right to give
gradual development to the power of the
people, so the day is approaching when,
by the further growth and diffusion of
intelligence and of virtue, it will be wise
and expedient to grant them a larger
and a constantly increasing share in the
government. (Hear, hear.) But I
utterly deny that any man has an inhe-
rent and personal right to a share in the
government. It depends entirely upon
his fitness—upon his relation to his fel-
low men—upon the existing constitution
of his country—and upon those maxims
and balances which are necessary to pre-
serve the equipoise of the State.
(Cheers.) Subjects, as well as Kings,
must be content to have their powers
subjected to such checks and limitations
as are necessary for the public welfare.
I will not detain the House long with
what I have spoken of as a plan sha-
dowed forth in analogy to the, American
Senate; for, in truth, I think I have
gone too far in attributing any substance
to the views of the honourable member,
who has descanted so largely on the
merits of that institution as contrasted
with the House of Lords. That honour-
able member has not favored the House
with any plan by which his preference
could be indulged; and I answer that it
is an impossibility. Without going fur-
ther into this topic, I think it sufficient
to observe, that there is no confederation
of independent States, as in Ameiica,
and consequently no analogy exists (hear,
hear). Carefully considering the pro-
visions in the bill for a nominee
Upper House, I think that, in all essen-
tial particulars, it is the nearest approach
that circumstances permit to the great
institution of the House of Lords. I
have no doubt that it will have within
its walls men of honour, wealth, intelli-
gence, and experience—not Lords, cer-
tainly, but men who, whilst they will be
independent, will not be absolute ; and
who, if they despotically persist in
opposing the popular will, (will find
their power controlled by the Ministry,
who will be the concentration of public
opinion and popular power. I do not
see how it is possible that such a House,
with responsible Government, can be
dangerous to the public liberties, or
obstructive of national progress. No
doubt the two houses would often be
antagonistic ; but it is well they should
be so ; and I have little fear that it will
be anything but a healthy antagonism.
(Hear, hear.) It has been made a grave
objection to the principle of nomineeisra,
that the first House is to be nominated
by the Government. It is quite clear
that the Council must be created in the
first instance, and before responsible
Government is established; and I ask
what better power could be selected to
create this body than the existing Go-
vernment ? Its creation gives no undue
advantage to ,the Government. The
political features of the colony as yet
have hardly cast their shadows before.
When the present question as to the
Constitution is settled, the Executive
Government of the colony can scarcely
be said to have any political opinions.
So that, supposing the Government were
wicked enough to appoint a nominee
House, having reference to the presumed
pliability of members to carry out bad
measures, they really would have nothing
to guide them in the choice of their
tools. Measures which they had never
dreamt of interfering with them wmuld
in all probability be found to recoil
upon themselves. But if the Upper


Chamber were elected by the people, or
by the Lower House, the particular
politics of the electors at the time of the
election would guide them in their choice;
the sentiments of each and every mem-
ber would be carefully ascertained and
weighed; and thus the Upper House
would be simply the reflex of the Lower.
With this view of the case, I contend
that the first nominee chamber should
be appointed by the existing Govern-
ment. (Cheers.) It has been urged, in
objection to a nominee House, that in
Canada the Conservative party is in
favour of an elective house, whilst the
Liberal party is firm in respect to the
maintenance of the nominee chamber.
If this be so, how strange is it that they
who assume to be the Liberal party in
this House should refer to the case of
Canada in support of the principle of
popular election. For myself, so far
from thinking that a nominated Council,
with responsible Government, will not be
subject to the popular will, I feel that
the danger lies rather in the opposite
direction. I refer to the danger that
a power which should be regarded only
as the “ last resource of the Constitu-
tion,” should be resorted to on insuffi-
cient occasions—the almost unrestricted
control which the representative body
would possess, through a minority de-
pendant upon its votes, might at any
lime be so used as to destroy the balance
of the State. Against this danger we
should have little security but in the
good sense ol the people and the wisdom
of the future statesmen of the country.
But to these, and such checks as the
Governor could interpose, I hope and
believe that we may trust. I am con-
vinced that the deep responsibility, which
will attend upon the exercise of the
power of swamping the Upper House,
and the conviction which men of emi-
nence will feel of the importance of
preserving the Constitution intact, will
restrain all such rash and hasty inter-
ference with the Upper House, as will
impair its weight and usefulness; and
I feel sure that a wise and courageous
exercise of the power would not be more
surely rewarded by public approbation
than would the unconstitutional abuse of
it be, in time, followed by retributive
condemnation. (Cheers.) It is also to
be remembered that, in this extreme case
of swamping the Upper House by the
infusion of new members, the assent of
the third estate here, the Governor-Gen-
eral, would have to be obtained; and
although his Excellency would in most
cases yield to his minister, yet in so mo-
mentous a matter there can be little doubt
that the most careful and anxious
deliberation be exercised. I
sincerely believe that the proposed Con-
stitution may be received with confidence
by the country, in the firm reliance that
the safety-valves of which I have spoken
will never be opened for the purposes of
destruction. (Loud cheers.) I will
advert only to one other topic before I
resume my seat. It has been asserted
that the present nominees in this
Council have no right to take part in
the debate on the Constitution Bill.
I deny that proposition. The nominees
are appointed members of this House by
the Act of Parliament under which it
meets. They, perhaps, may be regarded
as the conservative element of the
Council, and as such it is important on
this, as on many other subjects of legis-
lation, that they should take their proper
part in the councils of the country. In
a reform of the House of Commons,
would any one have the hardihood to
assert that such reform should be con-
ducted by the Commons alone ? Still
more, if a reform of the House of Lords
were contemplated, would the duty be
confined exclusively to the Commons ?
Why, such a proposition would amount
to a revolution. (Hear, hear.) The
Imperial Legislature, by whose authority
the power of framing a new Constitution
has been conferred, has assigned that
power to this House as at present con-
stituted. It is, therefore, not only our
privilege, but the bounden and solemn
duty of the nominee members to delibe-
rate and vote on this great question as
their convictions may require. Their
privileges, if they have any, apart from
their duty, they may relinquish as they
will; but their duty on this occasion


it would be shameful to abandon. Thus
impressed, I have addressed the House ;
and in voting 1 , I feel that I am perform-
ing the greatest public duty it may ever
he ray lot to be called upon to discharge.
(Loud and prolonged cheers.) If, in so
speaking and so voting, I am contri-
buting to the framing of a good Con-
stitution for this important colonv, I
shall be truly happy. I firmly believe
that I am; for the Constitution Bill
before the Council appears to me to
have been framed with reverential
regard to the noble principles of the
British Constitution. Under that Con-
stitution I have been born ; have lived ;
and hope that I shall die ; and the same
high privilege I fervently pray may
be the lot of my children and their suc-
cessors. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. THOMAS BARKER : In offer-
ing a very few observations on the im-
portant question before the Council, I
cannot but express extreme surprise at
the invidious remarks which have fallen,
during the debate, from honourable
members, as to the position of the no-
minees who sit by the authority of the
Imperial Act in this chamber. Sug-
gestions have been thrown cut, that a
gentleman sitting here as a non-elective
member has actually lost his position in
society. I desire to ask upon what
grounds such a suggestion is thrown
out ? I will, as one of this abused body,
assert that I have as much right to speak
and to vote here as any of the elective
members. Really, a stranger unac-
quainted with the existing Constitution
of the colony would imagine that the
Crown nominees are a most disgraceful
set; with no consciences; no stakes in
the country; no integrity: in fact, that
they were men of straw. Now, I fear-
lessly assert, that the non-elective mem-
bers are fully as respectable and inde-
pendent as the elective; and therefore
I cannot understand on what ground
they are to be shut out from speaking or
voting on this great question. The
nominees are not chargeable with having
broken their promises to their consti-
tuents ; a charge too often justly made
against those who, on the hustings,
1 make all manner of pledges to the
electors which they never mean to keep,
and do not keep in the Council chamber.
(Hear, hear.) lam sorry that the ho-
nourable and learned member for Cum-
berland (Mr. Darvall) is not present,
because I desired to advert to several
points, whereupon I consider that ho-
nourable gentleman has stigmatized the
nominees most unjustly. With reference
to the Bill before the Council, I quite
concur with all that has fallen from those
who have given such warm tribute of
praise to the honourable and learned
framer of the Bill and his able col-
leagues. The report by which it is ac-
companied is a most valuable document,
worthy to be ranked with any state paper
of the oldest legislatures. (Hear.) Look-
ing at the despatches, and all the various
papers which have passed between this
colony and the mother country, on the
subject of the New Constitution, I feel
that the house is bound by the compact
recognised through all this correspon-
dence, in respect to a nominated Upper
Chamber. His Excellency, in recom-
mending the petition of that Council,
certainly had a nominee Upper House
in view : and when to that house it was
promised to cede the appropriation of
all the revenues of the colony, .and the
disposal of the waste lands, unshackled,
save by a civil list—the amount of which
is left to the Council to determine—it is
most certain that the home government
considered a nominee Upper House a
main condition in the compact. As to
the probable choice of nominees by the
Government, can there be in the minds
of any reasonable man the least doubt
that the nominees would be men of high
standing, honour, property, and intelli-
gence,—men in every respect identified
with the best interests of the colony.
This has been called a money-loving
community, and I fear that it has too
truly been called so. lam afraid that
very many people think of the acquisition
of money only—and nothing else. I
fear danger from the arts of these mere
money-making men. t Why, it would be
the easiest thing for these people, by the
wily use of a little money (and very little


rould suffice), to pack an elective Upper
louse, and by the aid of their cats-
aws there, and their confederates in the
>wer chamber, effect the most gigantic
chemes of spoliation. (Hear.) One
f their first acts would most likely be to
>wer the minimum price of waste lands,
nd this done, it would be no difficulty
o monopolise all those that were avall-
ble. This might be easily done by half
dozen designing men; and the know-
?dge that it could be done is, in my
pinion, the real reason why the move-
lent against the conservative principles
f the Constitution Bill had been so suc-
ssful out of doors ; on no other grounds
,n I conceive that the leaders would act
3 pertinaciously against reason and
otnmon sense. A few daring specu-
itors (if the agitation without, pre-
ailed) might swallow up all the waste
mds of the colony ; each pocket one or
wo hundred thousand pounds, and then
?ave tho counlry to its fate. I shall
upport the second reading of the Bill.
Cheers.)
Mr. TIIURLOW: In rising to address
he house at this late period of the de-
ate, I will explain why I have not taken
n earlier opportunity of joining in the
iscussion of this most important ques-
ion. I feel that, out of doors, I have,
o a certain extent, been committed on
his question, and that I have not all
he liberty of a free agent in respect to
t. I have come into the house by an
ccident—by a vacancy occurring from
he absence of one of the members for
he city of Sydney, and not from being
eturned at a general election. Now it
s known that when the election took
dace, this question of a Constitution was
poken of very largely. The Constituion
Mils brought up by the select committee
'f last session, and laid upon the table,
vere canvassed by the public and the
»ress ; and it w'as very generally con-
idered out of doors that they would be
ery materially altered before being
irought before the house in the present
ession ; and if this conviction had not
;n entertained, no doubt there would
iave been petitions sent in for a disso-
ution of the Council. Feeling this, I
have wished to hear what could be said
in defence of the Bill before 'I expressed
my final opinion upon it. I find it ne-
cessary to say, that as a member of the
Constitution Committee, it has been a
matter of deep regret to me, owing to
circumstances over which I ould have no
control, that I have been unable to attend
its discussions so frequently as I could
have wished, and ought to have dove,
and to suggest such amendments in the
measure before the house, as would have
made it more acceptable to the people at
large. It is, however, possible, that in
a further stage of the bill, if it should be
read a second time, these amendments
may still be made. I take much blame,
in common with others of the Committee,
for not having made these suggestions
in their proper place; for it does appear
to me, that all suggestions that were
made in the Committee have been em-
bodied in the measure broug-ht up by the
honourable and learned member for Syd-
ney,—a measuie which I admit is dis-
tinguished by much learning and re-
search, and which, to some extent, re-
flects much credit on the honourable and
learned framer. There are, however,
many portions of it which are not accept-
able out of doors. In proceeding to dis-
cuss this question, I would beg to make
one or two prefatory remarks. I well
know that for a long time past I have
been looked down upon by a portion of
the present government; but this feel-
ing will not lead me to any factious o
sition to the present measure. There
are, I am proud to say, many members
of the Government who, though their
view's are hostile to my own on this
question, are actuated 1 know by the
most conscientious motives. But in mak-
ing a constitution for this country as at
present circumstanced, it cannot be con-
cealed that there is a portion of the
members of this House whose position
may naturally lead them to support a
measure w'hich has the favour of the
Government. The determination the
House will come to on the present mo-
tion is, I take it, pretty well known.
The course the debate has taken has
cleared away all doubt on that head.


The supporters *of the Bill Tiave, one
after the other, been most favourably re-
ceived ; and as, no doubt, the members
of the Government have the right to
confirm their speeches by their vote,
there will be a large majority in favour
of the measure. Whatever may be the
result of this Bill, however, it cannot be
said that it is a constitution framed by
the representatives of the people. If
the Bill passes its second reading, and
goes into committee, there are some of
the clauses for which the members of the
Government cannot vote. In re-
ference to those clauses I will say that,
so far as the salaries of the officers of
tiie Government are concerned, I have
no wish to reduce their amount. I
gather from the observations of the
honourable and learned Solicitor-General
that it would be impossible to elect an
Upper House in this colony. Now I
cannot see the reason of this. If the
people of the colony have all the requi-
site qualifications to elect one house, I
do not see why they should be unable to
elect another somewhat similar in char-
acter, but chosen from a different source.
But it is said by another party that there
would be difficulties enough in finding
materials for one house: but if the
people had intelligence and prudence
enough to elect one House of proper
members, they would have intelligence
enough also to elect another House of a
conservative character. Neither does
the argument against the competency of
the people to elect their own legislators
seem to me very consistent, considering
the source it comes from. In the petitions
which have been sent home from this
House, praying for redress of grievances
and concession of rights, the House has
a!w r ays claimed the power for the people
of this colony to govern themselves ; and
in the despatch of Sir John Pakington,
in answer to one of these petitions, the
fullest admission has been made of the
intelligence and ability of the colonists
to govern themselves. Sir John Paking-
ton, in his despatch, states, in reference
to this colony—
With the evidence thus before them, they can-
not but feel that while it has become more
urgently necessary than heretofore to place ful
powers of self-government in the hands of i
people thus advanced in wealth and prosperity,
that people have on the other hand given signal
evidence of their fitness to regulate their "own
affairs, especially under legislative institutions,
amended in the manner which the Council itseil
has pointed out in the concluding part of this
petition.
(Hear, from Mr, Wentworth.) It is tru(
that the reservation spoken of is in allu-
sion to the offer of the House to accepi
a constitution similar to that of Canada
But we heard the other night, from the
honourable member for Durham (Mr,
Cowper), that there is a change aboul
to be made in that constitution, which
will render it much more democratic
than it is at present. But why, I ask,
on such a question as this, should we
be bound by an offer made some time
ago, when our consideration of the
matter had been small, to take a con-
stitution which may be injurious to
the interests and dangerous to the des-
tinies of the country. Are we to be
bound in a matter of this kind as in a
matter of bargain and sale, for money
or goods, or chattels ? We had far
better wait to see what the changes
are which it is proposed to make in
the Canadian constitution, than take one
which will not work well, which can-
not work well, and have eventually to
fall back upon the miserable system
under which we are now governed.
What constitution, I would ask, can
exist for long, which is opposed to the
wishes of the great mass of the people,
against which protestations are being
received from all parts of the country;
that is opposed by those whom it is the
fashion in this House to call a mob, but
among whom, are men of standing and
intelligence equal to any honourable
member. But it has always been the
habit of the Council to treat the ex-
pression of public opinion out of doors
with disrespect. (Oh, oh.) We never
hear of attention being paid to opinion
out of doors, unless it is expressed by
men of great wealth, standing,
and some character : then, indeed, their
voice is listened to, but the industrious
classes, and their appeals, are entirely


orgotten. (Cheers.) They are not
dlowed to enter into consideration in the
jassing of laws by which they are to be
iffected; their voice is of no weight;
hey have no right to appeal, and are fit
>nly to be ruled by an iron law. (Oh,
»h.) It seems to be the wish of a cer-
ain class in this House that no man of
ow station should be allowed to rise to
espectability—that he ought to be pre-
'ented from aspiring to the advantages
)f education and the rights of property.
No, No.) We have heard a vast num-
ier of authorities quoted by various
mnourable members—the press has been
;rammed with them, and I admit that
nany of these were quoted from writers
leserving great attention. But they
ire, for the most part, antiquarian
.uthorities. They are full of that sort
if liberty which prevailed in ancient
imes, and the authors were very good
,nd useful men to live in those times, but
hey only partially apply to our present
tate. We have heard of America, and
if other States, and of England itself.
But there might be loyalty in England,
iven although the House of Lords should
>e abolished, which it might be if its abo-
itlon should be again asked for. I would
isk, in framing a constitution for this
solony, should we go back to the ages
>f barbarism, when tyranny existed in
ivery shape under the authority of kings
ind queens. We may try these
heorles, based on the authorities that
lave been read, but I repeat that we shall
lever be able to make any constitution
:hat will stand, whiph is not sanctioned
ly a vast majority of the people. But
;hough the people out of doors, who
jppose the bill, do not perhaps look as
ffosely into history as honourable mem-
bers, they certainly are not men deserv-
ng of the titles of federalists and
socialists. It has been said the Go-
vernment out of doors has lost the con-
fidence of the country. I believe that
some of its members have ; although, I
idmit, there are some, who, in the event
if responsible government, would be re-
turned, by the people, to the House.
But the people are heartily sick of nomi-
ueeism ; and the House itself has, for
years, been protesting against it. It has
been the greatest contest in which the
House has ever been engaged, and the
honourable and learned framer of this
bill has been the leader in the cause of
liberty. We have seen that nomineeism
has been an injury to the country ;it has
kept down everything but favoritism
among a certain class, and yet, after all
this, some now want to ask for nomi-
neeism in another shape as the best go-
vernment they can have. The only
suggestion which has been made of "a
different form of constitution is con-
tained in the very eloquent address of
the honourable member for Cook and
Westmoreland (Mr. Martin) ; and it is
that the Upper House should be elected
by the landowners of the country. But
this would be the election of a class only,
and I agree with the honourable and
learned Solicitor-General that it is not
necessary to wait to see whether a man
has bullocks, or whether he has land, to
give him a right to vote, so long as he
possesses that intelligence which can be
turned to his country’s good. I see no
more difference between the landlord and
the tenant, than Ido between the pro-
ducer and consumer, and I would give
neither the preponderance. I also ob-
ject to the clauses restricting the
qualification of membership from clergy-
men and the judges, though cer-
tainly I should not be very likely
to vote for either; nor do I think
the people out of doors would. Still,
however, these restrictions ought not
to exist, as the time may come
when even these classes may be roused
to action. The House has already passed
a law excluding clergymen, but it has been
disallowed at home. I think, also, that
the clause relating to hereditary honors
should be modified, and also the clauses
for the distribution of members, and the
clause respecting the squatters. I fully
admit that the squatters are a class de-
serving the greatest consideration, and
that they have done much service to the
country; and if they had been, on one
occasion here, led on by the people to
obtain that possession of the lands which
is now thought undesirable, I would yield


to them that fair and reasonable com-
pensation to which they are entitled tor
the restitution of those lands. With
respect to one other clause—viz., that
respecting the schedules—l would say,
that if the principle on which it is founded
be right, and I am not conclusive on this,
that the officers on the government should
be pensioned otf. I do not think the
amounts at all too high. I am for
paying all good public servants well.
There is one class of public officers in
particular which to the best of my ex-
perience and judgment has always been
underpaid ; I allude to the law officers of
the Crown. The learned Judges have
very heavy and responsible duties cast
upon them, and it is only just to say that
they have always discharged them in the
most upright and honorable manner. It
is matter of pride to this country tnat it
is the one colony of the empire in which,
after careful research and deliberation,
an honest decision can be obtained as to
what is law. (Cheers.) This is a most
important consideration. The Bench is
the highest tribunal to which the people
of the colony can appeal. The Judges
stand between the Crown and the peo-
ple, as the safeguard of their rights,
their properties, and their personal liber-
ties. Therefore Ido not object to these
amounts, although there are some gen
tlemen who have lately crept into office
with liberal salaries, who, if this clause j
were passed, would have to retire at too
early a period on the expense of the
country. Although I am a junior mem-
ber of the House, and although there
are many members whose tenure in this
Council is much longer than my own,
and for whose abilities and public and
private character I have the highest re-
spect, still, on a question of this nature,
I feel I have as good a right to speak
freely as any one. Still, I have not
identified myself with the opposition to
this measure out of doors, because I did
not think it was fair for me to do so, []
until I had heard what could be said in
favour of the mnasure in the House,
and I had determined on leaving my
judgment unfettered ; if I felt I ought
to vote for it, I would resign my seat. I
■ agree, however, with the honorable an
• learned member for Sydney, that membei
i of the House ought not to be mere deh
. gates, but that all ought to vote accorc
ing to their conscience. I think tin
some concessions might be made in th
Bill. The hereditary clauses, for ii
stance, might be given up. Not bt
what I believe their introduction int
the measure has done much good b
having opened out something for the re
flection of the colonists, which had nc
been thought of before. Ido not thin
that the power to confer these title
should be given by Act of Parliamenl
I but they might be conferred by her Ma
jesty on deserving subjects here, and i
would have been a wise and generou
spirit for the government to have dis
played, had it recommended the
—the fountain of all honor—to confe
on those men in this country, who ii
its early and struggling days conferre<
honour on it; and it may be those mei
are as worthy of such honours as thosi
in the mother country who now enjo'
them. The Colonial Secretary has toh
us of his having been inundated with ap
plications from gentlemen who desire t<
be enrolled in the commission of tin
peace. What has been the result of al
this I will not stop to enquire. Th<
honorable gentleman has a record ii:
his office, and he might see from this
I vvhat service these persons had rendered
to the country, and how far thev
were respected. If this system ol
nomination was to be taken as a speci-
men of what a government might do,
even in defiance of the people, the House
ought to pause before they opened the
door for the exercise of such a power.
It is admitted, that we only want an
Upper House to prevent hasty legisla-
tion, and that it will be impossible to
create any thing analogous to the House
of Lords. But if the nominees in this
house have no weight, what additional
weight can they acquire by being placed
in a separate chamber ? No advantage
will be gained, and there will be a
continued risk of the extreme measuie
of a stoppage of the supplies being re-
sorted to in order to resist coercion from


this Upper House. We ought not to call
these antagonistic powers into existence ;
but, with the many recent arrivals, it is
quite possible that a sufficient number to
constitute both Houses may be elected
in whom the people will have full con-
fidence. And I would suggest this:
if the colonists generally are competent
to elect members for the Lower House,
where all the intelligence of the country
will be needed, they may be equally
trusted to elect, directly or indirectly,
the members of an Upper House. I
would propose, therefore, that the gen-
tlemen elected by the people should
have power, either from their own num-
ber, or from the colonists at large, to
elect a small number—say 21, for seats
in the Upper House. To make the
latter independent of those who .ap-
pointed them, I should propose to give
them a term of office, not, indeed, for
life, but three or four times as long as
that for which the members of the Lower
House would hold their seats. It may be
said that this would be a mere duplicate
of the Lower House ; but this would not
be the case. The nature of its position
and term of office would render it inde-
pendent, while it would be indirectly
appointed by the popular voice. There
are other suggestions from a gentleman
(Mr. Norton), whose standing and long
experience entitled him to considerable
weight in that House, and whose sug-
gestions honourable members would do
well to consider. Their leading feature
was, that the government should nominate
100 gentlemen, and that out of this
number the elected chamber should select
twenty-one. 1 concede that this subject
is one of very considerable difficulty, and
admits of very wide difference of opinion.
What is the proposition of the body out
of doors, which has taken this matter
into consideration, I am not prepared to
say, not having yet had an opportunity of
considering it. But in any case the
House has no right to gag these people.
I should rather be prepared to give a due
consideration to their suggestions. It
is a great pity that expressions should
have gone forth taunting and branding
these people as ail that is contemptible.
There is, I maintain, as much intelli-
gence among these people, and as earnest
I a desire to promote the best interests of
the country as there is in this House.
There has been no demonstrations antago-
nistic in the slightest degree to the law
of the country. (Hear, hear.) In
former years no one was so much looked
up to as the hon. and learned member
for Sydney. I have myself been in the
habit of looking up to that gentleman as
one of the ablest men in the country.
And if I now insist upon the expression
of any particular views, it is that gentle-
man's influence and example I have to
thank for it. Although differing from
the hon. and learned member’s present
views, and opposed to his present mea-
I sures, people out of doors still admire him
I for his great abilities, and appreciate the
good he has done in times past. That
gentleman might, in fact, pass as safely
through the city at any hour of the
twenty-four as the most popular member
of the day. The people, Avhose repre-
sentations have been rejected and treated
with contempt by that House, must
j appeal to the Parliament of England if
I this measure be pressed against their
will. And if they are compelled to take
this step, one object which the House and
the country have in view, that of obtain-
ing responsible government, will be de-
feated. The government at home will
never venture to confirm a law which has
been passed by thirty gentlemen in the
face of thousands; and seeing that
| there is no agreement here as to what
i form of constitution should be adopted,
I they can come to no other conclusion
! than that the time for granting responsi-
| ble government had not arrived. I will
call upon the House to pause ere it
grafts nomineeism upon this measure,
in the vain hope of establishing an in-
stitution bearing some analogy to the
British House of Lords. We have
abundance of talent and abundance of
experience among us, and we ought to
make a constitution for ourselves—a
constitution not copied from that of
any other land, but one which shall
be peculiarly our own, and adapted to
the exigencies of the country. There


are people here of all pursuits. The
honourable and learned member for
Sydney has himself had a finger in
every pie, and an iron in every fire,
until he attained his present happy
position of complete and comfortable
independence. And this, by the by, he
attained through the gold discovery,
from which he predicted nothing but
loss and confusion.. The interests of
the country are by no means identical
with those of its great freeholders or
great squatters, and no paramount in-
fluence should be given to either of
these classes. Mr. Lowe, I presume,
will not be objected to as an autho-
rity in this House, (hear, hear, and
ironical cheers,) and I will quote from
that gentleman with reference to the
position and influence of nominees,
although, as a general principle, I must
condemn, as useless, the very lengthy
and continued quotations from various
writers in all ages which have been made
throughout the debate. Mr. Lowe
said—
I speak with some degree of certainty upon this
Subject, because I have had the honour of filling
that office myself, and of resigning it, because
I found it impossible, whatever I did, to fill it to
the satisfaction of my own conscience, and, at the
same time, to the satisfaction of others. For
instance, if I voted with the government, I was
in danger of being reproached, as I have been on
one or two occasions, by representative members,
as a mere tool of the government, and not,
according to the theory of the constitution,
acting for the colony at large; and if I took the
opposite course, and voted with the opposition, as
I did upon most questions, and upon none more
heartily than on that relating to district councils,
J was reproached by the officials as a traitor to
the Government. In fact, I was in this position
—if 1 voted with the government I was taunted
with being a “ slave and if I voted against
them, I was taunted with being a “traitor.”
The emoluments of the office are not so tempting
as to induce any one with the least spark of in-
dependence to put up with this situation, and
therefore I thought it the wisest course
to resign my seat, and I did resign it
altogether. Observe, now, the position which
these nominees hold universally throughout the
colonies. It is one full of anomalies. They re-
present nobody ; yet they have not the slightest
affinity to an aristocratic institution. They are
the scapegoats of the constitution, the target for
every attack, the butt of every jest. Ignominy
and obloquy rain thick upon them : and when it
is asked whether the colonies have materials for
J a second chamber, the question may, I thint
with more propriety be put, can they have mu
terials for nominees ? Can they have people s
j paramount in talent, so independent in property
i so conciliatory in manner, so combining al
sorts of contradictory attributes, that they cai
} hold this invidious office without exposing them
i selves to the sort of treatment to which I hav
J alluded? That I think is impossible; and it i
not my opinion alone, but that of almost ever'
other person throughout the Australian co
lonies.
At one time the whole house had beer
in arms to put down this creature nomi-
neeism (hear, hear, and laughter). Tht
hon. and learned member for Cumber*
land, and the hon. member for Durham,
brought under the consideration of tht
House a great mass of arguments and
authorities to show the fallacies of this
measure; but they had all up-hill work,
and met with nothing but unmerited
abuse. The hon. member for Northum-
berland has entertained the House with
details of tyranny and oppression during
the early times of America. But surely
the hon. gentleman does not mean to
say, that such acts would be permitted
here in the present day. They might
have done very well at former periods
of the colony’s history, for there were
many cruelties here in times past. What
those cruelties were I will not stop to
inquire; but I will leave the hon. mem-
ber to inquire for himself. The de-
tails of the measure will have to be
considered and discussed when it goes
into committee, and I will therefore
not detain the House by going into any
of these questions. My chief desire has
been, in performance of what I conceive
to be ray duty to my constituents, to
vindicate them from the aspersions which
have been cast upon them. I again en-
treat the House to pause before it admits
this principle of nomineeisra into the
bill. After having contended so long
and so earnestly to get rid of this sys-
tem altogether, it is better that hell
should gape, and swallow us, than that
we should thus, by our own act, give
up a measure of freedom within our
grasp.
Mr. NICHOLS: Had it not been for
the lengthy arguments which have just
been addressed to the House, I should


not have thought It necessary to trouble
the House long. As to the attacks upon
the honorable and learned member for
Sydney, I may well leave him to defend
himself. But whatever opinions may be
entertained upon this bill, however the
measure may be condemned, I have no
doubt that every reflecting and impar-
tial man must give the honourable and
learned gentleman who framed it, credit
for having preserved and conservated the
best interests of the country. (Cheers.)
In its main features this measure is cha-
racterized by a large and enlightened
liberality; and we should be traitors to
ourselves and to our posterity if we re-
fused to accept it. (Cheers.) Now I am
unable to come to the conclusion that
the country is not pledged to this mea-
sure, although I admit that some latitude
of discretion is allowed in the despatches
of Sir John Pakington; and I believe if
the measure is not accepted, the colony
will lose all those great advantages which
it has so long contended for, and which
are at length conceded to it. I believe,
although the question of a nominee or
elective house will have to be settled in
Committee (hear, hear), I believe that
this bill will check anarchy, whilst it
will secure to every man his liberty.
(Loud cheers.) And when future gene-
rations shall enjoy the inestimable bless-
ings of true public liberty—when the
party animosities and personal antipathies
of the present day have faded away—
when our posterity comes to weigh im-
partially the great actions of distin-
guished men-r-I believe they will place
at the head of the list of the worthies of
Australia, the name of William Charles
Wentworth. (Loud cheers.) I believe
that, as a reward for his public services,
he will have the praise of having laid
the deep and secure foundations of the
future empire of the South; for, to use
his own expressions, there is no doubt
that this colony has been precipitated
into a nation. I and my honourable and
learned friend are not wanderers in the
land ; we are natives of the soil—all our
affections and all our hopes are centered
in this land; and can we so betray our
posterity as to found a constitution which
will degrade us as a nation? (Cheers.)
We are of the people. Have not I
risen from the ranks of the people ?
Has not my honourable and learned
friend raised himself, by his genius and
his talents, from the ranks of the peo-
ple ? Is he not one of the people now ?
and has he not the same deep interest in
the country as any other man has ?
Why should he wish to injure himself
and his own children ? Does any one
believe it possible that he who has
achieved for his country the freedom ot
the press, trial by jury, and the right of
electing its own representatives, that
he should wilfully forfeit his claims to
the gratitude of that country, —that he
should deliberately tarnish his fair
fame ? (Cheers.) Ido not and cannot
believe this. I cannot believe that, at
the close of his great career, my honour-
able and learned friend could be such a
traitor to himself. (Cheers.) The lion,
member for Sydney has quoted some ob-
servations of Mr. Lowe in support of
his arguments ; but if he had read a
little further he would have found that
those observations -went the other way.
And, indeed, Mr. Lowe is well known to
have changed his opinions as often as
the earaeleon changes its skin. (Hear,
hear.) In the speech of Mr. Lowe to
the Colonial Reform Association, in
June, 1830, after he had quitted this
country, though he complained of his
position as a nominee, he never dreamed
that the Imperial Government would
consent to give an elective Upper House
to the colony. And he had first broached
the idea in a letter which was addressed
to the editor of one of the Sydney
papers. lam surprised—or rather lam
not surprised—at this sudden change of
opinion on the part of Mr. Lowe.
(Laughter.) I have answered that letter
. through the press, referring to the former
speeches of that gentleman, because I do
not like to see my fellow-citizens led
away bv the opinions of a man who is so
constantly vacillating. (Hear.) [ihe
honourable gentleman here referred to
one of those speeches in which Mr. Lowe
had strongly advocated the maintenance
of the British constitution.] It is my


desire to see that British constitution
lOaintained. I have been taunted with
changing my opinions; and, in truth,
I did begin life as a radical, but only as
a radical reformer of all proved abuses ;
and I have yet to learn that the British
bonstitution is a proved abuse. (Cheers.)
On the contrary, it is acknowledged on
ail hands to be the pride, the admiration,
and the glory of the world. (Renewed
cheering.) The honourable member for
Sydney has said that he is not here as a
delegate but as a representative ; but his
speech denies his assertion. His speech,
indeed, is merely a repetition of what
has appeared for the last month past in
the columns of the Opposition press, and
1 compliment the honourable member on
the excellence of his memory. (Laugh-
ter.) But I have a much higher view of
the duty of a representative. If my
services to my constituency are not worth
their votes, I declare at once that I care
not two straws for a seat in the Legisla-
ture. (Hear, hear.) These are my
principles. I have a deep respect for
public feeling and for popular applause ;
but I will always give my honest opinion
fearlessly, hoping that what I do will be
for the benefit of the country. (Cheers.)
If they reject me, let them do so ; I shall
be no worse a man, and they may get a
better representative. (Cheers.) I have
no intention to trouble the house with
lengthy authorities ; and, indeed, I think
that it is a very inconvenient practice
that has grown up in this house; but i
will refer briefly to a modern writer who
has lived in the neighbourhood of a de-
mocracy, and knows well what it really
is. Now it may be that I should be for
extending the franchise; and I think
that a class of persons who are now paying
large taxes to the Government ought to
be enfranchised. But I believe that in
no part of the world is life and property
safer than in New South Wales. (Cheers.)
Kvery man that is honest and indus-
trious can sit under his own vine and his
own fig-tree. The Government has done
much by its educational plans to advance
the social and moral welfare of the
people ; and it is no vain hope that,
ia future days, orators, statesmen, and
| poets, will spring up in this land equal to
those of any other country under the
! sun. (Cheers.) The labouring classes
i are better off than in any other country.
| Would to God the poor starving thou-
sands in the mother country could share
in their abundance, for all we want are
the sinews of the labourer to make this
i colony a great nation. But though 1
; a:n favourable to the extension of the
franchise, I am not now for universal
suffrage. 1 read my recantation on that
point (hear, hear) ; and I am reminded
of an old man, now living, who was the
contemporary of Fox, Pitt, Burke, and
Sheridan, but who acknowledged that
in early life he was a Radical, in middle
age a Whig, and he intended to die a
Conservative. (Laughter and cheers.)t
Now I believe in my heart the honourable
-member for Sydney is the rankest aris-
tocrat in the colony (renewed laughter) ;
and that he would be eminently fitted to
succeed Lord Campbell, of Campbell’s
Wharf. Why, I remember the time
when the honourable gentleman would
not deign to sit upon a jury. (Hear,
hear.) Where was he when the Pa-
triotic Association was fighting for the
I liberties of the country ? (Laughter.)
I Why, either in his • counting-house,
I counting out his money, or at the Pestle
and Mortar Club. (Laughter.) Talk
about consistency ! Why he is the most
inconsistent man in the House. (Cheers.)
And I will tell him that 1 thought at
first that the representation of Sydney
ought to be increased; but, after the
exhibition he made of himself the other
night, I am more inclined to think
that Sydney has one representative too
much. (Laughter and cheers.) I have
listened to the honourable gentleman's
speech with great attention; but I defy
anybody to understand what he meant,
and I defy the honourable member him-
self to explain what he meant. (Con-
tinued laughter.) Of all the melancholy
exhibitions that have ever been made by
the representative of such a city as this,
that was the most disreputable. Tlx?
honourable member from Salisbury Plains
(Mr. Marsh) has said that the greatest
constituencies often returned the worst


members ; and I am only too much
afraid it is true in the case of Sydney.
'Cheers and laughter.) The honourable
member said he would support the Bill,
yet all his arguments were afgainst it:
lie reasoned in a circle, neither knowing
where he began nor where he left off.
'Cheers and laughter.) I will now quote
i few passages from Sam Slick, to show
the absurdity of an elective Upper
.ouse ;
That's the beauty of havin’ two bodies, to look
it things thro’ only one spyglass, and blow
bubbles thro’ one pipe. There’s no appeal, no
redress, in that case, and what’s more, when one
party gives riders to both horses, they ride over
von like wink, and tread you right under foot, as
arbitrary as old Scratch himself. (Laughter.)
I’here's no tyranny on airth equal to the tyranny
>f a majority; you can’t form no notion of it
unless you seed it. Jist see how they sarved
them chaps to Baltimore last war, General Lin-
gan and thirty other fellers that had the impu-
dence iO say they didn’t approve of the-Join’s of
the administration ; they jist lynched ’em and
itoned ’em to death like dogs. We find among
us the greatest democrats are the greatest
tyrants.
I have no doubt the honourable gen-
tleman would live to find that out.
( Cheers.) Looking at the effects of de-
mocracy on the Continent and in Cali-
fornia—looking at the shooting down of
innocent women and children in France,
and the hanging of people without trial
in America, I would ask, is that the sort
of government that Englishmen desire ?
(Cheers.) God in his infinite goodness
preserve this country at all events from
such horrors as those. (Loud cheers.)
But let the house hear Sara Slick again:—
If there l>e any good in that ’are Council at
all, it is their bein’ placed above popular excite-
ment, ami subject to no influence but that of
reosoa, and the fitness of things; chaps that
have a considerable stake in the country, and
don't buy their seats by pledges and promises,
pledges that half the time ruin the country if
they are kept, and always ruin the man that
breaks ’em. It's better as it is, in the hands of
tie government! It’s a safety-valve now, to let
atf the fume, and steam, and vapour, generated
by the heat of the Lower House. If you make
that branch elective, you put government right
in the gap, and all difference of opinion, instead
If being between the two branches as it is now,
That is, in fact, between the people themselves,)
would then occur in all cases between the people
md the Governor. Afore long that would either
seal up the voice of the executive, so that they
clarn’t call their souls their own, or make ’em
onpopular; and whenever the executive once
fairly gets into that are pickle, there’s an eeml
of the colony, and declaration of independence
would soon toller. Papenor knows that, and
that’s the reason he’s so hot for it—he knows
what it would lead to in the eend. That critter
may want ginger, for ought I know ; but be
don’t want for gumption, you may depend.
Elective Councils are inconsistent with colonial
dependence.
(Hear, hear.) No one could doubt that;
and I would ask whether the IToqse
would rather see the colony independent,
or see it continue under the protection of
the glorious flag that has
Braved a thousand years,
The battle and the breeze ?
(Cheering.) I do not think it worth
while to reply to the scissors and paste
speech of the honourable member for
Durham, I have read it, but I can
make neither head nor tall of it. (Hear,
hear). I have been taunted with making
an after-dinner speech, in which I said
that, if the British Government refused
to concede the colony its rights, they
could look to American sympathisers to
enforce those rights. True, I did say
so; but has not the British Govern-
ment actually conceded all demands ?
(Cheers.) There is no occasion now for
sympathisers to take away our allegi-
ance from our Sovereign—(cheers)—and
I will say, with my honourable ami
learned friend the member for Sydney,
that I hope the British flag will never
again witness the bloodshedding of free-
men ; and whenever the day comes
—which may come indeed—in which
a separation must take place, it will be a
peaceful separation. (Cheers.) The
House will pardon me if I now say a few
words in reference to the hereditary
clauses. It has been said of me that I
want to become Marquis of Waterford.
(Laughter.) As reasonably might they
call my honourable friend from Toxteth
Park Earl of Drlnkwater. (Renewed
laughter.) I have never done the dis-
graceful things which were recounted
of the Marquis of Waterford. lam
strongly opposed to hereditary titles, for
I consider that where high merit claims


recognition, it is at the Sovereign's own
hands it should be given. It has been
made a matter of obloquy that the local
government has been inundated with ap-
plications from gentlemen desirous to be
placed in the commission of the peace.
I deny that such a desire is a too ambi-
tious one. In distant districts of this
colony, where probably the farms and
stations are infested with marauders or
hostile tribes, it is natural, on the part of
gentlemen holding large stakes there,
and also for their neighbours and de-
pendants, to desire to have the great ad-
vantages of the speedy administration of
justice. ' Those gentlemen, tfierefore,
who profess their willingness to perform
the onerous duties of justices of the
peace, so far from being twitted with
being guilty of an Inordinate ambition,
ought to be praised for aspiring to an
honorable and responsible office (cheers).
To one mis-conception of the honour-
able member for Sydney (Mr. Campbell),
I must allude ; and in doing so, I would
observe, that when members express
their opinions upon points of constitu-
tional law, they really ought to take the
trouble to make themselves acquainted
with the principles and provisions of the
laws they referred to. A fair knowledge
of the laws under which he lives is an
important part of every gentleman’s
education ; and I was certainly surprised
to hear the honourable member, in de-
precating the exclusion of judges from
seats in the legislature, (as proposed in
the bill before this House) assert that
judges sat in the House of Commons by
virtue of their offices: Now, the fact is,
that the only one who now occupies a seat
in the Commons is the Master of the Rolls,
and that is deemed so objectionable, even
though he is an elective member, that a
bill has been introduced to exclude
learned gentlemen, in his position, from
being eligible for election. In respect
to the exclusion of clergymen from seats
in the Council, I (Mr. N.) would refer
the honourable member to the special
act made in the case of Horne Tooke, |
which prohibits any one who had ad- |
ministered the Sacrament from being :
elected to Parliament,
Mr. CAMPBELL .' A special Act is
not part of the Constitution,
Mr, NICHOLS : I have always been
taught that an Act of Parliament is
' part and pSrcel of the Constitution ; and
i both as respects the exclusion of judges
I and clergymen from the House of Com-
mons, I maintain that the highest con-
stitutional principles have been carried
out. As to a judge occupying a seat
in the legislature by virtue of his office,
the danger is incalculable. A political
judge is placed in the most invidious of
all positions. On the one hand, the ne-
cessary suspicions which would be raised
as to bis integrity and impartiality would
sadly impair his usefulness on the judg-
ment seat, be he ever so independent
and upright; whilst on the other, he, if
a willing tool to power, would be in a
position to endanger the liberties of the
people. (Hear, hear.) In this colony
the baneful results of judges sitting in
the legislature has been seen in former
days. A high minded and honest judge
has been bullied in Council by a despotic
governor, to whose mandates he refused
to yield, (Hear.) I hope that such
scenes will never again occur in this
colony ; and, I will repeat, that a poli-
tical judge is the most dangerous evil
with which a community can be cursed, J
(Loud cries of hear.) In times of poll- J
tieal strife and social danger, what
might not be dreaded, if persons ac- i
cused of treason, libel, or other offences
against the state, were arraigned before
a judge who had already, in his capacity ]
of political partisan, expressed in his
place in Council his decided opinions
upon the very questions he was called ,
upon to try in his place in the Supreme
Court? (Hear, hear.) With reference
to the approximation of the Constitution,
now proposed for this colony, to that
of Canada, it has been asserted the
latter has worked badly ; but I do not
believe that any proposition, to amend
or modify either that or the Jamaica
has yet been formally
brought before Parliament. I will ob- |
serve that, with the exception of the new
Cape Constitution, which is scarcely
working as yet, there is no instance of


a British colony where the nominee prin-
ciple does not obtain in respect to the
Upper House. The recent experiment
at the Cape is too new to be referred to;
but it is opposed by a very large and
influential body of the wealth and intel-
ligence of the colony. (Hear, hear.) As
to the alleged failure of the nominee
principle in Canada, it is easily accounted
for. Those who were foremost in the (
rebellion were now at the head of affairs
in that country. In looking over the
list of the present Canadian ministry, I
find the name of one who was an assigned
servant of mine, when he arrived in this
colony under sentence of transportation
as a rebel. (Hear, hear.) That indivi-
dual was a man of honour ; and his only
offence was a political one ; and I merely
allude to the circumstance to show that
angry political differences, the antago-
nism of two unfriendly races, old family
feuds, jealousies, and struggles for su-
premacy, prevent Canada from being, in
respect to its social constitution, any
precedent for this colony’s guidance.
The high principles, however, of its poli-
tical institutions had been carefully
weighed both here and at home when
this colony asked for a new constitution ;
and I feel, looking at the terms of the
correspondence between the Governor-
General and Sir John Paklngton, that
the Council is bound by the contract
then made in its full integrity. (Hear.)
I think that honourable members have
misconceived the question when they
allude to the dangerous power which
could be exercised by an Upper House
of nominees. What undue power could
they exercise so long as the purse-strings
were held by the Lower ? (Hear, hear.)
I conceive that this would be the course
of action in the event of the Bill passing
into law. The election of members for
the Lower House would first take place ;
and amongst the elected I sincerely hope
to see certain members of the present
Government. (Cheers.) Most earnestly
do I hope, above all, to see my honour-
able friend (the Attorney General) re-
turned as a representative of the people—
a meet tribute to his worth and ability,
and in grateful recollection of his long
and unwearied services, both as a legal
adviser of the Crown, and as a member
of the Legislative and Executive Coun-
cils of the colony. (Loud cheers from
all parts of the House.) The election
over, it would then be the duty of the
Governor-General to form his ministry,
and, with responsible government, it is
clear that the ministry must be chosen
in accordance with the approval of the
majority of the House. In a little
brochure just published in Sydney, this
fact is recalled to our recollection
by quoting some observations of Mr.
Roebuck, in reference to a fallacy per-
vading at the time when the Reform
Bill was under the consideration of Par-/ 1
liament. The learned gentleman writes
thus ;
Who determines all the important acts of the
King ? Is it the King or the House of Com-
mons ? By whom is Lord Melbourne made mi-
nister? Is it by the King or the House of Com-
mons ? It is notorious that his most Gracious
Majesty cordially detests the present ministers ;
but ho cannot get rid of them, simply because
the House of Commons determines that he shall
have no one else. In a desire for independence,
the King lately chose Sir Robert Reel. What
was the result ? The Commons very coolly told
his Majesty that Sir Robert did not suit them,
and Sir Robert consequently retired. So it is
with all the acts of the Crown. The ministry,
while in office, determine everything, and the
are chosen by the Commons.
Well, the ministers chosen by the Go-
vernor in accordance with what his Ex-
cellency would undoubtedly know to be
the wishes of the House, the first nomi-
nees of the Upper Chamber would be
chosen with their sanction and upon their
recommendation ; and thus it must be
plainly seen that the first nominee
chamber would, virtually, be appointed
by the people through their representa-
tives, (Loud cries of hear.) If, on the
other hand, there were two elective
Houses, so both would claim the right of
holding the purse strings, and having an
equal right in the appropriation of the
public revenues. And suppose a rupture
between the two chambers, and one re-
fused to pass the money-bills of the
other, what would be the result ? The
wheels of government must at once
stand still. (Hear, hear.) The elective


and non-elective checks are thus found to
be necessary; and as they are essential
elements ol the British Constitution, I
earnestly hope they will be found in the
new political institutions of this colony.
(Cheers.) With regard to the cry out
of doors as to injustice threatened to the
people, I will say, that in the working
sense, in every sense of the word, I
myself am one of the people. The
working man who tolls from six in the
morning until six in the evening, does
not toil so hard as I do. Frequently am
I busily employed from six o’clock in the
one morning until two or three in the
next; and thus Ido lay claim to the ho-
norable title of a laboring man. Still I,
in that capacity, deny the right of the
laboring classes, who form, of course, a
large majority in most communities, to
monopolize that power claimed for them
by the leaders of the movement now
attempted out of doors. I must again
express my concurrence with my friend
Sam Slick, who thus describes the min-
ister’s toast—“ May our Government
never degenerate into a mob, nor our mobs
grow strong enough to become our Govern-
ment.” (Loud and long continued cheers.)
Having recurred to Sam Slick, I will, for
the edification in particular of my hon-
orable friend and member for Sydney
(Mr. Campbell), whom I strongly advise
to study the Clockmaker, request atten-
tion to the following passage. He is
speaking of the British Constitution, and
he says:—
Presarve the principle of the mechanism of
your Constitution, for it ain’t a bad one, and
presarve the balances, and the rest you can im-
prove on without endangerin’ the whole engin’.
One thing, too, is sartain—a power imprudently
given to the executive or to the people is seldom
or never got back. I ain’t been to England
since your Reform Riij passed, but some folks
say it works complete, that it goes as easy as a
loaded waggon down hill, full chisel. Now,
suppose that Bill was to be found alterin’ any of
the balances, so that the Constitution couldn’t
work many years longer, without cornin’ to a
dead stand, could you repeal it, and say, “ As
you were ?” Let a bird out of your hand, and
try to catch it agin, will you ? No, squire, said
the Clockmaker ; you have laws for a regilatin’
of quack doctors, but none a regilatin' of quack
I>oiiticians. Now a quack doctor is bad enough,
and dangerous enough, gracious knows, but a
quack politician is a devil outlawed—that’s a
fact. (Loud laughter.)
I wo&ld observe that there can be no
doubt that the framing a constitution for
a colony is a grave and most nice ex-
periment, and I think that New South
Wales ought to be truly proud that she
is the only British colony to which has
been entrusted the important duty of
framing its own constitution. That
many amendments and modifications
may be needed in time, the experience of
the past assures us. The Reform Act,
that great work of a “ bloodless revolu-
tion,” is now about to be amended by its
noble author in various points where
new concessions are to be given to the
people. But here, also, the power of
amending our constitution will be given
to us under the conditions of the bill
before the council. I, however, would
observe that organic changes ought not
to be made here without the utmost cau-
tion and deliberation. In America, it is
to be remembered that federal states
form a supreme government themselves ;
whilst, with us, our right to govern
ourselves, is derived from a higher ori-
ginal power. (Hear.) Before I con-
clude I will once more draw attention to
some further sayings of the clockmaker,
for, upon the question of “ Elective
Councils,” the learned author offers, in
the disguise of Sam Slick, some most
valuable suggestions:
“ What would be the effect, Mr. Slick,” said I,
“of elective councils in this country, if govern-
ment would consent to make the experiment T'
“Why, that’s a thing,’’ said he, “you can’t do
in your form o’ government, tryin’ an experi-
ment, tho’ we can ; you can’t give the- word of
command, if it turns out a bungling piece of bu-
siness, that they use in militia trainin’ “as yon
were.” It’s different with us, we can—our go-
vernment is a democracy—all power is in the
people at large ; we can go on, and change from
one thing to another, and try any experiment wo
choose, as often as we like, for all changes have
the same result, of leavin’ the power in the same
place and the same hands. But you must know
beforehand how it will work in your mixed go-
vernment, and shouldn’t make no change you
arn’t sure about. What good would an elective
council be ? “ It is thought it would give the upper
branches,” said I, “more community of feeling,
more sympathy and more weight with the country
at large : that being selected by the people, the
people would have more confidence in them, and


that more efficient and more suitable men wonkl
be chosen by the freeholders than the crown.”
“ You would jist get the identical same sort o’
critters,” said he, “in theeend, as the members of
assembly, if they were elected, and no better;
they would be selected by the same judges of
horse flesh as t’others, and chose out o’ tiie same
flock. It would be the same breed o’ cattle at last.”
“ But,” saiu I, “you forget that it is proposed
to raise the qualification of the voters from forty
shillings to forty pounds per year ; whereby you
would have a better class of electors, and insure a
better selection.” “Jist try it,” said he, “ and there
never would be an end to the popular motions in
the House of Assembly to extend the suffrages
—for every thing that gives power to numbers
will carry numbers, and be popular, and every
feller who lived on excitement, would be for ever-
lastin’ly a agitatin’ of it, candidate, slangy-
whanger, ami member. You’d have no peace;
you’d be for ever on the move as our citizens are
to New York, and they move into a new house
every first o’ May-day.”
With reference to the movement which
has been begun out of doors, I beg dis-
tinctly to be understood in my admission
of the full right of the people to meet
for the purpose of considering public
questions, and petitioning the Legis-
lature, which petitions, when respect-
fully worded, it is the duty of mem-
bers to present. But I cannot hut be
struck that the objections now raised
against this measure have never been
urged until wdthin the last month or so,
when the Constitution Committee made
their report and presented their Bills.
It is true that Mr. Beit has said that
he wrote a letter against the main
principles of the Bills some time ago,
but, with that exception, I do no not be-
lieve a single voice has been raised
against those principles which, it has
been known for a length of time past, it
was the intention of the Constitution
Committee to recommend and to main-
tain, Therefore, the silence of the colo-
nists may justly he taken to be a consent
to those principles, and I contend that
in all honour we are bound to fulfil the
contract which has been made. (Hear,
hear.) In conclusion, I desire to thank
the House for the patience with which
they have heard my lengthy, and, I fear,
tedious appeal to their attention. (No,
no, and loud cheers.) I know of no
country but this. It is my own. (Hear,
hear.) 1 therefore hope that, in the
discharge of my duty on so important an
occasion as the present, I am serving ray
country; for by any act of mine that
might tend to its injury, most assuredly
I should be deeply injuring myself. It
is a source of proud satisfaction to me to
be enabled to state, that when I had the
honour to be connected with the press ot
this colony, I single-handed advocated
the policy of that enlightened and liberal
Governor, Sir Richard Bourke, when it
was proposed that trial by Jury should
be introduced into the then penal colony
of New South Wales. And in other im-
portant movements in the direction ol
freedom, I ardently supported that wise
ruler as far as my position with the press,
and my humble abilities, would allow;
and justly proud am Ito have in ray pos-
session tlie most flattering testimonials
as to my earnest advocacy from Sir
Richard Bourke. (Loud cheers.) I have
lost a fortune in pursuing the course I
did, but I feel no regret at losing it in
so good a cause. (Hear, hear.) From
my youth to manhood I have struggled
for the liberties of my native land; and
never have I done an act in my public
career which I would desire \o recal.
The constitution which I have assisted
to frame will, I earnestly pray, enjoy
that permanency which my honourable
and learned friend, the member for Syd-
ney, predicts for it. Framed in accord-
ance with the great principles of the
British Constitution, I fondly hope that
it will be said, “ Esto perpetua,” and
that in its working it will ever tend to
the happiness and prosperity of the
people. (Loud and continued cheers.)
Mr. WILLIAM BOWMAN : 1 rise
to express my concurrence in every out-
line of the Bill. I believe it to be a
measure admirably adapted to its high
purpose; and I have not been able to
discover In any one of the plans proposed
in lieu of it, whether within or without
the walls of that house, anything prac-
tical or worthy of adoption. I regret to
be obliged to differ from many gentle-
men who oppose the Bill; but 1 con-
sider that sufficient attention to the
principles and provisions of the measure
have not been given by those out ot


doors who have Opposed it. No doubt
the citizens have a right to canvass the
merits of the Bill, but I deny their right
to dictate to this Council, which has ever
been ready to receive and to give every
attention to petitions. I sincerely hope
that the Council will not be intimidated
by out-door agitation, but carry out this
great measure, on which the destinies of
the colony depend. The personal at-
tacks upon the honourable and learned
member for Sydney, to whose great
ability the Council and the country are
indebted for the well considered and
comprehensive measures under consider-
ation, might well have been passed over
by that gentleman with pity; for he
assuredly stands too high in the opinions
of the colonists to render it necessary for
him to stoop to resent such poor assaults.
(Loud cheers.)
Mr. RUSSELL : Whilst I express
my concurrence in the main features of
the Bill, I cannot, as one of the mem-
bers for the northern district of the
colony, agree to a measure which, in its
fifty-first clause, prevents the separation
of Moreton Bay from the middle district
of New South Wales. I must, therefore,
feel it my duty, knowing how deeply my
constituents feel on the question of se-
paration, to oppose, in all its stages, a
measure which seeks to prevent the
attainment of that great object. With
reference to the remark made by the
honourable member for Sydney (Mr.
Thurlow), that the squatters locked up
the lands of the colony, I, as a squatter
myself, can only say that I should be
glad to see many of the pastoral lands
occupied for agricultural purposes, as
I will prove if any agriculturalists will
visit my stations. (Hear.)
The debate was adjourned, on the
motion of Mr. Morris.
Mr. MORRIS : After the long pro-
tracted debate which has engaged the
attention of the House, I feel that the
subject before it, as well as the patience
of the House, must be nearly exhausted ;
nor would Tmow venture to trespass on
the attention of the House for the mex-e
purpose of replying to the arguments of
tkdse opposed to the bill; but I will
j venture to claim the patience of the
j House, jn order that I may throw out a
j few suggestions, which may perhaps
j smooth the way to the removal of all
j difficulties in the way of the settlement
jof this important question. 1 have one
j satisfaction in addressing the House on
| this question, wdiich is, tjgxt I have so
i often seen some hon. members change
their minds upon it, that I think they
may pei'haps be induced to change them
yet again ; and I have felt the difficulties
of the question, and have experienced
this variation of opinion. In the first
place, I have been in favour of a nomi-
nated Upper House, then I turned to
favour an elected Upper House, but I
have now, with no real change of prin-
ciples, but a more mature consideration of
the circumstances, come back to my for-
mer opinions, and am convinced that
they are right and just; and I hope
that I may be able to induce some others
to follow my example ; and I would call
upon those who are opposed to this Bill,
to see now the greatness of the tyranny
which those who were opposed to it
would, if they could, exercise over hon-
ourable members of this House. I
would call their attention to this point,
and particularly would I remind the hon-
oui’able members who were opposed to
this Bill, of the wox-ds of scxdpture, “ Ixx
the gx-eatness of his folly shall the fool
be led astray.” I find in one paper that
has set its face against this Bill, and which
has for some weeks past been endeavoux*-
ing to subject this Council to a dominion
of terror, had on one occasion said,
that to bang the honourable and learned
member for Sydney, would be too good a
fate for him, and which has poured scur-
rilous abuse on every member who has
been opposed to its political views on this
question,—that in another, there was
made a most indecent pex'sonal attack on
an honourable member who addi’essed
the House last night on the Bill—an at-
tack founded principally on the circum-
stance of the honourable member having
quoted a book in which the author, under
a certain levity of style, conveyed prin-
ciples and precepts, which almost every
member of that House admitted to be


fraught with profound wisdom. (Loud
cheers.) This is the sign, the signal of
forbearance, of what is called the demo-
cratic party. I find, too, with much regret,
that honourable members of this House
do not hesitate in like manner to add
their weight in the endeavour to establish
this dominion of terror over the Legis-
lature of the country. I find the hon-
orable member for Durham, and the
honorable member for Bathurst, joining
in the assertion, of the Council being in
a conspiracy against the liberties of the
people. I did hope that some attempt
would be made to explain in what the
conspiracy consisted. The honorable
and learned member for Cumberland
(Mr. Darvall), who joins in the same
cause, said that the grounds for believing
in such conspiracy, were in the proceed-
ings of the Council in respect to this Bill.
The honourable member for Durham
said nothing; whilst the honourable
member for Bathurst (Mr. Bligh) has
alledged it to be in the 68th clause of
the Bill, referring to certain privileges to
be granted to squatters. None, however,
have condescended to say what the con-
spiracy really was, at what object it
aimed, and how it was being worked.
(Cheers.) This, I contend, is the mere
claptrap of the debate ; this is the real
levity which has been introduced into
this discussion. Well may those gen-
tlemen who are ’ content to adopt such a
course as this wish for American institu-
tions. But they now deny that they have
ever suggested American Institutions.
They now confine themselves to the
argument, if it can be called such, that
a representative house and a nominee
house would be continually brought into
collision. But when asked to go to the
American Constitution, then they re-
fuse to go, although it is the only foun-
dation on which their real views can be
maintained. They prefer, to having a con-
stitution on which individual as well as
national rights are secured, a system under
which security against wrong is never
even claimed. I am sorry to occupy the
attention of the House so long in pre-
fatory remarks, and I will now briefly
proceed to express my own opinions upon
the question. It is that the members of
the Upper House should be nominated
by the Colonial Parliament. This'isnot
a new idea, but one which has been acted
on in England ; and 1 find in Allen’s
history of the Middle Ages, the follow-
ing passages;—
The next method of conferring an honour of
peerage was by creation in parliament. This
was adopted b\ Edward 111. in several instance*,
though always, I believe, for the higher titles of
duke or earl. It is laid down by lawyers, that
whatever the king is said, in an ancient record,
to have done in full parliament, must be taken
to have proceeded from the whole legislature.
As a question of fact, indeed, it might be
doubted whether, in many proceedings where
this expression is used, and especially in th«
creation of peers, the assent of the commons
was specifically and deliberately given. It seems
hardly consonant to the circumstances of their
order under Edward 111. to suppose their sanc-
tion necessary, in what seemed so little to
concern their interest. Yet there is an instance,
in the fortieth year of that prince, where th»
lords individually, and the commons with ona
voice, arc declared to have consented, at tha
king’s request, that the Lord de Couroy, who
had married his daughter, and was already pos-
sessed of estates in England, might be raised to
the dignity of an earl, whenever the king should
determine what earldom he would confer upon
him. Under Richard 11. the marquisate of Dub-
lin is granted to Yerc by full consent of all the
estates. But this instrument, besides the unusual
name of dignity, contained an extensive juris-
diction and authority over Ireland. In the same
reign Lancaster was made Duke of Gnicnne, and
the Duke of York's son created Earl of Rutland,
to hold during his father’s life. The consent of
the lords and commons is expressed in their
patents, and they are entered upon the roll of
parliament. Henry V. created his brothers
Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, by request of
the lords and commons. But the patent of Sir
John Cornwall, in the tenth of Henry VI., de-
clares him to be made Lord Fanhope by “ con-
sent of the lords, in the presence of the three
estates of parliamentas if it were designed to
show that the commons had not a legislative
voice in the creation of peers.
Thus it is shown that, by the assent of
Parliament, peers have been created in
England. The process by which this
nomination by Parliament should take
place here, would be for the Governor to
send down notice to both Houses, of a
number of names as members for the
Upper House, and if there was no objec-
tion made to them, then that they should
be appointed. In the first instance, pf


course, the Upper Council would have to
be appointed pro tempore by the Gover-
nor, as in the case of new Corporations.
This seems to my mind to establish a
most salutary system of balances or
checks, in the constitution of an Upper
Legislature. I do not imagine that any
difficulties, even in practice, would arise
from such a system as this, as it must be
that only men of mind and standing
would be nominated. Such a system
v'ould, I think, keep out objectionable
persons, aud admit only those that were
unobjectionable, I have been told if
such a system were adopted, scenes would
occur in the House similar to those
which once occurred in the nomination
of the Senate of the Sydney University.
But I do not believe that this would be
the case. Improper and objectionable
persons would not be proposed, and such
objections could scarcely exist. I believe
this would be the best method of recon-
ciling the objections to both the nomina-
tive and the elective systems. 1 will now
beg to add a few remarks in reference
to the distribution of members under the
system of representation proposed. That
system will not alter the representation
as it at present stands ; but I agree with
the honourable Colonial Secretary that
there is nothing magical in the number
54: and I would add 4 members to that
number, 2 of whom I would give to Syd-
ney, and 2 to the southern and western
boroughs, thus ensuring full representa-
tion to the mercantile, manufacturing,
and mining interests. Now, although I
do not think representation should be,
based on population alone, I do not
think I shoul 1 find much fault at present
with such a system here ; and I find,
under the proposed system, that the agri-
cultural districts, with a population of j
87.000, return 26 members, or 1 member ;
to every 3347 persons. The Sydney
and other urban electorates, with a popu-
lar ion of 72,000, 20 members, or one
member for every 3600 persons. The
pastoral districts, with a population of
28.000, 12 members, or 1 for every
2330. By this it seems that the urban
and rural representation are nearly
the same, but that the pastoral dis-
tricts on this scale are at a disadvantage
of one third. But if we ai’e to take
tne true principle of adjusting the repre-
sentation in proportion to the adult male
population—who are alone entitled to
vote—we shall find a great difference.
I find that in Sydney and other urban
districts (on the basis of the last census)
the number of adult males was 19,565
and they returned 20 members, or 1 in
877. The counties had a similar, popu-
lation of 27,426, and returned 26, or 1
in 1054. The pastoral districts had a
population of 13,552, and returned 12
members, or lin 1130. Sydney and the
Hamlets, with a male adult population of
13,221, would return 8 members, or 1 in
1777. Other boroughs with a popula-
tion of 6334, 12, or 1 in every 526.
Cumberland, including Sydney, and other
boroughs with a population of 22,139,
returned 15 members, or 1 in 1475.
The County of Cumberland 4 members
from a population of 5943, or 1 in 1480.
Newcastle, with a population of 492, 1
member. Camden, with a population of
2789, 4 members, or lin 697. Parra-
matta, with a population of 1191, 2 mem-
bers, or lin 595. Cook and Westmore-
land, with a population of 1320, 2 mem-
bers, or 1 in 660. So that, with the
exception of the County of Cumberland
and Sydney, the pastoral districts are
less fully represented than any other.
I am satisfied that the addition which I
have proposed would be acceded to by
the House, and by my honorable and
learned friend, the member for Sydney,
whose only wish I know is to establish
a safe and satisfactory constitution for
the country ; and lam sure such a con-
cession would be embraced with satisfac-
tion by all classes of the community :
those who would seek more, may be
safely set down as unreasonable and per-
verse individuals, who clamour from a
wish for disturbance, and not from a
desire of conciliation and settlement.
If 1 have succeeded in contributing a
single reflection which may assist in the
settlement of the great question before
the House and country, I shall have real-
ized, I hope, the observation of Mr.
Burke, that a great statesman oftentimes


receives some assistance in perfecting 1 the city. To what other body, except
his measures from the least of his fol- the Imperial Parliament, can we appeal
lowers, rather than have laid myself open in the present instance? The Imperial
to the charge of the honourable the Parliament has given this Council power
Attorney-General, that “fools rush in
where angels fear to tread.’’
The POSTMASTER GENERAL:
As far as I can understand the remarks
of the honourable member for Liverpool
Plains, his speech divides itself into two j
branches. The one relates to a matter
of detail, which can be considered better
when the bill comes before the house in
committee, and is not a matter of prin-
ciple affecting the question upon its
second reading. The other does some-
what affect that question, and to this I
will briefly refer. The plan which I
have just beard propounded, for the first
time, proposes, not that the Governor
should nominate the members of the
Upper House, but that his Excellency
should nominate a number of gentlemen
to be submitted for approval to the Le-
gislative Assembly. In the first place, I
consider that such a course wou'd be a j
departure from the British constitution ;
in the next, that the proceeding would
be sure to lead to acrimonious debates,
seeing that the personal character of
each individual, some of whom might
be members of this House, would have
to be fully discussed before election
to the Upper Chamber. (Hear, hear.)
I will now make a few remarks on what
has fallen from the honourable members
in reference to the right of members
in my position to address the house. The
honourable member for Sydney has put
it boldly, that if the constltutiqn be
passed by this House, as at present con-
stituted, it cannot be regarded as the
work of the people. What is meant by
the people I do not know, unless the ho-
nourable member desires that the Consti-
tution should be framed and established in
the public streets. Ido know, however,
that this House is the only authority in
the country which is competent to make
laws and enforce them. Only very re-
cently the honourable member resorted
to this house, when he wished to have
bills passed to regulate hackney car-
riages, and to amend the Corporation of
to frame the bill. And honourable
members seem to forget that this very
bill gives us power to get rid of the
nominee element, of which we hear so
much complaint. (Hear, hear.) Not-
withstanding what has been said by the
honourable member for Cumberland, I
feel that I have every right, although an
officer of the government, to discuss the
merits of a constitution under which my
children and my children’s children are
to live. (Hear, hear.) When I was
nominated to this house by the Governor
General, 1 never for a moment under-
stood that I was bound to remain a silent
spectator, while one of the most im-
portant measures which has ever come
before this house was under considera-
tion. lam aware that any argument
which I can bring forward will be only
a reiteration, in a more feeble shape, of
those opinions which have been so ably
expressed by the supporters of the mea-
sure who have preceded me. I feel I
have not the ability which will enable
me to grapple effectively with the lead-
ing points of the question ; neither have
I devoted that attention and research to
the subject which is necessary: but being
aware that every man who considers a
great question, must view it in somewhat
a different light from others, I will tres-
pass on the attention of the house while
I make a few remarks on the general
principle involved. It needs not the
unanswered and unanswerable arguments
which have been adduced, to satisfy roe
that the general tendency of this bill
is to frame a constitution for the land of
my adoption, closely assimilated to that
of Great Britain. If my honest con-
victions on this head were not clear and
precise, I might, indeed, repose with
some security on the circumstances under
which this bill has been brought under
the notice of the house. When 1 find
that the measure has emanated from a
man who stands first in the country in
point of intellect, and every tendency of
whose heart must necessarily lead him,


not only to seek to render the bill such
as will endure for ages, but to make it
one that will ensure the greatest possible
happiness to the country and the people
with which his name is so indissolubly
linked, I feel I have an additional gua-
rantee in favour of the measure. Fu-
ture ages may see in the Senate of this
country patriots, orators, and statesmen,
with
Thoughts that breathe, and words that burn.
(Cheers.) But at present who can echo
the sentiment of the Spartan mother,
and say that
Australia hath many a worthier son than he ?
And had I not the genius and patriotism
of the framer of the bill to insure the
conviction, that of all the schemes that
have been brought before the house and
the country, this is the closest approxi-
mation to the institutions of our fore-
fathers, I have my own judgment to
guide me to the belief that the measure
approaches nearer to the British consti-
tution than any other wfc can devise.
I will not detain the house with any ob-
servations on the British constitution,
whose praises we have heard so often
repeated. I will, however, say, that
although I have travelled in many coun-
tries, I have never yet seen the great
bulk of the people enjoying greater hap-
piness than they do in Great Britain.
If, in former times, some misery did
exist, I believe that the day has arrived
when the people have found a panacea
for whatever social evils they endured.
That panacea is emigration, which, like
Mercy, is
Twice blest; it blesseth him that gives, and
him that takes;
and through the effects of which the work-
ing people of the kingdom are now en-
sured what alone they desire—a good
day’s wage for a good day’s work (hear).
If history be not a myth, arid if her pages
have not been unrolled for us in vain,
then do I gather from her records that
certain institutions have a tendency to
favor and superinduce democracy, and
other institutions are necessary if we
would uphold monarchy ; and that whilst
the raacli iery favorable to the latter is
freely made use of in the provisions of
this Bill, that with a known republican
tendency, is prominently brought forward
in the schemes which have been sha-
dowed forth by its opponents. The hon.
member for Durham has quoted an array
of names to convince the House that an
elective Upper House would be more in
accordance with the British Constitution
than that which is proposed. It may
i be that I belong to a by-gone regime,
! but I must say that the names quoted,
j with one or two exceptions, are not
names that have any weight with me.
I do not think they are the sort of
men, from Carter up to Adderley, whose
opinions are entitled to confidence on
a question like this under debate. If
I understand the arguments relied upon,
they go to show, in the first place, the
progress of intellect to be such, that the
checks and balances of the British Con-
stitution are no longer necessary; and next,
that what may be applicable to the state
of society in Great Britain, is not appli-
cable to these colonies. With regard to
the first position, I would ask whether
mankind has in any respect altered ?
whether we do not see that men are still
actuated by the same ambition, the same
perversity, the same feelings and motives,
whichhavealwaysgoverned their actions ?
Who can say that men are now different
from what they formerly were ? Let
us look to the history of nations, and,
glancing- at the course of events in
France, I would ask, what is the dif-
ference between Nopoleon I. and Napo-
leon HI. ? (Hear, hear.) In politics,
as in mechanics, as a natural law, similar
results must invariably follow from similar
causes. To say that what is good for
Great Britain may not be good for this
colony, is, in fact, a libel on the country.
Every man who has visited this colony,
and every writer who has written on the
customs and conditions of its people, has
been struck by its similarity to the mother
country. It may be true that the gen-
tlemen, the professional men, and the
artizans, that Great Britain has sent
forth to this colony, may not be of so high
a character as some of those left behind ;
but the reason of this is very obvious.


Through every rank of society, from the
highest to the lowest, there must be the
inferiority of a small nation to a great
one—and of an old country to a new one.
But as her youth must ripen to maturity,
and the core of her heart is British, why
should we deny to Australia the institu-
tions of our father land? (Cheers.)
One circumstance ought to stamp the
authorities which have been quoted to
the House with suspicion. That is,
that the opponents of this Bill are not
heard advocating the application of the
same system to England, which they
wish to enforce in the colonies. I
should like to see these gentlemen seeking
to apply the elective principle to the
House of Lords, before they seek to
enforce it in regard to the Upper Houses
of the colonial legislatures. And suppose
this experiment is tried, and turns out
an utter failure, where will all these gen-
tlemen be ? The colony will, indeed, be
in utter confusion, but they will be coolly
seated round their mahogany tables in
Belgrave-square, or some other equally
fashionable locality, where, sipping their
Chateau margeaux, they may exclaim,
“ Ah ! 1 now see clearly that elective
institutions will not answer in New
South Wales.” (Hear, hear.) The
suggestions of these gentlemen remind
me of the mode of training which sur-
geon’s apprentices undergo in all parts
of the world. The more influential and
richer patients are always reserved for
the attendance of the master, being
never approached by the apprentice’s
hand. 'lhe functions of the latter are
to extract the tooth of a pauper,
or to bleed some friendless boy, or he
may even, for the sake of experi-
ment, be permitted to apply prussic
acid to the tongues of surplus kittens,
(Loud laughter.) We must, however,
demonstrate that Australia is by far
too valuable a patient for experiments.
We must have no experiments. If we
are to have British institutions, we will
travel the beaten road to obtain them,
and not pursue some untrodden by-path.
(Hear.) It is impossible that we can
ingraft monarchy on a democratic basis;
as well may we expect that on placing
the seed of one plant in the soil, another
will spring forth and flourish. I feel
fully satisfied that the principles of the
British Constitution are those best
adapted to this country ; and having
satisfied myself by due consideration,
that the principles and the stability of
monarchy will be promoted by the bill
under consideration, I have made up my
mind to give the measure my most heart-
felt and support. (Hear, hear.)
If I may be allowed to allude in such a
discussion to rny own personal history, I
would say that I am one of six brothers,
all of whom have seryed the sovereign of
Great Britain; some of the number
having sealed their devotion to that ser-
vice with their blood. My father and
my grandfather were in that service, and
I may add that I myself have known no
other since I was a lad of fifteen. I ear-
nestly pray that my bones may moulder
cold and low, before I or mine are called
on to transfer our allegiance to any Re-
publican Government, from the monarch
of the most glorious empire on which the
sun has ever shone. (Loud cheers)
Mr. PARKER : I will not detain the
House long, as there is, doubtless, a
natural and generally pervading anxiety
to hear the reply of the honourable and
learned member for Sydney. But I
conceive it to be the duty of every mem-
ber, in the discussion of so deeply-im-
portant a matter, to afford every assist-
ance in his power, however small the
amount of that assistance may be. lam
decidedly opposed to the amendment of
the honourable and learned member for
Cumberland. If we have not experience
enough now to deal with this question,
we shall be in no better position six
months hence. If the measure is to be
postponed at all beyond the period named
by the honourable and learned mover, it
had better be postponed for several years.
But the interval between the second
reading of this Bill and its consideration
in committee will be quite sufficient for
the purposes of full and fair deliberation,
and I hope that, when the details come
to be considered, we shall be able to
arrive at such a conclusion as will prove
satisfactory to the countr I will beg


leave to offer one or two observations
with reference to the public meeting and
petition which have been so often alluded
to. I will be quite ready to treat every
representation from without with proper
respect; but, in considering a petition
of this sort, it is open to us to consider
also how its signatures have been pro-
cured. And I am credibly informed that
this petition has been carried for sig-
nature not only into the public-houses of
Lower George-street, but to the various
shipping offices, where the names of
sailors, or any other persons who could
write, were added to it. (Hear, hear.)
The mere numbers made up in this way
are not entitled to any weight. We
must look to the nature of the petition
itself, and to the names of the respectable
and intelligent persons who have signed
it, and must give it only such weight as
these may warrant. (Hear, hear.) A
great many gentlemen went to the public
meeting also, not for the purpose of
identifying themselves with what might
be theu said and done, but for the laud-
able purpose of hearing both sides of the
question, and there were many whose
names were included in the list of the
self-appointed Committee without their
sanction. (Hear, hear.) I know one or
two who were not only placed in this
position, but who entirely dissented from
the opinions which were expressed, and
tiie course which was pursued. (Hear,
hear.) WTien we reflect upon these
things, upon the circulation of inflam-
matory placards, which have been re-
sorted to, and upon other measures of a
similar nature which have been taken, it
is quite fair and reasonable to say that
respect should be paid now, only to the
opinions of such persons as are capable
of forming a reasonable judgment, and
that time should he given for mature and
calm deliberation throughout the whole
country before it can he assumed that
the popular voice has been heard upon
the question. (Hear, hear.) And while
the oppositionists out of doors charge
the supporters of the Bill with incon-
sistency, they have been themselves pe-
culiarly inconsistent. In the very first
session of this house, when it was sub-
stituted for the old nominee Council,
Committees of Grievances, territorial
and general, were appointed, and these
committees had, year after year, urged
their claims for redress in the most
strenuous terms, vituperating, in fact, the
ministers who turned a deat ear to their
applications. The final petition to the
Queen for redress was carried by the
almost unanimous vote of that Council,
and I maintain that the Bill before the
House contains, in a condensed shape,
the redress of every one of the grievances
which have been so long complained of,
(Hear, hear.) There is no deviation ex-
cept in the hereditary clauses. To show
how inconsistent is the present outcry,
I will quote from the despatch to the
Secretary of State as to what is asked
for and proposed. The petition, after
setting out the grievances, proceeds to
declare that, in order to afford no excuse
for the continuance of these complaints,
the Council
Are prepared, upon the surrender to the Colonial
Legislature of the entire management of all
revenues, territorial as well as general, in which
we include mines of every description, and upon
the establishment of a constitution among ns
similar in its outline to that of Canada, to as-
sume and provide for the whole cost of our in-
ternal government, whether civil or military, th«
salary of the Governor-General only excepted,
and to grant to your Majesty an adequate civil
list on the same terms as in Canada, instead of
the sums appropriated in the schedules and the
Imperial Act 13 and 14 Victoria, cap. 59.
And, in conclusion, humbly prays that
Her Majesty will be graciously pleased
to cause such measures to be adopted as
may be necessary to give effect to this
proposal.
I have already in my despatch, No. 69, of
the 12th April, 1850, expressed my opinion on
the principal points now suhmitteil to her Ma-
jesty’s consideration ; but I deem it right to
add, that when the motion upon which this
petition was adopted was brought before the
Council it was carried (after a division which
was called for by the Colonial Secretary, on the
part of the Government,) by a majority of 21
to 8, the minority consisting entirely of the
official nominee members, with the exception of
one non-official nominee member, Mr. Parker.
Now, I would beg to observe, with re-
ference to the mention of my name in
the foregoing paragraph, that the- only


reason why I did vote with the majority
on that occasion was, that 1 did not at
that time think the colony was fitted for
Kesponsible Government. The despatch
goes on to say ;
It is also proper that I should state my con-
viction that the desire to have a Constitution
conferred upon the colony, agreeing in its
jirinciples with that applied for in the petition, is
not confined to the Legislative Council alone, or
to a party in the colony, but that it is supported
by the general and deliberate opinion of the most
loyal, respectable, and influential members of the
community.
And further, his Excellency expresses
his opinion that such a concession would
be considered as a great favour con-
ferred upon the colony. (Hear, hear.)
But my honourable and learned friend
was not satisfied with this, and he at-
tempted to induce the House to stop the
supplies; which was thus noticed in the
Governor-General’s despatch of the 31st
August, 1852 :
I also transmit a copy of the Sydney Morning
J’erald of the 26tb instant, containing the re-
port of a debate in the Legislative Council on
the previous day, on a further motion brought
forward by' Mr. Wentworth that the Council
should pledge itself to refuse to vote the supplies
for the year 1854, unless a favourable reply was
returned to the above-mentioned petition.
Vnd farther on ;
I have only to add my conviction of the great
m<! growing desire entertained by ad classes in
his community that this concession should be
minted.
Now it appears to me that it Is impos-
sible any measure could be devised so
completely to redress the grievances
complained of as the Bill now under the
consideration of the House. (Hear,
bear.) And considering the length of
time during which the public at large
:nive had these matters under consider-
ilion, and considering the total silence
which has prevailed out of doors, which
nust be construed into acquiescence, 1
lo think, if the measure be rejected now,
:he colony will be guilty of the grossest
nconsistency. (Cheers.) Sir John Pa-
iington, in his reply to that despatch,
lys:—
They (her Majesty's Government) have been
billy impressed with a sense of the importance
»o be attached to that petition, not only as pro-
reeding from a great majority of the LcgisSa-
tore of the province, but as reiterating that
statement of the causes of discontent felt by the
community, which had been deliberately urged by
their predecessors upon the attention of her
Majesty's then Government —a statement, more-
over, which was accompanied by your assurance
that its sentiments were shared by the most
loyal, respectable, and influential members of the
community.
And further on :
In compliance, therefore, with the opinion
expressed by the Council in favour of a Consti-
tution similar in its outlines to that of Canada,
and with a view also to the most simple and
expeditions mode of completing the whole trans-
action, it is the wish of her Majesty’s Govern-
ment that the Council should establish the new
Legislature on the bases of an Elective Assem-
bly and a Legislative Council to be nominated by
the Crown.
Now, I consider that this is as plain as
language can possibly be. (Hear, hear.)
It clearly sets forth what the colony asks
for, and what the Home Government is
prepared to accede to. (Hear, hear.)
But it is asserted by some honourable
members that there is no compact, and
that, even if such did exist, there is no
guarantee that Her Majesty’s Ministers
will perform their part. (Hear, hear,
from Mr. Thurlow.) But 1 can really
see no grounds for such an argument.
If this Bill goes home, and is accepted,
the concessions to the colony will b®
made concurrently with the establish-
ment of the new Constitution. The
measure must be passed as a whole or
not at all. (Hear, hear.) But it is
urged also that the Duke of Newcastle,
in his despatch, has opened a door—
has given a certain latitude of discretion ;
and I find that this is admitted even in
the report of the Select Committee. But
I confess I cannot discover anything of
the kind in the despatch of his Grace.
The only part which refers to the sub-
ject in any way is the last paragraph but
one ; which, to say the most, is exceed-
ingly obscure. But even if it is the
intention of the Secretary of State to
open the door to discussion, still the
latitude is explicitly left to this House
itself. (Hear, hear, hear.) The para-
graph is as follows :
I am ignorant of the shape which the project
under the consideration of the Committee of tie


6ooncil may eventually assume. The Legislative
Council, indeed, in the petition before adverted
to, favoured a constitution similar in its outline
to that ot Canada. It would be premature for
rae to pass an opinion, without materials for
forming a judgement, upon the policy of totally
reconstructing the frame of Government recently
established ; but I may state that I have always
thought it probable that the experience and wis-
dom of the Council would dictate better provisions
than Parliament for securing good government
in New Soyth Wales, and promoting harmony in
the connexion subsisting between Great Britain
and this important province of the empire.
There is no other part of the despatch
bearing upon the question ; and the de-
cision is clearly left to the Legislative
Council. (Hear, hear.) Now it has
been charged against my honourable and
learned friend the member for Sydney,
that he has changed his opinions. But
I do not think so. The Bill is a specific
confirmation of all that he ever has
contended for. Possibly the language
he has recently used was more conser-
vative than that which he formerly in-
dulged in (a laugh) ; But after all, with
what grace does such a charge come from
bon. members opposite ? They are so
fond of citing Mr. Lowe! Has not Mr.
Lowe changed his opinions ? (Hear,
hear.) Has not the hon. and learned
member for Cumberland changed his
mind ? Have not many other hon. gen-
tlemen changed their minds? (Laughter
and cheers.) ’ They claim that privilege,
but they will not allow that time and
experience should influence anybody
else. (Cheers.) The w r ho!e scope of
the arguments in the house have been as
between the British Constitution and
other Constitutions. I have been happy
to be instructed by these comparisons,
but for my part I do not want to go to
America, or to Belgium, or to any other
country for a Constitution. (Cheers.) I
am satisfied to live under the Constitu-
tion of England; and it appears to me
that all we have to do is to fall back upon
the nearest resemblance to that Constitu-
tion which we can devise. (Cheers.)
And how it can be argued, that an elec-
tive Council would in any way resemble
the House of Lords, I am quite at a loss
to conceive. In the composition of the
House of Lords there is nothing elective :
the only approach to it is the case cited,
which occurred in the reign of Edward
HI. But this, which was an election of
a peer by peers, was admitted by Hallam
to be very doubtful, and wrapped in ob-
scurity. At all events, the Commons
had nothing to do with the election.
But even this was only an exception to
the general rule. The House of Lords,
in its legislative capacity, is entirely a
nominated body ; and I know of nothing
to prevent the Queen from adding any
number of peers by nomination. (Hear,
hear.) What, therefore, can be a closer
resemblance than a House of Nominees
appointed by the representative of the
Crown? (Hoar, hear.) But though
this is quite clear, I think it still desir-
able to satisfy all reasonable doubts, and
I would offer one or two other observa-
tions. If we trace the history of the
Commons, we shall find that they are
absolutely supreme as regards the power
of taxation (hear, hear); and with that
power neither of the other branches of
the legislature can interfere. There is
all the difference between the power of
taxation and the power of legislation,
without representation. The house of
Lords can only assent or dissent in
the case of money bills, but cannot alter
them ; but in respect to all other legis-
lation it has equal powers with the other
two estates. This absolute power over
taxation possessed by the Commons, as
representatives of the people, is expressly
acknowledged in various ways. The
Queen, in opening the session of Parlia-
ment, always addresses the Commons
separately on the subject of. the finances
of the nation, and the preamble of the
Annual Appropriation Bill is differently
drawn from that of all other bills, ex-
pressly acknowledging that grants of
money are of the Commons alone. And
the royal assent is also given to money
bills in a different form from that which
applies to all others. Instead of the
words La Iloyne le veult, the formula
used is La Royne remercie ses bons
sijets, accepte leur benevolence, et ainsi le
veult. Now I think, that all rea.sona.ble
persons ought to be satisfied with this
supremacy which resides in the people’s


representatives with respect to money
bills; and 1 contend that, with a system
of responsible government, no reasonable
man will be dissatisfied. (Hear, hear.)
I will say no more on this particular
point, but will only address a few ob-
servations to the house on the subject of
the electoral districts. Additional re-
presentation is claimed for Sydney.
(Hear, hear.) Now I have analysed the
returns in Parliament under the general
election of 1852, and will beg to trouble
the house with a few strange anomalies,
in regard to the representation of the
people of England. For instance : the
cities and boroughs of England (ex-
cluding the universities) elect 319 mem-
bers, and they contain a population
of 7,140,241 ; the remainder of the po-
pulation, 20,310,621, elect 339 members,
—a minority of the people, electing a
majority of the Parliament. The nine
counties (or portions of counties) of Rut-
land, Westmoreland, Sussex (West), Hun-
tingdon, Worcester (West), Cumberland
(West), Northumberland (North), Salop
(South), and Nottingham (South), having
a population, exclusive of towns in them
represented, of 514,783, with 30,647 vo-
ters, and rated to the poor at £2,855,452,
send 18 members, while the West Riding
of Yorkshire, with a larger population
(794,779) —electors 37,319 —and rated
to the poor at £2,405,871, sends only 2
members ! The Tower Hamlets, with a
population of 539,111, registered elec-
tors 23,534, property rated £1,373,052,
returns only two members; whereas the
Borough of Honiton also returns two,
but with a population of only - 3,427,
registered electors 278, and property
£9,924. Each has the same legislative
power, yet one has 157 times as much po-
pulation, 82 times as many electors, and
has property rated to the poor 132 times
greater than the other. These illustra-
tions, showing conclusively that popula-
tion is not the basis of representation,
are only a few of those which might be
taken from the eccentric anomalies in the
representation of England—the majority
are excluded from the representation, the
majority of the electors are out-voted
■by a minority. Parliament is elected by
only a portion of the electoral body, and
represents only a minority of those who
are entrusted with the franchise ! And
yet we have the most ample experience
that this anomalous construction is found
to be perfectly compatible with the
purest liberty, with national prosperity,
and national greatness. (Cheers.) Now I
appeal to these figures to show that po-
pulation is not, and ought not to be, the
basis of representation. But if the meet-
ing which is to be held on Monday will
be satisfied, if Sydney will be pacified
by a small concession, I have no objection
whatever that her share in the represen-
tation should be somewhat increased.
(Cheers.)
Mr. BERRY : In rising to express my
entire concurrence with the great prin-
ciples of the Bill, I request the indul-
gence of the Council on the ground of a
very severe hoarseness under which I am
labouring, and which I fear will render
my few remarks but imperfectly under-
stood. With respect to minor details of
the Bill, and also as regards the sche-
dules, I do not intend to refer at this
stage of the proceedings, as they can be
far more appropriately discussed in Com-
mittee. With reference to the great
point, the institution of two Houses of
Parliament, it appears that all parties
are agreed : -but with this wide difference
—the mode of returning the members.
That party which support the Bill before
the Council advocate a nominee Upper,
and an elective Lower Chamber. The
opponents of the Bill contend that both
Chambers should be elective. Then the
first party are stanch advocates for mo-
narchical principles ; the second vehe-
ment clamorers for republicanism. (Loud
cheers.) I will remind the Council that,
agreeably to the principle of the British
Constitution, the House of Lords is com-
posed of nominees, whilst the Americans,
when they first shaped their constitution,
ha/1 no remedy but to resort to elective
councils, for they were all rebels. (Hear,
hear.) They might have had great
cause to rebel; but they nevertheless
were rebels in the eyes of the law. (Hear,
hear.) Thank God, Australia has not
come to that pass, and I hope and believe


she never will. (Loud cheers.) Indeed
I should be extremely puzzled to know
what the colonists can possibly have to
rebel about. (Renewed cheers.) We have
no grievances, no taxes, nothing on earth
to complain about; we have liberty of
the press; and God knows we have free-
dom of speech enough : for if such ram-
pant speeches as were uttered at the Vic-
toria Theatre the other day, had been
spoken in any of the countries of Conti-
nental Europe or America, the speakers
would have been liable to incarceration,
if in foreign lands, or Judge Lynch’s
law in the States of the Union. (Hear.)
Now, I prefer a monarchy to a republic.
Independently of my love for the noble
institutions of the mother country, as
those under which I have been born, I
love them for their intrinsic value, for I
do not hesitate to declare my full and
unqualified belief that Great Britain and
her magnificent colonies are the only
countries in the world where free consti-
tutions exist. (Loud cries of hear.) Talk
of the liberty of the model republic in-
deed ! Can that laud be said to be free
where, in its slave States, one-third of
the population form the goods and chat-
tels of others ?■—where, in what were
mockingly, styled the free States, every
man was the slave of the mob, who re-
sorted to Judge Lynch if he dared to re-
sist its power ? (Hear, hear.) In Eng-
land, or in this colony, #ho dare oppress
the meanest person in violation of the
law of the land ? No man. And I de-
clare before God, that for myself I can
see no blemish in the British Constitu-
tion ; but, on the contrary, can only see
that which this great and rapidly rising-
colony will do wisely and well to follow.
(Cheers.) All that can be said in favour
■of America is, that there, as in Aus-
tralia, the hard-working industrious man
is sure to find constant work and fair
remuneration. (Hear.) But here all
men are free ; whilst in America there
are fifteen slave states, whence, if any
slaves escaped, they were hunted’like
wild dogs by their savage masters, and if
they reach any of the free states they,
under the infamous Fugitive Slave Law,
and carried back to their abode of mi-
sery. (Hear.) Their only place of re-
fuge is on the ground of British America,
upon which, when they place their feet,
they, by the Jaw of England, are at once
free. (Cheers.) That the Constitution
Bill before the Council will have to be
improved and modified, as the colony in-
creases in wealth, population, and im-
portance, there can be no doubt. The
British Constitution is the result of six
or eight hundred years’ experience ; and
the great great grandson of the first
Norwegian pirate who landed on Eng-
land's shore, never could have dreamed
of the future glory of the land his an-
cestors came to ravage. The attacks of
hon. members on pastoral and other rural
occupations, I can afford to smde at.
These attacks are so easily and so con-
stantly made, when solid argument is not
forthcoming, that it is really a waste of
strength to repel them. (Hear.) As to
vague but dark hints thrown out by agi-
tators, that the example of America
might soon be followed here, in so far a*
throwing off the yoke went, I would
only remind these revolutionary gentry,
that all that America asked for—nay,
much more than she asked for—when
she quarrelled with the mother country,
is now cordially offered to her Australa-
sian colonies. (Loud cheers.) I assert,
that no colonist of New South Wales
has any just reason to predict its separa-
tion from England; we had far better,
from every motive of love, duty, and our
own great advantage, teach our children
to hope for, and to bid our descendants
also to hope, an eternal alliance with the
greatest and most prosperous empire of
the earth. (Prolonged cheers.) To ano-
ther point I would briefly allude, namely,
the desire expressed by certain of the
Northern settlements for separation from
New South Wales. I deeply deplore the
Infatuation of these people, and depre-
cate the miserable example they want to
set. If they succeed we shall next have
St. Vincent, Northumberland, and other
of our districts, praying to be allowed to
set up for themselves ; and then what a
pretty prospect of being cut up into ri-
are at once given up to their pursuers, ; diculously petty and republican States


will be held out for a great colony
which now aspires to take rank as a
nation. (Renewed cheers.) I firmly
trusty to the good sense of the colonists
to resist these dangerous quackeries.
hon. member, who, in consequence
of severe indisposition, was nearly in-
audible in many parts of his address,
thanked the House for the indulgence
which had been shown to him, and,
amidst cordial cheers, concluded by ex-
pressing his determination to give the
Bill his most earnest support,
Mr. GEORGE BOWMAN: After
tfie many able addresses which have been
olfered during the most important debate
which has ever taken place in this House,
I will not detain the Council with any
comments of nay own ; for I feel that
every point has been fully discussed, and
every objection completely refuted. I
will only express my concurrence Avith
the great principles of the measure, and
state my intention to vote for the second
reading, and to support the Bill through
all its remaining stages. (Cheers.)
Mr. WENTWORTH, in reply: Mr.
Speaker, I can assure the House that it
is not without the greatest delight that I
perceive that there is at last some pro-
bability of a termination to this tedious,
this very prolonged—unnecessarily pro-
longed—debate. I say unnecessarily
prolonged, Sir, because the arguments,
if they may be so called, which have been
urged against this measure by one or two
hon. members of this House—from whom
such arguments, judging from their
antecedents, certainly could not have
been expected—were demolished, I may
say, at the very first broadside fired
against them. Sir, the speech, the single
speech, of my hon. and learned friend,
the member for Cook and Westmoreland,
did not leave them even the rag of an
argument ; for, that speech demolished
the basis on which all the propositions,
and all the reasonings of this miserable
faction rest, namely, that the people of
this country have an inherent and in-
alienable right to representation. That
is the basis, the erroneous basis, upon
which ail the assumptions put forward in
this case rest. That basis was cut from
under their feet by that speech. They
have nothing more to rely on, And, Sir,
I think that the altered tone of the public
press, since that speech Avas delivered,
sufficiently shows the conviction at which
this miserable party have arrived—that
their schemes for the revolution of this
country cannot, at all events, be realised
now, and that if they are ever to be re-
alised, they must be realised at a much
later period of the history of this colony
than the present. Sir, 1 can assure the
House that I labour, notwithstanding,
under a weight of oppression which I
never yet before experienced. Commen-
dations, unmeasured commendations, have
been heaped upon me, at all events by
every party within these walls (Hear,
hear.) But, Sir, it would seem that 1
am a despised and calumniated object
beyond them (No, no, no.) It is Some
consolation that I retain the friendship of
ray early associates, of those who have-
been the partners of ray toils, my feelings,
and my fame (Hear, hear.) After a file
spent in the service of my country, it is
not gratifying to find that I am a man so
little understood by the great body of my
countrymen—that all the efforts, all the
labours of my life to achieve the liberties
of ray country—those liberties Avhich we
have won, in frequent contest, piece by
piece, until now we have this glorious
opportunity of accomplishing their con-
summation, —I say it is painful to see that
notwithstanding the long period I have
devoted to this object—l raaj say, almost
exclusively devoted to it—the people of
this country can style me—their earliest
champion, their best friend—a traitor—.
aye, Sir, a traitor to those liberties Avhich
certainly I have been mainly instrumen-
tal in achieving (Hear, hear.) Sir, I
admit that there has been a weak point of
mine in this debate—that I hav’e taken
notice of the calumnies and slander
heaped upon me. I admit that I forgot
what was due to the dignity of my na-
ture and my station on that occasion
(Cheers.) But, Sir, I would not have it
believed, for it is not. true, that the
epithtts I retorted upon my revilers were
epithets addressed to the colony or the
people at large (Cheers.) No; they were


limited, at all events in my intention, if
not in my words, as I believe they were,
to the vile slanderers themselves. I
never meant to apply those terms which
have been considered so objectionable,
and which I admit were objectionable,
to any beyond the few paltry assailants of
my motives and my character (Hear,
hear.) And, Sir, I hope that the public
at iarg-e will receive from me this sincere
declaration of what was the real object
and intention of the words which I then
uttered (Loud cheers.) No doubt it is
expected of me, and perhaps with reason,
considering that now sixty winters and
more are on my head, that I should
possess some moderation. No doubt it is
expected that when 1 am smitten on one
cheek, I should turn my other cheek to
the smiter. Unhappily it is not in my
temperament or in my nature to be thus
forbearing. There is within me a flood
of lava which ever and anon boils over,
and which I cannot keep down. This is
the infirmity of my nature, rather than
the fault of my intention. It will, no
doubt, Sir, be expected of me that I should
infuse into this debate—into the conclud-
ing scene of it—some novelty of argu-
ment or of illustration. But, after the j
complete exhaustion of the subject—after |
the analysis and dissection of the argu- j
ments on the other side, which have |
already been made by so many speakers, j
I feel the task to be almost impossible: |
I feel, in fact, that nothing is left me to j
answer; that everything that has been I
advanced by the opponents of this Bill j
has been completely disposed of already; j
and if I have anything to offer now, it j
must be rather with the view of supple-
menting some omissions which I made in
my original address to this House, than
of adverting to any of the already re-
puted arguments which have been adduced
against this measure. Sir, I do not see
in his place at this moment, my hon. and
learned friend, the member for Cumber-
land, who led the assault on the great
measure now under consideration. I will
not taunt him with his inconsistency, for
that he admus; I will not repeat what
has been said before, that a man who
Las arrived at the matmity of manhood
I and of his intellect, should not be subject
ito these frequent oscillations. I will
| assume that he is sincere ; but on making
i this assumption, I still cannot understand
how it is that he should feel himself
justified in alluding, as he has done, to
the impenetrable dignity in which, he
says, I have involved myself: he, a man,
if I know him, who, though he has un-
doubtedly formed just now strange
associations, is more distinguished for his
aristocratic pretensions than perhaps any
single member within these walls. No
doubt he has some x’easons, best known to
himself, for the course he has pursued on
this occasion : but whether they proceed
from conviction or from pique, whether
from accident or from design, I shall not
attempt to determine. He has undoubt-
edly lately formed strange alliances:
and, Sir, not only formed them, but at-
tempted to vindicate in this House the
course of conduct he has pursued, I
shall not now allude to that vindication;
first, because the castigation he was
smarting under proceeded from himself
originally : and next, because the fallacy
of the justification he has attempted has
been amply shown by my hon. and learned
friend, the member for Cook and West-
1 moreland, who, without questioning the
I right of the public generally, whether
I consisting of members of this House or
; persons out of it, to attend public meet-
; ings, has at all events shown that he and
I those similarly situated, who are in fact
I the constitutional judges appointed to
| decide this question, have no right to
i prejudge it by foregone conclusions, and
[ therefore no right, at all events in such a
case as this, in a question then under
pendency, to attend such meetings at all ;
and that, as a necessary consequence, their
attendance on that occasion has degraded
them from the position of representatives
of the people into that of mere delegates.
Sir, whilst I advert to what I consider to
be this great impropriety, which that hon.
and learned member, as well as others,
has committed in this case, I by nomeans
intend to question the right of the great
mass of the people who attended that
meeting to give us their opinions on the
measure now before us. They have a


perfect right,to give us those opinions in
the usual and constitutional way, by
petition : that right, which they have
already exercised to a certain extent,
they may exercise further. But I do deny,
in common with many other members of
this House, the right of any body of the
people to form themselves into a conven-
tion, and to frame a constitution for the
colony, or to dictate a constitution for
the colony, by which we should in any
way be bound. Sir, this is a duty which
the Legislature of England has cast upon
us, a duty which we cannot get rid of if
we would, a duty with which we should
allow no interference. And, Sir, what-
ever influence the opinions of this meet-
ing, or of any other meeting, may have
upon this House,andupon its deliberations,
at all events that influence will be, as far
as regards myself, only the legitimate
influence such bodies ought to exercise,
the superior reason and intellect which
they can bring to bear on the question
under consideration. Sir, I think this
body of petitioners has no right to com-
plain, although I find they are- complain-
ing, of the course this House is adopting.
For what was the tenor of their petition ?
That we should give them a month’s
■delay, in order that the and
opinions of the country might be con-
veyed to us. They asked for a month
and we give them three months, which is
the interval I propose shall elapse before
the House goes into Committee on this
Bill, This, at all events, does not look
as if I were myself a conspirator, sur-
rounded by a set of other conspirators,
whose object is to strangle the liberties
and birthright of the country. Sir,
whilst, however, I deny the right of the
parties who have signed this petition, or
of any person or persons out of this
House, either individually or collectively,
to dictate to us, or to frame a constitu-
tion which is in any way to guide our
deliberations, it is to me a matter of in-
finite pleasure that they have appointed
a Committee to try their hands at this
sort of work. Sir, we have before us
already the first outlihe of the Consti-
tution which this body, with its superior
intellect, intellect so superior to anything
of the kind to be found in this House,
have determined upon ; and what is it ?
A system of Crown presentees and
people’s presentees. Why, Sir, they
have purloined the very idea and elemen-
tary principle of the constitntion of this
very House. For what have we here but
the Crown presentees in the nominated
members, and the people’s presentees in
the elected members ? It is true, Sir,
they want to constitute the thing in a
somewhat different manner. They pro-
pose, for instance, that the Governor
should send down double the required
number of names to the people for their
acceptance—whom they mean by the
people I cannot understand—and that
the people should send up to the Go-
vernor for his acceptance also double the
required number; half of each of these
lists to be rejected by the vetoing power
on both sides. Now, Sir, if it should
happen, as I think it will be very likely
to happen, that the Governor might not
think any of the people’s presentees the
sort of persons to sit in a nomina'ed
Upper House, why of courseheis bound, in
the exercise of his veto, to send them back
to the people ; and if, on the other hand,
the people, as would be most likely the
case, should think the Governor’s presen-
tees equally objectionable, I suppose they
also would have to go through the same
sort of evolution; and then a consequence
would arise which these worthies seem not
to anticipate, namely, thatthere would be
no Upper House at all, and the Legisla-
ture of the country would consist of only
one House, the representatives of the
people properly so called. But perhaps
it is not at all impossible that this is the
very object some of these worthies have
in view, and that, by a sidewind, they
want to get rid of the Upper House alto-
gether. If that really be their aim. 1
should like to know who are best entitled
to the name of conspirators ? The mem-
bers of this House, ora certain Commit-
tee out of doors ? But, Sir, really it is
absurd to talk of, to w r aste one’s consider-
ation on such crude projects as these.
It ought to show these people, if they
are open to convictionat all, how difficult
a thing it is to frame a constitutioii,


how impossible it is to avoid some folly
or other when we depart from the great
landmarks of the British Constitution
(Loud cheers) —when we eeaseto regard
the maxim “ Stare super antiquas vias.”
That, Sir, is the maxim we ought
to adhere to. (Cheers.) It is the
maxim which has guided me- in
framing this measure, and the maxim
which I confidently anticipate will be
adopted by this House. Sir, I do be-
lieve from my conscience, that all the
opposition which we are now encoun-
tering has arisen from a few obscure
demagogues, who, if they could get the
upper hand in this country, would tread
with an iron heel on, its neck (loud
cheers, and no, no). I do not deny
that many honourable and respectable
men have been foolishly induced to
join in this movement (hear, hear.)
But I do hope, that when the deliberations
of this House go through the country
—when they see the grounds upon which
the recommendations of this self-elected
body out of doors rest, and the grounds
d our opposition to them, which have
been developed in this discussion ; I do
hope and believe that many persons,
who have joined inconsiderately in their
train, will desert them, and that before
the three months expire, which I have
proposed to give the country at large,
ior the consideration of this question and
the expression of their opinion upon
it, there will be very few persons who
will stand by them. I believe, sir, this
miserable ebullition will soon subside,
and that though we have had undoubt-
edly a bottle of soda-water opened under
our noses just at present, it will be very
stale indeed before the end of that
period (laughter.) Sir, I am not going
on this occasion to weary the House with
quotations, I have trespassed long
enough in that way already ; burf, before
1 go further into the subject, let us see
the manifesto which the arch-anarchist
himself has put forth as to the nature
and extent of the rights to which these
people are entitled. We have got it
here fortunately under his own hand and
seal. It will he found in his issue of the
10th of last month. It is fortunate, at
all events, that he has put forth some-
thing definite—something with which,
this House may deal—something with
which the country may deal. I will
now, sir, take the liberty of reading to-
the House what he says on this important
subject, which is in fact the pivot on
which the whole debate ought to turn.
Speaking about the Chamber of Nomi-
nees proposed by the Bill, ho says,—
First, with regard to what we are entitled to
expect ? With increased population and increased
wealth, with new accessions of population and
wealth every day ; with nearly an unbounded
prospect of numbers and prosperity at no great
distance, and a high destiny in the future, the-
colony S has an undoubted right not only to a
Constitution which would be an improvement
upon the last, but so eminent and free a Consti-
tution as Gfeat Britain herself enjoys. This is
our right. No power in England has any just
authority to> gainsay it, and no individual here
can well be satisfied with less, who is not a slave-
in the recesses of his own heart. Mr. Went-
worth’s Bill professes to be something of this
kind, and pretends to assimilate itself, in form at
least, to the British Constitution. In reality, it
is worse than that which degrades the colony at
present, and which it proposes to displace.
Now, sir, there is his manifesto. He
says that the people of this country
have a right to the British Constitution.
I admit they have a right to it. But
neither more nor less.' They have no
right to that Yankee Constitution of an
elective Upper Chamber, which is now
Insisted on (hear, hear.) Now, I ask
this House—l ask the people out of the
House, whether there can possibly be a
nearer approximation to the British
Constitution than is contained in this
Bill ? Mr. Parkes says this Bill pretends
to be an assimilation to the British Con-
stitution. Let him and his adherents
show in what point it does not come
up to the British Constitution. Let him
show, if he can, that it is not as near
an approximation as possible to that
Constitution. If he shows that, then,
sir, I will admit that there is in this
Bill some defect which ought to be re-
medied. If he cannot show it, then it
follows that he ought to be content
with the Constitution now before the
House, and that the people, having
under it the rights and privileges to
which they are entitled as Englishmen,


ought to be content with it too. This
is the conclusion, Sir, at which I have
arrived, in considering this question;
and if the House shall agree with me
that this is as close an imitation of the
British Constitution as the circumstances
of this colony admit; if they agree
with me, as I confidently anticipate they
will, then it follows, even according to
the showing of these agitators, that the
people of this colony have got all they
are entitled to, or have a right to de-
mand. Sir, it was with the sole object
that they might have all they have a
right to demand, that I framed this Con-
stitution. It was to confer on them those
rights for the attainment of which I
have fought the battle of the country for
the last thirty years. It to confer
on them these rights and no other, that
I have taken the lead in this great ques-
tion. And if they are not satisfied, all I
can say is, that I, for one, will be no
party to giving them any more (hear,
hear.) Sir, the nature of the Constitu-
tion embodied in this measure—of the
more important and prominent clauses
of it—has been well dwelt upon and ex-
plained by my honourable friend the
Colonial Secretary, who, in this way,
has supplied a very great omission con-
tained in my original address to this
House, in which I failed on some points
to give the necessary explanation. Sir,
I will, notwithstanding, advert a little
more at length than he did tp the Con-
stitution of the Upper House, which this
Bill proposes to establish. This mea-
sure, if it shall pass into law, empowers
the Governor, in order to constitute the
Legislative Council, or Upper House,
by an instrument under the great seal
of the colony, to summon to the Legisla-
tive Council such persons, being not
fewer than twenty, as her Majesty shall
think fit. That, Sir, is the first propo-
sition in these clauses—that her Ma-
jesty, or the Governor, under her direc-
tion, may summon to the Legislative
Council, a body of twenty nominated
members at the least. But, sir, there
is nothing in these clauses to prevent
her Majesty, if she think fit, to direct
the Governor to Summon a hundred such
members; and it is in this expansive
character of this Upper House that the
real safety-valve is to be found (cheers.)
Sir, it is this expansive character of the
House of Lords which has saved Eng-
land from more than one revolution. It
is to this expansive character in the
Upper House proposed in this Bill that
I look forward as a port of refuge for
the Constitution at all times. Sir, any
one can perceive, if the time should ar-
rive—and most assuredly it will arrive—
that there is an obstructive body in the
Upper House Impeding the legislation of
the Lower House unnecessarily—impe-
ding it, B)t for purposes of revision or
consideration, but for purposes of faction,
or even from an erroneous conviction or
opinion of their own—l say, if a dead
lock of this kind should ever arise, there
is a remedy. The constitutional minis-
ter of the day has only to advise a fur-
ther creation to the extent necessary to
get rid of the obstruction, and then the
obstruction, as a matter of course, will
cease. Now, sir, my honourable and
learned friend the member for Cumber-
land has spoken of this power, the me-
nace of which, at all events, is within our
own recollection, as a great defect in the
character of the House of Lords. He
has said that on certain important occa-
sions they abdicated their functions, and
he to the fact, that on one of
those oecasions, the passing of the Re-
form Bill, they gave a reluctant and un-
willing assent to that measure. No
doubt, sir, they were driven to give that
assent by an intimation that there would
be a new creation of Peers if they ob-
structed the Bill any further. But, sir,
the House will recollect that, at this
period, this measure of reform had under-
gone, over and over again, discussions in
both Houses of Parliament. It had been
amply considered, from one
end of the country to the other. What-
ever opinion the House of Lords had
upon that question, a great and vast
preponderance of the enlightened opin-
ion of the country was then in favour
of it (cheers), and if their obstruc-
tion had not been got rid of as it
was, by their abdicating their functions,


as ray honourable friend calls it, what
must have been the consequence ? Why,
Sir, it has been termed a peaceful
revolution as it was ; but if it had not
been a peaceful revolution, it must have
been a revolution of another character.
Therefore, sir, so far from, this abdica-
tion, which is objected to, being a ble-
mish in the constitution of the House of
Lords, I consider it one of its greatest
recommendations, and one of the purest
efforts of the patriotism of its members,
that they had the good sense, at last,
when the question had been perfectly
discussed, to give way and to bow to the
general and superior intelligence of the
country (cheers.) Now, sir, my honor-
able friend, who seems so little fond of
abdications, with a sort of marvellous
consistency—a consistency for which he
is so particularly distinguished—for I
will say this of my honourable and
learned friend, that long as I have known
him, greatly as I admire his eminent
abilities, he is still a puzzle to me; I
have never been able to understand him,
and in the ten years during which I have
had the honor to be associated with
him in this House, I declare solemnly it
has scarcely ever been my good fortune,
when he commenced his speech, to know
what would be his conclusion (laughter,)
for it has so frequently happened that
his conclusion has not been warranted
by his premises, and his premises have
not borne out his conclusion, that I have
never felt sure whether he was for or
against me, until I got his vote (renewed
laughter). But I say my honourable and
learned friend, with marvellous consis-
tency, has a strong predilection for ab-
dications here ; for what does he advise
the nominated members of this House to '
do on this occasion ?—to abdicate their j
duty—to follow the example of the i
House of Lords and march m out of the I
House. I am very glad those independ- j
ent gentlemen who sit here as nominated j
members of this House— l mean particu- j
larly the unofficial ones—have felt that I
they belong to the people at large ;
(hear, hear,) that they have as great a j
stake in the interests and welfare of the i
country as my honourable, friend or any |
other elected member, and that they
have as much right to vote and be heard
as he has. Sir, that is the conclusion
at which they have arrived—a conclu-
sion which will no doubt be equally
satisfactory to their own judgment and
to the judgment of the intelligent por-
tion of the public out of doors. Sir, it
is precisely because that form of consti-
tution for the Upper House, which my
honourable friend behind me (Mr. Dar-
vall) suggests, is incapable of this elasti-
city, that it can form no part of the
.British Constitution. My honourable
and learned friend admits that we cannot,
if we would, imitate the Senate of
America. And if he did not admit it,
every body must know that it represents
the federal principle of the United States,
and that we have no analogous principle
here which an elective body could
represent. What then, sir, I would ask,
is this elective body to represent but
democracy ?—that democracy which,
whatever any one may say to the contrary,
is sufficiently amply represented in the
House of Assembly proposed by this Bill.
I say, sir, the principle of democracy will
be more largely represented in this
House than it is in the British House of
Commons. And I say too, that this
measure proposes an extension of the
elective franchise to which no analogy is
to be found in that Constitution, And,
sir, while on this subject, I will have the
candour to admit—fori hate concealment
—that I have proposed this extension,
not because I think it will render the
Lower House more democratic, but be-
cause I think that franchise more con-
servative than some of the franchises we
possess already. I believe that fran-
chise in particular which admits persons
in the receipt of salaries of £IOO a year,
will be highly conservative—that it will
introduce for the first time a new con-
servative principle, a principle to be
found among the middle and intelligent
classes of the community—a principle
which the existing Constitution has to-
tally excluded (hear, hear.) Sir, Ido
not mean to say this principle can have
any extensive operation in other parts of
the colony but the towns and cities. But,


sir, it will have an extensive operation
there, and if the effect of it should be,
as I hope it may be, to alter the majori-
ties which have hitherto prevailed in
this city and in some other parts of the
colony, I can only say it is a consumma-
tion devoutly to be wished. For as
things now are, what is the nature of the
representation of this great city ? We
have six wards in it, two of which can
swamp all the rest ; and give Sydney
four, six, or any number of members. If
you do not divide the constituency into
wards, the only result will be that a bare
majority of the electoi’s will return all
the members. And what does that ma-
jority consist of? Sir, you have only to
go to an election and stand by, as I have
often been obliged to do, and see the
elements of which the electoi’s are com-
posed, and then you will know the class
in this city who actually command and
control its representation. This is a
state of things which may seem desira-
ble to some, but its perpetuation does
not seem at all desirable to me. I can
only say, whilst I am on this point, that
if I should be induced to be a consenting
party to any addition to the number of
members for Sydney—if I am induced
to aid my honourable friend who spoke
first in this debate this evening (Mr.
Morris), in giving the city two more
members, it shall be on the single con-
dition that the city shall be divided into
wards. I have said before, and it
has been proved conclusively, in the
course of this debate, by my honourable
friend, Mr. Parker, who has spoken
this evening, that this city of Sydney is
over represented. That, sir, has been
demonstrated. And, whilst on this sub-
ject, I will not hesitate to express the
conviction I feel, that if the system of
clamor and tumu’t which has prevailed
is to go on increasing—if this system of
intimidation is to be applied in an aug-
mented ratio to the deliberations of this
House and the councils of the Govern-
ment, the sooner this House
takes the patriotic step of removing it-
self and the Government from such in-
fluences—the sooner it adopts the wise
policy of the United States, which peo-
pie are so fond of admiring, and estab-
lishes a new Washington beyond the
reach of the mob orators and the mob
force of this city, the better it will be
for the calm deliberation of the repre-
sentatives of the country, the better for
the independence of the Government,
and the better for the safety and welfare
of all classes of the community, includ-
ing even the citizens of Sydney them-
selves. (Cheei’s.), Sir, if 1 understood
my honorable and learned friend behind
me (Mr. Darvall) rightly, he has made a
most important admission in this matter.
I trust 1 understood him correctly. lie
has admitted that the necessary sequence
of an elective Upper House is a repub-
lic—that monarchy cannot co-exist with
it.
MR. DARVALL: I beg my honor-
able and learned fi'iend’s pardon. He
has entirely misappi'ehended the tenor
of my observations. His version is en-
tirely inconsistent with what I said and
what I meant. I have found great diffi-
culty, Mr. Speaker, in making myself
understood on this point. What I meant
to say was this : no doubt the time may
come—at all events those who most
heartily desire the longest adherence to
our connection with Great Britain must
admit that the time may come when a
severance of that connection must take
place. I say, then, that the expectation
of a transition to a limited monarchy,
without a pi’evious course of bloodshed
and revolution, is unwarranted by histoxy,
and that so long as we continue under a
monarchical form of government an
elective Legislature will be more con-
ducive to that continuance, and when the
time of separation from the parent state
does come it will render the sepai-ation
easier.
MR. WENTWORTH resumed :
Well, then, Mr. Speaker, it appears that,
in common with many other honorable
members of this House, I have had the
misfortune not to understand my honor-
able and learned friend’s sentiments on
this question. But whether he admits
or denies that the inevitable tendency of
an elective Upper Chamber, in combina-
tion with an elective Chamber of Repre-


sentatives below, is to sever the connec-
tion with the mother country, 1 will now
undertake to prove it. What he has not
admitted I will endeavour to establish by
argument. Now, sir, my honorable and
learned friend will at all events not deny
that an elective Upper House is as yet
a matter of mere theory, so far as the
British empire is concerned, There is
unfortunately one British Colony, the
Cape of Good Hope, in which this ex-
periment has been made, but the experi-
ment itself has not yet come into oper-
ation. Now, if it is, as I infer of that
experiment, the same constituency, only
differently distributed, which, returns the
members for both the lower and the
Upper House—a constituency resting on
the low franchise of £25 a year, and
haring also another franchise introduced
into it, somewhat similar to the enlarged
franchises which are contained in this
Bill, giving to persons having salaries of
a certain amount—l think £SO a year—
a right to vote, and giving even to ser-
vants who receive wages of £25 a year,
with board and lodging, also a right to
vote ; it cannot be denied that the fran-
chise on which this elective principle in
such a combination as this would be,
that the Upper House would be more
democratic than the lower. We should
then have a double democracy, or a de-
mocracy in the Upper House for the re-
vision of the deliberations of the more
conservative element in the Lower House,
Now, what chance would there be that
these two bodies would pull different
ways on any popular question ? What
possibility is there that they would do it ?
Suppose then, that, acting in concert,
the two Houses at the Cape, elected in
this way, should attempt, as they un-
doubtedly will before long, to force on
the Governor of that colony some legis-
lation which he cannot ratify, to which
he cannot give the assent of Her
Majesty—what must be the consequence ?
Sir, the framers of that constitution have
foreseen that these conditions may arise,
and they have given the Governor the
power of dissolving either or both of
these assemblies, for that is their proper
name—-to call one a council and the
other an assembly is an absurdity. But
what would be the consequence of the
exercise of this power of dissolution ;
a consequence that we have seen to fol-
that colony rests, is of a most wide and low invariably in all similar cases ? That
extended nature. What sort of a lower the constituencies will send back to him
House the coloured and degraded races,
who have thus obtained so large a share
of the franchise, will elect, it is impos-
sible to say. What sort of an Upper
House they will elect it is equally diffi-
cult to surmise. But, at all events, this
may be safely predicated, that inasmuch
as those o, constituencies are grouped to-
gether in the election of an Upper House,
that Upper House will necessarily be
more democratic and less conservative
than the Lower House. And, sir, I
think this anticipation is fully justified
by the knowledge which every one here
must possess, of what would be the
nature of an Upper House elected under
a similar system of grouping in this
country; Why, sir, if Sydney and the
other towns were thrown into ore, two,
or even three great electoral divisions,
the rural population would be swamped,
and the urban population would be all
predominant. The inevitable result of
the same men, and the same men will
send back to him the same measures,
(hear, hear.) and ultimately the vetoing
power of the Crown will be overthrown.
(Hear, hear, hear.) My honorable and.
learned friend may shrug his shoulders
at this consequence, but to me it appears
a most disastrous one ; for it satisfies me
that the authority of the Crown cannot
exist as a separate and independent estate
under such circumstances, and that these
two elective House can coerce the Go-
vernment into giving the Royal assent to
any measure however destructive. Then,
sir, the ultimate consequence which I
wish to prove must follow, the dissolution
of the connection with Great Britain.
Yes, sir, in the place of the Crown must
be substituted an elective President; and
the country must very soon, or at all
events in the long run, become a republic
and nothing else. I admit that ray honor-
able and learned friend behind me (Mr.


Darvall,) or the honorable member for
Durham (Mr. Cowper,) who seems to be
associated with him in this new predilec-
tion for an elective Upper House, as an
inducement to this country to substitute
this form of government for the vene-
rated British constitution, which other
colonies so long and so happily have
lived under, has quoted the authority of
some great names in England, the autho-
rity among others of Lord Monteagle,
Mr. Gladstone, and the Duke of New-
castle. But after all, what are these
but opinions—the opinions, indeed, of!
eminent men—formed at a distance from
us, of men ignorant of the state of
society which exists among us, ignorant
of our wants, ignorant of our wishes,
ignorant even of our principles, (Hear,
hear.) I really believe that these gen-
tlemen have arrived at the conslusion
that we are a democratic community, and
that nothing but democratic institutions
will go down with us. Perhaps I myself
may have been unfortunately instru-
mental in misleading these statesmen. I
will admit that some of the speeches I
have delivered in my earlier days, out of
this House, many even in this House,
might well impress these statesmen with
that conviction. We ourselves most
likely have been the authors of this im-
pression ; and I, perhaps, a greater
offender in this respect than others.
But there can be little doubt that they
have arrived at the conclusion that, now
that a perfect measure of self govern-
ment is to be conceded to us, this elective
principle in both Houses is the only prin-
ciple which We will tolerate or accept in
our constitution. Sir, those speeches, of
which we have had a full narrative given
to the House by the honorable member
for Durham (Mr. Cowper), were for the
most part delivered upon the passing of
the Bill to confer the present Constitu-
tion on the Colony of New Zealand.
But, sir, what is the Constitution, these
speeches notwithstanding, which has
been conferred on that colony ? Why,
sir, a representative assembly and a
nominated Upper House. (Cheers.) So
that whatever effect the Speeches of
these eminent individuals may have had
in guiding the convictions, or regulating
the conclusions of my honorable and
learned friend behind me, and his col-
league in this contest, they,at all events,
had little effect on the deliberations of
Parliament on the question then under
consideration. They were not considered
sufficiently potent by Parliament to in-
duce a deviation from that form of Con-
stitution which for Centuries has existed
in British colonies. Why then, sir,
should they influence our decisions in
this matter at all ? I believe that there
is within this House as great a fund of
experience and information on this sub-
ject as belongs to any of these noble
individuals. There are members here
who have made this subject the study of
their lives. I believe w r e are capable of
forming as correct conclusions on this
matter as any member of the British
Cabinet, as any member of the British
Parliament. The Parliament itself has
come to this conclusion ; the ministers of
England have come to this conclusion.
They have told us—even the Duke of
Newcastle, who advocates an elective
Upper House, has told us, in a,, despatch
quoted by my honorable friend, Mr.
Parker, this evening, that he doubts not
we ai-e more competent to deal with the
matter than himself. Lord Grey held
the same language to us ; for in a memo-
rable despatch now amongst the papers
of this House, what has he stated ? That
we are “an authority more competent to
deal with this matter than Parliament
itself.” These are the words of his de-
spatch. And yet, sir, this minister, the
author in other days of so much ill blood
and ill feeling in this House, and through-
out these colonies in gerieral; who would
have ruled the colonies with an absolute
autocratic sway, if permitted; tvho for
so many years has treated them, not as
British communities, but as fiefs of the
Crown, —since his place is no longer pos-
sessed by him, comes round and advises
these colonies, with respect to which, at
| all events, he ought to be better in-
formed—advises, or rather permits them,
to deviate from the old landmarks of the
i British Constitution, and to elect an
Uppet Housei Sir, this same nobleman


by the authority, not of Parliament, but
of the Queen alone, was the first to
sanction this innovation, this great inno-
vation, in colonial constitutions, by pro-
posing such a thing for the Cape of
Good Hope. No doubt, a certain class
of people there have accepted it with
joy. No doubt, his influence and autho-
rity in this matter has extended further.
He has induced a pliant Privy Council
to give their recommendation to this
measure. And the fact that so intelli-
gent, so highly conservative a body of
such distinguished statesmen, as comprise
this Council, have concurred in this new
principle, is relied on by my honourable
and learned friend behind me, and the
honourable member for Durham, as
affording unanswerable proof that this
old nominee principle—the sole prin-
ciple that has hitherto existed in the
Upper House of the colonies of England
—is now an exploded principle ; that it
is worn out, and will work no longer.
Now, Sir, I will just read a passage from
Lord Monteagle’s speech, when it will
be remembered by this house that Earl
Grey pursued a precisely similar course
when the present constitution of this
colony was under consideration. He re-
ferred to the Privy Council, and this
same Council brought up a report upon
it. The authority of this report was
much relied on, both in England and
elsewhere; but what does Lord Mont-
eagle say of it ? And it is important
that we should recollect that Lord
Monteagle himself was once Colonial
Minister, and knows all the ins and outs
of the way in which this Privy Council
is worked upon. I will read an extract
from his speech, to show the value of the
testimony which the Council have borne
to this new principle :
But his noble friend had taken a most extra-
ordinary and unprecedented step to get himself
out of the difficulty into which he had been
p unged by his former experiments. He intro-
duced a new principle, unheard of before. He
sought the aid of a Committee of the Privy
Council, to assist him in framing constitutions
far the colonies, casting on them a responsibility
which should have attached to himself alone. '
Eut he did not leave to those councillors
the freedom of thought and action essential for j
offering sound advice. He had already pre-
judged the question, and committed the Govern-
ment. The Committee of Council felt them-
selves bound by what the Secretary of State had
already announced. He only allowed them to
advise, so long as he was himself pleased to take
i their advice. It was, on the whole, the greatest
farce ever performed.
That, Sir, is Lord Monteagle’s opinion
of the value attachable, and justly attach-
able, to reports of Committees of the
Privy Council appointed and selected in
this way. Sir, I leave to the country
the conclusions to be drawn from this
undoubted fact, stated by Lord Mont-
eagie in the House of Lords, in the
presence of Earl Grey, and not denied.
I leave this house and the country to
say, after those conclusions have been
drawn, what weight is to be given to
such an opinion as that given by the
Privy Council. Ought it to weigh for
a feather in the deliberations of this
house on this most important question ?
As I have, Sir, said before, whatever
may be the desire of any members of
this house, or of any of the people of the
country at large to have a body among
us assimilated to the Senate of the
United States of America, it is impose
sible, for the reasons I have stated.
But, if we could have such a body,
what other consequence would result
from it than that I have already de-
duced, as the necessary sequence of the
existence of any elective Upper House—
I mean, the severance of the colony from
the mother country. Why, Sir, the
authors of the American constitution
themselves were perfectly cognisant of
this fact. They have only two estates
in their constitution, not three. The
President of the United States has no
; power of vetoing the measures sent up
to him by Congress and the Senate.
He may send them back for reconsidera-
tion, but if they do not choose to alter
i the measures within a certain specified
time—three week,s, I think—they be-
come law. The constitution of the
United States, then, is a constitution
without a third estate—a constitution in
which the legislature of the country is
omnipotent, as far as regards legisla-
tion—in which the President has no-
thing but a suspensive veto.


Mr. COX thought the honourable and
learned member was in error on this
point.
Mr. WENTWORTH: Sir, I have
already taken the trouble to read to this
house the outlines of the American con-
stitution, and I am satisfied I am right.
I say, the government of the United
States is composed only of two estates,
the House of Representatives and the
Senate. The President has no veto on
legislation but what is called a suspensive
veto, which enables him to refer mea-
sures back for the consideration of the
houses that passed them; but if they
persist, those measures become law,
whether he likes them or not. That,
Sir, is the constitution of the confede-
rated States of America. And if there
was within us a federal principle which
could be represented in the same way,
who would think of introducing such a
constitution into this colony ? But it is
enough to say, that we have no federal
principle to represent. We may frame
a mongrel imitation of it—some faint
and distant approximation to it; but
that is all that the ingenuity of my
bon. and learned friend behind me, and
his colleagues, can propose for adoption.
Sir, I have said before, and I repeat it,
that the great and insuperable objection
to all these elective bodies is, that they
are inflexible; their numbers are unal-
terable, and can neither be added to nor
diminished. The third estate of the
realm can exercise no authority over
them but the authority of dissolution. I
have shown that that authority is not
sufficient to preserve the vessel of the
State from wreck—that the elective
element, doubly represented as it would
be in any such constitution, must and
will become too powerful to be controlled
—and that under such a form of Go-
vernment the throne must give way.
Sir, I think that these arguments ought
to be sufficient to convince the House,
and the country at large, that this pro-
posed elective Upper House is an inno-
vation which we cannot safely admit.
Yes, Sir, it is an innovation we can never
introduce without contemplating, not in
the far future, as my honourable and
learned friend has stated, but as an im-
mediate, or at least an approximate re-
sult, the severance of our allegiance from
the mother country, and of our loyalty to
the throne (hear, hear, and no, no) —the
severance of that ancient and glorious
tie which binds us to our father land—
that golden link which, I trust, will ever
bind us to it—which those may sever, or
attempt to sever, who like, but which I
trust will be maintained for ages to come
by a very large majority of the loyal and
respectable portion of this community.
(Loud cheers.) Sir, I will now go into
a brief examination of the hereditary
clauses of the Bill now before the House.
I have said before that there are three
clauses connected with the formation of
the Legislative Council here proposed,
which involve two propositions : lirst, a
nominated Upper House, without titles;
and, secondly, a nomination of patentees,
to have titles which are to be descendible
to their children. When these two orders
together—that is, the patentees, and the
children of patentees, inheritors of their
titles—shall amount to a certain number,
it is proposed that then the mere nomi-
nated Upper House shall cease—that is,
that portion of it without titles; and
that the functions of legislation shall
then be taken up by the original paten-
tees who may then be living, and a cer-
tain number to be elected out of the
whole body by the patentees, and per-
sons by whom descendible titles shall
have passed. Sir, I do, upon my con-
science, believe that if these clauses
had not been introduced into the Bill
by me, much of the opposition this
measure has met with would have been
avoided; and that an outcry and cla-
mour have been raised by these means
throughout the country, which can only
arise, in my opinion, from the fact
that the nature of these clauses is
not understood, and from the prepos-
terous notions which even really well in-
formed people, I am told,, entertain on
this subject. I have heard, from good
authority, that a very respectable, and
generally intelligent man, made this ob-
servation— “Mr. Wentworth is to be
Duke of Vaucluse, and to have £50,000


a-year : Mr. Maearthur is to be Earl of
Camden, and to have £30,000 a-year.”
And so he went on through a regular
series of Earls and Barons, varying the
amount of incomes they were to receive
from the £50,000 a-year of the Duke of
Vaucluse, to the £IO,OOO a-year of the
lesser Barons. Now, Sir, can any one
think it possible that such absurd opi-
nions as these could be circulated through-
out the country ? But 1 have no doubt
that statements and opinions of this kind
are at the bottom of the main objections
which prevail against this Bill. In in-
troducing, however, such clauses into this
Bill, 1 have done so under the conviction
that the inhabitants of this country have
been too long excluded from titles. It
has been well observed by my honourable
and learned friend, the member for Cook
and Westmoreland, that the love of dis-
tinction is a natural passion of the human
mind. What is it that gives value to
property, that thing which is sought
after by all men—what is it but its trans-
missible quality ? Is it not its chief at-
traction that a man can leave it to his
children ? And, Sir, when after a course
of prosperous industry, or long and meri-
torious services rendered to a country,
rewards of this kind become coveted and
desirable, why should the British sub-
jects in this distant dependency, be ex-
cluded from the privilege enjoyed by
their fellow subjects at home? (Hear,
hear.) Will anybody tell me that any
good and sufficient reason exists for this
exclusion ? Will it be asserted that
there are not some men in this colony—
though indeed they may be few—who
are worthy of this distinction ? Sir, it
has been insinuated that ray desire to
acquire a distinction of this kind is at
the bottom of these clauses. I deny the
assertion. I have a large family, a family
of ten children, and when what I possess
comes to be divided into ten parts, there
will not be sufficient for any one of them
to maintain an hereditary title with
honour. There will not be an estate on
which any hereditary title could properly
rest, at all events in my family. But,
Sir, what is that to the question ? Is it
a-uy reason because I do not wish, or
because the circumstances of my par-
ticular case render it Inexpedient that
a title should be conferred on me; is
that any reason why this badge of ex-
clusion should be applied to the colony ?
The idea of conferring titles just now is
new no doubt; but the Quebec Act to
which these hereditary clauses are, to a
certain extent, an approximation, confers,
or, at' least, did confer whilst it was in
force, a right to do much more than these
clauses seek to establish—a right to con-
fer honors, with hereditary seats in the
legislature to the possessors of those
honors, those hereditary seats being de-
scendible to their families. It intended
to place the titled inhabitants of Canada
exactly on the footing of the lords of
England, to make them a legislative
body of themselves, and to give to their
descendants an hereditary right of legis-
lation. Sir, I have not gone so far,-be-
cause I consider this principle of here-
ditary legislation objectionable; because
I think it a much better principle to
establish among this Jbody that right of
election only from among themselves
which belongs to the peers of Scotland
and of Ireland. And, it does appear to
me to be somewhat inconsistent that
those honourable members who are so
fond of the principle of election,in refer-
ence to the Upper House, should object
to it in the form in which I propose it,
for it will be a necessary consequence of
the adoption of these clauses, that that
which, in the first instance, will be a
purely nominated body will eventually
become a body partly nominated and
partly elected. It may in the
progress of things, that when the persons
to whom these hereditary titles belong
shall amount to a certain, number, the
upper legislature would become wholly
elective. Now, Sir, my honorable and
learned friend the Solicitor-General
stated last night, as one of the main ob-
jections that occurred to him against
these propositions, that the power of
creating titles, or patents, of this kind,
must, of necessity, be local. Well, Sir,
1 agree to that proposition, but I referred
him to an authority las't night, which, i
believe, has been misquoted. I referred


him to the Charter of Maryland to
show that such a power as this had been
delegated to Lord Baltimore. But it
has been stated that the power which I
alleged to have been given to Lord
Baltimore, was a power to create an here-
ditary peerage. So far from that being
the case, the power so conferred was a
power to create titles of a different
nature. Sir, I will read the words used
in granting this power, for, undoubtedly,
if hereditary honors are to be conferred
at all in this colony, either with or with-
out an hereditary right of election to
the Upper House, it may be important
to consider in what way this power must
be exercised. The clause in the Charter
of Maryland is this :
Furthermore, that the way to honors ami dig-
nity may not seem t 6 Jpe altogether precluded
and shut up to men well born, and such as shall
prepare themselves unto this present plantation,
and shall desire to deserve well of us and our
kingdoms, both in peace and war, ip so far dis-
tant and remote a country ; therefore we, for us,
our heirs and successors, do give free and absolute
power unto the said Lord Baltimqpe, his heirs and
assigns, to confer favors, rewards, and honors
upon such inhabitants, within the province afore-
said, to invest them with what titles and digni-
ties soever as he shall think lit (so as they be not
such as are now used in England.)
Now, Sir, I do not know whether Lord
Baltimore, his heirs or assigns, ever ex-
ercised this power. I have not made the
researches necessary to ascertain the
fact. Neither do I know whether his
Majesty, under the Quebec Act, ever ex-
ercised the power to confer hereditary
honors in connection with an hereditary
seat, as that Act permitted. I think it
is likely, as this Act was passed just on
the eve" of the great French revolution,
when the attention of ministers must
have been drawn off from all other
subjects—when they had not time to
attend to such minute and petty details
of government as this, that the clause
was altogether forgotten, and that the
power remained altogether in abeyance.
I say I think this is probable, and this
probability is greatly strengthened by
the consideration that there could have
been few, if any, men in the province of
Quebec, at that time, who had sufficient
private fortune to iupport such honors.
It may be that this was the reason why
these honors were not conferred on any
of the inhabitants of any of the northern
provinces yet united to the Crown of
England. We all know, as a matter of
fact, that even in Canada, where there
are large and rich merchants connected
with the trade of the country, the ma-
jority of the people are mere farmers—
that there is scarcely a man among them
who has more than two or three hundred
acres of land, which he tills and culti-
vates himself by the aid of his family ;
and that, with few exceptions, hereditary
honors could not be supported, if her
Majesty were disposed to confer them.
But, Sir, I would ask, is that the case in
this colony ? I believe, on the contrary,
that of all the dependencies of the Bri-
tish Ci’own, there is none, and never will
be any, where such large fortunes in land,
and iu various other ways, exist, and will
exist. Sir, have we not a distinguishing
characteristic in this country which
renders it the most eligible of all
others to support a nobility ? Nobility !
That word is not found in the Bill ; and
I believe no one who concurred in these
clauses had any expectation that Her
Majesty would confer on any person in
these colonies a greater dignity than
that of a baronet. But I would say, Sir,
is there not—to say nothing of large
landholders—is there not a class pecu-
liarly fitted for hereditary distinctions ?
a class which has been great and power-
ful in all ages and in all countries where
it has existed ; which must continue to
be great and powerful here as long as
the great interior wilds of this country
can be applied to no other purpose than
the sustentation of sheep and cattle ?
Yes, Sir, we have among us, and we
shall have among us to the la'est gene-
rations, our Shepherd Kings. And I
believe that, as they are a body peculiar
to this colony, so are they, as a general
proposition, the body most fitted of all
in the colonies—i mean the principal
men among them—to receive these he-
reditary distinctions. I can afford to
say this now, because I can scarcely be
called a squatter myself any longer. I


ask if men of this qlass, in ages long
gone by, were not the founders of the
greatest and most celebrated cities and
nations of antiquity ? Who but this
race founded Nineveh and Babylon, and
subjugated the surrounding nations? It
has been admitted, in the course of this
debate, by the honourable and learned
member for Cumberland and others, that
though it may be fit that hereditary
titles should be created, yet that there
should not be attached to them any
power or faculty of legislation. Sir,
those are not my views. My views on
this subject, I dare say, will be opposed
by probably a majority of this House,
as they are opposed by a majority out of
doors. But lam not Inclined to persist
in them, if the opinion of this House
should be against me. (Hear, hear.)
1 am willing to give them up. The
Bill is a perfect measure without them.
It will then still leave us a nominated
Upper House—an element which I be-
lieve to be an essential and indispensable
element in the Constitution—an element
which, though antagonistic at times, and
necessarily antagonistic, because it ex-
ercises, and has a right to exercise, a
veto on the legislation of the Lower
House, contains within it a principle
without which, I have shown, there is
no safety-valve, and can be none, in the
British Constitution. Sir, the working
of this principle has been well described
by Pope, in his allusion to the British
Constitution, and the beautiful mix-
ture of antagonistic elements which it
contains ;
Till jarring interests of themselves create
The according music of a well-mixed State.
These lines, Sir, convey Pope’s views of
the British Constitution. They are
views which I have no doubt will be
adopted by this House, and, I hope, by
a very large majority of the country.
Sir, 1 have forborne, in this discussion,
from noticing many personal observa-
tions which have been addressed to me
bv various members, and particularly
some that I conceive to have been ad-
dressed to me by my honourable and
learned friend behind me. As I have
stated before, I feel indebted to him for
the chivalry with which he attempted to
vindicate my motives and my character
at the public meeting to which I have
formerly alluded. he has told us,
in the course of his remarks to this
House—and, no doubt, in the same spirit
which prompted him to that vindication
—that he does not desire my scalp
(laughter)—that he would be sorry to
raise the hairs of my head in that way.
Sir, I am excessively obliged to him for
his forbearance. And when I consider
the gross onslaughts made upon me
by others out of this House—that,
as my honourable friend opposite (Mr.
Morris) has stated this night, one
ruffian has proposed that I should swing
—I cannot but leel, after the delicate
allusion he made to fate of a name-
sake of mine in New* Hampshire, that he
was particularly lenient; for his dose
would be merely evacuatory, whilst
Hawkesley’s would be most stringent.
(Laughter.) All that my honourable
and learned friend has suggested is, that
my house might as well be gutted as the
house of my namesake in New Hamp-
shire. (Laughter, and “ No, no,” from
Mr. Darvall.) That was the course
adopted in his case ; and the mere sug-
gestion of such a course to certain gen-
tlemen out of doors might be all-suffi-
cient. Now, fortunately for me, I have
long ago anticipated that process, and
with the aid of Mr. Salamon I have
cleared out all; so that if these maraud-
ing gentlemen were to act upon the
suggestion, they would find nothing but
the bare walls. (Laughter.) But, Sir,
notwithstanding this —he may call it
what he likes—l thought it was a sug-
gestion ; but my honourable ami learned
friend does not concur in that inter-
pretation ; but I repeat this suggestion,
or whatever name it may deserve ; not-
withstanding this, I shall not seek to re-
taliate on him in the way in which it is
possible I might. And I am still less
inclined to adopt that course, because
I do think that my honourable and
learned friend feels miserable within
himself. (Laughter.) Sir, if I could
judge of his feeliugs by his attempted


vindication in the House, whilst I was
listening to him dragging his slow
length along, like a wounded snake,
I could not but believe that he himself
sincerely and conscientiously felt aware
of the badness of his cause, and the
dreadfully disreputable associations he
has formed. (Laughter.) Therefore,
Sir, considering the lashing he has got
from many other honourable members
of this House, combined with that
inward self-disapprobation he must
feel, I shall leave him to his reflection,
which I hope will, at all events, teach
him that “ evil communications corrupt
good manners,” (loud laughter) and
teach him to avoid such bad company for
the future. Sir, as I have said before,
1 really have felt that every additional
irgument that I could apply to this sub-
let has been already anticipated. But
there is one observation yet remaining,
)f my honorable and learned friend,
which I must notice—an observation
which tends to fix upon me the charge
)f inconsistency, to which he himself
jas pleaded guilty, and with the fact that
a the earlier years of my career in this
House I was one of the strongest repro-
aators of the nominee element which
obtains here, and which 1 now seek to
alace in a Legislative Council by itself.
Sir, if my honorable and learned friend
had given himself time to think, he must
have known that was a charge that could
not be sustained. He must have known
that I myself was the suggestor, the
author of this Constitution under which
we now sit; that it was I who introduced
;he nominee element into the House,
hear, hear) ; and with the view that by
neans of the official members of the
House the government might be repre-
sented, and by means of the nominee
nembers, a conservative and equipoising
nody might intervene between the official
nembers, on the one hand, and the re-
rresentatives on the other. Sir, I have
fften said, and who can say otherwise ?
bat during the violent times of a pre-
;eding government, which I shall not
jharacterise, the unofficial nominees in
his House neglected their duty, 1 have
)ften said that they ought to come into
this House as free and Independent as
the elective members. I have said that
it was not their duty or their business to
give pledges to the government. And I
do remember, when one member, a par-
ticular friend of my own, in alluding to
a certain measure of colonial policy then
under the consideration of the House—
I mean the formation of District Coun-
cils in this country—said openly in this
House, that he had voted for that measure
against his conscience—that 1 did get
up and express the strong disapprobation
which I felt. But, Sir, the whole tenor
of my observations, throughout my whole
life, on this subject has been this, not that
the nominee element ought to be got rid
of, but that the nominee element here
should act that independent and conscien-
tious part which the Constitution in-
tended. (Hear, hear.) That was the
tenor of the observations which I did
address to the House on this subject,
though I may have been misunderstood,
Now, Sir, in further corroboration of my
assertion, that these were my views, and
always have been my views, let us refer
to the divisions which took place when the
elements of which it was proposed to form
the Constitution of 1848, were under the
consideration of the House. When my
honorable and learned friend, and the ho-
norable member for Durham, introduced
a resolution into this House, to the effect
that the deliberations of the nominees
should be separated from those of the
elective members, Avho w r as it that op-
posed that resolution but, myself ? Sir,
that resolution, supported by the elo-
quence of the late honorable and learned
member for Sydney, and by the majority
at the back of these honorable members,
w r as carried, on a division, by eleven to
ten against me. Sir, whilst the whole
country w\as in favor of a nominated
Upper House at that time, I was the great
champion for retaining the nominee prin-
ciple in this House, which it is now said
I have always opposed. If at that period
it had not been for me, and those who
thought with me, that we were not ripe
for a separation of this kind, this nomi-
nated Upper House would now have been
constituted then. Sir, all who remember


the debates that took place in Parliament
must know, that the Minister was so con-
vinced of the division of opinion on this
subject which existed in this House, and
out of it, that though, when our pi’esent
Constitution was given us, a very large
majority of members of Parliament in
both Houses were for at once separating
our Legislature into two parts, he and the
other Ministers of the Crown prefei’red,
on the contrary, that we should retain the
form of constitution which we then pos-
sessed, and that the power of altering
and adapting it to suit the circumstances
of the colony should be given to us.
That, Sir, was the origin of the con-
stituent powers which we are now assem-
bled here to exercise. I therefore think
that I have proved to the satisfaction of
the House, that the observations I made
on this subject have been misunderstood
by my honorable and learned fi'iend.
(Hear, hear.) Sir, it has been further
objected to me by some honor-able mem-
bers in this House, and by an immense
multitude out of it, that I have desex-ted
the principles of my early days, and that
I am no longer the same William Charles
Wentworth that I was—that I, the man
of 1853, in the words of my honorable
colleague opposite, am not the man of
1843. If this charge were true—if it
could be really objected to me that I was
evej in favour of democratic institutions,
or that I ever gave them a preference
over the glorious constitution of our
fatherland, I might claim the same right
of altering my opinions as my honorable
and learned friend behind me. I might
claim it, even accoi’ding to these ob-
jectors, on much better grounds, for
whilst he is in the prime and vigour of
Ills intellect, it has been stated of rre
that I am in my senility. (Loud and in-
dignant cries of no, no, from all sides.)
Six’, without enquiring how far a charge
of this latter kind is true or false, I deny
the imputation altogether-—I will not
even admit that I commenced my life, like
the old gentleman whom my hon. and
learned friend, the member for the Nor-
thumberland Boroughs, quoted last night,
a Republican, that i became in middle
age a whig, and that I shall die a con-
servative. Sir, at all events, I shall die
with conservative principles; but however
I may die, I deny emphatically that I
ever was a democrat or a republican.
I was a whig, I admit, till I was ashamed
of whigism. I was a whig until that
great whig leader and despot—that man
who played so many pranks with the
colonies of the British Crown, and with
this colony in particular—Earl Grey
and his faction converted me from
whigism. (Cheex-s and laughter.) In
the wildest flights of declamation I have
ever indulged in 1 defy any one to sav
that I ever ceased to be an advocate for
the British constitution. What has been
the uniform object of all the political
battles I have fought but to confer such
a constitution on this country ? It is
fortunate for me that my consistency in
this particular—the deep ardour and
attachment that I feel, and have ever
felt, to that constitution, can be esta-
blished in other ways than by my mere
unsupported allegation. Sir, I can
refer, for proof of this, to one of my
early productions—a production whiclx
attracted more attention than it de-
served, but which, at all events, shows
that fi’om my boyhood upwards the esta-
bishment here of the British constitution
has been my sole end and aim. Sir,
that production concludes with these
lines :
May all thy glories, in another sphere,
Relume and shine more brightly still than here.
And oh, Britannia ! shouldst thou cease to ride,
Despotic Empress of old Ocean’s tide ;
Should thy tamed lion, spent his former might,
No longer roar, the terror of the tight;
Should e’er arrive that dark, disastrous hour,
When, bowed by luxury, thou yieldst to power ;
When thou, no longer freest of the free,
To some proud victor bend’st the suppliant knee;
May this, thy last born daughter, then arise,
To glad thy heart, and greet thy parent eyes;
And Australasia float, with flag unfurled,
A New Britannia in another world!
(Enthuslastic cheering, the gallery join-
ing in the applause.) Sir, an effusion of
now more than thirty years standing,
will, at all events, px-ove that I com-
menced my career as a boy, an ardent
admirer of that constitution, and that
only under a policy which was to flow


frora a similar constitution did I ulti-
mately expect an Empire to rise in these
seas, and upon these shores, which might
rival in greatness and in splendour the
glorious mother-land, when her glories
have departed. (Loud cheers.) This was
my early dream—it is the hope of my life;
a hope which I will not part with but
with the last pulse of my existence.
(Renewed cheers.) Sir, I feel that we
have arrived at a great crisis in the
history of this country. I feel that we
are in the throes and agonies of a con-
stitution which must influence, for good
or for evil, for weal or for woe, our
future generations—influence them, I
repeat, in exact proportion as we assimi-
late that constitution to the glorious
model of our fatherland. (Great cheer-
ing.) Sir, I am aware that there are
those by whom the authority of the
ancient pilot is unheeded. I know
that we are surrounded by a crew of rash
and daring, and, as I conscientiously be-
lieve, of disloyal innovators, who would
w'rest the helm from my hands, and steer
the vessel right on the rocks which lie
ahead of her. (Hear, hear, hear.) Sir,
those rocks are anarchy and confusion.
These are the Scylla and Charybdis we
have to avoid, and which we must avoid,
before this glorious vessel of the state
can be anchored in security. Sir, I call
upon the officers and the crew of this
vessel—that is, the loyal part of the
crew—to put down this mutiny—to put
it down, I repeat, at all hazards, I call
upon them to be firm, to be resolute, to
do their duty. Sir, if we are firm, we
shall succeed ; if we falter, we shall be
beaten. We shall not, Sir, retire from
this disgraceful and ignominious contest
—this fatal Paria—even with our ho-
nour. No, we shall leave even that be-
hind ; we shall not be able to exclaim,
with Francis the First, “ Tout est perdu,
savfe Vhonneur.” (Cheers.) Sir, we
have in this matter a solemn duty to
perform; that duty which we owe to
ourselves, our children, our posterity, our
country, and our God. I call upon you
fearlessly, faithfully, to perform it. We
cannot recede without disloyalty and
disgrace. Our only chance of success
lies before us ; lies, in an onward course,
to the goal we have in view—the con-
summation of this glorious constitution.
Sir, I will trouble the House with but a
few more observations. This is pro-
bably the last occasion—at all events,
the last important occasion—upon which
this voice may be heard within these
walls; and the time cannot be far dis-
tant when this tongue will be mute in
death. In the short interval which must
elapse between me and eternity, on the
brink of which I now stand, I would ask,
what low motives, what ignoble am-
bition, can possibly actuate me ? The
whole struggle and efforts of my life
have been directed to the achievement
of the liberties of my country ; and it is
with this constitution, which I now pre-
sent for its acceptance, that this achieve-
ment will be consummated. Sir, it has
not only been my misfortune, but it has
been the misfortune of all my country-
men, that we have not lived in troublous
times, when it became necessary, by
force, to repress domestic faction or
treason, to repel invasion from without,
or, perhaps, to pour out our chivalry to
seek glory and distinction in foreign
climes. This is a privilege which has
been denied to us. It is a privilege
which can only belong to our posterity.
We cannot, if we would, sacrifice our
lives upon the altar of public good. No
such opportunity has occurred, nor, pro-
bably, will occur, to any of us. Yet,
Sir, there is one heroic achievement
open to us, and that is, to confer
upon this country that large mea-
sure of freedom, under the protecting
shade and influence of which an enno-
bling and exalted patriotism may at last
arise, which will enable the youth of this
colony the youth of future ages—to
emulate the ardour, the zeal, and the
patriotism of the glorious youth of Sparta
and of Rome, and to teach and make
them feel that ennobling sentiment which
is conveyed in the lines of the Roman
lyric,—
“Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori.”
Sir, this is not our destiny, but I trust it
will be the destiny of another genera-


Ayes, 33.
Noes, 8.
The Colonial Secretary
Mr. Bligh
The Attorney-General
Mr, Richardson
The Colonial Treasurer
Mr. Park
The Solicitor-General
Mr. Russell
Mr. James Macarthur
Mr. Smart
The Auditor-General
Mr. Darvall
Captain King
Mr. Cowper ) ,
Mr. W. Macarthur
Mr. Thurlow /
Mr. Wentworth
Mr. Cox
Mr. Dohie
Mr. Fitzgerald
Mr. Nichols
Mr. Flood
Mr. G. Bowman
Mr. W. Bowman
Mr. Broadhurst
Mr. Campbell
Mr. Barker
Mr. Macleay
The Collector of Customs
Mr. Jeffreys
Mr. Bradley
Chief Commissioner Crov
rn Lands
Mr. Barker
The Postmaster-General
Captain Dumaresq
Mr. Finch
Inspector-General of Police
Mr, Allen
Dr. Douglass
Mr. Martin) m n
Mr. Morris } Teiler8 '
.
tion, who shall arise with larger feelings,
and, it may be, purer aims. Sir, this
great charter of liberty, which I believe
will be pregnant with these results in
after-ages, I leave now as my latest
legacy to roy country. I beseech this
House and that country to accept it.
(Cheers.) It is the most endearing proof
of my love to that country which I can
leave behind me. It is also the embo-
diment of the deep conviction which I
feel that the model, the type, from which
this great charter has been drawn is, in
the language of the eloquent Canning,—
The envy of surrounding nations, and the
admiration of the world.
Sir, in the uncertainty which hangs over
the destiny of the country—in this awful
crisis of our fate—l can only hope that
the deliberations of the country may be
guided to a safe conclusion upon this
vital question, and that by a large, a
very large majority of this House, and
of the community beyond it, the Consti-
tution will be gratefully and thankfully
received. (Loud cheers.) Sir, I shall
only say, in conclusion, that in inviting
this House to the second reading of this
Bill, I have to enunciate distinctly, as
I did before, that the sole principle
I wish to have affirmed by the second
reading is, that there shall be two
Houses of Parliament, an Upper and a
Lower House, and that whether the
Uppper House is to be elective or no-
minated is to remain an open question
until we shall receive an expression of
opinion from the different districts of the
country on that subject; and that this
important part of this measure shall only
be determined when the House goes
into committee of the whole House,
which I propose it shall do—not, as I
stated before, on the 20th November,
hut on the 6th December, which I find
will be more suitable to the general
wishes and convenience of honourable
members.
The honourable and learned gentleman
sat down amidst the greatest applause
from all sides of the House, the numerous
strangers in the gallery joining most
enthusiastically until called to order by
the Speaker.
The House then divided on the ques
tion, with the following result;—
The Bill was then read a second time,
and its committal ordered to stand an
order of the day for Tuesday, the 6th of
December.
The announcement of the result of the
division was the signal for renewed and
hearty cheers.


• V
• • ■ . . 'M


PRINTED BY THOMAS DANIEL.
YORK STREET.




