

f=
OF THE
PROCEEDINGS IN
EQUITY
l|
BEFOliK THE
=7
•C~
li
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
$8
§5
IN THE CASE OF
II
MACPHERSON &
OTHERS
||
fc—
V-
II
SUTHERLAND &
OTHERS,
During the Years 1884 and 1885,
it
API III
SJ <*&» s»s& *& -Xf>!&
sEiii inmiinllmimiii 11 mi i in 111111 in mi ini i linn niini in mi 111 in in in m 1111 nm 11 rw-i
n JUttFcnfic gifafemenf |l
•~E Calling upon the Civil Courts of the Colony to annul a sa
sentence of expulsion from the Synod of Eastern Australia,
't E and repone three of the Plaintiffs as members of the Synod.
Consisting of Copies of the Pleadings and Docu- =
ments in the case, or otherwise explanatory thereof, E?
Tr together with the Decree of the Primary Judge in
sij Equity, and of the Full Court on Appeal by the zCy
£E Plaintiffs. =3
Published for the information of the Members E?
and Adherents of the Presbyterian Church of E>’
Eastern Australia, and with the sanction of the Ev
gS Synod thereof. Ev ;
-Sit bun)
Printed l),v W. M. Maclardy, Printer. 319 George Street, Sydney.
MDCCCLXXXVI.
iini ni i iwi ii iini ri ithmmiiiiiiiii ri i ri.i iin i min in 11 in ninin 11 mi i|Ss




JVn statement
OP THE
PROCEEDINGS IN EQUITY
BEFORE THE
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
IN THE CASE OF
MAC PH E RSON & OTHERS
SUTHERLAND & OTHERS,
During the Years 1884 and 1885,
Calling upon the Civil Courts of the Colony to annul a
sentence of expulsion from the Synod of Eastern Australia,
and repone three of the Plaintiffs as members of the Synod.
Consisting of Copies of the Pleadings and Docu-
ments in the case, or otherwise explanatory thereof,
together with the Decree of the Primary Judge in
Equity, and of the Full Court on Appeal by the
Plaintiffs.
Published for the information of the Members
and Adherents of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia, and with the sanction of the
Synod thereof.
tSgtne}):
Printed by W. M. Maclardy, Printer, 319 George Street, Sydney.
MDCCCLXXXVI.




Htnss fe«^3/2
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
1. Statement of the Constitution and Proceedings of the Synod
of Eastern Australia on 6th May, 1884, out of which the
Suit in the Court of Equity arose ... .. 5 13
2, Statement of Claim, with affidavit in support thereof ... 13 33
3. Application to the Court for Injunction to restrain defendants
from dealing with the Church Funds 33—35
4. Statement of Defence ... ... ... ... ... 3g 4*7
5. Concurrence in the foregoing sworn Statement of Defence by
the remaining defendants (ministers) excepting Rev. D.
Maclnnes ... ... .. 47
6. Report of the Tidal before the Primary Judge (Sir William
Manning!, and of the evidence given thereat, as reported
in the Sydney Morning Herald of 20th May, 1885 ... 47—55
7. Report of meeting on Ist May, 1885, proposing to recon-
stitute the Synod on 19th June referred to by the Judge
—with certificate that no such meeting was held ... 55 57
8. Affidavit of Rev. J. S. Macpherson as to abandonment of
meeting proposed for 19th June 57
9. Report of the judgment delivered by his Honor Sir William
Manning, on 14th July, 1885, as given in the Sydney
Morning Herald of the following day ... ... ... 53 67
10. Appeal by the Plaintiffs to the Full Court against the decree
of his Honor the Primary Judge in Equity 67 68
11. Report of case on Appeal before the Full Court, as given i'ii
n 1 „... 7 T 7.7 P onn at a & ,
the Sydney Morning Herald , of 28th November, 1885.... 68—75
12. Treasurer’s Report as to Funds passing through his hands' iii
connection with the Synod of Eastern Australia, sub-
mitted to and approved by the Finance Committee on the
10th April, 1885, as to be given in evidence, if demanded
at the Supreme Court at the approaching trial .. ... 75 80
13. Report of the Committee of Synod as to the management and
distribution of the Ministers’ Widows and Orphans Fund,
adopted at Meeting of Synod on 10th November, 1879 ...’ 80
14. Extract from the report of the Finance Committee of the
Sydnod of Eastern Australia for 1884-5, together with
extract from the Synod’s deliverance thereupon dated the
9th day of February, 1885 ... ... .. ... gj g 2
15. Extract Minute of Synod’s Proceedings, 12th November
1879 (asprinted) ... ... ... ’ gg
16. Extract from the Free Churchman of May, 1884, published
immediately before the Meeting of Synod’ on 6th of
that month, under the editorship of the Rev. John S.
Macpherson ... ... ... ... ... ' g 4 gg
17 Notes respecting the right or power to expel Ministers from
Church Courts—prepared by one of the defendants for
consideration of Counsel ... . . gg qq
18. Questions Nos. 4,5, 7, (required to be answered in the Affir-
mative by Probationers before Ordination, and by
Ministers already ordained on their admission to Pastoral
Charges, together with the Formula required to be sub-
scribed by Probationers, and by all office-bearers at the
time of their admission ... ... ... .. gj
10. Fundamental act of the Free Presbyterian Synod of Aus-
tralia Felix (afterwards Victoria) 92




-A-isr
Jlutkmtic .Statement of the dtquitn Suit
MACPHERSON & OTHERS
SUTHERLAND & OTHERS,
IN THE
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES IN 1884 & 1885,
WITH
EXPLANATORY AND ILLUSTRATIVE DOCUMENTS.
1. Statement of the Constitution and Proceedings of
the Synod of Eastern Australia on 6th May, 1884,
out of which the Suit in the Court of Equity
arose. Prepared by an eye-witness.
In the absence through illness of the moderator,
the Rev. W. S. Donald, A.M., the ex-moderator, the
Rev. S. P. Stewart conducted the usual opening
service, preaching from 11. Cor. vi. 4, and thereafter
constituted the Synod by prayer.
The Clerk then called the roll, when the following
eight ministers were found to be present: —Rev.
Samuel Pentleton Stewart, moderator ; Revs. George
Sutherland, Peter Macpherson, Duncan Kennedy
Mclntyre, John Shiret Macpherson, Hugh S. Buntine,
A


Isaac Mackay, and Duncan Mclnnes. Commissions
in favor of the following five elders were presented
and sustained : —Samuel Martin, Francis McKenzie,
Alexander Law, David J. Lobban, and Samuel
Porter.
THE QUESTION OF THE APPOINTMENT OF
MODERATOR.
The Rev. S. P. Stewart (ex —and presiding—
moderator), then stated that according to the rule
usually observed the Rev. George Sutherland was
next in turn to occupy the moderator’s chair, and
accordingly nominated him as his successor, and the
nomination was seconded in due form by the Rev.
Isaac Mackay.
The Rev. J. S. Macpherson thereupon tendered a
dissent from such nomination to which he said
reasons were appended.
The Rev. D. Mclnnes, the clerk, said no dissent
could be properly received against the nomination,
but that there must be previously an amendment
made, moved, seconded, and lost.
The Rev. J. S. Macpherson said they would not
move an amendment because it would be against the
rule of the church which gave Mr. Sutherland his
turn to the chair.
The Rev. S. P. Stewart then, after waiting a
short time, said that having nominated Mr. Sutherland
according to the ordinary rule, and his nomination
having been seconded, and no amendment having been
proposed, it only remained for him to vacate the chair
in favor of the Rev. George Sutherland. Whereupon
Mr. Sutherland took the chair as Moderator,
The Rev. J. S. Macpherson again tendered his
dissent or protest and reasons.
The Moderator, the Rev. George Sutherland, said
it is for the Court to say whether these papers shall


be read. Whereupon the Rev. D. Mclnnes again
said that the dissent could not be received as the
nomination was carried, and no amendment had been
proposed. This appeared to be demurred to by the
Rev. J. S. Macpherson, but no motion was made on
the subject ; and, at this point, there being nothing
before the Synod,
The Rev. I. Mackay rose and said:—Moderator,
—lt is my painful duty at this early stage of our
proceedings to read a document of grave import,
signed by a majority of the members of this Court.
It is as follows :
THE EXPULSION DOCUMENT.
“It is well known that at least three members of
this church, disregarding the repeated and confirmed
deliverances of this Synod in matters of vital moment,
affecting the moral character, reputation, and useful-
ness of several ministers of this church, and through
them the standing and usefulness of the denomination
in all these colonies, but especially in New South
Wales, have continued to repeat the charges which
they had previously published, and condemned the
proceedings of the Synod which exculpated these
brethren from all blame on the points on which their
character was assailed ; and in particular that the
Rev. Peter Macpherson, in the columns of a monthly
called the Free Churchman , and the Rev. John S.
Macpherson as- editor and publisher of that periodical,
and the Rev. Hugh Livingstone in the columns of the
Lismore Chronicle , have continued in the manner
aforesaid to defame the character and reputation of
the majority of this Court and their decisions in
vindication of their brethren.
“And whereas the continuous accusations levelled
against the Rev. George Sutherland, of St George’s
Church, Sydney, and accusations on various occasions


levelled against the Rev. D. K. Mclntyre, of Sydney,
by the Rev. Peter Macpherson in the columns of the
Free Churchman and the Protestant Standard , render
it impossible, with any shadow of self-respect, regard
for public Christian sentiment, or with obedience to
Divine precept as bearing on such a case, for these
brethren to sit in the same Presbytery with him.
“ And whereas the Rev. W. S. Donald, minister
in Clarence Town, has been constrained to abstain
from taking his seat in the Presbytery of Maitland
for this reason that he found his presence at meetings
of Presbytery rendered legal the decisions of the other
two brethren—viz., the Rev. John S. Macpherson
and Mr. Samuel Porter, elder —although he had
objected to the same ; also, that he felt that the
Presbytery, by its findings, was ignoring the decisions
of the Synod in the Aberdeen case ; also, that he was
so frequently compelled to enter protests and appeals,
that he considered it better to entirely withdraw from
the meetings of the Presbytery.
“And whereas the Presbytery of Grafton has been
the scene of frequent and painful contendings, mainly
through the action of the Rev. Hugh Livingstone in
reference to a finding of this Court ; further, the
said Rev. Hugh Livingstone having published a
number of extended advertisements in a local paper,
and having widely circulated them, expressed in these
his condemnation of the just and reasonable decisions
of the majority of this Court, representing as they do
fully three-fourths of the office-bearers, members, and
adherents of the denomination.
“ And whereas the present defamation, obstruction,
and strife carried on by the aforementioned ministers
have brought the Church to a stand, as a similar
course of proceedings led to the same result in the
Victorian Free Church some years ago, fulfilling the
words of the Saviour that ‘if a house be divided
against itself that house cannot stand,’ no students


can be expected to join us, no systematic training
can be given them if they did offer themselves,
Presbyterial action through the Courts of the Church
is either suspended or neutralized ; and the whole
Church is presented to the community as a seat of
contention and a cause of shame.
“ And whereas this evil, instead of abating with
time, is increasing in various assaults made since the
last meeting of the Synod on the reputation of mem-
of this Court, three of these members being
special objects of attack, had most offensive epithets
applied to them recently in the columns of the Free
Churchman , over whom the Synod has repeatedly
thrown its shield of defence as brethren.
“ And whereas the due administration of Presby-
terial authority would now require that the Rev.
Peter Macpherson, the Rev. John S. Macpherson, and
the Rev. Hugh Livingstone, should be dealt with for
contumacy for their various publications, tending to
bring the decisions of this Court into contempt, and
to destroy its influence ; also, the Rev. John S.
Macpherson and Mr. Samuel Porter (elder), the
majority of the Presbytery of Maitland, for ignoring
the decisions of the Synod while dealing with the
settlement of a minister for Aberdeen, all which matter,
if brought before the Synod, would lead to no good
result, but would rather give rise to prolonged
wrangling and strife, to the injury of religion, and to
the reputation of this Church.
“ And whereas the last three and a half years of
contention in this Church furnish abundant evidence
that, constituted as we are, it would not be possible
to work out the Church organisation. It is, moreover
perfectly evident that if we, the undersigned, are what
our detractors, the aforementioned ministers viz.
the Rev. Peter Macpherson, the Rev. John s!
Macpherson, and the Rev. Hugh Livingstone repre-


sent us to be, they should not sit in the same Courts
with us; and, on the other hand, as we are not what
they represent us to be, we cannot sit in the same
Courts with them.
“ Taking these premises into consideration, we,
the undersigned, have come to the conclusion that,
after three and a half years of forbearance with the
Rev. Peter Macpherson, the Rev. John S. Macpherson,
and the Rev. Hugh Livingstone, the time has come
for a separation.
“ Moved by the Rev. Isaac Mackay, and seconded
by the Rev. Samuel P. Stewart— ‘ That the Synod
receive this paper, now read, approve of the reasons
assigned for the separation proposed therein, instruct
the Moderator to intimate to the Rev. Peter Macpher-
son, the Rev. John S. Macpherson, and the Rev.
Hugh Livingstone, that they are no longer members
of this Court, and to order the Clerk to remove their
names from the roll.’
“ N.B, —It is understood that this deliverance does
not affect in any way the legal rights of these
ministers and their congregations to the Church
property in their possession.
“ Signed,
“W. S. Donald, Minister (by express
authority to Rev. George Sutherland).
“ George Sutherland, Minister.
“I. Mackay, Minister.
“ S. P. Stewart, Minister.
“ Alexander Law, Elder.
“ Samuel Martin, Elder (per Alex. Law).
“ D. K. Mclntyre, Minister.
“Francis Mackenzie, Elder.
“William Grant, Minister (by express
authority to Rev. George Sutherland).
“David J. Lobe an, Elder.”


(The whole statement, including the motion and
explanatory note was understood to have been agreed
to by the subscribers to it, and to have been com-
mitted to writing to secure that the mover, whoever
he might be, should exactly express their united
sentiments as leading to, and including the motion—
and explanatory note appended thereto—with which it
concluded.
The Rev. W. S. Donald and the Rev. W. Grant
being both unavoidably absent through illness,
had, by telegraphic messages, authorised their signa-
tures to be appended by the Rev. George Sutherland,
who exhibited the messages to the Synod.)
SUBSEQUENT PROCEEDINGS.
The confusion that followed arose from the Clerk,
the Rev. D. Mclnnes, pleading that the matter should
have passed through the Committee on Bills and
Overtures, which had not then been appointed ; and,
in opposition to the clear right of the Synod to
enter upon any business that came before it, as it
could not be subject to any Committee of its own
creation.
The confusion was intensified by the Revs. Peter
and John S. Macpherson, H. S. Buntine, and Mr. S.
Porter, who all rose to their feet and continued loudly
vociferating so far as could be understood in support
of the Clerk’s action.
No amendment was, however, offered upon Mr.
Mackay’s motion, and being supported by 8 of the 13
members present (exclusively of the Revs. W. S.
Donald and W. Grant), the motion was carried, and
in terms of it the Moderator immediately intimated
to the Revs. P. and J. S. Macpherson that, they were
no longer members of the Synod, and stated further


that when the Rev. Hugh Livingstone should appear
in Court a similar statement would be made to
him.
The Rev. H. S. Buntine then rose, and said that
if the ministers named were expelled he would go
with them, in which statement he was joined by Mr.
Samuel Porter.
The Moderator then nominated the Committee on
Bills and Overtures to consist of the Moderator and
Clerk, Rev. I. Mackay, Rev. S. P. Stewart, with
Messrs. Lobban and Martin, Elders.
The confusion and disorder continuing, Mr. S.
Martin moved, and Mr. Law seconded, that the Synod
adjourn to meet at 11 a.m. on the following day with
closed doors. There being no amendment the motion
was declared carried, and intimation made accordingly
as well as of a meeting on Bills and Overtures at
10 a.m. Those intimations having been made, the
benediction was pronounced, during which loud cries
were made of “ Sacrilege,” “Agony,” “Mob Law,”
&c., &c.
At the sederunt of the Synod on the evening of
the 9th May —lnter alia —the Rev. Hugh Livingstone
entered the Court and presented a commission in favor
of Mr. Hector Mackenzie as representative Elder for
the Richmond River Congregation, which was
sustained.
The Moderator then read the document (quoted
above), and in terms thereof declared the Rev. Hugh
Livingstone to be no longer a member of the Synod.
Whereupon Mr. Livingstone intimated that he con-
sidered himself still a member of the Court, but made
no request to be heard in his own defence; and shortly
afterwards, while the Court was being dismissed with
the usual benediction, left the Church in a noisy and
highly disrespectful manner.


2. STATEMENT OF CLAIM WITH AFFIDAVIT IN
SUPPORT THEREOF.
The Reverend John Siiiret Macpherson and
Others v. The Reverend George Sutherland
and Others.
STATEMENT OF CLAIM.
Prior to and at the date of the events referred to in
the next paragraph there existed in this colony a
Presbyterian Church in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland.
In the year one thousand eight hundred and forty
six certain ministers and elders members of the Synod
of the said Presbyterian Church and certain congre-
gations belonging to the same church separated
themselves therefrom and formed themselves into a
separate church which then became and still is known
as the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia.
The said separation was consequent upon and
analogous to the early separation from the Established
Church of Scot]and of certain members thereof who
formed themselves into the Free Church of Scotland.
The Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia is
a voluntary association of persons united for religious
purposes who have by mutual compact agreed to be
bound by and to be subject to certain rules and
practice substantially equivalent to the rules and
practice of the Free Church of Scotland affecting not
only matters of doctrine but also the mode of holding
and the manner of administering the property of the
said association such rules and practice are in short
the constitution in accordance with which all the
members of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia have agreed that it should be governed.
The chief governing body to which in accordance
with the said rules and practice the regulation of
matters affecting the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia is entrusted is called and is hereinafter


referred to as “ the Synod.” It is a representative
body and is composed of ministers and elders who
represent various districts of this colony. The
Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia is possessed
of very considerable property and funds the manage-
ment and disbursement whereof are in accordance
with the said rules and practice entrusted to the
Synod. The plaintiffs and defendants (excepting the
said Edward Alexander Rennie) were at the date
of the matters hereinafter complained of and still
are the sole members of the Synod as at present
constituted.
For the purpose of enabling the business of the
Synod to be more conveniently conducted various
committees are and have been for many years past
constituted from among its members and by its
authority.
Each committee is presided over by a convener.
The moneys at the disposal of the Synod stand in a
bank in the name of the Treasurer of the Synod who
is and has been since the date of the resolution next
hereinafter mentioned authorised to pay out of such
moneys only such sums as shall be certified by the
respective conveners of the various committees and
in the case of new expenditure not specially authorised
by the minutes of the Synod only such sums as may
be certified by an extract minute of the committee
authorising such expenditure.
The practice of dealing in manner aforesaid with
the moneys standing in the name of the treasurer was
adopted in pursuance of a resolution duly passed by
the Synod at a meeting thereof duly held in the St.
George’s Church Sydney in this Colony on the twelfth
day of November one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-nine and has been since the date of such
motion and still is the invariable and only way of
dealing with such moneys such practice is in fact
binding on the defendant Edward Alexander Rennie


who is the present treasurer of the Synod and on all
the other defendants and members of the Synod.
The said committees at the date of the matters
hereinafter complained of comprised and still comprise
inter alia the following eight committees that is to
say “ The Committee on Foreign Missions” “The
Committee on Statistics” “The Sustentation Fund
Committee” “The Sabbath School Committee” “The
Committee on Historical Records ” “ The Committee
on Religion and Morals ” The Finance Committee”
“The Committee on the Widows and Orphans
Fund.”
The plaintiffs or some of them are members of all
such eight committees and in particular the plaintiff
John Shiret Macpherson is the convener of the
Sustentation Fund Committee the Committee on
Religion and Morals and the Committee on Widows
and Orphans Fund and the plaintiff Peter Macpher-
son is the convener of the Committee on Statistics
and the Committee on Historical Records.
By a resolution of the Synod which was duly and
unanimously passed at a meeting thereof duly held
on the twenty-first day of iSovomber one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-one in St. George’s Church
aforesaid it was resolved as follows :—“ That Mon-
•crieff on Church Law be adopted as the law of this
Church instead of Forbes until we can frame a code
for ourselves.” The Moncrieff on Church Law
referred to in the last mentioned resolution is a book
styled “ The Practice of the Free Church of Scotland
in her several Courts ” (third edition) prepared and
published by authority of the General Assembly of
the Free Church of Scotland in the year one thousand
eight hundred and eighty. The said book was com-
piled by H. Wellwood Moncrieff and is hereinafter
referred to as “ Moncrieff.” No code has since the
date of the last mentioned resolution been framed by


the Synod and the law and practice as laid down in
“ Moncrieff” has been since such last mentioned date
and still is binding upon the Synod and all other
members of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia.
On the sixth day of May one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-four a meeting of the Synod was
held in St. George’s Church aforesaid at the com-
mencement of the meeting the defendant Samuel
Pentleton Stewart who as acting Moderator presided
over it proposed that the defendant George Sutherland
should be Moderator of the Synod during the then
next twelve months. The plaintiffs John Shiret
Macpherson Peter Macpherson Hugh S. Buntine and
Samuel Porter at once rose and expressed their
dissents (which had been embodied in writing and
were then handed in) from such proposal. The
defendant Samuel Pentleton Stewart notwithstanding-
these dissents and before they had been read illegally
declared the defendant George Sutherland to be elected
Moderator and the same defendant thereupon took
the chair.
The question whether the said dissents should
then be read was raised and whilst it was actually
being discussed and was still undecided the defendant
Isaac McKay suddenly rose and proceeded to read to
the meeting a lengthy document. Several members
of the Synod at once rose to order but no notice was
taken of the point of order by the defendant George
Sutherland.
A motion was duly made and seconded during
the reading of the said document that the defendant
Isaac McKay should be prevented from reading the
same on the ground that (as the fact was) it was dis-
orderly but such motion was wholly disregarded by
the defendant George Sutherland The defendant
Isaac McKay continued notwithstanding the said
interruptions and many other protests by members


of the Synod to read the said document of which the
said plaintiffs were then unable to hear or understand
more than that the said document concluded with a
motion that the Synod should instruct the Moderator
to intimate to the plaintiffs Peter Macpherson John
Shiret Macpherson and Hugh Livingstone that they
were no longer members of the Synod and to order
the clerk to remove their names from the roll.
On the conclusion of the reading of the said
document some of the plaintiffs protested that (as the
fact was) the reading of the same was altogether
irregular but notwithstanding such protests and the
fact that the last mentioned motion had not been duly
seconded and that there had been no opportunity
whatever given for discussing it and that in fact it
had not been discussed at all the defendant George
Sutherland without putting such motion to the Synod
declared it carried and intimated that the plaintiffs
John Shiret Macpherson Peter Macpherson and Hug] l
Livingstone were no longer members of the Synod.
Almost immediately after the last mentioned declara-
tion and whilst some of the plaintiffs continued to
protest against the proceedings the defendant George
Sutherland declared that the Synod was adjourned
till the next day at eleven a.m.
Immediately after the said adjournment the
plaintiffs other than the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone
who owing to his absence from Sydney was not
present at all during the last mentioned meeting
wrote and signed and handed to the clerk of the
Synod a formal protest against the illegality of the
proceedings at such meeting declaring that they did
not recognise the said proceedings as in any way
affecting their position as members of the Synod.
The defendants or persons instigated by them or some
of them endeavoured by various tricks and devices to
prevent the plaintiffs from framing or writing the
said protests.


On the seventh day of May last (being the day
following the day on which the last mentioned
meeting was held) the plaintiffs (other than the
plaintiff Hugh Livingstone who was still absent
from Sydney) arrived at St. George’s Church ten
minutes before the hour of eleven a.m. and found the
doors of the said Church locked and though they
knocked repeatedly at the said doors and remained
there for upwards of an hour they were unable to
obtain admission. The plaintiffs have since discovered
and it is the fact that the defendant George Sutherland
and not more than five others of the defendants had
been previously to the said hour of eleven a.m.
assembled in St. George’s Church aforesaid and locked
the doors thereof for the express purpose of excluding
the plaintiffs therefrom and whilst the plaintiffs were
so excluded the same defendants purported to hold a
meeting of the Synod.
The plaintiff Hugh Livingstone on the ninth day
of May last attended a meeting of the defendants or
some of them which purported to be but was not a
meeting of the Synod and then and there formally
protested against the expulsion of himself and the
plaintiffs John Shiret Macpherson and Peter
Macpherson from the Synod. The plaintiffs Hugh
S. Buntine Samuel Porter and Hector Mackenzie very
shortly after the said seventh day of May gave the
defendants formal notice of their determination not
to attend any meetings held by the defendants and
purporting to be meetings of the Synod on the ground
that (as the fact is) any proceedings taken at any
such meeting would be illegal by reason of the
proceedings herein complained of.
The defendants respectively have attempted to
expel or have acquiesced in the expulsion of the
plaintiffs John Shiret Macpherson and Hugh Living-
stone and have in fact excluded all the plaintiffs from
the Synod.


The plaintiffs had not nor had any of them an}'
notice whatever that the said document read at the
said meeting of the sixth day of May would be so
read or that any motion or attempt would be made
at the same meeting to expel or exclude any of the
plaintiffs from the Synod. The said document did
not as the plaintiffs have since discovered state any
grounds which could possibly justify the expulsion
or exclusion of any of the plaintiffs from the Synod
and none of the plaintiffs had any opportunity what-
ever of being heard by the Synod in opposition to
the said motion brought forward by the defendant
Isaac McKay. The said motion was in fact declared
to be carried in the absence of the plaintiff Hugh
Livingstone.
By the rules and practice of the Synod every
document to be brought before it must before it can
be so brought be considered and passed by a com-
mittee of the Synod called the Committee on Bills
and Overtures.
The said document so read as aforesaid has never
before it was so read been in any way considered
passed or even brought before such committee as last
aforesaid.
The said attempted expulsion and exclusion have
been carried out in a manner wholly contrary to the
law and practice laid down in l< Moncrieff ” and also
in a manner wholly contrary to those rules of natural
justice and fairness to which every body of men
associated together for any purpose is impliedly
subject. The said attempted expulsion and exclusion
is in fact wholly illegal inequitable and ultra vires.
Since the date of the said attempted expulsion
and exclusion the defendants have illegally held divers
meetings which purport to be but are not meetings
of the Synod and have acted and are acting in all
respects as if the said attempted expulsion were valid
and have excluded and are excluding and threaten


and intend and will unless restrained by injunction
continue to exclude the plaintiffs from the Synod and
from all participation in the affairs or business thereof.
The plaintiffs John Shiret Macpherson and Peter
Macpherson have not nor has either of them since
the date of the said attempted expulsion given to the
defendant Edward Alexander Rennie the Treasurer
of the Synod any certificates or certificate for the
payment of any moneys in respect of any of the
committees of which as aforesaid the same plaintiffs
are respectively conveners yet the defendant Edward
Alexander Rennie has without any lawful authority
made divers payments out of the said moneys at the
disposal of the Synod and debited such payments to
the several committees hereinbefore specified. The
defendants in fact threaten and intend and will unless
restrained by injunction continue without any lawful
authority to disburse and otherwise deal with and
dispose of the funds and property under the control
of the Synod.
THE PLAINTIFFS’ CLAIM.
That it may be declared that the said declaration
of the defendant George Sutherland that the said
motion of the sixth day of May last was carried and
his intimation that the plaintiffs John Shiret
Macpherson Peter Macpherson and Hugh Livingstone
were no longer members of the Synod were
respectively null and void and that the same plaintiffs
now are entitled to exercise and enjoy all the rights
and privileges attaching to membership of the Synod
as fully in all respects as immediately prior to the
said declaration and intimation of the sixth of May.
That it may be declared that the expulsion of the
plaintiffs from the said meeting at St. George’s Church
on the seventh day of May last was illegal and ultra
vires.


That it may be declared that all payments made
and all acts and things done since the sixth day of
May last by the defendants or any of them and pur-
porting to be made or done by or on behalf of the
Synod or any committee thereof are invalid and null
and void.
That the defendants and each and every one of
them may be restrained by the order and injunction
of this Honorable Court from excluding the plaintiffs
or any of them from the Synod and from doing or
causing to be done any act or thing whereby or by
means whereof the plaintiffs or any of them may be
in anywise prevented from or hindered in exercising
all the privileges and enjoying all the rights attaching
to membership of the Synod.
That the defendants and each and every of them
may be ordered to do all such acts and things accord-
ing to the constitution and practice of the Synod as
are for the due exercise and enjoyment by the plaintiffs
of such privileges and rights as aforesaid.
That the defendants and each and every of them
may be restrained by the order and injunction of this
Honorable Court from disbursing disposing of or
otherwise dealing or intermeddling with the moneys
funds and property under the control or management
of the Synod in any manner inconsistent with the
constitution and practice of the Synod or with the
rights and privileges of the plaintiffs as members
thereof.
That an enquiry may be directed as to what pay-
ments have been made or expenditure incurred by the
defendants or any of them and in particular by the
defendant Edward Alexander Rennie since the sixth
day of May last and out of moneys funds or property
at the disposal of the Synod and that the defendants
or some of them may be ordered to replace and make
good what on such enquiry shall be found to be the
amount of such payment or expenditure.


That the defendants or some of them may be
ordered to pay the costs of this suit.
That the plaintiffs may have such further or other
relief as the nature of the case and the circumstances
may require.
W. Gregory Walker,
Counsel for the plaintiffs.
Note.— This Statement of Claim is filed by Herbert Salwey
of number thirty-three Hunter Street Sydney Solicitor for the
Reverend John Shiret Macpherson of Maitland in the Colony of
New South Wales The Reverend Peter Macpherson of Albion
Street Sydney aforesaid The Reverend Hugh Livingstone of
Lismore in the said Colony The Reverend Hugh S. Buntine of
Aberdeen in the said Colony Samuel Porter of Maitland
aforesaid and Hector Mackenzie of the Clarence River in the said
Colony the above named plaintiffs.
AFFIDAVIT IN SUPPORT OF CLAIM AS SWORN
TO BY THE PLAINTIFFS.
The Reverend John Shiret Macpherson, the Reverend
Peter Macpherson, the Reverend Hugh Living-
stone, the Reverend Hugh S. Buntine, Samuel
Porter, and Hector Mackenzie, v. the Reverend
George Sutherland, the Reverend William Scott
Donald the Reverend Isaac McKay, the Reverend
Samuel Pentleton Stewart, Alexander Law,
Samuel Martin, the Reverend Duncan Kennedy
Mclntyre, Francis Mackenzie, the Reverend
W illiam Grant, David J. Lobban, the Reverend
John Davis, Alexander Bain, the Reverend
Duncan Mclnnes, and Edward A. Rennie.
On this twenty-fourth day ot June one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-four John Shiret Mac-


pherson of Maitland in the Colony of New South
Wales a Minister of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia one of the plaintiffs herein Peter
Macpherson of Sydney in the Colony aforesaid
Minister of the said Church one of the plaintiffs
herein and Samuel Porter of Maitland aforesaid an
Elder of the said Church one of the plaintiffs herein
being severally duly sworn make oath and say as
follows—
Prior to and at the date of the events referred to
in the next paragraph of this affidavit there existed
in this Colony a Presbyterian Church in connection
with the established Church of Scotland.
In the year one thousand eight hundred and
forty-six certain Ministers and Elders members of
the Synod of the said Presbyterian Church and
certain congregations belonging to the same Church
separated themselves therefrom and formed them-
selves into a separate Church which then became and
still is known as the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia The said separation was consequent upon
and analogous to the earlier separation from the
established Church of Scotland of certain members
thereof who formed themselves into the Free Church
of Scotland,
The Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia is
a voluntary association of persons united for religious
purposes who have by mutual compact agreed to be
bound by and to be subject to certain rules and
practice substantially equivalent to the rules and
practice of the Free Church of Scotland affecting not
only the doctrine but also the mode of holding
and the manner of administering the property
of the said Association such rules and practice are
in short in accordance with the constitution which
all the members of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia have agreed that it should he
governed.


The chief governing body to which in accordance
with the said rules and practice the regulation of
matters affecting the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia is entrusted is called and is hereinafter re-
ferred to as “The Synod” It is a representative
body and is composed of Ministers and Elders who
represent various districts of this colony. The Pres-
byterian Church of Eastern Australia is possessed of
very considerable property and funds the management
and disbursement whereof are in accordance with the
said rules and practice entrusted to the said Synod
AVe these deponents together with the plaintiff Hugh
Livingstone Hugh S. Buntine and Hector Mackenzie
and the defendants were at the date of the matters
hereinafter mentioned and still are the sole members
of the Synod as at present constituted.
For the purpose of enabling the business of the
Synod to be more conveniently conducted various
Committees are and have been for many years con-
stituted from' amongst its members and by its author-
ity each such Committee is presided over by a
Convener. The monies at the disposal of the Synod
stand in a bank or are otherwise invested in the
name of the Treasurer of the Synod who is and has
been since the date of the resolution next hereinafter
mentioned authorised to pay out of such moneys only
such moneys as shall be certified by the respective
Conveners of the various Committees and in the
case of new expenditure not specially authorised by
Minutes of the Synod only such sums as may be
certified by an extract minute of the Committee
authorising such expenditure. The practice of deal-
ing in manner aforesaid with moneys standing in the
name of the said Treasurer was adopted in pursuance
of a resolution duly passed by the Synod at a meeting
thereof duly held in St. George’s Church Sydney in
this colony on the twelfth day of November one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine and has


been since the date of such motion and still is the in-
variable and only way of dealing with such moneys
such practice is as we are advised and believe binding
on the defendant Edward Alexander Rennie who is
the present Treasurer of the Synod and on all the
other defendants and members of the Synod.
The said Committees at the date of the matters
hereinafter mentioned comprised and still comprise
Inter alia the following Committees that is to say
The Committee on Foreign Missions the Committee
on Statistics the Sustentation Fund Committee the
Sabbath School Committee the Committee on Histor-
ical Records the Finance Committee and the Com-
mittee on Widows and Orphans Fund. The printed
book now produced to us and marked “ A ” intituled
“ Minutes of the Synod of the Presbyterian Church
of Eastern Australia ” contains a correct list of such
Committees and the Conveners thereof respectively.
We these deponents and the plaintiff Hugh Living-
stone are respectively either conveners or members of
the said Committees.
By a motion of the Synod which was duly and
unanimously passed at a meeting thereof duly held
on the twenty-first day of November one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-one in St. George’s Church
aforesaid it was resolved as follows That “ Moncrieff
on Church Law” be adopted as far as practicable as the
law of this Church instead of “Forbes” until we can
frame a code for ourselves. The “Moncrieff on Church
Law ” referred to in the last mentioned resolution is
a book styled “ The practice of the Free Church of
Scotland in her several courts ” prepared and pub-
lished by authority of the General Assembly of the
Free Church of Scotland in the year one thousand
eight hundred and eighty the said book was compiled
by H. Wellwood Moncrieff and is hereinafter referred
to as “ Moncrieff.” A copy of “ Moncrieff ” is now
produced to us and marked “ B.” No code has since


the date of the last mentioned resolution been framed
by the Synod and the law and practice laid down in
“ Moncrieff ” has been since such last mentioned date
and still is binding upon the Synod and all other
members of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia.
On the sixth day of May one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-four a meeting of the Synod was
held in St. George’s Church aforesaid—at the com-
mencement of the meeting the defendants Samuel
Penticton Stewart who as acting Moderator presided
over it proposed that the defendant George Sutherland
should be the Moderator of the Synod during the
then next twelve months the defendants John Shiret
Macpherson Peter Macpherson Hugh S. Buntine and
Samuel Porter at once rose and expressed our dissents
(which had been embodied in writing and were then
handed in) from such proposal. The defendant
Samuel Penticton Stewart notwithstanding these
dissents and before they had been read declared the
defendant George Sutherland to be elected Moderator
and the same defendant thereupon took the chair.
The question whether the said dissents should then
be read was raised and whilst it was actually being
discussed and still undecided the defendant Isaac
McKay suddenly rose and proceeded to read to the
meeting a lengthy document several members of the
Synod at once rose to order but no notice was taken
of the point of order by the defendant George
Sutherland a motion was also duly made and seconded
during* the reading of the said document that the
O O
defendant Isaac McKay should be prevented from
reading the same on the ground that (as the fact was)
it was disorderly but such motion was wholly disre-
garded by the defendant George Sutherland. The
defendant Isaac McKay continued notwithstanding
the said interruptions and many other protests by
members of the Synod to read the said document of


which we were then unable to hear or understand
more than that the document concluded with a
motion that the Synod should instruct the Moderator
to intimate to the defendants Peter Macpherson and
John Shiret Macpherson and the plaintiff Hugh
Livingstone that they were no longer members of
the Synod and to order the clerk to remove their
names from the roll.
On the conclusion of the reading of the said
document some of us protested that (as the fact was)
the reading of the same was altogether irregular but
notwithstanding such protests and the fact that the
last mentioned motion had not been duly seconded
and that there had been no opportunity whatever
given for discussing it and that in fact it had not
been discussed at all the defendant George Suther-
land without putting such motion to the Synod de-
clared it carried and intimated that the deponents
John Shiret Macpherson and Peter Macpherson and
the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone were no longer
members of the Synod almost immediately after the
last mentioned declaration and whilst some of us con-
tinued to protest against the proceedings the defend-
ant George Sutherland declared (on the motion of
the defendant Samuel Martin seconded by the defend-
ant Alexander Law) that the Synod was adjourned
till the next day at 11 a.m. The defendant George
Sutherland thereupon amid cries of “sacrilege” went
through the form of pronouncing the benediction.
The benediction having been thus pronounced
the gas was turned off by the Church officer (acting
as we believe by the instructions of the said defend-
ants or some of them) we however commenced to
write a formal protest against the proceedings by the
light of the candles on the table of the clerk (the de-
fendant the Reverend Duncan Mclnnes). To prevent
us from doing this the said candles were several times
blown out. Ultimately however and before leaving
the Church we respectively wrote and signed and


handed to the clerk of the Synod a formal protest
which was in the words following—“ Within St.
George’s Church Sydney 6th May We the under-
signed Ministers and Elders members of the Synod
of Eastern Australia in our own name and (of) all
who adhere to us hereby protest that the whole pro-
ceedings of a meeting of Synod held in St. George’s
Church since the Reverend S. P. Stewart left the
Chair are utterly illegal and unconstitutional and we
declare that we do not recognise the proceedings as
in any way affecting our position as members of the
Synod of Eastern Australia.”
On the seventh of May last (being Wednesday)
following the day on which the last mentioned
meeting was held we respectively arrived at St.
George’s Church aforesaid ten minutes before the
hour of 11 a.m. and found the doors of the said
Church locked and though we knocked repeatedly at
the said doors and remained there for about an hour
we were unable to obtain admission. We have since
discovered that the defendant George Sutherland and
not more than five others of the defendants had long
previously to the said hour of 11 a.m. assembled in
St. George’s Church aforesaid and locked the doors
thereof for the express purpose of excluding us and
the plaintiff' Hugh Livingstone therefrom and whilst
we were so excluded the same defendants purported
to hold a meeting of the Synod.
The plaintiff Hugh Livingstone owing to absence
from Sydney was not present at the said transactions
of the sixth and seventh of May respectively but on
the thirteenth day of May last attended a meeting of
the defendants or some of them which purported to
be but was not a meeting of the Synod and then and
there as we are informed by him read and tabled a
protest of which the following is a Copy:—“Whereas
by the recognised constitution of the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia every pastor of a con-
gregation under the spiritual and financial super-


intendence of the Governing Courts of our Church is
of necessity a member of the Presbytery within
whose bounds his charge is situate and also of the
Supreme Court of the Church (viz.) the Synod of
Eastern Australia and cannot legally be excluded
from any meeting of the said Synod under any
pretence while legally retaining his position as the
pastor of a congregation as aforesaid. And whereas
the Synod of Eastern Australia is a court not only
for the spiritual Government of Congregations in
connection with the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia but also for the management of temporal
and financial affairs and particularly for the disposal
of certain common funds in which every member of
the Synod has a common interest and especially such
of them as are Pastors of Congregations. And
.00
whereas the forcible exclusion of some of the
members of the said Synod (against whom no regular
Ecclesiastical process has heen instituted by other
members of the said Synod) instantly vitiates the
Constitution of the Synod and renders null and void
all the proceedings of any members pretending to
act as a Synod while those members are forcibly ex-
cluded by them. And whereas on the evening of
the sixth of May inst. when the Reverend George
Sutherland entered the Moderator’s Chair a paper
was irregularly and unconstitutionally read in the
face of earnest protests on the part of several
members of Synod and a motion was declared to be
carried to the effect that the Reverends P. Mac-
pherson John Shiret Macpherson and Hugh Living-
stone were no longer members of the Synod which
motion was neither discussed nor read by the Clerk or
Chairman nor put to the meeting the whole proceeding
being evidently the result of a previous arrangement
on the part of certain members of the Synod to de-
prive certain other members of the Synod of their
just rights as members. And whereas on the morning
of the seventh May inst. a meeting was held in St.


George’s Church Sydney by six members of the
Synod while other members of the Synod were
forcibly excluded by the doors of the Church being
held locked against them I Hugh Livingstone being
still Pastor of the Richmond River Congregation in
connection with the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia and according to the recognised laws and
o O
constitution of that Church a member of the Pres-
bytery of Grafton and of necessity a member of the
Synod of Eastern Australia do hereby protest that
these irregular acts of some of the members of Synod
has vitiated the Constitution of the Synod and
rendered null and void all the proceedings of the
parties pretending to act as Synod I further protest
that notwithstanding any act of mine taken through
ignorance of the above recited irregular acts the
meetings now being held in St. George’s Church
Sydney since the reading of the above mentioned
paper on Tuesday evening sixth May inst. are not
and cannot be legal meetings of the Synod of Eastern
Australia and that any attempts by the parties afore-
mentioned pretending to meet as a Synod to deal
with the Governments of Congregations in connection
o o
with the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
is and shall be an infringement of any Ecclesiastical
rights and that any attempt on their part to deal
with or interfere in any way with the trust proper-
ties finances and common funds of the Synod of
Eastern Australia is and shall be an infringement of
my civil rights. Further I utterly refuse to recognise
any proceedings which may be taken by the
individuals now pretending to be the Synod and
shall hold the parties who have prevented me from
exercising my rights and privileges responsible for
any personal damage or other evil consequences that
may ensue.
(Signed) Hugh Livingstone.
May 13th, 1884.


The deponents Hugh S. Buntine and Samuel
Porter on the evening of the seventh of May last
attended a meeting of the defendants or some of them
which purported to be but was not a meeting of the
Synod and read and tabled a protest of which the
following is a copy “We the undersigned being
members of the Synod of Eastern Australia learning
that certain members of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia met this morning within St.
George’s Church Sydney with closed doors pretending
to be a meeting of the Synod of Eastern Australia
and after sitting for some time adjourned to meet this
evening and having learned that such a meeting is
now going on we hereby protest that all the pro-
ceedings at the said meeting this forenoon or at the
meeting now being held are illegal and that we cannot
continue to recognise this as a meeting of the Synod
of Eastern Australia.
“ (Signed) Hugh S. Buntine Minister.
“ Samuel Porter Elder.”
Shortly after the said seventh of May the plaintiff
Hector Mackenzie wrote a letter to the defendants
protesting against the whole of the said proceedings.
The defendants respectively have as hereinbefore
appears attempted to expel or have acquiesced in the
expulsion of the deponents John Shiret Macpherson
Peter Macpherson and the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone
and have in fact excluded all the plaintiffs from the
Synod,
We the deponents had not nor had any of us nor
had the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone any notice what-
ever that the said document read at the said meeting
of the sixth of May would be so read or that any
motion or attempt would be made at the same meeting
to expel or exclude any of us or the said Hugh
Livingstone from the Synod. The said document did
not as we have since discovered state any grounds


which could possibly justify the expulsion or exclusion
of any of us or the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone from
the Synod and none of us had nor had he any
opportunity whatever of being heard by the Synod in
opposition to the said motion brought forward by the
defendant Isaac Mac Kay. The said motion was in
fact declared to be carried in the absence as aforesaid
of the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone.
By the rules and practice of the Synod every
document to be brought before it must before it can
be so brought be considered and passed by a com-
mittee of the Synod called the Committee of Bills and
Overtures. The said document so read as aforesaid
had never before it was so read been in any way
considered passed or even brought before such com-
mittee as last aforesaid.
The said attempted expulsion and exclusion have
been carried out in a manner wholly contrary to the
law and practice laid down in “ Moncrieff ” and also
in a manner wholly contrary to those rules of natural
justice and fairness to which (as we are respectively
advised and submit) every body of men associated
together for any purpose is impliedly subject. We
are respectively advised and submit that the said
attempted expulsion and exclusion is wholly illegal
inequitable and ultra vires.
Since the date of the said attempted expulsion
and exclusion the defendants have illegally held divers
meetings which purport to be but are not meetings of
the Synod and have acted and are acting in all
respects as if the said attempted expulsion were valid
and have excluded and are excluding: and threaten
and intend and will unless restraint by injunction
continue to exclude the respective deponents and the
said Hugh Livingstone from the Synod and from all
participation in the affairs or business thereof.
We the deponents John Shiret Macphersonand Peter
Macpherson respectively have not since the date of the
said attempted expulsion given to the said defendant


Edward Alexander Rennie the Treasurer of the Synod
any certificates or certificate for the payment of any
moneys in respect of any of the committees of which
as aforesaid we are respectively conveners yet we the
deponents respectively say that the defendant Edward
Alexander Rennie has without any lawful authority
made divers payments out of the said moneys at the
disposal of the Synod and debited such payments to
the several committees hereinbefore specified or some
of them. The defendants in fact threaten and intend
and will unless restrained by injunction continue
without any lawful authority to disburse and other-
wise deal with and dispose of the funds and property
under the control of the Synod.
The means by which we are respectively enabled
to depose to the matters hereinbefore deposed to
sufficiently hereinbefore appear.
John S. Macpherson.
Peter Macpherson.
Samuel Porter.
Sworn by the several deponents on the day first
above mentioned at Sydney Before me
J. Arthur Dowling
A Commissioner for Affidavits.
3. Application to the Court for Injunction to restrain
defendants from dealing with the Church Funds.
The Reverend John Shiret Macpherson and others
v. The Reverend George Sutherland and
others.
Take notice that by special leave of His Honor Sir
William Montagu Manning the Primary Judge this
Honourable Court will be moved before His Honor
the said Primary Judge in Equity on Wednesday the
twenty-fifth day of June instant at the hour of Ten
of the clock in the forenoon or so soon thereafter as
Counsel can be heard on behalf of the above-named
Plaintiffs for an injunction restraining the Defendants


and each and every of them from disbursing disposing
of or otherwise dealing or intermeddling wdth the
moneys funds and property under the control or
management of the Synod of the Presbyterian Church
of Eastern Australia in any manner inconsistent with
the Constitution and practice of the Synod or with
the rights and privileges of the Plaintiffs as members
thereof.
And also take notice that the Plaintiffs intend to
read and use in support of this application the
affidavits of the Plaintiffs filed herein.
Dated this twenty-first day of June one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-four.
Yours &c.,
Herbert Sal we y.
Plaintiff’s Solicitor to the above named Defendants.
( Copied from report in Sydney Morning Herald of 26th June ,
188 J/..) In Equity.—Before His Honor the Primary Judge.
Macpherson and others y. Sutherland and others.
INIr. W. G. Walker, instructed by Mr. Herbert Salwey for
the plaintiffs ; Mr. A. H. Simpson, instructed by Messrs. Allen
and Allen, for the defendants.
This is a suit brought by the Revs. J. S. Macpherson, Peter
Macpherson, Hugh Livingstone, H. S. Buntine, and Messrs.
Samuel Porter and Hector Mackenzie, against the Rev. George
Sutherland, William S. Donald, Isaac McKay, Samuel P. Stewart,
Alexander Law, Samuel Martin, Duncan K. M‘ln tyre, Francis
Mackenzie, William Grant, John Davis, David J. Lobban,
Alexander Bain, D. MHnnes, and E. A. Rennie, to have it
declared that the expulsion of the plaintiffs by the defendants from
the Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia was
illegal, and the resolution effecting it null and void ; also that the
said defendants be restrained from excludingthe plaintiffsor hinder-
ing them from the enjoyment of their rights of membership ;
and also from disbursing, disposing or otherwise dealing or
intermeddling with the moneys, funds and property under the
control or management of the said Synod in any manner incon-
sistent with its constitution and practice. An inquiry into the
past dealings of the defendants with the funds is also sought.
Mr. W. G. Walker moved for an interim injunction to have the
defendants restrained from dealing with the funds until the hear-
ing. The suit arose out of an unfortunate dispute in the Synod.


Mr. A. H. Simpson said he objected to the motion for an
injunction, on the ground that there were 13 defendants, and
only 5 had been served with notice. An injunction such as that,
asked for would practically stop all the operations of the Church.
His clients’ case was that the plaintiffs were not members of the
Synod.
Mr. Walker said it was necessary that something should be
done before the close of the term on Friday. He would not
object to an adjournment till Friday to enable some modus
vivendi to be arrived at, so that the Church operations might go
on. Some of his clients were members of committees who had
to sanction the payment of moneys by the defendant Rennie, and
since their expulsion Mr. Rennie had been paying moneys away.
He would not object to an adjournment, so that means might be
devised whereby the least possible restraint could be put on the
plaintiffs during the vacation.
Mr. A. H. Simpson said they would agree to do nothing out
of the ordinary course. The plaintiffs were outsiders.
His Honor said that, taking the plaintiffs to be persons
interested in the welfare of their Church, he would not like to
see things done for which they might hold themselves in a
measure responsible.
Mr. Walker said he would only ask for an injunction against
the five defendants who had been served. He only wanted to
know for what purposes they proposed to spend money.
Mr. Simpson said he preferred that the matter should go on,
because he would not be in a better position on Friday.
His Honor said he would not be likely to stop the operations
of the Church without it were shown that some irreparable
damage would be done through the Court holding its hand.
Mr. Simpson said they might want to make some extraord-
inary expenditure in August, so that it would be necessary to
bring the matter before the Court. It would not, therefore, be
desirable to make the undertaking extend to the hearing.
His Honor said the matter could stand over till the hearing,
on the understanding that the undertaking not to deal with the
various funds in an extraordinary manner was not to debar the
defendants from meeting any emergency that might arise.
Mr. Walker said his clients had not cashed certain cheques
which had been drawn by defendants in their favor, on the
ground that they considered that such a course would prejudice
their positions. He wished to know whether the other side
would waive any point in respect to these cheques which they
might otherwise raise.
Mr. Simpson said he could not but commend such heroic
self-sacrifice. They had no objection to the cheques being cashed.


4. STATEMENT OF DEFENCE.
We the E ev. George Sutherland the Eev. William
Scott Donald the Eev. Isaac McKay the Eev. Samuel
Penticton Stewart Alexander Law Samuel Martin
the Eev. Duncan Kennedy Mclntyre Francis
Mackenzie the Eev. William Grant David J. Lobhan
the Eev. John Davis Alexander Bain the Eev.
Duncan Mclnnes and Edward Alexander Eennie do
on our respective oaths say as follows ;
We do not admit that the persons who form the
Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia (hereafter
called for shortness sake the said Church) have agreed
to be bound absolutely by the rules and practice
referred to in the 3rd paragraph of the Plaintiff’s
Statement of Claim. We hold that such rules and
practice are only binding where practicable and we
say that the said Church acting through the Synod has
the right to determine in any case under its considera-
tion whether the said rules are applicable to it and to
alter such rules and practice if it will be conducive to
the welfare of the said Church so to do. The Synod
is the supreme governing body of the said Church and
can therefore make regulations as to the said property
of the said Church and in this sense the property of
the said Church is entrusted to the Synod but no
property is vested in the said Synod and as a matter
of fact the said property is held and disposed of in
accordance with various special trusts.
The Sustentation Fund referred to in the 6th
paragraph of the Plaintiffs’ Statement of Claim which
is the fund out of which the stipends of ministers in
charge of congregations are paid is not a permanent
endowed fund but consists of moneys contributed by
the different congregations which make up the body
of the said Church. Each congregation according to
its size and means is expected to contribute to the
fund (but not less than £2OO per annum) and the
aggregate contributions are equally apportioned by the


Synod among the ministers who are in charge of
congregations subject however to the contributions
when much below £2OO being withdrawn by the
Synod from participation in the equal dividend and
being returned to the congregations by their order.
The apportionment or adjustment of the annual
contributions is made in November for the year ending
October by Minute of Synod passed 21st November,
1881. As the Synod did not meet in November 1883 the
distribution for the year ending the previous month
might have been made by the Finance Committee but
the returns to the Treasurer were then incomplete
several congregations having failed to report in
consequence of the unsettled condition of the Church
through the conduct of the plaintiffs John Shiret
Macpherson Peter Macpherson and Hugh Livingstone
hereinafter mentioned and one at least of the congrega-
tions having refused to allow their contributions to
go to the fund for the benefit of two of the said
plaintiffs viz. J. S. Macpherson and Hugh Living-
stone who would in the ordinary course participate in
the equal dividend. The moneys received by the
Treasurer for the year 1883 were therefore returned
to the congregations and at the meeting of Synod in
May 1884 there was no Sustentation Fund in hand
to divide for the year 1883 but in order to remove
any shadow of reason for complaint on the part of
the plaintiffs J. S. Macpherson and Hugh Livingstone
a full report of the collections was obtained by consent
of parties with a view to ascertain what the equal
dividend would have been in the ordinary course and
it was found that the total afforded a dividend ot
£2Ol 17s lOd to the seven ministers upon the fund.
This result required the payment to the plaintiff
Hugh Livingstone of £25 13s 7d and to the plaintiff
J. S. Macpherson of £lO 11s lOd but there being
no funds in the Treasurer’s hands sums were
subscribed by some of the defendants out of their own


pockets and paid to the last mentioned plaintiffs to
make up the amount which said plaintiffs would have
received if there had been a Sustentation Fund to
divide. The Sustentation Fund for the six months
November 1883 to April 1884 being incomplete for
like reasons the several sums have been returned to
the congregations as before no equitable division being
possible in the circumstances.
We deny that the plaintiffs Peter Macpherson
John Shiret Macpherson and Hugh Livingstone are
any of them still members of the Synod as at present
constituted. We deny that the Treasurer of the
Synod is only authorized to pay such sums as are
certified by the respective conveners of the various
committees referred to in the sth paragraph of the
Plaintiffs’ Statement of Claim. The rule referred to
in the same paragraph is strictly speaking only
applicable when the Synod is not sitting. The
certificate of a convener is sufficient authority for the
Treasurer to justify him in paying any sum but the
Treasurer is not bound to pay it. All such certificates
are subject to confirmation by the Synod and while in
session the Synod frequently directs various payments
without reference to the recommendation of committees
or the certificates of conveners.
We deny that the committees referred to in the
6th paragraph of the Plaintiffs’ Statement of Claim
still comprise the eight committees there mentioned.
The said committees are all annual appointments and
at the last meeting of the Synod in the month of
May last the number of such committees was greatly
reduced. We deny that the plaintiff John Shiret
Macpherson is now the convener of the Sustentation
Fund committee or the committee on Religion and
Morals or the committee on Widows and Orphans
Fund. We deny that the plaintiff Peter Macpherson
is now the convener of the committee on Statistics or
the committee on Historical Records. All conveners


tire appointed for one year only and the Synod did
not at the last session renew the appointment of the
plaintiffs J. S. Macpherson or Peter Macpherson or
either of them.
We do not admit that u Moncrieff on Church Law”
has been adopted absolutely as the law of the said
Church or until a new code can be framed. The rules
and regulations contained in the said book known as
Moncrieff are only partially applicable to a Church
in the position occupied by the said Church and the
said rules and regulations were only adopted “ as far
as practicable” leaving the said Church acting through
the Synod to decide in each case whether application
of the said rules and regulations or any of them was
practicable.
We deny that at the meeting of 6th of May last
the defendant Samuel Pentleton Stewart illegally
declared the defendant George Sutherland to be
elected Moderator. The proposal that the defendant
should be Moderator was duly moved and seconded
and no counter motion or amendment was proposed
by any person. We believe that two documents being
a dissent and a protest against the election of the
defendant George Sutherland were handed in by some
of the plaintiffs to the defendant Duncan Mclnnes
the Clerk of the Synod but the said Clerk declined to
read the same on the ground that such protest and
dissent were as they were in fact idle and out of
order and he informed the said dissentients that if
they wished to oppose the election of the said George
Sutherland they must propose some counter motion
or amendment to the motion then before the meeting.
No such motion or amendment was proposed by any
of the said dissentients although they had full
opportunity so to do. They in fact declined to do so
as they or some of them said it would be against the
rule of the Church which provided that Mr. Suther-
land should take his place as Moderator in his turn


and as no further opposition was made the said George
Sutherland was thereupon declared by the acting
Moderator to be duly elected.
We deny that the question whether the said
dissent and protest or either of them should be read
was raised or discussed except in manner aforesaid or
that while such question was actually being discussed
and was still undecided the defendant Isaac McKay
rose suddenly or otherwise or proceeded to read to
the said meeting a document lengthy or otherwise.
The said dissent and protest were handed to the said
Clerk by the plaintiff J. S. Macpherson and the con-
versation between him and the said Clerk was carried
on in a low tone and such conversation had in fact
come to an end when the defendant Isaac McKay
rose.
We deny that no notice was taken by the
defendant George Sutherland of those who rose to a
point of order for we say that the said George Suth-
erland as Moderator at once rose and requested such
members to resume their seats so that he could speak
but those members disregarded the order of the chair
and remained on their feet vociferating. We deny
that a motion was duly made and seconded during
the reading of the said document that the defendant
Isaac McKay should be prevented from reading the
same whether on the ground that it was disorderly or
otherwise inasmuch as the said Isaac McKay was in
possession of the chair and was actually submitting
a motion. It was out of the question to attempt to-
submit another motion while the first was being
heard and we consequently deny that any such motion
was or could be disregarded by the defendant George
Sutherland and 1 the last named defendant say that
no such motion was made in my hearing or to my
knowledge and that the first time I ever heard of
any such motion was when I read the Plaintiffs’
Statement of Claim. Continuous and noisy inter-


Tuptions were made by some of the plaintiffs while
the defendant Isaac McKay was reading through the
said document. We do not admit therefore that the
plaintiffs w r ere unable to hear or understand more
than the conclusion of the said document and we say
that they would have been able both to hear and
understand the same if they had wdshed so to do.
During the year 1881 the plaintiff John S.
Macpherson and Peter Macpherson supported and
aided by the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone violently
assailed the character of the said George Sutherland
-and other members of the Synod by a series of
pamphlets public letters advertisements or other
publications intended to bring the character of the
defendant George Sutherland and such other members
into public odium and contempt and containing grave
charges against the said George Sutherland and such
other members.
A number of charges made against the said
George Sutherland and such other members were duly
investigated by the Synod in the years 1880 and 1881
and such investigation was again renewed in 1882
and after a long trial and enquiry the same charges
were declared to be entirely unfounded.
Noth withstanding such declaration the plaintiffs
John S. Macpherson and Peter Macpherson supported
and aided by Hugh Livingstone in violation and
disregard of the decision and orders of the Synod in
these matters and of the express urgent call of the
Synod to refrain from all mutual recrimination whether
in the public press or otherwise to cultivate a spirit
of brotherly kindness and charity have continued in
pamphlets public letters advertisements and other
ways to reiterate the said charges and to bring other
charges in an offensive manner against the defendant
George Sutherland and other members of the Synod.
The plaintiffs John S. Macpherson Peter Macpherson
and Hugh Livingstone declined in fact to recognise


any authority in the Synod and rendered it impossible
for the defendants to co-operate with them as members
of the Synod or of the said Church and by their
conduct as we submit practically withdrew themselves
from membership both of the said Synod and the
said Church.
The said document read by the defendant Isaac
McKay set forth the reasons which rendered it
impossible for the majority of the said Synod to act
with the plaintiffs Peter Macpherson John S. Mac-
pherson and Hugh Livingstone and concluded with
the following resolution : —“ That the Synod receive
the paper now read approve of the reasons assigned
for the separation proposed therein instruct the
Moderator to intimate to the Rev. Peter Macpherson
the Rev. John Shiret Macpherson and the Rev. Hugh
Livingstone that they are no longer members of this
Court and to order the Clerk to remove their names
from the Roll. N.B. —It is understood that this
deliverance does not affect the legal rights of these
ministers and their congregations to the Church
property in their possession.”
The said motion Was duly seconded by the
defendant Samuel Pentleton Stewart and the same
was then duly put to the meeting by the defendant
George Sutherland as Moderator. We deny that no
opportunit} was given for discussing the said
document. On the contrary before taking the sense
of the meeting the defendant George Sutherland
waited a reasonable time to allow the plaintiffs or
some of them to propose an adjournment or some
amendment or counter motion to the motion then
before the meeting. But no such proposal was made
and the said motion having received the support of
the majority of members then present was declared
duly carried.
We deny that almost immediately after the said
motion was declared to be carried the defendant


George Sutherland declared that the Synod was
adjourned till the next day. Some interval of time
elapsed while other business was duly transacted and
the motion for adjournment was then duly proposed
seconded and carried.
We do not know what the plaintiffs mean by
stating that the defendants or persons instigated by
them or some of them endeavoured by various tricks
and devices to prevent the plaintiffs from framing or
writing a protest. We deny that any tricks or
devices were used.
On the 7th day of May last at 10.30 a.m. the
defendant George Sutherland and some other members
of the Synod forming the Committee on Bills and Over-
tures met at St. George’s Church. The doors of the said
Church were closed by order of the Synod. We deny
that any of the plaintiffs except the plaintiffs John S.
Macpherson and Peter Macpherson were designedly
excluded from the meeting of the Synod on that day.
We deny that the document read by the
defendant Isaac McKay did not state any grounds
which could justify the exclusion of the three
plaintiffs named in the said resolution from the
Synod and we deny that none of the last named
plaintiffs had an opportunity of being heard before
the Synod in opposition to the said motion. The
plaintiffs John S. Macpherson and Peter Macpherson
had such opportunity as hereinbefore stated.
The plaintiff Hugh Livingstone arrived in
Sydney shortly after the 6th day of May last and on
his entering the place where the Synod was assembled
he was informed by the Moderator the said George
Sutherland of what had taken place and a copy of
the said resolution set out in the 12th paragraph of
this Statement of Defence together with the state-
ment of reasons on which it was based was read to
him. The plaintiff Hugh Livingstone had full
opportunity of asking to be heard in his own defence


but the plaintiff Hugh Livingstone did not seek per-
mission to be so heard and in fact defied the said
Synod and declined to submit in any way to its
jurisdiction.
The plaintiff Peter Macpherson is not and was
not on the 6th day of May last a minister in charge
of a congregation but was at that time a professor of
theology and the plaintiff Peter Macpherson had no
right to a seat in the Synod except as such professor.
Inasmuch however as the plaintiff Peter Macpherson
was never inducted to his professorship as required
by the law of the said Church according to Moncrieff
which law is perfectly applicable to the professorship
of the plaintiff Peter Macpherson the said plaintiff
had not as a matter of Church law any right to a
seat in the Synod,
The said protest and dissent handed to the
defendant Duncan Mclnnes at the said meeting of
the 6th May last which the plaintiffs or some of them
desired to be read aloud to the said meeting were
published subsequently in an organ of the plaintiffs
and were found to contain a violent and unfounded
attack upon the character of the said George Suther-
land.
We deny that by the rules and practice of the
Synod every document to be brought before it must
previously be considered by the Committee on Bills
and Overtures. Such rules and practice refer only to
the ordinary routine of business. The Synod has and
exercises the right to consider any matter at any time
irrespective of any Committee on Bills and Overtures
or of any committee if in the opinion of the Synod
such matter is of importance or urgency.
We deny that the said exclusion and expulsion of
the plaintiffs John S. Macpherson Peter Macpherson
and Hugh Livingstone have been carried out in a
manner wholly or at all contrary to any rules of
natural justice and fairness. We submit that such


expulsion and exclusion are valid and legal and that
the plaintiffs John S. Macpherson Peter Macpherson
and Hugh Livingstone are no longer members of the
Synod. We deny that any of the plaintiffs except
these three last mentioned have ever been excluded
from the Synod.
Several meetings of the Synod were held since
the expulsion of the plaintiffs John S. Macpherson
Peter Macpherson and Hugh Livingstone up to the
close of the session on the 14th of May last and a
considerable amount of business affecting a great
variety of interests both home and foreign was trans-
acted at such meetings and we submit that they were
in all respects valid and legal meetings and the
business transacted thereat was in all respects valid
notwithstanding the absence of one or more members
of the Synod.
The defendant Edward A. Rennie has made no
payments out of the moneys at the disposal of the
Synod except with its authority and the accounts of
the said E. A. Rennie have been duly audited and
approved. We do not intend to deal with any funds
or property under the control of the Synod except
under the authority of the Synod or in a legal and
proper manner.
Shortly after the 6th of May last the plaintiffs and
some other persons met and formed or purported to
form themselves into a court called the Provisional
Court and elected or purported to elect the plaintiff
Peter Macpherson as their Moderator and the plaintiff
John S. Macpherson as Clerk of the Court and
enrolled or purported to enrol the plaintiff Hugh
Livingstone as a member of the said Court. Such
court met on several occasions and purported to
perform ecclesiastical acts which can only be
performed by the Supreme Court of a Church. We
say that by such conduct the plaintiffs while claiming
to belong to the said Church and to be members of
45


the Synod thereof were guilty of pursuing divisive
courses in contravention of the constitution of the
said Church and have thereby withdrawn themselves
from her communion and ceased to be members
thereof.
The various matters in respect of which statements
or denials are made in this Statement of Defence are
not all within the knowledge of all of us but such
statements or denials as do not rest on the knowledge
of all of us are made by those of us who have no
knowledge on the information of those of us who
have knowledge or of some ot such last-mentioned
persons and we each of us believe every statement
and denial made on such information to be true.
It is part of the fundamental constitution of the
said Church that in spiritual affairs such Church is
not subject to the control of the State but that all
questions between members of the said Church in
respect of ecclesiastical or spiritual matters such as
the right to belong to a particular congregation a
particular court or to the Synod are internal matters
to be settled only by the duly constituted authority
of the said Church.
No property is vested in the said Synod and
although the said Synod as the governing body of
the said Church has an ultimate voice in disposing of
the funds belonging to the said Church, membership
in the Synod does not confer any other or further
right of property. Under the circumstances afore-
said we submit to the Honourable Court whether or
not the Court has jurisdiction to decide the question
involved in this suit.
This Statement of Defence was sworn by the
above named defendants George Sutherland Alexander
Law Duncan Kennedy Mclntyre and Edward Alex-
ander Rennie this 29th September 1884 before me at
Sydney. Signed P. C. Curtis Chief Clerk in Equity.


Signed George Sutherland Alexander Law Duncan
K. Mclntyre Edward A. Rennie.
(The remaining defendants being absent from
Sydney were allowed by the Primary Judge on
petition to put in their statement without oath or
signature.)
5. Concurrence in the foregoing sworn Statement of
Defence by the remaining defendants (ministers)
excepting Rev, D. Maclnnes.
We, the undersigned, being defendants in the
Equity Suit, Macpherson and others v. Sutherland
and others, concur in the terms of the answers to
Plaintiffs’ Statement of Claim which were sworn to
by Rev. George Sutherland, Rev. Duncan Kennedy
Mclntyre, E. A, Rennie, and A. Law, four of the
defendants in the same cause, and which have been
filed in the Supreme Court in its Equity Jurisdiction,
and are prepared to make affidavit to the same if
called upon to do so.
W. S. Donald, Minister, Clarence Town.
S. P. Stewart, Minister, Manning River,
I, Mac Kay, Minister, Grafton.
W. Grant, Minister, Bank Grove, Clarence River.
John Davis, Minister, Hastings & Macleay Rivers.
February, 1885.
G. Report of the Trial before the Primary Judge
(Sir William Manning), and of the evidence
given thereat, as reported in the Sydney Morning
Herald of 20th May, 1885.
Supreme Court. —Tuesday, May 19.
In Equity. —(Before his Honor the Primary Judge).
Macpherson and Others v. Sutherland and Others.
Mr. Harley, Q.C., Mr. W. G. Walker, and Mr. G. Campbell,
instructed by Mr. H. Salwey, for the plaintiffs ; Mr. Owen, Q.C ,
and Mr. A. H. Simpson, instructed by Messrs. Allen and Allen,
for the defendants.


This suit is brought by the Revs. J. S. Macpherson, Peter
Macpherson, Hugh Livingstone, H. S. Buntine, and Messrs.
Samuel Porter and Hector Mackenzie, against the Revs. George
Sutherland, Wm. S. Donald, Isaac Mackay, Samuel P. Stewart,
D. K. Mclntyre, W. Grant, John Davis, D. Mclnnes, Messrs.
Alex. Law, Samuel Martin, Francis Mackenzie, Alexander Bain,
D. J. Lobban, and E. A. Rennie, to have it declared that the
expulsion of the plaintiffs by the defendants from the Synod of
the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, in May, 1884,
was illegal, and the resolution effecting it null and void; also,
that the said defendants be restrained from excluding the
plaintiffs or hindering them from the enjoyment of their rights
of membership ; and also from disbursing, disposing, or otherwise
dealing or intermeddling with the moneys, funds, and property
under the control or management of the said Synod in any
manner inconsistent with its constitution and practice. An
inquiry into the past dealings of the defendants with the funds
is also sought.
The suit came before the Court solely on the point as to
whether there was jurisdiction, his Honor having determined
to decide that question before proceeding upon an inquiry into
the merits.
John S. Macpherson deposed that he had been eight years
a member of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia ; the
Synod was the supreme governing court of the Church, and it
was constituted by the ministers in settled charges, professors of
theology and other subjects required for the training of students,
elders elected by the congregations, and such other ministers as
the Synod may admit by special vote ; in 1864, four bodies of
Presbyterians, including the main body of the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia, formed the United Church of New
South Wales, but four ministers held aloof from the union and
kept up the Church of Eastern Australia, which now numbered
11 or 12 ministers, of whom he was one ; the sustentation fund
was contributed by the members and adherents of the various
congregations; the regulation in force at the time of the expulsion
of plaintiffs was that the local treasurers were to hand over the
collections for the first half-year to the ministers, and so much of
those for the second half as would make up .£l5O each ; the
balance had to be forwarded to the general treasurer of the Synod
for equal distribution ; if the amount contributed by any con-
gregation fell very far short of the recognized minimum—about
£lso—then the amount could be returned to the congregation
which collected it, and they did not participate in the distribution;
the widows and orphans fund was made up by a bequest for a
tolerably large amount, sums subscribed by private individuals,
and accumulations upon amounts in hand ; an annual collection


was made in each church to augment this fund, and the money-
collected was forwarded to the treasurer of the Synod ; a scheme
which he had drawn up had been adopted, which enabled ministers
to allow their shares to accumulate, or to draw it annually and
insure their lives; the church extension fund was made up by
two collections annually, the receipts being forwarded to the
treasurer of the Synod; the late Mrs. Win. MGntyre had
bequeathed XIOOO for the same purpose; this fund was controlled
by the Synod ; the foreign missions fund was made up by con-
tributions from the members and adherents ; there were also
three smaller funds, viz., the Synod, theological, and professorial
funds, which were controlled by the Synod ; the real property of
the Church was vested in local trustees : he had only known of
one instance where land had been sold, and that was at the
Manning River ; in that case the trustees applied to the Synod
for permission to sell; he had seen all the property belonging to
the Church, and he put it down at £25,000 or £30,000.
Cross-examined, the witness said it was a principle of the
Church that spiritual decisions were not subject to review by
civil courts, but those decisions must be arrived at according to
the forms prescribed and according to the laws of the Church as
laid down in the word of God; there was no fundamental
difference in the laws and rules of the various bodies of Presby-
terians, but only in matters of detail; there were scores of
Presbyterian bodies, each accepting one particular digest of the
law, but none differed materially from the original standard,
which was adopted in 1648 ; he would seek the judgment of a
civil court whether the decision arrived at by a Presbytery was
according to the digest which the Church had adopted.
When spiritual decisions involved civil interests then they
appealed for those civil interests to the Judge; the expulsion
order had had no effect upon his position as a minister ;
when plaintiffs were locked out of the Synod they agreed
to form a provisional court to maintain the Churches under
their care ; one of the resolutions they had passed was
that in view of the state of disorder into which the
Church had drifted, the local treasurers should pay the whole
amount collected to the ministers, taking their receipts in order
that they might be produced at the first legal meeting of the
Synod ; they had explicitly declared that they did not wish to
set up a Synod or tribunal; the ministers in the provisional
court had been limited to the amount of £l5O as required by the
minute of the Synod ; he had so far received £146 for the past
year ; he knew that the expulsion document concluded with the
words, “It is understood that this deliverance does not affect in
any way the legal rights of these ministers and their congrega-
tions to the Church property in their possession;” on the Ist


instant a meeting was held in the Ebenezer Chapel, Riley-street,
which was attended by certain ministers and elders of the
Church ; witness was appointed clerk of that meeting ; a resolu-
tion was passed affirming “ the advisability of resuscitating the
Synod or supreme court of the Church now defunct; ” similar
meetings had been held all over the Colony ever since the week
after the expulsion, and witness and some of the plaintiffs had
attended these.
Re-examined : The witness said that their case was that
the Synod had been defunct since the 6th May, 1884; they
wished to exercise their inalienable right as members of the
Presbytery.
Mr. Parley put in some copies of the minutes of the Synod
and other documents, and he said he would call no other evidence.
Edward Alexander Rennie, the treasurer of the Synod and
one of the defendants, said the accounts up to the 30th April,
1884, were made up on the 13th May. The Sustentation Fund
showed an amount of £96 19s. lOd. in hand, of which £9l 19s.
9d. had been repaid to the congregations; the balance was a sum
of £5, held at the disposal of a lady contributor; the Church
Extension Fund showed an overdraft of 13s. 6d.; there was a
bequest of £lOOO under Mr. MTntyre’s will, but the income
from this was only disposable at the discretion of the trustees of
the will; the income had been paid half-yearly, and had been
always applied towards the payment of the stipend of the Rev.
W. S. Donald, under instructions from the trustees; the balance
to the credit of the Home Missions Fund was £251 145., but at
that date there was a liability of £l6O 10s. for remittances to
three missions supported by the Church; the Widows and
Orphans Fund stood at £9Ol 12s. Bd., but there were liabilities
to the extent of £125, thus leaving £770 Is. 4d.; there was
2s. 6d. to the credit in the Synod Fund, and a liability of £l2
10s.; the Professorial Fund stood at £42 195., and the Theo-
logical Hall Fund at £l3l 195.; the last two amounts were still
in his hands; the Churches and Manses were all vested in
separate trusts under grants from the Crown ; he had seen some
of the grants, and the trusts were for the Presbyterian Church
of Eastern Australia; moneys stood in the name of the Synod of
the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, and were operated
upon by his cheque; he usually had the order of the Synod for
payments, but sometimes got the authority of the convener of
the particular committee, making the payment as a voucher for
himself.
Mr. Darley contended that sufficient had been shown by the
evidence that there was property to give the Court jurisdiction,
but on the ground of status he would argue that there was above
sufficient. He referred to the case Forbes v. Eden, the L. R.


Scotch appeal, 575, to show that the Lord Chancellor referred to
the case iVLMillan v. the Free Church of Scotland in Dunlop’s
reports, which were unfortunately not to be had in this Colony.
The Lord Chancellor, however, quoted the words of Lord Justice
Clark, “ That the possession of a particular status, meaning by
that term the capacity to perform certain functions, or to hold
certain offices, is a thing which the law will recognise as a patri-
monial interest, and that no one can be deprived of its possession
by the unauthorised or illegal act of another without having a
legal remedy.” The head note to Forbes v. Eden was —“ Per
Lord Cranworth : Save for the due disposal and administration
of property there is no authority in the courts of England or
Scotland to take cognisance of the rules of a voluntary society,
entered into merely for the regulation of its own affairs. But if
funds are settled, to be disposed of amongst the members of a
voluntary association according to their rules and regulations, the
Court must necessarily take cognisance of these rules and regu-
lations for the purpose of satisfying itself as to who were entitled
to the funds. Per Lord Colonsay : A court of law will not
interfere with the rules of a voluntary association, save to
protect some civil right or interest which is said to be infringed
by their operation.” It was quite sufficient that they should
have disposed of property. This was a voluntary association which
had a supreme court which governed all affairs—both spiritual
and temporary affairs—of the Church, and the plaintiffs com-
plained that they had been deposed from rights which the
constitution of the Church conferred upon them. The expulsion
affected their status in the Church, and being expelled from the
Church, they had no power to bring their suit before the Synod.
Putting the case on the ground of property they found that large
funds were contributed by the members of the Church as a whole,
and the Synod had the disposal of these moneys. These funds
were not only under the control of the Synod, but stood in its
name at the bank. Yet the plaintiffs were to be cast forth from
any benefits arising out of these funds. He cited Astler v. the
Corporation of Southampton, 16 L.R., C.D., 145, to show what
the law was with regard to the status of an alderman who had
been considered to have forfeited his seat by reason of a com-
position with his creditors. An alderman would have the disposal
of funds, but could have no personal interest in them. The
Master of the Rolls regarded the case as one of property. It
might be shown hereafter that the defendants had a right under
the laws of the Church to expel plaintiffs, but for the purposes of
the argument it must be assumed that they had not. A Church
was not a corporation; still it was a quasi corporation. He did
not think it necessary to go into the club cases, which were very
numerous, but he took it to be clear that they went upon the


ground of property. It was certain that these cases were not
based upon any principle of partnership. He referred to the
Imperial Hydropathic Company v. Hampson, 23, L.R„ p. 1, to
prove that there was no inherent power not contained in the
articles of association to remove a person from his office before
the period for which he was appointed had expired. There was
no doubt that if a minister was guilty of misconduct, such as
immorality, he would be tried by his presbytery, who would
report to the Synod, and the offender might be put out of the
Church ; but in this case it was the right of every minister to
sit in Synod, and that could not be taken away from him so long
as he was in the Church. Strangely enough this expulsion docu-
ment left the plaintiffs in the churches but expelled them from
the governing body. Something had been said about the
attempt made this month by the plaintiffs to resuscitate the
Synod, being an attempt to give the go-by to the Court, but it
was nothing more than an ordinary attempt to settle the case. If
theie had been such an attempt it could not deprive the Court
of its jurisdiction.
Mr. Walker, following his leader, said that in the case of
Astler v. the Corporation of Southampton, and the case Regina
v. the Borough of Dover, the Court of Queen’s Bench decided
two years after the case was instituted that the individual had
no right to be in office.
Mr. Owen submitted that the Court had no jurisdiction, and
if it had, the case was not one in which the Court would exercise
their jurisdiction, inasmuch as the plaintiffs had declared the
Synod to be defunct, and had endeavoured to form a Synod,
which they admitted would be illegal if the defendants did come
into it. The property that had been shown was nothing more
than the voluntary contributions of the congregations, and if the
plaintiffs formed a new association they would still have the
funds furnished by their own congregations. In what way were
the plaintiffs deprived of the rights under the bequest of Mrs.
MTntyre, seeing that they still belonged to the Church of
Eastern Australia 1 The only document before the Court was
the will of Mrs. MTntyre, which showed that the defendants
were not trustees. He referred to the case Forbes v. Eden,
which had been cited by the other side, and he submitted that
Lord Cranbourne had laid it down that the Court would only
interfere with the due administration of the funds. Lord
Colonsay had put the matter more clearly when he said that the
Court would not interfere unless to protect some civil right or
interest. If there were some maladministration of funds, then
the Court would order an account. Mr. Forbes in this case had
taken exception to the alteration of some of the canons of the
Episcopal Church of Scotland, which was a voluntary association


and had gone out of the Church, and had attempted to show that
there were funds and property in question. The Court expressly
held that there was no ground for its interference. He referred
to the case Rigby y. Connell, 14 Chan. Div., which involved the
expulsion of a member of a trade union. The Master of the
Rolls had followed the decision in Forbes v. Eden. In the
Southampton case the Master of the Rolls said the borough
council must have property, being an old corporation ; but that
was not the ground upon which the Master of the Rolls had
decided, he having held that if it had not been for a section in
the Judicature Act which gave him power to interfere, the
remedy would have been by quo warranto at common law. The
Master of the Rolls had only referred to the Dover case in order
to show that there had been such a gross miscarriage of justice
in the instance that the Court should have power to act immedi-
ately by mandamus. A doubt was thrown on the decision of the
Southampton case in the North London Railway Company v, the
Great Northern Railway Company, 11 Q.B. He contended that
these cases had nothing to do with the present, because they
dealt with expulsions from legal corporations and not voluntary
ones. He claimed that the plaintiffs had no remedy at the
hands of the Court, and even if they had their action in setting
up another body had deprived them of it.
Mr. A. H, Simpson also argued on behalf of the defendants.
There had been no interference with the status of the plaintiffs as
ministers and members of the Church. The only way in which
they had been interfered with was as members of the Synod. If
property were attached to a status such as that referred to in
Forbes v. Eden, the Court could not interfere. He contended that
there was no jurisdiction for the Court unless there was a right to
the disposal of property. The only way that plaintiffs had
endeavoured to overcome this was by a mere dictum of the Master
of the Rolls, thrown out in the course of an argument. It had
been said that the Court of Equity had enormously increased
powers. If so, Mr. A. G. Taylor could have come to the Court
for an ex parte injunction to prevent him from being excluded
from the Legislative Assemby, on the ground that he could not
get an immediate relief at law. All the funds of this Synod were
ephemeral, excepting the £lOOO bequest to the Church Extension
Fund, over which the defendants had no control. As to the
Widows and Orphans Fund, the plaintiffs had just as much right
to participate as they had before they were expelled. In no case
did a minister get any money himself, because the amount insured
went to his widow. It lay upon the plaintiffs to show that they
had suffered injury to any rights of property, and as they had not
done so there could be no status in a voluntary society.


Mr. Barley contended that when a voluntary association had
funds to deal with, and was on a permanent basis, the Court would
grant relief respecting it, just at it would with any other associ-
ation. The plaintiffs had not declared the Synod to be defunct,
though possibly the Court would come to the conclusion that it
was so. If it were defunct, it was so through the acts of the
defendants. It was impossible for the plaintiffs to be excluded
from the Synod, and yet to be members of the Church. Every
minister, according to the laws of the Church, must hold a seat in
the Synod, and as the plaintiffs were still ministers of the Church,
the Court was only asked to prevent the defendants from closing
the doors and keeping them out of their rights. Each member of
the Synod was a trustee for his congregation. If the argument
of the defendants held good, they could go on expelling members
until there were only two members, and a majority could not be
secured. Would these members have a right to deal alone with
the property and funds ? Even on the Sustentation Fund there
was an interest, because the richer congregation had to share its
contributions with the poorer one, and this fund was not dealt
with according to rules, but at discretion. Some of these trustees
had ejected other trustees. It was impossible for the plaintiffs to
form a Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia by
themselves. Could it be doubted that in the Widows and Orphans
Funds there was property in which the plaintiffs were affected ?
It had been said that the plaintiffs had still a right to participate;
but, supposing the defendants suddenly came to a resolution to
stop it. Were there no trusts in connection with this fund ?
Four trustees had no right to expel three because they could not
agree with them; on the point the case of Astler v. the Borough
of Southampton was conclusive. If the case of Forbes v. Eden
had arisen out of the expulsion of Mr. Forbes, then the Court
would have been bound to go into the merits; and if he had been
put back in his benefice he would not have been bound by the
objectionable canons. In the Southampton case the Master of
the Rolls dealt with the plaintiff as a trustee. There could be no
distinction between a voluntary association and a legal corporation
once the possession of property was proved. This was incontest-
ably proved by the club cases. The trades union case cited by the
defendants had not the least application, because trades unions
were only legalised in such a way as to prevent a trustee from
embezzling funds. The Master of the Rolls had distinctly termed
the association an illegal one. He submitted that the Court had
nothing to do with anything that would arise from putting the
plaintiffs back in the Synod.
His Honor said it was not his intention to deliver final judg-
ment in this matter at present It appeared that soon after the
suit had been instituted, certain of the plaintiffs and others had


held meetings at which resolutions were passed treating this
Synod, with respect to which he was asked to make an order, as
defunct, and expressing the advisableness of resuscitating it. The
Court could not submit to a rival or concurrent jurisdiction. On
the one hand, he was appealed to by the plaintiffs to reinstate
them in a Synod, and on the other they said that this Synod was
not in existence. He thought the Court should wait till the 19th
June, the date of the meeting to which this matter had been
adjourned, in order to see what those parties would do. It was
an exceedingly difficult matter to decide, because he foresaw that
he could not compel the defendants to sit and deliberate with the
plaintiffs, and all he could do would be to prevent the defendants
from dealing with certain property. One might take a horse to
water, but one could not make him drink. The result of the
meeting must be made known to the Court by affidavit, and the
matter could stand over till the 22nd June.
7. Report of meeting on Ist May, 1 885, proposing
to reconstitute the Synod on 19th June referred
to by the Judge—with certificate that no such
meeting was held.
Extracted from Sydney Morning Herald of Saturday,
2nd May, 1885.
MEETING OF PRESBYTERIANS.
A meeting of ministers and representative elders of the
Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia was held in Ebenezer
Church, Riley Street, yersterday forenoon. On the motion of
Mr. M'Kenzie, seconded by Mr. Porter, the Rev. P. Macpherson
took the chair, and opened the proceedings with devotional
exercises. The Rev. J. S. Macpherson was appointed clerk.
The Chairman then read the circular convening the meeting, and
called upon Mr. Macpherson as clerk of the Presbytery of
Maitland, in whose name the circular had been issued, to explain
the object of the meeting. In response to this invitation, the
clerk made a long statement, setting forth the reasons which had
induced the Presbytery of Maitland to issue the circular. After
referring to the present disorganised state of the Church, and the
fact that the synod, or the supreme governing court, had been
defunct since the 6th of May, 1884, he drew attention to the
resolutions adopted at a number of congregational, presbyterial,
and other meetings, to the effect that it was most desirable steps
should be taken to resucitate the synod ; and that the present
meeting had been summoned to consider whether or not it was
advisable to appoint a day on which the synod should be re-con-
stituted, He further stated that a circular had been sent to


every minister and representative elder in the Church, and that
besides those present three ministers and one elder had sent com-
munications apologising for their absence, and consenting that a
day should be appointed for re-constituting the synod. The
chairman then invited those present to consider the question
brought under their notice by the last speaker, and, after long
and careful deliberation, the following motions were unanimously
adopted 1. “ That, in view of the present disorganised state
of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, this meeting
of Ministers and representative elders of the said Church is
unanimously of opinion that, according to the genius and spirit
of Presbyterianism, it devolves upon the Church, acting through
its teaching and ruling elders, to take such action, in harmony
with the constitution, as may be deemed advisable to restore
order and preserve its existence as a section of the visible Church
of Christ in this colony. And, whereas the ministers and elders
now present have assembled in response to an invitation addressed
by the Presbytery of Maitland to each minister at present con-
nected with the Church, and to the representative elders appointed
by the kirk sessions of the. various congregations, with the view
of considering the advisability of reconstituting the synod, or
supreme governing court of the Church now defunct, and it
appearing that an absolute majority of the eleven ministers and
eight elders so summoned—that is to say, The Revs. Peter
Macpherson, Hugh Livingstone, Hugh S. Buntine, Duncan
MTnnes, and John S. Macpherson, ministers: and Messrs.
Hector M‘Kenzie, Richmond River ; Joseph Martin, Grafton ;
Roderick M‘Donald, Rocky mouth; David Lindsay, Hastings
River; Samuel Porter, East Maitland ; and John Donaldson,
Namoi River, representative elders. In all, five ministers and
six elders are of opinion that immediate steps should be taken to
reconstitute the synod. It is hereby resolved that on the 19th
day of June next the ministers and representative elders of this
Church, or a majority of them, shall meet within Ebenezer
Church, Riley Street, Sydney, at 11 o’clock forenoon, and then
and there re-constitute the synod of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia,.” 2. “ That the chairman and clerk, with
Messrs. Porter and Donaldson, be appointed a committee to
make the necessary arrangements for holding the meeting now
appointed to be held on the 19th June, with instructions to
forward copies of these resolutions to every minister and elder
entitled to be present at such meeting, and also to prepare a
report of this meeting for publication in such newspapers as they
may deem advisable.” 3. “That this meeting recommends that
Thursday, the 28th May, should be observed throughout the
Church as a day of humiliation and prayer for divine guidance
and blessing.” It was then resolved to adjourn till the evening
and the proceedings were closed with prayer.


Memo in Sutherland v. Macpherson.
165 Phillip St., Sydney, 19th June, 1885.
With reference to the last clause of the first resolution
passed at the meeting reported in the annexed extract, I beg to
■certify that I attended at Ebenezer Church, Riley Street, Sydney,
at eleven o’clock forenoon, this day, being the place, day, and hour
appointed by said resolution for the alleged purpose of re-consti-
tuting the Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia, —and that no such meeting took place, the Church
door being locked, and although I knocked audibly at said door
several times, and waited some twenty minutes, I could not get
access to said Church, nor find anyone in the building.
R. BURNS CALLANDER.
8. Affidavit of Rev. J. S. Macpherson as to
abandonment of meeting proposed for 19th June.
The Reverend John Shiret Macpherson and others
v. the Reverend George Sutherland and others.
On this twenty-fourth day of June one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-five John Shiret Macpherson
of Maitland in the Colony of New South Wales Minister
of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
being duly sworn maketh oath and saith as follows:
I am one of the above-named Plaintiffs.
As it was understood by myself and the other
plaintiffs in this cause from the remarks of His Honor
the Primary Judge when this cause before His
Honor on the nineteenth day of May last that the
proposed meeting on the nineteenth of June then
next was deemed an interference with His Honor’s
jurisdiction the Committee entrusted with the
arrangements for summoning and holding the said
meeting decided not to issue the invitations and
accordingly no meeting was held nor have any
arrangements been made for the holding of any such
meeting at any future time.
Sworn by the Defendant on^|
the day first above men - J- John S. Macpherson.
tioned at Sydney. Before me J
T. W. Garrett,
A Commissioner for Affidavits.


9. Report of the judgment delivered by his Honor
Sir William Manning, on 14th July, 1885, as
given in the Sydney Morning Herald of the
following day.
Rev. Macpherson and Others v. Rev. Sutherland and Others.
His Honor, in delivering judgment to-day, said : —This suit
was commenced in June of last year, by the Reverends J. S.
Macpherson, P. Macpherson, H. Livingstone, and H. S. Buntine,
and Messrs. S. Porter and H. Mackenzie, against the Reverends
G-. Sutherland, W. S. Donald, J. McKay, S. Pentleton-Stewart,
D. K. MTntyre, W. Grant and John Davis, and Messrs. A. Law,
S. Martin, P. Mackenzie, D. J. Lobban, A. Bain, D. MTnnes,
and E. A. Rennie, for the purpose of compulsorily settling,
according to the plaintiffs’ views of their rights and of the
powers of this Court, certain differences which had arisen between
them and the defendants, as ministers and office-bearers of the
“ Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia.” Objection having
been taken by the defendants to the power of this Court to deal
with the merits of complaints, and to the propriety of its exer-
cise, if existing, the cause was set down for hearing before me
on that objection, apart from the general merits of the case ; and
such evidence only was taken as was considered appropriate to
this preliminary inquiry. The statement of claim, alleged inter
alia that prior to 1846 there existed in this Colony a
Presbvterian Church in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, and in that year certain ministers and elders,
members of its Synod, and certain congregations belonging to
that Church, separated themselves from it and formed themselves
into a separate Church, which then became and is still known as
the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, —which separa-
tion was consequent upon and analogous to the earlier separation
from the Established Church of Scotland of certain members who
formed themselves into the Free Church of Scotland, that this
Church of Eastern Australia is a voluntary association united
for religious purposes of persons who have by mutual compact
agreed to be bound by certain rules and practices substantially
equivalent to the rules and practice of the Free Church of Scot-
land, affecting not only its doctrines but also the mode of
holding and the manner of administering its property ; which
rules and practice are, in short, the constitution in accordance
with which all the members of the said Church of Eastern Aus-
tralia agreed that it should be governed; that the chief govern-
ing body to which, in accordance with the said rules and practice
the regulation of matters affecting the said church is entrusted,
is called the Synod ; that the Synod is a representative body, and
is composed of ministers and elders who represent various districts


of this Colony ; that the said Church is possessed of considerable
property and funds, the management and disbursement of which
are entrusted to the Synod; that the plaintiffs and defendants
except the defendant E, A. Rennie (the treasurer) were at the
date of the matter complained of and still are the sole members
of the Synod as at present constituted ; that for the purpose of
conducting the business of the Synod various Committees (which
are enumerated) are instituted, each of which is presided over by
a convener, and that the moneys at the disposal of the Synod
stand in a bank in the name of its treasurer, who is authorised to
pay such moneys as are certified by the conveners or by the
minutes of the Synod. The claim then states that by an unanim-
ous resolution of the Synod in 1881 “ Moncrieff on Church Law ”
(being the law of the Free Church of Scotland, published by
authority in 1880) was adopted as the law of the said Church of
Eastern Australia. The grounds of the plaintiffs’ complaints are
then set out at length, to the effect that at a meeting of the
Synod, held on 6th of May, 1884, the reverend defendant, S. P.
Stewart, as acting Moderator, presided, and proposed that the
defendant Sutherland should be Moderator for the next twelve
months ; whereupon the plaintiffs, J. S. and P. Macpherson,
Buntine and Porter, at once expressed their dissent, which they
embodied in writing; but the president, without reading the
dissents, declared the due election of defendant Sutherland, who
at once took the chair; that various motions and protests were
made, and interruptions and disorder followed, during which a
paper was read, and at the end a motion was proposed and
declared to have been carried, without having been carried, without
having been duly put to the meeting, that the reverend plaintiffs,
J. S. and P. Macpherson and Livingstone, were no longer mem-
bers of the Synod, and that the clerk be ordered to remove their
names from the roll ; and that immediately afterwards, and
whilst protests were still being made by some of the plaintiffs, the
defendant Sutherland declared the meeting to be adjourned to the
next day; that on the following day, at the hour appointed, the
plaintiffs, other than the plaintiff Livingstone, who had been and
still was absent from Sydney, arrived at the church where the
adjourned meeting was to be held, and found the door closed and
locked, by the order, as the plaintiffs afterwards found, of the
defendant Sutherland and some others of the defendants, for the
express purpose of excluding them. The claim further alleges
exclusion of all the plaintiffs, including the plaintiff
Livingstone, from the synod, notwithstanding formal protests ;
and asserts that the expulsion and exclusion were decided on with-
out giving the plaintiffs an opportunity for answering the grounds
put forward for that course, and were contrary to the law and
practice of the Church, as laid down in Moncrieff, and against


natural justice and fairness ; and that the defendants have since
held various meetings purporting to be meetings of the synod,
and have acted in all respects as if the plaintiffs’ exclusion were
valid ; and they threaten and intend to do so. The claim there-
upon prays :—l.—That it may be declared that the declaration of
defendant Sutherland, that the motion for expulsion was carried,
and the intimation that the Revs. Macpherson, Livingstone and
Macpherson were no longer members of the synod, were null and
void, and that these plaintiffs are still entitled to exercise
and enjoy all the privileges and rights attaching to member-
ship of the synod. 2 That it may be declared that the
exclusion of the plaintiffs from the meeting on the 7th May
was illegal and ultra vires. 3. That it may be declared
that all payments made, and all acts and things done
since the said 7th May, by the defendants or any of them,
and purporting to be on behalf of the Synod, are invalid,
null and void. 4. That the defendants may be restrained by the
order and injunction of this Court from excluding the plaintiffs
or any of them from the Synod, and from doing any act whereby
they may be prevented from or hindered in exercising the privi-
leges or rights attaching to the membership of the Synod. 5. That
the defendants may be ordered to do all such acts and things, as
according to the constitution and practice of the Synod, are
necessary for the due exercise and enjoyment by the plaintiffs of
such privileges and rights. 6. That the defendants may be re-
strained from disbursing or otherwise dealing with the moneys,
funds, and property under the control and management of the
Synod in any manner inconsistent with such constitution and
practice, and for an enquiry as to payments and expenditure from
the said 6th May, in particular by the defendant E. A. Rennie.
The defendants’ Statement of Defence denied or qualified some of
the plaintiffs’ statements not material for the present purpose, but
admits the vote of expulsion on 6th May, and the exclusion of
the plaintiffs J. S. and P. Macpherson from the Synod meeting on
the 7th, but denies any intention to exclude any of plaintiffs
other than the plaintiffs J. S. and P. Macpherson and Livingstone.
The defence then alleges that the vote of expulsion was duly
carried and assigned as the ground for such expulsion, the conduct
of the Revs. J. S. and P. Macpherson, supported by the Rev. H.
Livingstone, in assailing the character and conduct of the Rev. G.
Sutherland and other members of the Synod, during the years
1880, 1881, and 1882, by a series of pamphlets, public letters,
advertisements and other publications intended to bring their char-
acters into public odium and contempt, and containing grave
charges against them, and in reiterating those attacks by the same
means, and in adding fresh charges in an offensive manner, not-
withstanding two investigations by the Synod in 1881 and 1882,


and its declaration that the chai’ges were entirely unfounded ; and
notwithstanding the express and urgent call of the Synod to refrain
from mutual recriminations, whether in the public press or other-
wise, and to cultivate a spirit of brotherly kindness and charity.
It is further stated that these the plaintiffs declined, in fact, to re-
cognise any authority in the Synod, and rendered it impossible
for the defendants to co-operate with them as members of the
Synod, and had, as the defendants submit, withdrawn themselves
from membership. As regards the vote of expulsion, it was
said that it was passed on the basis of a prepared statement which
was read to the meeting, showing on the part of the majority of
the Synod, the reasons for it, and on a resolution that the
Moderator be instructed to inform the Revs, J. S. and P. Mac-
pherson and Livingstone, that they are no longer members of the
court, and to order the clerk to remove their names from the roll,
subject to the following proviso :—“ It is understood that this de-
liverance does not affect the legal rights of these Ministers and
their congregations to the Church property in their possession.”
As regards the plaintiff Livingstone, the defence alleged that
shortly after the 6th May, and on his entering the place of meet-
ing of the Synod, he was informed of what had been done, and
was furnished with a copy of the resolutions, with the statement
of reasons ; but, that, although full opportunity was given to him
for asking to be heard in his defence, he defied the Synod, and de-
clined to submit in any way to its jurisdiction. Then, after some
other statements, the defence goes on to state that shortly after
the 6th May the plaintiffs and some other persons met and
formed, or purported to form themselves into a Court called the
Provisional Court, and elected the defendant P. Macpherson their
Moderator, and the plaintiff J. S. Macpherson Clerk of the Court,
and enrolled the plaintiff Livingstone a member of the Court;
and that such Court met on several occasions, and purported to
perform ecclesiastical acts which can only be performed by the
Supreme Court of a Church ; whereby the plaintiffs while claim-
ing to belong to the said Church were pursuing divisive courses in
contravention of the constitution of the said Church, and have
thereby (as the defendants allege) withdrawn themselves from their
communion and ceased to be members. The defence then alleges
that it is a part of the fundamental part of the said Church, that
in spiritual affairs such Church is not subject to the control of
the state, but that all questions between members in respect of
ecclesiastical or spiritual matters, such as the right to belong to a
particular congregation or particular court or to the Synod, are in-
ternal matters to be settled only by the duly constituted authority
of the said Church. It is then finally alleged that no property is
vested in the Synod, and that although the Synod, as the governing
body of the Church, has an ultimate voice in disposing of the


funds belonging to the Church, membership of the Synod does not
confer any other or further right of property. The defence closes
with a submission to this Court whether or not it has, under the
circumstances stated, any jurisdiction to decide the question in-
volved in this suit. Upon this the point of jurisdiction has been dis-
cussed before me. I would willingly have avoided setting forth
so much as I have done of the unhappy differences which have
found their way into this body ; but I think it has been requisite,
in order to show what is the full and true nature of the controversy
upon which the intervention of this Court is sought. Whether
the plaintiffs or defendants are right in their respective sides of
these dissensions, is wholly unknown to me ; but I think it is
obvious, from the statements put forward on the one side and the
other, that the aid of the Court is mainly sought to assert and re-
store to the plaintiffs their status of membership for general
ecclesiastical purposes, rather than to deal with any interest in
property. At the hearing, however, the evidence was most pro-
minently addressed, for legal reasons, to facts relating to the pro-
perty of the Church, and the relations of the Synod to that
property. The Rev. J. S. Macpherson, one of the plaintiffs, who
appeared to be specially versed in Presbyterian Church matters,
was examined for himself and his co-plaintiffs. By his evidence
in chief it appeared that the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales is now the larger body of Presbyterians in the colony, re-
presenting the union of four previously existing Presbyterian
bodies, with the exception of a few Ministers of the Church of
Eastern Australia, who would not join, and retained the name of
the Church of Eastern Australia, and seceded or kept aloof.
This seceding body had originally 4 Ministers, and now has 11, of
whom 8 are settled Ministers. Their Supreme Court or governing
body is the Synod, which is composed of all the ordained ministers
of this Church of Eastern Australia having settled charges, to-
gether with professors of Theology, &c., for training students for
the Church, and such other ministers as the Synod may resolve to-
admit as members, and certain elders. The Churches of the
various districts have separate trusts of their own lands and build-
ings amounting in the whole to the value of £25,000 and upwards,
but are subject to the determination of the Synod as to selling.
Each Church or district collects money for the sustentation of its
minister ; but with a view to the equalisation of stipends up to
£2OO a year, they are expected to send all their collections above
£l5O a year to the Synod, that it may at its discretion supplement
the stipends of the ministers of the poorer districts ; but none of
this money is retained by the Synod. There is a fund consisting of
collections in the various Churches for foreign missions ; a fund
for the widows and orphans of the ministers, raised by contribu-
tions, and aided by a legacy of £SOO, but applied, as I gathered,


in the way of premiums of insurance on the lives of the ministers;
and there are three other small funds respectively, for the Synod’s
expenses, and for professors, and a theological hall. On cross-
examination this witness stated that the Synod had jurisdiction
over ecclesiastical offences, by way of appeals from the decisions of
a presbytery, and also in the first instance for offences committed
under its own eye ; and that it was a principle of the Church that
spiritual decisions of the Synod were not to be interfered with by
the civil Courts. It was further elicited from him that after the
expulsion of the three rev. plaintiffs from the Synod on 6th May,
] 884, the expelled members agreed to form themselves into a pro-
visional Court not a Synod, under which the local treasurers of
their Churches pay the sustentation collections of their districts to
their own members, limited to £l5O, with a recommendation to keep
any balances until there shall be a Synod properly formed. He
stated that the expulsion did not in the least affect the position of
the expelled members as members of these Churches. It further
appeared from him that there had been a meeting of certain min-
isters and elders on the first of May in this year—that is to say, after
this cause had been set down for hearing, and only 13 days before
the actual hearing—for the purpose of “ resuscitating the Synod,
or Supreme Court of Eastern Australia,” at which meeting it was
resolved that “the Synod or Supreme governing Court had become
defunct since the 6th May, 1884,” and it was also resolved that on
the 19th June next the members and representatives of the
Church should meet at Ebenezer Church, Riley Street, Sydney,
and “ then and there re-constitute the Synod of the Church of
Eastern Australia ”; and tha t this witness took part at that
meeting, and the plaintiff P. Macpherson was chairman ; and that
there had previously been meetings of the congregations of the
revs, plaintiffs and others, one as far back as August, 1884, at
which the matter had been discussed, and resolutions passed that
the Synod was defunct and ought to be reconstituted—at one or
more of which meetings all the plaintiffs had respectively taken
part. For the defence, the defendant Rennie, the Synod treasurer,
was called, who showed the state of the different Church funds.
The sustentation fund stood on May 13th, 1884, at £96, of which
£9l was payable to the congregations, and £5 to a special con-
tributor, and no money had since been received for this fund.
For Church extension, there was a deficiency of 10s. after de-
ducting liabilities. For foreign missions there was £254 in hand,
with liabilities of £l6O to three missions. In the widows and
orphans fund a balance was available of £706, including the
legacy of £SOO, and a balance of collections. The other funds
amounted to next to nothing. The banking account is in the
name of the Synod, and is operated on by the treasurer under
orders from the Synod, and by conveners of committees. There


had also been a bequest of £I,OOO by a late Mrs. MTntyre, for
the benefit of this Church, but this was not in the hands of the
Synod, but in those of the testamentary trustees, who were
directed by the testator to apply the income at their discretion
either in the payment of the passages of ministers to the colony,,
or for their salaries and allowances, or by way of appropriation to
the Church extension fund. It was in fact regularly applied by
the trustees to the stipend of a minister of a poor district. Upon
this evidence, the point of jurisdiction was argued before me on
13th May, by Mr. Darley, Q. 0., and Mr. Walker, for the
plaintiffs ; and by Mr. Owen, Q.C., and Mr. A. H. Simpson, for
the defendants. The following cases, amongst others, were cited
by council: —Forbes v. Eden, 1 Law R., Scotch Appeals, 568-
575; Artlett v. Corporation of Southampton, 16, Chancery
Division, 143 ; and Rigby v. Connell, 14, Chancery Division, 482.
At the close of the argument I reserved judgment, and stated
that it would not be delivered until after 19th June, on the ground
that the avowed object of the intended meeting of that day, to-
gether with the resolutions already passed with the active con-
currence of the plaintiffs was incompatible with the plaintiffs’
claim to the exercise of jurisdiction by this Court, and that I
could not proceed with the case concurrently with a course of
action on the part of the plaintiffs outside the Court, which
virtually amounted to taking the case out of my hands ; and 1 re-
quired that an affidavit of the proceedings of that meeting should
be laid before me. Shortly after the 19th June an affidavit was
produced stating that the intended meeting had been abandoned.
It now therefore becomes necessary to pronounce my decision upon
the case as presented at the hearing :—and after giving full con-
sideration to the facts and such authorities as have appeared to
me applicable to the question of jurisdiction and its exercise in
this case I have come to the conclusion that the Court ought not
to interfere. As the arguments for the plaintiffs rested largely on
the relation of the plaintiffs or some of them to trust funds, I will
first examine that subject. Now, it appears to me that all the
funds spoken of are ephemeral, and not of the nature of settled
trust property, and are therefore insufficient to justify judicial
interposition,—with the exception of Mrs. MTntyre’s legacy of
£I,OOO, and the widows and orphans fund. The former clearly
does not come under the authority of the Synod, nor within the
control of the Court in relation to the Synod ; but the latter does
so, and to this I can alone give attention. That is certainly under
the control of the Synod, and is dedicated to a purpose in which
such of the plaintiffs as are ministers of the Church are interested
indirectly—that is to say, on behalf of their widows or children—
and this may perhaps be regarded as equivalent to personal interests
in themselves. But, on the other hand, there is nothing to show


that the action of the majority of the Synod in expelling these three
ministers from that body, whilst leaving them in undiminished
possession of their individual status and rights as ministers of
congregations, has affected their interest in that fund ; nor is
there any statement of misapplication, or of any apprehension in
which the plaintiffs may thus directly or otherwise participate.
Hence, the question resolves itself into one of trusteeship as
members of the Synod rather than of interest as cestui-que trusts ;
and I have, therefore, to consider whether this Court can interfere
on the ground that the defendants have ousted the three plaintiffs
or any of them from active participation in the trusteeship. This I
do not think it can do ; or at least I think it so doubtful that in
the exercise of the Court’s discretion—influenced also by other
considerations peculiar to this case, and which will be mentioned—
that I ought to refuse interference. In ordinary trusts the Court
does not interfere with trustees in the way of mandatory injunc-
tion to compel one trustee to co-operate generally with a co-trustee
although it may do so in respect of particular acts, not involving
a trustee’s discretion, such as the execution of a proper deed, &c.
If one trustee will not act with another, there may be ground for
removing him from the trust, or for the removal of the latter
trustee if his conduct has made it impracticable for the former to
act with him ; but no such remedy would be possible in this case,
because the trustees are not of a class to be removable by the Court.
Their money-trust is only incidental to their higher position of
members of a Synod, as the supreme governing body of a volun-
tary Church association, and otherwise unknown to the law ; and
for that reason the Court could not interfere to restore them to
the status of trustees of the fund. It might interfere to prevent a
definite breach of the trust, but it cannot restore those gentlemen
to a trust which exists only in virtue of membership of the Synod
of this voluntary association. This leads to the more serious
points of the case, which involve the question whether the Court
can take upon itself to adjudicate upon the differences which have
unhappily arisen; and either to hold the plaintiffs to have been
legally expelled, or, on the contrary, to hold the expulsion to have
been illegal, and decree their restoration to the status. Ido not
see any right or power in the Court to accept this jurisdiction.
It cannot act as a moral arbitrator between disputants in such an
association. It can only adjudicate where it has power to enforce
its decisions, and such a power I think this Court clearly has not.
Can it compel the majority to receive back the ejected minority ?
Can it compel them to act harmoniously ? It it be that the plain-
tiffs or any of them are given to attacking one or more of their
•colleagues so as to preclude the possibility of harmonious co-opera-
tion ; or if it be on the other hand, that one or more of the de-
fendants conduct themselves so as to merit the reprehension of


the plaintiffs, can this Court check the former or reform the latter?
The answer is clear—that for every such purpose the Court would
be altogether impotent; and it would, therefore, be idle to
attempt to force the parties into co-operation as a united body.
The Synod, moreover, has duties, which every member of it will
recognise of incomparably higher importance than those of
trusteeship of the Church funds. It has power, by the laws of
its voluntary association, to try the members of this Church, of
all ranks, for heresy and other matters regarded as ecclesiastical
offences by the principles and rules of Presbyterian Church organ-
isation and discipline. Can this Court, under the notion of re-
storing the plaintiffs to a voice in the management of a trifling
money trust, assume authority to decide on internal dissensions,
and decree restoration to a position which involves the right to
exercise such powers? Assuredly not. And yet Ido not see how
to restore these plaintiffs to the financial trusteeship without de-
creeing membership of the Synod, and compelling, or attempting to
compel, their recognition as such for all the purposes attaching to
the position. Nor, indeed, can I regard it as seriously sought by
the statement of claim that I should do anything short of full
restoration of the plaintiffs to their seats in the Synod. The
money question appears to me to be no more than a legal pivot
on which to accomplish the larger object. These reasons are, I
think, sufficient for declining to interfere as prayed ; but I must
add others. This is a voluntary association, brought into exist-
ence by secession, and as free to split into new divisions as it was
to secede from the parent Church, or to stand aloof from the new
Church organisation of 1864, by which the great majority of Pres-
byterians in this colony associated themselves. Its members may
hold one another to be bound by some internal acts of adhesion,
but I do not see that the Court can control any disruption, and it
seems to me that the action taken by the plaintiffs and various
congregations with which they are connected since 6th May, 1884
up to and and including the resolutions of the Ist May, 1885, are
clearly of a disruptive character, and that they are incompatible
with the claim they had made, and are still making, for the
Court’s interposition for re-uniting them. It is true the final step
proposed for the 19th June has been abandoned ; but one and all of
the plaintiffs, and their congregations, as I gather, have set them-
selves up as a rival power in opposition to the Synod, and have
declared that body to be defunct, whilst at the same time the
plaintiffs are seeking restoration to it at the hands of the Court.
They have at various meetings so declared it, and have resolved
that it must be <! reconstituted.” How reconstituted ? How
could that be at the instance of one division of the Church, ex-
cept by uniting among themselves and claiming the name of this
Church, and the right to put in the plaintiffs and such others as


they may think fit as the governing body? It seems indeed to
contemplate nothing less than a reconstitution by which the de-
fendants should be overmastered by outside action. To “ resus-
citate ” or “ reconstitute ” in the sense of merely declaring the
plaintiffs and defendants to be jointly members of the Synod,
would be what is asked for here, and would be as impracticable as
for this Court to weld them into one co-operative body. Moreover
the course adopted by the plaintiffs has gone to the base of the
association commenced in 1864, by bringing into hostile activity
antagonistic sections of the primary members (the electoral body,
so to speak) of the association ; and they have by this course
really broken away from the rest of the body. This Court cannot
deny their right to do this ; but it must, on the other hand, regard
it as wholly inconsistent with that course for the same persons to
ask the Court to force the now-divided bodies into reunion. It seems
to me that if there were no other grounds for refusing the prayer of
the plaintiffs’ claim than this disruption outside the Court, thus
effected by themselves, I should be bound, in the exercise of my
discretion, if I really had any, to refuse interference. For these
reasons the suit must be dismissed, and of course with costs.
10. Appeal by the Plaintiffs to the Full Court against
decree of his Honor the Primary Judge in
Equity.
Brief for the Defendants on Appeal.
Take notice that the plaintiffs appeal against the
decree of his Honor Sir William Montagu Manning
Primary Judge in Equity pronounced on the 14th
day of July 1885 dismissing this suit for the following
among other grounds and reasons that is to say —
That his Honor was wrong in holding that he
had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit and that his
Honor ought to have heard the suit upon its merits.
Dated &c.
We certify that this cause is proper to be reheard
before the full Court.
W. Gregory Walker.
Gerard K. Campbell.
Herbert Salwey
Solicitor for the plaintiffs
2 O’Connell Street Sydney.


Upon this suit coming on to be heard (so far only
as relates to the question of jurisdiction raised by the
Statement of Defence) before his Honor Sir William
Montagu Manning Primary Judge in Equity on the
18th and 19th days of May last and upon reading
the pleadings and hearing the evidence of the plaintiff
John Shiret Macpherson and the defendant Edward
Alexander Rennie respectively examined orally
before the Court and upon hearing Mr. Parley
Q.C. Mr. Walker and Mr. Gerard Campbell of Counsel
for the plaintiffs and Mr. Owen Q.C. and Mr. A. H
Simpson of Counsel for the defendants and upon the
hearing being adjourned to the 24th day of June last
and coming on then to be further considered and an
affidavit of the plaintiff John Shiret Macpherson filed
on the 24th day of June last being then read, his
Honor did order that this cause should stand for
judgment. And this cause standing for judgment
this day in the paper in the presence of Counsel for
the plaintiffs and defendants his Honor doth order
that this suit be and the same is hereby dismissed
out of this Court with costs.
11. Report of case on Appeal before the Full Court,
as given in the Sydney Morning Herald , of 28th
November, 1885.
Supreme Court. —Friday, November 27.
Equity Appeals.—(Before their Honors Sir James Martin,
Mr. Justice Fawcett, and Mr. Justice Innes).
Macpherson and others v. Sutherland and others.
This suit is brought by the Revs. J. S. Macpherson, Peter
Macpherson, Hugh Livingstone, H. S. Buntine, and Messrs.
Samuel Porter and Hector Mackenzie, against the Revs. George
Sutherland, William S. Donald, Isaac Mackay, Samuel P.
Stewart, D. K. M'lntyre, W. Grant, John Davis, Alexander
Bain, D, M‘lnnes, Messrs. Alexander Law, Samuel Martin,
Francis Mackenzie, D. J. Lobban, and E. A. Rennie, to have it
declared that the expulsion of the plaintiffs by the defendants


from the Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia,
in May, 1884, was illegal, and the resolution effecting it null and
void ; also, that the said defendants be restrained from excluding
the plaintiffs, or hindering them from the enjoyment of their
rights of membership; and also from disbursing, disposing, or
otherwise dealing or intermeddling with the moneys, funds, and
property under the control or management of the Synod in any
manner inconsistent with its constitution and practice. An
inquiry into the past dealings of the defendants with the funds is
also sought.
The case came before his Honor the Primary Judge on the
preliminary point of jurisdiction, and his Honor held generally that
the Court could not entertain the suit. In his opinion the funds
were ephemeral, and they were only brought into question in
order that the Court might inquire into the main dispute between
the parties. He held that there was no property which could
justify the Court in interfering between the parties as members
of a voluntary institution, and was of opinion that the plaintiffs
by constituting another religious body, and declaring at public
meetings that the Synod was defunct, could not ask the Court
to restore them to a body which in their opinion had no existence.
Erom this decision the plaintiffs appealed.
Mr. Darley, in arguing on behalf of the appellants, said that
the case came before the Court simply on the point as to whether
there was jurisdiction. It had been shown there was property
as to the management of which the plaintiffs had a right to partici-
pate. He contended that so long as these plaintiffs remained
ministers of the Church they must be members of the Synod.
The Court would inquire into this matter, though the Synod
were a voluntary body, just the same as it would in the case of
the expulsion of a member of a club. The question was simply
whether there was property or the management of property in-
volved. He referred to Artlett v. the Borough of Southampton,
16 C.D., 143, to show that management of property gave juris-
diction in the same way as if there were property, and that there
might even be cases in which the Court would interfere where
only personal status were involved.
The Chief Justice said this was a case where an expulsion
was about to take place under an Act of Parliament.
Mr. Darley said the case had only been doubted as to one
branch of it, and that was with respect to the power of the
Court to grant an injunction. The case to which this one was
referred to, North London Railway Company v. Great Northern
Railway Company, 11 2 B ; there Lord Justice Brett held that
the 57th section of the Judicature Act did not deal with the
jurisdiction, but only with procedure as to granting of injunction.
There was a case cited below by the other side, and that was


Rigby v. Connell, 14 C.D., 482. That was a case of a trade
union having expelled a member who sought to be reinstated,
but the Master of the Rolls had declined to do so on the ground
that the association was an illegal one. This, of course, was
before the Trade Union Act, 1871. That case was alluded to in
the case Duke v. Littleboy, 49 L.J., Chan., 802, and the judg-
ment there showed that the decision had gone on the point
whether the association was lawful. To show the practice laid
down in the club cases, he cited Hopkinson v. Marquis of Exeter,
5 L.R., Eq., 563; Labouchere v. Earl of Wharncliffe, 13 L.R.,
Ch. D. The property of the Church, which was valued at
£25,000, the Sustentation Fund, the Widows and Orphans Fund,
as well as other funds, were all matters in which the plaintiffs
had a right to share in the management. He submitted that
the Primary Judge had come to a wrong conclusion on the point
of jurisdiction.
Mr. Walker also argued for the appellants. He thought
that his Honor below had taken an erroneous view of what he
had been asked to do, and had come to a wrong conclusion. He
cited Forbes v. Eden, S. L. R., Scotch appeals, 5,6, 8, in which
was distinctly stated there that status formed a patrimonial
interest, which would give the Court a right to interfere. The
case Brown v. Cure de Montreal, 6 L. R., Privy CL, 207, was
one of mixed spiritual and temporal character, yet the Court
afforded relief.
Mr. Stephen, in arguing for the respondents, said that so
far as the merits were concerned, his clients put the statements
of the other side in issue. If the case ever went to a hearing
the Court might be compelled to determine questions of doctrine,
therefore it would be well for the Court to pause before it
accepted such a jurisdiction. He referred to the case of Brown
v. Cure de Montreal, to show that it was laid down there that
the Court would have to enquire into the laws and rules of the
tribunal which had dealt with these plaintiffs. He only cited
this to show what the width of the enquiry would be which
would be opened up. He, of course, admitted that a difficulty
in trying such a case as this was no ground for refusing juris-
diction. The case was different from those arising out of club
expulsions, because there was nothing substantially at stake but
the personal status of the parties, seeing that they bad been left
in the enjoyment of their livings and their privileges. It was a
misnomer to say that the decree of his Honor, the Primary
Judge, went upon the point of jurisdiction ; it was simply a
decision on a preliminary objection on the ground that there was
no property in question. The Master of the Rolls had decided
the case Artlett v. Borough of Southampton on the same ground,
having avoided any determination of the more difficult question


of the construction of the 57th section of the Judicature Act by
proceeding to his judgment solely upon the fact that property
existed. He cited re St. James’ Club, 3D. M. and G., to show
that an individual whilst a member of the club might tile a bill
to have the assets and furniture realis(d, and have his share.
The plaintiffs here were not in that position, because there
were no rights trespassed upon. The evidence showed
that this Church was supported by voluntary contributions,
which went to the general treasurer for distribution amongst
the ministers. These funds were not vested in the Synod.
It was difficult to say in whom the beneficial interest
lay. The plaintiffs were asking to be restored to a body
which had nothing to do with these funds, except to vote as to
their disposition. The case was more like a quarrel between the
committee of a club rather than an expulsion from membership.
If the Court were asked to administer such funds as existed here
it would be difficult to see how it could lay hold of them. The
Sustentation Fund from which the stipends of ministers were
paid was ephemeral, and had nothing to its credit. He contended
that the Primary Judge was right when he said that this question
of property was a make-weight, and that the plaintiffs were not
seeking relief in that respect, but were merely seeking restoration
to a body which they had themselves declared to be defunct. It
was clear these plaintiffs had constituted another body, and their
congregations were subscribing funds of their own. The real
property was vested in trustees, and the trusts under which they
held were not before the Court. The Synod had no power to
sell. It had been shown that the Synod had been asked in one
case to consent to a sale, but he contended that this was only
done in deference to the governing body, whilst the parties were
working harmoniously together. If the plaintiffs had any right
at all it was in their individual capacity, as his Honor below
had held.
Mr. A. H. Simpson also argued for the respondents that the
plaintiffs must show that by being turned out they lost some
vested interest in property. The only fund which would enable
the Court to found any jurisdiction upon was that of the Widows
and Orphans, and there was no present right in any person to
receive a share of that fund. If the principle contended for by
the plaintiffs were correct, Mr. A. G. Taylor could invoke the
interposition of the Court to restore him to his place in Parlia-
ment after expulsion, on the ground that he was thereby deprived
of a voice in the management of the property of the State.
Mr. Darley, in reply, said the decree showed that the judg-
ment had gone on the point of jurisdiction. He laid great stress
upon the opening words of the judgment in Forbes v, Eden, that
the Court had no jurisdiction with respect to a voluntary institu-


tion, “ save for the due administration or disposal of property.”
The evidence of Mr. Rennie, the general treasurer, who was one
of the defendants, showed that the funds were operated upon by
him under instructions from the Synod. Moncrieff, the authority
by which the Synod admitted itself to be bound, laid it down
that every minister who was in a settled charge had a right to
be a member of the Synod. As things stood seven ministers had
expelled four, and there was nothing to prevent this sort of thing
going on until two expelled one, and held the whole property at
their disposal. The contention of the plaintiffs was that the
Synod was defunct, inasmuch as it could not be lawfully con-
stituted in their absence any more than the Court could be if one
of their Honors were absent. The Court had not shrunk from
dealing with matters such as this in the cases —Bishop of Natal
v. Gladstone, 3 L.R. Eq. 1, and Brown v. Cure de Montreal, 6
L. H., Privy Council, 207. The plaintiffs simply came to the
Court and asked it to grant them the hearing they had been
denied by the Synod. The temporal right, which admittedly
might be 100 to 1 as compared with the spiritual matters in this
case, was the management and disposition of property. Had
not the plaintiffs a direct and personal interest in the Widows
and Orphans Fund when their share in it went to augment the
provision they might make for their families? How could the
act of the plaintiffs in holding mortgages and endeavouring to
carry on their Churches make them outlaws, as far as this Court
was concerned, as his Honor, the Primary Judge, had held ? It
was the act of his Honor that this point of jurisdiction should be
decided first. He submitted that the Court had abundant juris-
diction, and that it would direct it to be exercised.
The Chief Justice said that some years ago there was a
voluntary association formed in this Colony for religious purposes,
and designated the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia.
The affairs of that voluntary association were placed in the hands
of the Synod, composed of ministers of religion in connection
with it, having charge of congregations. This suit was instituted
by six members of the Synod against the rest. There were nine
laymen among both the plaintiffs and the defendants. The suit
was instituted under these circumstances : At a meeting of the
Synod a report was brought up for confirmation, but on objection
being taken to its being read several points of order were raised,
and a resolution was brought forward that three members, two
of whom were present and one absent, should be expelled from
that body. That resolution was put and carried. On a subse-
quent occasion two of the members so expelled attended another
meeting, avowedly ignoring what had been done, and asserting
as far as they could their right to attend, notwithstanding their
expulsion. On subsequent occasions, however, the doors were


locked, and they had been since excluded. Under those circum
stances the plaintiffs filed their statement of claim setting out the-
separation of this body from the established Church of Scotland,
and the constitution of this new body, which is stated to be in
accordance with Moncrieff on Free Church Law. The plaintiffs
asked that the resolution expelling them should be declared null
and void, and that their exclusion was ultra vires. Also, that it
might be declared that all payments and things done after the
exclusion should be declared null and void; and further, that the
defendants should be restrained by injunction from excluding the
plaintiffs any longer, and be compelled to do all things according
to the constitutional practice of the Synod. The statement of
the defence denying many of these allegations was filed, and at
that stage of the proceedings it was thought necessary to have it
determined by the Primary Judge whether the statement of claim
showed any matter cognisable by the Court. In that inquiry it
appeared that the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
had property to the amount of £25,000 and upwards. But it
also appeared that the property was vested in local trustees, not
legally under the coercion of the Synod. It also appeared that
the various congregations were in the habit of subscribing for the
maintenance of their ministers. These subscriptions were voluntarv,
and formed part of the arrangements entered into by the members
of the association. It was part of the arrangements entered into
that the minimum amount raised by voluntary subscriptions by
each congregation should be £2OO a year, and that where the sum
so subscribed did not approach the minimum such money should
be returned to the subscribing congregation; otherwise it would
go into a common fund for equal division among all the ministers.
Then there was a sum for the relief of widows and orphans, and
a further sum of £IOOO, the amount of a legacy by a Mrs.
M‘lntyre. That sum being vested in the trustees of the will was
not under the direction of the Synod ; but the Widows and
Orphans Fund was; and of that they had £750 in hand.
Those were all the funds in question here, and they were all
voluntary. The fund for the support of the ministers had £5 in,
hand, a lady’s subscription which had been placed at her disposal
if she thought fit. An objection was taken to the right of these
persons bringing this suit, on the ground that the Court had no
jurisdiction to interfere. After argument, his Honor the Primary
Judge was of opinion that all these funds were ephemeral in
their nature. (His Honor here read portions of the Primary
Judge’s judgment.) He (the Chief Justice) thought that every
word of his Honor was material, and concurred with him
entirely. The Court would not interfere in the affairs of a
voluntary association unless there was property in question. In
Forbes v. Eden (L. E. 1, Scotch appeals, at page 581) Lord


Cranworth said :—“ Save for the due disposal and administration
of property, there is no authority in the Courts either of
England or Scotland to take cognisance of the rules of a
voluntary society entered into merely for the regulation of its
own affairs, &c.” Again, in Rigby v. Oonnel (14 Ch. Dis., at p,
487), Sir G. Jessel, M.R., says:—“What is the jurisdiction of a
Court of Equity as regards interfering at the instance of a
member of a society to prevent his being improperly expelled
therefrom 1 I have no doubt whatever that the foundation of
the jurisdiction is the right of property vested in the members of
the society, and of which he is unjustly deprived by such unlawful
expulsion. There is no such jurisdiction that I am aware of
reposed, in this country at least, in any of the Queen’s Courts to
decide upon the rights of persons to associate together where the
association possesses no property.” There were many other cases
in which the same law was laid down. The Courts take no
■cognisance of such associations unless the rights of property
come in question. If no member complained that the property
of the association was about to be taken from him, or that some
breach of the law or malversation had been committed, or that
dhere was some attempt to misapply the funds, the Court would
not interfere ; but in all those cases there must be some allega-
tion that there is some danger to the funds, some attempt to
misapply them, or that the property of the association will be
jeopardised. There was no allegation here that the rights of any
one of these persons would be injured. Their status as ministers
remained. There was no allegation that the Synod had done, or
was about to do, an} thing to interfere with their rights of
property. Therefore the view of the Primary Judge was right,
and ought to be upheld. The Court had been referred to the
case of Artlett v. Corporation of Southampton, in 16 Ch, Dis.,
and the judgment of Sir G. Jessel, M.R. (His Honor referred
to the judgment at p. 145.) That was admittedly not a well-
considered judgment, and did not affect the determination of the
present case ; and he (the Chief Justice) said so without for a
moment wishing to disparage one of the ablest Judges that ever
sat on any Bench.
Mr. Justice Faucett said he had read his Honor the Primary
Judge’s judgment, and he agreed with the conclusions at which
his Honor had arrived. There was no charge of malversation
whatever. The last case to which his Honor the Chief Justice
referred was entirely distinguishable from the present case. That
case dealt with the right of an alderman to administer funds
which he, as an alderman, had a right to administer. That was
not the case of a voluntary association, but of a legal body
incorporated by Act of Parliament. The plaintiff had been
elected, and was legally a member of the Council, and entitled
to be there. All that the Court determined was that his act, in


compounding with his creditors, was not within the meaning or
scope of the Act constituting the municipality. The learned
Judge in that case distinctly stated that it could not have arisen
before the Judicature Acts, which brought about the unity of
law and equity. Having read the statement of claim, he now
understood what his Honor the Primary Judge had meant by
saying that there were a hundred ecclesiastical points to one of
legal right. The plaintiffs themselves, by their own showing,
had not carried out their own contract —that differences which
might arise were to be settled between themselves, and not in a
Court of law. The plaintiffs themselves had broken this agree-
ment. A Court of Equity could not compel trustees to act
together. The proper course was to have the trustees removed
if any charge of malversation were made. Or, if trustees refused
to execute a deed, or do something of that kind, the Court would
compel such refusing trustees to execute such deed. The Court
could not compel people to act as the plaintiffs wished. There
was another part of the Primary Judge’s judgment with which
he entirely agreed. The plaintiffs had formed a Church of their
own. They had a perfect right to do so. They had a right to
secede from the larger body to which they belonged. They,
being the minority, were the seceders. They were now trying
to be restored to the body from which they had seceded. They
called a meeting to say that the old Synod was defunct, and a
resolution was carried to the effect that the Synod created by
them should govern the Church. He found that the defendants
had been most careful in their proceedings to protect the property
rights of the plaintiffs, whom they had expelled.
Mr. Justice Innes concurred with their Honors. He had
felt throughout the argument considerable doubt, which was not
■entirely dispelled. He came to the conclusion that the rights of
property said to be involved were tco shadowy and unsubstantial
—to be considered—not necessarily because the funds were small,
but because of their ephemeral and evanescent character.
Appeal dismissed, with costs.
SUPPLEMENTARY AND EXPLANATORY
DOCUMENTS.
12. Treasurer’s Report as to funds passing through
his hands in connection with the Synod of Eastern
Australia, submitted to and approved by the
Finance Committee on the 10th April, 1885, as to
be given in evidence, if demanded, at the Supreme
Court at the approaching trial.
The several funds to which there are more or less annual con-
tributions are seven in number, and at the closing of the accounts


Church Extension Fund
60
7
6
61
1
0
Dr.
0
13
6
Foreign Missions Fund
251
14
1
160
10
0
Cr.
91
4
1
Ministers’ Widows and
Orphans Fund
901
12
8
125
11
4
Cr.
776
1
4
Synod Fund
0
2
6
12
10
0
Dr.
12
7
6
Professorial Fund
42
19
9
0
0
0
Cr.
42
19
9
Theological Hall Fund
131
19
1
0
0
0
Cr.
131
19
1
on 13th May, 1884, had at their aggregate credit, a sum of
£1485 15s. 5d., subject however to payment of accrued claims
to the amount of <£4sl 12s. Id.
The distribution of these figures is as follows, viz :
Fund. Balance Liabilities. Balances.
13th May, 1884.
Sustentation Fund 96 19 10 91 19 9 Cr. 5 0 1
£1,485 15 5 451 12 1 1047 4 4
Less Dr. Balances 13 1 0
Net Balance—<£1034 3 4
Of the aggregate balance at 13th May, 1884, there was :
Cash in the Bank ... ... ... ... ... 364 11 5
Deposits in Savings’ Bank, and Fixed Deposits in
other Banks ... ... ... ... ... 871 4 0
Loan to East Maitland Church ... ... ... 250 0 0
£1485 15 5
The following explanation may serve to show how those
several funds arise, and the objects for which they were established.
The Sustentation Fund.
This fund nominally corresponds to the similar fund estab-
lished by the Free Church of Scotland at the' disruption in 1843,
and is supposed to be contributed to by every member and
adherent of the Church, to form a consolidated fund out of which
every Minister of regularly organized congregations should
annually receive an equal proportion or dividend, whether his
congregation contributed more or less than the amount of that
dividend to the common stock.
In practice, there occur many circumstances to vary the
application of this theory.
In consequence of the disorganisation of the church—from
whatever cause arising—the Sustentation Fund in hand at 13th
May, 1884, consisted of contributions from two congregations only
(£9l 19s. 9d.), and a special subscription of £5, and thus no
course seemed open but to return the contributions to the sub-
scribers, which was accordingly ordered to be done.


No further sums on this account have been received, and the
balance of £5 on hand is simply held at the disposal of the sub-
scriber.
The Sustentation Fund is therefore practically defunct for
the present.
The Church Extension or Home Mission Fund.
This fund was originally formed to provide means for paying-
passages to the colony of Ministers coming from other countries to
join the Church here, and for paying stipends to such Ministers
or other laborers in places where the congregations were too limited
in numbers or means to admit of their becoming charges on the
general Sustentation Fund.
The only ordinary charge on the fund is that of a nominal
stipend of £lOO per annum to the Rev. W. S. Donald, of Clarence
Town and Dungog.
The annual collections from the congregations by which the
fund is kept alive, are not sufficient to pay that stipend, as well
-as the occasional allowances to Catechists and others employed on
mission work, but the trustees of Mrs. Mclntyre’s legacy of £lOOO
have hitherto applied the annual interest of that legacy—from
£4O to £6o—towards Mr. Donald’s stipend, in the exercise of the
discretion specially given them by the terms of the trust.
A sum of £5O is due Mr. Donald on 30th April, and there
is only a balance of £45 6s. 6d. recently received from the afore-
said trustees to meet the claim.
There are therefore no funds on hand on this account to be
dealt with.
Foreign Missions Fund,
This fund is also maintained by the voluntary contributions
-annually made by the congregations, and the amount has been
applied, by direction of the Synod, for several years past in aid of
three distinct missions : 1. The Chinese Mission of the Presby-
terian Church of England. 2. The African Mission of the Pres-
byterian Church of Ireland, and 3, the Jewish Mission of the
Free Church of Scotland. The aggregate amount having been
£l6O for each year.
The balance at 13th May, 1884, was £251 14s. Id., of which
£l6O 10s. was applied as above in the following June, leaving
£9l 4s. Id. as a nucleus for the next annual remittance. There
have been received since, £62 19s. Id., which with about £6
interest, will not quite cover the amount which the missions
quoted have been led to expect from this Church, and which
therefore amounts to a claim that has been ordered to be met by
the Synod at its meeting in February last.
There are therefore no funds in hand on this account.


Ministers’ Widows and Orphans Fund.
At the 13th May, 1884, there was a balance of £9Ol 12s. Bd.
at the credit of this Fund, consisting of—
£ s. d. £ s. d.
(1) Capital derived from accumulated
collections, 1874 to 1878 ... 105 0 0
Interest ... ... ... ... 4 811
Special Bequest by Rev. D. K.
Mclntyre, one of the defendants 630 11 8
740 0 7
(2) Accumulated dividends at the credit
of four ministers whose lives are
uninsured ... ... ... 125 11 4
(3) Interest and collections from Ist
November, 1883, to 13th May,
1884 32 3 3
(4) Amount short distributed ... 3 17 6
£9Ol 12 8
This Fund was established to assist ministers of regularly
organised congregations in making provision for their families on
their decease, or rather to assist the congregations in making
such provision for their ministers’ widows and orphans.
Under a Minute of Synod passed in 1879, the annual income
from interest and collections by congregations in aid of the Fund
is divided equally among the number of ordained ministers in
charge of congregations at the end of each financial year, i.e., the
31st October.
The dividend thus ascertained is issued to those Ministers
who have insured their lives as a full satisfaction of the claims of
their widows and children; and, in the case of uninsured married
ministers, the annual dividend is placed to their credit to be paid
at their.death to their widows and children, or both.
This arrangement has been carried out for the years 1879
to 1883 inclusive, there having been five ministers who drew their
dividends, and four whose accumulated dividends are in the hands
of the Treasurer, making £125 11s. 4d. at 31st October, 1883.
The names of the five ministers who have drawn their full
claims are the Revs. George Sutherland, D. Mclnnes, H. Living-
stone, J. S, Macpherson, and S. P. Stewart; and the names of
the four ministers whose dividends are on hand, are the Revs.
W. S. Donald, J. Mackay, W. Grant, and J. Davis, these four
being all defendants.
The income for the year 1883-4 has been ascertained to be
£42 11s. Bd., from which has to be deducted an over-distribution
for the year 1880 of £l7 18s. 5d., leaving £24 13s. 3d. for equal


dividend of £2 14s. 9d., which the Finance Committee consider
to be now available for distribution to the nine ministers above-
named, including the Revs. J. S. Macpherson and H. Livingstone.
As the account 1883-4 includes the period 6th May to 31st
October, 1884, during which the two ministers named were
expelled from the Church, it has not been considered advisable to
divide the income for the year on that account; but as under the
Minute of 1879 the accruing income for the year ending 31st
October next is not divisible until after that date, it is premature
to take any action in regard to it.
The Synod Fund
Is also formed by collections taken from the congregations to
meet expenses of the Synod, such as the allowance to the Clerk,
stationery and postages, and printing minutes, &c.
The account is overdrawn, and ten guineas are due for the
Clerk’s allowance.
The Professorial Fund
Was started in 1880 by a special subscription of £25 to provide
some remuneration for two Professors who had been nominated
for the training of students for the ministry of the Church. In
1881, four congregations contributed a total of £l3 Os. 4d.
Savings’ Bank interest added makes the balance now at credit
£42 19s. 9d.
It had been proposed to pay the two Professors, Revs. George
Sutherland and Peter Macpherson, a nominal salary ; but by a
Minute of 1880, the Synod “ deemed it advisable to come under
no obligations to hx or pay any salaries to the Professors.”
In the same Minute it is stated that the Rev. Peter
Macpherson had waived “ his claim of salary as Professor for the
past year.”
The disposal of the balance is an open question.
The Theological Hall Fund
Was initiated in 1878 by the application of two special subscrip-
tions of £5O each, under Minute of Synod, 12th November, 1878.
Nothing further has been done since. Interest accrued,
£3l 19s. Id., makes the total credit, £l3l 19s. Id.
The scheme is in abeyance, and it is an open question how
the fund is to be disposed of.
It should be noted that the Balances £ s. d.
At the credit of the Professorial Fund ... ... 42 19 9
And Theological Hall Fund... ... ... ... 131 19 1
With a portion of the Widows and Orphans Fund 75 1 2
Or in all ... ... ... ... ... ...£250 0 0


are on loan to the trustees of the East Maitland Church, where
the Rev. J. S. Macpherson at present officiates. No interest has
been paid on that loan since 31st October, 1883 ; nor any contri-
bution from that Church since 18th November, 1883, to any of
the Funds named above.
13. Report of the Committee of Synod as to the man-
agement and distribution of the Ministers Widows
and Orphans Fund, adopted at meeting of
Synod on 10th November, 1879.
Your Committee beg to report that they have considered the
matter specially sent down to them by the Synod at its sitting
in 1878, as to the distribution of the annual income, at the
disposal of the Committee, arising from interest on invested
moneys, and the annual collections in aid of the fund, and now
beg to submit the following scheme for the consideration of the
Synod, viz. :
(1) That such annual income shall be divided by the
number of the ordained ministers in the Synod, at the end of each
financial year; and that the sum, the product of such division
shall be at the disposal of each minister who has insured his life,
or may yet insure their lives, to aid them in payment of their
annual premiums; and such shall be deemed a full satisfaction
of the claims of his widow and children upon the fund.
(2) That in the case of ministers who may be unmarried,
or who at death may leave no widow or children, half the amount
of sum assured by the annual grant from this fund, shall revert
to the capital of the fund.
(3) In the case of married ministers whose lives may be
uninsured, the sums to which they are entitled annually, shall be
credited to them, and at their decease the total amount standing
to their credit shall be paid to the widow and children, or to the
widow, or to the children; and the widow of such deceased
minister, during her life or until the contraction of another
marriage, and the children until marriage or attaining their
majority, shall continue to receive the amount annually which
the deceased minister would have been entitled to receive as his
proportion of the annual income. The principle of division to be
the same as that followed by the Free Church of Scotland.
(4) In the case of ministers whose lives may be uninsured,
or who may leave no widow or children, the amount standing to
their credit, shall, upon their decease, revert to the capital of
the fund.


14. Extract from the Report of the Finance Committee
of the Synod of Eastern Australia for 1884-5,
together with extract from the Synod’s deliver-
ance thereupon dated the 9th day of February,
1885.
* *
In regard to the Sustentation Fund, no further collections have
been reported since May last, and nothing can be done further
towards declaring a dividend for the year ended 31st October
last, and as understood at the last meeting of the Synod, the only
course in the circumstances is to permit the several Deacons’
Courts to retain their respective collections for the benefit of
their respective ministers, until it may again become possible to
re-establish a Sustentation Fund. The Committee, however,
notice that a balance of £5 remains in the treasurer’s hands, as
received in May last from Miss Caiman, Dandeloo, Bogan River,
and they recommend that the treasurer be instructed to inform
Miss Caiman that, in consequence of the impracticability of
making an equitable distribution of the Sustentation Fund to
which she had kindly contributed, the Synod had directed that her
contribution of £5 should be held at her disposal, and request
instructions as to the same.
The overdraft of £l4 13s. 6d. in the Church Extension, or
Home Mission Fund, will be covered by the credit of £5O within
the next few days of interest on Mrs. MTntyre’s legacy of £lOOO,
which the trustees thereof usually pay in towards the stipend of
the Rev. W. S. Donald of Clarence Town.
The Foreign Missions Fund shews a balance of £154 3s. 2d.
which is barely sufficient to allow of the usual grants to the three
Foreign Missions, supported by this Synod for several years past.
The income for the year, or rather for eight months only, has been
£62 19s. Id.; and, if the Church is to continue its grants, a
vigorous effort will have to be made throughout the congregations
u , o O O
attached to it.
' Since May, only £3 3s. 6d. has been contributed to the
Widows and Orphans Fund, but in a few days there should be
added £SO as interest upon sums permanently and temporarily
invested. The amount of the income last divided, namely for
the year ended 31st Obtober, 1883, was £sl ss. That sum was
directed by the last convener to be divided into ten parts, thus
yielding a dividend to be paid to insuring ministers of £5 2s. 6d.,
or to be placed to the credit of those ministers whose lives had
not been insured in terms of the Synod’s minute of 1879. The
income for the year ended 31st October, 1884, amounted to
£SO Is. Bd., which on the lines of the previous year’s arrange-
ment wmuld admit of a dividend of £5 os. 4d. to ten ordained
ministers. This would include apparently, the Revs. Hugh


Livingstone and J. S. Macpherson, and possibly the Rev. H. S.
Buntine. The Committee, however, have some doubts as to
whether, in the circumstances, the distribution should be made
without legal advice, inasmuch as the income is partly made up
of collections to which the parties referred to have not contri-
buted, and partly of interest on sums permanently or temporarily
invested. The income for the year commencing last November
and ending next October, will probably equal that now in
question, say £SO ; and its distribution would depend upon the
principles to be decided regarding the income of 1883-84. In
connection with this matter, the Committee also reports that the
trustees of the East Maitland Church having failed to pay interest
since 31st October, 1883, on the loan of £250 to them, the
Widows and Orphans Fund is deficient in its share of that
interest, and thus far the account of income is imperfect.
The Synod Fund requires to be replenished by £9 16s. 6d.
to equalize the Dr. balance, and by further sums to meet further
claims.
The Theological Hall and Professorial Funds being for
purposes that could not be carried out hitherto, remain practically
dead—some small additions being made to them for interest on
the amounts to their credit.
Extract Minute of Proceedings of the Synod of Eastern Australia
on the 9th day of February, 1885, on tvhich day the Synod
met and was constituted in St. George’s Church, Castlereagh
Street, Sydney.
Inter alia. It was resolved “That the report of the Finance
Committee be adopted—the thanks of the Synod be conveyed to
the Committee, especially to the Convener—and that the Com-
mittee be instructed—and they did, and hereby do instruct the
Committee, to carry out the recommendations made by them as
to the balance of £5 at the credit of the Sustentation Fund, and
as to obtaining legal advice respecting the distribution of the
income of the Widows and Orphans Fund—the expense thereof
to be charged to the fund. The Synod also recommend that the
agent of the Foreign Missions be instructed to forward £l6O to
the three Foreign Missions in similar sums and for similar pur-
poses to those authorised to be sent for previous years.
“That the several congregations be urged to contribute
liberally towards the Foreign Missions and Synod Funds, and
also towards the Widows and Orphans Fund during the ensuing
year.
Extracted from the records of the Synod of Eastern Australia
by me,
Isaac Mackay,
February 17, 1885. Clerk of Synod.


15. Extract Minute of Synod’s Proceedings, 12th
November, 1879 (as printed).
97. The Rev. J. S. Macpherson brought up the report of
the Finance Committee. The report was adopted. The Committee
was thanked and re-appointed—the Rev. 13. K. Mclntyre, Con-
vener. With respect to the two suggestions contained in tlm
report, the Clerk was instructed to engross them in the minutes,
which suggestions are as follows, viz.:—Ist, “That the Treasurer
be authorised to pay all sums certified by the respective conveners
of the various Committees2nd, “ That all new expenditure, not
specially authorised by the minutes of Synod, must be certified
by an extract minute of the meeting of Committee authorising
the expenditure.”
TREASURER’S NOTES ON ABOVE MINUTE
The directions in Synod’s Minute of the 12th
November, 1879, have been duly observed, and the
Treasurer’s Accounts for 1880, 1881, 1882, 1883,
and 1884, have been duly audited and found correct.
Those directions were adopted at Mr. Rennie’s
own suggestion, but they do not bear out the state-
ment that the Treasurer is authorised to pay “ only
such moneys,” as shall be certified by conveners, &c.,
inasmuch as the Synod, while in session, frequently
directs payments to be made (either in accordance
with the recommendations of committees or inde-
pendently of them), and such directions are paramount
to any order of conveners of committees the
meaning of the directions referred to being that for
any payments requiring to be made by committees
for the expenses of their work during the intervals of
the meetings of Synod, the Convener" 1 s order should
he a sufficient warrant to the Treasurer to draw on
the Synod's account , but such orders are subject to
confirmation by the Synod at its next meeting.
Moreover, if any Convener’s order were not in
accordance with the recognised ordinary expenditure,
the Treasurer has a right to challenge it or even to
refuse to comply with it.


16. Extract from the Free Churchman of May, 1881 r
published immediately before the Meeting of
Synod on 6th of that month, under the editor-
ship of the Rev. John S. Macpherson,
(At the conclusion of a series of eight articles described as
“The Policy of the ‘Majority’ in the Synod of Eastern Australia,’
there occur the following sentences, which are given here as a
specimen of the character of the language employed in numerous
publications to which the names of several of the plaintiffs have
been appended).
Remarks.
Such are a very few notes regarding the two worthies from
the Free Presbyterian Church of New South Wales who paid a
visit to the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria. No doubt
the Georgium Sidus * will find its way to the great Public
Libraries of Melbourne and Sydney, and will afford a most
instructive hour’s reading to those who may interest themselves
in the early history of Presbyterianism in the Australian colonies.
We have been referring to the development of Mr. Sutherland
which has been taking place, and we must not lose sight of the-
similar process which has been astonishing so many people
regarding Rev. D. K. Mclntyre during the last four years. It
is certainly curious that the logical pressure of events has brought
these two men into the same line of policy here in New South
Wales, and that the steady operation of causes should have
wafted them both over to Victoria to carry out the same policy
across the border. That the saintly innocent Mr. Mclntyre
should be found to harmonise with the reckless and turbulent
Mr. Sutherland has been a stumbling-block to some Highlanders.
Yet the domain of zoology supplies us with parallels. The tiger
which bounds with a roar upon his victim is a very different
animal from the stealthy “ glarked-looking ” alligator that comes
up from his muddy depths and puts in an appearance in a very
unexpected manner. Yet different as are these creatures, the
unfortunate victim is about as safe in the claws of the one as in
the jaws of the other. No doubt the mammal is a far nobler
animal than the slimy reptile, but one’s fate is equally sealed in
falling into the power of either. Which is the more deadly—Mr.
* The reference is to a pamphlet entitled “ Contributions towards an
Exposition of the Genesis (and, n.v., the Extinction) of a New Light called
‘ Georgium Sidus ’in the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. ” The pamphlet
was published nominally in Melbourne, but industriously circulated in
this colony ; and although anonymous, it yet bears unmistakeable internal
evidence of having been compiled by a Free Church Minister of Victoria,
with the assistance of another in this colony, and of its object being to
destroy the character and influence of other ministers besides the one
obviously meant by “ Georgium Sidus.”


Sutherland with his tiger-like spring and roar, or Mr. Mclntyre
with his stealthy movements and his slimy whispers and his
money-power, and his saintly work of celebrating the Lord’s
Supper among the Highlanders ? Considering the material for
criticism supplied by such men as Mr. Sutherland and Mr. Mclntyre,
we do not see they have reasonable ground for complaint, though
some very plain things are said of their strange doings. Should
we pursue the matter further, and shape our criticisms in view of
the utter lawlessness which Mr. Sutherland encouraged in his
friends in Victoria, can he complain if we describe his conduct as
that of a sort of ecclesiastical bushranger ? Then, as to the crazy
conduct of Mr. Mclntyre, can he complain if we utilise another
colonial institution, and describe his readiness, on such short
notice, to lapse below the line of civilisation as very well set forth
by comparing him to a blackfellow ? To move the anger
and bitter hostility of such men is almost of itself tantamount to
a proof that one is on the side of truth and honour, righteous-
ness, and common fair play.
The Two Representative Men, Messrs. Sutherland and
Mclntyre, Outwit Themselves.
After what has been already said, we might have simply
wound up with writing the words at the head of this paragraph.
As to Mr. Sutherland’s mission, we have seen that he brought
matters to a head more rapidly than was good for his revolutionary
deceitful, and dishonourable policy. He has given startling
evidence how little he cares for the fate of Free Church principles
as such, provided his own ecclesiastical filibustering should be
crowned with success. But while showing the cloven foot of
disregard for the real interests of the Free Church in the neigh-
bouring colony, he has also had the extinguisher pretty effectually
put upon his unscrupulous mischief-making. He has given two
young ministers ample reason to take stock of that pernicious
“ moulding ” influence, which has got them both into very serious
scrapes. As to Mr. Mclntyre, it is really difficult to try him by
the ordinary rules of civilisation. If he was honestly chronicled
by the editor of the Witness as going to preach the gospel of peace
to the people in the West of Victoria, there is now unanswerable
evidence that he helped on the cause of dispeace and dissension.
If he went to cultivate friendly relations with Mr. Paul, the Free
Church veteran of Victoria, he took a most unaccountable method
for accomplishing that object. Could a blackfellow have gone
more awkwardly or ridiculously about the matter ? In any case
he has evidently spoiled his own work in this view of the matter.
But the question recurs: what went he into Victoria to do? Was
it to work up the pernicious element of “ Sutherlandism ” ? Then
in this view of the matter also, his work has been, as it richly


deserved to be, a signal failure, notwithstanding all the pious
pretences with which the undertaking was accompanied.
17. Notes respecting the right or power to expel
ministers from Church Courts—prepared by
one of the defendants for consideration of
Counsel. '
A minister comes in to the Church Courts (Pres-
bytery Synod or Assembly) by ordination or induc-
tion as a pastor of a congregation on condition (among
others) that he hold and maintain the distinctive
doctrines and principles of the Church—that he lead
a holy and circumspect life —that he submit to the
government and discipline of the Church —and in the
spirit of meekness submit to the admonitions of his
brethren of the presbytery being subject to them and all
the judicatories of the Church—following no divisive
courses but maintaining the unity of the spirit as be-
comes a Christian society.
It follows that if a minister be found directly or
notoriously failing in either of the obligations under
which he came at his ordination he necessarily ceases
to have a right to the position on which he was placed
on the faith of his fulfilling said obligations.
The right to determine a question of default in a
minister rests naturally with ther Church which
ordained or inducted him that is with his brethren
associated in Presbytery or Synod in the exercise of
their judicial functions.
Suspension followed by deposition on continued
default is the usual judgment where the offender does
not voluntarily resign or remove beyond the bounds
of jurisdiction. The Church is always loath to take
extreme measures and prefers where it can to leave
offenders with a right to exercise their office else-
where while excluding them from doing so within the
bounds of its own society or in other words to afford
them a locus poenitentioe.


Hence expulsion is occasionally resorted to in
certain cases where differences of opinion exist leading
to disobedience or to such acrimonious controversy as
to render mutual action in the government of the
Church absolutely impracticable.
Such a case occurred in Scotland where a pres-
bytery refused to induct a minister as enjoined by
the Assembly. On that occasion four ministers in-
volved in the case were expelled from the Church of
Scotland and were joined by others who together
formed a new Church communion afterwards known as
the Secession Church.
A similar example of expulsion occurred in the
neighbouring colony of Victoria in or about 1857
where irreconcilable differences of opinion arose out
of negotiations for union and where it was impossible
to deal with the dissentients in any other way than
to expel them. The dissentient ministers four in
number were accordingly expelled. Amongst them
was the Rev. Arthur Paul of St. Kiida.
When a presbytery consists of only a bare quorum
i.e , two ministers and one elder, discipline and
government are obviously impossible in case of offence
or difference of opinion in one of its members. Hence
the Synod has to take action and where a Church is
numerous there is room for just judgment and effect-
ive discipline by the larger Court,
But a Synod may consist of such a small number
of members or of such small presbyteries that if it
happen that several members of the respective pres-
byteries of only a quorum in strength become in-
volved in a case of discipline, more or less affecting
them all, the Synod becomes so reduced in number
by the number of parties placed at the bar that a
proper or effective judgment is impossible.
That is the case here. The Synod consists of 4
presbyteries three of which can only have at the ut-
most four members and the other can only have eight.


The ministers in all these presbyteries number or did
number only eleven. But by traverse operations arising
out of the unruly and divisive courses pursued by the
three expelled the whole eleven had become so mixed
up in the matter that it would have been impossible to
avoid the charge of being judges in their own case if
they had proceeded as they might legally have done
to deal with the offenders for contumacy —a course
which without repentance on their part would have
almost necessarily ended in their deposition if the
usual procedure had been carried out —but a course
which the defendants were unwilling to take preferring
the milder one of expulsion which left them in their
lull status as ministers and their congregations with
them, should they see fit to stand by them and
separate from the main body of the Church.
In the case of the late Dr. Lang who was deposed
by his Church for slandering his brethren in a news-
paper of his own and for contumacy in refusing to be
called to account for it—a parallel case in its main
features to the present one —Dr. Lang’s congregation
adhered to him and retained possession of the Church
which sought to be recovered from them by the
Synod of Australia through the Supreme Court here
some years ago but unsuccessfully (Purves and others
v. Lang). Dr. Lang afterwards associated with him-
self some other ministers and ordained others making
a separate Synod which continued for years so until the
union of 1865 when his deposition somehow was
allowed to drop out of sight.
That case serves to show that even deposition
from the ministry by a Church Court does not
necessarily deprive a man of his position as a minister
nor of his means of living by his office—it being
always in the power of the people to choosetheir own
pastor and support him as an unattached congregation.
The Synod on the other hand has no power to
compel the people nominally and voluntarily


associated together under their jurisdiction to con-
tribute to the support of ministers of whom they
disapproved although they may not be openly
amenable to discipline of any kind.
It may be added that the principle on which the
governing power in the Presbyterian Church is formed
is mainly that of representation of the members of
the Church by a pastor and a lay-elder for each con-
gregation and the decisions of the Church Courts are
always determined by majorities by which decisions
the minorities are bound to abide in terms of their
common bond of union.
Two other examples of excision or enforced expulsion may
be here quoted as having occurred in the Presbyterian Churches
of America,
In the United States of America there are nine distinct
Presbyterian Churches; of these, the one that bears the broad
name of “ The Presbyterian Church in the United States of
America,” embraces rather more than one half of the 10,000
Presbyterian Ministers in that land. In 1837, of the scores of
Synods, it cut off from its roll the majority of members of four
Synods, viz.: —Western Reserve, which had eight Presbyteries
within its bounds, and Utica, Geneva, and Genesee, numbering
some four hundred ministers, which, at the time of the excision,
had fifty-one representatives on the floor of the General Assembly.
The alleged cause of exclusion was disorderly proceedings, and
erroneous views. Protests against such exclusion were taken at
the time, with apparently strong reasons ; but the protests were
answered with equally strong reasons. The Assembly claimed
the right of determining who should be worthy of a place on its
roll, and who not. At the same time it dissolved the Third
Presbytery of Philadelphia, against the protest of twenty-five
members, on the broad ground “ That, being originally formed by
the Assembly, none can question the right of that body to dis-
solve it, whenever its continued existence is found to be injurious
to truth and charity.” The Assembly did not depose these men
from the Ministry, nor deprive them of their Churches, but they
severed them and all that adhered to them from their Communion,
after what they call six years *• Of contention and strife, such as
many of us never expected to witness in the Presbyterian Church,
and such as are highly disgraceful to our Christian character.”
They add :—“ This spirit of contention deprives the Church of all
power which would conduce to the edification of the body of
Christ,” and declare that separation could alone terminate the


contentions. They justly complain that the reviving and con-
verting influences of the Holy Spirit have been withheld, and
their “ Time and strength have been painfully occupied with
strife and debate, instead of being wholly given to the spread of
the Gospel, and the conversion of the world.”
In the following year, 1838, in a Pastoral letter explaining
to the Churches that the excision was an imperative necessity
they make this statement : —“ The essence of all religious liberty
and ecclesiastical order is evidently involved in the principle, that
where two parties in the same community cannot agree, the
majority must govern; but, if the minority cannot in conscience
submit either to the measures or to the doctrines of the majority,
it is their right and duty to separate and form a different denom-
ination.” In the same letter they say :—“ For the last seven or
eight years of our history, we have been full of darkness, our
Church has been occupied with strife, filled with railing accusa-
tions and misrepresentations among professed brethren, which
was well calculated to harden sinners, and provoke the scoff's of
the infidel.” Again, respecting periodicals, they say :—“ We
should suppose that intelligent Christians would not find it difficult
to determine what periodicals or papers they ought to sustain;
they may try such papers by the Bible. Publications filled with
railings and misrepresentations cannot produce the peaceable
fruits of righteousness.” The enforced separation restored the
Church to her normal state and work. (Vide Baird’s Collection.)
In Nova Scotia the same principle of action was pursued
towards a member of Synod, in a case of persistent accusation by
him, of failure in moral obligation. The member referred to
claimed, that his property which had been rented for temporary
use as a college, should, as a matter of moral right and obligation,
be purchased, from statements which he alleged, fell from the lips
of members of the college Board. The Board had afterwards
purchased, for college purposes, another building. Hence the
complaint and accusation. It was admitted that there was no
legal right which could be enforced ; but the complainant insisted,
and rightly, that moral right has force in the absence of legal
claims. But the Members of the Board denied that they ever,
as a Board, promised to purchase the property. The Synod sus-
tained the denial of obligation on the part of the Board, and
sanctioned the purchase of the other property. The complainant,
an ordained Minister, doing work within the bounds of the
Presbytery became contumacious, and persisting in his disregard
for the repeated investigations and decisions of the Synod, was
severed from all connection with the Church ; and, as a matter
of course, deprived of a seat in Synod, by simple resolution of
Synod, and that a Free Church Synod, without any process of
libel or any deposition from the sacred office which he held.


These cases show that, formal process and libel are not
prerequisite to excision or expulsion where the circumstances are
so notorious as to require no proof to be led in justification.
18. Questions Nos. 4,5, 7, (required to be answered
in the Affirmative by Probationers before
Ordination, and by Ministers already ordained
on their admission to Pastoral Charges,
together with the Formula required to be
subscribed by Probationers, and by all office-
bearers at the time of their admission.
Questions.
4. Are you persuaded that the Presbyterian government
and discipline of this Church are founded upon the Word of God,
and agreeable thereto, —and do you promise to submit to the
said government and discipline, and to concur with the same, and
not to endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or subver-
sion thereof, but to the utmost of your power, in your station, to
maintain, support and defend the said discipline and Presbyterian
government, by Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods,
and General Assemblies ?
5. Do you believe that the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and
Head of the Church, has therein appointed a government in the
hands of Church officers, distinct from, and not subordinate in
its own province to, civil government, and that the civil magis-
trate does not possess jurisdiction or authoritative control over
the regulation of the affairs of Christ’s Church ; and do you
approve of the general principles embodied in the Claim, De-
claration and protest, adopted by the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland in 1842—in the Protest of Ministers and
Elders, Commissioners from Presbyteries to the General Assembly,
read in presence of the Royal Commissioner on the 18th May,
1843, and in the Protest read in the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland, on the 10th
October, 1846, as declaring the views which are sanctioned by
the Word of God, and the Standards of this Church, with respect
to the spirituality and freedom of the Church of Christ, and her
subjection to Him as her only Head, and to His Word as her only
standard ?
7. Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and humbly,
in the spirit of meekness, unto the admonitions of the brethren
of this Presbytery, and to be subject to them, and all other
Presbyteries, and superior judicatories of this Church, where God
in His providence shall cast your lot; —and that, according to


jour power, you shall maintain the unity and peace of this
Church against error and schism, notwithstanding of whatsoever
trouble or persecution may arise, and that you shall follow no
divisive courses from the doctrine, worship, discipline and govern-
ment of this Church ?
Formula.
-, do hereby declare, that I do sincerely
own and believe the whole doctrine contained in the Confession
of Faith, approven by General Assemblies of the Church of
Scotland, to be the truths of God; and Ido own the same as the
confession of my faith, as likewise I do own the purity of wor-
ship presently authorised and practised in the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia, and also the Presbyterian gov-
ernment and discipline thereof —which doctrine, worship, and
Church government I am persuaded are founded on the Word of
God, and agreeable thereto; I also approve of the general
principles respecting the jurisdiction op the Church, and her
subjection to Christ as her only HEAD, which are contained
in the Claim of Right, and in the Protests referred to in the
questions already put to me, and I promise that through the
grace of God, I shall firmly and constantly adhere to the same,
and to the utmost of my power shall, in my station, assert, main-
tain and defend the said doctrine, worship, discipline, and govern-
ment of this Church, by Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial
Synods, and General Assemblies, together with the liberty
and EXCLUSIVE jurisdiction thereof, — and that I shall, in my
practice, conform myself to the said worship, and submit to the
said discipline, government, and exclusive jurisdiction, and not
endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or subversion of
the same ; and I promise that I shall follow no divisive courses
from the doctrine, worship, discipline, government, and exclusive
jurisdiction of this Church, renouncing all doctrines, tenets, and
opinions whatsoever, contrary to, or inconsistent with, the said
doctrine, worship, discipline, government, or jurisdiction of
THE SAME.
19. Fundamental Act of the Free Presbyterian Synod
of Australia Felix (afterwards Victoria).
Although the Synod of Eastern Australia has not
hitherto formulated the principles on which it is
founded, those principles are so clearly set forth by
the Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria in their
Fundamental Act, and so clearly explain the grounds
on which the foregoing questions and formula are
92


based, that it is here inserted as a valuable document
for reference. The Act was passed at a meeting of
the Synod, held 9th May, 1848.
I. That the Word of God, which is contained in the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and Hew Testaments, is the only infallible
rule of faith and practice, and the true and certain standard
according to which all opinions of men are to be tried, and all
matters of worship, government, and discipline in the house of
God to be regulated.
11. That this portion of Christ’s Church receives the Con-
fession of Faith agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines which
met at Westminster in the year of the Lord 1643, and approved
by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in the year
1647, as exhibiting a system of doctrine founded on the Word of
God, and agreeable thereto, a useful testimony against error, and
a safe-guard against unsound teaching; and declares it to be the
Confession of this Church.
111. That this portion of Christ’s Church believes and
maintains that the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only King and Head
of the Church, hath appointed a government therein distinct from
and in no wise subordinate to the civil magistrate; and that the
Presbyterian form of Church government is founded on the Word
of God, and agreeable thereto. Of this government, the general
features and principles are set forth in the form of Presbyterial
Church government agreed upon by the aforesaid Assembly of
Divines, and in the First and Second Books of Discipline of the
Church of Scotland.
IY. That the Directory for the Public Worship of God
agreed upon by the same Assembly of Divines shall be the
Directory for worship in the congregations of this Church, it
being provided and declared that the supreme governing Assembly
of this Church (which at present is this Synod) is and shall be
unrestricted in the exercise of its right to set down rules and
directions for the better ordering of the public worship of God
and government of his Church, and to perform every other duty
belonging to Synods and Councils.
Y. That as the members of this Church have been called,
in the providence of God, to testify on behalf of the truth, that
there is no other Head of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ,
and that the Lord Jesus, as King and Head of His Church, hath
therein appointed a government in the hands of Church officers
distinct from the civil magistrate, the Synod do hereby solemnly
declare that, according to their understanding of the Word of
God and the Confession of Faith, the principle of Christ’s Headship
over the Church, and of a distinct spiritual government therein
appointed by Him, implies the following among other things :


1. That the office of the holy ministry and authority to
preach the Gospel and rule in the Church are derived from
Christ’s commission when He ascended up on high. The Word
is to be preached, the sacraments administered, the worship of
God conducted, discipline exercised, and all the affairs of Christ’s
house regulated in virtue of Christ’s appointment, in accordance
with the Scriptures, and not in virtue of the authority or subject
to the directions of any secular power whatsoever.
2. It belongs to the officers in Christ’s house to admit to
membership, offices, and privileges within the Church, to oversee
and direct members and officers in the discharge of their respective
duties, watching over them in the Lord; and when necessary, to
censure, suspend, and exclude both members and officers when,
they have violated the laws or neglected the institutions of
Christ. More particularly does it belong to the ministers and
elders of Christ’s Church, solemnly met in assemblies for the
government thereof, to try and judge of the fitness of persons
proposed for admission to spiritual offices, such as the ministry
and eldership, admitting only those whom they deem duly
qualified ; and in case of conduct unbecoming their profession
and position on the part of either ministers or elders, to suspend
or altogether remove from office.
3. It belongs to the assembled officers of Christ’s Church
to take measures for adding to the number of churches, ministers,
and elders; to determine who shall be, and who shall not be,
members of Church Assemblies; and to distribute the powers and
duties of spiritual oversight and administration between the
different congregational, classical, and synodical assemblies; so
that all things may be done decently and in order, for the per-
fecting of the saints, the work of the ministry, and the edifying
of the body of Christ.
4. The above duties and functions belong to the ministers
and elders of Christ’s Church, in virtue of His commission, and
are to be discharged in accordance with His will, in dependence
upon His help and blessing, and under a sense of accountability
to Him. They belong to Christ’s ministers and elders alone, and
the civil magistrate may not intermeddle with them.
5. Wherefore, the Synod do solemnly declare, that they
hold it to be inconsistent with the Word of God and the Confession
of Faith, and highly sinful, for any civil authority whatever to
issue commissions to hold any spiritual office; or to dictate to or
interfere with the ministers and elders of Christ’s Church in the
performance of any part of the work committed to them by Him.
It is not lawful for the civil magistrate to forbid assemblies for
the worship of God and the celebration of His ordinances, or to
hinder the preaching of the Gospel. Neither is it lawful for the
civil magistrate to prescribe in any way the admission of persons


to Church privileges, or Church offices, or to hinder the officers of
Christ’s House from passing such censures as they may deem
necessary on members and officers, or to inflict or remove such
censures, or to order their infliction or removal. Neither is it
lawful for the civil magistrate to enact laws or issue orders for
the regulation of the affairs of Christ’s house, or for admission of
persons to the pastoral office therein, or in any way to coerce
individual officers or assemblies in the management of the affairs
of Christ’s house.
And this Synod do condemn, and by God’s help resolve ever
to testify against, all interference of civil magistrates with the
spiritual affairs of Christ’s house, and against all ecclesiastical
bodies countenancing or submitting to such interference, either
directly or indirectly; and against all tenets, principles, practices,
and acts by which such interference on the part of the civil
magistrates, or such submission on the part of ecclesiastical bodies
may be countenanced.
VI. That as the authority committed by Christ to the
officers in His house is not lordly but ministerial, they are bound
in all things to have respect to the laws of Christ given in His
Word, and to the rights and privileges of His people. It belongs
to those already in office to try and judge of the fitness of persons
proposed to any of the work in Christ’s house ; to them alone
belongs the power of investing with office, which power they are
bound to exercise freely, fearlessly, and impartially, as they shall
answer to God ; but it is not lawful for them to intrude into any
of the offices of the Church contrary to the will of the Christian
people therein. And it is hereby declared to be a fundamental
rule of this Church that the election of ministers, ruling elders,
and deacons therein, belongs to the members of each separate
congregation in full communion, the assemblies to which the
oversight of the Church is committed superintending and regulating
such elections.
VII. That the Free Presbyterian Church of Australia Felix
is an independent portion of Christ’s Church ; possessing within
itself the full and unfettered power of regulating all matters of
doctrine, worship, and discipline connected with the whole body,
and its various separate congregations, and of defining, determining,
and, if need be, modifying or altering its relations to other ecclesias-
tical bodies. It is not, and shall not be, under the superintendence
or control, or subject to the interference, of any body whatever
external to itself. All ecclesiastical status, and all temporal
privileges and possessions which are, or may be hereafter, enjoyed
within this Church by its ministers, elders, or other members, in
virtue of their office or membership respectively, are and shall
be possessed and enjoyed free from the interference of any body
other than the assemblies of this Church.


VIII. That the preceding declarations, resolutions, and
provisions shall form and shall be called the Fundamental Act of
the Synod. All ministers, ruling elders, and preachers of the
Gospel shall be required to declare their adherence to them before
being admitted to any function in the Church; and continued
adherence to the principles hereinbefore set forth shall be held as
a condition of any status, office, or privilege within the Free
Presbyterian Church of Australia Felix. The Synod at the same
time declare that they do not preclude themselves from making
such additions to this act as may be necessary to set forth their
principles clearly and fully; and they reserve to themselves and
their successors the right of making any change in the designation
of the Church which circumstances may hereafter render necessary,
in order to exhibit its position, its relation to other bodies, and
the testimony it bears of the truth against error.
In further illustration of the foregoing, and of the testimony
of the Free Church of Scotland against appealing to the Civil
Courts from sentences pronounced in her own spiritual juris-
diction, the reader is invited to consult the report of Dr.
Oandlish’s speech on the Cardross case, as given in the appendix
to Hugh Miller’s “ The Headship of Christ.”
W. M. Maclardy, Printer, 313 George Street.
96




'CT/
(4
