

v\ : r P?'"in
Our (Stanttaris atiti their dradungs?
AS BEARING ON
MASB I A G
THE SISTER OF A DECEASED WIFE,
CONSIDERED IN THE LIGHT OF SCRIPTURE
AND COMMON SENSE.
askic pans
«Oi*
A SERMON
Preached in the Presbyterian Church, Coburg, on the Evening
op Sabbath, 26th October, 1873.
WITH APPENDIX,
Containing brief Strictures on Dr. Cameron’s Pamphlet.
IB BAD JOHN COOPER,
Author of “ Science of Spiritual Life,” “ Truth in its own Light," tyc.
JEtlimtinu:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, LITTLE COLLINB-ST, WEST.
MDCCCLXXIII,


Just Published, Iby the same Author,
PRICE ONE SHILLING,
A CATECHISM OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
BIBLE CLASSES, HIGHER CLASSES IN SABBATH SCHOOLS,
SABBATH SCHOOL TEACHERS, AND ADVANCED PUPILS.
IN THREE PARTS
Preparing for Publication, by the same Author,
THE PROVINCE OF LAW IN THE RECOVERY S3F MAH.


illaiTutgc toitlt the Sister of a Bcceascb ffife>
“ Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover her naked-
ness, beside the other in her life time," — Leyit. xviii. 18.
Our lot is cast in times of change. Changes, deeper and broader
far than the unobservant imagine, are passing over us—-changes
affecting almost every department of literature, science, philosophy,
politics, religion, and life. The Church, during the last fifty years,
has undergone a very considerable change in sentiment and con-
dition. Nor are we to be surprised at changes occurring in the
Church, or in the condition of man upon earth. They are necessary
to his passing from evil to good, from self to Cod. Changes are
to be looked for in the Church —and by the Church we are not to
understand any one of the denominations, but the professed
faiths of Christendom, or the regenerated of God on earth. By
the one we are to understand the formal, by the other the true,.
Church of Christ.
Change is the condition of the Church on earth ; the necessity
of her development in time. The Church is the germ of spiritual
vitality cast into the soil of the world, and, by means of the
changes through which the Church is passing, God is showing u to
principalities and powers in heavenly places His manifold wisdom .”
And if we learn aright the history of the Church as she passes
through the changes of her progressive development, we will be
constrained to exclaim with Paul, “ 0 the depths of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God. How unsearchable are His
designs, and His ways are past finding out: for who hath known the
mind of the Lord, or who hath been His counsellor, or who hath first
given to Him, and it shall he recompensed to him again ? for of Him,
and through Him, and to Him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever. Amen.”
In such a state of things we are not, on the one hand, to “ he
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by
the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in watt
to deceive nor, on the other hand, to be indifferent to “ the signs
of the times.” Our duty is to attend to the operations of God’s
doings in the earth, and rest in the conviction that He who shed His
blood to found His Church, and ascended to the right hand of the
Majesty in the heavens that He might receive the investiture of
all power in heaven and earth for the good of His Church, is-
'more deeply interested in her progress than any individual or any


•denomination of the Church of Christ, and is, by means of the
■changes and trials of her earthly condition, removing those things
in her “ ivhich are to he shaken, that those things ivhich cannot he
■shaken may remain and is thus guiding her onward to her
glorious consummation of millennial perfection and bliss.
We are to rest in the conviction that the Church is passing
through such changes as are necessary to her perfection in the
•outcome of her inner life ; and that she will be defended and
guided so as in the end to appear before the world “ fair as
■the moon, dear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners
Controversy, which is her necessary ordeal, is not in itself an
■evil, but the fire of her purification and strength. It is the
odium theologicum ” with which controversy is so often conducted
that is to be deplored. It is matter of surprise and grief that
so many controversialists should forget what manner of spirit they
are of, and imagine that the bitterness of their ire and fury of
their wrath is the holy unction of the spirit of truth. They
should ever have hung in their view the words of the heathen poet,
“ Tantanee animis coelestibus irce ” (“ Dwells there such wrath in
heavenly minds”), or the reply of Christ to the disciples when they
were for bringing down fire from heaven to consume those
they imagined were against them, or when they were for hindering
another from casting out devils because he followed not with
them.
We shall endeavour to keep these things in view as we pro-
ceed to the investigation of the disputed and agitated question of
marriage with the sister of a deceased wife, announced for dis-
cussion to-night. In connection with this theme, or as form-
ing a part of this discussion, it will be necessary in the first place
to inquire, What is the position of standards of belief among
brethren 1 or, What is the legitimate influence of creeds in the
Church of Christ 1
Creeds or standards of belief are necessary to the union and
co-operation of men of imperfect discernment, and to the protec-
tion of the Christian Church from the errors of schismatics and
assaults of foes. As long as the Church was without division of
sentiment and error of belief, there was no room for creeds, the
-apostolic influence and writings of inspiration were all that were
needed; but the moment that error crept in, and division sprung
up in the Church, that moment brought with it the necessity of
a creed around which the adherents of truth might rally, and
•exhibit their opposition to the error that was assailing the truth;
and the circumstances which necessitated the introduction of
creeds into the Church require their continuance in it still.
A human creed is man’s interpretation of one or more portions of
inspired Scripture, or the view of certain doctrines of Holy Writ
taken by the ecclesiastics of a particular time. A creed is thus
necessarily an imperfect and partial, if not a one-sided, view of
Divine truth. Creeds are the human husks which contain in them


the seed of Divine truth, and must be broken for the outcome
and development of the germ of the inner life of the Church. And
our Church has had the grace given to her, in her entering into
her united form, to set an example to other churches of modifying
standards as the times require ; and, in so doing, she has acted in
the spirit and on the advice of the wise men of God who formed her
standards. In the Confession of Faith, chapter xxxi., section 4,
we read thus —“ All synods and councils since the apostles’ time,
whether general or particular, may err and may have erred ; there-
fore they are not to be made the rule of faith or practice, but to
be used as our help in both.” See also section 5. In this section
we have the key furnished to the true spirit in which the en-
lightened ecclesiastic gives his adherence to the Confession of Faith.
Forms of doctrine, like the human body, must ever be undergoing
change for the progress of the life of the Church. No formal
embodiment of truth can ever fully express the real truth, and much
less can any finite form of truth give full expression to infinite
truth. As God, in His providence over His Church, develops the
deeper depths of His truth to angels and men, there arises from
time to time the necessity of change in the ecclesiastical forms of
truth. There is no stereotyped form of Christian doctrine but the
inspired Scriptures themselves, nor can the Church with safety
acknowledge any other. And if any denomination refuse to modify
her Confessions as the development of truth requires, God will
do it for her as in the Reformation, the rise of the Associated and
Relief Churches, the outcome of the Non-intrusionists, 1843, &c.
We are now prepared for the inquiry—-
What is the position of our standards in connection with the
question of marriage with the sister of a deceased wife, and our
reply is —lt is one that stands greatly in need of remodelling , as
we shall endeavour to show.
There were no laws in any of the nations, affecting marriage,
until the Mosaic legislation took the matter up. Nay, it is even
questioned by learned men whether the prohibitions in the
eighteenth chapter of Leviticus refer to marriage at all. It must
be known to well-read men that Sir William Jones, one of the
highest authorities on the customs of antiquity among heathen
nations, states as his belief that the prohibitions in the Mosaic code
have no reference to marriage relationships at all, but were in-
tended simply to prevent among the Jews the revolting practices
common among members of the same families in the surrounding
nations of heathenism, and because of which the land vomited out
the people. Individuals married in accoixiance with taste, con-
venience, and prejudice. But to proceed on the view of the Con-
fession.
Adam married bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh—the very
flesh and bone taken out of his own body. His sons married their
own full sisters—the younger of them may have married their
nieces. Abraham, the friend of God, married his own half-sister.


Abraham’s brother married his own niece. Jacob married two
sisters, cousins of his own by his mother’s side. Judah married
his own daughter-in-law, from the offspring of which marriage
sprang our Lord Himself. Am ram married his aunt, his father’s
sister.
And like marriages prevailed among the Gentiles. The
Athenians married half-sisters by the father’s side. The Spar-
tans married half-sisters by ths mother’s side. The Assyrians
an d_ Egyptians married full sisters. The Persians, Medians,
Indians, and Ethiopians allowed marriage with mothers,
daughters, and sisters. In the earlier periods of human history
there was no restriction on marriage with relations. And
marriage with near of kin seems to have been the common
practice. The only hindrance was, not from marrying relations,
but from going beyond them in marriage. There was a strong
aversion to marriage with strangers, women of other tribes and
creeds. Hence the call for Moses’ interference.
Moses took a broad, comprehensive view of things around him.
He saw the state of the Gentile world and of the Jewish nation ;
he felt the need there was of reformation, but he also knew that
any attempt at radical change would be hopeless. His object
was as far as possible to restrain and ameliorate. He, or rather
God in him, knew that the Israelites were incapable of being raised
into a high condition of spiritual religion or social morality, and
that any attempt to do so would only make matters worse with
them than they were. And the sequel of the Jewish history
shows the wisdom of the divine legislation by Moses. God, in His
requirements of men, does not overlook their circumstances, or
require of man what he is unable to perform.
The Jews came far short of even what Moses required of them.
If, then, a higher standard, such as perfection demanded, had
been given to them, what would have been the result 1 Their
backsliding would have been all the greater, their trangressions
the more numerous, their guilt the more heinous, their condition
the more disastrous, and their reform the more hopeless. Hence,
many things which were not commended, far less approved, were
tolerated among them on account of the hardness of their hearts.
Why, then, did God wink at certain things among the Gentiles,
and suffer others among the Jews 1 Because centuries were to inter-
vene ere on Calvary the only power which can melt the hardness
of the human heart and enable man to repent, would be created.
And this is the only power that can speak effectively to the heart.
Law may restrain, but it can never melt or change the human
heart. Hence, until this power was created, God did not call upon
“ all men everywhere to repent:’’ Moses, then, because of the hardness
of their hearts, suffered many things among the Jews which were
beneath the highest standard of morality and religion. And
marriage with the sister of a deceased wife was one of
them. Our standards, then, which demand compliance with the


highest condition of morality and religion, are and mast be at vari-
nace with Moses. This prepares us for our next inquiry,
Is our Confession correct or incorrect in its comprehension of
the law of Moses ? It is incorrect : the compilers of our Con-
fession fell into a serious error when they took for granted that
Moses legislated for a perfect condition of moral and religious life
among the Jews.
Our Confession is incorrect in its view of the 'purpose of the law
■of Moses. The compilers of the Confession, and those who
uphold it as it is, take for granted that Moses legislated for a per-
fect condition of social and religious life, whereas he legislated so
as to restrain, as far as circumstances permitted, the evils of a
semi-barbarian social condition and a foreshadovjing religious state.
This error of the compilers vitiates the whole teaching of the Con-
fession on the question of marriage. The purpose of Moses is not
so easily discerned as many commentators suppose.
Some imagine that he legislated on the question of marriage to
promote the physical vigour of the race, which is not unlikely.
Others suppose that conjugal love destroys natural affection,
and that Moses legislated for the defence of natural affection.
How they come to the opinion that conjugal love destroys natural
they do not tell us, and it is difficult to conceive. They
may with as much propriety tell us that the love existing after
marriage between husband and wife destroys the love they had
for one another before marriage. Will or can any man in the
•exercise of his common sense believe that the kve which man and
wife cherish to one another destroys the love which drew them
into the relation of husband and wife?
Others assert that it was to protect family purity.
Others, again, suppose that it was to widen the circle of human
Perhaps it was a purpose profounder than any or all of
these, embracing what is true in them, and a great deal more—
a purpose which, when understood, will be seen to be worthy of
•Hod. It was a purpose evidently foreshadowing better things to
•come ; for, viewed in itself, the legislation of Moses was, as declared
by Peter, a yoke which “ neither our fathers nor toe were able to
'■ heard ’
The Confession is incorrect in its interpretation of the law of
Moses, for it makes Moses teach that affinity is the same as
•consanguinity—in other words, that relationship in affinity is as
near in blood as relationship in consanguinity; and this is the
opinion clung to by tbe upholders of the Confession in its entirety.
But this is a doctrine which contradicts the common sense of
mankind, and could not have been the doctrine of Moses. It is
■a doctrine as absurd as, and requires to be placed side by side
with, the doctrines of Tranmbstantiation and Consuhstantiation—
doctrines which require man to believe in opposition to his
sense and rational dictates.


To tell a man that his wife’s sister is as near in blood to him as
his own sister, is to assert what reason revolts from ; and to
endeavour to persuade men that such is the teaching of God’s
Word, is only to do what is calculated to induce them to sneer at
revelation, and join the ranks of infidelity. When will men dis-
tinguish between superstition and simple belief in God’s Word?
This mode of interpreting the law of Moses, happily for the cause
of inspired Scripture, breaks down when applied to the eighteenth
chapter of Leviticus.
The inference of the Confession is equally incorrect, viz., that
the man who marries the sister of his deceased wife is guilty of
an incestuous deed. This is the opinion of those who hold to the
Confession in its integrity.
An inference which Moses guards against in the text:—“Neither
shall thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover her naked-
ness beside the other, in her life timer The marginal reading is
somewhat different, which is “one wife to another.” The textual
reading, however, is the correct one. It is the rendering which is
supported by all the ancient versions, and by the great majority
of learned and judicious interpreters of all countries and times.
Indeed, so obviously is the textual rendering the true one, that no
other would ever have been thought of, had it not been felt that
it opposes the Church doctrine.
If the marginal reading be the true rendering, then does Moses
contradict himself; for the marginal reading forbids a plurality of
wives—a thing that Moses everywhere allows. The prohibition,
of the text is the marrying of a sister of a wife in her lifetime.
The text neither enjoins nor forbids such a marriage after the
death of the wife. The most learned commentators are of opinion
that the words “ beside the other in her lifetime ” distinctly teach,
by implication, the lawfulness of such a marriage. And the-
ground of this prohibition seems not only to be the unseemliness,
of the thing itself, but also the jealousy and strife which such a
marriage caused in the family of Jacob.
The result of the Confession’s teaching is the most objectionable
of all; for, on the teaching of the Confession, there is no evading
the idea — that God is the Author of sin.
This is the conclusion to which intelligent individuals, reasoning
on the matter, cannot help coming, if they take the teaching of
the Confession in connection with the command contained in the
fifth and on to the sixteenth verse of the twenty-fifth chapter of
Deuteronomy.
In this passage we have not a simple permission, but a definite
command, that the brother of the deceased husband shall marry
his widow, and raise up seed unto his brother. And what is the
object for which this command (which, on the teaching of the
Confession, we cannot but regard as a command to do an immoral
deed, i.e., to commit a sin) is given? It is to perpetuate the name
of his brother!


Could not the brother, as the nearest heir of his deceased
brother, have assumed his name, and entered upon the inheritance-
of his property, and pensioned his sister-in-law, or widow of his
brother, during her lifetime! This simple arrangement, which is
so natural as to be almost a universal law of nations, would have
secui'ed the same end, and would have avoided the somewhat
strange marriage—a marriage which, if we are to look upon the
marriage of a sister of a deceased wife as an incestuous thing, then
must we regard this marriage as more incestuous still. Certainly,
if the Confession’s view of such marriages be correct, we may
infer that Moses—the wisest of legislators—would have adopted
this or some other method of meeting the difficulty.
There is no getting rid of the conclusion that if the marrying of
the sister of a deceased wife be an incestuous and sinful act, then
the marrying of the widow of a deceased brother by his next
brother is a more incestuous and sinful deed; for, if there be a
difference, the indelicacy is greater in the latter than in the
former, especially if it be the marrying of a deceased brother’s
widow, not by one, but by six brothers, as in the case referred to
our Lord by the Sadducees; for whatever objections there be to
the widower of a deceased wife marrying her sister, there is a far
greater objection to six brothers marrying the widow of their
elder deceased brother. And it is most noticeable that our Divine
Lord, in whom dwelt all wisdom—(who, when He said, “ Ye have
heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shaft
not commit adultery,” immediately added these words —“ But I
say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her
hath committed adultery with her already in his heart ”) —when
He decided on the case brought forward by these Sadducees, never
dropped a hint or breathed a word implying immorality or incest
in such marriages.
Are we, then, to be forced into the belief that Moses, or rather
God by Moses, to secure a trifle—nay, a nonenity (for in the case
referred to our Lord by the Sadducees it turned out to be such) —
went out of His way to command an incestuous deed, to enjoin
the commission of a gross sin! There was no principle in morals,
no law of religion , requiring one brother to marry the widow of
the other that had died childless. And if, as in the case referred
to by the Sadducees, the childlessness of the deceased brother was
traceable, not to him, but to his wife, there was no perpetuation of
his name, there was nothing but an incestuous connection and
sinful life secured by the command given in the twenty-fifth
chapter of Deuteronomy. Are we, then, to believe that God
would have commanded six—nay, it might have been ten, twelve,
or more—brothers to enter upon and to live incestuous lives with
one and the same woman for no object whatever. And yet such
is the absurdity to which a blind adherence to the tradition of
their fathers drives some.
Such a method of treating the Word of God does violence to


■our moral nature, shocks our religious convictions. And if we
are to view the matter as those who declare the marriage of a
lister of a deceased wife incestuous would have us, then there is
no escape from doing violence to our own religious convictions,
and of presenting the Word of God to others in such a manner as
will induce them to turn away from it with loathing and disgust.
Thanks be to God that in His great mercy He has preserved us
from such an awful calamity.
We have only to cast our prejudices away from us, rise superior
to the traditions of men, refuse to become idolaters of human
standards, and come to the study of the Scriptures “ as newborn
babes, desirous of the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow
thereby ,” and we will behold the glory of God in His word, such
divine majesty in the Scriptures, as will constrain us to acknow-
ledge their heavenly source, see them to be worthy of God,
adapted to our true nature and circumstances, the true source
■of morality, and the only means of religion.
Do we, then, advocate marriage with a deceased wife’s sister ?
Ho more than we do with the widow of a deceased brother. What
we desire is, to do all in our power to preserve the Scriptures from
perversion, and the Church from occupying a false position. The
entrance into marriage with the sister of a deceased wife is not
without risk, and those who contract such marriages are not likely
to be without “ trouble in the flesh.” If the encouraging of such
marriages does not endanger family purity, it is calculated to mar
the delicacy of the sweet and lovely intercourse of the household
circle. If it does not awaken in the calm and amiable breast of
the gentle wife the emotion of burning jealousy towards a lovely
sister, it is sure to interfere with the free and unfettered inter-
course of relations in life. Nor can the vague possibility of the
aunt proving a better stepmother than another woman compensate
in the family for the evils that may otherwise arise. If the aunt-
stepmother should have no children of her own, she is likely to
prove the better stepmother ; but if she become a mother herself,
then the chances are in the other direction.
Those who defend the doctrine of the Confession of Faith lay
great stress on the saying of John the Baptist in'his condemnation
of Herod for having his brother Philip’s wife, and on Paul’s
rebuke of the Corinthian Church for tolerating in their communion
•one guilty of gross sin. It is amazing how intelligent scholars
will allow themselves to be carried away by feelings which with-
draw them from the perception of the force of a word. Neither
the Baptist nor the Apostle speak of the unlawfulness of having
the vjidow, but of the sin of having the wife of another man, and
■of this sin being greatly aggravated by the fact that the women they
had in these connections were—one, the wife of a brother; the
other, of a father; and in this lies the difference. Indeed, the
cases of Herod and of the unnatural son, as read by the upholders
•of the Confession, have no bearing on the matter in dispute ; but,


read by their opponents, the case of Herod has a very direct
■and important bearing on the question, for Mark tells us that
■John said to Herod, “It is not lawful for thee to have thy
brother's wife." Now, as Herodias was the niece of her first
husband, according to their interpretation of the law of Moses,
John, as an upholder of the Levitical law, could not have recog-
nised her as the wife of Philip, for she was not, in their view of
the law of Moses, the lawful wife of her uncle. But John did
view her as the wife of Philip, and therefore John could not have
held their view of Moses’ law.
Let us look for a moment at consanguinity and affinity. We
have said that the two are not identical. Affinity is higher, more
■comprehensive, and diviner than consanguinity. This we may
be able to illustrate by a reference to voluntaryism as con-
trasted with establishments. While establishments are far inferior
to voluntaryism, they in a 1 ‘ carnal ” state of religion secure a far
greater amount of good than voluntaryism does. They prevent
the giving with grudging—doling out as if parting with drops of
heart-blood; they prevent an empty exchequer in the house of God ;
they prevent the jealousy, rivalry, and strife of small, struggling
congregations contending for existence, and which, instead of
•cherishing towards each other the spirit of brotherly love, exhibit
a spirit more from beneath than from above.
But, in a high state of grace, voluntaryism is by far the lovelier
■of the two. It acts not by the constraint of external law, but by
the impelling power of glowing love. It allows scope for the full
■expression of adoring gratitude —for enlightened compliance with
felt obligation ; it affords opportunity for strengthening the graces
•of the divine life in the soul—of displaying zeal for the glory of
Clod in promoting the highest well-being of fellaw-men ; it feeds,
■matures, and beautifies the inner life of the Church.
And so in a worldly, selfish state of society, consanguinity reigns
and secures the greatest amount of good, more than affinity can in
such a condition of human life. In such a state of society the old
proverb will hold true—“ Blood is thicker than water.” And in
this we perceive a manifestation of God’s wisdom and goodness.
As man descends in the scale of life, he enslaves himself the more
to law. This was understood by Moses. He looked abroad on
the heathen world, and saw it struggling in vain with the law of
its bondage, for by selfishness and idolatry it only sank deeper
and deeper into the depths of servitude to self and sin. He
felt for Israel, and imposed on it the restraints of a higher law
than that of self and sin, that he might retard it in its downward
■course. But in this he only put on the brake as tight as the
mechanism of the descending locomotion could bear, at the same
time giving to the Jew a glimpse of a higher and holier state, as
he foreshadowed “ better things to come."
In certain states of social life, marriage with the sister of the
deceased wife is the necessity of the bei'eaved father and husband.


He is left in such, abject poverty and helplessness that he is
obliged to call the sister of his departed wife to his own and the
assistance of his children. With his limited surroundings, and
in these circumstances, a speedy marriage is the least of the evils
that are likely to ensue.
The principle of affinity, however, secures for the social circle of
humanity a loftier, purer, and more blessed condition of life than
consanguinity does or can do. It inbreathes into the individual
life of man the diviner, brotherlier, and universal affection ; it en-
larges the sphere of human love, and ennobles the life of man. It
lifts him out of the selfish, the false, and superstitious, by intro-
ducing him into the true, the self-sacrificing, the God-like. And
just as Christianity advances, will the nations be raised into the
realisation of the higher conditions of affinity.
The duty of the Church is no t to intermeddle with the political
affairs of the State, or by a mistaken zeal for purity to attempt by
forms of discipline to coerce her members into the life of love.
By so doing she only attempts an impossibility, and secures an
opposite result. In such efforts she mistakes her mission, loses her
enviable opportunities of doing her Master’s work, enslaves her-
self in the trammels of superstition, and fails in the end of her
high calling of God. Her members are not to cherish the spirit
of thanking God that they are not like other men, each demanding
of his brother that he comply with his interpretation of inspired
truth, else he will anathematise, and refuse to hold brotherly inter-
course with him.
Such would be to act on a principle that would prevent union
in the Church of Christ, co-operation of brethren—a principle
which only divides and destroys. The disciples of Jesus are to
pursue the things which make for peace, the things wherewith
they edify one another. They are to forbear with one another in
love; to walk together, in so far as they are agreed, in the con-
fidence that by so doing God will bring them into oneness in the
things regarding which they differ.
By so doing the members of the Church will present to the
world such a spectacle of heavenly power, commanding majesty,
Christian love, as will draw its attention to the power of its re-
generation created for its salvation by the Incarnate Lord of Glory,
yielding to its enmity on the cross of Calvary—the power which
alone can awaken in the heart of man supreme love to God, fellow-
love to his brother; draw men out of their selfishness into the true
knowledge of human well-being- ; and thus glorify Christ, save
souls, secure a lovely and blissful condition of human society on
earth.
If, on the other hand, ecclesiastics forget what manner of spirit
they ought to be of, cling to their individual or party shibboleths,
wrangle about hair-splittings, denounce and anathematise one-
another, hear not the voice of God speaking to them in the events,
of His providence in connection with His Church, then will they


display the worst form, and darkest spirit of superstition, and do
the work, not of Christ, but of Belial.
The times are ominous for the Church. Portentous clouds,
heavily charged with dangerous and threatening fire, are gathering
in thickening gloom over her horizon ; and hence the need, on the
part of the Church, of the wisdom of the serpent and the harmless
ness of the dove. Ecclesiastics should be more than ordinarily
■cautious of not placing the Church in a false position before the
view of the world; for never were the masses of the people passing
from within her pale as they are now doing ; never were the
enemies of Christianity so panoplied, arrayed, united, energetic,
and mustered in such scientific battle array, as they at present
are. But little do they perceive that the firebrands which they
are so actively and thickly scattering over the ranks of an ignorant
and erroneous civilisation, to destroy the Church of Christ, are the
very elements which, while they will scorch the Church, will
•consume themselves—destroy, as adversaries, the worldly millions
of a nominal Christianity.
What, however, the Church has most to dread is, not the
attacks of her infidel or semi-infidel foes, but the mistaken
Christianity of her weak, though well-meaning, friends. This has
been the means of her greatest weakness, in all ages—the incubus
which clogs her strength, retards her progress, and sullies her
■beauty—an incubus which requires an almost convulsive effort to
throw off, but of which she must rid herself, ere she will appear in
the glory of her Lord, and become the joy of the whole earth.
Christianity in danger ! Yes, when the Self-existent God and
all finite being have perished in an utter annihilation ! She is
founded on a rock, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against
her. She is too dear to the Father, Son, and Spirit; she has cost
the Godhead too precious blood, and her sons too much suffering,
to be neglected by the One or forsaken by the others. Her trials,
her groans, her self-sacrifices, are the means of her existence, her
purification, and strength. She was born in pangs ; she has been
•cradled in persecutions; she grows, thrives, triumphs in self-
sacrifice. She has already triumphed over the most subtle, artful,
powerful of enemies; she has overcome the most formidable
oppositions possible to her ; she has passed through the severest
trials that can assail her; and she has proved herself superior to
■every opposition.
And the ordeal which now awaits her is one that she is more
than equal to. The ordeal of a scientific scorching is what she
longs for. Such will bring her forth from the encumbrances of
superstition, all radiant in the glorious robes of her scientific
light. Do the admirers of science, who are hurling their frag-
ments of discovery against the truths of Scripture, know, or will
they allow themselves to perceive, that Christianity is the most
thing in existence—the all-comprehensive science of
•being—the science which embraces within her the science


of matter, mind, and spirit—the science of all finite existence—-
the science of the Eternal Council 1 She is the profound science-
of Godhead; and the noblest employment that science can devote
itself to, is the study of the Gospel of the Son of God.
The duty of a Church, when a difference of opinion arises,
within her pale, regarding either the scripturalness of her
standards or the exact nature of their teaching, is to make the
matter in dispute one of forbearance, until clearer light is given
to her—light which will enable her to understand more fully
the teaching of revelation, and bring her standards into unity
with Scripture doctrine.
This, at all times, is the clear and well-defined duty of a
Church in such circumstances, and especially so when there are
grave misgivings if there be one of her ministers or congregations
who literally conform to her standards or directories. The words
of St, Augustine should have weight for us at this hour—“ If any
thing cannot be true by certain and clear places of the Scriptures,
let man’s presumption stay itself, not leaning to either part.” Or
those of Bishop Jeremy Taylor—-“It were good, if standing in
the measure of the Divine law, we should lay a snare for no man’s,
feet by putting fetters upon his liberty without just cause, but
not without great, great danger.”
We close with the well-chosen words of a great man and illus-
trious scholar:—“lf I have erred, it is in good company. I have
the countenance of Luther and Melancthon on a similar point; of
Chalmers, Whately, Thirlwall, Wesley, Bunting, Eobinson, and
many more divines, with all the great names in Hebrew philology
and commentary; men who, released from the solemn frippery,,
tedious casuistry, and perplexing despotism of the Canon Law,
form their own independent conclusions as to the meaning of the
sacred records.”—(John Eadie, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Theology
to the U. P. Church, in exposition of Leviticus xviii. 18.)
May God, in His great mercy, grant to the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria wisdom equal to her times. Amen.
MASON, FIRTH, AND M'CUTCHSOS, PRINTERS, MBLBOUKtt


APPENDIX.
While correcting the proofs of the foregoing pages, Dr. Cameron’s pamphlet,
reached us. We have read it carefully, but have only been confirmed in
our own views by the Doctor’s ponderous production. The Doctor fails to see
that his ‘‘familiar principle of interpretation ” has no bearing on the pas-
sage in dispute. If the wife after her death was to remain in the family,,
and sustain the same relations to her husband, as she did before her death
— i.e., be liable to be influenced by the presence and doings of her sister-
wife—there would then be some pertinence in his citing such passages
as “ Remember your Creator,” &c.—for an individual remains and sus-
tains the same relation to God in his manhood as in his youth, and God to-
him. The Doctor is as fallacious in the second part of his argument, for in it
he appears to be uninformed regarding the fact that married sisters with
children, under the same roof, are more jealous of attentions paid to the one
and her children over the other and hers than women who were strangers
before their marriage, and that by their jealousies and strifes they produce
a far greater amount of suffering than other women in like circumstance..
Of this fact Moses was fully aware, as he shews us in what he records, of
the heart-burnings in Jacob’s family. While he speaks of the jealousy and
strife of the two sisters, he gives not the slightest hint of any approach to
such on the part of their handmaids. If the jealousy of married sisters
having children, and living under the same roof, be much greater and more
bitter than of other women in like circumstances, then we see the wisdom
of Moses, while permitting polygamy, forbidding that sisters should be
brought into such a relation. In this view of the case we see the meaning
of “in her lifetime ,” or, as the Doctor would have it,. “ all her days," a
distinction without a difference. “ The abomination ”of which the Doctor
makes so much could be nothing but the consummation of the marriage
which, in the case of sisters, would be such an abomination as to justify
Moses forbidding it. The Doctor’s argument is, after all, but a superficial
gloss, instead of a learned interpretation of the text. An unsophisticated
mind will see the text to be a simple prohibition of marriage with the
sister of a wife during her lifetime, for it is only during the lifetime
of a wife that the taking of her sister to wife could vex her, hence
the restriction is during her lifetime, for it is only then that the
uncovering of her nakedness could vex her. We have other difficulties-
in connection with Dr. Cameron’s pamphlet, passing by the adulation so
cordially given to his '•'•facile princeps,” the sarcasm of “ a cartload of the
opinions of ‘ authorities ’ ostentatiously paraded on the other side,” so un-
called for. We cannot overlook the more serious defects into which his
homage to the traditions of the Fathers has drawn an acute and cultivated in-
tellect ; and this we do out of no disrespect of a “ brother beloved,” whom we
highly esteem, but in the name of truth : e.g., Dr. Cameron holds that the
marriage law as laid down.in Lev. xviii. is neither municipal nor Judaic,
but moral, “the Divine law of nature,” intended for all nations and times,,
and yet at the same time he admits that the eighteenth verse of the same
chapter, and which is a portion of the same law, countenances polygamy—
ergo, polygamy is lawful for all times and for all nations. Can Dr. Cameron
lift us out of this difficulty ? Further, in his exegesis of the words “to un-
cover her nakedness,” he says not a single instance can be adduced in
which the phrase is used to indicate lawful intercourse. If this exegesis be
correct, then the prohibitions contained in the eighteenth chapter of
Leviticus have no reference to marriage at all. What, then, comes of the
marriage law ?—theDivinelawcf nature for all times and all people! Or apply
it to the verse in hand, and it upsets the very law of that verse -which says
“thou shaft not take a wife to her sister.” Again, the Doctor, in his
“ Exegesis,” asserts that the eighteenth verse means, “ Thou shalt not take


:a wife to vex her. by the sin and shame of an incestuous husband all the
■days of her life.’’ According to this “ Exegesis,” it is not the second wife
that is the cause of the vexation, but the husband himself. This
■“ Exegesis” does violence to the grammar of the verse. Besides, it
somewhat difficult to see how, in every supposible case, the first sistt
should see the sin and shame of an incestuous husband, and be vexed
thereby, while the second sister should always be so widely different in her
mental constitution that she should see no sin and shame in it, and conse-
quently suffer no vexation; and, further, the sin and shame of taking a
second sister, while the first is living, cannot necessarily be either a sin or
a shame when the first is dead. Once more, the Doctor declares that when
a man unites himself to a woman in marriage, he accepts her relations to
her blood kindred in the forbidden degrees, which is to put marriage with
them out of the question. According to this view of the case, marriage
between first cousins is incestuous.
Dr. Cameron’s review of the literature of the controversy is as unsatisfac-
tory. Although the Doctor can afford to throw overboard a cartload of
authorities, he may ponder the following note, from what is commonly
known as the Speaker's Commentary , which may be regarded as an
.altogether impartial view of the matter in dispute :
“ 1. The rule, as it here stands, would seem to bear no other meaning
than that a man is not to form a connection with his wife’s sister while his
wife is alive. It appears to follow that the law permitted marriage with
the sister of a deceased wife. A limitation being expressly laid down in the
■words ‘beside the other in her lifetime,’ it may be inferred that when the
limitation is removed, the prohibition loses its force, and permission is
implied.
*• The testimony of the Rabbinical Jews in the Targums, the Mishna, and
their later writings; that of the Hellenistic Jews in the Septuagint and Philo
\'de Sj>pg. Ligg. hi. 6); that of the early and mediaeval church in the old
Italic; the Vulgate ; with the other early versions of the Old Testament, and
in every reference to the text in the Fathers and Schoolmen, are unanimous
in supporting, or in not in any way opposing, the common rendering of the
passage. This interpretation indeed appears to have passed unchallenged
from the third century before Christ to the middle of the sixteenth century
after Christ.”
We regret to be compelled to add, “ how doctors differ.” Dr. Cairns (page
10) says “ Opposite that verse in our old Bibles there is a marginal render-
ing which, upon good grounds, is considered to be a more faithful reading
olAhe original than the translation given in the text; instead of a wife to
her sister, the marginal is one wife to another. This preserves the con-
sistency of the law, and is, we doubt not, the true meaning.” Dr. Cameron
(page 21) says :—“lf the marginal rendering were the correct one, the
words would of course have nothing to do with marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister, but would contain simply a prohibition of polygamy. The
rendering of the text, however, is to be preferred ; indeed, I have the con
viction based on grammatical and other grounds that it is the only render-
ing admissible.” How absurd the idea of compelling us to one mode of
thinking, when the men who assume to be our guides so differ on the very
threshold of the matter ! They would do well to consider the advice of
Gamaliel.
Mason, Firth, and 31‘Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders Lane Wed, Mellcurne.
