

The Dramatic Story of Adam Lindsay Gordon
GOLDEN
WATTLE TIME
Crawford Vaughan




GOLDEN WATTLE
TIME
CRAWFORD VAUGHAN
SYDNEY:
FRANK JOHNSON
350 GEORGE STREET
PHONE: BW 6463


Copyright, 1942.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Pinnacle Press,
431 B Kent Street, Sydney.
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney, for transmission by post as a book.


CHAPTER I.
A HORSE IS STOLEN
No game was evefi yet worth a rap
For a rational man to play,
Into which no accident, no mishap,
Gould possibly find its way.
—ADAM LINDSAY GORDON .
THE billowing mists, so common to the West of England,
swept like white tides through the streets of Worcester
on that June night in the year 1858 when the famous racing
mare Bay Iseult was taken from the Old Plough Inn stables. She
was taken under the very noses of the Sheriffs officers.
Had the Man in the Moon been really observant, the nicker-
ing moonlight might have revealed to him two lads, slinking
into the shadows, across the road from the inn, just as the
town clock struck the midnight hour. In the taller figure, how-
ever, he would scarcely have recognised the 18-year-old son ot
Captain Adam Durnford Gordon, master of Oriental languages
at the Cheltenham Military College. Nor to so casual an
observer would the smaller lad have seemed to have borne
resemblance to Master Charlie Walker, heir to Squire Walker,
of Eldon Hall, The Cotswolds. On their outward, ragged,
appearance, indeed, the two ragged youths might have been
charged with vagrancy. . . .
Young Gordon watched the light flickering feebly m an
upper window of the hostelry. ‘‘Wait till they douse the glim,
Charlie,” he whispered. . ,
“Better give it up, Adam, before we go too far. You know
we’re risking our necks. Don’t you know a man can be hanged
for horse-stealing.” Charlie was studying law, and liked to air
his knowledge.
“Horse-stealing? Who’s horse-stealing? Didn’t we pay
Black Tom Oliver for half a share in the mare? Can a man
steal his own horse?” Young Gordon fired these questions con-
temptuously, but in a muffled voice.
“Ah’ That was so, but seizure by the Crown of the mare
for debt puts a different complexion on ownership. The King
can do no wrong, you know.” Charlie laid down thelaw with
all the aplomb of a learned counsel. And then he added, as a
clinching argument: “And which half did we pay foi, tell me
that!”


“Which half?” replied Adam scornfully. “Why, the half I
lead out, and if the other half follows, am Ito blame?” A low
chuckle evidenced his satisfaction at his own reply. “Anyway,
Black Tom must be taught to respect other people’s rights,” he
added.
Suddenly the light in the upper window went out. Adam
drew a deep breath of relief. “All clear now, Charlie; follow
me to the archway, and wait there till I come out. Keep your
eyes skinned, and your ears open, for the watch—they’re about
due.” And with finger raised, and a whispered “Hist!” he led
the way across the road.
Charlie watched him disappear down the dark alley. Reach-
ing the stable door, the young adventurer fumbled for a moment
with the key he had wheedled out of one of the inn maids,
Charlie had remarked at the time that Adam could wheedle the
keys, of the Golden Gate itself, out of an archangel. To the
turn of the lock, the stable door swung open on its rusty hinges
with a squeak. A better alarm signal could scarcely have been
devised. However, there was no turning back now. Carefully
closing the door, which once more sent out its warning creak
through the midnight stillness, he glided stealthily towards the
stall where he knew Iseult was feeding. He could hear the mare
nosing for the oats in the bin. The other three horses, which
he knew were in the stable, could be heard snorting, and
rattling their chains, further along.
Iseult heard him as he reached her side, and would have
whinnied had he not been quick enough to place his hand over
her nose in time, and stroke her silky mane. But the sound
of lumbering footsteps caught his ear. It was the ostler,
roused, no doubt, by that confounded hinge. The man’s heavy
clogs clattered over the cobbled floor. A light appeared, swing-
ing in an arc, and there, looming behind it, was the dark body
of the Sheriff’s man, lurching on unsteady feet. A voice could
be heard muttering thickly.
Evidently the good ale which Adam had seen was supplied
to the stableman through the medium of the maid of the inn,
was having its effect. The fellow, who carried a hay fork in
one hand, and a lantern in the other, passed the stall and
squinted drunkenly at the door, evidently failing to realise that
a shut door may yet be unlocked. His back was turned to Adam,
who slipped out of the stall, dodging behind a post near the
wall.
“Hell’s bitters, if that don’t beat me,” said the ostler. “I
swear I ’erd th’ ’inge squeak.” At that moment a rat, disturbed
by Adam’s movements, ran from under his feet, scampering past
the light.
“Ah! ’Tis you, yer varmint,” shouted the ostler, vainly
trying to pin the rodent with his fork. And then, his suspicions
.not fully lulled, he added, “But a rat don’t squeak like a ’inge.”


The light, swinging around slowly, fell on Adam’s foot obtruding
from the post, where the timber was worn thin. The sound of
the man’s indrawn breath warned the lad that he was dis-
covered. Looking around the post, he saw the searcher’s atti-
tude stiffen, while the grip on his improvised weapon tightened.
Adam thought to escape into the shadows. He made a move.
“Stop! Stop there! Curse yer ’ide, or I’ll pin yer through
th’ gizzards, I will.”
There was no alternative but to confess defeat. The lad
stepped out from his hiding-place, his head hanging discon-
solately, eyes fixed on the ground.
“Ah!” said the ostler. “So, ’tis only a bit ev a boy after
all. Coom ter dope th’ mare, eh?” He took a step towards
the boy. “Well, oop yer go to th’ Sheriff in th’ mornin’, and
th’ night yer spend in th’ watchhouse, yer sneakin’ young
varmint.”
Edging ever closer, Adam watched for his chance. The
man put his lantern on the floor, keeping a watchful eye on the
intruder. He evidently wanted to have the free use of both
hands if necessary. As the man stooped Adam swung a
straight right for the jaw. The uneven floor, however, threw
him slightly off his balance, and in the uncertain light he caught
his unsuspecting adversary in the neck instead, swinging him
around. The fellow almost fell, but firmly retaining hold of
the hayfork, he pivoted on his feet with surprising agility,
flinging with added impetus the pronged weapon straight at the
face of his attacker.
Short-sighted as the boy was, it was his pugilistic training,
rather than actual observation, that saved him. For, as Jem
Edwards had taught him to do, he bent his head to the side
after delivering the blow. As it was, the right prong pierced
his hat and carried it spinning into the hay, where the fork
transfixed the post, quivering like a javelin that had found its
mark.
The young unprofessional bruiser was not one to give his
adversary breathing time. He who had laid low Jem Edwards,
the champion lightweight of England, and had stood up to the
redoubtable Tom Sayers, was not one to be caught again by the
unskilled antics of a stableman. He drove with all his power
for the solar plexus. He might as well have struck a whale,
for his fist hit hardy blubber it seemed. There was a grunt,
but the tough creature came back with flailing arms.
This time Adam made no mistake. Lightly he balanced
himself on the balls of his feet, side-stepped, and his swinging
left to the upturned chin was beautifully timed. It made con-
tact with a sound that echoed through the stables. The man
went down like a felled ox. But his collapse sent the lighted
lantern spinning amongst the loose hay. The crash gave the
naked flame its opportunity. In a moment the place was ablaze.


To untie Iseult, snatch the saddle and bridle from the rail,
and drag the mare to the door was an exhibition in economy of
action. Flinging open the door with a crash he shouted for
Charlie. Young Walker, taken by surprise, was rather “slow
in the uptake.”
“Hurry, for heaven’s sake,” cried Adam. And as Charlie
came running he added, “Saddle and bridle her, and wait for
me.” Alarmed at the reflection of the flaming straw, the less
venturesome lad shouted, “Don’t go in there —you’ll be burned
alive.” But the reckless young Abednego had already dis-
appeared into the fiery furnace.
It was one thing to put the ostler to sleep, but quite another
to leave him helpless before the flames. And there were the
other horses to release. Racing through what looked like a
wall of fire the boy seized the unconscious man, dragging him,
none too gently perhaps, into the lane. Once more the journey
through smoke and flame had to be faced. Releasing all the
horses he threw a blanket over the thinnest part of the fire,
stamping on it for the sake of the animals, and then drove them
to the open air. Swiftly they galloped away, their iron hoofs
beating on the cobbled highway.
His flesh bitten by the heat, his hair singed, and with the
smoke nearly asphyxiating him, the heir of the Gordons emerged
through this ordeal by fire to find the neighbourhood aroused.
The faithful Charlie stood by his post holding the now bridled
and saddled mare. He would no more have moved, till he
received orders, than did the Roman soldier at Pompeii when
Vesuvius was in eruption.
To spring into the saddle and drag Charlie after him, was
swift work that suited, Adam’s sense of adventure. But the
crowd was already gathering at the entrance to the alley, and
in a moment or two, would spill down the lane to the fire. Lights
were tearing holes, it seemed, into the black curtain of the
night. A voice called from an open window at the inn; “The
stables afire.” The windows seemed to go up everywhere.
“Thieves!” someone cried. And then the cry was taken up.
“Stop thief! Stop thief!” with further calls for “The Watch!
The Watch!” The babel of cries was enough to waken the
town, if not the dead —at least, so the boys thought.
They were not idle. With Charlie securely placed behind
him, Adam drove his spurless heels into Iseult’s sides. The
mare made a bound, and fairly raced for the archway. Not until
horse and riders were nearly upon them did the crowd at the
entrance scatter like a covey of scared partridges, their fright
giving them no chance to scan the faces of the riders as they
flashed by.
“After them! Stop thief!” became a belated chorus. But
soon the sound of galloping horses after them set young Charlie’s
heart galloping too. The mists proved their good friend that


night, for the white rolling waves of fog enabled them to double
back on their tracks, and give their pursuers the slip.
They rode to the coppice of elms where they had tethered
their horsek and heard their pursuers go scattering by; for
Adam had no intention of spoiling Iseult’s chances for the Cup
by riding the mare, double-banked, the 26 miles to Cheltenham.
As it was, dawn was breaking when they reached Eldon Manor,
where the racer was safely hidden in a shelter.
Over breakfast next morning Charlie Walker staked his
legal future on the assertion that nothing short of transporta-
tion to the colonies faced them both. All through the ride he
had imagined the Bow Street runners to be on their heels. And
since Adam was determined to ride Iseult in the Cheltenham
Cup on the following day, the fate of convicts, in the long run,
or as Charlie put it, in the short run, was for them inevitable.
Gloomily, he ate a substantial breakfast. Yet never for a
moment would this loyal comrade have dreamed of leaving his
friend to the fate he was inviting for both. To stand by a
comrade was the sporting thing to do.
Adam, on the other hand, was bubbling over with exhilara-
tion. He declared he felt like champagne that has just been
uncorked from the bottle that has been gathering dust and
-cobwebs in the cellar during. untold years. His spirits always
rose in ratio to the proximity and intensity of danger. When
Charlie drew the picture of them both in the foul hold of a
convict ship in irons of course Adam retorted with stories
of his cattle-reiving ancestors. Like the Gordons of old, he
had matched his wits in a foray against those in authority, and
the thrilling denouement had yet to come. He would ride the
marc to victory on the morrow. “Ruat caelum,” he added
portentously.
His friend tried to persuade him to lie low till the Cup
event called him to Knoverton Course. But Adam would have
none of it. _
“Come what may, I am going home this morning, Bonnie
Charlie Boy,” he announced as he drank his last cup of coffee.
“But, Adam, that’s just where they’ll be looking for you.”
Charlie’s concern was evident in his tone.
“Not they, my lad,” answered the older and the more
experienced youth. “I doubt if they even suspect us yet. And
anyway home’s the safest place for me. If you want to be a
successful Toby of the Road, or the nead of a Highland clan—it’s
much the same profession—always do the obvious. That s the
last thing Sheriff’s men expect you to do. Tactics, my lad;
tactics. And now keep that mare safely hidden till to-morrow—
the day of days—to-morrow.” And with a cheery wave of the
hand he set out for the Cheltenham home.


CHAPTER 11.
THE GORDON HOME
9 1 HIE sitting-room in the Gordon home at Cheltenham that
• mornin o was its usual condition of disarray. Nobody
ln establishment was ever punctual, not even the servants,,
and everything about the house bore the appearance of either
3emg out of place, or of being only accidentally in its right
setting. Yet the room was not unattractive, and the lack of
anything approaching institutional precision, somehow gave it
the air of homeliness and intimacy which was the delight of
most callers. On the polished oaken floor skins of tiger, leopard,,
>eai, and of beautifully marked deer, were spread with careless,
jut unpremeditated artistry. These were the spoil of Captain
Gordons big game'hunts in India and Burma.
The room was spacious, lending itself to the display of the
numerous family portraits and pictures, which had some pre-
tensions to taste. The furniture, mostly Jacobean, fitted in with
the surroundings, and a fine old grandfather clock, chiming away
the hours in a corner near the stairway, recalled the family
pomps of yesterday. The bookcases on either side of the room
were tightly packed, mainly with classics—the special collection
o± Captain Gordon. It was amongst these, that his son liked to
browse, when the mood dictated.
The broad mantelpiece in oak at the end of the room was
encumbered with rare vases, ivory figures, including white and
black elephant pieces, mainly it would seem from Indian bazaars.
Masses of English flowers about the room, and on the tables,
with a giant Chinese vase filled with roses and lilac, before the
open hearth, lent lovely colour to the surroundings. It was a
room with character, and grew upon one.
The grandfather’s clock had chimed the hour of eleven
before the maid came in, with a white cloth in her hands,
preparatory to the morning tea call, which was set for this
time, 01 thereabouts. She set about removing the ornaments
and books from the table under the side window, hummino- a
tune meanwhile.
A manservant presently entered—he was nearly breathless.
‘•Well, Simkins, leavin’ me ter do everythin’, as usual?”
, . "Growlin’ suits you, Sally, makes you almost pretty. * I bin
elpm’ th’ captain in the stable with th’ sick ’orse, I’d ’ave yer
know.” George picked up a book from the table and placed itr
with deliberation back in the bookshelf.
Sally sniffed contemptuously. “I ’ope yer washed yer ’ands
and wiped yer boots, after messin’ round the stables.” she sain!
pertly.
‘‘Course I did —and combed me ’air with the currv comb ,fr
He laughed derisively.
“The captain’s most upset over Master Adam’s specadillos,’ 9 *


said Sally with a knowing air.
“Specadillos ?” He laughed. “That’s a nop ’un on me. Ain't
it a kind ev hant-heater from South Hamerica, or somewheres ?
he asked, as he set a chair in order.
Sally stopped dusting for a moment, and laughed. “Oh,
’ear ’im. A ant-eater? Ho! Ho! That’s rich—that is. I’m
surprised at yer ignerance, George Simkins. Why, silly! It
means his goin’s on—mixing with stable-boys, and prize-fighters,
and runnin’ inter debt, and sich like.’'
“Ah, well, all them mad Gordons did worse ’un that, afore
’im.” George’s look took in the portraits on the walls. “See
that ole boy in ruffles up there?” He pointed to a large heavily-
framed painting. “I ’erd the captain tellin’ Squire Walker that
’e was the founder of th’ Gay Gordons. An’ ’e got ’ee’s Aber-
deenshire lands from King Edward th’ First, ’e said, for desert-
ing Robert Bruce and his spider, and ’elping th’ Hinglish ter wipe
out th’ Scots.”
“Ah! That’s wat comes ev makin’ a pet of a spider,” com-
mented Sally, laying the cloth, and smoothing it out to emphasise
her deductions from this review of Scottish history. “And,
any way,” she added irrelevantly, “I can’t stand them bagpipes.
George, however, was not to be interrupted by such
persiflage. “And thaf,” went on the improvised waiter, halting in
his belated effort to bring up an easy chair, and pointing out the
painting inscribed “Lady Henrietta Gordon.” “She’s the gayest
of ’em all, and grandmother to both th’ Captain an’ ee’s lady—
seein’ they’re cousins.”
“But she wasn’t mad like Lord George of the Riots, and
Lord William that run off with Lady Sarah Lennox—and ’er a
married woman.” Sally paused and sniffed. “That’s some
scandal if yer like. No wonder they put Lord William’s
portrait out in th’ hall. He ain’t respectable.”
“Well some of ’em got be’eaded for ’elpin’ Bonny Prince
Charlie so th’ Captain said,” George interposed, anxious to air
his knowledge before Sally.
“An lots more of ’em ought ter been,” said Sally con-
temptuously, “and so will you be, George, if yer drop that vase,
clumsy!” She took another vase of flowers off the mantelpiece
and put it on the table, at the same time directing George to
straighten that tiger’s tail and unroll the bear’s skin. Added
Sally. “ ’Tis the Mistress that’s at th’ bottom of all the talk
about Master Adam.”
“A woman allers ’as been at th’ bottom of all man’s troubles ”
commented George, with a side-glance at the maid.
She rose to the bait.
“Well, I like that!” she exclaimed. “You’ll be blamm
Florence Nightingale next for the Rooshan war in the Crimear.”
But sarcasm was lost on George, who was determined to


10 GOLDEN WATTLE TIME
offer his comment on a subject dear to his heart.
“Hall I say is she nags th’ Captain like that bad-tempered
mare that bites th’ ’and that feeds ’er.”
Sally looked anxiously at the clock, and held up her hand
to listen for any approaching footsteps. Satisfied that the family
was to be late as usual, she looked at George shrewdly, “Wat I
say is, wen cousins marry, there’s bound ter be trouble. It
ain’t natural. Them Scotch is just bare-legged savages, any-
ways, wat with their kilts, and their bagpipes, not to mention,
cattle-lifting, and sticking nasty knives into their next-door
neighbours. But wen it comes to Gordon cousins makin’ a
match of it—three times in sucksession—it don’t come to no
good, I tell yer.”
“My, Sally, ’ow learned you be! Where dud you come by all
that?”
“By noticin’ wat’s goin’ on around me, stoopid. Any ways,,
I’m glad you’re no cousin of mine,” she added significantly.
George dropped his duster. “Sally, you mean?”
“Nothing, silly.”
He moved across to her, and tried to seal a compact, but
Sally dodged adroitly around the table. Not to be denied, he
turned to meet her, and sweeping her into his arms kissed her
full on her rosy lips, as she intended he should do.
’Ow dare yer, imperdent,” she cried. Then, with warning
hand raised, she whispered anxiously; “Quick, bring in the
mornin’ tea. They’re cornin’.”
The man assumed what dignity he could, and made for the
kitchen.
Mrs. Gordoif came down the stairs on the arm of her
daughter, with all the air of a grand dame. Her ungainly
height, for she was more than six feet tall, was accentuated
by her slimness, and by what her husband gallantly called her
swan-like neck. Her figure somehow reminded one of a human
note of interrogation. A perennial grievance with life had
stamped discontent upon her rather small face, which so seldom
smiled that it was difficult to imagine that the indignity of a
laugh had ever been permitted to disturb its static dolefulness.
At the moment Inez, her 16-year-old daughter, was bearing
the burden of her complaints. “Fate has robbed me of my for-
tune, I say, and now my own son would squander the little saved
from the wreckage,” said this strange mother petulantly.
The reference to the lost fortune, as Inez was only too well
aware, referred to the great West Indian plantations which, as
a child, her mother had inherited from her father, a former
Governor of Berbice. Despite the compensation paid by the
British Government to dispossessed West Indian planters the
abolition of chattel slavery under the British flag had shattered
the economic system of which slavery had been an integral part
That system was doomed, anyhow. Compensation merely


softened the blow. The executors had been VoVon but
something like £20,000 out of the wreckage for Mrs. Gordon, but
this was as a mole on the left ankle compared with the income
she had enjoyed as a schoolgirl, and upon which her habits an
expectations had been moulded. Tordoo
Her marriage with her cousin, Captain Durnf ord Cordon,
of the Bengal Cavalry, had been purely a marriage de con-
venance. Neither party to the contract was under any ihusion
that love was included in the marriage bond. indeed
was the bride to discover m her soldier husband, a
gentleman, chivalrous, kindly, and infinitely patient,
his rare cultural gifts secured for him, m thej ebb
family fortunes, an honoured place m the Cheltenham Mihta y
Academy for Boys as a teacher of Oriental laa | a ages.
His wife ignoring his qualities, felt herself free to fly into
temper, so that, at times when anything
handv she hurled it at the unoffending head ot the father
of her children. But the Colonel Newcombe of the household
met such physical assaults as though they were merely the
indulgences Mrs. Gordon’s grievance was
directed against her only son. As mother and daughter walked
S e tow g aldfthe teateble, she was fastening the .absent
Adam as with whips and “Stablemen and
prize-Shterrire nice company for a descendant of the Dukes
of Gordon and the Earls of Aberdeen. Gordons
“But, mother, he’s only a boy, and as to some of the Gordons
of the past the least said the soonest mended.
Inez had read closely the family records.
“Inez! I forbid you to say such things. You mus t
that young ladies should never be flippant. You re as bad
vnnr brother He forgets that his mother once owned her
thousands of slaves, before the weakly sentimental Government,
flstenfng to that little hunchback, Wilberforce robbed us of our
property. Anyhow, lam determined not to be brought to the
noor-house bv the extravagances o± my son.
George came bustling in with a tray held high. He set che
* Sf +Vipir saucers held a chair in place for the Mistress
to be seated* while Sally did the same for Inez. All of this was
done with the characteristic appearance of efficiency that had
won for the wily George the reputation of an excellent house
S6rV "There, Mother darling, pour out the tea/’ said Inez. Turn-
ing to the man, she went on: “Simkins, call Captain Gordon and
366 made his exit briskly in order
to hurry his master in from the stables. o
“The men late as usual,” remarked Mrs. Gordon. Here


is the Captain home on holidays, but he gives all his time to
horses. And Adam can lie in bed till all hours, while that maid
ot mine wakes me up at dawn.”
“But, mother dear, you named the hour of the clock when
you should be called.”
“The clock? Am Itobe a slave of the clock? Only fools
and servants are that. Pass the muffins, child. You like your
tea weak. She passed the cup to Inez.
“Adam would agree with you, mother dear. He told me
yesterday, that time’s not to be counted by ticks of the clock,
but by the things that happen,” remarked the daughter, with a
bth at ier mother ‘ She was rather fond of quoting her
Yes, and he proves it by staying out half the night boxing
with that man Edwards, or talking to that steeplechase rider
instead of fitting himself to carry out the traditions
FTu f °f Ti he is the heir - And when fie does
get to bed he spends half the night reading Byron or young 1 Mr
Browning I even found a book by that impious fellow fwin?
burne on Ins bed—at least the maid did.”
“But, mother, I thought Byron was a Gordon.”
VV edo not claim him. He is no credit to the family— wild
and loose liver that he was, like most poets—Shelley and that
ploughman Burns for another.”
“Even Shakespeare isn’t above suspicion, is he*?” asked
Inez slyly.
“A child like you discussing Shakespeare. What’s the world
coming to? Pass the scones, child.”
\\ as Lord William Gordon who ran off with Lady Sarah
Lennox any better than Lord Byron?” asked Inez, looking up
with innocent eyes. 1
“Inez! It’s most improper to mention such things Pm
astounded at your levity.”
There was a sound of dogs running, and two setters came
bounding into the room. They had learned, however, to respect
the mistress of the household—at a distance. But they fawned
on Inez. *
Presently they were followed by Captain Gordon He
carried a rose in his hand.
“I wish you would keep those dogs off, Durnford. They’re
not allowed in the house, as you know. But it seems mv wishes
are never respected in my own home.”
.“I’m so sorry, my dear. Out Rover, out Ranger ”he said
turning to the dogs. Obediently they scampered* off. The
captain came up to his wife, raised the rose to his lips, and
gallantly pinned it in her bodice.
She accepted this attention nonchalantly. “Do sit down
and have your tea, Durnford. It will be cold by now I expect ”
Her husband took the tea, sipped it, looked at her and


said: “Lovely, my dear.” Whether the compliment was meant
for the beverage or his wife was left to their imagination.
“Where’s Adam?” he asked Simkins, who came in with some
more hot scones and hot water. <(TJ
“Master Adam will be down presently, sir, he said. He
has just come in.” , ,
“Come in? Where’s he been?” asked the captain, surprise
in his tone. , , , .. , 0 . T ,
“He stayed out at Eldon Lodge last night, Sir, I under-
stand.” Then he caught a look of dismay from Inez, and Sally
surreptitiously trod on his tender corn. “I understand they
pressed him to stay because of the rain last night, he impro-
vised. Taking up the jug he hurriedly made his exit.
Mrs. Gordon was not to be appeased by such special pleading.
“Adam’s a terrible trial, Durnford. He takes too much
* after you—a reckless rider, and with an obsession for horse-
flesh. I’m being worried into an early grave by a son who
spends his time and my money in vulgar pursuits like racing
and prize-fighting. I see no alternative but to send him away
to India or Australia.”
“Oh, mother,” broke in Inez, “don’t talk of sending him
away. He’s so young after all. I’m far older at 16 than he
is at 18. I just couldn’t bear to be separated from him. And
he has such good points—loves the classics and even writes
poetry himself —he’s read some to me. Isn tit wonderful?
Captain Gordon shook his head. “Adam’s all right at
heart my dear, but as for the classics —fiddlesticks —quotes a
tag of Horace or Virgil rather badly—the merest smattering.
Classics?” he laughed. “No! No! His mind runs on Eohippus—
the horse. He’s near-sighted, but a regular Centaur come to
life—half horse, half man—l was like that myself—before 1
married,” he added with an involuntary doleful intonation.
The subject of the discussion arrived in time to hear his
father’s comments. , . . ..
“Centaur? Not bad, sir. I’ll put that mmy next verse if
I don’t forget it. A jolly old Centaur, eh ?” He laughed lightly.
“Good-morning, mater,” he added perfunctorily kissing her oir
the forehead.
“Oh Adam, at last. You’re dreadfully late, you know.
Inez ring for some more hot water.” Mrs. Gordon involuntarily
felt herself disarmed in Adam’s presence.
“Hot water, for me?” retorted the scapegrace son. “I’m
always getting into hot water, you know.” His smile lit up
his whole face. With most women that smile was to prove
irresistible. “Yes, cream and muffin, sister mine,” he added.
“ “So you stayed at Eldon Manor last night?” remarked his
father.
“Yes! Yes! How did you know?”
“Simkins told us,” interposed Inez quickly. “He said they-


pressed you to stay on account of the rain.”
“Yes, on account of the heavy rain,” replied Adam, with a
grateful look at his sister.
“But it didn’t rain,” said Captain Gordon. ‘Not here. Yet
you say it rained heavily over there, just a few miles away.
Strange
“Rained cats and dogs,” replied Adam, unabashed, in fact,
judging by the howling wind, more dogs than cats, I should say,
sir.”
The only sign of a smile on the face of the father was in
the twinkle of his eyes. The captain was thoroughly enjoying
his son’s persiflage.
“Were you and young Charlie Walker discussing anything
especially edifying, may I ask?”
“Yes, sir, we like Omar’s lines.”
“Omar? Ah how very interesting. I was lecturing about
Omar and Persian verse only yesterday.”
“Oh, I mean Omar—the grey gelding Stevens is riding in
the Grand National, sir.”
For once the captain had been trapped. He proceeded to
turn the retort to account. “My boy,” he said solemnly, setting
his empty cup on the table, “I like a good horse as well as any
man. I love to put it to the fences and feel the lift of its
haunches under me, as the sailor feels the lift of the waves. You
know what I mean. But that’s not all life, my boy. When will
you settle down seriously?” Then looking rather slyly around
to see if his wife were still discussing household affairs he
whispered, with a twinkle in his eye, “Do you think Omar has a
chance?” , . , ,
“Put your shirt on him,” said his unabashed son. “Though
I never bet, sir, as you know.” ....
“That’s right, my boy, your mother wouldn t like it it you
did,” said his father. .
Hearing her own authority mentioned, Mrs. Gordon could
not refrain from pursuing her grievances. “Yes, Adam, your
father and I simply will not be forced to stint and scrape to pay
your moneylenders and racehorse bills. I can scarcely get a
penny out of your father for decent clothes.”
“Oh, come, my dear! Hardly as bad as that. After all
you have your own income from your own safely invested for-
tune And we manage to get you away to the Riviera every
winter But Adam,” the captain continued turning towards his
son, “definitely don’t look to me to pay for any more of your
escapades.”
His mother took up the tale. “Yes, Adam, this must stop
or it will leave no alternative but to put you in the Indian Service
or send you to Australia.”
“Oh, father, Adam only needs guiding,” put in Inez looking
very distressed at the turn of the conversation.


“Guiding?” interrupted Adam indignantly, “I’m no plough
horse to be guided along the furrows. I must be free to jump
my own fences.” ... ,
“Oh, Adam, you might be a fine poet if you liked—a Byron
or a Shelley, perhaps. Who knows?” Inez had sublime faith
in this wonderful brother of hers.
But Captain Gordon would have none of the muse lor his
reckless offspring. Turning to his daughter: ‘ You re romanc-
ing, child,” he said, “like myself he is not inappropriately named
Adam.” He chuckled, “Adam is my first name as it is my
son’s. There’s a good deal of the old Adam in all us Gordons,
and your brother’s got a double dose from both sides of the
family. . ...
“The trouble about you, my boy,” he went on, looking
towards his son quizzically, “is that there’s nothing staple about
you—except,” he added, with an apologetic laugh, ‘you re all
stable.” „ ...
Adam flushed, but came back with his defence. “The stable
has its good points, sir. The horse is man s best friend, they
say. Anyway, if I can jump my fences as well as Omar or
Iseult, I’ll be satisfied.”
Mrs. Gordon moved restlessly.
“Oh, I’m sick of all this talk of horses and fisticuffs, she
exclaimed petulantly, “your father sent you to Woolwich to
become a soldier and to fight for your Queen and country, but
you wasted your time and came home disgraced.”
Adam bristled. “I saw no future in the Army. They say
there’ll be no more wars. (My best friend there, Charlie
Gordon, says he’s going to China, because there’s no where else
to fight.) I don’t want to be a soldier, and just strut around
in a red coat like a popinjay.”
“It’s no use, Durnford,” interposed Mrs. Gordon, rising.
“I’m so weary of it all. Gordons won’t be led, and can’t be
driven. Come, take me into the garden for an airing. You
might find me a ripe peach on the wall.’ Rising to her great
height she leaned upon the proffered arm of her patient husband,
and together they slowly made their way into the sunshine.
They were' apparently in earnest discussion in low tones that
could not be overheard, but the captain seemed to be mildly
protesting against his lady’s point of view.
Inez turning to her brother as soon as the way was clear,
and putting her hand affectionately on his arm said tenderly,
“Don’t be troubled, Adam dear. It will all come aright.”
Adam laughed sardonically, “What’s wrong I’d like to
know? But wait till they hear what happened last night.” He
looked at her curious intentness.
“Last night? Oh, what did happen, Adam?” Inez knowing
her brother’s capacity to do the wrong thing at the wrong time
looked distressed.


“Only that Charlie) Walker and I took Bay Iseult out of
the Old Plough stable at Worcester and I knocked the ostler out
with a straight left—fair on the chin.” Adam grinned.
“Oh!” Inez turned pale. “The ostler, was he hurt?”
“Knocked stone cold, but he dropped the lantern and the
hay in the stables took fire. Oh, don’t worry girl,” he added as
his sister gave a startled exclamation, “the real fun started
when I dragged him to safety—and I saved the other horses all
right. Then the crowd got busy after us.” He laughed
uproariously.
“Adam, this is terribly serious. Don’t you understand?”
“What if a bit of hay went up in smoke. I hope it wasn’t
worse/’ he added a little anxiously. “We couldn’t wait to see—
but I did take the mare from under the very noses of the
Sheriff’s men without them spotting who I really was.” There
was a look of pride in his eye.
“Adam! Adam! Oh! How could you?” She looked so
distressed that Adam put his arm around her. “There, girl,
don’t you worry. It’ll all blow over all right when I ride Iseult
first past the post to-morrow.” He smiled. But the fear
deepened in her eyes.
“You are so reckless—you will be arrested. Do, do, send
back the horse now—let it loose and they’ll never know—oh, for
my sake, Adam, for all our sakes.”
“What and lose the Knoverton Steeple when I know I can
beat the field—there I must go, girl, I’ll tell you more later.”
“But won’t you understand—mother will be horrified, and
father won’t be able to hold out against her if this happens—
can’t you see?”
“Hold out against what?” He looked mystified.
“Against sending you out to Australia,” she replied *
earnestly, “Someone has convinced mother, that Australia’s
the only place for you—and you know once she gets a plan in
her head, there’s no shifting her.”
“Australia? Send me to Australia?” He queried scorn-
fully. “There have been whispers of this before. Well, I’ll
never go, even though they do say its streets are paved with
gold. The governor may get annoyed, but I’m sure he’d never
send his only son and heir out to the wilds of the colonies.”
But Inez was not so easily convinced. “I’m afraid, I’m
afraid,” she said, with a wild look in her eyes. “Oh, I don’t
want to lose you. But mother seems set on your leaving Eng-
land. She doesn’t want to be troubled with bringing up anyone
so irresponsible as you, she says.” Inez spoke bitterly.
“Leave England? Never. What?” he went on indignantly,
“give up hunting, racing, and abandon Charlie, my friends, you—
.and others? Never, I say.”
“Others? Jane, you mean?”


The flush in his face answered her. “Jane —oh, Jane’s a
good friend of mine. She always talks straight to me—tells
me my faults—does me a world of good. And there’s Essle-
mont. I’m the heir—and it’s strictly entailed. I’ll keep a pack
of my own there —run my own stud—some day.”
“Your future home, Adam. All that is at stake, and I
know Jane would warn you as I do. Stop all this now before
it’s too late,”
“Too late—it’s too late to turn back now, anyway, and that’s
not my way Inez.” He shook his head. “No, I’d feel like a
worm if I let the horse go, when Charlie and I have half paid
for her. When I win to-morrow they’ll forget my escapades,
as they call them. There, Inez, it’s settled. To-morrow I ride
Iseult.” He stooped and kissed her. “There, don’t worry,” he
added, and strode towards the door.
She watched him go with anxious eyes, her heart weighted
down by a. sense of impending Fate.
CHAPTER HI.
“HOW WE BEAT THE FAVOURITE”
THE morning broke clear, though not cloudless. The fleecy
clouds only deepened the blue of the sky. Mists floated
slowly across the Cotswolds, like bridal veils trailing in the wind.
Occasionally, the sun broke through, lighting up with a golden
glow, the green pastures, and late spring foliage of the fox
covers and coppices. Lower down in the bottoms, where cattle
browsed, the brilliant verdure deepened by the thatched and
lichen grey roofs of the farmhomes and barns, gave such a
richness of colour as only England can offer.
Here Nature was brushed and combed and had her face
washed, as it seemed, every morning. That had gone on for
centuries, and though war might ravage the earth elsewhere
and kingdoms be overthrown, though new and ever more terrible
methods of carnage might wreck mighty cities and even con-
tinents, these homes of the western counties would remain,
symbols of the enduring fibre and strength of rural England.
The crowd, pouring along the roads and lanes that led to
the Knoverton Course winning post, drank in little of the beauty
of hill, valley, and field, that was theirs for the taking, and
so poor that they could not share this wealth on equal
terms with the best of them. Laughing, chattering, singing,
and shouting, they were on pleasure bent for the day, with the
off-chance of backing a winner or two. Remarkable indeed was
their knowledge of weights, ages, and performances of the
horses, especially of those running in the Cheltenham Steeple,
which, for the first, and, as events turned out, for the last time
was to be settled on the difficult Knoverton Course.


In the dark shadow, under one of the oaks in the saddlingg
paddock, Charlie Walker and Adam were rubbing down the littlee
mare, for which the officers of the law were vigilantly
all over the county. Adam had reasoned that the last placee
they would be looking for the missing Iseult would be in thee
famous Cheltenham Steeplechase, in sight of the thousands whoo
knew her so well, because they had backed her so often.
“That’s just a brilliant idea, Adam, but what about it whcna
the exposure comes? Did you work that out?” Charlie hadl
taken up the currycomb and was about to apply it to the restive 2
racer, when Adam, without ceremony, snatched it from him.
“You idiot, Charlie,” he almost shouted, “a currycomb on ai
sensitive thoroughbred just before a race. Get that soft rag:
and rub her gently—you’re got to humour her, like you do all
females, my boy.”
“Look, Charlie, listen to me. We’ll saddle her now; then
you lead her out with her rug on. Take her on the course, and
then, at the last minute, I’ll rush across, you whip off the rug,
and I’ll be at the starting post before the} Sheriff’s pimps so
much as get their eye, much less their hands, on her.”
Charlie nodded. “You’re Crusoe, my lad. I’m only your
man Friday.” He laughed as he lifted the saddle from the tree,
and tested the girths, while Adam tested the stirrup lengths.
The hill, which sloped down to the winning post on the
Knoverton field, happily commanded a fine view of the greater
part of the cross-country course, over which the big race of
the day was to be run. There is something in a steeplechase
that appeals almost fundamentally to the English sporting
mind. Flat racing is a mere trial of stamina, fleetness, wind,
and, other things being right, the jockey’s, rather than animal,
intelligence plays the leading part.
Gordon rather despised fiat-racing as tame and safe, just
as he scorned the sporting spirit that had to be buttressed by
big money betting, or the rider who rode for the stakes, and not
for the glory of winning. He always rode solely for the joy of
the riding, the thrill of rising at the fences and stone walls,
landing his horse safely on cushioned feet, exercising judgment,
caution, daring, and meeting the challenges of the field with the
will to win. And in a steeple the horse must be almost as
intelligent as the boy on his back. It was no mere case of
reflex action.
Adam was thinking in this way as he ran across to where
Charlie was holding Iseult out near the winning post. To strip
the rug from those silky shoulders, grab the reins from his good
comrade’s hands, and spring rather than mount in the saddle
was but the work of a moment.
“Good luck” was Charlie’s parting comment.
“It’ll be your win as much as mine, Charlie, old man,” Adam
flung back at him as the impatient Iseult gavotted gracefully


before the crowd. There were surprised shouts, “It’s Iseult.
It’s the stolen mare,” Adam heard it as he passed down between
the rails. Someone shouted, “It’s young Gordon. He’s found
Iseult.” The excitement grew, for the public had believed the
mare could not possibly be found in time to run, and as she
was fancied in many quarters, inclusion was likely to lengthen
the odds against the favourite, The Clown.
Adam waved cheerily to the crowd as he passed, cantering
up towards the starting place, Iseult being the last to show her
paces. He did not see the startled group close to the judge’s
box, nor hear the exclamations of wonder and dismay which his
appearance evoked from the members of the Gordon party.
With the Captain and Mrs. Gordon were Inez with Jane Bridges,
and Jane’s father and sister, Sally. An old comrade-in-arms,
Major George Barnett, was pointing out the horses to the party.
“There’s my horse—Sir Peter—and a good chance he’d have
if the going was heavy.” He indicated a big powerful roan.
But since there had been no rain to speak of for the past week
the Major was not backing Sir Peter that day.
“Yes, there’s some company here as you say George,”
responded the Captain, who was as good a judge of horses, as
he assuredly was of boys. “It’s a pity Iseult isn’t here —seized
by the Sheriff for debt, I understand.”
“Yes, but did you hear that the mare was stolen out of the
Old Plough stable by some thieves, the ostler nearly killed, and
the stable set afire?”
“Good heavens. Did they catch ’em? Such miscreants
ought to be given the lash, and be transported into the bargain.
A nice state England’s coming to when even the Sheriff’s
authority is flouted like that.”
Mrs. Gordon was talking to Jane about the noisy clamour
made by the bookmakers shouting their odds, and asked
whether it couldn’t be stopped. She caught the words, “Sheriff’s
authority.”
“The Sheriff’s such a charming man, Durnford. You must
ask him over. How dreadful anyone should steal his horse.”
“What, Sir Gifford Sterling?” Captain Gordon laughed.
“I don’t suppose he’s heard a word of it. It’s his men who are
doing the worrying. Some of them will be sure to be here,
to-day, with runners from Bow Street, to see if they can pick
up the rogues.”
Mr. Bridges intervened. “I like the cut of White Surrey
going by now,” he said. “He’s good for the distance, and a safe
jumper I’m told.”
“Jane, dear/’ said Mrs. Gordon turning from her husband.
“These steeplechases are so terribly risky. You remember
young Lord Havisham was killed last year, and he heir to Lord
Suffolk’s estates. Such a pity, my dear.”
“Is it more dangerous than fox hunting, and we wouldn’t


be the nobility if we gave up that would we?” asked Jane, whoo
kept her own hunters, and rode splendidly. “I know most off
the gentlemen riders here,” she added. And then with thee
greatest surprise in her voice, “Oh, I didn’t know Adam waas
riding to-day.”
“Adam?” Mrs. Gordon was strangely moved. “Of coursee
he’s not riding. Whatever makes you think that?”
“Why, he’s riding past now. See, there he goes. And whatt
a lovely horse.”
“It’s not a horse—it’s a mare,” remarked her meticulously/
exact parent. “And if I’m not mistaken, that is the missing’’
Iseult. My word, it is then.”
“The devil it is,” Captain Gordon almost shouted in his;
excitement and concern. Knowing Adam he feared the worst.
“How queer!” remarked the Major. “Why the boy must
have tracked the thieves to their lair. I expect he beat them up
badly, handed ’em over to the Sheriff, and, being part-owner,,
as he told me himself, is now going to win on the mare. ’Scuse
me, I’m going over to put a fiver on her, for he’s a great boy
over the fences—is Adam.”
He rattled this off almost breathlessly, and was gone before
the Captain could recover from his surprise.
“He mustn’t ride. He mustn’t ride—he may be killed like
young Lord Havisham,” cried Mrs. Gordon. “I know he’ll be
killed,” she added, apparently choking back tears. “Order him
back, Dumford! Order him back! At once, do you hear?”
She wiped her eyes, and blew her nose—a signal that the danger
of inundation was passing,
“It’s too late, my dear, they’re gone to the starting post,”
responded Captain Gordon, in so troubled voice that Jane looked
at him sharply, sensing that there was something more in this
adventure of Adam’s than met the eye.
She turned, however, to her hostess. “Don’t be troubled,
Mrs. Gordon, he’s a splendid rider, though he is near-sighted.
He takes the fences and stone walls and the brooks by instinct.
You see, I’ve ridden alongside him at many meets of the Wool-
ford pack. There’s nothing to worry about, I assure you.”
Mrs. Gordon was not one to relinquish her grievances so'
lightly. Upon grievances, indeed, she seemed to lavish the
affection she gave so sparingly to her offspring. “He might,
spare my feelings,” she said petulantly. “Now I shall be in fear
and trembling till the race is over. He’s spoilt my day, the
selfish boy.”
Major Barnett came bustling up at this moment. He was
full of the news. “The bookies had the surprise of their lives
when they saw Iseult with Adam up,” he said. “The odds
shortened right after I had put a tenner on. I increased my
wager, you see—a fiver between you and Bridges, old chap, if
you both want it.”


“Certainly,” responded Jane's father with alacrity. “Jane
thinks the world of Adam—as a rider,” he added, turning to
Mrs. Gordon. “You do, too, don’t you, Jane?”
“Yes, of course,” said Jane, rather faintly.
The flush of colour that the watching Inez saw lighting up
Jane’s dark beauty offered convincing evidence of sleeping fires.
“But Tom Oliver owns Iseult,” said Captain Gordon, looking
puzzled. “I don’t think he’d give Adam the mount without
consulting me. I wonder if the young Jackanapes has taken—
ah, here comes Black Tom himself, and he looks in a devil of a
rage. He’s coming to speak to us, I fancy.”
“That man—a horse trainer—how dare he? It would be
like his impertinence after luring Adam to ride his wretched
horse.”
Tom Oliver, though evidently very angry, respectfully took
off his hat to the ladies. He was a nuggety man of broad
shoulders, uncommonly deep chested, and much taller than one
at first would have supposed. His fine brown eyes and firm,
but not ungenerous mouth were likely to win anyone’s con-
fidence. Black Tom Oliver had, the reputation of being what
he looked—a man who would fight for his rights, but loved
sport, and would stand by his friends.
Planting himself squarely on his feet, with his hat in his
right hand, and his left fist clenched, his lips tight closed, he
fixed his eyes upon those of Captain Gordon. The silence was
as impressive as he meant it to be.
“Capt. Gordon, sir!” he said at last. (He spoke in the
broad west country dialect.) “I wud speak to you, sir, about
your son.” He looked pointedly at the others, who were being
entertained by Major Barnett’s comments on the start.
“These are wonderful glasses, Miss Jane,” that sportsman
was saying. “Take them—Look, you will see the horses in the
far distance—something’s kicking up at the post.”
Jane politely declined, and the major—the claims of polite-
ness having been met—clapped the lenses to his eyes again
“They’re off,” he shouted, and the cry came from a thousand
throats, “They’re off.”
The Capt. had meantime drawn Tom Oliver a little away
from the group. “Mr. Oliver, sir, what do you mean. My boy!
What has he done, except ride your mare without my knowledge,
sir.”
“Capt. Gordon, sir, I warn you this is real serious. He's in
deep water, sir.”
The voice of the Major excitedly proclaimed: “They're all
bunched, making for the first hedge.”
Capt. Gordon, his attention was now party distracted by
the murmurs of the crowd, and the Major’s stentorian voice:
“Bonney Brae seems to be leading. I thought I caught just a
flash of yellow.”


“You might as well know it,” persisted the trainer too the
father of the culprit, “You’ll have to know it soon. Last
night your son, with young Charlie Walker we believe bbroke
inter the Old Plough stables at Worcester and forrcbly
seized me mare, Bay Iseult, after knocking oot th Shemffs
man. And now ’e ’as the impert’nence, sir, to.ride er ml dus
race, sir.” The anger in his face showed in the dark flussh ot
the cheeks, and the fierce light in the eyes. .
“They’re over all over,” shouted the Major. The clarmoui
that broke from the crowd showed they realised that, toco.
“Broke into the Inn Stables?” exclaimed the Captaim in-
credulously. “Attacked an officer of the law ? Stole a hoDrse.
Adam do this? Impossible, sir. Impossible.
Mrs. Gordon had come up unseen. “How dare you say , such
things of my son,” she said indignantly. A Gordon stceal a
horse? Of course you lie, my man.” She looked down mpon
Black Tom with the utmost contempt.
“Me? ]i e me?” Tom’s indignation overcame his sense
of respect for the Gordons. “And as to stealin a orse, or other
cattle, if it comes to that, it’s what many a Gordon did afore
lm ' Captain Gordon did Black Tom the justice to accept his
word about the Gordon traditions without challenge. But he,
point-blank, refused to believe Adam had stolen a horse
“Mermaid’s leading the field—she s leading, shouted the
excited Major, forcing the glasses on the unwilling Inez, who
was straining her ears to overhear the startling conversation
between her father and Oliver. Quickly she passed the binocu-
lars to Jane, and they quickly reverted to the single-track
minded racing authority. . . _ ~
“There must be some mistake, repeated Gordon.
“Some misunderstanding. It’s not like Adam. ,
“Mistake, sir? Misunderstanding? Not a bit o it, said
Oliver fiercely, losing his temper at the remembrance of how
he had been outwitted by a lad. “A warrant s oot for is arres ,
sir! There’s no mistake aboot that.”
Mrs. Gordon had for a moment been reduced to unusual
silence by the startling character of the information. This,
however, was too much for her. “Warrant. Arrest. My son.
How dare you talk of arresting my son! I’ll have you remember
who he is.” She seemed to think that was the last word.
“That won’t save ’im. Many a Gordon’s gone to the block
fer less Ma’am.”
“Oh . . .” she breathed heavily, in horrified dismay.
The conversation had been interpolated with running com-
ments on the race by the vociferous Major. His thin voice rose
almost to a falsetto note. “My horse is running free He is
leaving the field behind—he is out by himself. What do you
think about that?—Ah, the water-jump—He’s over—No by


Gad—He’s down ...” a groan broke from his lips. “Down in
the brook. Thank heaven he can swim,” he added with a
chuckle, recovering his spirits.
“I say, Oliver, this matter can be settled,” the Captain’s
voice betrayed his anxiety.
“Settled?” said Oliver. “I tell you the matter’s out of my
’ands. The warrant’s out, and the Sheriff’s men ’ull be waitin'
for ’im when ’e weighs in.” His tone was a trifle apologetic.
Despite his anger, he could not help keeping one eye on the great-
ness of the race.
“This man Oliver is becoming impertinent, Durnford,”
interposed Mrs. Gordon in her most scathing tone, unable, as
she was, to adjust her feelings to the facts of the situation.
With the shouts of the crowd, the anxiety to find a way
out of the impasse before the horses flashed past the post, the
need to keep Mrs. Gordon’s rising temper within restraints, and
at the same time to conciliate this obstinate horse-trainer, the
unhappy Captain Gordon was being tried almost beyond
endurance.
When Barnett shouted gleefully: “The favourite’s down,'
he’s down—no, he only kissed the turf for luck,” the Professor
of Oriental Languages said something in Persian that might
have excited the envy of Omar himself.
“What did you say?” Mrs. Gordon drew herself up to her
full Height of Gft. lin., looking at Black Tom, she almost hissed
it, “You horse-trainer. My son be arrested? Before all these
people. Captain Gordon, will you not save your wife from this
disgrace ?”
Again the Major took the field. “The Clown and Iseult
leading the field—racing for the last jump. O-ver! Gad, what
a jumper The Clown is—just flew.”
Shouts of “The Clown!” “Iseult!” from the crowd rose like
prayers to high Olympus.
“I’ll say this, Capt’n, yer boy can ride—’e took that last
jump like a bird. ’E’s creeping up; ’e’s creeping up,” shouted
Tom Oliver excitedly. “ ’E’s a great lad, ’e is then. I’ll see
what I can do, Captain Gordon. Come Charlie Walker, quick.
Can’t yer see, the lad wants our help?” And seizing young
Walker by the arm he pushed his way through the excited
crowd like an irresistible icebreaker with a small tug in tow.
No one minded. The yells “Iseult,” “The Clown” would have
drowned any protest, anyway.
Meanwhile the gallant Major was beside himself with excite-
ment. Jane and Inez were not bad seconds, and even Bridges
came sufficiently out of his customary dignity to throw his tall
hat up on the air where it spun over the heads of the excited
crowd till it was trampled back into its original rabbitskin.
The horses flashed by, the yelling throng proclaiming each
the winner—as if their shouts could affect the judge’s decision.


Iseult, ridden with magnificent judgment, appeared to pip the
favourite on the post. But only the judge knew.
“Bridges, come with me quick, if you will. My dear, con-
tinued Captain Gordon to his wife, “you wait here with Jane
and Inez. Why, where has Sally gone? Oh, with young
Walker.” „ „
They reached the judge’s box in time to see Iseult pro-
claimed the winner. So Adam had won after all. A flood of
pride submerged the Captain’s censure of his son. He loved
the game. Had he not ridden in India and pulled off the Rajah s
Cup? After all, the boy’s escapade was understandable. But
what a jam it was.
Looking around, he saw three men who looked as 11 they
might be Sheriff’s men. Making his way towards them,
he was quickly by their side and had asked the most impressive
member of the trio, “Are you, by the way, officers of the law?
“And, what if we are?” answered the man curtly enough.
“I am Captain Gordon.”
“Oh.” There was respect, and amazement, in the look the
three gave.
“I’ll come rignt to the point. You are here to arrest my
boy.” .
“Sorry, sir, that’s our orders, and orders must be carried
out.”
“Of course,” responded the Captain in his best* manner. “All
I suggest is, that the law can be served by making the arrest
after he has weighed in, and led the horse away from the crowd.
You see, it will save my wife the indignity of seeing her son
arrested before a throng of people, and on a charge that cannot
legally be sustained.”
“Sorry, sir, can’t be done, though I’d like to oblige you, sir.
My boy is under you at Cheltenham Academy, sir.” The man
looked as though he were sorry.
The Captain acknowledged the gesture. “I submit the
suggestion not only for my sake, but for yours. You see, to
arrest the winner and the popular winner of the Cheltenham
Steeple before the crowd may well create trouble. I’ve seen a
riot for less. You don’t want that?” He saw the impression
he had made, &nd followed it up. “He can’t get away from
you, if he wanted to,” he added. “If you must do it, do it
quietly, and suit everybody. That’s common sense.”
They looked at each other. One man who seemed quicker
in perception than the others, turned to his leader and said,
“ ’E’s right, Charlie.”
“Orders is orders,” was the reluctant response.
“That’s so,” responded Adam’s father, flushing unwittingly,
“but the manner of his arrest is left to your wise discretion.
Isn’t that so,” he responded with a catching smile.
The man took off his hat, and scratched his head. “That’s


so,” he responded. “All right, Captain Gordon, happy to oblige
you.” The Captain breathed freely.
Quite innocent of what the father had done to save his son
and his wife the humiliation of an arrest in sight of the crowd,
Black Tom and Charlie Walker, with Sally Bridges in attendance,
hurried down the track and met the victorious Adam as he at
last turned the too-willing Iseult back to receive the plaudits oi
the crowd.
“Adam,” said Black Tom, seizing the horse’s reins and
leading her, as the trainer of a winner is entitled to do. “Look
you ’ere, lad, you played a trick on me, but forgit that now. The
Sheriff’s men are yonder, waiting to put the darbies on you.”
“They daren’t do it—the crowd won’t let ’em,” replied Adam
sharply. “Tom, you’re a good sport. I was mad that you
wouldn’t let me ride the mare. I knew she’d win.”
“Yes, lad, and I knew, too, but I was saving her for Tewkes-
bury, when the Sheriff seized her over a disputed account.”
“Well, let them try to take me, I’ll give ’em what I gave
the ostler.” , „. ,
“Don’t be a fool, Adam—you can’t fight the law. Listen
to me, quick. After you weigh in, they’ll be waitin’ at the
crate—now I’ll fix it with Dick Neville to take your cap, and
walk on the off-side o’ the mare. Those Sheriff’s officers ’ll be
watching that cap thinking ’tis you. You lead out The Clown
wearin’ Dick’s cap. See?
“But I just beat Dick. He rode The Clown,” said the
astonished Adam. “He’s a good sport, but you can’t expect him
to do that.”
“I’ve done a lot for Dick, and Dick will do the same for me,”
said Black Tom confidently. He went straight to the rider of
The Clown.
Duly the winning jockey was weighed in, and Iseult’s name
run up as the winner. Readily Adam entered into the spirit
of the newi adventure, wondering why the officers of the law
allowed him to go so far without arrest. Black Tom, though, of
course, ignorant of the Captain’s innocent connivance at the
escape, suggested to the Sheriff’s men exactly the same course
of procedure as Adam’s father had done, and for the same
obvious reason. Naturally that confirmed their decision.
After all, it was Tom who had originally laid the complaint,
and the Sheriff’s men naturally believed him to be on the track
of the miscreant like themselves. Thus when Tom pointed out
Iseult and Gordon’s cap bobbing up on the off-side, they unques-
tionably took him at his word.
“See, ’e’s coming now,” he said. ’E’s walkin’ on t’other side
of the mare.” The crowd began to cheer as Iseult approached
tbe gate.
Dick Neville leading the winner passed through, only his
cap visible to the watching minions of the law.


“Foll’er him,” said Black Tom fiercely.
The men took up the trail with the step of authority. Adam
passed out behind them. To slip the reins to Charlie and make
for the tree where the roan was tethered was accomplished none
too soon.
One of the Sheriff’s men happened to look back. The tell-
tale colours of Adam’s jacket for the moment surprised the
fellow. Then he shouted, “We’ve been fooled. There he is.
After ’im.”
By that time Adam had thrown himself across the roan,
and was digging- his heels into the flanks of the astonished, and
outraged, gelding. He looked back to see his pursuers already
mounted, but the traffic of riders, buggies, carts, waggons,
sulkies, and hand-carts, loaded with the debris of a racing day,
to say nothing of pedestrians, not all sober, seriously impeded
their progress.
Adam laughed, and, taking the back road to Eldon Hall, was
soon lost to his pursuers.
The men whirled their mounts in circles, not knowing where
their quarry had flown.
“The Tewkesbury Road,” shouted Charlie Walker, and had
the satisfaction of seeing them raise the dust in thick clouds,
as they widened the gap separating them from his good comrade!
CHAPTER IV.
EXILED TO AUSTRALIA
ON the morning following the disgraceful proceedings at
Worcester the sun shone as if nothing untoward had
happened.
The sky, peeped with blue eyes from between fleecy, but
tearless, clouds, as the two lads strode through the woods that
sheltered Eldon Manor from unprivileged eyes. The birds
greeted the malefactors with a chorus of welcome, and a cock
pheasant in all his new season’s glory proudly strutted
across their path, as if it had been donned especially in their
honour. All nature seemed to be on the side of these modem
Robin Hoods who, like the gallant outlaws of Sherwood Forest,
found themselves at loggerheads with the Sheriff.
They realised of course that Bow Street runners might
even now be on their trail. But the sense of impending danger
sent a thrill of delight through the very marrow of Adam’s
bones, so he said. It appealed to the Gordon tradition. His
ancestors had lived by the chase, even when it involved the
lifting of a neighbour’s cattle, or raids across the English
border. Then some of his Jacobite forbears with Bonnie Prince
Charlie had played fox and hounds with the English soldiery.
“If only we were in the Highlands, Charlie,” he exclaimed


buoyantly, ‘Td call the whole of the Gordons out, and wi skip!
o’ pipe and claymores in our hands we’d rouse the clans o
Scotland against the King’s men.” „ V
“And be hanged for it, like your ancestor the Marquis
Huntley,” was Charlie Walker’s matter-of-fact comment
“He wasn’t hanged,” declared Adam indignantly. He was
respectably beheaded.” . . „
They skirted around the edge of a field, with an injunction
to keep their “eyes skinned.”
“All I know is” continued Charlie lugubriously, that here
we are being chased like a couple of foxes with the J«>™ds in
full cry, and they are sure to run us to earth before day is
done. Indeed,” he added, “we’re deliberately walking right into
the AHain laughed. “Don’t you see how clever that is. The
one way to put hounds off the trail is to run to meet them. They
wouldn’t believe it could be true. In fighting, Charlie, you
never do the expected until you have to.” He walked a few
paces in silence, thinking over a new idea that had suddenly
come to him. . , ~
"Wou see, Charlie,” he said picking up a stone and throwing.
it at a rook that had started cawing despondently out on a dead
limb, “they, can do nothing to me. Think of it! The son of
the highly respected Master of Oriental Languages charged with
horse-stealing like a common malefactor. He turns the other
cheek by laying a counter charge against the bheritt tor
illegally seizing half a horse —the property of the defendants-
to wit, Adam Lindsay Gordon and Charles Walker, gentlemen at
large. He claims the rights of Magna Charta, and the case
goes to the Privy Council. Meantime the mare is held in
Chancery until she dies of old age, when a case for compen-
sation is moved against the Crown. Beadle v Jack Cade Cases
Vol. 34. . _
' Even Charlie could not refrain from paroxysms of laughter,
but as a student of the law he felt it incumbent on him to
uphold its dignity. “That doesn’t absolve us from a charge of
assault and battery, to wit, knocking out the Sheriff s man by
a straight left on the chin, as well as arson and robbery. A
clear hanging case,” he added with due solemnity.
“Bah,” retorted his associate contemptuously, all that s
Queen Anne stuff. And she’s been dead a long time ” _
“Well,” replied the other trying to look very judicial— the
least penally for horse-stealing is transportation Lots have
been sent out to the colonies for less. You can t fool with the
law of England.” „ , ... , , ,
Adam laughed. “Maybe you can’t fool with the law, but
if you can make a fool of the law your case is won, he said
triumphantly. “Englishmen can stand anything except being
made fools of.” He took the “there’s no-answer-to-that ’ atti-


tude, and pulled up. “We’ll cross that brook where the willows
hide us from view. Take advantage of every bit of timber, when
you’re scouting, Charlie. Fenimore Cooper says so. Come on.
Follow me.”
Avoiding beaten paths they made their way to the stream,
and dodged along under the weeping willows, through a coppice
of beech and oak, and then along hedges thick with hawthorn.
The sense of danger, lurking he knew not where, put fire in
Adam’s eyes, and colour in his cheeks. He always said that peril
was as good as porridge to him. Charlie, on the other hand,
though staunch as steel, had no zest in venture. He felt the gyves
already on his wrists. His loyalty was all the more finely
tempered, because his imagination was steeped in English
reverence for law and order.
Slowly they made their devious way towards the Gordon
home at Cheltenham. At that home a historic drama was in
the making, its actors blissfully unaware of how far-reaching
would be its consequences, not to themselves alone, but to a
new land, half the world away. Mrs. Gordon, still in bed, was
fitfully in tears, but between showers, as Sally put it to the
kitchen staff, she managed a “ ’arty breakfast.” Her husband
summoned out of untroubled sleep, and commanded to attend
her in her room, went unshaven in dressing gown and slippers,
his lank hair unbrushed, and feeling grateful that if he had to
die for his convictions at least there were no giving of marriages
in heaven. His face, however, bore the stamp of cheerful
patience it invariably assumed on such occasions.
“Durnford,” exclaimed his wife, looking at him intently as
if to challenge any right on his part to appear so cheerful, “I
haven’t slept a wink. I’ve turned the whole dreadful matter
over in my mind again and again. It’s all too shameful.” She
felt like tears—but this was no time for such luxuries. “You
simply must get Adam away quietly before they can arrest
him.”
The Captain looked amazed. “And have a hue and cry all
over England—all the hounds of the law searching for him—
his name on everybody’s lips. Besides, we don’t live in the
days of King Charles 11, when fugitives hid in oak trees.” The
Captain came as close to being sarcastic as his mild manners
would allow.
But then he had not yet had his breakfast, and was not
altogether his normal self.
“Hue and cry? Nothing of the sort,” replied Mrs. Gordon
firmly. “You must put him undetected aboard a ship sailing
immediately for Australia or India. Once he’s sailed they wifi
never catch him, and it’s too far off for them to bother about
him once he’s there.'
“But my dear,” protested the unhappy Captain, “you urged
all this long before he had got into this trouble with the Sheriff.


And why should we send our only son to the other ends of the
earth for a boyish prank.” He ended, however, with an apolo-
getic gesture for he discerned dark clouds rising on the domestic
horizon.
“You do everything in your power to thwart my wishes,”
she answered him bitingly. “He must secretly vanish, I tell
you.”
“But, my darling, one can’t escape the law so easily as all
that. They’ll be watching every ship that sails. And, besides,
ships don’t sail for Australia, or India, every day.”
To his surprise she had her ready answer. “There is. a
ship sailing for Australia in two days’ time.” Then, seeing his
look of surprise, she went on: “I wrote my attorneys in London
last week about it and so that difficulty can be met.” She made
no effort to keep the note of triumph out of her voice.
For the moment he was reduced to silence. So all along
she had made up her mind to get Adam away, as, indeed, she
had previously suggested. A strange mother, he thought. Still,
discretion —yes, this was an occasion for discretion. “My dear,”
he said persuasively, “I’ll take the matter up with Sir Gifford
Sterling, the Sheriff, personally. Indeed, he sent word by his
man that he’d proposed to look in as he was passing to-day. He’s
a good friend, and I’m not without influence higher up. ■ Maybe
it will all blow over.”
“Durnford,” said his wife with her sharpest inflection,
“why do you always try to defy me? I look to my husband
to save me from the disgrace of my son’s arrest. Until Adam
goes to Australia or India—l don’t care which—there will be
no peace in this house for me or for you.”
Her voice rising to falsetto presaged a storm of high
intensity. From experience he knew that the “mad Gordon”
temperament, when thoroughly roused, was capable of attaining
a crescendo of violence, ending as it had done before even in
dinner plates being hurled, not unerringly it is; true, at his
devoted head. To surrender in such circumstances had become
in him something of a fixed habit if only in the interest of
domestic economy.
In this case, however, his only son’s "whole future was
involved. He determined to put in a final plea to his “spoilt
darling.”
“My dear,” he said in his best Colonel Newcombe manner,
“remember what you urge means exile for our only son and
heir. There must be a better way out than that for Adam.
This will be a lesson to him.”
“You always put my feelings, my sensibilities last—
indeed, they have no place in your mind at all,” she shouted in
reply, her eyes narrowing, her face deeply flushed, her hands
clenched, “Will you humiliate your wife, drag the Gordon name
in the mire, make us the laughing-stock of the whole country-


30 GOLDEN WATTLE TIME
side? Never! Never! Do you hear me? Never.”
There was not the least chance of failing to hear a voice
that carried through the open window to the neighbourhood, a
voice that already seemed to have set most of the dogs barking
for half a mile away. The Captain shrugged his shoulders—his
invariable sign of surrender. In his anger he did not trust
himself to speak, and turning abruptly on his heel passed out
through the door, even going to the unusual length of slamming
it behind him.
The two lads meanwhile had warily been approaching the
Gordon home. At first sight there seemed to be no unusual
activity indicating that the hounds of the law were on their
trail. But on turning round the corner of the stables they
caught sight of a broad back moving away from them. Evidently
the man had been searching the stables. Slipping into the hay
loft they covered themselves with straw, with only space enough
to breathe.
“Anyway we’ve given ’em a run for it. Fancy thinking to
catch a Gordon in bed, or hiding behind his mother’s skirts.”
Adam screwed up his nose to indicate his contempt for the
enemy’s intelligence. “They came here first, I’ll bet. Then
they went to Eldon Hall, for that owl’s hoot of old George gave
us the warning.”
Charlie, however, was always for sifting things to their
logical conclusion. “We can’t escape them, Adam, you know
that. What are you meaning to do?”
“Let ’em come. A Gordon’s no fox to hide in a hollow log,
I’ll meet them in the open as a Gordon should,” was young
Gordon’s retort.
“It may sound like boasting, I know,” he continued, “but
Jem Edwards always says I can give as good as I get. Anyway
I’m done with running, Charlie.” Suiting the deed to the word
he came out of the hay, brushing the wisps from his clothes
and hair.
Charlie, ever imitative of his friend, did the same. “We
risk our necks, Adam, but if its good enough for you, it’s all
the same for me,” shrugging his shoulders.
Adam laughed* “Risks are the spice of life, Charlie. War,
tiger hunting like my father did, fox-hunting, racing, fighting—
risks, thank goodness, everywhere.” He laughed gaily. “Fight
as you ride I say. Give me stiff fences, the big stone wall, the
ditch beyond the hedge, and the chance of a broken neck, that’s
life.
“No game was ever worth a rap,
For a rational man to play,
In which no accident, no mishap,
Could possibly find its way.’’
Charlie Walker was not moved by this philosophy or the
poetry. His normally lugubrious expression actually deepened.
“Well,” he said, “if that’s what you’re really after, we’ll soon


get all the fun you’re looking for, I can’t see —quite like you do,
but—”
“No! you gloomy owl,” interrupted Adam cheerily, “I
believe it makes you blink to see the sun shine, you old Misery
Pot, but Charlie,” he added earnestly, “I’d never ask for a
stauncher friend at the pinch than you. Come on, my lad, let’s
face all the devils in Hell or out of it.”
He led the way down the rickety steps into the stables, and
with head erect marched into the sitting-room, followed by his
faithful henchman. To his surprise the room was empty when
he had expected, to see the Sheriff himself waiting to clap the
irons on him. Quite unconsciously he loved to dramatise him-
self. Confronted by inaction, another mood seemed to take
possession of him. His gay nonchalance gave place to one of
those fits of despondency that were, he believed, part of his
Gordon heritage, shaping his destiny to some dark end.
Charlie knew that at these moments Adam was better
facing his problems alone. The sound of footsteps coming
slowly downstairs indicated Mrs. Gordon’s approach, probably
in company with the Captain.
“Sounds like your father and mother coming, Adam. It’ull
be a family party, you’d better talk to them alone. I’ll wait
for you out in the stable,” he whispered.
“Good old Charlie,” said Adam, firmly gripping his hand.
“Something tells me we’ll soon be borne along different currents,
but let’s stick together while we can.”
Charlie glided silently out by the side door. The sound of
the approaching voice with its rising inflection presaged a storm.
And he knew he was its cause.
Both parents were surprised to see their son there in the
flesh. They had pictured him, hunted and in hiding, and his
mother had seen, as in a vision, the “heir of the Gordons”
already in durance vile.
“Ah! There you are, my boy,” exclaimed Captain Gordon
sternly, but with a twinkle in his eye that carried its message
of forgiveness and understanding.
“Your absence, sir, has been worrying your mother ter-
ribly.” The last was a concession offered in the hope of lowering
the domestic temperature.
He cast an anxious glance at the wife on his arm.
Mrs. Gordon took up the word with avidity.
“Yes, ‘terribly’ is right. I thought of you sleeping in some
copse, or hidden by your prize-fighting friends in some hovel—
that is, if you were not already thrown into gaol. .. . Oh, the
disgrace of it all—it’s killing me—killing me.” She broke into
tears and her husband gently lowered her into an easy-chair.
At least she should be allowed to do her weeping in comfort.
“There, there! Don’t be so upset, my dear. Adam, explain
yourself, sir,” he said in his best paterfamilias manner—a hus-


32 GOLDEN WATTLE TIME
band must keep up appearances.
There’s nothing to explain,” said Adam innocently.,
Charlie asked me to stay with him and I accepted. That’s all.”
“I see,” said his father, nodding. “You just went quietly
to bed, said your prayers as usual, nobody disturbed you, and you
awakened this morning to the music of the birds' An idyllic
picture, my son!”
Mrs. Gordon looked at her spouse as if she could hardly
believe her ears. “Why,” she said, her voice charged with
indignation, “Adam escaped the disgrace of being arrested on
the racecourse only by running away, with the Sheriff’s men
galloping after him. As it was, everybody was talking about
the disgraceful episode. I can never again look respectable
people in the face. And”—tears came into her voice—“how
your father and I are ever to meet the Sheriff and Lady Sterling
1 simply don’t know,” She* raised her kerchief to her eyes.
Then glancing up at the Captain, she said with great emphasis..
Uurnford, you agree there’s only one thing to be done?”
Her husband did not answer. He could not look at Adam.
And what’s that?” asked her son.
“You must go away.”
“Away, mother? Where?”
“To India or Australia. Oh, it doesn’t matter where, so
long as it’s far enough away from the scene of your—your mis-
deeds—that is, if the law will allow it.”
“You see, Adam,” said his father, speaking with unusual
hesitation, “your mother and I have talked things over and we
have consulted the Sheriff’s representative only this morning.
If you leave immediately for, say, Australia, they will let by-
gones be bygones, you understand?” The Captain looked
extremely uncomfortable. His mouth took all sorts of twists
and turns as if the words had the utmost difficulty in coming
out.
“Australia? Half-way round the world. I’ve heard of this
before—yes, sir, before there was any silly fuss over a horse
which, after all, is half mine. What right had they to take my
horse—that is Charlie’s and mine. We paid half down.”
“So that’s where my money has been going,” said Mrs.
Gordon, fury in her eye and gesture. “Buying racehorses with
money I gave you to pay your debts.” She was’ righteously
indignant. “That settles it. It’s no use, Durnford, I’m simply
distracted with Adam’s peccadillos, his wasted life, his low
companions. And now to have him put into g'aol with common
thieves, murderers, and highwaymen. He must be sent awav
immediately.”
“Immediately?” said Adam incredulously.
“Yes, to-night,” said his father, feeling it incumbent upon
him to take up the tale. “The ship sails from Gravesend at! the


week’s end. I’m dreadfully sorry, my boy. The alternative is
your arrest.”
“And I would die first,” said his mother, dramatically.
“But what can I do out in Australia,” asked the now dis-
tracted boy.
“Hunt, ride, dig for gold like young Lord Cecil, who will
some day Be Lord Salisbury. There’s a lot of the nobility there.
It’s the land of adventure, of big open spaces, of freedom. They
say you can dig up gold in the streets.”
“And gold grows on the bushes, so I’ve heard,” said Mrs.
Gordon. »
“But all my friends? Am I to leave them behind, never
to see them again ? And Inez ? Am Ito be separated from my
only sister?”
His father put a friendly hand on his shoulder.
“You’ll come back famous some day, my son, Australia
will be the makings of you. You may be a rich squatter, raise
sheep, graze cattle on a thousand hills, and become a great
conquistador, perhaps. Or you can write that verse stuff of
yours ride Pegasus in the race for fame, and win, my boy,
won!”
Under the spell of his father’s glowing imagery, Adam
felt himself slipping into something like acquiescence. After
all, he was tired of this conventional round of English life, that
led nowhere. He wanted adventure. Out there was an un-
tamed, unspoilt land, beckoning him to come. Living under the
starry skies, in the golden sunshine, in the silver moonlight, the
gift he felt was his to give the world—the poetry of action —
vibrant with life, telling the story of the open spaces, of another
England washed by the southern seas—ah, such a gift might
give him the w T reath of Virgil, the crown of Horace, or Euripides.
What Europe and sunny Greece had done in giving the world
“Childe Harold” might not the Antipodes do for another Gordon,
yielding the key to the Temple of the Immortals?
Such fancies flashed through his quick mind like lightning
on the horizon of the future.
But when his mother interrupted his train of radiant
thought with her plaint, “There’s no other way to save the
family honour,” the spell was broken,
“Family honour!” he retorted cynically, “Am I to
sacrifice everything on the altar of ancestors who did nothing
for me but bequeath the Gordon curse?”
“And, pray, what curse is that?” asked his father, looking
up astonished*
Adam flushed —sorry now he had introduced this old story—
but he had to explain. “The curse,” he said, “that Robert Bruce
laid on the founder of our family, The False Gordon’ who
betrayed Bruce to the English.”


“Fiddlesticks!” exclaimed his father indignantly. “Where
did you learn suchi stuff and nonsense. And what was the
curse?”
Mother once told me as a small boy, for this desertion
of Scotland’s hero, from time to time the heir of the Gordons
is doomed to exile, until one gives his life in expiation.” As
a matter of fact, Adam never had any real belief in this fable,
and now regretted having mentioned it.
Captain Gordon laughed loudly and sardonically. “Of all
the auld wives’ tales!” he exclaimed, and then, catching sight of
hig wife’s face, he went on, “My dear, I mean it is just Scottish
mysticism run to seed, you know.”
Any further reflections were interrupted by the appearance
of the manservant.
“Two gentlemen to see you, sir; Sir Gifford Sterling and
Mr. Oliver, sir.”
“Don’t let them in—till he’s gone.” Mrs. Gordon rose from
her seat and caught her son’s arm. Her eyes were wild with
apprehension,
“Impossible, my dear. He can’t escape the law.” Turning
to the man, he said peremptorily, “Tell them to come in. Now
let me handle this, my dear, and don’t intervene, or I shan’t
answer for the consequences.” His firmness was impressive.
The Sheriff and Black Tom Oliver came into the room. Sir
Gifford Sterling bore himself with almost old-time courtly grace.
He was tall and slender, with the slightly stooping shoulders of
a student. His face was long, the eyes kindly, and the mouth
sensitive. An interest in Oriental languages had brought him
into contact with the master of those languages at the Chelten-
ham Academy.
He bowed to Mrs. Gordon with a cordial smile, and held out
his slender hand. Raising her hand to his lips he paid her a
courtesy that was fast going out of fashion in England, and Was
all the more appreciated by the lady because of its unexpected-
ness. His very presence was disarming.
“Ah! Madam, how delightful it is to see you again, and”
(turning to his host), “you also, Captain Gordon. I was so
looking forward to renewing our discussion over those recent
Bokhara discoveries. But, pardon, I quite overlooked our good
friend, Mr. Tom Oliver. I take it you need no introduction.”
Black Tom, not quite knowing what to do with his hands,
or whether he was expected to shake hands with so formidable
a lady, contented himself with nodding.
Sir Gifford suddenly discovered Adam, who had dropped
back on the entrance of the visitors. “Ah, so this is Adam!”
He held out a hand with so engaging a smile that Adam for
the moment lost his poise. He felt his hand gripped in a firm
and friendly grasp that was strangely at variance with all his
anticipations.


“Well, my boy, I hear you have been making my men look
to their laurels. Now, what’s it all about?”
Adam found himself, after a difficult opening, putting his
side of the story succinctly, and not without a touch of humour,
weaving into it that thread of romantic adventure that coloured
his life and was the scource of all his troubles. He found an
understanding listener, who laughed and slapped his sides as
Adam claimed his rights to half the mare, and indicated a case
against the Crown.
“Well, well!” he said, “a most intriguing point of law.
Don’t you agree, Captain? Ho, ho!” Captain Gordon joined in
wholeheartedly. “That would send even the Law Lords into
convulsions. I must tell the Lord Chancellor, he loves a good
joke.” And then he proceeded to point out to Adam that to
take the law into one’s own hands, however just one’s cause
appeared to be, was unlawful, and he himself as Sheriff for the
County was; sworn to carry out the statutes. He rubbed his
forehead as if perplexed. “You still remember your Shakes-
peare, how Henry V, when he became King, had his former
boon companion arrested, because the law is greater even than
the King. My boy,” he said, “strictly speaking, I should allow
the law to take its course, but that means bringing sorrow on
your mother and father.”
Adam drank it all in with the feeling that he was being
treated as a man.
“But, of course,” continued Sir Gifford, spreading his hands,
r ‘if it happens that you are not here to be charged, but are on
the high seas sailing for a port 15,000 miles away, I am sure
her Majesty would not regret that a writ could not be served.
You understand —don’t you, my lad?”
Adam nodded. “Yes, sir,” he said.
“Then,” said the Sheriff, “will you forgive me, Mrs. Gordon,
and you, Captain Gordon, if I take my leave. I won’t sign any
writ until to-morrow. And” (turning to Adam again, he held
out his hand), “good luck, my boy, wherever you may happen
to be. Play the game abroad in your day as Drake and Raleigh
did in theirs. Good-bye. England needs adventurous spirits
like yours.” Adam took the outstretched hand and returned the
firm grasp.
As Ke turned to go, Black Tom stepped forward. Regret
and concern were evidenced in his strong face. His heart went
out to the lad, and with the realisation of parting, a frog seemed
to jump up in his throat.
As the Sheriff turned to go, regret and concern were
evidenced in his not unkindly, face. He turned abruptly, and
faced Adam’s father and mother.
“Good-bye, Adam,” said Black Tom, coming forward. “I’m
sore troubled that I won’t see you for a long time. I’m real
proud that I gave you your first mount in a steeple. Ride as


straight wherever yer be, as you did with me, and Tom Oliver
’ll be proud of yer—that he will.” He too held out a big friendly
hand, and some tears came unbidden to Adam’s eyes as he
thought of parting with his old turf patron. Then, turning
abruptly, Tom Oliver strode from the room, passing the others
in the passage, as though they did not exist.
When they had gone and Captain and Mrs. Gordon had
accompanied their visitors to the door, the empty room seemed
suddenly to typify to Adam the world he was suddenly called
upon to face. With every home-tie severed, his friends of years
suddenly cut off from him, his beloved sister no longer to be at
hisi elbow to listen to confidences, even the faithful Charlie
separated from his companionship by half the world of rolling
ocean, he realised what exile really meant. But deeper than
all else was the severance from Jane.
He hadn’t even told Jane yet that he loved her. With
every fibre of his being he knew he loved her. Always he had
thought there was plenty of time to find courage enough to lay
bare to her the secret places of his heart, always that elusive
inner self of his, too shy to let her know what his looks, his
touch, his cautious words had failed to convey—that he loved
her and always would love her. Those dark brown honest eyes
of hers, set under sweeping lashes and arching eyebrows, looked
at you with such tender Madonna-like condescension that to have
spoken of love would have seemed desecration. Yet Jane was
not quite his own age. Her broad forehead, finely chiselled
features, that generous mouth, and firm chin, how well he knew
them. The delicate rose of her complexion that vied with the
loveliest in England, all this served to set her apart from the
rest of womankind.
Never had he dared think of her as a mother of his children.
That was not a growing lad’s way of looking upon the maid of
his heart. What he had cherished was her sound but kindly
criticism of his careless ways of life, and the genuine help she
gave in encouraging his talent for writing lyric verse.
His mother and father’s return into the room brought him
back to earth.
“I’ll see you when you’re packed Adam,” said Mrs.
Gordon, with an air of embarrassment. “Now I’ll go and rest.
It’s all been very trying to my nerves. Take me to my rooms,
Durnford.” They passed to the stairs, she on the Captain’s arm.
So, thought Adam, they take it for granted that all is settled.
His head dropped. Therei was an ache in his heart. If only
Jane were here. Suddenly it came to him with irresistible con-
viction that he must see Jane before the final step was taken.
NoT Nof he couldn’t leave her. He couldn’t. He was in tor-
ment at the bare thought of parting—his brain seemed afire.
For some intuition banished from his mind any real hope that
once he left the shores of England he would ever see Jane again.


Well, he would see her now.
As if in answer to his thoughts—like a spirit called from
some vast deep—he felt her presence there in the room. Turning
Re held out his hands. She had just entered, her face flushed
into a new loveliness.
“Jane! Jane!” he cried, his whole heart in the cry, “Oh, it’s
you, it’s you.” He rushed to her, dropped on his knees, and
pressing his head against her for the first time in hi£ life since
childhood, and then only for a moment, he almost broke down.
“Adam! Adam!” Her hand rested on his curly head, her
voice carried the rich note of sympathy and understanding with
him in the climax of his overwrought emotions. Intuitively she
knew he loved her, and would never love any other. But she
also realised that the promptings of her heart to comfort him
were born of sympathy that had in it something maternal.
Passion, so far, had never touched her. She was perhaps never
to know its fire, its torture, its exquisite scourging of the flesh
and the spirit.
She was the first to break the spell that had come over him.
“Oh, Adam dear. I’ve heard all about it, your going away,
I mean. Father and I drove over in the phaeton to see that new
colt of your father’s. I’m so dreadfully sorry, I’m so dread-
fully sorry you must go—and so far away.”
Adam had risen to his feet, and his eyes showed little trace
of the recent storm. She made him sit down on the low couch,
while she sat close by, her hand in his.
“We only just heard that you are going to-night,” she went
on. “Australia’s so far away, and it’s all so sudden.”
“Oh, Jane, Jane, it’s all a mistake. They tried to talk me
into it. Said it was the only way. I suppose I tacitly consented.
But 1 made no promise to the Sheriff or anyone. One word from
you and I won’t go, I’ll face them all. Only one word from
you, Jane, and I’ll stay by your side for all my life.”
He rose, and she with him. He caught her hands in his.
His eyes suddenly looked into hers, and as by a revelation a
face that she had learned to look on as unexpressive changed
into one of beauty that recalled to her the picture she had seen
in Rome of St. Michael. Her heart seemed to leap in her throat.
Falteringly she answered —her words refusing to voice what
her heart would now have dictated.
“We are all so sorry,” she said in a trite voice that sounded
in her own ears like that of a stranger. “But I can’t say the
word, Adam.” She paused—her emotions deeply stirred. And
then reason again asserted itself. “I can’t after all the trouble
and expense you have given your poor father.”
It was, she realised a cold answer—curt to the point of
cruelty—to questionings that had been precipitated by untoward
circumstances from a delicately shy soul. In the crises of his
fate the lad had suddenly developed into manhood, and she had


38 GOLDEN WATTLE TIME
rebuked him as though he were a wayward boy.
Unconsciously he had winced under her reply. “You see,
Jane,” he said quite simply, “I love you—l always have loved
you—and always will!”
Somehow her hands were no longer in his. Her face flushed
into richer beauty. “Oh, Adam!” she said. “You never told
me. I never dreamt of it.” He noted her genuine distress. She
wrung heT hands—tears came unbidden into her eyes. And
with a frown of perplexity, and in a tone that almost amounted
to confession, she asked: “Why—oh why—have you said noth-
ing of this before.”
“Because I was afraid you might ridicule and shun me. I
couldn’t have borne that. And there always seemed plenty of
time.” He looked at her questioningly.
Her unresponsiveness, something in her face of baffled
regret, sent the blood from his face. A sudden thought seemed
to stay the beating of his heart. “Jane!” he cried, “is—is there
anyone?” He paused. “Anyone else, I mean?”
It appeared to open the way of escape for her —escape not
so much from him as from her own feelings so strangely moved,
feelings that, despite all her worldly judgment, made her think
of herself as a mother of his children. She knew she could love
him devotedly, perhaps passionately, if she yielded. But to
his question she took refuge in a gentle nod of affirmation.
“Jane,” he whispered hoarsely, “Do you mean it’s—too—
late,”
She spoke as if to herself, and it came to him like a sentence
of death, this repetition of words he had put into heff mouth.
“Yes! It’s too late.”
His tall figure seemed to sag—then quickly he drew himself
up straight.
A voice boomed suddenly through the open window—her
father’s voice, “Hurry, Jane —I’m waiting—the pony’s restless.”
“It’s father,” she said. “He’s waiting in the phaeton. I
must go—oh, Adam, I must go. I will always be thinking of
you,” she added, her colour coming and going. Suddenly she
lifted her face to his, kissed him full on the lips and had passed
out before he awakened from his bewilderment. He stood,
rooted on the spot, until the wheels could be heard crunching
on the gravel as the vehicle moved off.
“Oh Jane! Jane! my love!” he cried to the empty room.
“I need not have lost you, my love! my love!” He did not hear
his father come into the room. “My boy, you had better pack
now. The chaise is calling at any moment now, and it’s a long
journey to London.”
“Father—where’s Inez ? I haven’t seen her all the morning.
I want to ask her something—now at once,”
“I’m sorry, Adam. Your mother didn’t foresee it would be
quite so soon. She arranged for Inez to go over to your uncle’s


at Worcester until this trouble blew over.” The Captain s
explanation was an,’ apology.
“To Worcester—lnez gone to Worcester,” said Adam in his
consternation. “Cruel! Cruel!” he cried, quite distracted. “You
all knew I’d never see her again, and not even a last farewell
to my only sister.” He dropped in the chair and buried his
head in his hands. , .
“I’m dreadfully sorry, my boy,” said his father, placing his
hand on his son’s head —“dreadfully sorry. But of course you
will see us all again—why in two years you’ll be back—all this
will be forgotten—and you’ll be the richer for a wonderful
experience.”
“No! No! Something tells me I will never see any of you
again.” Adam looked up. There was a far-off look in his eyes
as though he was reading the future. And it was a dark future.
He shook himself together. “I’ll pack. Charlie promised to
wait for me in the stables. He’ll see me off at the ship.
As he strode away his father looked after him with an
aching heart.
Two days later, as the last rope was cast off from the quay,
the last word spoken, the last messages given, Adam gripped
Charlie Walker’s hand in silence. They needed no passwords
of understanding, these two good comrades. Mounting the gang-
way with resolute step, the voyager did not look back until he
stood by the rail gazing down at the apparently moving wharf,
where Charlie Walker, with tears sternly repressed, waved him
a last farewell. Amid the shouting of orders, the clatter and
din of making things ship-shape aboard, the silent figure, slowly
receding, seemed to the watching companion ashore, like the
wounded King Arthur in the dark barge sailing out into the
sunset.
CHAPTER V.
AUSTRALIA.
NINETY-MILE DESERT.
THE gloomy, if poetic, fancies of Mounted-trooper Gordon
were being constantly distracted by the necessity for keep-
ing an eye on his prisoner, who, mounted on a flea-bitten grey,
was forced to keep in front of his captor.
The man had proved sullen and uncommunicative through-
out the long monotonous two days’ journey across the Ninety-
Mile Desert. It had proved a weary vigil, for the member of
the Mounted, to watch his handcuffed man sleeping peacefully
during the previous night, beside a roaring fire in the bush,
while he, the representative of the law, must perforce keep
awake. The term “desert” applied to such an area, like many
other signs of inferior complex in Australia, was a misnomer.


In any other land, it might have been glorified into “The Ninety-
Mile Domain, ” for timber and bush were interspersed over a
territory as large as Wales. At midday, they had passed Mount
Misery a modest, sandy mound covered with she-oak and
clusters of acacia, and two hours later Trooper Gordon had got
fns bearings from Mount Desolate—a distant peak of glowing
giamte, that rose some two hundred feet, above the flat country
around it.
The light was now fading fast, and the guardian of the
law was on the lookout for a rockhole for another night’s camp.
The old bullock waggon tracks they had been following all the
afternoon, were already hardly discernible, even to so good a
bushman as the prisoner. To make the man in irons lead the
way to gaol, was not so difficult in a country where surface
water was almost unknown, for the water bags carried by the
mounted trooper offered the only escape from an agonising death
from thirst. Many a digger returning from some Victorian
Golconda, his “bluey” packed with golden security against the
future, missing the track in the monotonous uniformity of that
level mallee, had found himself wandering in eternal circles.
He would lie at last, face upwards to the pitiless sky, listening
with a terrible fear in his heart at the howl of the distant dingo.
7 The change from the homely woodlands, and green pastures,
of the west counties of England, to this gaunt and sombre euca-
lyptian wilderness, seemed to carry with it the very spirit of
exile. The immensity of the land, and the absence of any
human association save that of the taciturn prisoner, deepened
the loneliness of one, who had always sought, in action, escape
from the brooding of his own inner ego. In the Cotswolds every
hour seemed to bring its adventure. From the look on their
faces as they rode, Indian file, it would have been difficult to
have determined which was the more gloomy—the captor or
the captive.
Suddenly a distant “coo-ee," coming down the wind,
brought both men sharply to a new interest in life. The very
horses pricked up their ears. Instinctively they stopped dead
in their stride. Both riders answered back simultaneously the
bush call “Coo-ee,” and, with anxious intentness, awaited the
reply. ‘ It came again, like the call of a curfew, the rising note
on the last syllable. This time it was close at hand. The
member of the Mounted cheerily responded.
Presently there emerged, from the low timber on the right,
the most unexpected figure. The rider wore a clerical hat, and
the tails of his long black cassock flowed over his horse’s flanks.
He waved to them, and quickened his pace into a quick canter!
“By thunder, a sky-pilot,” murmured the astonished trooper.
Americanisms had crept into the language with the advent of
so many Forty-niners from California.
The effect of the apparition upon the prisoner was obviously


disconcerting. “ ’Tis Father Woods,” he muttered.
By this time the priest had arrived close enough to catch
the last word. “So you know me?” he questioned, looking good-
humouredly at the man. “It’s Father Lost-in-the-Woods I m
thinking, for I confess I was fairly bushed, and but for your
answers to my call I might have crossed your track without
knowing it. Maybe my bones might have been left for the dingo
to pick or the eagle to gather, for my bag is dry.” He said this
with an engaging smile, and sweeping his hand towards the bush.
“Glad to be of service, Father,” replied Adam, with an air
of official abruptness. He had not yet emerged from his mood
of despondency. “My name’s Gordon, Trooper Gordon. We’re
making for Butcher’s Soak.” He paused, then added, ‘ The
light’s failing fast, we’ll push ahead, and explain afterwards.”
Turning to the prisoner, he ordered sharply, “Get ahead.
It was a silent procession that passed through the low
timber, single-file, led by one whose every step brought him
nearer the penitentiary. As a bushman, he alone could lead
them to water, and it was part of his bushman’s creed to Iplay
the game to a priest, if not to a policeman, even when he migh t
have made a getaway with water so close at hand.
Presently a flight of white cockatoos shrieked past them, fly-
ing swiftly but heavily, and screaming like lost souls. It was clear
they were making for water, and the way the horses began to
prick up their ears indicated they were nearing the soak. The
harsh chorus of parrots growing swiftly louder and the bright
emerald colours flashing challengingly by confirmed the judg-
ment of the horses. A call from the prisoner told that a pad
marking the track of animals coming and going to water had
been seen. A pair of kangaroos stood on the track looking with
increasing wonder and fear at the strange monsters that had
invaded their domain, and then crashed through the scrub as
though the fiends were after them. From then until they came
in sight of the granite outcrop, they were conscious of never
being free from inquiring eyes. And when they reached the
green stagnant pool known as Butcher’s Soak, the one slender
tree—a blue gum—overhanging the emerald waters was laden
with galahs and white cockatoos, screaming and chattering, the
boughs dipping in the slime.
However, the garrulous company flew off fast enough as
the cavalcade approached. To unsaddle and let the thirsty
horses drop their noses deep beneath the surface, light a fire
and prepare tucker, was routine work. The flames shot up
quickly, and soon the mallee roots glowed red hot. But dark-
ness had fallen before the last of the billy tea was drunk, pipes
lit, and the atmosphere of the bush camp began to soften the
efforts of a hard day’s ride. The young trooper unbent
enough to hang a blanket, where it would shelter his strange
guest from the cold southerly.


The prisoner was sent to gather enough fuel for the night,,
and the two silent figures watched him come and go. The
quizzical look on the priest’s face did not belie his reputation
as a good fisher of men. The trooper turned to the prisoner,
who had just come in dragging a sandalwood bough behind him.
“That’ll do,” he called, “make your bunk and turn in.” He rose
and went over to the prisoner, waiting by him until the blankets
were spread. Then he drew a pair of bracelets from his pocket,
snapping them on the captive’s outstretched wrists.
If Adam expected the priest to take the hint and turn in
too, leaving him alone to hug his own gloomy meditations, he
was doomed to disappointment. There was nothing left to do
but to pull out his pipe again and sit meditatively facing the fire..
“Lonesome?” inquired the reverend father cryptically.
Adam looked up, self-conscious, as though the other had
surprised his hidden thoughts.
“It’s a lonely country,” he answered, biting on his pipe
stem.
“One’s only lonely when one lives alone,” said the priest,
knocking his pipe on a handy stone. And then added quickly:
“You’d expect a man of God, as they call me, to say that, of
couise, he added, “for when God and His angels keep you
company you can’t be lonely. But what I mean is that the old
country is full of history, and the bush is whispering to you all
day stories of an incredible past.”
“Old country? This is the New World.”
“Ah, you think so, young man. But as a dabbler in
geology, and in natural history, I see a world around me in this
strange land that was old when Europe was in its geological
swaddling clothes. Look at the aborigines—still in the Stone
Age, though they are late arrivals, and came over from Asia,
driving out the real natives—negroids, as black as any in Africa!
Look again at the fauna,” he went on excitedly, “creatures that
must have got stranded on this island continent when Noah
launched the Ark, for there’s no mention of kangaroos, wallabies,
kangaroo rats, or mice, or other marsupials in Noah’s stock-
taking.” He chuckled at his own humour, and the grin
broadened on the watching trooper’s face.
“Nor in the story of Creation,” interposed Adam slyly.
“Creation isn’t finished yet, my son. God never stops so
He spared us the details when it started.” This brought a
genuine laugh of appreciation from Gordon.
“But I will tell you one thing,” added Father Woods, “this
lovely golden wattle that is all round us is nothing but the old
mimosa of Egypt that the Pharaohs loved. Did it come with
the negroids? Their totems are Egyptian, you know. Ah my
S 2 n ’ y S U i alk 2 f loneliness in the bush. Why, it’s an open book
of unfolding Nature, with the Almighty’s ways to be seen in
beast and bird, in rock and tree, every mile you travel ”


“Ah, sermons in stones, books in the running brooks, and
good in everything.” Adam’s new interest in the conversation
was evident.
The priest looked his astonishment. „
“Well, ’tis not I who is the Melancholy Jacques, he
answered with a challenging grin, looking to see how the other
would take it.
To his surprise the trooper entered into the issue wim
zest. “Yet,” he answered, “you feel around you the spirits of
the dead—here in the dark gullies, in the scented eucalyptus,
in the soundless animals that hop by in the bush like grey
ghosts. It’s all so uncanny, so dull in its eternal monotony.
Ah! And so different from the light and shade, the colour and
beauty, of English woodlands and meadows.”
“It’s old, my son, incredibly old, but age has its beauty,
too. What are modern poets to the ancient bards? What is
England, with all its splendour, to the glory that was Greece,
the might and majesty that was Rome? They will never come
again, those pomps of yesterday, beside the Tiber and the Nile,
when the world was young.” . .
“When Sappho sang and Horace voiced his lines of living
fire.”
”It was the priest’s turn to show his surprise. sat
upright, and with open mouth looked at his companion. His
wonders will never cease,” he said, in a low voice, feeling for
his beads. “Is it given me to find under the uniform of the
Mounted a lover of ancient classics, a student of Virgil and
Homer and the great company of the immortals who still live
in the minds of men?”
“Or under & priest* cussock n heart that beats in tune with
the glamorous days of Isis and Dolores?” answered the younger
man with a smile —a happy smile, the priest noted.
Then Father Woods laughed outright. He quoted a line
of Homer. Adam retorted with a reference of Horace, and
cited a line of Pericles he had heard his father use.
Now in the full cry of the quest of song, and beauty of
long-forgotten ages, they left the world of their day. It
became unreal, fantastic, an illusion. Time ceased to be, and
from the depths of their well-stored minds the beauty and
wonder of ancient craft in thought and words was re-created.
The fire died down, and they failed to notice the cold that
came in with the fog. The rattle of the hobbles on the feeding
horses, seemed like the sound of prisoners marching between
the conquering legions of Augustus, or Caesar. The wind in
the trees, became the distant music of the harp that ushered in
Sappho’s songs. The stone was rolled away from the secret
places of their hearts. In that glorious, if ghostly company, a
new brotherhood was silently sworn. The night flew on starry
wings They lived again with Euripides, talked with Virgil,


louglit with Hector, sailed the blue seas with Ulysses. And then
racing through the centuries, they came to the young and
brilliant Swinburne, whom Father Woods named a facile classical
troglodyte, and so to Browning, Tennyson, and others of the
younger poets of their own time.
How it happened, Adam never quite knew, but presently he
round himself quoting snatches from uncompleted poems of his
own, Podus Okus,” and his apostrophe of the horse:—
In their own generation the wise may sneer
They hold our sport in derision,
Perchance to the sophist, the sage, or seer,
Was allotted the graver vision.
Yet if Man, of all creation planned,
God’s noblest work is reckoned,
Of the works of His hand, by sea or land,
ir M XT?" 11 ® horse m£ W at leas t rank; second.”
dedication • W °° ds was deli §’ hted . as he was with the suggested
‘‘Whence gathered?
The locust’s glad chirrup
May furnish a stave.
The ring of the rowell or the stirrup,
The wash of a wave.”
and
‘Lightly the breath of the Spring wind blows,
Though laden with faint perfume,
lis the rare, that the bushman knows
The secret of wattle bloom.”
,At last the priest reluctantly arose. ‘Til never forget this
night my son. We have supped with Plato, and the rest of
his glorious company. To tell you the truth I forgot the Ninety-
Mile Desert existed. ’ He laughed lightly. “By the way,” he
added m a whisper, pointing significantly at the sleeping man,
you didn t tell me what crime he’s charged with.”
‘‘Sheep-stealing,” said Adam laconically.
“Sheep-stealing ? Why I’ve been accused of that.”
“You, Father?”
“Yes, whenever a poor benighted Protestant leaves his own
fiock, and comes over to my fold, they charge me with sheen-
stealing. But they all do it,” he added.
Adam laughed, and then went on, looking cautiously at the
sleeping man, and speaking in a whisper. “But that wasn’t all
We have reason to believe he killed a squatter who has dis-
appeared. He’s dangerous, so I’m sitting up to watch him ”
“Can’t I—?”
“No sir! The Mounted Police watch their own prisoners
thank you all the same, Father.”
The priest nodded and wishing the trooper
good-night gathered his blankets, and made his bunk beside the
tire, first throwing a few roots on. Dropping to his! knees in
prayer he told his beads, and then pulling the blankets over
fiimseit with a sigh of content, seemed instantly to fall asleep


All appeared to be safe, but the trooper, short already of
a night’s slumber —a circumstance he had kept from his clerical
companion—knew that he must exert every care to keep awake.
His thoughts turned to his far-off English home. From that,
it was not a long step to memories of Jane. Ah, where was she
now? Would he never see her again? Conjuring up visions,
he made himself believe he could see her face in the fire. Per-
haps he could see her better, if he closed his eyes for a moment.
He leaned against a tree close to him. Memory had set him
a trap, and tired nature sprung it. In the briefest span of
time he was fast asleep, his back to the tree. He did not hear
the mopoke calling through the night for “more pork.” “More
pork.” Nor when a dingo took up the dirge with his howls,
was he conscious of the wild scrub around him. His thoughts
were in Cheltenham, or he was riding in a wild race pursued
by phantoms. The curlews called, and all the bush seemed
alive. Great cities may have their quiet hours before the dawn,,
but the creatures of the outback keep revel the night long.
The prisoner was the only one of the three who was con-
scious of every sound, of the horses; feeding close by in the
timber, their hobbles clanking with every step, of the honk of
geese flying high, and the lop-lop of the scrub wallaby. Then,
sensing no movement by his captor, slowly, with infinite caution,
he shed himself of his blanket, as silently as a snake in the
season sheds its skin.
Watching eyes, not yet fully open, saw him rise to ms
knees, waiting there to listen for any sound of alarm. Believing
the poor man meant to make a break for it, the priest was
caught between his priestly sympathy for any captured thing,
and his duty as a citizen. But when the prisoner at last found
his feet, he did not make for the open bush, but glided with
sinister motion towards the sleeping trooper. A mist clouded
the aspect for the onlooker, and clouds darkened the night. Only
the feeble flicker of the dying fire showed something untoward
was in motion.
The moon, tumbling out of the clouds into a pool of clear
sky, revealed the tense attitude of the prisoner, the manacled
arms raised above his head, every muscle taut, and his eyes
fixed upon the unconscious member of the Mounted Police.
To reach the wretch in time was impossible. Some diversion
was demanded instantly. A dry branch suddenly snatched up,
and flung on the dull embers, crackled and burst into flame. The
prisoner started back in alarm. The spluttering of the fire
aroused Adam with a start. Even then he would have been
helpless, but the priest was on his feet. Looking up, the
prisoner, with his arms again raised for the murderous blow on
the trooper’s defenceless head, saw the priest moving towards
him holding high the golden crucifix which his own faith com-


pelled him to revere and fear.
rf h i alf sta . rt ® d to complete his ghastly purpose, but before
eSS 4-? 11 ! Sloner he could not add murder to his crimes.
agonised C so,il th seemed to be wrung from the depths of an
agonised soul, the man dropped his arms before him, fell on
fled^nto eS tfe r mist ri then ’ With a C " y ° f despair ’
to ,£ ollo f’ but the mist had swallowed the
timber! P eSently ’ they heard a h °rse crashing through the
Regretful as a member of the Mounted Police always is to
lose his man, Adam felt in the morning, as he rode side by side
W l th bl f, new: ly-found friend, that perhaps the prisoner had
played the part Providence had intended, by bringing Father
S d the n yea™ SBlf mt ° & comradeshi P> that promised to deepen
v t Y° day ? bush travel that Passed, before they had
reached the township of Penola, Adam’s future took on new
and i esolute lines ot hope. The cheery optimism of the priest
was a spiritual and intellectual tonic, to one in sore need of life’s
greatest boon.
CHAPTER VI.
WOLF AND HOUND.
THE two horsemen on their greys, leading two packhorses
with saddlebags heavily laden, were pushing their way
along the western track from Castlemaine as fast as tired horse-
flesh would allow. Few indeed would have recognised, in this
un-umformed cavalcade, the famous Gold Escort of South
Austr a fl a whmh c ame d nuggets and gold dust from the
Victoria,!! El Dorados, to the capital of the neighbouring colony
r6 K to i-n e roagbly mi J ted into coinage. This was made neces-
saryby the shortage of sovereigns, occasioned by the gold rush
There were the roaring fifties of Australia, which followed
the equally roaring forties of California. It seemed that the
Golden Age had come, when fortune lavished her favours irre-
spective of rank or desert. Genuine forty-niners of the, land
ot the tree, rubbed shoulders with the scions of English nobilitv
ex-convicts shared the same chances of good luck with ex-
parsons, the seasoned prospector with the new-chum. Jew and
iVA Germans > French, Russians, Scandinavians and other
gold-bitten sons of the Seven Seas, ate, slept, drank, and fought
together, without racial prejudice. Even China sent her swarm
to the polyglot population.
What men won easily went easily. The thief and card-
shaper relieved the miner and lucky prospector overnight of
what they had won over laborious and fortunate days. To the


police, mounted and foot, fell the main task of upholding British
law, which meant guarding the fool against his own tolly, the
weak against the unscrupulous strong, and of bringing order
out of chaos, in a wide territory, where tented towns of as many
as 60,000 disappeared overnight, the population flitting like
locusts across the land to the latest rush.
The duties of the mounted, especially called for a rare type
of courage and endurance. Adam found himself, as a new-
chum, embarrassed with multifarious duties, including those of
registrar of births, deaths, marriages, and dogs, as well as
inspector of diseases, liquor licences, and other nuisances. At
times he was called upon to act as magistrate, or'as a coroner,
and even, on occasion, tied the knot in place of Hymen. To the
mounted, also fell the job of rounding up those Apaches of the
road, the bushrangers and other outlaws, who so far from being
romantic Dick Turpins, were mostly just cold-blooded ruffians,
and cowardly murderers.
The 300-mile trip through lonely bush, and especially the
Ninety-Mile section, offered rare chances for Colonial Tobies of
the Road, who boasted their willingness “to slit a throat for an
ounce a time.”
Acting under instructions, Adam and his fellow trooper,
Tom Gibbons, had, at last, discarded their uniforms for the old
clothes and equipment of prospectors. In sticking to their police
mounts, however, they risked offering a clue to their real
identity, since the dappled greys ‘of the South Australian
mounted were fairly widely known.
Ever since dawn, the troopers had picked out a distant
western peak, as their magnetic pole, that day. They knew it
to be one of the granite monoliths of the Grampian Mountains,
which rise some 2,000 feet out of the plain. To Adam’s expan-
sive imagination, these now began to assume the shape of a
group of recumbent giants, keeping watch and ward over the
vast interior. Away to the south were sugar-loaf cones, some
broken-rimmed, marking a chain of extinct volcanoes, which
accounted for the amazing richness of the soil. Little wonder,
thought Adam, that the original explorer of this Southland,
Captain Mitchell, named this wonderland “Australia Felix.”
Little did he know that the wealth of Golconda lay under this
rich soil.
Bluff Tom Gibbons, who believed that good bushmen don’t
waste their breath to spoil their porridge, had not addressed a
single syllable to his comrade for the past hour. But so moved
was he by the richness of the verdant country they were passing
through, that he was constrained to offer the cryptic reflection:
“Best country I ever seen, blow me if it ain’t. . . . For spuds I
mean,” and then, after an extended pause, “and onions.”
Adam was lost in poetic dreaming at the moment, and so
set on framing some light fancies into rhyme, that Tom’s out-


break took quite a measurable space of time to trickle into his
thSS wit^Ulyss^ 3 ’” he remarked dreamily -' his
* * *- be
rent ’’ rSf Ad»™ Ah ’ /??' the , 2 entl «™an that pays the
hff d Adam ’- now fully awake > an d anxious to provoke
grunters hereto ke “ Y , ou «”ely could growlnough
make the angel weep.” d “ Bnd enoUgh onions to
patch'° r Wal ffa tn? d ’ " Why ’ ,l ns °le colony is on’y a cabbage
pateh. Wait till you see them Bathurst Plains, and the
whpr red fi° V m - GS ° V black soil flats aion S’ th e Murrumbidgee
- that
saw?” BUt jUSt n ° W y ° U SaM this was the richest land you ever
MurrambM»l at snn S l d a Stan T dS - L sai i 1 could almost eat that
murrumbidgee soil, and so I could. But I ain’t agoin’ ter eat
my words not even to please you, Sergeant, which you LI let”
Against such logic there was no contending However it
was Tom, ever vigilant, who was the first to see a sniraTof dnsf
toward I;hem track -’ , a ? d evide ntly coming rapidly
ahead e °Th S e C °^ m f ? St ’” he Said ’ indica «"S the
against the teltera sk™ Gram P lans we re now silhouetted
Adal MlB;ht be a m ° b ° f Cattle for the goldfields,” ventured
sheep™“he Idled.” Gibbons - decisively - “No, nor
“How can you tell?”
vpri> ' V^ Ul h a ? y san ? drover gaUop fat bullocks to market I ask
maine. W cllrseTo n t ey bone at CasHel
“Mio-ut I * T. hat theres a ’orseman in a ’urry."
valuable freight 3 **“*' jested Adam, concerned for his
That bit ev dust ain’t made by a crowd It’s ton thin
“Weli d w;’n r t a l mOSt BU I Y s in a loomed’urry.” 1111
rnU W !’ We h take no risks, said Adam, pulling out his new
Colt revolver and examining the loading. Gibbons did tho L^
ThP rff ter °S r ° Utine u Thus they a wSted S devebpmeSs.
e r making such rapid pace now emerged out of the
white dust. Horse and man every moment annearpd fo dayrai^
from an Eohippus and its
mounted by a strange figure of a man. The rider pulled up^fs
winded horse almost on its haunches. The surerisl of the
Mounted was almost ludicrous. urpnse ot the
. - glister-me if it isn’t a parson,” whispered Adam fn
his brother trooper. .Both members of the Mounted hurrildfr


GOLDEN WATTLE TIME 49
replaced the weapons in their belts.
Bnt what was as surprising as his attire was his voice.
Pardon me, gentlemen,” said this strange figure, speaking in
a well-modulated, musical voice, “but something very dreadful
has happened. I want your help immediately.”
‘‘What is it?” asked Adam.
A man burnt to death, and a woman badly burnt in trying
to save her child. A frightful tragedy.”
“Where? Where, man?” asked Adam,, impatient to get the
salient facts.
~ the ranges, sir—at a place called Hall’s Gap, about five
miles off the main track.”
“W’at ’appened?” demanded Tom Gibbons.
“Last night the child—only three—such a sweet little
thing knocked over an oil lamp when no one els© was in the
room. You see, we were all with my friend the settler—he was
dying.”
. Accident, murder, or just natural?” asked the unemotional
Gibbons, taking out his pocket-book and pencil; and then looking
at Adam, he added: “Mind anythin’ he ses may be taken as
evidence .. ’ but his accompanying guffaw robbed his grim
joke of its sinister significance.
a 4. s along, said Adam, “we can talk as we go
At least we can go as far as the turn-off together.” He set his
horse in motion, dragging his packhorse after him. “Now what
do you want us to do?” he asked the clerical escort.
I take it, sir,” said that worthy, “that you are prospectors,
and have in those saddle-bags something besides specimens oil
tor burns, for instance—nearly all prospectors carry things like
that, I understand, in case of accident.”
Adam looked at Tom. “Why, yes, we have a kind of out-
fit. 11l give that to you.”
t A* 1 ' sa |d the other, “I can’t lift the poor woman alone
? *f, e< i y° u to help—m the name of mercy—won’t you come ? It
isn t far oft the mam track, and your time, I suppose, is your
own*
Tom looked over at his colleague. He shook his head, and
surreptitiously nodded towards the packhorses. A member of
the mounted gold escort was strictly enjoined to allow nothing
all sTts of t" e aPP ° inted r ° ute - bushrangers were up to
remarked. 1 ” 6 & mmister of religion ’ 1 see by your dress,” Adam
I beg your pardon, gentlemen,” the other responded “I
was so distressed I forgot to introduce myself—l’m the Reverend
yo^know 6 ” ty> ° f P ° rtland ’ one of the w ell-known Henty famU^
“Ah that accounts for your collar bein’ on back to front ”
interposed the unabashed Gibbons. “I thought maybe you got


up in a ’urry, or p’raps was just absent-minded like.
The minister looked across at the trooper amazed. I went
out to see my old friend, for I heard he was ill. And I found
him in his last gasp. But, gentlemen, I did not catch your
names.” ...
Adam and Tom looked at one another. “Oh!” answered
Adam, “I’m Adam Lindsay and this is Snappy Thomas—call
him Snap.” Tom looked daggers at this new christening.
“Oh, you will come out to Hall’s Gap with me, won’t you?”
the parson seemed genuinely moved. Tears started in his eyes.
“Yes, we’ll come, regulations or no regulations. You see,”
added Adam, “we are out for a company, and they made us
promise we wouldn’t stop for anyone. What’s your opinion,
SnappyT”
Tom looked across to his mate, with frowning forehead.
He held his answer for fully twenty yards. “The company’s
regulations also says, we got ter stick together. So I got ter
go where youi go, Mr. Bloomin’ Lindsay. Yer don’t git away
with them specimens, not that they’re worth much themselves,
but they’re hindicators of a good claim —though I say it meself.”
When, therefore, the party came to the junction of the
bullock track into the mountains, with the well-beaten road to
the South Australian border, the cavalcade turned north into
the mountains instead of skirting the foothills.
Adam thought the minister had an extraordinary way of
telling his story, for it was not until they were trailing down
a wide gully between towering granite hills, that they learned
the details of the tragedy. The mother, it seemed, rushed to
save her child in the burning room, and the minister followed.
She braved the flames to snatch the unharmed little one in her
arms, enduring the tortures of the damned, as the strange
parson expressed it, trying to reach the open. He had managed
to save them both. But meanwhile the whole house was a
holocaust, and the poor dying man was burnt to a cinder.
Adam had heard so many similar stories in the bush
country, that it all sounded true to life outback in this untamed
country. As they plunged deeper into the heart of the mountains
wild life became more abundant. Ring-tailed wallabies skipped
over the rocks with the surety of mountain sheep. Euros, a
hill type of kangaroo, plopped across their path without fear.
The Australian eagle soared majestically aloft. The mountains
were; the natural sanctuary of gorgeous parrots, and of little
ground birds that resembled English quail. Some naturalists
averred that these swift-winged creatures migrated all the way
from Siberia in the season.
The scenery was as bold as that of the Highlands. The dark
glens, and rushing waters along the pebbly bottoms, reminded
Adam of his family’s ancestral country of Aberdeenshire. He
half expected, at some turn or other, to see deer bounding into


GOLDEN WATTLE TIME 5!
shelter as they passed. “Great scenery, Tom, eh ? ”
ffood QLa orie^ d practical Gibbons. “What’s the
g-(X)d ov that. Sheep don t live on scenery. Though Ido mind
a feller out Bendigo way where the miners kept a lot ov goats—
sayr id ‘Yes’ m T e Tp^° m G ‘w°u?’ yer See all these bare ’ ills? ’ he
it y b„f ip ’ c 1 replles: Well says ’e, ‘yer mightn’t believe
the goats eat it U " r be pretty good in these Parts till
Adam roared, and even the cleric seemed to go into convul-
-1 hea rd of those goats,” he said. “They eat the clothes
Iholes ” llneS, ShlrtS and C ° atS ’ leavin £ nothing but the button-
The little intermission had served to take Adam’s thoughts
(oft the old country, the Cotswolds, the home in Cheltenham, and
.Jane. Here was an open unwritten page of life, where a man
might write his own story untrammelled by the scorings of the
l p ast. Here one could forget old liabilities, and start the account
a with destiny with a clean slate. These impressive granite tons
with age, seemed again like giants standing at attention,
t then speais in hand, for the mica-tipped peaks glistened in the
€ expiring glow of sunset.
Tom seemed to read his thoughts. “Why,” he interposed,
a as they followed the rough course of the creek, “these ain’t
i nothing at all to th’ Blue Mountains. You don’t follow no
vwatercourse there—you can’t. You just climb, an’ climb, along
tthe saddles, and ridges, with valleys 2,500 feet alongside One
fcbad step, an’ yer wouldn’t stop this side ev ’ell. They tole me
tthe old man of the mountains had a row with the feller with the
fforked tail, and cloved ’oofs, and they just threw them mountains
aat one ernother and let ’em lay.”
Tom looked up and laughed. “Looks like a storm brewin’ ”
hhe remarked, pointing to the clouds gathering on the heights ’
The track crossed and recrossed the creek, which had risen
suddenly, evidently from a mountain storm higher up the pass
TThe stream had become a foaming mass of brown water that
ccalled for watchfulness by the troopers, who were leading their
uunwillmg packhorses in and out of the stream. They went into
lilndian file, the cleric bringing up the rear. The thunder rolled
naearer, reverberating through the mountain gap, and the light
nnmg flashes came out of a black cloud that was thundering and
clelosing on them. Adam mounted the steep creek bank after a
wet crossing, with Tom behind, their baggage animals straining
att the leading reins, and the third man left to his own devices
Tfhe x troopers were both silenfly cursing their decision to enter
oim this errand of mercy.
With all their attention concentrated on their task in the
hdope of avoiding a bad spill, neither member of the Mounted
saaw a man emerge from the bush ahead, until his challenge ran?
ouut like a shot from a pistol. “Hands up!” Even then Adam


had no alternative but to struggle to the top of the bank, and
pull his saddle-bag horse behind him. Only then did he see
that another ruffian had Tom held up in the middle of the stream
at pistol point, and apparently the unfortunate clergyman behind
was too scared to move.
“Come right across,” shouted the bigger of the two bush-
rangers. Tom shrugged his shoulders and obeyed. The other
horses splashed their way to his side. More than once Adam
had thoughts of reaching for his firearms in his belt, but Tom
called to him: “Better not, mate—a dead prospector’s no good
ter nobody.”
“That’s right,” said the big man who had first challenged
them. “Ketch ’em alive is my way. Now git down off them
nice-lookin’ dappled greys ev yours, and don’t try no tricks.”
Tom nodded and both troopers obeyed. “Take them guns
they got in them belts, Joe,” ordered the bandit leader.
“Right, Ben,” said the younger of the two.
Something in the gait of the man, and in the inflection of
his voice, seemed strangely familiar. The light still held, and
bad as his vision was, he recognised his former captive of the
Ninety-Mile Desert. So this was his descent to Avernus.
“Facilis descensus Averno est,” he said.
“What you swearin’ about?” asked the big captor. “Keep a
shut mouth, will yer, or I’ll shut it fer keeps. Now, Joe, just
see what’s in them saddle-bags.”
“They’re only specimens, I assure you,” came the voice of
the cleric, whom Adam had clean forgotten.
The two ruffians roared with laughter*
Adam saw that the parson still sat his horse, and in his hand
was a pistol. He wondered that the others hadn’t seen it.
He thought to gain time. “Don’t hurt the parson; he’s
harmless,” he said.
There was another roar of laughter. “D’yer ’ear that,
Stiffy? The Reverend Stiffy, eh? Well done, ole boy. You
keep ’em covered, while Joe looks inter them bags, and we sees
them samples.”
So the parson was one of the gang, and two of the mounted
had been trapped as simply as that. Adam’s face indicated the
fury that swept over him. The man named Ben looked
impudently at him. “You infernal new-chums,” he said, “yer
ride perlice greys and think ter git away as simple prospectors.”
“Ah, my old friend of the desert. It’s your call this deal,
but the long arm of the law will get you all right, and in the end
you’ll swing for what you’ve done, my hearties.”
The man looked as if he meant to shoot Adam on the spot,
but Ben roared his orders. “Put that pistol down, you fool, or
I’ll drill you atween the eyes—l mean it.”
Joe dropped his arm. “We noo you was the gold escort
all th’ time. We ’ad yer watched at Castiemaine. And ’ow did


yer fall fer Stiffy? Used ter be an acter, didn’t yer Stiffy?”
Ben had been amused to watch the faces of the two members
of the hated mounted police. “Yes,” he added, “it was Stiffy
thought out th’ ’eart-breakin’ story about the dyin’ settler.
That so, Stiffy?”
“I must confess, gentlemen,” answered that worthy, “the
sketch was not entirely original. I played a very similar part
with Charles Keen at Drury Lane, when I was regarded as that
great actor’s only serious rival.” He bent his head gracefully
as to an audience.
There was, of course, more laughter, but Ben suddenly
cried, “Open them bags, Joe, no more ev this cursed plav-actin*
stuff.” *
Joe evidently found some difficulty in loosening the straps,
of the first baggage horse. He was hidden from both Adam and
Tom, on the off side of the beast. He seemed to be pulling at a
tight buckle, swearing vigorously. “If* tight—got wet cross-
ing I s’pose—l’ll cut the infernal thing.” Evidently he gave
the strap a sudden jerk.
There was a loud explosion, then another, and another. The
horses plunged frantically. Stiffy’s mount caught the fear, and
reared. In a moment, the members of the mounted had snatched
advantage out of the confusion. Pistols seemed to materialise
in their hands—emergency weapons hidden in their top-boots.
The tables were turned. The younger ruffian, taking advantage
of the horse being between him and the troopers’ line of fire,
dived into the bush, and disappeared with incredible swiftness.
“Hold those two, Tom,” cried Adam. “I’m after that man
of mine. But before I go,” he said, turning to the two captives,
that little show was a police trick. Those straps are always
fixed to a couple or more of hair triggers. One pull of the
straps and you get what you saw. You want a lot of luck to
beat the Mounted.” He mounted his grey, and turned to go
after the escapee, believing he would run him down. Suddenly
there was a crashing of the bush. The man had found his
horse, and meant to make a bid for freedom.
It was what the trooper had been waiting for—since he
saw, on foot, the bandit might have escaped in the thick bush.
But evidently he didn’t want to leave his horse behind, and
trusted to his better knowledge of the country to dodge his
pursuer.
“Wait for me, Tom !” shouted Adam. “Keep them covered!”
“Right,” replied his phlegmatic fellow-trooper. “Git yer
man, dead or alive, lad.”
Adam needed no more. He swept down the gully, guided
by the sound of breaking bush ahead. The rogue was making
the pace hot, but he was forced to risk the trail of noise. For-
tunately, the storm had spent its force, but the rain came down
gently from the tail of a cloud. The peaks were aglow with


the last rays of the setting sun, shining above the lace-like
clouds of the hillsides. And the early rising moon had begun
to silver the golden glow of the final shafts of sunlight.
The outlaw hoped no doubt to throw off the pursuer by the
pace he set, trusting to his unshod, sure-footed brumby, to pass
over the slippery rocks where the heavier police horse could
not hope to follow at any pace. But the lad who had' ridden
the glens of Inverness and the fastnesses of MacDhui, who had
hunted in the Cotswolds, taking fences and stone walls at killing
pace, was not to be outstripped by a ruffian, even on a bush-bred
brumby. i . . , ~
Yet the brumoy gave him a sorry chase, and had riders
been reversed, the wolf might( have escaped the hound. The
long hunt followed through she-oak and wattle, blackwood and
tall bluegums, across creeks and up steep mountain slopes, the
broken rocks slipping from under the horses’ feet v/ith a tell-
tale rumble as they slid down hill.
Adam knew, by the sounds, that the distance between
hunter and quarry was rapidly shortening. The moon was now
undisputed mistress of the sky, which had lit its starry lamps
in greeting. The silver light seemed to make the scene almost
as bright as day. The trooper was beginning to wonder
whether, after all, the scoundrel would not escape, when ahead
there was a heavy crash; rocks plunged into the depths below,
and a cry echoed through the night. Then came the sound of
a horse crashing through bush, and a man’s oath.
Apparently the sure-footed brumby had faulted for once,
and in the fall, his rider had been pitched out of the saddle.
Then the animal, scrambling to its feet, had broken away,
leaving the man afoot, and perhaps injured. Adam spurred
his tired horse, to a last burst of speed, as recklessly as the
ground would allow. A shot “pinged” close to the trooper, and
touched the horse’s withers. The grey’s iron shoes slipped on
some loose rock. It tried to save itself, but there was no safe
foothold, amid the wet smother of rock and bracken. His
rider did his best to slide out of the saddle, but the stumbling
of the animal gave him no chance to clear his stirrups. Flung
violently groundward, head first, he was saved from, perhaps,
a fatal fall, by a bush catching him in its elastic arms. Shaken
as he was, he looked first to his mount. The beast quickly rose
to its feet and stood obediently, but when it moved the trooper
noted the telltale limp. He must leave the animal there, and
follow his man afoot. -
Listening with keen acuteness, he thought he caught the
sound of something moving down in the bottom. His training
in deer-stalking in the Highlands seemed to lend him new senses
for this task. Making sure of his pistol, he glided as silently
as the slippery stones would allow, to the creek. Something
dark passed like a swift shadow across the face of white rock,


about a hundred yards ahead, the moonlight, picking it out as
it passed.
Risking an ambush, he made for the spot, almost ricking
his ankle in the journey, and came to a face of white rock that
towered like a wall some 150 feet sheer above the creek level,
jt was a blind gully, after all. But where had the man gone?
i seemed to have been swallowed up, as though the rock wall
had opened up to receive him and closed again. Realising he
was ottering an easy target for a desperate criminal, he kept to
the shadows. But where did that big flow of water come from?
Apparently out of the cliff. A large blackwood grew close
alongside the water. Daring everything, he pushed his way
behind the dark limbs. There he discovered the secret,
twenty! yards farther on was a cave. Out of that the water
flowed, and into that the wolf had sought refuge.
Somewhere in that dark, subterranean retreat a desperate
outlaw doubtless waited for him with his pistol raised. To
walk into that spider’s parlour was to invite the fate of the
proverbial fly. For, as he entered, his figure would be
silhouetted against the bright moonlight. Throwing a stone
into the cavern as far as possible, and dropping on his stomach,
Adam crawled as a child would do. The sound of the stone
crashing against the walls echoed loudly, and was answered by
a pistol shot. The flash revealed the bandit’s hiding-place far
up the cave which apparently opened out widely as the cavity
extended. Another stone cast did not draw fire. The outlaw
had no doubt sensed the ruse.
Not fear, but elation thrilled the member of the Mounted
as ’ by S P r °S ression > he drew nearer his man. How often
had the Gordons of old played such a game of hide and seek
with their foes, using dirks instead of firearms. Summoning
jail the caution instilled as part of his police training, and appre-
ciating his own native recklessness, Adam crawled still closer
Ito l he .u pla€e whe l e the enemy lay ‘ U was to he a pistol duel
'with the issue of kill or be killed.
Standing upright, well out of line of the cave open-
nng, he balanced himself on the balls of his feet as
hie had done many a time in facing Jem Edwards, ready
tto spring on one side or the other, as if in the ring. In the
dark his foot slipped on a wet rock, and down he went heavily
with a loud clatter of the loose stones. A flurry of wings of
m dozen bats further up the cave drew a shot intended for him
TThis time he fired back. Evidently the man had more than one
weapon, for an answering! bullet whined close to Adam’s ear.
Knowing it would take the miscreant time to reload his old-
ffashioned pistol, and chancing him having reloaded his other
weapon, the attacker rushed forward, firing his revolver at the
sjpot where a form had shown fitfully through the pistol flame
They were coming to close grips now, and it might yet have


to be settled in the darkness with bare hands. To his consterna-
tion, this expedient seemed to be confirmed, when, on testing
the cylinder of his revolver —an improvisation only recently
invented—he found it jammed. Racing forward in his despera-
tion, unwittingly he had brought himself between the moonlit
cave opening and his enemy. His form was plainly silhouetted
against the pale light outside—a target that could scarcely be
missed.
Two things saved his life. The bandit took his time to
make what he wanted to be sure, would be a killing shot. And
at the very minute of the bandit’s finger pressing the trigger,
an unseen drop in the cave floor swung the Member of the
Mounted out of the line of fatal fire. As it was, the ping of
the bullet in his firing arm, and the clatter of his revolver on
the stones, told his enemy that the shot had gone home—
whether, fatally or not, he could not tell in that Stygian black-
ness. The man shouted his exaltation. Adam could hear him
moving towards him. Murder, he knew, was in the fellow’s
heart. The ruffian was quite aware that his own life was forfeit
were he captured.
The arm pained excruciatingly, but with his other hand
Adam felt around for the fallen weapon. Luckily he put his
fingers right on it. Not that a jammed weapon was much use.
If it came to a tussle he had only one set of fingers to clutch
that throat.
To wait, however, would be fatal. Listening intently, and
measuring the distance to go by the sound of the approaching
shuffle, and with the revolver clutched in his left hand, he
determined to draw the enemy’s fire. Some idea crossed his
mind to use his pistol as a blackjack. Deliberately he shuffled
some stones under his feet, and sprang as swiftly aside. The
manoeuvre succeeded with dangerous directness. The answer-
ing flash was not five yards distant, and the bullet cut through
the trooper’s hat, parting his hair with a wet streak. But while
the figure was yet dimly discernible behind the man’s gunfire,
Adam instinctively raised his revolver, his finger on the trigger.
There was an explosion and a flame, a scream of agony—heart-
rending like that of a trapped rabbit. Propelled by his impetus,
Adam lurched forward, and struck with his pistolled hand. His.
weaponed fist hit flesh with a dull thud. There was the fall of
a heavy body, splashing in the stream.
On the alert, against surprise in the dark, he felt his way
to the fallen quarry. All was silent as a tomb. Was a wounded
ruffian, his pistols empty, waiting to grapple with him in a
death struggle? Feeling cautiously for the body, his hand
touched rough tweed, and moved up to the heart. The feel of
something moist made him shiver, but he knew the black heart
would beat no more. He had shot him dead in his lair.
He drew a deep breath of relief. Yet a nausea came over


him for a moment. It was the first! man he had ever killed.
Painfully he lifted the corpse from the water, and, step by
agonising- step, dragged it to the opening out into the moon-
light, The open eyes stared unblinkingly at the stars. So on
such a stage, and in such a light, the poor devil had made his
exit. But in such lawless times it was all in a day’s work for
the gold escort. Yet how he hated it.
CHAPTER VII.
THE TEST.
ON reaching the little township of Casterton the troopers
handed over their prisoners to the local Victorian police.
The shooting of the bandit in the cave was reported by Adam
prosaicially, as being all in a day’s duty.
In truth he was sick at heart with a calling that forced him
to the side of the law against the outlaw. It was so opposed
to his ancestral traditions. He felt that if he continued in the
Mounted he might drift in the same direction as “False Gordon,”
News of the adventure leaked out over the Casterton bars.
In his cups Tom Gibbons belied his usual sober taciterity. Thus
when the troopers reached Mount Gambier, the encounter had
become magnified into a sanguinary struggle with Trooper
Gordon as the hero. As the dusty cavalcade with their pack
horses passed down the main street, residents came out to greet
them, and when they came to the home of the Sergeant in
Charge of the South East, they were stopped by his young and
rather pretty wife, who insisted on shaking hands with the
two ragged and unkempt “prospectors.”
Adam was furious. He realised that the encounter would
= set malicious tongues wagging. Frequently had he danced with
1 the buxom lady, and, on one occasion, the Sergeant tyimself had
] rebuked his subordinate for sitting out in the shadows after
1 the ball was over. That they had kissed and parted on more
t than one occasion only increased Adam’s sense of annoyance.
When at last they reached the station it was to find Sergeant
I Mulligan in full possession of the news that his wife had gone
c out of her way to greet young Gordon. Tom Gibbons was
i remitted to Adelaide with a few commendatory references to
Y his courage, but Trooper Gordon was ordered to remain in the
g South East for instructions. These instructions turned out to
fc be too humiliating to be borne. Not only was the gold escort
t to go on to Adelaide without him, but his horse was to be
t taken over by the trooper who had replaced him on that mission.
The cup was filled to overflowing when the Sergeant bluntly
o ordered “The Grampion .Hero” to clean Mulligan’s boots. “And
b blacken ’em well” that officer almost hissed.
“Put up your dirty hands,” shouted the irate subordinate,
“ “and I’ll blacken those bleary eyes of yours instead.”


“Obey orders, or) take yer discharge, Trooper Gordon,”
retorted Sergeant Mulligan, now white with fear. Adam didn’t
know which was uppermost in that crafty mind. “Yer don’t git
me into trouble stagin’ a case of assault an’ battery in perlice
’eadquarters.”
“You want to kick me out of the service for kissing that
young wife of yours. Well, what if I did. There’s no harm
done. But what you’ll report me for is being drunk and too
free with women. Well, I never could abide liquor much, and
if I like the ladies in a free and easy way, you ought to know
what comes to old fossils, when a good looking young woman
marries Grandpa.”
There was no doubting that Trooper Gordon was mad with
anger at his superior officer’s orders. The young man looked the
grey-haired Sergeant squarely in the eyes he proposed to colojrr
black and blue, and what he saw in those watery optics, did
not seem very encouraging for a “go.”
“Obey orders or take your discharge, Constable Gordon.”
“Why don’t you put up your fists to back your sentiments?”
retorted the impatient trooper. “It’s a miserable worm that
won’t defend his wife. She’s a bit of a fool over some things—
marrying you, for instance—but you don’t have to worry because
you caught me kissing her, or her kissing me—l don’t know
where it began—it’s like the chicken and the egg—no one
knows which started first.” His smile was especially provoca-
tive.
Still the Sergeant believed discretion to be the better part
of valour. He had the whiphand anyway. A report that the
constable was drunk and disorderly would do the trick. Why
risk having his claret spilled, with what he knew would be most
efficient expedition?
Adam sensed what was going on in that common, crafty
mind. “I can’t help it if thatf wife of yours prefers me to a
low-minded, lying, cowardly wastrel of a husband, who is a dis-
grace to any home, and to any service.”
This was too much for the Sergeant. He struck without
warning, but hit empty air. Rushing his enemy, he clutched
at the elusive trooper with his arms wide open, knocking over
a couple of chairs in the process. Failing in this attempted bear’s
hug, he went berserk with rage, his arms flailing the air wind-
mill fashion, his eyes bloodshot, and foam showing on his thick
lips.
Adam’s low laugh maddened him beyond control—he had
begun to believe the young man either would not or could not
retort, except with his tongue. But in trying to jam him up
against the office table, he got a tap on the nose. Another rush
allowed the expert to close first the right eye then the left, and a
poke in the solar plexus, sat the chief representative of law and


GOLDEN WATTLE TIME 59
order of the south-east, ignobly on the floor.
“I give yer your discharge,” was all he was capable of
saying.
“I discharge myself,” reported the younger guardian of the
peace. “Make no mistake about it,” he added, “I’ve got mixed
up with too many fair women in these parts. Why they like me
I don’t know. But it’s getting complicated. That good-looking
wife of yours is the last straw. When it comes to women, it’s
me that does the running. I’ll just call on that missus of yours,
kiss her good-bye, and quit you and your cursed orders.”
The Sergeant looked up from the floor, his little eyes blink-
ing through their black and purple setting. “Curse you,” he
said, but as Adam walked smilingly out of the door a free man,
the curse seemed to lack authority. And that was the end of
his service with the Mounted Constabulary.
A few days later a solitary horseman might have been seen
by the wildfowl —for there was no civilized human in all that
lonely land to see him—picking his way along the edge of the
chain of lakes, that parallel the coast of Australia in those parts.
For a hundred and fifty miles or more, these inland waters run,
guarded, from the southern seas, by rolling sand-dunes, lightly
touched with the tender green of bush, and stunted trees.
Against that white rampart, the rollers from the Anarctic made
eternal assault in vain. Not one foot of ground had they gained
in all the ages. On the contrary, the rising continental shelf is
slowly pushing back the ocean nearer the magnetic pole, along
a coastline of 2,000 miles. But as Father Woods had pointed
out, it lias another 2,000 miles to go, before linking Australia to
Antarctica.
For three days the ex-trooper had pursued his tortuous
way, through marsh and sand, or over the bare limestone plains,
where sickly grass gasped for lack of mineral sustenance, or
again across the expanse of deep, peaty soils—the spoil of ages
of rich alluvial deposits. Mostly paper-bark ti-tree grew near
the edges of the marshy ground, and she-oak, on what were
euphoniously called the ranges, but which, in reality, were low
ridges, raised some thirty feet above the level of the surrounding
plains. Honeysuckle, acacia, and bottlebrush grew here, with
an occasional blackwood, or tall belt of eucalyptus, lifting their
amber tips to the sky. Here was the home of the black wattle,
whose gold, for what it could buy, was not worth the gathering,
but the valuable tanning qualities of its bark, had turned many
a kangaroo, and ’possum skin, into a fine rug.
No lover of nature, and of nature’s colouring, and still more
no “stringer of rhymes,” could possibly be lonely in such a
nursery of natural wonders. The whole land throbbed with life.
Marsupials—the surviving fauna of an age, that had vanished
elsewhere with the dinosaurians, and diprotodon—hopped silently


across the trail of the strange creature, that seemed to be half
horse and half man. Or these creatures of the wild sat up
with their small ears cocked on one side, inquiringly asking, so
it appeared, the eternal question, “Well, have you come to
exterminate me, too?”
The traveller had seen in the distance the smoke of blacks’
camps, but the aboriginal, so different from his white brother,
killed only to eat, leaving the balance of nature undisturbed.
It was, however, on the surface of the waters that life
teemed. Stately pelicans fished in the deeper reaches of
the lakes and lagoons, moving like a fleet in review formation.
They flew clumsily, sometimes carrying their full catch to the
nesting-islands, where, free from peril, their squawking young,
dug their bills deep into the open gullet, for the never-satisfying
meal.
Cape Barren geese honked overhead, or dropped into the
water, with a running splash. Black duck, widgeon, teal, and
diver, darkened the lake’s ruffled surface, or whirled aloft,
wheeling gracefully in their flight, or shot down the sky like
meteors. Black swan moved in groups across the face of the
waters like Royal barges in unhurried grace, while waterhens
waded knee-deep, like timid old maids, afraid of wetting their
feathered skirts for fear of getting drowned, their heads nod-
ding rhythmically, but always in an opposite direction to the
motion of their bodies.
Adam noted, too, the handsome gold-brown shell-drakes, or
mountain duck, moving in pairs, like loving couples along the
shores. And occasionally he caught sight of the giant native
companions, usually with wings outspread, performing their
graceful gavottes, and minuets, as to the manner bom.
The absence in the new land of any deer, or other hoofed
creature of the wild, struck Adam, as perhaps, Nature’s way of
balancing the absence of any carnivorous beast, except the
dingo—a migrant from another land. But then Nature in this
more or less primeval continent, played many fantastic tricks.
He had often passed in the scrub the mound nest of the
mallee hen, or native pheasant, which, after scratching together
a great mount of sand, laid its eggs in decaying leaves—Nature’s
incubator—and accepted no further responsibility for the hatch-
ing, or care, of its young.
With so well stocked a larder always available, Adam
seldom accepted the hospitality of the sheep, and cattle runs, at
which he volunteered to ply his calling as a colt-breaker, pre-
ferring the menu of the wilderness, with its damper and billy
tea, to the “wittles” and liquor, of the homesteads.
Pushing his tired horse while the sun still rode high, the
weary rider skirted a lovely little lake, a silver gem, in a setting
of deep green bush. The intermittent roar of the sea grew ever
louder. His quick ear, however, caught the sound of laughter,


and cheers. Ah, so he was on the outskirts of a settlement,
probably the little township of Robe, where the Governor of the
State went into residence every summer, to escape the heat of
the distant capital.
Breaking- through the dense scrub, the rider broke in upon
a crowd of men gathered around an improvised stockyard,
watching a buck-jumping contest. As he rode in all eyes were
turned momentarily upon the stranger. But the comical efforts
of a lad to stick on a bucking colt, soon recaptured the full
attention of the crowd.
As to the outlaw, it apparently knew all the tricks of its
enforced profession. If its contract was to keep an empty
saddle, it honoured it. One after another, amid the shouts and
roars of laughter, successive riders were thrown. One hardy
boundary-rider survived the rooting, and pigging, and all the
outlaw’s devilish efforts to throw himself backwards on his
rider, his twists and sudden stalling*, and the swerve so close to
the hardwood posts, as to threaten to break the rider’s leg.
But a double twist, followed by a sunfish dive, at last emptied
the saddle, the fellow being flung like a stone from David’s sling.
The man had pluck. He bounded up like a ball, dived for
the reins, and jerked them down and back with cruel insistence,
giving the animal’s mouth a vicious wrench each time.
“Good for you, Charlie,” shouted a big man in a red shirt
and corduroy trousers, rushing in and taking over the reins.
His puffy red face was good-natured enough, but his bleary eyes,
and Falstafflan girth, gave indications, that if he was a publican,
he would probably be one of his own best customers. And that
is precisely what he was.
“Boys,” he continued, “Charlie Mullaby’s shown us some
great tricks for stickin’ to the moke. I’ll bet there ain’t a rider
this side ev th’ border ter beat ’im. Watyersay, Charlie? Yer
garme ter beat th’ best ev ’em ?”
“I am that, Johnny Forbes. I’ll take on any blurry son ev
’orseflesh this, or t’other side ev th’ border. What’s th’ stake?”
“A noo sovereign, and a bottle ev brandy—l can’t say fairer
than that.” He looked around challengingly, “Go’s takin’ it
on? But don’t all speak at once,” he chuckled.
All eyes were non-committal. “No one’s tried Twister,” he
went on. “I make it a fiver ’ooever can beat Charlie in stickin’
ter Twister. Game Charlie?”
That worthy nodded,, but not too cheerfully, Adam noted.
Forbes accepted the nod as a bid for the fiver. Looking around
for a victim, his eye took in the stranger, with pipe in his mouth,
lounging lazily against the rail. “What about you, new chum?”
he asked aggressively. ‘You look a likely sticker.”
Adam grinned. “I’ve got a bad arm,” he said, feeling where
the bullet wound still troubled Him.
“Or a bad nerve,” said Charlie insolently.


Adam flushed. He had been in the country lone- enoue-h to
appreciate the code, “Cowardice was the brand of the unfit.”
the rodeo B arfff'^. e n^" comer the last hope of continuing
“pub ” ‘‘lf IL f keepmg- the crowd f or the plucking later at his
he said A yer won>t Waller that,”
ne said, spreading his hands towards Adam. “Now, I put it
imitation of ?hf- T®’ g ° in ? f ° r the third and last time!” his
the lasrtime^goln'” 10n6er W ° rk tick,ed the audi^oe--“for
sbouted Adam, laughing. The crowd cheered
To d fhpm I th6 ex ' member of the Mounted found himself popular!
outlaw” 1 was , a stranger who was game enough to ride an
r°etXta4Tharhe r . ted t 0 the “ jack ® r °°”
Twister, hurriedly saddled, was brought into the ring. Pie
came quietly enough. He was a roan entire, lanky, and long in
h!d l“™ ’i' Vlth r a Shol '! . neck ’ and an u «ly head. Evidently he
hole e ti! o re n dl u g I " l T’. bat was most ly brumby—the wild
untfl n b n S a , He looked as if he had not been mouthed
until after he had been running free on the ranges or in the
. H . e . ce ?’tf nly - s - howed a nasty and hi »
Adam safdh'^at^o’rse^h^^its/’ 010113 temP ® r - Yet *° “ f
You ride first,” said Charlie dictatorily
“We toss for place ” said Adam. “I don’t want to tire him
tor you, he added, with a smile—his directness causing a titter
around the ring.
Lp w3 kt ’ devil j” T Charlie began, but thinking better of it,
neither” ’ N °’ a ” d 1 don 1 want you to P ut one over on me,
“All right, then, we’re agreed. We toss for it ”
T u Tha £ as exactly whafe Charlie had not agreed to but
Johnny Forbes, with one eye on his bar takings, was determined
to settle it. Taking two shillings from his pocket he handed
one to each. Head rides first,” he said peremptorily. Adam
spun without a moment’s hesitation. The coin fell at Johnnv’s
feet, but others were near also. “It’s tails,” he said. “Now
Charlie, your go. ’
The surly boundary-rider spun the shilling after spitting
on it for luck. It rolled on landing, uncertain which side to rest
upon. Finally the face of Queen Victoria looked up Adam
thought indignantly. It s heads, Charlie,” said a wiry little
chap. “Fred Archer” they called him, because of his iockey
proportions. J
“Serve yer right, Charlie,” said Freddy. “That comes ev
spittin on the Queen’s face. I noo it ’ud bring yer bad luck ”
As for Charlie, he looked daggers at his new critic. Sullenly
he went across to the horse, held ready for mounting, and in a


trice he had climbed like a monkey into the saddle. Even
Twister seemed surprised at this expertness. But the next
moment, that brumby was rearing, plunging, twisting, kick-
ing,—all the actions in split seconds. Without any noticeable
let-up, he had thrown himself on his side, Charlie missing being
crushed by adroitly stepping out of the saddle, and in again, as
the brute rose to his feet. First round to Charlie! But then
came the famous sunfish dive, and the landing with a jar that
seemed to jolt the spinal cord, all four feet coming down together.
The rear backwards followed swiftly, and shook the rider, but
he managed to stick it, and the swing and sudden halt failed to
dislodge him.
No doubt, however, Twister felt the rider’s balance had
become as uncertain as the man’s confidence in himself, and the
creature rose and swerved, twisted, and flung himself, so reck-
lessly, that it looked as if he was prepared to commit suicide to
get the man off his back. Some such fear paralysed Charlie’s
judgment. He struck the brumby heavily on the head with his
whip handle. It reached an old bruise, and the agony sent the
horse berserk. He raced for the heavy gum-post that guarded
the gate, as if to dash out his own brains, and those of his tor-
mentor as well. Charlie’s nerves collapsed under the strain.
The horse stalled abruptly, and the boundary-rider was flung
ignominiously over his head. It was an inglorious ending to a
clever piece of riding.
Twister immediately stood as still as though he were the
gentlest creature alive, but his late rider lay like the dead. When
he came to, he staggered to his feet, and with oaths and curses,
would have mounted again. But the fall was conclusive.
“Well done, Charlie —that ’ull take a lot ev beatin’,” shouted
Johnny Forbes for everyone to hear, so anxious was he not to
offend a good customer. “And now, new-chum, it’s your turn
to play pitch an’ toss with Twister. I can tell by yer talk yer
ain’t a colonial—not by a long chalk.”
Adam strode over to the sweating horse. He picked a
cloth from out of the attendant’s hand, and began to rub the
entire down. “Give him a breather,” he said to the astonished
crowd, pointing to the still-heaving sides. Gently he passed his
hand over the outlaw’s nose and patted his neck, blowing the air
in a half whistle as he wiped him down.
Tenderly he felt the spot on the head where Charlie had
struck. The horse winced. “Ah,” he said, “not the first time
you’ve been hit over the head. It’s sore, isn’t it, old boy?”
The voice seemed to soothe the wild creature, which had
been so unused to such treatment. Another stroke of the neck,
and before anyone conceived his intention, much less Twister,
the newcomer was seated firmly in the saddle. By some
intangible process of understanding, rider and horse seemed to
have emerged into a single living organism.


Dl7O the brumby was no neophite to be won over by tricks,.
?rSV£ kmdn f S£ ;- Forthwith he went into what Johnny Ford
con - v H l :? huns /’ with the emphasis on the last syllable.
wiin o g 1 and stalling- suddenly,
f kook evei X bon e m the rider’s body, he went
through the whole gamut of contortions, almost, as one observer
ft * nto tke le^ters S and Xat the same time.
\ fair - Th ® human parasite oil his back stuck like a
S n l . storm-tossed ship. Sooner might he shake off his
of hi« stra^ e tklng ’ that had become, as it were, flesh
oi ins flesh, bone of his bone.
kis distress, his heart throbbing as though it must
burst, he made a last desperate effort to win his freedom by
wSThS S L e6P h rrr r !? 6^ of l agai ii st a post Ail that happened
nommpl of A +t. 7? ot I from the stirrups and let the
pommel of the saddle take the shock.
, tiV wfin COh Tu PUS resorted to guile. It stood suddenly
stock still Then, as quickly, it flung itself down to twist the
lecumbrant rider out of the stirrups. The rider backed on the
aS th e horse stumbled to its feet, he rose too.
hi saddlT WaS ° n hIS feet ’ kls rider was planted firmly again
a Wist S r s b° od ia st with drooping head—utterly beaten.
And then the hand came down smoothly on his neck-gentle and
soothing. It reached the tender spot on his head with com-
forting touch A voice talked a language he could not decipher,
but dmily understootl. Amid cheers, in which Johnny himself
belatedly joined, the victory was acclaimed.
Adam would have dismounted then, but something in the
distance had caught the crowd’s attention. Every eye was
ocused on the sight of a big mob of cattle, evidently from the
north, en route to the goldfields. Stockwhips were cracking,
cattle dogs barking, and bullocks bellowing. A girl from the
township, coming to the stockyard, was walking unconcerned a
hundred yards, or so, in front of the mob. This in itself presaged
no danger. 6
Adam was slow m taking in the sight, and was belatedly
about to dismount when, with a low rumble, the earth quivered
beneath. The posts rocked and swayed drunkenly, and the very
sky began to revolve.
‘'A shake,” someone called out in an awed voice. “Earth-
quake!” “Earthquake!” was taken up by the crowd. Old-
timers were no less shaken by the uncanny instability of the
solid earth, because the district was not unfamiliar with such
seismic waves, which had more than once tumbled their buildings
about their ears. Mother earth had not yet quite recovered
from her volcanic outbreaks of ages past, though, as Father
Woods could have told them, this was due to a fault somewhere
m the ocean bed along the southern coastline of the continent


Adam felt Twister quiver as with ague beneath him,.
The animal plainly was terrified. It was then he saw the cattle
moving toward them. Like the horse, they were terrorised by
the earth slipping beneath their feet. Bellowing wildly, the
mob began to toss and turn. Fear begot fear. Mob hysteria,
not uncommon with humans, as Adam was aware, tends to over-
take lower animals with increasing intensity, as the scale of life
descends. The cattle began to mill wildly in an ever-widening
circle, the pace ever increasing so that soon they were moving
fast, bellowing their fear, and with a roar that shook the earth
the stampede was on.
A cry of horror went up from the crowd. The girl heard
the animals, and ran screaming towards the stockade. But
everyone knew she hadh’t a chance to make it.
Adam did not hesitate. Racing Twister to the end of the
yard, he put the wild horse to the flimsy fence, and broke rather
than jumped it, with a crash. The horse stumbled, but
recovered with his rider’s help on the reins. And then, at racing
speed, they whirled towards the girl. Adam calculated distances,
noting that she was running as fast as she could towards him.
But the cloven hoofs drew closer with every heartbeat. To the
horrified onlookers it seemed that man, horse, and maid, must
be crushed to death under those relentless hoofs.
To a move of his rider’s heels, the thoroughbred in the wild
horse responded gallantly. But it was touch-and-go, Adam
did not shorten pace as he reached the girl—there was not
time—but, stooping over the saddle, he caught her under the
arms and swung her off her feet. With surprising presence of
mind, she clutched at his belt as he swung Twister sharply to
the left. The onrushing bullocks swerved the other way, as the
rider calculated they would do. Even then, the girl was partly
brushed from his grasp by contact with the side of the animal
on the outside flank of the mob, but horns and hoofs passed her
safely by. In his dismay, Adam turned to look back, failing
to notice a low overhanging bough of a blue gum. It caught him
under the chin; he was flung heavily to the ground, and knew
no more.
CHAPTER VIII.
WEDDING BELLS.
Hark the bells on distant| cattle
Waft across the range;
Through the golden tinted wattle,
Music low and strange;
Like the marriage bells of fairies
Comes the tinkling sound—
Or like bells of sweet St. Mary's
On far English ground.
THE divinity that shapes our ends may be of either sex. All
that the good people knew about the stranger was that his
name found in his pocket-book was Gordon. Someone


thought they remembered him as a mounted trooper. He could
not correct them, for he lay unconscious for weeks in the “Rams
Head” Inn, in the town, and was being nursed by Maggie Mac-
Gregor, niece of Johnny Forbes, the sporting publican.
The town gossips saw in the situation a romance in the
making. They felt sure he would wake up to hear the wedding
bells. Maggie, innocent of any attempt to do other than bring
back to life and health the man who had saved her so courage-
ously, heard him telling strange tales of the Cotswolds, of Jem
Edwards, and Charlie Walker, and calling from time to time
pathetically for “Jane!” “Jane!” Renewing the damp cloth on
the sufferer’s forehead, she watched that strong resolute face
almost smile at the comfort of it, and, thinking to relieve his
anxiety for the mysterious Jane, she would answer him. “Jane
is here,” she would say. “This is Jane by you.” And, after
she learned his Christian name from the pocket-book, she would
call him “Adam.” Unsophisticated as she certainly was, Maggie
knew that Jane was something dearer to him than a sister.
Another divinity named Destiny was also busy shaping
Maggie’s future. Her heart began to follow where her hands
had led. One day, after tne doctor had arrived from Mount
Gambier, 150 miles away, the patient had startled her suddenly
by saying, in a broken whisper, “Kiss me, kiss me, Jane.” She
had leaned over, and, with fluttering heart, kissed him on the
lips. Thus was her heart pledged.
The day came, three weeks after the fall, when he waked
to find her sitting by his bed. She felt she was lucky to be
there at the time. He knew he was lucky to have her there.
From the first he insisted in calling her Molly. He caught her
hand in his, and she, to comfort him, let it lie there. All of this
happened on the first day of his awakening.
The window commanded a fine view of the sea and of the
lovely Gruichen Bay. He loved to watch the surges breaking
relentlessly on the rock-ribbed coast, or covering, and uncover-
ing the white sands. He could recite another Gordon’s famous
apostrophe to the sea in Childe Harold, his kinsmen: “Roll on,
thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll.” And the tragic lines that
follow,
When, for a moment, like a drop of rain, he sinks into thy depths
with bubbling groan.
Without a grave, unknelled, uncoffined, and unknown—
made him realise that Molly would always appreciate, but never
understand, his excursions into great poetry.
Although normally the worst of invalids, with Molly by his
side loneliness lost its sting, and memories their bitterness.
Something was in the tender eyes of this faithful nurse that
recalled Jane. Molly even criticised him at times as Jane had
done, helpfully, and without censure. He began to pretend that
she was Jane, and deliberately set out to make love to her. He


would catch her hand, and thought that her answering flush was
only one of embarrassment, if not of annoyance,, at liberties she
was too good-natured openly to resent.
The revelation came home to him one day after he had been
asleep and had dreamt of Jane. He had thought the woman
he loved was by his side, somewhere in England. Only half-
awake he had caught Molly’s hand and pressed it to his lips. Her
sigh awakened him fully, and to his surprise he saw tears in
her eyes. Realisation came to him, like a blow, that she cared.
In all his careless life, and in his Don Juan-like attractiveness
to women, he had never consciously hurt an innocent girl, or
wantonly wounded even any wild thing. But he had never-
made pretence of having been an anchorite.
It was when she had gone hurriedly from the room, the*
idea of marriage first came to him. She was desirable, sweet,
and, in her one way, pretty. Yes, why not marry Molly if it
would make her happy ? If he didn’t, other complications might
set in, that would wound her and pain him. His own life was
broken, anyway. The pieces were not worth much to anyone.
Jane had forgotten him. She had probably married the unknown
by this time. No news had come to him, even in the few letters
good old Charlie Walker had written him. To forget the old
world, and be by the world forgot, was all he asked, and, with
Molly by his side, the evil hours would cease to torment him
perhaps.
She came in a little while after, her face rosy with facing
the southerly sea breeze that, as he often said came off the polar
ice. Her eyes were bright, and her sturdy, well-developed figure,,
girlish though it was, was an expression of health and vigour.
“Molly,” he said abruptly, “will you marry me?”
She turned pale. The question seemed to her like an accu-
sation of her secret thoughts. Nor had she ever dreamed that,
if it came at all, it would come this way. She felt bruised in all
her tenderest feelings, even though her heart throbbed with
delicious anguish at the thought of marrying the man she loved,
and of being always able to care and comfort him.
“What about it, girl?” he asked, in a most unemotional
tone. But there was a smile in his eyes. An innate honesty
and shyness of spirit combined to prevent him from decoying
her with honeyed words he did not mean. In his effort to be fair
to her, he went perhaps farther in the opposite direction than
his true feelings for her warranted. For he knew, in his
own heart, that he honoured and liked her well enough to ask
her to share her life with his.
“Oh, Adam,” she said shyly, and with some confusion, “it
is only lately I have come to call you Adam. Are you sure you—
you really care like that—enough to marry me?” There was
such earnestness in her voice; she was so selfless, so
sweet and simple, that a surge of feeling swept over him. He


looked into these dark brown eyes, and held out his arms there
as he lay in bed.
She came to him like a frightened thing, as he put his
arms around her, kissing her eyes, her lips, her hair,i with a
passion he knew in his heart was meant only for Jane.
In her responses there were no such qualifications. She
snatched blushingly at happiness with a full, indeed an over-
flowing, heart, though the still small voice whispered that per-
haps what he offered, and what she was prepared to accept with
all her heart, was hers only by proxy.
The new mission in life acted as an elixir to Adam. And so
in a very brief time the little settlement in that remote corner
of the Antipodes had one of its great days. The wedding bells
pealed their age-old message of happiness to the two who stood
by the altar, and pledged their lives to one another “till death
dof us part.”
Molly’s response, “I will,” given in a low but firm voice, was
charged with emotion. Adam answered in a clear but far-off
tone. His thoughts indeed had taken wings. Try as he would
to dismiss the idea, it was Jane he pictured by his side. The
signature which bound them man and wife he subscribed with
a flourish, while Molly set her name down in a girlish hand.
The ordeal of walking down the aisle after the ceremony to the
tune of the Wedding March, played on a wheezy organ, with the
grinning countryside throwing rice outside, he faced as though
he was being led to a firing squad. How he hated the ceremony,
the • onlookers, the congratulations from hilarious men he
despised, and from inquisitive women he detested. “And who,”
he asked himself, “was this little colonial girl, whom with all
his worldly goods he did endow—having no such worldly goods
to speak of—and whom, under the form of marriage, he had
made his unpaid housekeeper for life.” It was a bad half-hour
Adam gave himself after the ceremony, while Molly was busy
packing.
Yet after all they had the laugh against the townsfolk.
For within an hour of the ring being placed on Molly’s finger
they had started secretly on their honeymoon.
“It all seems like a dream, girl,” said Adam. “The
crowd, the stockyard, Twister, the cattle stampeding, then dark-
ness, and you nursing me back to life. And now here we are
riding together, and have been for three days or more, you and
I, girl, man and wife, bound for Dingley Dell.” He laughed
lightly, almost happily, and patted his horse on the shoulder.
“But, Adam, I’m ashamed of the way we treated those
poor people—they only meant it kindly,” said Molly. She looked
very pretty in her breeches, riding shirt, and top boots, her hair
showing beneath her wide-brimmed felt hat.


Adam admired the way she sat her horse and her under-
standing of horses generally. He grinned provokingly at her.
“All I can say is that I’d like to see the faces of the yokels, and
especially of the town fool who was going to play the usual
jokes on the young married couple—that’s you and me, Molly—
a lot of cuddlewits,” he said. He laughed uproariously, and a
pair of kookaburras on a dead limb of a big gum alongside the
track evidently saw the joke, for they echoed his laughter. Even
Molly was constrained to join in.
“Oh, Adam, they only meant it kindly.” Molly tried to
look at her husband reprovingly, but the effort wasn’t a success.
“KindTy?” Adam scoffed. “The sort of kindness the small
boy shows when he pulls a fly’s wings off to see the fun. And
weren’t we kind in letting them have the wedding breakfast all
to themselves, and leaving them that nice collection of old boots
and tin cans with which they were to have serenaded us. And
little did they think I had Twister and your bay mare Bessie
tied up in the scrub, with our swags, including those boy’s riding
pants you look so nice in.”
“Oh, Adam, I’m ashamed,” said Molly blushing. “And the
men at that last station stared so.”
But he only laughed. “Enough to make the man in the
moon stare, Molly. Pity all women don’t ride that way, instead
of those silly skirts that annoy any decent horse. Why not
show the good-shaped legs mother gave you?” he concluded
looking across to her, watching the colour flood her face and
make it beautiful. But she said nothing.
Adam turned his attention to his mount. “They never
thought I’d make a hack out of you, Twister, did they, old boy ?”
he said, stroking the brumby’s neck.
“It’s just wonderful how you make friends with horses,”
said Molly, casting an approving glance at this strange man who
was her husband.
“Horses, like women, only need a firm hand and an under-
standing heart, eh, Molly?”
“And some men only want a good nurse, a good cook, and
careful managing,” replied Molly with a disarming smile.
“That’s one right in the solar plexus,” and his loud laughter
awoke echoes in the low ranges over which they were at the
moment passing.
But never had life been so free from care for him. The
everlastings, heath and wattle bloom, the honeysuckle, bottle-
brush, and yellow native primroses made the bush one vast
garden. The bees were thick in the gum blossoms hanging in
clusters from the eucalyptus. Even the ti-trees decorated them-
selves with flow 7 ers in this late winter carnival. The tang of
winter in the air gave character to the sunny, almost cloudless,
June days, and all leagued together to make the honeymoon tour
a love journey through Arcady. Molly’s lack of cultural attain-


merits was not apparent in a domain which was hers by adoption,
if not by native heritage. Here she was all at home—helpful
with the horses, with bush cooking, tireless on the longest ride,
and sleeping on a shakedown of leaves like a child.
We re getting close up to Dingley Dell, the family mansion
of three rooms and a cowshed,” he said as they mounted one of
the innumerable sandhills, and caught their first glimpse of
the sea since leaving Gruichen Bay.
“And are there calves?” asked Molly excitedly.
“Why, yes, we feed two poddies on skim milk. And let me
tell you this, girl: In Europe before a calf is born they send for
the veterinary, and bring the cow in, watch her all night, and
give her far more attention than they do toi the women who
become mothers. Why, in most countries they never think of
having a doctor for their baby. They just manage among them-
selves. But the farmers over there insist on having a ‘vet.’ for
their calves. That’s what is so funny over here. No one worries
about a calf being born in the open.”
He happened to glance down at Molly, and was surprised
to see how embarrassed she was at this excursion into the
problems of animal maternity. “Why, you funny little girl-
life’s life, you know—and it’s all natural, girl, and the franker
you face it the more wholesome it becomes.”
Molly, howeyer, was not to be intrigued into such a dis-
cussion. “You little Philistine,” said Adam, laughing, but a
trifle exasperated. Then he leant over and touched her hair
as they rode, “You know, girl, I wouldn’t hurt a hair of your
head.” There was a tenderness in hisf tone that touched her
heart. Her face glowed with happiness. Hers was a love of
adoration, and she was not ashamed.
Adam, catching her look, wondered at the strange peace of
mind and spirit that this sturdy young woman had brought as
her dowry to him. “Ah, girl, you nursed me back to life. I
wonder sometimes whether I’ll bring sorrow to you. Better I
had passed into the Elysian shades than that. I don’t want
the Black Camel to come to your door,” he added gloomily, so
quickly did the mood take him from sunshine to shadow.
“Adam,” she cried, rebelling instinctively against some
intangible terror. “It’s wicked to talk like that. I don’t under-
stand quite what you mean about the camel, and a black one at
that. I never saw one of them creatures outside the pictures in
a Bible story-book.”
Adam laughed the mood off. “Dear Molly, no Black Camel
will ever call at our door while you’re about—you’re too delight-
fully alive—too direct, courageous, robust—say, I’ve run out of
adjectives. But anyway you’re everything, I’m not thank
heavens.” Their horses came close together at that moment,
and he leaned over and kissed her cheek.
Once more wattle time had come with early winter rains.
GOLDEN WATTLE TIME,


For three days they had passed through arbours of gold. The
scent of it filled the air, and with brilliant skies by day, and the
heavy dews of winter at night, it was like travelling through an
atmosphere of champagne—at least so Adam said. The tent,
rolled into a swag by day, was pitched at night in case of rain,
but usually the stars came out after dark, and they would sit
near the roaring camp nre, and the night would be beguiled
with story and recitation—necessarily a monologue.
To Molly it unlocked the door to a new and lovely world, a
world in which the musical and rhythmic cadence of language
coloured the glowing imagery of thought into the beauty of
poetry. Burns, Byron, a few excerpts from Shakespeare, Keats,
Shelley, all of these Adam presented to her untutored but
receptive mind. Not that she understood what it all meant,
but she liked the swing of the metre, and asked for more.
“I don’t understand you always, Adam,” she said wistfully
one night, as they looked into the still-glowing coals. “I love
to hear you recite, but there are times when I get afraid.”
“Girl,” he answered, “you understand with the spirit, and
that’s all that matters. But if I should ask, ‘Canst thou minister
to a mind diseased, pluck from the mind a rooted sorrow,Vjust
put it down to Macbeth, another Scot, by the way, who had his
moods, for did he not say, too: ‘Methought I heard a voice cry,
“Sleep no more! Macbeth doth murder sleep” the innocent
sleep; sleep that knits up the ravelled sleeve of care, the death
of each day’s life, sore labour’s bath, balm of hurt minds, great
Nature’s second course, Chief Nourisher of Life’s feast.’ For a
man who had committed murder there were tHe signs of good-
ness all right.”
“It’s beautiful,” she said, “even though I don’t understand.
It’s all so different to what’s going on around us.”
He laughed. “I wonder which is the real world and which
the make-believe. For my part* let me live with Hector and
Achilles, Listen to my Todas Okus.’ ”
Swift assault and sudden sally.
Underneath the Trojan wall.
Charge and counter-charge and rally.
War cry loud and trumpet call;
Doubtful strain of desp’rate battle.
Cut and thrust and grapple fierce-
Swords that ring on shields that rattle,
Blades that gash, and darts that pierce—
I have done with these for ever, by the loud resounding sea,
Where the reedy javelins quiver there is now no place for me.
Molly looked perplexed. She was struggling with words
that were as Greek to her simple mind. “It all sounds fine
when you say it, Adam, but it’s not healthy to live like that in
the past.” She picked up a dry bough and threw it on the fire.


blazed brightly. “You know, when you first came round after
the fall, you talked in a kind of dazed way of England. You
asked for someone named Oliver—Tom Oliver you called him—
and many times,” she added, with an anxious note in her voice,
“you wanted someone called Jane.” She waited for some com-
ment from him, but he was looking absorbingly into the fire,
his thoughts seemingly far away. Perplexingly she asked:
JUidn t you know what you were saying, Adam ?” Still
there was no reply. “But you did call, Jane! Jane! Oh, so sadly,
I nearly cried myself.” Her voice had a break in it. “Who is
Jane, Adam?” she asked, trying not to seem anxious.
Oh, yes, Jane. Yes, Jane. She is a fine girl—in England.
1 liked her—but she cared for someone else. There, let’s to
sleep and forget the past, as you say, wise little girl.”
It was the next day, as they mounted one of the many ridges
that parallel the coast, that they came within sight of the sea.
Adam broke into versip—some of his own—when they came in
sight of the rolling surges. Molly was as excited as a child
to catch sight of the sea again. It reminded her of home, and
an ache of longing for the old friends she had left behind touched
her heart.
“There’s a big sea on,” cried Adam, elated as he always
became at the smell, sound, and sight of the rolling waters.
The wind’s gone down, but look at those breakers. Come,” he
went on, “I’ll show you the Carpenter’s Rocks from that high
sandhill.”
Putting their horses to it they covered the ground quickly,
despite the heavy going. There a full expanse of the wild coast
broke on their view.
“See the rocks way down the coast? Those are the
Carpenter’s. Many’s the ship that’s met her doom there in
misty weather.”
Molly put her hand to her forehead. Suddenly she
straightened herself, peering anxiously at the distant reef.
“Adam! Adam!” she cried, her voice quivering with feeling.
“Oh, Adam, can’t you see? There’s a ship on the rocks now.
It’s terrible—terrible if it should be a wreck.”
“A wreck?” He cursed his short-sightedness. But his
gaze at last made out the object. There was no doubt it was
a wreck, and he knew no wreck had been there before the last
storm. “We must gallop for it,” he said, putting Twister to
the task. “Come on, Molly,” he called over his shoulder.
For a mile they fairly raced along a hard pan that skirted
the sandhills. They crossed the dunes, and there before them,
seemingly within stone’s throw—but Adam knew it was a good
100 yards from the shore—was the wreck of a noble ship. She
lay with her back broken, her stem and stern in the cruel grip


'( of the reef. And the fight between the sea and the rocks for
t the prey was still being waged in all the bitterness of remorseless
i forces.
“There are people there,” shouted Molly, her voice charged
1 with horror and excitement. “See, they’re clinging to the rig-
ging. Oh, the poor sailormen!” And then her voice took on
i a desperate note. “Adam! Adam! There are women there.
i Oh/ how terrible. What can we do? Oh, what can we do?”
“Tell me,” cried Adam,, not less horrified than Molly, “can
; you see her name on the hull somewhere, near the forepeak,
perhaps? Confound my eyes—blister me if I can see.”
“Yes, yes, there is a name. The stern is side on. Wait;
it’s something begins with A—ah, Adm— Would it be Admiral?”
“No; no. It must be —yes, it must be the fine intercolonial
ship that runs between Adelaide and Melbourne—The Admella.”
He paused for a moment, then was suddenly stirred into action.
“Molly, girl. My God, I must do something. I know,” he went
on excitedly. “There’s a timber-getters’ camp about five miles
along the coast. I’ll ride there, send them down with all the
gear they can muster, and then Twister and I will go hell-for-
leather for the Mount.”
“I’ll come with you,” said Molly quickly.
<7 No, girl. You wait! here. Someone might swim ashore.
You can never tell. You see, I must ride to the Mount to tele-
graph to Beachport for the lifeboat that’s there. It’ll be a
thirty-mile ride, but Twister can do it—a great horse. I know
now why it all happened at the stockyard. It’s Fate —Kismet.
But enough, I must go. You understand, Molly, wait for the
timber-getters.” He turned to kiss her. “You don’t mind, girl?”
“Of course not.”
“You plucky thing.” And with that he was off at a smart
canter through the heavy sand to the hard beach. Once there
Tie put his horse to the gallop just as the sun set in the western
sea.
•
Molly was left watching the helpless sufferers on the wreck.
She saw the great dark seas breaking over the deck and Hinging
their spray high in the rigging, evidently drenching the
unhappy wrecked ones. How long could they cling to that pre-
carious holding. The twilight was slowly fading, shutting off
the tragic sight, but then it seemed all the worse because, though
she could not see them, she could all the more acutely feel with
them in their terror and helplessness.
Still, Providence must be watching over them to have sent
the one man who could ride to bring help. Pray God he might
he in time. And she thanked God he was her man.


CHAPTER IX.
“THE RIDE FROM THE WRECK”
No slave but a comrade staunch in this
Is the horse, for he takes his share.
Not in peril alone, but in the feverish bliss,
And in longing to do and dare.
Where the bullets whistle and round shot whiz,
Hoofs trample, and blades flash bare,
God send me an ending as fair as his.
Who died in his stirrups there.
T 0 a girl of Molly’s practical temperament, the only immediate
* thing she could do was to give to the poor souls clinging to
the wreck the comfort of knowing that someone had seen them
irom the shore. She decided to gather wood for a fire
betore it got too dark to find the timber. Happily there were
plenty of dead boughs, broken off the stunted trees from time to
time by the coastal gales. Soon she was able to light a big pile
of timber and leaves that burnt fiercely, a beacon of hope to the
distressed in their desperate plight. '
Finding a sheltered nook under the lee of the sand hill, she
made up a smaller fire for herself, and, in any case, she had
enough to keep her warm in constantly replenishing the beacon
fire. Anxiously she listened for a gunshot that the men from
the timber camp would probably fire as they approached the
Carpenter s Rocks. Time lagged heavily because of her anxiety
and loneliness.
? a . rk shut down rapidly as Adam plodded through the dunes
that fringed the coastline. He was too experienced a rider not
to curb his all-too-willing horse in such heavy going. Twister
seemed to sense that some momentous task confronted him.
Between rider and horse there seemed to be perfect under-
standing on that point. The firm but friendly hand that gave
mm his head, without slackening rein, the body that fitted into
the saddle as if grafted into his own, and rose in affinity with
every motion of his swift-moving muscles, brought to the animal
a sense of confidence and surety that reduced wastage of effort
to a minimum. Adam allowed his mount to pick the easiest and
safest track by instinct. Little wonder was it, therefore, that
they covered the five miles from the Rocks to the Timber Camp
without Twister turning a hair.
the timber - getters’ fire, Adam quickened
pace. _ Flinging himself from the saddle, he made for
the . circle of light in the thick scrub. At the moment of his
arrival, an accordion was offering up its lamentations to the un-
sympathetic stars, as accompaniment to a sentimental ditty
Tins was voiced by the company in a pathetic tone that suggested
the Wailing Wall of Jerusalem at the peak hour of lamentations—
a conventional cowboy ditty in fact. The dramatic entrance of
trooper Gordon, whom they all knew, set them on their feet.


“Ullo! Vy pless me if she ain’t Trooper Gordon,” said Big
Bill Swanson, the Swedish boss of the camp, shaking Adam
vigorously by the hand.
“Come along,” shouted Joe Henson, “the night’s young. Join
in th’ Allelulah Chorus.”
“Wait, boys!” commanded Adam, holding up his hand—the
other still held the reins. “First, someone take this horse, give
him some oats, and a drink. I’m riding to the Mount to-night.
Without waiting for further explanation, a man took Twister
off Adam’s hands. But the others shouted with one accord, ‘ The
Mount?—To-night?” • . . „
“Yes, to-night; and you’re all shifting camp to-night, too.
They looked their surprise. “There’s a wreck down on the coast—
at the Carpenter’s Rocks every man needed—l go to the Mount
to telegraph for the lifeboat.” „ ,
In a moment there was pandemonium —questions were nrea
at the visitor from all quarters. The cook came up at that
moment with a steaming cup of billy tea, and some damper. Bet
the man feed,” he shouted peremptorily- “He can talk after.
Adam was grateful, and talked as he ate. He shaped his
plans to them. Ropes, blankets, water, food any medical stuff
they might have, tents —all were wanted. Better load horses,
not try to take a waggon across the sand to the coast. He told
them about Molly waiting for them. “And now, is that horse
of mine ready?” he asked. , . A
“I give ’im oats an’ a drink,” said the little chap who had
taken him away. , . n .. , . ■» ~
“Bring him, and see that the girths are tight enough.
“But,” questioned Big Bill. “Ow vill you ride to der Mount
in der dark, and threw der scrup, for dirty mile? You can neber
6 “lt’s got to be done,” answered Adam. “Ah, here’s Twister.
Well, I’m off.” , , .
‘Wait’” said Big Bill. “I zee dot message must get trew.
Bot vat ef you preak dot neck of yours ? ’Oo’d carry der massage
to der downship.” , „
“The horse was never bred that will break my neck,
answered Adam peremptorily, preparing to mount.
“Alvays hab a second axe handle, wen you go vood chopping,
mein vine lad. Here Sandy—zaddle oop dot shampion of yours,
and ride mit der member ob der mounted berlice.
Adam saw the wisdom of the advice, and did not trouble to
advise them that he was no longer a member of the pohcc. Better
leave them under the misconception that he spoke with authority.
Sandy was a wiry youth, fair of skin and richly freckled,
although he always swore that the freckles went off in the dark,
and challenged anyone to prove otherwise. “Yes, Bill ev course
I’ll go. Can that horse ev yours jump, Mr. Gordon, lor -we 11
, ave to take some fences, wen we get near the settlement.


“Twister’s not only a jumper, he’s a flyer. But you hurry
mere, bandy. Remember, every minute we save, may mean a
hte saved.
«i S f n< Jy needed no further spur. He raced for his horse.
Jready the camp was breaking up. They would travel by night
th -f sta £ s to li S ht the way enough for them, since they
*l 0 T 08 u e 5 6 bemg h . rou^ht in and saddled, food
neLr Sm\ S r °ii ed ’ Spar | tlmber fixed 80 that would
never shift. Watching them, and waiting impatiently for his
accompanying rider, Adam knew that the timber men would soon
be by Molly s side. The rest lay with them until- the lifeboat
came A better bunch of helpers he couldn’t have wished for.
Just before Charlie came racing into the fire circle Big Bill
th , e best roate with Adam. “Skirt der pig timber near
Bollocks, an go north ob der Dismal schwamp, keeping Break-
neck Hollow on der left. Sharlie, he know der vay veil enough.
Here he is. Coot luck to der poys.” g
fW And as , tbe two horsemen turned to the break in the timber
Bi at miTuffS 0 n- ? f th f all . ni £ ht ride across wild country at
Si r S 6d hIS hat and voice at the same time, and the
cheers of the company rang through the woodland.
i- , At ™ they groped their way in the dark, but a glow of
thLk a tn ter it Sky m S- ate J tb e Rising moon - The timber
was too thick to allow anything but single file for the first mile
but as they emerged into the more open range country the moon
A her lamp, and the thei? atf ’them
flood of silver beams came out of a clear dome of sky softening*
every roughness from the face of Mother Earth 7 ' g
riders ° r Whin r ?L half h °T a WOrd had passed between the
When they came to the open limestone flats, and could
iide side by side, Adam determined to break the ice that seemed
to have frozen Sandy’s vocabulary. “How are yiC W
he quest, oned in the broadest Scotch he could muster ’ Y '
i Brawly thank ye fer spearm,” retorted the other not to
be outscotched by a Gordon, although as a matter of fact SanHv
was c Ol iai b The sound of f he of F their foH^ars
the younger man 16^’3 Stati ° n ‘° the right ’” ™>™teered
who 7a o mVtf:;tt£ e fc!r: t^rsfh7ri t t°
mare branded T.H. on the Mount Gambled side ->* “ a
he sald n tiakfng out Pr ag a lin° USly - 3 h ° rse a mare ”
and
wm m d A Whether $ e horse was standing north or south that
see Mon?’™ 1 " 6 WhlCh ™ S the Mount Gambier side, A you


“Supposing he was standing east or west, what then?
asked the incorrigible Sandy.
“I give that, and you up at the same time,” Adam tried no
more stories on Sandy.
“Away to the left of that rise is the kangarooer s camp,,
and just beyond is the Bellangadoo run of MacPherson s, volun-
teered the young timbergetter.
‘The country’s getting thickly populated; we’ve seen two
homesteads in the last five miles,” Adam retorted to keep the
fires of conversation burning.
“Yes,” said Sandy, “my old father used to say, when he
first came to Western Victoria, that when you saw the smoke of
a neighbour’s chimney it was gettin’ overcrowded, and ’twas time
to get out where a man had elbow room.”
Adam, remembering Seven Dials, laughed. “How’s the
mare going?” he asked as they went out of a trot into a canter,
that was almost a gallop.
“Gallopin’ strong.”
But presently, they had to pull to a walking pace, as they
came to the thick timber into which the moonlight did not
penetrate. And then came boggy, treacherous ground, where a
horse might sink up to his withers, or even disappear in the bog,,
taking the rider into the slimy depths. A hard, clay-pan, along-
side a narrow lagoon, gave them a chance to show their speed,
and even when they dashed into the shallow water, the bottom
was still hard. But Adam tried that once too often, for in the
pipeclay along the marge of the next lagoon, Twister sank up
to his fetlocks, yvhile Sandy, better acquainted with the tricks of
the country, galloped safely through inch-deep water.
Windy Creek, wriggling like a great serpent along the base
of the range, its dark semi-stagnant waters fringed with reeds,
forced them to turn sharply to the east. The moon was veiled
by a cloud, when their first post and rail fence challenged the
tiring animals. Both managed to clear the rails splendidly,
but a big tree, that had fallen across the track, nearly caught
Adam —who was in the lead—by its unexpectedness. Then they
raced over bracken, that- crackled like thorns under a pot, as
they swiftly passed by, though the sandy soil, in which it grows,
slowed them up. This, perhaps, was a blessing in disguise. Yet
time was stealing away the moonlight, for clouds were banking"
up in the south-west. They realised they must get through the
scrub, while there was yet light. Suddenly a flooded creek con-
fronted them running almost a banker. Obviously, heavy rain
must have fallen near its source.
“In flood,” Adam shouted over his shoulder to Sandy, the
same time wheeling his horse along the bank, and looking for a
likely crossing. “Must risk it, Sandy,” he shouted again, turn-
ing Twister into the muddy stream. Without a quiver, the
brumby breasted it, keeping his feet, but unable to resist being


swept a space downstream. The water sf splashed over the saddle
at times, but shortly the other bank d; drew near, and a final
desperate series of plunges gave Twister a- a footing on the further
side. In a moment rider and horse werere safe. Sandy had a
tougher struggle. His mare was forced ii into a dangerous swirl.
Only a protruding bank saved the day, bubut the struggle left the
mare quivering with exhaustion.
She stood safe at last, but with drorooping head, breathing
heavily. Twister, on the other hand, shoMowed no visible signs of
distress.
‘‘She’s winded,” said Sandy. “I musust give her a breather.
You go on. I’ll follow as fast as I can. . You can find th’ way
now. And, anyway, I’ll pick up the piececes.”
Adam did not wait on ceremony. 1 The moon was fading
fast. He must be in Mount Gambier befofore dawn. He pictured
the surges breaking over the survivors, g, down on that jagged
coast. With a wave of the hand, he wasas off to do the rest of
the ride alone. How splendidly the big-hearted mustang
responded to the call!
Still galloping forward he passed a flocock of sheep in the half-
light, the animals scattering in all directiorions in their fright. He
was able to pick out Mclntyre’s hut, for hthe was coming into the
country he knew best in the south-easast. A mere mound,
euphoniously called McAllister’s Hill, he paoassed without realising
its dignity, until he was well beyond. TvTwister was still going
strong at the Warrigal Rocks, and crosseced the Wallaby Range,
a mere low ridge, with effortless ease, 1: like the shadow of a
cloud.
What a horse! Adam nursed him a a bit across the waste
land and through the timber, but let him h have his mouth across
Dingo Flat, where they broke upon a coveyey of wheeling plover,
the birds screeching like tortured souls. A \ glimmer of rose light
in the east told of the approach of anotheier dawn. In the fitful
light of the dying moon, he failed to see thhe big log right in the
track, but Twister sensed, rather than saw,v, the jump ahead. He
was, however, a trifle late in the take-off,', and clouted with his
Rind legs, staggering as he landed. Yet inn a moment the game
beast was back in his faultless stride.
Streaks of rose and gold were now ligghting up the eastern
sky—like the ripening of apples, Adam caalled it. At last the
volcanic peak of Mount Gambier showed ] like a lion couchant,
its dark form silhouetted against the dawwn. The goal was in
sight. Yet a mile, and still another, all ( over hard limestone,
that rang with a hollow sound. A fence—-l-dhe last—called upon
the tiring horse, but Twister rose gamely y to it, skimming the
rail like an English hunter. Where in all I the world was there
another wild horse to match this, was theie thought in Adam’s
mind. He stroked the poor beast’s sweating g neck, as they swung
along. The brumby tossed his head as iff to acknowledge the


gesture. Ah! Sunrise at last, and the deep green meadows of
the volcanic lands, glowed now like the fields of Devon, Only
one spot in all the colony could reflect such verdancy in the early
morning light.
They swept by the rim that fringed the volcanic lakes. One
more mile to go! Adam thought he felt the horse sway under
him, but the momentary halt hardly lessened the pace. He
would have pulled up to a walk, but the vision of those help-
less men and women, waiting on the wreck, drove him on
remorselessly. A white cottage flitted by, then a street with
houses on either side seemed to rush upon them. Twister
definitely staggered, but gathered himself together, bunching up
his shoulder muscles by sheer force of will for the final effort.
The inn light, still burning, beckoned them on. Opposite
was the telegraph office. Only when they reached that door
did Twister stagger and lurch, and then with a long choking
sigh he fell, and lay still.
Adam had scarcely time to step safely out of the saddle.
All his thought was now for the splendid beast that had borne
him to his destination. In a trice he had slackened the girths.
But the ugly head remained motionless. The great heart had
ceased to beat. Adam stood for a moment, and the unspoken
prayer went from his heart into the fresh morning air. Then
he ran, as fast as his cramped legs would take him, into the
telegraph office, to awaken the postmaster, and send the message
that would despatch the lifeboat at once, through tempestuous
seas, to the Carpenter’s Rocks.
An hour passed, a busy hour for the weary rider. For in
those sixty minutes a rescue party had been organised to leave
within two hours, equipment had been secured, the police
advised, and ships, about to sail between Adelaide and Mel-
bourne, notified of the wreck. The ringing of the church bells
awakened the town to a realisation of some tragedy.
The needful things done, Adam turned to his fallen com-
rade. A crowd had gathered around the form that, but so short
a span of time ago, had been the embodiment of speed and
energy. The muscles that had moved with such splendid pre-
cision were now stiff and cold. The great heart would beat
no more. As Adam arrived the town joker was asking who’d
bid for the hide.
‘‘Hold your noise,” shouted Adam with fury in his eye.
“There was more pluck under that hide than in the whole
cursed lot of you. Look at his heels.” They were caked with
blood. The brumby had never worn shoes.
# * *
As the darkness deepened, Molly’s heart had gone out
with more poignant sympathy than ever to the poor souls watch-
ing for the succour, that might never come. The timber-
camp, too, might have shifted long ago, for Adam had only sur-


■BO GOLDEN WATTLE TIME
. . . 0 1
mised it still was there five short miles away. To a young girl,
young in experience, and feeling, as well as in years, there was
something indescribably pitiful in tragedy which she could not
see, although so close at hand. Terror seemed to crouch out there
in the darkness, like an evil spirit in ambush. The fire she had
kindled, was to her, not only a heartening message to the
wrecked ones fighting against every onrushing wave, but was
her own protection against an intangible fear. She had read
that evil spirits will never cross a fire.
With what relief then, after interminable hours of waiting,
she saw the glow in the east that heralded the rising moon. And
as the great silver disc rose over the horizon, and cast its widen-
ing beams over land and sea, the dark wreck began to take
shape. Soon she would be able to see them, and they her. And
somehow, they would hear her prayer: “Jesus, Who walked on
the waters of Galilee, save all souls at sea.”
It almost seemed an answer to her prayer to hear a shot
above the roar of the ocean. Taking a dry honeysuckle bough
she dipped it in the flame, and held the fiery torch aloft. A
coo-ee sounded nearer. It was the rescue party from the timber
camp. So Adam had not failed, thank heaven. Presently they
burst in upon her.
“Ain’t it terrible, but we’re mighty glad to git ’ere, ma’am,”
said Joe Gregory, a sturdy young axeman.
fes, dat we are, interposed Big Bill. “Your huspand
says ve find you at der rocks, and here you vas safe and snug.”
he all right?” Molly asked anxiously.
“Right as a bug in a rug, vasn’t he, poys ?” Big Bill looked
around at the others.
“I on’y wish them poor devils out there was ’arf as right ”
answered Joe.
Now you just roll up there by the fire, while we gets der
gear out to take der line out to der wreck,” said Bill looking
towards Molly.
“Me?” she answered. “Rest? I don’t want rest. I have
been waiting for you to get busy. There’s coffee to be got, and
some sort of bunks to get ready. Where’s the things?”
How glad she was to get too busy to think. She was soon
at the tucker box, “nosing,” as Joe called it, ‘Tor the grub.”
“Got dem ropes?” shouted Big Bill. “You see, ma’am, Joe
here is ter schwim out mit der rope—he’s a great schwimmer is
Joe—but der surf’s a lot vorse dan I reckoned. Vat zav Joe—
iss she all right?”
Tie the lifebuoy round me, and you boys ’ang on fer yer
life. I’ll make it,” was Joe’s answer.
“And tie the end to a tree to make safe,” said Molly brightly
And so it was arranged. By knotting the ropes together’
they believed Joe might make it, if someone aboard had sense
enough to throw out a line to meet the swimmer. Though the


water was bitterly cold, and the wind as bad, Joe stripped almost
bare. His splendid torso gleamed in the moonlight, and when
he turned towards the sea, the muscles of his back rippled with
■every movement. At the last moment doubt assailed Big Bill.
The breakers crashed with unabated fury on the sands. They
could be seen flinging their spray high over Carpenter’s Rocks,
where the cruel teeth of the reef bit deep into the hull of the
broken-backed Admella, now split into three parts.
“No man can peat dot zee,” said the leader of the axemen.
“Better vait, Joe. Them curlers has two tousand miles of der
bitterest zees in der vorld be’ind dem all der vay from der
glaciers, and off der ice pergs. Vait till der zees'go down. Eh?”
“S’long Bill, I’m swimming to the South Pole,” answered
the imperturbable Joe. “Don’t keep me shiverin’ in the cold.”
The rope securely round his waist, and with the file of men,
and Molly hanging on in line, Joe only waited for the backwash
to giye him a chance to be carried beyond the range of the
crashing dumpers.
At last came the signal, and in he rushed, the line piling
out as he plunged beneath a great curler that seemed to rise on
purpose to crush this atom of humanity, that dared challenge
its power. And he might have made it, had it not been for the
inevitable drag of the rope. As it was those tons of salt surge
picked him up like a cork, and crashing upon him with titanic
force, flung him face down on the sandy bottom. And then
catching him up again in its mighty arms, the sea hurled him,
helpless as a football, to a second dumper, which tossed him
skywards, and earthwards, before the team on the ropes
dragged his helpless, and apparently lifeless, body ashore.
Molly rushed to get hot coffee and warm blankets, while his
mates, knowing their job, emptied the Southern Ocean out of
Joe, and patiently applied the methods of restoration under Big
Bill’s expert direction.
It took an anxious half-hour before the young man
responded to their tireless treatment, but when he came back
to the land of the living he was quickly on his feet, and wanted
to have another go to beat that “cursed ocean.”
They all knew, however, they must wait until the seas went
down or the lifeboat arrived, whichever happened first. There
was nothing else to do but to sit around the fire, chatter, and
keep the beacon light aglow, while one kept watch down by
the shore.
Molly’s thoughts were of Adam riding through the night
across bush country that offered all kinds of man-traps for any
rider, and especially one so near-sighted as Adam. They were
keeping themselves awake by drinking coffee when, just before
dawn, a shout was- heard from Joe, whose turn it was to be
on watch by the shore. They rushed to his side.
“I seen somethin’ out there against that settin’ moon—


somethin’ dark, like two figures on a sparr. I swear they was.
men, because I seen an arm move, like he iwas signallin’ ashore.
Just watch out everyone.” Joe was agog with excitement.
Molly was the first to confirm it. “‘There! There!” she
cried, pointing right in the direction of thee sinking moon, most
of which had dipped into the ocean out on the western horizon.
“Can’t you see?” she shouted. “It’s two ipeople—they’re quite
close in.”
Then they all saw the long spar and two of the wrecked
ones struggling for their lives. The ropes were hurriedly got
out again. Joe wanted to go out there and then, but Big Bill
put the veto on it.
“It’s only inviting Ole Man Death to der barty to fight dat
zee. Vait till dey get closer. Der waves a.n’ vind is vashing
them ashore.”
Moments seemed to crawl by as they stood helpless, but
their hearts beat fast as they saw the spar nearer than before.
The tide was apparently fighting the wind and waves, .and the
combat of forces was stirring the breaking rollers into a boiling
cauldron. But at last a mountainous wave caught the spar,
sweeping it from the weakening grasp of the swimmers. But
the same breaker flung them remorselessly towards the shore.
Joe waited for no more. Rushing into the sea, he grabbed
one man by the waist, while Big Bill, not to be outdone, plunged
in, and by the sheerest miracle of good luck seized the other.
Even then, the chance of all four not being- swept out to sea,
was no better than an even one, for neither of the woodsmen
had waited for the rope to be put around him. A quick succes-
sion of breakers—three of them—did the trick, countering the
backwash before it had a chance to do its deadly work.
Although, according to all the rules of the sea, the two
wrecked men should have passed out as drowned, the team work
ashore restored them to the living world, after hope had almost
flickered out. Dawnlight brought its revelations. The figures
of three women were revealed in the rigging, and they counted
some twenty-six men. Two bodies of sailors, washed ashore, *
were hidden from Molly. As dawn came, the wind began again
to rise, and the heavy clouds in the south-west presaged a storm.
Already giant combers were tearing at the victims like ravening
wolves. How human flesh could withstand that terrific impact,
after the night of terror, Molly wondered with deep admiration
for their unbreakable courage.
With horrified eyes she saw a woman with a bundle in her
arms, evidently her baby, suddenly leap into the boiling seas.
A cry of heart-rending anguish escaped Molly, and it took all
Bill’s kindly tact to avert a complete nervous collapse.
“Ma’am,” he said, “forget vat’s past—der is two women’s
yet ve can save. Jest get some preakvast for der poys—we
could all do mit it. Dat husband ob yours will pe yust proud
ob you when he comes.”


Molly’s response was immediate. “Oh, when will the life-
boat come?” was all she asked.
“Not till near midday, missus, so I reckon,” said Joe.
“Oh, I dunno,” queried Ben Watkins, who had some claim
to some sea knowledge, having been a runaway sailor. “Wuth
this wind be’ind ’em, even close reefed, they ort ter make good
time from Beachport.”
“Not as dey’ll know dere’s lives vating to pe saved. No sir,
not ven dey know dat already yet,” was Big Bill’s reflection.
After a snack of breakfast, which Molly with her memories
of what had passed out there at sea found hard to swallow, they
sent a man west along the coast to watch out for the lifeboat.
There was a yell of mingled dismay and hope, when a figure on
the wreck suddenly sagged and dropped into the engulfing
<iepth, and another evidently with a rope round him, dived over-
board, seemingly bent on swimming ashore. But that was the
last they saw of either.
The hours dragged by. Suddenly there was a coo-ee and
the watcher on the distant sandhill to the west signalled that
the lifeboat had been sighted. Then they caught sight of the
white scimitar of a sail out on the dark green waters. A scud
hid her, and when she emerged, she came down the wind like a
great bird under fairly full wings. Only when they seemed within
hitting distance of the reef did they bring her up to the wind,
and lower sail to bare poles. The steersman stood in the stern,
balancing himself on his long oar. All oars were out now, and
the watchers saw they were making for the lee of the wreck.
A wrong stroke now, and the fangs of the rocks would grip
them too, with deadly tenacity. To bring the boat in those
rising seas, and with the wind now at gale force, demanded not
only fine seamanship, but a close knowledge of the dangerous
currents and tidal swirls. With bated breath they saw the
boat nearly overturn, as a great green sea struck her broadside,
but she was built for such desperate encounters with wind and
waters.
Suddenly a man was seen to jump from the rigging, trailing
a rope, obviously trying to make connection between ship and
safety. It was a brave effort, but in those moving surges it was
hard to calculate. He dropped into the sea, only to be grabbed
by an oarsman. This diversion was, however, nearly fatal to
the whole crew, for the lifeboat crashed up against the side of
the wreck, and the onlookers expected to see it stove in.
“Oh!” ejaculated Joe.
But what happened was a splendid illustration of snatching
victory out of defeat, of seizing upon an adverse stroke of Fate
in order to force it to the service of success.
“Gott in Himmel pe praised,” shouted Big Bill. “Look, der
lifepoat skipper—he seize der ship, and shump aboard. Ya!
O der tays ob miracles is still mit us.”


“What’s he doing?” asked Molly, exciteedly.
“Vy he is aboard, an’ has picked opp dder rope, an’ der rest
is easy.” So exhilarated were those ashaore that they gave
three ringing cheers. * K
The captain passed down the women fnrom the rigging first,
and safely, though not without great dangeer, they were passed
into the boat. Each of the wrecked ones was lowered in turn,
a rope made fast 1 to the waist, until a Mill load was secured.
Then the pull for the shore, the willing anrms stretched out to
seize the gunwale of the boat and draw it t high on the sands,
the restoration of the exhausted victims, pDrovision of food and
hot blankets—all of this went on, while the lifeboat, under
stupendous difficulties, was launched safety by her crew, and
made the second voyage of rescue.
Care of the women was Molly’s speciaal task. Both were
sleeping, when for the second time the lifebooat came in bringing
unexpectedly a woman, unconscious, with heer baby in her arms.
It was with the greatest difficulty that Molly * was able to separate
the mother from the bundle she held so tenacciously to her breast.
When they unwrapped the shawl Molly gawe a cry, of horror.
The little spirit had passed on, and the motbher had been clutch-
ing her dead baby to her bosom, perhaps i throughout all the
bitter night.
To coax life back into the faintly beatinng heart of the poor
woman, proved no easy thing to do. It seeemed to Molly as if
the spirit of the mother longed to follow thaht of her baby. They
laid the tiny body in a grave by the sea, where, in storm, the
southern surges would chant their dirge of s sorrow, and summer
winds would sing their lullaby.
Not until late that night, when she contitinued to keep close
watch over the still-unconscious form in the J tent improvised out
of the lifeboat’s sails, did Molly gain, from thhe fluttering eyelids,
the first intimation of returning consciousneess. She had called
softly to Big Bill, who was within easy caall, “Bill, Bill, she’s
coming to,” and was still bending solicitoussly over the patient
when a voice behind her said, “You’re the ] pluckiest thing God
ever made, girl.”
It was Adam. Her heart gave a bouund of joy. Deep,
unfathomable happiness flooded her being. FFor an unforgettable
moment she abandoned herself in his arms, \ which closed around
her like a sheltering haven from all the 1 world. Lifting her
all-too-willing lips to his, she made him feel t the swift beating of
her tempestuous heart; the completeness oof her surrender to
the man she loved. Quickly she turned too her natient again.
And, for his part, he thought what a fool hee had been to repine
of a love that was but a dream, when this 5 vibrant young life,
and courageous heart offered him in full nmeasure, the selfless
love of a sweet, adorable woman.
At that moment, each was conscious thaat they had sounded


some depth of the inner self, hitherto unplumbed, and new hope
was born in their hearts.
CHAPTER IX.
“GORDONS LEAP AND AFTERWARDS”
TTOME atiast! Dingley Dell. The Gordon homestead could
-■-A scarcely claim the dignity of a sheep, or cattle run. Merely
a selection, its acres comprised mpstly sandy ridges, and lime-
stone flats, where the thin grass struggled for a living with the
wild bush, and gnarled and twisted gums and wattle. The few
patches of deep peaty soil yielded a scanty living to the horses
and cows, that overstocked the holding, so that the animals
were constantly v wandering far and wide in the adjacent scrub
to pick up what the country could offer. Adam was more
dependent upon cattle and horse dealing to keep the place
together, rather than upon any return from grazing his own
stock. And colt breaking provided most of the ready money
for Molly’s household needs.
Yet Dingley Dell was not without its attractions. The four
roomed iron roofed shanty, became a real home under the touch
of Molly’s deft fingers.' She grew flowers for table decoration,
and looked after the vegetable garden with the aid of Old Midas,
whose wealth was confined to his good natured willingness to
do anything for Mr. Gordon, and the Missus. To Adam, Dingley
Dell became a sanctuary against the pursuing Powers of Fate—
a home, with all that “home” meant to one who had been driven
from the house of his fathers. When business took Adam to
Mount Gambier, or elsewhere, he usually hurried back as fast
as horse could carry him, without distressing the animal. But
once he crossed the boundary of his homestead paddocks, he
slowed down to a walk, that seemed to attune to the peace that
came to him once he had passed through the gates. Only here
did he feel safe from the contending and inexorable forces that
had driven him so far.
Returning one sunny winter day from Mount Gambier town,
he was accosted by some old friends from Victoria. They told
him they were pursuing an old pastime of jumping cattle in the
paddocks, and asked him to join them. So he joined them at
the Mount.
“You mean to say you can jump those cattle over there as
they graze? I suppose you’ve heard of Baron Munchausen?”
Gordon looked scathingly at 1 the rider who had put up this
preposterous tale.
“Baron who?” innocently asked young Ashton.
“Munchausen.”
“No, I never came across a Baron in my life. The nearest


I got to that was a German Count, and-d—well—he didn’t count.
But if that Baron feller did this jump I before it’s news to me.”
It was then the others rode up. 3. They were all young
squatters from Western Victoria, andd most of them knew
Gordon. All had heard of his reputatidon as a horseman.
Jimmy Ashton especially wanted t(to see his horsemanship
put to a test that was out of the ordinaary. “It’s quite simple,
my dear Gordon,” said Jimmy in a rrather patronising tone,
‘‘iou just pick your beast. Your horsee knows his paces a
bit of judgment on the rider’s part—annd you’re over. That’s
all.”
“Sounds as simple as swallowing a sword, and bringing
rabbits out of your hat while you stand on your head,”
responded Adam, wrinkling his nose iin derision. “Let’s see
you do it,” he added shortly.
“Do it? We’ll all do it, won’t vwe, Jasper?” he asked,
turning to a tall young rider in a widde-brimmed cabbage-tree
hat.
“Like birds we will,” replied Jasper.r.
“We only make one condition, Gorddon,” Ashton went on.
“What’s that?”
“That you, as the best horseman onn this side of the border,
follow us, and show that you South Australians are as good as
us Victorians.” ,
Adam looked at the cattle. They 3 were calmly grazing at
the moment on the rich pastures. Maimnly, he noted they were
milch cows, absorbed in the one pursuit t of their lives—convert-
ing the grass of the fields into milk form humankind, under the
delusion that they were doing it for theieir offspring. Adam had
always thought it was a shame to talake advantage of their
innocence, but the hurdle was, to say the e least, an unstable one.”
“Well, what of it, Gordon?” asked i the aggressive Ashton.
The challenged man smiled. He 1 knew himself to be a
venturesome, but not a reckless rider, r. Moreover, his horse,
unlike those of the challengers, though h trained for mustering
cattle, was not schooled for riding over t their backs. Yet some-
how the challenge could not be passed b;by. Quickly he tried to
find the answer. He looked at his horsrse’s ears, which at the
moment .were lain back. The name camme to his mind, and gave
him the inspiration. Comets usually camme out of the void. Let
him jump into the void again. By the li living Jupiter he had it.
“You show me first what you cann do,” he said, turning
to the challenger with a cryptic smile a about his eyes. “Then
I’ll show you lads what a poor Cotswold 1 huntsman can do. And
a sovereign, to a cigar, my jump beats j yours.”
“Taken,” answered Ashton. “But itit’ll be a box of smokes.”
“Taken,” shouted the rest in chorusis.
“Right,” said Adam. “And you caian be the judges. Now
show the stuff you’re made of.”


They wheeled their horses on that. “See that respectable
fat cow over there Gordon?” said Ashton. “She’s never been
anything so undignified as a hurdle in her life before. Well,
I’ll show the old lady she’s no more account than a post and rail.
Come on Ginger, you show your paces.”
Putting his heels to the hunter’s flanks, and shaking the
reins, he raced through the deep grass almost soundlessly. The
animated milk machine, so intent on the great mission nature
had bequeathed to her, did not even turn her head until the
horse was right upon her. Before she could raise her rump
in protest and give an insipid exhibition of the cow kick, with a
final tossing around like a boat in a tidal wave, Ginger was over.
Adam regarded the trick worthy of a country fair rather
than as evidence of great horsemanship. But with the cheers
of the Victorians he joined in heartily enough.
“Splendid, Ashton. Very neat and clever. The way you
made that old cow churn round her milk it should, be turned
into butter.”
“My turn,” said a very freckled young chap, Sandy Marlowe
by name. “Now I’m picking a hard one. That roan bullock
over there with his back to us looks a likely hurdle to me. Of
course,” he explained, “every walking beefsteak doesn’t make a
good jump. Old Nebuchadnezzar there, if he sees me coming
will turn his sharp end at the horse, while his blunt end switches
the signals, that mean he’s really annoyed. Ready, boys?”
It was a case of all of them this time, and they wheeled in
different directions. They approached the quarry from
various angles. As Sandy Marlowe out on the left wing
put his horse to the gallop, Jimmy Ashton and the rest yelled
their hardest, and closed slowly in. Before the bewildered
creature knew what had happened Marlowe’s horse rose, and
cleared the broad back with flying colours.
They came riding back to Gordon in triumph, and received
the expected congratulations.
“What about it, Gordon? Have a go?” Ashton’s question
rather nettled the late member of the Mounted.
“I’m generally called a reckless rider,” he responded slowly.
“I’m really not,” he added quickly. “I’m too defective in the
optics to try a trick I know nothing about. But I’ll take up
your challenge in my own way. That way is to do a jump none
of you are game to follow.” He looked around, from one to
the others, with a smile.
“Gordon’s rung the challenge on us boys. Where’s this
jump?” Ashton said, turning to Adam with a provocative grin.
“Follow me.” Pointing towards the mount towering above
them, he galloped towards it, followed by the party. There
surely could be no jump on the side of the crater, or along any
of the chain of crater lakes, they thought, where they could not
follow. They were as dare-devilish as he was.


The winding track along which tthey sped, led through
bracken-clad slopes to a narrow saddle between two lakes. On
the narrowest section of this saddle tthe challenger, pulled up
sharply. “This is the spot,” Adam saiid, pointing to the Blue
Lake now three hundred feet below thtem. The rim ran for a
mile around those deep blue depths, thie cliffs falling sheer to
the water’s edge.
“The bottom, as you know, has been fathomed,” he
said whimsically, “and a fellow diving*- in might come out in
Windemere or Loch Lomond—that is iff the old earth is round,
which I very much doubt.” He laugheed lightly.
“I think it’ud be the Dead Sea,” retorted Ashton with a
significant nod.
They sat their horses there viewinig again the well-known
panorama. The plains seemed to flow around the mount like
a sea of green, with Mount Schank, another extinct volcano, to
the south. The brilliant blue waters beneath them reflected
not only the cloudless sky above, but tine Plutonic depths below.
Father Woods had explained to his readyr pupil some time before,
that this lake bed was caused by the ctollapse of the limestone
roof of a vast underground cave, through the weight of the
flowing lava. The course of the lava flow could be traced by
the black band in the metamorphic rocfks on the western face
of the cliffs. “The streams that fill tfchis great cistern,” the
priest had said, “flow underground for ans far as 100 miles, prob-
ably from the Grampians.” A strangce country, Adam had
thought, where rivers flow beneath thhe earth’s surface, and
great lakes lie sometimes a mile below/.
The others had been waiting for Adiam to break the silence.
He had seemed lost in a reverie. At Hast he turned to them.
“You know this place?”
“It’s suicide point,” said Ashton.
“Exactly—l take off here—but the suicide act is not in to-
day’s programme. Maybe some other Itime, but just a simple
jump into Avernus and back—and backk,” he repeated, with a
rippling laugh.
They all looked very serious. “Tdo Avernus it will be,
Gordon, if you try any fool trick like; that, and you’ll never
come back.”
“Look here, Gordon,” said George ILander, a tall Victorian,
who hitherto had kept his counsel. “Leet’s call the whole thing
off. It’s too uncanny for my liking.”
“And lose a good cigar?” asked Acdam, assuming indigna-
tion. “Not much! You keep your cigair. I’m doing the jump.
And don’t worry. There’s a little cherulb that sits up aloft, that
tells me my time hasn’t come yet.” Hiis nonchalant, and even
gay. air partly allayed their suspicions?, that, he had suddenly
gone mental. A frown, however, settled! on Ashton’s forehead.
“But, Gordon, old chap, you can’t heelp but break your neck.


and be drowned into the bargain. There’s no room for a horse
fo clear that fence, and check himself on the brink of the 300
feet fall—the ledge isn’t more than a few feet wide at best.”
They crowded around him, having dismounted, protesting
together in their earnestness.
Adam held up his hand, and fairly shouted, “Gentlemen I
Is this another hold-up?” They lapsed into silence, and fell
away from his horse. “Now let me have my say,” he went on
quietly. “I’m doing the jump, as you did yours jumping over
standing cattle.”
“But ”
“Cut out the ‘buts,’ ” Adam retorted. “Understand this—
I’m no daredevil rider. I know no tricks of the horse fair. But
Ido know horses. I might risk my own neck, but I wouldn’t
risk Comet’s. I’lhbe as safe as if I were riding in Rotten Row.”
They were puzzled rather than impressed. Marlowe made
one last appeal. “One word, Gordon. This is how I see it,”
he said earnestly. “The fence is a stiff one, but I grant you,
even with that short run, a good fencer could make it. But how
can any horse stop dead on landing? Answer that and I’m
satisfied.”
“Sound reasoning, Marlowe, but you don’t allow for horse
sense. I’ve looked this jump over scores of times, and worked
out how it can be done. I may be wrong, but I’m going to try.
Now, out of the way everybody.”
“You’re an idiot, Gordon, but a very plucky one,” replied
Marlowe. “Can’t we save you from yourself?”
“No one’s ever been able to do that for a Gordon,” came
back the retort. With that he urged Comet to the fence, to let
him look it over, patting his neck meanwhile. Then, wheeling
smartly, he took him back some twenty yards down the road,
and, turning, came at the fence at an angle.
The company waited with bated breath. Some of them
sensed the cleverness in taking the jump at ah angle—giving*
more room for landing along the ledge. But, even then, it could
scarcely be enough. The others saw only the bodies of the man
and hurtling to the depths below.
The rider knew he must clear the top with plenty to spare,
for a clout, however slight, would make recovery impossible.
Comet rose beautifully, not with birdlike flight, but more like a
bear standing on its hind legs to climb the obstacle. The horse
propelled himself forward enough to clear the rail, and responded
to a twist of the rein to bring his landing closer to the road.
The cry went up, “He’s over,” even before Comet landed.
It was a matter of split seconds only, but under the stress of
high emotions time is counted by heart throbs, and eternity
seems crowded into the experience of the moment. Between the
clearing of the fence, and the landing, time crawled on tortoise
feet, but it was at this point, that the real crisis was due. Could


90 GOLDEN WATTLE TriME
the horse possibly stop dead in his tracks.;.
Comet landed on four feet all right,;* but his body swayed
perilously towards the abyss.
“By heaven, he’s going,” hoarsely whispered young Mail-
field, the youngest of the party.
But before the! last word could bee checked, Comet was
stopped on the very edge of the precipicee. They watched him
shake himself, as if shivering, but, as AAdam said afterwards,
it was probably a fly, since they had a ggood foot to spare. A
laugh from the rider was echoed by a eery of relief from the
onlookers. But the trouble was by no mteans over. Ahead lay
a wide chasm, with a long, flat, narrow sshelf of rock between.
Without hesitation, Comet responded I to his master’s urge,
and, jumping for the shelf of rock, mereily touched it with his
four feet bunched together, it appeared, to spring to safety to
the farther side. To turn to the fence and jump back
into the road was like routine work. It waas over and the famous
leap had begun to be history.
u - done it.” “He’s over—what aa rider!” Cheers and
shouts, Bravo, Gordon!” “Bravo! Bravco!” followed.
“And what a horse,” said Marlowe.
“Quite simple,” Adam explained, you know the
ground. You see it was a case of taking Ithe jump on the slant,
and swinging in towards the fence. Jusst a matter of simple
calculation. Who’s got that cigar?”
Cigars were proffered from every quairter. Adam took one
from Marlowe, who flushed with pleasmre, as if a king had
honoured him.
“Calculation you call it,” protested Ashton, lighting Adam’s
cigar for him, “with no allowance for a miscalculation that would
have sent you crossing the Styx, with Oldl Charon, eh? Every-
thing just had to be right, or we’d be collecting for a tombstone
now to celebrate ‘Gordon’s Folly.’ ”
As “Gordon’s Folly,” it’s known to tlhis day.
“Gentlemen! Gentlemen! That’s am idea. Not Gordon’s
Folly, but Gordon’s Leap. We’ll put a mionument right on the
spot, to honour the greatest feat in horseirnanship ever known.”
“Don’t talk silly nonsense, Marlowe, o>ld chap.” But Adam’s
objections were overruled. “Gordon’s Leap” should be
honoured in some way.
“You’ll come and have a drink on it, Gtordon, at the Mount?”
Sorry, out Mrs. Gordon isn’t well. ‘She’s expecting me at
Dingley Dell, and when a man’s married you know the rest.”
He laughed. “Sorry, boys, drink my heallth if you will, coupled
with that of the cowboy cow-jumpers.” They all enjoyed the
badinage. “Till we meet again,” he and was off.
Cheers followed him down the road!. He took the Cape
Northumberland track to the south. When he reached the
bottom of the grade, a magpie carolled its? glorious notes, and a


second gave back that wonderful call, their not unusual greeting
to the rising, or the setting, sun. It made him realise how late
it was. He speeded up Comet, cantering smartly for a mile or
so. It was then he heard a hail from behind, where the road
from the township joined the Mount road. Pulling up sharply,
he saw the welcome figure of Father Woods swaying dangerously
in the saddle of the oncoming horse. The priest came up to
him. His face was like the setting sun, and it was apparent
he was out of breath for the moment.
“I’m going your way, my son,” he said, between breaths.
“Well, if it isn’t you, father! I’m downright glad to see
you. Is it a wedding, or a funeral, you’re racing to?”
“Well, my son, had I been the devil himself, I don’t think
you could have run away from him faster.” He breathed a deep
sigh and mopped his red face with a large bandana handkerchief.
I was told,” he went on, “that your body might be found at
the bottom of the Blue Lake, but here you are flying across the
world as if you were one of the four horsemen of the
Apocalypse.”
They moved forward at a walking pace. “I ride fast,
father, to escape my own thoughts.”
“Is the black mood come over you again—the dark shadow
of your race you told me of? No, my son; in this bright, sunny
land the old-world shadows should vanish like the devil before
holy water.” The good priest had long since come to an un-
spoken understanding with this strange spirit that had found,
that of an unecclesiastical father confessor. Not by a single
suggestion did he ever seek to proselytise this young man to the
faith he, himself, so devoutedly preached, and practised.
“I always think,” he went on, “that God, in His infinite
wisdom, and mercy, brought you to this far country for some
great purpose, as he brought the Israelites out of bondage, and
hardened them in the desert, to reach the Promised Land, that
their great Leader never entered.”
“You see things through the eye of faith, father,” said
the younger man, without enthusiasm but unconsciously waxing
poetical. “I confess I find much that is depressing in this crude
country-—in its dark gullies, its stark, inhospitable mountains,
its illimitable plains, and the sameness of its eternal, eucalyptus
forests. All so unlike England, where Proserpine comes
heralded with budding tree, and the lark’s song, and all nature
comes dressed for the festival.”
“My son, that isn’t England. And it isn’t Scotland or
Wales or Ireland either. England is a spirit—so is the rest of
the glorious British Isles, that we love so well. Wherever we
go we carry that spirit with us—to the uttermost ends of the
earth. Nature plays second fiddle to us.” He laughed. “It is
that spirit, my son, that has given you your gifts, and it is this
new England, that has given you the chance to express it in


your present verse.” The priest wass obviously deeply moved.
So was his listener. His eyes glglowed, the colour flashed
in his face, he sat more upright in tithe saddle, riding proudly
on his horse like a prince. “You aree a rock in a weary land,
father,” he said.
“As a bit of a geologist, ’tis my dduty to tell you that most
rocks of that sort are a bit crackedd. But thank ye for th’
compliment.” His light laugh carriedid it off.
“Tell me, my son, how your verse 3 comes to you,” he added.
They were passing across the omnipressent limestone plains.
Adam waved a hand as if to passs the responsibility to his
companion. And then in a rather monnotonous voice he recited:
Whence gathered, the locusts glad chirrup nrnay furnish a stave,
The ring of a rowell or a stirrup, the wash of a wave.
“And it comes to me,” he went om,
In the spring when the wattle gold trembhles twixt shadow and shine,
When each dew-laden air draught resembles s a deep draught of wine.'
When the skyline’s blue burnished resistance e makes deeper the dreamiest
distance,
Such songs in all hearts have existence; suebh songs have been mine.
The priest was deeply moved. Poor a moment he could not
find voice. “Ah, that is the divine toruch—the thing of beauty
that’s a joy for ever, as Keats puts it. Let me hear some more,
my son.”
“It wiles away the time, I suppose,’” said Adam. “You see;
Rhyme has not failed me for reason,
Nor reason for rhyme.
Sweet song had I found you in season,
And found you in time;
You beacon in bright beauty r yonder,
And I waxing fainter, yet fonder.
Now weary too soon, when It wander,
Now fall where I climb.
“Glorious!” exclaimed Father Wooods, “but why that doleful
note ?”
A loud coo-ee interrupted the ridders, and the sound of
galloping hoofs caused them to halt.
“Hello! Who’s this coming like ;a flying fury,” said the
priest. “It looks like a lad.”
And a lad it proved. He wore the i insignia of the Telegraph
Department. Pulling up his almost bblown horse with a tight
rein, the boy drew two telegrams frornn his pocket.
“Are you Mr. Adam Lindsay Gorddon?” he asked Adam.
“I am.”
“Those gentlemen riders at the Mdount told me you might
be found on this road. The telegrams,, sir, are marked urgent.”
He handed them to Adam.
The shreds of the torn envelopess were blown down the
road before Adam looked up, found ; a lonely shilling in his
pockets, and handed it silently to the booy. The lad took it.
“Yes, sir.” Touching his cap, the ' lad rode off briskly.


The priest had watched Adam’s face change from grave
to yet graver expression, as he read the first message,
“I’m glad you’re here, father,” said Adam with evident
feeling. To his surprise, Father Woods noted that his eyes
were moist, and his voice trembled. “My mother has gone—
and only now do I learn that my father died four years ago.”
“Oh!” The priest was moved by the news. “I can’t say
how sorry I am.”
“The dear old governor!” exclaimed Adam. “I have been
left a legacy from my mother’s estate, it seems,” he added.
“Is it much, may I ask?”
“£7,000.”
“I am so glad,” said the priest, “not only because the sum
will give you a chance to follow your bent, but because they so
remembered you.”
“And I never wrote—not once. Oh, of course there were
reasons, but I can’t forgive myself now. You see, they didn’t
write to me, and I was too proud to make the first move. Now
it’s too late.”
“It’s never too late to regret our sins of omission and com-
mission, my son.”
Not till later, was Adam to learn that letters had come
from home, but that the Adelaide agent had destroyed all com-
munications, because he had taken the remittances sent in the
letters. But what, he wondered, as he sat there with the tele-
gram in his hand, had happened to Inez—and to Jane. Out
of his reverie he was awakened by his companion. “And is
the other telegram as full of sad news?” asked Father Woods.
Adam’s answer was to pass it to the priest. “I’d be, glad
if you would read it and advise me,” he said.
There was a pause, while the quick eyes scanned the
message. “Why, this is just wonderful. My boy, there’s
always a silver lining to the darkest cloud if you look for it.
And here is a great career opening up to you, just when you’re
in a position to follow it. It’s from Mr. Riddoch asking you to
stand for Parliament.”
“You think then I should respond to Mr. John Riddoch’s
invitation?”
CHAPTER X.
THE ELECTIONS
THE homestead of John Riddoch, M.P., lay some five miles
from the small township of Penola, in a park-like setting,
recalling to Adam, as he approached the gates, a country seat
in England. Differences there were, of course, more especially
in the foliage and rich colourful trunks of the giant eucalyptus,
which, not infrequently, is larger than the greatest of English
oaks. And the “gum babies,” full of honeyed blossoms, had


nothing in common with anything of itsts kind in the old world..
Here, indeed, was a land of pleasant papastures—a land flowing
with milk, and honey.
Stretches there were, of course, of f sand and scrub, where
kangaroo and wallaby found food and shdielter, and emus hatched
their young, animals that had not yet t learned to walk on all
fours, and birds that had not yet learned d to fly, as Marcus Clarke
had expressed it.
When Adam passed through the preretentious opening gates
of Yallum Park, and rode along the didrive to the homestead,
English deer gazed at him unafraid. G;Gardeners were at work
in the* large flower-beds of English.plarants and shrubs, and in
the orchard there flourished fruits thatat in England could be
grown only in hot-houses, or on sunny shdieltered walls. Clusters
of grapes hung temptingly from trellillises and arbours, and
vegetables of all kinds grew luxuriously. r . A man relieved Adam
of his horse, when he dismounted at thdie hitching-post, and an
English butler welcomed him into the e hall, where John was
summoned to meet John Riddoch.
There any ceremonial atmosphere j ended. Nothing could
have been more cordial than the bluff we/elcome of John Riddoch,
the self-made squire of a great estate, , who prided himself on
having worked his way up from the hunmblest beginnings. He
led the way into the large sitting-roorom, apologising for the
absence of his daughter, for John was a a widower.
“Well, young man, so you’re gamee to give the Queen’s
Counsellor a run for it? I wouldn’t ( call it an even-money
chance, but I’d back your chances at twwo to one. I’m Scotch,
ye ken.”
Adam laughed. “I’m Scotch too, bbut I don’t know yet
whether I want to be a politician, I’we never made a public
speech in my life.”
“Dinna let that worry you, my lad. 1 Politics is like smoking.
The first pipe makes you swear you’ll neever try it again. But
when you get the taste, you can’t leave tthe ‘bacca’ alone. Only
don’t take it too seriously, laddie. I neverr knew a man, who took
politics seriously, who didn’t go broke.”
They both laughed at that. “But, if they ask me ques-
tions,” said Adam, “I won’t know the amswers, and what’s the
good of making a jackass of oneself?”
“Be a laughing jackass, and ye’ll d(0. Remember, ’tis the
solemn answer that turns away votes, and the laughing reply
that wins ’em. Tickle the ears of the groundlings and ye’ll be
all right.”
The maid came in just then with dirinks and smokes, and
gave John the chance to indulge in more political philosophy.
The way he put the matter made politics look like a huge joke.
The plan, too, fitted in with the Gordoxn sense of adventure.
He had always won out with horses, anid he believed what he


■could do with them, he could do with men. So the die was cast.
John’s daughter came in when lunch was announced, and
Adam found himself at once intrigued. Moira was good-
looking, rather than beautiful. Rather short and sturdy, she
looked the picture of buoyant health. Her grey eyes were frank
and honest, rather than alluring. Of feminine guide, she was
either entirely unconscious, or she scorned to play the part of
any Delilah of the species. The instinctive touch of femininity
that means so much to a woman of parts, was absent either by
some inscrutable obliquity or by design. Unspoilt by the com-
fort that, so far as she could remember, had always surrounded
her, she had acquired from her father a good Scotch idea of
values, both monetary and social.
While her father was with them, the talk revolved on
politics and the daily routine of life on a sheep run. But when
he was called away to see his overseer, the barriers to more
intimate matters were let down.
“Mr. Gordon,” she said, as they rose from the lunch table.
“You will pardon me for being frank, but that’s my failing, as
anyone will tell you.” She laughed lightly. “I could picture
you leading the charge of the Light Brigade,' as I read it in
your verse that Father Woods showed me, when he was here
last ‘Kettledrums,’ I mean.”
“Father Woods is prejudiced,” Adam interposed.
“Perhaps. But I’m so glad you are standing for Parlia-
ment, for in colt-breaking and poddy calf farming, and even in
the gold escort, you couldn’t possibly be fulfilling your destiny.
You won’t mind me being so outspoken?”
The subtle, even if unconscious, flattery of this approach to
that inner shrine he guarded so well, was not recognised by one
so direct in speech and action as Gordon. By her intuition she
had found a way straight to his intellectual consciousness, if
not to his wayward heart.
To his delight and surprise he found her well informed, and
indeed, for a country girl, most helpfully critical on English
literature. Her knowledge of ancient classics was through
translations only, but she seemed to have grasped the spirit of
the living past.
“My father, who taught Oriental languages in any English
school,” he said, “used to laugh at my knowledge of the classics.
So don’t worry. The spirit’s everything.” And then, at her
prompting to give; something of his own, he recited his verse
to the Sea.
I would that with sleepy embraces
Th© sea would fold me—would find me rest —
In luminous shades of her secret places.
In depths where her marvels are manifest;
So the earth beneath her should not discover
My hidden couch —nor the Heaven above her—
As a strong man, shielding a weary lover.
I would have her shield me with shining breast.
95
GOLDEN WATTLE TIME


Her delight showed in the glow w in her face, the sparkle in
her eyes. “That s beautiful—it’s strorong, and one feels and sees,
and almost smells the sea,” she saidid, her voice charged with
feeling. “Only a strong swimmer wwho loved the ocean could
have written it.”
The wine of it rather went to ) his head, and before her
father returned Adam had offered toto write a poem, especially
for her. Moira neither accepted norm refused the offer. That
she was beguiled by this strange personality, which had the
power to quicken her interest and hdier imagination, and bring
into her passive country life that re romance, and poetic intro-
spection, for which she had secretly loionged all her life. If, how-
ever, like Galatea, the slumbering womman within her were being
awakened, she remained blissfully umnconscious of the change.
To Adam, his first night at “Yallillum” was something more
than an adventure. He was not so o unconscious of his own
awakening to an intriguing situation.!.
The following morning, he and John left to “muster the
electoral sheep for shearing,” as Johnn frankly put it. The first
task in mustering is to round up the slstragglers, as he explained,
and this was to be done by personald interviews on, the farms
and stations.
A week later Adam stood facing ? a crowded audience at the
Mount Gambier Town Hall. John Rididdoch had broken the ice
in a practical speech in which he cultitivated none of the flowers
of oratory. “You’ve heard my opponeient, the eloquent Attorney-
General. He cultivates roses. I grow cabbages like most of
you do. A local cabbage grower putt it straight to me. ‘You
both are right,’ he said. And then hhe added: ‘But my vote’s
going to the candidate who can tell nme how I can get another
bob a dozen for me cabbages.’ Thaat, fellow electors, is just
what I’m here to tell you.” The audieenee roared. The humour
was stocky, but they liked it that wa^y.
When Adam’s turn came he felt ssuddenly contempt for the
crowd that faced him. That was the j characteristic attitude of
the Gordons for the “canaille”. Almaost he turned to go, but
thoughts of Moira and of John held hiim from this folly. A din
of cheers, howls, and catcalls greetecd his apparent hesitancy,
the cause of which the opponents miasunderstood. His fighting
spirit was roused. He compelled silennee by sheer force of will.
“I’m standing for Parliament,” Ihe heard himself saying,
“because I’m one of you. I live amonng you. I’ve worked with
lots of you. My interest is your intereest. We ought to be found
voting together.” Rounds of cheers ; from his supporters, and
some feeble boo-hoos from the back seats, greeted this sally,
and he knew he had made a good statart. Turning to those at
the back, he went on: “It takes us ssmall holders all our time-
to clear our land, drain the swamps, ; and look after the stock.
How are we to keep going? By gehtting a job with the big


squatter. He breeds the best of sheep. We stock up from his
flocks. So you fellows who want to cut up all the big holdings,
remember what happened to the Old Dame who killed the goose
that laid the golden eggs.”
“You may know something of horses, Mr. Gordon, said an
irrepressible interjector, “but what do you know about making
laws compared with the Attorney-General?” The enemy forces
rallied to this, but the young candidate was not to be caught by
such chaff.
“Yes, I know horses—bred up with ’em. All a man wants
for making laws,” the candidate replied, with a smile, “is horse
sense.” Tumultuous applause thundered through the hall, and
the chairman—an old dog for a hard road—took the occasion
to end the meeting on a good note.
In the weeks of campaigning that followed, Adam came
into his own. It was John Riddoch who made the valuable
contacts, but in young Gordon the supporters of the squatters
discovered a campaigner, whose sparkling repartee, and cultural
touch, together with his knowledge of so many voters outback,
made his speeches an entertainment of lasting value to his
party. He fought with bare knuckles, as indeed he had always
fought in the ring. And in answering the Attorney-General, he
gave as good as he got.
As election day seemed to race towards them the candidate
became increasingly aggressive. He grew to like the game for
its own sake. It was nearly as good as standing up to Jem
Edwards.
During the fight he scarcely saw Molly. The idea of her
being lonely hardly occurred to him. She was not one to make
complaint. But she felt it all the more because she knew, in
her heart that he was scarcely conscious of missing her, and
that had he married Jane he would not so readily have been
away from her side. The wound hurt, even though she never
thought of blaming him.
Yet firmly she held the conviction that she need not be
jealous of Jane, since Adam’s love for the English girl was not
a man’s passionate devotion for a woman of flesh and blood,
but for an ideal, a poetic fancy, a vision that held none of the
real qualities of womanhood. And while she could not have
expressed what she felt in tangible terms, she intuitively
believed, that Jane herself was sensible of the mystic idealism,
that enshrined her image in Adam’s inner consciousness. Such
a love she knew would never have met Jane’s needs.
• The thought stirred her into action. She would be no cling-
ing vine, but a real helpmate—the good comrade—in all her
strange husband’s labours. That afternoon saw her in the
saddle on the road for Robe, where she knew she could help
him most.
Riddoch was delighted when Adam read him the letter tell-


GOLDEN WWATTLE TIME
l n^ ln l WS '< T * B°b e i g 1 the Attorney-General’s: strong-
he said. “In a close fifight that may decide. I say,
Gordon, he went on, looking sbhrewdly at his colleague, “that
wite of yours has brains. I’d lilike to meet her.”
It was a new idea to Adam tbhat Molly was in any way clever.
It proved an astute move, for Moolly knew everybody in the Robe
is nc Their wedding at the 5 settlement, despite their flight,
a local a PP eal - Adam wass regarded a Robe man. And
lolly was all the happier becausse canvassing gave her a chance
to sing her husband’s praises ass nothing else would have done.
, f y m ? n afterrnoon that John and Adam spoke
at mat centre. So wide was thae electorate that they could not
* or n and thhe afternoon meeting gave the
outside electors a chance to reacbh home before dark. As Molly
threw herself into her waywarord husband’s arms, when they
reached her room at the inn—t-the very room where she had
nursed him back to life—Adam ffelt suddenly compunctious, and
kissed her tenderly, blaming hinmself for his neglect.
Molly, girl, he said, holdiling her to him, “when this is
over it I am lucky enough not tdp win, we’ll go to England and
see my folk—what are left of thhem.” He smoothed that head
resting on his heart.
She looked up at him, flushhing with joy at his thought of
her, but with purpose in her eye;es. “Oh, Adam, you just must
win. I m sure you will. And 3 you have a great career here
0 besides,” she addedd, “I’m not sure that I want to
go to England—not half as muchh anyway as I want to see you
in Parliament It was not for hher to tell him, that she feared
racing all that would have to bee faced by a colonial bush girl
in social England.
He noticed that she was stra’angely moved, but put it down
o her desire to help him. There’e was so much to talk about in
the arrangements at Dingley DOell, that there was no time to
speak of more intimate things bbefore the call came to go to
the meeting.
A letter was handed him J from Father Woods. It was
written from Mount Monster, a snmall inoffensive settlement that
deserved a better name. The ppriest wrote tersely:—“Steer
cle a r of sectarianism—you’ll get thhe Irish vote-I’ve seen to that,
i hey re agm the Government a anyway. So with that vote
bagged, go out after the other sidee by a bold policy of vociferous
silence on the denominational quuestion. Good luck.”
John agreed that the issuue of Government grant to
«^ ommatlonal schools, over whichh Orange and Green fought like
be adroitly 1 dodged. Under the guidance
°f father Woods the Roman Cathholics had refrained from sub-
nuttmg the issue to the squatter 1 candidates, their object being
to beat the Attorney-General aand force the defeat of the
Government.


John had got wind that the question might be raised by
one of the Government agents at Robe that afternoon, solely,
of course, in order to throw a “wooden shoe” in the Opposition
works. Plans were laid accordingly. When the chairman, our
old friend Forbes, the Falstaffian publican, opened the meeting,
he announced, “There’s goin’ ter be no insectarianism ’ere terday.
If th’ Dug bits anyone that way, ’e’ll be put out quick an’ lively.”
But when Adam had spoken, a question came from the local
schoolmaster, whose weakness for brandy neat, expressed itself
in verbosity,. He rose unsteadily, when the chairman called for
questions. “I want to ask the candidates whether they are in
ravour of trade reciprocity between the Australian colonies, with
a view to promoting co-ordination of national fiscal policy.”
The chairman, who had blinked at the language, rose nobly
to the occasion. “Th’ question’s too ’ard,” he said. “I don’t
understand it meself, an’ I’ll swear the candidates don’t neither.
An’ anyway, there will be no insectarianism ’ere ternight. Th’
question’s diserllowed, an’ th’ meetin’s closed.”
It was a decision that filled Mr. Forbes’s bar that night
with drinks on the house —at the secret expense of the
Opposition.
Election day dawned at last. Molly was still on her self-
appointed mission at Robe. The campaign ended at Penola, and
Adam put in the last few days at Yallum Park. From the outset
there never was the least doubt of the Squire of Yallum’s return.
Would the young Lochinvar win also? The first returns from
the larger centres put him so far behind, that he cheerily accepted
the worst omen. But John Riddoch thought it would be a close
go.
“It’s the town hare, and the country tortoise, my lad,” he
said. “You’re doing fine.”
On the second night the Stowe supporters held a jubilation
of victory, so far was the hare ahead. But when the country
boxes began to come in, though optimism still continued on the
Government side, it seemed, to an old-timer like John Riddoch,
to be forced.
“In a two-mile event, laddie,” he said, “it isn’t the sprinter
that goes to the front from the start that wins, but the stayer.
You’re the stayer. I don’t say you’ll win, but keep a stiff upper
lip.” Moira was away from Yallum for a week after the election,
and Adam was conscious of missing her. Molly had decided to
stay on at Robe on the plea that her sister was sick. In the
uncertainty, it was impossible for Adam to turn to his verse.
So he wandered restless about the run awaiting the verdict of
the ballot-box.
On the day that Moira Riddoch returned, the only box wait-
ing to be counted was that of Robe. The coach had broken
down, and the final counting was held up accordingly. The
margin of the Minister had dwindled to 42, but as Robe was


counted a Government stronglhold the success of Mr. Stowe
seemed assured. On his returrn rested largely the fate of the
Government.
Adarn went down to meett Moira. She was radiant with
excitement, and her evident wiish. for his success, expressed in
glowing eyes.
, Oh! Mr. Gordon, if you miiss by just a few votes I’ll never
forgive myself for not having sutayed at home, though I did get
some votes for you at Kalangadioo.”
Why, Miss Moira, don’t yrou bother your fine brain about
me. I really don t care a hootfc whether I win or lose. Of
course,” he added, seeing the loaok in her eyes, “I’d like to win,
now you’re so keen.”
I hey talked of the future off Adam’s verse, which she asked
to be allowed to help him reviise. They seemed to cover the
five miles to the homestead all Itoo quickly. John met them at
the door.
“There’s 118 votes in the Rcobe box,” he said. “The return-
mg officer told me. You’ve got tto get a lot to win, laddie. That
wife of yours will have had to bee a wonderful canvasser to do it.
However, while there’s life theree’s hope.”
They decided to go to Pemola telegraph office, and await
the news. When they reached t:he township a telegram awaited
them. But all it advised was thiat three votes were informal.
. That leaves 115,” said Jolhn. “You must get nearly 80
to win.”
4 . an t he done,” said the kocal secretary to the other side.
Besides, we are bound to get tttie majority by a long chalk.”
John merely shook his head!, and Adam smiled. What did
it matter, anyway?
wire. “Rougrh scrutiny, it looks possible.”
Ihe tortoise is creeping up,, it’s creeping up,” said Riddoch.
Half an hour later the clerlk handed Mr. Riddoch a folded
telegram.
. J° hn tore open the paper. “Gordon 80, Stowe 35, Gordon
wins by three.” Then John Ridddoch lost his Scotch head. He
threw his arms around Adam aand hugged him. Very embar-
rassed, he quickly released the equally embarrassed recipient.
You owe it to that wife of yours,?, Gordon. Isn’t she wonderfuH”
he exclaimed. Adam had hardly looked upon Molly in that light
before.
The crowd outside went wildd over the news, and shouting
themselves hoarse adjourned to the inn to drink the health of
the new member and the old, farr into the night.
“Why not rest here till the > House meets, and write some
of that verse stuff you were reaading to my daughter the other


night/’ said John to Adam the next day. “I understand your
wife’s still at Kobe, her sister’s ill, and we could see her,”
It seemed the sensible thing to do, and when Moira pressed
the invitation it was not easy to refuse.
“Mrs. Gordon is still away at Robe, and it will be lonely at
Dingley Dell,” said Moira. “And maybe I can help you with
the poem you promised to write for me.”
Adam thought he caught some inflection in the voice, that
made it always difficult for him to refuse a woman’s appeal.
In Moira, indeed, Adam found a ready listener. Old John would
go fast to sleep after the first verse, leaving the two to find a
place where they would not disturb his slumbers. It was Moira
who found the natural armchair in the big gum at the back of
the house, where Adam could sit any time, on a bright day, and
with pencil and paper immortalise the thoughts and music, that
promised to win him fame.
She would sit close by him under the arch of leaves. Her
understanding mind was linked to a helpful and inspiring spirit.
Under the spur of her encouragement he felt the fire of poetic
imagery kindling anew, and with a brighter, purer flame. He
knew that much that he wrote was imitative sometimes of
Swinburne’s music of word-pearls strung on the slenderest
threads of thought—at times of the robust lyrical ambiguity of
Browning—or again of Byron with his sense of freedom, his
world-scale canvases, his gloomy introspection.
But it was Moira who separated the virgin gold from the
rough quartz in his verse, and with her healthy womanly out-
look, discouraged his tendency to mistake self-pity for the
Pierian spring.
And so his stay was left undetermined, after breakfast,
when John would be called away perhaps to some distant part
of the run, the guest, impelled by a look in Moira’s eyes, would
saunter to his favourite seat in the tree, where presently she
would join him.
“Adam,” she said one morning as they were sitting there,
“if an English artist came here he would not go on painting
English scenes. He’d find a wealth of colour in this country—
in the gum trees alone. Why not set to ringing verse some-
thing Australian.”
“Be the poet of the bush Poet Laureate of the wild,
Moira?” He smiled at the idea.
“Yes, why not?” she answered. He saw she was very much
in earnest. “‘A Stockrider’s Story,’ or ‘The Wattle Gold/ you
understand.”
“Splendid, Moira, I’ll do it, but listen to what I’ve specially
written concerning my comrade, Charlie Walker.”


From the spot where we last lay dreaming
Together—yourself and I
The soft grass beneath us, gleamimg.
Above us the great grave sky,
And we spoke thus: “Though wee have trodden
Rough paths in our younger yesars.
And some with our sweat are sodeden,
And some are salt with our tearrs;
Though we stumble still, walking blindly.
Our paths shall be all made strraight;
We are weak, but the Heavens aire kindly,
The skies are compassionate.”
She showed she was not greatly iimpressed. “The work-
manship is excellent, Adam, but does it paint a picture? Isn’t
it Swinburnian rather than original ? D#oes it ring quite true ?”
she asked, with a disarming smile.
He looked a trifle baffled for a mioment. Somehow, the
frankness reminded him of Jane, who Ihad never hesitated to
tell him when he was wrong. Moira’s crriticism was refreshing.
It carried with it also a certain intimacyy that was flattering in
its intimation that he could do better tlhings.
“Why, Moira,” he answered, “how splendidly helpful you
are. I have often wondered why the best poets if they must
write so much trash, preserve it in thehr published works. I
know why now, Moira.”
“Why?” She was evidently intrigue;d.
“Because they never had an understanding woman’s mind
and spirit like yours to guide them.”
He saw her flush of pleasure or embarrassment—he didn’t
know which. Quite innocently he added to her confusion. “You
see,” he went on, “most poets marry beauty rather than for
mind and spirit—some lucky ones win both.”
“Perhaps they know they can’t have both,” she said. Then
she realised how close they were to dangerous shoals, and steered
the talk away from these forbidden waters.
“Read me what you have written about ‘The Sick Stock-
rider,’ ” she urged.
“Oh, the one you asked me to do?” he asked laughing.
“You must take the blame for it, you know.” And he read with
far more feeling than usual.
’Twas merry In the glowing morn, among the gleaming grass,
To wander as we wandered many a mile,
And blow the cool tobacco cloud, and watch the white wreaths pass,
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while.
’Twas merry ’mid the blackwoods, when we spied the station roofs,
To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard,
With a running fire of stockwhips, and a fiery run of hoofs;
Oh, the hardest day was never then too hard.
and then he came to the close,


Xiet me slumber in the hollow where the wattle blossoms wave,
With never stone or rail to fence my bed;
Should the sturdy station children pluck the bush flowers o’er my grave.
I may chance to hear them romping overhead.
“Ah, that is real —that has the touch of Nature that makes
the whole world know,” she said. “It’s a picture one couldn’t
forget.”
The bright autumn days passed in swift succession. Molly
wrote of the small round of life. She missed him so much, she
said. Adam’s replies were unrevealing—so much so that Molly
guessed something of an attraction at Yallum she was unable
to offer. y
Conscience flicked him with its whip now and then. He
wondered if he were playing with fire, for he was not unaware
that he possessed something of the Byronic attractiveness for
women. Moira became fully alive to it, as she was aware of
unplumbed depths within herself. In their close companion-
ship, any deeper attachment, although suggested by the very
atmosphere of poetic fancy in which they moved, was warned
off by inhibitions on both sides. The divine passion was given
no lambent flame of encouragement. Of all she might have
done for him had her spirit been free was indicated by what she
had already done. Under her guidance and inspiration he had
written, and was capable of continuing to write, the best his
creative genius could command.
• Convention held them fast-bound in chains, and thus the
question that w r as knocking at the door of their conscience
remained one in casuistry.
Manlike, however, he remained free to revel in her charm
of mind and spirit, to snatch pleasure from watching her deepen-
ing appreciation of his need of her. He realised, that had the
Fates decreed it otherwise, his mind could have been assured
the continued stimulus needed to bring his talents to fruition.
But, as it was, he feared he would grow more deeply to care for
her the more he leaned on the quality of her mind and
understanding. Meanwhile Destiny was busy working out its
own foolish and sinister plans for his future.
His helpful wife was eating out her heart over the
seeming neglect by her somewhat casual husband. She stayed
on at Robe continuing to nurse her sister.
At last the day came for departure from Yallum if the
members for Victoria were to be in time for the opening of
Parliament in Adelaide. John was to drive with relays of
horses. Molly was to see her husband as he passed through
Robe, when arrangements would be concluded for their residence
in the distant city.
Sitting with reins in hand, behind a spanking but restless
four-in-hand, John might have been preparing to coach on an


English run for all the concern he showed, instead of starting:
on a journey of some 300 miles througgh scrub and sand, and
waterless wilderness in parts, with no reserves in case of a
breakdown.
Sitting beside him, Adam smiled cdown on Moira waiting
to give the last message of word and book. She had taken care
to avoid any more intimate farewell onn the last night at the
homestead. She had adroitly used herr father as her uncon-
scious guard.
“Take care of yourself, father—anad you, too, Adam,” she
called, as John gave the first light flicck to the leaders. She
tried to keep her tone unemotional, but caught the vibrant
note in her voice.
The traces drew taut as the leaderrs got into their collars
and the polers breasted up to the task, a and with wheels crunch-
ing the gravel the long journey had beggun.
Fifty yards down the drive Adam booked back. Moira was
standing there with some servants besside her, watching the
departing waggonette. He waved, and instantly, as if expect-
ing the last gesture from him, she wawed back. He saw her
still waving to him, her sturdy figure the s embodiment of reliance
and steadfast friendship, and maybe of something deeper, that
was attuned to the insistent call of his own inner self.
And now the new life beckoned him i on. What would it do
to him ?
CHAPTER XL
BROKEN HOPESL
*‘T>UT why not come, Molly? You’ll enjoy the ride. Now I
iL) come to think of it you haven’t Ibeen on horseback for
ever so long. Why? Tired of riding?’”
“No—l just didn’t feel like it for the present.” He did not
note that Molly had flushed deeply at Ihis questioning. “But
you must go. Who are these people the Governor is taking up
to the Mount?” She seemed very insisttent.
“Visitors! Just visitors! Lord andd Lady Millbank!”
“Oh, yes!” said Molly, a little exciitediy. “They came in
their wonderful yacht, The Moonbeam. They’re sailing round
the world. She’s written a bock on it. II read it in the paper.”
“Well, if you don’t go that lets me outt. And, anyway, riding
hacks with ladies is like riding a rockdng horse to a cross-


country rider like me.” Adam pulled out his pipe and, lighting
it, blew out a ring of smoke.
They were seated in the verandah of the cottage at Glenelg
that Adam had taken for the Parliamentary session. The sea
lay just below them, with the morning sun glistening on the
gently-heaving waters. He had begun to think of such a sea as
a woman asleep, her bosom rising and falling as she breathed.
The yet-calmer seas seductively crooning to the shore he would
call Delilah, and the storm-tossed waters tossing the long sea-
weed, like a woman tossing her hair m a tempest of
he likened to Jezebel. And when Molly was called to household
cares, and while the mood was on him, he wrote a verse ot the
“Song of the Surf.”
Ynn come and vour crests are hoary with the foam of your countless years.
You break with a rainbow of glory through the spray of your glittering tears-
Is your song a song of gladness—a paean of joyous might.
Or a wail of discordant sadness, for the wrongs you never can right.
For the empty seat by the ingle? For children reft of their sire.
For the bride sitting sad, and single and pale, by the flickering fire.
Molly had come back while he was scribbling the lines. And
when he laid them aside, and lit his pipe, blowing the smoke
into the air, she remained strangely quiet. He looked up at ner,
a little concerned. He noticed that her face looked thin.
“I say, Molly, nothing wrong, is there Wont go any-
where. On this ride to-morrow for instance.”
“I’m all right, Adam—a bit run down the doctor says—he
told me just to take it easy for a while.” She flushed embar-
rassingly.
Adam looked amazed. “So you did see the doctor. o G ?ne
girl. Ah, well, take it easy, girl. He rose, knocking the pipe
on the verandah post. “I must be going.” „ ,
“But you will go with the Governors party, Adam, she
pleaded.
“I’ll see, girl; won’t promise.” And he turned towards the
stable^ at afternoon as he gat beside his colleague in the
Assembly, John turned to him and asked, “Weel laddie: An hoo
are your ships cornin’ hame?” This lapse into Scotch was
merely a device to hide the anxiety he felt.
“Like Antonio,” responded Adam gloomily. “I had argosies
on many seas, but none of them are coming home, it seems, the
fact is,” he went on, “I am a rotten business man—so unlike
you. All I have left is Dingley Dell, and a sheep run m Western
Australia, and now the agents tell me there’s poison weed m
the district. If anything happened to my 4,000 sheep there,
that would see me up a wattle.”


“Poison weed. That’s bad. Why didn’t von consul* ™
b ° y ' Take my advice and sell that
western Australian property as soon as you can.”
It was then the messenger came across the chamber He
had ate egram in his hand. “This for you sirhe said
handing the envelope to Adam. ’ ’ said?
his. co&e As J Adam d re oad 0 ad f"!
“ SSL He “ the •— 2
“Albany, W.A.
t mfor 4 m y ? u three thousand sheep dead, poison weed
hooks him rest will go. Wire instructions ”
will you do, Adam?”
Wire him, ‘Skin them and come home.’” Adam’s tone
was almost nonchalant. Adams tone
“I’m terrible sorry, laddie,” said John deeply concerned “I
5 000 y T feel U but my brother and 1 will L you up with
4,000 sheep down the south-east.”
lt Dell/and can start agaht Butt
SKd ferventW- S^n here ~ thank ** that" he
i Jo^ n big heart went out to the younger man
whom Fortune seemed to take up only to cast down aSn “f
know how you feel, laddie, and I won’t persua
your judgment, but if you must leave this den of liars choose
I°meanT make y ° Ur 6Xit gracefully ‘ — y °u understand what
“Ah, yes,” the other replied. “It shall be said of me
|aps, as of Charles the Second, that nothing so became him in
remembered“ an Hl ““be
memoered. He said it with such conviction and with
S °i s i rangely P ee ring as it were, into the future that John
?ver d °ht TO ““ afterwards ’ as if a chicken hadtalked
m th ’ bOyS What ’ S « ‘ n „ex h t
the nexf motion Ph TM^n^M d ’h bUt Imi meanin £ to speak on
e next motion. It II probably be my swan sons- Tobn ”
t h„P° hn , Rldd ? Ch f h 2 ok his W “Ah,, weirhl be here for
that, and went out of the chamber with sorrow in his heart.


The debate on the Estimates was degenerating into the
parish-pump stage. The Roads and Bridges members were
voicing local grievances, real and imaginary, but all designed
to catch votes. It was probably the only Parliament in the
Empire in which the speeches of members were printed daily in
the Press in full, as part of the Hansard contract. Such publicity
was not lightly to be missed.
The member who had the floor, and was speaking on the
sheep tick question, found himself subject to stentorian inter-
jections from a somnolent form on the Ministerial benches. The
bright idea struck him of calling attention to the hon. the
Premier’s sleeping partner “driving pigs to market,” and asked
the Speaker to declare the interjector out of order, as marketing
swine had nothing to do with the question of sheep tick.
In the uproar that followed the Minister awakened, rubbing
his eyes stupidly, while members came running in to see what
the fun was about. Only by such intermissions was a dull
debate made tolerable to representatives of the country.
Adam had found Parliament to be an unconsciously humour-
less place, and a sheer waste of time for a dreamer, unskilled in
intrigue and rhodomontade.
The Speaker was actually putting the next question before
Adam was aware, that the bill on which he had suddenly decided
to make his swan song was being shelved. He received the call,
however. When word was passed round that young Gordon
was speaking, the members came flocking in from outside. They
liked his humour, quaint though it was, and the Latin tags that
most of them misunderstood. He brought into an Assembly,
made up mainly of material as uncultivated as the acres they
represented, an Old World atmosphere of culture, and of some-
what pedantic oratory. Yet always was he robust, and frank
almost to a fault.
“Before the motion is put, Mr. Speaker,” he said in a high
voice that deepened as he proceeded, “I wish to express my
astonishment at the action of the Government, which would cast
a resolution one day, and the next knock it on the head.”
“Like a staggy calf,” interjected a friend.
“Yes, sir! It is a case of ‘Love’s Labour Lost,’ ” continued
the member. “It calls to mind the legend of Greek mythology,
where Sisyphus is engaged in constantly rolling a stone uphill—
an employment decidedly monotonous. (Laughter.) Shall we
emulate the renowned commander who with 20,000 men marched
them up a hill, and then marched them down again?”
(Laughter.)
“The good old Duke of York,” came from the cross-benches.


Exactly, Adam agreed, “And 1 with respect to the measure
itselt, it is a matter of sublime indilifference whether Trojan or
Tyrian, squatter or anti-squatter, ggain the ascendancy. The
blind egotism of a set of illiterate booors,” he went on, speaking
with great emphasis, raising his riright arm, and shaking his
linger at the Government benches, , “the senseless clamour of
the great unwashed (‘Oh!’)—the (canaille—(‘Oh!’) are alone
enough to aggravate a saint into a sspirit of contradiction.”
“ ‘Vox populi’ will deal with yoou at next election,” inter-
posed the Premier, with a sinister chhuckle.
I ask the Premier,” Adam went con unabashed by the recent
change in Government, and to the “haear hears” of his own side,
I ask the honourable gentleman, is this to be a war between
squatter and anti-squatter? Tim atttacks and .reprisals, the
mutual recriminations, the bitter inveective, the coarse personal
abuse (cheers), that passes on both ssides, is enough to make a
man regret that the march of civilissation has swept away the
institution of the Middle Ages, and aabolished ordeal by battle.
(Loud laughter.) The Opposition are; like the spearmen of the
Field of Flodden.
“Each stepping where his ccomrade stood.
The instant that he fell!’’
Loud “hear hears” greeted the conclusion of a speech, the
vigour of which they all appreciated, but the meaning so few
understood.
The swan song of the junior memnber for the South-east
had been sung, but only he and John Riiddoch realised it was his
impromptu farewell.
“Well, John,” said Adam, as he itook his seat—for John
had come in directly he had heard his colleague was on his feet—
“as I told you, I’m resigning. My resignation goes in to the
Speaker to-night. So I make my exit ais I said.” He looked to
see how John had taken it, and went; on, “ ‘Men make their
entrance and their exits. And one mam in his time plays many
parts.’ You know the rest as well as I do.”
“I’m more sorry than I can tell yom, laddie. As we Scotch
say, ‘Everything has an end and a pmdding has twain,’ but
you’ve done well since you’ve been here. ” You’re a braw fighter.”
“Oh! yes, I can always fight a losinjg battle,” said Adam.
“I’ve had my cake and I can’t ccomplain.
And I’ve only myself to blame.
Ah! That was always their tume at home,
And here it is just the same.”
He laughed sardonically, shrugging his straight shoulders..
They went to the bar where John orderced drinks.


“Now it’s over,” said John, “remember inquests are always
unhealthy. But let me say this. You had to choose between
becoming a present-day politician, or writing poetry stuff that
no one ever pays for, but everyone wants to read. That’s why
we Scotch like poetry sae much—it costs us naething, especially
if the poor poet’s nae longer wi’ us.”
It was impossible to keep a straight face over such phil-
osophy. John went on, in more serious vein. “You’ve tried
Parliament and found it just a graveyard of broken hopes, a
Golgotha of fine talents—that’s not my own, laddie, I read it
in a book—but what a man says, goes on the air like a bubble,
but what a man writes, if its truth, lives on after you’re dead.
Who remembers what the great orators said, except where some
great writer records what they probably didn’t say at all. But
great writers are with us for ever and aye.”
It was a long speech for John, and Adam was intrigued.
“The poet pays the price for his gifts, you know—Chatterton,
Burns, Poe, Keats, Shelley, Byron, Hood; I could go on citing
the great singers, who paid the price.”
“But it’s worth it, lad.”
“I wonder,” said Adam reflectively.
And so they parted. Others claimed his company, shower-
ing upon him their exuberant congratulations. It was a wild
night indoors. The “Hard-liver Brigade” were in full session.
Starting on drinking Gordon’s health, they drank everybody’s
health in turn, down to the house cat.
Adam didn’t like liquor much, and liquor didn’t like him,
but the occasion caught him in the mood to drown memories of
the past.
As the “Hard-liver Brigade” insisted on toasting the
“Young Political Lochinvar,” their hilarity increased propor-
tionately to Gordon’s gloom. Alcohol to him was no Prince of
Good Fellows, but a Lucifer Son of the Morning—a mocking
devil whose laugh was sinister.
“Good speech of yours, Gordon, wassentit, Tony?” asked
Jimmy Medlowe. “Curse th’ blisterin’ cocky, an’ th’ blinkin’
squatter—ye-es, I ’gree wi’ every word you said—quite ri’, ain’t
it, Tony?”
Tony poured another one out of the bottle, and filled
Gordon’s empty glass. “Down wi’ the dizzy lot ev ’em,” he
retorted, not without difficulty suiting action to the word. And
Adam kept him company. “I say that—l do—ef I stan’ alone.”
But since he couldn’t stand alone, he sat down. Adam did like-
wise. Then it was that the mists began to gather. A few


more quaffs of the dew of Kilmarnoch, and even the bagpipes
wouldn’t have waked him, no, nor Gabriel’s trumpet itself.
He was riding Comet, his favourite hunter, on the way to
Government House to join the Governor’s riding party. Their
objective was to be Mount Lofty, the highest peak in the ranges,
and ten miles from the capital as the crow flies, but double that
distance, as some wit had said, if the crow had to drive a
bullock waggon. The early morning: was sharp with the linger-
ing frost, but that presaged a bright, clear sky with the warmth
of the winter sunshine.
As Adam approached the gates of the Vice-Regal residence,
he noted the half dozen horsemen already gathered.
He was greeted cordially enougH by the aide-de-camp, who
introduced him to Lord Millbank, the visiting yachtsman, to
whom Adam took an instant liking;. There was a breeziness
about the baronet, and a complete absence of pomp, that was
typical of English seamen. Fortune had enabled him to sail
the seven seas like a nautical Marco Polo, and his wife’s book
on the voyage of the Moonbeam, was regarded as a classic.
The party was waiting for his Excellency and Lady Mill-
bank. At last they came out together, and her laugh seemed to
Adam to be strangely familiar. Yet he only noticed that she
was holding her riding skirt, as she walked towards her mount,
chatting brightly to the Governor. Again Adam was intrigued
by the ring of her voice. Not until the aide introduced her did
she see him. He looked up to notice the bewildered look in
her face.
“Adam,” she said, pleasure, surprise, and embarrassment,
deepening her rich and lovely colour, her eyes wide with wonder,
and unmistakable gladness. “Adam,” she repeated, “can it
really be you.”
“Jane!” he called, and all his heart was in the cry.
The others looked wonderingly.. His Excellency came for-
ward, with Lord Millbank, both obwiously seeking explanations.
“It is Adam Gordon, Henry,” slhe said, turning to her hus-
band. “You remember I have oftem spoken of my father’s old
friend, Captain Gordon, and of the farmily, who were dear friends
of my girlhood.” She looked to tine Governor. “Your Excel-
lency has indeed given me an unexpected pleasure in making
possible this meeting with Mr. Gordlon, with whom I often/Tode
to hounds in the Cotswolds, and the? brother of my dearest girl
friend.”
It was not exactly as Adam vwould have described their
relationship, but he admired her tacct and readiness.


“Ah, well!” said his Excellency, “I’m glad to have been,
however unconsciously, a good fairy in the matter, but let’s start,
and you can exchange reminiscences as we go.”
As they passed down the straight, broad, streets of the City
of Light, as the Governor facetiously called it after its original
planner, Colonel Light, Adam found himself riding as in a
dream. That the lovely spirit in riding attire was Jane —his
Jane—was surely too unbelievable to be true. Presently he
would awaken to the reality of a lonely heart, half the world
away from the girl he really loved. Since Jane rode between
his Excellency and her husband, the chance of saying what was
in his heart to confide, seemed to be remote indeed.
At last the Governor, and his visitor, fell into such close
conversation, as men will do, that Jane was able for a few
moments to drop back beside Adam.
“Don’t wake me, Jane—if this is only a dream. Let me
dream on, and we together remain like the figures on the Grecian
Urn, as Keats saw them. Every moment I expect you to fade
away into the mists. Tell me, is it true you are here riding
by me?”
She looked away—colour flooding her face. Rapidly she
threw off the embarrassment “Adam,” she said, in a voice in
which tenderness was mingled with reproach. “Why didn’t
you answer my letter—your father’s letters. He longed so to
hear of you, but there was only silence.” There were tears in
her eyes.
“Jane! So you wrote and I never knew it. And the dear
old Governor. Ah! How he must have been hurt by my
silence. But all those letters were destroyed by a heartless
scoundrel to cover his peculations.” And he told her what had
happened.
“Ah, Adam! How terrible, and I never guessed it.” It
was on his lips to ask her if it would have made any difference
had he answered, but at that moment the two riders in front
dropped back, and the chance passed.
The track to Mount Lofty from the city followed for some
five miles the coach track to the foothills. The cavalcade
passed througn the park-lands, originally designed to
afford uninterrupted views of any savage tribes attacking the
city. Since there never were any such tribes in the southern
part of the continent, the spaces became the lungs of the grow-
ing metropolis. The track led pleasantly through wild bush and
timber. Along the watercourses, emerging from the hills,
giant red-gums, wattle, and buttercups, grew luxuriously, the
trunks of the eucalyptus having been hollowed out by fire, in


many cases by the aborigines, to make the only kind of habita-
tion, except the bush wurlie, that the blacks knew.
To Jane, and the rest of the English party, every mile
revealed something new in this uncouth land, where the natives
had not yet emerged from the stone age. Soon they were
ascending the rising ground near the hills. The vast panorama
of plain and sea, opened up its wonders to them, and every mile
the horizon extended with the ascent of the foothills. To their
right the smoke-stack of the first silver-lead mines opened in
the continent, was belching forth its smoke, telling of activity-
deep in the bowels of the earth. Below them some olive trees
were coming into bearing, the black fruit hanging thick on the
boughs.
How like Italy, Henry,” said Jane to her husband.
“More like California,” said the much more travelled sailor,
pointing to the grassy hills rising up to the misty peaks beyond.
“Nature’s paradise, judging by the number of apple trees I’ve
seen, don’t you think, Mr. Gordon ?” He laughed.
“The trouble with the Garden of Eden,” retorted Adam,
“wasn't apples, but the shortage of pears.” He looked at Jane
with a quizzical smile, while she joined in the doubtful laugh.
He was, however, ashamed of his humour.
They had reached 'the summit of the foothills 1,000 feet
.above ihe plain, and beyond lay the ridge of the ranges another
l,oou feet higher, the topmast peak hidden in rolling mists
Indeed, the light fleecy clouds were sweeping down the mountain
sides, nllmg the Valley of the Waterfalls with impenetrable fog.
Soon they ran into the first thin veil of cloud, and all the land-
scape changed into a mystic realm, a dreamland of changing
beauty; with the curtain of fog lifting every now and then to
show them the heights beyond.
Jane seemed like an ethereal creature of the mist, not of
this world. The branch-off from the main overland road to the
summit was through a forest of tall timbers—their trunks like
Roman columns. Then, after they had put their horses to the
final rise they were above the fog, which rolled in churning
waves in the dark wooded valleys beneath. A break in the
clouds gave them a glorious vision of the city ten miles away,
spiawled out 2,500 feet below, with the blue sea beyond, while
to the north stretched the illimitable interior of the continent.
When at last the order to return was given, Adam had
moved to Jane’s side as they mounted. In half an hour the
change had partially dispersed.
“Where are you, Jane?” shouted Lord Millbank
“She’s here, Lord Millbank,” exclaimed Adam. “I know


GOLDEN WATTLE TIME 113
the way, and will see she isn’t lost.”
Without waiting: for approval, or otherwise, he caught the
rein of Jane’s horse, with a cursory explanation that he
would see her safely back to the main track. She for her part
appeared to trust him implicitly.
“Jane,” he said in a low voice, “this may be our last ride
together as Browning says. Will I ever see you again?”
“Of course you will, Adam. You will come back to England
some day. Why,Vou’ve no t forgotten you’re the heir of Essle-
mont. Some day you’ll be the Laird there.” V
“Esslemont?” he exclaimed wonderingly. “I had almost
forgotten the place. But my uncle may marry again. He
may have a son. Perhaps he has an heir already.”
“Oh, no, Adam! He’s a very sick man, and has never
married. No one will cut you out of the entail, you know.”
“Esslemont! Esslemont! I wonder!” His voice carried his
own doubts, even to his own consciousness. “That’s in the
future, Jane, anyway. I want to think only of now. You are
here by my side. Oh, Jane! Jane!”
“Hush, Adam. You know you mustn’t say such things.”
“All right, Jane, let’s talk of home and old times in the
Cotswolds. Only ride with me this once,” as the poet says.
She laughed, but neither refused the excursion nor approved
it. Romance beckoned her, and she felt she was safe to take
this liberty with a husband who adored her, forgave her every-
thing, and granted every wish. So they talked there, in the
solitude of the Ranges, not of intimate thoughts, but like
■children, of happy times in the West counties. And the sound
of her voice, though he could not see her, was, to him, like a
caress. They passed through the stringy-bark gums again in
single file, and emerged into the heath country.
At last he led her to the top of a deep descent leading into
a dark, fog-filled gully. She looked concerned. “Adam, are you
sure we came this way?” she asked.
“No, we didn’t, but I know this country like my hand, and
I’ll show you something beautiful.”
“But,” she protested, “will the others know we turned off
here. Hadn’t we better wait for them?”
He laughed somewhat sardonically. “Ah, Jane, you
haven’t changed a bit. Always playing safe—on the side of the
Philistines still, eh ? Well it’s all right because it was arranged
that we all werit back this way. So come along. No malinger


ing, you know,” he concluded, laughing boisterously, until the
sound was echoed back with weird iteration from the hillsides.
Only partly satisfied, she let hiim lead. Presently he dis-
m?u,nt?,d - „ “9, ive y ? ur hol : se his head, he’ll take you down
saiely. So they plunged into the cdeeper mists, Adam keeping
a hand on her horse’s bit. The sure-footed animals never
iaitered. The tooting was mostly Ibroken rock, made slippery
by the moisture oozing out of the hiillside
'ru reached a small cjreek, flowing crystal clear,
the fog had lightened. They could see the watercress growing
there by the running stream, and all iround was a riot of colour
maidenhair, yellow buttercups, violets, bluebells, scarlet runner-
all so different, from those of the English woodlands. Above
theni towered the tall hills, their height of 600 feet or more
seemingly enhanced by the lack of visibility. Adam gathered
a great bunch of wild flowers, red and white heath, and native
orchids, carrying it for her. Soon the music of the stream
running over the pebbly bottom was drowned by the sound of
falling waters.
Ihe sun shot its beams through the clouds. They seemed to
fall upon the figure of Jane, sitting there upon her horse. A golden
glow ethereahsed her form, and to Adam’s idealised vision,
the thin flowing mists about her bore resemblance to a bridal
veil billowing m the breeze. And as, with every caution, they
made down the steep slopes to the bottom of the fall, the glow
of sunlight followed her down, revealing her lovely dark beauty
and.deepening the pools of wonder in her eyes. They stood
by the pool with the spray blown in their faces
, , Why, it s like a fairy dell,” said Jane, raising her voice
to be heard above the noise of the tumbling waters. “I expect
the gnomes and fairies live all around these lovely hills,” she
added laughing happily.
Jane looked to the top of the fall. Evidently the others were
a long distance behind. He held out his arms to ease her to the
ground, for the riding skirt made the operation difficult on rough
ground. She lowered herself to find his arms around her, his
burning eyes looking into hers, and then his lips were pressed toT
hers with a passion that awakened some slumbering response
deep m her. She knew she should have repressed him, but it
Was too sweet not to yield.
You love me, Jane you love me—as I love you ”he mur-
mured as he lifted his lips from hers.
She did not answer, but he held her tightly to him—her
heart beating to his. Suddenly she awoke as from a dream.
She pushed him gently from her.


“Jane!” he cried, but knew the spell was broken. “Jane—
come with me away from everything—from the crowd, life that
is not life.”
She was not one to pay the price of love’s passion. That
way was madness —divine madness perhaps—but still madness.
“Adam,” she said, holding him off with her arms, “you would
lose me if you took me away—you know that, don’t you?”
He looked at her wonderingly. His arms loosed their hold—
he was like a man waking out of a sleep. Yet the desire for
her still held him. “You know I always wanted to marry you,”
he said.
“You always idealised me, Adam. lam not as you think,”
she said. “You would not destroy a happy memory, for if I
gave up all, that is what it would do to you. Let us treasure
something that never can be taken from us, like Keats’ lover.”
Once again her head was dictating to her heart. Common
sense was triumphant. The victory for the Philistines was all
the easier because her attitude threw him back upon his original
conception of her as a lovely woman, born for adoration, rather
than for man’s passionate regard.
for his part he could not fail to remember that Lord
William Gordon had run away with the beautiful Lady Sarah
Lennox, though she was married, and apparently no one seemed
to have thought much the worse of her. And he would marry
Jane.
He caught her suddenly in his arms, lifting her from the
ground. She made no protest; she did not even seem to resist.
Passionately he kissed her eyes, her hair, her mouth, and on
her lovely throat he pressed his hungry lips. He would be her
young Lochinvar, He would claim her body and soul. They
were his by right of love. They should be his by conquest.
Something was wrong. Fear had him in its grasp. She did
not seem like a living thing. His passionate kisses had become
as Dead Sea apples, “all bitter to the taste.”
A shout from the top of the cliffs brought him to earth.
They had seen the horses below, happily not himself and her.
* * *
He was some miles nearer home before he realised he was
riding Comet on the six-mile journey from the city to Adelaide’s
chief watering place, alone. And then the flood of recollection
almost overwhelmed him. Failure everywhere had set its
snares and trapped him —his fortune gone—his Parliamentary
career ended—Jane lost to him for ever. Was the road he was
now travelling to be his Journey’s End?
As he came within sound of the sea, the late moon rose
over the distant ranges, lighting up a quiet ocean. So peaceful


was it all—the slowly heaving waters, the ripple of the gentle
waves upon the shelving sandy beach—that the temptation
came over him to ride out into the quiet deep. Like Byron he
had always loved the sea in all its moods. Why not let the sea
cover him, as he had written? And yet no thought of death
had touched his consciousness. Rather he imagined himself
riding to join the glorious company of King- Arthur and Lancelot,
and the Knights of the Round Table—in Lyoness.
It was an historic spot. Thirty years before, Captain
Hindmarsh had landed and, under the Old Gum Tree, had pro-
claimed the new British colony. The proclamation, he remem-
bered, was read by Robert Gouger, the real founder of the
settlement, but immediately after Gouger had been summoned
to the bedside of his wife, who that day had given birth to a
son—the first white child to be born in the young Province.
Ah, then tragedy had i followed so swiftly, for within three
months wife and child lay together in a grave, and Gouger,
ruined in fortune, and in mind, had returned to London, to die
in penury.
He recalled all that.
Putting his heels to Comet’s flanks, he moved into the
shallow sea. The beach shelved slowly—so that at low tide
the sands were dry half a mile but from high-water mark. A
hundred yards from the shore, the waters were only up to his
horse’s knees. Arthur and his knights, in the lost Kingdom of
Atlanta, or on the dark waters Ulysses might give him hail.
Comet had at last found the deep waters, and struck out,
as he was used to doing, for exercise. Suddenly a light appeared
far out at sea. A yacht sailed into the quivering light of Venus.
“Jane! Jane! I am coming,” he called softly.
It may have been something in the tone of the voice he
knew so well, that turned Comet’s head shorewards, but not all
bis rider’s efforts and exhortations could divert the animal’s
purpose. Weak from the effects of his strange collapse,
Adam was powerless to change the course Comet had deter-
mined upon. Comet soon gained his feet, and a sandbank enabled
him to race for the shore, amid flying spray and oaths from
his rider. Nor did the gallant beast cease to put forth all his
speed until they reached the cottage gate.
Molly heard him coming, and stood with a light at the
door. “Adam!” she cried anxiously, “are you all right.”
He dismounted before he answered. “Quite all right, only
Comet bolted with me,”
He followed her in, and when she had put the light down,
to his surprise she held him in her arms.
“Why!” she said, releasing him in alarm. “You’re all
wet, Adam.”
“Yes,” he answered lamely. “I said Comet bolted with me.
He took me for a dip,” he added, with a feeble laugh.


“What took you into the water? Comet? How strange!”
she looked at him queerly, he thought. Gently she took him by
the arm, and, leading him to his room, took off his coat. He
Insisted on putting himself to bed, saying he wasn’t a baby.
He saw the colour rush to her face, and wondered why.
When she brought him some hot coffee in bed he said: “I
resigned from Parliament to-day, Molly.” He looked so
despondent she put her arms around him like a child, and said:
“I’m not sorry you resigned, Adam for my sake, as well as
yours.” Then tucking him in, she kissed him. “You just go
to sleep and forget everything!”
His contented sigh w r as her reward. There was not a word
of what had happened to him, though she guessed at the truth.
There were dark depths in the man she loved that were better
unfathomed. For her simplicity had given Molly an under-
standing not bequeathed to many abler souls. Not until noon
did Molly awaken her husband.
He looked at her wonderingly, for the moment still in
dreamland. “Adam, I have something to tell you,” she said
shyly, sitting on his bed, and stroking his hair. Before she
could say any more, tears gathered in her eyes, and she bent
over and kissed him.
This demonstrativeness was so unlike Molly that he was
surprised, and in a measure alarmed. Was she ill?
She flushed to the roots of her hair, and then bent over him,
whispering in his ear.
He sat bolt upright on the moment. “What’s that? Girl,
are you sure? Did the Doctor really say that? Oh, girl!”
She nodded, her whole look showing her happiness. “Yes,
Adam, dear, I’m going to be a mother to your baby.”
It was out at last. He caught her to him, resting her head
on his bare breast, where she could hear his heart beating, and
kissed her tenderly. “That heart, girl, beats from now on for
you and the little one,” he said, his voice deep with emotion.
Molly found him later in the stable, whistling gaily and
giving Comet a double allowance of oats. “Good old Comet,”
she heard him murmur. “You knew something I didn’t, ole boy,”
And he kissed that ugly nose.
CHAPTER XII.
THE CHALLENGE OF FATE
Child! Can I tell where the garlands go?
Can I say where the lost leaves veer.
On the brown-burnt banks, when the wild winds blow,
When they drift through the dead-wood drear?
Girl! When the garlands of next year glow,
You may gather again, my dear—
But I go where the last year’s lost leaves go,
At the falling of the year.


EVEN the divorcement from his fortune, which was “made
absolute,” by the poisoning of S,OOO sheep on his Westralian
holding, could not shake Adam’s belief in the future. He and
Molly were back again at Dingley Dell. It rather shocked Molly
to hear him singing in his unmusical voice, “Unto us a Child is
born, unto us a Child is given.”
But when she ventured a mild protest he had replied
cheerily, “The Man who said ‘Suffer the little children to come
unto me,’ wouldn’t object to us having our bit of heaven, and
saying so. The Lord doesn’t mind anyone being cheerful, Molly.”
In bringing order out of chaos in his affairs, Adam found
Molly’s practical knowledge of stock, and her common sense
invaluable. Her criticism of his dealing’s saved him many a
headache, and heartache, too. She knew the country better than
he, and was always at hand to make crooked dealers go straight.
And she was now working not for him alone, but for a child,
whose advent, she was sure, would bring him closer to her, and
would fill her own life with the wider love of motherhood. Never
had Adam been so content, nor felt such zest in living.
Full of foreboding when he heard of Adam’s resignation
from Parliament, Father Wood had resolved to see him without
delay. The rare insight of the elder man told him that Adam
was at the cross-roads of life; perhaps now more than ever he
needed a guiding or at least a steadying hand. So he set out
from Penola on his sturdy pony, just one hour after hearing the
news, and five days later turned up at the Mount.
The next morning he was abroad early and off to Adam’s
retreat.
His casual greeting well concealed his anxiety, as he rode
into the stock yard of Dingley Dell.
“Ah! there you are, Adam, my son,” he called cheerily.
“And what’s this I’m hearing about you, turning your back on
Parliament bedad. And what might your plans be now?” he
asked.
Molly came with Father Woods, who was riding that way.
He greeted him cheerily.
“And what are your plans now, my son,” asked Father
Woods. “Your colt-breaking days belong to the past—an ex-
member of Parliament can’t go round the country riding buck-
jumpers, you know.”
“Molly agrees with you on that—she always does agree
with you against her lawful husband,” Adam added with a grin.
“So I’m going into business.”
“And what business, may I ask?” questioned the priest.
“Horses—to tell the truth. I’ve been in touch with Ballarat


Golden h City” ig Hv6ry stables ~ th ey’re the best in the
hi* h 3° re orS f S ’ always horses >” Father Woods, shaking
ms head. As long as horses are around you’ll be riding them,
raiLiii y ° U ' 1 f bou i dn,t wonder when you meet the Angel
Gabriel if you don t ask to be allowed to ride with the Four
Horsemen, if there s nothing better offering.”
.^Y ed ’ re plied Adam, laughing, “I can’t imagine a heaven
without horses.
. When the priest left them it was in an atmosphere of hope
“5 P S e f, s ' A l amh ? < ? someone else to think of besides him-
a mll f y ’ might be a son to c arry on the great name.
And Molly drew nearer this strange husband, who was all tender-
ness and forgetfulness. He had brought her this precious gift
of a new life that stirred within her. No Royal Princess could
p ™ u i der . tha “ Molly in her knowledge, that soon she
would be able to give to her man this pledge of her love for him.
U They discovered that, although Ballarat was not what it
had been in the Roaring Fifties, it was still the second city in
e growing colony, when they took up their residence on the
outskirts of the town. The alluvial gold rush had spent’ its
“S: .°^,^ nid i° ns of wealth had been tom from Mother
YfYlf\ ihV n deep leads ’ and reefs » a lon £ mining history
stretched before the settlement. Agriculture, too, was beginning
to garner its annual and ever-increasing harvest from the richest
soil in the continent.
. In ! beir homo in the depths of winter the baby was
b ? o , v Adam , felt frozen with terror, rather than with cold,
d A C l° r Ca T m throu^h the snow that had fallen that
morning After quite a casual talk on the unrest of the miners
themai had passed in to where Molly, with the nurse, awaited
sn . I i?, e ( !“ e< G n te ™‘ y of a 2° n y befOTe he came out again,
Sn, S fi hlS ck an “ ounced smilingly, “Congratula-
„“ s a h? e f lrl - Nothing to worry she grows
older. Laughingly he passed on.
. j?? all , as . casua J as that - this wonderful event that had
was noT° rld f °f him ’ The momentar y disappoint-
ment that it was not a son to carry on the name nasspd in
Monv- e swenf irth °L- a chlld to him - A flood of tenderness for
Molly swept oyer him, and when, ages after, as it seemed to
him, he was admitted to the bedside, his first thought strangely
was for brave faithful Molly. The little bundle of red wrapped
m a shawl, looked as if it might be anything except his daughter


What a blind fool he had been, he thought to himself, to dream
of love for Jane —a love that was as unattainable as the stars —
when all the time a greater love had been at hand in the sweet,
unselhsh girl there, beside a child of his flesh and mind.
The months that passed were the happiest in their lives.
They named the little one Inez after Adam’s only sister. Three,
six, ten months sped by on roseate wings, each day bringing
its revelation of new babyhood wonder. Adam nursed his little
daughter, played with her, on privileged occasions even bathed
her.
“The worlds a nursery,” said Adam one morning, as he was
wiping the tiny body after her bath in the wooden tub. Inez
was making strange noises which Adam was sure were baby
talk which mere mortals could not be expected to understand.
“There are millions of fathers doing this this morning. .Why,
Mollvhe shouted to the mother, who was close by in the
kitchen, “this kid is just like you were once, the same sturdy
chest and shoulders, the fine fetlocks, and long barrel, and
splendid with
“Stop, Adam!” Molly shouted with flushed face. “A nice
thing for the neighbours to hear. And that baby of mine isn t
a horse.”
“No,” answered the unabashed father, “she’s a great little
filly though.”
Two days later Molly looked concerned. “Baby isn’t weU,
Adam. I fancy it’s her teeth again. I think I’ll see the doctor.
“Certainly, Molly,” said Adam, readily enough. “I’ll pay
him what we still owe, then you’ll feel free to call him in.
He left her shortly afterwards for the stables to fix up a
team for a visiting mining magnate, who was inspecting claims
in the district. It was not until the afternoon that they
returned to Craig’s Hotel. Adam had not done more than give
the ostler orders for unharnessing and rubbing down his crack
team, when a boy rushed into the stables. Mr. Gordon. Mr.
Gordon!” he cried.
“Here I am,” said Adam, coming out of the harness-room.
“What’s all the yelling about, lad?”
“Mrs. Gordon sent me to find you, sir. We live two doors
away.”
“Well, what is it, my lad, house afire?”
“No, sir, the baby’s ill.”
“111! What’s the matter?” asked Adam peremptorily.


“Convulsions, sir.” The boy looked concerned. “She wants
you to come at once, she said, sir.”
Adam flung the harness from him. A premonition of
disaster possessed his mind. It was a good half-mile to the
house. A horse was standing ready saddled at the hitching-
post near the end stall. Adam knew the owner, and knew also
that the animal was a bit of an outlaw. But there wasn’t a
horse in the world he was afraid to ride. And baby was ill.
She might be dying.
To drag the unwilling beast from the manger, slip on the
bridle, and fling himself into the saddle was the work of a
moment. He suddenly recalled that the animal was p, very tall,
ungainly brute. He dug his heels into the flanks and raced
for the opening.
His right foot was not yet in the stirrup. The horse felt
the swinging iron, and swerved as they reached the door. Short-
sighted as he was, Adam had forgotten the low overhanging
beam, and had miscalculated tne abnormal height of the gelding.
Too late, he saw the danger and ducked. There was a crashing
blow, the rider was swept to the cobblestone pavement into the
blackest night, while the horse galloped riderless down the street.
For a fortnight, he hovered between life and death. Re-
called by the voice of Molly, he thought for the moment that he
was back again at Robe with her as the nurse beside him.
Not for another two days did Molly break the terrible blow
to him. The tiny flame of life had flickered out. Molly’s heart
was broken. The blow stunned him into silence. The apparent
wantonness of it appalled him as no other cruel stroke of fate
could have done. The light had gone out of his life. Had the
means been available he would not have survived that day.
“Fate takes you up just to throw you down again,” he said
to Moby bitterly. “Why did He bring her into our lives, if He
meant to take her away so soon?”
“Oh, Adam!” Molly had answered, her eyes welling with
tears, “we don’t know all—it’s not given us to see. He knows
best.” Her gentle faith could be shaken, but not destroyed.
“He did trust her to us—for a time. We have the sweet
memory of her. And you are getting well again, dear.”
“What happens to me doesn’t matter a fig,” he replied
bitterly. “But that He should do this to a little child.” He
closed his eyes as if to shut out the sight of such tragedy.
“You mustn’t talk that way, Adam—it’s wicked. No good
will come of it. And it isn’t true.”


! he , “ e . arest Molly ever came to rebuking the
lather of their dead child.
CHAPTER XIII.
ESSLEMONT
The toils *th)at men strive for stout-hearted
The fears' that men fly,
I have known them, but these have departed,
And those have gone by.
Men toiling, and straining, and striving
Are glad peradventure for living;
I render to Life no thanksgiving—
Glad only to die.
rpJiH three musketeers of Australian literature, who were
i to ln t 0 e * ch other ’ s health in the bar of the Black Bull
* ® Collins Street on that June afternoon, were not given
to looking on the wine when it was red. Marcus Clarke, of the
newly founded “Australasian,” and Henry Kendall, the un-
crowned Poet Laureate of Australia, had conspired to lure Adam
Lindsay Gordon to this Melbourne drinking shop, in order to lead
him to the secure retreat of journalism. Marcus, indeed, had
come armed with an offer from the editor of the “Austalasian”
to place Gordon on that paper’s payroll. He had not yet
broached that delicate subject to his friend.
“Here’s to the Three Musketeers,” said Kendall, lifting his
innocuous glass, and passing his last available coin over the bar
counter, taking care that his comrades should not know it was
his last com.
The toast duly honoured, Marcus asked, “ ‘When shall we
three meet again, in thunder, lightning, or in rain?”’
I win the three steeples I’m riding in to-morrow,”
retorted Adam. “Then and not till then,” he added, “will I
have the price of another drink. You see, sobriety as a virtue
has been forced upon me.”
“Why be poor when Fame awaits you round the next
corner, and a pressman’s job is chasing you with a regular if
meagre, income at the same time?” Clarke pulled the order
1 *2 verify his authorit Y for the last statement.
Take witness, brethren of the Pen,” he said, opening the paper
for Adam to read, “Here is the signature and seal of the Arch
flam himself, editor of the ‘Australasian,’ to wit, offering one
Adam Lindsay Gordon the post of guide, philosopher, and friend
to every racing punter in the country, a job no man could fill


with greater profit to himself, and to the best racing journal
in the land.”
They read it with interest. “Why not, Adam?” said
Kendall, who was privy to this conspiracy of kindness. “Your
‘Bush Ballads and Galloping Rhymes’ are magnificent. But
don’t I know that Shakespeare himself, had he lived in these
times, would nave had to write his stuff in the poor-house.”
“Gordon,” Clarke interposed, taking up the running, “I’m
supposed to be a readable writer—got a style they say—but what
would I have to eat if I had to live on that alone? Why even
as it is the three of us haven’t got a spare sixpence to jingle on
a tombstone. Join the noble ranks of journalism, which is only
slinging a lot of ink in a little office late at night and calling
yourself the editorial “ ‘We.’ ”
But Adam was not to be persuaded. Filling his pipe, he
put a match to it, as if to dismiss the subject. “I know the
kindness of you two rascals. You would see me safe and snug.
And I’ll tell you this, that the publication of my last volume of
verse, which you gave such a good write-up to in the ‘Argus,’
compelled me to go without a smoke for a fortnight to make up
some of the leeway.”
Kendall nodded. “I’ve done the same many a time. We
write for Posterity,” he went on, looking down his nose, and
assuming a woe-begone air, “and ask for bread. And if you’re
lucky, posterity gives you a stone—over your bones.”
They all laughed at that. “Good old Posterity,” said
Clarke, “it pays its father’s debts. Now I make my generation
pay me by writing potboilers—l’ve got one on the stocks now.
I’m calling it ‘For the Term of His Natural Life.’ The recipe’s
simple. The Cookery Book for Potboilers runs like this: ‘Take
a little history, sprinkle well with romance, add concentrated
love essence, throw in a few murders, flavour with cannibalism,
the merest suggestion of the heavy father, but be generous
with the beautiful maiden, and don’t be too sparing with the
villain, let it simmer over three volumes, and bring to boil in a
happy climax, serving to girls under 18 and old ladies over 60.’ ”
While Adam laughed Kendall interposed, “Don’t you believe
him, Gordon. I’ve read his story and its ripping. It will live
and be read when, if they hear my name people will say,
‘Kendall. Oh, yes; wasn’t he one of those poet chaps that
Marcus Clarke used to have a drink with ?’ ”
“Another drink to the patron that never dies—good old
Posterity. Fill ’em up, barman,” and after they had honoured
their future patron Clarke made a last bid for Adam’s consent
to write for the Press. “All you have to do really, old chap.


is to tip winners, advise on racing, write up the sport of kings,
and man’s best friend, and all that, and there’s your bread and
butter, with cake on Sundays.” But Adam was, as Kendall
punned it, adamant. “Ever so many thanks, Marcus,” he said,
“but I’m no bird in a cage, not even of a racecourse.” He added
the last with a twinkle. “I wouldn’t barter my liberty of
thought or action to be a scribe, not even if they offered me the
editorship of the Government ‘Gazette’. Besides,” he added, “I
have other plans—an estate in Scotland, but I’ll tell you about
it when I’m more sure.”
They parted swearing by their faith in Pegasus to meet
soon again, and to meet often.
That afternoon Adam rode the best races of his life. The
will to win was dominant in his mind, and by pulling off three
steeplechases in a single afternoon he had probably created a
world record. His head was paining severely after the bad
crash at Ballarat. It was the worst of his near-sightedness,
which made it dangerous for him to be a gentleman rider at
all—for he would never lower his prestige by becoming a pro-
fessional jockey—and it was that which gave his riding all the
appearance of being reckless.
After winning the second steeple on Major Baker’s Babler,
the delighted owner urged Adam not to risk his neck again
that day. “When Babler clouted that stone wall,” he said, “I
thought you were gone for certain. How the devil you recovered
beats me. Now, Adam, take an older man’s advice and call it
a good day.”
“I’ve got to ride my own horse to victory yet, Major, and
that means a lot to me, you know,”
“Maybe, but you never wager on any mount, and the stakes
can’t keep a racehorse in oats, much less in training for a
season. It’s just a fool’s game to risk your life with every ride,
and only a sport like you would do it.”
But all the Major could urge Adam knew and had answered
to himself, “Needs must when the Devil of Debts drives.”
As he mounted for the last steeple he looked very worn
and tired. Molly was not there that day. He had seen to that,
because he knew she might have stopped him. His spare tall
figure was still very upright, though he leaned forward as he
walked, the better to see, no doubt. On this last race of the
great day he was recklessness personified. Racing his fences
like the Light Brigade at Balaklava, he shot to the front from
the start, and, casting finesse to the winds, outwitted his com-
petitors. riding as though there were no fences to clear at all.
But he knew his horse, and his horse knew him. That, indeed,
was the secret of his success. Skimming like a bird, the animal


under him made hacks of the rest of the field. Actually the pace
brought down Scoffer and The Admiral, two faster horses on
the flat who might have disputed his run home.
The ovation he received on returning to the winning-post
after passing it streets ahead of the second, failed to elate him.
As a matter of fact he despised the crowds, and hated the whole
racing fraternity, with the exception of patrons like Major Baker.
But strangely, he did feel a glow in breaking a world record,
perhaps even more than had he been acclaimed as Australia’s
national poet. He felt there was something creative in breaking
even a racing record. “This day—this happy day,” he repeated
to himself as he rode back to be weighed in. He was one with
Archer and Tom Stevens and the great riders of England. “Our
names, familiar as household words be in their flowing cups
freshly remembered. This story shall the good man teach his
son.”
It was his hour of triumph that made his long, painful
apprenticeship worth while.
But at the next meeting, a week later —the Melbourne
Steeple—he crashed at the big jump through no fault of his
own. The Clown crossed in front of him to take the jump, and
brought two of them down. Molly was there with the Major,
and Mr. Blackmore, of the South Australian Parliamentary staff.
Poor Molly was horrified when for a moment after the fall he
lay still. But it was only for a moment. He was on his feet
in a trice, had caught his horse, and was after the leaders as
though nothing much had happened.
“A marvellous recovery,” said the delighted Major, turning
to Molly. “Sir Rupert’s a clumsy beast. I’ll put him to the
stud after this. He’ll be killing someone yet.”
Molly was not so satisfied that all was well. “Oh, Major,”
she said pleadingly, “really he just musn’t ride any more. He
isn’t fit. He can’t see, and takes his jumps by instinct, trusting
to the horse. That’s why he shoud never have anything but a
safe horse under him.”
“Yes! Yes!” answered the Major, a trifle testily, his whole
interest absorbed in the race. “See, he’s catching Warbler;
with luck he’ll win yet. What a cracker of a pace.”
“But I know, Major, that something will happen. He’s not
really recovered from that last fall. I can tell from the way he’s
rushing his jumps. It’s sheer will-power that carries him
though. Fm terribly afraid something will happen, Major.”
Molly’s distress touched Mr. Blackmore. “It is too pacey
fo* a steeple,” he agreed.


And then it happened—just as Molly feared. They were
approaching the big post and rail on the rising ground. The
rise was enough to take it out of the horses. The field was now
fairly bunched. Alsatian, just in the lead from Tory Boy,
clouted the coping and nearly fell. Sir Rupert, close at the
heels of Trojan, who was running third, was put out of his
stride by the confusion of the horses ahead. He rose too soon
and struck the fence, with his forelegs, pitching headlong over.
Adam shot over his head like a stone from a sling. There was
a resounding crash, riders and their mounts seemed to pile on
one another, A cry went up from the crowd.
Molly’s heart seemed to leap in her throat. She sensed that
something dreadful had happened. Even the Major turned
white. When the horses had been disentangled from their
riders they could see a number of figures lying still, with the
crowd surging towards them. How anxiously she watched for
Adam’s colours to rise, but of that there was no sign.
One gasp of anguish came from her, for she knew she was
helpless to do anything. The stretcher-bearers were already
beside the fallen riders. Fortunately, it was not far away from
the casualty-room, and they brought him there with Molly
waiting. When she saw his still, white face, all the colour
drained from her face, but she put her hand on his heart, and
felt it beating before the doctor could intervene. He put her
gently aside, and said: “He’s going to get all right again, don’t
you worry, Mrs. Gordon.”
But he did not say that there was the bruise of a horse’s
hoof on his body, and he feared internal injuries. Mr. Black-
more insisted on sending him to the best hospital, and the Major
could not do too much in securing the finest specialist in Mel-
bourne to take care" of him.
Molly was beside his bed when he opened his eyes that night.
He did not speak, but held her hand, and she saw the look of
gratitude in his eyes. A little later, he smiled, and his voice,
reduced to a whisper, said: “Ah, girl, they tell me the only
horse I can ride after this is Pegasus.”
“Oh, Adam, you mustn’t ride at all. The doctor told me
he forbids it.”
His smile was bewitching as ever. It went straight to
Molly’s heart as he said, speaking in spite of an evident twinge
of pain: “You see, girl, Pegasus is a quiet old moke. I want to
ride—him—in—the—Posterity—Stakes.” He closed his eyes
for a moment. “Who knows—l—might—win!”
She didn’t contradict him; she hadn’t the heart to, and left
him in a peaceful sleep.


The Doctor was adamant about his riding again. It was a
blow to Adam’s hopes for, until Esslemont was assured, riding
offered his only means of living, unless of course he took Marcus
Clark’s advice and turned journalist.
In a week he was up and about, insisting on keeping faith
with Major Baker to attend a dinner to be held in his honour
at the Military Barracks to celebrate his famous triple win.
The evening came when he sat with the Major, Captain
Sedgley, and Lieutenant Russell in the smoke room of the
Barracks. They were awaiting the arrival of the other guests.
The wood fire burned fiercely, for the night was nippy. But to
the sick guest the flames that scorched his face, so close did he
sit to the fire, brought no warmth to the deep cold within him.
Something seemed dead there. The Major was under the im-
pression that his friend was seeing the specialist daily, but
Adam was too proud to run up a bill for his good racing patron
to pay.
‘‘What’s this I hear about you being heir to a Scottish
estate? You know, Gordon, you never told me about yourself,
and the next thing I expect to hear is that you’re a close relation
to his Grace the Duke of Gordon,” The Major laughed.
“Not exactly a near relation,” said Adam. “We are related
of course, but my great grandmother, Lady Henrietta Gordon,
was granddaughter to the second Duke, and, strange to say,
she was also the same relation to the first Earl of Aberdeen,
another Gordon.” He said it quite simply, as a mere matter of
history.
The Major, however, became quite excited about it. “Why
blister me if I ever guessed you were from that old Gordon
clan. Then you must be some relation to Lord George of the
Riots and Lord William, who ran away with Lady Sarah Lennox*
You see, I know something of your family history.”
“They were family skeletons,” said Adam.
“But I say,” went on the Major, to the amusement of the
others, now hot on the scent. “You come from a famous family
of soldiers. I made a special study of your family tree for the
War Office once.”
“Then you noted a few of them were hanged on that tree,”
interposed Adam, hoping to divert the narrator.
“No, seriously, Gordon, there was General William, who
went out after Waterloo; General Cosmo, and William of the
Black Watch, and his two brothers, George of the Navy, and
Charles Napier—he was well known—and by the beard of the
Prophet there was an Adam—Captain Adam something of the


Bengal Cavalry—now he must have been a close relation of
yours.
“He was my father,” said Adam quietly.
“I say, I’m sorry, old chap. And what’s this Scottish
estate ?”
“Esslemont the seat of the Hallhead Gordons it’s
entailed, and I happen to have been the heir, but only lately
did I know that my uncle had passed on.”
“And do you step right into it?”
“It’s not so simple as that, Major. My uncle left it to his
niece, despite the entail. She’s well off without it. But her
lawyers claim the entail was swept away by some change in
the law. My Scottish legal advisers claim I’m the rightful Laird
of Esslemont.”
“And must you fight it?”
“No. There’s a case before the Privy Council that will
settle the whole question. My advisers say they must give the
verdict that will establish my claim. But you can never tell
what the law will do.”
No one was more pleased when this interrogation was
interrupted by the door being suddenly flung open and the room
was filled with a chattering crowd in uniform, whose greeting
of their guest could have been more genuinely friendly.
An orderly presently made his presence felt with the
announcement: “Major, dinner is about to be served, sir.”
They filed into the big dining-room, where two roaring fires
on either side of the room were doing their best to drive the
cold out of doors. The long table was rich with flowers and
fruit. Several large slush lamps on the table gave all the
illumination thought to be necessary, as the fires lent a sub-
dued reflection to the room.
The courses duly partaken amid the chatter and gaiety of
the gay company, and the Royal toast honoured, the Major rose
to propose the health of the guest. “Gentlemen, be upstanding
and drink to the health of the greatest horseman south of the
line, the rider who broke a world’s record, winning three
steeples on the same afternoon, not only a gentleman rider, but
a poet, whose verse reflects the spirit of this new land, and
whose fame will be the imperishable heritage of Australia.”
Amid loud cheers from the exhilarated company, many of
whom had never read a line of Gordon’s poems, the protest of
the author went unheard.
“I will say this,” continued the Major, “as a poet he is
superb, and as a rider over the fences his achievement is without


GOLDEN WATTLE TIME 129
parallel in the annals of the turf.”
“Major! Major! I refuse to allow you to proceed, sir. The
horses won. Drink to them, gentlemen. Here’s to the noblest
creature God ever created for man’s use—l give you ‘The
Horse.’ ” ,
In the diversion, the toast to Gordon was overlooked, as
Adam hoped it would be. However, he was not to escape so
easily.
The Major, now well primed, rose again, and in a voice
that, like the wine he had taken, was all the richer for the
quality of the vintage, held the company while he told of Adam’s
love of the horse, illustrating it by reciting a verse from the
pages of Gordon’s latest volume:—
Oh the vigor with which the air is rife
The spirit of joyous motion;
The fever, the fulness of animal life
Can be drained from no earthly potion.
The lungs with the living gas grown light.
And the limbs feel the strength of ten.
While the chest expands with its madd’ning might,
God’s glorious oxygen.
Amid the cheers of the gathering, the Major said: “None
but a bom horseman could put it just like that unless he was a
descendant of a Centaur, or a horse marine.” The Major’s
similes, iiKe his drinks, were somewhat mixed. “And now I call
upon our guest to recite to us that epic of the racing world, ‘How
We Beat the Favourite,’ an episode, gentlemen, of his own
career.
There was no denying them, and so Adam began:—
“Aye, Squire,” said Stevens, “they back him at evens
“The race is all over, bar shouting, they say;
The Clown ought to beat her; Dick Neville is sweeter
Than ever—he swears he can win all the way.
A gentleman rider—well I’m an outsider;
But if he’s a gent, who the mischief’s a’jock;
You swells mostly blunder; Dick rides for the plunder.
He rides too like thunder —he sits like a rock.
He calls “hunted fairly” a horse that has barely
Been stripped for a trot within sight of the hounds;
A horse that at Warwick beat Birdlime, and Yorrick,
And gave Adb-el-Kader at Aintree nine pounds.
They we have no test to warrant a protest;
Dick rides for a Lord, and stands in with the steward;
The light on their faces they show him—his case is
Prejudged, and the verdict secured.
But none can outlast her, and few travel faster;
She strides in her work clear away from the’Drag;
You hold her and sit her; she couldn’t be fitter.
Whenever you hit her she’ll spring like a stag.
And p’haps thej green jacket at odds though they back it;
May fall, or there’s no knowing what may turn up;
The mare is quite ready, sit still and ride steady.
Keep cool, and I think you may just win the cup.


His rather high-pitched, monotonous voice deepened as,
proceeding with the verse, he came to the action in the story.
The picture began to emerge, clear-cut and colourful—the
great surging crowd, the start, clouting of fences, the falling
of horses, and spilling of riders on to the turf, the thrilling
finish with Iseult and The Clown matching it neck for neck,
and the last stride amid the roar of the throng as the outsider
pushed her nose in front in time to catch the judge’s eye.
“The greatest epic of the turf ever written” closed on the
simple, if ungrammatical, sentence, “And that’s how the
favourite was beat,” and lost none of its force because of its
faults.
Colonel Jackson, who sat next to the Major, and who was
something of a lion in colonial literary circles, turned to his
friend and said: “You know I wouldn’t call that great verse. I
doubt if it could be classed as poetry at all—but it’s something
more than verse. What I mean, Major, is this—it’s great
artistry for he paints in swinging rhyme, a group of pictures in
words, and each picture merges into the next, so that it’s one
grand panorama of a great race. It lives, it’s real, it’s got life
and action—of its kind it’s a masterpiece—an Illiad of the turf.”
The poor Major looked somewhat bewildered at this com-
mentary, with all of which he fully agreed, and just as com-
pletely failed to understand. It was a hectic evening after that,
with the wine going round and The room with it. Another toast
by a stout subaltern who had ripened both in the flushed colour
of his face and in his expansive hilarity. Strangely enough,
Adam became more depressed with the growing elation amongst
the company.
With the clink of glasses, the laughter, and ribald talk, a
persistent knock at the outer door was heard only by Adam.
Perhaps he was waiting for some dire stroke of fate, although
at the time he tried to force upon himself that it was but a
sick man’s fancy. There was at the moment no orderly in the
room. Adam rose and opened the door himself. A fierce gust
of wind indicated a sudden south-wester. Before he could see
who it was, there was a vivid flash of lightning that not only
seemed to blind him, but he felt in a shiver that ran from
the base of the spine to the tips of his hair.
“A telegram, sir,” said a boy’s voice.
Adam drew back as though struck. Gathering himself
together, he answered, “Come in.”
It was the telegraph boy. He had not been able to find


the entrance—he was new on the job, he explained. “It’s for
Mr. Adam Lindsay Gordon,” he said.
• had looked on at the strange episode with sur-
prise. One of them closed the door, for the draught threatened
to blow out the lights. Then they resumed their gaiety—all
but the Major who had suddenly sobered up as he watched
Adam s tace after opening the telegram, and reading the con-
tents For if ever there was despair written in a human
countenance, it was written! oil that of the guest.
The boy stood waiting in case there should be an answer,
as he had instructions to do in all cases.
“What is it, Adam?” asked the Major. “Is it bad news?”"
He had not meant to be inquisitive.
“Oh, I don’t know,” jeplied Adam laconically. “Only I’m
not to be Laird of Esslemont.”
“Who says so?” asked the Major, jumping to his feet.
, “T he Privy Council, and that’s a stone wall that even I
can t jump.” He appeared to be quite calm, almost indifferent,
but the Major knew he would rather a dagger had struck him
in the heart.
“Oh, I say,” exclaimed Russell. “Very sorry, old chap, but
maybe we can beat them yet.”
“Any answer, sir?” asked the boy, looking up at Gordon.,
He was a bright-looking kid. Adam delved into his pocket
for his last shilling and passed it over to the lad.
..... “ No answer, sonny,” he said, and opened the door. As the
little chap passed out a sudden hurricane of rain came down,
and vivid lightning seemed to strike the very room. Before
Adam could close the door a fierce gust of wind doused every
light on the table. The outer door was heard to slam.
It was uncanny. “Hello! The lights! The lights! Bring
candles, someone.” Shouts, interspersed with laughter, came
from all round the room.
Someone quickly found matches. It was Lieutenant Russell.
Striking the tandsticker, he said, “Let there be light,” and pro-
ceeded to apply the flame to the oil-lamps.
Order was soon restored. The Major looked round the
relighted room. “I say, where’s Gordon?” he asked with con-
cern and amazement. They looked into one another’s faces
portentously. Their guest had vanished.


CHAPTER XIV.
FAME’S SICKLE
Tired and worn, and wearisome for love
Of some immortal hope beyond the grave,
Thy soul thou frettest like the prisoned dove
That now is sick to rest, and now doth crave
To cleave the upward sky with sudden wing!
The heaven is clear and boundless, and thy flight
To some new land might be a joyous thing,
Within this cage of clay there is no light.
It is a god that would not have thee ’scape
The torture that he wills to be thy fate.
’Tis but a tyrant’s dream, and born of hate;
Then, soul, be not disquieted with doubt;
Step to the brink—this hand shall let thee out.
—Adam Lindsay Gordon’s last poem.
A HAM had walked back from the Barracks a prey to the
deepest gloom, after the news of the loss of Esslemont.
Thoughts of petty debts owed to tradespeople, rather than the
larger sums owing to his big-hearted friends the Riddochs,
weighed on his spirits like an incubus. Molly had sat up till
midnight, and then, not expecting him to return, had gone to
bed. But she heard him come into the sitting-room and stumble
into the easy chair. Hurriedly she made him a cup of coffee
in the kitchen, and took it to him. He was huddled before the
still-glowing fire, and did not at first notice her.
“Adam,” she said, “drink this, and then to bed. Bed’s
waiting for you, you know.”
He sipped the steaming coffee, and its warmth sent a glow
of hope into that dark and gloomy mind. Perhaps, after all,
things would straighten out. Molly touched his hair gently.
She knew how sensitive he was about being touched, being
“fussed over” he called it. But he was not to be cheered, try
as he did to respond to her efforts. She was not aware of the
tragedy of Esslemont. That would keep till to-morrow.
“No more talk to-night from me,” she said, “the dustman’s
calling. Come, dear.” And he had allowed himself to be led
to bed, there to sleep till another dawn should awaken him to
remembrance of the dark ways ahead.
When in the morning Kendall had come with the proofs of
his new book of verse, “Bush Ballads and Galloping Rhymes,”
Adam was another man. And Kendall’s praise had seemed


more precious than rubies, more to be treasured than fine gold,
for his sincerity could not be doubted. As soon as he was gone,
Molly had kissed Adam. “How lovely for him to bring them
to you, Adam,” she had said.
“He’s a white man,” responded her husband. “I suppose
it’s some compensation for the loss of Esslemont,” he added
bitterly. “What the gods give with one hand they take with
the other.”
“Lost Esslemont,” exclaimed Molly, deeply moved.
She looked so distressed that Adam put his hand on her
shoulder. “It’s the luck of the game, girl. The law says the
bally entail is broke—and so am I,” he said, laughing mirth-
lessly. He had risen and proceeded to knock the ashes out of
his pipe.
Molly looked bewildered. “Oh, Adam, I’m so sorry for
your sake. It’s so unexpected, so cruelly unexpected—to you.”
She added the last two words reflectively.
Something in her tone made him look at her. “And to you,
girl,” he said, “I was thinking what a change it would be for
you to be mistress of Esslemont, with maids to wait on you
instead of having to grub round getting my meals. And no
bills to worry about.” He chuckled ironically. “But it’s just
the baseless fabric of a dream, like life itself, as the greatest
of all poets expressed it,” he added nodding sombrely.
“Mistress of Esslemont?” answered Molly, looking up at
him, trouble in her eyes. “Ah, it was just what I was afraid
of.”
“What do you mean, girl?”
“Nothing, nothing at all. I’ll tell you some other time.”
Then Frank Madden had called, and had found Adam elated
over the proofs, but very tired, and suffering from the internal
injury, as well as irom the old crack on the head he had received
at Ballarat. Together they went over the proofs setting them-
selves to the task of correction and revision through the long
day.
At last Gordon, now thoroughly exhausted, rose.
“Let’s stretch our legs, Madden; I shall croak if I stay
cooped up here any longer. I’ll walk back with you to St. Kilda.”
So together they took the road to St. Kilda. Madden
reminded his friend that it was somewhere here that
Lieutenant-Governor Collins had landed with his load of con-
victs, only to pronounce the place uninhabitable, and to set off
with his cargo of sin and sorrow for Hobart Town. That, he
said, was in 1806. “And now,” he said, “here am I some fifty


ufnhabiteWe » ma^ng a kig in the country that was
But try as he would, he could not shake Adam out of his
moody silence.
July had come with its showers heralding the mid-winter
rams. Everywhere the acacias were in bloom, their golden
tresses shimmering m the breeze. The air was charged with
the heavy perfume of the blown pollen. Frank Madden noted
that Adam looked grey, his eyes dark with black rings, and his
oLGp 11S110SS.
~ “ Su J, e 7 ou,r 1 e to walk so far after your spill off Sir Rupert,
Gordon? he asked. “What does the doctor say about it?” he
continued.
“Doctors always order broken crocks off the course. That’s
what they’ve done to me.” He quoted his own verse:
Is it wise, they say, in the waning day.
When the vessel is crack’d and old
To cherish the battered, potter’s clay.
As though it wee r virgin gold?
Take care of yourself, dull, boorish elf.
Though prudent and safe you seem,
Your pitcher will break on the musty shelf,
And mine by the dazzling stream.
Madden laughed. “Splendid, Gordon—great stuff. But
wY 16 ! 8 no excuse for not having seen the doctor lately.
What did he say when you saw him with the Major?”
“Something— I forget the name—twisted inside—some con-
founded rupture. Talked of an operation as lightly as though
I weie a clock with the works gone wrong, just; wanting the
mainspring fixing, and the old pendulum here,” he puts his hand
over his heart, “needing renewing—sort of, ‘gun’s all right, only
wants a new, lock, stock, and barrel,’ you know.”
‘‘You old misanthrope,” said Madden.
“How could anyone be that with that yellow wattle against
me grey sky, and the white horses of the restless sea? It all
brings back memories to me,” said Adam, with something of
the old glow of enthusiasm in his voice. But it was only a
momentary change in his volatile temperament, for when
Madden asked, “Happy memories I hope, Adam?” he shrugged
his shoulders, as he quickened his pace.
“Some happy—some otherwise.”
He looked quizzically at his friend through narrowed eves
to see how he took it.
h rank Madden caught that look. He had once seen a
drowned man s eyes looking up at him through the water. There
was something here that brought that gruesome picture to his
mind. He felt an icy thrill go through his body. Then he
quickly recovered.


“Why, you old croaker,” he said, “you think of Edgar Allan
Poe’s ‘Quoth the Raven’. Stuff and nonsense —you gloomy old
mopoke, you.” . ,
“Ah! yes, Poe!” said his companion in a tar-oft voice.
“Victurosque Dei celant, ut vivere durent, felix esse mori, he
quoted.
Madden looked at him sharply, but Adam’s head was
averted. A good knowledge of Latin was not one of the Vic-
torian member’s accomplishments, but he half guessed the
allusion. And Poe had died at 40, but most poets died young—
Keats, Shelley, Burns, Byron. And from that thought, he was
led to recall with a terrible fear, that at the cottage he had seen
“The Life of Clive” —a book he himself had lent Gordon —Clive,
hero of Plassey, who died by his own hand in his fiftieth year.
They had walked in silence for quite a pace, each the victim of
his own gloomy thoughts. Madden’s heart almost ceased to
beat at the terror that gripped him like a fury. Summoning
his common sense, he threw this nightmare of the imagination
off and with a cheery inflection in his tone he asked, “What’s
Kendall’s verdict on that last book of verse?”
Adam, striding along, suddenly halted for a moment,
seemingly startled out of another world, and then, changing his
stride to time wfth that of his friend’s, he answered; All too
complimentary. ‘lmmortal verse,’ he called it. ‘Mortal jingle,
most of it. Wanted to cheer me on, poor devil. He’ll get his
cheers 100 years hence and after, when —maybe—-his bones will
lie under the Abbey stones. Not that he 11 care then, pool
Yorick.”
“But I tell you, Gordon, he’s right about you. You do
write immortal lines for the mortal mind, for I find eveiy
boundary-rider knows your ‘Sick Stockrider’, and every lover ot
the turf your epic, ‘How We Beat the Favourite.
Adam stopped, and his companion with him. If that s
how you feel, Madden, that last manuscripts yours, though the
less said about your judgment the better.” .
“That’s very generous of you, Gordon. It s something ili
treasure as long as I live,” said Madden earnestly.
He looked at his friend, who had turned white, grey almost,
as if some deep, tragic thought held him in its toils. “What s the
matter?” he asked. “You’re not ill?” he added, anxiously.
“It’s all right,” responded Adam. “Just a spasm of pain
from my injury. I was only thinking how uncertain life is.
And I’d like you to have a memento of me. Only you and dear
old Father Woods understand me, amongst all the men I know.
And now I find that rotten fall has slowed me up more than I
bargained for. I’ll go back now, if you don’t mind.” He spoke
in a matter-of-fact voice, but Frank Madden was not satisfied.


X ll come back with you, old man/’ he said.
tj u u banks - I’d rather be alone. I think better alone.”’
He held out his hand. “Good-bye, old critic,” he said with a
wan smile, holding- out his hand.
ry l , l o+ Madden to ° k - 2t in his ‘ “ Not S’ood-bye, but au revoir. I
must see you again soon. There’s a big- future for you ahead.”
“The future? Ah, the future! I wonder?” He spoke
dreamily, and, with that attractive smile of his, turned abruptly
tb^tn^ 60 -’ f ndMadd f? wonderin g' l y watched him striding down
the road into the gathering dusk. He shook his head as one
bewildered. A dark thought crossed his mind, but immedfately
Poets uormaHy dwelt on' life and death, and
Adam had a habit of dramatising- anything that touched his
consciousness This was a safety-valve. So long as the flame
wmin fol rL there K as f° re |' . d ?"ser from any consuming fire
step;hi s fet s m a e s”uag r ed " Bn * hton “° D With c 0“
That T™’ after tea, Adam and Molly sat before a glow-
mg hre in the tiny sitting-room. Adam could not help contrast-
ing the shabby apartment with his recollection of the capacious
hvmg-apartment of the old Cheltenham home. On what strange
S!i w a if he b ®, ei ! bo ™ e smce those da y s when the faithful
talker and he > bad P la yed that tragic, boyish prank.
Well, he had paid the price of it a hundredfold since.
He caught sight of Molly watching him. A wave of tender-
ness for her came over him. Some good fairy must have been
watchmg over him, for Molly, uncomplaining Molly, had never
failed him. But now it looked as if he were just going to be a
bu^ d( j? tobe f- suddenly remembered something she had
Said ulln before that challenged his curiosity.
T What was that you said about Esslemont last night, girl?
I didn t quite get what you meant.” He saw her flush, wonderl
mg what was behind it all.
“Oh; I did say that losing Esslemont mightn’t be without
s °me ( compensations. I’m afraid I was very selfish ”
SelM I Angels in Heaven; you selfish?” He laughed.
Why, you don t know the meaning of the word.”
, I do fnean it, Adam.” She looked troubled almost to tears.
You see I was wondering if we went to England how I would
are amongst all those fine folk. It would be so hard for vou ”
“Hard for me?” He looked mystified.
“Yes; you see, lam only a simple colonial girl, used to rough
ways, at home with the horses and calves and things, but I was
never brought up to mix with the gentry. They’d look down
on me, and would be sorry for you, and that.” Here she brought
out her handkerchief and wiped her eyes—“why that would be
the end ot things for me.”


“Why, Molly girl, you little idiot, I’d like to see anyone
who’d laugh at my wife.”
But she remained unconvinced. “It’s true, Adam. Out here
the difference in our upbringing doesn’t matter much, though I
wasn’t comfortable when you were a member of Parliament.
Some of the women only tolerated me for your sake, because
knew you were one of a famous family.”
“The snobs—the cursed colonial snobs,” cried Adam, his
face flushed and his eyes angry.
“And there was something more—Oh, I don’t like to talk
about ft—it might hurt you.”
“Come, spin it all out, girl. What was it?”'
She looked more embarrassed than ever. “It’s the English
girl I was thinking of—oh, not unkindly—you know that—but
you cared for her. I think you always have cared—in a different
way to what you have cared for me. I’m glad it was different,.
Adam.”
He remained strangely silent,. obviously lost in reflections.
Molly felt she had to go on. “You might think you cared for
her again, though I know you would never do anything to hurt
me; but I should never, never stand in the way of your happiness,
you know that.”
Her gentle renunciation touched him as nothing perhaps
had done in his life before. Yet there was so much truth in
what she said, that he felt as though, not she, but his own con-
science, had been challenging his secret thoughts. He knew
this must be stopped. “I’ve never heard you talk like this
before, girl. You must never even think like that again.
Promise me.” He spoke sternly, but she was not deceived.
“I promise, Adam,” she said in a low voice.
She moved over to the mantelpiece and took up a candle,
lighting it with a stick from the fire. “Don’t stay up long,
Adam. I know you’re very tired.” Leaning over, she kissed
him on the forehead as he sat. “You will come to bed soon?”
she asked pleadingly.
“I want to go over those proofs again before I sleep. The
last touch means so much. It’s my future—when I have nassed
on.”
He looked so forlorn that her heart seemed to melt for
him. “Adam,” she said, putting the lighted candle down on the
table, while she smoothed his ruffled hair, “to-morrow we’ll have
a picnic in the bush. -The wattle’s out everywhere. Like it
was on our honeymoon. It’s wattle time again.” Her voice
had a youthful resonance, that came like a breath of fresh air
from the wide spaces through which they had travelled in the
journey of life together. “Yes, it’s wattle time,” she repeated.


“Wattle time T’ he murmured, almost in a whisper. “There’s
no better time.”
“What did you say, Adam?”
“Only«a line for a jingle.”
It satisfied her, and she went on, thinking to wean him
from his evident depression. Little did she know that the
cause was as much physical as mental. The effect of the
internal injury left him with a sense of despair. Molly would
have borne the pain without a murmur, because she was built
to bear pain, and no such physical reaction would have afflicted
her.
“Yes, Adam, shall we ever forget how we rode through
miles of it the day of the wreck.”
“Miles of molten gold—not the bluebell, or the hawthorn
white, or buttercups—her heart’s delight,” he murmured in a
far-away voice. He seemed to' be as one talking in his sleep.
And then he added:
“You in your beauty above me bent.
In the pause of the wild west country ball;
Spoke to me —touched me without intent—
Made me your servant for once and all.”
“Why, what’s that?” asked Molly doubtfully.
He looked surprised. “I was quoting a poor poet without
realising it. Good-night, girl. I’ll come soon.”
Kissing him again lightly she passed out, giving him a look
in which the tenderness of motherhood seemed to be blended
with an unspoilt girl’s love.
Molly remembered afterwards that she must have fallen
asleep, as soon as her head touched the pillow. Awakened —how
long after she could not tell—by the sound of Adam’s voice
through the open doorway, she thought he was reading over
the proofs to hear how they sounded. He almost seemed to be
intoning the lines. They were strange words. “Oh, I see you
in the smoke drift,” and then in a note of anguish, “stay with
me, governor, stay with me—No, no! you have gone.” And
then came some indistinct mumblings; it didn’t sound like
poetry.
She half arose from her bed to go to him, but knowing how
greatly he disliked being disturbed when he was writing verse,
or correcting what he had written, she lay still. And then came
lines familiar to her because they were dedicated to another
woman.
Skies laugh, and buds bloom, and birds warble
At breaking of day.
Without, and within on grey marble
The light glimmers grey.
Ah, pale silent mouth, surely this is
The spot where Death strikes and Life misses :
*Warm lips pressing cold lips, waste kisses,
Clay cold on cold clay.


What did it all mean. This was not the new verse. She
lay paralysed by some intangible fear.
And then came the most poignant cry she had ever heard,
and the call—heart-broken, but as though part of a dark dream—
“ Jane! Jane! Stay, stay, only for a little while, Jane. Ah, so
you, too, are passing in the flame.”
Molly could bear it no longer. Casting off the blankets, she
threw on a gown and rushed to him. He was huddled up before
the waning fire, his head thrust forward, staring fearfully at the
smoke curling up into the chimney, as though he saw something
there that had shaken him to the very soul.
Touching his forehead she found it was wet with perspira-
tion. Adam! Adam!” she cried. “Wake up! You have been
dreaming, dear.” But it was not like a sleep—it was so hard
to rouse him. But she managed it at last, though it left her
trembling.
He looked up at her. “Dreaming? Yes, I must have been.
Such a frightening dream it was. How silly!”
Under her unobtrusive guidance, he rose. She tried to lead
him to bed, but he pleaded to be left before the fire for a little
longer—he wanted to get warm, he said. Knowing his obduracy,
she gently put a rug over his knees, and left him promising to
come soon.
Towards morning she had a dim recollection of him stooping
over her, and in her drowsiness of feeling a kiss on her cheek.
She had the impression that he had come in to rest at last.
There was a confused murmur that came later to her mind, “It’s
wattle time! Golden wattle time!”
Only when the winter morning sun came streaming through
her window did she awaken with a start. Uneasiness stirred
within her mind. Glancing at Adam’s bed she saw it had not
been slept in. An unaccountable terror gripped her very soul.
Rushing into the other room, the first thing that caught her
attention was the empty gun-rack, where he was used to place
the rifle that came to him as a member of the Brighton militia.
She forced herself to be calm. Of course, he had gone as usual
for his morning dip, for he never missed his sea bathe winter
and summer. And the rifle he had taken to pot a rabbit. There
was no need to worry so ridiculously. He would soon be back,
and she must have breakfast ready for him.
It was just then she heard the sound of a shot borne on
the sea wind. So they would have rabbit for dinner that day,
and she thought of how he would like to have it served.
Henderson, the fisherman tending his nets, had seen the
figure of the gentleman jockey whom he loved to have a yarn


with, come out of his cottage at sunrise. He noticed that he
carried a rifle on his shoulder. Maybe he was going down to
practise at the butts. He watched him call at old Prendergast’s
cottage next to the “pub.” But the old man, who was deaf,
apparently did not hear him. Anyway, the poet chap went on
after a while. He seemed a bit uncertain.
Henderson waved, calling a cheery “good-morning,” but
apparently he was not heard above the sound of the waves
breaking heavily on the beach. What had he gone to old Prender-
gast for at that early hour of the morning. “Oh, maybe some
cartridges, or maybe some of them violets the ole feller grows—
I seen him often take ’em to Mrs. Gordon,” the fisherman
muttered to himself.
It didn’t seem strange for the sportsman to turn into the
wattle grove near the shore. There was a big warren there in
the sandhill. Then came the sound of a shot. “Ah,” said
Henderson, “they’ll ’ave rabbit pie ter day, I’ll bet.”
A lad going out after the cows for the morning milking
turned into the wattle grove. There was a fallen bough across
the path, yellow with blossom. He kicked it out of the way.
And a few yards ahead was a figure lying there, a rifle by his
side. He was very still. Suddenly horrified, the boy raced to
the inn, and soon a crowd gathered at the fatal spot. They
found him lying there with a look of utter peace, his face turned
toward the sea, and the wattle waving its tresses of gold in the-
wind above his head.
THE END.


EPILOGUE
THE KING AND THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY
JUST a century after Adam Lindsay Gordon was born, and 60 years after
** his fateful end, the peace of Westminister Abbey was stirred by the
sound of approaching footsteps.
Long Corinthian pillars of pale gold light filtereld through the Abbey
windows, to rest like an aureole around the hushed company assembling
at the Poet’s Corner.
The Immortal song'smiths of other days looked on, Shakespeare,
Tennyson, Wordsworth, calm in the knowledge that a Singer from afar, and
one who had whispered the word “failure” for his Epitaph, was this day
to be enshrined amongst them.
For those who had gathered there had come from the far Corners of
the Earth to initiate Adam* 1 Lindsay Gordon, uncrowned poet-laureate of
Australia, into the Great Company, where his spirit belonged, and his songs
entitled him to live forever.
It was the 11th May, 1934, when two gatherings, in opposite poles of the
Earth, synchronised to commemorate the life and work of Adam Lindsay
Gordon.
One was attended by a future King of England and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in historic Westminister,, the resting place of the poets of the
Empire. The other memorial was sponsored by the Premier of Victoria,
Sir Stanley Argyle, in Melbourne, Australia, the farthest outpost of thd
British Empire.
Between the busts of Tennyson and Campbell, and close by the memorial
to William Shakespeare, that of Gordon, by Lady Hilton Young, was unveiled
by the present King, then Duke of York. He was accompanied by the
present Queen of England.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Cosmo Lang, D.D., thei Dean of
Westminister, the High Commissioner and Agent Generals of Australia, the
Representatives of other British Dominions, the American and kindred
Ambassadors, the Gordon Memorial Committee, and others in London, did
honour to the Australian poet, who,
scarcely knelw where to lay his head,
to honour him.
when in the full flow of his song,
It remained for a great Nation thus
Dr- Cosmo Lang said in words
glowing words:
that will live with the poet’s own
“A hundred years ago, Adam Lindsay Gordon was born, and
now his restless spirit finds, as it were, a home in the peace of the
Abbey. How little could he have dreamed that such a destiny
awaited him.
“There he lies, close to the memorials of Tennyson, Coleridge,
and Wordsworth. Almost at once, Australia took his poems to
her heart, and there ever since they have remained.
‘■■At only 37 years of age, he raced his last race, and sang his


last song. His verse seemed to recall that first rapture- ‘When
the morning stars sang together, and the song of God shouted for
joy.’
“Thus to him, exiled once and now forever, England gives a
place amongst her honoured dead.”
In Australia the words of Kendall, an Australian poet of his own time
were generously echoed by Sir Stanley Argyle—
“He sang the first great songs these lands can claim to be their own ”
These words were inscribed upon his tomb in Brighton Cemetery, Victoria.








MAGPIE SERIES
A SERIES OF SELECTED NOVELS BY AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS
These stories, depicting various forms of Australian life in romance,
humour and thrilling adventure, are by far the finest and cheapest
books yet issued in Australia.
THE FIRST OF WHICH ARE BY JOHN CROTHERS.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No,
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No,
No.
No.
No,
No.
No,
No
No
No,
22. SO MANY FIGHTS, by A. C. Headley
23. SHOOT rO KILL, by Jim McCarter
24. THE THIRD MAN, by C. K. Thompson
OTHER TITLES TO FOLLOW
128 PAGES PRICE 1/- EACH
Published by
FRANK JOHNSON
350 GEORGE STREET. SYDNEY. AUSTRALIA
PHONE: BW 6463
I. YARNS MEN TELL
2. STRANGE LUCK GULLY
3. THE GLORIOUS SCANDAL
4. THE VAMPIRE OF LOVE
5. AH THERE, FFYSHE, by W. S. Howard
6. HIDDEN HILLS, by John Carlshon
7. MISS PENNYCUICK'S NIGHTIE, by J. B. Blair
8. THE HILARIOUS DEATH, by John Harvey
9. CAPTAIN BILL, by Ernest Osborne
10. IHE GAME DARRELLS, by Leslie Haylen
11. THE LAUGHING BUCCANEER, by Will Lawson
12. FIGHTING MEN, by Tony James
13. THE KILLING OF JACQUELINE LOVE, by Jean Devanny
14. SUGAR HEAVEN, by Jean Devanny
15. JEAN OF THE TUSSOCK COUNTRY, by Walter Smyth
16. BOUND FOR CALLAO, by Will Lawson
17. THE GIRL FROM MASON CREEK, by Walter Smyth
18. WOODEN RAILS, by Walter Smyth
19. ORDER IN THE COURT, by C. K. Thompson
20. THE ADVENTURES OF MRS. PARSLEY, by Harold Mercer
21. GOLDEN WATTLE TIME, by Crawford Vaughan
