

F7VF p
61 o




tff&O
POET LONGFELLO
A C. MACDONALD.
~' nj clTß ,a iT~
ONGFELLOW is a poet who has many claims upon our
affection, a singer who sang for the whole world, and whose
verse breathes only the tenderest, gentlest, and most human-
ising thoughts and sentiments.
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was born in Portland,
Maine, on Feb. 27, 1807. He was educated at Bowdoin College, where he
began his higher studies at the age of fourteen. At the age of eighteen he
graduated with honours, and entered his father’s office (the Hon. Stephen
Longfellow). The study of law had, however, little charm for him, and he
soon relinquished it for the delights of foreign travel.
Before starting on his first journey through Europe, he had been offered
a professorship, which he accepted on the condition that he would only
assume his duties at the close of his tour. The arrangement being mutually
satisfactory, he left America, and spent three years and a half in France,
Spain, Holland, Germany, and Great Britain, returning home in 1829. He
at once entered upon his professorship at Bowdoin, and when George Ticknor,
the eminent author of the best history of Spanish literature known in the
English tongue, resigned, in 1835, the chair of modern languages, in old


Harvard University, Longfellow was appointed to fill the vacancy. To fit
himself more fully for his enlarged sphere of action, he undertook a journey
abroad, and sought acquaintance with the language and letters of Northern
Europe. He devoted twelve months to study, observation, and travel in
Scandinavia, Germany, and the Swiss cantons, and returned to the United
States in the autumn of 1836, refreshed in mind and body, and ready for his
work. He remained at Harvard as professor until 1854, when he resigned,
and was succeeded by his friend and associate, James Russell Lowell—the
distinguished poet and essayist—known, I suppose, to most of you through
his inimitable series of Biglow papers. (It may be of interest to note that in
the Australian Church collection of hymns, we have one by J. R. Lowell, one
by the poet Longfellow, and five by the Rev. S. Longfellow, the poet’s brother.)
Whilst an under-graduate, Longfellow began writing poetry, and many of
his best pieces appeared in the “Literary Gazette,” a well-conducted periodical
of its day, though once the editor, with the usual sapience of editors who are
popularly supposed to know and understand everything except politics,
advised him to give up poetry, and “ buckle down to the law.” This was odd
advice to a man who had produced at the time such work as the “ Hymn of
the Moravian Nuns,” “The Spirit of Poetry,” “Woods in Winter,” and
“ Sunrise on the Hills,” the last verse of which I will quote :
‘ If thou art worn and hard beset
With sorrows, that thou wpuld’st forget.
If thou could’st read a lesson that will keep
Thy heart from fainting, and thy soul from sleep,
Go to the woods and hills I—No tears
Dim the sweet look that Nature wears.”
But the poet, who fortunately knew himself better than his critic did, and
trusted his own powers, kept on throwing from his muse those wonderful
gems of song and poesy, which carry sympathy, and delight, and joy to
thousands of breasts in all lands beneath the sun. During his incumbency
at Bowdoin College, he wrote a good deal, in the way of criticism, for the
North American “ Review.” He published “ Outre-mer ” in 1835, and
“ Hyperion” in 1839, both prose works, and singularly graceful in style and
spirit. His first collection of poems also appeared in 1839, under the title of
“ Voices of the Night.” This little book contained besides the “ Midnight
Mass for the Dying Year,” “The Reaper and the Flowers,” and the
“ Beleaguered City,” that famous hymn, “ A Psalm of Life,” which is, perhaps,
better known than anything the poet ever wrote. It seemed at once to take its
place among the better poems of the world. It is full of lessons to the young
and the old, full of echoes of the heart and soul, full of comfort for everybody.
It has been translated into nearly all the European languages, as well as into
several Asiatic tongues, and its teachings have spread all round the universe
of God. How often have you heard or read these lines ?
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


“ Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.”
After “ Voices of the Night,” came, in 1842, “ Ballads and other Poems,” —
full of ringing metres and rapidly flowing thoughts,—and in the year following
he sent out “Poems on Slavery,” exhibiting much of his stronger work; and
the “ Spanish Student,” a drama cast in the Shakespearian mould, vigorous
in conception and individuality, marvellous in execution, but incapable of
representation on the stage. Its humour is exquisite, and the action free and
natural. In rapid succession, Longfellow produced “ The Poets and Poetry
of Europe,” “The Belfry of Bruges,” “Evangeline,” and the prose story
of “ Kavanah.”
After these came “The Seaside and the Fireside,” “The Golden Legend,”
and the grand “ Song of Hiawatha,” a poem which attracted a great amount
of criticism in its day, and made a very lasting impression on the reading
world. “The Courtship of Miles Standish, illustrating in every line the
Puritanism in Longfellow’s nature, and his rare skill as a sympathetic artist,
appeared in 1858, and met with a flattering and kindly reception everywhere.
To further enumerate the poet’s writings would be mere cataloguing, and
it would be wearying to extend the list. I may say, however, that among his
more prominent and permanent work may be placed his admirable translation
of Dante—a stupendous performance—his beautiful domestic poem of the
“ Hanging of the Crane,” which all young brides should read, and learn to
repeat by heart ; the “ Masque of Pandora,” “ Keramos,” “ Ultima Thule,”
and his last noble effort, “ Michael Angelo.” These exhibit Longfellow at his
best, and show his many-sidedness, his intimate acquaintanceship with all
phases of the human heart, and his love for doing good to his fellowmen. He
was a true poet of the affections, of Nature in all her moods, and of senti-
ment. In the humblest homes his is the poetry which makes the lives of their
occupants more gentle and pure. In France, in Russia, in Spain and
Germany, in Switzerland, in Scandinavia, and in our own Australia, his verse
has wound itself into the souls of the people, whether noble or peasant, and
in so loving and an obtrusive a way that even the native bards of those
countries have allowed him to share their popularity without a murmur.
• There is hardly a country on the face of the globe to-day which does not
know Longfellow. He is quoted in palace and in hall, in the cottage and in
the poorest hut, and in the back blocks of Australia. The great statesmen of
the time point their speeches with an apt figure from his muse. The church,
the bench, and the bar pay tribute to his genius, and embellish their utterances
with quotations from his works. The poet has become a household word in
the mouths of all. He sang for all the world. Like Milton and Tennyson,
3
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


he wrote for those of learned leisure ; like Burns and Beranger, he sang for
the poor and lowly, for those bowed down by grief, for those who wanted
words of comfort to ease the aching heart and the wearied brain, for those
who yearned for some joyous melody, some soul-entrancing strains from the
music of the spheres. He spoke words of solace to countless thousands, and
filled the air with generous songs, and Christianised the atmosphere of the
doubting. God, Christ, and religion, and the fundamental truths were taught
by Longfellow, in his splendid way, and who shall not say that he wrought an
influence for good that no man can estimate, and few, now living in the realms
of song and story, can surpass? To all hearts he has sung his tender songs,
and who can ever forget the majesty of the man, or the sweet earnestness of
the poet ? No one would wish to blot out a single line from his works. His
poetry is the natural outcome of a fresh, pure, and lofty soul, full of sympathy
for those in affliction, full of helpfulness and joy for mankind. His humanity
is so broad, his sympathies are so just and true, the spirit of his poetry is so
penetrating and Catholic, that it would be singular indeed if he failed to exert
an influence on the people of Australia as intense and real as it is in his own
native country (Canada).
But while Longfellow’s writing influences much of the thought which
finds an outcome in the hearts of all lovers of true poetry, it must be conceded
that his power more keenly asserts itself in the individual lives of the people
themselves, the readers of good books, and the lovers of true poetry.
On the people of the western part of Canada, Longfellow’s hold is very
strong. They learn morality from him, and high endeavour, and nobility of
purpose, and duty. His poetry has all the effect of beautiful music on the
senses. It is stimulating, and encouraging, and warm. Not a line of it
breathes impurity or a base thought. His very simplicity is his great source
of strength.
He will always be regarded as a Christian poet, as an educator of the
people, as a teacher of the principles of freedom and liberty, and as a real
humanising agency, full of good works and truthfulness. Longfellow’s name
is reverently treasured and respected and loved wherever “ Evangeline” has
found a foothold.
The historical accuracy of the poem (“Evangeline ”) enhances its beauty.
Haliburton, in his “History of Nova Scotia,” tells us that the story is founded
on a painful occurrence which took place in the early period of British
colonisation in the northern part of Europe. In the year 1713, Acadie, or, as
it is now named, Nova Scotia, was ceded to Great Britain by the French.
The wishes of the inhabitants seem to have been little consulted in the
change, and they with great difficulty were induced to take the oath of
allegiance to the British Government. Some forty years after this (Sept.,
1 775), war having again broken out between the French and British in
4
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


■Canada, the Acadians were accused of having assisted the French, from
whom they were descended and connected by many ties of friendship, with
provisions and ammunition, at the siege of Beau Sejour. Whether the accu-
sation was founded on fact or not has not been satisfactorily ascertained ; the
result, however, was most disastrous to the primitive, simple-minded Acadians.
The British Government ordered them to be removed from their homes, and
dispersed throughout the other colonies, at a distance from their much-loved
land. This resolution was not communicated to the inhabitants till measures
had been matured to carry it into immediate effect ; when the Governor of
the colony (Colonel Winslow), having issued a summons calling the whole
people to a meeting, informed them that their lands, tenements, and cattle of
all kinds were forfeited to the British Crown, that he had orders to remove
them in vessels to distant colonies, and they must remain in custody till their
embarkation.
In the disorder that prevailed during embarkation, wives were torn from
husbands, and mothers, too late, saw their children left on the land extending
their arms with wildest entreaties, and so into separate ships were Gabriel
and Evangeline carried.
“ Far asunder on separate coasts the Acadians landed,
Scattered were they like flakes of snow.”
For many a weary year they sought each other in vain—although the
poet tells us that at one period they were only separated by a day’s march.
Finally Evangeline, after having travelled over half America, found herself in
that delightful land which is washed by the Delaware’s waters —Pennsylvania—
the home of the Quakers, where all men are equal, and all were brothers and
sisters, and where for many years she lived as a sister of mercy, frequenting
lonely and wretched roofs in the crowded lanes of the city, where distress and
want concealed themselves from the sunlight, where the walls seem to echo
softly the words of the Lord, “ The poor ye always have with you.”
Pestilence and famine fell upon the city. With light in her looks she entered
the chambers of sickness, moistened the feverish lips, and the aching brow,
and in silence closing the sightless eyes of their dead. Many a languid head
upraised as Evangeline entered, turned on its pillow of pain to gaze while
she passed, for her presence fell on their hearts like a ray of the sun on the
walls of a prison.
Among the sick and dying she at last recognises the form of Gabriel, “old,
motionless, senseless, dying he lay.” Although both were so changed by long
years, the recognition was mutual. Gabriel dies in the arms of Evangeline
and so the sad story ends.
It is pretty generally known, I think, that the author never saw the spot
which he depicts with such fidelity in this poem. He was sitting in his study
5
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


once, when the story was told to him by Hawthorne, who had it from a friend
who wished him to make a romance out of it. The novelist had it from a
gentleman named “ Conolly,” who, in turn, had learned it from a French-
Canadian, whose name, unfortunately, has escaped the record. Hawthorne
jotted down the tale in his notebook as he heard it, and one day he related it
to Longfellow, who was so taken and impressed with it that he begged
permission to use it as the ground-work of an idyl. He did this, however,
only when he found that his friend had abandoned all intention of employing
the simple and tearful legend as a romance. It was full of poetry in his eyes,
and his heart at once went out in sympathy for the exiles, and the sore trials
they were compelled to sustain. What a poem he has made out of the
slender materials! Evangeline has become a type of sweet and tender
maidenhood, as much of a reality as “ Imogen,” or “ Desdernona as gentle
a study as “ Ophelia.” She develops herself in the idyl, and lives in the
human breast, this angelic Evangeline, pride of the village ;
“ Fair was she to behold, that maiden of seventeen summers,
Black were her eyes as the berry that grows on the thorn by the wayside,
Black, yet how softly they gleamed beneath the brown shade of her tresses!
Sweet was her breath as the breath of kine that feed in the meadows.
When in the harvest heat she bore to the reapers at noontide
Flagons of home-brewed ale, ah I fair in sooth was the maiden.
When she passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.”
Such is the portrait of Evangeline which Longfellow has sketched out
for us. The poem is a profound study of the human emotions, subtle, intense,
and real. It is elevating in its thought and morality, and presents a picture
of womanly devotion, womanly affection, and womanly sympathy, which no
one can examine without feeling deeply moved.
The critics are divided on the question of Longfellow’s masterpiece, the
“ Song of Hiawatha,” contending eagerly for first place with the tale of
“Acadie.” The latter was the author’s own favourite, but those who have
studied the two poems well, and measured their relative strength as pieces of
artistic workmanship, accord the palm to the Indian legend, which presents
in such a marked degree a true story of the forest, of rugged nature, and of
wild life, in all seasons of the year, in the poet’s own country. Theme and
treatment perfectly correspond, the former calling forth all the poet’s peculiar
talent ; the latter taxing, yet exquisitely illustrating, his literary skill. The
poem is full of touches of Nature. The character-drawing is admirable, and
exhibits remarkable familiarity with all aspects of savage life and custom. It
treats of a tradition current among the Ojibeway tribe of Indians, the scene
being located on the southern shore of Lake Superior, in the region between
the Pictured Rocks and the Grand Sable. There are dramatic fire, strong
movement, vigorous description, humour and pathos, and all the elements of a
6
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


great epic in this tuneful story. The wooing, the wedding-feast, the lamen-
tation, and the famine, exhibit various aspects of the poet’s genius, and show
in wonderful light his mastery over the canons of imagery, and his skill in
bringing out the essence of the great forces of Nature. While at work, in
this grand manner he describes the awful winter, and the famine which
followed the storm, the cruel blast, and the cold .
The poet then describes the long and dreary winter, the snow falling
thicker and thicker, burying the wigwam. The hunter, unable to find bird
or beast, saw no track of deer, no footprints in the ghastly, dismal forests; at
length he falls from weakness and starvation, unable to rise again, and
perishes where he fell
“ O the long and dreary winter I
O the cold and cruel winter!
Ever thicker, thicker, thicker
Froze the ice on lake and river,
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper
Fell the snow o’er all the landscape,
Fell the covering snow, and drifted
Through the forest, round the village.
Hardly from the buried wigwam
Could the hunter force a passage ;
With his mittens and his snow-shoes
Vainly walked he through the forest,
Sought for bird or beast, and found none.
O the famine and the fever I
O the long and dreary winter I
O the wailing of the children !
O the anguish of the women !”
The poet then tells of the entrance into Hiawatha’s wigwam of famine
(“ Buckadawin ”) and of fever (“ Ahkosewin ”), and of the death and burial
of lovely “ Minnehaha,” the bride of the young brave Hiawatha :
“ In the snow a grave they made her,
Covered her with snow, like ermine;
Thus they buried Minnehaha.”
Though “ Hiawatha ” was violently attacked by the critics, it found great
favour with the public, and the printing press was taxed to its capacity to
supply the demand. The publishers, however, bitterly resented the newspaper
and magazine opinions. One day, Mr. Fields, more exercised than usual by
the budget of attacks and parodies which he had received that morning,
hurried off to Longfellow’s house in a state of great excitement. “My dear
Longfellow,” he called out as soon as he caught a glimpse of the poet, “ these
atrocious libels must be stopped!” Longfellow glanced over the papers, and
without a word of comment, archly said, as he handed them back to the
7
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


publisher, “By the way, Fields, how is ‘ Hiawatha ’ selling ?” “ Wonderfully,
none of your books have ever had such a sale.” “ Then,” said Longfellow
softly, and with a smile, “ I think we had better let these people go on
advertising it.” In the short space of two years 50,000 copies were sold in
the United States alone.
Longfellow’s Puritanism is more strongly emphasised in the “ Courtship
of Miles Standish,” and in the “New England Tragedies,” than in
“ Hiawatha,” which breathe out in every line the true spirit of that faith.
“ Standish ” is the greater poem, more dramatic even than the “ Tragedies,”
more spirited in movement, and the warm pulsating figures with which it is
peopled lend a genuine reality and verisimilitude to the performance. There
is a certain grim and dry humour developed by the poet in this quaint conceit.
The gruff Puritan captain, too busy to do his own courting, despatches his
friend and companion at arms (comely John Alden) to the home of the
modest Priscilla, one of the charmingest maidens in poetry, and bids him woo
her for him. In war and in great affairs the captain’s maxim from a boy had
been, “ If you wish a thing to be well done, you must do it yourself, you must
not leave it to others;” but an affair of the heart was quite too trivial, and love,
he thought, could be developed just as well by proxy. Perhaps the old bear
thought that he could command a maiden’s heart as he could command his
army of twelve soldiers. Alden set out on his task. On the way he plucked
some May-flowers for Priscilla, whom he really loved himself, though he dared
not say so. His passion was returned, though so well concealed that the
brave and lithe young fellow scarcely knew his good fortune. When he saw
her that day singing and spinning in her quiet home, he might have had her
for his bride for the asking, but his friendship for Standish stood in the way,
and he began to ply the suit of his chief. He lost all his finesse, and bluntly
delivered his message like a schoolboy. Priscilla, annoyed and vexed, could
not brook such a system of business-like love-making. She spoke out, and
we may be sure her cheeks tingled with roses :
“ If the great captain of Plymouth is so very eager to wed me,
Why does he not come himself, and take the trouble to woo me ?
If I am not worth the wooing, I surely am not worth the winning!
Then John Alden began explaining and smoothing the matter,
Making it worse as he went, by saying the captain was busy,—
Had no time for such things—such things ! the words grating harshly,
Fell on the ear of Priscilla: and swift as a flash she made answer :
Has he no time for such things, as you call it, before he is married,
Would he be likely to find it, or make it, after the wedding ?
That is the way with you men; you don’t understand us, you cannot.
When you have made up your minds, after thinking of this one and that one,
Choosing, selecting, rejecting, comparing one with another,
Then you make known your desire, with abrupt and sudden avowal,
And are offended and hurt, and indignant, perhaps, that a woman
Does not respond at once to a love that she never suspected.”
8
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


In this strain the poem goes on. Alden tries to make matters better for
his friend, but all in vain. The more he tries the deeper involved he becomes.
He gets warm and excited over his praises of Standish, who could trace his
pedigree back to the days of Thurston de Standish.
‘ But as he warmed and glowed in his simple and eloquent language,
Quite forgetful of self, and full of the praise of his rival,
Archly the maiden smiled, and, with eyes over-running with laughter,
Said, in a tremulous voice, ‘ Why don’t you speak for yourself, John ?’ ”
And the sequel to all this delightful foolery was that John and Priscilla were
married, and when the grim captain got over his rage and mortification, he
forgave them both, like the brave and hearty soldier that he was. But as
Longfellow somewhere else says :
‘No one is so accursed by fate,
No one so utterly desolate,
But some heart, though unknown,
Responds unto his own.”
Miles Standish won a wife at last. One Barbara came out to the colony
in the Fortune , and the captain, having learned wisdom by sad experience,
this time did his own courting.
Most of Longfellow’s better known poems have a history. The “ Psalm
of Life,” the oft-quoted burst of song which sprang from the poet’s inmost
heart, was written by Longfellow when he was only thirty-one years of age.
He was sitting between two windows, at a small table in his chamber, looking
out on a bright summer morning in July, 1838, when the beautiful Psalm
came into his mind, and with scarcely an effort he penned the lines where he
sat. His heart, as we can well imagine, was very full, and he kept the poem
by him for some months before he gave it to the world. It was a voice from
his very soul, and he could not send it out then, for his own heart was bleeding
over a private grief. The poem of the “ Reaper and the Flowers ” also came
without an effort, and the lines—
There is a reaper whose name is Death,
And with his sickle keen
He reaps the bearded grain at a breath,
And the flowers that grow between,”
crystallised immediately into his mind, and as he rapidly wrote down the
stanzas, his eyes filled with tears. “ The Light of Stars ” was composed
on a serene and beautiful summer evening, exactly suggestive of the poem.
“ The Wreck of the Hesperus” was written in 1839. A storm had occurred
the night before, and as the poet sat musing and smoking his pipe, about
midnight, by the fire, the wrecked “ Hesperus” came sailing into his mind.
He jotted down some lines, then went to bed, but not to sleep. He got up,
and wrote the celebrated verses which gave him part of his fame. The clock
struck three when the minstrel’s last verse was done ;
9
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


“ Such was the wreck of the Hesperus,
In the midnight and the snow !
Christ save us all from a death like this,
On the reef of Norman’s Woe!”
That other noble ballad, “ The Skeleton in Armour,” appeared in 1849.
“ The Old Clock on the Stairs,” one of the most dramatic that the author has
given us, was based on a remarkable sermon which a great French divine,
Pere Jacques Bridaine, preached on eternity in 1754 at the church of St.
Sulpice, in Paris. He compared eternity to the pendulum of a clock, which
ceaselessly murmured, Toujours ! Jamais! Jamais! Toujours! Forever,
never, never, forever ! This sermon caused extraordinary excitement at the
time in the French capital, and people were driven, in some instances, into
insanity over the wild thought whichgrew from too much pondering overtheidea.
As soon as Longfellow read the sermon, he was struck with its awful power
and the startling figure which it conveyed. For several days he could not get
it out of his mind. Toujours! Jamais! Jamais! Toujours! his thoughts
turned incessantly to the musical refrain. He, too, was haunted as if by a
nightmare, and only when he had completed his poem was himself again :
Never here, forever there,
Where all parting, pain, and care,
And death, and time shall disappear, —
Forever there, but never here.
The horologe of eternity
Sayeth this incessantly—
Forever—never !
Never —forever 1”
Longfellow’s translation of Dante’s Divinia Commedia, with its 14,278
lines, is the only pure English version of the Italian.
There was a sad tragedy in the poet’s life ; for a while it threatened to
cloud his whole future, but time, that sublime healer of all our woes and
sorrows, intervened, and after some anxious years had passed away, the
golden sunshine streamed into Longfellow’s heart again, and glad songs from
his muse once more trilled upon the air. He had been twice married. His
first wife was Mary Storer Potter, daughter of the Hon. Barrett Potter, of
Portland. His bride was a very lovely woman, accomplished in several
branches of science, languages, and literature, beautiful in person, and
amiable in disposition. The marriage took place in September, 1831, but the
happy domestic life of the poet was destined to be of short duration. In
November, 1836, Mrs. Longfellow died at Rotterdam, and her memory, her
worth and gentleness were tenderly commemorated in the touching poem,,
“ The Footsteps of Angels.” But it was in connection with his second
marriage that one of the sorest trials which ever came to man occurred to
Longfellow. The reader of that delicate and pleasantly-told story, “ Hyperion, ,r
10
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


is, doubtless, familiar with the incident illustrating the meeting of “ Paul
Fleming ” and “ Mary Ashburton,” and what followed after those attractive
young people had been together some time. In real life, Longfellow met
Frances Elizabeth Appleton in much the same way. She was the brilliant
daughter of Nathan Appleton, of Boston, and sister of Thomas Gold
Appleton. Underwood, who knew her intimately, describes her as “the
possessor of every grace of mind and person that could charm the soul of a
poet.” He says “ her remarkable beauty was fitly accompanied by a serene
dignity of manner. As a matron she was even more beautiful than in her
fresh youth. With her children about her she looked a proud Cornelia.”
Longfellow’s story (“ Hyperion ”) was published in 1839. It will be
remembered that the hero is rejected by Mary Ashburton. So it is said
that Longfellow’s suit was not at first acceptable to Miss Appleton, but as
the years wore on a change came over her, and she claimed a woman’s
privilege, and changed her mind. W 7 hen the romance was published, every-
body seemed to know that Paul and Mary had living prototypes in the poet
and his sweetheart, and the arch song, beginning, “ I know a maiden fair to
see,” had a delicious significance.
This ballad occurs in “Hyperion,” and, as a reminder, I may quote a
verse or two
‘ I know a maiden fair to see
Take care!
She can both false and friendly be.
Beware! beware !
Trust her not,
She is fooling thee !”
The last verse—
‘ She gives thee a garland woven fair ;
Take care !
It is a fool’s cap for thee to wear,
Beware ! beware !
Trust her not,
She is fooling thee !”*
The lady yielded to her passionate lover of thirty-five, and in July, 1843,
the two were wed. Of this union, five children were born, two sons and three
daughters: Ernest the artist, and Charles the cavalry captain, Alice and
Anna, and “ Edith with golden hair.”
A description of the poet’s home, his study, piled with pamphlets and
papers in orderly confusion, the pictures upon his walls of crayon likenesses
of Emerson, Hawthorne, and Sumner; in one of his bookcases, rarest
treasures of all, the poet’s own works in their original manuscript ; the family
This was a favourite song, nearly thirty years ago, of Madame Carandini’s
daughters.
11
THE POET LONGFELLOW.


library, the quaint old house once occupied by Washington and Lady
Washington, is worth a pilgrimage to see. it is historic in two departments
of human activity, war and peace. Once Miss Longfellow asked a rosy-
cheeked child at Sunday-school “ why Americans kept Washington’s birthday? ’
the urchin answered, “Because he lived in your house.”
Longfellow took his bride to his pleasant home, and they lived happily
together until July 4, 1861, when the fearful tragedy occurred. Mrs.
Longfellow was seated in a room with her husband and children ; she was
dressed in flowing muslin, and while engaged in some household duty, her
garments caught fire. In a moment she was all aflame. Mr. Longfellow
seized a large rug, which he attempted to roll about her to extinguish the fire,
but his efforts were in vain. The injuries she received proved mortal, and
very soon she died. Her husband’s hands and face were severely burned,
and his grief and horror at his terrible loss aged him in a night. The poet
was never quite himself again from that dreadful moment. He kept his grief
to himself, and nursed in his heart the sweet and fragrant memory of the
kindly woman he had loved so dearly.
Longfellow was peculiarly the children’s poet. On the occasion of his
seventy-second birthday, Feb. 27, 1879, the children of Cambridge presented
him with an arm-chair, made from the wood of the village blacksmith’s
chestnut tree. For this charming testimonial, he returned some graceful
verses, the concluding lines being :
“ Only your love and your remembrances could
Give life to this dead wood,
And make these branches leafless now so long,
Blossom again into song.”
He was forever doing kindly and generous things, and his warm, loving
heart went out to the little ones always.
In person, Longfellow was a handsome man. His mien was thoughtful,
his figure erect as an arrow, and his eye was blue and liquid, and full of good
humour, and his manner was as gentle as a woman’s. The world to him was
always very beautiful. He looked out upon it, and saw there only the
sweetness of life, bright realities, and the goodness of God, and he sought to
make all those around him ' happy, contented, and joyous. The world, too,
was very good to him, and when he died he had his share of years and
honours. His record is a record of one who lived a blameless life. The
world was brighter because he was in it, and now that he has passed away,
his name and work survive. Men of the future will keep his memory green,
and the story of his splendid manhood, and the undying treasures of his
verse, will never fade from people’s minds, nor perish in the gaunt march
of centuries.




