

a O
Zl is
BEETROOT SUGAR:
BEING AN
ABRIDGMENT OF THE PAMPHLET
ARNOLD BARUOHSON
ON THE
ADVANTAGES OF THE GROWTH AND MANUFACTURE
• nr? npwTROOT cririATj
OF BEETROOT SUGAR.
Printed by Order of the Government , in accordance with the Recommendation of
a Select Committee of the House of Assembly.
JAMES BARNARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.
1868.


*


BEETROOT SUGAR:
BEING AN
ABRIDGMENT OF THE PAMPHLET
ARNOLD BARUCHSON
ON THE
ADVANTAGES OF THE GROWTH AND MANUFACTURE
OF BEETROOT SUGAR.
Printed by Order of the Government, in accordance until the Recommendation of
a Select Committee of the House of Assembly.
Cagmauia:
JAMES BARNARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.
1868.




/re k
■^V--V--VS
BEETROOT SUGAR.
Chapter I.
RISE AND PRESENT POSITION OF THE
BEET INDUSTRY.
In anticipating the probable early establishment of Beet-
root and its products as a leading branch of English and
Irish industry, it is interesting and instructive to remember
that scarcely three centuries have elapsed since the Sugar
Cane itself first became known to our forefathers. At
the present time Sugar is among the most valuable
vegetable products known to man. It is everywhere
extensively used. In this country it ranks rather as an
indispensable necessary of life than as an article of luxury.
In commercial importance it is surpassed by very few
commodities. And the uneasiness with which every rise
in its price is regarded proves the extent to which it has
entered into our daily wants, and how difficult would be
the attempt to dispense with it. In 1563 Sir John
Hawkins had brought a quantity from St. Domingo, but
its use in England was chiefly confined to medicine
until 1580, when having reached Portugal from Brazil,
it thence was largely imported by English merchants.
Gradually it supplanted honey as a sweetener of liquids,
and its value as an aliment having gradually been re-
cognized, its popularity steadily increased, till it reached
even the lowest classes of society. Were the entire
population of Europe to consume this article in the same
proportion as does that of the United Kingdom at present,
the quantity required to supply the demand would be
5,000,000 tons annually, instead of the 1,500,000 which
now suffice.
It would not be difficult to enlarge upon the hesitation
and tardiness with which the English nation first received


the article which was ultimately to become so valuable,
or to narrate to my readers how century after century has
witnessed the objects which w r ere scorned by one genera-
tion, endorsed by the next, and at length admitted to the
highest esteem. But as the history of almost every great
invention—printing, gunpowder, vaccination, steamers,
railroads—shows the same gradation upward to general
adoption, as each new branch of industry has had to
encounter ignorance and prejudice, I only refer to this
in order to suggest to them that if I venture to foretell
that ere long English agriculturists will grow a Root,
and from it extract a Sugar, which will, to a great extent,
take the place occupied by the juice of the Cane Sugar
in these islands, I do but anticipate a change equalled,
if not surpassed, over and over in the experience of the
present generation. That change I anticipate will shortly
be witnessed. And these pages are published as a slight
effort to expedite the realization of the numerous advan-
tages by which it will be accompanied.
Though the English public had seen little of Beetroot
Sugar till the year 1855, when, consequent on a great
and sudden rise of prices, the writer of this pamphlet
persuaded a Liverpool refiner to make the experiment
of using it, together with Cane Sugar; it has been,
nevertheless, extensively grown and manufactured on the
Continent since the commencement of this century, when
Napoleon Buonaparte, in carrying out his Continental
system, turned to it as an available substitute for the
produce of the British Colonies. The qualities of the
root were originally discovered in 1747. In that year,
a Prussian chemist, named Margraff, in his scientific
researches, found that it furnished excellent sugar, and
he advised his countrymen to cultivate it. The prices
then ruling, however, did not allow the introduction of
Beetroot Sugar without vigorous protection, as the Euro-
pean markets were abundantly supplied by Brazil, the
Dutch Colonies in South America, the French Posses-
sions, and the British West Indian Islands, where the
importation of slaves had recently given a fresh impulse
to the Sugar culture. Therefore, Margraff, while fore-
telling the benefits which would ultimately arise from his
discovery, felt that till a larger per-centage of Sugar


was extracted from the root, or a higher price could be
obtained for it, to pursue the subject further would be
useless, and it dropped out of notice.
In 1773, Achard, a Berlin chemist, convinced of the
great value of Beet, recommenced experiments to extract
its Sugar, under Royal encouragement. Frederick the
Great, a devoted lover of art and science, perceived in
the application of this discovery a means by which to
develope the resources of Prussia, and to diminish the
exportation of specie in payment for the imports of Cane
Sugar. The death, however, of this wise ruler prevented
Achard for some time from pursuing his researches, but
he resumed them in 1795; in 1796 established the first
Beetroot Sugar Manufactory at Cumoon, in Silesia, and
published a pamphlet in which he enumerated the
various uses and benefits to be derived from this root,
and predicted, like Margraff, that his native country
would ultimately look ou it as among its most valuable
productions. The pamphlet stated that, in addition to
its yield of Sugar, there would be valuable pulp to serve
as food for cattle ; that the head of the root would also
be eaten by them ; that much valuable manure would be
the result; that this manure, in returning to the ground,
would promote an abundant harvest of cereals ; that the
molasses could be converted into alcohol or vinegar ; and
that the leaves were an excellent substitute for tobacco.
He also communicated a series of letters to a French
chemical periodical, which produced a great sensation in
that country, where they appeared in 1799. The journals
generally inserted extracts, which were discussed by all
classes of society, according to the ideas and passions of
the period, Some regarded this new discoverer as a
quack, others looked on him as their deliverer from the
commercial and industrial monopoly of England. But
the attention of men of science, and of the Government,
was arrested by his assertion that the kilogramme (rather
more than 2 lbs.) of brown low Muscovado Sugar could
be produced for 65 centimes, or about 3d. per English
pound, and that if the manufacture were improved, and
the value of the residue deducted, the price might be
still less. Such an important fact could not be neglected;
and a Commission of ten, comprised of Sels, Chaptal,


Parmentier, and other eminent chemists, was appointed
by the Institute to investigate this new branch of industry,
and to report upon Achard’s writings on the subject.
The result was somewhat disappointing. That the root
contained crystallizable Sugar was evident; but that the
per-centage would repay the cost of extraction was not
so, especially as the failure of Achard’s manufactory—
who had made the fatal mistake of boiling the root before
he pressed it, thus rendering the starch in it soluble, and
so embarrassing his future operations—threw discredit on
the scheme. They reported that 25 tons of root yielded
only 4| cwt, of white cassonade, or a little over one per
cent. —less than a sixth of what is now considered barely
satisfactory; and again the subject dropped out of the
public mind.
At length, however, Beet Sugar was brought pro-
minently and successfully into notice by the industrial
complications consequent on the vast Continental blockade
established by Napoleon; for, in attempting to destroy the
Colonial prosperity of Great Britain by excluding British
Sugar and other produce from the countries under his
control, he deprived large numbers of his subjects of what
long use had taught them to regard as an indispensable
necessity of their daily life, and the discontent thus
caused led him to hold out splendid inducements to
chemists to provide an equivalent. The price of foreign
Sugar had risen to 9 francs the kilogramme (3 s. 9 d. per
lb.). It was, therefore, now possible to cultivate and
manufacture Beet at a profit. Chaptal, (then Minister
of the Interior), Crespel, Delisse, Benjamin Delessert,
Barruel, Isnard, and other chemists, roused by the im-
portance of the occasion, having turned their careful
attention to the causes which had led to the previous failures
of its advocates, soon introduced various improvements
into the processes hitherto followed; and the erection of
an imperial factory at Rambouillet, and of another at
Amboise, on the Loire, was followed by the general
spread of the manufacture, thus producing Sugar at a
price considerably below that to which it had recently
risen.
Improved machinery, the progress of chemical science,
and the application of steam, were of great benefit during


this time, enabling the manufacturers to extract from
the root larger quantities of Sugar than previously. In
1836 manufactories were dispersed over no fewer than
thirty-seven departments, to the number of 437. Thanks
to the fruitful alliance of this industry with agriculture,
the fallow ground soon everywhere disappeared, and other
branches of agriculture profited thereby. The breadth of
land sown with wheat in one section, which in 1816 was
only 94,000 hectares, was in 1836 115,000 hectares, and
the increase of barley and potatoes was proportionate.
It was just at this period, 1837, when it had become
clear that full and lasting benefit would be reaped from
this industry, that vacuum pans were introduced, and
filters for animal charcoal came into general use.
The quantity of Beetroot Sugar annually manufactured
in France since 1840 has been as follows;
Tons.
1840 22,000
1841 25,000
1842 30,000
1843 28,000
1844 30,000
1845 37,000
1846 49,000
1847 60,000
1848 56,000
1849 44,000
1850 64,000
1851 68,000
1852 70,000
1853 72,000
Further mention will be
Tons.
1854 70,000
1855 77,000
1856 90,000
1857 80,000
1858 89,000
1859 91,000
1860 120,000
1861 143,000
1862-3 175,000
1863-4 130,000
1864-5 165,000
1865-6 274,000
1866-7 216,000
1867-8 220,000
made later on of the various
purposes to which the products of the Beetroot are applied.
At this point it need only be said that, at every stage of
the growth and manufacture, waste is avoided; and
whether it be the green tops of the root itself, or the
refuse pulp when the Sugar has been extracted, or the
saline or other particles which, as interfering with crystal-
lization, are expelled with the utmost jealousy, —at
whatever we look, we find it is of collateral advantage,
and adds, with singular good fortune, to the profits of
those engaged in the business.


The total quantity of Sugar produced by all countries in
the year 1866 was about 2,320,000 tons, distributed as
follows :
Tons.
Beet Sugar 638,500
Maple 30,000
Cane 1,551,500
Palm and Date 100,000
Total produced 2,320,000
Thus the Beetroot, recent as has been its use in Europe
for this purpose, contributed more than one-fourth of all
the Sugar known to have been used in the world—having,
in fact, almost if not altogether, supplanted the cane
product in many Continental markets. The European
countries which chiefly produced it were—
Tons.
France 216,000
Belgium 40,000
Holland 7500
Zollverein 190,000
Austria 80,000
Russia 80,000
Poland and Sweden 25,000
Total produced 638,500
Both Achard and Margraff pointed out the variety of
purposes to which the products of the Beet could be
applied ; but even they scarcely anticipated the extent to
which the economy of materials would ultimately reach.
Successive decades, however, have witnessed improvement
following improvement, and discovery succeeding discovery,
each adding to the wealth which the users of the root
were already amassing, till it has come to be thought of
in many districts with almost enthusiastic regard.
We have mentioned that the harvest of 1865-6 in
France yielded 274,000 tons of raw Sugar. Now, in
addition to this, there were 100,000 pipes, each containing
100 to 120 gallons of strong spirit (distilled partly from
the root and partly from the molasses), the value of which


£
Sugar
. .. 6,250,000
Spirit
1,350,000
Potash.... ,..
Pulp
was £1,350,000 ; 20,000 tons potash were made from the
refuse after distillation and valued at £500,000 ; 1,600,000
tons of pulp, remaining when the juice had been extracted
from the root, estimated to be worth £1,000,000, and
purchased eagerly as food for cattle, who devour it with
avidity, and thrive on it even better than on mangel-wurzel,
especially when it is mixed with a small proportion of hay
or oilcake. In addition to all this, the leaves and scum
were valuable manures. Thus the manufactured produce
of that Beet harvest represented a value, without including
these last named refuse, of
T0ta1 .... £9,200,000
Nor do these figures show the whole advantage derived
from this root. To fairly estimate this, allowance must be
made for the undoubted facts that its culture as a rotation
crop so prepares the soil that it needs not to be left fallow,
and so improves the wheat that from one-fourth to one-
third more is produced than before Beet preceded it; and
that cattle fed on the leaves and pulp are exceedingly
prolific, while their milk becomes more abundant and of
better flavour, so that the production of Sugar adds to the
supply of bread and meat, and these three leading ne-
cessities of man’s existence stimulate and aid each other.
The manure from the increased number of cattle greatly
benefits the soil. Various instances could be stated where
land which, before it was introduced, yielded 19 hectolitres
of wheat an acre, now yield 27, or even more. Of 90,000
hectares, or 225,000 acres occupied by the farmers in a
certain district, only 1447 were formerly sown with Beet
for the use of cattle; the number now is 21,405. Formerly
4202 hectares of wheat were sown there ; now 9290, and
the cattle have increased from 6995 to 40,656. At certain
seasons the manufacturers and distillers throw such a
quantity of fattened stock upon the market that prices are
lowered considerably. The Department du Nord, which


produces the largest quantity of Beet Sugar, at the same
time raises and exports more wheat and cattle than any
other.
In the various pursuits connected with the manufacture
of Sugar from Beet, above 100,000 hands find employ-
ment exclusive of those permanently engaged in distilling,
who number nearly 26,000.
Occasionally, when the vine harvest has been deficient,
Beet growers devote a larger proportion of their produce
to the distillation of spirits, as was the case in 1853-54.
Thus the failure of one harvest is partly compensated to
the nation by the advantages which it brings to another.
The rent of land such as Beet growers need, has, it scarcely
need be said, steadily risen of late years. Its usual price
now is 200 francs per hectare, about (£3 per acre) ; and
the selling value of estates has proportionately increased.
The mechanical skill called forth by constantly needed
improvements of the many intricate machines in use, has
had a perceptible effect on the national intellect. During
the recent discussions on the Army Bill in the Corps
Legislatif, the great demand for men which arises from
the various industrial enterprises connected with Beet, was
alluded to as an important element in calculations relative
to the national labour markets. It is by persons connected
with these enterprises that almost all prizes are obtained
at agricultural and other exhibitions in the north of
France : and at the Grand Exposition of last year one of
them (M. Decrombeque) carried off the only Extra Grand
Prix of 10,000 francs, while other Beet manufacturers
took several valuable prizes.


Chapter 11.
CULTIVATION OF THE BEETROOT.
We now proceed to give some account of the growth and
manufacture of Beetroot, in the belief that at length the
attention of British agriculturists is turning to this subject.
We may premise by briefly stating that our reasons for
asserting that it can be introduced into these Islands with
advantage are—
1. Beet Sugar is largely and increasingly used by our
refiners.
2. The rapid decrease of slavery in the countries where
the Sugar Cane is cultivated, is calculated to increase the
cost and diminish the production there ; while the manu-
facturers in the tropics are at a disadvantage with the
improvements in machinery introduced by modern science
in Europe.
3. The tendency of British agriculture is toward a
preference of pasturage and root crops over grain,
4. The soil and climate of England and Ireland are
specially suitable for the successful growth of Beet.
5. Ireland needs new industries ; land and labour there
are comparatively cheap, and capital can be procured to
support judicious enterprise.
6. The saving on an average of about £4 per ton in
freight and charges from the Cane-producing countries,
and of £1 10s, to £3 per ton on Beet from the Continent,
Further reference will be made to each of these points;
but we now pass to a description of the root, and of the
mode of its cultivation.
The Beetroot is a biennial plant, originally from the
south of Europe, introduced into the Netherlands by the
Spaniards, and thence brought into Germany. It was
first introduced into France in the year 1595, passing the
Alps, but, according to Olivier de Serres, attracted little
notice till, in 1784, the priest Commercella called atten-
tion to it. There are many descriptions of it, differing in
formation of root, leaves, colour, &c., of which two are
usually cultivated—one producing succulent leaves only.


the other, the vulgaris, distinguished by its large fleshy
root. The former is chiefly cultivated as a culinary
vegetable, which is extensively used by the agricultural
labourers and small occupiers of land in many parts of
Germany, France, and Switzerland. The latter, of which
again there are several varieties, and to which the name
JJeet-ROOT is peculiarly appropriated, is grown in gardens,
especially the red species, for the sake of the root, as
when boiled and sliaed it is an excellent addition to the
winter salad. The common field Beet, of which the
German name is Mangel-wurzel (scarcity root), has long-
been known in Germany, from whence Dr. Lettsom, an
eminent English physician of the last century, introduced
it into this country, to become, as we scarcely need say,
an extensively popular crop for feeding cattle. Curi-
ously enough, while the Germans call this scarcity root,
the French give it two names of opposite significations
—racine d'ohondance, signifying abundance, and racine de
disette, signifying scarcity. The White or Silesian root
(Beta alba), of which again there are more than one
species, is, however, the most valued by Sugar manufac-
turers, as it is peculiarly rich in saccharine matter. It is
slender and tapering, and shows very little above ground,
penetrating about twelve inches into the soil, from which,
by means of its numerous radicles, it draws the necessary
pabulum. Its cultivation is similar to that of most weeded
sorts, and depends on the same principles—its pivoting
shape being unsuited to a clayey tenacious soil, but
prospering in rich, light, loamy earth, easily penetrated
by water, with nutritious elements at a good depth. The
leaves and stalks, which lie close to the earth, are green,
as is also that portion of the root which rises above the
ground. The leaves will sometimes rise very high before
spreading, but at others spread close to the root; and this
variation, which depends on various circumstances, needs
to be studied with care, for, when the closeness of the
leaves shades the roots from the sun, the portion above
ground is protected from solar action, and the otherwise
white root is not turned green ; but when the loftiness of
the leaves permits this, the change of colour has an
injurious effect on the quantity and quality of the saccha-
rine matter. The Imperial (so called by Knauer, who,


in 1854, first drew attention to it) is very rich in saccha-
rine matter. It is the Queen of Beetroots. Its shape
resembles that of a pear, and its leaves, like those of a
cabbage, are crisp, rough, and fatty. When fully ripe,
the stalks of the leaves near the heart are of a rose colour.
The Quedlinburger differs slightly from the Imperial in
the skin of the root, the stalks and the fibres of the leaves
having a reddish tinge, and is generally preferred in
France, though it does not contain so much saccharine
matter as the pure White Silesian, because it will flourish
on poorer land, grows to a greater size and weight, and
ripens a fortnight sooner.
The Imperial is that which the writer would recom-
mend ; but all should be tried before the preference is
finally accorded to it.
There are two other species which are somewhat
extensively grown—viz., the Yellow Beet of Castelnau-
dary (France), and the Red Beet. The first, however,
grows halt out of the soil, in consequence of which its
saline qualities are much increased, and its sugar propor-
tionately lessened; while the second protrudes still further,
and produces so little sugar that it is only used for dis-
tilling and cattle feeding. The presence of salt is above
all things inimical to the production of Sugar from this
root. Consequently, whatever increases its saline quali-
ties —proximity to the sea, solar action on the portion
above ground, the use of land or manure impregnated
with salt—is a serious obstacle to success, and must be
avoided. In some instances known to the author, the
undue proportion of salt in Sugar has nearly rendered the
Sugar unsaleable ; and so generally is this recognised
abroad, especially in Germany, that the manufacturers, in
contracting with the growers of the root, stipulate that it
shall not be grown on certain soils, and often even name
the manure which shall be used ; they also frequently
provide the seed themselves to ensure the right quality
being grown. The root of the Beet contains water, sugar,
vegetable fibrin, fat, gum, colouring matter, and pectin,
together with the carbonates, chlorides, sulphates, nitrates,
phosphates, oxalates, malates, &c., of potassium, sodium,
iron, and magnesia. The water varies from 80 to 88 per
cent, of the whole. The solid matter (12 to 20 per cent.)


contains from 4 to 6 per cent, of
vegetable fibrin ; the
remainder is made up of the other constituents mentioned.
Payen gave the following analysis
: —
Water
. 83*5
per cent.
Sugar
. 10-5
99
Cellulose
. 0-8
99
Salts, &c
. 3-7
99
Albumen, Casein, and Nitro
genous matters
1*5
99
100-0
Under salts, &c., he included malic acid and gum ;
nitrogenous substances, fatty matters, aromatic substances,
colouring matters, essential oil, chlorophyle, malamide,
oxalate and phosphate of lime, phosphate of magnesia,
chloride of ammonium, silicate, nitrate, sulphate, and
oxalate of potassa, oxalate of soda, chlorides of sodium and
potassium, pectates and pectinates of lime, potassa, and
soda, sulphur, silica, oxide of iron, &c. The Sugar is
entirely in the state of Cane Sugar. It has been shown,
however, that ammoniacal salts do not exist ready formed
in Beet juice, but are the product of decomposition
eliminated, especially when lime is added, as is the case
during the course of manufacture. And the whole of
the other ingredients named are not detected at all times,
or in equal proportions —difference of soil, climate, or
treatment having its usual effect The Siberian and
Russian roots seem to be more largely composed of Sugar
than those grown elsewhere.
The whole of the Sugar is secreted during the first
year’s growth. Consequently, for manufacturing purposes
it is an annual, though otherwise a biennial plant, pro-
ducing its seed in the second year of its growth.
In the early stages of this industry, the per-centage of
Sugar obtained from the root was far less than at present,
and the successive improvements in the richness of the
juice from one to ten per cent, of Sugar have had an
important bearing on the various calculations connected
with its production ; as, but for them, its manufacturers
and refiners could not have overcome the rivalry of the
Cane Sugar. The weight of roots per acre, also, was


originally far less than at present. Thus, Chaptal counted,
in round numbers, 20 tons per hectare (2| acres) ; later
on, Dubumfault, 24 tons ; and more recently still, Dr.
Sace, 40 tons. In the north of France, a hectare often
produces 50 tons, but 40 is considered a fair average. It
is on record, however, that M. Dargent, Department de
la Seine, produced 38 tons of superior root from an
English acre—a yield which Vilmorin in France, and
Knauer in Germany, encourage us to believe may in time
be equalled on all sides ; and bearing in mind that
agriculture is eminently an advancing art, it is but reason-
able to look for harvests far beyond what are now usually
gathered. Whilst at present, the quantity per statute acre
in France is from 16 to 20 tons ; in Germany, only 12 to
15 tons is raised ; though this difference is more apparent
than real, as in the latter country the economical and
fiscal considerations already explained lead the growers to
regard—not the weight of the root, but the quantity of
saccharine matter obtained ; and, accordingly, they culti-
vate a small, rich species. Where the white Silesian is
used, the average weight of a root should not exceed 3| lbs.,
and the sowing should be closer than larger ones. The
preliminary preparation of the soil varies with its nature.
The soil having been manured in the autumn, it requires
to be ploughed twice, to be then harrowed, and again
ploughed previous to the planting or sowing ; then to be
weeded, when the plant can be easily distinguished from
noxious herbs (darnel). It should also be ploughed twice
or thrice during the growing. Great cleanliness is requi-
site ; and labour freely bestowed on the land will be
amply repaid by the increased crop.
The most suitable time for sowing is from the begin-
ning of April till the early part of May. Like other
natives of a southern climate, the root is delicate, and is
liable to injury alike by the frosty nights which sometimes
occur before the first-named period, and by an unusually
warm, early summer; since the first retards its growth,
and the second causes premature vegetation, when, instead
of increasing in substance, the Beet shoots up in stalks
and stems.
In sowing, ridges of half an inch to an inch in depth
are made; and where women formerly followed the


plough, as they still do occasionally, they sowed the seed
at intervals of twelve inches, afterwards covering it with
earth. Sometimes the intervals are sixteen inches, but
never more, since too much solar heat then reaches the
earth. They are smallest in rich ground, where, if twelve
inches, the leaves will entirely hide the earth. A woman
would sow 6000 to 8000 seeds per diem ; but by placing
them in holes, rather than sowing broadcast, a less quan-
tity suffices, and the subsequent weeding entails less
trouble.
The seed requires no peculiar preparation. In properly
worked land, it breaks through the soil in ten to fourteen
days. If sown later than the first few days of May, it is
advisable to soak it in rain-water for twenty-four hours.
The quantity used varies according to the theories of
different farmers. Were only one seed to be dropped
into each hole, five lbs. per acre would suffice. But it
has been found far more profitable to use twelve or even
fifteen lbs., not only because the seeds break through
sooner and grow faster when several are together, but
because the failure of various holes is thus guarded
against. However, when the plants have come up some
little time, they must be thinned, leaving only one in
each hole.
Hoeing should commence as soon as they are above
ground. Many farmers repeat this twice, instead of re-
ploughing; using for that purpose, and for sowing, the
machines, of which there are several patented in Germany
and France, as well as here.
Weeding is commenced when some strength and firm-
ness has been attained by the plant, and requires to be
managed with care. In removing the superfluous plants,
the strongest must be left. This is followed by the
second hoeing, and this loosening of the soil allows the
young plants to grow and flourish, covering the field with
their leaves.
At the third hoeing or ploughing, which takes place
early in August, the chief object is to beware that the
top of the root is covered, the saccharine being by that
time in course of formation. After this, nothing should
be done to the plant till the harvest commences, which
it does in the latter end of September or in the com-


mencement of October. The readiness of the roots for
gathering is known by the change which takes place in
the colour of the leaves, the dark green becoming yellow
and drooping. To remain some little time longer in the
ground would not injure them ; but it is not wise to delay
beyond November, as frost setting in would be destructive
to their quality. They are simply dug up with a spade,
laid in a row, and carefully deprived of their leaves.
The root should be hard and of a close texture, with
a white and delicate skin, and it should be firm, heavy,
and break off short. A spongy, soft root, with a thick
skin, will be found deficient in saccharine matter. Its
taste should be sweet and pleasant, quite free from a
saline flavour.
Walkhoff states that having analysed twelve roots
gathered by him on the 12th September, he found that
3 roots, each under 1 lb., contained 13-9 per cent, of Sugar.
4 „ „ n „ 1M
5 » 2 ~ 9'9 ~ ~
And having gathered from the same field, on different
days, he found that those taken up on
4th Sept, contained on an average B*9 per cent, of Sugar.
15th „ „ „ 10-4 „
29th „ „ „ 12-5
From which he concluded that the smaller the root the
richer will be its saccharine qualities; and that the root
increases in richness until it is fully ripe.
As the roots are collected, haste should be made to
manufacture the Sugar, for exposure to light and air
seriously injures the saccharine matter. It is, therefore,
important that the works be near the farms, as is much
the case abroad; and that, if circumstances prevent the
extraction of the Sugar being at once commenced, the
roots be covered with soil, or placed in cool, dark cellars,
mixed with ashes or coal-dust. In order to obviate this
necessity, attempts have been made to preserve the roots
by slicing and drying in kilns, so as to keep them till a
favourable time for manufacturing them arose. This
system was patiently tried by the late M. De Morny on
his estate. The result, however, was not satisfactory.


Not only was considerable extra expense thus incurred,
but the saccharine quality was found to have deteriorated;
and the process has been generally abandoned in France,
though still partially continued in Germany. The alter-
native of covering the roots with earth, when the manu-
facture cannot be at once proceeded with, is, consequently,
the one in general use. When left, as they sometimes
are, in the field throughout the winter, they are piled in
heaps of three or four tons, and covered with earth from
six to twelve inches deep, which is increased to two or
three feet when the frost sets in. The heaps thus formed
are about forty-five feet long, four feet broad, and three
feet deep. But this delay, if continued beyond December,
diminishes the saccharine as much as one or even two per
cent. : hence, the manufacturing season is usually almost
over by the close of that month.
The price of seed is from 255. to 40s. per cwt.
A dry September is highly beneficial. Thus, though
the crop in 1860 was far from favourable, and its quality
inferior, yet, owing to that month being perfectly dry,
some of the roots in Puy de Dome were found to be
of remarkable richness, and a great quantity actually
contained fourteen per cent, of Sugar, nearly equal to
the cane of Mississippi.
The land most suitable for growing Beet is that on
which the soil is free from peat and salt, but is rich, light,
and loamy. Clay land is too cold; the roots do not easily
penetrate it, and they would be deficient in saccharine
matter. On moorland and heavy marsh-land the result
is the same. Nor does dry, sandy soil, or soil with a
hard, bottom, yield a satisfactory crop. Stony
ground also is to be avoided, as it cannot be thoroughly
worked, while ground newly cleared contains matter
detrimental to the sugar-producing power of the Beet,
Experience has amply shown that the best crojos, as
regards both quantity and quality, comes from a light,
deep, argillaceous soil, free from excessive moisture and
acidity a soil which has been long under cultivation,
and is not burdened with noxious weeds, whose exhaustion
is repaired by continual improvement in the cultivation,
and by restitution to it in the shape of manure of what
it has lost.


As this root takes up three to four per cent, of mineral
salts, lime, potash, and soda, and as the bases of these
may interchange one with another, all attempts to make
good Sugar from the product of salt lands, soil too much
manured, or ground recently cleared of timber, are certain
to be entirely futile.
Sloping land, of moderate elevation, will give the best
result.
The most suitable soil for the purpose would be that
which should contain four parts mould, fifty-six argil.,
thirty-six silex, and four carb. lime. From this about
twenty tons per acre, and twelve per cent, of saccharine
matter, are raised and extracted.
To arrive at maturity, Beetroot must absorb a certain
quantity of heat, which M. Gasparin has calculated to be
16,000 degrees centigrade. This estimate he arived at
by multiplying the mean temperature of each month of
its growth—May, June, July, and August—by the num-
ber of days. His calculation will enable us to decide
whether in any given country the root will ripen there so
as to give a fair per-centage of Sugar.
The seed begins to germinate at a temperature of forty-
three degrees Fahrenheit. It may, therefore, be sown
as soon as the earth is at that heat, provided there be no
frost.
It is of the highest importance that care be taken to
avoid errors here. One per cent, of salt destroys five per
cent, of Sugar, and thus root produced from the wrong
soil will disappoint all concerned. Farm-yard manure ,
for instance, should he used moderately. Rape-cakes,
bones, and guano are especially recommended ; lime, also,
is very good; and generally whatever is principally
composed of carbon—that is to say, of the necessary
element of sugar: thus all decomposed plants are valuable
for the purpose. The manuring should take place only
during the autumn preceding the seeding.
Way and Ogston calculate that one ton of roots remove
from the soil—


Average of three Average of three
specimens of bulb. specimens of leaf,
lbs. lbs.
Potassa.. a 4-99 .... 7-86
Soda 3-02 .... 2-52
Lime 0-41 .... 3-31
Magnesia 0-43 .... 3-27
Oxide of iron o*l2 .... 0-52
Phosphoric acid 0-66 .... P 94
Sulphuric acid 0-65 .... 2-20
Chloride of sodium 5‘29 .... 12-82
Silica 0-54 .... 0-76
16-11 .... 35-20
The choice of manures to supply this loss demands
care, as, though an abundant supply, judiciously selected,
well repays expense, error in selection is apt to deteriorate
the richness or flavour of the saccharine matter. And we
must not forget how important it is to assist the ground
with manure when not as free from weeds as could be
desired, since the alternate crops of wheat, barley, or oats
are thus so stimulated that they very soon overspread the
whole ground, and prevent the weeds from gaining the
upper hand.
It is also important to carefully arrange what crops are
to be sown in rotation with this. Wheat, flax, clover,
barley, and rapeseed, are all good; but whatever arrange-
ment be decided on, the first-named should follow the
Beet, for March wheat or summer oats are always
remarkable, when they follow this root, for their cleanness,
strength, and productiveness. In the case of a farm of
900 acres, divided into 300 for Beet, 400 for wheat, 50
for rye, and the remainder for clover, carrots, potatoes,
&c., it was found ihat the yield of wheat after Beet was
thus introduced became nearly as large as when the
whole 900 acres were used for its production.


Chapter 111.
PROCESS OF MANUFACTURE.
The processes of extracting the saccharine elements from
Beetroot are so complicated, and to fully describe them
would require the use of so much technical language,
that—even were the writer intimately familiar with them,
which he cannot claim to be—it would not be advisable
to enlarge upon them here. In France and Germany,
various elaborate works have been compiled for the pur-
pose ; indeed, the interest taken there in Beet and its
products is so great that there is an extensive circulation
for the weekly and monthly journals which, during
several years past, have been published. These treat
exhaustively, not only on all the questions connected with
the cultivation of the root and Beet Sugar manufacture,
but also as to their commercial and fiscal aspects in
various countries ; and to them are referred those students
who wish to master the subject.
Nevertheless, it may interest the readers of this
pamphlet if the more modern methods by which the
Sugar is extracted are briefly described.
It will be understood that the object of the manu-
facturers is to obtain from the roots as large a quantity as
possible of pure crystallizable Sugar, and that the diffi-
culties to be overcome consist—first, in the juice of the
root not containing all its sugar; second, in the Sugar
not being, by the methods now- known, entirely crystalliz-
able. The various improvements introduced from time to
time have borne always on one or the other of these
points, or on the most expeditious mode of manufactur-
ing the Sugar, so as to guard against decomposition
and fermentation. What may be the per-centage of
saccharine juice which science will ultimately extract,
remains yet to be seen; although it is now very much
larger than when the use of the Sugar thus obtained was
found by Napoleon such an aid to his policy.
M. Payen asserted that 5000 tons of root produced
300 tons of Sugar and 60 tons of molasses ; and at present


this is an average in France, six to seven per cent, of pure
Sugar being obtained ordinarily, according to the com-
parative richness of the root, the weather during the
season, and the skill of the manufacturer. Thus, while
in 1866 the per-centage in France was only five and a
half, in 1867 it was seven per cent., and in 1865 even
eight per cent. As a rule, 100 lbs. of French Beet con-
tain 12 lbs. gross of Sugar ; but during the crystallizing
processes a portion of this is lost. M. Louis Vilmaris, a
French physiologist, and known by the ameliorations he
has effected of various industrial plants, intimates his
having grown a species of Beetroot containing twenty-
four per cent, of saccharine matter ; and, going still
further, has stated that of this rich root he could obtain
about 60 tons per hectare. Were this but general, the
saving in labour and expenditure would be very important,
and the cost would be so low as entirely to supersede the
Cane. This, however, is at present an extreme case, and
is only interesting in this connexion as showing what we
may look for at some future day.
lire, Bureau, Dubrunfaut, Schwartzwaller, Liebig,
Muspratt, and other eminent chemists, agree that the
whole of the Sugar in the Beet may be crystallized, and
is in every essential respect similar to that extracted from
the Cane. Indeed, Ure states that Cane and Maple
Sugar are in cohesive quality surpassed by that of the
Beet, since larger and finer crystals of it are obtained
from a clarified solution of equal density. This is par-
ticularly the case in the article of candy ; if made of Beet,
as in Belgium, the crystals are larger and better defined
and cut than those which, in Holland, are made from the
Cane. This opinion is also that of Baron Liebig.
Perfectly pure Sugar made from Beet cannot be dis-
tinguished from perfectly pure Sugar made from Cane ;
but in its imperfectly purified state it can easily be
detected both by taste and by smell. Some of the refiners
in England, especially in London, were prejudiced at first
against the use of Beet Sugar, considering it inferior, and
would only purchase it at one shilling to two shillings per
cwt, below the price of Cane Sugar. This prejudice,
however, is rapidly disappearing. Those who have fairly
tried it are convinced that there is no difference between


the two ; nay, further, that being entirely free from sand,
and of stronger crystals, it is preferable to unclayed
Brazil, Cuba, or Manilla, &c., and in the process of
refining passes through the filters with greater ease.
Good quality Beet Sugar produces from ninety to ninety-
five per cent, of pure saccharine. In some manufactories,
fine white crystals are produced direct from Beet, without
having passed through the hands of a refiner.
The Scotch refiners, who have for some years largely
used the Beet, will pay rather higher rates than for Cane.
Unfortunately, the differential duties in this country have
made it the interest of its refiners to purchase chiefly the
common qualities, in which there is often an undue pro-
portion of molasses, mother-liquor, and other uncrystal-
lizable matter. Nevertheless, its use is rapidly increasing
in this country ; and should its growth and manufacture
be established in our midst, its great merits will
undoubtedly be admitted more and more.
In the manufacture, the roots are first carefully cleansed
from earthy particles in a cylinder drilled with holes, and
revolving in a trough filled with water. From this they
descend down an incline to the rasping machine, a cylinder
armed with blades fixed in its circumference at equal
distances all round and parallel with its axis, the outer edges
of which are cut into teeth of equal size, like those of a saw,
rising three-fourths of an inch from the surface. This
revolves 1000 or 1100 times per minute, and the root,pressed
against the teeth by mechanical means, is soon reduced
to pulp of the required consistency—not too coarse, as then
too many of the sugar cells remain unbroken, nor too fine,
as then it forms a compact mass, and the juice cannot run
through the bags into which the pulp presently passes.
These are made of loosely-netted woollen material, and
receive it from troughs which are placed beneath the
rasping machine, a small current of water falling on this,
so as to prevent a choking up of the blades. They are
laid one above another, but separated by trellises of iron.
When the pile is sufficiently high, it is pushed under an
iron plate made to descend either by hydraulic power or
by a mechanical movement; and by this action the juice
is extracted. The plate then rises, when the bags, always
with the trellis intervening, are laid one by one upon an


iron plate of a hydraulic press. When the new pile thus
formed reaches the top, the plate beneath ascends, pressed
upward by a forcing pump of 100 tons power, and this
produces a second exuding of the juice, after which all
that the two processes have extracted is transferred by
pipes to a monte jus a vapeur, or pump, which sends it up
into the chaudiere d defequer , or defecating copper, to be
boiled. During these operations it is important that no
delay take place, as incipient fermentation is liable to
commence, and this would have an injurious influence on
the juice.
To heat the defecating copper charcoal is used. In this
copper the juice is defecated ; in other words, when the
heat rises to 178 degrees Fahrenheit, there is added to it a
preparation of lime, in the proportion of 100 grammes of
lime to one hectolitre of juice, the lime having been
deadened and diluted with water to the thickness of cream.
This being well mixed with the juice, its action combined
with the heat causes a portion of the matter foreign to
the Sugar to coagulate, while another portion combines
with the lime into an insoluble substance. The whole
separates from the juice in a thick scum, which rises to
the surface, upon which the liquor beneath is run off
through a tap in the bottom of the copper, and the scum,
like the pulp, is pressed, to obtain from it whatever juice
may still be left in it. In this last pressing the woollen
bags are not used, but canvas ones, as the action of the
lime would injure the wool. By a recent improvement,
the woollen and canvas bags are dispensed with, and the
pulp is simply placed on a moveable table which passes
it under the press.
At this juncture the juice is tested by an instrument
made for the purpose, similar to the saccharometer, and
called pese liqueur of Beaume. The result shows the
comparative richness of the roots.
The pulp remaining to be used as food for cattle is
about one-fifth of the whole. The scum, also, is a valuable
manure.
During the last two years the hydraulic press has been
supplanted by a filter, which extracts the juice more
thoroughly. It consists of a series of disks covered with
canvas, and is contained in an iron case. Steam pressure


forces the scum between two juxtaposed disks, the contract
of which causes the juice to filter through the canvas, and
run out on the other side, while the whole of the insoluble
matter that has been precipitated by the lime during the
defecation remains inside, and when taken out forms like
the scum an excellent manure.
The whole of the defecated juice is now run off into
the saturating copper, where the superabundance of lime,
which while combined with the juice forms sucrate de
chaux soluble, is removed, being precipitated as an insoluble
carbonate of lime by means of carbonic acid gas which
a forcing pump blows into the juice. (The carbonic gas
is produced by coke in combustion in a cylinder covered
with bricks ; or, better still, in a limekiln, which decom-
poses the marl or carbonate of lime.) The lime should
not be entirely precipitated. One-half of a thousandth
part should be left in the juice. And care must be taken
that when the lime is completely saturated no more
carbonic acid gas be blown in, as then the precipitate
re-dissolves.
To facilitate the deposit of the precipitate the whole is
now boiled, and the clear juice is run on to the charcoal
filters, which are cylinders of sheet iron containing a
mixture of new and old large-grained charcoal. These
retain what lime the preceding operations have left,
together with the organic and mixed matter not separated
by the defecation, while in removing the coloured ingre-
dients which are usually thus arrested the colour of the
juice is also improved.
All the operations thus far explained are common to the
two systems of manufacture—the systems d air lihre and
dans le vide (vacuum pan). But from this point they
differ.
The system d air lihre (open pans) is arranged thus :
The filtered juice is evaporated in pans inside of which
are steam serpentine pipes, while outside is a calling-
chimney ( cheminee d'appel). When the juice acquires a
density of about twenty-five degrees Beaume, the evapora-
tion is interrupted, and the juice again run on to charcoal
filters. It is then again evaporated in another pan, till it
assumes the consistence of syrup. This is called the
boiling {la cuite). To ascertain if the syrup is thick enough


a drop is taken between the thumb and finger, and these
being separated when it has cooled, draw it into a thread
till it breaks, when, in forming, the top part should curl
upward. The boiled syrup is now run into sheet iron
troughs of the size of ten to fifteen hectolitres placed in a
room where the temperature is about eighty-six degrees
Fahrenheit. There it remains about eight days, sepa-
rating meanwhile into crystals, which will be larger and
more abundant in proportion to the purity of the syrup.
If boiled a great deal too much, the syrup yields almost
nothing, because the cooling at thirty centigrades (equal
86° Fahrenheit) brings it into a compact mass like gum.
The crystallization having continued about eight days, the
entire mass of crystals and uncrystallized syrup is stirred
together, and mixed with some syrup of thirty degrees
Beaume, so as to form a pap, which is then put into the
centrifugal machine. This should make at least 1400
revolutions per minute. The centrifugal force presses the
mass against the sides of the drum of the machine, but
only the syrup passes through the metallic cloth, the
crystals remaining attached to it. Should they then be
hard enough to support without melting a liquoring of
about one litre of syrup twenty-five degrees Beaume, or,
better still, a shoot of steam, the result will be a Sugar
(called first jet) of about No. 18 D.S, But should the
crystals be small and soft, through the syrup having been
badly purified and too much boiled, the liquoring or shoot
of steam will affect them seriously; they will lose in weight,
and the Sugar produced will be found only about No. 14
to No. 15 D.S. The separated syrup is now re-boiled
(having sometimes been previously mixed with water, re-
heated, and re-filtered), and put to crystallize in larger
troughs—of about sixty hectolitres—in a temperature of
about thirty-five degrees centigrades, during three weeks
to a month; after which, being put into the centrifugal
machine, it will, if not too much boiled, produce a Sugar
(called the second jet) that, supposing the first boiling to
have yielded No. 17 or 18, will be No. 13. Finally, the
syrup which yet remained, having been once more boiled,
and set to crystallize in troughs varying from 100 to 300
hectolitres, in a temperature of forty degrees centrigrades
(where it remains between three and four months), under-


goes the same process, from which there will result a
Sugar varying from No. 7 to No. 10, and (if the boiling
has not been too had and the primitive juice was well
purihed) as pure, though darker than No. 12 to No. 13 of
the first jet. This result is owing to the fact, that as
the crystals have been slowly formed, there is less syrup
embodied in them. At present the syrup remaining from
the third centrifugal operation is generally utilised for
distillery purposes. It contains from forty-two to forty-
five per cent, of crystallizable Sugar; but the foreign
matter which the various operations have not removed
remains here and prevents its crystallization. Various
experiments are going on with a view to remove it, and
thus crystallize the whole of the syrup ; and a favourable
result is confidently expected. The polarization of these
three jets should be : first jet , ninety-four to ninety-six ;
second jet , ninety-one to ninety-three ; third jet , eighty-
eight to ninety. From all this, supposing that the Beetroot
in use produced a juice with a density of five degrees, and
this contained ten per cent, of Sugar, the average result
will be as follows :
100 K. Beetroot produce 20 K. pulp, and 80 K, juice
of five degrees.
80 „ juice of five degrees produce 9 K. 80 gr. thick
syrup.
From these the centrifugal machine will give forth—
In the first jet 4 K 750 gr. Sugar.
Second „ 1 „ 250 „
Third „ 0„ 500 „
6-500
There are 3 K. molasses )
at 44 per cent. of>T32o
Sugar V
Lost in the scum, char-
coal, and other opera-
tions )
Left in the pulp 1 -300
Kils. 10-000.
There was therefore ten per cent, of Sugar in the
Beetroot,
Turning now to the system dans le vide (vacuum pans),
we find the process to be as follows:


The juice having been first filtered, is then evaporated,
not in open pans, but in closed cylinders, which are heated
by steam. A large tube connects the top of the cylinder
with a powerful sucking-pump, which takes off' the steam
of the juice as soon as generated ; and there being then
very little pressure on the surface of the boiling juice
(from half to quarter atmosphere), it boils more rapidly
then by the process d air lihre, while a less pressure of steam
suffices to maintain the heat. The usual force is only half
atmosphere, which can be obtained after the steam has
served in other operations. Further economy is effected
by coupling three cylinders together, so that the steam of
the juice in one passes by means of the sucking-pump
into the heating-pipes of the next, and thus is utilised.
The result is, that the steam from the boiler of the sugar-
house finds the following employment:—
First, in heating the defecating or saturating coppers,
through serpentine pipes on the inside, or through
double bottoms, and in turning the machinery.
Second, in heating the first evaporating cylinder.
As it also saves the heat which otherwise the second
and third cylinders would have required, this arrangement
is known as “ d’appareil, d triple effet de la vapeur.”
The juice having thus been evaporated to twenty-five
degrees Beaume, it is boiled d air libre for one minute, in
order to re-warm it, as it has fallen to sixty-five degrees,
and would not filter satisfactorily. The filtering is
managed as in the other process; and the juice is then
replaced in a closed cylinder, to be boiled into syrup, the
cylinder being of large size—forty to fifty hectolitres—and
containing three large serpentine steam pipes, while its
top communicates by means of a large tube or chimney
with a sucking-pump. The juice which this sucks up is
reduced to the syrup state in the manner already described,
and the degree of boiling is similarly ascertained, the
sample being obtained by means of a trier. The boiled
syrup is now set to crystallize in troughs of ten to fifteen
hectolitres, in a temperature of about thirty degrees.
Having been boiled at a lower temperature, it is less hot
and will crystallize sooner. The crystals, however, are
smaller, softer, and more mixed with molasses ; and as, in


this state, to liquor or steam them is impossible, that pro-
cess is omitted. When the syrup has been in the troughs
for a few days, it is put into the centrifugal machine
to obtain the first jet ; and the second and third are
obtained by the air litre process, except that the syrup is
usually, but not always, boiled dans le vide.
Another description of the course of manufacture was
given by the author in the paper read by him before the
Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool. It
differs in some respects from the preceding, which has
been compiled more recently from other sources, but, it
is believed, will prove not less interesting :
“ To procure the Sugar contained in the Beet various processes
have to be adopted, and they should be followed up without loss of
time. The first object is to get the masses in which the Sugar is
embodied, and to extract the juice as pure as possible. To achieve
this object, the roots are first thoroughly cleaned and cut in slices,
then pounded or rasped by machines, in wooden troughs ; by these
processes the cells are torn up, and the Beet reduced to a pulpy
substance.
“ The machine employed is a cylinder of tinned iron, two feet or
more in diameter, and eighteen inches in the axis, which is turned
by machinery. On the circumference of this cylinder are fixed, by
means of screws, ninety narrow plates of iron, rising three-quarters
of an inch from the surface, and parallel to the axis at equal
distances all around. The outer edges are cut into teeth like saws,
a slanting box is fixed to the frame on which the axis turns, and the
roots are pressed against the plates. The cylinder is then made to
revolve rapidly, the roots are thus scraped, and the pulp falls into a
vessel lined with lead. When two such cylinders are used, revolving
four hundred times in a minute, two and a half tons of roots are
ground down in two hours. It is necessary that operations should
proceed rapidly, or the pulp acquires a dark colour, an incipient
fermentation taking place which greatly injures the future pro-
ceedings. When the pulp is ground, it is put into strong canvas
bags, a number of which, separated by iron plates, are put under a
powerful press to extract the juice ; the residue is subject to a
second, or even to a third pressure, if necessary, till every drop of
Juice is extracted. The liquor runs into a copper vessel until it is
two-thirds filled ; the strength is ascertained by an instrument
similar to the saccharometer ; the fire under the copper is now
lighted, and by the time the copper is full, the heat is raised to 178
degrees Fahrenheit, not more.
“ In the meantime a mixture of lime and water has been prepared,
by gradually pouring as much water upon ten lbs. of quick-lime as
will make the mixture of the consistency of cream ; this is poured
into the copper when the heat is steady at the before-mentioned
degree, and is well mixed with the juice by stirring. The heat is
then increased until the mixture boils, when a thick scum rises to


the surface. As soon as clear bubbles appear through the scum, the
fire is suddenly put out by water, the scum hardens and cools, and,
the sediment being deposited, the liquor becomes clear and of a light
colour. The scum is then carefully removed by a perforated skim-
mer, and is put into a vessel until the liquor remaining in it can be
pressed out ; a tap is now opened, about five inches above the
bottom of the boiler ; another tap lower down lets out the remain-
der, until it commences to appear cloudy ; what still remains is
afterwards boiled again, together with that extracted by pressure
from the scum. The clear liquor is now subject to evaporation in
another boiler, which is wide and shallow ; the bottom is at first
but slightly covered by the juice, which boils rapidly ; as the water
evaporates fresh juice is let in. When a certain degree of thickening
has taken place, so as to show five or six degrees of
animal charcoal is gradually added till the liquor arrives at twenty
degrees by the saccharometer. One cwt. of charcoal is required for
the juice of two and a half tons of Beetroot. The evaporation by
boiling continues until the saccharometer marks twenty-five degrees,
and a regular syrup is obtained. This syrup is now strained through
linen filters, and the liquor is kept flowing by means of steam or hot
air, assisted by pressure ; in two or three hours all the clear syrup
will have run through.
“ The lime which has been involuntarily absorbed by the juice is
neutralised by acid. The syrup, when thus prepared, is again boiled
and skimmed, until it is sufficiently concentrated ; the fire is then
put out, and the syrup carried to the cooler, which is a vessel
capable of containing all the juice produced by four operations of
boiling ; until the crystallizing process commences, the whole is
well mixed and stirred. Before it becomes too stiff, earthen moulds,
of the well-known sugar-loaf shape, and of the size called great
bastards, are filled with the crystallizing mass, of which a little at a
time is poured into each ; when full, they are carried to the coolest
place on the premises. Whilst the crystallization goes on, the crust
formed on the top is rapidly broken, and the whole is stirred till the
crystals are condensed in the centre ; it is then allowed to go on
without being further disturbed, and in three days it is so far
advanced that the pegs in the holes at the point of the mould may be
taken out, and the molasses allowed to run out. In a week this is
mostly run off; white syrup is now poured on the top of the mould,
which filters through the mass and carries part of the colouring
matter with it. The sugar is then crushed, and if in refining the
same process is followed as with Cane Sugar, it is impossible for the
most experienced judge to distinguish one from the other either in
taste, smell, or appearance. From this it arose that, during the
blockade in France, smuggled Colonial Sugar was sold as "Beet
Sugar.”
Hitherto, manufacturers have been baffled in their
attempts to crystallize the whole of the saccharine matter
in the Beetroot; for, though in itself amenable to the
ordinary processes, the alloy of saline matter from which


they cannot separate it has resisted their efforts. Various
processes for thoroughly extracting the salt have been
devised, but only two of them are satisfactory. They are
known as le precede barytique and le precede osmose, and
were both invented by M. de Dubrunfaut.
The use of baryte for extracting sugar from molasses is
based on the principle that if Sugar and baryte are both
diluted with water and brought into contact, there will be
formed an insoluble composition {suerate de baryte ). If,
therefore, warmed molasses be mixed with a warmed
concentrated solution of baryte, this insoluble powder falls
to the bottom, while the liquid floating above it holds in
solution the saline and gummy matters which previously
were mixed with the molasses, and also the excess of
baryte employed. The liquid containing them may now
be drawn off, and the baryte being separated from the
Sugar by a current of carbonic acid gas, forms insoluble
carbonate of baryte, leaving the Sugar crystallizable by
boiling ; while the baryte which remains, together with
that obtainable from the saline water, can be renovated
by being heated in a kiln with coal.
In the osmose process for a similar purpose, use is made
of the fact that when two liquids are separated by a par-
tition of bladder, skin, parchment, or paper, they will
gradually mix by penetrating the pores of the partition,
but not in equal proportions, when they are of unequal
density. If on one side there be water, and on the other
a solution of molasses, it will soon be found that of the
water some has joined the molasses, and of the molasses
some the water. But the molasses being heavier, pass
with a different rapidity. The salt mixed with the mo-
lasses then breaks away, as if impatient of restraint, and
rapidly exuding through the partition, soon has almost
entirely disappeared in the water, leaving the molasses
somewhat weakened by the portion of water which it has
absorbed, but so far freed from the salt which lately was
combined with it that it can now be crystallized.
This may be illustrated by filling to within an inch a
small parchment bag with alcohol, tying it tightly, and
putting it into a larger bag, which is then filled up with
water. In a few hours the outer bag will swell, and even
burst, in consequence of the distension of the sides of the


inner bag having prevented the liquor which has passed
from it being replaced by that which was in the outer
one. For practical application of this principle to the
purification of molasses, use is made of a paper manufac-
tured from cleaned cotton, the sheets of which have been
dipped in sulphuric acid. This paper is divided into
pieces a yard square. Fifty pieces are fixed in a frame,
and fifty frames in a large case, and this case is then filled
with water and molasses in alternate compartments. The
water being shortly after drawn off, is found to have
become saline, when it only remains to draw off the
molasses which are now crystallizable.
A machine with fifty partitions will osmocise forty-four
or forty-five tons of molasses daily. The fresh water is
poured in at the top and the molasses at the bottom.
The salts which remain in the water are extracted from it
by evaporation, and used for other purposes.
This process has recently been applied to the first stage
of the manufacture, superseding the rasping machine, and
is said to largely increase the per-centage of Sugar ob-
tained from the juice. But its superiority is not yet
established, and the process already described is the one
generally used.
To ascertain its quality, the Sugar is analysed in the
following manner : —Having been polarized, the sample
is burnt till reduced to what is termed in French cendres
(cinders), which are supposed to consist of the salts. As
we have already seen, one degree of salt destroys five of
crystallizable sugar. Therefore, when the burning is
completed, the quantity of cendres remaining in the vessel
is multiplied by five, and the result being deducted from
the degree of polarization, the remainder is the degree of
purity. Thus, if Sugar has polarized 95‘25, and the
cendres weigh F 42, it is concluded that 100 kilogrammes
of this quality will give 88T5 in loaves, since F 42 multi-
plied by five becomes 7TO, and 7TO deducted from the
polarization degree (95 - 25) leaves 88T5.
It may be added here that to detect the presence of iron
in Sugar, tannin in a solution of Sugar may be used ; and
to show that of salt, a solution of nitrate of silver similarly
applied.


Chapter IV.
REASONS FOR CULTIVATING AND MANU-
FACTURING BEET IN ENGLAND AND
IRELAND.
Many parts of England are excellently adapted for the
successful growth of Beet, but experience has taught us
that Ireland especially is the country of bulbs, even if
there judicious tillage would not produce, as it does in
other parts of the United Kingdom, a harvest equal, if
not superior, to that in any part of the Continent. The
statistics of recent years show also that this has been
increasingly recognised by its landlords and farmers, who
now grow less grain, turning their attention more and
more to root crops and grazing. Flax also is cultivated
now more extensively than ever. As the Beetroot is most
profitably grown where these views prevail, it follows that
what in 1851 was shown to suit her farmers, is now still
more advantageous to Ireland.
Beet as an alternate crop is eminently suited to wheat,
flax, and turnips, all of which are then more abundant.
That this is especially so with wheat is agreed by all who
have made the experiement.
Sir Robert Kane, in the valuable report to which
allusion has been made, referred to the doubt which had
been expressed whether Ireland possessed sufficient of the
solar heat for the production of saccharine in the Beet-
root, and replied to it satisfactorily. The fact is that this
bulb flourishes only in the temperate zones, such as the
north of France, the north of Germany, Russia, &c. The
growers generally entertain a great dread lest too much
heat should injure it, as they do also of too great moisture.
The sky of Ireland is continually overcast, and the amount
of light greatly intercepted, which circumstance is adverse
to the successful growth of wheat. Thick fogs, in the
harvest months, constantly cover the country, and retard
the ripening action of the sun; hence, blights and failures
of the grain crops are frequent. And not only is the
produce, or quantity , of the cereal crops deficient, the


quality is on the whole inferior in its chemical and organic
constituents to that of similar harvests in Eastern and
Southern Europe. But Beet does not need a brilliant
sky, with much light and heat. Light has comparatively
little to do with producing its saccharine matter, for this
is formed, not in the portion above ground (where the
saline particles gather), but in that beneath. A moist
climate, with moderate sun, is what it requires, and such
is the climate of Ireland, As the average of inches of
rain falling yearly there is similar to that in France and
Belgium, being, however, distributed over a greater
number of days, it is clear that in this respect the climate
is even more suitable. With regard to the cost of land
and labour, the writer has made careful enquiries in
France and Germany, where, in the Beet districts, it has
been steadily rising during late years; and he believes that
suitable land may be obtained as low or lower in England
and Ireland than in those countries, where an English
statute acre cannot be leased under from Two Pounds Ten
Shillings to Four Pounds. In those countries the ex-
tension and known profitableness of this industry have
greatly benefited the landowners, raising the value to a
figure quite unobtainable previously. Labour also costs,
in those countries, about the same as here, farm labourers
receiving from One Shilling and Sixpence to Two Shil-
lings per day, and factory hands Two Shillings and Six-
pence to Three Shillings. Taxes are quite as high in
Austria, France, and the Zollverein as with us. We
obtain coals at less and guano and other manures at prices
no higher than are paid on the Continent. Our facilities
for transport, by road, canal, or railway are certainly not
inferior to those enjoyed abroad ; those for obtaining
cheap and good machinery are unquestionably superior.
As regards arrangements for collecting the duty, enquiries
made in official quarters show that the authorities are pre-
pared to do all in their power to lessen any difficulties
which may arise. But there is no reason to fear these.
The Beet Sugar Company, formed in 1851, found that, in
this respect, the necessary steps could be taken at very
slight expense and inconvenience, and whether the duty
be collected on the root, or on the syrup, or on the Sugar
manufactured, the Government would no doubt see that


the plans adopted were those which entailed least trouble
to the manufacturer and least expense in collection.
The arrangements for disposal of the roots, if made
with care, must originate with the manufacturer, since
until a market for them presents itself, the farmers can
scarcely be expected to commence growing them. Various
plans are open to manufacturers. The juice can be
extracted from the roots in small manufactories erected in
districts where the farmers have- pledged themselves to
grow a certain quantity, prepared for removal, and then
conveyed to refineries at a distance. Or large works can
be built on the spot for the complete production of Sugar,
the farmers still selling their roots to the manufacturers.
But it would be far more advantageous if, as we have
shown is the case in many parts of the Continent, the
entire enterprise could be carried through by one person
or one Company, for in this way only is it certain that no
hitch in the various arrangements will disorganise and
discourage all concerned.
In Germany and in France, it is usual to find the land
leased by manufacturing Companies, who, by the com-
mand of capital which co-operation secures, are enabled
to pursue the same system, and obtain equally favourable
returns. Were one of the many wealthy landowners in
England or Ireland to act similarly to the Austrian mag-
nates referred to, or to the late Count de Morny, the writer
is confident that he would enormously benefit himself,
while, at the same time, the whole population of the
district would share in the advantage. The undertaking
is eminently one in which these gentlemen are best quali-
fied to take the lead. There is no known department of
industry where unlimited extension combines so well with
profitable working, for it comprises not only the growing
of the root, and the manufacture and refining of raw
sugar, but also the distilling of spirits, the manufacture of
pot ashes from the refuse, the growing of wheat and other
crops, and the feeding of cattle. Ordinary individual
enterprise is unequal to such a task, but not so the aris-
tocracy of these Islands. And while that aristocracy
embraces the owners of possessions such as are in the
hands of the Marquis of Westminster, the Earl of Derby,
the Duke of Bedford, the Duke of Argyle, the Duke of


Devonshire, the Duke of Leinster, the Earl of Mayo, and
Lord Dufferin, not to mention many others, it is not un-
reasonable to hope that from it will come, if not the first
impetus, at least the encouragement which shall ensure a
fair and patient trial, and the lucrative results which can-
not fail to follow.
“ I have studied the question of Beetroot manufacture
in England and Ireland,” writes one of the largest conti-
nental manufacturers, “ and believe I can assure you
that it would be a great success. I am, however, afraid
that there is no one with sufficient knowledge of the
matter to carry out the undertaking to a successful issue,
which I regret the more because if once tried and found
unsuccessful your countrymen may be unreasonably dis-
couraged from further prosecuting this profitable branch
of commercial industry.” This we have seen was the case
in 1851.
In Germany, the various companies and individuals
interested in Beetroot have formed local and national
associations for mutual aid, by periodical conferences, the
compilation of statistics, and the publication of a monthly
journal (the “ Zeitschrift des Vereines fur die Rubenzucker-
Industrie im Zollverein”) in which are to be found the
most minute details of every matter connected with it. A
similar organization exists among the 420 manufacturers
in France, where a weekly newspaper (“ Journal des
Fabricants de Sucre,”) and a monthly journal (“ La Sucre-
rie Indigene”) furnish like information ; and both have
been exceedingly useful.
Full information can thus be obtained with ease, and
skilled managers may be engaged from Germany, under
whose intelligent direction the growth of root and per-
centage of Sugar could be relied on to be greater than are
obtained abroad, as was demonstrated by Sir Robert
Kane, Professor Sullivan, and M. Alphonse Gages.
These gentlemen stated that the quantity grown in Ireland
had been sixteen to forty tons per statute acre. They
obtained a per-centage in some instances of sixteen per
cent, (equal to that of the Sugar Cane), and in many
others superior to any the Beet had previously yielded
abroad, and they expressed their conviction that in the
course of agricultural and scientific progress Beet gene-


rally would be made to yield as much as its rival. Whe-
ther their expectation will be realised time must show.
But meanwhile it is significant that since 1852 the per-
centage obtained from it has largely increased, while the
cost of extraction is now less than it then was.
Sir R. Kane’s report stated that Lord Talbot de Mala-
hide estimated the cost per statute acre of growing Beet
on his Irish estate as follows :
£ s. d.
Three ploughings 1 8 0
Four harrowings 0 13 6
Four rollings 0 6 0
Opening and closing drills 0 15 0
Carting manure 1 0 6
Sowing seed 0 1 6
Hoeing, weeding, and seed 0 10 0
45 tons of stable-yard manure, at 2 s. 6d.. 512 6
Pulling, carting home, and clamping 1 14 8
12 1 8
Deduct value of leaves, 12 tons at 3s. 4c?.. 2 0 0
10 1 8
Add rent, taxes, &c 3 4 0
£l3 5 8
The produce was between forty-eight and fifty-two tons
per acre, showing an average cost of five shillings and six-
pence farthing per ton.
An interesting communication on this subject was in-
serted in the Mark-lane Express , 4th October, 1852, and
the Farmer s Magazine , of the same month, by Mr. James
Reeve, of Leatherhead, Surrey, and he therein states that,
after a lengthened experience of Beet cultivation, he has
strong confidence in it as a highly remunerative rotation
crop.
Mr. Reeve tells his readers that four of his fields
yielded in 1851 (which was considered throughout Eng-
land a more unsuitable season for bulbs than any period
within the preceding ten years)—


Tons. Cwt. Lbs.
White Silesian, per acre - - 38 17 96
Orange globe, ditto - - - 32 18 16
Rose pink, ditto - - - - 3110 9
Mangel wurzel - - - 39 13 6
And lie gives as follows the preparation of five acres of
these roots :—-
A Fallow, five acres —
Four times ploughed
Twice scarified - -
Twice drag-harrowed
Twice small, ditto-
Two rollings - -
Drilling - - -
Forty-two loads of yard manure
Twenty-two cwt. of salt-
Six cwt. of superphosphate
296 bushels of ashes
Carting and spreading
Five hoeings
Rent, taxes, &c.
That even forty tons per acre may be obtained is
deducible from the success of Mr, James Birch, of Sefton,
in cultivating Mangel Wurzel last year, as from the
Journal of the Manchester and Liverpool Agricultural
Society it appears that this gentleman grew forty-seven
tons seven hundred weight and sixteen pounds per acre of
that root.
Richard Noverre Bacon, Esq., of Norwich, author of
an able report on the agriculture of Norwich, furnished
Sir R. Kane with the following estimate of the cost per
acre in that country :
£ s. d.
Three ploughings - - - - 0180
Two scarifyings - - - - 0 4 0
Twelve borrowings - - - -060
Ridging up and closing, to cover
manure - - - - - 07 0
Twelve tons of farm-yard manure, and
labour - - - - - - 300
Rolling, planting, and seed - - 0 7 0


Hoeing and singling -
0
10
0
Cutting off tops and taking up -
0
6
6
Loading, carting, and storing -
0
8
0
Waste of straw to cover, and cover-
ing up
0
3
0
7
9
6
Rent, taxes, and tithes -
1
12
0
£ s. d.
Guano or other artificial manure -10 0
£9 1 6
The expense in Suffolk was variously estimated, the
average being eight pounds eleven shillings and sixpence;
but the figures for Norfolk and Suffolk make no mention
of the expense attending cartage to storehouse or railway.
What the roots would now cost the farmer per ton is a
question which the writer must treat with caution, for
reasons already given. Nevertheless, after communi-
cating with practical men, and having minutely examined
reliable figures, he is firmly of opinion that the estimates
published by Professor Sullivan were correct: that with
good cultivation, the ordinary yield would not be less than
twenty tons per acre, but probably more ; that good
ground, well cultivated, would produce even thirty to
forty tons. Allowing a liberal margin for working ex-
penses, the cost of Beetroot will not exceed eight shillings,
or at the utmost, ten shillings per ton, in Ireland. The
normal price paid by French manufacturers is sixteen
shillings per ton, at which figure Sugar could be pro-
duced in these kingdoms for twenty shillings per cwt.
The weight of the crop will depend on the system
pursued. As has been explained in these pages, good
roots will yield more Sugar than a larger weight of
indifferent quality—a point which is elaborately illustrated
in the Report.
Whether Beet will, on the whole, prove more remunera-
tive to our farmers than Wheat, is a question which, with
the information the author has furnished, they will have
little difficulty in deciding. It is evident that the
antiquated idea that it exhausts the soil is an error. It


has been shown that it benefits other crops, especially
Wheat itself, and that cattle are much more advan-
tageously kept where it is cultivated. But even without
these collateral arguments in its favour, Beet will be
found profitable.
The expense of manufacturing the root was also ex-
amined with great care and minuteness by Professor
Sullivan, who, in the pamphlet he published in 1852,
elaborately stated the result of his enquiries, including the
cost of the machinery then in use in a Prussian establish-
ment. He took the produce of the root at only five per
cent, (though at that time seven per cent, was being ob-
tained in Germany), and having allowed ten per cent, for
wear and tear of machinery, and made all other proper
deductions, showed that white Sugar could be produced
in Ireland for £2l 18s. 3 d. per ton. Equally favourable,
if not more so, would be the case now, will be evident
from the following figures. They have been collected
with care, and from the best sources, by the present writer.


ings and machinery,
10 per cent, on £20,000 2000
Ground rent of land (or
interest), taxes, insu-
rance, lighting, &c... 1000
Bags and cartage to store,
rail, or canal, say—
carting 1900 tons
sugar and molasses at
2s £190
EXPENSES AND RETURNS
TONS OF
Expenses.
20,000 tons root at 165... 16,000
General expenses (char-
coal, wages, and
management) 9000
Interest on capital in-
vested in buildings
and machinery, say 5
per cent, on £20,000. 1000
Interest on outlay during
six months’ season of
purchase, manufacture
and sale, say £24,000
at 5 per cent 600
Wear and tear of build-
Bags for 1300 tons
sugar, at 6s. ... 890
Barrels for 600 tons
molasses, at 155, 460
1030
IN MANUFACTURING 20,000
BEETROOT.
1300 tons sugar (at 6|
per cent.) at 245. per
cwt 31,200
Returns.
600 tons molasses, in
casks, at ss. per cwt.. 3000
4000 tons pulp (20 per
cent, of root), at 20s.
per cwt
( a ) The spent charcoal
and scum of the syrup
are not estimated,
though they have some
value.
(b) If the molasses be
distilled on the pre-
mises, a further profit
will accrue.
(c) By growing his own
roots the manufacturer
will save the farmer’s
profit on them.
( d ) 6J per cent, is named
only as a basis for cal-
culation. More may
be confidently looked
for.
Profit 7570
£38,200
The profit thus shown
quarters per cent, on the
tional half per cent, of Sr
seven and a half per cent.
£38,200
be twenty-four and three
ly (£30,630), Each addi-
vill add to it £2400, about
re outlay (£2
Sugar will ac
nt, additional
Thus, if eight per
cent, of Sugar be extracted, the profit will be forty-eight
per cent.
The importance of the industrial interests which would
be created by the introduction of Beet into the United
Kingdom will be at once apparent if it be remembered


From 400,000 acres, each twenty tons root,
yielding seven and a half* per cent, of
Sugar—12,000,000 cwt., at 24s
14,400,000
200,000 pipes, equal to 20,000,000 gallons,
strong spirits, 60° over-proof, at 2s. 3 d
2,250,000
2,000,000 tons of pulp, at 20s
2,000,000
40,000 tons potash, at £25
1,000,000
Leaves, radicles, &c., from 400,000 acres, at 20s.
400,000
Scum and refuse
100,000
Annual value of Beet manufactures
£20,150,000
that were only 400,000 acres devoted to its cultivation
there would he produced :
£
Why, then, are we without Beet Sugar made by our-
selves ? Why do we continue year after year paying to
Germany, France, Belgium, Austria, vast sums of money
for an article which could be more advantageously sup-
plied to us by our own countrymen ?
We have seen that the soil of England and Ireland is
suited to the production of Beetroot, and that it can be
grown and manufactured at a cost which will leave a
good profit for all concerned. There are, however,
various other important considerations in favour of its
being introduced amongst us, to which attention must be
directed.
1. Agriculture is in our days advancing with gigantic
strides. The spread of free trade principles is gradually
removing the shackles which once restricted every enter-
prising movement. Year after year it is understood that
the land can, and it is determined that the land shall,
yield more. Chemistry has taught those who cultivate it
to obtain constantly increasing harvests. And results
which sixty years ago were regarded as satisfactory are
now looked on as absolutely discouraging. From all
which it follows that such articles as Beet—requiring the
careful culture and the abundant assistance which are
available, and giving in return more remunerative
harvests—must increase in use with our farmers. France,
Germany, Austria, Belgium, have already discerned this
* H ere seven and a half per cent, is assumed as an average, as there can
be no doubt that in a very few years this will become the minimum, even if
not immediately attained in this kingdom.


truth and conformed to its teachings. Stimulated by
their example—aided by the record of their experience—
England and Ireland must follow in their steps —let us
hope that in this, as in many others matters, the follower
will soon become the leader.
2. It would be a new branch of industry, adding to the
internal resources of the kingdom, and rendering us more
independent than now of foreign aid. There can be no
doubt of the importance this fact would assume in time of
war, for then, as far as one most generally used article of
daily diet is concerned, we should be comparatively
undisturbed by the depredations of hostile cruisers or the
working of a new Continental System. Our Sugar would
be grown within our own borders, and however the pro-
duction in other countries might fluctuate, or the quantity
usually received thence by us might be disturbed, 400,000
acres of Irish or English land would supply the wants of
these kingdoms, and would, at the same time, aid in
solving what Baron Liebig has justly termed “ the most
urgent problem of the present day ; ” namely, how to
produce from a limited surface a larger supply of bread
and meat to satisfy the requirements of a constantly
increasing population.
It would interfere but little with our labour markets,
as at present constituted, except in furnishing good
employment to large number of those who most need it,
and this too at that period of the year when employment
is scarcest, for the Beet harvest commences when the
Wheat harvest has terminated. Thus it would not
interfere with the one which most imperatively demands
abundant labour. Its manufacture into Sugar is carried
on during the winter, when painters, bricklayers, and
most of the artizans connected with the building trade
are unemployed. It would afford to large numbers of
these a means of supporting themselves which now does
not exist. Thus it is that in the Beet districts of France
and Germany there is little or no pauperism. There the
approach of this harvest is hailed with general delight,
just as in the South of France the approach of the
vintage is the occasion of universal activity and pleasure.
No sooner has one medium of self-support passed by
than another presents itself, and throughout the year is


witnessed what monarchs, statesmen, and philanthropist*
most long to see —a contented and prosperous community.
4. Nor is it a small matter that, owing to the spread of
this branch of agricultural and manufacturing industry
being, by its very nature, confined to the country, it takes
away from young people the dangerous necessity for
resorting to large towns, which, when in unrestricted
operation, often produces disease and poverty and vice.
The Beet factories being scattered at intervals over the
districts where the root is grown, instead of being all
crowded into a small space, land for the erection of
dwelling-houses does not run up to the oppressive value
it realises in large towns ; consequently, the population is
not crowded into small unhealthy habitations, but is
comfortably accommodated in numerous large villages,
where the advantages and pleasures of a country life are
usually combined with many of those to be found only in
towns.
5. There is, perhaps, no other branch of industry which
so utilises materials, and provides variety of products, and
this advantage could be developed to a far greater extent
in this kingdom than it yet has been abroad, inasmuch as
the abundant means of communication, the practised skill
of our agriculturists and manufacturers, the overflowing
capital at command, the largeness of our farms in
England, and the great influence of the landlords in
Ireland, are calculated, and would combine with the
singularly favourable nature of the soil and climate, to
induce vigorous, economical, and patient management,
from which would flow the utmost and most varied uses
of the root. Not only does the introduction of Beet as
an alternate crop render it unnecessary for the ground
to occasionally lie fallow; not only does it immensely
increase the other crops, but it becomes the source of
various other rivulets of wealth, which, when rightly con-
ducted, all unite to increase the means of him who
possesses them. When our farmers grow Beet, they will
add to their own prosperity. But they will do more.
The neighbourhood of their farms will become dotted with
Sugar-manufactories, and with distilleries, where constant
employment for the population will be provided. The
usual results will be seen, in the reduction of poor rates.


in the spread of intelligence, in the increase of cheerful
contentment, and in the diminution of social jealousies
and wretchedness.
6. Especially would this be the case in the Sister Isle,
to which, as being highly suited to the introduction of
this combination of advantages, the author, like all other
thinkers on the subject, turns, as the part of this empire
in which it is most needed, and is most likely to be
welcome. Norfolk and Suffolk, Devonshire, Kent, &c.
will, he doubts not, in time add Beet to the long list of
rich harvests which already make glad the hearts of their
farmers. But above and beyond these, must Irish agri-
culturists, and all who can influence them, seek to plant
it deeply on Irish soil. While the climate is equally
suitable, the land is cheaper, and labour of the right
sort is abundant. Wheat, the best crop to alternate
with it, needs improvement there more than any
part of England. Already, Ireland has a large trade
in spirits, which would vastly increase were this
additional material for their manufacture to be pro-
vided. Flax, also, which is an excellent third with
Wheat and Beet, is established in popular favour ;
and while its refuse improves the Beet, that of the
Beet improves it. At present, also, all eyes are turned
to Ireland. Statesmen view with unusual favour all
attempts to develope her resources, and arrest the emi-
gration of her sons. And landlords show unprecedented
readiness to sympathise with their tenants.
Holland, although she draws from Java ample supplies
of the best Cane Sugar in the world, and fosters its use for
home consumption, nevertheless manufactures that of the
Beet on a yearly increasing scale.
The United States, after having for many years pro-
duced Cane Sugar to a large extent, have commenced to
manufacture that of its modern rival. A company, with
a considerable capital, was formed in 1866, to develope
this new branch of enterprise, and others have since been
formed. Nine per cent, of Sugar has been obtained.
And so favourably is it regarded by Congress that, setting
aside its protectionist prepossessions, it has admitted duty
free for twelve months all machinery needed for this
purpose.


Australia also has commenced. Last year the author
forwarded a supply of white Silesian seed to Adelaide, and
this year to Hobart Town ; and though it is questionable
whether that climate is not too hot and dry, Australian
farmers and manufacturers are so earnest in the matter
that they are determined to succeed, if success be possible.
Canada, too, is keenly alive to the subject ; and her
press strongly and continually urges the introduction of
the Beetroot industry.
But here, where more than in any other country it
might be conducted with success, its mention has for
many years fallen neglected on the public ear, and even
now is received in many quarters with doubt or apathy.
During the season of 1865-6, we imported from France
and Belgium alone 50,000 tons of Beet Sugar, and from
other countries about 30,000 tons. Of the large quantity
of refined Sugar we imported, at least 25,000 tons were
made from Beet. For these purchases we paid nearly
three millions sterling. But this money might have gone
to native producers, rather than foreigners. Instead of
turning to the Continent for Sugar, we might have turned
to Ireland. Nay, more ; the whole of the Sugar con-
sumed in these Islands, representing a value of from
twelve to fifteen millions, might have been supplied by
our own countrymen, and the further vast outlay con-
nected with its production might have benefited and
enriched this instead of other lands.
In view of such possibilities, and in the hope that as the
attention of many influential persons is now fixed on the
subject, they will be fairly weighed, the writer again com-
mends his few pages to the serious consideration of all
who desire to develope the resources and advance the
prosperity of these kingdoms. He will only add that,
since he commenced to write, much information has come
to hand showing that his statements concerning the
amount of Beet crops on the Continent, and the per-
centage of Sugar now obtainable, are below the facts ;
but he has not altered these, preferring to simply mention
here that they may be thus regarded.
JAMES BAESARD,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA.




