

A
LETTER,
TO THE REV. J. TAYLOR, A. M.
CURATE OF BRADFORD.
BY THE REV. FRANCIS MURPHY,
IN
Reply to his Unwarrantable Attack
ON THE
DEDICATORY SERMON,
PREACHED BY
THE RIGHT REV. DR. BAINES,
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW CATHOLIC CHAPEL, BRADFORD.
"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.”—Exod. xx.16.
Bradford:
Printed by J. Stanfield, Westgate;
AND SOLD BY KEATING AND BROWN, LONDON; BOLLAND AND TODDS, YORK;
P. WHITTLE, PRESTON; ROCELIFFE, LIVERPOOL; STANFIELD, BRADFORD;
AND OTHER BOOKSELLERS.
M.DCCCXXVII.


The Letter of the present venerable proteslant Bishop of Norwich, to Hugh O’Connor, Esq.
Mountjoy.square, Dublin,
Cheltenham, Bth January, 1827,
Dear Sir,
Accept my grateful acknowledgments for the trouble which you hare had, in
procuring for me an hundred copies of Mr. Wyse’s “ Address to the People of England.”
“If prejudice had either eye or ear,” this Address must be productive of the most benefi-
cial effects; at all events it cannot fail to put a slop in some degree, to the FALSE AND
INSOLENT ASSERTIONS OF THOSE BIGOTED INDIVIDUALS, WHO IN DEFIANCE OP
JUSTICE AND COMMON CHARITY, persist iu imputing to more than five millions of their
fellow-subjects and fellow-citizens, religious tenets which they have repeatedly disavowed,
and practices, of which, by an uniform conduct they have proved and now prove, their
abhorrence.
Believe me sincerely yours, &c. &c.
H. NORWICH.
To Hugh O’Connor, Esq. Mountjoy-square, East Dublin.
“ Forgery, I blush for the honour of Protestantism while I write it, seems to
have been peculiar to the reformed,,,, I look in vain for one of those accursed
outrages of imposition amongst the disciples of Popery”—Dr, Whitaker,
ENTERED AT STATIONER’S HALL.


A
LETTER, &C.
REVEREND STB,
A Pamphlet has just been put into my hands, entitled
“ The Errors, Corruptions, and Claims of the Church of Rome
exhibited in a Sermon preached by P. A. Baines, D. D. at the
Dedication of the Catholic Chapel at Bradford, exposed and refuted.
Had this pamphlet been the production of an obscure individual, or
some itinerant field preacher, feasting his delighted readers with tbe
ever grateful topic of the errors of Popery, I would pity his ravings
and his ignorance, and treat such a publication with the silent con-
tempt which it deserved. But when I find that the author of it is
the Rev. J. Taylor, Curate of Bradford, Master of Arts, &c. &c.
a gentleman whose very education and rank in life, as a Minister of
the Established Church, must give great weight to any thing coming
from his pen, it becomes an almost indispensable duty on my part, to
protect both myself and the Catholics of this town, from that ridicule
and hatred, which a pamphlet such as this,' is calculated and perhaps
intended to procure.
Although an enlightened public are daily opening their eyes to
the truth, and at length acknowledging that they have been most
shamefully deceived with regard to the real tenets of the Catholic
Church, yet still there are many persons who cannot so easily lay
aside their early prejudices ; prejudices which have constantly been
kept alive, by every kind of inflammatory publication, from the
penny tract to the folio volume. When, therefore, a pamphlet such
as this meets their eye, abounding with the same heavy charges,
which have a thousand times been advanced and a thousand times
denied, their former erroneous opinions are confirmed, —the spark
of hatred and animosity nearly extinct is again enkindled, —every
thing which a gentleman like you asserts, is of course firmly believed;
for they cannot for a moment be persuaded, that a clergyman of a
church shot like a bolt from heaven, of a minister of the God of
truth could deliberately advance a falsehood; nor can they conceive
it possible, that a Master of Arts should be ignorant of the important
subject of which he is treating.
It seems then, that your own burning zeal for the interests of the
true religion, and the solicitations of a few esteemed friends, have
at length induced you, after a consideration of eighteen months, to
overcome your natural diffidence and modesty, and after the throes


and pangs of a year and half’s protracted labour, you at length
usher into the world, not the strong and healthful offspring which
was expected, hut like the mountain in the fable, you at last bring
forth the insignificant mouse. Burning with shame for what you
supposed the cowardly conduct of your Rev. Brethren, the veteran
host of Israel, who shrunk back into the camp at the appearance of
the Philistine, you alone, like the youthful David, have had the
courage to single out from the ranks, and with nothing but a pebble
and a sling you threaten to level this modern Goliah with the ground.
You call upon other champions to pursue the enemy with more pon-
derous armour; you advise that the arsenals should be searched for
the rusty armour of the stoutest warriors of old, in order to guard
with vigilance and resolution the sacred citadel, the liequest of
illustrious reformers, 'purchased with death and ratified with blood.
All this, it must be acknowledged is very fine language; enough to
strike dumb with astonishment the unlettered crowd; but recollect
the proverb, “it is not all gold that glistens it is not empty decla-
mation that will now satisfy a liberal public, already sufficiently de-
ceived ; they want argument, sound reasoning, and authority; nor
does it require any great degree of talent to put together a parcel of
high sounding words, forming a splendid sentence on the whole, but
rank nonsense when it comes to be analysed.
I am very far from blaming that laudable zeal which makes a man
defend that religion or that church, which he conscientiously believes
to be the true one. The Catholic who conscientiously believes the
real presence of Christ in the sacrament, and the Protestant who
conscientiously denies it, should both be allowed to defend their
respective opinions by every fair argument in their power; and both
should be applauded, whilst they endeavour in the spirit of Christian
charity, to bring over each other to the belief of those truths which
they firmly believe to have been revealed by Christ. If then, zeal
like this, founded on charity, which makes us solicitous for the
salvation of our neighbour, be praiseworthy even in the Catholic
or Protestant layman, how much more is it to be commended
in the Minister of God, placed as the Apostle says, “in the
church, to take care of the flock confided to his
you, therefore, are firmly persuaded that prayers to the saints are
idolatrous, —that the term of Mother of God is unscriptural and
unwarranted, —that absolution from sin as practised in the Catholic
Church is abominable and corruptive of the soul, —that the doctrine
of purgatory as explained by Dr. Baines, is nothing but a fiend
dressed out in peacock’s feathers—you have a right, of course, to
speak and write against these abominable doctrines; yon are to be
applauded for that pastoral anxiety which you have evinced for a
beloved flock; for those sleepless nights which you have spent those


eighteen months, in making preparations to defend them; but in the
height of your religious zeal, you should, not outstep the bounds of
truth by asserting a falsehood ; nor grossly misrepresent the doctrine
of your neighbour, in order to accomplish your own purposes.
If, therefore, you in the defence of your own church, have con ■
sidered yourself justified in misrepresenting the doctrines of another,
you will not I hope be displeased, nor consider it presumptuous in
me, if with a strict adherence to truth I endeavour to vindicate
mine, and to prove your profound ignorance of every article on
which you have written; this being the only means to exculpate you
from a far heavier charge.
In the very first page, you set out by styling the Catholic Church
an old and inveterate enemy, which once ravaged the land, and sunk
all Christian nations in ignorance, idolatry, and slavery. Were you
really serious when you made such an assertion ? Did you reflect
that what you were writing was going to appear before the public,
and would infallibly prove, that a Master of Arts might be a most
wretched Historian ? The Catholic religion ravaged the land ! Did
the Catholic religion ravage the land when it founded the Universi-
ties of Oxford and Cambridge, and left you those treasures of learn-
ing which they contain ; when it erected York Minster, and those
other beautiful churches and cathedrals, which every where adorn
the face of the kingdom, and are the just admiration of every foreign-
er who beholds them ? Did the Catholic religion ravage the land
when it built those noble Abbeys of Kirkstall and Bolton, and
hundreds of others ? not as Protestant writers have maliciously as-
serted, to be the storehouses of lazy monks, but to be the happy
and peaceable retreats of a virtuous body of men—dividing their
time between God and their neighbour—sharing the revenues of
their monasteries with the widow and the orphan, doing away with
the necessity of poor-rates—during the day instructing the youth of
the neighbouring villages in every branch of human learning without
fee or reward—and at night throwing open their gates to the house-
less stranger or the broken-hearted child of affliction ? Did the
Catholic religion ravage the land when the Catholic Barons, with
Cardinal Langton, the Catholic Archbishop of Canterbury at their
head, extorted from the tyrant King John, the Magna Charta, the
great bulwark of English liberty ? Did the Catholic religion ravage
the land, when its Bishops and its Dignitaries expended their super-
fluous revenues, not upon the support of wives and families (for
they had none) but upon the repairs of churches, and the mainten-
ance of (he poor ? Did the Catholic religion ravage the land when
for nearly a thousand years, all were united in the one bond of faith,
all hearts linked together in charity and love ? whilst now they are
divided into so many sects and parties, that even within the circle


of the same family, yon will scarcely find two agreed in tho
same creed.
It seems also, that this old inveterate enemy, sunk all Christian
nations in ignorance and idolatry. This is another specimen of your
historical knowledge. Who rescued this country at two distinct
periods, from the darkness of idolatry ?—Catholic missionaries,
Fugatius and Damianus, sent over by Pope Eleutherius, in the
second century, and St. Augustin, with his fellow labourers, sent
over by Pope Gregory in the beginning of the sixth. Who
rescued Germany and Poland from idolatry ?—St. Boniface and
St. Adalbert, Bishop of Prague. Denmark was converted by St.
Poppo,—Sweden by St. Sigifrid, —Lesser Russia by Sts. Bruno
and Boniface, —and the Muscovites by Missionaries sent from
Greece; hut recollect at a time when the Greek church was in
communion with the Roman See. —Norway was converted chiefly
through the labours of Pope Adrian the Fourth, before he was rais-
ed to the Pontificate.—St. Francis Xavier, converted fifty-two
kingdoms to the faith of Christ in Japan and India, and baptised a
million of Indians with his own hand; —and St. Lewis Bertrand,
with Martin of Valentia and Bartholomew La Casas, converted
most part of Mexico and Peru. These thousands of souls, these
vast kingdoms, were all reclaimed from idolatry by Catholic mission-
aries, sent for the express purpose by the supremo head of tho
Catholic Church: and yet you endeavour to pawn upon the public,
this notorious untruth, that the Catholic religion sunk all Christian
nations in ignorance, idolatry, and slavery. No wonder for a
generous public to be prejudiced against Catholics, in tho manner
they are. N o wonder that a late celebrated Protestant divine. Dr.
Whitaker, Vicar of Blackburn, should declare that he was almost
ashamed to show his face on account of the notorious forgeries of
Protestant writers,* when the very masters in Israel, the professed
teachers of truth, are now become the circulators of the grossest
falsehoods.
As a proof of your assertions, you refer us to wretched and un-
happy Ireland. You may well call her wretched and unhappy;
There is not, perhaps, a more unfortunate country on the globe of
the earth. But to what is this (o be attributed ? I can perhaps
throw a little light on the subject. It is because the last farthing is
squeezed from the hard earned pittance of tho poor Catholics, in
* “ Forgery, I blush for the honour of Protestantism while I write it, seems to
have been peculiar to the reformed.,. .1 look in vain for one of those accursed
outrages of imposition amongst the disciples of Popery.”—Whitaker Vindic. of
Mary. Vol. iii.p. 2. See also pp. 45 and 46, &c. “Forgery appears to have
been the peculiar disease of Protestantism.”—lbid. p. 54.


order to swell the enormous revenues of a Protestant clergy, who
(with the exception, of a few worthy and liberal ministers) give
them no other return but abuse and contempt, and scurrilous pam-
phlets. It is because through Protestant influence, almost every situ-
ation under government, from the judge who sits on the bench to
the petty constable who attends in his court, is conferred upon fa-
vorite orangemen, whilst the Catholics are excluded as a proscribed
race, from almost every blessing of the constitution. Need we be
astonished at the wretched state of Ireland, when we consider the
persecuting system which has been so long carried on against her P
when we consider those sanguinary penal statutes, which were
enacted by a Protestant government, in order to destroy for ever, if
possible, the very name of a Catholic. Until his late gracious
majesty repealed the most part of those penal laws, no Catholic
dared to teach or keep a school under pain of perpetual imprison-
ment, nor send his child to be educated in a foreign country in the
principles of the Catholic faith, under pain of being deprived of all
the property, personal or real, which they possessed. If a Catholic
absented himself from a Protestant church on Sundays and Holy-
days, he forfeited twenty pounds for every month he staid away,
and if he refused to forsake the religion of his forefathers, and be-
come a Protestant, he could be transported for life by four justices;
and if he refused to go, or come back without the licence of the
king, he was considered guilty of felony, and suffered death without
the benefit of clergy.* And all this recollect, for no other reason
than because he remained in the Catholic faith and acted according
to the dictates of his conscience. When Oliver Cromwell invaded
Ireland, he set the same price on a priest’s head as he did upon a
wolf’s, and declared (hat he had a commission from heaven to ex-
terminate the Catholics, similar to the one which the Israelites had
received against the inhabitants of Canaan. At present there is a
law in force, by which a Catholic priest is subject to a fine of five
hundred pounds or imprisonment for life, should he marry a Catholic
and a Protestant, before the marriage ceremony is first performed in
the Church of England: and it is not many months ago since this
law was put in force against a Catholic clergyman, in one of the
northern counties of that kingdom. Ireland is unhappy indeed, but
for a very different reason from what you have assigned.
In the fifth page you labour hard to prove that the Catholic
Church is guilty of idolatry. You rest your argument on the words
of the Second Council of Nice, and those of the General Council
of Trent. In the first place you say, that the Council of Nice has
* Sec Judge Blackstone’s Commentaries, Vol. iv. p. 55.


declared that images may be had for the sake of worship, therefore
you conclude that the Council taught idolatry. Before I allow you
to come at once to this sweeping conclusion, permit me to ask you
what is the meaning of the word worship. Had you taken the
trouble of consulting Dr. Johnson’s Dictionary, you would have
there learned, that the word adoration, or worship, sometimes sig-
nifies merely an act of human respect, and consequently that we
are not always to understand by the word worship, that supreme
homage which is due to God alone. In the marriage ceremony of
the Church of England, the husband declares that he worships his
wife. An Alderman is addressed by the title of Worshipful, and a
Mayor by that of Right Worshipful. Now what answer would
you make to a Deist or an Infidel, who should take occasion from
those two expressions, to exclaim against the Church of England as
guilty of idolatry, in allowing a husband to worship his wife, or a
Mayor and Alderman to receive divine honors ? You would of
course deny the charge ; you would immediately set about explaining
the ambiguous meaning of the word, and the different manner in
which it should be understood, when applied to man and to God.
Allow the Council of Nice the same manner of getting out of the
difficulty, and there is an end to the objection. Look to your own
bible, read the Ist. Book of Chronicles, xxix. 20. In that chapter
we find these words. —■“ All the congregation blessed the Lord God
of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the
Lord and the King.” Is it not as evident as the noon-day, that
the word worship in this text bears two distinct meanings, for is it
possible that David would have suffered his nobles to worship him,
in the same manner as they worshipped the Lord. The very idea
is absurd; the worship therefore, given by the congregation of Israel
to the king, was a mere mark of human respect; but the worship
which they gave to the Lord was that supreme homage and adora-
tion which it would be the height of idolatry to give to any but
God alone. Therefore from the words of the Council, declaring
that Jesus Christ and his images are to be worshipped, you can no
more conclude that it was the command of the Council that the images
of Christ should be worshipped in the very same manner as Christ
himself, no more than you can conclude that when the Scriptures
say that the courtiers of David worshipped God and the king, they
therefore offered divine honour to both. But the best vindication of
those Councils are the words of those Councils themselves. The
Second Council of Nice, was held in the Year 786, for the express
purpose of stating precisely, the genuine doctrine of the Catholic
Church on the subject of images. “ Having,” says the Council,
“employed upon the subject all care and diligence, we decree that
“ holy and venerable images, whether formed in painted colours ot


k mosaic work, or of any other suitable materials, be set forth pub-
«lidv in the churches of God, whether on sacred vessels and vest-
ments, or on the walls and on tablets. For the more frequently the
“ eye is fixed upon these representations, the more powerfully is the
“ mind of the beholder raised to the remembrance and admiration of
«the originals. Also, that hiss and honorary adoration he given
“to them, not the true tcorship of Latreia, which according to our
“faith, belongs only to the divine nature,* but that incense and
“ lights be employed to honor them, according to the religious customs
“of oUr forefathers, in the same manner as is done to the figure of
« the precious and life-giving cross, the book of the Holy Gospels,
"and other sacred objects.”
Can there possibly be a clearer exposition of the nature of that
worship or respect which is to be paid to images. The Council
declares that they are not to be worshipped with that true worship of
Latreia, or divine worship, which according to the faith of the
Church belongs to God alone; only, that the same kind of honorary
adoration should be paid to them as was paid to the Book of the
Holy Gospels and othersacred objects; that is, that the same kind of
respect might be paid to theip, as pious Protestants now pay to a piece
of calf-skin and paper, which they respectfully kiss in a court of
justice ; that we might as lawfully bow down to the image of Christ
crucified as a mark of our respect, as his present Majesty and the
Bishops did so frequently to the altar in Westminster Abbey, on the
day of his coronation; and finally, that it is equally innocent for a
Catholic to bow down at the sight of Christ’s image, as it is for a
Protestant to bow down at the empty sound of his name.
Let us now hear how the Council of Trent explains itself. “The
" images of Christ, and of the Virgin Mother of God, and other
“Saints, may be had and retained, particularly in churches, and duo
“ honor and veneration may be given to them ; not that it is believed
“ that there exists in them any divinity or excellence on account of
“ which they are to be honoured ,or that any thing is to be asked of
"them or any confidence placed in them, as was anciently done by
“ the gentiles who trusted in idols, but because the honor which is
“ exhibited to them is referred to the originals, so that by means of
“the images which we kiss, and before which we uncover our heads
“and kneel, we adore Christ and venerate his Saints whose likeness
“ they bear.”—Concil. Trid-Sess. 25. Can you find much idolatry
in all this ?
But St. Thomas of Aquin, taught that equal worship was due to
* le ™ a g° as to the original St. Thomas taught no such doctrine;
Ka* TO.VTa.tf oa%OT\J.C'l KOI Tifj.YiTtx.riv rrpoa-xvvria'iy ovroyfinv ov fxtv Trv
KOTO, VtfTiv nfj,m aXn9imv XaTfnav J vtstci p o vn th* £t« svrn, &C.
B


if he did,' he would have had very little chance of being enrolled
in the calendar of the Saints; the calendar of idolaters would have
suited him much better; and there undoubtedly he would have long
since been placed by the Catholic Church, had ho broached the
doctrine which you attribute to him. But give him leave to
vindicate himself. “Idolatry,” says he, “is the greatest of
all crimes.”* “No worship or respect,” says'he, “is due to
the material image itself, because it is riot an intellectual being;”
and from this he concludes that any respect due to it, is
merely on account of the original which it represents.-]- As for
Cardinal Bellarmine, one quotation from him will clearly shew that he
had not the most distant idea of admitting divine worship being given
to images. “We declare with the Church,” says he, “ that the images
“of Christ and his saints are to be honoured, (as is declared in the
“ twenty-fifth Session of the Council of Trent) provided, however,
“ that no confidence be placed in them, nor any thing ashed of them,
“nor any divinity believed to exist in them; they only are to be Hon-
“ored on account of those whom they'represent to us.”J And again,
“ True divine worship is to he paid to Christ when he is adored as he
“is in himself, but not when he is adored under an image.” “Thus”
says he, “ the man who honors the servant of a king, honors the
king himself, but the honor which is given to the king when he is
honored in his own person, is very different from the honor which is
given him when he is honored in his servant.”|| And again, “An
image,” says ho, “is not to be adored with the same worship as
the original itself, no image is to ho adored with divine worship.”§
Now I ask you this simple question; How in the nameof religion
and charity, could you come forward before the public, and with
the most unblushing effrontery, openly maintain that the Catholic
Church taught idolatry to her followers, when you had before your
eyes all these passages of the Councils of Nice and Trent, and of Bellar-
mine and St. Thomas of Aquin, which I have just quoted. My religion,
which teaches me to love even my bitterest revilers, and to render
no man evil for evil, will not permit me to make use of the dignified
epithet of lying ■priest, which you have already so kindly bestowed
upon the Catholic ministry; nor will charity allow me to think so
wickedly of you, as to suppose that you have really read yourself
those writings to which you refer. No, I shall put this charitable
construction upon it; you have depended upon the extracts of bigoted
*■ Snmma 2a. Quest, xdv. art. 3. f Summi 3tla. Quest, xxv. art. 3. J Edit.
Ingolstadii, A. D, 1596, I)e imaginibus Sanctorum, lib. 20. c. 12, pag. 2238.
[| Ibidem, cap. 24, pag. 2274. § Imago per se et proprie non est adoranda eodem
cultu quo ipsum exemplar, et proinde nulla imago est adoranda cultu latriae per
»*et proprie. Cap. 24, pag. 2271.


writers, —you have copied from those who have gone before yon,—
and bv too close an attendance on their prejudiced volumes, you
have caught the disease with which they were infected, and invol-
untary forgery has been the consequence.
We are much indebted to you, for your kind endeavours to put
us upon a level with Jews and Pagans, because we kneel before the
images of out,crucified Redeemer. We kneel there, in order that
the sight of that object may bring to our recollection the excess of
those sufferings which our divine Lord so lovingly endured for us;
sufferings which unfortunately both you and I are too often inclined
to forget. But why were the Jews and Heathens justly called
idolaters, whilst they paid respect to images in which they believed
that there was no inherent divinity; the obvious reason is this, because
they intended, that all these outward marks of respect which they
paid to those images, should bo referred, not to one true and. living
God, but on the contrary to false Gods, or rather real demons,
whom they worshipped under those different figures and representa-
tions. Consequently every act of religious respect paid to the image
was an act of idolatry. The case is very different with the Catholic;
every mark of respect paid to the image of Christ crucified, is directly
referred to the great original who reigns in Heaven. Do you recol-
lect the religious respect which the Almighty himself required to be
paid to the ark, notwithstanding all his threats against those who
would give his glory to another. The Jews were commanded to
fall down prostrate as often as they appeared before it.* Oza was
struck dead for touching it irreveren fly. f With what respect and pomp
did David carry it into the city of Sion. And why was it command-
ed to the Jews that they should honor in this manner a chest of
wood covered with skins; because it was a religious memorial;
because to fall down prostrate before the ark was nothing else than
to adore that God of whose presence the ark was a figure. This is
clearly and beautifully expressed in those two hymns which were
appointed to be sung before it, one when it was raised up into the
air on the shoulders of the Levites.—“ Arise O Lord” &c. The
other when it was again lowered to the ground. —“ Return O Lord
to the multitude of the army of Why therefore shouldit not
be lawful in the same sense, and with the same intention, to treat
with religious respect the images of Christ and his saints, since every
mark of respect, like the respect given to the ark, is referred to the
prototypes which they represent.
The statue of St. Januarius, you tell us, is carried out at Naples
♦ Joshua, vii. -\ 2 Kinjs, vi. J Numbers, x.


by the Catholics as a preservative against the fiery eruptions of
Mount Vesuvius. Instead ot statue, you should have subsituted the
word relics, what objection can you have to it? Is it a crime that
the inhabitants of Naples should beg of Jesus Christ, for the sake of
his holy martyr, that he would preserve them from destruction ? Is
it idolatry to beg of God, who formerly promised to spare the five
cities of Sodom and Gomorrah for the sake of ton just men ? Is it
idolatry I say, to beg of him that he would now spare one, for the
sake of his holy servant who shed his blood, rather than offend him,
or renouncehis faith in his divine son, The Catholics of Naples do
no more than what the first Christians did, as we learn from the Acts
of the Apostles. We there read, in chap. s —lsv. that the Chris-
tians brought forth the sick into the streets and laid them on beds and
couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by, might over-
shadow them. And in chap. xix. I2v. we find that handkerchiefs
and aprons were applied to the body of St. Paul, and afterwards
brought to the sick, who by using them, were effectually cured of all
their diseases, and delivered from the evil spirits that tormented
them. If therefore, the Neapolitans on the authority of the Holy
Scriptures, (which if you please, you will allow them to interpret
for themselves) consider it both lawful and profitable to invoke the
protection of Christ, whilst they present before him the relics of his
once faithful servant, what right have you to find fault with them.
You are all burning zeal for putting down this species of idolatry,
this use which is made of the relics of the Saints; but keep your tem-
per; whilst the first disciples of the Apostles practised it, —whilst
books written by divine inspiration record it, —whilst the Apostles
themselves allowed it, —and whilst Heaven by the miraculous effects
produced, evidently approved of it, you need not be uneasy. St.
Peter and St. Paul, who took part in it, had certainly if not more, at
least as much true 'zeal for God’s honor and glory, as any Protestant
clergyman in the nineteenth century, even admitting that clergyman to
be a minister of a church shot like a holtfrom heaven.
As for Bambino and the wooden Jesus, it is so truly laughable and
ridiculously absurd, that 1 do not suppose that there is any Catholic
who can for a moment feel the least anger towards the retailers of such
stories. Wooden indeed must be the head, and still more wooden
the cause, if they cannot furnish something better than such wooden
arguments. Take the warning which the Rev. Mr. Thorndike,
Prebendary of Westminster, one of your own learned divines, gives
you in these words.—“ Do not lead people by the nose to believe
that you can prove the Papists to be idolaters, when you cannot.’’*
See Thorndike’s Just VVeightsand Measures, p. 10.


Praying to the Saints is the next point to which you draw our atten-
tion. This subject I think, has been sufficiently explained by Dr. B
I therefore shall only add a few remarks, and shall first trouble you
with a long quotation from a Protestant Bishop, whose sentiments on
the point are certainly entitled to some degree of attention from a
Protestant clergyman. Ido not mean to charge the Church of Eng-
land with maintaining as an article of her faith, every peculiar
opinion adopted now and again by any of her divines; this is a kind
of reasoning which I resign over to those clever Protestant logicians
who are for ever deducing general conclusions from particular pre-
mises, and saddling on the Catholic Church the doctrines and
opinions of every member of her communion.
The use which I wish to make of the following quotations, is to
shew, that if Catholics are guilty of idolatry in praying to the Saints,
that some of your own Bishops have been guilty of it too; and what
is still more extraordinary, that some of those illustrious reformers
who bequeathed to you the sacred citadel, purchased with death
and ratified with blood, now turn out to be nothing but notorious
idolaters. “I do not deny,” says Dr. Montague, who was Bishop of
Chicester and afterwards of Norwich, “but the Saints are mediators
as they are called, of prayer and intercession. They interpose with
God by their supplications, and mediate by their prayers. This is
the common voice, with general concurrence, without contradiction
of reverend and learned antiquity, for aught I ever could read or
understand, and I see no cause or reason to dissent from them, (the
Catholics) touching intercession in this kind.* I own that Christ is
not wronged in his mediation ; it is no impiety to say as they (the
Catholics) do : ‘ Holy Mary pray for me ; Holy Peter pray for
me.' f Could I come at them,” continues he, “or certainly inform
them of my state, without any question or more ado, I would readily
and willingly say, ‘ Holy Peter pray for me. Blessed Paul pray for
me,’ recommend my case to Christ Jesus our Lord. Were they
with me in my kenning, I would run with open arms and fall down
upon my knees, and with affection desire them to pray for me.”
And page 97 he goes on, I see no absurdity in nature, no incon-
gruity unto analogy of faith, no repugnance at all to sacred Scriptures,
much less impiety to say, ‘ Holy Angel guardian pray for me.’”
And yet you can find in it, not only absurdity, incongruity and
impiety, but even blasphemy and idolatry. Archbishop Sheldon,
and Bishops BlandfordJ and Gunning, |] who were the greatest
ornaments of the Episcopal bench, acknowledge that there is no
* Treatise on Invocation of Saints, p. 103. f Ibid. p. 118. J Sec Duchess York’s
Testimony on Brunswick’s Fifty Reasons. )| Burnett’s History of his own times,
Vol. I. p. 437.


idolatry whatever in praying to the Saints; and Luther himself, who
certainly must he ranked amongst those faithful guardians of the
citadel and stout warriors of old, to whom you allude in the first
page, even this stout warrior stoutly maintains, that praying to the
Saints is both lawful and profitable.—“ Who” says he “ can deny
that God works great miracles at the tombs of the Saints ? I there-
fore, with the whole Catholic Church, hold, that Saints are to be
honoured and invocated by us.”* He recommends also, that dying
persons should take particular care to invoke the intercession of the
Saints at their last hour. “ Lot no one omit,” says he, “to call upon
the blessed Virgin, and the Angels and Saints, that they may inter-
cede with God for them at that instant.”t If praying then to the
Saints as practised by Catholics, be idolatry, then the very founder
of the Reformation was an idolater, —then many of your own cele-
brated divines admitted the lawfulness of idolatry,— and this is not
all; but it will follow that Sts. Hilary, Gregory, Benedict, Augustin,
Jerome, Cyprian, Venerable Bede, and a whole train of others, who
are all marked down as Saints in your own prayer book, now turn
out to be nothing but idolaters, for they all prayed to the Saints ;
(recollect I can prove what I say) and what will follow then, —this
undeniable consequence, that according to your principles, a person
may be a Saint and an idolater at the same time.
To prove that those whom your own church acknowledges as
Saints, prayed to the blessed in heaven, I shall only give you the
words of one of them, as you may rest assured, that it will be far
more for your advantage to give me credit for the remainder. “ Holy
Mary,” says St. Augustin, “succour the miserable, —help the pusillani-
mous, —(he means by her prayers) comfort the afflicted, —pray for the
people,—make supplication for the clergy,—intercede for the devout
female sex.”J Now this very St. Augustin, is styled in your own book
of Homilies , the lest learned of all ancient and he is mark-
ed down in your own prayer-book as one of the Saints; therefore you
must either give up the Book of Homilies and the Book of Common
Prayer, or you must withdraw your charge against the Catholics.
See what a pretty dilemma you have got yourself into, by meddling
with matters which you do not understand; and 1 am very much
mistaken, if all the art of which you are master will be able to
extricate you out of the difficulty^
You next inform your readers, that you have found in one of our
prayers this impious and blasphemous conclusion, —“ Holy Mary,
* In Purgationc quorumdam articulorum, Artie. Tom. 1. Germet Epist. ad
Georg. Spalat. f See Luther’s Preparatio ad Mortem. J See his Sermon De
Sanctis. |) Second Part of Peril of Idolatry, p. 161, Oxford Edit. 1816.


Mother of God, pray for us;” a term which you say is unwarranted
and unscriptural. To this I reply, that to deny the blessed Virgin
to be mother of God, is, to use your own expressions, both blasphe-
mous and impious; and for this very obvious reason, that it strikes
at the very root pf the doctrine of the Incarnation, which is one of
the fundamental truths of Christianity. 2ndly.—Your assertion is
in complete contradiction to the words of the Sacred Scriptures ; for
when are women justly styled mothers, unless when they conceive'
their children, carry them in their womb, and bring them forth into
the world; now all these things are expressly read in the Sacred
Scriptures concerning Mary, with respect to the Son of God. In the
first chapter of Luke, 31 and 35vv, the Angel Gabriel thus addresses
the Virgin“ Thou shalt conceive in thy womb and shall bring forth
a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus. Therefore that holy thing
which shall be born of thie, shall be called the Son of God.”
Therefore the Son of God, according to the Angel, was to be con-
ceived by the Virgin, and was to be brought forth by her info the
world; therefore she was really his mother ; —the mother of the Man-
God; or there is no such thing as a mother. The term of Mother of
God is unscriptural ? What would you think, should Ibe able
to find you a text where she is expressly called the. Mother of
God ? Do you forget what St. Elizabeth said, when the Blessed
Virgin came to visit her ? “ Whence,” says she, “is this to me,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me.” I suppose St.
Elizabeth was also guilty of blasphemy and impiety, in making use of
this expression. Was Christ God, or was he not? if he were, then
as he was born of Mary she must be his mother ; if he were not, say
so at once; where is the use of cloaking your real belief. But I sup-
pose you intend to say, that she cannot be called the Mother of God,
because Christ was hot begotten of her according to his divinity; but
even this will not bear you out in your assertion, for as a woman who
does not beget the soul which is the nobler part of man, is nevertheless de-
servedly considered and said (o be his mother, because the body to which
the soul had been hypostatically united, was formed from her blood and
in her womb; so in the same manner since the body taken by the di-
vine Word was formed of the Blessed Virgin alone, and in her womb;
and the very instant in which it was conceived was hypostatically
united to the person of the Word; she is therefore deservedly called
the Mother of God, although she did not beget his divinity. ’ln the
nineteenth century you are reviving the errors of Nestorius, Archbi-
shop of Constantinople, who was condemned in the Council of Chal-
( cedon for maintaining two persons in Christ, and denying Mary to
be the Mother of God. And recollect that St. Gregory the Great,
who rescued your Pagan ancestors from idolatry, has declared that
he respected the decrees of this Council, as well as the other three


which were held before it, as he did the four gospels themselves.
In the eighth page we meet with the old hackneyed accusation of
selling pardons and indulgences. Claude de Espense, you inform us,
has written, that “provided money can be extorted, every thing pro-
“ hibited is permitted; on paying an annual tribute, priests have concu-
«‘ bines,” &c. Allow me to tell you, that not a single tittle of all this
stuff is to be found in the writings of Claude ; it is a forgery of some
Protestant writer, from whom you have copied it. The Nouveau
Dictionnaire Hislorique, printed at Caen in 1783, speaks highly of
Claude as a great Theologian and writer. He was Rector of the
University of Paris, was much admired by Pope Paul the IVth, and
was offered a Cardinal’s hat if he would live at Rome. Now is it
credible, that such a man as this should have uttered this impious
nonsense, which the smallest child, instructed in its Catechism, would
be able to refute. There was also, it seems, a list of the Pope's
absolution fees published in the seventeenth century; —you are per-
fectly correct; there wore more charitable things than this published
against the Catholic Church, these three centuries, but as to this list
being published by the authority of the Pope, this is an assertion which
I beg leave to deny; it wants a proof before I admit it; and when
you give proper references for the authenticity of this list, it will be
then time enough to take farther notice of it.
With regard to absolution from sin, as practised in the Church of
England, 1 shall just quote a few of your celebrated divines who
have written upon the subject, and leave you to meditate at your
leisure on the doctrine which they defend.
The celebrated Dr. Chillingworth was certainly one of the most
able defenders of the Protestant Church, and understood its doctrines
as well, if not better than the most part of her divines. This learned
prelate, speaking of that text where Christ says “Receive ye the Holy
“Ghost, whoso sins you forgive,” &c. Johnxx. 22 and 23, “Can
“any man,” sayshe, “ be so unreasonable, as to imagine that when our
“ Saviour in so solemn a manner, having first breathed upon his disci-
“ples, thereby conveying and insinuating the Holy Ghost into their
“ hearts, renewed unto them, or rather confirmed that glorious commis-
“ sion, &c. whereby he delegated to them an authority of binding and
“ loosing sins upon earth, &c. can any one think, I say, so unworthily of
“our Saviour, as to esteem these words of his, for no better than
“ compliment. Therefore in obedience to his gracious will, and as I
“am warranted and enjoined by my holy Mother the Church of
“England, I beseech you that by your practice and use, you will
“ not suffer that commission which Christ hath given to his Ministers,
* See his Epistle to John Patriarch of Constantinople.


«to be a vain form of words, without any sense under them. When
“you find yourselves charged and oppressed, have recourse to your
“spiritual physician, and freely disclose the malignancy of your
“ disease. And come to him not only with such mind as you would go
“to a learned man, as one that can speak comfortable things to you,
“but as to one who hath authority delegated to him from God him-
“self, to absolve and acquit you of your sins.”* Bishop Montague
says, that the Church of England requires confession in case of per-
plexity, and insists upon it at the last hour.—“We urge it,” says he,
“in extremes.”)- Bishop Andrews, in his Court Sermon on 20th
chapter of St. John, 23d verse, speaks after this manner. “God,”
says he, “ordinarily proceedeth in remitting sin by the Church.
“ And hence they (the ministers) have their parts and cannot be ex-
cluded. And to exclude them is towring the keys out of their
“hands, to whom Christ had given them; it is to account of all this
“ sending and inspiring, as if it were an idle and fruitless ceremony.”
Luther requires in his Catechism, that the penitent in confession
should expressly declare that he believes the forgiveness of the priest
to be the forgiveness of God.J In the order of communion composed
by Cranmer, and published by Edward VI, it is required that all
those whose conscience is troubled, should come and confess his sin
and open his grief, that he may receive of the minister of God
comfort and absolution. Dr. Comber, in his Exposition of the Book
of Common Prayer, maintains that absolution as used in the Church
of England, is not merely declaratory, but absolute and judicial.
If therefore, what you say be true, when you tell us, that you
pretend not to possess an authority efficaciously to absolve or con-
demn men, then all those learned divines of the Protestant Establish-
ment, must have entirely misunderstood what their Church required
of them to believe, and were they now living, they should be sent to
you to be better instructed on the subject. In the Order of the Visita-
tion of the Sick, in your Prayer-Book, we find these words.—“ Here
“ let the person be moved to make a special confession of his sins, and
“ then let the priest absolve him after this manner. Our Lord Jesus
“ Christ, who hath left power to his Church to absolve all sinners
“ who truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive
u thee thine offences, and by his authority committed to me, I absolve
“ thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
“ and of the Holy Ghost.” Here then we find that the dying sinner is
to be specially moved to confess his sins; is it therefore true what
* Sermon vii. Religion of Protestants, pp. 408, 409. f See his Appeal, chap.
32. JTnCatech. parvulorum.—See also Luther’s Table Talk, chap, xviii. on
Auricular Confession.,


you have asserted that you never absolve unless when particularly
requested. And if the Church of England pretends not to any
power of efficaciously absolving sinners, why does she say that out
Lord Jesus Christ left power to his church to absolve them? And
why is the dying man to be disturbed in his last moments by requir-
ing of him to make a confession of all the sins of his life, (at a time
that he is least of all capable of doing it) in order to receive absolu-
tion, if according to your account of it, that absolution is merely
declaratory, that is, not worth a farthing. When a master delivers
up the keys of his house to his .servant, with the power of locking
and unlocking the doors of that house, is it not a perversion of all
language to say that this person only received power to declare that
the doors are locked or unlocked, and is it not in the same manner
an equal perversion of language to say, that when Christ gave the
keys to the Apostles with the power of locking and unlocking, of
binding and of loosing, that he only gave them power to declare sinners
bound, or declare them loosed. St. John Chrysostom, who lived in
the sth century, and was one of the brightest ornaments of litera-
ture and orthodoxy that ever illustrated the church, lays down this
difference between the priests of the new law and the priests of the
old.—“ That the priests of the Jewish law could not cleanse the
“ leprosy of the body, but only pronounce those clean who were
“ already cleansed, but the priests of the new law,” says he, “ have
“ received the power of cleansing not only the leprosy of the body,
•‘but the leprosy of the soul; and of not only declaring the soul to be
“cleansed, but of actually cleansing it.”*
You conclude your elegant interpretation of absolution in the
Catholic Church, by declaring it to be abominable and corruptive
of the soul.—Let us come to the proof. The sinner is never absolved
by a Catholic priest until he first sincerely implores the divine mercy
and pardon, for the sins which he has committed'; —he is taught that
the absolution pronounced over him by the priest, is of no advantage
whatever, unless he be sincerely sorry for his past crimes, and de-
termined with God’s assistance to amend his life for the future; —has
he contracted any regular habit of committing grievous sins of theft,
of impurity, of drunkenness, of cursing, swearing, &c., should he
come an hundred times to confession, an hundred times is he sent
away without absolution, until he prove to his confessor the sincerity
of his conversion, by renouncing the wicked habits in which he had
been engaged;—Has he wronged his neighbour in his dealings, he
must solemnly promise that he will restore what he has taken as soon
as ever he has it in his power;—has he by false reports or lying
* liber tertius de Sacerdotio, cap. 6.


stories injured the character of his innocent neighbour, he must re-
pair the injury does he harbour the least malice or anger in his
mind towards even his bitterest enemy, never can he be absolved
until ho is first reconciledand should any member of my congrega-
tion refuse to forgive you from his heart, the serious injury yon have
done him by exhibiting his religion to the world as antichristian,
blasphemous, and impious, and his priests no better than liars, I
should withhold absolution from him even on the bed of death, and
suffer him to, die without the benefit of the last sacraments if he
persevered in this disposition. Is this then the doctrine which is
abominable and corruptive of the soul ? Is this one of the most
tremendous engines of priestly power ever lorded over any people ?
We next come to your remarks on Dr. B.’s explanation of the
doctrine of purgatory, which you very modestly are pleased to terra
a fiend dressed up in peacock’s feathers; a doctrine of Antichrist;
unsupported by scripture; contrary to the opinion of the primitive
church, and revolting to reason ; all very serious charges indeed, and
which if they be true, consigns at once to everlasting perdition all
the members of the Catholic Church these eighteen hundred years,
—all her learned doctors and prelates, —and every one of the Saints
whom you have registered in your own calendar; for certainly there
is no salvation for those who profess the doctrine of Antichrist. In
the first place you assert that it is unsupported by scripture : this I
deny; and I maintain that there are many texts in the holy scrip-
tures in favour of purgatory, or a middle state of souls, and not a
single text which will prove the Unlawfulness of believing in it.
The J ews prayed for the dead ; this we know from the hook of
Maccabees: I am aware that Protestants do not admit this book
amongst the inspired writings, yet every learned Protestant acknow-
ledges, that it is an authentic history of the belief of those times in
which it was written; taking it therefore, as a genuine historical
work, it clearly proves that the Jews, one hundred and fifty years,
before the coming of Christ, frequently prayed for the dead. What
then is the reason why our divine Saviour, who was incessantly em-
ployed in combating the false doctrines of the Pharisees, what is the
reason I ask, why he did not exert his divine zeal against this doc-
trine of Antichrist ? And when he saw the Jews every day before
his eyes praying for the dead, and sending drachms of silver to the
temple to have sacrifices offered up for them, what is the reason that
he did not exclaim against this pernicious practice. He exposed
the avarice and hypocrisy of the Pharisees in devouring the houses
of widows with their long prayers ; in causing the people to bring
their money and their gifts into the temple, whilst they left their aged
parents without support at home; would he then have been silent
with regard to those vast sums of money which were expended in


sacrifices for the dead, if praying for the dead was un scriptural,
antichristian, and revolting to reason. Not one word however, does
lie say against this practice, on the contrary, his own expressions
confirm them in their belief; he desires them to make agreement
with the adversary whilst they are on the way, lest the adversary
deliver them to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and they be
cast into prison, out of which he declares that they shall not depart
until they pay the last farthing. Luke xii. 5.9. You may interpret
this text in whatever manner you please, but you will give us leave
to prefer the interpretation of all the learned fathers of antiquity,
who declare to us that they have learned from the Apostles, that this
text is to be understood of purgatory, or a middle state of souls.
Christ again says, that the sin against the Holy Ghost will neither
be forgiven in this world, nor the world to come. Matt. xii. 32.
Now the great St. Augustin, (declared in your own Book of
Homilies to be the most learned of all ancient doctors) draws an
argument from this text, to prove that there must be a middle state
of souls, for says this saint, when Christ declares that this sin will
neither be forgiven in this world nor in the world to come, he evi-
dently insinuates that there are some sins which will be forgiven in
the world to come; but sins, says he, cannot be forgiven either in
heaven or hell, therefore it must be in some place distinct from both.*
St. Gregory the Great explains this text in the same manner in his
Fourth Book of Dialogues. Venerable Bede and St. Bernard do
the same.
St. Paul knew very well that the Jews prayed for the dead.
Under the very eye of this Apostle, (who pronounces an anathema
against an angel from heaven who should dare to change the gospel
of Jesus Christ,) the converted Jews were accustomed to practise
some baptisms or purifications, or religious rites for the relief of their
departed brethren.f Would he have mentioned this practice without
censurin'! it, if it were unlawful ? But hear now what the same
O ’
Apostle says upon this subject:—“The day of the Lord,” says he,
“shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man’s work
“of what sort it is; If any man’s work abide he shall receive a
“ reward. If any man’s work bo burnt he shall suffer loss, but he
“ himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.’’ 1. Cor. iii. 13, 15. Sts.
Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustin, explain this passage of purgatory;
the last named Saint speaking of this text says, “ Purify me, O
“ Lord, in this life, that I may not need the chastising fire of those
* Liber lus. de Civitate Dei, cb. 24. fKlse what shall they do who are baptiz-
ed for the dead, if the dead rise not at all ? Why are they then baptized for
them? 1 Cor. xv. SO.


“ who will he saved, yet so as ly Jure"* What does St. Peter
mean, when he says that Christ went and preached to the spirits
that were in prison, who were incredulous in the days of Noah.
1 Peter, iii. 19. Where were all the souls of the just who died
before Christ ? Were they in heaven ?—no such thing. Christ
himself expressly declares in his conversation with Nicodemus, that
no man had ever gone to heaven at that time, when he was speaking,
but he himself alone, whom he calls the Son of Man.-j- This is
also declared by St. Peter, in his first sermon to the Jcws, whore
proving the ascension of Christ to the right hand of God from this
prophecy of David..—“ The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my
“right hand,” he shews that this prophecy couldnot be understood
of David himself, “ for,” says he, “ David did not ascend to hea-
ven.” Acts ii. 34. Now if David did not ascend to heaven, neither
did any other who died before our Saviour. Again, St. Paul speak-
ing of all the saints before Christ, expressly affirms that “ All these
“being approved by the testimony of faith, received not the promise,
“God providing something better for us, that they should not beper-
“fected without us.” Heb. xi. 39, 40. W 7 here was the soul of
Samuel, when the witch of Endor raised him up for Saul, it was in
the bowels of the earth. —“And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast
“ thou disturbed my rest, that I should be brought up." 1 Kings, or
Samuel xxiii. 12. All these souls therefore, were in some place
distinct from heaven and hell, which shows the absurdity of deny-
ing a middle state of souls. When it is said that Elias ascended
into heaven, the Scriptures do not mean that he ascended into the
heaven of the biassed, but only into some place above the clouds,
for every place above the earth is called in the language of the Scrip-
ture the heavens, in the same manner as every thing beneath is
generally termed hell.
But let us come at once to the Protestant authorities. Melanc-
thon, one of the early reformers and a disciple of Luther, affirms
that in the ancient primitive church, prayers were offered up for the
dead, and that the Lutherans do not find fault with it 4 The
Duchess of York who was contemporary with Archbishop Sheldon
and Bishop Blandford, says, “ I spoke severally to two of the best
Bishops that we have in England, [Sheldon, Archbishop of Canter-
bury, and Blandford, Bishop of Worcester,] who both told me that
there were many things in the Roman Church, which it were very
much to be wished that we had retained, as confession, which was
no doubt confirmed by God; that praying for the dead was one of
* See St. Augustine on 37th Psalm, f John iii, 13. JSee Apology for Con-
fession of Ausburjf,


the ancient things in Christianity; that for their parts they did it
daily, although they would not own it. Next listen to the two
epitaphs which Dr. Barrow, Bishop of St. Asaph, and Rev. Mr.
Thorndike, Prebendary of Westminster, left for themselves. “Here
“are deposited the remains of Isaac, Bishop of St. Asaph, in the
“hands of the Lord, in the hope of a joyful resurrection through the
“ sole merit •of Christ. Oh all ye passing along into the house of
“the Lord, the house of prayer, pray for your fellow servant, that he
“ may find mercy in the day of the Lord.’’ And the second: —
“ Here lieth the body of Herbert Thorndike, formerly Prebendary
“ of this Cathedral, who whilst living, used every means to bring
“about a true reformation in the Church. Do thou, O reader ! beg
“ for him rest and ahappy resurrection in Christ.”* Before these
lived the eminent protestant divine, Bishop Forbes : —“ Let not,”
says this prolate, “ the ancient practice of fraying and making
“ oblations for the dead, received throughout the universal church
“ almost from the very time of the Apostles, be anymore rejected
“by Protestants as unlawful or vain. The universal church has be-
lieved this practice not only to be lawful, but likewise beneficial to
“ the souls departed, and has always most religiously observed it, as
“ delivered if not from the Apostles, at least from the primitive
“ Fathers, as is manifest from their writings.” And again in another
part of his work, he says, “ It is no absurdity to own that lighter
“ e sins are discharged after death, and this soon after the decease,
“while the ecclesiastical rites are piously and religiously performed,
“ in virtue of the intercession of the church, in her public prayers,
“ and particularly those which are poured forth in the celebration of
the sacred liturgy. ”f The late Dr. Milner, in his End of Religious
Controversy tells us, that the present Bishop of Exeter, publicly from
the pulpit, recommended the soul of the deceased Princess Charlotte
to the prayers of the congregation.
In the very first Liturgy of the Church of England, drawn up
by Abp. Cranmer and Bp. Ridley, and which seemed so truly or-
thodox to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
that they hesitated not to declare that it was drawn up by inspira-
tion of the Holy Ghost, there is a special prayer for the departed
souls, and the Almighty is entreated to grant them mercy and ever-
lasting peace.. You cannot deny that all those learned Bishops,
and above all Cranmer and Ridley, must be ranked amongst those
illustrious reformers who bequeathed to you, as you tell us, the
sacred citadel, purchased with death and ratified with blood.
* I have translated those epitaphs from the original Latin. fSee his Discourse
on Purgatory. J See Collier’s Ecclesiastical History, Vol. 11. p 257.


but lamentable to relate, it now appears that this sacred citadel was
nothing but an arsenal of rank popery, and that all its stout war-
riors, by praying for the dead, sanctioned the doctrine of Antichrist;
a doctrine entirely unsupported by Scripture, contrary to the opinion
of the primitive church, and revolting to reason; and what is still
more lamentable, that the Holy Ghost himself inspired them all
with this Antichristian doctrine. By this time, I have strong reasons
to think that you most sincerely wish that you had left Dr. Baines’s
Sermon where you found it. In a word, to sum up all I have said
on this point, if the doctrine of purgatory is nothing but a fiend
dressed out by Dr. B. in peacock's feathers, do not deprive others of
their share of merit in the ornamenting of it; —for recollect that
some of the first dignitaries of your own church assisted at the
toilet.
As for the two edifying extracts from Tetzel and Gavin, the
Romish priest, by which you endeavour to make the Catholic
Church accountable for the lying stories of every excommunicated
priest, and the base practices of every renegade friar, this is another
specimen of your knowledge of logic, which a person who only
studied that science for three months would be ashamed to display.
You took good care not to tell us who this Tetzel was, you had your
own reasons, very prudent ones no doubt, for doing so. I also have
mine, in troubling you with a short sketch of his history. John
Tetzel was a Dominican Friar, who being commissioned by the
Archbishop of Mayence to publish indulgences, and explain the
spiritual nature of them to the people, acquitted himself most wick-
edly of the trust, by preaching a shocking and unheard of doctrine
on the subject, as also by spending in public-houses, in eating and
drinking, the money which was given him for charitable purposes.
John Staupitz, Vicar- General of the Augustinian friars, ordered
his subjects to preach against the blasphemous mountebank, and
Charles Millitz, the Pope’s Nuncio at the Court of Saxony, repri-
manded him in such severe terms for the abominable scandal which
he had given to the Catholics of Germany, that he sickened and died
of grief, in 1519. From the fact of a drunken profligate friar, pro-
claiming to a few credulous old women, that “ the moment the money
“tinkles in the chest their father’s souls would mount up out of purga-
“tory,” you wish your readers to conclude that Catholics really believe
in all this ridiculous nonsense. Does not the very conduct of the Arch-
bishop of Mayence and the Pope’s nuncio, towards this profligate
friar, evidently prove how much the Catholic Church sets her face
against these impious doctrines aud practices. The chief pastors of
the Church exclaimed at all times against the abuses which were com-
mitted by self-interested designing men, in the publishing of indul


gences and in explaining the doctrine of purgatory. Pope Innocent
111, complained of them, in the great Council of Lateran, held
in 1215. Clement V, in the Council of Vienna, 1311, exposes the
enormous abuses which were committed by the Questors, or
collectors of money in those days; how they used to promise to release
souls out of purgatory, on condition of being paid a certain sum of
money; and he represents them as so many liars and cheats.* The
Council of Trent, in the 25th Session, censures all those practices
after the same manner.
You are quite uneasy that the Catholic priesthood should receive
any remuneration whatever, for offering up sacrifice ; you put us in
mind that Christ has left the blessings of salvation to all his followers,
without money and without price. Very true; and the Catholic
Church seems to understand this well, when in the very Ritual,
which her clergy use in the administration of the Sacraments, she
commands them neither directly nor indirectly to demand any thing
for the exercise of their spiritual functions, but merely allows them
to receive the voluntary oblations of the faithful, as contributions
towards their support. But if the blessings of salvation are to bo
dispensed without money and without price to every follower of
Christ, how does it happen that the Church of England charges such
vast sums of money for them ? How does it happen that Sacra-
ments are sold ? , Why are Baptisms paid for ? Why is money
charged for reading the burial service over the dead, which you
must acknowledge to be of no use whatever to them ? How does it
happen, that notwithstanding the command of Christ, who required
of his Apostles to preach the gospel without scrip or staff, or money
in their purse,f that the clergy of the Church of England must
receive thousands in the year before they will condescend to teach
their followers the road which leads to Heaven ? Does the Pro-
testant Archbishop of Tuam dispense the blessings of salvation
without money and without price, whilst he enjoys 98000 acres of
land for taking care of the 8000 Protestants that are in his Archdio-
cese P Does the Protestant Bishop of Durham exercise his spiritual
functions without money and without price, whilst he quietly pockets
every year of his life thirty or forty thousand pounds of the public
money? I will be silent about the remainder. Keep our cathedrals
and our churches —Keep entirely to yourselves our tithes and our
revenues, which were formerly employed in a very different manner
from what they are now, never cease to extol to the very skies
those illustrious reformers who have exempted you from fasting,
♦ Cle;nent. Constitut. Liber V, tit. 9, oh. 2. f Matt, x, 10.


. from confession,—from the daily recital of tlio divine office, —
from a life of celibacy, and from every other salutary practice which
imposes a restraint upon corrupt nature; enjoy all those blessings ;
receive annually as many thousands as you please; we do not at all
grudge them to you, but do not cast a wishful eye on the shilling or
two which a Catholic priest receives towards his support whilst ho
offers up the mass;—they will scarcely pay for the wine and the
llffiils which arc used in the sacrifice.
O
The next point which you touch upon is the sacrifice of the mass,
and to prove that it is full of inconsistencies and absurdities, you
appeal to St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews. Is it not, you
say, the grossest impiety to suppose that the offering of the body of
Christ once, is not sufficient to procure tho pardon of sin.—Undoubt-
edly. But where did you learn that the Catholic Church leaches
this impiety ? the bloody sacrifice of the cross is sufficient to cancel
the sins, not only of the present world, but of ten thousand worlds
more, should they be created. But then in order that this great
sacrifice may be an atonement for our sins, its merit must be applied
to our souls. Should there be a wholesome spring in a town, whoso
waters possessed the property of curing all binds of diseases, of what
advantage would this bo to the inhabitants, if they never made use
of it. The whole object of the Apostle, in this Epistle, is to prove
to the Jews the superiority of the sacrifice of the cross, over the
sacrifices of the Mosaic law; this he does by establishing the fact,
that all the Jewish sacrifices were so imperfect that they were
obliged daily to be renewed ; that there were different priests succeed-
ing each other in regular generations; and that tho sacrifices which
they offered, were quite distinct one from the other; but that now
there is no longer any necessity for any more of these sacrifices,
since the sacrifice of the cross is sufficient. If therefore, the Ca-
tholic Church held it as an article of her belief, that the sacrifice of
the mass was a different sacrifice from tho sacrifice of the cross,
then St. Paul in this Epistle would condemn her; but she holds no
such doctrine; she declares that in the mass Christ is the priest
and the victim, and that the sacrifice of the mass is the same
as the sacrifice of the cross, and only the means by which the
merits of Christs death and passion are applied to our souls.
Were I to quote all the authorities of the ancient fathers of the
church in favor of the mass, I should never have done. I shall
therefore only trouble you with a quotation from one of them, the
great St. Augustin. I take particular pleasure in appealing to the
authority of this saint on every occasion ; as he is the best learned
of all ancient doctors, and was always in high favor with the stout
warriors of old. Speaking of the death of his mother, St. Monica,
e says, She has not left me orders about the embalming of her
D


“ body, or about the place of her burial, but she has only requested
“to be remembered at thy altar, O Lord, from whence she knew
“that the holy victim is dispensed, by which the hand-writing is
“ blotted out which was against us. Inspire, O Lord, thy servants,
“that as many as will read those things may remember at thy altar ,
“ Monica thy servant and her husband Patricias.’' If you wish to
know the opinions of some of your own divines on the hi ass, I
would advise you to consult Rev. Mr. Thorndike,*' Bishop Forbes,f
and the celebrated Grotius in his book on Christian sacrifices.
Transubstantiation, you inform your readers, was never hoard of
before the ninth century. If you mean that the word Transubstan-
tiation was never heard of before that period, so far you are cor-
rect ; but if you intend to make us believe that the doctrine signified
by the word itself was never hoard of until then, there is not a single
ecclesiastical writer or ancient father of the church, whose works
will not condemn you. What answer would you give to a Deist,
who would endeavour to prove against you that the consubstantiality
of the Son of God was never heard of before the fourth century,
nor ever considered as an article of faith until it was first settled
upon in the First Council of Nice, in the year 325, You would
no doubt give him to understand, that although the word consub-
stantial was never heard of until then, nevertheless, that the faithful
always firmly believed as a divine truth the doctrine signified by it;
namely, that Christ was equal to God, and of the same nature and
substance as his eternal father. In the same manner the faithful
at all times firmly believed every thing meant by the word transub-
stantiation, although the word itself was not made use of until the
Council of Lateran.
Before I point out clearly to you that it has always been the
belief of the Christian world, since the Apostolic times, that our
divine Redeemer has left us his own adorable body and blood in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, I shall only remind you of the ex-
planation given by Dr. B. of the manner in which we believe that
Christ is present in the Eucharist; —that he is not there in a crude,
natural, mortal state, but after a supernatural and ineffable manner.
This explanation of his, is the same as that of the general Council
of Trent, in the 22nd Session, cap. 1 and 2. By transubstantia-
tion therefore, we mean nothing more than this, that after the
words of consecration pronounced over the bread and wine at the
mass, the whole substance of the bread is changed into the body,
and the whole substance of the wine into the blood ; that the taste,
the colour, the form, and the other appearances, remain the same
♦ Epil. lib. 3, ch. 5, p. 44. I Lib. de Eucharistia, lib. S'. ch. 2.


as before; that the entire change which takes place, regards the in-
ternal substance, which is entirely impervious to our senses; and that
every thing which is so astonishing in this incomprehensible mystery,
is performed by the sole power of Him whochangcd water into wine
at the marriage feast of Cana, and who daily transubstantiates a part
of the very foodj which weeat, into that blood which circulates through
our veins. It would take a whole volume to contain all the argu-
ments which I could adduce from the Holy Scriptures and early
Fathers of the church, in proof of Transubstantiation. Read the
words of Institution, —read the sixth chapter of John,—read St.
Paul to the Corinthians, —read the works of St. Cyril, John Chrys-
ostom, Gregory, Augustin, and other illustrious Doctors of the
Church, and if you are not dead to every feeling of shame, you
must blush for the ignorance 'which you have betrayed, when you
gravely tell us that transubstantiation was never heard of before the
ninth century. St. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, and a disciple of St.
John the Evangelist, in his Epistle to the Christians of Smyrna calls
the Eucharist “ the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ who suffered for
“ our sins;” St. Justin who from being a learned Pagan philosopher
afterwards became a Christian and a Martyr, speaking of the Holy
Eucharist, “we do not; take it,” says he, “as common bread, eras
‘‘ common drink, but we are taught that it is the flesh and blood of our
“Lord Jesus Christ, who became man “Since Christ himself,
“said,” says St. Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem, “this is my body,
“and of the chalice, this is my blood, who will dare to deny it?
“Do not judge the thing from the taste ; what appears to be bread i s
“ not bread, and what appears ]to be wine is not wine, although it
“ may seem so to the taste, but it is the blood of Christ.”f Is it so
very certain then, that the substance of the doctrine of Transubstan-
tiation was never before the ninth century ? But it would
appear that you are not satisfied with misrepresenting the doctrine of
the Catholic Church, unless you also misrepresent your own; this
will always be invariably the case, when persons take upon them-
selves to write upon subjects which they do not understand. What,
let me ask you, does the Catechism of the Church of England teach,,
concerning the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper ? The question pro-,
posed is this ; —“ What is the inward part or thing signified.” An-
swer.—“ The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed
“ taken and received’by the faithful in the Lord’s Supper.” Now
how can the body and blood of Christ be verily and indeed taken
* See his second Apology, written in the year 150, where he speaks of the
Assembly of the Christians, and the Celebration of the Eucharist, -j- Opera St.
CyriUi, Hier. Catcch. mystag, 4.


and received, if verily and indeed according lo you, it be not there
at all. “It is,” says Dr. Milner, “ like the speech of a debtor who
“ would say to his creditor, I do hereby verily and indeed pay you
“ the money which I owe you, but I verily and indeed have not the
money wherewith to pay you.” The first Communion service of
your own church, drawn up by your own Cranmer and Ridley, and
other divines, and published in 1548, clearly expresses the real
presence, and that the whole body of Christ is received under each
particle of the Sacrament.* Let us hear some of the Protestant
Bishops on the real presence.—“ No genuine son of the Church of
“ England,” says Bishop Bramhall, “ did ever deny a real presence.
“ Christ said this is my,body, and what he said, we firmly believe.”f
“ God forbid,” says Bishop Bilson, “ we should deny that the flesh
“ and blood of Christ are truly present and truly received of the
“faithful, at the Lord’s Supper. It is the doctrine that we teach
“ others and comfort ourselves withal.” Archbishop Laud, in his
conference with Fisher, section 35, n. 6. punct 4, quotes Bishop
Ridley’s Confession, set down by Fox, p. 1598, in those words;
“You, (the Papists) and I agree in this, that in the Sacrament is
“the very true and natural body and blood of Jesus Christ, even that
“which was born of the Virgin Mary, which ascended into heaven,
“which sits at the right hand of God the Father, only we differ in
“ the way and manner of being there.” “We confess with the holy
“ Fathers,” says Bishop Cosin, “ that the manner of Christ’s presence
“is ineffable and unsearchable, not to be enquired or searched into
“by reason, but to be believed by faith alone. For although it
“seems incredible that in so great a distance of place, Christ’s flesh
“ should come to us to become our food, yet we must remember how
“much the power of the Holy Spirit is above our understanding, and
“how foolish it is to measure his immensity by our capacity. But
“what our understanding comprehends not, let faith
Again, let us hear what the eminent Dr. Jeremy Taylor says on the
subject. “It is enquired,” says he, “ whether when we say we
“believe Christ’s body to be really in the Sacrament, we mean that
“body, that flesh, that was bom of the Virgin Mary. I answer,
“I know none else that he had or hath. We eat and drink
“ the body and blood of Christ, that was broken and poured forth,
“ for there is no other body, no other blood of Christ.” Again,
section 12, p. 288, “they that do not confess the Eucharist to be
“the flesh of our Saviour, which flesh suffered for us, let them bo
“ Anathema.” You complain bitterly of the Council of Trent for
* Burnett, p. ii. lib. ]. f Answer to Militiaire, p. 74. JSec Bishop Cosin,
Hist, Transubstan. p. 36, section 5, n. 4. —Nos rero kune modum, &c.


damning; that is for pronouncing an anathema against all those who
merely believe a figurative presence; in the present instance, how-
ever, we find one of your own most celebrated Bishops, doing pre-
cisely the very same. Bishop Forbes, another Protestant, in his
book de Eucharistia, 1. I, c. 1, sec. 7, gives us his opinion of the
sacrament in these words: —“ The doctrine of those Protestants,’
says he, “ seems most safe and true, who are of opinion, nay, who
rt most firmly believe the body and blood of Christ, to be truly and
« really, and substantially present in the Eucharist.” “To speak my
“ heart,” says the great Grotius, “ I think that many disputers do
“ understand well enough the sense of the ancient church, and of the
<• present Greek and Latin Church, but they dissemble it, that they
<« may have matter to declaim upon among those that make more use
“of their outward senses than of their inward.”* How truly ridicu-
lous do your three or four flimsy arguments against Transubstantia-
lion now appear, when contrasted with the unanimous belief of the
whole Christian world for eighteen hundred years, and the plain,
evident confessions, of so many celebrated divines of your own church.
You endeavour to comprehend an incomprehensible mystery; you
want to set limits to the infinite power of God; and notwithstanding
that Jesus Christ himself has declared at the last Supper, that the
bread which he held in his hand was his body, and the wine which
he presented them in the cup was his blood, words which so clearly
express the real presence, that Luther, the Father of Protestants,
was of opinion, that the devil must have mocked mankind when they
denied it ;f still you set up your petty reasoning against the infinite
wisdom of God; and because indeed, you cannot comprehend it,
therefore his words are not to be understood in the literal sense.
In the next place you tell us that no arguments can palliate the
impiety of celebrating Mass in the Latin language, a practice di-
rectly forbidden by St.' Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, as
the learned Doddrige has shown. Give me leave to tell both you
and the learned Doddrige, that neither one nor the other of you
seem to understand what St. Paul was speaking about at the time,
in his Epistle. In the first ages of the Church, the Holy Ghost
bestowed many gifts upon the faithful; some received the gift of
speaking languages which they did not understand; others received
the gift of understanding those languages, without being able to
speak them. The Apostle therefore in this Epistle, condemns the
pride and vanity of those persons, who made an ostentatious display
of their gift of speaking strange languages at a time when there was
* See his Vote for Peace, p. 92, of Transubsfantiation. -fEpist. adArgen.
ten. tom. 4, fob 502, Editio VVittenbiigensis. See also Parv. Gatechismus Lutb,


no person present who had the gift of interpreting what they were
saying, and he shows the confusion which must arise from this
jnactice. But it unfortunately happens in the present instance, that
we have the Scriptures directly in our favour. During the Baby-
lonish captivity, the Jews entirely forgot the old Hebrew language
in which the Scriptures were written, insomuch, that when they
returned to Jerusalem after the captivity, and that Nehemias and
Esdras bad read the law to them in the Hebrew language, they did
not understand it, and they were obliged to interpret the law to them
in the Chaldaio tongue. The language which the Jews spoke from
that time was the Syriac, and yet their public prayers and sacrifices
were all performed in the Old Hebrew, which they did not under-
stand.* Our Saviour assisted in the temple whilst the service was
performed in this manner, and never found fault with it, because he
knew that they were- carefully instructed in the meaning of every
thing. The mass, in the Catholic Church is a sacrifice, and the
priest stands at the altar, offering up the body and blood of Christ
for himself and the people ; is it necessary that the people should
understand the words which he makes use of? By no means; nei-
ther is it even necessary that they should be in the temple of God at
the time. Were they to remain outside the church doors, praying to-
God and joining their intention with that of the priest who is inside,,
they would have the full benefit of the sacrifice, equally as if they
were within and understood every thing that was said. The Al-
mighty himself in the. Old Law, issued this positive order; —“Let
no man be in the tabernacle when the High Priest goeth into the
“Sanctuary to pray for himself and his house, and for the whole con-
“ gregation of Israel, until he come out. Lev. xvi. 7.” And do vve
not find that in consequence of this very command of God, it is re-
corded ol Zacharias, the father of St. John the Baptist, that when
“ according to the custom of the priest’s office, it was his lot to offer
“ incense going into the temple of the Lord, all the multitude of the
“people was praying without at the hour of incense.” Luke i. 9.
Here we find by the express command of God, public prayers made
by the priest expressly for the people, and sacrifice offered up by
Zachary for them, and yet notone of them permitted to be present a
the time, much less to understand the words which the priest was
saying. And do you think that they did not partake of the benefits of
the sacrifice?—Undoubtedly they did: and why? because they
joined their prayers to the intention of the priest who was sa-
crificing for them, and although they neither heard nor saw what
he was doing, yet they understood full well that he was standing
* Walton’s Polyglot, Protcg. Hey, &c.


before the "altar of God offering up sacrifice both for himself
and for them. Luther wrote against Carlostad, Archdeacon of
Wittemberg, one of his first disciples, to prove that the lan-
guage of public worship is a matter of indifference. The Greek
Church have their public service in the ancient and pure Greek,
which is so very different from the Greek language now spoken,
that very few, except the learned, understand one word of
it.* Amongst the Maronites, of Mount Libanus, the Cophts, the
Jacobites, the Melchites, and the Georgians, divine service is cele-
brated in the Chaldee or Syriac, whilst at the same time the lan-
guage which those people speak is the Arabic or the Persian. Do
you recollect how the Irish Catholics were treated in the time of
Elizabeth, and afterwards of Charles I. when they were forced to
attend the Protestant Churches in Ireland, where the church ser-
vice was invariably read in English, although the natives did not
understand one word of it, “thus” says Dr. Hcylin, “furnishing the
Papists with an excellent argument against themselves.” The Ca-
tholics, I am sure, must be highly indebted to you for your kind
endeavours to procure for them something better than whispered
Latin prayers ; yet whilst they have those prayers translated, or
explained, in their prayer boobs, and are at the same time con-
vinced that the Almighty pays more attention to the affections of
hearts than to the multitude or noise of our words—they beg leave
to prefer them to those louder kind of prayers, which being, un-
fortunately, in some particular instances, repeated in so pompous and
affected a tone of voice, as seems to savour more of vanity than of
real devotion. As you have only touched lightly on the fantastic
robings of the Romish priesthood, I shall not detain you long on this
head, but shall only take the liberty of enquiring what is the mean-
ing of your own fantastic robings. What is the meaning of those
surplices, those white bands, those lawn sleeves, and those cassocks;
why not perform the public service of the church in the same plain
dress as the dissenting ministers. Read the 39th Chapter of Exo-
dus, and there you will learn the meaning of those fantastic robings:
in that chapter you will find the particular directions which God
gave unto Moses respecting those vestments which were to be used
by Aaron and the other priests when they officiated in the sanctuary.
The same motive which God had in view then, when ho ordered
those rich vestments, namely; that they might fill the minds of the
people with a sublime idea of infinite majesty, of that Being whom
they served; this very same motive induces the Catholic Church to
use them now, although by no means essential to religion. She
* Mosheim, by Maclaine, Vol. 2. p. 575.


liacs the scarlet colour on the festivals of the Martyrs, to put us hi
mind of the blood which they have shed for their Redeemer; the
Vestments of a white colour are used on the festivals of the virgins,
and represent to us their spotless whiteness and purity; the violet
colour is used in times of penance, and so of the rest, &c.
In the fourteenth page you commence the attack on the’second
part of the sermon, and you make the following assertions, every
one of which 1 shall separately consider. In the first place you
acknowledge that we are not at liberty to believe what we please,
that our salvation is attached to the belief of the very doctrines
taught by the Apostles, and that in order to come to a knowledge of
the very doctrine taught by the Apostles, every person is to exer-
cise his private judgment in interpreting those writings which they
have left us —that the Apostles were not always infallible when they
wrote —that neither Christ nor his Apostles required of us to rest
our faith on authority—that the Catholic Church is not agreed
where to settle the residence of her infallible authority and that
whoever reads and studies the scriptures with a sincere and honest
intention of profiting by them, will be so far led by the Holy
Spirit, as not essentially to err. Since therefore, according to your
own principles, it is necessary for 'salvation to believe the very doc-
trines taught by the Apostles, it necessarily follows that it is a matter
of the most awful importance, that we should have some certain
unerring rule by which wo may come to the knowledge of those
doctrines. But is the rule of private interpretation of the Scriptures
that unerring rule ? If it were, how docs it happen that all those
who interpret the Bible for themselves, are at complete variance with
regard to those truths taught by the Apostles ? How does it happen
that the Unitarian, who interprets the Bible for himself, clearly
discovers, (as he imagines) that it is an heavenly truth, taught by
the Apostles, that Jesus Christ is not God. How does if happen
that each member of that respectable body the Society of Friends,
clearly discovers from the Holy Scriptures, that Baptism and the
Lord’s Supper are by no means necessary for salvation, whereas the
orthodox Protestant has discovered from the same bible, that there is
no salvation without them.* How does it happen that you have
discovered from the writings of the Apostles that Episcopacy is of
divine institution, whereas the Presbyterian, whose understanding is
as good as yours, has discovered on the contrary, that the Apostles
taught a very different doctrine. Will you say that so many virtu-
ous, learned, and truly charitable persons who are to be found
amongst those different denominations of Christians, and who
* See Protestants’ Catechism.


according to the doctrine of your own church essentially err, will
you say that they have neither read nor studied the Scriptures with
a sincere and honest intention of profiting by them. What there-
fore, is the cause of all those errors ? It is because they prefer their
own weak understanding, their own fallible judgment, to the au-
thority of the church which Christ left them for their guide, and
with which ho promised that he and his Holy Spirit would remain
for ever.* The Apostle tells us that no prophecy of scripture is of
private interpretation ;t that there are many things in St. Paul’s
Epistles hard to bo understood, which the unstable and the unlearned
pervert to their own destruction, as they do the other Scriptures,s
and yet you find no difficulty in putting those very Scriptures into
the hands of every ignorant child, of every self-conccited unlettered
mechanic, and you leave him to grope his way through them with-
out a guide, at the evident risk of interpreting them to his own dam-
nation. Will you tell us, that whatever meaning he puts upon them,
still that there is no danger of his erring in essential matters. St.
Peter however is of a very contrary opinion. Allow me to ask you,
will a merciful God ever condemn us, unless for essential errors ?
Certainly not; and yet this Apostle hesitates not to declare, that
not only tho unlearned but also the unstable pervert those scriptures
to their own damnation, and consequently essentially err. Plad not
tho dissenters at all times many copies of the Scriptures in their
possessions ? Before their separation from tho Church of England
they read them attentively, and what has been the consequence ?
they have at last found out, that the Protestant Church is nothing
but a rag of Popery,—that tho Book of Common Prayer is brim-
full of errors, —that tho Apostles taught no such truths as the
Established Church endeavoured to pawn upon them, —and thus by
allowing every one to interpret the Scriptures according to his own
way, tho Protestant Church, says Protestant Dr. Daubeny, is now
like a great oak shivered to pieces with wedges made out of its own
body. You of course, as a Minister of the Established Church
firmly believe in the divinity of out blessed Redeemer, and that there
is no salvation for any person who disbelieves this fundamental truth
of Christianity, Let me now suppose that on some certain Sunday,
you have preached a most eloquent sermon, clearly proviiig 'that we
are not by any means to be guided by authority in tfuf interpretation
of the sacred test, but to depend entirely upon ourselves; and that
twenty or thirty of your congregation, acting upon this principle,
spend the whole week in studying the holy Scriptures in order to
discover whether Jesus Christ be God or not, and come to you on
♦Johnxir. 16, f 2 Pet. i. 20. J 2 Pet.iii. 15.
B


the following Sunday declaring their firm conviction that it is the
height of idolatry to adore him as such. I should wish to know
what you would say to them. Will you tell them that they have
evidently misinterpreted the Scriptures? But may it not be as
equally evident to them, that it is you who are in error ? Are you
infallible ? Does even the Church of England pretend to be an un-
erring guide ? on the contrary, she ridicules the idea of infallibility
being lodged even in the assembled Pastors of Christ’s Church. It
may therefore happen, (you cannot deny the consequence) that whilst
neither you nor your Church are secured from error, you may bo
teaching as truths delivered by the Apostles, what in reality are
nothing but your own inventions. How then will you be able to
prove to those persons of whom I have spoken that Christ is God ?
You gave them the Scriptures to interpret for themselves; they
have done so, and the result of their enquiry, is the firm conviction
that they would offer an injury to the Almighty should they adore
Jesus Christ as God. It is in vain that you will endeavour to make
them adopt your exposition of the sacred text, for they remember
what you have told them before, that they were not to attend to any
authority but only to their own reason and judgment. Give them
as many texts as you please in favour of the divinity of Christ, they
like the Unitarians will give you as many more which seem directly
to militate against it. Either one or the other of you, in your inter-
pretation of the sacred text, must be evidently wrong; the error is
a most essential one, for if Christ be God, it is blasphemy to deny
his divinity; and if he be not God, it is idolatry to give him divine
honors. Who is to decide this great question between you ? Fol-
lowing therefore, the principle which you have laid down for coming
at the knowledge of those truths taught us by Christ and his Apostles,
I maintain it as an undeniable truth, that we never can be certain
until the day of judgment, whether Christ be God or not, much less
to have a certain knowledge of the other great truths of revelation.
The Apostles you tell us, rested their doctrines not upon autho-
rity, but upon reason and argument, whilst they disputed with the
Jews and Heathens. They did so, and very justly. Would it not
be the height of folly for the Apostles, to endeavour to make the Jews
and Heathens believe those divine truths, which they taught on the
authority of a crucified man, until they first proved to them by reason
and argument, that this crucified man was the God of truth himself,
who could not deceive us; but as soon as ever they had convinced
them of this point, they then immediately required of them to bow
down their understandings, to the belief of mysteries which they
could not comprehend, on the authority of God who had revealed
them. Now I maintain it as an undeniable truth, that the Apostles
required from all their converts, the most perfect submission to all


their ordinances, and the firmest belief in every thing which they
taught them. They bid them “try the spirits;” they did so, but
then they gave them a rule for this trial. “He that knoweth God,”
says St. John, “hearcth us, he that is not of God heareth not us.
“ Hereby we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. He
desires them to take notice whether those persons listened or did not
listen to the divinely constituted pastors of the Church, and the
reason which he assigns for his wishing them to attend particularly
to this point is, “ because,” says he, “ many false prophets are gone
“ out into the world.” John, L Eph. iv. 1 and 6v, Our Saviour,
you tell us, did not require an ignorant faith, he bid the Jews to
search the scriptures: Did he tell them nothing else was necessary ?
Do you forget his awful denunciation ? —“He that will not hear the
church, let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican.” Matt,
xviii. 17. “ Whosoever shall not receive you, or hear your words,
“ going forth out of that house or city, shake off the dust from your
“ feet. Amen. I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom
“ and Gomorrah in the day of than forthatcity.” Matt. x.
14. Christ referred the Jews to the Scriptures, on the one particular
question of his divinity. He bid them search the Scriptures, and
compare the predictions of the prophets regarding the Messiah, with
his life and actions, and that they should then be convinced that all
those prophecies were fulfilled in him, and consequently that he was
that Messiah who had been long foretold. Should a Jew ask of
you to prove to him that Christ was God, would you not desire him
to search the Scriptures, without saying one word to him about the
church, until the divinity of Christ should be first established from
the sacred text. But whilst Christ bid them search the Scriptures,
did he mean that they were to pay no attention whatever to those
divine truths which he himself was teaching them ? Did he mean-
to say that they were not to heed the instructions of his Apostles, or
of his church, after having declared a short time before, that at the
last day he would treat the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah with
more mercy and favor, than those who should despise them. Nor
do not imagine that our divine Saviour only requiredfrom his follow-
ers that they should obey his Apostles, and not their successors;
his very words in the 28th chapter of Matthew, evidently prove the
contrary. “Lo,” says he, “I am with you all days, even unto
“ the end of the world.” He could not mean that he would remain
with his Apostles themselves unto the end of the world, for they all
died shortly after himself; but he meant that he should remain with
them and their successors in the sacred ministry, until time should be
no more, and that in every age of the world, he would rank amongst
heathens and publicans, those who despised the divinely-author-
ised expounders of his holy law: St. Paul pronounces a curse


against even an angel from heaven who shall dare to change the gos-
pel of Jesus Christ. Gal. i. Again, “ Remember your prelates,”
“says he, “who have spoken the word of God to you, whose faith
follow; —and be not led away by strange doctrines.” Hob. xiii. 7,9.
Speaking again to the chief pastors of the church of Ephesus;—
“Take heed to yourselves, and to the whole flock wherein the Holy
Ghost hath placed you Bishops, to rule the Church of God, which
he hath purchased with his blood.” In his Epistle to the Ephesians,
4 chap. 12 v. he declares that Christ left Pastors to his Church, that
“we might be preserved in the unity of faith, and not tossed about
with every wind of doctrine.” And in his 13th chapter to the
Romans, ho says expressly, “ Let every soul bo subject to the higher
“powers:—for they that resist, purchase to themselves damnation.
“ Obey your prelates and bo subject to them, for they watch, as being
“to render an account of your souls.” lieb. 13—17. And after
all these solemn declarations of Christ and his apostles, by which
the faithful are commanded in the severest terms, to receive instruc-
tions in the ways of salvation from the pastors of God’s church, do
you want to persuade us that we are to despise their authority, and
, set up our own conceited interpretations in their place.
The Catholic, ymu tell us, never can be certain that he is in the
right path, because he learns his faith from his priest; because ho
has never read the decretals of the Popes or the acts of the Councils,
so that even admitting the Church to bo immaculate and infallible,
still the Catholic can have no certainty of his being right. Accord-
ing to the same mode of reasoning, a Protestant never can be certain
that the Bible is the word of God; because ho has never seen those
huge volumes which have been written in proof of it; and only
believes those writings to bo inspired, because his Minister has told
him that it is so. If the Catholic learn his religion from his priest,
he knows very well that this priest is first strictly examined by his
Bishop in every article of faith, and would be instantly suspended,
from the use of his functions if he dared even in one point to alter
the faith of the Universal Church, or preach a doctrine contrary to
it. Ho knows that the faith of this Bishop must be the faith of every
other Bishop throughout the whole extent of the Catholic Church;
that in receiving the Bulls of his consecration, this Bi-hop has sworn
at the altar to preserve the sacred, deposit handed down to him by
those who have gone before him ; and that from the very instant
that it should be discovered that he either publicly or privately
maintained any opinions contrary to those articles of faith, which
the Church has solemnly defined in her general Councils, from that
moment he would he called to an account by his ecclesiastical
superiors; and should he persevere in his errors, that he would be
degraded from all his dignities. And here allow me to inform you*


of what you seem to be ignorant. No Catholic is obliged to believo
any doctrinal decision of the Pope, unless that decision be sanctioned
and ratified by the acceptance of the groat body of the Bishops.
Popes are men who are liable to error as well as others; neither
does their exalted situation secure them from the weaknesses or
frailties of human nature. W hen Christ promised that the gates of
hell should never prevail against his Church, Mat. xvi. 18. and that
the spirit of truth should abide with her forever, John xiv. 10, &c,
he did not promise infallibility to this or that particular Pope, or
Cardinal, or Bishop, but he promised his church, that is the body
of its pastors, that until the end of time, the Spirit of Truth should
so assist them, that the majority of them, representing the Church,
should never teach any false doctrine whatever, to the faithful. Shew
me therefore, a Council of Bishops, convoked together by the univer-
sally acknowledged head of the Church, perfectly uncontrolled in its
deliberations, in sufficient number to be considered as the representa-
tive of the Church; show me a decision of that Council declaring
that such or such a doctrine is a divinely revealed truth, and pro-
nouncing an anathema against those who refuse to believe in it, and
I affirm th it there is not a Catholic on the globe of the earth who
will not immediately admit it, resting convinced that if under those
circumstances the Church could teach error, there would at once be
an end to the promises of our divine Redeemer.* But as for any
particular decrees of Popes, or doctrines of Cardinals, if they be
innocent in themselves, we may admit them or reject them as wo
please; if they be absurd, we despise them. You inform your
readers, that Pius V. issued a bull against Elizabeth; he did so, —
but how did the Catholics treat that bull ? There was only one of
them who approved of it, John Felton a lay gentleman, and he was
put to death for pasting it against the Bishop of London’s house ; the rest
of the Catholics entirely disapproved of it, and considered it a mere
empty sound ofwords.f As for the bulls of the two Urbans, no such
bulls ever issued from their pens. Iwillprove you very shortly, guilty
of. the most egregious blunders, in almost every fact which you state.
Ist. This Father Carroll, of whom you speak as having murdered a
child at Limerick, committed this rash act not in Limerick, but in quite
a different place, many miles distant, in the County of Wexford, and
after having been tried for the murder by a jury of his Protestant
countrymen, he was acquited of the charge, because it was clearly
established at his trial, that he was insane at the very time that
* See Defence of the Nicene faith, hy the illustrious Dr. Bull, who was a
Protestant Bishop, and who died in the beginning of the 18th. century.* p See
the account of it in the Protestant writer Camden: anno. 1570.


he committed it. " Cardinal Bellarmine,” you »ay, " teaches that
“ heretics are to be destoyed root and branch, if that can possibly be
“ done.” After telling you a story which protestants circulated about
Bellarmine, and which was firmly believed by every enemy of popery
at the time, you will I should expect, be more cautious for the future
whilst taking extracts from Protestant writers. In the “ Dictionnaire
“ Historique, Article Bellarmine,” it is staled that “ the protestants
“ of Germany published a book in Latin, entitled ‘ The true History
“of the despairing end of Cardinal Bellarmine.’ In this work it is
“stated, that ‘ Bellarmine struck with horror at his numerous crimes,
“ resolved to go in disguise to Loretto, to make his confession to the
“penitentiary. On his arrival, he prayed three hours to the blessed
“ Virgin, and promised repeatedly to recall the errors which he had
“maintained against protestants, but the blessed Virgin would not
“hearhim. He next went to the priest, with a huge book of his
“ sins and presented it to the confessor, who reading therein, that
“ Bellarmine had kept up a criminal connexion with innumerable
“women, and had dispatched numberless illegitimate children by the
“ knife or by the fire, threw down the book, and said there was no
“ absolution for him or any chance of salvation. Bellarmine, as if
“ struck with lightning, fell to the ground, and after severe struggles
“ gave up his soul to the devil, whom he had served during his whole
“ life. ” This work was translated into several languages, industri-
ously propagated and piously believed by credulous protestants.
Unfortunately however, to their great annoyance,the good Cardinal
obstinately persisted in living for many years after the above publi-
cation, and finally died at Rome the death ofthe just.
The Council of Trent you next inform us, decreed “that the ancient
Latin Vulgale translation of the Bible,teas correct, sacred,and canoni-
cal,in all its parts, and in the same session ordered amore correct edi-
tion to be printed.” Is it owing to your ignorance of the Latin language,
or a wilful design of misrepresentation, that you have translated the
words of the Council in a manner entirely different from the meaning
of the original Latin. The Council never said that the Vulgate
was correct in all its parts, but that of all Latin translations then
in circulation, this should be held for authentic in all public instruc-
tions and disputations, and in the same decree of the same Session, (4)
a few lines lower down, the Council rebukes those printers, who
without leave of Ecclesiastical Superiors published any editions of
Scripture with such notes and comments as they pleased, and com-
mands that in future they should chiefly print the Vulgate with the
greatest correctness, and with leave of Ecclesiastical Superiors.
You have however found out, that it answered your purpose much
better to substitute the word “ correct in all its parts,” for the
word authentic, (which the Council uses) in order that you may


make your readers perceive the fallibility of these infallible Coun-
cils. —“ Forgery,” says Dr. Whitaker, “ seems to be the peculiar
“disease of Protestant writers Yes, and lam very sorry to be
obliged to add, that they do not seem to be as yet perfectly cured of
it. The word authentic which the Council uses, according to Bel-
larmine, Baronius, and Petavius, signifies that the Vulgate agrees in
facts and sentences with the originals. Now a work may be authen-
tic and not correct; for it may agree in facts and sentences with the
originals, whilst it swarms with false spellings and errors of print.
In the 20th page, we find you attacking Dr. B’s exposition of the
Catholicity and Unity of the Church, and by a few trifling observa-
tions which are not worth answering, you think that you have most
clearly proved your point that the Church of Rome neither possesses
Catholicity or Unity. As I have already extended this letter, far
beyond the limits which I originally intended, I must therefore rest
satisfied for the present, in briefly replying to the remainder of your
remarks. When we say that the true Church of Christ is Catholic
or Universal, we mean that this Church must have existed at all
times since the foundation of Christianity, and that it must at all
times be spread throughout the world, and not circumscribed by
provinces or kingdoms, nor taking its name from any particular
country, as the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, &c.
but it must, as the learned Protestant Fulke has remarked, I e Ca-
tholic in name as well as in substance. Secondly, in order that the
true Church of Christ should be Catholic, it is by no means neces-
sary that it should comprise within its communion a greater number
of individuals than what are excluded from it, it is only requisite that
it should far exceed in numbers any other sect of Christians sepa-
rately considered. Hence, St. Augustin proves against the Dona-
lists, that they could not be the true Church, because they wanted
this mark of Catholicity. “ They do not communicate with us”
says he, ~. But wherever they are, there is the Catholic Church.
“ but they are not every where, where the Catholic Church is.
“ Hence” says he, “it appears where that tree is which has spread
“ its branches throughout the whole earth, and where are the broken
“ branches which lie withering upon the ground.”* And at the very
time that St. Augustin was contending with the Donatist he etics, to
prove that they were not the true Church, from their want of this
mark of Catholicity, the Pagans were more numerous in all parts of
the world than the Christians. Compare, therefore, the Catholic
Church at present with the Church of England, or any other Church;
compare also the dates of their different origins, and you will soon
find which is the universal Church. As for the reasons which you
* Opera St, Auj. lib, it, contra Cresconiain, chap. 61.


bring forward to prove that Unity does not exist in the Church of
Rome, they are equally lame as the others. If there have been dis-
putes on points of religion between Jesuits and Franciscans and Do-
minicans, you forgot to inform your readers that these disputes were
not about articles of faith, but concerning metaphysical questions, or
expositions of some parts of .the scripture on which the Church had
decided nothing, because she saw nothing clear in revelation con-
cerning them, but at the very time that these persons were disputing
on those points, because the Church left them at liberty to do so,
every one of them was prepared to submit his opinion, and to give
way to the authority of the Church as soon as she would decide on
the question. Thus, for example, there Was a very sharp dispute
between Pope Stephen and St. Cyprian, in the 3rd century, on the
validity of Baptism administered hy Heretics, because the Church
had not decided any thing concerning the question at the time, but
as soon as ever this question had been determined by the Church,
and that Baptism thus administered was declared valid, not one
member of the Catholic Church has ever presumed to contradict
this decision. Catholic divines may at present exercise themselves
in writing arguments for and against the personal infallibility
of the Pope; they may dispute on the nature of the pains
of purgatory, whether a material fire brims there or not; some
divines may hold that leavened bread should bo used in the
Sacrament, others may be advocates for the use of unleavened
bread; all this time however, there is no danger of a division, —no
fear whatever for the unity of the Church, for as soon as any of
those questions arc decided upon, in her general councils, all submit;
there is an end to private opinions. All Catholics believe the same
articles of faith, —the same creeds, —not one shadow of difference
between them on these points.
“ There were two millions of bulls of indulgences found in a ship
captured by the English in the reign of Elizabeth.” Yes, but who
was it put them there ? She (Elizabeth) whoso hatred against the
Catholic religion was so great, as to induce her to pass an act of
parliament, by which any Catholic priest born in the dominion of
the crown of England, and who should stay in England three days
without becoming a Protestant, was guilty of high treason, and
should suffer death; she I say, would find no difficulty in forging
twenty ship loads of indulgences, in order to stir up the protestants
against her catholic subjects.*
In the 23 d page you have made a most important discovery. Dr.
B.’s character for historical information it seems, is for ever
* See Blackstone’s Commentaries. Vol. IV. n. 55.


destroyed. He has asserted that every nation which has at any
time become Christian, was originally converted by._ the Catholic
Church ; whereas your superior knowledge in history clearly estab-
lishes the fact, that “Russia with its thirty millions of inhabitants
“received Christianity not from the Romish, but from the Greek
“ Church.” lam extremely sorry to be obliged to throw a damp
over the imaginary triumph which you have gained, but truth forces
me to acknowledge that Dr. B. is perfectly correct, and that yon
are completely in the wrong. Lesser Russia was converted by St.
Bruno and St. Boniface, both of whom were priests of the Catholic
Church, and if the other parts of Russia were brought to the faith
by Greek missionaries, recollect that it was at a time when the
Greek Church was in communion with the Roman See. In this
very page, where you have falsely accused Dr. B. of an error of
history, you yourself are really guilty of a most notorious blunder
of the same kind. “ Labat,” you tell us, “ had a conversation
with “ Clement 11. in the Year 1772, about the conversion of
South America. Clement 11. give me leave to inform you, had
departed this life six hundred years before Labat was born. So
much for your accurate knowledge of historical facts. Had you
said that Labat had a conversation with Clement XI. so far
you would have been correct; but I suppose that the Christian
Guardian, or some other guardian, (to whom you acknowledge
yourself indebted for many of your observations) has informed you
that this conversation took place with Clement 11. and there-
fore like everything else, you took it for granted, and never troubled
yourself about finding out the truth. As for Labat himself, his
account of the conversion of America, is deserving of very little
credit. He was a French Dominican Friar, and was sent to America
in 1693, where he governed the mission of Macouba. He had a
(Conversation with Clement XI. as he states, Tome viii. p. 46,
“The Pope,” says he, “complained that whilst the Spaniards and
“ Portuguese missionaries made so many converts, the French had
“made none.” Here Labat recollected that he was a Frenchman,
and not being willing to allow that his nation was surpassed in zeal,
either by the Spaniards or the Portuguese, he replied that those
missionaries had nothing to boast of; that instead of converts they
had only made hypocrites ; that the dread of the rack and of death
had induced the savages to receive baptism, after which they remained
idolaters as before. Had Labat said that there were some mission-
aries who with a “zeal not according to knowledge,” had induced
the governors to some violent measures against the savages, perhaps
not many would have called in question the truth of his statement.
But when he says that it was constantly practised, he certainly either
deceived or tried to deceive. If the missionaries bad only made
F


hypocrites, who in their hearts remained idolaters as before, how
did it happen that South America in so short a time became almost
exclusively Catholic. If you read the work entitled, “Lettres
Edifiantes,” you will find Labat’s assertion contradicted almost in
every page by eye-witnesses, far more deserving of credit than
Labat. You will find in this work to which I allude, that the
success of the missionaries was entirely owing to their indefatigable
exertions, unparalleled patience, and heroical virtues. The cele-
brated Muratori wrote a history of the Christian Church in Paraguay,
in which after describing the astonishing piety, and purity of morals
of the converted Americans, he does not hesitate to compare them
with the first Christians in the times of the Apostles. The much
admired Protestant Historian, Mosheim, informs us in his Church
History, that the Catholic missionaries both in the East and West
Indies, met with better success than the Protestants, •‘because,”
says ho, “ they only brought the savages from one sort of supersti-
tion to another. Now would it not have answered his purpose
much better, to have adopted Labat’s account, could he have been
satisfied with his authority ? How did St. Francis Xavier convert
fifty two kingdoms in India to the faith of Christ ? By his preach-
ing and by the miracles which the Almighty enabled him to perform
in order to prove his divine mission to those poor savages. Was he
assisted by a Cortez or a Pizarro ? How did he appear amongst
them ?—ln the garb of poverty ; like his divine Master, he was a
pattern of humility aud of every virtue; and with no other arms
than his breviary and his crucifix, he convinced those poor Indians,
that the religion which he preached was of a divine origin, and he
confirmed them in this conviction by the stupendous miracles which
he performed, in every town and village into which he entered. Will
you deny that any such miracles were performed ? Then you must
admit a still more extraordinary miracle. For would it not be one
of the most extraordinary events that we ever heard of, that fifty
two kingdoms, containing thousands of idolaters, should all at once
throw down their idols, —renounce the faith of their forefathers, —
embrace a religion which imposed such severe restraints upon them,
—which required of them to dismiss their numerous concubines, —
and spend the best part of the year in fasting and abstinence, and
all this at the voice of a poor man, unless they had clearly per-
ceived the finger of heaven in those extraordinary actions which
he performed. You have accounted very satisfactorily for the con-
version of Mexico and Peru by a Cortez and Pizarro; your account
of the conversion of the Indies by a Xavier, will, I am confident,
give equal satisfaction ; I should like very much however, to hear
what you have to say on the subject; and also to be informed, was
it by bands of soldiers that all the great kingdoms of Europe were


reclaimed from idolatry, or that seventy-two thousand Protestants,
in Geneva, were induced by Si. Francis, of Sales, once more to
reunite themselves to the Catholic Church.
When you tell us that the Catholic Church has been unemployed for
centuries in the work of conversion, and that all that is doing now
for the conversion of the Heathens is doing by Protestants, you are
only still proving your ignorance of history, and entirely spoiling the
cause which you have undertaken to advocate. It is little more than
two hundred and fifty years ago, since South America and the
Indies were brought to the faith by Catholic missionaries. Since
that time fresh converts have continued to crowd the Church inCanada,
Tartary, and the islands of Africa and Asia; numerous savages in
the 18th century have been civilised and baptized, among the
Hurons, and other tribes of North America. “Butto come down
still nearer,” says Dr. Milner, “to our own time. F. Bouchet,
‘‘ alone, in the course of his twelve years’ labour, in Madura, in-
“ structed and baptized 20,000 Indians, while F. Britto within fifteen
“ months, only converted and regenerated 8000, when he sealed his
“ mission with his blood.” “By the latest returns,” continues he
“ which I have seen from the Eastern missionaries to the Directors of
“ the French Missions Elrangeres, it appears that in the Western
“ district of Tonquin, during the five years preceding the beginning
“of this century, (the nineteenth) 4,101 adults, and 26,915 children
“ were received into the Church by Baptism ; and that in the lower
“ part of Cochin China, 900 grown persons were baptized in the
“ course of two years, besides vast numbers of children. Bishop
“ Lamote, Vic. Apost. of Fokien, testifies that in his district, dur-
ing the year 1810, 10,384 infants, and 1,677 grown persons were
“ baptized, and 2,674 Catechumens admitted.”* So much for one
part of your assertion, that the Church of Rome has been unemployed
for centuries. Let us now see what Protestants have done for the
conversion of nations. Shew me one single nation on the face of the
earth that they have ever converted from idolatry. As for what they
have done within these few years in Bengal and India we have cer-
tainly heard great accounts, but when we read a speech of C.
Marsh, Esq. in a committee of the House of Commons, July Ist,
1815, in which he declares that not more than 80 converts have
been made by Protestant Missionaries during seven years, throughout
the whole of the Bengal government, which extends over from 30
to 40 millions of people, and that even those 80 were almost all out-
casts from the Hindoo tribes, we are, I must confess, a little stag-
* See Dr. Milner s End of Religious Controversy, Letter XXX. See Major
Waring’s Remarks on Oxford Sermons.


gered in our belief of those wonderful conversions which we hear so
much of every day. The Edinburgh Review, of April, 1808, in-
forms us that the Protestant Missionaries trembled for the persever-
ance even of this small number of converts; meaning, I suppose, that
they were afraid lest their faith might fail, with the failure of the
rice and rum which seem principally to have given it birth. Besides
of what advantage is it, to induce those poor savages to renounce their
idols, unless they be taught the true faith, and united to the true
Church of Christ. St. Augustin addressing himself to the Donatists,
who had separated themselves from the Catholic Church, and who
could reckon upwards of two hundred and fifty bishops amongst their
number, all validly and lawfully consecrated, declares to them, that
so far from benefiting those heathens, whom they baptized and
brought over to their erroneous opinions, on the contrary that they
did them a most serious injury. “By baptizing Pagans,” says he,'
‘‘they (the Donatists) cure them of the wound of idolatry, but they
“inflict upon them them the deeper wound of schism.”* Suppose you
happened to be dispatched on a mission for the conversion of Heathens,
in company with missionaries belonging to the Moravians, the Wes-
leyan Methodists, the Society of Friends, and the Baptists, all well
stored with a plentiful supply of Bibles. How will you proceed ?
You will of course first teach them to believe in Jesus Christ, their
only Redeemer. 2ndly,—That the Bible is the ward of God.
3rdly, —You will teach them the thirty-nine articles, the Nicene and
Athanasian creeds, and conformably with this last named creed, you
will declare to them that “ Whoever will be saved, above all things
“he must hold the'Catholic faith, which faith unless a man do keep
“ whole and undeliled, without doubt he will perish everlastingly.”-f-
You will next teach them that Baptism and the Lord’s Supper are
necessary for salvation, that our Lord Jesus Christ has left power
to his church to absolve all sinners who truly repent; and in a
word, you will inform them, that the Church of England is the true
church of Christ, shot like a bolt from heaven, to which all must be
united who wish to be saved. But as fast as you are teaching them
all those articles of belief, your fellow missionaries will be teaching
them quite a contrary doctrine ; they will be telling them that every
thing which you have said is completely absurd; that there is no such
thing in the Scriptures as a Nicene or an Athanasian creed; that
Christ never talked about thirty-nine articles ; that baptism of water
is an idle ceremony ; that the true baptism is that of the Spirit; and
that nothing more is required for salvation than to believe in Christ and
♦ Lib. I. de Baptismo, contra Donatistas, chap. 8. fSce Athanasian Creed,
in Book of Common Prayer.


to read the Bible. The Unitarian missioner will make Unitarians
of them; the Wesleyan missionary will make them Methodists;
the Presbyterian will convert them to Presbyterianism ; the Calvin-
ist will convert them to one doctrine, and the Arminiau to another ;
you will all tell them that the Bible is the word of God, but you
will all take care to make the Bible speak whatever you please; and
each of you will tell them, that if they wish to be saved they must
listen to him. And is this what you call converting heathens ?
After your fellow missionaries have prevailed upon them to take a
bible, which not one out of an hundred of them can read, much less
understand, after they have caused them to believe in the divinity of
Christ, still you must acknowledge that all is in vain unless they can
be made to hold the Catholic faith ; “ which faith,” says your Atha-
nasian Creed, and our Athanasian Creed too, “ unless a man do keep
“ whole and undefiled, without doubt he will perish everlastingly.”
Would you presume to say, that it is no matter to which of those
sects these heathens are converted, provided they take care to lead
good moral lives, your own Church immediately pronounces a curse
against you in her eighteenth article. You have already told us, that
our salvation absolutely depends upon our belief of the very truths
taught us by the Apostles;* go therefore, and agree among your-
selves what are those truths, and it will be then time enough for you
to talk about preaching them.
I shall spend very little time in replying to your observations on
the supremacy of the Roman Pontiff. “ I affirm,” say you, “in
“ the face of pretended infallibility, that Christ constituted no head
“of the Church, and that it is a bold and daring presumption of the
“ Pope of Rome to usurp the headship,” &c. After all you have
already affirmed in direct opposition to truth; after telling your
readers that we dare not have a bible in our possession, whereas they
are for sale in every catholic bookseller’s shop in Christendom; after
mis-franslating the words of the Council of Trent, in order to dis-
prove the infallibility of Councils; and after causing Clement
11. to have a conversation with Labat six hundred years before the
latter was born, we feel not the least surprise at any thing which
you may affirm : —you have gradually prepared our minds for every
thing. Notwithstanding however, this positive affirmation of a
Master of. Arts, which (as might be imagined) should be more than
sufficient to check all contradiction, at least from plain untitled
individuals; I must certainly be excused, whilst I have the
presumption to assert that I am most firmly convinced that Christ
*Scc page 14.


has constituted one supreme head of the Church, and that notwith-
standing your pigmy efforts, or the more gigantic efforts of those who
have gone before you, to strike that head from off the shoulders of
Christ’s mystical body, still it has for ever opposed an impenetrable
front to your blows, and each succeeding attack only serves more
clearly to prove, how vain are the weak efforts of man against any
thing which is of divine institution. The whole notion you maintain,
of Peter’s supremacy, is “ built upon a single verse, and that a verse
the exact meaning of which is disputed.” I think that with very little
difficulty, I shall be able to find you a few more. Besides that passage
where Christ says to St. Peter, “ Blessed art thou Simon Barjona,” &c.
“ And I say to thee thou art Peter, (a rock) and on this rock I will
“build my church,” &c. Matt, xvi 17,&c. do you forget what he says
to him in the 21st chapter of St. John ? Three different times he there
asked him this question,—“ Simon Peter, lovest thou me ?’’ He even
asks him, does he love him more than his fellow apostles; and upon
his answering each time in the affirmative, he desires him to feed his
lambs and to feed his sheep; by these words evidently confiding to his
charge, the whole care not only of the flock, but also of the pastors,
who are signified by the sheep, and whom the lambs are accustomed
to follow. Must not a man wilfully shut his eyes against the light, who
does not clearly perceive that the words of Christ are to be understood
in this sense, and no other. Why did he not address himself to the
rest ofthe Apostles in the samelanguage? Why did he not say to hisbe-
loved disciple John, or to Matthew, or to James, “Lovest thou memore
“than these?” “ Feed my lambs, feed my sheep.” Why does he pray
particularly for Peter, that he might be enabled to withstand the attacks
ofthe Devil, which seem principally to be directed against this Apostle?
“Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may
“ sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not;
“and thou being once converted, confirm thy brethren. Luke xxii. 33,
Why did St. Paul, who received his authority in so extraordinary a
manner from the lips of Jesus Christ himself, think it necessary to go
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and remain with him fifteen days, if he
did not believe that a special superiority had been conferred upon this
Apostle by his divine Master? Galat. i. 18. These are not the one half
of the scriptural arguments which I might bring forward in proof of
the supremacy of St. Peter. When we find ourselves pressed upon
this point, you charge us with having recourse to traditional argu-
ments, which no rational opponent will admit. If no rational oppo-
nent will admit traditional arguments, I should like very much to be
informed, where those scriptural arguments are to be found, by which
you will be enabled to prove against the dissenter or the deist the
validity of infant baptism,—the divine inspiration of the scriptures,—
the lawfulness of eating things strangled, and blood, contrary to the
positive precept of the Apostles in the Council of Jerusalem. Actsxx.
20.; and also, how perfectly justifiable you are in changing the obser-
vation of the Sabbath-Day from Saturday to Sunday, contrary to the


original institution of the Almighty himself. Lay aside traditional
arguments on those different points, and I confidently maintain that
you never will be able to answer a single one of their objections. Be-
sides, if no rational opponent will admit of traditional arguments,
why do you make use of those very arguments in order to prove that
the Roman Pontiffs never enjoyed any superior authority as successors
of St Peter? Why do you haverecourse to the conduct ofSt. Polycarp
towards Anicetus? Why do you quote the words of St. Cyprian?
Why do yoitappeal to the acts of the Council of Arles, and the pro-
posals of Pope Gregory to the British Clergy? What arc all those
but traditional arguments? If they be admissible on one side of the
question, why reject them on the other ? As for the conduct of St.
Polycarp, he opposed Anicetus, because it was a mere question of dis-
cipline, and because this Pope never urged his authority against him,
on account of the great respect which he bore him as a disciple of St.
John the Evangelist. If St. Polycarp acknowledged no authority in
Anicetus, would St. Irenoeus, (who boasts of having been instructed
by the former) refer us to the Church of Rome, “as the greatest, the
“most ancient, and most universally known, as having been founded
“by St. Peter and St. Paul, to which,” he says, “every church is
« bound to conform by reason of its superior authority.”* The quota-
tion from St. Cyprian, whose mind at the time he wrote, was very
much irritated against Pope Stephen proves very little when com-
pared with' other expressions of the same Saint on the ques-
tion of the supremacy. In his Epistle to Pope Cornelius, he expresses
the greatest indignation, that certain African schismatics should dare to
approach “the See of Peter, the Head Church, and the Source of
“Ecclesiastical Unity.”f And though he had a dispute with Pope
Stephen about re-baptizing converts from heresy, and firmly maintained
his own opinion on the point, because the Church had as yet decided
nothing on the question, yet still he always admitted the Roman Pon-
tiff to be the chief Bishop, as is evident from his advising this very
same Pontiff to depose Marcian, a schismatical Bishop of Gaul, and to
appoint another Bishop in his place. J In asserting that the Cnurch of
Britain was for several centuries independent of the See of Rome, one
would be inclined to think, that in penning down those notorious
blunders, you really imagined yourself beyond the reach of detection,
and considered your readers as persons totally unacquainted with Ec-
clesiastical History. In this very Council of Arles to which you allude,
the Bishops of York and London were present, and in conjuction with
the other Bishops, subscribed that Canon by which the Pope’s spiritual
supremacy was established.! And again, the British Bishops assisted
* Opera St.lrencci contra Haires, lib 111. chap. 3. t t-p. ail Cornel. 55.
“ Petri cathedra, ecclesia principalis, unde imitas sacerdotalis cxorta est. f Ep.
ad Cornel.ss. JEpis. 29. fj St.Athanas, Apolog. 2. See also Archbishop Usher.


al tie Council of Sardica, in Illyrium, hold in 347, wherelthe right
of appeal to the Pope, in all ecclesiastical causes, from every part
of the world was decreed by this Council, and subscribed by those
British Bishops.*
“ Proposals (you in the next place inform us) having been made
“by Gregory to the British Clergy, to submit to the diocese of Romo,
“ after a general consultation and mature deliberation, they firmly
“ rejected them; and because of this very rejection, 1250 of the
“ monks of Bangor, whose Abbot had made the reply, were murder-
“ed.” I have taken particular notice of the manner in which this
sentence concludes; there is not a single uninformed reader, who
would not naturally infer from the termination of the sentence, that
the British clergy were murdered through the intrigues of the Roman
missionaries, merely because they would not subscribe to their
proposals. In fact, it appears almost evident to me, that this was
the very impression which you wished to make upon your readers,
and of course to fill their minds with horror at the barbarous conduct
of those Popish priests, who could deliberately massacre, or cause
to be massacred, 1250 innocent men, for no other reason, than be-
cause they would not bow down their necks under the galling yoke
of Rome. Perhaps I maybe wrong in my suspicions; appearances
however, are very much against you. If you really are under the
impression that the British clergy were murdered through the intrigues
of Augustin and his companions, I think it very necessary to unde-
ceive you, in order to prevent hereafter, any misrepresentation on
the subject. These monks were put to death by Edilfrid, the warlike
and pagan King of Northumbria, near the hills of Chester; not
because they rejected the proposals of Augustin, (for he had been
dead many years at (he tirae,)f but for no other reason than because
they were discovered on a neighbouring eminence, fervently praying
against this Saxon prince, during the battle which he was fighting
against their countrymen, and endeavouring to regulate, by their
supplications, the fate of the contending armies. “If they pray,’’
cried out the king, “they also fight against us;” he led his troops to
the foot of the hill, and the monks were slaughtered without mercy.
With regard to the proposals made to the British clergy, was the
acknowledgment of the Roman supremacy amongst the number ?
By no means ; there was no necessity for asking them to recognise
an authority which they already admitted. The demands of Augus-
tin were reduced to three. He required of them to observe the
* See 3rd Canon of this Council, f Ipso Augustino jam multo ante tempora
ad coslestia regna sublato. See the works of Venerable Bede, page 81.


orthodox computation of Easter ; to conform to the Roman ritual irt
the administration of baptism ; and to join with him and his fellow-
missionaries, in preaching the gospel to the Saxons. The very fact
of his inviting them to join with him in the instruction of their Saxon
neighbours, evidently proves that they admitted the supremacy of
his master, and agreed in every thing excepting the points above-
mentioned. They certainly refused at the time to receive St. Augus-
tin as their Bishop, but neither did Augustin nor the Roman Pontiff,
require them to do so.* But from their vindication of the rights of
an ancient church, are we therefore to conclude, that they disavowed
the supremacy of the Pontiff? Did the French bishops deny the
supremacy of the See of Rome, when they resisted the concordat
between Pius VII. and Bonaparte ? Should Leo XII. grant the
Veto, and the Irish Bishops vigorously oppose it, must we therefore
conclude that they no longer acknowledge his authority? One in-
stance however, will put an end to this question, and clearly establish
the fact, that the British clergy did at this very time admit the su-
premacy of Romo; for two years after this conference had been
held, we find Oudoceus, Bishop of Llandaff) going to Canterbury
to receive consecration from the hands of St. Augustin, and upon his
return into Wales, he was received by all ranks of the people with
the highest honors,f and from that time forward, the Bishops of
Llandaff wore always subject to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who
was at all times the Pope’s Legate. “Is it now sufficiently demon-
“ strated by facts that the Church of Britain for centuries was wholly
“independent of the See of Rome.” The unexpected length of
this letter, now obliges me to'hasten to a conclusion; but before I
have done, allow me to ask you what could be your motive for so
shamefully vilifying an innocent body of men, who never injured you ?
Can a single plea be brought forward to extenuate your conduct ?
Allowing for a moment that you are really ignorant of the principles
ot Catholics, will that ignorance excuse you? Was it not very easy
for you to procure our books of instruction, —our creeds, —and our
articles of faith, and rightly inform yourself of our real tenets, be-
fore you undertook to discuss them ? Is it from prejudiced protestant
writers, or from apostate catholic priests, that you are to learn the
genuine doctrine of the Catholic Church ? After having exhibited
os as a parcel of blasphemers and idolaters, and stirred up the hatred
of the ignorant and uninformed against us, is it any consolation to
those who are suffering from your ignorance, to think that you have
written as you really believed. Your very r ignorance under such
* “ Neque se ilium pro Archiepiscopo habituros.” Bede page 80. I Vita
Oudocei, quoted by Godwin de Prcesul, and Archbishop Usher.
G


circumstances becomes a crime; you should have studied the subject
a little better before you obtruded yourself into public notice ; you
should have examined the story more attentively, before you gave
so wide a circulation to the calumny. But are we to attribute entirely
to your ignorance the many misrepresentations of which I have
proved you guilty ? Is there nothing more at the bottom ? What
motive did you propose to yourself, by declaring that you waited
upon a Catholic priest tor an explanation of the Catholic doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and afterwards, when you were called upon in
the public prints to name this clergyman, prudently to keep your
mind to yourself. Your motive is obvious to every one; and your
refusal to give either a public or a private answer to the question pro-
posed, has afforded strong grounds for the belief, that your assertion
is either a very neat jib, or at least something very like it. But if
you are so full of zeal for the protection of the Protestant Church,
if you are so justly alarmed at the multitude of enemies which are
so closely leagued against her, you should first attack the most for-
midable, and the remainder will become an easy conquest. Rest
assured however, that it is not against the Catholic Church your
principal efforts should bo directed ; the severe regimen which she
points out to her followers, —the rugged path along which she is sure
to conduct all those who apply to her as their guide,—the humiliatory
practice of confession, —and the painful exercises of fasting and absti-
nence which she rigidly exacts from each member of her communion,
will ever prove an insuperable barrier to those thousands of protest-
ants who might otherwise feel inclined to desert their own Church and
embrace that of their forefathers. Moreover as her doctrines atz idol-
atrous, blasphemous, antichrislian, and above all, revolting toreason ;
of course noperson of common understandingwillfor a moment believe
them, and surely the loss of a few idiots should give you very little
uneasiness. It is not therefore from this quarter that the Church of
England has to dread the principle attack : no, there is a more for-
midable opponent; an enemy even still more powerful than the old
inveterate one which once ravaged the land; there is the great body
of dissenters drawn up in battle array against you, every day they
are thinning your ranks and hemming you in within narrower limits,
every day they are making a breach in the walls, and ere long the
sacred citadel itself will be in their possession. Even within your
own entrenchments domestic dissension prevails to so alarming an
extent, that a Society has been organized by Protestants, for the con-
version of foreign Protestants, who are subverting the pure doctrine
of the gospel.* Here then is an enemy, against whom every effort
• This society was established in the year 1823, under the title of the “Liver


of your zeal should be directed, and your charity, (which, according
to the proverb, should begin at home) will find an ample field for
its beneficent exertions, in reclaiming from scepticism and infidelity
the different members of your own communion. Finally, if Dr. B.
is to be blamed for the kind and charitable manner in which he
endeavoured to convince his auditors that the church of which he
was the minister, was the very one established by Christ; if he is to
be censured whilst he pointed out to all, the necessity of being united
to that Church, or to adopt your own words, for gently shutting the
door of Heaven against the good people of Bradford, what are wo to
think of a Protestant Archdeacon, who rudely slaps it in their faces,
and by way of apologising for his conduct, politely assures them that
because they have dispensed with the services of the Church of Eng-
land, they are nothing but a parcel of bastards. “ The Church of
“ Christ, (says Dr. Daubeny, Archdeacon of Sarum) is but one and all;
“the promises of the gospel are exclusively made to that one Church.
“ None consequently but the members of that Church can lay claim
“to an interest in those promises; upon the same principle that none
“ but those who have been admitted members of any human society
* can lay claim to the privileges belonging to it. Indeed from the
“general tenure of scripture it is to be concluded that none but those
“ who are members of the Church, can be partakers of the spirit by
“ which it is accompanied. Without therefore presuming to determine
“ upon the condition of those who are out of the Church, we are at
“ least justified in saying, that their hope of salvation must be built
“ upon some general idea of divine mercy, to which the member of
“ the Church has a covenanted claim. In their case we recognise
“ what appears to us to resemble the uncertain provision of bastards
“compared with the more settled inheritance of legitimate children.”*
At the very time that you are endeavouring to persuade the good
people of Bradford, that the Catholic religion is idolatrous, antichris-
tian, and even revolting to reason, an enlightened Legislature is be-
stowing upwards of eight thousand pounds yearly on the support of a
Catholic College,! where four hundred young Ecclesiastics are at
this moment preparing themselves for the Catholic priesthood ; that
is, preparing themselves to teach five millions of people the same
antichristian doctrines which they are now learning themselves. The
Lord Chancellor and the three chief Judges are appointed by the
pool Auxiliary Continental Society,” in consequence of its having been discov-
ered, as the Rev. Mr. Tattcrsall declared, that on the Continent, among Protest-
ants, scepticism and infidelity had subverted the pure doctrine of the Gospel.
* Daubeny’s “ Guide to the Church page 177—8. f Royal College of May-
nooth, near Dublin.


Government to visit this College every three years; each treatise on
Divinity is laid open to their inspection; President, Professors, and
Students are ready to answer on their oath every question which
may be proposed to them, and yet marvellous to relate, with all their
talents and learning, these enlightened visitors have never yet been
able to discover any thing idolatrous, blasphemous, or antiohristian
in the doctrine which are there taught. You perhaps may have re-
ceived some peculiar illumination on the subject, which has been
withheld from them, I will not presume to question it; we live in an
enlightened age, and heavenly inspirations on every point are now so
very common, that a person should make a long pause before he rash-
ly rejects them. I have now done, and the importance of the subject
is the only apology which I can offer for trespassing so long upon
your precious time. Your own good sense must clearly perceive
that it was impossible in a few weeks to do full justice to the merits
of an elaborate production of eighteep months’ hard study, enough
however I hope has been said to make you come to this firm determi-
nation that for the future you will never open your lips against the
Catholic Church, until you have first studied her doctrines more
attentively, and until you are first perfectly certain, that youmay write
what you please, without the danger of contradiction. Upon these
terms I promise you that you shall not hear from me again. Occupied
with those multiplied duties, from which a more indulgent Church has
graciously exempted you, I find very little time for discussions of this
kind, even although I were inclined; this much however I can assure
you that I never shall suffer you nor any other individual to calumni-
ate that religion of whose character I am the professed guardian, and
although for the present, I have only acted on the defensive, yet
should you hereafter provoke an attack, should you unwillingly force
me to expose the origin of the sacred citadel, the architects who
built it, and the ways and means by which its tottering ruins have
since been kept together, attribute the disagreable consequences to
yourself, the second offence shall not be treated with the same degree
of lenity or indulgence as the first. “Post mihi non simili pcena
commissa luetis.”
I have the honor to remain.
Reverend Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
FRANCIS MURPHY.
Bradford, January 15, 1827.
