





GEORGE AUGUSTUS
SELWYN
FIRST BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND
AFTERWARDS BISHOP OF LICHFIELD
E. A. BULLEY
LONDON
WELLS GARDNER, BARTON & CO., LTD.
3 & 4, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.
AND 44, VICTORIA STREET, S.W.




GEORGE AUGUSTUS SELWYN
FIRST BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND
AFTERWARDS BISHOP OF LICHFIELD
George Augustus Selwyn, who was in later
life the first Bishop of New Zealand, was born
on April 5, 1809, at Church Row, Hampstead.
His father, Mr. William Selwyn, was at that
time an eminent King’s Counsel, and was later
appointed 4 Instructor of Prince Albert in the
Constitution and laws of his adopted country.’
The boy is described in a letter, written after
his death by his sister, as 4 a strong, self-willed
child, and my mother had to use Solomon’s
remedy’; but she goes on to say that 4 he was
ever energetic and ready to assist in any emer-
gency that might arise in the nursery. If any
case of distress was mentioned in his hearing,
his pocket-money was at once devoted to its
relief. I trembled under his eye if I took a
little more at table than he thought (in his
self-denying goodness) to be necessary.’
In his eighth year he was sent to a school
kept by Dr. Nicholas at Ealing, a somewhat
famous school in those days, numbering no less
than three hundred boys, and amongst them,
in Selwyn’s time, were the two brothers Francis
and Henry Newman.
From Ealing Selwyn passed to Eton, board-
-I—2


ing in the same house with Mr. Gladstone.
Bishop Abraham, a contemporary of Selwyn’s
at Eton, describes the following incident of his
behaviour on the river, which well shadows
forth the unselfishness so strongly marked in the
Bishop's future character:
‘ Our boats in those days were clumsy, and
the oars clumsier. In Selwyn’s “ long-boat ”
there were seven oars not very good, and one
superlatively bad. The boys used to run “up
town ” as hard as they could to Bob Tolladay’s,
and seize upon one of the seven moderately
bad ones, and the last-comer got the “ punt-
pole.” Of course he was sulky all the way up
to Surly, and the other seven abused him for
not pulling his own weight. Everyone was
out of temper. So George Selwyn determined
always to come last. The other fellows chaffed
him, but he used to laugh, and at last charac-
teristically said ; “ It’s worth my while taking
that bad oar. I used to have to pull the
weight of the sulky fellow who had it; now
you are all in good - humour.” This story
really illustrates his whole after - life. He
always took “ the labouring oar ” in every-
thing, and he “ greased the rowlocks ” in every
work.’
‘ He was always first in everything,’ con-
tinues Bishop Abraham, when writing about
his old schoolfellow in the Eton College Chron-
icle of June, 1878, ‘and no one knew him


without admiring and loving him. I believe he
was the greatest diver at Eton or anywhere else. 1
He was in the Upper Division when he left
Eton and went to Cambridge as a scholar of
St. John's, afterwards becoming a Fellow of the
same College.
He carried his love of athletic sports with
him, and was all his life an enthusiastic advo-
cate for rowing, so that when, in 1829, Oxford
made the first proposal for an inter-University
boat-race, and Cambridge warmly accepted the
challenge, the seventh oar in the boat was
pulled by George Selwyn.
He was also, in his college days, a great
pedestrian, and once walked from Cambridge
to London in thirteen hours without stopping.
He adopted the hardy habit of bathing daily in
the river, however cold or severe the weather,
and in such ways was—all unconsciously, it is
true —educating his body for the arduous post
of a Colonial Bishop, though such an idea had
probably never then entered into his calcula-
tions.
Selwyn graduated in 1831. He was second
in the Classical Tripos, but, having no love for
mathematics, his name was very low down on
the Mathematical Tripos, and, on reading the
list, the disappointment was so keen that, for a
moment or two, he could say nothing. At last
he turned to the friend who had come with
him to see the class list, and said, 4 Well! Eve


had many a licking at Eton, but I never felt so
beaten as I do now,’
After taking his degree he spent some months
in foreign travel, and then returned to his
beloved Eton as private tutor to the sons of the
Earl of Powis.
Here he was able to effect a wholesome,
radical change in the boating laws of the
school. Incredible as it now sounds to us,
boating had hitherto been an altogether for-
bidden amusement to the Eton boys, but,
though forbidden, it was none the less resorted
to by a large number of the lads, the authori-
ties finding themselves obliged to wink at such
irregularities.
The young tutor persuaded the Head-Master
(Dr. Hawtrey) to entrust to him the water
arrangements for the boys. ‘ Let them have
freedom,’ was his argument, judiciously adding,
4 but force them to learn swimming before
going on the water’—for in those days fatal
accidents on the water were only too common.
This was accordingly made the rule, and the
result has proved its wisdom.
During this time Mr. Selwyn was busily
engaged in preparing himself for Holy Orders,
and in 1833 he was ordained deacon, being
made priest in the following year. He was first
appointed to the curacy of Boveney, but shortly
afterwards became the licensed curate of Wind-
sor. Here he was allowed a free hand, as the


Vicar also held the living of Datchet, where he
resided, and, finding his young curate most
earnest and capable, Windsor parish was prac-
tically left entirely in his hands.
Numerous were the schemes which Mr. Selwyn
started in the parish, and not only started, but
successfully carried through.
About this time Mr. Selwyn became engaged
to Miss Sarah Richardson, a daughter of Sir J.
Richardson, a judge of the Court of Common
Pleas, who lived at Bray, a village some miles
from Windsor by road, though there was a
short cut by the ferry.
This short cut was much resorted to by
Mr. Selwyn ; but one night, on returning home,
he found he had kept such late hours that the
ferryman had left for the night. Here was a
dilemma! Of course Mr. Selwyn could easily
enough have punted himself across, but then,
how would the ferryman and his early customers
like to see their boat on the opposite shore?
Their business must not be sacrificed to his
pleasure. He settled the matter in his own
fashion. He punted himself across, undressed,
and, leaving his clothes on the Windsor bank
of the river, ferried the boat back to its old
moorings, then swam across in the dark to his
clothes, dressed himself, and ran gaily home.
His marriage took-place in 1839, and shortly
after came the call to the chief work of his life
—the Bishopric of New Zealand.


New Zealand had been formally declared a
British colony in the year 1839, and almost
immediately the ‘ New Zealand Church Society 1
wrote home to the newly-appointed Colonial
Bishopric’s Council, asking that a Bishop might
be sent to this ‘ Britain of the South.’
It should be stated here that the three islands
which form the colony of New Zealand had been
already practically christianised by the labours of
Dr. Samuel Marsden, and since his day, through
the agency of the Church Missionary Society,
churches had been built and schools established
all over the islands ; but the want of a Bishop
was, of course, keenly felt everywhere.
It is true, though difficult now to believe,
that many of the New Zealand clergy were
opposed to the idea of a Bishop coming amongst
them ; but this only shows to what a very low
ebb Church matters had fallen, and how badly
such clergy needed episcopal supervision for
themselves, to say nothing of their people, who
all these years had been almost without the
Gifts of Confirmation or Ordination.
It is true that in 1838 Bishop Broughton, of
Australia, a good and indefatigable follower of
the Apostles, had made a visitation to these
islands, and had held an Ordination and some
Confirmations, and consecrated certain burial-
grounds.
But his own large and fast-increasing Diocese
made it impossible for the good man to repeat


such a laborious Visitation, and the time had
most certainly come when New Zealand should
have a Bishop of her own.
So the Bishop of London, in May, 1841,
offered the See to Mr. Selwyn, and he, in a most
characteristic letter, accepted the charge ‘ with
all obedience and humility. . . . There is no
question about the spiritual duty itself,’ he
further said ; 4 the only question is whether in
the discharge of that duty we shall be obliged
to be tent-makers or not. , . .’
The reference in the letter to 4 tent-makers ’
was an allusion to the probability of the Infant
Church having to use daily labour to earn its
daily bread, for the House of Commons was
reluctant to grant the vote of six hundred
pounds per annum for the new Bishopric, and
it seemed likely at one time that the entire
income of the new See would be the six hundred
pounds granted by the C.M.S. Mr. Selwyn
however, had most certainly not accepted the
Bishopric for the sake of its emoluments, and
he told the Prime Minister that, having signified
to the Bishop his acceptance of the See, he
should consider it his duty to go to New
Zealand, whether the grant were forthcoming
or not. Eventually, however, the grant was
made, and the preparation of the 4 Letters
Patent ’ was rapidly pushed forward.
Mr. Selwyn was consecrated Bishop on Oc-
tober 17, 1841, in the Chapel of Lambeth
2


Palace by the Archbishop of Canterbury and
the Bishops of London, Lincoln, and Barbadoes,
the degree of D.D. having previously been con-
ferred on him by the University of Oxford.
On October 31 the Bishop preached his fare-
well sermon in Windsor church. His text—a
favourite one of his—was : ‘ Thine heart shall
fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of
the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces
of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.’
The church was crowded with eager listeners,
all of whom were deeply affected by his words,
and none more so than an Eton boy, who from
that hour silently vowed himself to follow the
Bishop when old enough to do so.
We all know how faithfully that vow was
kept, and the Church will ever hold sacred the
memory of the Martyr-Bishop of Melanesia,
John Coleridge Patteson.
The Bishop had taken passages for his wife
and himself, his clergy and catechists, in the
sailing-ship Tomatin , and after many delays the
vessel left Plymouth on December £6, 1841.
Many friends were on deck to take a last
farewell of the party, and the Rev. Edward
Coleridge thus describes the parting scene:
4 All was ready for sailing. In a few minutes
we all assembled, and the Bishop, having given
notice of the Holy Communion for next Sunday
. . . prayed for a safe voyage and a blessing.
We all remained on our knees for some time in


perfect silence . . . then we went into the
cabin of our dear friends, and the Bishop wrote
some words in my Bible whilst they were weigh-
ing anchor. ... We tore ourselves away . . .
and in a moment the ship with her goodly
freight was on her way. The Bishop, Whyte-
head, and others stood on the poop, the Bishop
repeatedly waving his hat round his honoured
head. When about a hundred yards off, I
stood up in our boat, and called to him in a
loud voice : “ GOD bless you ! GOD bless you !
Floreat Etona!” The Tomatin crowded her
sails and glided away from us. . . . Surely no
ship since that which carried St. Paul has gone
to sea with a holier or more precious freight!’
The episcopal party on the Tomatin was a
large one. There was, first of all, the Bishop
and Mrs. Selwyn and their baby-boy, two chap-
lains —Mr. Whytehead and Mr. Cotton—three
missionary clergy, three catechists, and a school
master and mistress.
Besides these, there was also a New Zealand
boy, Rupai by name, whom the Bishop valued
greatly, as by his means he hoped, during the
voyage, to learn the Maori language.
We may say here that this hope of the
Bishop’s was realised, and the long five months’
voyage was so well employed that on arrival
the Bishop was able to preach to the Maoris in
their own language, to their intense amazement
and delight. ‘ They listened to him as one
2—2


inspired,’ related one who was present at that
first New Zealand service.
As a rule a sea voyage is to anyone —always
excepting the captain and crew —a time of
lawful idleness, but it was to be otherwise with
the Bishop and his party; and as we read the
record of those days when the good ship was
sailing across the two oceans, we are amazed at
the amount of hard work which the Bishop’s
energy enabled not only himself, but also his
fellow-travellers, to accomplish.
We quote from the Bishop’s letters to his
mother the following account of the life led on
board the Tomatin :
4 Soon after sailing I gave notice that I should
open school on the first Monday in the new
year, allowing a week for sickness and con-
valescence. Accordingly, on Monday, January
3, we began regular habits: reading the daily
prayers at eight in the morning, and the Psalms
and Lessons, in the original languages, each at
their appointed hour. Besides this, there is a
New Zealand class, comprising nearly all the
party, and a mathematical class for the study
of navigation.
‘ I am studying practical navigation under our
captain (a most intelligent man) in order that I
may be my own master in my Visitation voyages.
It gives me great pleasure to find that lam
quite at my ease at sea, which makes me look
forward to the maritime character of my future


life with more comfort and hope. My chrono-
meter and sextant are in constant use.
‘On January 26 we crossed the line, and
purchased an exemption from the customary
shaving by presenting Neptune with a bone
shaving brush (like my father’s) enclosing five
sovereigns for the whole episcopal party.
4 When Easter Day came we were in latitude
thirty-eight degrees south, longitude eighty-
nine degrees east, and a more lovely day could
not be seen. Orders were therefore given to
prepare the quarterdeck for service. You may
judge of our delight when nine of the forward
passengers, who had not before attended our
communion, joined us on this occasion. In all
we had thirty-four communicants,
4 1 must now tell you about ourselves;
4 Sarah (Mrs. Selwyn) is very well. Baby (now
William, as being two years old) has not had a
day’s illness all the voyage. Lord Fowls’ cow
has never failed to supply him with milk twice
a day .. . and he has had fresh or preserved meat
almost every day, so that his diet has been as
good as it could have been on shore.
4 1 can now converse with Rupai fluently in
New Zealand, and catechise him always in his
own language. His company has been of the
greatest service to me, and has guided my
pronunciation, and given me a continual reason
for talking.’
The Tomatin anchored in Sydney Harbour.


on April, 14, 1842, and here Bishop Selwyn
had the opportunity of meeting the Bishop of
Australia, and receiving from this good man
many important hints as to the arrangement
of his Diocese.
Meanwhile the Tomatin was detained in
Sydney for repairs, and the Bishop, who
counted each hour till he could work in New
Zealand, resolved to leave wife and child to
follow him, and taking only his chaplain, Mr.
Cotton, he started in a small brig and reached
Auckland on May 30, the voyage from Sydney
having been accomplished in eleven days.
His first act on touching the soil of New
Zealand was to kneel down on the sand of the
shore, and to thank GOD for his many mercies.
‘ I must tell you,’ writes a lady to her friends
in England, ‘that our good Bishop has arrived.
. . . He took us all by surprise. . . . He had
been becalmed off' the heads, and, with his
chaplain and his native servant, took to the boat:
the two latter rowed, his lordship steered, and
they reached this place soon after dark. . . .
W. and H. were soon down at the beach, where
thev found the head of our New Zealand Church
busily engaged in assisting to pull up the boat
out of the surf. Such an entree bespoke him a
man fit for a New Zealand life. We are all
much delighted with him ; he seems so desirous
of doing good to the natives, and so full of plans
for the welfare of all. To-day the Tomatin has


arrived, bringing Mrs, Selwyn and the rest of his
numerous party.’’
All the episcopal party being now safely
landed at Auckland, the Bishop lost no time in
setting to work, and of course the first considera-
tion was where to fix his abode, all the towns
clamouring for the honour of the episcopal
residence. Here, however, the Bishop at once
showed great wisdom in deciding for the present
to live in none of them; choosing instead the
Waimate as his headquarters, where, fortunately,
the C.M.S. possessed enough houses to shelter
the party. ‘We are better placed here,’ writes
the Bishop, ‘ than in any of the English towns
... at the Waimate I am fettered by no usages
. . . I can take that course which seems to me
the best.’
Two months after he landed he started on a
tour round his Diocese, and, after long journeying
over rivers, scrub and forests, he returned early
in the following year, having made acquaint-
ance with every settlement, every clergyman and
catechist in the country. He spent a fortnight
at Nelson, where he at once pitched a Church
tent, which had been given him in England, and
held daily service for the natives in this ‘ canvas
cathedral.’ At Wellington he had the grief of
losing his dearly loved friend and worker, Mr.
Evans, who died of fever in the Bishop’s arms.
The cause of education and the care of the
sick were ever foremost in the Bishop’s plans.


and almost at once the College at the Waimate
was designed: (1) ‘As a place of religious and
useful education for all classes of the com-
munity, and especially for candidates for Holy
Orders ; (2) as a temporary hostelry for young-
settlers on their first arrival in the country ; (3)
as a refuge for the sick, the aged, and the poor.'’
It was conducted on St. Paul’s rule and
practice as contained in the verse, ‘That ye
study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we com-
manded you.’
The industrial system was from the first most
strongly insisted upon by the Bishop, and
indeed it was absolutely necessary, for the only
regular provision for the support of the Institu-
tion, so varied in its aims, was a grant of three
hundred pounds for the maintenance of pupils
from the S.P.G. Consequently, the students
were taught the work of gardeners, foresters,
farmers, and sacrists, these last having the care
of the churches and burial-ground, the latter of
which they had to clear, fence, plant, turf, and
drain. ‘I suppose,’ writes the Bishop to his
sister, ‘ that Sarah has given you an account of
our mode of life.
‘Mrs Watts is College cook, and bakes and
cooks for the whole body, so that ladies as well
as gentlemen are free to attend to reading and
teaching.
‘ After the aristocratic recollections of Eton,


it is amusing to compare our school at the
Waimate ; fustian jackets and corduroy trousers
are the order of the day, which are so far
from being a disadvantage that they facilitate
the industrial plans of the school, the boys
being employed in gardening, turning, car-
penter’s work, printing, and the like. Many
years must elapse before there will be room for
a fine gentleman in this country, and there-
fore we endeavour, as much as possible, to keep
out what someone has called the “gentleman
heresy 11 from among us. . .
The Bishop made this Industrial School a
means of introducing to the Maoris the arts
of spinning and weaving, the wool of their sheep
having hitherto been so utterly useless to them
that they generally buried it in the ground
to rid themselves of the lumber.
All this sounds very pleasant and peaceful,
but troublous times were shortly in store for
the Bishop. The land question, which had ever
been a source of difficulty between the two races,
in the year 1843 reached-its culminating point.
Land had been bought, or at any rate appro-
priated, by the Colonists in lai’ge quantities, and
without taking proper precautions to see that
the natives understood, or indeed agreed to the
purchase.
Of course dissensions arose, the natives, owing
to the cupidity and ignorance of some of these
early settlers, coming at last to believe that the
3


English meant to wrest the country from the
Maoris, and reduce them to the position of
slaves. The flagstaff on the hill above Korora-
reka was specially named as a proof that the
English meant to subdue the Maoris, and in
1844 a chief named John Heke cut down the
obnoxious flagstaff 1 , and when the Bishop, in
the interests of peace, remonstrated with Heke,
he and his party danced the war-dance before
the Bishop’s face !
War was now openly declared, and the natives,
proving the victors in their first engagement
with the British, were emboldened to attack
other settlements, until at last the whole of the
Northern Island knew something of the misery
of insurrection, if not of open warfare. Where-
ever the fight was fiercest, there would the
Bishop be found, with what aims the following
paragraph (taken from the Auckland Times of
1845) will best explain ;
‘ It is impossible for the rapture of praise to
exceed that with which every tongue loads him.
Fearless in the very midst of the contest.
Dr. Selwyn sought to allay the heat of blood
and to arrest the fury of the fight. He was
also seen bearing the wounded from the field;
afterwards, unwearied, at the bedside of the
dying. Much more than this, he was the nurse,
and the surgeon, and the servant of the sick, as
well as their spiritual attendant.’
These unhappy strifes sadly interfered, of


course, with the work of the Mission, and,
instead of visiting his clergy, or superintending
the numerous works of the College, the Bishop
reluctantly decided that he should now be best
fulfilling his duty by visiting the places where
the insurrection was most imminent, and by
endeavouring to put a stop, if possible, to the
warfare.
In these attempts, however, the Bishop, as
might be expected, made himself extremely
unpopular, first with the Colonists, because he
told them they had been unjust to the natives
in the purchase of their lands; while the natives,
on the other hand, mistrusted the Bishop
because they held him responsible for a breach
of faith which the British Government had
committed over this same vexed land question.
However, popularity was not what the Bishop
had come so far to seek, and he took all calmly,
hoping in time both sides would understand his
motives.
It became necessary, in 1846, to remove the
College from the Waimate to Auckland, the
C.M.S. having refused to renew the lease of
the former premises.
At Auckland, however, the Bishop was en-
abled, from money generously offered by friends
in England, to raise a solid stone building, with
noble sea views, and large enough to accommo-
date the large party of all ranks—Bishop, Arch-
deacon, Priests, students, and boys.
3—2


The College he always spoke of as “ the key
and pivot ” of his arrangements. From it,
Sunday after Sunday, went forth a little band
of clergy to serve chapels in connection with
the College, thus following the example of our
Cathedrals in the early ages of the Church.
The Bishop also made the College the centre
from whence radiated all the various working
organisations of the Diocese.
A special institution was the Hospital of
St. John, ‘ a free hospital for all, of whatsoever
race, station, or religious persuasion.’ The
inmates wei’e to be nursed by the ‘ Brothers
and Sisters of St, John,’ a Community who
pledged themselves to minister to the sick ‘ in
the hope of excluding all hireling assistance
from a work which ought, if possible, to be a
labour of love,’
Such a hospital is now, thank GOD, no rare
thing; but in the year 1846 (long before the
days of Miss Nightingale and the Crimean
War) any but paid nurses, and those mostly
very inefficient, were practically unknown, and
the Bishop’s scheme was warmly welcomed by
the Colonists.
It was not intended for infectious cases, but
the very year after it was opened it became the
centre of a virulent outbreak of typhus fever,
which attacked no less than fifteen of the
College inmates, including the Bishop’s two
little boys —for a second son had been born


since his arrival in the Colony. It was a most
anxious time, but eventually all recovered
except a native man, who had only come to
the hospital in the last stage of the disease;
and at the end of the year the Bishop was able
to send the eldest boy to his brother to be
educated, saying in the letter sent with the
little fellow, 4 1 can form no better wish for
him than that he should be sent out as a
missionary to this Diocese. -1
A few weeks later the Bishop held an
Ordination which, to use his own words, 4 was
worthy of England. 1 Thirteen clergy assisted
at the Holy Communion, and the native and
English schools chanted the Gloria and sang
the Veni Creator. Three Deacons were ordained
who had been trained under the Bishop's eye in
St. John's College, and shortly after the College
chapel was opened and consecrated.
4 You will be surprised to hear that I am
likely to sail soon for the Navigator Isles in
H.M.S. Dido ,' writes the Bishop to his home
people in 1848. 4 ln remembrance of the Arch-
bishop's valedictory letter, in which I am
solemnly urged to watch the spread of the
Gospel over the Pacific Ocean, I think of accept-
ing the offer of Captain Maxwell of a place in
his cabin, and shall probably sail in a week for
the Samoan or Navigator group. My endeavour
will be to bring back some promising boys to
associate with our native scholars, as a begin-


ning of the Polynesian branch of St. John’s
College, which is deeply impressed upon my
mind as a thing essentially necessary.’
It was, for the Bishop, not so much a Mission
voyage as a voyage of keen observation for
future Mission journeys, and with this aim he
thoroughly explored all the islands he could
reach, chiefly those of the Friendly, Navigator,
and New Hebrides groups. The Isle of Pines
bore a bad name, and though the Bishop was
anxious to land here, Captain Maxwell was
equally anxious to prevent his doing so. How-
ever, the Bishop was obstinate, and sculled
himself inside the lagoon. Here he came across
an English schooner, with one white man on
deck, who was calmly smoking his pipe, seem-
ingly in no fear whatever of the savage inhabi-
tants. 4 Why, how is this ?’ asked the Bishop,
4 This is one of the worst islands of the Pacific,
and yet you seem here in perfect contentment.’
The owner of the schooner soon explained the
mystery. He told the Bishop: 4 By kindness
and fair dealing I have traded with these people
for many years. They have cut many thousand
feet of sandalwood for me, and brought it on
board my schooner. I never cheated them, I
never treated them badly; we thoroughly
understand each other.’
The Bishop took the hint, and invariably
spoke of Captain Paddon as 4 my tutor,’ and
they were ever firm friends, the Captain giving


the name of Bishop to one of his schooners.
Indeed, the word ‘ Bishop 1 in time came to be
a sort of friendly password in these parts, and
was the means of saving the life of some
Englishmen belonging to H.M.S. Herald , who
were being menaced by the natives, when fortu-
nately one of the number happened to remark
on a terrible wound which he supposed one of
the natives had inflicted on himself with a fish-
hook. This word turned the scale in their
favour. The savages mistook it for ‘ Bishop, 1
and their menaces were changed to signs of
friendly welcome. Would that all English
traders had been as honest and fair dealing as
Captain Paddon ! We might then have had
no occasion to mourn over the massacres of so
many white men in these Southern seas.
Some Eton friends having presented the
Bishop with a little Mission schooner—the
Undine —he first utilised her by sailing to the
southern parts of New Zealand with a view of
selecting a spot for those parts, which was to be
similar in its aims to St. Johm’s College in the
north.
A spot near Wellington was selected, and
then the Undine was steered for Otago, the
Bishop, as ever, being his own sailing-master,
and, after picking up several native New Zealand
boys for the College, sailed again for Auckland.
‘My party of native boys, eleven in number,
collected from Otaki, etc., 1 writes the Bishop,


4 arrived at the College full of health and good
o o
spirits after sailing from one thousand five
hundred to two thousand miles from their
homes.’ Of the schooner he says with loving
pride: ‘ The good little Undine worked up to
her anchorage after a voyage of fourteen weeks,
with sails, ropes, and spars uninjured, having
sailed three thousand miles and visited thirteen
places. 1
There was no difficulty in finding New Zealand
lads ready and eager to come to St. John’s to
be taught; the difficulty in their case was to
find sufficient English teachers, and the funds
for the upkeep of all of them.
The funds of St. John’s were mainly depen-
dent on the work of its inmates, yet there were
not lacking people, both in England and New
Zealand, who objected to and ridiculed the
industrial part of the system, recognising
neither its deep moral benefit, both to the
English and native lads, nor the fact that it
furnished the chief means of providing the
necessaries of life for the large number of people
gathered together on the College foundation.
But of these cavillers the Bishop took little
heed.
The ‘ isles of the sea 1 now claimed his chief
attention, and he determined to sail his little
schooner to the Melanesian Isles, and to attempt
‘to bring back with me some swarthy youths
for education at our Polynesian College. 1


To many people, both in New Zealand and
at home, it seemed as if, in thus venturing him-
self in a little vessel which carried no defensive
arms of any sort amongst some of the most
savage tribes of the isles of the Pacific, the
Bishop was needlessly and recklessly exposing
his life, and that the results to be obtained
would be insignificant compared to what he
might accomplish by remaining quietly in New
Zealand.
But the Bishop was not of their opinion.
As regards the danger, he says simply: 4 1
assume it as an axiom that where a trader will
go for gain, there the missionary ought to go
for the merchandise of souls.’’
He hoped to be able to induce young lads
from these islands to accompany him to Auck-
land, to be returned again to their tropical
homes before the winter set in; he hoped that
in this way each youth might, by GOD’S
blessing, prove a sort of missionary to his own
family and island.
Though the Bishop spoke lightly of the
risks of this visit to the islands, where all
were savages and many cannibals, yet his staff
well knew the dangers he was incurring, and
saw him off in the little Undine with heavy
hearts.
But, after all, next to GOD, the Bishop
owed his chief safety to his own fearless and
dignified bearing. 4 He would not allow,’ says


a naval chaplain, 4 his crew of four men to have
a musket or any weapon of defence. His
wonderful presence of mind and dignified bear-
ing, and a certain something quite undefinable,
had such an influence over the savage mind that
the natives never seemed to contemplate the
possibility of his molesting them, and therefore
they never dreamed of carrying out their rule
to avenge the shooting of one of themselves by
the sandalwood traders by killing and eating
the first white man who fell into their power. 1
Two months later, at midnight, the Bishop
returned to Auckland accompanied by five
little savages! He was not expected at that
hour, and, making his way into the house, he
woke up Mrs. Selwyn with the gleeful exclama-
tion, ‘ I’ve got them I 1 He already saw in
those newly caught young barbarians the
native clergy by whose means the multitude of
the isles would be gathered into the Father's
kingdom.
The first 4 term 1 at College was quite a
success for these boys in everything except
climate—and perhaps, also, diet, for the island
boys missed the bananas which had hitherto
been their chief food, and they also felt the
cold of New Zealand after their tropical home.
All five were, however, in good health and
spirits some four months later, when the Bishop
again sailed in the Undine to return the lads to
their homes.


In the following summer a third visit was
made to fetch away the boys for another term
of instruction. 4 This time, 1 writes the Bishop,
4 we no longer visit the islands as strangers, but
we have our own scholars to interpret for us. 1
The result of this visit was that the Undine
returned bearing dusky youths from ten
different islands, all speaking a different dialect,
and one and all eager to come with the white
man who had been, so good to their com-
panions.
The year 1850 was a very happy one for the
Bishop, as the dearest wish of his heart was
then accomplished. Nearly ten years before,
when first called to the See of New Zealand,
his lifelong friend, the liev. C. J. Abraham,
had promised him that after he had placed on
a satisfactory footing some new arrangements
at Eton which he had pledged himself to carry
through, he would join the New Zealand Mis-
sion. This promise he was now ready to fulfil,
and arrived in Auckland in July with Mrs.
Abraham. The Bishop could now, without
any anxiety, leave the interests and discipline
of St. John's College in Mr. Abraham's able
care, and he at once set sail for the Southern
Settlements to overlook the College at Porirua,
near Wellington, going on to Australia in
October to meet the Australian Bishops in
Synod.
This Synod constituted an 4 Australian Board


of Missions,’ having for one of its objects the
conversion of the heathen races in all the islands
of the Western Pacific, to be undertaken con-
jointly by the Australian and New Zealand
Churches. The Australian dioceses, of which
there were five, furnished a ship of one hundred
tons, the Border Maid , and Bishop Tyrrell, of
Newcastle (Australia), undertook to make the
first voyage to the islands with the Bishop of
New Zealand.
Money, it may here be' said, \vas from time
to time sent from the Australian dioceses, but,
with the exception of this one journey with a
brother Bishop, the actual work of these island
Missions was left altogether to Bishop Selwyn
until, some years later, he was able to hand it
over to Mr. Patteson.
After the Synod Bishop Selwyn returned to
Auckland in the trading brig Emma , and we
copy the following extract from the skipper’s
log;
‘ One good to me of the Bishop being a bit
of a sailor was exhibited during service on
Sunday. He noticed that we should go better
on the other tack, and could see that I was
impatient to go about, so, before beginning the
Communion Service, he looked at me in a way
I quite understood, so I gave the order, “ ’Bout
ship, my lads, and when she’s round come aft
again !” So we put her on the other tack,
trimmed sails, and mustered again on quarter-


deck, and knelt down to prayers again. Few
Bishops would have so understood the necessity
for this manoeuvre, and with most preachers I
should have hesitated to move till the service
ended, by which time we might have lost some
miles of ground. 1
The Bishop was hardly home from this
voyage before he started off again in the little
Undine for a voyage to Stewart's Island, Wel-
lington, and Nelson. At Port Cooper (after-
wards Lyttleton) he met the ships which
brought out the first batch of settlers for
Christ Church, and was by no means pleased at
the arrangements made for them, whom he
calls, ‘a very good set of colonists. 1 He writes:
‘I find neither church, nor school, nor parsonage
in existence. Money enough has been spent,
but all in civil engineering. Last Sunday I
administered the Holy Communion in a crowded
loft over a store. Ido not care for these things
if they are unavoidable; but where it has been
part of the whole plan from the first to put
religion in its right place, I do object to spacious
and costly offices, long lines of wharves, roads,
piers, etc., and not one sixpence of expenditure
in any form for the glory of GOD or for the
comfort of the clergy. 1
On Whitsun Day, 1851, the long-expected
Border Maid was seen in the offing, and the
Bishop of Newcastle landed in time to take
part in the ‘ Unity Service, 1 held at a late hour


in the College Chapel, at which all the clergy
and laymen, who had been dispersed during the
day preaching and teaching in the villages
round, met together to offer their thanks-
givings before retiring to rest.
A week or two later the two Bishops started
in the Border Maid for a three months’ cruise
amongst the islands, encountering more perils
than on any previous voyage, but bringing
back a party of thirteen native scholars from
six different islands and speaking six different
languages.
We have seen how energetic the Bishop
could be in his Visitations both by land and
sea, but he was no less energetic on those rare
instances when he was at home with his wife at
Auckland. We give here a list of one Sunday’s
work, which we think few even of our over-
worked East End clergy would be able to beat:
May 6, Sunday after Ascension.
8 a.m. —Hospital; Litany and sermon (‘ I
will pray the Father’), etc.
9.80. —Military service; Litany; Communion ;
sermon (Elijah and the three captains of fifty).
11.—St. Paul’s: full service and Sermon
(‘ They shall mount up with wings as eagles ’) ;
infant baptism.
2 p.m.— Military Hospital ; Evening Prayer
and sermon (‘ I will send you another Com-
forter’).


3. —Gaol; Evening Prayer and exposition of
Second Lesson (Rom. viii.).
4.—St. Matthew’s: Evening Prayer ; infant
baptism and sermon (‘ See that ye refuse not
Him that speaketh ’).
6. —St. Paul’s: evening service and sermon
(‘ Why stand ye gazing up into heaven ?’).
The Bishop w r as now in a position to leave
one of his staff' (Mr. Nihill) at the island of
Nengone to keep school and evangelise the
natives during the months which formed the
New Zealand winter, returning in the spring to
fetch back Mr. Nihill and his scholars, and
visiting other islands on the way, with the
cheering result of gaining twenty-five youths,
and, better still, two girls !
These latter the Bishop esteemed as prizes
indeed. Here were the future Christian wives
for his scholars, and proudly did he manufac-
ture garments for them out of a gay patchwork
quilt, adding to this a scarlet bow for the
colour-loving heathens. On landing at Auck-
land he gave an arm to each of these dusky
maidens and led them in triumph up the beach.
These little girls, Wasibane and Wasi-
trutru (literally Little Chattering Bird) were
baptized as Sarah and Caroline after Mrs.
Selwyn and Mrs. Abraham.
At one of the islands at which they had
touched for the first time the Bishop was eyed


suspiciously rather; but he brought forward
one of the little boys he was bringing back
to his own islands, and, pointing to the
lantern jaws of a little native of the island, and
then pulling out the fat cheeks of this little
fellow, he made them understand that he
would do the same for any of their children
they would let him take. When they saw him
poking his fingers into the hollows of one’s
cheeks, and pulling out the fat of the other,
they danced and shouted with joy at the fun,
and would have let him carry off dozens.
The year 1852 closed sadly. John Thol, the
earliest pupil from the islands, died— ‘ My first
Melanesian scholar, and dear to me as my own
child,’ writes the Bishop.
Later on in the year two more boys died on
the voyage to their homes, and there were grave
doubts whether their parents might not take
upon themselves to avenge their deaths upon
the Mission party. But the surviving boys
loyally stood up for their friends, giving the
natives to understand that all possible care had
been bestowed on the little sufferers, and so
evil was averted.
The Border Maid , not being altogether satis-
factory, was sold, and, as Australia had pro
vided the vessel, the Bishop felt in honour
bound to return the money to the donors, so
that this Diocese of Islands was now without
any Mission ship whatever, and the Bishop did


his Visitations partly on foot and partly in
canoes.
At last the Bishop was to reap something of
what he had sown, and on Trinity Sunday,
1853, Rota Waitao, the faithful native lad
who had been his companion in most of his
journeys, was ordained deacon. 4 We had
been raising him step by step,’’ writes Mr. Abra-
ham, ‘ putting him in charge of Maori boys
and men, making him catechise in church,’ and
finally, after months of study and preparation,
Rota was examined by the Archdeacons, and
they were satisfied that he was a fit person for
the office of a deacon.
At the Ordination, at which several English
deacons were made priests, the Bishop gave a
few words of special address to the one native
deacon, 4 the most touching I ever heard —it
was quite in the vein of Paul to Timothy.
Both were deeply affected.’
The time had now come when the Bishop
found it urgently necessary to visit England to
press on the Government his three great needs
—viz.:
The subdivision of the Diocese and the
appointment of more Bishops.
Free power for the New Zealand Church to
manage its own affairs.
A definite plan for a Missionary Bishop for
Melanesia.


Accordingly, at the end of the year 1853, he
and Mrs. Selwyn sailed for England, taking
with them their youngest son, who was to join
his brother at school.
Of course, the Bishop’s life in England was
no less full thgm it had been in New Zealand.
He interviewed the Prime Minister, addressed
a huge meeting at the Mansion House, preached
up and down the country, and never gave him-
self a real day’s rest from pressing the cause of
his Diocese.
In some ways he succeeded almost beyond
his expectations, for a fund of ten thousand
pounds was quickly given for the See of Mela-
nesia, and a vessel was also presented to this
Mission bearing the appropriate name of the
Southern Cross. There was also no anxiety
about funds for the maintenance of this vessel,
as Miss C. M. Yonge devoted all the large
profits of her marvellously successful story,
4 The Daisy Chain,’ for this purpose.
The New Zealand Church was also placed on
an independent footing, but here arose a fresh
dilemma for the Bishop. The income of the
Diocese had hitherto been twelve hundred
pounds, half being furnished by the Home
Government, and half by the C.M.S. This
year the Bishop had resolved upon returning
to the C.M.S. their moiety of six hundred
pounds, to be applied to the support of new
Sees. No sooner, however, had he done this


than he found he had also lost the other half
of his income, for, local government being now
established in New Zealand, his salary was no
longer the affair of the Home authorities, and
had been altogether omitted from the Colonial
estimates, so that the Bishop found himself
without any income at all.
Little cared he! If money was not forth-
coming, he would do without it. 4 Twelve
years’ residence in New Zealand ’ —we quote
his own words — 4 have made me acquainted
with the best places for finding fern-roots and
the haunts of birds and fishes, and I wish to
state most clearly and distinctly, and in all
seriousness, that it is my intention to go back
to my Diocese and to dig or beg, if need be, for
my maintenance, for I am ashamed of neither. 1
One specially cheering result of this visit
was the acquiring of Mr. Patteson as a fellow-
labourer in the Melanesian harvest-field. He
had never forgotten the vow he had made
when, as an Eton boy, he listened to the
Bishop’s farewell sermon at Windsor, and now
the time had come for that vow to be kept,
and he offered himself freely and joyfully for
Mission work.
John Coleridge Patteson (always called
Coley by his own family and the Bishop)
was truly a man after the Bishop’s own heart.
Educated at Eton and Oxford, possessing in a
high degree the gifts of birth and culture,


beloved to an unusual extent by his family and
parishioners, Mr. Patteson was yet willing, nay,
eager, to relinquish all this and much more for
the sake of serving his Master amid the islands
of the Pacific. His gift of acquiring languages
rendered him peculiarly valuable in localities
where not only each tribe has its own tongue,
but, in some cases, the dialect spoken on one
part of an island is utterly incomprehensible to
the inhabitants of another part of the same
island. This young man, whom the Bishop
feelingly designates 4 a Divine recompense for
my two young sons,’ whom he was leaving
behind him in England, vowed both himself
and his all to the Melanesian Mission, and, to
the infinite grief of his parishioners, he an-
nounced his determination of sailing with the
Bishop early in the ensuing year.
It was intended to make the voyage to
Auckland in the Southern Cross , when a slight
but obstinate leak delayed her sailing, and as
the Bishop could not wait, he took passages for
his party in the Duke of Portland , leaving the
Southern Cross to follow as soon as she was ready.
In the following July (1855) the Bishop’s
party reached Auckland after a prosperous
voyage of ninety-six days. Archdeacon Abra-
ham writes ;
4 We were all taken by surprise, not having
heard a word from England of his intention to
come by the Duke of Portland. The first


intimation that he was on board the English
vessel was the fact that a strange vessel had
threaded all the intricacies of the harbour, and
rounded the North Head before the gun fired
for the pilot. There was not a breath of wind,
either, so that people began to say, “ There
must be someone on board that knows what
he’s about, and all the tides and currents of the
harbour ; and who so likely as the Bishop ?”
Sure enough, in half an hour more the Custom-
house officer came to say the Bishop was on
board, and that the Southern Cross was on her
way following him.’
Not long after his return there was another
outbreak between the English and the Maoris—
as usual, on the land question. It began at
Taranaki, and the Bishop, anxious as ever to
be a peacemaker, at once went to the affected
district, taking with him Archdeacon Abraham
and the Maori Deacon, Rota Waitoa.
At first the Bishop was far from successful,
each side being ready to believe he was favour-
ing the other. But eventually the Bishop got
the Maori chiefs together, and made them a
speech, in which he urged them tp return to
their homes.
‘lt was very striking, 1 says Archdeacon
Abraham, 4 to see the men's delight when he
wound up his harangue with their old song:
“ Ka tangi te riroriro,
Kei te ahi au tamariki !”


the Maori equivalent for “ Lady-bird, lady-bird,
fly away home,’'’ etc. All the good advice and
sober counsel given before seemed to tell but
little; but this quotation set the whole party
on the alert, and it was repeated and bandied
from one to another, well illustrating the well-
known saying, “ Give me the writing of your
ballads, and I don’t care who makes the
laws.” ’
The Melanesian boys were, from the first,
more especially Mr. Patteson’s charge, and he
threw himself into the good work with ardour.
These lads were a cause of ceaseless anxiety, as
the climate of New Zealand proved far too
bracing for these heat-loving natures.
On the very first week of the arrival of a new
detachment of lads from the Solomon Isles,
Mr, Patteson writes home : ‘ The four youngest,
sixteen to eighteen, sleep in my room. One is
now on my bed, wrapped up in an opossum rug,
with cold and slight fever. I have to watch
over them like a cat. . . . Think of living till
now in a constant temperature of eighty-four
degrees, and being suddenly brought to fifty-
six degrees!’
So loving was the young Englishman to these
black boys that the Bishop writes to Mr. Patte-
son’s father : ‘ Coley is, as you say, the right
man in the right place, mentally and physically;
the multiplicity of languages, which would try
most men, is met by his peculiar gift; the heat


of the climate suits his constitution ; his mild
and parental temper makes his black boys cling
about him as their natural protection, and his
freedom from fastidiousness makes all parts of
the work easy to him ; for when you have to
teach boys how to wash themselves and to wear
clothes for the first time, the romance of mis-
sionary work disappears as completely as a great
man’s heroism before his valet de chambre. . . .
You know in what direction my wishes tend—
viz., that Coley, when he has come to suitable
age, and has developed, as I have no doubt he
will, a fitness for the work, should be the first
island Bishop , . . that Norfolk Island should
be the See of the Bishop, because the character
of its population, the salubrity of its climate,
and its insular position, make it the fittest
place for the purpose.’
At the end of the year 1858 the Bishop was
able to write in his diary: 4 A year of many
blessings. Two prosperous voyages to the
Islands ; one prosperous voyage to the Southern
Settlements; one-third of the Visitation tour
by land accomplished ; the consecration of the
Bishops of Wellington and Nelson.’
The two new Bishops were his friends—Arch-
deacon Abraham and the Rev. E. H. Hobhouse
—and Bishop Harper had previously been con-
secrated Bishop of Christ Church, so that the
load of spiritual responsibility in New Zealand
was no longer one man’s share.


A time of bitter trial was now at hand.
Again war broke out, and this time the feel-
ing of the natives against the rapacity and
cruelty of some of the colonists was so bitter
that they came to abhor even the religion of
the white men. Some tribes relapsed into
heathenism, and even into cannibalism, and the
Bishop’s grief at the apostasy of his children
was bitter indeed.
There was but one bright spot in these dark
years of war and apostasy, and that was the un-
failing fidelity of the Maori clergy. Not one of
them deserted either his post or his principles.
In 1861, amidst the tumult and excitement
of warfare, the Bishop had the heartfelt satis-
faction of being able to consecrate his £ son in
the faith ’ —John Coleridge Patteson—as first
Bishop of Melanesia.
In sending; him forth to minister to the
O i ...
islanders the Bishop was acting on a principle
he never failed to express —namely, that the
first missioner to place foot on a heathen
country should always be a Bishop, so that the
Church should present the same spectacle as
the world at its creation —the fruit bearing seed
within itself.
In 1867 the Bishop was summoned by the
Archbishop of Canterbury to attend the Lam-
beth Conference, but it was with a heavy heart
that his friends saw him depart. They feared
—rightly enough, as it proved—that their


beloved Bishop would be taken from them, and
before he had been many months in his native
land he was offered the Bishopric of Lichfield
by the Prime Minister.
Bishop Selwyn, however, had no wish to
leave his own distant Diocese, and ‘after prayer
for. guidance, declined the offer by return of
post." But next came a letter from the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, urging him to accept the
post, and to the Archbishop, Bishop Selwyn
felt he owed obedience ‘ in all things lawful and
honest. 1 So he had to give way, and consent
to be Bishop of Lichfield 4 with as good a grace
as I could, 1 he writes sorrowfully to Archdeacon
Abraham. 4 1 feel very sorry when I think of
you and our native clergymen, and our friends
in Auckland, and Charles and Coley.
The difficulty of providing an endowment
fund for the See of Auckland had been one of
the causes of the Bishop 1 s hesitation in relin-
quishing the See; but at length this was
happily arranged, and on January 1, 1868, the
Bishop of New Zealand was enthroned at Lich-
field. He was at that time and for a whole
year longer Bishop of New Zealand as well, his
two Sees being some fifteen thousand miles apart!
The Bishop of Lichfield had but six months
to give to his new Diocese before sailing for his
other Diocese at the Antipodes to fulfil the
promise he made to his flock at parting—that,


if alive, he would without fail return to them.’
During his absence he left his English Diocese
in the charge of Bishop Trower.
The last voyage was more eventful than any
of the previous ones, the steamer actually suffer-
ing shipwreck. Eventually, however, the Bishop
reached Auckland, and summoned a General
Synod. Six Bishops were present, Bishop Patte-
son being one. Then, after settling many
matters, the sad day of final parting drew near.
The grief at losing the Bishop was universal.
Shops were closed, public business was sus-
pended, and the Bishop’s carriage was drawn to
the wharf by a mixed crowd of English and
Maoris. Then came choking words and stifled
efforts to say ‘ GOD bless you !’ and the Bishop
was gone !
‘ There is a work to begin at my time of life,
but I did not seek it,’ writes the Bishop, ‘ and
I only trust in Him whose strength is made
perfect in weakness.’
However willing the spirit, the flesh was
weak, and in 1869, whilst preaching to a large
congregation, the Bishop felt his heart almost to
cease beating, and he believed his hour had come.
But Lichfield was not yet to be deprived of
her faithful Bishop. Three months of absolute
rest somewhat restored him, and a great load
was taken from his mind by the offer of his old
friend, Bishop Abraham, to share his labours
at Lichfield, as he had formerly done in New


Zealand. Most gratefully did Bishop Selwyn
accept this offer, and with Bishop Abraham as
coadjutor the various plans which the Bishop
had started were effectively carried through.
The Probationer System was in those days
peculiar to the Diocese of Lichfield, and was
started by Bishop Selwyn. Under it men may
go up to Lichfield for examination twice in two
years, during which they may either give them-
selves up entirely to lay-deacon’s work, or may
continue in their trade or profession, at the
same time doing what work they can under the
guidance of some parish priest. Another year
before ordination has to be spent at Lichfield
Theological College.
The Bishop on settling into the Palace at
Lichfield found it necessary to make many addi-
tions and alterations to the building.
He added two large wings, one containing
offices for the Bishop’s secretaries and clerks,
with bedrooms above for the ordination candi-
dates, who would for the future be lodged and
boarded at the Palace, instead of being obliged
to seek for accommodation at the various inns
in the city, as they had previously been obliged
to do.
The other wing consisted of a large hall for
the ordinary examinations, and for meetings of
various kinds. Whilst this building was going
on the Bishop was working his Diocese with such
energy as to cause the Archbishop of Canterbury


to remark that ‘an electric force attended his
presence wherever he went,’
Annual, instead of triennial Confirmations
were established, and the Bishop set himself to
visit almost every corner of his Diocese—no easy
matter, as it included all Staffordshire, all Derby-
shire, and half Shropshire, and consisted of three
Archdeaconries, forty - eight Rural Deaneries,
six hundred and sixty-one parishes, and one
million two hundred thousand souls.
The Barge Mission was one in which the
Bishop was deeply interested, and to which he
devoted every spare Sunday. He built a
diocesan barge, which was to circulate on the
sluggish Midland canals, and to hold a congrega-
tion of at least fifty.
‘ If,’ he hopefully remarked, ‘ we shoulcj be so
happy as to gather a larger number, we have
the highest authority for assembling the people
on the bank, and teaching them from the ship.’
He never preached or taught from that barge.
It was first made too high to pass some of
the smaller bridges, and before this defect had
been remedied the Bishop had gone to that land
‘ where the glorious Lord shall be to us a place
of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go no
galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass
thereby.’
On leaving New Zealand, the Bishop had
publicly announced that one of the chief objects
of his life should be to maintain intimate union


between the Mother Church and her Colonial
branches.
This promise was most firmly kept, and
Lichfield soon became a sort of missionary
centre, from whence help and sympathy
radiated to distant lands, and to whose Bishop
workers beyond the seas could confidently look
for advice and assistance, Mrs. Selwyn gave
her help to this good work, and had a Mission-
ary Working Society at the Palace, when she
would often thrill the members with the account
of her Mission experiences.
In 1871 the Bishop was invited by the
American Church to be present at their Trien-
nial Convocation. He accepted, and was en-
thusiastically received, not only because he was
the first English prelate to visit their shores,
but also for his personal reputation.
To commemorate this visit the American
Church requested the Bishop to present a
magnificent alms-basin to the Archbishop of
Canterbury ‘as a visible token of unity with
the Anglican Church.’ This the Bishop
gladly undertook, and solemnly presented the
alms-basin in St. Paul’s Cathedral on July 3,
1872, The following day, that day so dear to
all Americans as commemorating their indepen-
dence, Bishop Selwyn, with charming good
taste, telegraphed to Bishop Potter, of New
York ;


‘ July 4. Alms-basin presented in St. Paul’s
Cathedral. Independence is not disunion.’
This message was, it is needless to say,
enthusiastically received.
The close of this year was terribly saddened
to all by the telegram reporting the murder of
the saintly Bishop Patteson by the natives of
the Santa Cruz group.
The Bishop had loved him as his own son,
and he never really recovered the shock of his
death. But, though personally grieving for the
younger brother, he could yet be thankful for
the glorious example of the saintly life and
martyr’s death, and at the early celebration on
the following Sunday he paused at the words,
‘ We also bless Thy holy name for all Thy
servants departed this life in Thy faith and
fear,’ and then added slowly, in a voice trem-
bling with the emotions of grief and triumph,
‘ especially for John Coleridge Patteson.’
In 1873 the Bishop’s youngest son, the Rev.
John Selwyn, offered himself for work in
Melanesia, with his father’s full approval, and
in 1877 he was chosen by the General Synod
of New Zealand to succeed Bishop Patteson.
In 1874 he once more visited New York to
attend the General Convention, and to com-
memorate his second visit the American
Churchmen founded a 4 Potter-Selwyn Prize in


Lichfield Theological College, , providing two
hundred pounds for this purpose.
The year 1878 opened joyously. The Bishop
was in good health and his energy was as surpris-
ing as ever; indeed, the amount of work he ac-
complished seemed truly prodigious for one so
nearly approaching the allotted span of man’s
life on earth. Just before Lent, however, the
work seemed to tell upon him with unusual
severity, and he consulted a London physician,
who, however, saw nothing seriously wrong with
him.
He confirmed the boys of Shrewsbury School
on March 24, addressing them with his wonted
earnestness, and Bishop Hobhouse, who was
present in case the Bishop should need help,
was struck with his apparent vigour, and said
something of this to the Bishop in the vestry.
The Bishop said slowly, ‘lt was like holding
on to a ship in a storm. I held on by my
hands and feet.’ Then, leaning back, he
said, ‘ I believe I have come to the end of my
tether.’
He returned to Lichfield next day, worn out
in his Master’s service, and life gradually ebbed
away. His sufferings produced slight delirium
at times, but even then duty was in his mind.
‘I am getting idle. Who is seeing to that
work ?’ he would ask, .and once he murmured
in the old familiar Maori tongue, ‘lt is all
light.’


He rallied for a little, and was able to receive
the Holy Communion with his family, and even
to say a special word to each.
Then came the end. On April 11, 1878,
the good Bishop passed to Paradise, whilst
Bishop Abraham read the Commendatory
Prayer.
After the first few moments of reverent
silence—a tribute to the mystery of death—all
the family and friends gathered round that
death-bed stood up, and round the lifeless form
of the Bishop repeated the Apostles’ Creed, so
appropriate to the occasion in its triumphant
ending.
His grave was dug where he himself had
wished—in the solid rock on which the cathe-
dral stands, and there rests till the Resurrection
Morning the body of one who, in his humility,
his zeal, and his single-mindedness, trod very
closely in the footsteps of his Divine Master.
WELLS GARDNER, DABTON AND CO., LTD., LONDON.




