



SOLIDARITY
SENTENCED.
The Conscription
Aftermath,
Labour Agitators get
150 Years.
Sensational Disclosures.
PRICE, THREEPENCE.


SOLIDARITY SENTENCED.
The Conscription
Aftermath,,
Labour Agitators get
150 Years Gaol,
SENSATIONAL DISCLOSURES
Printed by Marxian Press, 115 Goulburn-street,
Sydney, and published by George Kerr, Amal-
gamated Miners’ Association, Trades Hall,
Broken Hill, N.S.W.


SOLIDARITY SENTENCED.
An outrage has been perpetrated on the working-
class movement of Australia, an outrage which
the intelligent of that movement know full well they
cannot afford to ignore, and if the movement is
going to live up to its traditions, will be speedily
challenged, and its perpetrators emphatically called
to account. You, toiling millions of this country,
we appeal to you to protect the champions of your
cause from infamy. Never let it be said that in
this desperate situation we appealed to you in vain
to vindicate the principles our movement has always
stood for. For if the Australian Labor Movement
will not act, and act decisively, when its most
militant section is assailed in such a bloodthirsty
manner by the lords of trade, then we say that
it has taken a backward step, brought its followers
once more nearer to eternal bondage, and itself one
move nearer to final extinction.
Ask yourselves this, you, who advocate solidarity
and still more solidarity for Labor;- —Can you afford
to let your religion be trampled upon and spat upon
by the Powers that be? And ask yourselves this:
If the advocates of One Big Union for the working-
class are to be cast into the dungeons for their
propaganda, how long will it be before all unionism
is crushed in the dust under the iron heel of capital-
ism? For it is only a matter of degree after all.
The unity of Labor is the menace of capitalism:
that is an accepted principle by all of us, no matter
to what section of the movement we belong.
Consequently, the men who advocate the greater
unity represent the greater menace. But those who
advocate a unity slightly less comprehensive are
the next in the danger zone. And they will be


the next into the stone cells unless they are pre-
pared to act now and in no half-hearted manner.
The danger is not merely imminent —the danger is
here. The conspiracy of the privileged to crush
organised Labor in Australia has been brewing for
years. And now, at last, it has begun to make it-
self manifest for him who runs to read.
Twelve members of the Industrial Workers of
the World have been sentenced to terms of im-
prisonment ranging from five to fifteen years. And
we say, coolly, calmly, and collectively, fully
appraising the great seriousness of the charges
against them, that we don’t know what for; and
that we are convinced that at least the greater part
of them (probably all of them) don’t know what
for either, except that they are the inveterate
economic foes of the class from whose hands the
utterly brutal sentences proceeded. They were
charged with conspiracy in three separate counts,
briefly thus:
I. —Conspiracy to cause fires.
II. —Conspiracy to secure Barker’s release.
111.- —Conspiracy to excite sedition.
It would be vain for us to try to conceal the
sworn evidence if he so desired. It is public
property. A certified copy of it is at our rooms,
and may be perused by anyone who calls. And we
hope everyone will call.
For the evidence against these men is the case
for them.
And we venture to guarantee that nobody whQ(
takes the pains to go through the voluminous depo-
sitions, be it detective, judge, or useful member of
society, will find any fault with the brief epitome
of the case, which we will here submit to the con-
sideration of Australia.


LARKIN.
The evidence against Larkin was this: —Certain
detectives saw him in company with other mem-
bers in the street take a brown bottle from his
pocket, “appear” to sprinkle “something” from ft
on “something,” and throw his hands over his head.
A shorthand writer heard him say in the Domain
that, speaking of conscription, it would be far better
to see Sydney melt than to see its men taken away
to be butchered for any body of infidels.
That was all. And on that Larkin was found,
guilty of conspiracy to cause fires, and of conspiracy
to excite sedition.
And Larkin got ten years.
REEVE.
The evidence against Reeve: —That lie was seen,
with Lark-in when the latter is alleged to have
produced the bottle and thrown up his hands. Also
that he made a speech in the Domain, in which
he said, inter alia, that certain of the members
including himself, who were on bail for political
offences, might have to go to gaol for the summer.
Proceeding, he is alleged to have said that it would
be hotter outside the gaol than inside.
We have heard very mild unionists threaten to
make it hot for their masters, if something hap-
pened. But on this evidence Reeve was found
guilty of conspiracy to cause fires, and of seditious
conspiracy. And Reeve, also, got 10 years.
KING.
The evidence against King was: —That he mad©
a public speech, in which he said that it was the


mission of the working-class to make this world a
hell for the master-class, and that, personally, he
wouldn’t mind seeing the latter class roasted and
toasted on the gridirons (of hell, we suppose).
And King was convicted of seditious conspiracy,
and sentenced to five years.
Five years! That was the smallest sentence of
them all. But five years in gaol! And for saying
that much! Ye Gods!
GRANT.
Why Grant was charged: — Because he, it was
alleged, had made public speeches, in which he said
that, if he, and others, were convicted on certain
charges then pending, there would be less ore pro-
duced in Broken Hill. It was also alleged that
he had said every day that Barker was kept in
jail would be an expensive twenty-four hours for
the master-class. He had advocated sabotage on
the job.
But he had also said: —“Remember, use no
violence.” He had re-iterated that shop organisa-
tion would meet the case. And with due solidarity
shop organisation would have made Barker a most
expensive prisoner—we all know that.
And on this evidence Grant was found guilty of:
I. —Conspiracy to cause fires.
ll.—Cospiracy to get Barker released.
111. —Seditious conspiracy.
And Grant got fifteen years! Words on the sub-
ject are weak. Action is our only reasonable mode
of expression on the subject.
GLYNN.
Glynn’s terrible crime.— A shorthand writer


alleged that he had heard him advocate sabotage
in general.
And Davis Goldstein swore that Glynn said to
him: —“I hear one of the boys gave you some fire
dope last night.” That was alleged to have been
said in Sussex-street at 8 p.m. on the 21st Septem-,
ber. And Glynn called five witnesses with the
object of proving that 5 he was at a meeting a mile
away at that hour and date.
But Glynn was found guilty on this evidence of:
Conspiracy to cause fires.
Conspiracy to get Barker released.
Seditious conspiracy.
And Glynn got fifteen years. Let it sink deep
into your heads. Glynn got fifteen years’ penal
servitude for this.
Let us get our heads and forces together and
consider what we will do about it.
McPHERSON.
How McPherson earned his Tot: —One Mac Alister,
a wharf laborer, swore that he had promised him
(Mac Alister) some of “the stuff” to-morrow. Swore
also that on other occasions he had spoken of
an effective way of making the capitalist class
quake in their boots.
McPherson called witnesses to disprove that he
could have been at the places sworn to, on the
dates sworn to. Weight of testimony should
have released him there and then. But McPherson
was found guilty on the whole three counts.
And he, also, got fifteen years in the dungeons
of modern society, where the vilest deeds bloom
like poison weeds —as Oscar Wilde has it.


BEATTY.
The v/itness against Beatty—Was Scully, the
chemist, and friend of the police, who, on his own
sworn evidence, had gone there of his own free
will to teach workingmen the effect of certain
chemicals, under certain circumstances.
This man swore that Beatty had spoken to him
and expressed the view that, if conscription were
to be introduced, it could be met by arson and
destruction of property. Scully’s evidence went
on to say that one night at a certain house Beatty
had experimented with him in the action of certain
chemicals, and that he (Scullly) had suggested
means to make the result more effective.
That was all. But it was enough to make the
jury (who had “heard” about the I.W.W. from
“Labor Leader” Holman and “Labor Leader''
Hughes), it was enough to make that jury (who
probably wanted to get home to their wives and
couldn’t wait to adequately discuss the evidence),
this utterly paltry case against a man, this uncor-
roborated evidence of a self-confessed accomplice,
was enough to make that jury—good Heavens,
what a jury—convict Beatty of the three felonies,
viz.:—■
Conspiracy to cause fires.
Conspiracy to get Barker released.
Conspiracy to excite sedition.
And in the opinion of that eminently unbiased
guardian of justice, Judge Bring, it was sufficient
to sentence Beatty to fifteen years. Those fifteen
years’ penal servitude! Does the Honorable,
Just (with capitals) Judge, who threw them about
as recklessly as a child would pelt a cat, know
what they mean? Fifteen years is a lifetime. And
Justice Bring wasn’t man enough to refrain from


cracking a miserable joke on this business of the
sentences. He said the terms he was going to
hand out were not long enough, but he must be a
bit merciful. He added insult to injury.
HAMILTON.
In the case of HamPlton. — Scully said that Ham-
ilton and he had a talk about burning Sydney down
to prevent the adoption of conscription; also that
Hamilton had bought bi-sulphate of carbon from
him, and ordered a further supply.
Davis Goldstein said Hamilton gave him, also,
some of it; and that he next day commented on
his failure in an alleged attempt to us© it effectively.
A strong case, eh?
A weak case, as we will show later. A case,
lacking everything generally considered necessary
for a conviction in an ordinary criminal trial.
Hamilton got fifteen years.
TEEN.
Then Teen. —Four detectives allege that certain
chemicals and materials were found in the pocket
of the overcoat he was wearing when arrested.
(It is said that he and Goldstein were together at
the time, and were on a tram going to the fight
at the Stadium. Everything considered, those facts
alone make the evidence on the point very fishy).
He said the coat was not his; that it had been
hanging up at the I.W.W. rooms, and that he had
borrowed it from another man that evening. (This’
was proved; and it makes things look fishier than
ever).


Scully alleged that he had heard him advocate
arson, etc., as a means to prevent conscription.
Mac Alister stated that he had drawn lots with
him to decide who would start a fire, and that he
had heard him say that certain fires had been
caused, etc.
Mac Alister may be described as an accomplice on
his own evidence. The four detectives were four
detectives. And Scully, on his own evidence, may
be said to have been the originator, chief inciter,
and accomplice of the alleged business.
MOORE.
As to Moore. —Detective Leary stated (and Mac-
Alister corroborated) that he indicated Foy’s, and
later said: —“This on© must go. Ten or twelve
of the bastards should go together,” a remark, by
the Way, which might have applied to a lot of
things besides the burning down of shops.
Detective Lynch said he found cotton waste at
this place. Moore said it belonged to an engineer,
and no evidence was called to show that it didn’t.
Mac Alister said he drew lots with him as with
Teen.
Teen got fifteen years, and Moore’s parcel was
ten. And we might make this point before pro-
ceeding, viz., that the jury, in addition to their
evident prejudice, exercised criminal disregard of
the detailing of the three counts. Their verdicts,
supposing that they were convinced that every
word of the evidence was true, were utterly indis-
criminate, hap-hazard, and hit-or-miss in character.
That fact sticks out: friends and foes of the men
alike must agree about it. The verdicts suggest
that the names of the accused were put in a hat


and shaken up. Then that someone cried: —
“Guilty on all counts,” and a name was taken
out of the hats, “Guilty on Ist and 3rd,” and an-
other name picked out —and so on.
But then this jury told the judge in effect, early
in the case that they had decided to break their
oaths and not to “carefully consider” the evidence
at all. They told him that plainly, when they
asked to be supplied with the daily pap-rs to read
during the progress of the case. And he didn’t sternly
reprimand them or sack them as a conscientious
judge must have done. After consideration, he
told them their request couldn’t be granted; but
he subsequently recommended them for unusual
remunerations, which they got—a fact upon which
we leave you to put your own consideration.
We might point out here, that in all this gigantic
conspiracy (as it appears to us), the jury were
apparently the most capable. They had nothing to
gain, and the others had a tremendous lot to gain.
And we hope that in the interests of justice, our
enemies and our friends will remember these men
who wanted to read the papers when men’s
liberties and reputations, on the one hand, and
the community’s welfare on the other, depended upon
their absolute attention. If these men are busi-
ness men, the workingclass may be able to give
them the dressing-down which the unjust Justice
failed to do. Dinna forget, fellow-workers!
FAGIN.
And the next is Fagin. —Three detectives de-
posed to having found a bottle of the alleged
guilty chemical in a bag they were searching in nis
rooms. He didn’t tell half a dozen different stories


as a guilty man caught on the hop generally does.
He told one of them that he (the detective) had put
it there, and strongly reiterated his assertion.
There is the statement of the three detectives
against his.
It was further stated that he had been seen fre-
quently entering the chemist’s shop where Scully
was employed; but it was admitted that he was
known to be a sick man most of his time.
Scully stated that he had ordered phosphorous
from him, and had experimented with him in the
use of the alleged combination. Scully had heard
him advocate arson and violence, but under cross-
examination he admitted that he only advocated
resorting to such courses in event of conscription
being adopted. He is also alleged by Scully to
have spoken of distributing the preparation men-
tioned.
One originator, inciter, accomplice. Three
detectives corroborating each other. Guilty on
all three counts. Fifteen years.
BESANT.
And the last is Besant. —Found guilty of con-
spiracy to cause fires and of seditious conspiracy.
Ten years. Read the evidence: then reflect on the
criminal absurdity of convicting on such. Two
detectives swore that a parcel at the I.W.W, rooms
—which he told them was old clothes —was cotton
waste.
Besant is an engineer.
The same two witnesses swore also that he
had said some waste had been, found in shops lately,
and that more would be found anon.


Besant asked to be sworn. He stated, on oatb,
that there was more than one parcel. One con-
tained his old clothes. He hadn’t said anything
at all to the detectives about what the one in
question contained.
The detectives’ evidence went to show that there
was more than one parcel.
Besant, continuing, swore that he had made no
mention to detectives about anything being found
in shops, and strongly denied all knowledge of any
crime, a searching cross-examination failing to find
any weakness in his statement.
Two detectives only!
Two detectives, corroborating each other, and
giving evidence about only one matter at only one
time!
An engineer with cotton waste! Two detectives!
Ten years! Here endeth the twelfth lesson. Three
British cheers for British Justice!
At the point we have now reached we have seen
that there was no evidence worth considering
against the majority of the accused. But it may
be said that against others of them certain evidence
was submitted which a jury might consider. We
say that the reasons for which the latter should
have been acquitted lie precisely in the nature of
the case against them; and when such a case was
sworn to for the greater part by such witnesses
as the Crown used, it hardly needs considering.
Who were the Crown witnesses?
Davis Goldstein was lately charged with forgery.
It was said that he had financed a great forgery


of £5 notes. He was committed for trial.
Somehow he was admitted to bail, and, later
on, more mysteriously still —very mysteriously—
the charge against him was withdrawn. It appears
that in the meantime, with the charge hanging
over his head, he had set to work to collect evidence
about the fires for the police, his liberty, we should
imagine, depending upon his success in getting
such evidence.
It appears further that wtfien certain evidence
had been collected, he was saved. Now, in such
circumstances, who is going to believe the evidence
which such a man swears “before Almighty
God” —fancy Davis Goldstein and Almighty God,
anyway!
Then Scully, the chemist. —On his own showing
he had gone to the rooms and of his own free will
appointed himself Chief Instructor in Inflammables
to the party. On his own showing, too, he had
experimented with various members, and ex-
pounded his patent more fully, and had even
improved on it with them. Moreover, his evidence
states that he had discussed a certain policy of
arson, etc., with them, to be used in case of con-
scription.
Now, it will be evident, if his statements re his
instructorship are true, ti at when Davis Gold-
stein started out to get evidence for a prosecu-
tion, this same Scully was in a very dangerous
position. In fact, according to the above, he was
gone a million. Isn't, it very probable that he
agreed, for the same consideration as Goldstein, to
go for his life into partnership with the latter and
save himself.
As for Mac Alister, he was either an accomplice,
or else he may be classed with the detectives. He
was a wharf laborer, and at one time a member


of the party. He may have been an accomplice of
Scully’s, or he may have merely been a spy, whose
advancement naturally would then depend on his
success at the game.
The other witnesses were all detectives. It is
long recognised that owing to the nature of the
position they hold, the evidence of even the most
honest of them is to be subjected to the closest
scrutiny. In short, it is always regarded as ques-
tionable evidence, and, where uncorroborated by
disinterested witnesses, it has very seldom been
deemed sufficient to convict upon in case of a
serious charge. Everybody knows that. And in
this case the detectives, it is fair to assume,
believed for a start that the men they were after
were desperate characters, because they were
I.W.W. men. Like the jury’s, their minds must
have been affected by the long campaign of vilifi-
cation carried on for years now by men like
Hughes and Holman against the 1.W.W., during
which the two gentlemen named have done their
best to convice everyone that our organisation is
wholly composed of utterly abandoned characters.
Now, the striking feature of this case, worked
up by police and their agents, is this. That
although the agents had the full confidence of the
accused, and although the police got everything
from the agent§ without delay, yet they couldn’t get
any conclusive evidence against any of the accused.
Leaving out the bottle found in the pocket of an
overcoat under those very suspicious circumstances
we mentioned further back, nobody was caught
with any of this “fire-dope” on them, although
according to the evidence, the agents of the police
knew when and by whom it was being handled.
The police, with every opportunity, could get
no evidence to show that a specific fire had been


caused by a certain man. Nobody bad seen them
in any of the places alleged to have been fired by
them. With it all plain sailing, they couldn’t
bring outside evidence that the conversations with
Scully and Mac Alister had ever taken place. To
make a long story short, there is nothing to show
that any of the accused started a fire, or incited
or assisted anybody else to start one.
Worst of all, it is quite in keeping with the
evidence to suppose that Mac Alister, Scully, and
Goldstein caused all the fires themselves, and had
a tale ready for the. police to be used if they
thought they were discovered. And in the utter
absence of other evidence, whom would you con-
sider most likely to be guilty? A man who said
he fiananced a great forgery, and another man, who
said he went along with chemicals to incite men
to arson? Or the men that these two men gave
evidence against to escape gaol themselves?
But, after all, need we point out what the real
charge was? It was that these men were I.W.W.
men. They pleaded guilty to that. In fact, they;
were convicted of any crime they might ever be
charged with two years ago, when those two iii-
balanced, political mediocrities, Hughes and Hol-
man, first began to pump poison about them into
the public mind. Un-Justice Bring said as much,
in effect, when he sentenced them to 150 years in
the dungeons, and in the previous breath spoke
of getting the organisation suppressed. We thank
him for joining with us in telling the people what
the real charge was.
We understand the lives and struggles of our
class, and so, surely, do you. And we understand also,
and also so do you, that from right away back into
the midnight of history, up to Saturday, 2nd of
December, 1916, it has always been a legal crime


for the slave class to object to its slavery or to
unite to overthrow it.
We understand these things, and so do you.
And if, understanding them, you don’t see your
way clear to let Labor make common cause in
this matter, we can only point out that, as a
matter of logic you will sooner or later see differ-
ently, and go on alone ourselves.
But there will be unity of thought, as well as
unity of action in the matter of this monstrous
miscarriage of justice. For the working-class
throughout Australia have already made it abund-
antly manifest to us that they are stirring to see
justice done, and during the immediate future, the
black iniquity will be proclaimed to the working-
class from the far north and south to the far east
and west of Australia.
The capitalist class have spat upon organised
labor —that is what this famous alleged “arson”
case means. Their conspiracy to settle unionism
has begun with this attempt to crush its most
militant section out of existence.
Now they are sitting back, watching how organ-
ised labor is going to take it, before they proceed
to the next outrage.
How are you going to take it? What will your
answer be, fellow-workers? “Men of thought and
men of action, clear the way.”
