

OUTLINE HISTORY OF THE
VICTORIAN BUSH NURSING
ASSOCIATION
By the Hon. Secretary,
SIR JAMES BARRETT


Outline History of the Victorian Bush
Nursing Association
By the Hon. Secretary, Sir James Barrett.
A request was received from a city in Oklahoma, U.S.A., for an
article for publication in a nursing journal. The outline history
which follows was then prepared and forwarded to U.S.A,
Somewhere about 1908 the Countess of Dudley, wife of
the then Governor-General of Australia, noticed in her
journeys through a vast country that Trained Nurses were
not available in the country districts. Lord Carmichael,
Governor of the State of Victoria, and his wife, Lady
Carmichael, had come to the same conclusion, and sup-
ported her efforts to remedy the defect. They agreed that
there was much suffering which was avoidable if proper
steps were taken.
Many meetings and much discussion ensued respecting
the practicability of establishing such a service. The
Medical Profession were quite opposed to the project, as
they feared that such Nurses would become a sort of
inferior Practitioner. The Nurses were openly hostile, and
the public were afraid that yet another charity would be
established, and that they would be called upon to maintain
it.
In 1932 practically the whole of the Medical Profes-
sion in Victoria are actively pushing the movement for-
ward, Nurses are seeking admission into the service in ever
increasing numbers, and the public are giving the most
generous support. In 1932 there are 63 Centres, including
29 Hospitals, with a total accommodation of 290 beds. The
Association is the largest employer of trained Nurses in
Australia. There are now 22 Ambulances and 68 First-Aid
outfits established, and the Trust Funds available amount
to about £55,000. All these changes have come gradually,
and have been made as the necessity became obvious.
At the invitation of the Editor of the “Nightingale,”
I propose, with reasonable brevity, to set out the history of
a movement which began with intense opposition, and is
now supported with equal warmth.


The movement commenced in the State of Victoria,
which is about the same size as the State of Oklahoma, and
which contains a rather smaller population. As no funds
were available, Dame Nellie Melba gave a concert for the
initiation of the movement, and raised a sum of £2,500,
which was placed as the nucleus of a permanent endowment.
Half of this sum (£1,250) remained in Victoria, and the
other half was allocated to New South Wales. The capital
could not be spent, the income alone being available.
It was decided that the movement was not to be a
charity, but a co-operative movement, and that the dis-
tricts employing Nurses must, in the main, pay for them,
and the object was set out as follows:
“The object of the Association shall be to provide,
gratuitously or otherwise, Trained District Nurses
and other requisites, and attention for sick and
injured persons in country towns and districts.”
“The general sick nursing of the patients shall be car-
ried out under the direction of the medical prac-
titioners, except in cases of emergency.”
FIRST PHASE.
In February, 1911, the first Nurse was placed in a
remote township, Beech Forest, the district, through a
Committee, guaranteeing the salary and undertaking to
raise the income required.
By the end of the year, four Nurses were installed in
various places, and at once the practical difficulties became
obvious. No Nurse could be satisfactorily employed who did
not possess both a General and a Midwifery Certificate, and
doubly Certificated Nurses were not plentiful. It was further
decided that, except in trivial cases and emergencies, she
should act only under medical directions, whether person-
ally or by telephone. It became evident that there were no
ambulances in the country. Furthermore, the Committees
found great difficulty in raising the money for the salary
by the usual method of subscription. People gave in vary-
ing amounts. Nevertheless, the movement grew, and by
the end of 1914 20 Centres were established, and a number
of changes had been made.


The Co-operative System.
The Centres had abandoned the method of financing
solely by donations, and had devised a system by which
for a fixed annual subscription (15/- to 30/-), those who
subscribed were entitled to the services of the Nurse for
themselves, wives and children up to the age of 16 years.
Single people paid at the lower rate, but all were placed on
the same footing. Those who did not subscribe were
charged full nursing fees. But it was found quite impos-
sible to manage the Institution without a nursing officer
to visit the Centres, as the Association had become too large
for purely honorary management. The “Walter & Eliza
Hall” Trust then gave the Central Council of Management
£250 per annum to provide the salary of a Travelling
Superintendent. The first appointment of a Superintendent
was made in October, 1913. By this time a policy of com-
plete decentralisation had been adopted, each Centre elect-
ing its own committee and managing its own affairs, subject
to the general rules of the Association. The principles of
administration as modified and added to by 1932 are here
set out:—
PRINCIPLES OF ADMINISTRATION.
The principles on which the Victorian Bush Nursing Association
is administered are: —
(1) That the Bush Nursing Association is essentially a co-operative
movement.
(2) That each Centre, subject to the general rules of the Association,
manages is own affairs, and that the Central Council deals only
with the elected local Committees —i.e., complete decentralisation.
(3) That any assistance given to the Centres by the Central Council
is conditional on the Centres having made a determined effort
to help themselves.
(4) That the Inspector (or some other officer) frequently visits the
Centres and meets the local Committees.
(5) That, in the case of Bush Nursing Hospitals, the function of
the Central Council is limited to providing the staff and drawing
the attention of the local Committee to any circumstances which
require investigation.
(6) In the case of Bush Nursing Hospitals, the medical practitioners
visiting the Hospital are ex-officio members of the Committee of
Management. If the numbers become large, some limitation will
become necessary.
(7) In Bush Nursing Centres the medical practitioners of the district
must be invited to join the Committee of Management.


(8) That any promise of help for building purposes is made only for
a definite term, usually six months. If then the Centres are not
in a position to claim the assistance, the offer lapses without any
obligation on the part of the Central Council to renew it.
(9) That, although Bush Nursing Hospitals are not charitable
institutions, no case of emergency should be refused admission.
If the case be suitable for admission to a charitable institution,
it can be moved from the Bush Nursing Hospital when the
medical practitioner in charge thinks the removal can be effected
with safety.
(10) If a Nurse does not suit a district or a district does' not suit a
Nurse, a change will be made at once on notification by the
Executive Committee to the Central Council. Such change will
not involve any reflection on the Nurse or on the district.
(11) Remote and sparsely settled districts which make a serious
effort to help themselves receive preferential help, both in time
and amount.
By the end of 1914 the- Perpetual Trust Fund, called
the Lady Dudley Bush Nursing Trust Fund, had grown to
about £2,100. From the outset the Department of Public
Instruction provided £5OO per annum, in return for which
the Nurses were required to examine the children in the
State Schools, and report to the Medical Officers of the
Department.
The following extract from the report of 1931 indicates
the nature of the work done in the schools.
SCHOOL WORK.
Another important part of the Nurse’s work is done in connection
with the children attending State Schools. Once a month, so far as
her nursing duties will allow, the Nurse visits the State Schools in. the
districts and gives a short lesson on the value of personal cleanliness,
hygiene/ first aid and kindred subjects. Twice a year she sets a, few
simple questions to the children in the upper grades to test their
knowledge of the subjects which she has taught, and the answers are
forwarded to the medical officers of the Education Department of
Victoria.
Once a year the Nurse examines each child in the State Schools
in the Centre for defects, and sends in a report of the health of the
child to the medical officers of the Education Department, who, in
their turn, advise whether medical attention is necessary. Numbers
of defects are pointed out in this way. In Centres where the medical
officers of the Department have visited and examined the children the
Nurse does “follow-up” work, but does not examine the children.
Some Centres dropped out, others took their places, and
by the end of 1918 28 Centres were in operation on the
system outlined. In 1920, then, there were 28 Centres, a
Travelling Superintendent, moderate funds, and a well-
understood co-operative movement. But there were neither
ambulances nor hospitals.


The Housing of the Nurses—Nurses’ Cottages.
Early in the movement the housing of the Nurses be-
came a matter for serious consideration. It was found un-
satisfactory to let them board, or live in hotels. The patients
disliked it, as there was no privacy and irregular meals
were difficult to arrange. Consequently, a system of rent-
ing or building suitable cottages was adopted in many cases.
Where the cottages were built the Central Council gave
assistance, and easily and naturally some of the excellent
cottages were gradually expanded at a later date, until they
became hospitals.
It was at this stage that the services of the expert
hospital architect, Mr. K. F. Elliott, became so valuable.
Most of the cottages built at a later date were planned with
a view to conversion into hospitals when the necessity
arose.
Nurses possessing two certificates were not easily ob-
tained, and nurses were required to drive or ride in many
places. The Central Council arranged for instruction to be
given where necessary. 1920 then saw the close of the first
phase of a useful development.
SECOND PHASE.
The Hospital Appears.
Few, indeed, even then realised the remarkable develop-
ment which was to follow, and which would not have taken
place but for the public education provided by the activities
outlined. The second phase will be now described. It fol-
lowed the first by logical steps.
In 1920, the State Rivers and Water Commission were
constructing a large reservoir on the Goulburn River, and,
as a result, a large number of families formed a camp—
really a small town—in the vicinity. The Commission was
unable to obtain a satisfactory nursing organisation, and
applied to the Association, who provided a Nurse, whose
salary was paid by the employees. Members allowed a small
sum to be deducted from their pay. At once it became
clear to all that some sort of hospital accommodation was
essential, especially for maternity cases. This the Com-
mission provided by a small wooden cottage, linked by tele-
phone to the nearest town, Alexandra, 20 miles distant,
where there were two medical practitioners. The system


was administered by a committee composed of representa-
tives of the officers and employees. The latter demanded
that there should be a majority of representatives on the
committee of management, a policy which I advised the
Commission to agree to, largely because I knew that such a
committee would deal with unreasonable complaints with
extreme vigour—just what happened.
The system worked smoothly and efficiently, and
inaugurated the second phase of the movement. People
commencing to realise that those who are ill require
not a doctor nor a nurse, but both, and also need a suitable
place in which the work can be done. They also began to
realise that in some cases suitable transport is requisite
to move sick or injured people to a place where medical
attention can be obtained, and accidents were occurring.
The system continued to grow, and in 1923 there were
47 Centres, including one hospital. With this example, a
Centre about 40 miles from Melbourne (Kooweerup) erected
a small Bush Nursing Hospital as a Soldiers’ Memorial, and
at about the same time a generous citizen, Mr. W. E.
Thompson, realising that medical attention on an isolated
island—Phillip Island—was at a disadvantage, presented
the Association with a third cottage hospital.
By this time a number of public Trusts became
interested in the work, and a large one, the Edward Wilson
(“of The Argus”) Trust, which had assisted in the in-
auguration of the Association, was especially generous. The
Trust operated on the principle that help was to be given
to those districts which endeavoured to help themselves,
and as this is the fundamental principle of the Association
they lent it their powerful aid.
The principal Trusts who have so generously assisted
as time passed by are the Edward Wilson (“of The Argus”)
Trust, the H. V. McKay Trust, the Walter & Eliza Hall
Trust, the Felton Bequest, the Joseph Kronheimer, J. R.
McPherson, Miss Louisa Henty, David Syme, Stanley
Heath, Henry Gyles Turner, T. J. Sumner, Edments, The
Patrick Brennan and Forest Trusts.
Furthermore, at the end of the War, the British and
Australian Red Cross, through the Governor-General and
his wife, now Lord and Lady Novar, distributed surplus
funds for Bush Nursing purposes. The Victorian contribu


tion was £15,000, which is held in trust, and the income
applied for the benefit of returned soldiers in Bush Nursing
Centres.
The Edward Wilson (“of The Argus”) Trust further
determined to organise properly equipped motor ambulance
services throughout the State on a similar principle to that
of Bush Nursing, i.e„ that the ambulance should be a gift
subject to a legal guarantee that the district should main-
tain and administer the ambulance system, and should pay
to a Central Council a replacement sum annually, to cover
the ultimate cost of renewal.
THIRD PHASE.
Hospitals and Ambulances.
Thus, in 1924 the third phase of the movement began.
There were in that year 47 Centres, including three hos-
pitals and six motor ambulances. The whole of the very
moderate cost of Central administration was borne by con-
tributions from a large number of Public Trusts. In addi-
tion, money steadily flowed into the Lady Dudley Trust
Fund, which had risen in 1924 to about £5OOO,
With this development, all sorts of changes had become
inevitable. It had become necessary to obtain, on an increas-
ing scale, the services generously given of a firm of lawyers
(Messrs. Phillips, Fox & Masell), by reason of the real
estate and the Trust moneys involved. A firm of Account-
ants (Messrs. Hunting & McDonald) appointed in 1920,
was requisite in order to arrange the details of payments
and receipts, with the needful checks. The Superintendent
was hard put to it to visit all parts of the State, watch the
working of the system, smooth out difficulties, and supervise
the nursing.
It was still difficult to obtain suitable Nurses, holding
not two but three certificates, viz., general, midwifery and
baby welfare, although following its initial practice the
Association paid its Nurses better than anyone else. Ques-
tions of Insurance and Superannuation, and many other
problems, arose, and so the fourth phase of the movement
gradually emerged.


FOURTH PHASE.
The Provision of Nurses and Development of Hospitals.
What was to be the relation of the Central Council to
the Hospitals.
How was money given for the building and equipment
of Hospitals to be controlled in the event of failure, or of a
desire of the Hospital to break away from the Association.
The answer to these questions was difficult, and was
not furnished immediately, but was given ultimately in the
light of some experience and by the old-fashioned but effec-
tive method in human affairs of trial and error.
As long as the Association remained a purely nursing
service there was little trouble, but with the appearance of
Hospitals, Ambulances and a large amount of Trust money,
many problems made their appearance.
The Central Council was incorporated in 1924, in view
of the propertv involved, including buildings, whether cot-
tages for the Nurses or Hospitals. The services of an
expert architect became essential, and a formal appoint-
ment (Mr. K. F. Elliott) was made in 1923.
In 1922 a Centre was formed in Horsham, on the advice
of the Medical Practitioners of that Town, which contained
about 6000 inhabitants. This Nurse works solely under
the direction of these Practitioners, and as time has passed
has been provided with a car and has developed a Baby
Health Centre on the most efficient and economical
principles.
The Provision of Highly Trained Nurses.
Suitable Nurses were difficult to obtain, and in 1923 the
Edward Wilson (“of The Argus”) Trust made arrangements
with the Government to the effect that if the Government
would add something to the Nurses’ salaries the Trust would
provide for their training in Midwifery and Infant Welfare
m Melbourne. Arrangements were at once made with the
Women’s and the Queen Victoria Hospitals, and the tiain-
inor school of the Baby Welfare Association, and selected
Nurses holding general certificates were paid for the train-
ing In return they had to contract to serve the Association
for from 18 months to two years. This farsighted arrange


ment solved the nursing problem. It was decided also to
insure all Nurses against accident and disease, and the
scale of benefits is set out below:—
INSURANCE OF NURSES AGAINST ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS.
It is necessary that the Nurses should be, as at present, insured
under the Workers’ Compensation Act, but this only provides for
compensation in cases in which the damage is by accident when
actually on duty.
It is essential that the Nurse should be insured against accident
and sickness at all times. The total cost of both insurances varies
from £B/16/- to £lO/6/- per annum, payable in advance. In return
for this the Nurse wall be properly provided for in case of accident
or sickness, however incurred, and consequently no burden will fall
on the Centre.
All Centres must insure their Nurses as part of their contract.
Workers’ Compensation Premium and Benefits.
The rate for workers’ compensation insurance—a flat rate of £1
per Nurse per annum —is charged to Centres.
In the event of death; A lump sum for medical and funeral
expenses (not exceeding £75) in the case of a Nurse without
dependants, and varying from £2OO to £6Bo' in the case of a
Nurse with dependants wholly depending on her.
Total or Partial Incapacity: Weekly payments according to degree
of incapacity; not more than £2 per week and total payment
not to exceed £6OO.
These advantages only apply to cases of injury received when
actually on duty, but no compensation whatever is payable unless
the Nurse has been disabled for at least one week.
Further Accident and Sickness Premium and Benefits.
The benefits and premium under the further accident and sickness
policy are as set out in the following table;—■
PREMIUMS AND BENEFITS.
1. Death by Accident £250 0 0
2. Permanent Total Disablement by Accident (loss of two
limbs or 1 two eyes, or one limb and one eye) .. .. 250 0 0
3. Permanent Partial Disablement by Accident (loss of
one limb or one eye) 125 0 0
4. Temporary Total Disablement by Accident .. Weekly 1 10 0
(Limit 52 weeks)
5. Temporary Parial Disablement by Accident .. Weekly 0 7 6
(Limit 52 weeks)


6. Permanent Total Disablement by Accident (other than
as stated above, payable half-yearly for ten years)
Annuity 7 10 0
7. Disablement by any Disease —
(a) Temporary Total (Limit 26 weeks) .. Weekly 3 0 0
(b) Temporary Partial, following on Temporary
Total (Limited to 4 weeks) Weekly 110 0
8. Total and Irrecoverable Loss of Sight in both eyes or
Permanent General Paralysis by Disease; payable
half-yearly for 10 years Annuity 15 0 0
These advantages apply to injuries received at any time or to
sickness occurring not less than 28 days after the commencement
of the insurance.
The premiums per Nurse are £1 for workers’ compensation, and
range from £7/16/- to £9/6/- for the further insurance.
With an adequate supply of Trained Nurses and in-
creasing public support, the Hospital extension policy
became active.
The Conversion of Private Hospitals.
In 1926 a Private Hospital in the country had for vari-
ous reason been unable to continue. It had been largely
built by the district, and following the then customary
practice, rented to a Nurse, who charged ordinary Nursing
fees. The District and the Medical Practitioner applied to
the Central Council for help in continuing it on the co-opera-
tive principle. The Central Council, using Trust Funds,
assisted liberally in establishing it, but indicated definitely
that it must be self-supporting as regards maintenance.
Under the co-operative scheme so many people subscribed
30/- a year, and in return received nursing and hospital
attention when necessary for £2 to £2/10/- a week and no
extras. They make their own personal arrangement with
their medical attendant, a system which has worked
admirably.
The conversion of Private Hospitals into Bush Nursing
Hospitals has been freely practiced, and since 1926 no
less than 15 Hospitals have taken this step. The Hospitals
are managed by the local subscribers and Committees, sub-
ject to the general rules of the Association, which supplies
and inspects the staff. In addition, a number of Hospitals
14 in number, have been built, some replacing older hos-
pitals, some created ab initio.


List of Hospitals
Cost of
Amount
Donated
No.
of Beds.
Built by B.N.A.
Building.
by Central
C.
Ward
Verandah.
Pakenham
£3,650
£1,150
0
0
7
8
Tongala
2,200
700
0
0
4
6
Euroa
4,300
1,250
0
0
10
14
Nagambie
2,166
1,150
0
0
4
6
Violet Town .. . .
1,477
650
0
0
3
4
Yackandandah
2,792
1,296
0
0
8
8
Hastings
1,378
500
0
0
4
5
Korumburra .. ..
4,150
500
0
0
11
12
Edenhope
1,607
808
0
0
5
6
Werrimull
820
744
6
10
5
3
Katamatite . . ..
1,539
650
0
0
4
6
Kooloonong .. ..
1,212
1,171
7
5
4
4
Neerim South
955
590
0
0
5
£28,246
£11,159
14
3
74
82
Yarra Junction (the
gift of Mr. F. J.
12
Connibere) . ..
3,942
7
£32,188
£11,159
14
3
81
94
List of Hospitals in B.N. A.
Amount Advanced by
No. of Beds.
but not built by the B.N. A.
G. Council.
Ward.
Verandah.
Koo-wee-rup
£200
6
4
Walwa
2
Skipton
278
7
Cowes (the gift of Mr. &
Mrs. W. E. Thomson) ..
375
5
2
Murrayville
8
2
Beaufort
300
7
Penshurst
400
5
3
Glenthompson
75
6
Toora
o
Dromana
5
Lismore
8
2
Willaura
75
5
Coleraine
75
8
3
Mirboo North
250
6
Boort
700
11
£2,728
84
18
The complete list with cost is set out below:—
There are, therefore, in 1932, 29 Hospitals supplying
290 beds, i.e., 175 indoor beds and 112 on specially equipped
spacious verandahs. 15 Private Hospitals have been taken
over. 14 Hospitals have been built, at a total cost of
£32,188. Of this, the Central Council paid £11,159, but will
receive a refund of £l4OO, leaving a net contribution of
£9759, i.e., about one-third of the cost of construction.


The grants for maintenance have been:—
Donation to Mallee Hospitals by Government .. £3OO
Donation to Mallee Hospitals by Central Council £250
Donations to other Hospitals by Central Council £192
There is owing at present for Nurses’ salaries in Hos-
pitals, £512, nearly all of which will be paid by June 30th,
1932.
Thus in 1932 there are 29 Hospitals, with an aggregate
capacity of 290 beds. There are 68 Centres, 22 Ambul-
ances and 68 First-Aid Outfits, the latter supplied by the
Edward Wilson (“of The Argus”) Trust.
Maternal and Infantile Mortality.
In 1928 another most unexpected fact was disclosed.
Dr. Marshall Allan, now Professor of Obstetrics in the Uni-
versity of Melbourne, asked whether the Association would
let him see the monthly reports of the Nurses, and then
submitted his analysis, showing that 2000 births had not
been attended by a single maternal death, and that the
neo natal and still born mortality was extraordinarily low.
Dr. Marshall Allan’s first report then followed, and is
set out below.
The Association then determined to submit all reports
to him, and in fatal and severe cases to ask his advice and
help. He has dealt sympathetically with such difficulties,
and has been of great service to the Nurses. His report
follows, with the account of his visit to New Zealand: —
DR. MARSHALL ALLAN’S REPORT, 1827-1928.
At the request of Sir James Barrett, I have analysed the obstetric
records of the Victorian Bush Nursing Association, for the year 1927-
28. The results have been presented in two tables—the first compris-
ing cases which were conducted wholly at Bush Nursing Centres, and,
secondly, those cases which, for various reasons given in detail, were
transferred to other localities. The information for the second table
was obtained partly from the monthly records, and partly by specific
queries, in certain cases, to the Centre concerned. I have to thank the
medical practitioners and the nurses for the prompt manner in which
much valuable detailed information was supplied.
It will be noted that although no deaths occurred in the cases of
Table A, there were two deaths among the transferred cases. In
one case I consider that the death must be debited to the records of
the Association. The medical practitioner acted wisely in transferring
this patient to a suitable central institution, when he considered she


was fit to travel, bearing in mind the risks of cross infection to the
other patients, in a hospital working to capacity. The death of the
second case was apparently caused by a generalised rheumatic infec-
tion of several years’ duration. This case appears m the records,
because the Nurse was called in and conveyed the patient to the
nearest doctor and hospital. The patient was fortunate in having
skilled help available during the journey to the hospital, and the
ultimate result cannot be debited to the records of the Association.
ANALYSIS OF OBSTETRIC CASES, 1927-1928.
Table A. —Cases wholly attended at Bush Nursing Centres:—
Number of Individual Cases given Ante-Natal advice
by Nurses
Number of Cases Delivered • • • * **
In Bush Nursing Hospitals .. .. .. 437 (60%
In homes with Doctor and Nurse .. 183 (28%)
In homes with Nurse alone 136 (17%)
Maternal Mortality (For comments, see Table B.)
Infantile Mortality—
I. Still Births • • • • ; • • * 1
Still Birth Rate, 17.67 per 1000 births (State
average, 30)
11. Neo-Natal Deaths (under one month).. .... 13
Neo-Natal Death Rate, 16.41 per 1000 births
(State average, 31.3)
Table B.—Cases attended by Bush Nursing Association, but trans-
ferred elsewhere before or after delivery:—
Number of Cases transferred ’ • •
Reasons for Transfer—
1. Engaged doctor in nearest town for confinement.
Accompanied by Bush Nurse as precaution, because
of distance or bad roads. 1
Results —All mothers recovered; one still-born infant 11
2. Engaged doctor in nearest town for confinement.
Desired ante-natal attention from Bush Nurse dur-
ing pregnancy. . , , _
Results—All mothers recovered; one still-born infant 7
3. Engaged doctor in nearest town for confinement.
Owing to sudden onset of labour, patient accom-
panied by Bush Nurse to the doctor.
Results —All mothers and infants alive and well . . 4
4. Infant born unexpectedly, and case transferred to
nearest hospital because of lack of suitable accom-
modation.
Results—Both mothers and infants alive and well 2
5. Malpresentations—Diagnosis confirmed by doctor, and
cases transferred to hospital; induction of labour.
Result—Mothers and children alive and well .... 2


6. Threatened eclampsia—Seen once by Bush Nurse.
Transferred to hospital; induction of labour.
Result —Mother and child alive 1
7. Concealed accidental haemorrhage Seen once by
Nurse, and transferred to hospital. Caesarean sec-
tion, hysterectomy and blood transfusion.
Result —Mother recovered, infant still-born 1
8. Toxic vomiting—Seen once by Nurse, and transferred
to hospital; induction of labour.
Result—Mother recovered, infant still-born 1
9. Patient with history of epilepsy—Normal delivery and
convalescence in Bush Nursing Hospital. No post-
natal care, and patient in indigent circumstances.
Infant died two months later, and mother re-admitted
suffering from puerperal insanity. Transferred to
general hospital in larger town, and from thence to
asylum 1
10. Single girl, aged 18, who had been two weeks in the
district. No ante-natal care. Bush Nurse sent for,
and, finding her in labour, accompanied her to the
nearest hospital and doctor. Normal labour, with
living child. Had history of joint rheumatism for
several years. Became seriously ill, and died in three
weeks from acute articular rheumatism and carditis 1
11. Normal delivery, with living Child, in Bush Nursing
Hospital. No examinations during labour. De-
veloped puerperal sepsis. Doctor considered case
would recover after prolonged treatment, and, be-
cause of crowded state of hospital, transferred her
to a metropolitan hospital. Death occurred one week
later 1
Comments.
The large number of cases who received ante-natal advice is
most gratifying, especially as my records of country practice em-
phasise the difficulty most practitioners experience in obtaining ade-
quate supervision of their patients. There were comparatively few
abnormal cases in either group, and this was probably mainly due to
the excellent pre-natal care of the mothers.
With the establishment of additional Bush Nursing Hospitals,
the number of cases treated therein has increased rapidly, until for
the present year 60% of the deliveries occurred in these hospitals.
It is satisfactory to note that the provision of well equipped hospitals
with a highly-trained staff has been availed of to such an increasing
extent. The number of cases attended by medical practitioners in
association with the Nurse has risen from 77% in 1926-27 to 83%
in 1927-28.
The infantile mortality rate remains at a level considerably
below the average for the State. Although it has not been mentioned
in the Tables, there is ample evidence from the monthly returns; of
the increasing use of the Centres for post-natal advice of both mothers
and infants." All the patients were referred to the nearest doctor
unless simple methods proved efficacious.


A survey of the transferred cases shows that the majority of
these patients had used the facilities of the Association for ante-natal
supervision, although they intended to proceed elsewhere for delivery.
The Bush Nurse had been of great assistance in safely transferring
these expectant mothers to their destinations. In addition, all emer-
gencies which arose during pregnancy were immediately recognised
as such by the Nurses, and medical aid obtained, or the patient
taken to the nearest town with adequate facilities.
The medical practitioners and the Nurses associated with the
various Centres are to be congratulated on the results of the work of
the year. The co-operation of doctor and nurse, the provision of
well-equipped hospitals, and the willingness of patients to avail them-
selves of these facilities have all combined to produce a mortality
rate both for mothers and infants well below those figures which are
generally regarded as inevitable.
1.8.28. R. MARSHALL ALLAN.
ANALYSIS OF OBSTETRIC CASES, 1922-1928.
Number of Cases Delivered 3065
In Bush Nursing Hospitals 1222
In homes, with Doctor and Nurse 868
In homes, with Nurse only 975
Number of Individual Cases given Ante-Natal Advice by
Nurses . . 2477
*Maternal Mortality 0
No deaths whilst under Bush Nurses, but responsibility must be
accepted for one death.
Infantile Mortality—
A. Still Births 43
Still Birth Rate, 14.03 per 1000 births (average for
State, 30)
B. Neo-natal Deaths (under one month) 25
Neo-natal Death Rate, 8.16 per 1000 births (average
for State, 31)
COMMENTS.
During the period under review 68%, or approximately two-thirds,
of the cases were attended by medical practitioners. For individual
years the annual percentage of cases so attended shows a rapid
increase, mainly co-incident with the establishment of Bush Nursing
Hospitals.
1922- 43%
1923- 52%
1924- 60%
1925- 65%
1926- 77%
1927- 83%
*No deaths have occurred while actually under the control of
the Bush Nursing Association, but, as Dr. Marshall Allan reports,
responsibility must be taken for one death, of which particulars are
given in his report.


INFORMATIVE REPORT TO THE CENTRAL COUNCIL BY
PROFESSOR MARSHALL ALLAN ON HIS RETURN FROM
NEW ZEALAND, JUNE 30th, 1931.
That trip was made primarily to discuss various obstetric prob-
lems with the medical profession, but at the same time there were
numerous opportunities of meeting men and women interested in
matters of public interest. Within a period of six weeks I covered
nearly 5,000 miles in both islands and addressed over thirty meetings.
The usual procedure was to commence by showing lantern slides of
modern obstetric hospitals, followed by the fine series on the work
of the Bush Nursing Association, which you kindly loaned to me.
Apart from nearly thirty meetings of the medical and nursing pro-
fessions, I also had the opportunity of addressing six public meetings,
as well as speaking at the Auckland Rotary Club and broadcasting
from IYA Auckland. After this intimate association with Dominion
problems, there are several points which I wish to report to the
Central Council.
As you are aware, the hospital system in New Zealand differs
from our own. The Dominion is divided into a number of districts,
each with a Board controlling all public hospitals in that area. These
hospitals are open to all members of the community, but in many
instances medical attention is restricted to full-time officers. Finance
is arranged by a compulsory municipal rating in addition to a Govern-
ment grant. No co-operative scheme similar to that of the V.B.N.A.
exists. Owing to the present economic stress, New Zealand is finding
that her hospital scheme is very costly, and drastic cuts are proposed.
I need not stress the point that the medical profession desires radical
changes in the present system.
Professional interest was aroused by the manner in which the
B.N.A. had arranged for adequate accommodation in small centres
as well as for skilled nursing help. The co-operation of doctor and
nurse was very favourably commented upon, and also the “open door”
as regards attendance by all doctors in the area served by the
hospitals. The fact that these hospitals are of the small mixed type
—i.e., admit all classes of cases—and, despite this, that they have
no records of cross infection having occurred, made a deep impression.
It was recognised that this could only have been accomplished by
much care exercised by both medical and nursing staffs. At present
the Dominion Health Department is intent on the abolition of all
mixed hospitals. While this is a good policy in the larger centres,
it is not practicable for the smaller and more isolated areas, and the
New Zealand profession were pleased to get evidence that in such
instances it was not absolutely essential.
Both medical and lay audiences were surprised at the obstetrical
records of the Association. The maternal death rate is lower not
only than that of the Dominion, but also than that of the St. Helen’s
Hospitals—State obstetric hospitals which cater only for women who
have had adequate ante-natal care. As you are aware, the New
Zealand infantile death rate under one year is the lowest in the world.
But for flie period under one month their records are little better
than our own. The striking results of the Association attracted
universal attention and were the subject of many questions. It was


recognised that these records were closely associated with the atten-
tion given to the mothers before and during delivery, and reflected
great credit on all concerned.
The keen interest taken in the activities of the B.N.A. by the
medical profession was noteworthy, and in the future this work should
influence medical developments in the Dominion. I would stress once
more that our colleagues were impressed mostly by the details of
what can be accomplished when doctor and nurse work closely in
conjunction, assisted by the willing co-operation of the people of the
district. The trend of departmental opinion in New Zealand is to
limit the doctor to ante-natal care and abnormal deliveries, and our
records will assist the profession to combat such a short-sighted policy.
Note.—All obstetric cases in Victoria attended by Bush Nurses
which do not proceed satisfactorily are reported to the Centi'al
Council, and by them referred to Professor Marshall Allan, who, if
and when necessary, advises the Nurses concerned.
The record of no maternal deaths up to 1927-28 has not
been maintained, and could not be expected to continue, but
the result is still vastly better than the general result in the
State. Several deaths are included, for which the Associa-
tion is not in any way responsible, but it has been thought
desirable to include them and avoid the suggestion of the
selection of cases.
The low death rate is due to the simplest of principles.
The very best Nurses, working under friendly supervision,
get the confidence of the prospective mother and induce
her to visit a medical practitioner for complete ante-natal
examination and advice, with the result that danger is
foreseen when it exists, and is duly dealt with.


EPITOME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE ASSOCIATION.
The various steps in the development of the Associa-
tion arc, therefore, as follows:
1. The provision of adequately trained and specially
selected Nurses for service in country districts.
2. The provision of cottages for their residence.
3. The provision of a highly-skilled and friendly
Nursing Inspector.
4. The adoption of the co-operative method by the
districts which pay the salaries of the Nurses.
5. The gradual appearance of Hospitals and the natural
transference of the co-operative system to them
for the first time, I think, in history.
6. The excellence and cheapness of the Hospitals built,
and the systematic inclusion in the Committee of
Management of Medical Practitioners.
7. The creation of an organisation in Melbourne by a
sympathetic Nursing Supervisor for the supply of
extra Nurses at a moment’s notice.
8. The establishment of a Baby Health Centre in every
Hospital and in nearly every Centre.
9. The consequent remarkable reduction of maternal
and infant mortality.
10. The extraordinarily cheap, yet beautiful, construc-
tion of the Hospitals, and remarkable economy in
administration by reason of their construction,
and of the basic income derived from the co-opera-
tive method.
It will be noted that each step has resulted in some
new development, which is, nevertheless, the logical out-
come of that which proceeded it.
Difficulties there are, and always will be, in such a far-
flung administration, but each difficulty surmounted in a
sensible way eases the next step.


THE NURSES.
The loyalty of the corps of Nurses, their pride in their
work and in the Association, is in itself a factor difficult
to assess in figures and of incalculable value.
The opposition at the outset has been followed by
general appreciation by the public. Any woman who has
been a Bush Nurse is hall-marked, since so many instances
have come to light of their commonsense, technical ability
and unselfish devotion to their work.
To me, who saw the inception of the work and fully
realising the extreme difficulties, the lesson is conveyed that
the public may be slow to learn and prejudiced, but in the
long run never fails to rightly judge the worth of a sound
character.
The Association is the largest employer of trained
Nurses in the State, utilising the services, whole or part
time, of 70 to 90 Nurses.
THE AID OF THE TRUSTS.
It is fitting to observe that without the foresight and
sympathy of those distinguished men who control the
Trusts, the means to create this organisation would not
have been available.
In 1929 the Edward Wilson (of “The Argus”) Trust,
showed its confidence in the Association by handing £32,000
to a Trustee Company to be paid to the Association at the
rate of £4,000 a year for 10 years to enable Hospitals and
Cottages to be built in brick or concrete, and for the benefit
of women and children. Remote districts which make a
determined effort to help themselves are to receive priority
in time and amount. Financially the Association only ren-
ders help for maintenance in special cases and in moderate
amounts.
For construction and special help to save women and
children, money is available in fairly large sums, provided
always that self-help is evident.
The Association never asks any district to undertake
the formation of a Centre, but if a district wishes to form
one the Association cordially co-operates.


No. of
Date
No. of
Hospitals
No. of
Founded.
Centres.
Built and
Building.
Ambulances.
Administration.
1910
Founded by the Countess of
Dudley with the support of
Lord and Lady Carmichael.
First Superintendent ap-
1911
4
1913
13
pointed (Miss E. M. Greer).
1914
20
1915
21
1916
24
3 917
to
28
1920
1921
33
1
Miss E. M. Greer resigned.
Miss E, C. Cameron,
A.R.R.C., appointed.
1922
39
1923
47
Country
Ambulance
founded
Miss M. Mathieson appointed
as assistant.
1924
47
3
6
1925
47
3
11
1926
52
8
18
Miss E. C. Cameron resigned.
Miss M. L. Gillis appointed.
1927
55
9
19
1928
59
14
21
1929
62
17
21
Miss M. L. Gillis resigned.
Reorganisation of adminis-
tration; office of super-
intendent abolished. Office
and Nursing Supervisor
and a travelling Inspector
appointed, owing to mag-
nitude of work.
Miss M. Mathieson, Office
and Nursing Supervisor;
Miss M. Edwards, Travel-
ling Inspector.
June,
1930
68
25
22
June,
1931
66
28
22
1932
63
29
22
TABLE INDICATING THE HISTORY OF THE
VICTORIAN BUSH NURSING ASSOCIATION.
It is estimated that 31 Ambulances will furnish all the requirements
of the State. There are 68 First-Aid and Stretcher Centres, in
addition.


GOVERNMENT HELP.
It is gratifying to note that the Government has from
the outset provided free passes on the railways to Nurses
proceeding to and leaving a Centre, and has made a moderate
addition to the Nurses’ salaries, but no help has been re-
quested or desired for the construction or maintenance of
Hospitals with two trifling exceptions, viz., maintenance in
a drought-stricken district.
The Centres must be self-supporting, in reason, or cease
to exist.
ASSOCIATION’S METHOD OF HELPING HOSPITALS.
Money advanced by the Central Council for building is
almost always lent on mortgage for five years at 1 per cent.,
and so far the interest has always been donated to the
Centre.
A perpetual mortgage is illegal, so the mortgage is ac-
companied by a letter from the Association promising re-
newal so long as the Centre remains part of the Association.
If it ceases to exist as part of the Association from any
cause, the money would be claimed and applied to some
district which needed it.
SUMMARY OF WORK DONE FOR THE YEAR 1930-1931 BY THE
BUSH NURSES.
During the year ended 30th June, 1931, the number of cases
attended by Bush Nurses was 13,614.
The Total Number of Maternity Cases attended was .. .. .. 1,044
„ „ ~ Cases to receive Ante-natal Advice was 893
” „ „ „ Infant Welfare Visits 4,176
„ „ „ Cases other than Maternity Cases .. 11.677
Jf „ „ „ Visits Paid to Patients out of Hospital 32,381
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 30, 1931.
Gross Income of the Centres .. .. £27,810
Gross Income of the Central Council —
Contributed by the Centres £13,380
Received from Other Sources 1,540
Amounts Paid to the Centres from British and Australian
Red Cross by way of Half-Yearly Allocation £560
Amounts Contributed towards Nurses’ Salaries by the Govt. £1,350
Cost of Administration, including Accountancy, Salaries of
Inspector, Office . Supervisor and Permanent Relievers,
also Exchange on Nurses’ Salaries £1,280


Out-of-pocket Expenses of Hon. Solicitor and Architect’s
Honorarium £320
Amounts Actually Advanced to Various Centres by Central
Council for Cottages, Hospitals, Furniture and Other
Purposes .. £2,430
Grant towards Maintenance Given by Central Council to
Various Centres £6OO
Grants for Special Purposes Given by Central Council to
Various Centres £4O
Capital of the Lady Dudley Bush Nursing Fund £IO,BIO
(Amounts in round figures.)
WHAT OF THE FUTURE.
What may lie in the future no one can tell, but it is
evident that the system has profoundly altered in the last
six years, and is now composed of 63 Centres, nearly half of
which are Hospital Centres. Centre after Centre has
changed from being a purely nursing Centre into a Hospital
Centre, and Hospitals continue to be built and sought in
the midst of the economic blizzard, for the simple reason
that by no other means can people obtain such efficient
Hospital Nursing Service near their own homes, at so low a
cost. Furthermore, pride of the district in a Hospital
owned and managed by themselves is a factor of the first
importance. So far there is no sign of retrogression so far
as Hospitals are concerned, and at some of the newer
Hospitals as many as five Nurses have been employed at
times.
The nursing service is flexible, since Nurses are supplied
as required, and returned to Melbourne when the pressure
eases. Each Hospital built incorporates new ideas and
economies. At the present time 10 districts are either
enquiring or negotiating for Hospital establishment, and
some of them are certain to obtain them.
The creation of a Hospital takes time, as the people
have to understand the method and to realise that the
Central Council’s action depends on the efforts they them-
selves make. It will be noticed that two of the Hospitals
were donated by generous citizens —Mr. W. E. Thompson,
at Cowes; and Mr. F. G. Connibere, at Yarra Junction—
both of which have been of great service.


BUSH NURSING IN OTHER STATES.
The movement gradually spread to other States, and
the table which follows indicates their activities. But the
Hospital portion of the system, which, after all, is of very
recent origin in Victoria, has not so far developed fully in
the other States, though there are definite indications of
such a movement in New South Wales and Tasmania.
NEW SOUTH WALES BUSH NURSING ASSOCIATION.
Central Council.
President: Sir Charles Clubbe.
Secretary: Miss N. Morrice, R.R.C.. Kembla Buildings, Margaret
Street, Sydney.
Thirty-eight Centres in working order 368 midwifery cases were
attended during 1930.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DISTRICT TRAINED NURSING SOCIETY.
(Incorporated)
Council; 40 members —20 Ladies, 20 Men.
President: Dr. H. A. Powell, C.M.G., V.D.
Hon. Treasurer; Mr. P. F. Leader.
General Secretary and Superintendent: Miss W. Howie, 49 Exchange
Buildings, Pirie Street, Adelaide.
In this State bush and district nursing are combined.
QUEENSLAND BUSH NURSING ASSOCIATION.
Central Council.
President: Mrs. E. S. Jackson (wife of Dr. E. S. Jackson).
Hon. Secretary: Miss M. A. McDonald, “St. George’s Nurses’ Home,”
Milton Heights, Brisbane, Queensland.
TASMANIAN BUSH NURSING ASSOCIATION.
President: Mr. George Shields.
State Secretary: Mrs J. H. Fraser.
The Department of Public Health administers the Bush Nursing
Scheme on behalf of the Association. Bush Nurses were operating
in 17 Centres at the 31st December, 1930.
The following is a summary of the services rendered by the
Nurses during 1930:—Visits to Nurse, 3,442; Visits to Patients, 4,387;
Nursing Days, 1,367; Child Welfare Visits, 4,790; Maternity Cases, 179.


THE CENTRAL COUNCIL.
The whole of the administration is in the hands of a
purely Honorary Central Council, who have visited the
Centres and exerted themselves freely. The Central Council
for 1932 is as follows:
Life Patronesses:
THE VISCOUNTESS NOVAE, G.B.E.
THE LADY CARMICHAEL.
Patroness:
LADY IRVINE.
CENTRAL COUNCIL, 30th June, 1931.
President;
LADY MITCHELL, C.B.E. (Australian Red Cross Society, 8.R.C.5.)
Vice-Presidents:
Mrs. G. G, HENDERSON.
Mrs. J. S. FRASER, 0.8. E. (Australian Red Cross Society, 8.R.C.5.)
Members of Central Council:
Elected by Subscribers or Co-opted:
Mrs. JAMES ALSTON F. TATE, C.M.G., 1.5.0.
Miss E, GRICE , O. M. WILLIAMS. 0.8. E.
Mrs. C. O. WHITE Mrs. A. H. SARGOOD
Sir GEO. CUSCADEN, K. 8., V.D. Mrs. John MURRAY
Miss C. ARMSTRONG Mrs. W. H. FLOOD
W. G. HICKS
Professor MARSHALL ALLAN, M.C.
Mrs. R. WILLIAMS (Melbourne District Nursing Society)
Miss A. C. WHITEHEAD (Association of Friendly Societies of Vic.)
Dr. EILEEN FITZGERALD (Education Department)
Dr. EILEEN HIGGINS (Women’s Medical Society)
Dr. B. M. SUTHERLAND (Victorian Branch, British Medical Assn.)
Dr. A. P. DERHAM (Victorian Branch, British Medical Association)
Miss SARA BYRNE (National Council of Women)
A. H. HANSFORD (Victorian Civil Ambulance)
C, L. McVILLY (Inspector of Charities)
Hon. Secretary: SIR JAMES BARRETT, K.8.E., C. 8., C.M.G., M.D.
Assistant Hon. Secretary: Dr. EDITH BARRETT, C.B.E.
Hon. Treasurer: J, BROMILOW, J.P.


Officers;
Office and Nursing Supervisor: Miss M. MATHIESON,*
Inspector: Miss M, EDWARDS.
Hon. Architect: K. F. ELLIOTT.
Hon. Solicitor: M. P. FOX.
Hon. Auditor: P. J. W. DANBY.
Accountants: RENTING & MACDONALD.
Hon. Trustee:
THE EQUITY TRUSTEES, EXECUTORS & AGENCY LTD.
Central Office: 105 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
Telephone: Central 6678.
CONCLUSION.
The movement illustrates the wisdom of a very wise
man, viz., the late Professor Huxley, who said: “When in
human affairs you seek to make changes, you can be sure
of two results. When you have made the effort you will
not be where you started, and you will not be precisely in
the position which you thought you would reach.”
Appendix.
The maternal mortality and infantile death rate for 1931-1932
was as follows:
1 death (maternal) in 948 cases.
19 still births.
20 neo-natal deaths.
For the whole period, 1922 to 1932, the rates per 1000 live births
were as follow; —
Maternal death rate 1.96
(State average) 4.96
Still birth rate 17.05
(State average) 29.7
Neo-natal deaths 14.94
(State average) 30.1
It is unlikely that so favourable a result can be obtained indefi-
nitely. It is almost too good when all thd circumstances are taken
into consideration; but the Association, through its excellent staff,
will continue to do their very best, and, as usual, every doubtful
or disastrous case will be submitted to Professor Marshall Allan for
report and advice for future guidance. Every effort will be made
to maintain a record of which all concerned are justly proud.
It must be remembered that every death has been taken into
account, including several cases for which the Association is not
responsible, so as to avoid the suggestion of selection of cases.
* War service.


Since this outline history was prepared in April, 1932,
two Bush Nursing Centres have closed for economic reasons
to their regret and in spite of some assistance offered by
the Central Council. On the other hand, another private
hospital approved by the Central Council has joined the
Association, making a total of 80 Hospitals with a total
capacity of 300 beds. Four new Hospitals are in the course
of construction, and a number of districts are negotiating
for the establishment of Hospitals. It is more than ever
obvious that, notwithstanding the fine service rendered by
the Bush Nursing Centres, most districts are looking for-
ward to the establishment of Hospitals.
The cheap and superior accommodation afforded turns
feeling in that direction rather than to the creation of
Nursing Centres.
At the same time, there will always be Nursing Centres
in remote places, and the Association will continue to do its
best to establish and support them.
At present, during the economic blizzard, the Hospitals
offer economies greater than those of purely Nursing
Centres.








Printed by J. C. Stephens Pty. Ltd., 114-120 Hardware St., Melbourne.
