

Leichhardt's Exploring Expedition through the Interior of Australia




exploring expedition through the interior of
AUSTRALIA.
In the session of the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales for
1843, inquiry into the practicability and expediency of establishing an
overland route, direct from Sydney to Port Essington, across the inter-
vening continent, was first suggested'. The result of the discussion
upon the subject was to despatch an exploring expedition up the interior,
which quitted Sydney, with Dr. Leichart at its head, on the 13th of
August, 1844. The party consisted of seven gentlemen, three natives,
four kangaroo dogs, sixteen bullocks, and seventeen horses laden with
provisions. They then considered themselves prepared to undertake
a journey presenting innumerable difficulties.
Quitting Sydney, and passing round along, the coast to Moreton
Bay, the expedition proceeded to Jiraba, the farthest station of Dowling
Downs to the westward, which they left on the Ist of October, and
travelled through the great plains of the Condamines, meeting in the
way with many creeks and streams, which, flowing to the west and to
the south, join the river of the same name.
The novelty of the journey now commenced. Having passed the
Condamine Plains, the explorers entered a fine open country, presenting
many diversities of aspect. On one side a large well-wooded tract
spread away, and on the other meadows admirably adapted for feeding
cattle and horses. Dense patches of thicket were here observed, which
occurring at frequent intervals throughout the whole journey, sometimes
extended uninterruptedly for a space of twenty or thirty miles, resem-
bling greatly the jungle of India. The bricklow, a kind of acacia, forms
the principal shrub of which these thickets are composed. In their
shades the wild cattle and often the natives find secure retreats.
Skirting round the low woods, the party followed a narrow passage
between two thickets, over a very flat country, for many miles. Evi-
dences of some large volume of water being at hand were discovered;
lagoons appearing here and there, and creeks being beheld at intervals.
At length, to the infinite satisfaction of the travellers, they came upon a
noble river, meandering in a north-westerly direction, and flowing
between a rich country, with fine open flats on either bank, skirted by
long ranges of thicket. In the distance the waters entered a moun-
tainous country, and turning to the north-east worked their way
towards the coast. This river was christened the Dawson. Near it
was discovered a fine lake, which received the name of Palm-tree
Creek, from the abundance of coryphia palms which grew along its
banks. On either side extend rich level spaces and fine ridges, when
again the view is bounded by thickets, alternating with plains densely
covered by the plant vervain, which suggested the idea of Vervain
Plain. Continuing the journey the party came upon another lagoon,
christened Robinson’s Creek, the bed of which was broad, deep, and
sandy; while to the left were several sedgy swampy lakes, covered with
waterfowl. This stream flows down from the hills rising in the north-
west into ranges of considerable elevation, from which numerous brooks
and small rivers descend, and join with Robinson’s Creek, which is
scarcely a quarter of a mile distant from the Palm-tree Lagoon. Its


■waters turned to the south-west, and it was conjectured that they also
might possibly belong to the Condamine. The country around is open
and well timbered, and the elevated ridges are covered with silver-
leaved iron-bark.
Rivers in the interior of Australia seldom, if ever, appear unaccom-
panied by patches of water extending in their vicinity. The reason
of this is obvious. The rivers, instead of flowing between high hanks,
generally meander through a wide open country, and when swollen by
rains or torrents from the tills, the surplus waters inundate the plain,
and thus fertilize the land. The quick succession of small lagoons,
which so frequently appear on the level country, resembling the bed
of a large river dried up at intervals, in those parts where the soil rises
higher than the remaining portions, may in this way be accounted for.
The country now became more intricate: ranges of hills intersected
one another, and from between them rivers flowed out, to the north,
and to the south, and to the east, and to the west. The explorers felt
their energies for a moment damped. They were at a loss what course
to take, or how to accomplish the difficult mountain ascent with their
bullocks and horses, laden with provisions. But after a persevering
search for some days, a pass was discovered at the head of a creek,
leading in a north-easterly direction. Again, the spirit of enterprise
rose strong in their minds, and thanking Providence for the discovery
made, after crossing the mountain range, they entered a plain of great
extent, covered alternately with masses of thicket and patches of ver-
dure. This was in December, and the grass being burnt, and the
vegetation parched, the country presented a somewhat uninviting and
bleak appearance, save when now and then luxuriantly clothed meadows
were seen along with a group of fine zamia, clustering on the edge of
Zamia Creek, a little stream so called by the travellers, which though
deep as long as it continued amongst the hills, became shallow as soon
as it entered the plains.
The mountains now beheld were christened Expedition Range, and
keeping for some time on their easterly side, several creeks were
crossed, while the country still continued well timbered, and covered
here and there with fine groups of palm and erythrina trees, clustering
round little lakes, with fine grasses growing on their margins. Ascend-
ing the difficult passage of the range, the expedition paused to observed
the prospect presented on its north-west side. The view extended
over a large valley, boundesd to the west and north-west by lofty chains
of hills, called by the party Christmas Ranges. Down the slopes of the
valley, thicket grew densely, and over the plain which stretched at its
feet, were scattered a few isolated hills, with a lagoon occasionally
spreading between. Descending the hills they once more took a north-
easterly direction, and following the course of a large creek were led to
a small stream, lined on either hand with fine cassarinas, and flooded
gum-trees, which received the name of Comet River, from the fact of
their having beheld, while journeying along its banks, the comet of
1844. The Comet is badly supplied with water, its course in some
places being wholly dry. It flows over downs and plains from the west-
ward, on each side extends a slip of forest land, which, continuing for
some miles, is at length succeeded by thicket, until it joins the Mac-
kenzie. The country around is not by any means adapted for agricul-


tural purposes, being a continuation of plains covered alternately with
thicket, vervain, and sow-thistle, among which kangaroos are found in
great numbers.
The Mackenzie flows directly from the westward, and is a valuable
stream, abounding in a variety of excellent fish, which forms the prin-
cipal food of the natives. Amongst them was found the fresh-water
muscle. The river extended sometimes into small lakes, from two to
ten miles in length. The party were prevented from examining its
head by the dense mass of thicket which lined its banks in that direc-
tion ; they accordingly followed its course through a deep narrow
valley. From its left bank a high level country extends, covered with
thicket and box forest, and appearances along its banks led them to
conjecture that a coal formation extended a great way up the river.
Several round pieces of fine coal were discovered, resembling that of
Newcastle. The course taken by the Mackenzie was to the eastward,
and in spite of the denseness of the thicket, the abundance of water, the
variety and richness of the grasses, the fine plains and open box-forest,
present an inviting prospect to the settler. The natives were seen
along the banks, who manifested a friendly disposition, and took infinite
pains to point out the further course of the Mackenzie, which it is said
enters the flats of the east, and continues henceforward in that direc-
tion.
Quitting this stream, the travellers once more struck off to the north-
west, and were strongly impressed with the fertility and beauty of the
land through which they passed. Long patches of thicket stretched
away, composed of fine narrow-leaved iron-bark forest, intermingled
with box-wood. Rich plains extended, clothed with fine grass and
herbs; honey, sweet as that of Hymettus, was found, with abundance of
game, while the air was rendered fragrant by the odours of the wild
thyme and marjoram. A chain of hills extended to the north-west.
For some time the journey was pursued through rich and smiling plains,
extending over an immense extent of country, from which rose a series
of magnificent cones and ridges. On all sides, chains of hills were
perceived in the distance, and though the plain was but ill-watered, the
smoke curling up to the eastward, the young grass, the late burnings,
with other indications, proclaimed the country to be densely inhabitated.
Glimpses were, indeed, occasionally obtained of the black men.
No continuous rains were experienced during the whole journey, but
a few sharp thunder-storms occurred, which seemed to fill up the parched
lagoons, and afford a supply of fresh water. A creek was selected
from amongst many others, on which was bestowed the name of Hugh s
Creek, whose course it was determined to follow. The stream was full and
rapid as long as it continued to flow between the hills, but when it left them
became almost dry. Around the well-filled basins the drooping tea-tree
was discovered, which, like the weeping-willow, appears to require much
moisture. The pendulous foliage affords a delightfully refreshing shade.
Following the course of the creek, and passing for some time through a
flat country, covered with narrow-leaved iron, box-wood, and a new
species of gum-tree called the poplar gum, from the resemblance which its
leaves bore to those of the trembling poplar of England, it led the party to
a river flowing through a hard and sandy bed, with high banks on either
hand clothed by fine flooded gum-trees and cassarinas. This stream, called


Isaaks, was dry, but a swamp running parallel to it, yielded excellent
water. It was followed in a north-westerly direction up to its head; con-
tinuing totally destitute of moisture until near its source, though in the
adjacent country, wells sunk by the natives were found, and small wreaths
of reed scattered about round little basins, pointed out where, in a more
favourable season, water could be procured. A range of hills swept
down the left bank of the river, which received the name of Coxen’s
Peak and Range. The Isaaks breaks through the chain of hills,
between which, plains well adapted for agricultural purposes and the
breeding of cattle and horses extended. A flat country now stretched
on either side, bounded in the distance by hills. A drizzling rain
commenced, and continued through the end of February and the be-
ginning of March, 'which must have rendered the progress of the
explorers a little uncomfortable, though their adventurous spirit caused
it to be passed off with but a slight remark. The next stream was
the Suttor, surrounded by a fine level country covered with many very
curious kinds of grass and various herbs, to which cattle and horses
are particularly partial. Water is abundant around it, and the lagoons
are frequently long and broad and covered with wild ducks. Here the
pandanus was first observed, and traces of fires made by* the natives
were discovered along with the shells of the fruit called cycas, which
they had no doubt been eating. A new species of grevillea was found,
while the poplar gum-tree, along with the drooping tea-tree, growing to
an immense height and yielding excellent timber, were also seen. The
blood-wood and iron-bark are often available for building huts. After
examining the timbered but occasionally rocky course of the Suttor,
they arrived at a most magnificent sheet of water, which proved to be a
portion of another river, broken into a series of basins well supplied
with water, being joined by numerous streams, one of which received
the name of the Cape. It winds round the foot of an isolated mountain
called Mount Maconnel, and thrtows itself into a running stream with a
bed a mile in width, which flows from the north-west and turns to the
eastward. Here the explorers pitched their first camp and called the
river Burdekin. The character of the country varies extremely; lofty
ranges of hills now T advance, now recede from the river, while here
and there large level spaces covered with thicket, rendered the passage
very difficult. The whole country is here composed of granite and
sienitic rock; the river now flows through a deep valley, having open
plains on either side covered with lagoons, over whose waters the lotus,
forming an article of food with the natives, flowered in rich profusion.
Along the basaltic ridges bounding it on the south, a brook overgrown
with reeds, winds along. This spot received the name of the Valley of
the Lagoons.
Ascending the basaltic ridges, the travellers found themselves in a
level, well-wooded country, many miles in extent, through which a
small rippling stream was found meandering. A huge mountain rising
from this table-land received the name of Mount Lang. Here the
travellers observed numerous mounds, raised to a considerable height,
by the industry of the large white ant. Passing on, discovering in their
way, many creeks, through a beautifully grassed table-land, which struck
the travellers as admirably adapted for a station, from the coolness of
its climate, the soundness of the ground, and the ppen nature of the


forests, and offering ready means of rapid communication with the
Eastern Coast and the Gulf of Carpentaria. TJhey discovered a river
passing through a broad bed, separating into numerous channels as it
flowed through the passes in the mountains. Tlhe banks are timbered
with the apple-gum, blood-wood, and stringy barlk, and are also covered
with a good supply of grass. Many new trees were discovered on the
ranges near the Lynd, as well as along the river and within its bed.
One gum-tree in particular was found, bearing beautiful blossoms,
resembling those of the orange-tree all in bloom. Its foliage was very
similar to that of the tea-shrub, and hence it was called the tea-tree gum.
Several new species were here observed, and among others, one resem-
bling the iron-bark, which continued to be found at intervals throughout
the whole journey. The expedition now proceeded along a fine rapid
river, sometimes narrow, sometimes shallow, and then swelling out into
broad sheets of water, like so many lakes. Down its banks ran a belt
of forest, and farther on the country became more and more open,
changing from forest-land into a series of plains running parallel with
the river bounded by woods of small acacia-trees. The aspect of the
country continued to improve, the plains became larger, the forest-land
richer, receding further and further from the river, which received the
name of the Mitchel. The explorers would have proceeded further up,
but fearing that their provisions might grow short, they quitted its banks
and journeyed to the westward, the scenery being varied by plains,
forest-land, lagoons full of fish and overspread by the broad leaves and
the showy blossoms of the lotus plant.
The party here sustained a serious loss in the death of one of their
companions. The night had come on, and their tents were pitched
near a large creek. Most of the travellers had retired to rest after the
fatigue of the day, when suddenly strange sounds of stealthy footsteps
creeping over the ground were heard, and soon after a rush was made
upon the tents by a number of natives, who. had. tracked the expedition
up the country. Several of the travellers escapmd with severe injuries,
but Mr. Gilbert received a mortal wound from a spear that pierced his
chest just at the very moment he was preparing to issue from his tent.
Guns were now fired through the darkness, which by the loud echoes
they awoke around, appeared to terrify the natives, who on hearing the
report, immediately took to flight. Early in the morning their wailings
and lamentations announced that one at least of their companions had
received injury from the discharge of the fire-arms. Poor Gilbert was
buried near the lagoon, and the only remembrance of his fate is to be
found in the river, soon after discovered, which received from him its
name. Another stream was called Tapper, a word caught from the con-
versation of the friendly natives along its banks, the water of which was
found to be brackish. The whole country, from Gilbert’s Lagoons, the
spot near which he died, to the Tapper, is composed of large open plains,
intersected by narrow strips of forest-land, and extensive levels, well
timbered with box and tea-wood, which changed at last into fine grassy
meadows, spreading along chains of lagoons. The shady forests along
the rivers, afford a pleasing prospect to the traveller’s eye, and the open
plains are admirably adapted for the cultivation of rice and cotton.
This part of the interior appeared densely inhabited. A fine shady tree
bearing a yellow eatable fruit, growing in abundance on the plains, gave


to them the name of Monda Country. It seems indigenous to those
parts, for the travellers in the whole course of their journey never met
with it again.
Three salt-water rivers were discovered between the Tapper and the
Nicholson, a branch of the Albert, flowing into the Gulf of Carpentaria,
previously discovered by that indefatigable explorer, Captain Stokes,
who has lately given to the public his Discoveries in Australia; one
of them received the name of Beames’ Brook. This stream was only
about twenty yai'ds broad when it was first discovered, and was lined
on either side by a verdant brushwood of pandanus and other shrubs ;
where they crossed it was conly three yards in breadth, very deep in
some places, shallow in others, and then swelling into a full rapidly-
flowing river, overshadowed! by fine oak trees, palms, pandanus, and
flooded gums. It far surpassed in beauty all the other streams disco-
vered. The country, aften- undulating for some extent, rises into a
hilly forest-land, and then into large open plains, some ten miles
in length. The level coumtry extends along the hanks of the three
rivers, and are lined by thickets of a small tree, which the travellers
called raspberry-jam tree, tfrom the resemblance of the scent emitted
by it to that preserve. Thes smoke of fires proclaimed them to be in
the neighbourhood of the natives. The salt rivers are in general very
broad but easily crossed, tthey abound in fish, and the places where
they were considered fordalble were indicated by the rude fisheries of
the natives, composed of stiicks stuck close to each other, so as to form
a sort of hedge, which prevented the fish from returning with the tide.
Frequently large pieces of irock had been cast into the water, so as to
form stepping stones.
From the Nicholson to tlhe Eaper they travelled through a country
rendered difficult of passage by the dense masses of tea and stringy-
bark forest and a close undierwood. One shrub attracted their notice;
it varied in height from twio to five feet, and had a winged stem, and
branches with yellow blossoms. Acacia, too, was seen, along with the
grevillea, which abounds all the way to Port Essington. In fording this
stream the party sustained! a severe loss; four of the finest horses
were drowned by slipping diown the steep and boggy banks. In con-
sequence of this disaster thee greater part of the botanical and geological
collection were thrown awary, along with the plans for returning over-
land. The Marlow and Y. r an Alpher rivers were in succession disco-
vered ; the latter flows through fine plains, covered as usual with patches
of low thicket. The Abel Tasman was the next river of importance
found. It forms a broad slheet of salt-water, and possesses high, steep
banks, lined with trees. Tlhe level land above is grassy, well timbered
with blood-wood, stringy-bairk, and white-gum trees.
The waters of the creeks: are here almost always of a brackish nature,
and the country for some miles became a succession of tea-tree and
cypress-pine thickets. In tthe middle of this a fine stream was found,
which received the name cof Seven Emus Fiver, from the flocks of
emus which were noticed near its banks. Sixteen of these animals
were shot, and each provided meat for the party for a whole day.
Passing along the river, and following a native path, the expedition
found itself on the edge of a large dried creek, whose banks were clothed
with cypress-pine and cycas groves. This tree strongly resembles


the palm, and reaches the height of more thaan fifty feet, with some-
times two or three heads, and bearing excellent fruit, which, in fact,
constitutes the principal part of the food of tthe natives. During the
month of September they gather and cut it intto thin slices, which they
spread on the ground in the sun ; after beingg rendered perfectly dry
they are soaked in water for several days, anid then packed closely in
sheets of tea-tree bark. In this way they undeirgo a process of fermen-
tation, which destroys the deleterious properties of the fruit, and a
mealy substance, with somewhat a nutty flavour, remains, which is
made into cakes. Scraps of the fruit of the pandanus were discovered
in the native camp, from which it was conjectured they made a kind of
fermented liquor. Following the footpath under a succession of cycas
groves, and a wide expanse of verdant country, the travellers came
upon a large salt-water river, called the Robimson. The way now led
to a large well, near the bank of the stream, to which an alligator was
tracked, while porpoises were seen frisking about in the broad salt
water of the Robinson, which, at this place, umites with a larger fresh-
water stream.
A few miles on the party had an interview with the natives, who
by signs gave them to understand that they were acquainted with the
use of the gun and the knife. Presents were exchanged, and the tra-
vellers proceeded. Between the Robinson and tthe Macarthur, the next
river discovered, several creeks were found, amd then they came upon
the Red Kangaroo River, which flows over a hard sandy bed through
two channels, separated by a broad high bank, (one of which has a good
supply of water, while a fine lagoon extends along its southern bank.
In a level countrj 7 , extending for twenty-nine miles, all the small trees
had been blown down by a violent wind. It was conjectured that the
same hurricane which passed over Victoria in 11838 had uprooted those
trees in the space intervening between Red Kangaroo and Linnen
Bight.
The party had now arrived near the sea, amd beheld the ocean, an
island, and a river coming from the westward;; white sand plains were
seen along its course. The country became 7 very intricate, covered
with salt-water creeks, whose heads were frequently formed of fern
swamps. Ten miles further the explorers came upon the northern
branch of the Linnen Bight, which receives the name of Wickham River.
The scenery around it is very remarkable. Steep sandstone ranges are
seen parallel to each other, in a direction from south-west to north-east;
chain upon chain rose, one behind the other, till their dim outlines were
whollv lost in the deep blue of the horizon. Plains, covered with tea-
trees, lay between them, and around their feet clustered a rich vegeta-
tion, composed of the pandanus, the leguminous iron-bark, and blood-
wood. The horses and cattle were very sore-footed, and the travellers-
struck accordingly in a northerly direction, in order to avoid the hills.
The Roper runs through a fine country, now undulating into plains;
fine lagoons are occasionally seen along its banks, covered with wild
ducks and geese. The stream is from 160 to 200 yards broad, deep, with
steep banks, lined with dense hedges of pandanus, the drooping tea-tree,
and, amongst others, a kind of jasmine, whose blossoms wafted a deli-
cious fragrance through the air. Vines were suspended from tree to
tree, and a fine climber, with green flowers, large pods and seeds, grew
U. S. Mao., No. 216, Nov., 1846. Z


in great abundance. These seeds, when pressed and boiled, formed a
satisfying food, and it was afterwards discovered that the natives them-
selves crushed it on stones found in the numerous camps along the
river. The country is timbered, and opens into fine plains, which are
well adapted for agriculture. Many rocky ranges and isolated hills, which
approach the river, render the travelling along its banks excessively
difficult. The natives inhabit the vicinity of the stream, and the
explorers had much friendly intercourse with them, though at nightfall
they attempted an attack.
A great number of creeks, brooks, and lagoons, were traversed by
the party, who proceeded for several days along open well grassed stone
ridges. Ranges of sandstone, as before noticed, rose one behind
another, lifting their white rocky crests over the forest, and presenting
deep gulleys, perpendicular walls, rocky creeks, and magnificent preci-
pices, over which the rivers in the rainy season doubtless form magni-
ficent waterfalls. The expedition worked its way down one of these
creeks, and followed it along its bed, until a vast precipice, between two
mountain walls, compelled them to abandon this track, and strike off
up a grassy lawn to the northward, which conducted them to a deep
valley, containing a river flowing from the east to the west. The
descent down the grassy slopes was somewhat difficult, but having been
accomplished a plentiful supply of water was discovered rushing over
the loose sandy pebbles which formed its bed.
Crossing the river, and following a northerly course, they passed
over a table-land, and discovered numerous creeks, situate two or three
miles distant from each other, surrounded by tea-tree swamps at their
head, and taking their rise out of the level country. They become
very rocky on both sides for several miles, and open again on fine
grassy flats, well provided with water, which soon become rocky again,
and are joined by deep gulleys on both sides. Precipices, varying in
height, interrupt their course, and a deep valley lies below, and the
waters rush over perpendicular- walls about seven or eight hundred feet
high down into rocky basins, and into the channels in which they flow
westward to join the main branch of the South Alligator River. The
table-land is covered by forests of stringy-bark, of melaluca gum, and
banksia. Several valleys, covered with the white gum, the tea-tree, and
excellent grass, were seen. The South Alligator River, after passing
for some time through the valley, goes out between a high range and
an isolated peak. A small fan-leaved palm became frequent, and the
lagoons were surrounded by magnificent tea-trees, and the opening
through which the river was passed was lined with pandanus, and
myriads of wild ducks and geese covered the water. The late thunder
clouds had produced a most luxuriant grass; large plains now accom-
panied the course of the river, of a rich loose black soil, yielding beau-
tiful mangroves, a thick vine-bush, gigantic tea-trees, palms, and
bamboos.
The explorers came next upon what seemed to be a fresh-water river,
lined with pandanus and palms; they followed up its course, and found
it to be merely the outlet of a swamp of a considerable size, which,
according to the statement of the natives, extended far to the eastward.
With little exception, the swamp was dry; its bed a stiff clay, cracked
by the heat of the sun, out of which little groups of pandanus and of


tea-trees rose, sometimes round like a tuft of green grass, and some-
times long and irregular. The travellers heard that a large lake
stretched at its head. Crossing this swamp, and following rather a
northerly direction, the explorers travelled over iron-stone ridges,
covered with low thicket, in which the small fan-leaved palm became so
abundant as almost of itself to form the forest. Intermingled with
others is a kind of fruit-bearing shrub resembling the gooseberry, which
name accordingly was bestowed upon it. Passing numerous creeks,
they found a running brook, which bubbled and murmured like some
of those found in Europe; along its banks was a broad path, made by
the natives. Pursuing the northerly direction taken, it led to an im-
mense plain, with rich soil and splendid grass, stretching away to the
east and to the west, having the forest-land on one hand and bounded
by salt-water creeks, lined with mangroves, on the other. It was found
impracticable to keep on the open country, the travellers accordingly
struck into the forest in a swamp, near which fresh-water lakes were
found, covered with ducks and geese. Four miles further on, meeting
with the, natives, wells were pointed out. The East Alligator was now
met with, a river flowing between large plains, skirted by forest-lands.
To the right were observed conical and other shaped hills, some isolated,
others running in short ranges, and further still rocky sand-stone
chains surrounded the valley of the river. At their feet stretched
many line lagoons, covered with a plentiful supply of wild geese, some of
which the party shot. This bird was observed in such abundance that
the travellers were for a moment tempted to bestow on the East Alli-
gator the name of Goose River. The whole scenery around the stream
is beautiful; a broad level valley clothed in luxuriant verdure, hills and
ridges abruptly rising along the western side, and enclosing it on the
south, were seen, with scattered lakes and a fine salt-water creek wind-
ing through it.
The travellers journeyed for some time) through a diversified country,
now plain, now undulating and covered with forest. Once more pur-
suing a northerly course through woodls and mangroves, they were
conducted by a tribe of natives to a large lagoon situated in a plain,
extending some miles on either hand, on which the tea-tree flourished
luxuriously, and attained a size serviceable for timber. In two days
more the natives guided them down Van Dieman’s Gulf and to the
Coburg Peninsula, where pointing out a foot-path leading to Mount
Morris Bay, they quitted them. On the peninsula groves of the cypress-
pine, the stringy-bark, the cabbage-palm, with its long pinnatifid leaves,
cluster round the creeks, and crown the tops of ridges, forming some-
times a dense forest. The small fan-leaf palm is very abundant, along
with the gooseberry-tree, which, however, in this part dwindles into a
small shrub. The tracks of buffaloes were here discovered, which
became more and more numerous as the party advanced along the
neck of the peninsula. They formed, in fact, quite a broad pathway
along the sea-coast, sometimes skirting the mangrove swamps. They
had made in one place quite a network of paths, leading some into the
forest, some along the side of the creeks. Many of these animals were
seen hurrying out of deep water basins, within the creek, whither they
had ensconced themselves for coolness. A fine buffalo was shot by the
party.


Turning now once more to the westward, but keeping accidentally
too much north, they arrived at Raffles’ Bay, when the natives whom
they met guided them round Port Essington to Victoria. The exploring
expedition entered the town about five o’clock in the morning, after
having endured great perils and many privations. In some parts of the
journey provisions had been scarce; when their stock of flour, tea, salt,
and coffee was expended, they lived on dried beef as long as it continued
eatable. Towards the end of the journey, however, the meat became
tainted, and had not game been plentiful, they would have been exposed
to much severer privations. Eight horses and one bullock alone re-
mained, the rest having been killed for eating. One fellow traveller
they had left sleeping his last sleep in the vast interior; and thanking
Providence for the care with which it had watched over them, the weary
travellers prepared to rest awhile after the fatigues they had undergone
in achieving the object for the attainment of which they set out.
The news of the safe return to Sydney of the Exploring Expedition,
after an absence of eighteen months, employed in examining 3000 miles
of country, hitherto untrodden by the foot of civilized man, and thought
of only as a vast unknown interior, belted round by a rim of civilized
coast, has just reached England.
An indefatigable perseverance, a bold spirit of enterprise, an un-
daunted courage prepared for every emergency, strongly characterises
their whole proceedings, and though the examination of the country
through which they journeyed must of necessity have been somewhat
cursory, the results arrived at are invaluable. Future exploring parties
will occupy themselves with all the minute details. Meanwhile, the
expedition has been amply rewarded for the perils of their journey.
They have ascertained the nature of the country, and in a measure
settled the question as to whether or not those hitherto unknown and
totally unexplored regions afford facilities for colonization. Such faci-
lities they do in fact appear to present. The interior of Australia is a
wide expanse of territory, containing all the elements essential to a
colonial settlement, and is described as possessing many noble rivers,
magnificent hills, rich loamy plains, admirable pasture-lands, abundance
of water, valleys, broad lagoons, lakes, timbered levels, fine flats
clothed with rich sweet grasses, quantities of excellent game, honey,
gums, herbs, and plants, and shrubs of many kinds. In a few years
may we not hope to see the white smoke of the settler’s hut curling up
amid those palms and mangroves, and behold numerous herds of cattle
feeding upon those rich meadows 1




