

1 2-io
THE JEWISH BOCTEIHE OF THE &UAEBIM AIGEI.
CHRIST THAT ANGEL TO HIS PEOPLE,
A,SER M O N ,
PREACHED 6th MARCH, 1864 (MORNING), AND
21st MAY, 1865 (EVENING)
i’AMS
AT THE
1 S
UNITARIAN CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
MELBOURNE,
HENRY HIGGINSON, Minister.
PUBLISHED EY REQUEST.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED BY H. T. DWIGHT, BOOKSELLER, NEAR PARLIAMENT HOUSES.
[ PRICE SIXPENCE.]


■
» •
a


SEEION.
Matthew xviii. 10,— “ Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven, their angels do always behold the face
of my Father who is in heaven
It is probable from the context of this passage, that the little
children here spoken of* are the meek and humble disciples of
Christ, whom he calls by this endearing expression; rather than
mere children in age, and not perhaps born of Christian parents, or
in any way attached to the Christian Church, For, you will
observe, the discussion has been concerning the comparative dig-
nity of the several apostles in the coming kingdom of Heaven ; not
at all concerning the protecting providence of God as exerted over
his human offspring from their first birth to their last breath.
Moreover, though this incident of the little child being called and
set in the midst of the Apostles, as a striking image of that
humility and docility which is needful in the Christian, is recorded
by all the first three evangelists, yet this remark about the Angels,
which more especially forms our present text, is found in Matthew
only, and seems, accordingly, not to be an essential part of the in-
cident, but rather a casual observation, not essentially connected
with it. And it is probably this, which has led the Christian
world at large to attach it in application, rather to that other
tender incident of little children being brought to Jesus that he
might touch them, —and from the two together to elicit the beau-


tiful and poetical idea of the Guardian Angel, assigned by the good
providence of God, to every child at its birth. “ Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not,” says our Lord on
another occasion, apparently different (Luke xviii. 16.) But in
the hearts of his disciples there are associated with these tender
words, those others of our text, “in heaven, their angels do always
behold the face of my Father, who is in heaven.”
Much discussion has been spent on the question of the existence
of Angels, as an actual prosaic fact; some maintaining that they
are merely a part of the highly poetical and imaginative language
which the Hebrews use in reference to God and his Providence.
It would appear that the human mind fails to realise the idea of
this great universe, with its countless worlds moving in space, and
peopled (it may he), by myriads of rational and accountable beings,
being all sustained, kept in order, and governed by one sole supreme
intelligence, even though he be the Almighty and All-wise God.
The Hebrew mind apparently was unable to conceive even of this
earth, of which they knew but a small part, (and beyond which they
do not seem to have had any idea of other inhabited worlds), being
governed by the one God alone and unaided, though their Scrip-
tures abound with magnificent ascriptions of sole sovereignty
to the Supreme Jehovah. But it was more in the style
of the Hebrew poetical temperament, to surround the throne
of the King of the whole earth, as they saw the throne of
oriental kings surrounded, with a crowd of subordinate officers,
each ready in his separate official rank to do the will of the Great
King, and go even to the ends of the earth at his bidding. On
this subject, I cannot enter now ; nor perhaps is there much
occasion to do so at all. At no time should I dare to dogmatize
upon it, for it is evidently a subject on which we cannot consider
ourselves to know anything;—except indeed those of us who
may retain a belief in the literal dictation by the Almighty, of those
sacred Scriptures which tell us of his successive revelations to
mankind. Both of the ideas are grand and sublime; they could
be nothing else, if they be any way worthy of their subject.


Perhaps the idea of the sole God upholding- and governing all
things by his direct and unaided will, is the more sublime ; but
the idea of his governing- the world, visible and invisible (as we see
that he mostly governs this world in which we dwell) by sub-
ordinate agents, always subject to his ultimate will, is the more
touching, and the more level to the limited capacity of our minds.
I know not but that we are at liberty to adopt the one or the other
supposition, as it approves itself to our intellect and to our hearts ;
nay, I know not but that we may adopt at one time the one, and
at another time the other, according to the varying moods of our
souls, —sometimes more enthusiastic perhaps than at others. The
essential thing, I conceive to be, that however we may theorize
as to God and his government, we should always endeavour to
retain vividly in our hearts, and to reduce to practice in our lives,
the great conviction that “ the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth
and reigneth with so minute a supervision of affairs, that in our
Lord’s highly figurative language “ not even a sparrow falleth to
the ground without your Father; but the very hairs of your head
are all numbered.” (Matt, x., 29, 30.)
A part of this language concerning Angels (whether that
language be figurative or literal in its acceptation) and by no means
the least poetical, and the least touching, is that of the Guardian
Angel of each man from his birth upward, which is alluded to in
our text. It is probable that the Jews entertained this belief, more
or less distinctly, before the times of Christ: indeed there are hints
of such a belief also in ancient heathen literature : and on this
whole subject of Angels, we see from the remains of the writings of
the ancient Hebrews, that they had added much to their previous
ideas, during their captivity at Babylon. Our Lord, then, may in our
text, have been merely alluding to the current belief of his times
and country, as in all probability he frequently does in more
important passages, where his unthinking followers suppose that
he is speaking to them literal truths, not only new, but divinely
inspired into him by the God of all truth, as an essential part of
his Gospel, and for the use and guidance of all generations of
men.


The Hebrew idea, then, of the Guardian Angel of men, seems to
be this; that to each of us at his birth is assigned, by the kind
providence of God, an Ang-el, to be always with us ; ever to watch
over our steps, to shield us from harm, and to direct us in the way
in which we should go. This heavenly companion, then, sympathises
in all our joys and in all our sorrows ; rejoices with us when we
rejoice, and tempers our joy within due bounds ; —weeps with us
in our tears, —but viewing our sorrows from a higher level of soul,
pities their excess, and moderates them into that godly sorrow
whereby the heart is made better. As our protector, too, our Angel
wards off from us dangers not only physical but moral; —aids us
in our resistance to temptation, rejoices when we come off
and grieves when we fall away into sin. And, as a part of this
protection, our Guardian is supposed to be our advocate in heaven,
against the violence of men, and the wiles of the tempter. In
which latter office, observe how this poetical conception itself runs
into the very difficulty which it was designed to obviate. It was
supposed that God must rule by subordinate agents because of
the extent of his universe and the multiplicity of his affairs; and
one great difficulty to the human mind to conceive of his im-
mediate agency was, that being supposed to sit on His throne in
heaven, yet we find him evidently acting amongst us on earth.
Yet here again, in the case of the Guardian Angel assigned to each
of us, to be near us and aid us individually; while he is with
us on earth, we consider him to be also our advocate before the
throne of heaven. So inadequate are our minds worthily to
conceive of those heavenly realities, in which notwithstanding we
cannot but believe. But our belief in them is the subject rather of
the soul than of the logical intellect; and our religion, if true and
effectual, cannot confine itself to the prosaic facts of this life, but
must rise into the poetical and figurative conceptions which
form so great a charm of the ancient Hebrew Scriptures. The only
danger in doing so, is that by long use, this poetical imagery is
apt to become to us literal fact, and to lead us accordingly into
extravagances, unless it be duly restrained by reason and medita-
tion.


This doctrine of our Guardian Angel is, unquestionably, most
tender and attractive in its applications; and thoug-h these attach
themselves to the weaknesses of our intellectual and spiritual
nature, rather than to its strength and power,—yet, for all that,
they are perilaps all the more tender and touching. Thus, the
Christian mother, when called by the voice of the Father in
Heaven, to leave on earth those pledges of her love whom it had
been the dearest ambition of her soul to train to duty and to God
to leave, perhaps, one,—the latest born,—the most
needing of a mother’s love and care, .... she yet departs
in faith, obeying the heavenly call the more cheerfully, because
she sees in her spiritual vision, the Angel companion hovering
over the child who is just about to be deprived of its earthly
guardian. ..Providence, indeed, works by human instruments;
and in that Providence the mother is on earth the representative of
God’s tender care in the guardianship of the child; but when that
earthly guardian is removed, untimely as we say, then certainly
this poetical representation of the Angelic Guardian comes in most
tenderly and beautifully to fill up the void, and reconcile the dying
mother to her divinely appointed lot. Yet though this view be
tender and beautiful, as it undoubtedly is; that other is perhaps
more sublime, and more worthy of our highest conceptions of God
and His Providence, which we find suggested by an old Hebrew
prophet (Jeremiah xlix. 11)—“ Leave thy fatherless children to me,
(saith the Lord); I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows
trust in Me.” After all, it is but two ways of expressing the same
idea. The Guardian Angel of the fatherless or motherless child, is
the agent appointed by God to his office; and God equally pre-
serves the child alive, and provides for its welfare, whether through
this mediation or immediately. Let us then hold our faith in God
in whichever of the two ways most approves itself to our reason
and our religious instincts—nay, in both ways it may be—according
to our varying moods of faith and emotion. But in all, the
essential thing is, to preserve our faith in God unclouded, through
all the dispensations of his Providence.


Prom this doctrine of the Guardian Angel of children and of
men, parents moreover are encouraged cheerfully to resign their
offspring when they are summoned first; contrary though it be to
the ordinary course of nature, according to which we hope to leave
them behind us as our representatives on earth when we shall our-
selves be called away. It seems as if the t’oung go, as it were, to a
a home prepared for them, when they find awaiting them in heaven
the Guardian Spirit appointed as their protector and their guide from
their very birth. And certainly, such might seem to be the natural
interpretation of this doctrine, if we looked upon heaven as lying
empty, so to speak, till the general resurrection and the last
judgment, which Christendom in general expects. But though such
is theoretically the expectation of Christendom, founded on certain
passages of Scripture perhaps not altogether rightly understood, —
yet the practical belief of Christendom, arising’ rather from the
emotions of the human soul, than from the letter of Scripture, is, I
believe, that already our departed friends are peopling heaven, and
worshiping in his more immediate presence the God whom they
distantly adored on earth ; and seeing face to face, in the glory of
the Father, him, whom though now we see him not, we love —
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, With this cheering belief,
D '
none the less real though we cannot prove it, and though we see
that it is difficult to reconcile it with the literal sense of many
passages in the New Testament; we do not think that our children,
as they depart from before our eyes, are going to a desolate home,
where without their Guardian Angel they would be alone. For
already we look upon heaven as by the good Providence of God
peopled with hosts of glorified spirits, amongst whom we fondly
place many a houshold saint gone before from our own homes.
To them, then, the mother, the sister it may be, of our early and
purest love, still enshrined in the holy of holies of our hearts, —to
them in full faith we consign our blighted flowers as they one after
another drop off from the parent tree. They, we trust, will lend
and water them, till they shall revive and put forth branches, and
produce fruit to eternal life in the gardens of the heavenly paradise.


Nay, indeed, we know not, but that these very pre-deceased saints
of our earthly home, may even be, in the kind providence of God,
the very Guardian Angels that have been appointed over them for
their earthly life. Thus, though we do not deny the doctrine of
the Guardian Angel continuing his care even in heaven, we do not
so much feel the need of it in taking leave of our children on their
departure from earth, as we do in our own departure, leaving them
behind us, exposed to all earth’s sorrows, trials, temptations, and
dangers.
Concerning this poetical doctrine which we are considering,
Stier, a commentator, says, in reference to our text: —“ We speak
to our children far too little about their Angels; and we ourselves,
as believers, do not think enough of ours. The Angels are in
heaven, and yet occupied at the same time in service and business
on earth, about their wards; for the heaven is not closed in space
over the earth, but is ever open to us in everything which it sends.
Where the Angels of God go and stand, there also is heaven, and
the face of God, which they at all times, without interruption from
anything else, behold.” And this remark, I think, gives us the
key to the right view of the doctrine itself though the commen-
tator (I apprehend) did not mean it so. This doctrine of the Guardian
Angel is a doctrine for children and imperfect Christians; it is milk
for babes, rather than strong meat for men. To such—the young in
years and the imperfect in the understanding of the Gospel—it is
apt to be attractive, and comes with much beauty and force to their
apprehension. To such it may be recommended, and I, for one,
would do nothing to weaken their faith in it; for it is essentially
true in the tender spirit, though perhaps not in the hard letter.
Children not only in years, but children also in the faith, are most
accessible through their emotions; and this doctrine is much
adapted to move their hearts. It is good for them to be so moved.
But there are children of a prosaic turn—there are imperfect
Christians also of more mature years, to whom notions like these
of a highly imaginative and poetical nature, are distasteful. On
such they should by no means be forced, as if they were essentials


of true religion; for such compulsion is apt to indispose them
towards religion altogether. And, after all, the grand doctrine of
God's providential rule does not depend upon any particular figures
of speech or conceptions of the imagination. Let us admit and
cherish that grand and general doctrine; and in whatever form it
most approves itself to our minds and hearts, in that form let us
surrender our lives to its influence, and show in act and deed, our
practical apprehension of it.
I have stated my belief that this doctrine of the Guardian Angel
is one mainly for children in years and for children in the Christian
faith; and, in conclusion, I would briefly indicate my reasons for
this assertion. I have already stated that the doctrine of our text
was, in all probability, a doctrine of the Jews before our Lord’s
time —one branch of their general system of belief in Angels.
Consider then, what effect the mission of the Saviour should have
upon this and other such doctrines. The whole doctrine of Angels
arises from man’s difficulty of conceiving of God and his provi-
dential rule over the universe. Christ has shown us the Father in
a clearer light than he was ever revealed to man before; should
not then this clearer light chase some notions fit only for the
twilight of Judaism ?
Especially should it not abate that extreme terror in reference to
the supreme Jehovah which evidently characterized the Jews, at
least in the times of Moses ?—that fear which dictated the pre-
cautions on Sinai, lest he should “ break forth upon them,” and led
them to say to Moses, “ Speak thou with us, and we will hear, but
let not God speak with us lest we die.” Yet we must not forget
that even a Jewish prophet in later times ascribes to God the ten-
derness of a mother, no less than the providential care of a father.
And this gracious teaching is confirmed and amplified by our Lord,
who, in God’s relation of Father to the human race, almost entirely
merges those other relations of King and Judge.
Again :—This whole notion of Angels arises from man’s intense
want and earnest desire of some being between himself and the great
God, to whom he looks up with an awful reverence which makes


him fearful to approach to his mysterious presence. Well, —in
Jesus himself, the Father has given us that Mediator between God
and Man, whom the human race so much needed. In himself, in
his whole life and conversation on earth has he shown us the
Father, —in his own truly divine virtues and excellences, which
form to us the most worthy notions we can conceive of the cha-
racter and attributes of God himself. Through him, he has
encouraged us to approach the Father with our humble prayers,
calling upon him not only as our God, but as our Father also in
Heaven ; —and he has in this, as in all things, set us an example;
—for he himself worshiped the same God, calling him “my
Father and your Father, my God and your God.” Again, Paul
(Romans viii., 34) represents Christ as being now even at the
right hand of God u who also maketh intercession for us.” What
need then have me of any Guardian Angel in heaven as an inter-
cessor for us? Nay rather, our Lord himself says (John xvi., 26)
“ at that day ye shall ask in my name; —and I say not unto you
that I will pray the Father for you; —for the Father himself loveth
you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came
out from God.” Againour Lord promised his first disciples
(and we have reason to suppose that all his true disciples to the
end of time inherit that same precious promise) that he would be
in them, as the Father was in him. And when he was leavingthem,
he repeated the promise, that he would be with them always, to the
end of the world; or, perhaps, rather to the end of the age. And though
that age has ended, —yet still do we feel the need of Christ’s
presence with us, and still do his true disciples feel the reality of
his presence with them; he is indeed “ Christ in them, the hope of
glory,” and in that hope, the inspirer of present duty. What
need then, non, has the Christian, whether child or grown-up
man, of the poetical Guardian Angel of the old Jewish idea?
Jesus himself is the Guardian Angel of his people. The child is
early attracted to him, as it was in the days of his mortal life on
earth; and comes to him willingly as ever. And he becomes the
guardian of the child, and remains with him through his mortal


life; he sympathises in his joys and his sorrows, and hallows both
to his spiritual growth in grace; he furnishes strength in tempta-
tion; he rejoices in our victories, and grieves over our defeats; and
encourages us still to persevere in the warfare of the Christian life.
He nerves us to the perils of our course; he leads us through the
dark valley which closes our mortal career; he welcomes us to the
heavenly career which then opens before us,—for he has gone before
us to prepare our place in the mansions of the Father’s house on
high. No !we need no other Guardian Angel,—in life, in death,
and to eternity, than Jesus the Christ, our Lord and Saviour.
Thus, through Jesus, coming to his Father and our Father; and
partaking, according to his promise, in the influence of that Holy
Spirit, whose inspiration makes holy the life of Christians,—let us
rest in faith, and believe unhesitatingly and practically in the pro-
vidence of God, which bring’eth about g'ood, and good only, in his
own due time, to all that know him, and strive to do his will.
Amen
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.
