

THE NAVY LEAGUE
(SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH)
J
SOUVENIR
NELSON DAY, 1918
ADELA 'DE
G. HASSELL & CURRIE ST.


I
I . \
I ' : 4
w 4
B *


THE NAVY LEAGUE
(SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH)
SOUVENIR
NELSON DAY, 1918
ADELAIDE
G. HASSELL & SO CURRIE ST.


CONTENTS
Address by Sir Henry Galway, K.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Address by Sir William H. Irvine, K.C.M.G.
Address by Professor G, C. Henderson, M.A.


ADDRESS by HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR HENRY L. GALWAY,
K.C.M.G., D. 5.0., Sc.
Governor of the State of South Australia,
Patron of the South Australian Branch of the Navy League.


To-day we celebrate the anniversary of Nelson’s
victory at Trafalgar, and the feeling uppermost in our
minds is pride in the magnificent manner in which the
Royal Navy has upheld the Nelson tradition during the
last 115 years, especially during the last four and a
half years, during which period the Navy has saved both
the Empire and Europe. The Navy has indeed been
rightly called our strong right arm. We members of the
Navy League realize with a greater certainty than ever
that the root and foundation of our Empire’s greatness
lies in sea power. Our Navy—incomparable, unconquer-
able, and confident—is the keystone of our security.
Had the German legions succeeded in reaching the
Channel ports in April last, the enemy would have been
as far as ever from winning the war. The invisible links
of sea power which knit together all the resources of
England and America with those of France and Italy
would have preserved the continuous front.
During the year that has passed since we last cele-
brated Nelson Day the Navy recovered its original birth-
right. I refer to the attacks on Zeebrugge and Ostend,
the first of which took place on St. George’s Day. The
details of those attacks are already famous to the world,
immortalized in British memory, and will be celebrated
as each St. George’s Day comes round.
The achievements were no mere dazzling of the
unbounded personal courage and cool daring which are
common form throughout the Royal Navy. They were
far more than that. Instead of being only magnificent
and not war, they were magnificent and the soul of war.
Anybody who may have begun to think the “Nelson


touch” was lost to the Navy had his answer in the
Zeebrugge affairs.
I doubt if one was to search through our long record
of naval history, an inspiring compilation of glorious
deeds, whether one would find a parallel to the St.
George’s Day feat. Nelson's glorious but unsuccessful
fight at Vera Cruz and Drake’s dash into Cadiz the year
before the Armada suggest themselves as presenting
some similarity. But neither of them has the exact
mixture of blazing gallantry and tactical genius which
marked the achievement of Sir Roger Keyes and his
merry men.
That gallant commander calculated every detail to
a nicety, and knew he could trust his men to carry
them out. Just think of the calculations required.
The tide, the light, the weather, were all factors which
had to be taken into account. The attempt could only
be made at some hour which gave a favorable conjunc-
tion of all these three essentials. Then consider the com-
position of the force —monitors, old cruisers, destroyers,
Mersey tugs, motor boats, and other craft. All these
had to be welded into a coherent force which would
act in concert —everything had to be carefully timed and
adjusted to fit their various speeds, draughts, and fight-
ing functions. Needless to say, with all such details
perfected, the main success of the enterprise depended
upon the element of surprise.
We all know now, and history will record it in suit-
able language, how successfully the gallant blue-jackets
and marines carried out their Commander's orders, and
achieved two feats of arms, second to none for dash and
sheer bravery, which will live for all time in the annals
of our race.. Not until some future writer chooses as his


theme “The Influence of Sea Power in the Great War”
will be known the full value of the Zeebrugge and
Ostend ventures.
Superstitious folk will be interested to learn that
Sir Roger Keyes presented the Commander of the
“Vindictive” with a horseshoe before setting out on the
first of their ventures. Captain Carpenter nailed the
horseshoe to the smoke-stack of his ship. There were
also two black cats aboard! The horseshoe came back
intact, but I have not heard whether the cats were
equally fortunate.
It is interesting to note that among the miscellaneous
collection of vessels which composed Sir Roger Keyes’
force were two Mersey tugs, the “Iris” and the “Daf-
fodil”! I heard that these two vessels had gone back to
their ferry work on the Mersey.
There is a touch of the impressive in this matter-of-
fact return to everyday occupation, as if the incredible
adventures the tugs took part in were all in the day’s
work. Well, Cincinnatus after saving the Republic went
back to his plough!
They say that the two famous ferry boats are to be
renamed the “Royal Iris” and the “Royal Daffodil”—a
good example of painting the lily and gilding the rose.
As each Trafalgar Day comes round we realize more
and more what the Navy means to us as a nation. The
Navy saved us from the submarine peril, and so enabled
our armies to carry on to victory in every theatre of
war.
The crushing defeat now being inflicted on Germany
and her allies is in a great part due to the whole-hearted
co-operation which has existed all along between the
armies and navies of the Allies.


There can be no doubt, too, that the preparedness of
onr Navy on the very day war was declared, Avhen it
bottled up the German fleet in the Kiel Canal, laid the
foundation of ultimate victory. What a contrast the out-
look is to-day to what it was when we last celebrated
Nelson Day. We have every reason to look back with
great thankfulness for many deliverances and to look
forward with certitude to an early peace. When neace
will actually #ome is a mere matter of guesswork, and it
would be folly to underrate Germany’s power to fight on
for many months longer. 1 prefer to bank on results
rather than on either probabilities or prophecies.
The Allies must carry on, despite all peace rumours,
and complete the task of breaking for ever German war
power. When that is done it will be time enough to
formulate peace terms and to build the League of
Nations. Let the Allies hold on to that programme and
everything else will be added unto them.
We have the extraordinary satisfaction of being able
to feel confident that every day now brings Germany
nearer to her fate, and President Wilson, as spokesman
for the Allied Powers, has made it plain to the German
leaders that the Allies’ only terms are unconditional
surrender. No terras the Allies demand could be harsher
than the conditions Germany would impose were she the
victor.
Good news follows good news now as regularly as
night follows day, but I would urge that we should
receive all such news in a dignified manner, and above all
let there be none of that undignified hysteria known as
“mafficking.” However good the news we receive may
be, we must remember the terrible sacrifices that have
been made to bring about the present situation, and do


not let us forget the everlasting debt of gratitude we
owe to our fighting men on land and sea.
Our toast to-night is the Royal Navy, and with that
grand service I couple the Mercantile Marine. For
superb courage, devotion, doggedness, and self-sacrifice,
Merchant Jack stands out in this war in glowing colours.
The sons of the salt sea whom we honour to-night have
laid the nation and its Allies under an everlasting obliga-
tion to them.
Let us of the Navy League always remember, as
stated in the preamble of the “Naval Discipline Act’’:
“It is on the Navy, under the Good Providence of God,
that our wealth, prosperity, and peace depend.”
In keeping with the few words I have addressed to
you 1 beg to move the following resolution, and will ask
Sir William Irvine and Professor Henderson to support
the same:
“That this Branch of the Navy League records its
unalterable confidence in the Navies of the Allies, and in
the great and distinguished commanders of the Naval
forces, and, at the same time, expresses its deep admira-
tion of the men of the fleets and of the mine sweepers and
trawlers who, during the great War, by their glorious,
silent and effective work, have saved Great Britain and
the Overseas Dominions from invasion with its consequent
frightfulness, and finally the members of the League
express their deep gratitude to all ratings for upholding
the sure shield of the Navy as a protection to the peoples
of the civilized world against the aggression of the Central
Powers. ’ ’


ADDRESS by THE HON,
SIR WILLIAM H. IRVINE, K.C.M.G.,
Lieut.'Governor and Chief Justice of Victoria,
President of the Victorian Branch of the Navy League.


We celebrate to-day the Battle of Trafalgar—a
battle that was fought against a people then arrayed
against ns in the ranks of war—now united, and, I hope,
ever to be united, to us in the bonds of closest friendship.
You will not, I think, consider it out of place on this
occasion for me to say something about that great people.
The history of France is unique. She alone of all
the nations of Europe has maintained her place in -the
front rank throughout modern history. Other nations
have risen and fallen: France alone has always been
either first or in the front rank in peace as in war.
She has seen Venice rise from the sea, live her few
centuries of glorious life and perish; she has seen the
Italian and the Dutch Republics rise and fall; she has
seen the world Empire of Spain come into being and pass
away for ever. Other nations have flourished for a time,
but of France alone is it possible to say that though she
has had her moments of weakness she has never alto-
gether fallen from her high estate, and she has never
entirely abdicated the intellectual leadership of Europe.
But not in the days of her greatest power—not when
under her ancient monarchy she dictated the policy, as
well as the manners, of Europe—not when, under
Napoleon, her legions dominated the Continent, did
France stand so high as she does to-day! Never did she
present to the world so inspiring a spectacle as she has
done for the last two years especially (I mean since
Verdun), when, torn and bleeding, she has fought on for
liberty and for right.
But there is something else that binds our interests
to those of France.


He is blind, indeed, who does notf see that the im-
mediate future holds serious dangers for all the peoples
that have taken part in this war. It is inevitable that
restless desires and ambitions should follow such an
upheaval. Things can never he as they were. The waters
of the great deep have been moved. We must all face
the problems before us with courage and wisdom. It
may seem strange that we should look to France for
guidance in these troubles. But remember that France
has lived through social reconstructions, and has learned
some fundamental truths. France has sounded all the
depths and shoals of revolution.
The words, “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity,” are not,
for France, vague and empty catchwords of the political
platform—they have a real and sane significance. France
has learned that “Liberty” does not mean licence: she
has learned that the only liberty worth living for or worth
dying for is the liberty that is based on order and duty and
on the mutual obligations and common sacrifices of the
whole people. France, too, has long since learned that the
word “Equality” does not mean that all men are equal,
which nature herself has made impossible, but that all
men are equal before the law, that all men have an equal
right to enjoy the fruits of their toil upon this earth.
France, perhaps, has not yet fully learned, though I
think she has, perhaps, gone further than any other nation
in learning, the significance of that ‘ 4 fraternity which,
if it mean anything, means that all men, rich and poor,
are members of one family, living under the same roof,
and helped or hurt by the same conditions of good or evil.
This, the last and hardest lesson of the charter of man-
hood that France gave to the world a century ago, will
not be learned till the black spirit of class hatred that


now ranges through the world is hurled back to the pit
from which it sprung.
Let us on this Trafalgar Day rejoice that, after
nearly half a century of oppression by the threatening
presence of the very personification of brute force, the
genius of France will rise to new freedom, strengthened
and purified by the ordeal through which it has passed.
The day we celebrate should bring to us thoughts,
not of the past only, but of the future. If 1 might venture
on a criticism, I should say that the Navy League has
been content to rest too much on the past. No man can
live on his past, and no nation. The word of command
both for men and nations should be “Eyes front!”
But before coming face to face with the problem of
the future, it is necessary to look back for one purpose,
and for a few moments only.
What we call the British Empire dates from the
Battle of Trafalgar. Since then we have had four
generations of immunity from national peril. lam afraid
many have forgotten the conditions which rendered that
security possible and enabled the British Empire to come
into existence. Others have seen them through a glass,
darkly. Now we must all see them face to face.
There have been other world empires. In ancient
times Rome, in modern times Spain, controlled empires
as mighty in absolute extent and far greater in propor-
tion to the civilized world of their time, than the British
Empire of to-day. But those empires were governed from
the centre and, where necessary, with a rod of iron. But
never before in the history of the world has there been an
empire which is a family of free, self-governing peoples


scattered over the whole world acknowledging no other
bond or emblem of unity than the flag that stands for
liberty as well as union.
Such an empire, in which the various communities
which constitute it claim not only the right of self-
government but of undisturbed possession of tracts of the
earth's surface vastly greater than they can presently
make use of, could only have come into existence as a
result of undisputed naval predominance. Most people,
of course, know this. But is it sufficiently realized that
under the inevitable pressure of population upon the
means of subsistence in other parts of the world, such an
empire can only continue to exist as long as it maintains
that naval predominance?
It is upon this vital cpiestion that 1 wish to speak
seriously and plainly to-night.
Do not be led away by dreams of universal peace.
We all hope that at some time in the future such a thing
as a league of civilized nations may render war impossible,
may, at all events, render such a war as we have had im-
possible. But we dare not fold our hands in contempla-
tion of such a thing. I hope that relations of close friend-
ship and co-operation may exist between the nations that
have fought together for freedom. I have sometimes
thought that a closer and more permanent union among
the peoples that speak the English tongue may not be a
fanciful dream.
But, to attain any of these objects, we must be strong
and self-reliant. The hand of friendship that we hold out
must not be unnerved by any longing after an indolent
security. It must have the grip that comes of a strong
right arm behind it! The day when Britain is willing to
rest her security upon the strength of any other nation


on the earth is the first day of her degradation and down-
fall !
We must not forget that the British Navy has for a
hundred years been a powerful agent for the world's
peace, I will not claim that this great sea power has
never been abused; but I do claim that by acknowledging
and maintaining the right of all peoples to the free use
of the great highway of nations Britain has obtained
from the world—omitting Germany—a general recogni-
tion of the beneficial effect of its sea supremacy. And
never forget that the sea power that gave birth to our
Empire is necessary to its continuance.
The great question for us is: How shall that sea
power be maintained? What are the conditions of a
great sea power? They are, I think, three-fold :
(1) The possession of a great fleet and an efficient
naval service.
(2) The possession of naval bases, and of footholds
suitable for naval bases, in every ocean.
(3) The continuous application of industrial and
financial power to naval construction and
maintenance.
Of the first two I shall say little. Though the facts
are necessarily unknown, I venture to think our Navy is
twice as strong as it was four years ago. At no time has
the naval service been more efficient. I honour that
service for its silence. The Navy’s greatest work in this
war has been unseen and unheard of. Our confidence in it
is none the less on that account. How impressive a
spectacle the Grand Fleet has presented, appearing now
here, now there, only to disappear again, like an eagle in
the clouds. Once only had it occasion to hurl its in-
vincible strength upon the enemy that dared to break the


bounds assigned to it. But what greater feat has the Navy
ever performed in its history than to bring in safety to
the scene of war many hundreds of thousands of fighting
men from the ends of the earth ?
So much for the first condition. As to the second,
no other nation can approach us. The footholds which we
possess in many parts of the world were not won without
heroic effort and, in many cases, heroic sacrifice, With
Gods help we shall, at least, hold fast to what Ave have
so gained!
It is about the third of these conditions of sea poAA r er
that I wish particularly to say a few words. I intend
at this time only to suggest the problem—not
to solve it. It is known to all that a modern
effecti\ r e navy is the creation of great and
continuous effort. Even before the war a ceaseless
process of scrapping and renewing \A r as recognized as
essential to naval efficiency. Since 1914 the pace has been
quickened, and a new element of an importance not yet
fully measured has arisen in submarine warfare. The
actual size of the naval armament has been, perhaps,
doubled, and, with the size, the cost of maintaining it.
There are people Avho think that if we win this war
we can fall back on the old conditions. Banish that
thought from your minds! Whatever the Empire must
do without, it must have its navy! And that navy must
be the strongest in the world.
During all our past history the immense cost of main-
taining the imperial navy has been borne almost wholly
by the people of Great Britain. While endowing the new
Dominions with the inestimable gift of self-government
and security, that people, with an almost quixotic
generosity, has never even asked the Dominions to join in


bearing the burthen of the great shield under which alone
self-go verninent and security can exist. Perhaps
that generosity was warranted, for before the
the war the dominions had begun to waken to their
war the dominions had begun to waken to their
position as members of the Imperial partnership, and were
prepared, in one form or another, gradually, too gradu-
ally, I think, to take up their burden.
Remember that England has been rich; that she will
be poor—for a time at all events. The burden
of repatriating her millions of fighters, the enormous
increase in the annual interest on her national debt, the
sudden shrinkage of the great stream of wealth that
flowed into England from the shipping business —not to
speak of other things—will make her people less able to
continue to bear alone the burthen that belongs to all.
And whether this financial weakness of England and
therefore of the Empire is to be temporary only will, in
my opinion, largely depend upon whether the sea power
of the Empire can be maintained at a height at least as
great, relatively, as before the war.
That task can only be accomplished by the joint
efforts of all. The greatly increased burthen of the
Empire’s Navy can only be borne by the whole Empire.
It will be no longer safe even if it were just, to allow it
to rest longer on the shoulders of the Motherland alone.
I do not hesitate to say that the Empire can only continue
to exist, under the new conditions, by the peoples that
constitute it rising to the full height of their imperial
responsibilities.
Let us look at this matter a little more closely. There
are only two ways in which the burthen of common


defence can be distributed amongst and imposed upon
those people. Those are:
(1) By the Dominions consenting to the exercise
by the Imperial Parliament of its reserved
powers
(2) By the Dominions voluntarily agreeing upon
and offering adequate provision in men,
money, ships, and services.
It is, 1 think, the earnest hope of all patriotic
Australians that the latter course may be found practic-
able and sufficient. 1 use the words “practicable” and
“sufficient” advisedly. In order to be “practicable”
some scheme of control and co-ordination must be found,
which, whilst preserving the local character of the
Dominions’ fleets or units, will also give the strength that
comes only from co-operation of all the parts, not in war
only, but in peace.
1 say “sufficient,” because I think that any scheme
of naval construction and maintenance that will lie at the
mercy of every gust of popular feeling, and of every
momentary political fluctuation in each part of the
Empire, will not be sufficient.
I am not attempting, to-night, to present you with
solutions of the riddles lam putting before you. lam
merely stating in the barest outline the problem for which
a solution must be found, and found soon. Under present
circumstances the earnest and intelligent discussion of
this problem seems to me, as I told the Melbourne branch
the other night, the only real purpose for which the Navy
League now exists.
Without, therefore, attempting to do more than state
the problem, I may, with regard to the last of the diffi-
culties I have referred to, that, namely, of political in-


stability, remind those present who are familiar with
constitutional law that in the very full powers given to
the colonies imperial interests have been preserved either
by express limitations in the local constitutions or by
requiring Bills which affect imperial concerns to be
reserved for Royal assent. I do not say that the latter
course is, under present conditions, either adequate or
satisfactory. Moreover, other safeguards for continuity
of policy will probably suggest themselves. I cannot
enter into greater detail without touching upon matters
that may involve political controversy, but I venture'to
urge that the working out, by discussion and correspon-
dence amongst the branches of the Navy League in the
Dominions, of a scheme of naval co-operation for the
empire is the main duty that now lies immediately before
their members.
I must now conclude. I have spoken of duty. Duty
was the keynote of the message that flew from ship to
ship at Trafalgar a hundred years ago and has vibrated
in the hearts of Englishmen ever since. Duty is pecu-
liarly the watchword of the Navy. It is seldom given
to the sailor to gain praise for deeds of individual valour,
apart from his ship and his service. Such feats as that
of Zeebrugge are rare, because such opportunities are
rare. But we know that in our Navy no endurance and
no sacrifice that duty calls for will be put aside.
Let us try and awaken, and keep awake, in the
minds of all the people of this country that spirit of
national duty which can alone hold this Empire together..
At this time, when our brethren and sisters of the
motherland, in addition to all the personal bereavements
of war, are suffering privation and enduring sacrifices
unknown to us here, it is not for us to be aggressive or


boastful. While we are tilled with a just pride in the
great work of those who have gone from here to fight,
and have fought so nobly, our attitude as a people should
be one of profound gratitude —not untouched by humility
—towards the people of the countries from which we
sprang, for what they have done and suffered in this
war—and to none more than those of the great Service
which we are met here to honour to-night.


“Australia’s Indebtedness to the British Navy,”
by
PROFESSOR G. C. HENDERSON, M.A.,
Professor of Modern History in the
University of Adelaide.


In his opening address this evening his Excellency
expressed the hope that we should never forget how
much we owe to the men who have fought for us on
land and sea. I might take that as a text for the few
words I have to say on our indebtedness in past times,
and in this terrible conflict, to the British Navy.
In January, 1788, Captain Phillip sailed into Botany
Bay and founded the first British settlement in Australia,
From that day to this the people of Australia have been
defended in their property, their freedom, and their lives
by the British fleet, and it is only in the past two or
three years that they have begun to realise it. Many
are still only vaguely conscious of it, some doubt it, a
few still use the columns of a section of the press to
ridicule the idea.
In the twenty or twenty-five minutes that are per-
mitted me 1 would fain make it clear to yon that there
is no reasonable doubt about it.
Let me ask you to picture in your imaginations our
precise position on a map of the world. We live in an
island continent in the southern seas between the Indian
and the Pacific Oceans, thousands of miles away from
the big populations of the world. Of certain commodi-
ties—wool, wheat, beef, mutton, dairy produce, and fruit
we produce far more than we are able to consume,
and it is essential for our economic welfare and develop-
ment that the highways of commerce should be kept
open. Onr chief markets are in Europe, ten thousand
miles away, and at all times a considerable portion of
our wealth is on the sea. If that wealth were destroyed,
or if any hostile power could prevent us carrying our


goods to market, we should suffer severe economic loss.
Up to the time of the outbreak of this war we suffered
no injury in this way at all. The trade routes were
kept open, not by any strength of our own, but by the
world-wide protecting power of the British fleet.
That is one reason for expressing our gratitude, but
it is by no means the most important. Nearly all the
older nations of this world have had to fight their way
to political unity and national development in the teeth
of hostile invasions that have involved enormous expen-
diture of life and treasure. Australia has, happily, been
spared any such terrible calamity.
And what is the explanation? It is not because our
geographical position has rendered us immune from
attack. Not far away from our north-eastern and
northern shores we have several European Governments
established—France in New Caledonia, Germany in the
north-east of New Guinea, and Holland in the west of
the same island. There have been great European wars
since 1788; but there has been no counterblast in the
Pacific to disturb our sense of security in Australia.
Further to the north lie the islands of Japan, with
their overflowing population of fifty millions, differing
in colour, race, language, tradition, and ideals from our
own, possessing a strong navy and efficient armies. Yet
we have been allowed to go on working out our destiny,
using our wealth for the development of the resources
of our country, and even passing legislation to the
prejudice of some races whom we consider undesirable
citizens. These are great privileges which give us a
place among the more fortunate people in this world’s
history, but they are not due to immunities based upon
our geographical position.


Neither are they to be explained by our ability to
defend ourselves against all coiners. Australia is an
island continent with a coastline of 11,31.0 miles, and of
this 4,000 miles, extending north and west from Sydney
to Broome, are exposed to attack and invasion. For one
hundred years after the settlement of Australia we had
practically no maritime defence, and from 1788-1910 we
relied on a squadron of ships hired at a trifling cost
from Great Britain. Even now our navy consists of less
than twenty vessels, and there is only one battleship
among them. How could we have defended this country
under such conditions?
The true explanation of our security is to be found
in our Imperial connection. Something is due to the
wisdom displayed by British Ministers in making alliances
that have operated in our favour; but most, and in the
last resort nearly everything, has depended upon the
maintenance of the command of the sea by Great Britain.
On October 21, 1805, Nelson fought and won the battle
of Trafalgar, and ever since that day no hostile fleet
has been able to attack any British possession without
running grave risks of being cut off from its source of
supply. In all naval warfare there is nothing so vital
as the command of the sea. Since 1805 no Power has
been strong enough to wrest it from the British Navy.
It has maintained the security of this country for the
past 130 years.
A brief survey of the history of defence in this
country will, 1 hope, make this quite clear. It falls
naturally into four periods. In the first, from 1788 to
1875, the people of Australia felt so secure that they
did not realize that there was a defence question for
them at all. The first attempt ever made to bring the


Australian colonies under the authority of one central
Government was in 1850. In the Bill which passed
through the British Parliament arguments were based on
the need for uniformity of tariffs and railway gauges,
and uniform administration of roads and waterways, but
no mention was made of defence. This may be called
the period of unconscious reliance upon the protection
of Great Britain—unconscious even though the great
international wars of the French Revolution were raging
from 1796-1815.
From 1875 to 1888 was the period in which the
people did realize the need of defence, but refrained,
nevertheless, from accepting any financial responsibility.
It was the period of the peaceful penetration of the
coloured races from China, and the scramble for posses-
sions in the Pacific Islands. In 1876 Japan reoccupied
Bonin Island; in 1879 Germany got a footing
in Samoa; France had designs on the New
Hebrides, and in 1880 it was rumoured that Germany
intended to colonize New Guinea. An Australasian
Congress met at Sydney, sent a message to Great Britain
intimating that any further occupation of Pacific islands
by foreign Powers would be highly prejudicial to the
interests and security of Australia, but nothing was said
of any financial help in matters of defence from the
Colonies themselves. Councils were held, and there was
much talking, and with mere talk the second period
ended.
In 1888 the third period began with a splendid burst
of generosity on the part of the Colonies. As a result
of a conference in London, it was agreed that Great
Britain should provide a squadron of seven ships, for
which the Colonies would pay 5 per cent. They would


also provide maintenance to the extent of £91,000, but
any losses by accident or otherwise were to be made
good by Great Britain! In 1903 the Federal Government
agreed to pay the Admiralty £200,000 a year toward
naval expenses, provided the naval force in the Pacific
and Indian Oceans was kept in sufficient strength! This
lasted throughout the first decade of the twentieth
century, and may be designated the period of niggardly
contribution to the Imperial Navy.
In 1909-10 the Commonwealth Government took up
the problem with both hands and founded a policy of
national defence which would bring our contribution to
a figure proportionate with the expenditure of the British
taxpayer. It was the only possible policy for a country
that had begun to cherish national ambitions, and before
the outbreak of the war the first fleet unit of the Com-
monwealth was completed.
In the face of these facts and figures, is it possible
for any reasonable man to maintain that Australia has
relied on her own strength in the hundred and twenty
years from 1788 to 1908? Is it possible for any reasonable
man to deny that the people of Australia in all these
years have relied upon the British fleet for the protection
of the highways of commerce and their own freedom
from foreign invasion? It ought to be as clear as stars
°n a frosty night that our security has been Imperial,
not local or national.
Is it not clear, too, that in this terrible struggle since
August, 1914, our security has rested mainly on the fact
that Germany was never able to wrest command of the
sea from Great Britain in European waters?
Before the war broke out the Australian fleet unit
consisted approximately of one battle cruiser, four light


cruisers, three destroyers, two gunboats, two torpedo
boats, and two submarines, and undoubtedly they did
good service in the Pacific in the early years of the war.
But their success was entirely conditioned by the colossal
services rendered by the British fleet in the North Sea.
How long could we have held the German Pacific islands,
protected the trade routes, or defended our own country
from attack, if Germany had shattered the British fleet,
got command of the sea, and detached a powerful
squadron for service in Australian waters?
And how long could our three hundred thousand
soldiers have fought with the armies of the Allies in
Mesopotamia, the Dardanelles, and on the Western front
without the services rendered day by day and week by
week by the British fleet? Millions of troops had to be
convoyed, millions of tons of raw material taken to
Britain to be made into guns and ammunition, which
had to be shipped again to the several theatres of war
for use. Millions of tons of food had to be carried across
the sea to feed the armies, and none of these mighty
operations could have been carried on for a month if
Britain had lost command of the sea. Germany would
have w T on this war in three months or less, had it not been
for the silent, effective, unceasing work of the British
Navy. This will, lam sure, be one of the great outstand-
ing truths when the history of this war comes to be
written.
It is, I hope, not unfitting that we should have these
facts clearly before us on the 21st of October, when we
celebrate one of the most illustrious victories of the
commander who was the greatest embodiment of British
naval power. For my part, I have long been convinced
that this country has been almost entirely dependent upon


its Imperial connection for security, and I feel sure that
for a long time to come Australia will not be able to
build a fleet powerful enough to police her seas, keep
the trade routes open, and defend four thousand miles
of dangerously exposed coastline from Sydney to
Broome.
It is a mistake to suppose that a fleet unit consisting
of less than twenty efficient ships can discharge even a
considerable part of these great responsibilities. And
how much can we hope to add to our naval strength in
the immediate future, saddled as we are with the heavy
debt incurred in the prosecution of this war? Up
to June 30th, 1918, the Commonwealth had raised
£234,500,000 for war purposes alone, and though the war
is drawing to a close the end of expenditure is not yet.
Interest on this money has to be paid; ordinary expenses
of government will go on as before. How much will
we have left to spend on increased naval armament?
Not much, I am thinking; and if that be so we
are bound to remain in a position of dependence for a
long time to come. It may wound our national vanity
a little to confess this; but honest confession is good for
the soul, and “swelled head ' is dangerous. Megalomania
is a malady to which young nations are peculiarly liable,
and even when they become as powerful as Germany they
may suffer terribly from the effects of it. It is a fell
disease, more to be dreaded than Spanish influenza. It
comes of thinking too much of our own achievements
and too little of the great things that have been done
for us by others. It is reasonable that we should feel
a little prouder of our Australian nationality than we
did four years ago: the courage and endurance of our
troops have justified that. But there is a proportion in


things. Far more has been done for us in this great
struggle and in the past century than we have been able
to do for ourselves, and among the mighty forces by
which we have prospered there is, under Providence, none
to which we owe as much as to the British Navy.
