

sfL~ n oro V& fn *
TALES FROM THE MEWS HUT.
How I WENT
2585
ON THE WALLABY;
It is now about ten years ago since I, then an un-
fortunate “new chum,” having hung about Mel-
bourne in the delusive hope of procuring employ-
ment till my last few shillings were nearly
expended, reluctantly made up my mind to face,
what I believed would be a life of the greatest
danger and privation, namely, that of a Bush-
man, and with many misgivings started one bleak
wintry morning bound for that (to me) terra in-
cognita, the liush.
My adventures, however, at this time did not
prove of by any means so thrilling a nature as I
had anticipated, and, indeed, were it not that
thereby hangs a tale, or rather, to perpetrate a
vile joke, a collection of “Wallaby Tales,” I
should scarcely deem it worth while to relate
“ How I went on the Wallaby track.”
But as I am not quite sure that all my readers
will be sufficiently well versed in bush phrase-
ology to understand what is meant by this oft-
repeated expression, I may explain that it is the
term which is applied to the course of a man
who is travelling about from station to station in
search of employment, and in many instances, I
am sorry to say, praying heartily that he may
not be disappointed by finding it. His blankets
and worldly possessions rolled into a bundle,
called in the vernacular, a “swag,” or “drum,”
are hung on his back, he carries a black “ quart
pot” or “billy” in his hand;, a patched blue
serge shirt worn loose as a coat, a pair of mole-
skins that would almost pay to boil down for the
quantity of grease which could be extracted
therefrom, and a battered cabbage-tree or billy-
cock hat, usually go to make up the tout ensemble
of a genuine old “sun-downer” or trackman.
As different a figure as it is possible to conceive
did I, your humble servant, exhibit to the no
doubt astounded, but certainly amused optics of
an admiring country populace, when I had
tramped boldly out from the dozy but beautiful
little town of Geelong, whither I had come by
steamer from the metropolis, reducing my small
stock of cash to the miserable sum of three
shillings and twopence by expending half-a-
crown in a steerage passage.
The following description, as I can remember
it, will give some slight idea of the ludicrous
appearance I must have presented: I was
attired in a venerable double-breasted frock coat
originally black, a pair of grey tweed trousers
on the Track.
fashionably cut, but patched and frayed to a
woeful extent, and crowning all a sadly dilapi-
dated high white hat, encircled by a black band.
This last absurdity, however, I may explain I
wore, not from choice, but necessity, for I had
the sense even then to be conscious that the bell-
topper of civilisation was scarcely the most suit-
able article of attire for the kind of life upon
which I was entering. Not that I supposed for
one moment that there was anything particularly
outre in my appearance, which, on the contrary, I
thought was rather striking than otherwise (as
indeed it was, though scarcely in the manner I
so fondly dreamed.) For as I am, and always
have been, by nature what bushmen call rather
slab-sided, my general appearance can be better
imagined than described. And looking back
when I think of my tall, slim figure closely
buttoned up in the long coat, I can see that had
1 particularly desired to array myself in the most
ridiculous manner possible in making my debut
in the bush, I could scarcely have succeeded
better.
So, thus accoutred, with all my personal effects
consisting, I remember, among some other
equally useful articles, of a case of razors, two hair-
brushes, a tooth-brush, a few pair of white socks
of a pious turn (at least they were very holy),
and a box of paper collars, the whole contained
in a small carpet-bag and “ new chum’s bundle ”
slung over my shoulder, I trudged valiantly, but
with, it must be confessed, a very heavy heart, to
seek my fortune “ On the Wallaby.”
During the day I tramped through several
small townships, the inhabitants of which inva-
riably stared after me with what I at the time
thought a most incomprehensible degree of in-
terest (I don’t wonder at it quite so much now).
However, I plodded painfully on, and managed,
though at the expense of broken and blistered
feet, to get over about thirty miles of country
before nightfall. The sun was just dipping beneath
the western horizon, weird grey shadows were
creeping like a funeral palh over the scene, and
the evening hush had softly fallen on the world.
As the dusk drew on, I found myself in the middle
of a cold, bleak plain, with nothing in sight but
the wire fences on each side of the road, through
which the wind was sighing in a most melancholy
manner, a few straggling trees in the distance,
and a heap of broken road metal, upon which I


sat wearily down, feeling a greater degree of heart
sickness and miserable loneliness than I ever re-
member to have experienced before, or ever desire
to again—and, indeed, it will be conceded that I
had some cause for so feeling. I was quite
alone in an utterly strange country, without a
friend or relative within sixteen thousand
miles; all hope of obtaining the employment for
which by education and training I was suited,
completely gone, and having as little idea of the
sort of work which would be necessary in my
new mode of life, as a middle-aged buck ’possum
might reasonably be supposed to have of trigo-
nometry. I never meet a poor beggar of a new
chum to this day but I feel impelled to go and
have a quiet chat with him, and cheer him up a
bit, for the sake of old times, instead of treating
him to the usual chaffing which he more com-
monly gets on his first appearance in the bush.
Well, there I sat on the stone heap, looking re-
gretfully back on the past, and despondingly
enough to the future, till, and I feel almost
ashamed to confess the fact, I felt two hot drops
of moisture rise to my eyes and drop on my
clasped hands. I was just becoming conscious
that I was very weak and hungry, and wonder-
ing where and how I should pass the night,
when suddenly a heavy hand was laid upon my
shoulder, and a rough strong voice, that withal
had a kindly ring in it, cried, “ I say, ole chap,
yer mustn’t break down like that; never say die;
there’s corn in Egypt yet, that’s my motter, an’
that’s why they alius calls me ole “ Corn in
Egypt.”
I glanced quickly up, and saw standing beside
me a big rough-looking old fellow, with a face
about the colour of a half-burned brick, and a
thick bushy beard that reached far down on his
blue serge shirt, attired in regular bush costume,
with a swag on his back, and a sheep dog at his
heels.
“An’ ye’ll find it a darn’d good motter too,”
continued my strange companion, “you’re a new
chum, I see, an’ looks as though ye was down on
yer luck heavy, but arter all ye’ll find that there’s
many a wusser place nor the bush for a chap as
is on his last legs, as you seems ter be. I should
think as how ye was a gent by the cut on ye;
yer hands is pretty white enny how, an’ don’t
look as though ye’d done much hard graft in
yer time. Now, don’t get yer back up at my rough
bush ways” (for he saw that I was looking annoyed
at his freedom), “ I don’t wish to ’fend yer;
but seein’ ye a settin’ there in that outlandish rig,
an’ a lookin’ as miserable as a bandicoot in a
burnt log, I ses ter myself, now there’s a poor
devil of a new chum, as is just about at his wit’s
end to know where he’s a goin’ ter get a bit o’
grub an’ a place ter “quamby” in to-night. So
now look ye here, mate, if yer likes to come along
ame I’ll put yer in the way o’ gettin’ both. But
fust, ye know, we must try an’ change that there
get up o’ yourn a bit, so’s ye’ll pass muster with
the “cove”; jest chuck that long-sleeved hat
away, an’ I’ll lend ye my ole billy-cock as hev
travelled most all over the “ Island’;’ * I’ve got
a ’possum-skin cap in my swag as ’ll do me jest
* The old hands usually speak of the Australian continent
as the “ Island,” probably from associating it with Tasmania,
as well. Take off that parson-rig coat, an’ let’s
try an’ roll that new chum’s bundle o’ yourn
summat more ship-shape; now ye’d better rub
some of the black off o’ my “billy” onter yer
hands, so’s they won’t look so white and lady-
fingered. An’ don’t yer speak much to-night,
but jest keep yer weather eye open, an’ let me do
the jawin’ part o’ the bisness.”
In less time than it has taken me to write these
lines, good old “ Corn in Egypt ” had metamor-
phosed the ridiculous looking “new chum” into
something like a genuine bushman, and taking
my poor half blanket which Iliad hitherto carried
stowed away in the bag, and wliich indeed I had
brought with me more by good luck than good
guiding, he rolled my possessions into a respect-
able looking swag.
“ Now,” said the good-natured fellow, “ I’m a
goin’ ter make to Thompson’s to-night, it’s only
’bout a mile an’ a half from here, though yer
can’t see it, fur it’s down in a holier in the plains,
so up with yer “ drum,” my lad, an’ let’s be a
gettin’ on, for we’re sure of a feed an’ a shake-
down on Carrunna. I’m a gettin’ precious
tuckerish myself, an’ a feed won’t do you no
harm neither, I can see.”
I thanked him gratefully, for I thought his
kindness to a stranger was something to be grate-
ful for, nor have I seen cause since to alter my
opinion on that score. We started for the station,
and on the road my new companion made it his
business to give me the fullest directions as to
the formula to be observed on arriving at our
destination, for up to that time I had been
ignorant of the fact that a supper and place to
sleep in were almost always granted to any man
who came to a station after sundown, hence the
term “ sun-downer,” which is applied to a class
of loafers who pass the year on the tramp, with
the exception of a few weeks at shearing time,
and who never by any chance, whatever the dis-
tance may be, put in an appearance at the door
of the men’s hut till the sun has set. At one time
they had nothing to do but to put down their
swag and take their seat with the men at the
supper table, but of late years the squatters have,
in self-defence, been more particular, and the
consent of the overseer or person in charge has
now usually to be gained before the desired
hospitality is obtainable. As the mode of solicit-
ing this is almost invariably the same with these
old stagers, and rather amusing, it may not be
out of place to give, verbatim, a conversation in
which I have often taken part, though, with a
few exceptions which occurred in my early bush
experience, my role has always been that of
the “ Boss,” or “ Cove,” as the man in authority
is usually termed. An old fellow will come
crawling up with the regular hamper’s limp, as
if he could scarcely put one leg before the other,
though likely as not he has come about half-a-
dozen miles, or perhaps less, since morning, and
open the dialogue, which will run somewhat as
follows
Tramper: “ Good hevenin’, sur,” in. a low re-
spectful tone.
where they passed many years of their life. So much so,
that the term has become recognised in the bush among all
classes of bushmen as meaning all overjdie colonies.


“ Super” (who has just dealt with eight or ten
other travellers, rather gruffly): “ Good evening,
my man.”
Tramper (deprecatingly): “Ken ye give us a
job o’ work, sur?”
Super (shortly): “No! Don’t want any hands.”
Tramper (imploringly): “If ye please, ken I stop
the night, sur ? ”
Super (doubtfully): “How far have you come
to-day ? ”
Tramper (wearily) : “ From Warrandra, sur,
Mr. Jason’s place, as is sixteen good long miles,
sur, cross country” (he has really come in from
one of the out stations, about four or five miles
away.)
Super (resignedly): “Ha ! well, I suppose you
can stop ; go down to the hut and tell the cook
you have seen me.”
Tramper (gratefully): “ Thank you, sur” (aside,
as he walks off), “ d d mungy old wretch ; I
bet he won’t give breakfast in the morning.”
And so ends the colloquy.
It must not, however, be imagined that all who
travel on the famous “ track” necessarily belong
to the genus loafer, for many an honest hard
working fellow is compelled at times to take to
the “ Wallaby, ” and sorely against his will, toil
many a weary mile in search of the work he
would only be too glad to find. For, as my first
bushmate, old “ Corn in Egypt,” used sometimes
to observe, with a profound shake of his head,
“ Some sailor cove, he onced said to me as how
it warn’t all beer and skittles in this here world,
an’ darn me, but though some of them ‘big
bugs’ in town thinks different, I’m blessed if it’s
all mutton damper an’ easy lines in the bush,
not but as I sed before, there’s many wusser
places.”
But JRevenons a nos moutons, for I have cer-
tainly strayed from my track , which was leading
HOW I WENT
At the time this story opens I was a sort of sub-
overseer for Mr. Newell Thorn, of Michiga station,
at the foot of the Warrigals. Out over the
ranges were a large number of wild cattle, and
one morning I started with about half a dozen
stockmen and three black boys, for the purpose
of getting in some of these mobs. On the second
day, however, whilst in pursuit of a small mob,
my horse placed his foot in a wombat hole and
came down a regular cropper; I felt myself fly
through the air, and then came complete oblivion
for a time. When my dazed senses returned,
the hallooing, and shouting of the stockmen
sounded faintly in the distance, —and worse than
all, my nag had vanished. I had a sensation of
bursting pain in my head; my neck was swelled
and terribly stiff, I reckon ’twas a near case of
what the faculty term dislocated vertebra. At
first I had little fear for the result of my adven-
ture, as I thought I should have no difficulty in
finding my way on foot to our camping place, by
the old log stockyard, which I knew was not
more than about five miles distant. So, picking
the old bushman and my transmogrified self to
the men’s hut of Carrunna station, which in due
time we reached, and my companion being fa-
vourably known to the “ boss” as a worker, and
not a loafer, no questions were asked, and we
were soon seated at a plentiful, if plain meal, to
which, it is needless to say, I did the most ample
justice, thinking the “ post and rail” tea, sweet-
ened with brown ration sugar, and guiltless of
milk, more enticing than any champagne I had
ever tasted, and deeming the baked mutton and
solid damper simply delicious; but then we all
know the truth of the old proverb— 7l n'est sauce
que d'ayetit, which I with many another have
proved to be undeniable.
Such, then, was my first introduction to bush life
and the “Wallaby Track.” I have travelled
many a mile on the same course since that to
me eventful day, and in my rambles had some
stirring adventures, met some strange and origi-
nal characters, and last, but not least, heard
some real tough yarns of the good old days,
“ When eveiy man done as he darn well pleased,
when there was no ( condemned ) fences about the
country; when a man were a man, an’ the (con-
demned) squatters were darn glad to get a man
about their ( condemned) stations at all.” ffi hoc
genus omne, for in this wise usually run the
“ old hands’” tales, as told in the men’s huts at
night, interspersed with digging anecdotes, and
experiences on the “track.”
Having in my earlier days acquired a know-
ledge of Pitman’s system of Phonography, which
I have since practised, having found it so useful,
I have often been enabled to take down the
substance of some of the bush yarns I have
heard in the exact words, and, indeed, accent of
the narrator, and in the following pages I
shall endeavour, with what fidelity I can, to re-
late a few of the “ Tales told in the Men’s Hut.”
OFF
the Track.
up my hat, whip, and saddle (for the girths
having burst, my pigskin and myself had saluted
mother earth in company), I made a start; but
soon found, that owing to the effects of my fall,
I should have quite enough to do to reach the
stockyard, before night closed in, without any
incumbrance, so I planted the saddle in a hollow
tree, which I marked, to enable me to find it
again, and pushed on once more. But I suppose
that the backhanded slap, with which my (liter-
ally) stony-hearted maternal relative aforesaid,
had repulsed my warm salutation, had deranged
my ideas; for before long I found, to my sur-
prise, that I was at the foot of the ranges instead
of out on the grass-tree fiat, which I should
have reached by that time. I now began to feel
alarmed and determined to climb to the summit
of a precipitous spur near by, and mark the lay
of the country; but before I reached the top—
what with heat and excitement —my injured
brain gave way, and I fell in a sort of stupor on
the rough hill side, within a few feet of a beetling
crag. And so, for the three days during which


I was lost, with the exception of a few lucid in-
tervals, in one of which I found myself in the
position just described, I wandered on perfectly
unconscious of whither I was going. On the
third day, late in the evening, I was found
by one of Mr. Logan’s shepherds out on the
Golden Craig Run, and was taken by him in to
the station, having travelled over seventy miles
right through the ranges —how I managed it,
God who helped me only knows.
For ten days I lay tossing in a burning fever,
during which time I received every attention
from the kind-hearted proprietor. When I began
to come round again, my host, who was a cheery
weather-beaten old Scotchman, and a confirmed
batchelor, used to come and sit by my bedside,
and beguile the slow tedious hours with his queer
yarns and quaint sayings.
One night, as the old gentleman was reflectively
puffing at his black cutty, and using his thick
forefinger for a tobacco stopper, with a steaming
glass of whisky toddy at his elbow, he suddenly
paused in his occupation and said with great
deliberation, “ Noo, that jest minds me, dud ye
ever hark til the shaerpenin’ o’ a crosscut saw,
that ye thocht was sweeter than the vera sweetest
music that ever ye heerd ?”
“No, indeed, sir,” said I; “I can’t say that I
ever did, the sound of the sharpening of a saw
is more apt to set my teeth on edge.”
“ Ah! weel, it dudna set ma teeth on edge the
time I’m speakin’ o’.”
Seeing that a story was impending, I settled
myself comfortably in my pillows, and begged him
to tell me how it came about.
“ Weel,” said Mr. Logan, taking an affectionate
sip at his glass, “ folks ’ill tell ye, na doot, that
auld Davie Logan’s a vara rich man—an’ I’m no
denying that I’ve gotten a bawbee or twa pit
bye—but I can assure ye, lad, that when I landit
in the colony I hadna a thing but the clathes I
stood in, an’ jest twa pund twalve an’ saxpence
in ma poket, for I had jest slippit awa fra’ ma
ship.”
“All the more credit to you, Mr. Logan,” said
I, “for then you must have worked your way to
vour present position by the force of sheer industry
and perseverance.”
“ Na, na, no exactly that, but I jist workit ma
way tae ma present position by the force o’ sheer
gude luck ; an’ if it dis na deeve ye to listen tae
an auld carl’s clatter, I’ll gie ye the hale histry.”
On assuring him that it would give me the
greatest pleasure to listen to him, the old gentle-
man took another lingering sip at his toddy and
commenced :
MR. LOGAN’S STORY.
As I tell’t ye jist noo, lad, when I left the ship,
“ Scotia’s Monarch,” at the auld Sandridge pier,
ma warldly gear consistit o’ a few bit clathes in
a wee bundle, an’ the twa pund twalve an’ sax in
ma pooch. The Melbourne bodies at this time
were a’ jest gangin’ clean daft aboot the gowd that
had been fund at Mount Alexander, so I thocht
I could na do better than jist toddle awa’ there
masel’, for I confidently believed that the gowd
wad be pickit up fra’ the groun’ like chuckie stanes.
So after passin’ ane nicht in the toon, I pit ma
traps ontil ma back an’ startit for the diggins.
For man- nor a week I ploddit along the track,
sometimes pittin’ up at a shanty, but maistly stop-
pin’ at the stations near the road ; but on the
eighth day, as I was tryin’ to mak Black Creek
station, I gaed adrift oot in the rough country to
the north-east, an’ bein’ nothin’ but a green new
chum I jist gaed further an’ further awa’ fra
ceevilisation till I was fairly lost. To say that I
was really frichted wad convey but a vera puir
conception o’ ma feelins when I fund that I did
na’ ken what gate ta gang. I ran this way an’
that like ane dementit, till I could na stir a step
for weariness, an’ the nicht was fast failin’., I
fund a hollow tree into which I creepit, an’
wrappin’ ma bit blanket aboot me, sat there
shiverin’, no’ darin’ to stir, nor even to sleep, for
fear o’ the wild dogs that were howlin roon’ me,
an’ which I thocht were wolves. But the day-
licht brak at last, an’ glad was I ta stretch ma
weary and crampit limbs again. Puir fuil that
I was, I hadna the gumption to male’ ma coorse
by the sun, but started aff on the way I thocht
the road wad be—but things got warn- an’ waur,
for I was gettin’ mair confus’d an’ weak every
’oor. Sae, havin’ some matches, an’ a sma’ bag
wi’ a handfu’ or twa o’ oatmeal intul’t, I camped
doon by a sma’ creek, an’ litit a fire an’ made
masel’ a bit parrich; after which feelin stronger,
I started on again, but still stupet like I turned
my back on the wee burnie, an’ pushed awa’
intae the scrub. It does na matter that I tell ye
hoo I passed the next three days wanderin’ here
an’ there. I killed a serpent, an’ though ma
bowels was sail- against it at the first, I managed
ta eat it, an’ fund that it was na sa bad—still I
was like to dee for the want o’ a drap o’ watter,
as, though the weather was cauld, there had been
but little rain.
On the third day, aboot sax in the afternoon,
I spied a sma’ hut, an’ it gart ma heart leap,
for I thocht there wad surely be some folk aboot
it, but I fund that it was maist in ruins.
Oot on the plain roon’ the hut I saw an auld
ragget ewe sheep feedin’, which I managed to
run intae the crumblin stockyard, an’ then, as
it was dark, I tied the beast tae a post wi’
ma belt, thinkin’ to kill it in the mornin’.
But in the nicht I was -waken’d wi’ an awfu’
clamjamfry o’ howlin’ an’ worryin’, an’ in the
mornin’ I fund that the puir brute was picket
just as clean as the palm o’ my haund by the
wild dogs.
By the mercy o’ Providence I fund a wee drap
o’ watter in the bottoms o’ some broken bottles
roon’ aboot the hut, an’ that keepit the life in
me.
A faint track led awa fra’ the place, an’ I
thocht that by followin’ it, ’t wad lead some-
where ; but I soon lost it, an’ then for twa mair
weary days I wann’erd on, in a fearfu’ sort o’
dream.
In ma wann’erin’, I mind, I got intae a deep
gully an’ tried to scrape for vv after in the bed o’ a
dry creek, workin’ we ma haunds, an’ I minded
that the sand seemed unco’ heavy, and fu’ o’
sma’ specks and lumps o’ a shining yellow metal,
sae in my cranky fancy I pit some handfu’s o’it
intae ma pockets because that it was pretty,


but I got na watter, sae I crawled onward. Weel,
some time after that, though hoo lang I have na
the least idea, for I had lost all reckonin’ o’
time, I suddenly heerd a soond which I first
thocht was but a delusion an’ pairt o’ the dream;
for I ken’d the noise weel, being reared near tae
a lairge builder’s yard in Greenock, an’ the noise
was the sharpenin’ o’ a crosscut saw. I stoppet
for jest a minute, an’ then raised a weak shout;
when a big man wi’ a large beard, an’ an axe in
his haund jumpit up frae ahint a tree, where he
was restin’. He startit back when he saw me,
for 1 lookit mail - like a ghaist than a man, then
he called oot, “’Tarnal thunder! what the na-
tion’s this ? Come here, Bill, quick, here’s a poor
begghr bin lost in the bush!” Then the noise o’
the saw stoppit, an’ another man came over tae
where I lay, for 1 had fallen doon.
They carried me intae their hut, an gave me
some sperrit an’ watter ta revive me, and then
some food in sma’ quantities. They were a
couple o’ men wha was log fencing for the
Black Creek station.
Weel, for days an’ days I lay weak an’ wanner-
in’ in ma head, in their bark “gunya,” an’ then
began ta come roon again.
Ac nicht, as I was lyin’ between sleepin’ an
waukin’, I heered ma twa kind freens cracking
aboot the diggings, and the great fortins that
was ta be made there, an’ how, if I was only
richt, they wad mak’ a start themsels, for ane
o’ them hed been in California an’ ken’d some-
thin’ aboot diggin’. All at once ma dream came
back ta me, sae I started up in bed an asket Joe
(or Yankee Joe, as he was ca’ed), hoo the gowd
lookit in the groun’. He tellt me that ’twas
sometimes in nuggets, spmetim.es in sand, an’
ithertimes in quartz. With that ma heart gave
a leap, an’ I cried: “Weel, lads, you’ve been real
kind ta me, an I’m hopin’ that I can mebbe
mak’ all oor fortins, for I think I fund gowd in
a gully that canna be sa far fra here,” an with
that I jest whip’et oot the sand fra ma po’ket an’
clapit it intae Joe’s haund. He gave but ane
look at it, an’ then yells oot, “ Gold, by the ’tar-
nal! hurra, .lads, we’re made men!”
Ye may be sure I wasna lang in bed after
that, an’ next day we started off, ta find the
place.
Stringy Bark Bill, oor ither mate, was a first-
class bushman, an was able to follow my tracks,
where the groon’ was saft, —an’ by making some
casts aboot we at last fund the gully.
Weel, lad, tae mak a lang story short, the gowd
was indeed there—an plenty of it. For in the
first day surfacing, wi’ a tin dish only, we
washed oot nearly a poun’ o’ fine gowd besides
some nuggets. So the next day Yankee Joe rode
tae the station an’ brocht oot a few tools an’
■necessaries, sayin’ that they was goin’ prospect-
ing. It wasna lang, however, before ane o’ the
stockmen drapped upon us. an’ then the thing
soon got wind; but, afore there was ony rush
set in, we had it a’ ta oorsells, an’ gude wark
we made o’t. Then we markit oot a prospec-
tor’s Claim, in the best pairt o’ the gully, which
is known ta this day as Scottie’s Gully. An’
fra that claim, sir, wi’ oor few weeks’ surfac-
in’, we cleared, each man o’ us, over 8000 punds.
My mates cleared oot wi’ their gowd, but I
went in for storekeepin’; and wi’ the prices that
were got in thae days, in three years’ time I
hed doubled ma capital three times o’er. Then
I gave up the store, an’ boucht this station; an’
things has na gane badly wi me syne. Sae ye see,
that gangin’ off the track was after a’ the vera
best day’s wark that ever I did. Still, but for
the mercy o’ Providence, I had dee’d in the bush
an’ never been heared o’ mair; but, as I tell’t ye
first, the sharpenin’ o’ that saw was jist the
sweetest music I ever listened ta in ma life.
Mr. Logan paused a moment, and then said:
“Ah weel, the auld sayin’ bauds gude still, that
‘ It’s better ta be born lucky than rich.’ But
it’s time I was sayin’ gude nicht ta ye, ma lad,
it’s unco late for you ta be waukin’, ye’ll, I
hope, be better by the moruin; an’ mebbe, wha
kens, but ’twas a gude day’s wark for you that ye
went off the track too. But I’ll no keep ye the
noo, sa gude nicht,” and with a kindly shake of
the hand the old man went out, leaving me to lie
tossing, trying to imagine what he could mean
by saying that it might be a good thing for me
that I had gone off the track; I could make
nothing of it, and so fell asleep, dreaming that
1 had found a golden hole.
Next morning Mr. Logan explained his mean-
ing, telling me that he had taken a fancy to me,
and as he was becoming old and stout, and in-
tended paying a visit to his native land, he
wanted a general manager for his station, —that
he felt certain he could trust me,—and he offered
me the position, which you may be sure I did
not hesitate about accepting. So here am I, in
sole charge at Golden Craig, and here likely to
remain. Mr. Logan has gone on his projected
visit to Scotland, and I am therefore my own
master, with a good salary, a good housd, and a
good horse, or rather a dozen—when I want them
—and last, not least, a warm welcome for every
man whom I know to be an honest traveller on
“ the track,” or otherwise. Now, what, in the
name of fortune, could a man desire more?
unless, indeed, it were a wife, and—well, you
need not mention it again—l rather imagine
that this is an addition which I may soon boast.
So I think, after all, that I may say with Mr.
Logan, that the best day’s work I ever did was
on the day “ I went off the track.”


Brave
“ You'll no doubt remember, sir,” said Flash
Fred, “that we had three days of regular soaking
rain in the middle of last shearin’; well, we was
all at our wits’ end after the first few days, while
the sheep were drying, what to do to pass the
time. We’d washed all our duds, and smoked,
and played cards till we was sick of it. At last
some one proposed to have a go in at telling
yarns of our own experience round the country;
nothing could have been better, down w r e sat,
each man filled his pipe, and at it we went at
once. Now, I ain’t going to tell you all the tales
that were told, firstly, ’cause I don’t remember
half of them ; and next, ’cause ’twould take me
nigh all night to do so. But the last one we
heard, and to my notion by long odds the best,
was from one of the boys who was there to pick
fleeces and carry the tar-pot. This was how we
came to h ave it. We had got pretty well through
our list, and were just thinking of making another
call on some of the best pitchers for a second
tale, when old Joe the Crusher (with, I’m sorry
to say, a few very strong expletives, and between
the hard sucks at a most refractory pipe), gave
vent to the following idea —‘Why the—(suck)
—can’t some of the—(suck)—young uns try their
—(suck) —hands at a—(suck) —yarn. Here’s
little Billie, now—(suck) —l’m well —(suck)
—sure he could tell some sort of a—(suck) —
yarn if he was ter—(suck) —try.’ ‘Oh ! you
surely don’t expect much of a yarn from me,’
cried the lad, a fine pretty little chap of about
twelve years old, 1 you see I’m only such a little
fellow, and ain’t knocked about a great deal yet.
This is the fust time as ever I’ve bin from home
in my life, and I shouldn’t be now, only mother
let me come here with Jim Jackson to pick
fleeces, ’cause they won’t begin the shearin’ at
Coonanga till this shed’s done, and she’s got
little sis now to help her with the sheep till I
come back. But still, if you’d like, I’ll tell you
about my brother, Brave Bob, and how he saved
me from drowning.’ ‘Hear, hear, youngster!
Go it, little un ! Bv jove! I’ll bet the boy ’ll
tell as good a yarn as any,” were the encouraging
remarks that went round the hut. ‘ Yew jest
fire away, Billie, an’ I’ll take an shew yer how ter
shear a sheep at “ smoke, oh ! ” to-morrow. I’ll
pick yer out a nice bare-bellied yeo to try yer
hand on,’ granted old Joe from the middle of a
thick cloud of smoke. ‘ Well,’ said little Bill,
‘ let’s have a drink of tea, and I’ll try.’ So this
was
LITTLE BILL’S STORY.
Brave Bob, as folks mostly called him, was
my big brother—when I say big I mean he was
a goodish bit bigger than me, though I believe
he was only about fourteen year old when he died,
but I used to think him a reg’lar grown man. for,
you must remember, I was only such a very little
chap then, not quite six year old. Then he was
so brave and manly, and took such care of me,
and —and at the last he saved my life with his
own.
Bob.
(The tears welled up io the boy’s eyes, his
voice trembled, but he went on.)
Father, you know, hed bin shepherding for
Mr. Fairthorn on the Lake Coonanga run, but he
died when I was only a year and a-half old, and
then Bob, though he was only eleven year old’
himself at the time, took father’s flock, and with
mother just giving him a hand to yard ’em at
night, shepherded’em so well that Mr. Fairthorn
kep’ him on, and still gave mother the forty-five
pound a year that he used to give father before
—him for shepherding, and mother hutkeeping.
About the earliest things as I can remember
at all was when Bob used to be carrying me pick-
a-back across the stepping stones in the creek
when he’d be going out with the sheep in the
summer mornings, and sitting with him under
the thick shade of the blackwoods when the sun
got hot, and him telling me what the crows were
saying to each other out of the tree tops, mimick-
ing them, and making them say all sorts of funny
things ; or what the jackasses were laughing at,
how they would kill the ugly snakes by lifting
them up and dropping them, and then would
chuckle and laugh at their wriggling ; he’d show
me where the little yellow tomtits built their
soft covered nests under the thick branches of
the honeysuckles, and break down great boughs
of sweet-smelling wattle, covered with its yellow
balls, for us to lie on, till we were nearly as yellow
ourselves as the dusty coated bees that were
humming among them. And in the winter, too,
he’d build such snug “mia-mias,” and cover them
with grass and ferns, under which we would
nestle warm and dry, whilst he tailed his new
stockwhip or plaited rush baskets for mother.
Dear, dear old Bob ! he would always have me
with him, so mother hadn’t no trouble with me,
nor hadn’t to watch me at all, fox- she knew I’d
be safe with Bob. Sometimes, though, he’d go
out alone on to the lake of nights in the old punt
shooting ducks, and I was always a bothering of
mother to let me go too, but she’d always say,
“No, wait till little Willie is as big and strong as
Bob, and then he shall go out and shoot ducks for
mother, if he likes.” But one night, as Bob was
going out, he seen me looking so longing like that
he turns round and says, “ Mother, do let the
little fellow go with me to-night, you know that
I’ll take good care of him, and I’ll come home
early so’s to let him get to bed in good time ; the
old punt’s quite safe, and there’s not the least
danger.” So mother, she was over-persuaded,
and she let me go. I was half wild with joy at
the thoughts of going. As we got into the boat
the moon was shining pretty bright, and Bob
said there was plenty of ducks on the lake. He
sang as he rowed out to the feeding ground, and
was so merry, poor fellow, and he made me quite
warm with his old blanket poncho, telling me to
sit still.
Well, somehow, I suppose ’twas on account of
being out on the lake in the moonlight, as Iwas
watching the white mark the moon made on the


water, and looking up among the stars in the
dark blue sky, I began to feel a solemn sort of
feelin’, and got asking Bob some queer questions,
where the streak of light on the water went to ?
was it a track ? and what was at the other end
of it, away beyond the tiny stars on the other
side of the sky ? I remember Bob stopped row-
ing for a bit, and oh 1 I remember as if it was
just yesterday, how his face, turned upwards,
looked with the moon shining on it, and on his
thick curly hair, for his hat was off, that shone
round his head just like the rings of light
around the heads of the saints in mother’s big
bible. I could see his large dark eyes looking
far away to the stars, as he said slowly and
softly—-“ It’s strange, very strange, little Willie,
that you should ask me what I want to know so
much myself; I often sit and look, little brother,
and long to know where that shining track leads
to, and what is out beyond the stars. I believe
heaven is there, and I sometimes think that the
shining track leads to it. But come, Willie, we
must hurry along, or we shall be late home, and
mother will be anxious.”
I didn’t think then, mates, nor I don’t sup-
pose Bob did, neither, that that very night one
of us would know where the shining track went
to; but one of us did.
We got out to the feeding ground at last, and
Bob loaded the gun and put it across his knees,
then he commenced to paddle gently onwards.
Suddenly he made a motion to me to sit still,
as he was going to fire; he stood up ; I saw his
body between me and the sky, for the moon was
behind a cloud. I was sitting in the bottom of
the punt. Then there was a flash and explosion.
The fire seemed to flash all around us, for the gun
had burst. I saw him stagger back, and then
came darkness, and I was struggling in the cold
water with Bob’s poncho round my neck, but as
soon as I came to the surface his hand caught
hold of me, and put me clinging on to the boat.
I got my head out of the blanket, and then I felt
lighter. Bob had got round to the other side of
the punt which was just afloat, so as to balance
her, telling me to hold fast, till he’d see what
was to be done. Every minute he’d call out to
cheer me, and to make sure I was safe, saying
we should be all right directly, for that we
wasn’t very far off from the shore.
Now we had got a good half mile or so out be-
fore the boat capsized, but the wind was blowing
from the other side, and was drifting us in fast.
We could see the light in mother’s window,
making a red shining track across the dark
water, and behind us was the cold white path-
way that the moon made, leading away among
the glittering stars. Ah ! 1 travelled along the
red one, that led back to mother and the world.
I wonder if Bob went away by the other, and if
it did lead to heaven.
So there we was, me and Bob drifting over the
big 1 ake; but soon the wind began to rise in
squalls, and the old boat dipped terrible, for she
was very old and sodden with the water. I know
I went quite under several times, but I wouldn’t
cry out for fear of frightening Bob. I was get-
ting to feel very chill and weak, when suddenly
I felt my brother at my side—he was holding on
to one of the oars, and seemed nearly exhausted.
I saw a big gash on his pale forehead from which
the blood was slowly trickling; he came close
alongside of me, and putting his white face —
ah! so very white in the moonlight—close to
mine, he said—“ Now, Willie, dear, be a brave
little man, and hark to what I’m going to say.
You know the gun has burst—it has broke my
left arm, besides giving me a bad cut on the
head; the old punt, I’m afraid, won’t keep afloat
with us both on it, so I’m going to try and swim
ashore. I would take the boat in tow, too, but for
my broken arm. You won’t be frightened, will
you, darling, and will hold on tight? Think of
poor mother, what would she do without you?
You’ll have to help her all you can you know, for,
perhaps, I won’t be able again.” “Oh ! yes, I will
indeed, Bob,” said I as brave as I could for my
sobs, “but where will you be?” “I’ll be looking
out for you, dear, when you reach the shore,”
said he, with a bright smile on his pale face, “ I
know you’ll get there some time.” And then I
heard him saying low to himself, as if he didn’t
mean me to hear him, “ But please God not yet
awhile, or what would poor mother do, indeed?”
Then the dear old fellow kissed me two or three
times, and before I knew he was gone he had
slipped away in the darkness, and I was left
clinging to the old boat alone.
So I went drifting on, straining my eyes
along the red line that led to mother’s window—
for it seemed to be the only thing that joined me
to the world—wondering whether Bob had got
ashore, and whether he could help me. Poor
Bob! he had certainly reached the shore, but not
as I thought; for I know now that he had not the
slightest chance of swimming to the bank with
his broken arm, and that he knew it well himself
when he left me; but he knew if he stayed the
boat would sink, and both be lost, and again,
that it would cheer me to think of his being
on land and bringing help. And so he sacrificed
himself for his little brother Willie.
(Here the boy’s head went down on the side of
his bunk, quite overcome with his feelings: his
sobs were audible, and, indeed, his were not the
only wet eyes present, by long odds. Old Joe
the Crusher sucked at his pipe savagely, though
it was black out, and swore in a thick voice that
this was the cussedest ’bacca as ever he smoked,
it most brought tears to his eyes. In a few
minutes the lad commenced again.)
Well, mates, I went floating on, and soon I
began to felt a sort of senseless feeling coming
over me, and then all was darkness, for I don’t
really know how long. When I came too, I
found I was in my own bed at home, with mother
sitting crying softly by my side. “ Mother,” said
I,“where’s Bob?” “Willie mustn’t talk,” says she.
“Your dear brother’s quite well and happy now.”
“ Then he did get safe to land ?” I questioned.
“ Yes, my darling, Bob’s got safe to land, but
Willie must go to sleep.”
Then, as my heavy eyes closed again, I thought
I heard her murmur, “Yes, to the brighter,
the better land; and if it wasn’t for you, my
poor pet, and little sis, I’d wish I was going right
there too.”
In a few more days I was quite well again, and


then mother took me on her knee, and told me
that Brave Bob was dead. His body was found
on the beach the next day after I got ashore.
Mother, it seems, got frightened when we did not
come home, and went down to the beach to look
out for us just as the boat with me clinging to it
drifted into the shallow water ; she rushed in,
took me off, and carried me home. Soon after
one of the boundary riders, who had been kept
out late with the wild dogs, rode up to the hut,
and after searching around by himself for a while
he rode off full split for the station, and gave the
alarm. One man was sent off for the doctor for
me, and the rest turned out to look for Bob, for
they all loved him, and not a man of them went
home till his body was found. When I was better
I went out with mother to see his grave. The
station hands had buried him beneath one of the
big old blackwoods that we used to sit under, in
How WE
Cured
He was a shocking old liar that same Tom Linch.
To hear him talk you’d think there wasn’t a bit
of the whole of the colonies but he had bin over.
But before he’d tell you about any place he’d
first ask had any of us bin there, and if not,
lord! wouldn’t he just spin you a yarn about it;
and if any one had seen anything at all uncom-
mon, old Tom had seen something more strange
still. In fact, there wasn’t his equal at telling
a twister from Cooma to Camperdown. Of
course, sometimes we’d lay a trap for him and
bowl him out; but it didn’t matter a bit; Tom
’ud just lie his way right clean ahead out of it.
I mind once there was a young chap from the
Adelaide side on the place, and he tried to trip
the old man irp, but it wasn’t to be done.
’Twas in this way. Young Bill Thomson, that
was his name, sez one night to one of the other
chaps as was up to the move, “ I say, Bob, where’s
Gumeracha ?”
“ Blowed if I know,” says Bob.
“ What! was none of ye’s ever there?” cried
old Tom, quite glad of the chance, for he hadn’t
had a slant to pitch a cuffer all the night. “ Begor,
then, I’m the very chap can tell ye’s all about
that same place; and more be token, ’tis the
dhryest place ever I was in. ’Tis on the Sydney
side, away in the back counthry, an’ sthands
on a plain, wid no threes, or wather widin many
a mile of it. Shure ! the few days I was in
it I dhrunk nothin’ but grog that was a
shillin’ the nobbier, for wather was that scarce
’twas worth half-a-crown a glass, and hard to
get at that. I thried fur a change to make
some tay wid a billy full av beer ; did any av
yez ever taste tay made with beer ? No. Well,
thin, let me tell ye, there’s a treat in sthore for
ye; for it gives the tea a richer taste than whin
made wid wather ; but the wurst av it is that ye
can’t dhrink much for the tay gettin’ to yer head.
But, faix, ’twasn’t a bad place afther all, for
they wor a foine dhrinkin’ people, and conse-
quintly there was plenty av devarshon an’ fightin’
goin’ on night and day, an’ a cove cud be
dh rank from wan week’s end to the other widout
On the Wallaby; or, Tales from the Men's Hut.
Tom Linch.
a little hollow near tlie lake, and covered it over
neatly with green sods from the spring. The
carpenter, he had cut a little white cross to put
at the head, on which Mrs. Fairthorn had painted
in such beautiful letters, “ In affectionate remem-
brance of Bobert M‘Pherson, aged 14 years and
6 months, who lost his life in saving that of his
brother ; this cross is erected by his mates, the
men of Coonanga station.”
So, mates, that’s how Brave Bob died, and the
crows caw drowsily out of the tree-tops in the
long summer days, and the jackasses laugh as
merrily as they used to do when him and me sat
there and listened to their cackling long, long
ago; but Brave Bob sleeps beneath the black-
woods near the lake. I shall never forget his last
words to me about taking care of mother, nor
that he would be waiting for me on the shore,
and I believe he is.
spindin’ a shillin’, tliere was so many chaps a
knockin’ down their cheques. Now, you’d
mebbe not believe me, boys, but they wor that
wild there that many of them didn’t know what
a plough was ; an’ oh thin ! but you’d laff to see
them all gathered round won that a chap had
just brought up to do a bit of farmin’ wid ; some
thought it was for one thing, and some for
another, till at last one bright little chap sings
out —‘ I know what it’s for ! daddy,’ sez he, ‘ ’tis
a new kind ov sledge for to drag the wather up
from the spring down bey ant at Coonataba.’ But,
faix, Iwondher none av yez wus ever there.”
“ Now look here, Tom,” says young Bill, “we’ve
jest caught you out nicely now, for do ye see,
I come from that very place, an’ every word
you’ve said about it was thundering lies; cos
firstly, it aint in New South at all, but in South
Australia; next, it’s hilly country, thickly tim-
bered, with a river running through the middle
of it, and creeks and springs all round about it,
and to finish up, it is a great farming place, and
ploughs are as plentiful as blackberries, which,
by the way, there are plenty of there too. So ye
see, Tom, that shows what a thunderin’ old liar
you are, and that you never was near Gumeracha
in your blessed life.”
“Gummerackee! Gummerackee!” shouted Tom,
who was jest a watching for a chance to get out
of it. “Who the mischief sed anythin’ about
Gummerackee, sure, ye oinadhaun! yer talkin’
about one place, an’ I was tellin’ ye about an-
other ; an’ don’t I know well Gummerackee’s in
the cintre av Adelaide ! ’Twas a place called
Guracke, on the Sydney side, I thought ye axed
about—an’ ’tis true every word I told ye about
that place.”
The roar of laughter that rose then was regu-
lar deafening, and after that we left off trying
to bowl old Tom out. But the greatest laugh
ever I had in my life, we got out of old Tom
some time after; ye see, when he seen as we had
left off a trying to catch him, he began to get
worse and worse, and would sit pitching such
fearful twisters, as ’ud most make yer hair stand


on end to listen to him—and he’d swear they
was all true too —every word of ’em. So at last
the boys got quite tired of his everlasting lying,
and some of them detei’mined to give him a
lesson, and try and frighten him. into telling the
truth; and that same night Tom himself put the
vexy idea into their heads. It came about in
this way: one of the chaps who had not been
many yeai’S in the country, had been reading
something about Tasmanian devils, and he asked
one of the “ old hands ” present what they was
like; but before he could say a word, old Tom
jammed his oar in.
“ Be the holy breeches av the blessed St. Peter,
and that’s as strong an oath as I know, but I’m
the vexy chap ken tell ye more about thim same
divils nor any man in the place.”
“ Yew be splintered, ye old crawler,” growled
Scrummy Dick, bringing his withered, or
“scrummy” hand down on the table with a
thump. “ Why, what the do yew know about
it, ye never was in Van Deman’s Land in yer
blessed life; why every one knows as yew was
only a thunderin’ old kangaroo-eating ‘ Sydney
man,’ that never knew what the taste of good
bullock was till ye got yer ‘ ticket ’ —why, darn
yew, yew never saw the devil since ye was born.”
“ Didn’t I thin, just. D’ye think I wanted to
be a dirty ‘ Derwenter ’to see divils ? Faix, be
this an’ be that, but I’ve seen more divils in my
time than you’ve got wrinkles on yer ugly face,
an’ that’s no few number ather.”
Seeing that a row was coming on, some of the
chaps struck in, and to quiet them tried to start
old Tom with his yarn, by asking with a great
show of interest where he had seen them.
“Why? where would I see thim, but where
thay was swarming in plenty, like rats in a bam.”
“You’ll see them where they’re swarming one
day, no fear,” grunted Scrummy Dick.
“ Shut yer gap, Dick, an’ let’s hear his last lie.”
“ There niver a lie is there about it, byes, at all,
at all—’tis as true, as true —”
“As the rest of yer yarns. Come, go on, Tom,
we’re all a waiting.”
“Well, as I wor sayin’, byes, whin I was up an
the Queensland side, out beyant Gympie, the
divils wor there in hundreds, an’ fierce bastes
they wor too. Shure thim Vandemonian ones
isn’t a patch on thim for size, ugliness, an’
wickedness.”
“Whatsize wor they?”
“Well, I don’t know what size thim was that
Dick there saw over in the Derwent, but these I
mintion wor as big, pretty nigh, as—”
“A bullock,” said old Scrummy.
“ Well, no, not quite, but bigger nor a big New-
foundlan’ dog; an’ that savige, they’d make
nothin’ av chasing a man, an’ if they’d catch him,
shure, he’d niver ate damper agin. There was
only one way a chap cud git away from them,
an’ that was by slippin’ on wan side whin they’d
rush at him, ’kase av their not being purvided
wid a jint in their necks they can’t turn round,
an’ av they don’t see ye they won’t come back,
I was the only chap round thim parts as iver
stud agin one, an’ I fit him for nigh on two hours,
an’ killed him at last; but he wounded me
dhreadful about the body, especially on my
shoulders an’ arrums.”
“ ’Twas another sort of animal gev ye them
marks,” said Scrummy with a sneer, “one of the
pussy sort of animals, that hev more tales than
claws.”
“Oh, you shut up, Scrummy,” says one of the
chaps. “ Don’t mind him, Tom. What colour are
these devils you saw ? ’cause I was out down by
the Wattle Dam yesterday, an’ while I wasgivin’
my moke a drink, a big beast came down to the
other side to drink too. First I thought it was a
queer marked calf, but I soon seen that it wasn’t
that, so I called Harry there out of the timber to
have a look, and he seen it too, but when I called
it started an’ ran back into the scrub.”
“Oh!” says Tom, “the Queensland ones is
black wid red stripes down their backs (‘Like
Tom’s own,” laughed Dick) an’ big flamin’ eyes,
wid white marks round thim.”
“By Jove! then, that’s just what we seen to-
day,” cx-ied the two in a breath. “By jove, I’m
glad it didn’t see us.”
“ Come, byes, none av yer larks, yer tryin’ to
take a rise oxxt av me now.”
“No, really, Tom, our colonial oatlis, we really
did see it, both on us.”
“Musha! but some av yees has got to be such
dhreadful liars now, that one doesn’t know whin
to belave yez, at all, at all.”
“Here’s a start,” said Scrummy, “it’s werry
awful, aint it? why the mischief don’t you
open a Sunday school for them, Tom, and teach
’em to tell the truth ? tell ’em to foller your
example, to tell the truth an fight the devil.
That’s the kerect sayin, ain’t it, lads ?”
So then we all got a talking quite serious like,
and a asking the chaps about this beast they’d
seen, an Scrummy Dick declared that it was just
like a Tasmanian devil, only summat larger, and
told Tom, with a wink to us, that for once he had
told the truth, for he had described the devil
exactly. And so the talk about devils went on
till it was time to turn in, old Scrummy making
them out to be even worse than Tom had, and
telling horrible tales of their viciousness. Now,
Tom Linch occupied a little hut by himself
about a couple of hundred yards away from the
regular men’s hut, and as it got time to go to bed
we could see that he was a bit “ gallied” over the
business, though he tried to laugh it off, but
when the cook had cried “ now then, lads, clear
out,” he slipped up to the cove who gammoned
he had seen the beast, and asked him, “ honour
bright,” had he seen it, or was he only joking ?
Then the chap assured him most solemn as he’d
seen it, and as a parting shot said, “ I’m darn
glad as it’s you, and not me, Tom, as has to sleep
down in your hut to-night, for I wouldn’t be by
myself on any account if them brutes is about.”
No sooner had we got Tom off than some of the
youngsters starts off for the calf pen, and gets
out a good sized black bull calf, a regular young
Ilooslum, about six months old, took him up to
the stable, and one chap streaked his back down
with stripes of raddle, while another drew a
broad red stripe down the brute’s nose, and a
couple of circles of white paint round his eyes,
till he looked a frightful beast, and then went


back to the hut and got the cook to let us sit up
and play cards quietly till about twelve o’clock.
Then we slipped out and dragged the blessed
calf —which it took four of us to do, one holding
his nose to keep him from bellering—down to
Tom’s hut.
Now Tom on going to bed bad carefully bolted
bis door on tbe inside, but it was one of those
bolts tbat you can open with a string from tbe
outside ; be didn’t, of course, take away tbe
string, ’cause, of course be thought no beast could
open it tbat way. On tbe outside was a staple
and padlock to lock it when be was away. His
little slush lamp that be always lcep’ alight at
night was burning dim inside. We tied a bunch
of prickles to the calf’s tail, then one drew tbe
bolt gently and held the door ajar, another gave
tbe poor calf’s tail a good twist, then letting go
of bis nose pushed him into the but, shut to tbe
door, slipping the hasp into the staple, and
slithered round tbe corner. Tbe calf gave a
horrible beller tbe minit be got inside ; next
minit Tom gev a wild yell, and we could hear
him jump out of bed. I got my eye to a chink
(there was no window), Tom was standing where
he had first jumped staring at the boast, with his
face like a flour bag, and his eyes nearly out of
his head ; the calf gev another roar, and Tom, he
jumped clean from where he was standing up on
to his bed, and into the corner of the hut, then ;
the calf he gev a swish with his tail, and the
prickles gev him a dab, so he makes a dead rush
forrad, and over goes the table with the lamp,
so, of course, I couldn’t see the rest, but we
could hear the calf a rushing round the hut smash-
ing everything before it, and Tom screeching in
the corner ; then all of a sudden we heard a smash
above; up went a sheet of bark, and out came
Tom’s head, his body next; as Dandy Bob said:
“ Classically attired in one garment only.” We
kept close to the wall, so he did not see us, but
jumped down and run, like a red shank, for the
men’s hut, his shirt tails flying behind him. As
soon as he was off, we ran inside, pulled out the
calf and taking off the prickles gave him a kick,
and sent him off into the paddock, then we ran
up to the hut by another way. When we got
there we heard an awful row, “ all hands and the
cook ” were roaring and swearing at Tom for
coming up there in the middle of the night to
waken them, with what old Dick said was only
another of his infernal lies; we slipped in quietly
during the row, and joined in with the rest; but,
after a bit, we let Tom persuade us to go down
with him to see what was the matter; so taking
a double barrelled gun and a lantern, we went
to the hut; when we reached it of course all was
quiet inside, and the door shut and bolted.
“ Oh, thin, the cunnin’ varmint,” said Tom,
“ Sure he knows we’re here an’ is waitin’ to lep
out on us whin we’d open the doore; but wait a
bit, my boy, give us a lift up on the roof, lads; an
give me the gun an’ lantern, till I’ll shoot him
that way—for he can’t get out.” So up got Tom
still rigged out in the “ classic style,” he poked
the lantern through the hole, while we waited
below.
“Now, then, why don’t ye shoot him? What’s
he doing of now ?” calls out old Dick with a
grin.
“That’s just what meself can’t rightly make
out, byes,” said poor Tom, with his teeth chatter-
ing like the bones the niggers uses, “He wor safe
enough, but I can’t see him now, unless it was
he opined the door, an’ wint out; an’ that mincls
me, how the divil did he get in an’ the doore
bolted?”
“ Oh! come down, come down, you old rascal,
I knowed ’twas just another of your confounded
lies,” ses Dick, “ Bringing us all out o’ bed with
yer cock an’ bull stories of devils.”
That was more tlian old Tom could stand; he
called Scrummy all the contaminated old
villains he could lay hisflongue to, and swore by
all that was good, that the beast had been there
—though how it got away he couldn’t tell.
Inside the hut was an awful wreck; everything
topsy-turvy, smashed and scattered about; the
slush lamp spilt right into the middle of the bed.
But old Scrummy gammoned he wasn’t convinced
even then, and went off grumbling out that that
old liar Tom had capsized the things himself to
make us believe as he’d seen the devil, but he
wasn’t going to be took in that way, not he. So
we all went back to the men’s hut, Tom with us,
for he would not stay by himself; assuring us all
the way that he really was a telling of the truth
this time, though of course we stuck out agen it.
Next morning early we went an’ washed the
paint off of the poor calf, though the beggar
hadn’t done so bad after all, as he’d got with
his mother all night, and was as round as a
barrel. For two or three days Tom and Scrum-
my were always worrying at one another, Dick
chaffin Tom about his last thunderin’ lie, and
Tom returning the lie with a lot o’ choice adjec-
tives; at last we told him the truth, and then,
instead of going into a tearing pelter, as we ex-
pected, he just gev us one good blessing, and
then turning sharp to Dick ses, “ Ye see afther
all, ye d——d ould wretch Scrummy, I was
telling ye the truth.”
Of course it didn’t quite cure old Tom, no-
thing on earth could do that, he’d been at it too
long; but it improved him so much, that he’d
often commence telling us a cuffer, an’ then,
remembering hisself, ’ud stop short and turn it
off. Even Dick had to give in at last, that Tom
could tell the truth sometimes; but he always
used to add that he thought it was only by mis-
take when he did.


The tale which I am about to relate, although it
may possibly appear too romantic to be probable,
is, nevertheless, not merely founded upon fact,
but, with the exception of the alteration of date,
names, and locality, almost literally true. I
may premise that I am not one of those who
believe in what are termed spiritual manifesta-
tions, and yet, in this particular instance, I can
scarcely otherwise account for the occurrences
herein related than by attributing them to some
unknown power in nature which, as yet, we have
not fathomed, resembling what in Scotland is
termed second sight. But to come to my story.
I was on the track at the time—-I mean that
well-known route so famed in colonial song and
story, “ the wallaby,”—in other words, I was out
of employment, and therefore compelled, as many
a better man has been before and since, to place
my movables on my back, or, in bush slang, to
“ hump my drum,” and start off in search of a
job; not that I was by any means destitute, for I
have ever made it a practice to have a few
pounds in store for an emergency, so that when
on the “ track” I could always put up at a “ pub”
for the night, should no station be conveniently
near. Well, one day, about 11 a.m., I arrived at
Mostyn’s, on the Crooked Creek, and over the
usual pannikin of tea I was informed by the
cook that his predecessor, old Harry Linton, or
Hopping Harry, as he was called on account of
his lameness, had only left an hour or so before,
and was going on to Derwent Jack’s with his
cheque. Now I had intended making the same
place myself that night, and the prospect of
having a mate for the twelve miles or so which I
should have to travel, especially such a one as
old Harry, whom I had known in several places
before, and for whom I entertained a sincere
regard, made me push briskly on, and about mid-
day I came up with the old chap, sitting under a
lightwood discussing some provisions which he
had brought with him from the station.
“ Darn me if ’taint Long Rob the Ringer,”
cried he, as I came in sight. “ Well, old fellow,
I’m blessed glad to see any one at all along this
road to-day, much more you, Rob, for I’m rather
queer, and down on my luck somehow to-day.
But thank goodness I’ve got a regular ‘ old man’
cheque, pretty nigh as big as a blanket, which
I’ve got to spend in the orthodox style, and, as a
matter of course, you’ve got to help me spend it.
That’s logic, I reckon, no one can say as it ain’t,
so w’ell just get along, as fast as this old crooked
leg ’ll let me, to Saunder’s shanty, and ‘ knock it
down’ like gentlemen.”
“Ah, Harry !” said I, “still the same old sort,
I see: work hard for months, make a good cheque,
and then smash it in the first shanty. Why,
you know, the last cheque I saw you ‘ knocking
down’ over at Skinner’s, you did not know when
it was God’s blessed day, and when it was black
night, for over three weeks.”
“ True for you, old chap; but, after all, what’s
the use of talking 1 Here am I, fifty-eight years
old last March, with neither chick nor child, nor
Hopping Harry.
home to turn to, nor relatives to disgrace, no-
thing to look forward to, nothing to look back to,
except a misspent life. Why. hang it, man, I
must drown care somehow, or I should go mad;
I ain’t far from that now at times, when I think
of what I now am, what I once was, and what I
ought to be. You’re a gentleman reared, I know,
Rob ; who you are I don’t seek to know, but I’ll
tell you something now, some day I’ll tell you my
story, and then you will be the only one, with
the exception of an honest couple who knew me
at home, in this accursed land who knows that
old drinking, swearing, rough-spoken, Hopping
Harry mas a gentleman. Aye, lad, and though
I confess I don’t look or speak like it now, a
college-educated man to boot. No, indeed,
Hopping Harry does not look much like the
Henry Hardinge who was a ‘double first’ man
of Brazennose College, Oxford, in 1827, but for
all that he is the same; but one who was
shipwrecked at the very commencement of his
voyage in life, and who has never had his feet to
bottom since, nor ever will in this world. But
enough of this, lad, or I’ll be making you feel as
bad as Ido myself. I don’t know what’s come
over me these few days past, but I sometimes
think that the water is shoaling, and that I shall
touch bottom before long; but if I do, ’twon’t be
in Australia, you bet.”
For a few moments we sat in silence, for in
reality I was too amazed to speak. That old
Harry was a well-informed man, that his bush-
slang and roughness were largely assumed, and
that he could speak like a man of refinement
when he pleased, I had long been aware; but
that beneath his rough and reckless manner was
concealed such an utter depth of misery, I had
not the faintest notion. After this apparently
involuntary outburst he calmed down, seemingly
ashamed that he had shown his feelings so
plainly, and then, with a joyless hollow laugh, he
cried, “ Come on Rob, man; don’t stand there
staring like a stuck pig, I was an old fool to
break out like that at all. I reckon I’m not the
only one who has seen better days that’s knock-
ing about in the bush. Come, let’s be jogging,
or we shan’t get to Jack’s in time to get well
drunk to-night.”
I saw it was useless reasoning with him m his
present reckless mood, so I said, “Well, Harry,
if you will be foolish, of course I can’t prevent
you; but for any sake, don’t go on the burst at
Derwent Jack’s, for you know as well as I what
a bad name he bears; but if you must have a
spree, let’s stay at Jack’s to-night and go on to
the Mount in the morning, and as I’m going to
stay there a few days, I’ll look after you a bit.”
“ Why, hang it, Rob, what’s the odds, I might
as well be slow poisoned at old Jack’s as at the
Mount; but as you’ve always been ’most as good
as a son to me, why I will go on with you to-
morrow, if you’ll just shepherd me a bit, and
keep me from starting on the beer in the morn-
ing, for I can’t help myself if I do.”
With this assurance we started, and about


nightfall reached the small bush shanty, known
as “Derwent Jack’s.”
The proprietor of that celebrated h ouse of en-
tertainment was sitting under the bark-roofed
verandah, smoking a short black pipe, as we ap-
proached, and certainly, if there is any truth in
the idea that the face and figure of the boniface
is a pretty sure indication of the quality of the
entertainment which his house is likely to afford,
that of the Shearer’s Arms, for so the shanty was
named, was certainly not of a promising character.
Mr. John Saunders was not a beauty ; of that
there could be no question. He was a short,
burly, slovenly-looking fellow, Avith thick sen-
suous-looking lips, small cunning black eyes, deep
sunk in their sockets, overhung by bushy brows,
and a low twitching forehead, which he had a
horrid habit of working when at all excited,
causing the whole scalp to bristle and creep in a
most unpleasant manner.
“Why, b -t me, if here isn’t old Hopping
Harry and Long Bob the Binger,” roared he as
we came in sight, and then, with a string of
oaths which, seasoned as I was, positively made
me shudder, he bade us welcome, and ushered us
into the house.
“ Well, an’ where now may you chaps be bound
for? Why, it’s the deuce’s own time since I seen
either of yer afore. What are yer a-goin to take,
boys? My shout, ye know. I’m real glad to see
yer, though I don’t suppose you’ve either on yer
got a big cheque to smash at this time o’ year;
but ye know I’m alius glad to see sech old friends
as you any time, whether you’ve cash or not.”
This was merely a feeler. He was well aware
that Harry had been at Mostyn’s for the last
eighteen months, and that neither of us would
have come to his shanty without money in our
pockets, so he knew he should not loose by his
apparent generosity.
“Oh, cheese that, Jack,” said Harry. “We
ain’t new clums, and you won’t fetch us that way;
you know darn well that we’d never come here
if we were stumped, so stow your gammon, and
let us have some lush. I’m for a deep-sinker
myself to wash down the confounded dust.
What’s yours, Bob! What’s yer own, Jack ?”
“Now you know, Harry,” said I, “I’ve told
you I’m going to keep on the square, so as to go
on to the Mount in the morning. I’ll jnst take
this one glass, and then I vote we have some tea,
and get to bed early, so that we can make an
early start, for we’ve a good day’s walk before
us to-morrow, and you can’t get along very
quick.”
Whilst I was speaking, I noticed the eyes of
the landlord fixed on me with no friendly glance.
Seeing that he was observed, he busied himself
in pouring out the drinks. But his look changed
to one of cunning glee as he took the cheque
which Harry offered him, and commenced mak-
ing the usual excuses for not cashing it at once.
I stopped that quickly by saying, “Never mind,
Harry, I’ll lend you a few shillings to pay your
way, and you can repay me when we get to the
township.”
Then Mr. Jack suddenly remembered that the
“ Missus” had some money stowed away some-
where, and he thought he could manage it. So,
much against my will, the cheque was cashed,
and I noticed, not without surprise, that the
change was all in gold, instead of in notes, and
smaller cheques, as is more usual in such cases.
I afterwards saw clearly the diabolical motive
which influenced the villain, but that is antici-
pating. However, we had tea, and then, after
Harry had imbibed several nobblers, he and the
landlord commenced playing euchre, but it was
soon evident to me that Saunders was not play-
ing fair; just then Harry caught him in the act
of slipping an ace from his sleeve, and became
so enraged, that he struck him heavily in the
face, knocking him off his seat. Saunders sprang
to his feet white with passion, his scrubby hair
bristling, and the whole scalp twitching, whilst
at every move of the skin his upper "lip rose,
displaying his big teeth set like the fangs of an
angry dog, to which at the moment he bore no
inapt- resemblance ; except that no dog could
possibly look so much like a fiend. I rushed
between them to prevent mischief, and catching
the old man in my arms, carried him off to the
room which he was to share with me, and per-
suaded him to undress and turn into bed, as I
myself intended doing. We had scarcely lain
down, when I heard Saunders’ voice in the pas-'
sage ; he knocked at the door, saying, “ Come, let
me in, boys, its all right now, I’m sorry for the
row, it was all my fault, I don’t bear malice,
and hope you won’t, so let’s in, for I’ve brought
a couple o’ glasses o’ grog for to make it up.
When the door was opened, and he had handed
each his glass of hot grog, he said—“lt was my
own fault, Harry: I acknowledges I was a adoin’
of a bit o’ shenanikin’ with the cards, but I
couldn’t resist the chance, for ’tis so seldom I
ken get a chance of a lark that way now. Come,
old man, drink up yer grog and let’s shake hands
an’ be friends.” But there was a nasty smile on
his face as he said it, and I could not help think-
ing there was something suspicious in his exces-
sive affability.; and fancying the grog, had a
queer taste, I did not quite finish my glass. So,
when the door closed on our host, I said, “ Hang
me Harry, but I believe that grog was liocussed. ”
“ Oh bosh !” said he, “ you’re too suspicious by
half, Bob, the chap’s right enough, though he
does do a'bit of cardsharping occasionally. The
Mischief’s not nigh so black as he’s painted.
Good night, lad, I’m going to sleep.”
I began to feel drowsy myself, and had just
turned to the wall, and was falling asleep, when
Harry came to the side of my bed, and said in a
strange voice, almost as though talking in his
sleep,—“ Bob, old man, I want you to take care
of my money for me; here it is, sixty-four
pounds. There’s something ■wrong, though I
don’t know what—for just now I saw the face of
one who has long been with the angels, one
whom I fondly loved, but long since lost, and
who never comes but to warn me of some im-
pending evil. Good night, old mate, once more,
good night.”
I planted the bag carefully beneath my bed.
Then, notwithstanding the intense desire I had
to remain awake, I found myself gradually be-
coming oblivious. Still I thought my drowsiness
might be attributable to a fatiguing day’s tramp,


and paid no particular attention -to it. Before
I had quite lost consciousness in sleep, I heard
the voice of my poor mate as though from a
distance, murmuring—“ Yes, Hilda darling, I
see you, and I thank you, love, for the warning.
I am nearing the land now, for the water is
smoother, and is shoaling fast.” So murmuring,
he fell asleep, to awake, ah ! where ? Well, let
us hope in charity that he reached the shore of
a land far happier than Australia had ever been
to him.
But now, I myself glided into what was at
first a deep dreamless sleep, which, however,
changed afterwards to a restless state, a species
of nightmare, from which I vainly strove to
awaken. Then images were presented to my
mental vision, and I saw the form of a female
bending over the bed of my sleeping mate, with
an expression of yearning love in her large pur-
ple bhie eyes; her hair, which was a rich golden
brown, rippled like a glory round a face so sweet
and tender, that even if I did not carry it now in
miniature here beneath my vest, would haunt me
to my dying day. But soon the scene changed,
another face came into view, and oh ! such
another. It was the brutal countenance of our
villainous landlord. I seemed to feel that cold
shuddering sensation, which I can only describe
as a feeling as though ants were crawling down
one’s spine.
Again the scene changed. I saw a stretch of
dusty road, along which a man was staggering
beneath what seemed a heavy load. Once more
it was the repulsive form of Saunders, and the
burden beneath which he was labouring was—oh,
horror ! the inanimate form of poor old Harry.
I strove to rise, to cry out, but seemed bound
hand and foot. The figure in my dream still
struggled on till it came to a stunted crooked
tree in a bend, where the road turned to the
right; there it stopped for a moment, then turn-
ing short off into the scrub to the left was lost to
sight, and once more there was to me complete
oblivion.
The glad sunlight was shining brightly in
at the window when I awoke; I found myself
in a cold perspiration, and trembling in every
limb. Harry’s bed was unoccupied, and the door
leading into the yard was standing half open.
Had it not been for my terrible dream, I should
not have been at all uneasy at this circumstance,
for, like all old bushmen, and more especially
after a slight spree, the old man was an early
riser. But with that fearful scene so vividly im-
pressed upon my mind, this seemed but to con-
firm my apprehensions, so, hastily throwing on
my clothes I unlocked the other door, and
stepped into the bar. I found Saunders busy
amongst the bottles and glasses. He had evi-
dently been drinking heavily, for his eyes were
bloodshot, and his hands trembling dreadfully.
“ Hallo, Bob,” shouted he as I appeared, “if
you’d only a’ bin here four or five days instead of
one, I’d say as you was safe in for a fit of the
horrors, you look that mealy and bad.”
“ Where’s Harry, Jack ?” said I, looking him
full in the face.
“ How the h—l should I know ?” he retorted
sharply, but the glass he was hastily carrying to
his lips fell to the ground, and was smashed.
“ D—n yer, that’s your fault,” he roared.
“ How the blazes should I know where the old
fool is? ain’t he in his bed ?”
“ No, he is not, and the yard door is open.”
“Well, there ain’t nothin’ very wonderful in
that, is there ? You know he was pretty ‘ well
on’ last night, so like enough he’s got up an’
gone an’ laid out under a tree somewheres in the
paddock : you’ve knowed him do that many a
time afore, and so have I, when he’s bin a bit on
the lush.”
“That won’t do, Jack,” I replied; “he wasn’t
on the lush to that extent last night, and I believe
something’s happened to him, so I’m going out to
look for him.”
“ Then go and be d d,” he growled, “ you’re
as big a fool as him.” But as I turned to go his
voice changed, and he said, “ Come, Bob, my boy,
don’t be an ass, sit down an’ have a nip, an’ make
yourself comfortable, the old chap’ll be along all
right afore breakfast’s ready.” Still, all the time
he was speaking he was fidgeting with his glass,
and his eyes never met mine once.
“ It’s no use, Saunders,” said I, “ you can come
or not, as you please, but I’m going to look up
the old man. I had a bad dream last night, and
wont be satisfied till I see him.”
“ Oh, well, if yon will, why do, hnt I know he’s
all right, mebbe about the place somewhere; I
shant go.” So I started off alone (for there was
no one about the place but Saunders and his
wife), with that terrible scene of the dusty road
burning in my brain.
There was a blacksmith’s forge about half-a-
mile off, on the road to the Mount, and I deter-
mined to go to this man, and get him to help me
in the search as I did not know the neighbourhood
well, and several roads led off from the shanty,
on one of which I felt assured I should find the
scene of my dream. I reached the smithy, and
knocked up the goodnatured Irish smith, to whom
I told my suspicions.
“ Oh, thin! the blashted villin,” cried he,
“ shure, didn’t I always say ’twas the gallus was
marked in his dirty face, an’ ’ud be his ind some
day.”
At this juncture we were joined by the black-
smith’s wife in a state of deshabille , and in the
greatest excitement.
“What’s that yer saying, young man?” she
screamed, “that ould Hoppin’ Harry’s kilt—not
that that was his name, nather, for ’twas the
rale jintleman he was, though he was only a
shearer’s cook —an’ ’twas in his carriage, wid
sarvints to wait on him, he should be av he
had his rights. Shure, didn’t I know him an’ the
father before him that kem av the rale opld stock.
Brian, allana ! do ye mind how he stopped to
nurse our little Ellie that’s dead, and parscribed
the med’cin’ for her better nor the docthor cud ;
an’ how the poor darlin’ tuk to him, and cried
whin he wint away. Take yer ould pisthol, an’
I’ll go an’ rouse the boy, an’ sarch the counthry,
but only find him. An’ here’s my curse on that
Derwint Jack, the black-hearted villin, av he’s
hurted a hair ov his head this day! ”
As soon as we were ready to start, I turned to


Brian and his son, and said, “ Now, I want you
both to think and tell me if you know where the
place that I am going to describe to you is situ-
ated, for wherever it is there we’ll find poor
Harry and I commenced to describe the scene
of my dream.
As soon as I mentioned the peculiar crooked
tree, the boy said, “ Oh yes, of course, I know the
place, ’tis only about half a mile or so away if
we cut through the scrub. ”
“ Then, for God’s sake, lead the way, lad, for
mark what I say, near that tree we’ll find him,
dead or alive.”
Without another word we struck into the tim-
ber, and in ten minutes we came to the place.
Yes, there was the road and the twisted tree just
as I had seen them the night before. By this time
I was nearly crazy with excitement, for my worst
fears seemed about to be realised. We rushed
up to the old gum-tree and commenced searching
around. There, sure enough, to the left, we
found a track, as though a heavy body had been
dragged through the scrub. We followed rapidly
on the trail, and in a few minutes came to a
small clear space, in the middle of which was a
burning log. And oh, merciful heaven ! from
out of one end of the log, partially covered with
smouldering brushwood and bark, was the
mangled corpse of my poor old mate. The mur-
derer had not had time to complete his hellish
task, and all the upper portion of the body was un-
consumed. The back of the skull was fractured
as by a heavy blow, but the dead face wore the
peaceful happy expression of a man who was
calmly sleeping.
Big Brian had given the pistol to the boy to
hold, and was down on his knees beside the body,
crying like a child.
At that moment a horrible harsh laugh struck
on our affrighted ears, and there, just in the
middle of the entrance to the little glade, stood
Derwent Jack, with a revolver in his hand. A
demoniacal grin was on his ugly face, whilst the
short hair on his low forehead was twitching in a
manner that made me shudder.
“ Ha ! ” he screamed, with a hoarse discordant
chuckle, “ Mr. ‘ Bob the Kinger,’ ai;’ you,
too, Big Brian, so yer thought yer treed ole
Derwent Jack, did yer, ye ? Well, ye was
out, yer see, for he’s treed ye, an’ the deuce a one
of yer’ll leave this place alive to-day. An’ by the
’tarnal! but I’ll see the fire does its work better
this time.”
The wretch had evidently been drinking
heavily, and was apparently in the first stage of
delirium tremens, liaising his revolver slowly,
he took deliberate aim, and a bullet broke the
skin of my ear. But instantly there was another
report, so that the two almost sounded like one.
Saunders jerked himself suddenly straight, and
then fell forwards on to his face, whilst the boy
dropped the big horse pistol, gave a quick half-
terrified cry, and would also have sunk to the
ground with fear, but that he was caught in his
father’s arms. It was his.first experience in the
shedding of human blood.
Iran to where Saunders was struggling on his
face, clutching at the grass and bushes. Just as
I reached him, he managed to turn over on to
his hack and motioned me fiercely off. The dark
blood was flowing quickly from his mouth, but,
dragging himself into a sitting posture, he spat
it angrily out, and said, in a thick, choking
whisper: “ You’ve done for me this bout. Well;
I’d a done for you if I could, as I hev’ afore for
better man when they was in my way, so we’re
even there. As for that old hound Harry, curse
him, I am glad I finished him any way—first,
’cause he struck me, an’ next ’cause he done me
out o’ that money I thought to get last night.
A pair o’ soft fools ye was to think I’d let yer off
so easy. I hocussed. the both of yer last night,
an’ when ye was both dead gone, I kem in
through the yard-door to get the tin; mebbe if I’d
found it I’d ’a let him off, an ’ swore as he’d
a’ planted it hisself in his sleep—but he’d bin an’
planted it afore I came. Then my blood ris, an’ I
thought on the blow he’d a given me ; so I jest
tuk the ole wretch out o’ his bed, an’ carried
him here, he warn’t very heavy, an’ then knocked
his d d ole head in with the pistol—a harder
blow ’twas than he gave me, but I gave him the
interest on his’n. I’d a’ served you the same,
only I wanted it thought he’d gone off in his
sleep an’ got lost. I meant as he should never
be found. And that cub that shot me,” fixing
his glaring eyes on the trembling lad, “he’s
begun man-killing young, an’ I only hope he’ll
end on the gallows. An’ curse ye, curse ye all,
I say, for this day’s work.” So cursing, and
blaspheming, he fell back with a gasp, and died
as he had lived, a villain.
Ileverently and tenderly, we removed the muti-
lated remains of poor old Harry, and whilst so
doing, I noticed a thin gold chain around his
neck, on drawing which out, I found a small
beautifully executed miniature painting on ivory
in a double gold case.
Now, friends, what follows you may think was
merely an illusion due to my nervous state at the
time, but I know diffex-ently. The ethereal face,
with the pitying blue eyes, and the profusion of
golden hair, —the portrait in my hand was the
exact counterpart of the lady whom I had seen the
night previously bending over my dead mate.
On the reverse side was a portrait of Harry
himself in his more youthful days, and to which,
after all the lapse of years that had intervened,
the calm face of the dead man bore a most
striking resemblance. Of course the police were
communicated with, an inquest was held on both
bodies, and a verdict of wilful murder returned
against John Saunders. The lad was acquitted,
the finding of the jury being, justifiable homi-
cide ; and he was praised by the magistrates for
his pluck and presence of mind.
The gold belonging to the dead man I handed
over to the police, and I believe it went to the
curator of intestate estates, his friends being
unknown. But the locket I retained, and wear-
round my neck to this day, to remind me of
Henry Hardinge, and when I look at it, I thank
God for saving me from death that dreadful day,
but more particularly for preserving me from the
condition worse than death into which he, poor
fellow, had descended.


“ A cussed old hunks, and hanging’s too good
for him,” said Long Bob.
“ He is so, darn him,” growled Bullockv Bill ;
“ an’ if I had. my way he’d not be long on Tarnia
Station. I’m blessed well sure it was him as
blowed the gaff an’ jacketted me to the ‘cove’
about them three bottles of grog I brought out
from the township, in the bottom of the dray,
last night.
“Don’t you believe it, Bill!” cried young
Fred Thorn, a bright-eyed curly-headed lad of
thirteen ; “ old John wouldn’t ever be so mean. ”
“ Of course the young ’un ’ll say so” grunted
Bill, “he allers takes his part; but I ses agen,
as I ses afore, there ain’t a miserabler old skunk
in the island than Old Crabb.”
“Ah, well,” said the boy, “I like to follow
that good old rule, and speak of a man as I find
him.”
“ I’ll you what it is, my bold covey,” roared
Bob, “if I have enny more of your cheek, I’ll
put a stopper on your jaw quick, so jest you shet
up, or I guess you’ll wish you was dead pretty
soon if I lays my hands on you ; and I ses the
same as Bill, that there ain’t a more jumped-up
contaminated old dog between Melbourne and
the Murrry than that old crawler, Crabb the
Growler.”
The subject of the foregoing not over compli-
mentary remarks, was an old man between fifty
and sixty years of age, named John Craig, but
who on account of his morose ways and crabbed
temper had been nicknamed “ Old Crabb.” And
certainly the title was deserved. He was one of
those cantankerous growling old fellows who are
always in hot water with their companions, few
of whom, however, cared to stand up against him
in fair fight, for he had been a noted prize-
fighter in his youth, and was in fact sent out to
the colonies for life for having killed a man in a
prize-fight, but which offence a merciful jury
had returned as manslaughter. He was still a
hale man, but had that dry and withered look
peculiar to “ old hands.” The fact of his being
a convict would in no wise have militated against
him in the bush, where so many “old Derwent-
ers and Sydney men” arc to be met with ; but
on account of his solitary habits and bad temper
he was generally disliked. In fact, there was but
one thing to be mentioned in his favour, and that
was his kindness to and protection of young Fred,
who had nursed and attended him through a
severe illness, when all others had left him to shift
for himself. The knowledge that he was almost
universally detested seemed rather to please the
old fellow than otherwise, and he took every
opportunity of keeping up the grudge. This was
not a difficult task, for there was yet another
source of dislike, which was that he was a
favourite with the “ Boss,” who used to say that,
despite his age, there was not a man on the place
who could and would do such a day’s work as
old John Craig ; and that he did not care a
button who and what a man was, so that he did
a fair day’s work for a fair day’s wage. And it
was certainly true that the old man possessed a
Old Crab the Growler.
large and varied store of busli knowledge, and
that nothing in the shape of station-work came
amiss to him. So, of course, he was on good
terms with the “ Boss,” but with the exception
of Fred Thorn, there was not another on the
station, or indeed for many miles round, who had
a good word for “ Old Crabb the Growler.”
“Well, lads,” said the “super” one morn-
ing, “ as there is not much doing about the place,
I think we’ll get the bullocks in, and go down
and put that bit of log fence across the gap that
the fire made last year ; so get your axes in good
order, and I think if we go at it with a will, we
can do it in a couple of days or so.”
In half an hour’s time the axes, bars, and some
tucker, were stowed in the bottom of the dray,
and the men mounted en route for the place,
which lay about eight miles from the home-
station. On the road down, several of the young
fellows commenced bantering old Crabb, telling
him he was too old, ugly, and bad-tempered to
live ; and he, as usual, lost his temper, consigned
them all to a warm place, for a set of insolent
whelps, and declared that he could do a better
day’s work than any two of them. This went on
till the war of words waxed so hot that the
“ super ” had to interfere to prevent a row. On
arriving at the scene of labour, the horses were
hobbled, aud the men divided into pairs to cut
down suitable timber for the fence. Crabb chose'
young Fred as his mate, saying, that he
“ guessed the young ’un and the old ’un would
show as good a day’s work as any of them.”
And, sure enough, they did, Crabb however doing
the lion’s share, and at the same time initiating
the lad into all the knacks and devices in timber
cutting so well-known to the old convicts.
Things went on quietly enough for some hours,
save that some of the men w r ould shout to the
old fellow, who was anxiously watching the boy,
to keep him out of danger (for the timber was
thick, and the trees apt to hang and kick on the
stumps coming down), that he was just like “ a
hen with one chick,” hopping round the young
’un; and, after all, they guessed he’d do the lad a
darn sight more harm than good, pntting him up
to his “ old hand” dodges. But this time he
did not retaliate, though his face worked, and a
muttered curse broke from his lips ; for he sel-
dom swore aloud, unless sorely vexed, while in
the presence of his young companion, but would
sometimes say, “ Fred, my lad, there’s lots of
time for yew to larn wickedness. It won’t do
you no good to larn it, and it won’t do me no
good to lam it yew; so I don’t intend to, though
I knows plenty.”
About eleven o’clock it was noticed that
a fire had broken out somewhere to wind-
ward, but as it was evidently outside the run,
and on the opposite bank of the river, no par-
ticular notice was taken of it. The men had
dinner, and started work again, but at two p.m.
Vhe smoke had increased so much that the
“super” deemed it prudent to ride out a few
miles, and see where the fire really was. In
half an hour or so he came back, saying that he


did not think it would give much trouble, as it
was on the other side of the river, and unless the
wind rose verymuch, and carried it over amongst
the stringy barks, he did not think it would do
auy harm. Butin an hour’s time the wind did rise,
and it was soon found by the increased beat and
smoke that the fire had crossed the water, and was
nearing fast. Now to those who do not know, I
may explain that a fire in a stringy-bark forest
is one most to be feared in the bush, as (unlike
a fire on the plains amongst the grass only) it is
next to impossible to stop it, or combat it in any
way. The blaze first catches the fibrous ragged
bark, then mounts rapidly amongst the foliage,
which, containing as it does such a large quantity
of essential oil, soon ignites, and then, if the wind
be at all strong, leaps from tree to tree, one vast
sheet of roaring flame. Such was the danger
which menaced. But let me explain the posi-
tion of affairs at this stage. The station and
cleared paddocks lay about eight miles due north.
Five miles of this distance was country covered
with forest, through which the fire was fast
coming before a strong wind from the west, so
that the only chance of safety lay in getting
through the timber ere it came up. The horses
had already been caught, so that all that re-
mained to be done was to mount and gallop for
home, as some were already doing.
“ The cussed fools,” growled old Crabb,
as he saw some of the men cut through the
thickest of the timber, in a straght line for the
station, “ why, they’ll be roasted out o’ that afore
they’re half way home. Why the mischief don’t
them turn off to the west, where the trees is not
so thick 1 The fire won’t come on so fast there.
They’ll meet the blaze right up if they don’t turn
off.”
The horses required no pressing to make them
do their best; they knew they were racing for
life, and strained every muscle. The heat and
smoke were becoming every moment more un-
bearable, and the faces of the men showed they
felt that they were in the greatest danger.
The old man seemed the least concerned of
any, and laughed out that he had “ seen many
a wusser fire nor this. Don’t you be affeared,
sonny,” said he to the boy who rode silently by
his side, “we ain’t a-going to let you be toasted
up like a bandicoot in a log jest yet a bit,, so keep
your pecker up, watch where ye’re a-going, and
ride straight.”
The words were scarcely out of his mouth
when the boy’s horse came down stumbling
heavily over a log, with his rider underneath.
Not one of the others drew rein, hut Crabb
pulled up instantly, and jumping down raised
the lad tenderly from the ground, for his shoulder
was badly crushed and his arm broken.
“ Don’t stop for me, John,” said the brave boy;
“ let me get on again : I can ride all right.”
But the horse had broken his neck in the fall.
“Nevermind, sonny; I’ll take you up afore me.”
“ No, no, John, your horse can’t carry two, and
the fire will soon be on us.”
“But I say he must an’ shall; so shet your
mouth now, and don’t jaw, for I sed I’d pull yer
through this here, an’ I will;” and with that he
lifted the boy gently into the saddle, and mount-
ing himself was soon under way again. For
a quarter of an hour neither spoke. The horse
was becoming exhausted with the heat and
double burden he carried ; the roaring, hissing
blaze drew nearer and nearer.
Suddenly Crabb bent down over his young
companion, who was lying in a half swoon on
his arm, and said—“ Fred, my lad, can yer hear
me ?”
“ Yes, John,” said the lad faintly.
“ Well, listen. Do yew know that thick beam
what crosses over the head of my bunk, up in my
hut ? Well, hear what lam going to say. . Run
yer hand along that on the top till yew find a
knot; pick that out, and under , yew will find a
small hole. There’s money in it—l think £4O
in notes, an’ a bank receipt for £3OO ; for I've
been a reg’lar old miser. Well, lad, that’s for
yew—you’ll find a paper as ses so with the
money; an’ now, as this here old moke can’t
carry us two much further, but can take a
feather-weight like yew right through to the
station, I’m agoing to get off and tie yew on—”
“Oh no, John ! let me get off. ’Twas I who
got you into this fix. No, John ! you must let
me get down,” and the boy weakly struggled to
descend.
There were big tears in the old man’s eyes
while he said —“ Nov r , ’taint no manner of use
for you to say ought agen it. I’m the strongest
an’ I’ll have my own way.” So saying, he gently
but firmly tied the half-fainting boy to the sad-
dle, saying as he did so—“ Now, lad, you’re the
only creetur I ever loved, ’cause I think yew
loved me. I know you was kind to me when the
others would hev let me die like a dog. Ive
lived a reg’lar bad life, I knows ; an’ I’m an old
wretch who ain’t got much to live for, an’ won’t be
missed much when I’m dead; but you’re young an
innocent, an’ hev plenty of time afore yew. Make
better use on it nor I hev done. Now, God bless
yer, boy, ’tis the first time I’ve sed His name this
many year ’xcept to curse ; but I hope He’ll be
marciful, an’ put this yere last act o’ mine agen
my many bad ’uns. Now, good-bye, Fred, lad,”
and the rough convict kissed the boy’s pale
brow.
The horse sprang off—and the last the one
saw Wes' a pale tearful face turned beseechingly
back ; whilst the other saw a big brawny figure,
with the white hair blowing about its head,
waving him a last good-bye; and then the
smoke and flame parted them for ever !
The boy reached the station in safety ; but no
man ever again looked on the face of “ Old
Crabb the Growler.”


Lanty Mehan
“They'tell me,” said Lanty Mehan, between
the whiffs of his pipe, “ they tell me, Mick, that
there does be bears in thim ranges foreninst us ;
an’ faix, wan av the boys tould me he knew a
poor lad that was eat up body and breeches by
wan av thim.”
“ The divil a lie was there in it, thin, at all, at
all,” said Mick Mullaney, with a wink to the
others present; “sure ye can hearthim from this
very place, sometimes roarin’ and screechin’ like
stame engins.”
“ Holy Vargin be betune us and harum,” said
Lanty piously ; “what wid the thriantelopes an’
scorpions and schnakes, sure a dacent boy hasn’t
the pace av his loife. Every noight now, before
I goes to bed, I does be pokin’ and tossin’ the
blankets wid a long shtick, to see would there be
any bastes in it to disthroy me; an’ av there’s to
be bears too, begor! it’s never shleep a wink I’ll
be doin’ all the noight.”
“Yes, indeed,” said Long Dick the stockman,
“them native bears is terrible brutes. Why, I
came very nigh being chawed up by one once
myself. I was out in the stony rises a lookin’
arter some heifers, for we’d a lost several just
before, eat up by the native bears, I believe. All
at once my horse stumbled, and came down a
regular buster, throwin’ me clean over his head,
and then made off, leaving me stunned on the
ground. Well! I don’t know how long I laid,
but I was brought round at last pretty quick, by
feeling summat like a heavy hand laid upon my
breast; and when I opened my eyes there was a
booming old man bear, as big as a bullock, an’
twice as heavy, a sittin’ lookin’ me in the face.
You bet I shut my peepers jolly quick, and
‘gammon’d possum.’ Well, the old chap he
seemed as though he didn’t quite know what to
make of me ; for native bears won’t eat dead
men, you know, Lanty (they allers likes to kill
their own game), and he didn’t know whether it
was a man or only a body he had found. So he
went off a bit to see if I would move ; but 1 only
just watched him from under my eye-lids, and
lay still. At last he seemed to make up his
mind what to do. So he comes back and just
picks me up by the waistband of my breeches,
gives me a shake, and walks off with me as a dog
would with a rat. Now, what do you think the
cunning old varmint thought to do with me,
Lanty? Why, he just meant to take me along
to his den, an’ arks Mrs. Bear what she thought
on me; an’ whether she considered as I was
good grub for the cubs (just as a man would arks
his wife about a joint of meat). Ye see, Lanty,
Mrs. B. had charge of the tucker department,
and would be likely to know best whether I was
good eating or not. So he just lugs me on, an’
puts me down outside of his house, while he goes
in to call Mrs. Bear. As soon as I heard him go
inside, I jumped up and took to my scrapers, an’
never knocked off running till I got back to the
station again. But you see it stopped my growth,
the fright did, fur I’m only six foot two now, an’
’s Adventure.
but fur the fear that was on me that day I’d a
bin quite six foot six by this time.”
“ Faix thin, but thim bears is the ’cute cra-
thurs all out,” interposed Mick.
“ Whirra, whirra!” cried poor Lanty, “why did
I ever lave a dacint land, to come out to this
hathen couuthry, where a man’s life isn’t safe for
a minnit wid thd wild bastes ?”
It will be seen from the foregoing conversa-
tion that our friend Lanty was a new arrival, and
was undergoing the course of stuffing at the
hands of the elder bushmen, which is by them
always deemed so necessary for the edification
of an unfortunate “new chum” ere he is
thoroughly initiated into the mysteries of bush
life. Poor Lanty was as green a specimen as
was ever operated upon, and took all the banter
to which he was liberally treated in the most
sober manner, firmly believing every word. A
few days after his arrival he met with an adven-
ture which nearly turned his hair white, and was
a standing joke on the station for many a day
after.
“ Lanty,” said the overseer one afternoon, “ I
want you to go down to the paddock, and run in
the horses. Mick is away, and I’ve no one else
to send. You had better take the old black mare.
You can’t miss your way. Just go through the
slip-panels yonder ; you will find the horses in
the far corner, I expect. Turn them towards
home, and they’ll come right themselves. And
—mind you don’t fall off the old mare,” he cried,
as he saw our hero laboriously climbing up on the
wrong side. “ Now be as quick as you can, for I
want to go into the township in half an hour.”
“ Faix, I’m the boy can do it, sor,” said Lanty,
proud that he should be so soon promoted to the
post of stockrider, the greatest height of his am-
bition. So, coiling round his arm an immense
stock-whip, which he had as little idea of using
as of the use of a case of mathematical instru-
ments, and for which he had lately exchanged a
good pair of blankets, he started quickly on his
mission. Now, the old mare he bestrode, know-
ing well what was required, would, had she been
left to herself, have gone straight to where the
other horses Were camped, and turned them
homeward, but Lanty had no idea of thus trust-
ing to the sagacity of the old animal, but deem-
ing himself a lirst-class bushman and most effi-
cient stockrider, he started on a course of his
own, cutting about the paddock, which by the
way was only a mile or so square, until he be-
came thoroughly confused, whilst, to make mat-
ters worse, he would persist in trying to crack his
stockwhip, a proceeding which merely resulted in
his managing to tie it round his own neck, and
driving the mare nearly mad. At length that
sensible old beast became so disgusted with his
antics, that she quietly put her head between her
legs, and deposited him safely on his back in
the grass, and then turning sharp round she
trotted off home. Lanty lay still for some mo-
ments ; then getting on his feet commenced


carefully to feel himself all over, to make sure
that he had sustained no injury ; and being quite
satisfied on that score, he began to congratulate
himself on his good fortune.
“Be me word, though,” said he, “but I did
that purty smart anyhow ; many a one ’ud have
bruk bis> neck wid sech a tumble. Faix! Lanty,
but ye’re the lucky boy this day. Well: ’tis home
I’ll be goin’ now, fur sorra a one of me can
droive thim bastes up to the place widout a
horse under me ; but, be me faith, ’tis myself
doesn’t rightly know which way is the station, at
all at all. I’ll just walk straight ahead, an’ av
coorse I’ll foind it all right.” Then, coiling up
his monstrous stockwhip, once more he struck off
in a diametrically opposite direction to that in
which the station lay. After walking for some
time he came to the f( nee enclosing the paddock.
“Well,” said he, “that’s good anyhow. Sure!
I thought I’d foind me way. Now I’ll be all
right.” So saying he walked forward, and with
the most inconceivable stupidity, deliberately
climbed the fence, and went on his way, leaving
his only hope of safety behind him. “ See there,
now ! that’s the ould crooked tree I passed whin
I was cornin’ down to the paddock,” cried he.
But no, when he reached it he found he was mis-
taken, neither was there any sign of a track as
he had expected, but, on the contrary, the timber
seemed to grow thicker as he proceeded.
“ Begor, but that bates everythin’,” said he ;
“ but I’ll just kape goin’ on, an’ mebbe ’twill be
all right directlyand he wandered away still
further into the bush, instead of turning back to
the fence. Suddenly the dreadful truth burst
upon his dull intellect, that he was really lost,
and then all the frightful tales of bears, &c.,
which he had heard during the past week rose -to
his mind; and with a terrible Irish howl Ihe
threw himself down on the grass, and writhed in
anguish of spirit. “ Oh! Holy Mary! Ofh!
saints above !*’ moaned the poor fellow, trying to
pray; and then, springing to his feet, rushed ioff
he knew not whither, in an agony of terror. In
the meantime, the old mare, having got ridl of
her troublesome rider, had trotted off horme,
and was found by the man who went out to taake
down the rails for the horses standing quietlyy at
the slip panels waiting to be let through. TThe
alarm was at once given,, and the “supoer,”
reproaching himself for sending out a new haand,
and fearing an accident, at once instituteed a
search ; and as the men came in from worlk at
sundown, they (on hearing the news) started l out
to search the paddock thoroughly, never dreeam-
ing that Lanty would be so foolish as to lea we it.
Of course they were unsuccessful, and as tthey
dropped into the hut one after another aboutt ten
o’clock to get something to eat, and heard that
he had not yet been found, the good-natrured
fellows trudged out again to continue the sesarch,
but as they did not go out of the paddock, they
of course found nothing of the lost man. But
whilst his mates were thus employing themsiselves
on his behalf, our hero had wandered on, until
just as night was closing in, he discoverred a
small hut, on the banks of a creek. Hee ran
quickly and joyfully towards it, and kneocked
eagerly at the door. After one or two sallutes,
finding that his summons was 'unheeded, he
pushed it open and entered, but found that the
hut was uninhabited, and had apparently been
so for some time. “Well, - ’ said Lanty, “sure
I’ll have a roof over me anyhow, an’ a doore be-
tune me an’ the bears an’ wild dogs,” but on
trying to close it, he found that the door was
destitute of either latch or bolt. So shutting it
and putting a log against it, he threw himself
down in an empty bunk in the corner, which
contained only a little straw, and notwithstand-
ing his troubles, was soon fast asleep. He had
scarcely slept a quarter of an hour, when he was
awakened by a terrible commotion at the door,
which was shaken violently, accompanied by a
Horrible noise of grunting and squealing. Poor
Lanty started to his feet, every hair on his scrub-
by head standing erect with terror, whilst a cold
sweat bedewed his forehead. He felt fully
assured that not only had the old bears come
themselves to devour him, but that they had
brought all their cubs also to enjoy the feast.
“ Saints in glory, look down on me to-noight, fur
’tis ate up entirely I’ll be this very minute,” he
moaned. Then Suddenly remembering the rough
beams which cross from the wall-plates in all
slab huts, he sprang up on the bunk, and thence
managed to reach one of them. Just then the
frail door came in with a crash, and in the dim
light from without he saw a huge black animal,
followed by a number of smaller ones, rush into
the hut. To his intense surprise, instead of en-
deavouring to reach him as he had anticipated,
they all scrambled into the empty bunk which he
had just vacated, and with many grunts expres-
sive of satisfaction, proceeded to make them-
selves comfortable in the straw.
“ Well that bangs Banagher,” whispered Lanty
to himself, “ sure who’d think that the Austra-
lian bears ’ud have the sinse to build themselves
cabins like Christians. Well, well! av I only
knew ’twas a bear’s din, divil a wan av me ’ud
a come into it to be thrapped this way. See
here, now,” he muttered after a pause, “av I
didn’t know ’twas bears was in it, sure I’d think it
was pigs. Oh, be the hokey ! now listen to that.
Be me sowl, av that isn’t as like the grunt av me
mother’s ould sow, beyant in Connaught, as two
pays, may I never see glory. Musha, who’d think
the wild native bears ’ud grunt just like dacint
Irish pigs ; but oh thin ! whin they'd build them-
selves houses they’d do anythin’.”
The night wore slowly on; to poor Lanty
perched up on the rafter it seemed an age. It
never for a moment entered his stupid head to
push off a sheet of the bark roof and get outside ;
but there he sat praying, crying, and swearing
by turns, half frozen with cold and his body-
aching with cramps. Just as the morning dimly
broke a faint “coo-ey”met his ears, to which he
responded with a wild Irish yell, causing his
room mates below to start, and then grunt omin-
ously. But Lanty reeked not their growls now
that help was at hand, but chuckled at the
thoughts of the vengeance dire and deep he
would ere long have the satisfaction of taking on
his enemies. Soon the shouts of his comrades
drew nearer, and Lanty could just discern the
forms of his late tormentors moving beneath him


(for it was still very dark inside the hut), as
though they were disturbed and thought of
moving.
“ Come on, boys, quick, quick,” he roared;
‘' but look out fur the bears, fur the house is full
av thim. Have at ’em, the villians 1” And
Lanty jumped upon hi,s perch with excitement.
But he had better have remained quiet, for the
hut was old and rotten, and the rafter on which
lie was sitting suddenly gave way, precipitating
him into the very midst of the dreaded bears.
Just at this moment the searchers arrived at the
door, and a scene met their astonished eyes that
fairly baffles description. In the middle of the
floor, with his heels above his head, on which every
red hair stood on end with fright, was Lanty,
still clutching the treacherous beam which had
caused his mishap, and yelling at the pitch of
his voice, amid a chorus of the most hideous
squeals from the throats of an old sow and about
a dozen young porkers, who rushed pell-mell out
Ned
He was a general favourite, was Edward Sefton,
or “ Gentleman Ned,” as he was commonly
called. Yet he was not the sort of character
generally appreciated amongst a rough lot of
diggers such as were assembled on the banks of
Black Log Creek, Victoria, in the year of our
Lord 1855. In a few words I will describe our
hero, and no man ever better deserved the name.
He was of medium height, slenderly built, with
small well-shaped hands and feet, his complexion
a rich brown, though when he first came on to
the rush it was fair as a girl’s, large dark womanly
eyes, shaded by long sweeping lashes; in fact, but
for his well-kept moustache and beard—for Ned
was always natty in appearance—he would have
been thought effeminate looking. As it was,
when he first arrived, he was nicknamed by the
rough diggers My Lady Sefton, and jeeringly
advised to go back to his crochet and embroidery
work, arid not to dirty his pretty hands by
attempting to work. But all that was over long
ago, and at the time of which I write no man
was more universally respected and liked on the
camp than Edward Sefton. How the change of
opinion came about was in this wise.
About a month after Ned arrived the rains fell
heavily up in the ranges for several days, and
our creek began to rise, but not so much as to
cause alarm, though some prudent old fellows
advised the removal of tents and tools, &c., to
the higher ground, which advice was acted on by
all but three foolhardy men who had a rich claim
close to the water’s edge, and who declared that
they would not shift from their claim not if the
Atlantic Ocean were coming down the creek.
Well, one morning, just as day was breaking, the
whole camp was aroused by a loud shriek from
the water, and hurrying out of bed, we were
startled to hear the roaring of a heavy flood, for a
sudden fresh had come down the creek, carrying
away the tent and three men. Two of them,
however, managed to scramble to land, but the
other poor fellow was carried, clinging to some
of the tent furniture, out into the middle of the
Sefton’s
Luck,
of the hut through the legs of the men, upsetting
several of them in their wild flight. Amidst
roars of laughter from all present, poor Lanty
related his misadventures since he left the station
the day before, hardly satisfied even now in his
own mind that it was not from a troop of ferocious
bears that he had escaped, instead of a litter of
harmless pigs.
The explanation was simple enough. The old
hut was only about two miles or so from the
station in a direct line, though Lanty had pro-
bably walked twenty ere he reached it; the sow
had gone off down the creek with her litter, as
the half wild pigs on some stations often do, and
had taken up her nightly quarters in the hut.
It was many a long day ere Lanty forgot the
fright he had had in the old hut with the bears ;
and ever afterwards all animals of the porcine
tribe on Parrulla Station went by the name of
Lanty’s Bears.
torrent, which had increased till it was nearly a
hundred feet wide.
While we were rushing about, some trying to
fling a rope to the drowning man, others stupidly
staring with distended eyes at their unfortunate
comrade, who was fast being carried down the
stream, Ned Sefton came out of his small tent,
which he had erected at a short distance from
the camp, and seeing the danger the man was in,
came running down to the bank, throwing off his
clothes as he ran, and then, telling the men to
keep a fast hold of the rope, he knotted one end
firmly round his waist and plunged boldly into
the turbid flood. We followed along the bank as
the rush of water carried both men down round
the bend, but Sefton was nearing the drowning
man every stroke. Suddenly there was a loud cry
from those behind, “ Keep clear, look out, Ned ! ”
as a huge tree swept round the bend, and bore
swiftly down on the struggling men. Sefton
had just caught the other by the collar
when the mass of timber crushed down upon
them both, apparently burying them beneath
the dark water for ever; but no, in a few
seconds the two heads came to the surface
again behind the tree. Firmly, but cauti-
ously, the rope was drawn in, and with a shout
that echoed for miles we landed both men, the
digger not much the worse for his immersion—
but Ned was so exhausted that he became insen-
sible almost immediately ; and we found that he
had received a heavy blow on the head whilst in
the water, which, combined with the severe exer-
tion he had undergone, acting on a frame
naturally sensitive, brought on a severe attack of
illness which laid him up for weeks, and from
which he never entirely recovered. But from
that hour he was the hero of the camp, and in-
stead of his former ridiculous title, was heirce-
forth called Gentleman Ned. And surely no man
had better right to the title than our poor digger
mate.
The story of his life, as I afterwards heard it,
was as follows : —His father was a country


gentleman, with a fine estate in Devon ; and up
to a year or so before our tale opens, Edward
had been studying for the church, and was just
about to be ordained, when a claim was instituted
on the property by a hitherto unknown member
of the family, which resulted in the Seftons
(unjustly as they believed) being ousted from
possession. But the evil did not stop here, for
a demand to a large amount for mesne profits,
while they had been in possession, was rigorously
and cruelly enforced, and poor Mr. Sefton, utterly
broken in health and spirit, was incarcerated in
a debtor's gaol, where he died leaving his wife
and family of daughters (for Ned was an only
son) totally unprovided for. So Ned, poor fellow,
had to give up all thoughts of entering the min-
istry, and the Australian goldfields having just
broken out, he w r as induced to come out and try his
luck in the new El Dorado. But the man was
not suited for the hard, rough life of a digger,
he was too physically weak, and the illness brought
on by his adventure in the flooded creek did not
tend to improve his general health. He, how-
ever, was too proud to accept assistance, nor would
he join a party, though several times pressed to
do so—giving as his reason, that he could not
do his fair share of the work, and although
many would gladly have had him for a mate,
and would have given him only the lightest of:
the work, he preferred to toil alone as a “ hatter,” ’
and even to live by himself. After his day’s
work was done, he would quietly retire to his
tent, and the light burning till late in the night,
betokened that he had not abandoned his studious
habits. But although he worked early and late,
and tried many different places, poor Sefton’s
holes were always “ duffers ; ” for while the men
on each side were getting paying gold, he would
bottom on the colour only, and seemed to earn
scarcely sufficient to keep him in “tucker.”
Many a kind-hearted fellow would have gladly
helped him, but he would receive aid from none:
but day by day he became thinner, and paler, as
though the thought that he could do nothing to
help the dear ones at home preyed on his mind ;
and many said that he was denying himself
the necessaries of life, in order to save every
penny for his friends. “After all, what does it
matter ?■” he would reply, when remonstrated with;
“I am not going to live very long any way.” So,
seeing that we could do no good by interfering,
we let him go on in his own way, though we all
pitied him sincerely.
At last, after bottoming four or five holes down
the gully with but ill success, for in two of them
he had got a few ounces, the others had been
regular “shicers,” —one morning, in spite of the
earnest adviceof the old diggers, he shifted his tent
higher up the hill, and commenced sinking in a
small, reddish patch of ground, about as un-
likely a looking spot as could be imagined; but
to all advice he only said, “that he somehow
had a presentiment that his luck was about to
change, that he would soon come on a lot of
gold, go home and be happy.” For two or three
days he worked steadily ; but on,the fourth he
was seen to go down his hole, and at dinnertime
did not make his appearance. So one kindly old
fellow, who had always taken a great interest in
the young man, went up to see what he was doing ;
we saw him descend, then ascend quickly again,
and come running towards the camp.
With a presentiment of evil, several of us
hastened to meet him, and in a few words he
told us that Sefton was, he believed, dead, and
that the claim was a perfect “ jeweller’s shop,”
for the gold was lying about in lumps. We
were quickly down, and there, in a short drive,
was poor Ned lying on his face, with his arms
clasped round the largest nugget it was ever my
fortune to see, whilst all around him the wash-
dirt was thickly studded with the precious
metal. But from his mouth issued a crimson
stream of blood, and he was quite dead. The
realisation of his hopes had killed him. Sorrow-
fully and slowly we bore the body of our un-
fortunate mate to his lonely tent, in which, to
our grief, we found nothing in the way of edibles but.
a small piece of dry damper, reserved evidently
for his frugal dinner, showing how much he had
been denying himself.
_ In a little beautifully worked bag beneath his
pillow (the work of some tender fingers at home),
we discovered £lB in sovereigns, a packet con-
taining a lock of his own curly brown hair, en-
twined with a long fair tress, and a paper on
which was inscribed —“ I. Edward Knowles
Sefton, knowing that I shall not live long, and
may possibly die here, away from friends and
home, do solemnly charge the finders of this
packet, to forward it and also whatever other
property of value I may die possessed of, to
my mother, Mrs. Henry Knowles Sefton, 131-
street, Camden Town, London, and tell them
that I have toiled hard, but this is all at present
I have been able to save. May God help and
bless them. (Signed) Edward Knowles
Sefton.”
So poor Ned’s presentiment came true ; his
luck had changed at the eleventh hour, he had
found the gold he dreamed of—and—had gone
home, as I am fully assured, to be happy.
We buried him the next day under a gnarled
old drooping gum down by the creek," where
the soft scent of the wattle-trees came wafted
down from the hills, and from the boughs the
wild magpie rippled out its rich sweet melody,
as the sun’s last rays lit up like molten gold the
waving tree-tops and purple mountain-peaks.
Nearly every man on the rush attended at the
grave, even the two opposition shanty-keepers
shut up their places, and came with the rest to
pay a last tribute of respect to one who had won
the respect of all by his noble self-sacrificing con-
duct. When we had consigned the body to the
earth, a mass meeting was held, at which it was
resolved to take out a prospector’s claim, and
that it should be worked for the benefit of the
deceased man’s relatives, that the storekeeper,
two others, and myself should act as trustees to
have the claim worked, and send the proceeds
home. This, lam happy to say, was done, and a
very considerable sum of money was sent to those
dear ones in the old country, for whom poor Ned
Sefton had so nobly toiled and died.
The rush which immediately set in round his
old claim has ever since gone by the name of
the “Ned’s Luck.”


Bonny
One of the loveliest children I ever saw was
Nelly Windham —or Bonny Nellie, as she was
more usually called by all who knew her. She
was a little spirit-like thing of seven summers,
with that clear complexion so unusual in bush
children, which even her wild out-door country
life had not embrowned ; large violet blue eyes,
fringed by long drooping lashes, and an abund-
ance of wavy flaxen hair, which floated airily
behind her as. she tripped about; for it was one
of Nellie’s pecularities that she never seemed to
walk, but rather to glide so lightly and grace-
fully along as to produce the idea that she only
wanted a pair of tiny wings, such as painters
depict on the shoulders of their cherubs in old
religious pictures, to enable her to fly, so light
and" fairy-like did she seem.
Plow we all loved that child—from the “super”
to Billy, the black stockman ; from poor old
blind Paddy, the superannuated shepherd, to
the small boy who rode into the township for
letters. There was not one individual on the
station who would not have risked his life for
Bonny Nellie. The most depraved and hard-
ened “ old hand” on the place (and there were
several genuine old “ Derwenters” in the hut)
would hush the rude oath and song, and drop
the cards, if Nellie did but peep in at the door.
Even the very animals knew and loved her. Old
Tawny, the large yard-dog, a cross between a
bloodhound and a mastiff, who would not allow
a man about the place within reach of his
chain, would sit contentedly with his huge head
upon her lap, and his red fierce eyes looking lov-
ingly up in her face, whilst she patted his rough
coat, or played with his long ears. The dairy
cattle, too, would lie quietly munching in the
long green grass by the river whilst Nellie stroked
their sleek sides or rubbed their hairy foreheads,
merely turning their large mild eyes on her, as
though to say, “ We know and love each other,
Nellie,” and so would go on quietly chewing as
before. The kangaroo pups never went into such
ecstacies of enjoyment-—such romping and tumb-
ling; such yelping and scrambling —as when
Nellie, with her sunny ringlets floating wildly,
and her little feet twinkling merrily over the
green sward, would race with the whole pack at
her heels down to the banks of the lagoon, into
which the dogs would incontinently tumble,
dashing and splashing the clear water over their
heads, till they seemed to gamble beneath a
shower of diamonds, and then there would be a
rush home again, amid peals of silvery laughter
and joyous barking.
She was such a brave little maiden, too, for
when the mallee bullock escaped from the yards,
and came madly tearing towards the spot where
the child was standing; when many a bold
heart grew sick, and strong men felt faint with
fear for their darling, Nelly stood calmly awaiting
the rush ; then, when the horns of the infuriated
animal were within a few paces of her, and
destruction seemed inevitable, she sprang nimbly
on one side behind an old tree which stood near,
Nellie.
as she had seen the men do in the yards, and ere
the beast could turn it was cut out by the stock-
man. Then, and only then, did the brave little
heart fail. Her face became colourless, and she
would have fallen, but was eagerly caught in
strong arms, and tenderly borne to her mother’s
cottage.
On another occasion, as she was watching the
men at work log-burning, a large black snake sud-
denly twined around her foot, but she stood quite
still without uttering a cry, whilst one of the men
struck the reptile a sharp blow, which disabled
it, and caused it to release its coil; then she
sprang to her father’s arms, and nestled there
sobbing for some time.
How ever Tim Windham came to be the father
of such a fair child was a problem I never could
solve, except on the rule of contraries, or that ex-
tremes sometimes meet, for he was a rough-gnarled
old fellow, with a complexion the colour of maho-
gany, seamed and grained as surely was no log
of mahogany that ever was cut, with a grizzled
beard, and but one eye, for the other had been
knocked out by a cow in the stockyards ; but
withal as genial and good-hearted a fellow as
ever stepped, honest and gentle as a woman, an
invaluable man on the station ; for it was said,
and with truth, that Tim Windham knew more
about the management of stock, &c., than even
the “ super” himself. Such was the father of our
blue-eyed fairy, and I believe that Nellie thought
there was not a handsomer man in the whole
world than her rough old father, for the child
could see deeper than a superficial observer, and
saw the kind and loving heart which beat be-
neath that rugged exterior, and knew that it
glowed with the fondest and most devoted love
for his little daughter. The mother was an
ordinary woman, kind-hearted enough, but with
nothing worthy of notice, except perhaps the
remains of good looks. She was many years
younger than her husband, and Nellie was the
only child of their union.
One scorching day in December, just before
Christmas —I shall never forget it, for that was,
without exception, the saddest Christmas Eve I
ever spent —we were mustering at one of the out-
stations, when Black Peter rode out with the
disastrous news that Nellie had strayed away,
and was lost since morning. I think I see the
ghastly face of poor Tim whilst Peter delivered
his message. With one accord the men rushed
to the stockyards to let the cattle go free again,
and then turning their horses’ heads towards the
station, rode like madmen homewards, the
“ super,” on his fine blood mare, at their head;
close behind, with his eyes fixed and looking
straight before him, rode poor Tim Windham,
his lips tightly compressed, and his hands twitch-
ing nervously. The blackfellow was eagerly ques-
tioned as we sped along about the disappearance
of the child, but could only tell us that she had
been seen about nine o’clock at a little distance
from the house, just at the edge of the scrub,
playing with a young wallaby which one of the


men had brought in from the run in his pocket
as a pet for her, and which had become so tame
that it would follow her about the place like a
dog. It was thought that the little animal had
strayed into the scrub, and that in following it
the child had become confused, and lost her way.
The few hands left about the place had turned
out as soon as she was missed; but failing to
to find her, Peter was despatched to bring all the
available assistance, as the nights w 7 ere moonless,
and unless she was traced before the darkness
set in, there would be little chance of finding her
till morning. When we arrived at the station,
we found the place entirely deserted, but just
outside the home paddock was Mrs. Windham,
with hair dishevelled and eyes red with crying;
she was sitting on a bank, for she had been
running about like a mad woman, until unable
to stand from exhaustion. Just then the wife of
one of the men came in sight, and with much
difficulty we persuaded the poor woman to go
home with her, as she would only have hindered
the search by coming with us as she wished to do.
It was now about half-past 5 o’clock, and the
superintendent, calling all hands together, told
us to spread out in a line at about 200 yards
apart, and to shout to each other at intervals, in
hope that the child might hear us, whilst the
firing of three shots from his revolver w r as to be
the joyful signal that she was found.
The country back from the river which we
were now traversing was rather poor and sandy,
thickly covered with lignum scrub, but with oc-
casional patches of better land, and small plains
from a few acres to a couple of miles in extent.
For half an hour we rode forward without any
discovery being made, and then a shout from
one of the black stockmen brought us together
again. He had dismounted, and was on his
hands and knees eagerly scanning the ground,
which about that place was rather hard and
gravelly. At length he rose, exclaiming, “ Mine
see it. Nelly run along dis way, but tinna time
him go berry fast long a dis w 7 ay; tink it him
nea’ly home —bi-am-by him top, sit down, blenty
cry, den jump up, go off along dere,” pointing
due north. The black seemed quite certain, and
although the oldest bushman on the ground could
not see the faintest sign of a track, yet knowing
the wonderful sagacity of the natives in tracking,
seemingly almost by instinct, we followed Billy,
who, giving his horse to one of the men to lead,
now ran along at a good pace in front, zigzagging
about, and stopping occasionally to make sure,
till we came to softer ground, and then the track
of tiny feet could be distinctly seen in the sandy
soil, so (the black mounting) we rode rapidly
forward. But by this time night was quickly
drawing on, and a bank of heavy-looking dark
clouds indicated the approach of one of those
sudden storms which are sometimes experienced
even in the middle of summer, and fears were
entertained that unless we soon came up with
the little wanderer we would have to camp on
the track, and wait for morning; but the father
would not hear of it, and insisted on riding to
the station for lanterns, and endeavouring to
follow the track by their aid ; but before he had
got half-way back the storm had burst, the
rain fell in torrents, totally obliterating the
footprints and making any attempt to con-
tinue the searcli that night worse than useless.
For an hour tiie storm raged violently, and
then the weather suddenly cleared, and the
twinkling stars once more gleamed coldly down.
The men sat huddled together under a hastily-
constructed “mia-mia” (for the night had grown
rather chilly), talking in low, sad tones of the
chance there 'was of finding the child alive on
the morrow. .About eleven o’clock, Tim arrived,
accompanied Iby a black boy, with a cart con-
taining provisions and water. After a hasty
meal, for we lead eaten nothing since breakfast,
each man tried to snatch a few hours’ sleep, till
the return of day should enable us to continue
the search, though if the others were as unsuc-
cessful as myself they did not get much rest, for
the idea of that tender little child, exposed to the
scorching sun and rough weather we had just
experienced, wandering, half wild with terror,
blindly on, she knew not whither, was too much
for me. I had to rise and walk about to compose
myself.
At a little distance from the camp I found
poor Windham sitting on a fallen tree with dry
eyes and compressed lips, gazing far into the
darkness, and with such an expression of agony
on his face as I never wish to see again. I spoke
to him gently, wishing to cheer him, but he
neither moved nor spoke; and, after all, what
comfort could I give, when my own heart was
filled with dread misgivings ? I laid my hand
gently on his shoulder, and said sorrowfully
enough, “ God help you, Tim.” That seemed to
break the spell which bound him. He sprang
to his feet, and, seizing my hand, said excitedly,
“ Oh ! Selton, I’m going mad, this suspense is
driving me distracted. I could have borne any-
thing but this. Surely God is very hard on a
fellow 7 . I and I only have sinned, then why not
punish me alone-? I could stand that, but why
should my darling suffer for my sins ? Why
should she die who never did wrong ? And, my
God, what an awful death ! Oh, had she but
died at home in her own little white bed, with
her soft hand clasped in mine, and her last kiss
upon my lips, I could have endured it, and would
have said, His will be done, though he alone
knows how hard that would have been to bear.
But to know that she is w'anderiDg weary, faint,
and bleeding over the burning sand, wildly call-
ing for the father who would give his best heart’s
blood to save her, is awful. Harry, Harry ! she
was the only child I ever had to call me father ;
why has a merciful God taken her from me ?”
In broken accents, which I tried in vain to render
firm, I endeavoured to speak words of comfort
to the stricken man. I said he must not give in
like that, that tbe day would soon break, and
that we would be sure to find her on the long
morrow. But my own mind was full of sad fore-
bodings, and I fear I was not very successful
in my object. Soon, however, the wished-for
day dawned, and ere the first white streak
in the eastern horizon had deepened to
crimson, we mounted our horses and spread
around, eagerly striving to pick up the trail.
This, however, we did not succeed in doing until


near mid-day, when we seemed to have passed
beyond the limits of the last night's storm. The
footprints were distinctly visible in the sand, but
the track was wavering and uncertain, as though
the child had become very weak and faint, and
Billy immediately cried out, “ Him blenty tire
now, bi-am-by him quamby long a track, den we
find him.” So we followed rapidly on, expecting
every minute to come on the poor little maid,
either dead or alive; but suddenly the track
turned at right angles, and made for a stony
range, near which, on some rocky ground, we
lost it again. The poor child had evidently gone
towards the ranges, and climbed their rugged
sides in hopes of seeing her home or the way to
reach it. For hours we searched about the spot,
but without success, and even the blackfellows
were at fault, until, half-way up the range,
jammed between two rocks, one of them picked
up a tiny shoe, all torn and rent, and marked
with dark spots of blood, showing that the foot
to which it belonged had been cruelly lacerated
by the sharp rocks. When Tim saw it all spirit
seemed gone from the man. He bowed his head
down on his horse’s neck, and the tears burst in
torrents from his eyes, as in trembling tones he
said, “ At last I know the worst. Thank God !
my pet is now free from pain ; but, boys, I won’t
give up yet, for living or dead I’ll find her, if it
is only that I may lay her beneath the old droop-
ing redgum near the river, just in sight of our
hut door, so that I may still have my darling
with me.” Just then we were all startled by a
sudden exclamation from the super, as, striking
his hand on his thigh, he shouted, “ What a fool
I was not to think of it before ! Hooray, boys !
Cheer up, Tim, we’ll find her yet, please God.
See here, the man from whom I bought old
Tawny assured me he could track any living
thing if you only gave him the scent. Now
we’ve found her shoe, which will be the very
thing; it is just three o’clock; I will ride to the
station, which is only seven miles from here
across country, and bring the dog. Do you
keep up the search, and expect me back in an
hour and a half at the latest.” So saying he
plunged the spurs into his horse’s side, and was
off like a shot. The prospect of success acted
like an electric shock on all hands. We set to
work with redoubled vigour, and soon afterwards,
on the other side of the range, the trail was
again discovered, but the ground being hard and
stony it could not be followed rapidly. However,
we pushed on, the black walking a head, occa-
sionally dropping on his hands and knees when
the marks were very obscure, till at last the bay-
ing of the hound fell joyfully on our ears, and the
superintendent came in sight with the animal
bounding in leash at his side. To put it on the
scent was the work of a moment, and with a
deep short howl it started at a good pace. On-
ward we went, one mile after another, still on-
ward ; surely the child could never have travelled
so far. Had we passed her? were we on a
wrong track after all ? were the questions which
anxiously suggested themselves to our minds ;
but it was our only chance, so onward we went,
on and on. For some time the dog had been
showing greater excitement, as though he was
drawing near to what he sought, and gave im-
patient" jerks at the rope which held him. Sud-
denly the superintendent’s horse stumbled, and in
trying to keep it up he lost his hold on the rope
that confined Tawny, who darted forward at once,
and despite our utmost endeavours to keep him
in view, we lost sight of him in the thick scrub,
but his baying occasionally guided us in the
right direction. All at once it stopped, and as
we rode at full speed towards the spot where we
heard the sound last, we saw the huge animal
bending over a little white heap, and there be-
neath a stunted mallee was the child. But not
dead. Oh, no, thank God ! not dead ; for as we
came up we saw the little thin white hand weakly
raised to caress the dog’s shaggy head. When, how-
ever, we attempted to raise her, Tawny would not let
one of us come near until Tim approached, then,
with a satisfied growl, the animal quietly relin-
quished his charge, and lay down panting. Yes,
our goal was reached. There was the child,
very weak and emaciated, and almost uncon-
scious ; yet, strange to relate, with the little
wallaby tightly clasped in her arms, and almost
the first words she said were, “ Oh, father, I’ve
got Joey safe.” You should have seen how the
men shouted, shook hands, and capered about
like madmen, while the tears flowed from many
an eye that had long been a stranger to such a
phenomenon. We bore her gently homeward,
whilst one rode on a head* to prepare the mother
for the joyful news, she being utterly prostrated.
Poor old Tim! he came out to the door of his
cottage as soon as he had laid the child on her
mother’s breast, and with his cheeks wet with
happy tears, and with his one eye beaming with
gratitude, exclaimed, “ Boys, if ever I forget you
and what you have done for me and my darling
this last two days, may Almighty God so forget
me,” and then, with a grip of the hand ail round,
he went in, shutting the door softly behind him ;
while we Well, we went up to the station,
and all I know is, that later in the evening some
of us most distinctly saw two sets of rails in each
panel of fencing on our road to the men’s hut,
attributable no doubt to our late excitement,
though possibly it may have been owing to the
strength of the superintendent’s brandy, which
he had been liberally dispensing all round.
E ven old Tawny was not forgotten m the general
joy, for all his grumpy ways were forgiven, and
he became a great favourite with the men. One
ingenious fellow made him a huge-spiked collar,
on which was engraved in large letters, “Nelly’s
Preserver,” and so, after all, we spent areal
merry Christmas on Talumba Station.


Jumbuck
I had the following from an old traveller in the
hut, to whom I had applied for a tale :
“Well, sir,” he said, “ I ain’t what ye might
call a first-class single-handed pitcher, but I
reckon I could spin ye a bit of a yarn about my
old pal Jumbuck Jack, who I dessay you’ll know,
seeing he’s so well known all round the country.
I mind he was a tramping it once with me up
along the Loddon, and through the Riverina
country, “ Murrumbidgee whaling,” as they calls
it, through most of the reg’lar hands carrying a
bit of twine and some fishhooks, so’s to catch a
cod or two, or a few blackfish to make a feed
where there’s only a pannikin of flour given to
travellers; and one night we got to old Martin’s
station (Mungy George the chaps call him, on
account of his being so bad to travellers), and
Jumbuck says to me, “ I’m a going to see if I
can’t knock a feed out o’ old Mungy to-night;
anyhow, I’ll rile him up if he won’t.” So up we
goes to see the “ cove.”
“ We don’t want any loafers round here,” he
roars when he seen us a coming.
“ So we was hinformed, sir,” ses Jack, “ and so
we come along. We wants a job if ye can give
us one.”
“ I don’t want any hands,” ses he, “so that’s
soon settled.”
“ Then will you let us stop the night, sir ?”
“ I don’t feed travellers !” he ses, awful short.
“Well, can you sell us a bit of tucker, sir?”
“ No, I can’t! I don’t keep a store.”
“ Oh, then,” ses Jack, stepping forrad and
makin’ him a perlite bow, “would you kindly
have the goodness to lend us a small hammer for
a few minutes ?”
“ Why, what the d—l do you want a hammer
for?” ses the “ cove,” took all aback.
“ Oh, only jest to knock out our teeth, as we
don’t seem to have no use for them at all round
this part of the country at all now.”
By Jove ! didn’t old Mungy George dance and
swear a few, and call us all the loafing scamps
he could lay his tongue to ? but I’m hanged if it
didn’t fetch him through after all, for we’d only
got about three hundred yards or so on our way
when he sends a chap arter us to tell us to go and
stop in the hut all night, and blessed if we didn’t
get breakfast in the morning as well.
Another time, Jack he came to old Row’s
station on the river, and asked for a job. Now,
old Row has got a real queer way with him of
sticking in the words “You see,” and “Jest so,
my man,” into all he ses, and he never seems to
notice when the chaps takes him off by answer-
ing him the same way.
Well, up goes Jack ; and ses he, “ Can you
give us a job o’ work, if you please, sir?”
“Ye see, my man,” answers old Row, “I don’t
seem to know you, and ye see, a man w r ants to be
known round these parts, ye see, before we cares
to employ him, ye see. Jest so, my man, jest
so. ”
“May I stay here the night, then, sir?” says
Jack.
Jack’s
Escape.
“Well, ye see, my man, there’s a terrible lot of
travellers round just now, ye see, and we can’t
feed them all, ye see; but you can doss down here
to-night, anyway, as you don’t look like a loafer,
ye see; but ye want to be known round these
parts, ye see, to get on well. Jest so, my man,
jest so.”
“If that’s all as is wanted,” says Jack to him-
self as he streaked for the men’s hut, “ I’ll d d
soon right that, anyway.”
So he starts next day, and takes a turn round
the country a bit, and in a week’s time turns up
at old Row’s again, jest at sundown.
The old man takes a good look at him, for he
was a bit near sighted, and ses he, when Jack
axed for a job, or to stop the night, “ Ye see, my
man, we can’t feed all the travellers in the
country, ye see; but I seem to know yer face, ye
see, so you can stop ; but a man wants to be real
well known round these parts to do any good.
Jest so, my man, jest so.”
“ You’ll know me yet, I reckon,” ses Jack.
So in a week’s time back he comes again.
Old Row looks him up and down, and then he
calls out, “By thunder! I know you now.
Why, ain’t you the chap’s bin a travelling round
here these last few weeks ? why, hang your skin!
what the blazes do ye mean ? ”
“Well, ye see, sir,” says Jack, very quiet and
humble like, “ye said as I must be well known,
ye see, to do any good round this part of the
country, ye see, so I thought if I was to call
round aboutonce a week, ye see, for a month or two,
ye see, you might get to know me pretty well by
that time, ye see, and then I might get a job, ye
see.”
“Jest so, my man, jest so,” ses Row. “But
now, ye see, don’t ye ever try that game on with
me again, ye see, else there’ll be a rumpus. Be
off to the hut, you infarnal rascal, and I’ll put
you on work in the morning. Jest so.”
Then as Jack walked off, he heard the old chap
say to himself,
“ Sold, by George ! Well, that’s the first man
as ever done old Row. J-e-s-t s-o, j-e-s-t s-o.”
But the funniest thing ever I heard the old chap
tell was once when we were both shearing for
Harrison on Indigo Creek. We was all asettin’iu
the hut one night arter tea, and there was two
chaps there who wasn’t smokers, and they started an
argument about smoking, a sayin’ as it was a bad
thing, wasting of money, and so on. Of course
everybody was down on to them at once, but one
of them .was a smart sort of feller, a reg’lar
bush lawyer, and he was a wiring in hot and
strong about the way tobacco injured the brain,
and about nicotine, &c., and, by gum, the smoker
was a gettin’ the worst of it fast, for this chap
he’d got the whole thing at his finger ends, and
could talk like a novel book, when all at once
old Jumbuck Jack, who had bin a settin’ quite
quiet in a corner with his pet pipe, a drawin'
away like a factory chimney, sticks in his oar,
and observes with a shake of his head, and look-
in’ as wise as a mopoke in the daylight—" Nobody


needn’t tell me as smoking ain’t no use, for I ses
it is, and if I hadn’t a bin a smoker onced I’d
a bin blessed well nigh pisened myself.” “ How
was that, Jack?” ses one of the chaps; “ come, let
us hear. There, now, hold your noise, lads, and
let us hear what old Jumbuck has got to say
about it.”
“Well, ye see, ’twas this here a way. There
was me an’ Mick Hogan, who was a new chum
them times, an’ a real green un he were. . I
worked him into a carryin’ o’ my swag for nigh
on to half the day by promisin’ for to tell him of a
certain way for to always have a good tuck out
when he was on the tramp, and at night I told
him as the way were just to prig enough grub at
breakfast to last him for the day. Wasn’t he
riled ? just rather. Well, there was him, and me,
and Old Larry the Lag, was on the ‘ track’ to-
gether, an’ one night we camped close to a small
swamp that was nearly dry, on old T -’s run,
up in the Tatiara, on the Adelaide side, so we
tossed up to see who would go out in the swamp
and fill the billy with water —for Mick wasn't to
be gammoned into going, he was so feared o’
snakes, which I was fool enough to tell him the
day afore as the swamps was full on, meanin’ to
give him a fright with a big old mud eel —and
by bad luck it fell to me. So I started, and ye
see ’twas thunderin’ shaller, so I went hoppin’
out a bit so’s to get a good dip, and when I kem
back, hang me if my knife and pipe hadn’t
slipped out of my belt an’ was lost. You may
bet I swore some, for I’d had that pipe for years,
an’ more be token ’twas as black as the ace of
spades. But ’twas no use grumbling. Larry
promised me a smoke out of his; so the billy was
biled, and we sat down to our grub like hungry
men. Well, Mick Hogan he no sooner tastes the
tea than he ses, ‘ Begor, byes, but this is the
quarest tay meself ever drunk. Sure, but it tastes
fur all the worold loike the bacca water fur dippin’
the sheep.’ ‘ Bad cess to you fur a grumbler,
thin,’ growled old Larry, ‘ the tay’s right enough ;
’tis only the bad taste in your mouth. Ate yer
tucker and don’t talk.’ Ye see, I thought it
wasn’t quite the cheese, but didn’t let on. I seen
poor Mick getting a sort of dirty white colour
about the gills, as though he wasn’t quite com-
fortable ; and, by jove, my second pannikin
made me feel rather queer, too. Just then Larry
turns up the billy to pour out the last pannikin
o’ tea, an’ ses he, ‘ Arra, why what the dickins
med some one put bones into the taypot ?’ ‘ Let’s
look,’ ses I, for a thought just struck me. An’
there, hang me, right in the bottom of the billy,
if it wasn’t my old black cutty pipe biled as
white as a new clay.”
“ As soon as poor Mick seen that, he makes a
jump, runs behind a tree, an’ begins heaving
away as if he was a tryin’ to throw up the heels
of his boots (I fancy he did manage to chuck up
his conscience, I know he’s never had any of
that article about him since), for ye see he wasn’t
a smoker. I didn’t feel exactly nice myself, for
though no one likes their bacca better nor I do
in its proper place, still I don’t fancy it in my tea.
As for Larry, he were so seasoned that he swore
he never tasted it at all; but Mick, he were real
bad for days arter. So ye see, boys, that’s the
vantage o’ smokin’, for if I wasn’t a smoker I’d
a bin pisened that day sure.”
“Ah! but, Jack,” objected the lawyer chap,
“ if you hadn’t been a smoker you wouldn’t have
carried a pipe, and then it couldn’t have fallen
into the billy.”
“ Yes,” ses the old fellow after one or two
reflectiv e draws at his cherished cutty, “ but then
ye see some other chaps might, so it would have
bin all the same any way.”
Of course nobody could get over this way of
putting it, though the lawyer he raised some ob-
jections, but got laughed down, and so the whole
argument finished up in a regular shout of
laughter at old Jumbuck Jack’s story.
Dick’s Mate,
One of our hands recited the following verses one night in lieu of telling a story, and though
the metre was rugged and the language scarcely poetical, they pleased the taste of the rough bush-
men present, who could, at all events, appreciate what sentiment they contained. He said the
author was a bush poet of his acquaintance, but he was believed to be the author himself,
as he was strongly suspected of wooing the divine muse, or, as Scotty, our cook, phrased it, “ lug-
gin’ varses oot o’ himsel” :
“ You ask who’s the sick man, Mister ? why, that is my old mate, Jack,
’Tis two year ago come shearin’ he’d a fall as hurt his back.
Ye see we was after cattle, an’ his horse it warn’t half broke,
It rared an’ kem down a cropper on the roots of an old scrub oak,
An’ Jack, the poor dear ole fellow, when we went ter raise him, then
Said ‘ Let me lie still here, mates, for I never shall ride again.’
And that were the truth, sir, surely, for ever since that there time
Quite helpless he has been lyin’ up in that ole hut of mine.
Most of them wanted ter send him to the hospital; but no,
I sed as I meant ter keep him, and I wouldn’t let him go.
So I got the Boss ter order some cushions an’ things from town;
And Jack shan’t want for nothin’, not while Dick hev got a crown.
’Twould have bin mean if I hedn’t stood to him in his sore need,
For, but thanks to old Jack only, I’d hev given the crows a feed.
As it was ’.twere a close shave rather, an’ believe me when I say


If it warn’t for my poor mate yonder, I’d not have bin here to-day.
How that was, I see you’d ask me; I will tell you then the tale,
How he from a death once saved me, that would make the boldest quail.
Hut at that time I am certain you wouldn’t ever have found
A stiongei chap than Jack Joiner in all the wide country round.
A leal fine, great, handsome feller, no more like that poor wreck there
Iropped up in the pillers yonder, than a bandicoot’s like a bear;
An he everywhere was reckoned the ringer of all the sheds
From Moolna on to Mooranga, an’ right to the Reedy Beds.’
Well, me and him was a making from the Mulga Billabong,
i 01 the shearin here at Moolna, an’ the tramp was dry and long ;
So we started on our journey by the back track through the scrub,
We had one canteen of water, an’ a tidy store of grub.
We made the well by the quan dongs, the place we had meant to stop,
-Next day soon after dinner time ; ’twas dry to the smallest drop !
So then there was nothing for us, but to push on while we could
1’ 01 the tank on the track to Cooper's, where the old out-station stood ;
It would make our way much longer, by some thirteen mile, but then
y e thought there. was no help for it, so we started on again.
But I tell ye, sir, ’twas the worstest thing as we could have tried,
For ’twas sundown when we reached it, an’ the tank was choked an’ dried.
As soon as I fairly saw it, all my brain seemed turning round,
An’ I got quite sick an’ dizzy, and fell senseless on the s ground.
When I came back to my senses, Jack was holdin’ up my head;
The fool, like a girl, was crying, for he thought as I was dead.
When once more I tried to travel, I found that I couldn’t stand,
A n again I should have fallen, but for my poor mate’s strong hand.
I’d been ill before we started, an’ the drouth hed done me up,
But I knew he could make to Moolna without another sup.
I wanted him to leave me, but do you think the chap ’ud start;
He swore we was mates for the journey, an’ that we wouldn’t part;
So he jest stooped down, a7id put me up on to his brawny back,
Aa leaving our swags in the mallee, starts off on the station track.
An I. tell ye, six’, he bore me right on through that desert wild,
J o within five miles of Moolna, like a mother her ailing child;
1 hen at last his great strength failed him, an’ he tottered to the ground,
And fell right there in the dray track, an’ I couldn’t bring him round.
So there we laid both together, right under the burning sun:
It seemed as our journey was ended, an’ our tramp for ever done.
But Providence must have started Black Bill with the bullock dray,
Croing out with the shepherd’s rations, to travel along that way;
An’ there on the sand lie found us, myself quite gone in the head,
An Jack, in a faint with weariness, lying as though he was dead.
So that is the reason, Mister, why I sticks to my poor old mate,
lor ye see ’twas him who saved me that day from my dreadful fate.
A burden 1 Oh! bless ye no, sir, I’ve managed quite well till now;
No, thank you. I don’t take money, that cannot be done no how.”




