







\


- >
.
■
■
♦


THE BOOK
1
“ And now, Daniel, shut
up these words, and seal
this book, until the last times,
when many shall come over
it, and find great under-
standing .” Dan. xiv. 4.
Luther’s Translation.
OF THE
R EVE LATI ON
By JOHN THE DIVINE,
A F O n n i qtxt
5
“ We have also a more sure \
word of prophecy ; whereunto
ye do well that ye take heed,
as unto a light that shinetk
in a dark place."
II Peter i. 19.
JLJL U JLJL Kj v YV •
“ Searcl the Scriptures.” Ue it p i a i n upon tables, that “ Behold 1 oome « nickl y-’’
, vision, and nr le may run
“Write the ' • nat r eadeth it” •>
THE APOCALYPTIC KEY. Chau.i”'- 2 '
THE TITLE, THE DEDICATION, AND THE THREEFOLD DIVISION OF THE BOOK.
1.
THE THINGS ALREADY SEEN.
II.
THE THINGS WHICH ARE.
The Seven Churches of Asia as representative of the General Visible Church during the period of the Great Red Dragon, or the Gentile Dispensation.
EPHESUS.
SMYRNA.
PERGAMOS.
THYATIRA. 1 SARDIS.
PHILADELPHIA.
LAODICEA.
The 1st Century.
Decline from first
love, and from pure
doctrine.
2nd and 3rd
Centuries.
Period of the Ten
Persecutions.
4th and 5th
Centuries.
Constantine the
Great. The Arian
Heresy.
6th to 12th Century, j 13th to the middle of
the 16th Century.
Papal Supremacy ; j The Dark Ages ;
Justinian Code, &c. i Papal Councils, &c.
Middle of the 16th to
end of 18th Century.
The Reformation;
Pre-Millennial views
19th Century until
the Rapture.
Ritualism,
Rationalism, &c.
III.
THE THINGS WHICH SHALL BE HEREAFTER.
THINGS OF THE RAPTURED CHURCH.
First Resurrection (1st Stage.) | The Rapture of the Saints. 1 The Church in Glory. 1 The Illustrious Investiture.
DANIEL.
vii. 23, 24, 25.
xi. 21 and 25.
1
THE FIRST HALF OF DANIEL’S SEVENTIETH WEEK.
Things
The commencem
under the Seals, Trumpets, and Vial
s. 1
1 1
REVELATION. i H
W
M
f
M
©
w
The 0
i=j
h
s
period of the h
j.
r 1 0
Gospel
H
j O
Angel.
1 B
*
xiv. 6-8. «
THINGS SECULAR.
First Seal.
ent of the marked career, professedly peaceful , of the last of earthly potentates.
Second Seal,
First and Second
Trumpets,
xi. 25 to 27.
Second Seal.
The white horse exchanged for the fiery steed of war, and the harmless how for the great sword.
First Trumpet.
Great war ; dreadful slaughter ; destruction of some ancient and modern political institutions, Sfc.
Second Trumpet.
Sanguinary strife between some great power and the democratic masses. Maritime interests suffer.
xi. 28, and Joel i. 11.
Third Seal. Fourth Seal.
The hlaclc horse of famine, Sfc. j Famine, war, pestilence, and fearful riots.
He shall return
and have indignation
against the Holy
Covenant : He shall
even return, &c.
xi. 30.
THINGS ECCLESIASTICAL.
Third Trumpet.
Great commotions in the ecclesiastical heavens. Fall of the great star of Protestantism
Fourth Trumpet.
Third part of the sun of Christianity; and of the moon of the Jewish system darkened.
-
I*
1 w
I F
: O
1 H
W
A
M
GO
GO
Fifth Seal.
The close of the period o f the Dragon in the ecclesiastical heaven. The martyrs of that period are
bidden to rest, until a “ little season ” of martyrdom, in ivhich their fellow servants should be killed
as they were, should be fulfilled.
The temple measured,
&c.
And arms shall
stand on his part,
and they shall pol-
lute the sanctuary
of strength, &c.
xi. 31 to 35.
THE LAST HALF, OR THE FORTY-TWO WEEKS OF REVELATION.
THINGS OF THE PERSONAL ANTICHRIST.
Fifth Trumpet— 1st Woe.
Fall of another Star. The sun of Christianity and the political atmosphere darkened.
The fall of Babylon,
xiv. 8.
THE WOMAN IN THE WILDERNESS STATE. Rev. xii. 14.
THE WITNESSES PROPHESY 1260 DAYS.
And the king shall
do according to his
will, &c. xi. 36 to 39.
Sixth Seal.
The overturning of thrones, dynasties, and systems by a great earthquake of war, Sfc.
The warning Angel,
xiv. 9, 10, 11.
At the time of the
end shall the King of
the South push at
him, &c. xi. 40 to 43.
Sixth Trumpet— 2nd Woe.
Four great powers lead forth their hosts ; the war originating with matters connected with the
Eastern Empire.
Delay shall be no
longer, x. 5, 6, 7.
.... Thy people
shall be delivered.
xii. 1.
Seventh Seal.
Period of silence. Suspension of Divine judgments. Rejoicing of the dwellers on the earth, Src.
The witnesses slain,
xi. 7, 8.
Seventh Trumpet.
Completion of the first resurrection. The universal sovereignity of Christ proclaimed.
xi. 15-19.
But tidings out of
the east and the
north shall trouble
him: therefore, &c.
xi. 44.
THINGS OP THE DAY OF WHATH UNDER THE YIALS.
FIRST VIAL SECOND VIAL
THIRD VIAL [3rd Woe.] FOURTH VIAL
FIFTH VIAL SIXTH VIAL
The harvest of the
earth, xiv. 14, 15,16.
■ But he shall be
broken without hand
(see viii. 25). Yet he
shall come to his end,
and none shall help
him. xi. 45.
Seventh Vial.
The great earthquake of war. The complete overthrow of all human systems.
Vine of the earth
gathered.
II Peter iii. 10 to 13.
THE GREAT DRAGON BOUND.
“Behold I make all
things new. And he said
unto me, Write : for
these words are true and
faithful. Rev. xxi. 5.
THINGS OF THE MILLENNIAL REIGN.
THE LAST APOSTACY.
THINGS OF THE FINAL JUDGMENT.
TTTT7. TT'.T'VR NT AT QT A TP
“Behold I come quickly :
blessed is he that keepeth
the sayings of the prophecy
of th is book.
Rev. xxii. 7.
UJLUXlil AJJ |J JL Xl i_Li.
book: for
“ Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this
the time is at hand.” Rev. xxii. 10.


VISIONS
IN THE
ISLE OF PATMOS:
(Their Tnmboiical ||l caning
SHOWN IN A
CHRONOLOGICAL, CONSECUTIVE, AND HARMONIOUS
SCHEME;
EXPLANATORY REMARKS,
DESIGNED FOR THE USE OP PLAIN MEN.
Bv B. GILLINGHAM.
“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep the things which are written in them ; for the time is at hand.”—Rev. i. 3.
SEBASTOPOL:
GILLINGHAM AND CO., ALBERT STREET.
MDCCCLXTX,


JAMES CURTIS,
STEAM PRINTING WORKS, 39 ARMSTRONG STREET,
BALLARAT.


2.6-5 ~77
GENERAL PREFACE.
It is an undoubted fact, that, in the-present day, “ the more
sure word of prophecy ” is gaining the attention of very many
in the Christian world. Events are transpiring which, by
their great suddenness, their vast importance, and marked
tendencies, arrest the minds of men of all classes.
Some view these events from one stand-point, and some
from another, and are prognosticating accordingly. In some
cases the enquiry is, “ what saith the Scripture ?” For a
reply the sacred oracles are searched, and it they alone were
consulted, the answer would not only be forthcoming, but it
would be such as to enlighten and satisfy the mind, at least,
to a very considerable extent; but, generally, expositors and
commentators are consulted also, and the result is often unsatis-
factory, inasmuch as the views of commentators in regard to
prophecy often appear to be opposite to each other, at variance
with the character and tendencies of the events of the times,
and with the plain literal statements of the Divine Word.
Difficulty and failure have frequently occured in the past,
and will, most likely, occur in the future; but that is
no reason why the study of the prophetic Word should be
abandoned, it is deeply interesting, and all important; and,
therefore, it becomes the duty of all who tcel an interest in
these matters to do what they can to aid the spirit of enquiry
which has been awakened.
Admitting that the study of unfulfilled prophecy is sur-
rounded with difficulty, it may be asked, are not many of
the difficulties connected more with the mode of interpretation
than with the subject itself ? And, if so, may not the exami-
nation and comparison of the several methods be the means
of lessening the difficulties, and of leading to a clearer and
more harmonious exposition of prophetic truth ?
To these questions the writer is disposed to reply iqMjiif ~'
affirmative; and, therefore, it is his wish that where ffie has
adopted a method of interpretation different to that of otboxs,
it may be subjected to the ordeal just referred to, and lus


hope is, that the result will show that he has rendered some
assistance to those who desire to investigate these all impor-
tant and deeply interesting matters.
Such wish and hope must be his apology for deciding to
select for investigation “ The Book of the Revelation of Jesus
Christ,” when he might have selected a far less difficult, and,
at the same time, a far more popular subject.
It is somewhat more than two years since the writer began
to investigate the prophetic Word; and on reading the Book
of Revelation and examining its peculiar symbolism, it occured
to him that the book constitutes a part, and a very important
part, of the sacred volume, of the “ Scripture which is given
by interpretation of God,” and intended for the use and
benefit of man ; and if so, then there must be some plainer
method of interpretation adopted. To that end the thought
was entertained that some harmonious arrangement of the
various portions of the book was desirable and necessary :
and in view of that the book was read and re-read, and an at-
tempt was made to form such an arrangement. It was soon
found that the task was a difficult one, and slow in progress.
At length, however, something like a congruous Scheme was
devised, and although differing very materially from the views
generally held and taught, it was suggested that its publica-
tion might be of some service to a certain class by whom more
elaborate works on these subjects cannot be reached.
But on consulting a gentleman well read in Biblical
literature, he advised, for several important reasons, that the
Scheme should be abridged, that the explanatory matter
should be given in a pamphlet with the general Scheme at-
tached, because such an arrangement would be far more
convenient, and afford the opportunity of furnishing a larger
amount of expository matter. In acting on this advice, the
writer has, as far as possible, pursued an independent course,
although consulting several eminent authors (Bishop Newton,
Elliott, Faber, and others) who adopt a different method of
interpretation.
A want of time and ability, if not of inclination, has
deterred the writer from all attempts at being elaborate ; and,
besides, had he been so, it would have frustrated his main
design—viz,, that of aiding, in prophetic research, those who,
like himself, have but limited means and opportunities for
such research.
The Scheme is arranged with the design of giving a kind
of ivbird’s eye view of the whole book of the Revelation. The


symbolism of the book has been considered in relation to
other portions of Divine prophecy, and, as far as could be per-
ceived, in accordance with the order of predicted events, and
in such a way as to avoid the objections and difficulties which
the laws of astronomy and of other sciences present in con-
nexion with some other methods of interpretation.
What he has writen is mainly of a suggestive character.
In perusing the book, one thing became very evident —namely,
that the exposition must be such as shall not disturb the
general harmony of the prophetic statements, nor be at
variance with what may appear to be the great purposes ot
the Divine being; this, as far as possible, has been borne in
mind. There has, also, been the endeavour to avoid all ex-
tremes as to literalizing, allegorizing, &c.
Some, perhaps, will be, in a measure disappointed, in not
finding dates introduced. The writer is ot opinion that we
have very little indeed to do with dates, that they have mis-
led some of the best writers (historical as well as others),
and that the Bible says a very little about dates. The Great
Teacher has furnisned us with certain signs and taught us to
watch for and observe them as containing solemn warning to
the careless and ungodly, and as being a cause ot gladness to the
people of God. Those signs relate to the coming of Christ,
and who can conceive all that is involved in that coming ?
That it is vastly important is evident from the fact that it
would be very easy to select, from the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testaments, a hundred passages in which the coming
of Christ is directly or indirectly referred to, and on no point
is the reference more distinct than on that of its suddenness.
The sudden coming of Christ, coupled with its uncertainty,
supply the most powerful motives to constant watchfulness
and preparation. That preparation must consist in something
more than mere belief in the advent. It must
not bo forgotten that “ Without holiness no man shall see
the Lord.” John puts the faith and preparation together —
1 Epistle, chap. iii. 2, 3 : “ Beloved, now are we the sons of
God, and it doth not yet appear what wc shall be ; but we
know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for
we shall sec him as he is. And every man that hath this
hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.” Christ
says : “ Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of Man cometh
at an hour when ye think not. Watch ye, therefore, lest,
coming suddenly, he find you sleeping.” As a recent writer
puts it; “It will come on men suddenly. It will break on


the earth all at once. It will not have been talked over, pre-
pared for, and looked forward to by everybody.
“ It will awaken men’s minds like the cry of fire at mid-
night. It will startle men’s hearts like a trumpet blown at
their bedside in their first sleep.
11 1 suspect men cling to the idea that there will be a kind
of Saturday night in the world ; a time when all will know
the day of the Lord is near; a time Avhen all will be able to
cleanse their consciences, look out their wedding garments,
shake oft’ their worldly business, and prepare to meet their
God. If any reader of this address has got such an idea into
his head, I charge him to give it up for ever. If anything
is clear in unfulfilled prophecy, this one fact seems clear, that
the coming of Christ will be sudden, and take men by sur-
prise. And any view of prophecy that destroys the possibility
of its being sudden, whether by interposing a vast number of
events as yet to happen, or by placing the millennium between
ourselves and the advent, any such view appears, to my mind,
to carry with it a fatal defect.
“ Everything which is written in Scripture on this point
confirms the truth that Christ’s second coming will be sudden
. . . . Reader, the suddenness of the Lord’s second ad-
vent is a truth that should lead every professing Christian to
great searchings of heart. It should lead him to serious
thought, both about himself and about the world.”
The author could have wished to carry out more completely
his general plan, and dealt more fully with matters of detail.
Rut, though not having done so, he ventures to send forth
his little work, trusting that, notwithstanding its numerous
defects, those for whom it is principally designed will
derive some help and benefit from a candid perusal of its
contents.
Sebastopol,
January, 186'J.


INTRODUCTION.
The Book of Revelation is, confessedly, one of tlie most
mysterious portions of tire Sacred Volume. And yet, relating
as it does to the last times, the period when “ the times of the
Gentiles shall be fulfilled,” it is important that its import
should, if possible, be ascertained. Nearly all are ready to
admit that the Book is prophetical; and that, its predictions
being embodied in symbols, men are apt to allow their fancy,
rather than their judgment, to guide them in its investigation.
Now in order that we may be guarded against that, the few
following plain rules must be adopted :
hirst. We ought to ascertain from the plainer predictions
of the inspired writers, what the great purposes of the Divine
Being, in regard to man, really are; and also to allow the
plainer statements to guide us in examining the symbolical
representations which have reference to those purposes.
Second. We ought to examine, and, as nearly as possible,
decide as to whether a given statement contains a plain pre-
diction of an event, or whether that event is symbolically re-
presented.
Third. If a statement is of a symbolical character, then
we should determine as to its being illustrative or prophetic.
Fourth. We must explain a prophetic statement, whether
plain or symbolic, in such a manner as shall embrace the en-
entire statement, and harmonize all its parts; there must
be no incongruity. There must be agreement as to time
places, persons, circumstances, and also in relation to other
distinct statements respecting the same things.
Is it not evident that, if this had been adhered to, there
would not have been so much spiritualizing nonsense as has
obtained since the time of Origen, who was not only one of
the Fathers of the Church, but also the Father of the al-
legorizing race. But while many spiritualize parts of plain,
literal predictions, others treat us with a deal of literalizing
nonsense, attaching a literal moaning to some of the strangest
compounds of symbolical representation. Who was the
father of the literalizing family, the writer is not able to say.


Fifth. We ought to treat unfulfilled prophecy in the same
manner as we would fulfilled prophecy, and avoid absurdity
and contradiction, by regarding the events in a literal sense.
It is worthy of remark that, in reference to symbolical
prophecy, we have a number of instances in which the writers
furnish a key which, if rightly used, will enable us, to some
considerable extent, to unlock the prophetic treasury, and
discover and arrange its gems of mystery. The writer has no
wish to be dogmatical; but he desires honestly to express his
views on these subjects, and to leave them to the candid con-
sideration of his reader.
He thinks the second chapter of Daniel gives the key to
that book; and that the twelfth and thirteenth of Revelation
furnish the kev to its wonderous visions.
He is inclined to the opinion that it is necessary to follow
the order included in the three-fold division of the Book, as
given by Christ himself; to treat “ the things seen,’- and
“the things which are” historically, and to adopt tin'
FUTURIST MODE of interpretation in the consideration of “ the
things which shall be hereafter.”
All are embodied in The General Scheme, which gives
the Book of the Revelation in one view. The explanatory
remarks follow in the same order as that contained in the
scheme, so that reference to the remarks on any particular
part will not be difficult.
Due attention to the General Scheme, and to the Apocalyp-
tic Key will, the writer ventures to hope, be of some consider-
able service in the study of the interesting and WONDERFUL
Book.


The Apocalyptic Key
It lias been said “ the Bible' is its own best interpreter.” That
holds good, especially of the Book of Revelation; such at
least, after a long, patient, and independent study of the book,
is the opinion of the writer. He believes that the best key to
the book is found within itself, and is contained in the sym-
bolism of the xii. and xiii. chaps. A very highly esteemed
friend stated some time since that he considered thexiv. chap,
contained “ a general summary of the whole book,” —an
opinion which the writer is now prepared fully to endorse.
These views are now presented somewhat in detail for the
reader’s candid consideration.
The exposition of the xii. and xiii chaps, may be found
to be at variance with that given by some learned men, but the
reader must compare, and judge for himself.
Brevity being necessary in regard to these pages, we
must decline, for the present, entering upon the con-
sideration of any conflicting opinions in relation to the sym-
bolism of the chapters about to be remarked upon.
And, first, the symbol of the sun-clothed woman.
We think that, in order to give an exposition of this
svmbol that will make it harmonize with the other portions of
this chapter, we must consider the woman as representing a
system of Divine Truth, Christian Truth, as, unquestionably,
the woman of the xvii. chap, symbolizes a system of Apostatic
error. A<xain, she is seen “ clothed with the sun,” as with a
0 *
robe of light, while “ the moon is under her feet,” occupying


a subordinate place. Does not this teach that it is the system
of Christian truth that is thus represented ? That, in its light
and glory, it exceeds the Jewish dispensation, as much as the
light of the sun exceeds that of the moon ; and that while the
latter shone as with the pale and cold beams of the moon,
shedding the feeble light of type and shadow only, the former
shines with all the brightness of the orb of day. What says
the great Apostle, 2 Cor. iii. 7to 11 —“ But if the ministration
of death . . . was glorious, . . . which glory was to be
done away, —how shall not the ministration of the spirit be
rather glorious ? For if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed
in glory, for even that which was made glorious had no glory
in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.” It
may be remarked, in passing, and by way of further illustration,
that the light both of the Jewish and Gentile dispensation
will fade away before the brighter effulgence of the millcnium.
“ Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the light of the
sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven fold, as the light
of seven days, in the day the Lord bindeth up the breach of
his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.” But there
is something far beyond even the millenial light and glory.
When the holy city, the New Jerusalem, shall come down
from God out of heaven to the new heaven and the new earth,
all the light and glory of the past will be entirely superseded.
That city, John tells us, “ had no need of the sun, neither of
the moon, to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof.”
But to pass on. “ And upon her head a crown of twelve
stars.” This coronal of twelve stars, no doubt, relates to the
twelve apostles. They were divinely inspired to teach and to
to establish the system of Christian truth. Inßev, i. 1G we
read, “ and he had in his right hand seven stars ;” v, 20, “ the
seven stars arc the seven auyds (; messengers , ministers) of the


seven churches .” Such were the twelve apostles in relation to the
system of Christian truth under the Gentile dispensation.
stars thus represent ecclesiastical teachers arid rulers.
What of the place, where the woman is said to be,
“ heaven ?” Whatever this heaven may he, it is one in which
the dragon also occupies a place—one in which the man-child
is born, and in which a war is carried on. Expositors under-
stand the term “ heaven ” in live different senses, as political,
atmospherical, sidereal, ecclesiastical, and celestial. Some
tell us that the dragon is in the atmospherical heaven, as
“ the prince of the power of the air.”* Some understand it
in the political sense; and others as referring to the celestial
regions, &c., &c. But, avc think, much of the perplexity and
difficulty may he avoided, and the harmony of the general
statement be made more apparent, by understanding the
heaven in the ecclesiastical sense. Is not this “ heaven ” the
outAvard, Aisible, professing church, as existing throughout
the Avhole bf Christendom, and which is to be continued
“ until the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled ” —the church
vehicle is designated by Christ as “ the kingdom of heaven.”
We here see that the woman and the dragon are in the
same heaven; and are they not both in the kingdom of
heaven as described by the great teacher ?
In Matt, xiii, avc have a number of parables, in Avhich
Christ represents the mixed character and increasingly corrupt
state of the professing church.
In the parable of the soAA er AV'e lurvc the Avord of the king-
dom, Christ’s truth, and the limited success of that truth.
One carise of that limited success is Satanic influence; the
devil is there, “ taking aw ay the Avord out of men’s hearts,
lest they shordd believe,” &c.
In the parable of the Avheat and the taros there is taught
the mixed condition of the church, and that that condition Avill
* The dragon symbolizes a system of infidel error.


continue “ until the end of the age.” The parable of the net
teaches the same lesson. “ The enemy that sowed the tares
is the devil.” “ Birds of the air,” of all kinds, lodge in the
branches of the great tree. The leaven of infidel error, corrupt
doctrine, and ceremonial religion, began to operate at a very
early period of the kingdom, and will continue to operate
until the great infidel apostacy is the restdt. That leaven of
error is the opposite of the unleaven of 1 Cor. v. 8.
e thus see that in this heaven, the professing church,
there is the presence and the powerful influence of the truth,
and also the presence and powerful influence of Satan.
In this heaven the man-child is brought forth. Here
men pass through the regenerating process. They are born
again of incorruptable seed, the word of truth, —the word of
God, which liveth and abideth for ever.
Those who are thus born constitute one body; one living
church, which is Christ’s body, of which individual believers
“ are members in particular.”
In this symbolism of the man-child, they are represented
in the aggregate, as a body corporate, one and complete, and
as such “ caught up to God and to his throne.”
But there is a further view which, we think, ought to be
taken of the symbol of the man-child—one arising from its
being so nearly related to that of the woman. That view is,
briefly, this : —The system which the woman symbolizes is
largely impregnated with the doctrine of a Divine Rapture,—
a rapture of the true church of God. That doctrine becomes, at
a particular time, fully developed, in a corporate body, as repre-
sented by the man-child. The woman symbolizes Christian truth
in its operations and effects in general; the man-child, this
truth in particular. This truth is referred to several times and in
various ways in this book, and, therefore, it is not a matter
of surprise that we find it so distinctly brought out in the key.
The rapture of the man-child is essentially connected with the


high function which he is destined to exercise, that of “ ruling
all nations with a rod of iron;” strong governmental power,
exercised for their benefit, and to which they must submit or “be
broken to shivers ” (chap. ii. 27.) And her child was “ caught
up to God and to his throne.”
That rapture, with its associated circumstances, will con-
stitute one of the most glorious triumphs of the saints.
The dead saints will bo raised, the living ones will be
changed, and they will “he caught up together to meet the
Lord in the air; so shall they be ever with the Lord.”
Satan sees, in this triumph, that final and complete
victory, in which “ death, and him that had the power of
death, that is the devil, shall be destroyed; when shall be
brought to pass the saying, Death is swallowed up in victory.”
It is, therefore, not at all surprising that Satan should, through
the dragon’s agency, try to blind the minds of men as to the
real character of that triumph; and to lead them to believe in
anything rather than in this rapture and its concomitants,
especially the rule over the nations. That rule is closely
related to the pre-millenial advent, and the personal reign of
Christ; and these, although most distinctly taught in the
inspired volume, many ministers of religion, and members of
the church ignore.
“ And the woman fled into,” or towards “ the wilderness.”
(Elliott). She does this during the first 12GO days, or the
first half of Daniel’s week of years, the first great event of
that period being the rapture of the church, when things will
rapidly tend towards the wilderness state, which will charac-
terize the forty-two months’ period of the personal Anti-Christ.
This flight of the woman will come under our notice again.
We now come to notice the war in heaven. We may
suppose that the removal of the True Church, from among
the nominal professors, will be the means of arousing mul-
titudes of the luke-warm and half-hearted; that they will


become decided for Christ, and valiant for His truth ; and that,
in the maintenance of the truth, there will be a mighty con-
flict; “and there was war in heaven!” Yes, now for the
grand decision ! “ Who is on the Lord’s side ?” One side or
the other must be taken.- Matters have come to a crisis; no
neutrality now; it is truth or error —Michael or the dragon,
Christ or the devil. Alas ! although the dragon did nof
succeed in his attempts to devour the man-child, yet his efforts,
in other respects, are not without results, for even a third of
the stars of the ecclesiastical firmament, entangled in the folds
of his infidel tail,were drawn down. What the numbers affected
by their sad example are, we are not informed. But many for-
sake the “ holy covenant,” and one way or another, the monster
musters a great host for the coming conflict. On the other hand,
there is Michael, “ Captain of the Lord’s Hosts,” and the
remnant of the woman’s seed —the major part have been
removed—the faithful ones who keep the commandments of
God, and witness for Jesus Christ; his divinity, his atoning
work, his saving power. They glory in his cross: knowing
nothing among men, save Christ, and him crucified.
Their banner “ bears a bleeding Lamb.” “ Thou has given
a banner unto them that fear thee, that it may be displayed
because of truth.” We have indications of the coming
struggle, and the mighty conflict is nigh at hand, as Ave shall
see presently.
The scene of war, the battle held, let us not forget, is
heaven, —the visible professing church.
“ Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and
the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither
was their place found any more in heaven.”
Victory, in that respect, is on the side of the woman’s seed,
and she herself is perserved as by miracle. The dragon, that old
serpent the great deceiver, is cast to the earth, and will mrw try to
accomplish, by civil power, what he was not able to effect by


ecclesiastical influence, although up to this time lie had effected
a great deal. Only the truly faithful now constitute this
heaven, and victory is on their side, although some fall
in the struggle. (See Dan, xii. 32 to 35.)
The raptured church take an interest in the triumph.
John “heard a loud voice saying in Heaven now is come
salvation,” &c.; “ therefore, rejoice ye heavens and ye that
dwell in them,” ye MILITANT and triumphant ones. The dragon,
being no longer allowed to corrupt the truth of Christ in the
church, persecutes her, but she is beyond his power, and is
wonderfully preserved, though in a lonely state, even during
the period when the dragon, through the beast, makes war
with her seed, and overcomes them. But the dragon makes
one more effort to destroy the woman, by casting out of his
mouth water as a flood, that she might be carried away by it.
The flood of water from the dragon’s mouth is a flood of infidel
error, and by its coming out of his mouth it is shown that it
is by teaching, and that, at the time referred to, infidelity will
be systematically taught, if not enforced, among men. “ The
earth helped the woman,” by receiving what is thus taught;
the terrible effects of the hellish poison will be seen as we
proceed. Meanwhile, as Ave shall presently see, Anti-Christ
becomes indebted to this monster for “ his power, and his
throne, and his great authority.”
Before proceeding to the consideration of that portion of
the Key va hich is contained in the thirteenth chap., it may be
well to make a remark or tAvo on a fcAv other points; and, for
this reason, that it is'desirable to understand the Key as fully
as possible, so that by using it as avc proceed, very little
additional explanatory matter be required. We have en-
deavoured to slioay that the heaven in Avhich John sees the
Avoman, the dragon, &c., means the visible church. But in
verse 12, avc have heavens plural. Here Elliott, and some
other commentators, are somcAvhat at a loss.


Now, we think that if we can get over this difficulty, we
shall, by so doing, get over another, namely, in regard to the
combatants mentioned in the seventh verse.
The difficulty in reference to the term “ heavens,” can be
obviated, perhaps, only in one way, and that is by admitting
that the rapture had taken place. The war is carried on in
the heaven of the professing church, by Christ’s militant
embodied host. They overcome by the blood of the Lamb;
faith in that constitutes them more than a match for the great
dragon of infidelity; that faith they boldly avow, and victory
is theirs. That victory is celebrated in triumphal songs by
the raptured ones.
Though up yonder with their Lord, they do not forget
their “ brethren ,” who are still on the battle plain, and whose
conflicts are, in some respects, more severe than theirs had
been.
No, they watch with deepest interest every fresh conflict,
and join to celebrate, in joyous song, every fresh triumph.
“ Therefore, rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them.”
It is, so far, plain that these overcoming ones are not
angelic beings, for they conquer by dying, and are on the Lord’s
side,- —and valiant for the truth; and those who rejoice in
their triumphs, possess the same nature, for they call them
their “ brethren.” It follows that the combatants on the
other side are men —men on the side of the devil—men who
maintain that systematised infidelity, which is symbolized by
the dragon, and which is the embodiment of that “ old
called the devil, and Satan.”
“The warriors, then, on either side, are embodied men,
not unembodied spirits : and, with respect to the character of
these men, it is fixed, if I mistake not, by the common appel-
lation which is borne alike by the individuals of each conflict-
ing army,” (Faber.) If what has already been said, in reference
to the dragon, be at all correct, it will not be very difficult to


'determine wbat is meant by the statement, that “ his tail
drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them
to the earth.” Let it not be forgotten, that we want to get a
complete Key, and among the rest, for this term tail, because
we shall meet with it again. Now, the tail denotes effects,
that which follows.
In the statement just referred to, we have the effects of
infidelity on the minds of an important class, —ministers,
lights of the church, stars of the ecclesiastical firmament.
Entangled in the folds of “ the great dragon’s tail,” he draws
them from their high position, and casts them down to a low,
earthly, secular condition. And this infidelising, secularising
process has been going on in the professing church for many
years past; and it is going on still. Many pious and thoughtful
men contemplate it with deep concern ; and wonder “ where-
unto it will grow.”
But there is another term which we must try and get the
meaning of, that is “ earth ” —the earth to or towards which
the stars were cast by the tail of the dragon while he was in
the heaven (fourth verse), —the earth into which he was
himself cast at the close of the “ war,” when he and his angels
were cast out of heaven. “ Woe to the inhabiters of the earth
and of the sea! for the devil is come down to you, having
great wrath, because he knoweth he hath but a short time,” —
only about “ twelve hundred and sixty days.”*
* The dragon is not symbolical of the devil simply and in the
abstract, but is representative of satanic power or influence, under some
particular form.
That form is unbelief. By that he assailed our first parents in
Paradise. Hence the reference made to him as “that old serpent,” &c.
“As Satan, in his persecution of the faithful, acts through the
instrumentality of visible powers and human agents, so in the hieroglyphic,
his figure is managed after such a manner, that we may at once learn
from it the particular power and the particular agents which he employs
as his external instruments during the chronological term of the present
vision.” (G. S. Faber, 8.D., Sacred Calendar, vol. hi., p. 59.)


In usuing tlie Key in reference to tire earth, we must first
allow the context, &c., to determine as to whether the term
relates to governmental power, or to mere territory.
It should be borne in mind, that the geographical plat-
form referred to is represented, in its division, at the time of
the man-child, and of the war in the ecclesiastical heaven,
&c., by seven heads and ten horns.
That is, territorially, by seven distinct kingdoms, and
governmentally, by each having its own sovereign.
The ten horns, or powers, will be developed territorially,
and under their full regal aspect, in connection with the beast,
(chap. xiii. 1, chap. xvii. 12.)
“ The Earth,” in relation to the heaven, must be under-
stood here in the antithetic sense, or as being in opposition
the one to the other. So that if we are to understand heaven
in the ecclesiastical sense, we must regard the term earth in
a secidar sense; or, that the system represented by the dragon
is one that is thoroughly secularised —fully incorporated with
earthly empire; that empire comprising the entire geo-
graphical or territorial platform; and governmentally, the
seven heads.
“ The Sea ” is a phrase which repeatedly occurs, and as
it is found in the Key, a few remarks respecting it may not
bo out of place.
We have attempted to show that the term earth signifies
territorial and regal empire; therefore, as in the natural
world, the earth or the globe includes the sea; so when, in a
symbolical sense, the term “ sea” is used in the Book of
Revelation and elsewhere, it is, in most cases, to be understood
as belonging to, and included with, the symbolic earth.
Yet, it is evident that a distinction must be made, and
that the distinction lies, it would be seen, in a great measure
in the form of government; showing in fact that “ the
inhabiters ” will not escape the wrath of thcYlcvil, no matter


what may characterize them politically —whether the imperial or
the democratic form of the government, or a mixture of the two.
They will all alike bo exposed to the malice of Satan, who
will vent his rage to a fearful extent during the “ forty and
two months.”
The Sea. —This kind of symbolism is found in other
parts of the Inspired Volume, and refers to the people as
such, —to their political power, their social economy, &c.
Thus the Psalmist, “ which stilleth the noise of the seas, the
noise of the waves, and the tumult of the people.” (See Psalm
xlvi. 1,2, 3 ; Ixxxix. 9 ; xciii. 3,4.)
“ Many waters ” represent multitudes, and nations, &c.
(Rev. xix. 15.)
The Sea, as a collection of waters, symbolizes nations,
people, &c., in the aggregate, and includes, as a matter of
course, their political economy, their social institutions, *kc.
“ The sea and the waves roaring,” social discord, &c.
But while the natural world seems to be the foundation on
which the Apocalyptic Visions are based, and its several parts
are found to supply the symbolism employed, the chronological
element is hy no means excluded. (See introduction to the
things under the seals, trumpets, and vials.)
The symbolism of xiii. chap, must next be considered.
The beast simply denotes empire, a kingdom, or power, and
emerges from the sea of popular commotion; that commotion
arising from the influence of the infidelity of the times,—" the.
falling away,” the Apostacy—the great one. (2 Thess. ii. 1
to 12.) “ And the dragon gave him his power, and his scat,
and great authority.” (v. Ito 8.)
Such is the ten-horned seven-headed beast.
At v. 11, another beast is brought under our notice ; one
that presents a combination of ecclesiastical features as re-
markable as are the secular features of the ten-horned beast,—


a combination of two professedly religious and powerful
elements; and, yet, the teaching is essentially and unmis-
takably infidel.
There is a still further combination, and that is of the
ecclesiastical with the secular, and constituting one system.
'lho two coalesce and carry on their fearful work. This
two-horned beast has its origin in worldly empire; is
the offspring of secular power—“comes up out of the
infidelised earth.”
It is not easy to determine, with anything like certainty,
what two or more of the systems of the day will constitute the
“ two horns,” —the principal and most prominent power of this
beast. There is one, viz., spiritual : sm, which will constitute
a very remarkable feature of the awful system here represented.
The system itself will bo a complete caricature of Christianity.
The beast, or rather the head of the system, is designated
the “ false prophet.” He enforces the worship enjoined by
the system. Multitudes are deluded into that worship “by
means of those miracles which he has power to do;” while
those who refuse are, through his power, put to death.
The last part of the Key is the darkly propounded enigma,
•—the mystic number as contained in v. 18.
This has engaged the attention of many learned men.
Various explanations have been given, and as various have
been the applications of the 666. This number “is the name,”
or is contained in the name, “of a man,” And all are denied
the right to buy or sell who “have not the name or the
number of the name.”
We may just notice that it is the number of the beast, and
also the number of a man. It is thus seen, and should be
especially borne in mind, that the whole system is « compacted
together ” by, and is headed up in, one man; that man being
repeatedly designated the beast. The writer has no hope of
succeeding where so many have failed; nor will he attempt


“to decide where doctors disagree.” Still, he ventures to
think, that by making one or two suggestions, others may be
led to investigate the subject, and arrive at what may prove
something like a satisfactory solution of the enigmatical
number.
It may be asked is the “ name,” containing the number,
characteristical or personal; is it descriptive of his character,
or is it his proper personal name ?
Some tell us that it is the one, and some that it is the
other. Time may show that both are right.
According to the teaching of Paul, in 2 Ihess. ii., “ The
man of sin, the son of perdition, the wicked one,” is at the
head of the “ falling away,” the great Apostacy.
John tells us that on the heads of the beast there is the
name of blasphemyand that the beast opens his mouth in
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, —the Son, —
and his tabernacle —the Jewish system, —and them that dwell
in heaven—the true and faithful church, dims we see that
the system is one of infidel apostacythat the head is an
infidel Apostate; this is his character The Apostate.
From this Faber gives him the name of APOSTATES, stating
that “ the fated number cannot be elicited from the parallel
word Blasphemes.” But he maintains “ the principle -that
the name must be, as John himself teaches us, the name of
Blasphemy or Apostacy.” “That principle,” he observes,
“is no modern fancy. On the contrary, it has been far too
much neglected and overlooked by modern commentators.
“ Hence, we have been saturated with a coinage of fancied
names or titles, loose or indefinite or inapplicable, which are
recommended by little more than the circumstance of then
numerical letters severally producing the fatal sum of 6GG.
The principle for which I contend, is as old as the time of
Ireneus; and Archdeacon Wrangham shewed, at once, his
judicious soberiety in adopting it, and his felicitous ingenuity


in striking out the true name under its safe and satisfactory
guidance.”*
So muck for the name considered characteristically.
But many eminent men of the present day regard the name
as being strictly and properly a personal one, and that the
mystic number is found in the name Napoleon, —the name
by which the Emperor of the French chose to be designated.
If it should happen that he becomes the head of the apostacy,
then he will bear the name characteristically. And so, as just
intimated, both parties will have their theories verified.
There can be no reasonable doubt as to both theories
being contained in the subject, or as to the subject being most
distinctly announced in the sure word of prophecy, however men
may feel inclined to indulge in their witticisms in regard to it.
In concluding these remarks in reference to the Key, the
writer avoulc! state that he is disposed to consider that the
ten-horned beast and the two-horned beast constitute one
huge system of INFIDEL APOSTACY, the elements of which
are already in existence, and to an extent that to many would
appear almost incredible. (See Spurgeon’s sermon on Baptis-
mal Degeneration, Win. Hep worth Dixon’s New America, &c.)
* In order that the above may be rendered somewhat plain and
intelligible, a few r additional remarks may be desirable. The following
is the substance of what is staged by Dr. Bloomfield, late Bishop of
London, and others. It appears that about the thirteenth century a
peculiar mode of abbreviated writing was invented; a mode of writing
something like what we call a running hand. In addition to this, they
adopted a kind of short hand style, or the use of contractions; and
others what some call the compendium s , or the combination of the
letters Sigma and Tan ; Sigma-Tau.
It follows, if the word Apostates be written in the running hand,
and with the number six as above referred to, then we have exactly the
mystic number G 66, dnosargsi as under: —
This name meets all that is required by St. John’s description.
1. It is the name of Blasphemy, or Apostacy. 2. It is a name descriptive
of character &c. 3. It is the name of some remarkable man as connected
with an apostacy. 4. It is a name which contains the fatal G 66. 5. But
it is a name which contains that number only, when calculated with
what John calls wisdom or understanding. (See Faber.)


The Summary Chapter
Revelation xiv.
Under the seals, trumpets, and vials, we have a succession
of events running on from the opening of the first seal to
the outpouring of the last vial.
But these things are not stated by John in consecutive
order.
There arc several chapters which may be designated as
interm edial.
Such, for instance, is the seventh chapter, which comes
in between the opening of the sixth seal, and that of the
seventh, and which contains two distinct and important state-
ments.
In the tenth chapter, and the eleventh, to v. 14, we have
a description of events which occur, principally, between the
sounding of the sixth trumpet and that of the seventh.
The twelfth and thirteenth chapters belong to the same
class. On these we have already remarked.
The fourteenth chapter contains a synopsis of “ the things
which shall be hereafter,” and embodies seven great leading
events.
The first of these is contained in the first five verses, and
is one which it is very difficult to deal with. The writer is
inclined to the opinion that the hundred and forty and four
thousand of this chapter is the same party as that named in the
seventh chapter, and that it refers to the Jews, but, at the
same time, to a party distinct from that seen in vision, as
described by John iv. 4.


In dealing with the subject before us, we may, perhaps,
obtain some assistance from Daniel.
We will endeavour to do so in manner following
In Daniel x. 14 we read, '
understand what shall befall
(the days of Anti-Christ); for
DANIEL.
for yet the vision is for many days.”
“ Now I am come to make thee
[ thy people in the latter days
There shall he a time oe trouble
such as never was, Sfc. xii. 1.
And arms shall stand on his
part, fye. xi. 31 to 35.
At that time thy people shall be
delivered, every one that shall be
found WRITTEN IN THE BOOK. xii. 1.
REVELATION.
And when he had opened the
sixth seal and the moon
(of the Jewish system) became as
blood, Sfc. i. 12 to the end.
The servant of Ood sealed on
their foreheads. And I heard the
number of them which were sealed
an hundred and forty and
four thousand of all the tribes
OE THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL, vii.
3, 4. Having his Farther's name
WRITTEN IN THEIR FOREHEADS.
xiv. 1.
A part of Daniel’s people are thus registered, sealed, &c.,
for service, deliverance, and special honour, in connection with
the remnant of the woman’s seed.
THEIR SERVICE.
But the people that do know their And they overcame him by the
God shall do exploits. And they blood of the Lamb, and by the word
that understand shall of their testimony ; and they loved
instruct many : yet they shall fall not their lives unto the death, xii. 11.
by the sword, Sfc. xi. 32,33.
“ And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they
shall prophesy 1260 days, clothed in sackcloth ,” §fc, —Rev. xi.
3 to 10.
THEIR DELIVERANCE OR REDEMPTION.
At that time thy people shall be
delivered, xii. 1.
The hundred and forty and four
thousand, which were redeemed from
the earth, without fault
before the throne of God, Sfc. xiv.
3 to 5.
“ And after three days and an half the spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet,
AND THEY ASCENDED UP INTO HEAVEN IN A CLOUD.
Rev. xi. 11, 12.


THEIR SPECIAL HONOUR.
Their special honour, &c., is celebrated in their new
song, &c.
“ And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with lire : and
them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name,
stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God.”
“ And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and
THE song of the Lamb, saying, great and marvellous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty; JUST AND TRUE ARE ALL THY
ways, thou King of Saints,” &c.—xv. 2,3, 4.
In Rev. xix. 1 to 9 we have all the parties above
referred to forming one glorious company, and joining in
triumphal song. In that song the Hebrew Alleluia is strikingly
prominent.
The remaining events, contained in the summary chapter,
must be considered more briefly.
The next, in order, is the proclamation of the gospel
message. That message is delivered at a period when the
character and claims of the Supreme Being are disregarded, if
not denied; and when the Almighty is about to visit the
nations in terrible judgment, and thus demonstrate that he,
the God of nature, and not Nature, has the right to their
homage.
All this shows that there is a speciality as to the time
when, and the circumstances under which, the message will
be delivered. As to the time, the place it occupies, the
order in which it is given, go to shew that it will be imme-
diately after the removal of the true church (see key), and
when the Divine judgments are about to descend on the infidel
nations-—on Antichrist and his hosts. That time, it may be
added, is not so far off as some may be inclined to suppose;
for, alas 1 that the condition of things referred to is being


rapidly developed, is a fact to which the writers of the day, if
at all observant, are continually directing our attention.
The Ballarat Evening Post, for Saturday, Nov. 21, con-
tains an article, evidently from the pen of its able and out-
spoken editor, in which is noticed some of the proceedings at
the Annual Meeting of the British Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science, at Norwich, in August last; and in
which, speaking of the discourses delivered by the great
scientific leaders at that meeting, the writer says, “ they are
one and all open and avowed declarations of the creed of
Materialism.”
He goes on to state that “ Dr. Hooker (the president)
pointedly denounced even Natural Theology—that is to say,
the demonstration, from creation, of an Almighty Maker—
‘as the most dangerous of all two-edged weapons, a science
falsely so calledand that he defended at great length the
Darwin doctrine of the spontaneous evolution of all organized
beings; which doctrine expressly excludes a Creator; and
emphatically stated his conviction, that ‘if religion and science
are to be reconciled, the basis of the reconciliation must be
this deepest, evident, and most certain of facts, that the
power which the universe manifests to us is utterly inscrutable.’
In other words,, all questions of a Divine Revelation must be
set aside as a figment of the imagination, and an impossibility.”
The writer further asserts, “Either Materialism is a
baseless edifice of specious falsehood; or else the whole sys-
tem of Christianity is a vast and designed imposture.”
“ Professor Tyndall, ably followed up the same teaching,
His discourse was throughout simply a pointed, and certainly
a very brilliant, and searching defence of the Materialist and
his desolating creed,” &c.
The writer goes on to say “ The one question which the
preceding facts raise in the mind of any thinking man is,
what reply will the professional defenders of Christianity


have to make to these great professors of science ? And so far
as appears, they have no reply at all to make. The Pulpit, as
a rule, is doggedly and ominously silent Whilst
all the world around is reading Hooker, and Tyndall, and
Darwin, and Huxley, with minds troubled to their deepest
recesses, the Pulpit alone never so much as hints its know-
ledge of the existence of such teachers, —never has a word to
say about them or their doctrines Ot such a
state of things as between Belief and Materialism —or say
rather, between Christianity and declared Atheism—who can
doubt the issue ? If the Pulpit shall persevere in its present
policy, then there is no hope for Christianity that we can see.”
The same opinion, in reference to the spread and tendency
of the doctrines of Materialism, is held and stated by many
wise and good men.
But, from the statement that is made in regard to the
Gospel angel, it seems likely that the great truths of the
Gospel of the ever blessed God will be proclaimed, at least,
faithfully, and the Godless and the Christless systems of the
times will be earnestly opposed, and with some success. But
the success will not be such as to prevent what is next re-
ferred to, viz.; the fall, or the falling away of the professing
Church.
There is, however, one consolation left to the Christian;
that is the testimony of the sure word of prophecy as to the
triumph of the enemies of his faith being of short duration.
The third event is the “ fall of Babylon, that great city,”
so often referred to by John. /
That fall is “the falling away,” the Apostacy- —the great one .
Not a corrupted Christianity merely, such as is characteristic
of the Roman and Greek churches, and even ot some of the
Protestant sects, but “a falling away,” or an apostatizing
into open and avowed infidelity; the result, mainly, of that


unholy alliance which the church, professing to be the bride of
Christ, the Lamb’s wife, has formed with the State, and which
has existed, to a geater or less extent, during the last fifteen
hundred years.
And while that incongruous and unhallowed union involves,
on the part of the professing church, unfaithfulness to her
rightful Head, she has availed herself of the opportunity,
afforded by that union, of manifesting “ the wrath of her
fornication ,” by the bitter persecution, even to the death, of
those who dared, for truth and conscience sake, to dissent from
the established religion, no matter what the name or form
might be under which it existed.
Next we have a solemn warning against worshipping the
beast, and a full and faithful declaration of the tremendous
judgment that will be inflicted upon all those who disobey
that warning.
In the next place we have the patient endurance and
fidelity of the saints, the remnant of the woman’s seed and
the faithful Jews, under Antichrist’s terrible persecution. The
beast shall make war with the saints, and overcome them;
yet, paradoxical as it may seem, they are the victors; though
put to death, they are re-animated, ascend up to heaven in a
cloud, stand on the sea of glass, and sing the song of triumph.
The sixth event is the gathering of the harvest of the earth.
Commentators differ in their opinions as to the character of
this harvest. Some regard it as a harvest of mercy, and others
ils a harvest of judgment.
The writer is inclined to the latter opinion. See Elliott,
vol. iv., p. 75, &c.
Lastly, the gathering of the vine of the earth ; and casting
it into the great winepress of the wrath of God , under the
seventh vial. The winepress will be trodden by Christ, at
the great battle of Armageddon.—Rev. xix. 11 to 16.


Explanatory Remarks
the title; the dedication; and the three-fold
DIVISION OF THE BOOK.
The contents of the first chapter of The Book of Revelation,
containing, as they do, not only a general introduction, but
also a kind of foundation on which the grand superstructure
rests, it is important that we should get as full and as correct
a view of them as possible.
In the first three verses we have a brief introduction in which
is contained the proper title of the book itself.
“ The Revelation of Jesus Christ.” This title is very full
and complete. It is not “ The Revelation of John the divine;”
he was only the writer of the book.
The Revelation ; the future glorious manifestation of
Christ, when he shall appear in his own glory, as the Son of
man; and in the glory of his Father, in his Divine nature;
and in the glory of bis holy angels, and with ten thousand of
his saints.
This Revelation of Christ is the great theme of this book.
“The things signified,” or shown by signs, all refer to this
Revelation, and are but subservient to it.
In the second verse Ave have a declaration in reference to
John’s fidelity as the writer of the book.
The statement contained in the third verse is desenung
our most devout attention.
“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the aaouls
of this prophecy, and keep those things Avhich are AAiitten
therein ; for the time is at hand.”
On this verse, Mr. Wesley has the following remarks
“ Some have miserably handled this book. Hence, others axe


afraid to touch it. And while they desire to know all things
else, reject only the knowledge of those which God hath shown;
they enquire after anything rather than this : as if it were
written, happy is he that doth not read this prophecy.
Nay, but happy is he that readeth, and they that hear and
keep the words thereof: especially at this time, when so con-
siderable a part of them is on the point of being fulfilled.”
Next we have the preface, or rather, the dedication of the
book to the seven churches, by John.
In this dedication he wishes for them the blessings of
Grace and Peace from the Sacred Three.
Then follows a doxology, in which he reminds them of
what the Saviour, in his love, hath done for, and promised to
make his people : and ascribes to the Divine Redeemer, glory
and dominion for ever and ever.
But John’s mind was full of the all-important subject which
runs through this book, viz., the coming of Christ, and ho
no sooner mentions his name, than he exclaims, “Behold, he
cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him,” &c.
“ Christ is gone to heaven to carry on his mediatorial work,
but not to remain there. No, the' oft repeated statement of
the book of God is, Christ will return to this very earth, come
again as the Son of man; in his own proper person; in his
glorified humanity. 1 Even so, Amen.’ Christ had not long
returned to heaven when he shouted back, ‘ Behold I come
quickly!’ and John and his fellow disciples responded in
fervent prayer, ‘ Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus!’
“ Momentous matters are connected with that coming; and
when we seriously think of what the sacred scriptures say
respecting them, ought they not to occupy our thoughts and
impress our minds most deeply ?
“ It will be a terrible day to the wicked, and to those who
hare not watched, nor prepared for it.”—(Dr. Seiss.)


I.—THE THINGS ALREADY SEEN.
The instructions given to John, by his Divine Lord, were,
“ What thou seest write in a book, and send it unto the seven
churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus,” &c.
He afterwards receives instructions somewhat more specific,
“ Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which
are, and the things which shall be hereafter.” This passage
is rendered somewhat differently by Dean Alford, Stuart, and
others. But, as those renderings convey very nearly the same
meaning, the common translation will, in this instance, be
adhered to. Christ, himself, explains the meaning of the things
which John had already seen.
“ The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches:
and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven
churches.” ,
The record was sent not only to the seven churches then
in existence ; but also, through them, to the church universal.
For, let it be observed, not only are the addresses to be sent
to those churches, but the book likewise; because, while the
letters to the churches contain a symbolic description of the
outward universal church, in different periods of her future
history, the book itself gives, in fuller detail, the remarkable
events by which that history, in the lq.st times, would be
distinctly marked.
The above remarks will, wo think, be quite sufficient in
regard to “ the things already seen.”
lI.—THE THINGS WHICH ARE.
The seven churches of Asia and their several states sym-
bolise the professing Christian church, throughout her entire
history, during the age or dispensation that now is. It is
somewhat remarkable that very little use is made of the ad-
dresses to these churches,


A few texts have been selected, principally from tbe promises
contained in these letters, as topics of discourse, &c., the other
portions remaining little more than a blank, on which dark-
ness and mystery are left to rest.
The reason of this is, apparently, that these addresses are
considered as applicable, almost exclusively, to the seven
churches. But, while the seven churches may bo considered
as being severally in existence, and each in the state descubcd,
there are, notwithstanding, some important reasons for adopt-
ing a broader basis. There is, for instance, the very singular
fact that these seven churches are selected rather than others
which were, at that time, quite as prominent. And it
might be asked, why was not some of the othci distinguished
churches of that day selected ? The obvious answer is that
their condition was not such as to constitute the representative
character so fully as was required.
Again, it is seen that while there is a peculiar condition
characterizing each of the seven churches , there is also the
employment, to a considerable extent, of symbolical language
and a distinct reference to several characters. And furthei,
there is the very remarkable conclusion of each address, \iz .
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to
the churches.” There is also the number seven, this is
generally understood as being symbolical.
These and other considerations go to show that the churches
are representative, and that the epistles form a kind of pio-
phetic history of the changes, declentions, trials, and sufferings
of the Christian church. This view is sustained by ecclesias-
tical history, with which, without anything forced, far-fetched,
or fanciful, the descriptions contained in the addresses strik-
ingly correspond.
THE CHURCH AT EPHESUS.
Judging from Paul’s letter to this church, we might con-


elude that it was faultless. But he who walketh amidst the
churches, and who says, “ I know thy works,” and who saw
much to commend, saw also that there was a decline from first
love. While Christ commends the zeal, the patience, and the
purity which characterised the early church as a whole, he
saw that the fine gold was becoming dim, and the brightness
of the first days was beginning to fade away. “ I have* some-
what against thee, because thou hast left thy first love.”
There is ako a corresponding decline from pure doctrine.
This view is fully corroborated by the history of the early
church. Read that history as given in the Acts of the Apostles.
Partiality and cruel neglect of the destitute widows on the
part of the office bearers in the church, and hypocrisy,
coveteousness, lying, &c., among the members. Paul, when
taking his farewell of the Ephesian church, says, “For I know
this, that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your ownselves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
disciples after them.” In his epistle to the Romans, Paul com
plains of their judging and despising one another in matters
non-essential, and instructs them to u mark them w hich cause
divisions, See., and to avoid them; for they that are such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.
In the church at Corinth there were envying, strife, and
divisions arising out of attachment to favorite preacheis, abuse
of the ordinances, especially of the Lord’s Supper : a want of
order and of regard to mutual edification in their church services,
error in doctrine, denying a resurrection, &c.; false prophets,
deceitful workers, &c.; and some who were guilty of immorality.
The state of the other apostolic churches was one which, in
some way or other, required caution, reproof, &c.; while the
descriptions given by Peter and Jude are sad indeed. Our
limits will not allow us to trace the gloomy picture further.


THE CHURCH AT SMYRNA.
In reading the address to this church, we find a reference
to a time of fiery trial and terrible persecution.
The history of this period of the church’s existence is one
of sadness. Season after season of persecution was her lot for
the next two hundred years. That period is designated by
the sad but significant phrase, “ the ten persecutions .”
There is in the letter to this church a kind commendation,
a loving assurance, and a tender caution, “ Fear none of those
things that thou shalt suffer,’ 5 &c., to prepare them for the
trying time, which would be severe and long. The saints
of God were cruelly butchered by ten pagan emperors in
succession, and by one of them for a period of ten years.
And what was the watchword of these martyred ones?
It was one taken from their Lord’s admonition, “ Be thou faith-
ful unto death.” And their faith and courage were sustained
by his cheering promise, “ I will give thee a crown of life.”
“ Faithful unto deathwhat a glorious triumph! “ They
overcome, and shall not be hurt of the second death. They
die; but they conquer, and gain a crown of life.
It is very questionable if there be much of the martyr spirit
in the present day. The Christianity of the times is a poor,
stunted, worldly, time-serving, accommodating sort of thing,
that would, it is to be feared, melt away before the fires of
persecution. But a testing time may not bo far distant. Are
we ready for it ? That it will come is as certain as that the
one we have just noticed has already been. It is a matter respect-
ing which the Prophetic Word gives no uncertain sound. How
about the watchword ? Would it be, “ Faithful unto death ?”
THE CHURCH AT PERGAMOS.
The state of this church, as described in the address, may
be regarded as a type of the general church during the greater
part of the fourth and fifth centuries. Christ sees much to


commend. The truth, as it is in Jesus, is held fast by many,
even amid opposition and error. But there was much that
was blameable. There were some who held the doctrine of
Balaam, who were ready to serve any party for worldly gain;
take the side of truth or error for the reward of covetousness.
On referring to the history of the period above noticed, what
do we find ? What, but a state of things just corresponding with
that we have just named. Constantine the Great appears before
the world. He was a Briton by birth ; was born at York, of a
British princess, who afterwards became an empress, and who
instructed him in the Christian faith. When raised to the
imperial throne, he avowed himself a Christian. This, as
might be supposed, effected a change in the fortunes of the
church. Human nature has been the same in all ages, and
hence multitudes made a profession of the emperor’s religion
for the sake of securing worldly emoluments; for place and
power, wealth and honor were conferred by Constantine on
those who had been the subjects of such terrible persecutions
under his predecessors on the throne. Men did, indeed, fol-
low in the way of Balaam, loving the wages of unrighteous-
ness, and professing the faith of Christ and the service of God
for reward.
This state of ease and honor was favorable to the develop-
ment of doctrinal error in regard to the person and work of
Christ. Arianism spread far and wide ; “ and superstition, in
various forms, so prevailed in the church, as, in course of
time, almost to thrust true religion aside.”—(Mosheim.) One
of the emperors, having embraced Arianism, persecuted to
death those who held fast the name and faith of Jesus. Are
there not multitudes in the present day who “hold the
doctrine of Balaam ?”
THE CHURCH AT THYATIRA
In this church is represented a condition of things which
characterized the professing world during a period of seven


hundred years. In the address great prominence is given to
one particular character, “ The woman Jezebel.” The type
may be found as given in 1 Kings xxxi. Jezebel the queen
writes letters in the king’s name, seals them with his seal, and
sends them to the elders and the nobles. They are requested,
in these letters, to proclaim a fast, and in connexion with it,
and under the wicked pretence of punishing blasphemy, to put
to death an innocent man. This woman had, at vast expense,
maintained a grand system of idolatry, and supported “ four
hundred prophets of Baal and four hundred and fifty prophets
of the groveswhile, in her case, there was no repentance,
but, the most signal retribution.
The professing church furnished the antitype at the period
above stated. Bor some time superstition and error had been
gaining ground in the church, and prepared the Avay for the
full development of fictions of an early origin—viz., saint
veneration and relics, a purifying fire, celibacy, &c., &c., and
under the Papacy that development became fully apparent.
Professing to be Christ’s church, the Lamb’s wife, she, in
his holy name, perpetrates the foulest deeds. But Christ dis-
owns the relation which she claims, and in speaking of her
says “that woman” and “she called herself a prophetess:
while her work is that of teaching and seducing his servants
to commit spiritual fornication.
But, as in the sad times of Jezebel there were some faithful
and hidden ones — seven thousand men, who had not bowed
the knee to the image of Baal, —so, notwithstanding the false
teaching and superstition which marked the history of the
church at the period under consideration, there were those whose
love, and service, and patience, and works, were recognised by
“ the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and
his feet like fine brass.” And when the threatened doom
shall overtake the faithless church, the faithful ones who
hold fast till the coming of their Lord shall be associated


with him in universal sovereignty over the nations. What
a glorious consummation ! What a motive to fidelity to Christ!
“ For if we suffer with him, we must also reign with him.’
THE CHURCH AT SARDIS.
In this church we see a sad state of things; one fully
known to the Omniscient Saviour. There was no real life, no
spiritual vitality; in short, there was not anything which the
All-seeing, the kind and glorious Redeemer could commend,
but much to blame and condemn. There was, as the name
imports, only a remnant, the remainder. As we trace the
history of the church, the scene becomes darker and darker ,
but few were found who were faithful to Christ and his cause,
and the vital truths of Christianity became almost extinct.
This state of things continued for the next three hundred
years, including the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries.
That period has been significantly termed “ the dark ages.”
Ceremonial religion and sacramental salvation were almost
universally taught and practised. The pre-millenial coming
and personal reign of Christ was ignored. Hence the admoni-
tions, “Be watchful,;” “If therefore thou shalt not watch, I
will come upon thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what
hour I will come upon thee.” Still, there were a few who
had not defiled their garments, and who had not been influenced
by the corrupt teachings and practices and priestly assump-
tions of those who robbed Christ of his high priesthood and
headship over his church. To these faithful and overcoming
ones the Saviour’s promise is, they shall walk with me in
white (an emblem of purity). Nay, more, - they shall he
clothed in white raiment, arrayed in priestly vestures, and he
made priests of God and of Christ.
It is gratifying to the true Christian to think that in the
darkest time God has had, and still has, his faithful ones.
Yes, even in the present day, amid surrounding woildliness


and lifeless formality, there are those who honour Christ as the
head, who rest on him as the only foundation of their hope,
and some who wait and watch for the coming of their Lord.
THE CHURCH OF PHILADELPHIA.
This church is regarded by Christ with special favour, and
elicits from him high commendations. And “ he that hath the
key of David ” —the sole authority to open and shut—sets be-
fore this church “an open door, which no man can shut.” To
commendation and privilege, the Saviour adds special promises.
Before entering on the consideration of that period of the
church’s history which is represented in this address, it may
be well to notice the difficulty there is in applying to the
churches in Asia the whole of the symbols and language em-
ployed ; and in no case is this more apparent than in the one
we are now considering. Hence the utility of these addresses
can only be seen as viewed in their prophetical or representa-
tive character.
It it difficult to see how much use can be made of the letter
to this church, unless it be considered in relation to the Refor-
mation. The door then opened has not yet been shut, and,
although it has not been opened equally wide at all times
since then, we still have an open Bible and an unforbidden
proclamation of its truths. But let it not be forgotten that
the door may—nay, will be shut; yes, and by him “ who
shutteth and no man openeth.” May we be wise to “ know
our gracious day.”
We have remarked that, in the period represented by the
state of the church at Sardis, the pre-millenial coming of
Christ was ignored. The Saviour, so to speak, puts in a re-
minder by saying, “ Remember, therefore, how thou hast
received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If, therefore,
thou shalt not watch , I will come upon thee as a thief \ and
thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee”


In the church at Philadelphia it was very different. They
not only heard, but they kept the word of Christ’s coming.
True, it was then, and is now, the word of patience. James
says, “ Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord.” Paul prays, “ And the Lord direct your hearts into
the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.”
This church is commended for acknowledging the name of
Christ as the only Saviour, and for keeping the word of his
patience. This word the Saviour here repeats for their com-
fort and encouragement. “ Behold, I come quickly; hold that
fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.”
In all this there is, we think, much that is very significant
and appropriate: for while this is the last period but one of
the history of the Gentile church, it is well known that it was
one in which was revived the belief of the early Christian
church in regard to the second advent. That belief continues
to be maintained to the present time, and respecting it there
is, almost daily, an increasing interest awakened in the minds
of men. Since the present century began nearly two hundred
authors have written and published more than three hundred
volumes on unfulfilled prophecy, in most of which the pre-
millcnnial advent and kindred doctrines are maintained, and
there is wisdom in this, for the time is at hand. Christ’s
word is his word of promise, “ If I go away I will come again
and receive you unto myself, that where I am there ye may be
also.” Why then should any, who profess to be his, fold their
arms and say, “my Lord delayeth his coming.” If we truly
love the Saviour, let us keep, in our minds and loving hearts,
his gracious words, “ Behold I come quickly; hold that fast
which thou hast, that no man take thy crown”
“ 0 may we thus be found
Obedient to his word,
Attentive to the trumpet’s sound;
And looking for our Lord.”


For when that trumpet shall sound, “ great voices will be
heard in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are become
the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign
for ever; ” and then, as promised to this church, there shall
be conferred on all the faithful ones the most glorious titles,
the highest honors, and the sublimest joys.
THE CHURCH OF THE LAODICEANS.
In this church, as described by the faithful and true Witness,
there was not anything which he could commend. With
regard to merely nominal religion, there was no avowed
hostility, neither was there any true fervent zeal and earnest
piety; but there was a false estimate of their state—self-
satisfaction and self-deception. Therefore, the Saviour says, “I
counsel thee to huy of me gold” —genuine saving faith, — “ and
white raiment ” —true holiness, without which no one can be
admitted to the marriage of the Lamb, —“and anoint thy
eyes with eye-salve ” —use means whereby thy real condition
may be discerned. And unless this counsel be attended to,
and earnestness and repentance prevent, even the loving
Saviour will have recourse to rebuke and punishment; but,
still, all in mercy and love. They are tender appeals, the
knockings at the door; and, if there be a yielding, blessed
union and communion with Christ will be realised, which
shall issue in being enthroned with him in all the high honors
of his coming kingdom and glory. But if, on the other hand,
there be no repentance, no change, still continuing neither
cold nor hot, sad rejection will be the result.
The above description is applicable to the professing church
in the present day, and ought, therefore, to be most solemnly
regarded. This Laodicean state is the last state of the so
called Christian church, and the doom of the nominal church
found in that state when Christ coines for his watchful waiting
ones will be that sad rejection .


But, it may be asked, is there any evidence that the present
condition of the professing Church corresponds with the
description given above? We answer, yes. And in proof
we need not refer to the Roman Catholic Church with her
hundred and seventy millions, nor to the apostate Greek
Church numbering seventy million members; it will be quite
sufficient if we only look at the Protestant portions of the
Christian world. Look at Protestant Germany the Ration-
alistic party there have been quietly allowed to disseminate
their semi-infidel principles until the masses of the people
have become permeated with their anti-Christian anti-scriptural
dogmas. And what of America? There the evangelical sects
are allowing the ground to be taken from under them with ?
apparently, but little concern. Systems the most godless and
christless are advancing with giant strides among the people.
Unitarians, Universalists, Shakers, Spiritualists, Mormons, and
others are sapping the foundations not only of Christianity and
piety, but also of society itself. But, to come nearer home —
w r hat, we ask, is the condition of Great Britain and her
colonies ? Arc things more hopeful there than elsewhere in
Christendom ? Alas ! no. Many good men, men who are ob-
servant of things as they actually are, deeply deplore the
lamentable amount of indifference which 'exists in regard to
real religion, the spread of infidelity among the masses, and
the rapid growth of popery, in its various forms, in England
and Scotland; while within the pale of the professing Pro-
testant Church the principal signs of life are seen in an un-
holy emulation among the sects, vicing with each other in
ecclesiastical pomp and power, from the State Church down-
wards.
Again, as a distinguished writer observes, “ What a sad
amount of ignorance and indifference, and even dislike, to the
teachings of the Prophetic Word do we everywhere encounter.”
Many of the most sublime and most important views are


altogether ignored; while those who venture out of the com-
mon track, and investigate and believe the prophetic state-
ments in reference to the speedy coming of Christ and the
events which shall immediately precede and follow that coming,
are regarded as fanatics and candidates for a lunatic asylum.
A clergyman, writing to the editor of the Rainbow (see No. 55),
says “ There are few or none hereabouts that have faith in
Christ’s speedy personal advent and reign. All the various
churches are in a Laodicean state; the world, science, and
infidelity are predominant; conversion work is at a standstill.
All churches, and states, and kingdoms are feeling the shak-
ing of those things that must be removed and make way for
the kingdom that cannot be moved.”
The admonition appended to each address is deserving of
special notice. “He that hath an ear let him hear what the
Spirit saith to the churches.”
And first, this shows that we should each make these ad-
dresses a personal study. They teach lessons which are of
vast importance to us individually; they furnish subjects for
close self-examination; they impart counsel, having an im-
portant bearing on our personal safety and happiness ; and
they contain the most powerful motives to fidelity to Christ
and his truth under all circumstances, however trying, with
assured promises of high and fadeless honors and unending
bliss as the reward of such fidelity.
Again, in these addresses, we have a kind of prophetic
history of the professing Christian Church. This, we con-
sider, is a very important view, and one which, if correct,
forms a broad and firm basis on which to rest the expositions
we purpose to give of other portions of the Revelation; a
view warranted by the statements which the letters to the
churches contain, and by the actual history of the Gentile
Church herself, one which embraces a connected series of events,
and thus obviating the force of a very plausible objection


to what is called the Futurist scheme of interpretation as op-
posed to the Preterist and the Presentist or historical schemes,
viz.,that the Futurist scheme involves a break, or a con-
siderable interval between “ the things which are ” and “ the
things which shall be hereafter.”
Lastly, we may learn what is the present position of the
general church in relation to the past, and also as to the
future. We are furnished with one vast, important, and un-
broken chain; and tracing that chain through its various
links, we find the present —the Laodicean state —to be the
last, the most prominent, the concluding one in relation to
the church under the Gentile dispensation.'* The nominal
church, having reached the state represented, will be rejected,
as being “ unworthy to escape those things which shall come
to pass.” “ That day will come” upon multitudes “un-
awares ;” for as a snare shall it come upon them that dwell
upon the earth, and they shall not escape.’ “ W atch ye,
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all those things, and to stand before the Son of Man,”
and thus share in the high privilege and blessedness of the
Philadelphian Church : “ Because thou hast kept the word of
iuy patience, I will also keep thee from the hour ot temptation,
which shall come upon all the world to try them that dwell
upon the earth.” “He that hath an car, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches.”
XU—THE THINGS WHICH SHALL BE HEREAFTER.
THINGS OF THE RAPTURED CHURCH.
We have previously remarked on “ the things which are,”
that is, on the things relating to the church in general during
the Gentile dispensation; and we showed that the condition
*Tt may be worthy of observation, that both in individual cases, and
in the several sections of the Christian Church and also in Christendom
as a whole, there may be a state and condition of things which but too
fully corresponds with the description furnished, by the pen of inspira-
tion, of the seven churches of Asia.


of the Laodicean Church represented the last of those things
It may be observed here that the rejection referred to is not
of a final and hopeless character. There was to be rebuke
and chastisement in order that there might be repentance,
earnestness, and decision ; a reception of Christ by faith, and
union and communion with him; and, finally, a participation
in the honors of the coming kingdom. But it may be asked,
in Avhat way and under what circumstances is it likely that
any such result will be brought about in regard to any of the
members of the Laodicean Church ? This question, and the
fact that, in entering upon the consideration of “ the things
which shall be hereafter,” as recorded in the fourth and fol-
lowing chapters, we come upon one of the sudden transitions
which are of such frequent occurence in this book, render it
necessary that we should have recourse to our Key. There
seems to be something omitted—a break in the chain: we
must, therefore, try to supply the omission; find out the link
which will unite the broken chain, so as to form one har-
monious whole. It is observable that the scenes described in
the fourth and fifth chapters, are laid in heaven, the world of
glory, the residence of the Deity and relate to the Church tri-
umphant ; while the others, which comprise “ things which
are/’ are laid on earth, and relate to the Church militant.
John sees, representatively, the redeemed in their resurrected,
raptured, and glorified state. It is, therefore, very evident that
other and intermediate events had taken place; and as the
connecting portion is not supplied here, we must seek it else-
where. In this, we think, we shall not find much difficulty.
The xii chap., and some other portions of the Prophetic
Word, especially Daniel vii, will supply us with what we
require.
First, then, wc consult the Key, chap, xii, 5, “ And she
brought forth a man child and the child was caught
up to God and to his throne.” It is generally admitted


that by the man child is symbolized the true Church of Christ;
and it is certain that the man child being caught up to God
and to his throne, represents the rapture or ascension of the
Church. But on this subject there is a great deal of doubt
even in the Christian world; we would, therefore, let the
book of God speak for itself, taking the several subjects in
the order in which they are placed in the Scheme.
THE FIRST RESURRECTION
IN ITS FIRST STAGE.
At both stages, the resurrection of the dead saints and the
changing of the living ones precede the rapture. Paul says,
“We that are alive and remain shall not prevent (go before)
them which sleep.” This shows that there will not be the
changing and the removing of living saints without the resur-
rection of the dead ones.
And we observe further, that this resurrection includes
the saints of the Old Testament. Job says, “ I know that
my Redeemer liveth, and that ho shall stand at the latter day
upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God,” &c. David
says, “ I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness.
Isaiah, “ Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body
shall they arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust,”
&c. The angel said to Daniel, “Go thou thy way until the
end be ; for thou shalt rest and stand in thy lot at the end of
the days.” Christ says, when speaking of the first resurrection,
“ Yerily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God : and
they that hear shall live.” See also Heb. xi. 13, 16, 35, 39, 40,
It was this resurrection that Paul wished to attain unto. —Phil,
iii. -ii. The first resurrection will he completed under the
seventh trumpet. This, the second stage, will include the


4C> explanatory remarks.
witnesses, all the faithful ones, Jews and Gentiles, who testify
against the claims of Antichrist, and who seal their testimony
with their blood; and also all the living saints then upon the
earth. “ Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in
lieaven he shall send forth his angels with a
great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his
elect,” &c.—Matt. xxiv. 30, 31.
Now, this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God Behold, I show you a
mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,”
&c,—-Cor. xv. 50, 51, 52, 53.
THE RAPTURE OF THE CHURCH.
The resurrection of the dead saints, and the changing of
the living ones having taken place, in the first stage, the
rapture follows, “ Come, thou my people, enter thou into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it
were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.”
—lsaiah xxvi. 20.
The statements of the great teacher in relation to this
subject are remarkably striking; and from those statements
it is evident that the rapture will take place suddenly, and
in various parts of the world at one and the same time. Yes,
while it is night in one part of the globe, and the inhabitants
are reposing in peaceful slumber, some of them shall be taken,
and the others left; and while it is day in another part of the
earth, and women are busily employed in their household
affairs, and men are pursuing their usual avocations, one will
be taken and another left.—Matt. xxiv. 40, 41. “For as the
lightning lighteneth out of,the one part under heaven shineth
unto the other part under heaven, so shall also the Son of
Man bo in his day.”—Luke xvii. 24, 34, 35, 36. Let it not
be forgotten that a distinction similar to that we have just


referred to has been made before. Noah entered the ark,
Lot went out of Sodom, and the divine judgments descended
on those that were left.
But some may feel something like surprise, as did the
disciples, and may be ready to ask what will become of the
taken ones ? The disciples said, “ Where, Lord Christ,
in reply, repeated what would be to them a well known
proverb, one which they had often read in the book of Job,
“ Where the carcase is, there,” &c; or, where the Head is
there will the members be gathered. Paul says, “ Then wo
which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with
them (the resurrected ones) to meet the Lord in the air; so
shall we be ever with the Lord.” John says, the “ man child
was caught up to God and to his throne.” This is a triumph
over death and the grave, and “ him that hath the power ot
death, that is, the devil,” which he, through the dragon,
would gladly prevent.
The passages we have quoted, in relation to this subject,
correspond, in a remarkable manner, with what is taught in
the parable of the ten virgins concerning the five wise and pri-
vileged ones. This event will come upon the professing world
suddenly, and not proceeded by any other than—to them—
ordinary events, he., political and ecclesiastical changes; events
which they will think sufficient to warrant them in saying,
“My Lord delayeth his coming.” The admonition of the
Master is, “ Take ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not
when the time is.” Yet, though we know not the time, there
will be “ signs,” which it will be well for us to watch—signs
in the ecclesiastical firmament and upon the political earth,
distress of nations with perplexity, the sea and the waves
roaring (the noise of the waves, and the tumult of the people),
men’s hearts failing them for fear, &c. But—
Whatever ills the world befall.
A pledge of endless good we call,
A sign of Jesus near.


“ And when -ye shall see these things begin to come to pass,
then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption
draweth nigh.”—Luke xxi. 25 to 36.
THE CHURCH AS SEEN IN GLORY.
The scenes described by John, in the fourth and fifth
chapters, are the most sublime and glorious recorded in the
book of God. Daniel had a prophetic view of the same
scenes.
DANIEL.
I beheld until the thrones were
cast down (or placed), and the An-
cient of Days did sit, &c. His
throne was like the fiery flame.
The saints stand during the
judgment of service.
They are mentioned by the usual
title, The saints of the Most High.
Christ is designated the Son of
Man, and comes near the Ancient
of Days.—Chap. vii.
REVELATION.
A throne was set in heaven, and
One sat on the throne, &c. And
there was a rainbow round about
the throne.
The judgment is passed, and they
sit on the seats, or thrones, and are
arrayed as kings and priest s.
They are seen representatively in
the twenty-four elders.
The Lamb standing in the midst
of the throne. —Chaps, iv,. v.
THE INVESTITURE.
Amid the scenes of ineffable glory described in those
chapters, Christ and his saints are invested with the kingdom,
and its high and glorious functions. In Daniel, the Son of
Man receives a dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, &c., and
the saints are associated with him, as stated by the in-
terpreting angel. “ But the saints of the Most High shall take
the kingdom: And the kingdom, and dominion, and the
Greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be
O °
given to the people of the saints of the Most High,’ &c.
vii. 21, 22. The time when they shall possess the kingdom
will be after the seventh trumpet and vial.
In Rev., Christ, the Head of Judah’s Royal Tribe, David’s
Son and David’s Lord, the Lamb, the Omnipotent and Om-


niscient Redeemer, comes near to him that 4nts upon the
throne; and the last part of the formula, so to speak, takes
place by his reception of the seven-sealed book.
It was to this period the great Apostle looked forward
when he said, “ Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give
me in that day, and not to me only, but to all them that love
his appearing.” The investiture having thus taken place, it
is celebrated by those whose ransom is now complete, in a new
song, which includes the worthiness of the Lamb to open the
seals, an acknowledgment of his redeeming love, and of the
high honors he had conferred on them —honors not merely in
name, having only the titles, for they add, “ And ive shall
reign on the earth.” Read Dan. vii. 13, 14, 18, 22, 27; Rev.
iv. v. xx. 4,5, 6. This last includes all the stages and all the
parties, and twice states the period during which the kingdom
under the whole heaven and the reign on the earth shall be
continued —viz., a thousand years, —after which these high
honors shall be enjoyed in the new heavens and the new earth
for ever, even for ever and ever.
The author, for various reasons, wishes to keep within
certain limits, or he would offer some remarks on the distinct
functions which the saints will exercise. But it may be
briefly stated that, according to the symbols of the chapters
just considered, they will probably be the angelic, the priestly,
the kingly, and, as may be gathered from other parts of the
divine word, the judicial.


Things under the Seals,
Trumpets, and Vials.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
Nearly all Apocalyptic writers agree in tire opinion, that
the hist four seals relate to matters of empire.
Faber and a few others violate the plainest principles of
interpretation by making these seals retrospective, ex-
plaining them as representing the four great empires of
Daniel: and that too in the face of the plain declaration of
the voice addressed to John, “I will show thee things which
must he hereafter;’ We are inclined to the opinion that the
Preterist, or retrospective method, is sadly out of place, and
that the only tendency is to perplex and confound the reader,
even much more than the historical mode; and this involves
the necessity of such an amount of learning, as to limit the
blessedness of reading and hearing the words of this prophecy
to a very small number of persons. Besides, if the views, as
gi\ en above, of the raptured church are correct, then it follows
that the historical scheme cannot stand—that is, in regard to
the seals, &c.; for it must be very evident that the Lamb
docs not open the seals prior to his receiving the sealed book,
and that he has not yet received the book, if the scenes of the
fourth and fifth chapters have not, as yet, taken place; and,
we think, no one would be able to prove that they have. The
inevitable conclusion, therefore, seems to be that the seals,
trumpets, and vials are, as yet, future.
The historical scheme, involving, as it does, the rejection
of a personal Antichrist, the pre-millenial advent, and the


personal reign, renders necessary great historical research,
classical learning, a knowledge of dates, &c., &c., such as
very few can command. And, besides, there is implied in all
this a reflection on the Divine wisdom and goodness, in that
he has given at least one very interesting and important por-
tion of inspired truth which must remain a sealed book to the
greater number of his own people. Such a supposition is
not to be entertained, even for a moment.
The last of Daniel’s seventy weeks, or, more properly,
seventy sevens, of years, is a very remarkable period:
it is his “time of the end.” That period, we incline
to think, begins with the opening of the seals; the first half
beginning at the opening of the first seal, and running out
under the fifth seal; the other half, or three and a half years,
commences under the sixth seal, and concludes under the
seventh vial.
It is observable that the first four seals do not in any
way resemble the last three seals. In the first four we have
four war horses. Almost all commentators agree that a
beast symbolizes an empire simply; a wild beast, a secular,
persecuting power; and a war horse, a military power, and
that a military power may also be a persecuting power, if any
symbolisms show that it is so.
Having made these necessary remarks, we will now pro-
ceed with the general subject.
THE FIRST SEAL.
Under the first seal we have, we believe, the commence-
ment of the marked career of the last of earth’s great
potentates. In the early part of that career he is the rider on
the white horse, professing purity of motive and peaceable
intentions ; and although the bow seems to indicate war-like
designs, yet only peace is contemplated. Meanwhile, he pre-
pares his plans, and seeks to gain his ends, as far as possible,
by deceit and flattery. “ A crown is given to him,” though


not by willing bands, and he goes forth, having conquest for
his object. Daniel says, “ Out of one of them—the four horns
came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great.
And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power,
to whom they shall not willingly give the honor of the king-
dom; but ho shall come in peaceably and by flatteries, and he
shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the
province, and he shall make a covenant with many (Jews)
for one week —seven years.”
But, when the white horse shall no longer suit his purpose,
he will exchange it for one of bloody hue, and in place of the
harmless bow, he will wield “ a great sword.” “And after the
league made with him he shall work deceitfully : for he shall
come up, and shall become strong with a small people.”
“Yea, he shall forecast his devices against the strong holds,
even for a time” —one year.
THE SECOND SEAL.
The second seal is opened, and the unfolded roll presents
another picture, in which is seen a fiery steed ready for the
plain of battle. The rider has power to take peace from the
earth. He is furnished with a great sword, and is bent on
carrying out his ambitious schemes, though it be by human
slaughter to an appalling extent, while the loud blast of the
trumpet of war proclaims, “ The lion is come up from his
thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way.”
THE FIRST AND SECOND TRUMPETS.
FIRST TRUMPET.
The first trumpet sounds, and on the fertile plains of Europe,
marshalled troops are seen; the tramp of war is there; the
loud boom of heavy artillery, and the sharp crack of the
murderous rifle echo and re-echo far and wide; and the fire
and the hail mingle with the blood of the dying and the dead.


The “fire and the hail” affect the earth of governmental
empire, and the result is the overthrow or destruction of
“ a third part of the trees” of old political institutions, and
the “ green grass ” of modern social arrangements.
SECOND TRUMPET.
The second angel sounds, and his trumpet, like that of
the first angel, appears to belong to the second seal, and also
to be a war trumpet.
The symbolism connected with this trumpet seems to
indicate a dreadful and sanguinary conflict on the part of the
masses of the people j a great revolution, resulting in the
destruction —in a political point of view—of a vast kingdom,
previously stable as a “ great mountain,” the governmental
power of which becomes developed under the demociatic form,
but at the cost of a fearful amount of bloodshed and terrible
slaughter.
It would appear, further, that this kingdom is a dis-
tinguished maritime power; for “ a third part of the ships
are destroyed.”
THE THIRD SEAL.
It has been remarked previously that the war-horse repre-
sents a military empire ; the rider, of course, guides its affairs,
shapes its polity. Let this be borne in mind as we look at
the awful picture which is presented on the Apocalyptic roll
when the third seal is broken.
The black horse of famine, with his gaunt rider, are seen to
stalk through the land. Military despotism and war, togethei
with unfriendly seasons, occasion a fearful scarcity of the staff
of life. Now is fully realised the meaning of Ezekiel, “ They
shall eat bread by weight and with care.” In this season of
scarcity the rider regulates the price of food “ A measure of
wheat for a pennyhuman food is, at least, eight times the
usual price; and there is a scanty supply of all [produce, ex-


ccpting “ the oil and the wine.” Thus the hand of God is
seen in these calamities.
FOURTH SEAL.
The fourth seal is broken, and a picture still more gloomy
presents itself. Not only do red war and lank famine fur-
nish their countless victims, but “ the pestilence that walketh
in darkness ” supplies its full quota to the voracious grave;
and men, in riotous mobs, impelled by hunger, and defying
law and order, like furious beasts, prey on and destroy one
another, thus aiding death and hell in depopulating one fourth
part of the earth.
THINGS ECCLESIASTICAL.
THIRD TRUMPET.
The third angel sounds, and we have great commotions
in the religious world. The nominal Protestant Church, with
its head, becomes corrupt and falls, like a great star from the
ecclesiastical heaven, where, for centuries, she had shone with
distinguished brightness. Thus corrupted and fallen, she is
designated wormwood. To the extent of one third, the rivers
and fountains of religious instruction are made hitter by a
Rationalistic and Ritualistic teaching, and produce their fatal
effects on the minds of men.
FOURTH TRUMPET.
Under the fourth trumpet the third part of the sun of
Christianity is smitten, and a third part of the moon of Juda-
ism, and a third part of the stars of the ecclesiastical firmament;
so that a third even of the day of Gospel light, and a third of
the light of the Jewish system shines not. The principles of a
ceremonial and semi-infidel theology, darken the systems both


of Christianity and Judaism, and also the minds of the teachers
and rulers of those systems. Those principles are now in
active operation, and, ere long, circumstances will favor a
more complete development; all being only the sad prelude
to the more terrible darkness under the fifth trumpet, when
the falling away, the great apostacy, will reach its climax.
FIFTH SEAL.
Under this seal the period of the great red dragon closes—
that is, in relation to the professing church. He and his an-
gels are about to be cast out of heaven, the outward church,
where, for more than eighteen hundred years, he has been
carrying on his hellish schemes with, alas ! terrible success.
He has been the instigator of the debates, the strifes, the de-
visions, the unholy emulations, the bigotry, the hatred, the
the persecuting malice, and the deeds of blood, which for
centuries have torn and disgraced the Christian world. He
has counterfeited, opposed, and persecuted pure Christian truth
by various forms of superstition, and error, and priest-craft;
and when cast out, he still persecutes the truth, and goes to
make war with the remnant of her seed. This he does
through the ten-horned beast, to whom he gives his power,
and his throne, and great authority, and who makes war
with the saints, and overcomes them.
Under this seal John sees, in vision, the souls the
living persons who, during the period of the dragon, were
slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held. They had been offered on the altar of God’s service,
and are still recognised as connected with that altar, until
their blood shall be avenged. They are in a resurrected state,
and aware that they will take pi rt in what they refer to in
their enquiry ; but they are bidden to wait until another,
though little, season of martyrdom shall be fulfilled, that
little season being the forty and two months of Antichrist.—
Chap. xiii.


THINGS OF THE PERSONAL ANTICHRIST.
The wars, and civil and ecclesiastical changes, under the
the previous seals and trumpets, prepare the way for the full
development of the personal, secular, infidel, and persecuting
Antichrist. That development may, we think, be traced in
the symbolism of the fifth trumpet and that of the sixth seal.
His empire will be an embodiment of the metalic image, and
of the four beasts of Daniel; the seven heads of the close of
the dragon period, and of the ten crowned horns; —himself,
as the beast, becomes supreme.
FIFTH TRUMPET —FIRST WOE.
The great star of Protestantism, as a general system, has
already fallen ; and under this trumpet there is the fall, from
the wide firmament of the ecclesiastical heaven, of another
and similar star —namely, the papacy. (It is possible that by
this time .a union of the Greek, Roman, and other Churches
may have been brought about).
There is now but little restraint on the infidelity of the
times, and that little is exercised by the faithful Jews, and by
the remnant of the woman’s seed who have no state aid or
patronage; and, therefore, it will not be at all surprising if
we now find it fully and systematically established.
Most commentators suppose that the woe under this trum-
pet refers to the rise of the Mohammedan delusion, but their ex-
position of the minor parts are not very clear and satisfactory ;
and the writer is not sure that his remarks on the peculiar sym-
bols will be considered more so. Still, if we bear in mind the
great apostacy as being the most prominent feature of the last
times,there will be less difficulty in understanding what is in-
tended by the symbolical representations we are about to con-
sider; although a clear and full exposition of all the strange
symbolism cannot, at present, be expected. An almost insuper-
able difficulty is presented at the very commencement, and


that is in regard to the individual who is said to have the
key of the bottomless pit given to him. Is it the angel,
or is it the person who is represented by the fallen star ? The
writer is inclined to the opinion that it is the latter. The
fallen star, he thinks, is the false prophet, represented by the
two horned beast of Rev. xiii., and that by his agency the abyss
is opened-—that the key (the power) is, for a time, vested in
his hands.
The expression “ the bottomless pit ” here, if not else-
where, seems to be symbolical. In chap. ii. 24, we read of
“the depths of Satan,” and it is quite certain that, if there be
anything arising from, or connected with, those depths, in-
fidelity ought to be included. From that open abyss is
emitted that infernal smoke which not only darkens the sun
of Christianity, but also the political atmosphere. The
various forms of infidel error and false religion become com-
bined in one system, of which the beast and the false prophet
are the acknotvledge heads; the beast, the principal one (see
chap. xiii.). That system will now produce its sad effects
upon society; its principles will extend far and wide, spread-
ing through the land like an army of locusts. In these
principles will be embodied a terrible power to hurt —not the
vegetable world—but only those men who are not sealed as
God’s faithful and favored servants
The calamities inflicted by civil discord, atheistic-democratic
power, intellectual strife, domestic broils, and social wrong,
will be such as to make men wish for death, but in vain. A
state of things exist far worse than that of sanguinary Avar,*
All opposing influences Avill be ineffectual ; they Avill pursue
their fearful course like horses rushing to battle. Their
king is the angel, the messenger, of the bottomless pit, the
* This state of things is to continue for a period of five months,
during which men are not killed, as in war; but we inay gather from
what is stated in regard to men’s inpenitence under the next trumpet,
that foul murders are perpetrated; and we can scarcely conceive that
the system or the men will better than their king.


devil s missionary, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is
Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon,
that is to say, “ a destroyer” (see margin).
SIXTH SEAL.
The sixth seal is broken, and on the open scroll is depicted
the overturning of thrones, dynasties, and systems, by a great
earthquake of dreadful war.
The little horn of Daniel’s fourth beast is now fully de-
veloped, and commences the time, times, and half time, the
twelve hundred and sixty days, during which he shall make
war with the saints and overcome them. —Daniel vii. 8, 21, 25 ;
viii. 9, 10, 11, 12.
) XV, XX,
Out of the sea of infidel-democratic commotion under this
seal, John sees the beast arise, as described in chap. xiii. 1,
and to whom power is given to continue forty and two
months. This, too, is Daniel’s time of trouble, and of the
great tribulation spoken of by Christ. The sun of Christ-
tianity is totally darkened; the moon of the Jewish system
is quenched as in blood; the stars of heaven—teachers and
rulers, —previously darkened and corrupted, fall like untimely
figs ; and the very heaven—the professing church, which
they and their systems occupied, and of which they formed
part — departs as a scroll when it is rolled together, that heaven
now consisting only of the persecuted and faithful few. But
the earthquake wave rolls on, and earth’s most stable
thrones and governments, as well as the less strong and fixed,
are like mountains and islands moved out of their places. All
classes suffer, and are filled with consternation. Men's hearts
fail them for fear. It is part of God’s great overturning ;
the commencement of the Lamb’s day of wrath. —Daniel xi.
31 to 35.
SIXTH TRUMPET —SECOND WOE.
The sixth trumpet is sounded, and vast armies, in numbers
numberless, are brought into the field of battle, by four great


military powers, who, for a season, had been bound, or held
in restraint, and whose interests are involved in matters con-
nected with Eastern Empire.
Science has brought to great perfection the instru-
ments of deadly warfare, and by these one third ot the
numerous hosts fall in the sanguinary conflict. In this war
Antichrist, the king who shall do according to his will , takes
a part and is victorious. —Daniel xi. 40 to 43.
Under this trumpet we have the vision of the Covenant-
Angel, as described in chap. x. The things which the seven
thunders uttered being sealed up, any attempt to investigate
and understand them would be not only useless, but pie-
sumptuous.
There are two statements made by the Angel which
deserve our special attention. One of these, as rendeied in
our common translation, is, that there should he time no longer.
Strange conclusions have been drawn from these words,
strange theories have been based upon them, and various have
been the renderings of the original in order to support those
theories and conclusions.
Barnes, in commenting on the passage, says, “It seems
now to be generally agreed among critics that our translation
does not give the true sense, inasmuch (a) as that was not the
closing of human affairs, and {h) as the angel proceeds to
state what would occur after that. Accordingly, different
versions of the passage have been proposed.
Professor Stuart renders it, “that delay shall be no
longer.”
Mr. Elliott, “ that the time shall not be yet,” &c.
Andrew Puller, “ there should be no delay.” So Dr. Gill,
Barnes himself renders it, rf that the time would not be
yet.” But he says, “ the sense of this passage is to be deter-
mined by the meaning of the words and the connexion.


of his will .
. , , that in the dispensation of the fulness
of times he
might gather together all things in Christ/’ &o,
Chap, iii
Tor this cause .... How that byre-
Taking this statement as a rule by which to be guided, and
adopting the version given by Professor Stuart, Andrew
Fuller, Dr. Seiss, and others—namely, that delay shall he no
longer—we proceed to remark on the connexion, that is, the*
other parts of this statement, But in the days of the voice of
the seventh angel when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of
God shall he finished, as he hath declared to his servants the'
prophets ,
But it may be asked, “ What is the mystery of God, and
what is meant by its beng finished? In reply it might
be enquired, “Is it not the Gentile dispensation ?” By
consulting the great Apostle of the Gentiles, we may get,
some light on the subject:—Rom. xvi. 25, 26, “ Now unto
him that is of power to stablish you according to my Gospel,
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation
of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began.
But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the pro-
phets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God,
made known to all nations for the obedience of faith.”
Ephes. i. 9, 10;—“ Having made known unto us the mystery
velation he made known unto me the mystery which in other
ages was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now
revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit,
that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs,” &c., to verse 9.
Also, Colossians i 25, 26, 27.
Christ says that Jerusalem shall be trodden underfoot of
the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” In
the days of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the
MYSTERY SHALL be finished ; the Gentile dispensation shall
close, and give place to one far superior.
The other statement refers to the proclamation of Divine


tffith under that coming difbshsdtion.—Chap, x, 8 v. to end.
This is almost the only instance ’in' which John himself is
seen to sustain a representative character.
Under this sixth trumpet the witnesses finish their testi-
mony, and are killed.—xi. 7.
In the earthquake of war the tenth part of Christendom
falls, politically, and there are slain seven thousand distin-
guished men—“ men of name.”
SEVENTH SEAL
“ And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was
silence in heaven about the space of an hour.”
It is not easy to determine what is meant by the heaven
referred to in the above statement. If this can be ascertained,
it will not be difficult to understand what is meant by the
silence here spoken of. If the term heaven be understood in
the ecclesiastical sense, it then follows that the silence relates
to the church militant, the fact being, that, so to speak, there
are, just at this particular time, none in that church. The
saints have finished their work, and passed through their
sufferings ; the hundred and forty and four thousand are with
the Lamb ; the great multitude have come out of tribulation—
the great one —and stand before the throne of God and before
the Lamb; the witnesses, having finished their testimony and
sealed it with their blood, have ascended to the celestial
regions, where they sing the song of Moses the servant of
God, and the song of the Lamb. Hence the silence referred
to as above, and which is connected with the seventh trumpet.
There is, further, silence, or stillness, as it regards the
Divine judgments, which, it appears, are suspended for a
brief period. These judgments, as a series, recommence un-
der the first vial and terminate under the seventh.
This interval of silence is also a period of rejoicing among
the godless and infidel dwellers on the earth . —Chap. xi. 10.


They once more indulge in the old cry of “ Peace, peacebut
they are doomed yet once more to prove that the triumph of
the wicked is short, and that will be when the events of the
last trump shall have taken place.
SEVENTH TRUMPET—THIRD WOE.
The clangour of the seventh trumpet is heard, and those
who, under Antichrist, have died in and for the Lord, start
into life; and the living saints, who, residing in distant
parts of the globe, have escaped the fatal persecution of the
beast, are changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
this last trump, and the mortal puts on immortality. The
first resurrection is completed; angelic legions gather together
Christ’s elect from the four Avinds, from one end of heaven to
the other, and escort them to where their Head and their pre-
viously ascended brethren are.
During the silence under the seventh seal, and while the
godless multitudes are enjoying their unhallowed though
short-lived triumph, those, who, for the sake of distinction,
may be designated the seventh trumpet party, will be invested
with the high honors of the kingdom—the regal, the priestly,
the angelic, and the judicial functions which they shall soon
severally exercise. And the armies of heaven will, during
* &
that silence, prepare for the great and glorious triumph over
Antichrist and his hosts (Rev. xix. 11 to end).
The rapturous scenes, amid which the above will take
place, are finely described in chap. xix. Ito 9. John hears
their loud and oft-repeated alleluia. In this the martyred
throng take the lead, and the party brought under our notice
in chaps, iv. v., and represented by the twenty-four elders, re-
spond, saying, “ amen, be it so, alleluia.” Then the great
multitude take up the mighty chorus, which rolls and sounds
as the voice of many waters and as the voice of mighty thun-
dering s, “ ALLELUIA; eor the Lord God Omnipotent


REIGNETH and amid all this gladness and joy the everlast-
ing union of Christ and his people is celebrated.
Wait we till the spouse shall come.
Till the Lamb shall take us home ;
For his heaven the Bride prepare.
Solemnize our nuptials there.
THINGS UNDER THE YIALS.
THE HARVEST OF THE EARTH DURING THE DAY OF THE WRATH
OF THE LAMB.
We now come to consider the last two events of the pre-
sent economy —namely, the harvest and the vintage of the
earth. The harvest of the earth is the sixth great event pre-
dicted and symbolized in the Revelation (xiv. 14, 15, 16.)
It has been stated above that difference of opinion exists
as to the character of the harvest; but ere we decide, let us
examine the context. In most cases of difficulty in regard to
any particular passage, the context will be found to render
the best assistance. So in the present instance, if we allow
the context to guide us in our conclusions, it will appear that
the harvest is one of judgment. The following particulars are
worthy of notice ;
1. The connexion and order in relation to the harvest and
vintage—the one immediately proceeding the other.
2. The instrument employed —a sharp sickle. It is the
same both in the reaping of the harvest and the gathering of
the vine. In each case there is the idea of something violent
and painful; and, therefore, as there can be no mistake as to
the gathering of the vine being representative of the Divine
judgment, so the reaping of the harvest is of the same
character.
3. It is designated the harvest of the earth. The term
earth is nowhere used in Revelation to denote the people of
God, the Church of Christ, or the professing Church in any


way. To represent these the word heaven is employed (see
Key), and it is remarkable that that term, in the ecclesiastical
sense, is not met with in the descriptions given of the vial
judgments. The expression the earth is generally employed
in a restricted sense, and refers to the Roman Empire, or
earth, territorially, or governmentally, each including, as a
matter of course, the people—the particular state of the earth
representing that of the people. We find similar language
employed in reference to the antediluvian race. The earth
also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with
violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was
corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. —
Gen. vi. 11, 12. In the case under consideration, the people
—all classes—by their ungodliness and infidelity, have made
themselves ripe for Divine judgments, and the judicial harvest
is reaped during the course of the seven vials of wrath. The
vintage takes place under the seventh vial.
4. The condition of the harvest — it is ripe. Infidelity has
produced its withering effects upon society, and the harvest
of the earth has become “ dried up. So it is in the original,
and the dried state of the produce forbids the idea that it is a
harvest of anything that is good.'’ —Elliott.
5. The person by whom the reaping is executed— the Son
of Man. 1 He has been invested with his kingdom (see
seventh trumpet, &c.), and, apparently for the first time, John
sees him in his kingly character, wearing the emblem and
exercising the power of sovereignity. 2. He is seated on a
white cloud, denoting purity and splendour, and indicating
the position he occupies for awhile, prior to his Revelation ,
his appearing, his personal visible coming in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory.
In the removal of his people, the tribes of the earth will
have seen the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and now,
under the infliction of terrible judgments, they will mourn.


“ The harvest shall he a heap in the day of grief and of
desperate sorrow.’'
In Joel iii. 13, we have the same two successive judgments,
“ Put ye in the sickle for the harvest is ripe: come, get ye
down,* for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wicked-
ness is great'’
It will, we think, be made apparent, as we proceed with
the vial judgments, that they are inflicted principally upon
apostate Christendom. “ For thus saith the Lord of Hosts,
the God of Israel; the daughter of Babylon is like a threshing
floor, it is time to thresh her; yet a little while and the time
of her harvest shall come.’’ —Jer. li. 33.
FIRST VIAL.
“ And I saw another sign in heaven, seven angels having
the seven last plagues ; for in them is filled up the wrath of
God.”—Rev. xv. 1.
“ And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to
the seven angels, go your ways, and pour out the vials of the
wrath of God upon the earth.”
“ And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the
earth; and there broke out a noisome and grievous sore (or evil
ulcer) on the men which had the mark of the beast, and on
them which worshipped his image.”
A careful observation of the events which have marked
the history of the Church and of the world, will lead to the
conclusion that there has seldom, if ever, been a sudden and
full development of those events, but a gradual process of
unfolding, causes operating silently, and, it may be, by slow
degrees, produce at length their full effects. It is thus that
the study of the recorded past materially assists us in the
investigation of the predicted future. For if the same causes
are now in operation, the same results may bo anticipated ;
and hence, in adopting the Futurist mode of interpreting the
* Thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Lord.—Joel iii. 11.


manner hitherto unknown. ... As the
eighteeneth cen-
tury advanced, a regular system of irreligion
was excogitated
and diffused, with wonderful art, activity,
and success by
Voltaire and his numerous associates. . . .
. By degrees,
Re'v elation, it can at least be said that, to some extent, similar
events have already taken place. The above remarks apply
so fully to the out-pouring of the Divine judgments under the
vials, that by using the future tense, and by representing the
judgment scenes on a larger scale, the statements furnished
by the historical interpreters might be adopted almost
verbatim. Thus, on the first vial, G. S. Faber says (vol.
hi. 256); —“ In a theological sense, ill-digested and virulent
humours in the body politic denote various modes and
measures of irreligion and apostacy working and fermenting
throughout the body which they afflict. The breaking out
of such humours in the natural body produces an offensive
and disgusting ulcer, no longer concealed beneath the skin,
but open and revealed to the eye of observation. Hence,
analogically, a noisome and grievous sore in the body politic
being similarly produced by the eruption of long-fermenting
virulent humours, must denote the open display of those
concocted principles of irreligion which have hitherto fluc-
tuated in an undefined and impalpable form. In short,
virulent humours are irreligion in a state of preparative
theory : while the noisome sore, produced by the eruption of
those humours, is irreligion in a state of open and undisguised,
and avowed practice.”
After referring to the spirit of Antichrist as manifested
in the apostolic age, he goes on to state “ that in the year
1697, the noxious humour of infidelity began to ferment in a
the members of the Antichristian Association got possession
of nearly the reviews and periodical publications, estab-
lished a general intercourse with distant provinces, instituted
an office to supply all schools with teachers, and thus ac-


quired an unprecedented dominion over the public mind,
without giving alarm to the world by any overt, tangible, and
visible action They boasted of their success in
Russia, in Poland, in Prussia, in the north of Germany, in
Spain, in Italy, in Bohemia, and Austria; France, of course,
was theirs, and Geneva, and England, and Switzerland, were
overrun with men who hated and despised Christianity as
Julian hated and despised it. When the humour had thus
spread extensively we shall not wonder that it soon broke
out into a noisome and grievous sore On the
memorable 26th August, of the year 1792, an open profession
of atheism, and irreligion, and infidelity was made, and forth-
with acted upon. Christianity was then formally abolished,
as a notorious and malignant imposture, by the governors of
revolutionary France ; and so well did the people second them,
that while not a trace of the Gospel could be found through-
out the reprobate Metropolis, frantic orations in praise of
atheism were loudly and energetically applauded.
All Europe seemed to have drunk deep of the cup of trembl-
ing.”
Similar allegorical humours are now fermenting. Reason
and science are arrayed by men against Christianity, and by
their doctrines of materialism, &c., they are excluding God
from the universe. This is not being done in a corner, but
is going on openly in every part of Christendom, and, ere long ,
there will he the disgusting aud powerful outbreak. On the
continent of Europe, Popery is giving way to infidelity, and
Protestant truth is set aside by Rationalistic error. In
America the foundations of Christian truth are being under-
mined by many and various Christ-denying and God-
dishonoring systems. While in England things, in the
so-called religious world, are, to a great extent, fearfully un-
settled, and drifting towards the fatal rocks of atheism. The
elements of the antichristian and atheistical apostacy are ex-


tensively in existence, and operating with fearful power in
the minds of men; while the time may not be very far distant
when those elements will constitute one vast system, which
will become a withering blight, a terrible curse to society, and
when a godless race “ shall eat of the fruit of their doings
SECOND VIAL.
“ And the second angel poured out his vial on the sea;
and it became as the blood of a dead man : and every living
soul died in the seaf &c.—Rev. xvi. 3.
The first vial, it is said, was poured upon the (symbolic)
earth, and sad effects resulted to those that had the apostasing
mark, &c. Those effects extending widely, and affecting all
classes of the community.
The second vial affects, principally, one particular class,
namely, the people, in their political poAver and privileges,
&c. The symbolic meaning of the term “ sea” has already
been noticed (see Key). The description given of the effects
of the second seal shoAVs that there are sad scenes of san-
guinary strife.
Faber says (vol. iii.page 260), “In the abstract, the sea
denotes a nation, or nations, in a restless condition of tumult,
or Avar, or revolution.” But by giving it the historical ex-
position he makes it apply to France; still, if Ave adopt the
course just previously suggested, Ave may regard Avhat is said
of France as shadoAving forth Avhat Avill occur on a larger
scale. There is, hoAvever, this difference, that Avhile the
masses, in their restlessness, Avill be divided among them-
selves, and faction oppose faction, the stronger, by proscrip-
tion and death, crushing the Aveaker, &c., they Avill attempt
to set aside the iron rule of Antichrist, and establish the
sovereign power of the people. That attempt will be resisted,
and, amid scenes of fearful bloodshed, a military despotism
will be established. Thus, to use the strong language of re-


relation, “ the troubled st '<? will become, as the sea of a dead
man; and every living s< wl die in, the sea (of democracy).
They shall not cleave to one '• another even as iron is not mixed
with clay.” —Daniel ii. 43.
“ Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a
noise like the noise of the f jeas ; and to the rushing of nations,
that make a rushing like a rushing of mighty (or many)
waters. The nations sh; rU sh like the rushing of many
waters, but God shall reb , Bl ke them, and they shall flee far off
and shall be chased as t ae chaff of the mountains before the
wind, and like a roll’ mg thing before the whirlwind.”—*
Isaiah xvii. 12, 13.
THIRD YIAL.
“And the third a ngel poured out his vial upon the rivers
and fountains of Wdfer: and they became blood.
And I heard the angel of the waters say: Thou art
righteous, 0 Lord , which art, and least, and shalt be, because
thou hast judged t.hu s. For they have shed the blood of saints
and prophets: mid thou hast given them blood to drink, for
they are worthy. And I heard another from the altar say:
Even so, Lord ' 9od Almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments. —Rev. xvi. 4, 7.”
If the opinion that the rivers and fountains of water (Rev,
viii. 10), which we are told were made bitter, symbolized the;
sources and stream s of Religious instruction, then the rivers,
and fountains of w ater, on which the third vial is poured,
denote the souirces and streams of atheistical teaching, &c.,
agreeable with what has been already said as to infidelity
being systematically taught and enforced. Such teaching will
be certain to produce its usual results in society, whatever
men may imagine to the contrary. It is highly probable
that bitter and sanguinary strife will be wide-spread; that
civil discord and bloodshed will be OR© of the chief character^


istics of the times; and in all this there will be unmistakable
evidence that it is a period of terrible retribution.
The principles Avhich lead them to imbrue their hands in
the blood of saints and prophets, will so operate as to lead to
their shedding the blood of one another. “ Take the wine
cup of this fury at mine hand, and cause all the nations to
whom I send thee to drink it. And they shall drink, and be
moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send
among them”.—Jer. xv. 15,16. “For I set all men every one
against his neighbour.”—Zech. viii. 10. “But 10, I will
deliver the men every one unto his neighbour’s hand, and
into the hand of his king.”—Chap. xi. 6.
FOURTH VIAL.
“ And the fourth angel poured his vial upon the sun ; and
power was given unto him to scorch men with fire,” &c.
In the explanatory remarks in connexion with the fourth
trumpet, in the exposition of the Key, p. 9., it is shown that
the sun symbolizes Christianity as distinguished from the
moon of the Jewish system. It is plain, however, that the
sun on which the fourth angel is said to pour his vial cannot
be representative of Christianity. Still, it is unquestionably
emblematical of a system, that system being one of infidelity,
which, strange as it may seem, will have connected with it a
form of religious worship. Such is the constitution of the
mind of man that he must have a system of religion of some
kind.
But what is the religion of the period under consideration ?
What ? but a religion from which God is excluded; a religion
based on the soul-debasing principles of atheism ; the worship
of the image of the infidel beast by the men who have the
mark, the stigma of the apostacy. —Chap, xvi. 2. This system
of religion will, as has been just stated, be a caricature of
of Christianity, a mock sun, that, to its votaries, will be like


a scorching Jire. Let it not be forgotten that retribution is
the marked characteristic of the vial period ! Men, having
blotted out the sun of Christianity, and embraced the system
of the two-horned beast, find that as they have sown so they
have to reap. “ For wickedness burneth as the fire. . . .
Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened,
and the people shall be as the fuel of fire: no man shall spare
his brother.’’—lsaiah ix. 18, 19. “ The earth also is defiled
under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed
the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting
covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and
they that dwell therein are desolate ; therefore the inhabitants
of the earth are burned, and few men are left.”
FIFTH VIAL.
“ And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the
beast; and his kingdom was fidl of darkness ; and they gnawed
their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven
because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of
their deeds.” —Rev, xvi. 10, 11.
The fifth vial is poured on the throne of Antichrist—that
throne is endangered—and his kingdom is filled with the
darkness of governmental perplexity. Matters connected with
the great eastern war, referred to under the sixth trumpet,
will cause him great uneasiness. “ Tidings out of the east
and out of the north shall trouble him : therefore shall he go
forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away
many.” —Daniel xi. 44. Besides this, things present a dark
and threatening aspect in his own more immediate kingdom.
Men, it is likely, will fret and rebel against the iron military
rule to which they had been so long subjected. In their
desperation, and, it may be, influenced by demons, they will
attempt the overthrow of Antichrist’s throne. “ And when
they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar


spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter; should
not a people seek unto their God ? for the living to the dead.
To the law and to the testimony; if they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them. And
they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry ; and
it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they
shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God,
and look upward. And they shall look unto the earth ; and
behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they
shall be driven to darkness.”—lsaiah viii. 19-22. “In that
day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea;
and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow,
and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.”—lsaiah
v. 30. “Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity;
the sea and the waves roaring.”—Luke xxi. 25.
SIXTH VIAL.
“And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great
river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the
way of the kings of the east might he prepared. And I saw
three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they
are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto
the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them
to the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Behold, I
come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. And
he gathered them together, unto a place called in the Hebrew
tongue, Armageddon. —Rev. xvi. 12-16.
The wars under the sixth trumpet result in a state of
things in the east, which parties, principally in the east, take
advantage of. Those wars leave only a shred of the Turkish
power, and even that disappears under the sixth vial. The
waters of the mystic river are dried up; and thus the great


obstacle to the gathering of the nations and their kings is re-
moved, and soon shall be fulfilled the prophetic word, I will
gather all nations; multitudes, multitudes in the valley of
decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of
decision.
This gathering will be the result of the agency of what
faber calls “the marked triple Spirit of the Times.”
Three unclean spirits, spirits of devils working miracles. An
awful combination, a complete system of demonism; embody-
ing the spirit of infidelity out of the mouth of the dragon,
the spirit of lawlessness out of the mouth of the beast, and the
spirit of a Godless and Christless religion out of the mouth of
the false prophet.
Under the sixth vial we have the terrible culmination and
issue.
Many who are observant of the signs of the times, most
distinctly affirm the existence, in the present day, and to a
sad extent, of Ihose triple evils. W. A. Passavant, D.D., of
America, describing the clouds in the modern church (see
“Prophetic Times,” 1868, p. 183, &c.), thus expresses himself:
“ Never before, since the sixteenth century, has the world
witnessed such contradictory and appalling tendencies in the
bosom of the Christian Church as in this seventh semi-
centenary of the Great Reformation. It is true the Christian
tradition of all ages exists as before. It is true that nominal
Christianity has become popular and pleasant, “ and that the
offence of the cross has ceasedbut, on the other hand, while
Christian terms remain, Christian realities, in many minds,
are passing away. Even where not entirely discarded, they
are often accommodated to the spirit of the age, and to a
philosophy falsely so called.
“ The scepticism of our times reveals itself also in undis-
guised hostility to the supernatural doctrines of religion, and
to what may bo denominated the unpopular doctrines of the


Bible. Men go away from Christ now as they did during his
• * O
ojourn upon earth, and say, " J his is a hard saving', who
can hear it ?” And out of this grow censures and schisms,
separations and strifes, the old contests renewed again of
religious indifference pleading for toleration, and, when
strengthened by toleration, refusing to tolerate the truth as it
is in Jesus. And to these are added laxity of doctrine, false
theories of charity, a small regard to what God has revealed,
but a blind bending of the intellect to man’s judgment and
opinion, a melancholy decay of principle, and a debasement
of Christian manhood to policy, so absolute that truth and
right often perish in our streets. All these reveal the drift
and tendency of the ago working in the Church, and carrying
away the minds of mulitudes into the fearful abyss of doubt.
“That one of our principal dangers now is from the
rationalizing tendency all facts, events, and experiences de-
monstrate. On every side the evidences are multiplying that
in the minds of millions the realities of God’s kingdom are
passing away like the clouds above their heads. It would
almost seem as if the science of the schools and the wisdom
of the world, though professing the Christian faith, had grown
weary of Christ’s authority, and were casting aside his easy
yoke ! else, how are we to understand “ the falling away ” of
many who were once regarded as witnesses of his truth and
defenders of his faith ? How are we to account for the
presence, in the visible Church, of men like Colenso and the
authors of the Essays and Reviews in England; of Strauss,
Schenkel, and a host of others in Germany; of the Humanist
clergy in Switzerland, the Socinian pastors of France, and the
Phil .sophical Schools ot Holland, all of whom have denied
he Lord who bought them, and put him to an open shame?
But .... the spirit of Rationalism is not more ncrilrms
the spirit of Rationalism is not more perilous
han is that of Romanism, coming too, as it now does, under
he professed form of a truer conception of Christianity, and


a more devoted attachment to Christ and his Church. The
undisguised aim of a large and influential party in the Church
of England, and of an increasing number in the Episcopal
Church in this land (America), is to unprotestantize that
Church, and bring it into unity with the Greek or Roman
communions. How fully they do this is seen by exalting
the authority of the church above that of the Holy Scripture,
by rejecting the corner stone of the Gospel edifice—-justification
by faith alone ; by asserting the regenerating efficacy of the
sacraments without faith on the part of the recipients, by
teaching the meritorious value of good works and deeds of
penance j by inculcating the duty of auricular confession, the
doctrine of a purgatory, the value of prayers for the dead, and
the invocation of the saints; by adopting the Romish doctrine
of transubstantiation, in the very words, too, and with the
ceremonial of the mass book; by praising the unmarried state
as best suited to the holiness of the priest’s office; by pro-
posing and carrying out the establishment of convents and
monasteries, and recognising the Papal Antichrist as the
visible head of the Church, and a dear elder brother in the Lord!
« What a fearful evidence of the mystery of iniquity at
work in the Church is not manifest in the fact, that nearly
two hundred members of the universities of Oxford and Cam-
bridge, with Newman, Faber, and Manning at their head, ha\e
already passed over bodily to Rome; while the alarming fact
stares us in the face, that for one who has acted the honest
part, and openly renounced his birthright, there are five v.ho
arc Papists in feeling and Jesuits in practice, eating the biead
of a Church whose doctrines they abhor, and whose Protestant
name they abjure : and that the bishops, the sworn guardians
of the flocks, in not a few instances, are admitting ravening
wolves into the fold without even the sheep’s clothing of a
nominal orthodoxy, and with full liberty to kill and to destroy,
provided they do not disturb their revenues or repose! The


same neglect of tlie preaching of justification by faith, which
has produced these results in England, has wrought the
same demoralization in this land (America), where one bishop
and more than thirty episcopal clergymen have already
bowed the knee to the papacy/ ”
Next we have (p. 184) the devil’s urim and thummim,
i.e., Blanchette. " Those of our readers (American) who have not
already heard of the new “ institution ” called Planchette, will,
undoubtedly, soon be gratified or puzzled, as the case may be,
by its appearance, as it is already offered for sale in several
cities. It consists of a simple oblong, or heart shaped, board,
about eight inches long by five to seven wide and a quarter
of an inch thick, supported on wheels or castors, on which it
moves freely when touched, and has a soft pencil fastened
into one end. The work of this pencil is the mystery of the
whole. It is declared that, when placed on a sheet of white
paper and lightly pressed by two persons for a few minutes,
it will trace on the paper an answer, more or less intelligent
or correct, to any question a third may propose. It is also
asserted by some that the past and the future are equally re-
vealed, and that distance creates no difficulty to this wonder-
ful inanimate fortune-teller, matters passing on the other side
of the world being as certainly made known as those in the
same room. ... It seems to be of French origin, its name
signifying a little board, and it is known to French, Russian,
and Spanish courts. In England, one maker says he has sold
four hundred and sixty-six Planchettes, besides sending several
abroad The author of a volume on Planchette,
published in England, gives minute instructions for its use, by
the obs< rvance of which, he thinks, most persons may, in time.
become confidants of its mysteries.”
On page 185, we have a brief article on Spiritualism.
“ The Spiritualists claim that Spiritualism is the onlv true
religion, and that it is to reform the world.”


We do not see how it is possible for Satan to invent a
system more fullyv. Antichristian in all its features than is
Spiritualism. Its doctrines are the same as taught by the
heathen, which they received from the demons, who claimed
to be human spirits. Then, as now, the spirits were opposed
to Christ and the religion and doctrine he taught. Spiritual-
ism offers a shelter to everybody that will help to oppose the
Bible and its author, and is endeavoring to put down all who
attempt to defend them. The warfare is becoming an earnest
one, and we have no expectation that it will abate till Jesus
comes to set up his heavenly kingdom.
“ It is claimed that Christ has come to as many as there are
of those who have embraced Spiritualism, and that there will
be no other coming of Christ; also it is claimed that
Spiritualism is the only true religion. If we did not know it
to be a fact, we coidd hardly be made to believe that intelli-
gent men and women, educated where the full blaze of Gospel
light has been shining upon their pathway, could be led to
follow the teachings of such lying—“ seducing spirits,” as are
the authors of Spiritualism. Truly we have come to PERILOUS
TIMES !”
“ Infidelity is making far more rapid progress than we area!
all aware of. It is secretly sapping the foundation of faith and
feeling throughout the whole civilized world. In numberless
cases, where there is the outward semblance of reverence for
outward things, there is underneath a sceptical influence at
work, which only waits for the suited occasion to burst forth
with overwhelming force, and carry away the feeble embank-
ments which education and social influence have erected. In
many cases it is painfully apparent how little reverence there
is for the Bible or sacred things on the part of the young
people growing up around us. If we look back upon the
history of the last quarter of a century, we cannot but see a
marked and melancholy change in this respect. There was


an outward respect, at least, for the Word of God, sufficient
to make men shrink with a sort of horror from any one who
could dare to breath infidel or sceptical notions. Even that
feeling is rapidly passing away. Thousands and tens of
thousands now listen with cold indifference, if not with secret
feeling of approval to bold infidel attacks upon the sacred
volume. All this, with much more that might be named,
marks the appalling progress' of infidelity. Professing
Christian teachers are not ashamed or afraid to call in
question the authenticity of Holy Scripture. Every new at-
tack upon the Bible, every new assault upon Christianity, is
received with growing interest by millions of professing
Christians throughout Europe and America. Every new
theory which seems at all likely to furnish materials for an
attack upon Divine revelation, or its Divine Author, is swal-
lowed with avidity. We cannot shut our eyes to these facts,
and we dare not withhold them from our readers.
“ Then, as to Superstition, in all its forms, can any one
tail to mark its progress ? What a growing confidence in
ordinances what attention to the outward forms and cere-
monies of ritualism; what a clinging to human authority ;
■what reverence for tradition; what earnest cravings after an-
tiquity ; what thirst for the attraction of music, painting,
sculpture, and architecture in the so called service and worship
of God! What do all these things indicate ? In what
direction arc they leading souls ? Of what are they the
symptons ? What is there in the professing Church to stand
against this rapid tide ? Let the thoughtful Christian answer.”
—Things New and Old, March, 1868.
Volumes might be filled with quotations showing that
there is being developed, in our day, a condition of things
under which all that is represented as taking place under the
sixth vial will be fully realized. But the remarks on this
head must close with one general observation on the Saviour’s


solemn and oft repeated declaration, Behold, I come as a thief.
It is a subject which demands onr most earnest attention
and should lead to watchfulness, and prayer, and preparation.
In the case before us, it is calculated to produce a most
startling effect upon the mind, inasmuch as it refers to his
coming in vengeance, coming to inflict the terrors of his wrath
on his enemies ; that coming in which he “ shall be revealed
from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not (rod, and that belicv e not
the Gospel of Christ.” He will be thus revealed under the
next (the seventh) vial, “at the battle of the great day of
God Almighty; in the place called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon.”
SEVENTH VIAL.
Ami the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and
there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven from the
throne saying, It is done. And there were voices, and thun-
dering s, and lightnings', and there was a great earthquake,
such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake, and so great. And the great city was divided into
three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon
came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. And every island fled
away, and the mountains were not found. And there fell upon
men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of
a talent: And men blasphemed God because of the plague of
the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.
As the Saviour was about to expire on the cross he cried,
It is finished.” In that exclamation there is a fullness of
meaning such as the mind can scarcely comprehend and the
same mav be said of the declaration given in the record of
the outpouring of the seventh vial, " It is done.”


Under this vial we have the complete accomplishment of
the prophetic word in relation to the times of the Gentiles ;
the time of the end ; the end of the days ; the last end of the
indignation ; the day of the Lord, in which the heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up ; the end of all things; THE end of
the age. The entire overthrow of all mere human institu-
tions, both civil and ecclesiastical, which must give place to
the better dispensation of the millennial period.
We might fill many pages with the statements which the
inspired penman furnish on these subjects, from the Book of
Psalms on to this last vial. Psalm xviii. 17 to end, with
many kindred passages from the pen of the royal bard.
The rapt and evangelical Isaiah in chap, xviii. 17 to end,
and in other parts of his prophecy, most vididly depicts the
scene of terrible vengance. The weeping prophet, Jeremiah,
also, is strains of sadness, tells us that destruction upon destruc-
tion is cried; see chap. iv. 19 to 28; xxv. 15 to end,
Ezekiel too, the wondrous seer, in chap, vii.; xxxviii. 18
to end, declares in the most solemn language that the Lord
will do unto the king and unto the people after their way,
and according to their deserts he will judge them, &c. The
prophetic word of Daniel, the beloved, will also, under this
vial, receives its complete fulfilment. Read, chap, ii, 34, 35 ;
vii. 11, 2G; viii. 19—25; xi. 45; xii. 7. So also all the
minor prophets. On the awful judgment of the last clays,
and the time of the end they give no uncertain sound.
To the prophetic statements of the Old Testament, might
be added the numerous declarations made by Christ and his
apostles, which most distinctly refer to the same period, and
to the same events.
“ And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air.”
This denotes the wide extent of the effects of this vial. The


whole political atmosphere is affected, and there is a scene of
wide spread commotion—“ voices, and thunders, and light-
nings.”
“ And there was a great earthquake, such as was not since
men were upon earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great.”
This is the last the greatest war. A war such as never before
occured in any period of human history,
“ And the great city was divided into three parts.” A
great diversity of opinion exists as to what is meant by the
“ great city.” Some, who appear to be fond of literalizing,
contend that it means Babylon in the most literal sense, and
that, in order to the fulfilment of the Divine predictions, the
city will be rebuilt on its ancient site, and restored to its
former greatness, &c. Some tell us that it means the city of
Rome; and others, that the Papal system is meant.
The writer thinks that there are insuperable difficulties
connected with each and all of these opinions, and that,
although he may not be able to suggest a meaning altogether
unobjectionable and free from difficulty; yet it appears to
him that by regarding the phrase as applicable to the whole
of Christendom, with its many and varied concomitants, on
to the time of the end ; we shall have less incongruity and
difficulty to contend with.
Space will not admit of any amplification, or the matter
might be put in a plainer and more conclusive light.
Let the reader consult all the passages in Revelation, in
which the expression occurs, and judge tor himselt.
The views objected to can not furnish a very easy solution
of what is said respecting the three-fold division of the great
city.
Adhering to the suggestion that Christendom is meant, we
may conclude that, probably, the division is a political one ;
and that it arises from the war and commotions just referred


“ And the cities of the nations fell/’ and probably from
the same causes. These cities, we think, are to be regarded
as the centres of empire, or governmental power, the cities
in which the “ ten kings ” will severally have their
thrones.
“ And great Babylon came into remembrance before God
to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath.” Her doom is strikingly portrayed in chap, xviii. S
verse to end. There arc two or three particulars to which it
may be necessary to make some allusion;—
1. It must not be forgotten that the true Church has been
already removed.
2. That removal has facilitated the fall of Babylon, the
infidel apostacy.
3. There is the complete overthrow, by Divine judgments,
of apostate Christendom; the harvest, it would seem, of the
world —the end of the aye.
‘■'And every island fled away, and the mountains were not
found.” Human governments are no more ; human supremacy
no longer exists.
Under the sixth seal the mountains and islands were
removed out of their places, having to give way to Anti-
christ’s system. But under the last vial they flee away
and are not found; all having to give place to the king-
dom and reign of Christ and his saints. The image is
broken, and the kingdom of God takes its place.—Daniel ii.
34, 3d, 44.
“ And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven,” &c.
The last desolating plague is inflicted upon the apostate and
impenitent race.
The vine of the earth is gathered, and the winepress of
the wrath of God is trodden as is described in chap, xix. 11
to end.
So LET ALL THINE ENEMIES PERISH, 0 LORD !


THE GREAT DRAGON BOUND.
The Liple spirit of evil having accomplished its diabolical
mission, and gathered the beast, and the kings of the earth,
and their armies to the battle of the great day, to make war
with the Lamb, that war issues in the complete overthrow
and destruction of Antichrist and of his confederated host,
and thus verifies the angel’s statement; “ These shall make
war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them : for
he is Lord of lords, and King of kings : and they that are
with him arc called, and chosen, and faithful.”
“ And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and
their armies, gathered together to make war against him that
sat on the horse, and against his army.” “ And the beast
was taken, and with him the false prophet which wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had
received the mark of the beast, and them that worshiped his
image.” “ These both were cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone.” “ And the remnant were slain
with the sword,” &c.
The whole description is of a military character, and what
is thus strikingly symbolized will be fully realized. The beast
of secular, anarchial and anti-Christian power; and the false
prophet, or teacher, of an anti-Christian and atheistical
system of religion, or rather demonism, having been vanquished:
it only remains that satanic influence, as personified by the
great dragon, should be placed under restraint during the
millennial period. That influence, as stated previously (see
Key, and foot note, pp. 16 and 17), is seen in a system-
atized infidelity. Barnes, in his notes on the third verse of
the xii. chap., has the following observations :
{a) The dragon. This is explained verse 9 of this
chapter : —“ And the great dragon was cast out, that old
serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceiveth the
whole world.”


So again, on cliap. xx. 2, And he laid hold of the dragon,
that old serpent, which is the devil. Compare Bochart, Hieroz,
ii. p.p. 439 and 440. “There can be no doubt, therefore,
that the reference here is to Satan, considered as the enemy
of God and the enemy of the peace of man, and especially as
giving origin and form to some mighty power that would
threaten the existence of the church.” That “ mighty power,”
we have endeavored to show, is a system pf atheistical
apostacy, which not only threatens, but destroys the existence
of the church. But that mighty power is doomed, and with
it all that is antagonistic to the kingly character and claims
of Christ. All merely human government, which has ever
been characterised by ambition and its attendant evils, will
no longer exist as a curse to the human family. All human
forms and systems of religion, which, at best, have always
been imperfect, and failed to realize the best intentions of
their authors, and which have often been sadly corrupt and
led to divisions, and strife, and persecution, shall give place
to one in which, among all the tribes of Adam’s race, Christ
shall be all in all, and “ there shall be one Lord and
his name One.” In fact, before the great battle of Armaged-
don takes place, there will have been, as above stated, the
removal of the true church, and the martyrdom of those who,
on that removal, become decided for Christ, and the remainder
of Christendom having apostated, all names, and sects, and
parties, will have ceased to exist.
There remains, therefore, only the monster evil of infidelity
which the dragon represents, and that particular form of
Satanic power is crushed, Satan himself being bound, and
held in restraint during the period of the millennium.
With the following words, from the pen of Dr. Chalmers,
we close our remarks on the Seals, Trumpets, and Vials.
In a letter to the Rev. E. Bickersteth, dated 17th February,
1836, he says, “I have lately finished the perusal of allMede’s


and of all Cunninghame’s prophetical works, and certainly !
have been much impressed by them. 1 sympathise, hone\ei,
far more with your doubts than 1 do with his decision on the
subject of a personal reign. But of this in the general lam
well satisfied, that the next coming (whether in person or not
1 tbrbear to say) will be a coming, not to the final judgment,
but to precede and usher in the millennium. I utterly despair
of the universal prevalence of Christianity as the result of a
pacific missionary process, under the guidance of human
wisdom and principle. But, without slackening in the least
our obligation to help forward this great cause, I look for its
conclusive establishment through a- widening passage of
desolating judgments, with the utter demolition of our present
civil and ecclesiastical structures.” — Life of Ttev, E. Bicker steth,
vol. ii. p. 92.
THINGS OF THE MILLENNIAL REIGN.
. Bid I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment
mas given unto them ; and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God,
and which had not worshiped the beast, neither his image,
niether had received his mark upon their foreheads, or on their
hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the
thousand years were, finished . This is the first ressurrection.
Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first ressurrectiou :
on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be
priests of God and of Christ, and they shall reign with him
a thousand years. —Chap. xx. 4,5, •>.
Were it not that men have some favorite theory to main-
tain. the above passage might be left to speak tor itself.
Onthesubjectofthemillennium.it is multum in parvo,


and viewed in connexion with other passages on that subject
it certainly seems to teach the following :
First, that John sees, in vision, two parties.
The first, “ those who sat on the thrones, and unto whom
judgment was given.” And who are they ? In reply we
further ask, can they be any other than those who are men-
tioned in chap. vi. 4—10; chap. vi. 8, 9,10. (See pp. 48, 49.)
The second party, those who had been beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, &c., under the personal Antichrist. (See
special honor of these, p. 25.)
As to the attempt of some to make a great deal of the
expression “ the souls,” which occurs in the above passage,
as though disembodied spirits only were meant, it may be
merely remarked that such a view, with the plain, distinct,
and repeated statement as to the resurrection. — 'the first
resurrection —cannot be maintained. And further, that in
several instances the expression is employed in such a manner
as to denote only living persons: “ Ten souls were saved in
the ark.”—l Peter, iii. 20. “We were in all in the ship two
hundred threescore and sixteen souls.” —Acts xxvii. 37.
The high honors, which the above passage represents as be-
longing to the parties just referred to, cannot, with propriety,
be considered as being any other than real. The glowing pre-
dictions, the delightful promises, and the sublime symbolical
representations in which those honors are presented to our
view, are so numerous and so varied, that one cannot help
feeling some surprise when men tell us, as some do, that the
above passage is almost the only one in which is taught the
personal reign of Christ on the earth, and the reign of the
saints with their Lord; and that that is to be understood in
a figurative sense. The only particular in relation to which
the above statement, just referred to, is at all correct, is that
which relates to the period during which the reign (of Christ
and that of his saints will be continued—namely, a thousand


years ; and that is twice stated, or we might say it occurs no
less than six times in the first seven verses of this twentieth
chapter.
It is from this the term millennium is taken; or rather,
from the word ml lie, which, means a thousand. But while the
term is a convenient one for use while speaking on the
general subject, the time which it designates is not of very
great importance, one thing being very plain—namely, the
time will not be less than a thousand years, literally under-
stood. Some say they are prophetic years; if so, then the period
will be one of three hundred and sixty thousand years. But
the prospect of one thousand years of blessedness, for this sin-
smitten, down-trodden world of ours, together with the thought
that it may very soon commence, ought to gladden the heart
of all who have any regard for the honor of Christ, and the
well-being of their fellow man.
In remarking further on this important subject, we would
lay down a few plain propositions in regard to the millennium,
understanding it as including the premillennial advent and
the personal reign ;
First. It is necessary on account of the heathen world.
It may be briefly stated that the heathen population, at the
present time, is something like nine hundred and tufty million.
Think too of their sad condition, and how little has been done
doing to improve that condition. The last sixty years have
been marked as a period of missionary effort, and,
during that period one and a quarter million have been con-
verted from heathenism : but during the same period the
heathen population has increased one hundred and fifty
million.
Second. The condition of the Christian world renders the
millennium necessary. How divided, distracted, torn, and
corrupted is the professing church! Those who take a nar-
row view of things may think otherwise. But let them take


a glance of the whole of Christendom. It is seen to consist
of three parts, and numbering in all about three hundred and
fifty million. Of these, as above stated, the Roman Catholic
Church numbers about one hundred and seventy million;
the Greek Church, seventy-six million; and the Protestant
sects, eighty-five million, with a number of non-descripts.
(See p. 41).
Third. What is termed a millennial condition of things is
most distinctly predicted by the inspired writers. On this
nearly all are agreed, and, therefore, further remark is un-
necessary.
Fourth. The millennium will include the conversion of the
Jews and their restoration to their own land.
Let any one lay aside the metaphorical and spiritualizing
system of handling the Prophetic Word, and commence to
read the predictions which relate to Israel and Judah, and he
will not fail to be struck with the number, the variety, and
the fullness of those predictions ; nor will he be at a loss to
perceive by what means and under what circumstances they
will be verified.
Fifth. The millennium will be a period of general blessed-
ness ; one of divine knowledge, of righteousness, and
peace.
The nations are to know the Lord and serve him. “All
the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the
Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship
before him.” “ All nations whom thou has made shall come
and worship before thee 0 Lord; and shall glorify thy name.”
“ The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the
waters cover the sea.” “ And there was given him dominion,
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him.”
Were it necessary, many other passages of the same
import might be quoted.


Sixth, During the millennium there will be the employ-
ment of suitable agencies. Those agencies, it would
appear, will be somewhat similar to what we have
under the present dispensation, but they will be used under
more favorable circumstances, and with greater success. We
find frequent reference to the remarkable outpouring of the
Spirit in the latter day, but we nowhere learn that the Divine
Spirit will operate on men’s minds independent of human
instrumentality. We see this in in the case of the Jews —
Ezekiel xxxvii. 1-14, and Zechariah xii. 9 to end.
During the times and calling of the Gentiles, the Gospel
message is proclaimed; salvation by faith in Christ is the
grand theme; and those who, under the influence of the
Divine Spirit, embrace the Gospel message, become partici-
pants in Gospel blessings : and so long as the present dispen-
sation lasts, these means and results will continue. May
they he greatly multiplied: there is ample scope for it, and
abundant reason why the church should be in labors more
abundant, attending to the great Master’s command, “ Occupy
till I come,” and thus contribute, instrumentally, to the suc-
cess of the Gospel of the grace of God, and be looking on to
the time of the kingdom when “ all shall bo blessed in the
King and call him blessed.”
To bring about that much to be be desired condition of
things in this rebel and disordered world, “ the Spirit will be
poured out from on high” “upon all flesh;’ and suitable
human instrumentality will be largely and successful!)' en-
gaged in the work of evangelizing the nations ; such instru-
mentality will be chiefly that of the Jews, bhe Jewish people
have been wonderfully preserved, not only because Jehovah
has rich blessings yet in store for them, but also because that
through them he intends to bless the nations of earth.
Thus runs the word of promise; “ Behold, at that time I
will undo all that afflict thee; .... for I will make


you a name and a praise among all the people of the earth,
when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the
Lord. And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse
among the heathen, 0 house of Judah and house of Israel, so
will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but let
your hands be strong. He shall cause them that come of
Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the
face of the world with fruit. And I will set a sign among
them, and I will send of those that escape among them unto the
nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to
Tubed, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my
fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my
glory.”
“ When the Lord is merciful to his people and to his land,
all the earth will share in the blessing. c Rejoice ye with
Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her/ for the
promised era of her prosperity will be the grand harvest time
of missionary success. ‘lf the casting away of them be the
reconciling of the world, what shall bo the receiving of them
but as life from the dead V They are the Lord’s appointed
missionaries to all lands, though they know not now, in the
days of their darkness and unbelief, the high honour which
their long despised Messiah—Jehovah Jesus—has in reserve
for them,” The first missionaries were Jews, and no others
have been so successful.
We have already remarked on the dispensational character
of man’s history; that one dispensation or age has succeeded
another ; that former dispensations have been wound up under
terrible judgments; that each succeeding dispensation has
been brighter and better than the previous one, and that the
present, the Gentile dispensation, will run out under the form
of a sad apostacy and retributive judgment, to be followed
by another and a more superior dispensation; that again to
be characterised, in the end, by apostacy and judgment, and


succeeded by the glorious dispensation of THE ETERNAL AGES.
Let it be particularly observed that the mdlennial dispen-
sation will be strikingly typical of the glorious and eternal
dispensation, by which it will be followed. And, as a writer
in the- “ The Prophetic Times ” (Aug., 1868) observes : The
millennium will he the restoring period; and in the eighth and
all coming ages, things will he in an actually restored state.
The prophet Isaiah, gives a most glorious description of
the light and glory of the millennial and the post-mcllennial
state, and shows that they are vastly superior to those of
Judaism and Gentile Christianity. “ The sun shall no more
be thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon
give light unto thee : hut the Lord shall he unto thee an ever-
lasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy SUN shall no more
go down, neither shall THY MOON withdraw itself; for the
Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended/’ Isa. lx. IJ, -9.
THE LAST APOSTACY.
The millennium being a subject of great importance, one
which occupies a very prominent place in Holy Writ, and one
in which we are personally interested, a considerable portion
of our limited space has been devoted to it; and as the limits
within which it was the intention to keep the general subject
have been greatly exceeded, the remaining portions must be
treated very briefly.
The last apostacy lies far on in the unknown future, and
is a matter respecting which mankind may have other and
plainer revelations. The statement we have respecting it is
very brief, but it embodies all that it concerns us to know.
It takes place at the close of the millennial period. Satan,
the adversary, is the prime agent. Once more, and for the last
time, he is permitted to deceive the nations. Under Satanic in-
fluence they will be gathered together to battle, compass the camp


of the saints round about, and the beloved city. But their malig-
nant designs are frustrated, they themselves fall victims to the
judgments of heaven, and the devil that deceived them shares in
the dread and eternal doom of the beast and of the false prophet.
This apostacy does not in any way nor in any of its features
resemble the apostacy under Antichrist. The nations are not
the same; the results, in regard to the saints, are not the
same; and, probably, the armies will not be the same. The
issue is the final overthrow of evil, and of the evil one. Thus
there will be a gliding, as it were, of the millennial into the
higher and eternal state. “ And when the thousand years are
expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go
out to deceive the nations, which are in the four quarters of
the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them to battle: the num-
ber of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they went up on
the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the
saints round about, and the beloved city: and fire came down
from God out of heaven, and devoured them. And the devil
that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brim-
stone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ever and ever,”
THINGS OF THE FINAL JUDGMENT.
And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it
from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there
was found no place for them.
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God;
and the books were opened: and another book teas opened,
which is the book of life : and the dead were judged out of
those things which were written in the book, according to their
works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it ,■ and
death and the invisible state gave up the dead which were in
them: and they were judged, every one, according to their
works. And death and the invisible state were cast into the


lake of fire. This is the second death. And if any one were
not found written in the hook of life, he ivas cast in the lake
fire. —Rev. xx. 11-15.
In the above passage we have a description of the findl
resurrection and general judgment.
We have already remarked on the first resurection and its
several stages. —(pp. 18, 24, 45, 46, 62.)
On this subject the apostle Paul, in his full and conclusive
argument on the resurrection, as given in 2 Cor. xv. chap, is
remarkably clear and convincing. Sec particularly'verse 16-26.
The 22nd verse includes all the subjects of the resurrection.
“ For as in Adam all die even so in Christ shall all he made
alive.” No statement can be plainer, and if the apostle had
said no more, our friends, who contend for the one and simul-
taneous resurrection of the righteous and the wicked, might
claim Paul as being on their side. As the case stands,
however, he affords them no countenance whatever, for he adds,
“ But every man is his own order : Christ the firstfruits, after-
wards they that are Christ’s at his coming .”
But those who contend for the post-millennial advent and
the resurrection of the righteous and the wicked at one and the
same time, think that the above statement, by John, is decidedly
in their favor inasmuch as it contains a reference to the
righteous dead. That the passage does contain such a reference
may be readily allowed, though at the same time it is evidently
more in favor of the pre-millennial view than it is of the post-
millennial, for while there is the resurrection of both good
and evil, of those who were and of those who were not written
in the book of life they must, unmistakably, comprise the rest
of the wicked dead, and of the righteous, and others who die
during the millennial period,'* so that, without any far-fetched
exposition, or incongruous spiritualizing nonsense, we see the
* The fourteenth verse contains the first intimation of any reversal
of the sentence of death, or of death itself being destroyed. (Ses Isaiah
Ivi. 20.)


plain meaning of the statement contained in verses 4,5, 6, of
this twentieth chapter.
In reference to the passage in Cor. xv. 23, it may be ob-
served that there is an interval of nearly two thousand years
between the resurrection of Christ (the firstfruits) and that of
those who are Christ’s at his coming; so that it need not be
at all surprising if there be other, yet shorter, intervals between
the different stages of the first resurrection, and an interval of,
at least, a thousand years between “ the firstfruits ” and the
general resurrection.
The subject of the general judgment is one on which it is
not necessary to make any observations, as it is one distinctly
taught in the sacred Scriptures, and one which, with greater
or less correctness, is frequently dwelt upon by the teachers
of Christian doctrine.
A word or two on a portion of the eleventh verse must con-
clude our remarks on the things of final judgment.
The reader will understand what portion is referred to if
we give it parenthetically. il And I saw a great white throne,
and he that sat on it (from whose face THE earth and the
heaven fied away ; and there was found no place for them).
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.”
May it not be asked, Do not the words, given as above, relate
to what had taken place sometime previously, and refer to
the order of things under the Gentile dispensation, which had
already passed away ? (See p. 80).
THE ETERNAL STATE.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, &fc.
In Rev., chap. xxi. 1-5, and 9 to end, and chap. xxii. 1-5, we
have a very striking description of the new order of things, of
the ineffable glory and distinguished blessedness of the people
of God in the everlasting ages. Of that description, the


plainest part is that which is contained in chap. xxi. 1-5;
the other portions are highly symbolical, and in attempting
to explain the symbolical portions care must be taken, so
that such explanations shall harmonise with the plainer part
referred to. Let the following be attentively considered; —
And I saw a new heaven and a
new earth : for the first heaven and
the first earth were passed away, and
there was no more sea. —Yerse 1.
And I John saw the holy city, new
Jerusalem, coming down from God
out of heaven, prepared as a bride
adorned for her husband. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God
is with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people,
<sfc. —Verses 2, 3.
And God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes; and there shall be
'no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: for the former things are
passed away. —Verse 4.
And the city had no need of the sun,
neither of the moon, to shine in it:
for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof.
Verse 23.
And the nations of them which are
saved shall walk in the light of it:
and the kings of the earth do bring
their honour and glory unto it. And
the gates of it shall not be shut
at all by day : for there shall be no
night there. And they shall bring the
glory and honour oj the nations in.o
it. —Verses 24-2 G.
And there shall in no
defileth, neither whatsoever
lie; but they
Yerse 27.
And he that sat upon the (white)
throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And he said unto me, Write:
for ‘these words are time and faith-
ful. —Yerse 5.
And there came unto me one of the
seven angels saying.
Come hither, I will show thee the
bride, the Lamb’s wife. And he car-
ried me away in the spirit to a great
and high mountain, and showed me
that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God, <Sfc. —Verses
9, 10.
And there shall be no more curse :
but the throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it; and his servants
shall serve him ; And they shall see
his face; and his name shall be in
their foreheads. —Chap. ixii. 3, 4.
And there shall bo no night there :
and they need no candle, neither
light of the sun; for the Lord God
giveth them light. —Chap. ixii. 5.
And he showed me a pure river of
the water of life, clear as crystal, pro-
ceeding out of the throne of God and
of the Lamb. In the midst of the
street of it, and on either side of the
river, was there the tree of life, which
bare twelve manner of fruits, and
yielded her fruit every month: and
the leaves of the trees were for the
healing of the nations. —Chap. ixii.
1, 2.
enter into it any thing that
ivorketh
abomination, or maJceth a
which are written in the Lamb's booh of life.


The author thinks he cannot do better than to conclude
by quoting the following words of the Rev. J. C. Ryle : “ The
one point on which I desire to fix the eyes of my own soul, is
the second personal coming of my Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ. To that blessed hope and gloiious appearing I wish
by God’s help, to direct all who read this volume. God for-
bid that any one should neglect present duties ! To sit idly
waiting for Christ, and not to attend to our respective
positions, is not Christianity, but fanaticism. Let us only
remember in all our daily employments, that we serve a
Master who is coming again If I can only stir up one
Christian to think more of that second coming, and to keep
it more prominently before his mind, I feel that the volume
will not have been published in vain.”
REY.
The Church has waited long
Her absent Lord to see;
And still in loneliness she waits, —
A friendless stranger she.
Age after age has gone.
Sun after sun has set.
And still in weeds of widowhood
She weeps, a mourner yet.
Come, then. Lord Jesus, come !
Saint after saint on earth
Has liv’d, and lov’d, and died;
And as they left us one by one.
We laid them side by side;
We laid them down to sleep.
But not in hope forlorn;
We laid them but to ripen there.
Till the last glorious morn.
Come, then. Lord Jesus, Come !
The serpent’s brood increase.
The powers of hell grow bold.
The conflict thickens, faith is low.
And love is waxing cold.
How long, O Lord our God,
Holy and true and good.
XXII. 20,
Wilt thou not judge thy suffering
Church,
Her sighs and tears and blood P
Come, then. Lord Jesus, come !
We long to hear thy voice.
To see thee face to face,
To share thy crown and glory then.
As now we share thy grace.
Should not the loving Bride
The absent Bridegroom mourn ?
Should she not wear the weeds of
grief
Until her Lord return P
Come, then. Lord Jesus, come !
The whole creation groans.
And waits to hear that voice
Which shall restore her comeliness.
And make her wastes rejoice.
Come, Lord, and wipe away
The curse, the sin, the stain,
And make this blighted world o
Thine own fair world again.
Come, then. Lord Jesus, come !
JAMES CDHTIS, CAXTON STEAM PRINTING WORKS, 39, ARMSTRONG-ST,, BALLARAT.




