

Federal Elections, 1934
LABOR’S POLICY
Speech delivered by Hon. J. H. Scullin, M.H.R.,
Leader Australian Labor Party, in Richmond
Town Hall, on Wednesday, August 15, 1934
A grave responsibility will rest upon
the people of Australia on September 15.
At the last election the present Govern-
ment was swept into office on a wave of
credulous optimism originated by artful
propagandists.
Returning prosperity with the advent
to office of the U.A.P. was portrayed to
the anxious minds of suffering men and
women. The platform, the press, broad-
casting stations and city hoardings were
employed to proclaim the glad tidings
that a change of Government would trans-
form the people’s conditions from poverty
to prosperity.
To give a semblance of having per-
formed the wonders envisaged in their
election declarations the Government and
its supporters are striving to persuade
the people that they have really entered
into the Promised Land, Constant repe-
tition that marvellous benefits have is-
sued from the Lyons Administration is
relied upon to convince the unemployed
and struggling farmers that they are not
really suffering from the privation they
believe.
By unstinted expenditure on printed
and radio messages, it is hoped to hypno-
tise electors into Imagining that their
ills have vanished. Political faith heal-
ing is being practised on a large scale,
and magical curative results are con-
jured up as election day approaches.
When the Labor Government was in
office every disability suffered by the
community was emphasised and cited as
proof of Labor’s wrongdoing. To-day
the serious ills of humanity are veiled
from the political sight of many by the
colored speeches and writings of Govern-
'iment apologists.
A FINANCIAL AVALANCHE
During the first two years of the dec
pression the Labor Government struggled
against a formidable economic and finan-
cial avalanche, and by resolute measures
saved the country from being over-
whelmed. Remedies had to be applied
determinedly. No anaesthetics were
available to ease the pain. When, later,
our Government faced the electors, we
made no attempt to disguise the truth.
The facts were placed fully and frankly
before the country. We outlined com-
prehensive measures to grapple with the
unprecedented problems confronting us;
but the alluring pictures of painted pros-
perity by our opponents won the day.
Disappointment and disillusionment are
now the lot of the multitude. Knowing
this, and entering into the feelings of the
disillusioned people, I come forth, on be-
half of the Labor Party, with practical
proposals that can be put- into operation
in the next Parliament —proposals that
will be given effect to if Labor Is elected
to power.
The ideals of the Labor Party are set
out printed in the forefront of our plat-
form as an objective and «a guide. The
progress made in the realisation of those
alms along the course of democratic de-
velopment will necessarily depend upon
the steps taken and the pace made as
the will of the people reacts to changing
circumstances in the light of experience
and understanding.
TASK AND REMEDIES
The Immediate task confronting us, at
this juncture, however, is to cope effec-
tively with existing conditions by prac-
tical remedies for present-day ills.
Stern realities must be faced. We
have still more than 300,000 unemployed.
The majority of our farmers are working
for nothing, and are sinking further into
debt. Thousands of the youth of Aus-
tralia have no permanent prospects. To
meet the situation the nation is not called
upon to set up an organisation to in-
crease our productive power. There is
no need to practise self-denial to provide
the means of purchasing machinery,
erecting plants, and buildings, and con-
structing railroads and wharves. We
have all these agencies of production only
partly in use. The one thing lacking is
money.
The present monetary system has
failed. Another must take its place.
Control of monetary machinery for
private profits must give way to national
control for the benefit of all. Change of
control alone, however, will not suffice.
There must be a change of policy. Money
must be made the servant of industry,
not its master.
MONETARY REFORM
Monetary reform involves the question
of unemployed relief; a just price to pro-
ducers; adequate social services; and a
standard of living rising higher and
1


higher until we have reached our capacity
for production. These aims are practic-
able, and cannot be dismissed by mere
political persiflage. The superior pose
of bankers speaking with self-assumed
authority cannot dispose of the tragic
facts of private monetary control. Let
the money masters be judged, not by
their words, but by the fruits of their
policy. Engineers have almost perfec-
ted productive machinery. Organisers of
industry have co-related the factors of
production so effectively that all human
requirements can be provided in super-
abundance. The controllers of finance,
however, have lagged behind. They
live in the financial era of the last cen-
tury, and loftily scorn the demand for
modern methods of finance to meet
modern conditions.
The main features of the policy the
Labor Party places before you include
these vital issues:
Radical monetary and banking reform;
Definite planning to provide employ-
ment;
Raising living standards to increase
purchasing power;
Marketing of Australian products; and
Effective protection for Australian in-
dustries.
LABOR SET EXAMPLE
More than 20 years ago the Labor
Party set out to nationalise banking; to
bring banking and credit under National
instead of private control. To that end
the Commonwealth Bank was established
by the Fisher Government. Starting
without capital, it soon became a live
competitor with the private banks, and,
by its handling of Australia’s war loan
flotations, saved the people of Australia
£6,000,000 in flotation expenses alone.
The direct profits of the Commonw r ealth
Bank and Note issue, now exceeding
£25,000,000, are substantial gains to all
the people which otherwise would have
gone to shareholders of private banks.
Fully one-thiid of the dividends from
private banks operating in Australia is
paid to overseas shareholders. It Is not
profits, however, that a nationally-owned
bank should seek, but the general welfare
of the peop’e. Banks control credit,
which is the life blood of all industries.
Their power to expand or contract credit
makes them overlords of industry and
trade, and, in difficult times, even gives
them control over the activities of Go-
vernments. If that power were exer-
cised for public ■well-being, without first
thought of profits or dividends, all would
be well. But that is too much to expect
from profit-making companies.
FALSE ALLEGATIONS
It is suggested by unscrupulous politi-
cal opponents, and by ill-informed critics,
that the Labor Party would confiscate the
banks, seize the deposits, and generally
commit wanton acts of robbery and pil-
lage. Such allegations are false. They
are wicked misrepresentations of an
honest Party composed of honorable men.
That persons occupying high positions in
the community can degrade themselves
to uttering such mendacities is beyond
the comprehension of true Australians,
The Labor Party proposes to continue
the work of expanding the Common-
wealth Bank to that of a Banker’s Bank.
Its control was taken out of the hands of
the Governor and placed in a Board of
eight, of whom six represented private
financial and commercial interests.
The Governor’s position was a full-time
one, and his energies were directed solely
to the promotion of the Bank’s success.'
The Directors who were later appointed
to give part-time service represented out-
side interests in the commercial and
financial world.
Our proposal is to restore the manage-
ment to a Governor, as originally, when
established by the Fisher Government.
The bank will be freed to enter upon
a policy of vigorous competition with the
private banks. Branches wall be estab-
lished in centres where banking business
warrants. The banking business of Com-
monwealth and State Governments, Muni-
cipal Councils, and all other public bodies
will be reserved by legislation for the
people’s bank. There is no just reason
why public accounts should be building
up private profits when there is a
publicly-owned bank to do the work.
CONTRADICTORY CRITICISM
Much of churlish criticism of that
policy is self-contradictory. An oligarchy
will be set up in banking, says one. The
bank will be subject to political control,
avers another.
Without going into unnecessary de-
tails, I point out that control by the full-
time Governor, with proved capacity and
integrity, is preferable to an oligarchy
composed of Directors with greater in-
terests outside the Bank’s operations.
To guard securely against political con-
trol, or private interference with the de-
tailed working of the Bank ,the Governor
would be appointed tor a fixed period, and
removable only by vote of Parliament, as
in the case of judges.
Under Sir Denison Miller, who was ap-
pointed by a Labor Government, the Com-
monwealth Bank was free from political
interference. Political control began
when the power of the Governor was
made subservient to a Board of Direc-
tors politically appointed by the Bruce-
Page Government.
The policy and administration will be
laid down by Act of Parliament. It is
surely preferable to have banking policy
decided by a Parliament representing the
people than to have it dictated by vested
interests.
Matters of high policy will be deter-
mined by Parliament and executed by
the Government. But the detailed ad-
ministration, the handling of individual
accounts, will be kept free from Govern-
ment or any other interference. That
principle was laid down by the Labor Go-
vernment in 1911, and is still the policy
of the Labor Party.


AftßitfcAftY FIXING
Banks play an important part in deter-
mining interest rates. Supply and de-
mand may operate, but the Banks exer-
cise considerable control of the supply.
Too often they arbitrarily fix the rate of
interest, and a tightness in the money
market is their opportunity to squeeze
greater tribute from borrowers. ■ Indus-
tries have been crushed under the in-
terest burden, and only by legislation and
public pressure have interest rates been
reluctantly reduced.
Fears are entertained by officials in the
private banks that their employment
would disappear with nationalisation of
banking. But, with the expansion of the
Commonwealth Bank, the officers of other
banks will find full opportunities of em-
ployment.
It is true that eventually there would
be less duplication of branches. Who
can justify half-a-dozen banks in a dis-
trict where one would suffice? Observe
the number of bank premises in suburbs
or country towns where one post office
copes with all postal work. And postal
facilities are provided for a larger num-
ber. of individuals than those patronising
banks. With banking and monetary re-
form assisting and stimulating industry,
there would be greater opportunities for
employment in all walks of life.
Objection is taken that the proposal
would create a Government banking
monopoly. But that is preferable to
private monopoly in banking, which is
coming nearer every year. Banks are
being absorbed, and binding arrange-
ments are made between the others
In 1917 the principal private, trading
banks operating in Australia numbered
20. Since then 11 have been absorbed,
and nine remain.
The amalgamated balance-sheets of
the trading banks for the 10 normal years
after the war and before the depression,
1920 to 1929 inclusive, show (heir repor-
ted profits £46,086,930, and the dividends
paid £33,237,787. These reported profits
gave an average return on paid-up capital
over the ten years of 14.86 per cent. The
dividends paid averaged 10.61 per cent,
on paid-up capital.
ABSENTEE SHAREHOLDERS
The three London controlled banks,
with their head offices. Boards of Direc-
tors, and a majority of shareholders over-
seas, have more than one-third of Austra-
lia’s banking business, and, approxi-
mately, one-third of their dividends go
abroad. The City of London, therefore,
wields considerable influence over Aus-
tralian finance. In 10 normal years, 1920
to 1929, the reported profits of these
banks were £16,000,000, and the divi-
dends paid £12,000,000, their dividends
ranging from 10 per cent, to 15 per cent.
In those 10 years the dividends paid
exceeded the capital subscribed, In
addition, a large percentage of their pro-
fits have been placed in reserves, to say
nothing of considerable sums of hidden
profits placed in hidden reserves. The
amount of these can only be ascertained
by a searching enquiry. The Labor Go-
vernment will institute a thorough and
impartial enquiry into the Whole mohe-
lary question, as well as the operations
of private banking.
May I explain that when the Govern-
ment borrows direct from the banks by
overdraft or issue of Treasury Bills, the
banks are enabled to expand credit rest-
ing upon the nation’s credit, and so
charge interest upon what virtually be-
longs to the nation.
There is no sound reason why the Go-
vernment should pay heavy interest
charges to private banks in order to
utilise credit belonging to the whole com-
munity.
Public works for national needs as well
as for the lifting of unemployment could
be undertaken without crushing the
people with heavy interest burdens.
As an excuse for its failure on unem-
ployment, the Lyons Government quotes
figures showing a decline to 20.9 per cent,
in the number of unionists unemployed.
The statistics quoted, however, do not in-
clude large numbers of boys and girls
left school and denied employment.
None of that alarming number is recorded
in the Unions’ reports to the Statistician
as unemployed. They have never heen
in a union, because never employed. Bach
year 90,000 boys and girls leave school
seeking work. Fifty thousand wage
earners die or retire annually. There
are ninety thousand workers. Herein
is the most tragic phase of unemploy-
ment.
A FALSE CLAIM
There are 1,610,000 employes in Austra-
lia who have reached the age of 20 years
and over. On a 20.9 per cent, calculation
that would give the total number of un-
employed in Australia as 336,000. The
position is surely grave in the extreme,
notwithstanding that there has been some
improvement! Let the fact here be noted
that the increased price of wool, adding
£22,000,000 to the National income last
financial year, was not due to any action
by the Lyons Government. That rise,
however, created optimism in certain
quarters, and many who had locked up
their money early in the depression are
now beginning to employ it. The re-
vival in gold mining due to currency de-
preciation and the stimulus given by the
Labor Government was another factor in
improving the position. These upward
movements are wrongly claimed as
achievements by the Lyons Government.
The Government also seeks credit for
the increased employment in factories,
but that is due almost entirely to the ope-
rations of the Labor Government’s pro-
tectionist policy.
The Chief Inspector of Factories re-
ported that, in 1931, no less than 222 new
factories commenced operations in Vic-
toria, and that the number employed were
5776 greater than in 1930.
The higher duties, however, did not
take full effect until two years after being
imposed, owing to the holding of heavy
stocks of imported goods. Despite duty
reductions by the present Government,
Australian industries have benefited from
protection given by the Labor Govern-
ment,


STATISTICS AND STOMACHS
The number employed in factories has
increased by over 60,000 since June,
1931. In the wool and worsted industry
5.000 more are employed than before the
depression. In the cotton industry the
number of employes doubled, and 2,000
more were employed in the electrical ap-
paratus and wireless industries. These
are illustrations of the movement that
has taken place in manufacturing, and
bears testimony to the value of the Labor
Government’s protectionist policy. This
upward trend - -must be stimulated by
greater efforts. To quote reductions in
the percentage figures of unemployment
will not lighten the burdens of the
300.000 still unemployed. The self-satis-
faction and complacency of the Govern-
ment is disastrous to men and women
suffering acutely.
Although faced with greater financial
difficulties, the Labor Government ex-
pended more money in 1930-31 on works
than was spent during the last two years
by the present Government, And what
we did was only a fraction of what could
have been done had not our financial pro-
posals been rejected by the Senate.
The anti-Labor Parties seek to make
political capital out of the fall in the num-
ber of unemployed, but there is very little
rubstance in their claim, in face of the
fact that the percentage improvement in
unemployment figures has been greatest
in West Australia since the Labor Go-
vernment there was returned. In Labor-
governed Queensland the percentage of
unemployment is the lowest in Australia.
Before the U.A.P. Federal Government
can justly claim credit they should show
what part they actually played In bring-
ing about any improvement. The Go-
vernment rests its claim almost entirely
upon one set phrase; “We have restored
confidence.”
Realising that the public were looking
for some specific proof, Mr. Lyons, speak-
ing in Sydney on 2nd July last, essayed
to supply it. On that occasion he said;
—“Four per cent. 1961 Australian stocks,
in September, 1931, were down in value
to £7O/18/2. On 22nd December of that
year, a few days after the present Go-
vernment had been elected, they had
risen to £9O/18/6.”
WRONG DEDUCTIONS
By that statement the Prime Minister
sought to create the impression that Aus-
tralian stocks had jumped from £7O/18/2
to £9O/18/6 immediately his Government
was elected. The honest fact was that
these same stocks had risen to £9O/14/5
before the elections were held. So that,
instead of rising £2O in a few' days after
the elections, they rose by the trifling
amount of 4/-. So much for this vaunted
restoration of confidence, forming the
whole political stock and trade of the
Lyons Government.
Confidence in the security of Australian
stocks was restored during the last three
months of Labor’s regime. Following
upon the success of the huge conversion
loan, the market price of our stocks rose
consistently. Lack of opportunities to
invest in industry has caused further
rises in the price of Government stock.
We should hear no more of the vain-
glorious boast that confidence had been
restored by the change of Government.
Faith in Government securities has
been restored, but much more remains to
be donie. There is still lack of confidence
in thousands of homes where unemploy-
ment and poverty prevail. There is
grave anxiety in other homes where
parents are seeking in vain for opportuni-
ties to place their children in work and
commence them on useful and honorable
careers.
At the Premiers’ Conference, called by
the Labor Government in September,
1931, special consideration was given to
unemployment.
The Commonwealth and State Govern-
ments submitted lists of works of perma-
nent value, including building of work-
men’s homes, afforestation, road construc-
tion, opening up new land for occupation
and serving also to feed the railways,
clearing Crown lands, water supply and
sewerage for several country towns and
outer suburbs, water conservation for
stock and irrigation purposes, dams and
bores on stock routes, wheat bulk hand-
ling, and harbour improvements. The
Commonwealth Railways submitted a
proposal for the construction of a railway
from Port Augusta to Red Hill on the
standard gauge, and to continue that
gauge to Adelaide. That would give a
uniform gauge from Kalgoolie to Ade-
laide, and would bring us another stage
nearer a uniform railway gauge for Aus-
tralia.
BANKS PROVOKE POVERTY
The Premiers’ Conference 'appointed a
committee to report on these and other
proposals. That committee consisted of
Mr. J. Gunn, Mr. H. W. Gepp, represent-
ing the Development Department; Profes-
sor Brigden, Professor Giblln, and Pro-
fessor Hytten, as economists; and
Messrs. Mulvaney and Murphy, of the
Commerce Department. The committee,
in their report, advised: “THAT IN THIS
EMERGENCY THE BANKING RE-
SOURCES OF THE COUNTRY MUST
BE USED TO THE LIMIT.”
The banks, however, took a different
view, and the comprehensive plan of pub-
lice works was not proceeded wtih, be-
cause money was not obtainable. Mean-
while, thousands of workers and their
families are living on sustenance. State
Governments have spent £27,000,01)0 over
the past three years on sustenance and
work for sustenance, of little permanent
value while the workless remain to eke
out a miserable existence. Not this, but
a bold forward policy is needed to trans-
fer a large number of men from susten-
ance to permanent employment, thereby
making a substantial start on the upward
grade.
An Australian outlook is also needed.
The purchase of a cruiser overseas at a
cost of £2,280.000 is monstrous, while
thousands of Australians are unem-
ployed.


NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
The north of Australia offers scope for
national development in pastoral, agri-
cultural, and mining pursuits. Settle-
ment of the north is essential to the pre-
servation of our White Australia Policy.
Labor is strongly opposed to the ex-
ploitation of Northern and Central Aus-
tralia by Chartered Companies. We
shall seek the aid of the people of that
Territory, by granting to them a system
of self-government through an Advisory
Council, as was proposed by the Labor
Government, but rejected by the Senate.
In classifying lands of the Territory,
Labor will remove many anomalies at
present existing. All leases will be sur-
veyed to determine boundaries and facili-
tate improvements.
Encouragement will be given to the in-
troduction of stud stock, and the develop-
ment of the great agricultural possibili-
ties of this Territory.
To help in placing the unemployed in
work assistance will be given to prospec-
tors, Government batteries and water
supplies will also be provided where prac-
ticable.
The preservation of our forests is a
national obligation. If large numbers of
men were employed to protect our tim-
bers and safeguard our forests against
fires and despoilers, the cost of their em-
ployment would be saved many times
over. The destruction of our forests is
a crime against future generations.
The production of oil and petrol in Aus-
tralia from shale, coal or petroleum wells
would open up important avenues for em-
ployment, and would ease the heavy
drain on the nation’s finances for im-
ports.
Our dependence on overseas sources
for our supplies is a grave national weak-
ness.
OIL PRODUCTION
In 1930 the Labor Government pro-
vided £IOO,OOO to employ men producing
oil from shale. Assistance was also
given to those searching for petroleum
oil.
This encouragement will be continued,
and, in addition, the possibilities of pro-
ducing substantial supplies of oil from
coal will be fully explored.
Any development in oil produciton will
be amply safeguarded against attacks
from powerful overseas interests.
By declaring that private enterprise
must be relied upon to absorb the unem-
ployed, the Government merely seeks to
throw off its own responsibility. When
private employers cannot employ the
workless the Government must. Work
for sustenance cannot continue indefi-
nitely. Its peril lies in too great a strain
upon human endurance, which must
eventually lead to desperation or degene-
ration.
It is protested that the country cannot
afford to spend large sums of money on
extensive public works, but what would
these works cost? If the materials
were locally produced, the bulk of the
cost involved woiild be labor, and labdi :
costs, in the main, simply represent foodj
clothing, bootsj housing, etc., provided .in
the form of wages. Can it be truthfully
said that, within the nation, the workers’
needs cannot be produced? That life’s
essentials, in sufficient quantities for its
present population, are not within the re-
sources of Australia? A thousand times
No! It is obvious that Australia’s
problem is not one of ample production.
That has been mastered, or, rather, over-
mastered. I do not suggest there is no
limit to the provision of finance for em-
ployment, but the limit is the capacity of
the nation to produce. We are certainly
a long way from having reached that
limit.
Observe all around us idle machines,
factories, and workshops wonderfully
equipped to produce very much more than
the people are able to buy because,
though needing so much more, they have
not the purchasing power. Loss of pur-
chasing power is mainly due to unemploy-
ment. Yet there is plenty of work to be
done. The folly of that state of affairs
is appalling.
AN OBSOLETE SYSTEM
In this enlightened, progressive age
we remain slaves to an obsolete banking
system. The nation’s economic energies
are bound with financial ligatures stag-
nating the lifeblood of industry.
When the Labor Government submit-
ted a measure enabling the Common-
wealth Bank to provide £1,000,000 a
month to employ 50,000 men on full time
employment on Public Works it was de-
nounced and defeated. That, however,
was not an extravagant proposal. It was
quite practicable and well within the fin-
ancial means of the nation. Besides
giving a stimulus to every industry in
Australia, the new purchasing power of
50,000 men on full wages would have crea-
ted an activity in shops, and factories and
the market for primary products would
have expanded.
In carrying out this plan the Govern-
ment and the Bank would be guided by
experience. The price level would be
carefully watched.
CURRENCY AND UNEMPLOYMENT
Monetary and Banking reform and the
provision of employment for the work-
less are closely interlocked. Definitely
related to both is the question of market-
ing Australian products.
By monetary reform and the employ-
ment of workless men, financial difficul-
ties and the burden of interest will be
lessened, and purchasing power will be
increased, thus ensuring a better home
market for primary and secondary indus-
tries.
The Labor Party undertakes to pass
the necessary legislation and to facilitate
schemes for orderly marketing of primary
products whenever the producers them-
selves are prepared to organise.
The profit margin between the price
received by producers and that paid by
consumers can be scaled down. The


UoStS ol distribution are too heavy. Much
o£ the profits o£ middlemen are lying idle
in bank accounts. In the hands of work-
ing farmers, these would be circulating
through business channels and increasing
employment.
What has already been done with the
organisation and marketing of dried
fruits can be done with other products.
The Labor Party does not rely upon mar-
ket manipulators, financiers, and brokers
for political support, and is, therefore,
tree to render maximum support to sound
marketing schemes.
The Commonwealth Bank, reorganised,
can render greater assistance in financing
pools and making advances pending the
final realisation of farmers’ products.
NATIONAL PLANNING
National planning is required to lift
the community out of unnecessary
poverty.
Restriction of output is not a remedy;
it is a calamity.
Mr. Lyons, speaking in Tasmania, is
reported in the Hobart “Mercury” of 22nd
June last, as saying:
“It is futile for us to place our hopes
in greater inter-Empire trade.”
Giving as a reason for that statement,
Mr. Lyons added;
“The United Kingdom has contracted
obligations in her treaties with foreign
countries, which prevent her imposing
severe restrictions upon foreign meat and
dairy products, unless she also imposes
restrictions upon Dominion products of
the same kind.”
So much for the Ottawa Agreement.
AWFUL OTTAWA AGREEMENT
Not only must we provide better mar-
keting organisations at home and abroad
for present production. We must ex-
pand productivity locally in those goods
at present being imported. With that
object in view the Government I led gave
generous encouragement to tobacco-
growers in Australia. The result was a
marvellous expansion in the cultivation
of tobacco. A change of policy, how-
ever, came with a change of Government,
and a severe set-back was given to that
industry.
A Labor Government will not only
restore the necessary margin of protec-
tion, but will restrict imports for a num-
ber of years, gradually diminishing the
importation of foreign leaf and increas-
ing the consumption of Australian
tobacco.
Australian exports to America are
valued at only £3,500,000 a year, whilst
importations from that country amount
to £8,000,000 annually. Included in
the imports from America is tobacco
leaf. Last year 15,000,000 lbs. weight of
tobacco leaf were imported, whilst tne
total consumption was 18,000,000 lbs.
weight. If the present rate of importa-
tion is permitted to continue, there is no
outlook for the tobacco industry in Aus-
tralia. A change of Government will
change that policy, and, we hope, change
it permanently.
For tke past loUr years the wheat-groiv-
ing industry has been in a parlous plight.
It is an industry of great national im-
portance, providing employment and food
for our people, as well as producing an
exportable commodity to pay for neces-
sary imports. In view of these facts tne
wheat industry must be placed on a
sound basis.
Temporary assistance from year to
year leaves it in a precarious position.
A WHEAT POOL
The Labor Party proposes that, after
reference to the growers by ballot and
with the co-operation of the States, a
stabilisation plan be adopted covering a
period of three years.
The outlines of the plan are;
A national wheat pool on lines similar
to those proposed in the Bill introduced
by the Labor Government in 1930.
A guaranteed price of 3/9 per bushel
f.o.b. for all wheat sold off the farm.
Wheat for home consumption to be
sold from the pool at 4/- per bushel.
The pool to be financed through the
Commonwealth Bank.
Fifty per cent, of any increase in
price over if- a bushel f.o.b. to be paid
to the bank until the money advanced
has been liquidated.
The home consumption price to remain
at if- during the three years period.
The price of flour to be fixed on a fair
basis in relation to the price of wheat.
State and Commonwealth legislation
will be required, enabling the wheat-
growers and Government representatives
to control the pool, and to protect farm-
ers from foreclosures during the period
of stabilisation.
The whole postiion to be reviewed at
the end of three years.
During the years 1916, 1917, and HUS
there was a national wheat pool. The
price of wheat was fixed at 4/9 a bushel,
and the price of bread was 4d. per 2 lb.
loaf. There is no reason, therefore, why
bread could not be sold at its present
price with wheat at 4/- a bushel.
MARKET MANIPULATORS
Market manipulators and food specula-
tors will bitterly assail this proposal as
they did the Labor Government’s Wheat
Pool Bill in 1930, when they succeeded in
having it rejected by the Senate.
The result of this election is a matter
of grave concern to those who are in-
terested in the maintenance and expan-
sion of Australian industries. t Too much
damage has already been done by duty
reductions on 1,000 tariff items.
Unless Labor is returned s wlth a ma-
jority, another Coalition Government is
inevitable with the Country Party holding
important portfolios.
The flood gates once again will be
surely opened to foreign goods.
At the Australian Country Party Con-
ference in Sydney on 10th July last, it
was unanimously agreed that,, despite any
agreement reached by the Parties for co-
operation for the elections or afterwards,
6


there must tye no departure from the tariff
policy adopted by the Country Party.
That policy is definitely opposed to pro-
tection.
A vote against Labor is a vote against
effective protection for Australian indus-
tries.
The Labor Party is more than ever
convinced that adequate protection is es-
sential to Australian development.
HOPE FOR THE FUTURE
The hope for the future lies in sound
economic planning to exploit the coun-
try’s resources: to establish firmly local
industries aiid local markets, and to build
up a robust race of men and women
freed from the blighting effects of unem-
ployment and poverty.
Propaganda claiming credit to the
Lyons Government for balancing Aus-
tralia’s overseas trade and balancing the
Budget is audacious misrepresentation.
The Bruce-Page Government, after an
orgy of profligate spending, reckless over-
seas borrowing, flooding Australia with
foreign goods, left the Labor Government
with a financial mess to clean up. That
herculean task was courageously faced in
the midst of the world-wide depression.
Labor corrected the adverse trade bal-
ance by drastic tariff action, and, at the
same time, balanced the Commonwealth
Budget.
The Lyons Government, coming into
office in January, 1932, merely presented
the Labor Government’s 1931-32 Budget,
which showed a favorable trade balance
of £35,000,000 and a Budget surplus of
£1,314,000.
WEALTHY FAVORED
Having reaped the fruits of Labor’s
action, the Lyons Government passed the
benefits on to their political friends by
reducing taxation on the wealthy and im-
posing heavier burdens upon the poor.
The policy agreed to by the Govern-
ment of floating loans at £3/7/8 per cent,
to replace Treasury Bills carrying £2/5/-
per cent, is imposing an unnecessary bur-
den upon Commonwealth and State Bud-
gets.
The transfer of Treasury Bills to bonds
adds £l/2/8 per cent, to the interest bill.
On the £13,000,000 of Treasury Bills re-
placed by bonds, the interest charge to
Governments has been Increased by
£147,000 a year. The interest burden
must be reduced, not increased.
In Great Britain there is an open bill
market, and -the British Government has
issued Treasury Bills totalling
£988,000,000. These Bills are regularly
renewed, and become practically a per-
manent loan. The interest paid is less
than one per cent.
By arrangement between the Treasury
and the Commonwealth Bank, a Bill mar-
ket could be established in Australia. By
that means the Commonwealth and State
Governments, could obtain use of moneys
at lower rates of interest than that being
paid to-day for Treasury Bills or bonds.
Reductions in pensions, social services
and public service wages and salaries
were temporary exigencies to meet a
financial emergency, and will be fully re-
stored by a Labor Government. The ob-
jectionable clauses in the Pensions Act
relating to pensioners’ property and
charges on relatives will be repealed. A
review of the Arbitration system and the
methods of applying the cost of living
figures to the basic wage will be under-
taken.
IMPROVEMENT IN LIVING
STANDARDS
There must be progressive reductions
in working hours and increases in liv-
ing standards commensurate with in-
creased powers of production, due to
specialisation and mechanisation of in-
dustry.
National insurance against unemploy-
ment, accidents and sickness are im-
portant aspects of social economic plan-
ning requiring earnest attention.
Consideration will be given to the
financial relations between Common-
wealth and States, with due recognition
of their differing economic conditions.
Suitable action will be taken, paying par-
ticular attention to the unequal effects of
Commonwealth legislation and finance.
To give fullest effect to some of the
proposals I have submitted, amendments
of the Commonwealth Constitution will
be necessary. Such amendments are
long overdue. Fortunately, the Constitu-
tion gives to the Commonwealth adequate
powers on banking. But on industrial
and commercial matters Commonwealth
powers are severely limited.
Having failed to reach agreement at a
Premiers’ Conference on the question of
amendments to the Commonwealth Consti-
tution, the Government should have
seized the opportunity to consult the
people on Constitutional amendments
simultaneously with the holding of these
elections.
Had not the life of the Labor Govern-
ment been suddenly ended in 1931, we
would have submitted to the people by
referendum three questions. One of
these would, if carried, have made the
Commonwealth Parliament the only
sovereign Parliament in Australia. State
or Provincial Councils could then have
been set up to deal with purely local mat-
ters, with powers delegated to them by
the Commonwealth. The alternative for
submission was to enlarge the industrial
and trade and commerce powers of the
Commonwealth. The Bills for the Refer-
endum had passed the House of Repre-
sentatives once, but were rejected by the
Senate. They were ready for the second
introduction to Parliament, and could
have gone direct to the people if
again rejected by the Senate.
The sudden defeat of the Govern-
men by Parliament, however, de-
stroyed that opportunity of obtaining the
authority of the people. If elected, the
Labor Government will refer to the elec-
tors measures for altering the Constitu-
tion to unify and simplify Government
throughout Australia.
7


In this policy speech my purpose is to
focus public opinion and to concentrate
efforts on the outstanding questions.
LABOR CONSTRUCTIVE
The Labor Party’s policy is construc-
tive. We are not out to destroy, but to
build up. A Labor Government created
the Commonwealth Bank, and a future
Labor Government will extend that
Bank’s power and influence for the pur-
pose of strengthening the financial and
economic position of Australia.
I urge you to study carefully the Labor
Party’s proposals. I ask you, in fairness
to yourselves, to judge these proposals as
enunciated by Labor’s accredited leader.
I exhort you to disregard the caricatures
of that policy emanating from our poli-
tical opponents.
Summed up, the main proposals in
Labor’s policy are: —■
Monetary and Banking Reform.
Expansion of the Commonwealth Bank.
Interest Reductions.
Stimulus to Employment.
Financial co-operation with States and
Municipalities for useful works, including
uniform railway gauge.
The Commonwealth to begin with the
construction of the Port Augusta-Red Hill
railway.
Northern Territory Development.
Constitutional Amendments.
Effective protection to primary and
secondary industries, workers, and con-
sumers.
Review of the Ottawa Agreement.
Organised Marketing.
National Insurance.
Arbitration Amendments.
Restoration of reductions in Wages,
Pensions, and Social Services.
Wild, unfounded charges concerning
Labor's attitude towards banking and
finance, calculated to create public panic,
are freely indulged in by certain persons
and newspapers, unmindful of the serious
consequences.
It is astounding how reckless these are
in their desperate anxiety to conserve
vested interests against the interests of
the nation.
Dire calamities are predicted if Labor
be returned. The bitter attacks upon
our banking policy are a repetition of the
misrepresentation employed against Mr.
Andrew Fisher and his colleagues 24
years ago, when they announced their in-
tention to establish the Commonwealth
Bank.
A FOOLISH PROPHECY
During the 1910 elections a conserva-
tive paper declared that “the financial
sky would rain foreclosures and evic-
tions.”
The evictions since then of many poor
people in our midst, however, cannot be
ascribed to Labor’s policy. But can more
correctly be said to be the effect of a
ruinous financial policy opposed by
Labor.
That the influence of the money power
is tremendous is evident when the press,
with a few notable exceptions, bow down
before it. Newspapers that refuse to
yield to the pressure of financial interests
should have the weight of the community
in numbers solidly behind them.
Much discussion is taking place as to
whether democracy has failed. The
evils that beset the world are advanced
as proof of its failure. The truth is, de-
mocracy has not been fully or fairly tried.
Political democracy we have. We must
have industrial democracy. The
fortunes, particularly the misfortunes
of the people, are bound up with bank-
ing policy. While money magnates dic-
tate conditions, and unduly in-
fluence the policy of Governments, there
is not complete democracy.
Scoffing jibes at Labor’s proposals offer
no remedies.
PLATITUDES FUTILE
Platitudes on “sound finance” and “real
money” will not provide for those ex-
periencing cruel privation.
Misrepresentation to create fear of
Labor is not a substantial subrtitute for
food.
The means to live a reasonable life as
decent citizens is the right of every
worthy man and woman.
A negative policy, or a wait and see
attitude, is tragic after five years of de-
pression and deprivation.
DEMOCRATIC RULE
It was persistently suggested at the
last elections that, while the Labor Go-
vernment was in office, bankers and finan-
ciers would not release money for enter-
prise, and that, with the removal of the
Labor Government, millions would flow
int.o industry and employment and pros-
perity would appear. Thousands of poor
people, sorely tried by poverty, voted
against their lifetime convictions, but
they have had a sad awakening. lam
confident that, on this occasion, they will
assert their rights as men and women,
and, by their votes, will transfer their
power to a Labor Government with ma-
jorities in both Houses of Parliament.
That power, in Labor’s hands, will be
used with firmness and with justice.
Democracy shall rule Australia, not a
financial oligarchy.
(Authorised by D. L. McNAMARA, Sec. A.L.P., 56 Victoria-stre
Industrial Printing and Publicity Co. Ltd.. 24 Victoria St.
