

TESTIMONIALS
in favour of
EUSTACE W. FERGUSON,
M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.)
Applicant for the position of Hon. Assistant
Pathologist, Sydney Hospital.
Graduated with Honors, Sydney University - - 1908
Resident Medical Officer, Sydney Hospital - - 1909
Resident Pathologist, Sydney Hospital - - - 1910
Junior Demonstrator in Pathology, Syd. University, 1911


THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
17th May, 1912.
I have much pleasure in stating that 1
have formed a very high opinion of the ability
and attainments of Dr. Eustace Ferguson.
After a year as Resident Pathologist at
Sydney Hospital, he spent another year with
me as Demonstrator in Pathology at the Uni-
versity, where he proved himself to be a
most competent and obliging colleague, both in
teaching and in original work. Here also he
continued to develop his special aptitude for
pathology, and his special training and exper-
ience in practical methods.
1 can confidently recommend Dr. Ferguson
as one of the most promising of our younger
pathologists.
D. A. WELSH.


I can with every confidence strongly re-
commend Dr. Eustace Ferguson for the position
of 2nd Assistant Pathologist to the Sydney
Hospital.
Fie acted for 6 months as my Resident
Physician and subsequently for a year as Resi-
dent Pathologist. In both instances his work
was done under my direct supervision.
From personal experience I can say with
the utmost confidence that Dr. Ferguson is most
enthusiastic in his work, and has a very good
knowledge of the work required to be done by
the occupant of the post he is applying for.
I heartily wish him success in his appli-
cation, as I am sure he will make a pleasant
colleague as well as a skilful and enthusiastic
worker.
SYDNEY JAMIESON,
M. 8., CM., M.R.C.S.. L.R.CP.
Hon. Director Pathol. Dept., Hon. Physician and
Lecturer on Clinical Medicine, Sydney Hospital.
16-3-12.


127 MACQUARIE STREET,
SYDNEY,
14th May, 1912.
I am glad to have an opportunity to add
my testimony to those of others in favour of
Dr. Eustace W. Ferguson, who is an applicant
for the post of Honorary Assistant Pathologist
to the Sydney Hospital.
After occupying the positions of Resident
Assistant Physician and Resident Assistant
Surgeon to the Hospital, he became Resident
Pathologist for one year, and I am in a position
to state that his work during that time was of
the highest order, and gave complete satisfaction
to the Honorary Medical Staff.
1 know of no one more fitted for the poSt
he is applying for, and can strongly recommend
him for such.
A. JARVIE HOOD,
MB. (Glasgow)-
Honorary Physician, Sydney Hospital-


WYOMING, MACQUARIE ST.,
SYDNEY,
May 13th, 1912.
Dr. E. W. Ferguson, having been hrSt
one of the Resident Medical Officers, and then
Resident Pathologist at the Sydney Hospital,
informs me that he is now applying for the post
of Assistant Pathologist at that institution.
I have, therefore, much pleasure in testi-
fying to his many excellent qualities ; and am
sure that he will perform his duties in a satis-
factory manner.
J. MACDONALD GILL, M.D.,
Physician to the Sydney Hospital.


1 have known Dr. Ferguson for several
years, and especially during his occupancy of the
position of Resident Pathologist at the Sydney
Hospital.
He is a man of ability and a worker. His
knowledge of Pathology and Pathological
methods is extensive, and his opinion is a valuable
one.
Added to all this, he is a man respected and
liked by all those who have worked with him.
CYRIL E. CORLETTE,
M.D, D.Ph.
Lyons Terrace, Sydney, May 16, 1912.
Hon. Assistant Surgeon, Sydney Hospital.


34 COLLEGE STREET,
25th May, 1912.
Dr. Eustace Ferguson, after a distinguished
career at the Sydney University, became a
Resident Medical Officer at the Sydney Hos-
pital. During the year 1910 he was Resident
Pathologist, and in 191! he was demonstrator
in Pathology at the Medical School, I always
regarded him as a brilliant student and an excel-
lent pathologist, and 1 can confidently say that
any hospital will be fortunate in securing his
services, and especially as he is devoting his
whole time to Pathology.
ARCHIE ASPINALL,
M. 8., Ch.M. (Syd.)
Late Medical Superintendent Sydney Hospital-
Hon. Assistant Surgeon, „ „
