

; '
UNCA’ rf ' OGUED
3~nl
'K illnnoir
of
'l.' ’
Hljoba §eatim OTtolib
COMMONWEALTH
2 9 SEP 1949
I
RATIONAL ÜBBARV
—l ~


With the passing of Rhoda Beatrice Webb, the oppor-
tunity arises to place on record the steps by which she was
led to make the establishment of the Retreat House possible.
As a young woman she had worked as Sunday school teacher,
leader of the Heralds of the King, parish visitor, and leader
of a Prayer Group at S. John’s Church, Adelaide, and as
Diocesan Secretary for the Heralds of the King. For a
short time she was Assistant Secretary in the A.B.M. Office
in Adelaide. She was keenly interested in the promotion
of Christian knowledge by conferences and study groups,
and was well aware of the unsuitability of the accommoda-
tion available for such gatherings.
When serious illness brought to an end her active par-
ticipation in this ministry of the Church, she found oppor-
tunity, often in the silent watches of the night, to pray
and plan for the establishment of a Retreat and Conference
House.
In 1933, the Rev. R. S. Campbell, then a member of the
Community of the Ascension, spent three days as her guest
at the Rectory, Belair, and in converse with him Mrs. Webb
gained a deeper consciousness of God’s redeeming love, and
a readiness to respond to it more fully. Later in the year
Father Campbell asked her to make a meditation, in verse,
on the Passion, following a plan he suggested, which he
desired to use in his Lenten work. This resulted in a long
and personal application of the inner meaning of our Lord’s
sufferings, which helped her to realize yet more fully the
greatness of the Love of God, and had a very definite bear-
ing upon her readiness to give as she did later, for the
provision of the House.
Through the years of weakness she had been uncom-
plaining and patient, now came courage to accept and use
her infirmity to God’s glory, and her plans began to
take shape.
As Victor Harbour had so often been used for con-
ferences, Mrs. Webb acquired about two acres of land
beautifully situated. She then consulted the Rev. P. P.
Maclaren (who had previously urged the establishment of
a Retreat House and had worked to that end for some years)
and members of the Community of the Ascension, as well
as others known to be interested in the scheme, particularly
the Rev. Frank Weston and the Rev. H. P, (now Canon)
Finnis.


With slightly restored health she was able to take an
active part as plans developed from 1936 to the opening of
the House at Belair in 1942.
In 1939 with the approval and blessing of Bishop Nutter
Thomas, Mrs. Webb convened a meeting at the Cathedral
for prayer, followed by conference in the J. M. Dunn Music
Room. At this gathering a Committee was appointed under
the chairmanship of the Rev. Frank Weston, Mrs. Webb
and her husband becoming joint secretaries. Mrs. Webb
laid before them the tentative plans she had made, together
with two architects’ drawings for such a House as she had
visualized, but she stipulated that the Committee was not
to feel bound by the fact that the land she offered was at
Victor Harbour, since it was essential that the most suitable
site should be chosen, and that the prepared designs were
only for use if wanted.
In December, 1939, by the kindness of Bishop and Mrs.
Nutter Thomas, a meeting was held at Bishop’s Court, when
the scheme was definitely launched.
It being almost unanimously felt that Victor Harbour
was too distant from the city for the purpose, an active
search was begun for a suitable property, which was even-
tually found at Belair, and Mrs. Webb provided the money
to purchase it, together with a considerable sum towards
the cost of renovation. She took a great interest in all the
details of alteration and furnishing, and did much of the
actual shopping, and was able to be present at the dedication
of the house for its new purpose, on April 18, 1942.
In agreement with her suggestion, the Committee in-
vited Fr. Homersham, of the Community of the Ascension,
to become priest resident at the House, and she also sug-
gested that Miss Williams should be asked to be matron.
For the next seven years, in spite of increasing ill-
health and inability to attend Committee meetings, though
she always kept in close touch with the Committee, she
retained her active interest in the work, planning and
advising on the use and management of the House. Its
welfare was at all times in her prayers, and her thankfulness
to God for His manifest blessing on the work, enabled her
to face her own forced inactivity with wonderful fortitude.
On October 14, 1948, her course on earth being run,
she entered into the Nearer Presence of her Lord, surely a
“workman that needeth not to be ashamed.”
“Grant her, O Lord, eternal rest.”


