

Irrigation For Queensland.


It is specially requested that books
borrowed from the “Departmental Library”
be returned to the Librarian within 28 days
from date of issue, or renewed by application
for a further period if urgently required.
J. BEYNON A. REED,
Superintendent of Stores.
7185 St 2176






IRRIGATION FOR QUEENSLAND.




IRRIGATION
FOR
QUEENSLAND.
(Practically and Professionally considered').
APPLICABLE TO OTHER COLONIES OF AUSTRALIA.
BY
PERCY C. SMITH, C.E.
:
WATSON, FERGUSON AND CO.
1889.


Printed by
WATSON, FERGUSON AND CO.
Queen Street, Brisbane.


ERRATA.
Page 5, Line 7—“ particular ” should read “ particulars.”
„11 „ 3—“ point” „ „ “part.”
„ It) „ 27—“ simplest ” „ „ “simpler”
„16 „ 29—“ positions ” „ „ “portions”
„33 „ 9—“ affects” „ „ “affect.”
„33 „ 23—“ bulks” „ „ “banks.”
„36 „ 20—“ rivers” „ „ “river.”
69 „ s—“ mistake ” „ » “ mis-state.
„ 75 „ 14 —should read “total revenue, £3,273.”


PREFACE.
In placing this treatise before his readers, the Author
trusts to the interest at the present time attached to the
subject, to obtain for him some attention from those princi-
pally attracted by the theme. While claiming only the
merit of originality, yet, from the close attention and obser-
vation which he has devoted, during the leisure of several
years, to the subject of Irrigation for Queensland, as well as
from the study of this particular branch of his profession,
and of practical information obtained from external sources,
during the same time, he hopes to have produced that which
will merit a fair and unbiassed criticism.
The reader must not expect to find demonstrations and
comparisons, accompanied by copious extracts and figures
from divers Blue Boohs. The object of the Author has been to
present to those interested, a concise record of his own con-
clusions, which are the result of observation and the inception
of the ideas and opinions of those with whom he has been
fortunate enough to come in contact, personally or through
the press ; and he has attempted to produce that which may
be read with some degree of interest, by practical farmer and
professional expert, and which may, at least, promote
discussion on this important topic.
Rockhampton,
May Ist, 1889,




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.' PAOE
Introduction. Comparisons and Advantages 1
Conditions, Favorable and Otherwise ... ... ... ... 3
Requirements.—Varieties of Soil and Climate 4
CHAPTER 11.
Private Enterprise Unaided g
State-aided Corporations 7
CHAPTER 111.
Methods Suitable for Different Localities 10
Typical Scheme and Detailed Suggestions ... ... ... 11
Main Service or Conduit
Storage of Supply
Distribution by Pipe Service 13
Methods of Ultimate Distribution ... ... ... 15
CHAPTER IV.
Funds 21
Means of Revenue ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Disposal of Revenue 24
Ultimate Constitution 25
Private Irrigation Works 26
Management, Staff, &c 27
Employment of Works at “off” Seasons 28
Arbitration 29
Rights Established by Parliament .., 30
Comparative Advantages of Concerted Action 31
CHAPTER V.
Weirs 33
Obstruction Caused by Weirs .. 36
Riparian Rights
Pumps and Engines
Elevation of Water .. 43
Pipes for Mains and Connections 44
Pipes or Conduits of other Material 45
Aqueducts Connecting Both Sides of Stream 47
Flumes ... 43
Outlets ... 49


PAGE
Capacity of Works in Relation to Requirements 50
Quantity of Water Required per Acre, —Duty 51
Evaporation ... , 61
CHAPTER VI.
Argument in Conclusion 63
EXAMPLE 70
ESTIMATE OF COST.
Cost of Weir j,... 73
Cost of Mains—B Miles iff ... 73
Cost of Engines, &c 73
Cost of Elevated Reservoir ... 74
Summary of Cost 74
Estimated Revenue per Annum 75
Estimated Expenditure 75
ADDENDA.
Design for Weir Embankment. (Figs. 2, 3 and 4.) 76
Device for Flume Off-Siioot. (Fig. 5.) 78


CHAPTER I.
Introduction. Comparisons and Advantages.
It is satisfactory to be able to say tbat tbe question of
Irrigation bas been so ventilated and discussed in literary
circles especially, and individually, collectively and politi-
cally, to a less extent —tbat a statement of its advantages,
directly to tbe cultivator of tbe soil, is scarcely necessaiy.
Newspaper editors have judiciously spread abroad —the
results of experiments —tbe opinions of investigation com-
mittees, tbe publication of statistical records, and tbe
criticisms of able men upon undertakings and stated
possibilities; so tbat those who are in any way interested
—and who are not ?- in agricultural advance, have had
every opportunity to discover tbe merits of artificial supply
of one of tbe most necessary factors of plant growth, and
which is, at tbe same time, tbe most uncertain of natural
disposal. Nevertheless, this paper would be incomplete as
an argument without touching upon all the favourable, as
well as unfavourable, points.
The disastrous season through which we have just
passed, during which all classes suffered, but more especi-
ally those who depend directly upon the products of the
soil, must prove, to the most callous of conviction, that it
would be advantageous to lay out part of their profits
which such seasons make negative —to the command of


a supply of moisture when required. At the same time,
the consideration of the waste of nature, as shown by her
profligate floods in the early months of the two years just
passed through, causing damage enough in themselves,
and succeeded by an opposite state of things which in-
tensified calamity and disheartened so many of our famers,
can only forcibly convince us that we are not put upon the
earth to enjoy her fruits produced by a blissful alternation
of rain and sunshine, without some help from ourselves.
A provident nature supplies us with the necessary consti-
tuent in bulk and it remains for us to conserve and dis-
tribute it in accordance with our requirements.
There is no one who has any acquaintance with farming
districts, I am sure, who requires to be told how the seed
has been sown, with good or bad prospects of success, —how,
perhaps, the crop has shown above the ground, green
and luxuriant, until the absence of moisture fades and
curls the blade and no amount of expectation or anxiety on
the part of the farmer has brought the desired shower.
So has the time gone on until fairer signs have led him to
replough and resow the land with no better success. In
some cases there has not been sufficient moisture in the
soil to force the blade above the ground. Thus have seed,
labor, time and horse flesh, all been lost, and health im-
paired by anxiety; and, perhaps, this experience dis-
courages so extensive an undertaking until the next oppor-
tunity has gone by. Having to dispense with labor, the
poverty of his stock, and the depression of his spirits,
prevents the farmer from making an effort to regain some
of his loss on the next favourable occasion. So, when a
good rainy season comes, it finds the land unprepared,
and the farmer more disheartened at his “ ill luck ” in not
having planted as much as before. But if he had at his
command a supply of water to place, at will, upon the land


or crops, his calculations could be within the bounds of
accuracy, and he would be enabled to keep up to a standard
of area under crop without so much liability to failure.
Agriculturists must teach themselves that, if the seasons
and elements, in their periodic changes, cannot be con-
trolled, an equivalent must be supplied where the desired
element fails to satisfy. In Queensland we have good soil,
good natural drainage and an abundance of solar heat, all
favourable to the cultivation of crops, but we suffer from
the semi-tropical disadvantages —irregular seasons and an
unreliable rainfall. At the same time we are periodically
subjected to floods, supplying an excessive amount of
surplus water which is allowed to go to waste.
Conditions, Favorable and Otherwise.
Every continent and district on our globe has its dis-
tinctive features or prevalent natural conditions rendering
it favourable, or not, for the diversion and artificial distribu-
tion of its natural sources of water supply. India and
America, where irrigation is largely carried on, both enjoy
the possession of large and rapidly flowing rivers which
are capable of diversion, by canals, across the valleys or
low countries, and yet both countries go in for water storage
upon a large scale for the benefit of the less favored agri-
cultural districts. Australia possesses some large rivers
also, and some with a very good regular supply of water;
but, with the exception of a few which rise in the high
ranges close to the sea on the North-eastern tropical coast,
there is very little fall in their beds, owing to the source
being at a small elevation above the sea, or to the great
distance traversed by them before reaching the sea. At
the same time, the banks of the rivers are high, rendering
a diversion of the channel, without impounding the water,
impracticable, at least for the purpose of agricultural use.


These are obstacles which render the mode of procedure
of necessity different from those in other countries, where
the rivers contain the supply.
Requirements.—Varieties op Soil and Climate.
Queensland has many and scattered agricultural districts,
and there are many different descriptions of soil which
have greater or less powers of retaining and absorbing
moisture, and upon which the effects of rainfall are more
or less immediate and serviceable. These soils may be
generally classed into three, viz.: —sandy loam, volcanic
soil and stiff clay loam. The first absorbs a great quantity
of water and passes it away in a very short time ; it has,
however, this advantage, that plant life is more rapidly in-
fluenced by moisture by reason of the warm constituents of
sandy soil. Volcanic and scrub soil absorbs a great deal
of water but does not pass it away so rapidly, the decom-
posed constituents being retentive of moisture —the water
consequently reaches a considerable depth but does not
drain away so rapidly as with sandy soil. Stiff clay loam,
of which most of our black soil flats are composed, is
particularly retentive of moisture on account of the large
proportion of clay; and, although if once it becomes
tliorougly dry, a great quantity of water is required to
drench it, the average quantity required throughout the
year for the use of plants is much less than in the case
of lighter soils. This quality being possessed tO| such an
extent by black soil, renders artificial drainagtparticularly
beneficial when the land has not sufficient natural slope, as
the stagnation of water, which always results on flat land
with strong clay subsoil, is fatal to the quality of any
crop. There are, of course, many intermediate kinds of
soil, partaking, to a greater or less extent, of the qualities
of two or more of these chief classes, but it is sufficient for


my purpose to only mention the extremes. The presence
of gravel in any soil, by rendering it more open, facilitates
the passage of water so as to affect the requirements. The
general description of the soil, in the district to be operated
upon by the irrigation works, as well as the nature of the
climate, average rainfall, liability to drought, in which
particular districts in Queensland differ so much, while all
are more or less sufferers from deficient rainfall, —should
not escape consideration iu an estimate of the requirements,
in order to approach as near as possible to the limit ot
economy in outlay.


CHAPTER II.
Private Enterprise Unaided.
The capital necessary to initiate and carry out irrigation
works on a large scale, by unaided private enterprise, renders
this almost prohibitive to tbe average farmer. Wherever
it has been attempted by those in possession of means
above the average, the success attained should be a spur
to their less fortunate brethren, to effect by combination and
mutual scheming what individually they are unable to do.
Those who have attempted irrigation single-handed, are
composed principally of pastoralists who irrigate lucerne
for their sheep, and the larger dairymen and farmers who
have supplies of water principally obtained by well sinking
and tapping lagoons and streams. Besides these, our alien
population has, in some districts, quite outshone the Euro-
pean agriculturists in enterprise and outlay, and are reaping
large rewards by irrigating their crops.
While some have judiciously laid out their money and
obtained a sufficient return, pointing to economic manage-
ment, others have spent large sums of money, and, although
possessing power and water enough for double the area
operated upon, by the bad system of dealing with the
water and distributing over the ground, they court failure
or only partial success. This is principally due to want of
knowledge and consideration in the first instance and to


adopting 1 a system winch, eventually tlu^/^N^.'ih^ /®Tust\\
alter because of the waste of labor and lhst& ial. One mh \
two instances there are within my knjjwledge, in which I
double the estimated expense has been)vncurre<| thrpugh,.
want of proper supervision and t.o
workmanship of those who profit by
Notwithstanding this, I do not know of one who regrets
the expense, or who would take his money back to have
the old state of affairs, thus showing the certain and recog-
nised advantages that follow from this example of self help,
which bears its reward in spite of bad management and
extravagant cost. Wherever capital is available and the
favourable conditions of a plentiful supply of water and
good agricultural land to work upon are existent, there is
no doubt that with judicious management an excellent
return for the outlay will be realised.
State-aided Corporations.
Wherever possible, it is better that irrigation schemes
should be carried out by private enterprise and capital, for,
in actual experience, those not depending upon the assist-
ance and management of the State are the most flourishing.
The advantages which private and independent enterprise
has over State-governed works of any kind are palpable to
the most casual observer, although liable to be exaggerated
by hasty criticism. The management of affairs by the
persons directly interested in the welfare and solvency of
the works—and the benefits, by the distribution of water,
falling directly upon the same persons, would not only
naturally be expected to result in the best management of
each department, but would also lead to the best adjust-
ment of expenditure to produce the best results to the
individual owners, whose interests are solely at stake.
Whereas the well-known absence of enterprising manage-


ment in all institutions guided by tbe reins of State govern-
ment —caused naturally by disinterestedness failing to pro-
duce the desired excellence, notwithstanding the ability and
purpose of the governing officials —proclaims against schemes
being managed by the State, although preferably subject to
State inspection and audit wherever Government funds are
bestowed or public lands rated. It is consequently to be
preferred that corporations or companies retain the manage-
ment rather than allow the State to manage for them. A
system of local government would result, similar to the con-
stitution of the Divisional Boards, but narrowed down to
more proprietary rights and finally merging into an inde-
pendent company working for their own mutual advantage.
It may be urged that capital should be obtained from the
open market for the carrying out of works of this kind,
but when it is considered that the Government are willing
to lend assistance in irrigation schemes, and that money
obtained in the name of the country, must be, and actually
is, cheaper than by individual companies, and as it will be
necessary to obtain Government aid in dealing with sur-
rounding lands, and placing upon a firm basis the rights of
the company as well as of individuals, it would be more
advantageous to have external dealings with the Govern-
ment alone. Thus in schemes where borrowed capital acts
a part, the assistance of the Government is beneficial, for
the financial returns of the scheme itself are not sufficiently
immediate to warrant a large expenditure of money without
the favourable assistance, which low rates of interest,
Government subsidy, and the rating rights would afford.
Although the farmers individually would benefit as soon as
water becomes available, the profits to the company or cor-
poration which carry out the works could not be expected
to be realised until a large proportion of the irrigable
area is operated upon, and the onus of outlay would be


borne by the Government until such time as the works
became self-supporting and the debt paid off, when it
would be to the advantage of all to transfer them to those
immediately benefited by them. State aid becomes
almost a necessity where a scheme embraces a scattered
settlement, in order to draw together for mutual benefit
those who would otherwise remain aloof from their more
enterprising fellows, and where works could be constructed
to embrace the whole settlement almost as cheaply as for
only a part of it. The imposition of rates upon those who
are within reach of the means of irrigation, causing com-
pulsory contribution from those who would not willingly
assist in the general welfare and who are blind to
their own interests, would, in a short time, bring them
to a more favourable view. In towns which enjoy
the advantage of a water supply, a rate is compulsory
even with those who do not use the water, provided
a service main passes their door. The same arguments
used to prove the appropriateness or validity of this custom
would apply to irrigating agricultural settlements. The
value of property is increased, the benefits of irrigation are
available whenever settlers choose to take them.


CHAPTER III.
Methods Suitable foe Different Localities.
The various and dissimilar agricultural groups, which desire
the one great blessing of a supply of water available on
each farm for the defiance of the demon drought, render
different schemes necessary to suit the natural features and
deficiencies of each particular district. Some groups would
obtain their supplies from lagoons, or fiats dammed back,
and depend alone upon the surplus local rainfall; others,
failing more favourable means, might command a consider-
able supply from underground sources, while others, and by
far the larger number of groups, would find in the rivers,
on the banks of which they are situated, their supplies
waiting to be artificially conserved and distributed. With
the rare exception of a case where the source of supply is
sufficiently elevated above the land to be irrigated, and
where the country, by reason of its even and gradually
sloping character, would admit of the Avater being dis-
tributed throughout by means of gravitating canals raising
water by means of powerful pumps, and other methods of
distribution would have to be resorted to.
In this treatise it will not be attempted to propound
schemes fitting all cases in detail, but one will be suggested
which, it is thought, might form the basis of almost every
scheme having similar aims, requiring extension or contrac


tion in some particulars to suit the circumstances of the
case. Although treating particularly of groups along
rivers’ banks, the main point will equally apply in all cases
where the methods of primarily dealing with the water are
the same, that is, wherever water is elevated by means of
pumps, or in cases where it can be conserved at a consider-
able elevation without pumping.
Typical Scheme and Detailed Suggestions.
On most of our rivers, along whose banks are agricul-
tural groups or settlements, it is practicable to select a
pumping site fulfilling the favorable conditions for throwing
back a large quantity of water, —sufficient during dry seasons
for the irrigation of land within a considerable distance, —by
means of a weir, constructed at a comparatively low cost,
at an elevation of only a few feet above the level of the
water. If such weir site could be selected where there is
an unusually high bank, caused probably by some spur
abutting on the river, a small reservoir should be excavated
and built up at as high an elevation as circumstances
would warrant, to provide a head of water commanding as
much of the surrounding country as deemed expedient.
The object is not to obtain a high pressure of water at
any outlet, but to command an elevation sufficient to supply,
by means of gravitation, the major part of the surrounding
agricultural land; consequently, the required elevation
would, in most cases, not be great. The size of the
reservoir would depend upon the estimated requirements of
the works, and it should only be required to hold a supply
equal to one day’s maximum consumption, as the reservoir
should be kept full, for the greater part of the time, and
is only to act as a head for the water. In the event of a
sufficiently elevated site being unobtainable, pressure would
best be obtained by means of an air vessel, fitted with the
necessary valve regulator, pressure valves, &c.


The next provision would he a set of pumps of
a suitable kind and of sufficient capacity for estimated
requirements, to be worked by engines of requisite
power. Care in the selection, and estimate of capacity and
power suitable, is very important, as it affects the economy
of the whole works to a very great extent.
Main Service or Conduit.
The service will, in most cases, be best performed by
pipes, which would carry the water over low or high
country to the limit of the height of reservoir, outlets
being provided to discharge into canals, flumes or pipes,
according to the choice of the consumer. In some cases,
such as along most of our Western rivers, where the
country falls gradually away from the river banks for a
considerable distance, and where the banks are seldom
broken by tributary gullies and abutting spurs, good results
would be obtained by canal conduits and services alone.
This would reduce the first cost of the work considerably,
but would naturally add to the quantity of water used in
consequence of the waste by evaporation and absorption, to
which the open canals would be subjected. When, how-
ever, the contour canals could be constructed without having
too many obstacles to overcome, and where an excessive
supply of water is obtainable, this could be met by an
extra allowance of pumping capacity and power. In a
case of this kind, there would, of course, be no occasion
for an elevated reservoir.
Storage of Supply.
In consideration of economy in water consumption, it is
always undesirable to conserve a greater quantity of water
than can be used within a reasonable time —the loss by evapo-
ration is proportionally very much greater as the surface of


water is increased—it follows, also, that the larger quantity
of water, as regards vertical face, will require a very much
larger outlay of money to safely impound, all things else
the same, and the possible loss by unforseen accidents
would represent a greater risk. Consequently, care should
be taken not to conserve a greater quantity of water than
would give a fair margin for extreme demand. The foster-
ing of what might become a white elephant is at all times
inimical to financial success.
Distribution by Pipe Service.
The main should be laid as nearly as possible along the
natural fall of the country, taking advantage of low and
regular dividing water sheds, avoiding as far as possible
the otherwise necessary aqueducts over gullies and creeks
and reducing the loss of flow by friction, caused by bends
in uneven country. Having- the main on the most elevated
country commanded by the reservoir would be of especial
service in supplying outlets at the most convenient points,
and would tend to economy in branch connections. At the
same time, the proximity of the main to the land most
likely to be irrigated, and especially to such portions as are
already under cultivation, is equally important as reducing
the immediate outlay in distribution. It is most necessary,
however, that the policy of works of this kind should be
broad and far-seeing, and not confined too strictly to
present requirements.
For connections with groups of farms, situated at a
distance from the maiu, a special branch would be required
to supply the farms along its route. To provide for
the better working and economy of ultimate distribution,
a plan should be carefully prepared at the outset,
shewing the points at which the main outlets could be most
advantageously provided. The country along the route of


the main should be divided into sections, each section
being provided with an outlet in capacity depending upon
the irrigable area of the section, each section being so
bounded as to embrace all land most conveniently supplied
by a branch through that section. In order to thoroughly
accomplish this it would would be necessary to discover
from each farmer at what point on his boundary he would
prefer an outlet; if that point is inconvenient to the branch
through any section, another point should be chosen, suit-
ing both the consumer and supply. Land, no part of
which is already under cultivation, should be considered
secondary where combating interests are encountered, but
should, none the less, be provided for in the sections. The
capacity of the branch main should bear the same propor-
tion to the capacity of the principal main that the area to
be commanded by the former bears to the whole area
operated upon by the works.
For reasons which will be given in Chapter V, it would
not be expedient to allow more than one-third the total
capacity of outlets to be in operation at the same time;
consequently it would be necessary to so divide the sec-
tions into three divisions that the aggregate capacity of the
sections in each division should be equal. The necessity
for this provision would only gradually present itself as the
distributing pipes laid down represented the estimated total
capacity of the branch mains allowed for the service; and
it would most likely be a considerable time before it was
found necessary to regulate the supply to consumers. As
such necessity did arise—which would not be until the
distributing capacity exceeded the working capacity of the
main—it should be met at first by rules enforcing appli-
cation for water, to be made not more than, say, fourteen
days and not less than, say, seven days, before time of re-
quiring water, —time required for to be stated by applicant.


Priority of application to decide any clashing of consumers,
&c., &c., as occasion may suggest. Eventually, as the
works become fully extended it will be expedient to allow
the Divisions alternative periods during which they are
available for use ; such periods to be tabulated for the in-
formation of consumers, so that no delays or mistakes
should occur and the efficient working of the scheme should,
in this manner, be promoted.
It would be preferable that the operations of the head
works do not extend beyond supplying each consumer with
an outlet and quantity of water, according to his require-
ments at the most convenient point on the boundary
nearest the main; except it be found advisable to supply
labor and material for laying service pipes at the request
and expense of the consumer.
Methods op Ultimate Distribution.
The natural formation of the farm land must govern the
farmer in his choice of a plan of distribution. Should the
farm be an unbroken, even slope with the highest point in
the side nearest the main, the simplest plan, having
obtained an outlet at that point, would be to conduct the
water by means of a gravitating canal or by a well con-
structed flume, along a contour course, to the different
sections to be irrigated. The use of flumes would be the
most economical plan, as regards the water, for it would
not be subject to loss by absorption in the passage over-
ground which it not the intention to irrigate ; there would
also be in its favour the absence of scouring and the ability
to conduct water across inequalities without loss or extra-
ordinary provision. Economy of water would be a great
consideration where the consumer has to pay for quantity.
The use of flumes would be necessary on a farm whose
surface is broken by gullies, across which it is desired to


conduct the water and where local gravitation alone is to
be the motive force.
Upon farms whose general surface is irregular, consist-
ing of a number of ridges and gullies which divide them into
parts requiring a special means of connection, it would be
expedient to revert to the more costly but, at the same
time, the more advantageous system of a continuous pipe
service with outlets commanding the elevated points of the
different sections requiring irrigation.
The use of pipes in conducting the water over the area
to be irrigated, has these advantages over the disposal of
the water at the highest point and contouring by local
gravitation, throughout the farm, viz. : —lst, there is no
loss in transit either by evaporation or absorption ; 2nd,
the water can be available at the different outlets at a
pressure represented by the difference in elevation of
outlet and reservoir, should pressure be desirable ; 3rd,
the water can be conducted by the shortest possible route
to any point of the farm below the level of the reservoir,
and a contour route would be necessary for a canal or
flume.
While advocating the use of pipes in conducting the
water to different points on the farm, it must not be con-
cluded that I am in favour of their exclusive use in dis-
tribution ; on the contrary, it were better to have a com-
bination of both flume and canal with the service pipe and
the simplest and more direct the pipe service is the better.
The pipe should be so laid as to command the most elevated
positions of the farm in the most direct way ; all further
connections, within the sections, to be perferably made
with flumes, canals only being used in final distribution,
and they should be of such a nature as would not interfere
with the surface of the land any more than necessary, so
that agricultural implements would not be prevented from


working over them —being merely continuous artificial
hollows in the field, made to retain control over the water
in the final stage of distribution. Many failures —or
rather only partial successes —are due to faulty methods of
distribution, and this is the point on which the farmer re-
quires to place his attention particularly. There is one
method which must be deprecated, and that is, the appli-
cation of water to the land by means of a hose. I know
that there are a few farmers who have followed this practice
to their own satisfaction and who are professedly deter-
mined to continue it. But this can only be attributed to-
the absence of proper provision for application at a time
when it would have saved a vast deal of subsequent labor.
These farmers tell us that they have had their calico or
canvas hose in constant use for several years, and that
with due care they are almost imperishable, &c., &c. The
chief objections to the use of a portable hose are : first, the
damage caused by the impact of a confined stream of
water forced through the hose scouring and baring the-
soil at whatever point the mouth of the hose is for the time
directed, the constant requisite locomotion rendering
these points innumerable; secondly, the amount of labor
which the application, by means of a hose, necessitates
in comparison to the method of Hooding. With reference-
to this latter objection, it is advisable to point out
that if the land is once properly prepared for flood-
ing it remains so, as long as due care is taken to
maintain and preserve the surface, and water may be-
applied to a considerable area in a very short time, the
only labor and attention required being that necessary
to cut off and divert the water from and to the different,
sections; at the same time it may be possible to flood
several sections at once, according to the available supply
of water. Properly arranged, the water should rather move-
c


over the land than flow , so that no scour is caused. In
using a hose, a man is required to constantly move the
mouth from place to place, and, at times, to drag the whole
ponderous weight across the land. Even when the water
is stopped to allow the hose to empty and be rolled up and
carried to another connection, the time lost in thus stopping
the supply of water, is equivalent almost to the labor and
inconvenience of dragging the full hose across the land-
The best system of working with the hose is undoubtedly
to have the hose in sections, one removed at a time.
Whatever system is adopted of working with the hose,
there will always be the same labor and loss of time until
some other method is decided upon.
Some dissentients may assert that scouring is caused by
the flooding method, but they may be assured that if the
land is carefully, but not necessarily expensively prepared
in the first instance, little or no scouring should result; m
fact, this is one of the secrets of successful irrigation.
Whereas, by using a hose scouring cannot be avoided. It is
necessary to become thoroughly convinced of the efficacy
of the method proposed before adoption, and it should
always be the aim to avoid choosing time-serving methods
which consume, by the waste of time and labor, so much
of the profits ; and it should be borne in mind that the
system is best which is, perhaps, not the cheapest to in-
augurate but which enables the farmer to operate upon a
considerable area at once at a minimum of labor, and which,
at the same time produces uniformity of distribution and
excellence of result. Inability from want of funds may be
pleaded as a reason for not starting properly ; but the sam
axiom applies to this as to other farming operations, viz. :
ten acres well managed is better than fifteen in-
differently cared for.” Reduce the area operated upon
rather than put up with make-shifts.


In many cases injury lias been done to raijjns by con-
■ I CO
ducting water at too steep a decline over thafland, scouring
and washing away the fine and soluble
leaving behind barrenness and destruction. prop^£
attention to contour courses for channels, this
happen, as when actually on the land the water should
move in a very gradual stream. Where the land has a
steep sideling slope, extra care will be necessary in apply-
ing water and the sections require to be smaller, so that
control is constant, for if the water is allowed to break
bounds a good deal of damage may be done. Where crops
are planted in drills or lines, such drills or lines should be
made to follow contour courses as nearly as possible, so
that in the after application of water it will follow the
gradual descent along the lines, and will be checked by
the drills and held in partial suspense by the crops them-
selves, and prevented from rushing down the steep side-
lings. Although straight lines are the usual and simple
guides in ploughing and planting, with care and skill
curvilinear courses may be taken to great advantage in
applying water on broken country.
The mode and seasons for applying water to land or
crops should at all times claim the attention and observance
of the farmer —much has to be learnt as to the require-
ments of different soils and crops, and each should strive to
learn and improve. It is generally, however, established,
among those have had large experience, that most cereal
crops will come to maturity if the soil has a good soaking
before the seed is planted and without any subsequent
watering. Wherever this is the case it is much better for
the crop, as the after application of water tends too much
to consolidate the soil, preventing the access of air. As
has been said, so much depends upon the retentive quality
of the soil that no rule can be laid down. It may be taken


as a general fact, however, for it would be an exception
for the crop to pass from seed to maturity without one
shower of rain, but in such an event, should the crop
appear to fail it should be irrigated. Some crops, such
as potatoes, should not be irrigated after they have reached
a certain stage, that is, when the tubers have fairly formed,
or harm will result.
The principal cause of injury done to crops by over-
irrigation is defective drainage, and there is little to fear
in irrigating land which has an open subsoil or which is
well drained by natural slope or artificial drains. Marvel-
lous results have been obtained in low lying lands by a
combination of irrigation and drainage. Whenever water
is applied to standing crops it should be done either at
night or upon a dull day, as much injury may be done by
the joint influence of sun and water upon crops. It is, in
fact, always preferable to apply water to soil when there
is no sun upon it, on account of the less evaporation at
such times.


CHAPTER IV.
In the last chapter an effort was made to discuss the
practical features of a general scheme for supply and dis-
tribution of water, without going into those details which
must be governed by the circumstances, and, consequently,
must vary considerably. In this chapter will be shown
means, which appear feasible, for raising funds to carry
out in a general way schemes assisted by Goveimment.
Other matters pertaining to finance and management will
also be treated.
Funds.
Firstly, it is evident that a scheme, which is to
benefit all within a considerable area, and which depends
upon Government aid in promotion and temporary sus-
tenance, must be to a certain extent compulsory and im-
partial as regards its revenue and liability, and should be
founded as much after the style of existing local benefit
corporations, as may be possible.
For reasons given in Chapter II (“ State aided Corpora-
tions”) it would be advisable that the works be undertaken
by a representative board, consisting of ten men elected by
the corporation from among themselves —such corpora-
tion to consist only of those whose interests are directly
affected, in other words, those who will be consumers of
water and payers of rates. The funds for the prosecution
of the works, to be borrowed from the Government, after


the corporation shall have established rights and penalties
by Act of Parliament. The money to be drawn from
•the Treasury as required, at definite stated periods, and to
bear interest from the date of withdrawal. The works to
be carried out by contracts under the supervision of a
competent engineer—who shall be in the service of the
corporation and in charge of the works —and subject to
inspection by the Government. The only other officers
required would be an accountant, who would act as pay
clerk and secretary to the Board, and so many inspectors
of works as may be required by the exigencies of the works.
When the construction of the work is complete, or when
the water becomes available, such other arrangements
should be made as spoken of further on. The accounts
would be, of necessity, subject to Government audit.
Means op Revenue.
First there should be levied an annual water rate of
half-a-crown per acre, upon all land determined as irrig-
able within the prescribed limit of the operations of the
works. This should be supplemented by a valuation rate
of 6d. in the <£, to be levied upon all land not subject to
the water rate, within three miles of the river centre, from
end to end of the irrigation service, including pastoral,
leasehold, and vacant crown lands ; the assessed annual
value determined by the Divisional Board to be the basis
of valuation.
An endowment of £2 for £1 should be payable by the
Government out of the Land Revenue. This is justifiable
on account of the appreciation of the Crown Lands in the
district alone, besides the increase to general revenue
resulting from the prosperity of the district. The endow-
ment should be payable until such time as Act of Parlia-
ment may determine at the outset, say for five years after


tlie water becomes available. Such definite term "&!(fSjld I* e
\k\ (P
preferable to a limit determined by the financial hf 3C
the scheme, as it removes the liability to *
the purpose of retaining the endowment by improper mea/frrr.
The sooner the corporation is able to stand alone and
undertake the responsibilities and liabilities of the loan,
without the Government’s assistance, the better for the
prosperity of the individual concern as well as for that of
the general public. While there is an indefinite and un-
failing source for supplying interest, which may only be
cut off upon the self-assumption of independence upon the
part of the corporation, there will remain a drag upon its
prosperity and success. A. definite termination of such
endowment will, on the other hand, act as a spur to success-
ful management and finance. It may be urged that the
State should continue to grant an endowment as in the
case of Divisional Boards. The cases are, however, only
analogous to a certain point; the granting and continua-
tion of the endowment to Divisional Boards is merely the
acknowledgement of the responsibility of the State in con-
nection with the public highways and thoroughfares
which is a constant unending factor of the constitution
and a recognition of the right of all sources of revenue to
contribute to the maintenance and improvement of such
thoroughfares. On the other hand, while a corporation
engaged in the prosecution of irrigation works for general
purposes has a claim to State recognition and assistance, in
so far as it improves the value of the public estate it
hastens the development of resources, and it advances the
prosperity of the district, thus adding to the general
revenue; yet, since it resolves eventually into a pri\ate,
though beneficiary, institution without constitutional re-
sponsibilities, it can have no extended claim to State
support.


Besides the above means of revenue, there should be
payment for water consumed, preferably by meter, or,
failing that, by gauging and time payment. Meters would,
however, be the most accurate and consequently the most
satisfactory where it is possible to use them. The charge
for water should be merely nominal, and Id. per thousand
gallons for 100 feet lift would be sufficient to cover the
cost of pumping, as well as being sufficiently light to be
almost unfelt by the consumer. An acre of land could
receive a quantity of water equivalent to one inch of rain-
fall, at a cost of about Is. lid., exclusive of rates.
Disposal of Revenue.
In the disposal of the surplus revenue, that is, the excess
of revenue above working expenses and interest charges,
a part, say 80 per cent, should be devoted to paying off
the debt, and the remaining 20 per cent, should be carried
to an “ extension or renewal fund,” which should be estab-
lished as soon as possible, to provide for all subsequent
outlay in increasing the capability of the works and for all
repairs. In the event of the revenue, for the time being,
proving insufficient to pay the interest on the loan, after
paying working expenses, the amount of such deficiency
should be added to the loan, instead of being met by in-
creased rates and charges. This is very necessary, so that
Consumers of water, as well as other contributors, should
have a perfect understanding at the outset as to the amount
payable by them for their privileges, until such time as they
agree mutually to increase their payments, in order to re-
lieve themselves of the debt the more rapidly, when the
benefits have become palpable and the initial private ex-
penditure has been chiefly recovered. It is but right that
early shortcomings should be provided for out of the
expected prosperity of the future, rather than that the


operations of consumers should be hampered and crippled
by increasing calls during the time when the outlay is
being made and before the benefits are realised. A properly
nurtured and managed scheme should not, oven at the
first, fall short of expectations, except in the event of un-
foreseen occurrences, such as floods during construction,
impeding the works.
Ultimate Constitution.
When the Government endowment is taken off, it may
become necessary to raise the charge in order to gradually
pay off the loan and relieve the works of the burden of debt,
but this should only be done by general meeting of share-
holders. Shareholders would consist of those who con-
tribute directly to the funds or revenue, and in such
proportion as each individual’s aggregate contributions bear
to the whole receipts of the works, exclusive of endowment.
This should not include any payment made for services
rendered by the works in the supply of material and laying
of pipes, &c., which should be entirely private contracts.
Shares should not be transferable or marketable, but
should appertain only to the land representing them, and
should belong exclusively to the owners of the several
portions of land. In the event of sub-division after some
time of working, any land becoming possessed by several in
the place of one, such arrangement should be made to
determine the apportionment of shares as the interested
parties might agree to, the result of such agreement being
submitted, properly signed and witnessed, to the Board
for the record of shareholders.
When the time arrives that the corporation becomes free
from debt, and it is found that no extra funds for exten-
sions or renewals are immediately required, the valuation
rate should be removed, and the profits of the works should


be forthwith devoted, (in so far as would not interfere with
the working,) to the purchase of the shares held by those
outside the irrigable area, who have been paying the
valuation rate. When such time has arrived, a proper
apportionment should be made, and a valuation properly
attested should be taken to show the depreciation of the
works, and the present value of each shareholder’s portion,
no allowance for interest or discount to be considered.
This re-purchase of the outlying shares would be advisable
for the purpose of narrowing the proprietary, and increas-
ing the facilities for future management and discipline.
Private Irrigation Works.
Individuals who have already provided for themselves a
means of irrigation, should be exempt from the water rate,
—unless they should at any time choose to avail them-
selves of the supply from the works, —but they should be
subject to the valuation rate of 6d. in the £, if within the
proscribed limit.
The right to rate lands in the vicinity of irrigation works
might also be claimed by those who have already such
works in operation, or who erect same with their own
capital. As it will be necessary for Legislature to pass a
general Irrigation Bill, empowering Parliament to deal
individually with schemes desiring State aid, a clause
might be inserted extending all rights to private individuals,
who erect works of sufficient magnitude to allow of others
receiving supplies of water besides the owners, provided
such owners agree to transfer the works and all appurte-
nances and rights, for the distribution of water, to a com-
pany composed of those who would make use of the water.
The area, over which the works shall have a rating right,
to be determined by the capabilities of such works. The
original owners to take the position of the lenders of the


capital, and the rights of all to be the same as if constituted
under the lines of State-aided works.
Farmers may find it necessary to borrow money, in order
to carry out works for final distribution of water and
levelling land, and it might be proposed to allow them to
borrow from the funds or credit of the association, but
I would suggest that this be not entertained. The result
would only be to swell the loan, to harass the corporation,
and to open the doors to abuse and collusion, deplorable
under any circumstances, but especially so where so many
interests are concerned. The farmer will never find it
difficult to raise money for the prosecution of works for
the improvement of his farm, and, as the value of his
estate will be daily increasing, he will find loans forth-
coming, when desired, from any respectable institution,
and the fact of his future output in crops being assured
should render him less chary of working with borrowed
capital. If a farmer, by the outlay of £IOO for which he
pays 8 per cent, interest, increases the output by 20 per
cent.—which is a very low average as a result of irrigation
—without increasing usual working expenses, supposing his
usual output to be £3OO, he in two years realises a profit
which pays back the capital, with interest, expended on
that which becomes a permanent improvement, increases
the capital value, and which makes its yearly return
increasing under more efficient management.
Management, Staff, &c.
As the works progress and pass from the construction
stage to the maintenance and extension stages, it will be
necessary to re-adjust the management in its official bear-
ings, so as to relieve the works of as much expense as
possible. As soon as the construction is complete, there
would be no necessity for the continuous services of a civil


engineer; but one, resident in the neighbourhood, should
be retained at a small annual fee, to be available, when
required, for special purposes, and whose regular duty
should be to present to the board of management a report,
at stated intervals, upon the works, with suggestions and
recommendations to follow a periodical inspection. All
special work requiring design or supervision, should be
paid for at a scale mutally agreed upon. The permanent
officers should consist of one engineer—with one or more
assistants, as the size of the works demands —in charge
of the machinery; one head inspector or overseer to super-
vise any repairs or extensions decided upon by the
board, and to attend to the maintenance and proper
management of the mains, outlets, &c., and there should be
as many workmen as the exigencies of the works demand.
The management should solely devolve upon a represen-
tative board, elected from time to time by the shareholders ;
three members of the board being appointed each quarter-
night as a working committee to attend to the duties
during the term. All clerical work should be performed
by an accountant or secretary.
Employment op Works at “off” Seasons.
There would, of course, be periods when the water would
not be required by farmers—when the rainfall is sufficient
for the crops, or when the works are not using their full
power. At such times it would be advisable that the
power and labour be made of use in other ways, for the
benefit of the works and the farmers, (such as crushing
bones for manure,) to be supplied to shareholders at a lower
price than to outsiders. Other undertakings for rendering
produce more fit for the market, or for preparing material
necessary for irrigation purposes, &c., might be entered
upon, to turn to advantage the available power of


machinery, provided they shall in no way interfere with
the prime object of the works, or involve the corporation
in liabilities or engagements which the irrigating require-
ments might prevent it from carrying out. Among these
undertakings may be enumerated —fruit drying, hay and
chaff baling, stone breaking for concrete, &c., &c.
Arbitration.
A clause would be necessary enacting that, in the event
of a dispute between any individual and the irrigation
corporation, with reference to rating, charges, or other
matters coming within the board’s direction, the mattei
shall be referred to arbitration. Each party shall appoint
its arbitrator, and, in case of failure to agree, the Under-
secretary for Agriculture, or some other official in a
similar position, shall be umpire, whose decision shall be
final, and who should be constituted, by virtue of his office,
standing umpire for all disputes coming under the Act. In
order that individual farmers should not be debarred, for
fear of expense of proceedings, from seeking just treatment
from the corporation, and to induce the board to come to
fair terms with the disputant, the cost of the arbitration
case could be thus arranged : —the corporation should, in
any result, be compelled to pay at least, say, three-fourths
of the costs, and so much more as the arbitrators may
decide, according to the result of the case. The liability of
the farmer to a probable fourth part of the costs would
prevent his pressing to arbitration a case of palpable
absurdity, in order to cause expense to the board. On the
other hand it would be necessary to offer an easy appeal to
individuals, who might otherwise be overruled by an
interested majority in any decision affecting his particular
interests.


Rights Established by Parliament.
The absence of well-defined and well-considered laws for
the establishment of the rights of corporations, of
individuals and of the general public in connection with
irrigotion works, has, in many cases, been a serious draw-
back to the financial succes of such undertakings, bringing
about expensive and lasting litigation. This has especially
been the case in America, where great trouble has been
caused by absence of forethought. Therefore must the
establishment of the rights of irrigators be a particular
point in the framing of the laws here, and no labour
should be spared to get them on a firm footing. First, and
most important among the questions for settlement, are the
“ riparian rights,” or those pertaining to the impounding
and using the waters of main streams, and to the liability
for damage resulting from raising the flood level of streams
by obstructions, as well as minor considerations with
reference to river beds, etc. I intend to treat in a suceed-
ing chapter, of methods by which this damage can be
avoided, and the through flow of water may be, as much
as possible, maintained. Otherwise, it remains for Parlia-
ment to thoroughly define the rights and penalties pertaining
to river obstructions, and to give irrigators as much license
as is consistent with general security and welfare, in deal-
ing with waterways. The other principal rights it will be
necessary to clearly define, are those pertaining to
thoroughfare and access to Crown and private land where
necessary, and the rights to lay mains and branches in
public roads and on Crown and private lands, and to
protect same from destruction or ill usage. It is needless
to enlarge upon this latter question, as it can only be a
matter for mutual adjustment, where interests are so
commingled, and it should be left to the discretion of the
board, subject to arbitration, to decide questions of


propriety and expedience in laying the mains or carrying
on the works.
Comparative Advantages of Concerted Action.
In concluding this chapter, which completes the general
aspect of the question, as intended in this treatise, it will
not be out of place to point out the comparative benefits
derived from co-operation and a division of responsibilities
and expense, as compared with individual and separate
schemes for the different estates. In the first place, it
must be apparent that, in order to elevate and distribute
a quantity of water sufficient for irrigation of a small
area, an expenditure is necessary which would require to
be very little exceeded in order to command a very much
larger area, as the increase of cost necessitated by an in-
crease of capacity is proportionately small. Consequently
the larger the area operated upon, provided the supply of
water is assured, the better is the prospect of financial
success. Thus, as regards first cost affecting results, it is
clear that a scheme which can embrace a number of farms,
fully satisfying their requirements, would prove more
economical than one which only supplied one farm on the
same principles. Now, let us suppose there are twenty
farms to be operated upon, of equal size and similarly
situated. Suppose each farm acted independently and
supplied its own machinery, labor, management and
method. Besides the extra expense entailed in the first
outlay, providing these twenty different works, as com-
pared with one large scheme which would supply the
whole economically; there would be so much dead labor in
supplying water, as each farm would require to work its
own machinery, being subject to extra loss in keeping* in
order and loss of time in starting, &c., while the labor,
which would otherwise be employed upon the farm, would


be constantly occupied in attending tbe works. There
would also be considerable waste of power in consequence
of each farm only requiring its machinery at intervals, the
remainder of the time it would be lying idle. The com-
bined works would, of course, be subject to this waste, but
to a very much less extent. The extra amount of
machinery requiring attention, the greater liability to get
out of order, and the greater proportionate loss in the case
of a break down or disaster, are all against the numerous
small works. Whereas in the case of united action,
supplying from one head the quantity of water required
by each farm, the expense of management, the liability
and risk would be equally divided, and would be infinitely
less than in the other case. The management alone would
be less costly than the combined cost of three or four
single ventures, and should be more satisfactory by reason
of thorough organisation. It is unnecessary to dwell upon
this, although many arguments could be adduced to show
the great saving effected by combination in this particular
matter, where there is so much dead work and where
capital is apt to lie idle for some time.


CHAPTER V.
In this chapter technical matters will be considered in a
general sense, as far as they bear upon the most important
branches of the subject, leading up to the determination of
the most suitable and economical methods of procedure in
different cases. At the same time it is impossible to treat
extensively any particular technical matter, in a treatise
which aims principally at condensing general facts, and
grouping together in a small space such matters as most
particularly affects this large subject.
Weibs.
The construction of weirs commands our most strict
attention, and professsional men cannot be too careful in
the selection and carrying out of designs, so as to render
the structure proof against the many trials to which it is
to be subjected. No amount of subsequent attention or
repairs can rectify the effects of faulty design or faulty
construction. The principal essentials of a weir are—
ability as a structure to resist the pressure of the volume of
water which it compounds, soundness of construction pre-
venting seepage or soakage, provision to defend structure
from logs and snags in flood time, and ample and perfect
wings and apron to provide against destruction of the
bulks and foundation by scouring and undermining.
The choice of materials and design must to a great
D


extent be guided by the prevailing conditions of site,
&c. —such as class of foundation and depth of alluvium,
if any, fall of stream, greater or less liability to scour, as
shown by tortuous or straight course and evenness or
ruggedness of banks, &c. At the same time, the local
available material, both as regards class and quality, should
have weight in the decision. Care must be taken, however,
that false economy is not allowed to bear a part, and it is
far better to expend a little extra, even to the verge of
extravagence, than that the structure should succumb in a
few years, and a loss of the whole first cost be sustained.
Wooden weirs, combined with earthwork, are as a rule un-
satisfactory, when rapid running streams are to be dammed.
In the first place, the beds of such streams are usually of
rock, necessitating silling or planting piles, which in itself
is not objectionable, except on the score of expense, but
principally becomes so because such conditions render
the use of other superior materials practicable. In rivers
which have a considerable depth of alluvium in their beds
and which are not rapid, the use of timber as a basis is
almost essential. The principal difficulty to contend against
in timber structures, is prevention of seepage or filtra-
tion, which when imperfectly provided for becomes an ever
increasing evil. This point demands strict attention, not
only as regards the dam itself but particularly behind the
wing-walls, which are to a great extent the mainstay of the
structure; for, should they be scoured out, the life of the
weir would be very short in the event of a succeeding
freshet. To render wooden weirs impervious, special care
has to be taken in their construction and the filling-in
material must be well selected and even in quality.
Dressed stone or rubble masonry hag quite been super-
seded by concrete as a material for weir structures, prin-
cipally on account of the latter not requiring skilled labor


—consequent cheapness—and the stability, impenetra-
bility and finish rendered possible by its use, besides the
fact of such a large part of the composition consisting of
raw material usually obtainable near site. The use of con-
crete alone, however, as a material for large embankments
becomes extremely expensive when running into such quan-
tities ; besides this, in rivers carrying a great deal of debris
in flood time, the breastwork and apron would be liable to
great damage, unless protected by timber fenders and false
aprons, which would be objectionable on account of the
extra scour and obstruction caused by them. For low
weirs, however, on a good foundation no better or more
economical material could be made use of than concrete,
sufficiently protected.
In India, low weirs have been successfully and satis-
factorily constructed of large loose boulders, laid at easy
batters, and having nucleus walls of masonry running their
whole length. The nucleus walls are built on firm founda-
tions, and serve to render solid and impervious the other-
wise porous and uncemented structure. The boulders bear
the whole wash and scour of the water, thus protecting the
walls from destruction by that means; and, by reason of
their high specific gravity and affinity in disposition, as
well as in consequence of the easy slope at which they are
laid, they relieve the walls of most of the pressure resulting
from the body of water compounded. The essentials for
success are, easily sloping batters for the loose material, in
order that the danger of rolling with the force of the
stream may as much as possible be guarded against.
Consequently, except such loose material is available at
site in great quantities, this system is only practicable for
low structures.
With a careful bestowal of forethought and application
to the conditions and favourable features, economy and


efficiency should be made to travel hand in hand in this, as
in other matters of importance. It is sufficient for the
present to say that a proper combination of materials, —
adapting the use of each to its particular characteristic, so
that the minimum quantity of each class of material fulfils
the maximun duty required of it—should be in all cases
the basis of selected design. No one material fulfils to
perfection and in economy, the requirements of this im-
portant factor of water conservation.
Obstruction Caused by Weirs.
The rise in rivers caused by obstructions at the time of
flood is a matter which is very little understood, and it is
generally thought that the placing of a weir across a stream
materially increases the height of extreme flood, thereby
causing great damage to land within the river valley.
Although there is always an increase in rise, yet at
extreme flood the increase is usually very small. The
difference in rise occasioned by the obstruction varies
as the proportion which the sectional area of obstruction
bears to the sectional area of rivers ; consequently as the
level of flood is raised the difference in rise caused by
obstruction is considerably diminished, as all rivers widen
from the bottom upwards. The rapidity of the flow of
the river also governs the result; the obstruction causing
a greater rise in rapid than in sluggish streams. To
show the small rise occasioned in high floods it is well to
take an example. A river which at extreme flood, previous
to obstruction, has a velocity of five miles per hour, if
obstructed by a weir whose sectional area is one-third the
sectional area of river at flood, —the rise occasioned by
obstruction at extreme flood would be only 1-| feet.
Suppose again that with same obstruction and velocity the
proportion is as 1 to 2, the rise occasioned with this mode


rate flood would be 2 A feet. From this we see that when
the area of obstruction is not a large proportion of the
sectional area of extreme flood, the effect upon high floods
is almost unappreciable, but that at small floods there
is a considerable difference of rise. This latter is of little
consequence to us, as most of our rivers are subject to
frequent small floods, so that cultivated land is oot as a rule
to be found at a very low level, and damage is seldom done
by any but very high floods.
In cases where sufficient water could not be impounded
by one weir, without endangering the adjacent farms by
flooding, a series of low weirs above the pumping site
would answer the purpose, without causing a great rise in
flood waters, and would prove of advantage in other ways :
as, for instance, presenting less risk from damage—for if
an accident should happen to one, in consequence of a
landslip or other cause, the remaining ones would remain
intact.
Connection should be established between the reservoirs
by means of syphons, and the lowermost reservoir should
be kept full as long as water is obtainable from the upper
ones. Although the cost of foundations for several small
weirs would be greater than for one large weir, this excess
of cost would, in most cases, be more than compensated by
the less strength and consequent less amount of material
required by the small weirs. Upon rivers which are
crossed by bars of rock at short intervals, thus being
divided into short reaches, this plan would be advantage-
ous as damming back larger quantities of water, with the
use of a smaller amount of material and with less risk of
damage. If the weirs are so arranged, in point of ele-
vation that the water backed up by the lowermost weir
extends to the foot of the next weir, so as to tail upon the
embankment, —thus serving as a cushion to the overflow


of water of the second weir, which should, if possible, be
made to perform the same service for the third, and so on
in succession in the case of a number of weirs, —a consider-
able saving" would be effected in the cost of the upper
weirs, as they would not require so much provision for
aprons and against scour by over-wash.
Riparian Rights.
Before leaving the subject of weirs, it is necessary to
say a few words about the right of a corporation, consisting
of land holders, having a considerable aggregate frontage
to a river, to impound the river water. It is clear that they
have a right to a portion of the water which continually
passes along the river bed, and it is equally clear that the
portion should be determined by the length of frontage —a
single frontage entitling the owner to half the water
represented by the length of such frontage. The question
to determine is, to what whole length shall that portion of
frontage bear, in order to arrive at the proportionate
quantity of water to which that frontage is entitled ? It
is evident, that the right of partition only refers to that
portion of the river which is below the point where the
impounding is to take place, for no one above lias a right
to any of the water which is allowed to reach that point.
The lowest limit of right to flowing water must also be
fixed, and I see no reason why that limit should not be at
the first point, where the bed o'? the river is, say, five feet
below ordinary high-tide level. This being- so, the quantity
of water a corporation would have a right to, would bear
the proportion to the whole quantity of water flowing at
site as the frontage represented by such corporation bears
to the whole frontage, from the corporation’s uppermost
limit to the lowest limit of river frontage at tidal head.
From this we see that everyone impounding water should


allow a proportion, equal to the right of ail below him, of
the water running' in, to pass by him. In tie same manner
his rights should be protected, by not alio win grehose situateq •
higher up stream, to use more than their
The necessity for careful manipulation would only arise in
the case of flowing streams, at the dry seasons of the year?
when more is used and less is available. At such times
rivers become taxed to the utmost, and it would be
necesssary to have periodic guagings above all reservoirs,
the proper quautity of water allowed to pass being
estimated therefrom. Such guagings should be the office
of the Government or of a local board. As before stated,
great pains should be taken by Parliament to thoroughly
define water rights, and it appears to me that in order to do
this thoroughly, after power has been given, each river or
stream should be separately considered and proportionate
rights settled once and for all. This work should be given
into the hands of a department, to prepare plans of districts
with their principal streams, upon which are to be fixed the
limits of title at the different points. This appears to me
necessary, as so many different considerations present them-
selves, and no rule can be laid down dealing with all rivers
alike; some must be subject to special provisions. They
may, however, be divided into classes and so become subject
to rule according to class. In the same manner it may be
necessary to classify frontages, according to the purpose to
which the land representing the frontage is devoted.
Thus, for instance, Class I. might include all agricultural
land cultivated over 75 per cent, of area; Class 11., agri-
cultural land cultivated over 50 per cent, of area; Class
111., agricultural land cultivated over 30 per cent, of area,
also all grazing land stocked up to its full carrying capacity ;
Class IV\, agricultural land cultivated over 15 per cent, of
area, and grazing land stocked over 50 per cent, of carry-


ing capacity ; Class V., agricultural land cultivated over
5 per cent, of area —grazing land stocked over 20 per cent,
of carrying capacity ; Class VI., grazing land stocked over
5 per cent, of carrying capacity; Class VII., land upon
which the owner is resident, but which is not up to Class
VI. in standard. All land which is not eligible to be
classsed should not be entitled to any consideration for
water frontage. Class I. should be entitled to a full water
frontage; Class 11. to, say, 80 per cent, of its frontage;
Class 111. to 60 per cent.; Class IV. to 40 per cent.; Class
V. to 30 per cent.; Class VI. to 20 per cent.; Class VII.
to 10 per cent. Equivalents of frontage should be allowed
to industrial institutions or manufactories, in proportion to
the capital they represent, within a prescribed limit of the
river, which may give notice of intention to use the water.
Frontages should apply to all land within a limit of, say, one
mile from the river, except some should be within one mile
of another stream also, when the limit should be equi-distant
from both. The land actually having a frontage should
share with back lying lands its right of water, according to
class. Absolute frontage should consequently be ignored,
and frontage according to area should rule the rights ; thus,
say, it is established that all land should be considered a s
bounded at the back by a line parallel to the course of river
at its frontage, measured from the centre point of actual
frontage, and that the established frontage should be deter-
mined by the area of land within the prescribed limit,
considered as a rectangle whose frontage boundary shall be
equal to two-thirds the depth, the length of such frontage
boundary fixing the allowed length of frontage to river.
By this means, those who have been fortunate enough to
secure a disproportionate actual frontage, will be placed on
the same footing as their less fortunate neighbours. In
classing land, it may be that a portion of a block is eligible


as agricultural land for one class, and the remainder may
be grazing land stocked up to a percentage above mentioned;
in such a case, the agricultural land should be taken as the
portion fully cultivated, and the remainder taken as grazing
land; each should be classed according to area, and the
sum of the frontages should decide the resulting class,
which, of course, can be no higher than Class I.
This subject calls forth so much consideration and caie-
ful handling, that a scheme for dealing with it cannot be
hastily formulated. It appears necessary, in order to
satisfactorily settle this question, that a board of experts be
appointed, to carefully consider it from all its bearings and
to assist Parliament in its decision. Such Board should
make its recommendations as widely discursive and as
deliberately minute as will leave no loop-hole for litigation
in special cases, and in order that injustice to persons may
be avoided. This would most likely be a considerable cost
to the country, bnt the advantage of having well-defined
rights would be undeniable and everlasting. The necessity
may come at a time when it would require large sums to
overcome litigation, in the assertion of proprietary rights
by powerful combinations. The experience of other
countries should teach us, that provision in time is desir-
able and of vast importance. In Victoria, at the present
time, the question of water rights is coming forward after
irrigation works have been established, and it is broadly
asserted that although irrigation may be considered to be
in its infancy in that colony, yet, works have already been
formed capable of consuming the whole of the available
water supply of the principal river. Laws have been
passed under the Irrigation Act of 188 G, dealing with the
rights of irrigators, but it is generally understood that they
are not sufficiently complete. I have dwelt at some length
upon this matter, yet, such is the importance of it, an


many are the contentions which are likely to be presented
that the subject seems scarcely to have been touched.
How best to allow a definite quantity of water to pass,
when the water level of reservoir is below the breastwork, or,
in other words, when the works are pumping more water
than represents their share of stream inflow ? This brings
us back to a technical question. There are only two ways
by which this can be done without the expenditure of
power. The first is by having provided a pipe or subway
at the base of a weir, furnished with a valve or sluice to
regulate the quantity. There are two main objections to
this method; the first is that such a pipe weakens the
structure, and is liable to conduct water into the interior of
the same, owing to the liability of the pipe to damage from
unequal pressure, and the tendency of water to follow a
lead through any material. The other objection is that,
being so situated at the base of the structure, the pipe is
not sufficiently accessible. The method which I do not
hesitate to recommend, is the use of syphon pipes passing
over the weir and leading down to the bed on the lower
side. By using a number of these, the quantity of water
can be easily regulated, by simply cutting off the stream
in one or more of them. The valves should, of course, be
near the bottom, on the down stream side, so that the
pipes are constantly full, provided they are kept air and
water tight. The whole of the pipe being exposed, except
that portion within the reservoir, enables it to be easily
attended to. One or two precautions require to be taken,
such as placing the syphon pipes on the bank most suit-
able, and protecting them with timber fenders, or other-
wise from debris in flood-time.
Pumps and Engines.
Little need here be said on the matter of selection of


necessary machinery, except that care should of course be
taken to have the best for the particular circumstances.
Engines and pumps should be at least in duplicate, to
allow of one being always available for work in the event
of the other requiring repairs. Two engines and pumps of
aggregate power and capacity, equal to requirements, would
be preferable to one of sufficient power and capacity, for
reasons for which it is scarcely necessary to point out.
In providing machinery for water supply to towns, it is
customary to allow a large margin for extra demand, in
some cases double the estimated requirements being pro-
vided for. With irrigation machinery, such an extra power
is not necessary, sufficient only being allowed to overcome
probable defects, waste, &c. In time of extra demand,
provided the capacity has been properly selected in pro-
portion to supply, the supply of water available wid be a
check upon the use, and, if the distribution is faiily pro-
portioned, no extra pumping should be necessary.
Elevation of Water.
The amount of water required to be elevated the
extreme height, is not necessarily the total estimated
requirement for the irrigable area, and, indeed, in
most cases the greater bulk of the water would only
need raising to about half the extreme height required
for special portions of the surrounding land. The schemes
should be so arranged that the circumstances of the site
and surroundings should be so taken into account, and all
that is favourable made use of, that economy of outlay
combined with sufficient provision may, as far as possible,
be attained. In a great number of cases, where works are
to be established on the banks of rivers, it would be
possible to irrigate the nearer and downstream lands
from a low elevation, while a high head and the con-


duct of water under pressure would only be necessary to
supply the higher and more remote lands. As the forcing
of water to a height increases the requisite power of
engines, in the same ratio, either as the volume or the
height increases, it will be easily understood that an im-
perfectly arranged scheme in this particular would entail
a considerable extra cost, both in outlay and working ex-
penses. Not only would it affect the engine power, but all
the principal works (with the sole exception, perhaps, of
storage capacity), would be to a greater or less extent,
affected by the attention given to this arrangement of
distribution and disposal.
In the choice of pumps, where the height to which the
water is required to be lifted is not excessive, the centri-
fugals will be found to be the most economical and effective.
These pumps are capable of lifting enormous quantities of
water at a comparatively small expenditure of power, chiefly
on account of the simplicity of effect, the absence of shocks,
the small amount of friction and the continuous action and
flow. The smoothness with which these pumps work, ren-
ders a firm and solid foundation unnecessary, and the
comparative lightness of the pumps themselves makes their
use and transport at once easy and inexpensive.
Pipes eoe Mains and Connections.
Cast iron pipes may be considered to be out of the
question for irrigation works, in consequence of the great
cost per lineal measurement, and the weight for which
freight has to be paid. Wrought iron bids fair to super-
sede cast iron for the purpose of large mains, because of its
greater tensile strength and the consequent lightness in
comparison with cast iron of corresponding lengths of
manufactured pipes. Wrought iron pipes, of 24 inches
diameter and under, for the purpose of irrigation works


under light pressure, may safely be made of No. 16 B.W.Gr.
iron plate, the difficulty being in manufacturing with water-
tight rivetted seams. It may be interesting to note en
passant, that in America, California especially, wrought
iron has been in use for over twenty years for water works
mains ) in Victoria for over three years, and to a less
extent in New South Wales ; while in Europe wrought iron
has come largely into use in the construction of large
mains. In order to preserve the pipes from corrosion—
wrought iron being more subject to damage by corrosion than
cast iron when in the ground —they are treated to a coating
of asphaltum and coal tar, properly prepared. The chief
authority on wrought iron pipes in America states, that if
properly coated, wrought iron pipes will last at least as
long as cast iron with the ordinary coating.” To those
who are interested in this subject, and who are able to
obtain it, I beg to recommend the paper on "Wrought ii on
Water Pipes,” by W. Davidson, Esq., C.E., Superintending
Engineer, Melbourne Water Supply, which was read before
the Victorian Institute of Surveyors, on 11th June, 1887.
Pipes or Conduits of other Material.
Although I would specially suggest the use of w r rought
iron pipes, as suitable for uneven country or where the
water is required to be conducted across low country and
discharged at higher points, limited, of course, to the
elevation of reservoir, or pressure of the water in the
pipes, yet under more favorable conditions, pipes or sluices
of other material may be constructed at less cost. Con-
crete or cement lined open channels may be used where
local gravitation is sufficiently favorable, thus preventing
the loss by absorption to which channels cut in the soil,
without lining, are subject. These lined channels would,
however, be subject to loss by evaporation, which, in the


climate of Queensland is, at times, a very considerable
factor of water consumption. In cases where there would
be very low pressure, cement barrel drains or pipes,
properly constructed and carefully imbedded, could be
made to answer the purpose for which iron pipes are
recommended, with the advantage of cheapness. These
pipes should be made continuous, on the ground, and not in
sections, to be afterwards fixed in place, as the latter method
is objectionable on account of there being more liability to
unequally distributed pressure, which would result in
damage to the weak places or joints. The former method
is free from so much risk, on account of the absence of
joints and the greater solidity rendered by the better
packing and filling the irregularities of the trench by the
pipes built in place. The difficulty encountered in con-
structing continuous concrete, cement or asphalt pipes of
small dimensions, is the moulding in the trench, and with-
drawal of mould without damage, this is, however, not
insurmountable, as may be shown hereafter.
Galvanized tinned iron of 24 guage, is a material which,
under certain circumstances, may be used for pipes of small
dimensions. This material will not last when in contact
with the soil, on account of the corrosive action of the soil
alkalies taking effect through the thin coating, but if the
pipes are enveloped in a covering of cement or fine con-
crete, in thickness from in. to 3in., they would be
protected from these salts, effectually or not, according’ to
the care taken to lay evenly, and render the envelope free
from liability to crack, caused by an uneven foundation or
undue pressure above. This would, of course, increase the
cost of the pipe, but would answer a good purpose if
properly constructed, strengthening and protecting the thin
metal which would only require to be well soldered at
joints. As wrought iron pipes of small diameter would


cost more per unit of weight than those of larger diameter,
on account of the greater difficulty in rivetting the smaller
pipes, these galvanized enveloped pipes would be much
cheaper and easier to place. Galvanized iron is, however,
best suited for use
above ground, upon
framework, and if sub-
jected to any consider-
able pressure, the
pipes should be made
and secured as per
diagram, in which the
Fig.1.
pipe is rolled so that it takes a third turn past the
joint. The external joint is then strongly soldered,
and the pipe is further strengthened by being encircled
at intervals by rivetted straps of the same material
as the pipe is composed of. The principle of this
method is chiefly the continuous loose flap inside, which the
pressure of water firmly presses against the pipe, thus
relieving the soldered joint of a tendency to open, the
force being directed along the circumference, instead of
radially, when in the vicinity of the soldered seam. Well
soldered galvanized iron of 24 gauge, with ordinary seams
and without straps, will stand a good deal of even pressure
if the pipe is not reduced in diameter, and a constant flow is
allowed unobstructed and not suddenly diverted or checked.
I have seen them used 4 inches in diameter, to conduct
water forced by a pump along a horizontal or slightly
inclined plane, without damage.
Aqueducts Connecting Both Sides of Stream.
In the case of a river where operations are intended to
extend to both sides from one head works, it will be neces-
sary to provide for carrying the water in a main across the


stream, in order to connect with and make effective the
elevated water on the one side, for the benefit of the farms
on the opposite side of the stream. The method which
appears to me most economical as well as serviceable and
consolidating, is to lay the main in the solid weir embank-
ment, sufficiently near the summit to avoid the danger of
its presence interfering with the strength or solidity of the
structure in the event of leakage, and also in such an event
to enable it to be more easily accessible for repairs. Great
care would require to be taken that the foundation be
stable, and that the pipe be firmly and compactly embedded
in the suurrounding material.
In the case of a weir having nucleus walls of concrete, the
main wall should be made to carry the waterpipe; and in
such material —provided it be of sufficient surrounding
thickness —an almost perfect foundation and security from
leakage might be assured.
Flumes.
The use of flumes, as means of conducting by gravitation,
is strongly to be advocated and the overhead system is un-
doubtedly the best, where fields are crossed by them, to
allow work being carried on beneath them. In some cases
it may only be found necessary to supply flumes along the
boundaries or dividing lines, of fields in which cases overhead
elevation is not necessary. The materials of which flumes
may be economically and safely made, can, I think, be
limited to wood and galvanized iron. Many objections are
raised to the use of wooden flumes, on account of the diffi-
culty to render them watertight; but, properly constructed,
there need be little waste, and very little mechanical in-
genuity is required to overcome the usual defects of ill-
made flumes. For flumes up to two square feet sectional
area, galvanised iron, soldered at joints is, at once, in


expensive and efficient, combining lightness with durability
and security. A proper system of erection and support
should, however, be adopted. The flume should be laid
along a longitudinal beam or girder, supported sufficiently
to prevent warping or bending with the weight of water.
Iron U straps should be fixed to the girder at intervals,
gripping and holding the flume in position. Once properly
erected, there need be no more attention, except to renew
any part in the event of decay; care only being taken
that the frame is not allowed to lean or leave its original
position. Choice of material and method in the manu-
facture of all these details depends so much upon locality
aud other circumstances, that suggestions in a general way
are alone admissable. The cost of the different materials
and workmanship varies to such an extent, according to
locality, that it is not advisable to compare, without
running the risk of misleading, which is particularly to be
avoided.
Outlets.
The rate of outflow at the different outlets is an import-
ant consideration, as upon it depends the satisfactory supply
of a given quantity of water to the consumers. This
should be calculated upon the basis of the maximum quan-
tity allowed to flow at one time, and should consequently
determine the minimum supply available at each outlet.
The quantity would of course depend upon the size of the
outlet,— the elevation of reservior above outlet, —the length
of pipe between reservoir and outlet, —and the capacity
of intervening outlets ; and although this should be calculated
beforehand, in order to determine the size of outlet re-
quired to fulfil the prescribed duty, it would be advisable
to determine it by actual gauging and experiment after
construction, in order to obtain greater accuracy. For
there would necessarily be irregularities, caused by defects,
E


&c., which theory would overlook, and therefore, to an
extent only found by experiment. The total amount of
water, as represented by the capacity of the outlets open,
allowed in use at one time, should be limited to the capa-
city of the works or main, so that each outlet shall com-
mand a quantity of water at least equal to its capacity,
represented by the common flux due to the elevation of
reservoir above outlet.
Capacity op Works in Relation to Requirements.
Supplying water for irrigation purposes differs greatly
from water supply to towns, and principally in the
particular of intermittent as compared with constant and
regular consumption. Even in time of drought, when the
greatest demand would be made upon the resources of the
works, it may easily be understood that the water would
not be required for application upon the whole area of
cultivated land at once; first, because the different crops
would not require irrigation at the same time, even suppos-
ing all the different farmers were prepared to irrigate at
the same time; secondly, few farmers, if any, would be
able to apply water to the whole of their cultivated land at
once; thirdly, all other things granted, it is well-known
that farmers are seldom together in their cropping, and
that difference of soil and aspect are alone sufficient to
cause great variations in the maturity of crops planted
simultaneously. From this we may infer that, in the
application of water, either to the standing crops at dif-
ferent stages or to the land before or after ploughing,
there would be considerable differences in times of re-
quiring.
As a consequence of this, it will be seen that, to supply
power and auxiliary capacity, sufficient to work up to the
maximum estimated requirements, would, be at least,


extravagant, and I would suggest that one-third the maxi-
mum requirements for the irrigable area be taken as the
standard for power and capacity of machinery, auxiliary
or elevated reservoirs and mains. Although this would,
in most cases —at least for a considerable period —be found
to be excessive, yet the fact that the machinery, when
working at low pressure, gives far better results in respect
to cost of fuel consumption and maintenance, reduces the
extravagance of provided power to a minimum, and the
time would arrive when it would be found a factor of
economy in being prepared for increased demand. The
extra capacity of auxiliary reservoirs would allow of
machinery being at times inactive, and the attendants
being employed with other work. Extra capacity of mains
would be, in the end, more economical than being obliged
to supplement them or remove them to substitute larger
ones.
Should the consumption at any time exceed the capacity,
it would be advisable to resort to the enforcement of
alternating the available divisions as spoken of formerly
(in Chapter III.); this would only occur when the water
becomes generally used, and when the whole irrigable
area is operated upon.
Quantity of Water Required per Acre —Duty.
As regards the quantity of water required per acre, so
much depends upon the conditions of soil, climate, and mode
of appliance, that no hard and fast rule can be laid down.
In the first place, local position or situation has a great
effect upon the requirements of any particular crop, where
other conditions are the same. For instance, in Queens-
land, the humidity of the atmosphere prevailing within a
limit of about 50 miles of the east coast, and within the
immediate vicinity and influence of the Dividing Range,


compared to the almost total absence, at least for the
greater part of the year, of this humidity in the districts
west of the Dividing Range, renders the artificial require-
ments of plant life considerably less on coastal and
mountainous belts.
Little can be gained by a comparison of the experiences
of other countries, where irrigation has been successfully
carried on, to aid us in the determination of this question of
quantity. For instance, in India, where irrigation is largely
pursued, and which country supplies the most reliable statis-
tics on the matter, yet these statistics show such wide differ-
ences, that even if a mean were taken, it would not fairly
represent what, in an ordinary season, would be required
in any part of that country. For the purposes of guidance
in this particular, the utter worthlessness of statistics may
be understood from the fact of their failing to supply such
information as the amount of deficiency, or otherwise, of
rainfall compared with the average; the numbers of water-
ings and crops per annum; the frequency, duration, and
seasonableness of the wet and dry periods during the
year; the general class of soil operated upon, as well as
the natural or artificial drainage existing, and the probable
amount of loss of water by evaporation and absorption in
canals, as in almost every case the gaugings have been
taken at the head of supply. If for no other reasons,
these are sufficient to show that it is useless for us to turn to
this means to solve our problem, and, no matter upon what
basis the capacity is determined, it cannot help being
partially experimental, as it is impossible to discover an
exactly parallel case whose experience might serve as an
illustration.
With reference to climatic peculiarities, the experience
of Queensland, and I may say, of all Australia, is that we
are subject to periodic droughts which leave their effects


upon the face of the land for a considerable length of time,
paralysing industry and enterprise and rendering more un-
certain every year the prosecution of husbandry. It
is to overcome or lessen the effects of these dry times
that irrigation is to be undertaken. Before general-
ising and making provision to this end, it is advis-
able that we analyse, as far as possible, the constitution
of droughts. We encounter an excessively dry year,
and a drought is said to have begun or to be raging.
Although, in the successive years a fair average rainfall
may be experienced, it is not until an exceptionally wet year
or two supply to the earth a thorough soaking that the
drought is said to be ended, and although the actual
drought may have only extended through oue procession of
seasons, it is usually considered as having lasted for several
years, on account of the aqua-distributing pendulum hang-
ing, as it were, in the balance, before it swings to the
other extreme and produces compensation.
Of late years, there has been undoubtedly a more fre-
quent recurrence of dry times, which has almost completely
destroyed the theory of the cycle, or which might lead
adherents to that theory to believe that it is becoming more
narrowed in duration. However feasible the cycle theory
may be, we can only build upon the experience of the past,
and we may be sure that we will not be far wrong if we
accept the average as a true type of the average of the
future. A perusal of the published recorded annual rain-
fall of Brisbane, valuable though it is, does not suffice to
instruct us upon the frequency with which the colony has
been visited by droughts, unless we carefully examine and
compare the periods of greatest and least rainfall. Bven
then, the information obtained leaves us at fault as to the
other districts of the colony. Consequently we must search
for the information, as regards the general state of the


country, more from among the annals of memory and
history. Supposing the dry year to occur on an average
as frequently as once every four years, it will be sufficient
for the purpose of illustration, and in my opinion operations
based upon this assumption would offer ample provision for
requirements in our climate, generally considered, and
would prove to be economical. In some cases, the dry year
is immediately succeeded by average years before a wet one,
but, in other cases, the revulsion comes more immediately,
and the dry year is almost lost in its effects. The question
which we have to consider is : —Are we to provide an
artificial supply sufficient to change the effect of the dry
year, which occurs once in four, so that it shall be equiva-
lent to a good or plenteous year, and thus provide a super-
abundance of water for the remaining years of average or
plethoric rainfall ? Would not this be waste in every con-
ceivable way? Would it not be better to supply sufficient
to change the average years into years of plenty and the
dry year into one of average results ? By this means we
secure three years of plenty and one year of fair returns;
and this system, if it were possible to thoroughly carry it
out, should produce the best results in proportion to outlay.
Most of our eastern rivers are subject, in average years,
to periodical freshes caused, usually, not by rains falling
generally upon the watershed, but by spasmodic downfalls
over a small portion of the head watershed, the surplus
water being brought down by one or more of the tributaries,
causing a considerable rise in the main stream. The effect
of these freshes would be to periodically fill the reservoirs,
at the same time as there would probably be no rainfall
upon the country embraced by the irrigation works. The
western rivers, which flow across the interior downs, are
seldom subject to more than one rise in the year, and,
indeed, they are sometimes even without that. The


principal reason for the difference is undoubtedly that the
intermittent rains, or those which are not general, are
usually confined, as regards their western limit, to the
vicinity of the main Dividing Range, and fall usually on the
eastern slope, and even if distributed across the shed, the
results of equal falls on both sides are rendered different
by the great difference in slope of the eastern and western
falls of the watershed. On the eastern fall the descent is
rapid, the country more broken, and the greater quantity
of the water finds its way into the watercourses before the
ground has time to absorb it. On the western fall, however,
not only is the soil usually more absorbent, and rendered
more parched by the drier winds and less frequency of
the showers, but the fall, being less rapid, enables the
water to find its way into the soil, and precludes its reach-
ing the main watercourses, except at times of continuous
rains. While the quality of receiving the water and
retaining it is of advantage to the locality visited by the
rainfall, yet it is of negative value to water conservation
for the benefit of any particular area, and it is usually the
uncultivated and heavily timbered tracts, on the western
fall, which receive these most frequent visitations. In the
tropical portion of Queensland, the rainfall is more regular,
and any intermittent rains are usually of what is generally
known as a tropical character. From all this it may be
gathered that the supply for which it will be necessary to
provide storage capacity, would vary considerably under the
different conditions of locality especially.
In considering the effects upon agriculture of dry seasons,
we will see that it is not so much a question of quantity
as it is seasonsable or regular bestowal of the required
element; and thus it is that a year which is not a bad one
for the pastoralist may be disastrous to the farmer. An
ample quantity of water may fall during the year, bub at


sucli times as to be of little service to tlie farmer, and it is
to retain tbe water which falls at unseasonable times, in
order to apply it to the land or crops when most service-
able, that is to be the endeavour.
It will be at once admitted that a fall of rain equal to three
inches, spread at pleasure over a period of ten days in
thirty days, would be ample for any crop which is pro-
duced in Queensland at the present time—not even accept-
ing- rice, if grown in low lying and retentive localities—
consequently if sufficient capacity in the raising and distri-
buting agencies is supplied to produce the equivalent in
artificial supply to this amount of rainfall, over the whole
irrigable area, sufficient provision would be made to over-
come the ill-effects of the driest month we might experience.
It must not, however, be expected that the application of a
quantity of water equal, in volume, to a distribution of three
inches over the area operated upon would be equal, in effect,
to a rainfall of three inches over the same area. Here ao-ahi
©
the modes of appliance and other conditions affect the result
and it is difficult to arrive at a definite conclusion as to
equivalents. I think we may safely allow a double quan-
tity in bulk to represent the equivalent in rainfall, and in
my opiuion it would be a very faulty system that should
require even that margin, but that in order to allow for
unequal distribution it will be necessary to be liberal in
piovision. I do not, however, propose that capacity be
provided for more than three inches per month in actual
volume, for this reason—that it is very improbable that,
even if the whole of the irrigable area be under cultivation,
moie than half the total area would require irrigation in one
month, as the different crops have their different require-
ments, and farming properly carried on should provide a rota-
tion in such a manner that the various portions are in different
stages of rotation at one time, thus having several varieties


of crops on each farm at the same time, or that the land
should be in different stages of preparation. My scheme,
as before explained, provides for the partition of the irrig-
able area into three divisions during maximum consumption,
so that one division shall be supplied at a time ; Jby this
system the cycle of thirty days would be arranged so that
each division is supplied during ten days, with a quantity of
water equal to three inches in depth upon the whole area of
division. To supply this quantity of water without exces-
sive outlay, it would be necessary to provide machinery
and auxiliary workings, capable of supplying an equiva-
lent of one-fifth of an inch on the whole irrigable area in
twenty-four hours, in other words 4,754 gallons per acre in
twenty-four hours. The main pipes or conduits should be
made of capacity equal to double that of pumps and other
auxiliary workings; for, although the water may take
twenty-four hours to raise and render available, yet it may
be found that all may be required for distribution in twelve
hours.
Thus is determined the capacity and magnitude of the
works in all but the original or principal storage. The
amount of water compounded must depend upon the
circumstances of the stream operated upon, and the fre-
quency with which it is subject to floods, at the same time
as upon the estimated frequency with which the month’s
supply available for consumption is to be absorbed. In
order to arrive at some standard, we must consider the
periods of imperative requirement by the farmer and the
constitutiovL of an ordinarily imperfect procession of
seasons.
Although the southern portion of Queensland is usually
spoken of as having no regular seasons on account of the
uncertainty of what we are led to expect taking place,
yet experience causes us to look forward to a wet period,


usually extending over three or four weeks in February,
after which slight showers alone may be expected, until
July, when we may hope for winter rains to usher in the
spring. From this time, until November, we seldom have
any but showers, perhaps with an early thunderstorm or two.
In November it is usual to have very frequent thunderstorms,
accompanied by tropical showers. These storms become
less frequent in December, and in January one is only
occasionally experienced, and there is usually a complete
absence of rain for one or two months before the wet
season, the thunderstorms in December and January being
usually very partial and scarcely to be counted. The above
is a description of what we would call an average year
with regular seasons. Although this procession is fairly
regular, yet, unfortunately, the time of any stage of it
cannot be depended upon or reckoned with any degree of
certainty. Sometimes the wet season will commence
unexpectedly in January, or it will not open until March ;
sometimes it is spread over three months and causes
disastrous floods; at others it is represented by a very
insufficient fall of rain. In winter, the rainfall is very
rarely excessive, unless it occurs towards the end of the
season, when it produces an abundant spring. The absence
of spring rains, or rains preceding the spring, has the most
disastrous effect of any insufficiency, especially so if the
preceding winter has been lengthy or severe. The thunder-
storm season is generally more reliable than any other, as
regards periodicity, but, in point of general value and
quantity of rainfall, it is subject to the same variations as
other seasons.
What does the farmer require ? The cultivation in the
major part of agricultural Queensland consists generally of
two principal sowings, about February and August, and
two intermediate sowings, about June and December.


First of all, it is necessary, except in very light soils, that
the land should be soaked previous to ploughing. Then at
the time of sowing the crop, moisture is necessary to ger-
minate the seed, and if the ground has a thorough soaking
at this time, the crop will—except perhaps, in the case of
the midsummer crop —mature without further application
of moisture. In the absence of this soaking at start,
occasional waterings are necessary to bring the crop to
satisfactory maturity. Sometimes failure is caused by the
land being unprepared for the rains which would otherwise
suffice to mature a good crop ; this is mainly due to farmers
being, as a rule, possessed of insufficient power or imple-
ments to render them independent of the soaking prior to
ploughing. At other times, favourable appearances lead
the farmer to sow the seed, and the absence of moisture at
first, prevents the seed from germinating; or, if it
germinates, insufficient rains result in checks and ultimate
failure. It is not so often that the season fails in all
particulars, but that it is impossible to foretell in what way
it will be favourable. If the farmer “ had only known ”
how it was going to turn out, he could have made a failure
at least a partial success. The duty that irrigation is to
fulfil, to the best and most economical advantage, is that of
rendering available a supply of water which will be
sufficient, not to supply the farmer with all the water he
requires during the year, independent of rainfall, but to
supply the deficiency in ordinary bad seasons by adjusting
the surplus rainfall to the requirements of the farmer, both
as to time and quantity.
In the event of the farmer being obliged to soak his land
at the time of sowing—which is the best time to artificially
apply water to cereals —it may be assumed that nature will
afford sufficient moisture to carry the crop to maturity,
even supposing the first watering should be of itself


insufficient. In the other case, if rain is plentiful at the
time of sowing, the artificial supply is held in reserve for
after use if desirable.
As an outcome of this contention, I would supply
sufficient water to allow of three applications, each of one
month’s consumption during the year. I would igmore the
June sowing, as any water required would most probably
be supplied by the excess of water that usually flows along
our streams at that time of the year, or shortly prior to it,
and because the winter crops require very little moisture,
and are better without artificial irrigation.
These three applications, of three inches each, would
total nine inches during the year, or about 214,000 gallons
per acre. To this amount must be added a sufficient
allowance for evaporation or other probable loss, the
proportion depending upon the surface area of compound-
ing reservoir, methods of connection and distribution, &c.
In some cases, such as on the western rivers, cited be-
fore, and drier districts, it will be necessary to make pro-
vision for conserving the total annual requirement at once ;
but, in other cases, where periodic freshes occur, I would
recommend that provision be made at first for conserving
only sufficient for one application, or for three inches over the
whole area, with the expectation that the reservoir would
be filled often enough for a total quantity of water, equal
to requirements, being supplied. Whereas it is advisable
that the auxiliary workings, such as auxiliary reservoirs
and main services, should be of sufficient magnitude for all
future requirements according to original project; yet the
same is not necessary for the compounding reservoir, for
it is likely to be some considerable time before the whole
irrigable area will be operated upon, and, in the meantime, it
would be a saving if no more storage works were constructed
than necessary for the time being; provided, of course,


that they may be increased without loss of any value of
the first provision. That is to say, it would not be advis-
able when, in order to increase the storage capacity, a weir
of large dimensions would require to be constructed upon
the site of the first which might have to be demolished for
that purpose. In the case of a river offering facilities for
the construction of several weirs in succession, and if one
of sufficient size to compound a quantity of water equal to the
above recommended capacity could be constructed, at the
pumping site, the experience of a few years would decide
whether it would be advisable to construct other weirs above
the first in order to meet future demands; and in the
meantime, the first reservoir, if only filled once a year,
should hold sufficient for the demand. I have treated this
portion at a greater length, and have attempted a minute
elucidation of what I consider to be one of the most im-
portant points, as directing particularly the meeting point
of economy and efficiency, wishing also to thoroughly ex-
plain and substantiate my reasons for the conclusion to
which I am led.
Evaporation.
Owing to the important part which this physical pro-
perty plays in the subject under consideration a short
paragraph should be devoted to it. The large surface of
water represented by a reservoir of such size as would be
required for the purpose of storing sufficient for an irri-
gation scheme, if subject to a vertical reduction of six or
seven feet, —which is the amount of evaporation per annum
to which our climate subjects us, —would involve a huge
loss of water during the year, and any precautions which
can possibly reduce it should be taken. The cause of
evaporation is the chemical dissolution of the water into
component gases and this is effected naturally only upon
contact with the atmosphere, the action of heat being to


increase and accelerate the process. If we could cover the
water with an impervious, non-absorbent material we would
be able to prevent the process from continuing. Oil at
once offers itself as fulfilling these offices to perfection,
inasmuch as it has the property of distributing itself in an
immeasurably thin coating over the surface of water and
it prevents evaporation to such an extent while it is undis-
turbed. As the least current would effectually carry away
the oil with it, there would be no advantage in placing it
upon any but stagnant water. But in a reservoir, such as
has been discussed and described in this treatise, oil may be
applied as soon as the water level is found to be at still
water, when a gallon or so of oil would not be thrown away
if the loss of a large quantity of water, such as would re-
sult from evaporation, would be felt by the requmements.
The elevated reservoir might always be kept covered with
a film of oil. Of course no pumping or overflow pipe
should take effect upon the surface, as the oil would,
gradually but surely, be withdrawn. The objection to
covering water with such a coating is on account of the
bad effect upon the water caused by preventing contact
with the air. This is, however, only to be considered
when the water is required for drinking purposes, and as it
eventually becomes distributed while in contact with the
air it recovers any of its properties, necessary for plant
life, which it may have lost.


CHAPTER VI.
Argument in Conclusion.
Everyone has heard of the Messrs. Chaffey Bros, and their
great work of initiating irrigation on a large scale in
South Australia and Victoria. Their underbaking is, in
effect, the selection of a tract of country favourable to the
supply and distribution of water, and to every possible
consideration; then, by the erection of machinery and
other plant, and, by holding out every inducement to
settlement, they turn an uninhabitated region, very
shortly, into a busy hive of industry, thus benefiting the
country generally, and those who take advantage of their
terms in particular. In time, there is no doubt, that they,
themselves, will have no cause to regret their eterprise and
investment. This is, undoubtedly, a very satisfactory
state of affairs, and we would all be pleased to see the
same in Queensland. But, I must say, it does not present,
to my mind, the best way of benefiting all classes, and
particularly the farming class at present resident upon the
land. It is like to a gold rush. Would be settlers flock
from all sides; immigrants are, for the most part,
introduced in large numbers, and the discontented agricul-
turist leaves his small farm to try another commencement.
This great magnet draws to it all those who have not any
great stake holding them to their place of former choice,


and who are able to get a start in the promised elysium.
The Chaffeys found great difficulty in keeping pace with
the population; they found the people prepared before
water was available. All this, of course, points to the
ultimate success of the venture, provided the enterprising
promoters can fulfil their engagements, and it shows how
well they are backed up. But Ido not think the resident
farmers of South Australia or Victoria are in any way
benefited by the venture, and, in fact, the boot is likely to
be on the other foot. The resident farmers are, in my
opinion, entitled to consideration as well as the consumers
of produce and other classes of the community, who are
to be benefited as soon as Mildura and Renmark become
reproductive, and the floating and unsettled population
attracted to these centres. Where Government aid is to
be held out to advance irrigation in this colony, it is to be
hoped that the manner of it will be such as to induce our
resident farmers to make an effort to obtain by combination
the fruits of irrigation for the benefit of the whole
community. In Victoria this has been effected by the
establishment of trusts, and by measures for the assistance
of those who are enterprising enough to take advantage of
them. In my humble opinion, however, we may hope to
attain better ends by leaving less in the hands of the
Government, and finally rendering the undertakings inde-
pendent, in point of proprietorship, of all besides
the individuals immediately concerned. It may be said
that farmers should help themselves, but in large
undertakings, where mutual assistance is necessary, it is
expedient that they be brought together and shown
methods by which they may attain the desired end, and
then they should be blamed if they do not come to the
scratch. As it is, farmers will have to take care that a
scheme for throwing open a large tract of land, for the


settlement of agriculturists, to be irrigated at Government
expense does not rob them of the expected assistance in
schemes for the irrigation of the present settled agricul-
tural districts. The effect would be to reduce the prices
of produce without an equivalent for the present grower, a
reduction in the value of their land, and perhaps, the pro-
duction of a tendency to vacate the present agricultural
settlements for those rendered more attractive by the
development of natural physical advantages. The benefits
of such a scheme would of course be general, to the Trea-
sury, to the consumers of produce, to those especially in
the vicinity of the works or who settle on the irrigation
colony, and to the community at large, in consequence of
the resulting prosperity. These benefits would result just
as well if existing groups of farms were operated upon; the
difference being that there would be fewer sufferers and
the benefits would fall upon the pioneers of the soil; the
present centres of population would remain undisturbed,
except in the direction of progress. The only sufferers,
comparatively speaking, would be those either unable or
unwilling to provide the same means of success and com-
petition. Some there would be, with farms so situated,
that a supply of water and distribution would be difficult of
attainment, but there are few which would not admit of
some practicable scheme for irrigation at a greater or less
expense. It behoves our farmers, then, and those in-
terested in their prosperity to do their best, by concerted
action and by agreeing amongst themselves as to what
terms of assistance they would accept from the Govern-
ment, to bring about such a desirable result as would cause
their lands to produce twice their present average crop and of
a far superior quality. It mast be borne in mind that tho
fact of our agricultural groups being so much scattered and
each having an equal claim upon the Government’s assistance,


renders it difficult for the authorities to decide upon a point
of commencement, in a policy of irrigation, without laying
themselves open to a charge of favouritism and causing
dissatisfaction among the ignored districts. To surmount
this difficulty, overtures should come from the farmers
themselves, and the Government is not likely to refuse to
meet propositions, with all the consideration due to the
enterprise and spirit shown by the petitioners. They should
be only too pleased to have the responsibilities of choice in
such a delicate undertaking, lifted from their shoulders.
Farmers, considered as a class, are slow to combine, and
appeartohave a liking for individuality, and a disinclination
to obtain in company what, single handed, they are unable
to compass. The principal cause of this appears to be, not
want of perception, so much as a natural disability under
which our farmers labour. The occupation, interest and
attractions for the farmer are all upon his own land and
connected with his own home; he seldom goes abroad to
seek companionship and commune with his fellows, except
it is to come into competition with them and thus sharpen
and strengthen his individuality. His ambition is usually
to outstrip his neighbours and to obtain higher prices, and
this becomes so much a part of himself that, he is
ever ready to advance himself and his farm, when he is
divested of his old time conservatism, provided he can do so
without improving his neighbours as a whole. He is
consequently slow to join in organisation, which he is afraid
will equalize results so that he cannot beat his neighbours,
and his desire to excel prevents him from sharing. He
is forgetful of the fact that general prosperity must mean
his prosperity, and that there should be competition of
districts, rather than competition of individuals, for the
highest progress. These characteristics are of the typical
farmer and are fast becoming eradicated so far as the


tendency to conservatism is concerned. Wdiat is required
to further the cause is encouragement to intercourse and
discussion ; the difficulty, often enough, is to get the farmers
together for any specific purpose, not that they are so much
wanting in the requisite sentiment or opinion. It is so
much against the hard working agriculturist’s inclination to
leave his home after his work is done, or to set aside any
special day to devote to what may interfere with the progress
of the work on the farm, that he is apt to argue with him-
self that they can get on just as well without him; and,
when four-fifths of the farmers are absent, the remainder
lose interest and think that they might have done better by
staying at home, so that on the next occasion they are
amongst the delinquents. It appears to speak well for the
agricultural industry in this colony, that it should be so
flourishing that farmers can afford to look on while almost
all other classes are organising and combining for their
mutual good ; but unfortunately, appearances often
deceive.
It seems almost superfluous to add more to what has
already been urged on the score of the benefits from
irrigation, but I am tempted to have a parting thrust with
reference to competition and advance. Our local market
for produce is constantly on the increase, and we have yet
to produce a superior article to command the price obtained
for the imported production. This can best be effected by
commanding the growth of the product; and the mode of
preparation must improve with a more general use of the
superior implements, that the established confidence urges
our farmers to invest in.
On all hands appear the pros, and the cons really resolve
into two main objections which are urged by a very modest
few, but which should be met by fair argument, whether
worth it or not. It is said we may so lower the price of


produce by the probable excess of supply over demand as to
produce a negative result by our irrigation. Farmers with
experience will, I think, admit that although a bad year so
increases the price, that a temporary benefit is derived by
those who are able to produce a crop, yet it does not more
than make up for the loss in quantity and weight of the
crop. And there are times when, as I have before shown,
no crop is taken off for months, resulting in a clear loss of
seed, labor, &c. Would it not be better, in a large degree,
if a regular average price is obtained, with the certainty of
a crop being taken off at a time almost at the direction of
the farmer ? As regards probable excess of supply over
demand, there is little prospect of this, considering the
amount of produce we import and the constant increase of
the non-producing consumers. An almost certain know-
ledge of what are his yearly assets would alone be suffi-
cient gain to the farmer.
Another exception taken to the expenditure of money m
this manner is that the experiment, —as they choose to call
it, —does not hold out sufficient certainty of success, and the
uncertainty of seasons is to be preferred to an expenditure
of money on that which may only be partially successful.
The only, and I think, sufficient answer to this is, that it
is the cry of the croaker, who doubts his own ability to
carry out a scheme, which has every favourable aspect and
initiation, to his own advantage. In the hands of good
men, who are intelligent and energetic, given the supply
of water, the result bids very fair to be satisfactory, to
say the least. The money expenditure, in such a scheme
as I suggest, merely amounts to the payment of a very
small sum, equal to a few bushels of corn per acre, for the
command of the elements, or, which is the same thing, the
command of the seasons.
I cannot do better than close this with what may be


considered a “clincher” in the shape of a clipping from
the columns of a late issue of the “ Queenslander .” The para-
graph in question, having originated in a periodical pub-
lished in the same country to whose statistics it refers,
is not likely to mistake what might be so easily contra-
dicted, if untrue —vide :
“ A recent issue of Harper’s Weekly states, that within
the last five years over £5.000,000 has been invested in
irrigation works in California, and as a consequence the
value of land with water has increased from ten to fifty
fold. The taxable valuation has increased at the rate of
£20,000,000 a year during the last four years. Under the
influence of irrigation, counties which before were almost
entirely unproductive, are now blooming with verdure and
yielding abundant crops.”


EXAMPLE.
Although it is improbable that any great deal of information of
individual value may be obtained from an example or estimate
based upon general and indefinite data, yet a good deal of light
may be thrown generally upon the subject of cost by such an
example shown in semi-detail. The estimates for the example
submitted are supposed to fit what might be termed an average
case in south-eastern Queensland, where the site is within one
hundred miles of one of the principal ports, and where there
are no supreme obstacles to transport. At the same time, the
estimates are intended to be to the full, rather than otherwise.
Taking a scheme which intends to extend for five miles along
a river frontage, and to have a range of three-quarters of a mile
on each side, for the purpose of illustration.
Area of land within reach of the square miles, of
which we may assume two-thirds to be irrigable. This would
make the irrigable area five square miles.
Average lift, 100 feet* above normal level of river to reser-
voir surface, allowing i in. per day over whole irrigable area.
Total consumption allowed for thirty days : 5 sq. miles=3,2oo
acres ; 3in. deep=34,848,000 cubic feet, or 10,890 cubic feet
per acre.
One day’s maximum
Assuming that a level reach of water, one mile long is
* This need not represent the extreme height of any particular lift, but may be taken
as being the average height to which the whole body of water has to be lifted ; thus
100 feet is a high average for illustration.


available, above pumping site, at which a bar of rock facilitates
the construction of a weir.
Mean width of reservoir ... ... 300 feet.
Mean height of reservoir... ... 25 „
Mean length of reservoir ... ... 21,120 „
Capacity of compounding reservoir 39,600,000 c. „
Elevated reservoir (in the case of all the water being dispensed
from one head) to contain one day’s supply.
(Say) Mean depth ... 10 feet.
Mean length ... 500 „
Mean width ... 300 ~
Capacity ... 1,500,000 c. ~
Allowing an average effective head of four feet above orifice
at discharge (Theoretical velocity 16'05.) A pipe to supply
(say) 1,500,000 cubic feet in twelve hours, or 347 cubic feet per
second, would require to be 2 4 square feet in sectional area ; to
this should be added 25 per cent, for allowance on the score of
friction, defects, &c. Then a pipe should be provided having
three square feet sectional area or, (say) twenty inches in
diameter.
In order to arrive at the total approximate amount of pipes
required for mains, suppose the mains are carried to within half-
a-mile of extremities of frontage and run parallel to the river on
either side, this would necessitate (say) eight miles of pipe
mains presumably comprised as follows :
1 mile 20 inches diameter pipe
1 55 55 55 55
2 y> lb ~ 55 55
1 55 12 ~ ~ >)
1 9
X 55 * 7 55 55 55
2 „ 6 55 55 55


Approximate weight of pipes of No. 16 B.W Gf. iron plate, in-
eluding laps and rivets :
1 mile 20" pipe, sheet 67" wide=37 tons per mile ... 37 tons
1 „ 18" „ „ 60" „ =34 „ „ „ ... 34 „
2 „ 15" „ ~ 51" „ =27 „ „ „ ... 54 „
1 „ 12" „ „ 40" „ =22 „ „ „ ... 22 „
1 » 9" „ „ 31" „ =l5 „ „ „ ... 15 „
Total ... ... 162 tons
The 6" pipe should he made of 24 gauge galvanized iron, as
per diagram, and can either be laid upon staging above ground,
or laid underground with a casing, 2" thick, made of fine cement
concrete. The casing or envelope would require about 70 cubic
yards of concrete per mile.


ESTIMATE OF COST.
Cost of Weib.
£
Concrete nucleus walls, wings, &c., 2,000 cubic yards
at £2 10s. ... 5,000
Filling and packing, 20,000 cubic yards at 3s. ... ... 3,000
Allowance for pitching, if required, 1,000 cub. yds. at 10s. 500
Syphons and fenders ... ... ... ... ... 250
Total ... ... £8,750
Cost of Mains— B Miles.
£
Wrought iron mains, 162 tons at £2O per ton ... ... 3,240
20 per cent, allowance for freight and handling... ... 648
2 miles galvanised iron piping, with concrete casing, at
£3OO per mile ... ... ... ... ... ... 600
Lead for joints, including freight, &c., 9 tons at £2O ... 180
1,584 joints, excavating holes, leading, &c., at 4s. ... 317
Excavation and re-filling, 7,040 cubic yards at 2s. ... 704
Cast iron outlet lengths, hydrants, &c., &c. (say) ... 311
Total ... ... £6,000
Cost of Engines, &c.
Pumps and engines required to lift 7,500,000 gallons of
water 100 feet high in 24 hours, or 5,208 gallons per
minute ; horse power required, 200 (with full allow-
ance for friction, &c.) ; cost, inclusive of buildings,
setting, &c., at £45 per h.p £9,000


Cost of Elevated Beservoir.
£
Presuming the reservoir may be represented in volume
by half being excavated, and the remainder provided
by a wall and embankment across a gully or depres-
sion ; excavation, 30,000 cubic yards at Is. 6d. ... 2,250
Concrete wall, 560 cubic yards, at £2 10s. (backed up
with earth) ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,400
Total £3,650
Note.—Exception may be taken to the low prices allowed for excavation
in elevated reservoir, and the low price for packing and filling the weir
embankment; but it is presumed that, at least, half the excavated
material in the former case could economically be utilized for packing and
filling in the latter case.
Summary of Cost.
£
Total cost of Weir 8,750
Total cost of Machinery, Buildings, &c. ... ... ... 9,000
Total cost of Auxiliary Beservoir ... ... ... ... 3,650
Total cost of Mains... ... ... ... ... ... 6,000
Item for supervision, services, &c ... ... ... ... 2,600
Total amount of outlay ... ... £30,000


Estimated Revenue per Annum.
£
Rates from irrigable area 3,200 acres, at 2s Od. ... ... 400
Valuation rate on 53 square miles or 33,920 acres ...
Capital value at average of, say, £1 per acre=£33,920... > 51
Annual value at 6 per cent., £2,035, 6d. in the £, £51... '
Total rates ... ... 451
Endowment at £2 for £1 ... ... 902
Revenue from taxation ... ... 1,353
Consumption of water, say, 6 inches over total irrigable
area, per annum (representing two-thirds the maxi-
mum) = say 12s. per acre, 3,200 acres at 12s. ... 1,920
(403,200,000 gals, per annum)
Total Revenue ... £3,234
Estimated Expenditure.
£
Interest on £30,000 at 4 per cent. ... ... ... 1,200
Cost of Pumping, 403 million gallons at £2 per million 806
Balance towards other expenses with probable surplus ... 1,228
£3,234


ADDENDA.
DESIGN FOR WEIR EMBANKMENT.
(Figs. 2, 3 and 4.)
In submitting the accompanying design, it is my object to
illustrate, generally, a suggestion for a structure composed
of boulders and other suitable loose material, strengthened
and rendered impervious by a concrete nucleus wall and
foot wall of the same material. The suggested disposition
of boulder formation appears to me to be the most feasible
combination of the convex and concave systems of the
horse-shoe form of weir, overcoming, as much as possible,
the objections to each system.
In building a weir, one ot the principal objects to be
aimed at is to divert the current, as much as possible, from
the banks, at the same time avoiding too great a concen-
tration of water at any particular point of the structure.
The stream of water to be considered in making this pro-
vision is that which will most often pass over the structure,
or, in other words, a moderate fresh, as it is the continuous
flow which causes scouring and undermining the most often.
It is not to be anticipated that the loose boulder work would
preserve its form of crest when subjected to the force of a
large body of water, such as would pass over the structure
at high flood, but the boulders would, until such time of
high flood, perform the principal duty expected of them,
namely, to preserve the concrete walls from destruction or
damage by logs —and the gradual fall on the downstream


side, would at all times, lessen the scour, both on the banks
and in the bed of the stream.
In constructing an embankment of this description, it
would be advisable to build the foot wall and lower wings
first, and before the main nucleus wall has adviariced
beyond the foundation stage, the filling and boulder work
should be built up over the foot wall, the full width of
stream, to about the line shown on “ transverse section ”
as “ line of premier filling.” This would answer the dual
purpose of allowing this portion of the embankment
which requires to be most stable, to thoroughly settle and
consolidate, and preserving the nucleus wall while under
construction, from having to bear any undue pressure, or
from the evil effects of scour. The line of filling, should
of course, be brought up as the construction of the wall
progresses —all mud should be kept from the structure.
During construction, it would be of advantage if the
pumping machinery could be utilized for the purpose of
keeping the water away from the structure, and for this
purpose the syphons should also be available for use. In
choosing the material for the filling, care should be taken
that the major portion of it consists of boulders and
insoluble rocks, a fair proportion of clay and gravel,
or shingle being allowed as filling, on or near the
foundations, to bind the structure, care being taken
that ,jthis latter class of material is not allowed to
support any weight as it would most probably subside or
scour out. For the same reason it would be useless to use
clay, gravel, shingle, or any soluble material where likely to
be influenced by the action of flowing water ; consequently,
the surface for a thickness of several feet, of the down-
stream slope should be formed of well packed boulders.
The crest and slope should be as well as possible main-
tained, and repaired after displacement by floods.


DEVICE FOR FLUME OFF-SHOOT.
(Fig. 5.)
In the practice of distributing water by means of wooden
flumes, it is found difficult to intercept water en route with-
out encountering loss by leakage, principally at times when
the branch outlets are not in use. To overcome this diffi-
culty,—caused by the almost impossibility of rendering
wooden traps or other openings watertight, —I present the
accompanying device in which the openings are above the
waterline. The water is intercepted by the sluice door
and backed up until it overflows into the funnel. The
amount of water intercepted can be regulated by the
height at which the door is fixed. The flume would re-
quire to be of larger dimensions at the “ off-shoot” and
should be run back level until it meets the sloping side.
The sluice door would be most advantageously made of
I" plate iron, travelling in saw cuts deep. Indentations
or obstructions should be provided on the surface of the
plate with which the adjusting peg should engage.
Although this device is represented in connection with a
wooden flume, yet it might be quite as well adapted to use
with flumes made of galvanized iron or other material,
subject of course, to modification.
The funnel should in every case be made of galvanized
iron.
The strap, shown in Fig. 6, is designed for use with
rectangular wooden flumes, and is recommended to be
fixed at short intervals for the purpose of keeping together
the structure in as secure a manner as possible, subject to
adjustment. By attention to the tightening of the nuts, a
flume, well put together in the first instance, should be
kept practically watertight.








PLATE I
DESIGN FOR WEIR EMBANKMENT
FIG 2
Transverse Section (drawn to natural scale)
Shewing Cross Sectians at A.S.E. and BSF, CSD (see Sketch-Plan and Elevation)
PLATE II
DESIGN FOR WEIR EMBANKMENT
(FIG 3)
SKETCH PLAN OF WEIR
Dotted line SSSSS shews line of Crest of Boulderwork.
FIG 4
SKETCH OF ELEVATION OF WEIR
Shewing dispostion of boulderwork
PLATE III
FIG 5
DEVICE FOR FLUME OFFSHOOT
a. Sluice door
b. funnel
c. Support, with adjusting peg.
FIG 6






