

Peru p
U'M- H
Hoa-
JMcbp.uc'g
TO WHOM WERE THEY ADDRESSED ?
? Shakespeare?s Sonnets are a chapter of autobiography,
although unreadable till criticism finds the key.? A
Journal of Summer Time in the Country, hy the Kev. 11.
Aris Wilemott : Parker and Son, 1854.
? All those discourses which have been written for the
soul?s heraldry, will not blazon it so well to us as itself will
do. When we turn our eyes in upon it, it will soon tell
us its own royal pedigree and noble extraction, by those
sacred hieroglyphics which it bears upon itself. ? John
Smith. (Extracted from the above.)
All Rights Reserved.
mania:
Davies Bros., Printers, Hobart.
1881.


*


Jannete.
TO WHOM WERE THEY ADDRESSED 1
? Shakespeare?s Sonnets are a chapter of autobiography,
although unreadable till criticism finds the key.? ?A
Journal of Summer Time in the Country, hy the Rev. R.
Aeis Willmott : Parker and Son, 1854.
? All those discourses which have been written for the
soul?s heraldry, will not blazon it so well to us as itself will
do. When we turn our eyes in upon it, it will soon tell
us its own royal pedigree and noble extinction, by those
sacred hieroglyphics which it bears upon itself. ? John
Smith. (Extracted from the above.)
All Rights Reserved.
Davies Bros., Printers, Hobart.


?' I ' ? '


TO . J . O . HALLIWELL-PHILiIPS .
THESE . INSVING . LINES .
ARE . DEDICATED .
.
THE . WELL-WISHING .
ADVENTVRER . IN .
SETTING .
FORTH .
S.S . T




PREFACE.
Having been permitted by the Editor of the
Victorian Review to publish for private cir-
culation the article on Shakespeare?s sonnets,
which appeared in it, December 1, 1880,1 take
the opportunity of adding the following pre-
fatory criticism :
The first seventeen sonnets, without an ex-
ception, make the marriage of his son their
object. This theme is the one entreaty of a
father to his son to marry, and perpetuate a
race.
After the seventeenth sonnet, he never again
alludes to this ardent wish, and hitherto all-
engrossing subject of his thoughts.
I conclude from this, that his son had
married after the 17th sonnet ?or that the
mother was dead. The sudden cessation of
this stream of unceasing importunity points to
.one of these two alternatives.
That that importunity was not all his own,
I can well imagine. It was inspired by the
mother, and written to please her. This was


his motive, which ceased to operate when their
son married, or when she died.
The 30th and 31st sonnets slioav direct
reference to her death, which, therefore, I take
it, occurred between the 17th and 30th. I
have always felt that there is a delicate amorous
breath of inspiration in all the first seventeen
sonnets, showing that he Avas writing to please
the mother; looking mentally at her, as he was
composing, and having her mother?s love and
her family pride, always as his key-note.
The 31st sonnet is very plain?
? How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stolen from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear
But things removed, that hidden in thee lie ,
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live.?
That the object of the first seventeen sonnets
was married after the 17th was written, and
that the mother died before the 81st, and that
Shakespeare?s motive was removed before the
18th was written, I consider proved.
The total want of allusion to her death from
the 17th to the 30th, also convince me it was
not death, but marriage.
Again, after her death, which I assume to


have occurred some time before the 30th, for
in it (the thirtieth) occurs the line?
? And weep afresh love?s long-since cancelled woe,?
how is it there is never any, even the faintest
allusion, to the one all-absorbing theme of mar-
riage ? Even if he felt personally indifferent to
the perpetuation of his son?s putative name, and
family, still, from many other motives?chief of
which would be the wish of the dead?would
he not have forced himself to renew his old
entreaty ?
This is, to my mind, conclusive. The son,
the object of the first 17, and subsequent 109
sonnets, was married after the 17th was written.
My theory clashes with Mr. Massey?s, of
necessity. Southampton will not fit in ; neither,
indeed, will Herbert ?dates forbid.
As to Southampton, our Poet?s dedications
to him of the Venus and Adonis, and of his
Lucrcce, seem altogether too cold, and too
much at war with the tone of all the 126
sonnets.
The perfect intimacy and familiarity shown
in the latter, must assuredly have communi-
cated their colour, however faintly, to these
dedications. Besides, Mr. Massey says that
the first 26 sonnets were not later than 1.393,


when Southampton was aged 20 ; if so, how is
it that Shakespeare?s incessant entreaty to
marry, ceases at once and for ever, at sonnet
17 ? Southampton not marrying till late in
1598 ! Just after Mere?s reference to the
sugrcd sonnets.?
I am infinitely pleased to find so just and
? sympathique ? a critic as Mr. Massey say,
he had loved him as a father loves a son.?
When he wrote this, he was, as children say
in the game of Blind Man?s Buff, very ? warm I?
It was the father, pouring out the passionate
Hood of his love to his son.
I cannot conclude without expressing my
sorrow for mutilated reproductions of our
Shakespeare, such as given by Mr. Francis
Turner Palgravc. There is Jesuistry about his
edition of the songs and sonnets in 1865 that is
to be regretted. It is beautifully ? got up,? and
reflects the highest credit upon the publishers,
Messrs. MacMillan. But when examined,
there is a manipulation throughout that must
be painful to every lover of Shakespeare.
Where are the 20th, the 151 st, 153 rd and
154 th sonnets ? And why does he not plainly
indicate, not only their, omission, but his
reasons for such a very serious erasure ?
How dare he, or any man, thus injure our


Shakespeare 1 The tenor of his notes must
also offend every clean-minded reader. This
is harsh language, of course, in this milk and
water age. This age, which Charles Lamb
characterised so happily, as notable for its
? stupid infantile goodness. ? ? But I leave it to
any lover and student of Shakespeare, to read
and collate the said publication, and then pro-
nounce. The lion is dead ; shall his remains
be mangled ? And shall they be made the
? coward conquest of a wretch?s knife ? without
a protest ?
If I love Shakespeare more than I do any
author, living or dead, shall I sit by and let
such imputations as are conveyed with much
skilfulness, by Mr. Palgrave, pass unnoticed,
and not hurl one stone of reproach at him ?
We Englishmen owe Shakespeare a debt of
gratitude too incalculably great for any one
who has read him, and has the courage of his
opinions, to acquiesce indifferently in these
oblique aspersions.
Myremarks will possibly irritate the Stcevcns
and Malone school. I would ask Mr. Rossetti
how he would like some future critic of this
class, to ? improve ? and emend his work 1
Poor Shelley ! I can imagine the delicate
* ? Specimens of English Dramatic Poets.? See Appendix.


features of that great Shade, working with
anger, not unmixed with humour, at the recent
tampering with his text.
These great authors are a public property,
in which we and future generations have a
divine right, and real estate. We want them,
as they were, with all their imperfections.
No meddling, or tampering, with their precious
text ; above all, no Bowdlerising !
S. Smith Travers
Hobart,
Tasmania.
o^ ipHr


Shakespeare s Sonnets.
TO WHOM WERE THEY ADDRESSED?
Reprinted from the Victorian Review ,
of December 1, 1880.
THE non-personality of Shakespeare?s dra-
matic works, the absence of everything
which can in any way throw light upon his
individuality, his ? Ego,? must strike all who
read him with ordinary love and intelligence.
In this respect, it is impossible to help com-
paring him with other great writers. We
then find how rarely any rise to the level of
that high inspiration?when the ?Ego? dis-
appears, when the God speaks through his
instrument, and when the oracle is untainted
by self-consciousness. With all other authors
one gathers some idea, right or wrong, of the
man. Whether it be Chaucer, Bacon, Milton,
Dryden, Wordsworth, Shelley, Coleridge,
Byron, or even the perfect poets, Keats and
Herrick, the individuality peeps out; the


reader may detect the man and much of his
mental idiosyncrasy underneath his various
disguises, and can, according to his own in-
sight, lay his finger on this or that weakness
or greatness, and say, ? Here speaks the man
egotistically.? With Shakespeare this cannot
be said. With all the characters ho created,
and upon which he has conferred immortality,
there is no trace of himself. He would be
still, but for his sonnets, the great unknown !
a wonderful mystery ! unlike all other men,
not only in his knowledge and power, but in
his inscrutability. In these sonnets only, and
at last, we sec the man, but still inscrutable,
propounding, no doubt, most deliberately, and
with what success we all know, a riddle to
posterity. Who lias yet answered the question
ho implies in his first 126 sonnets ? That
question being, ? To whom do I address these
verses ? ? And yet, with consummate art, he
has left the answer hidden in the sonnets them-
selves 1 To those who arc amateurs of our poet,
rather than to professed Shakcspeareans, do I
look for a verdict, ? Die Menschheit hat ein
fein Gehor ,? Goethe said ; and I confess I
appeal to ? Die Menschheit and not to that
jealous, envious being, the Shakespearean.
The latter is confessedly in the dark, and not


the less dangerous to the luckless individual
who brings him light. The secret of the
sonnets, of the one hundred and twenty-six in
question, is simple. They were addressed to
his son. Not a son by Anne Hathaway, but
to an illegitimate one by some other woman?-
the evidence would go to show, by some woman
of high rank. In those days, when blue blood
was a reality,?when thebelief in rank and caste
was more deeply rooted than in religion even?
an intrigue between a poor player and some
charming, appreciative, clever, great lady, no
doubt, happened more often than the immense
gulf between them, would at first permit us to
believe. But, as he makes Suffolk say?
? She is beautiful, and, therefore, to bo woo?d.
She is a woman, therefore to be won.?
When, according to Mr. Palgrave, ? our great
and gentle Shakespeare submitted him-
self to these passions ? and ? really endured
them,? can we imagine that any mere woman
could resist him ? The higher her intellect, the
less capable of resistance. On the other hand,
can we not readily imagine his adoration and
gratitude, carried on and translated to the
child ? This mixed adoration and deep love,
which shine out in each sonnet, is thus
accounted for. We must remember the age in


which ho wrote. lie was proud of his con-
quest ; but, above all, proud and passionately
fond of its fruits.
Beyond his relationship as son, the question
?Who was W.H.?? matters little. Though
Shakespeare knew that he was writing for all
time, he recked little of posterity and its fame ;
he cared really only for the present. His son,
his son?s mother, if alive (and there is evidence
here and there that she was dead when most of
the sonnets were published?sec sonnet xxxi.),
perhaps, also, one or two dear friends and con-
iidants ?these were for whom he wrote those
immortal and perfect words.
To the proofs, however. They arc not many,
but can never be set aside, or sneered at, and
they speak for themselves. In sonnet in. we
find in the Dth and 10th lines :
? Thou art thy mother?s glass, and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime.?
When this was written, not published, the
mother was, therefore, alive !
In sonnet x.:?
? Make thee another self, for love of me.?
In sonnet xtii.: ?
? Yon had a father, let your son say so.?


Coupled with what follows, this will be found
to be an appeal from the father to his son.
Sonnet xv.:?
? And all in war with Time for love of you,
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.?
Sonnet xxil: ?
? My glass shall not persuade me I am old
So long as youth and thou arc of one date.?
Sonnet xxxi.: ?
? How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol?n from mine eye,
As interest from the dead, which now appear
Hut things removed, that hidden in thee lie.
? Thou art the grave, where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,-
Who all their parts of thee to me did give ;
That due of many noiv is thine alone !?
This is difficult to interpret?not from my
view of the theory; for, it is evident that he
addresses his son ; but from the subtle,
metaphysical implication of the reaction of his
dearest friends and lovers on his inner self,
and powers of reproduction.
Sonnet xxxtit. is conclusive, even if we did
not know Shakespeare?s love of the pun, or
play on a word.
? Even so, my Sun one early morn did shine
With all triumphant splendour on my brow ;
But out, alack ; ho was but one hour mine,
The region cloud hath mark?d him from me now.
?Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaincth ;
Suns of the world may stain, when heaven?s sun
staineth,?


The above must bo read together with
Sonnets xxxiv. and xxxv. They belong to each
other, and refer to some wrong done him by
his son. What this wrong was, may be that
which is indicated in Sonnets XL., xli., xlii.
But it is not the less plain that it is his son he
addresses. The license of the age must be
remembered.
Sonnet xxxvi.:?
? Let me confess that wo two must he twain,
Although our undivided loves are one ;
So shall these blots that do with me remain
Without thy help by me borne alone.
? In our two loves there is but qne respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which, though it alter not love?s sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love?s delight.
? I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame ;
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name
? But do not so ; I love thee in such sort
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.?*
To analyse this sonnet, full of paternal
anguish and remorse, is beyond my powers.
It is, all of it, profoundly touching. The father
addressing his bastard son ; not his son before
the world, but none the less his son?and
bastard?appreciating as only Shakespeare
* See Sonnet xevi.


could, their mutual relations, and his sou?s
feelings. It is wonderful how it could have
escaped even the bat-like Shakcspeareans. If
there were no other evidence, this sonnet alone
suffices.
Sonnet xxxvii.:?
? As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by fortune?s dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth
? For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more ? * * * *
Corroborative, but no more.
Sonnet xxxix.;?
? O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,
When thou art all the better part of me ?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring ?
And what is?t but mine own when I praise thee ?
?Even for this let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give
That due to thee which thou deserv?st alone.?
Can anything be stronger ?
Sonnet xlix. :
? To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of hues,
Since why to love I can allege no cause.?
Sonnet lxii. The whole must be read. I
give it, therefore, entire :
? Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.


? Methinks iio face so gracious as is mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
And for myself mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmounts
? But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
Boated and chopp?d with tann?d antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read ;
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
? Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
Painting my ago with beauty of thy days.?
Sonnet lxxi. :
? 0 ! if I say, you look upon this verse
When I, perhaps, compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
But let your love even with my life decay ?
? Lest the tvise world should looh into your moan,
And modi you with me after I am gone."
This needs no comment.
Sonnet lxxii.
? 0, lest the world should task you to recite
What merit lived in mo, that you should love
After my death, dear Love, forget me quite ;
Por you in me can nothing worthy prove;
? Unless you would devise some virtuous lie
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I
Than niggard truth would willingly impart ;
? 0, lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you :
? For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.?


Sonnet xcvi, :
? But do not so, I love tlioc in such sort,
As, tliou being mine, mine is tliy good report.? *
In the above quotations, I have singled out
only such as afford direct evidence ; read by
their light, many of the other sonnets bear
corroborative testimony. lam happy in think-
ing that the above remarks cannot possibly be
classed among the ordinary Shakespearean
criticisms. The question here is not, ? What
is his, Shakespeare?s ?? or, ? What is Marlowe?s
or Fletcher?s, Jonson?s or Beaumont?s ? ? This
is no question, as Swinburne would put it, for
? critics of the finger-counting, or syllabic
school.? It is the simple solution of a riddle,
put to posterity; a matter in which the non-
Shakespearian one of the ? dipolloi ,? untroubled
by too much study, by too much published
criticism, has a singular advantage ; and, with
a little Einsicht and much love of his author,
can see what is for ever denied to the mere
critic. If these one hundred and twenty-six
sonnets were not addressed to his son, then, I
ask, ? what is the meaning of these hidden
allusions ? ?
Before closing this paper, and after despatch-
ing the more direct evidence, I may be per-
* See Sonnet xxxvi.


mittcd to draw my reader?s attention to one
or two of the other sonnets, in which may he
found an indirect testimony of what I advance.*
Is not the first sonnet an entreaty to a son to
marry ? In the second, read by the strong
light of my theory, what is plainer than the
plea ?
? When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty?s field,
Thy youth?s proud livery, so gazed on now,
Will be a tatter?d weed of small worth held.
? Then being ash?d where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days ;
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
? How much more praise deserved thy beauty s use,
If thou couldst answer, ? This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,?
Proving his beauty by succession thine !
?This were to be new-made when thou art old,
And sec thy blood warm when thou fecl?st it cold.?
What a delicate flattery in this ! and always
the father who speaks. Up to sonnet xvn. it
is an incessant appeal to his son to marry ; and,
it may be suspected, at the mother?s instance.
When she dies, the appeal ceases, and is never
renewed again !
* I would here add, for the consideration of my reader, the words in
Sonnet cxvii.?
? Your own dear purchased right,?
And in the last, cxxvi.??
? 0, thou, my lovely hoy.?


Our most positive and all-knowing Shake-
spearean, Mr. Swinburne, has lately laid down
the law, that?
? Upon the sonnets such a preposterous pyramid of
presumptuous commentary has been reared by the
Cimmerian speculation and Boeotian ? brain sweat ? of
sciolists and scholiasts, that no modest man ? [this is not
bad] ? will hope, and no wise man ? [this is better] ? will
desire, to add to the structure, or substract one single
brick of proof or disproof, theorem or theory.?
With some respect for this dictum, from
an author whose ?flux de louche ,? when he
gets into prose, is well known, and who will
deny himself assuredly thrice ere he die, and
yet write volumes upon these very sonnets, I,
who am a very much older student of our
author, would say to him, ? Read the sonnets,
and write rather less of this clever rubbish ;
the sonnets have a meaning, although it may
not have been granted to you to see it.?
S. SMITH TKAVEIIS.
kS) ** V" ??d � (*J


APPENDIX.
Page 7. ??Stupid infantile goodness .? The
passage in which this occurs is all of it so
charming that, to save my reader the
trouble of reference, I here transcribe it.
It occurs in a note to an extract, or speci-
men, from ? A Fair Quarrel,? by Thos.
Middleton and Wm. Eowley :
? The insipid levelling morality to which the
modern stage is tied down would not admit of
such admirable passions as these scenes are
filled with. A puritanical obtuseness of senti-
ment, a stupid infantile goodness, is creeping
among us, instead of the vigorous passions and
virtues clad in fiesh and blood, with which the
old dramatists present us.
? Those noble and liberal casuists could dis-
cern in the differences, the quarrels, the
animosities of man, a beauty and truth of
moral feeling, no less than in the iteratcly
inculcated duties of forgiveness and atonement.
? With us all is hypocritical meekness, a
reconciliation scene (let the occasion be never


so absurd or unnatural), is always sure of ap-
plause. Our audiences come to the theatre to
be complimented on their goodness. They
compare notes with the amiable characters in
the play, and find a wonderful similarity of
disposition between them. We have a common
stock of dramatic morality out of which a
writer may be supplied, without the trouble of
copying it from originals within his own breast
?to know the boundaries of honour, to be
judiciously valiant, to have a temperance which
shall beget a smoothness in the angry swellings
of youth, to esteem life as nothing when the
sacred reputation of a parent is to be defended ;
yet, to shake and tremble under a pious
cowardice, when that ark of an honest confi-
dence is found to be frail and tottering, to feel
the true blows of a real disgrace blunting that
sword which the imaginary strokes of a sup-
posed false imputation had put so keen an
edge upon but lately. To do, or to imagine
this done, in a feigned story, asks something
more of a moral sense, somewhat a greater
delicacy of perception in questions of right
and wrong, than goes to the writing of two or
three hackneyed sentences about the laws of
honour as opposed to the laws of the land, or
a commonplace against duelling.


?Yet, such things would stand a writer
nowadays in far better stead than Captain
Ager and his conscientious honour; and he
would be considered as a far better teacher of
morality than old Rowley or Middleton if they
were living.? ?Specimens of English Dramatic
Poets who lived about the time of Shakspeare;
with Notes by Ciias. Lamb. Second Edition .
London , Rumpus, 1813.
Davies Bros., Printers, ? Mercury ? Office, Hobart, Tasmania.




