

m\r jsovtjb: mus.
Governor Macquarie's Tour over the Western, or Blue Mountains, in April and May 1815 (From the Sydney Gazeţte)
. 'Mol .
- y(.




down for their government.—There are crimes which may be committed
without a breach of our present laws, and which make it necessary that
some further restrictions than those contained in the present licenses of our
traders, should either be added under penalties, in those licenses, or pu-
nished by way of a discretionary power, lodged in the superintendent,
extending (o the exclusion of such individuals from the Indian trade.
Of (his description I shall here enumerate the—
First, that of holding conversations with the Indians, tending to bring
our government into disrepute among them, and to alienate their affec-
tions from the same.
Second, that of practising any means to induce the Indians to mal-treat
or plunder other merchants.
Third, that of stimulating or exciting by bribes, or otherwise, any na-
tions or bands of Indians to wage war against other nations or bands, or
against the citizens of the United States, or against citizens or subjects of
any power at peace with the same.
These appear to me to be crimes fraught with more real evil to the
community, and to the Indians themselves, than vending ardent spirits, or
visiting their hunting camps for the purpose of trade; yet there are no
powers vested in the superintendents or agents of the United States, to pre-
vent their repeated commission, nor restrictions nor fines imposed by our
law, to punish such offences.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
(From the Sydney Gazette.)
GOVERNMENT AND GENERAL ORDERS.
Government House, Sydney, June lOlh, IB 15.
THE governor desires to communicate, for the information of lire public,
the result of his late tour over the Western, or Blue Mountains, undertaken
for the purpose of being enabled personally to appreciate the importance
of the tract of country lying westward of them, which had been explored in
the latter end of theyear 1813, and the beginning of 1814, by Mr. G. W.
Evans, deputy surveyor of lands.
To those who know how very limited a tract of country has been
hitherto occupied by the colonists of New South W'ales, extending along
the eastern coast to the north and south of Port Jackson only 80 miles, and
westward about 40 miles, to the foot of that chain ot mountains in the in-
terior which forms its western boundary, it must be a subject of astonish-
ment and regret, that, amongst so large a population, no one appeared
within the first 25 years of the establishment of this settlement, possessed
*f sufficient energy of mind to induce him fully to explore a passage over


these mountains: but, when it is considered, that for the greater part of
tiiat time even this circumscribed portion of country afforded sufficient pro-
duce for the wants of the people; whilst, on the other hand, the whole sur-
face of the country beyond those limits was a thick, and in many places
nearly an impenetrable forest, the surprise at the want of effort to surmount
such difficulties must abate very considerably.
i he records of the colony only afford two instances of any bold attempt
having been made to discover the country to the westward of the Blue
Mountains. Ihe first was by Mr. Bass, and tire other by Mr. Cay ley, and
both ended in disappointment—a circumstance which will not be much
wondered at by those who have lately crossed tiiose mountains.
fo G. Blaxland and W. V\ entworth, Esqrs. and Lieutenant Lawson, of
the Royal Veteran Company, the merit is due of having, with extraordi-
nary patience and much fatigue, effected tire first passage over the most
rugged and difficult part of the Blue Mountains.
The governor being strongly impressed with the importance of the ob-
ject, had, early alter his arrival in this colony, formed the resolution of
encouraging the attempt to find a passage to lire Western Country, and
willingly availed himself of the facilities which the discoveries of these three
gentlemen afforded him. Accordingly, on the 20th of November, 1813, he
entrusted the accomplishment of this object to Mr. G. W. Evans, deputy
surveyor of lands; the result of whose journey was laid before the public,
through the medium of the Sydney Gazette, on the 12th of Feb. 1814.
The favourable account given by Mr. Evans, of tire country he had
explored, induced the governor to cause a road to be constructed for (he
passage and conveyance of cattle and provisions to the interior; and men
of good character, from amongst a number of convicts who had volunteered
their services, were selected to perform this arduous work, on condition of
being fed and clothed during the continuance of their labour, and being
granted emancipation as their final reward, on thecompletion of the work.
The direction and superintendence of this great work was entrusted to
W. Cox, Esq. the chief magistrate at Windsor; and, to the astonishment
of every one who knows what was to be encountered, and sees what has
been done, he effected its completion in six months from the time of its
commencement, happily, without the loss of a man, or any serious acci-
dent. The governor is at a loss to appreciate fully the services rendered
by Mr. Cox to this colony, in (he execution of this arduous work, which
promises to be of the greatest public utility, by opening a new source of
wealth to the industrious and enterprizing. When it is considered that
Mr. Cox voluntarily relinquished the comforts of his own house, and the
society of his numerous family, and exposed himself to much personal
fatigue, with only such temporary covering as a bark hut could afford from
the inclemency of the season, it is difficult to express the sentiments of ap-
probation to which such privations and services are entitled.
Mr. Cox having reported the road as completed on the 21st of January,
the governor, accompanied by Mrs. Macquarie and that gentleman, com-
menced his tour on the 25th of April over the Blue Mountains, and was


joined by Sir J. Jamieson, at the Nepean, who accompanied him during
the entire tour.
r i he following gentlemen composed the governor’s suite:—Mr. Camp-
bell, secretary; Captain Antill, major of brigade; Lieutenant Watts, aide-
de-camp; Mr. Redfern, assistant-surgeon; Mr. Oxley, surveyor-general;
Mr. Meeham, deputy-surveyor-general; Mr. Lewin, painter and naturalist;
and Mr. G. W. Lvans, deputy-surveyor of lands, who had been sent for-
ward for the purpose of making further discoveries, and rejoined the party
on the day of arrival at Bathurst Plains.
J he commencement of the ascent from Emu Plains to the first depot,
and thence to a resting place, now called “ Spring Wood,” distant twelve
miles from Emu Ford, was through a very handsome open forest of lofty
trees, and much more practicable and easy than was expected. The fa-
cility of the ascent for this distance excited surprise, and is certainly not
well calculated to give the traveller a just idea of the difficulties he has
afterwards to encounter. At the further distance of four miles a sudden
change is perceived in the appearance of the timber and the quality of the
soil—the former becoming stunted, and the lattet barren and rocky. At
this place the fatigues of the journey may be said to commence. Here the
country became altogether mountainous, and extremely rugged. Near the
18th mile mark, (it is observed, that the measure commences from Emu
Ford,) a pile of stones attracted attention; it is close to the line of the
road, on the top of a rugged and abrupt ascent, and is supposed to have
been placed there by Mr. Cayley, as the extreme limit of his tour; hence
the governor gave that part of the mountain the name of “ Cayley’s Re-
pulse.” To have penetrated even so far, was at that time an effort of no
small difficulty. From hence, forward to the 2Gth mile, is a succession of
steep and rugged hills, some of which are almost so abrupt as to deny a
passage altogether; but at this place an extensive plain is arrived at, which
constitutes the summit of the Western Mountain; and from thence a most
extensive and beautiful prospect presents itself on all sides to the eye. The
town of Windsor, the river Hawkesbury, Prospect Hill, and other objects
within that part of the colony now inhabited, of equal interest, are dis-
tinctly seen from hence.—-The majestic grandeur of the situation, com-
bined with the various objects to be seen from this place, induced the go-
vernor to give it the appellation of “ The ikiug’s Table Land.”
On the S. W. side of the King’s Table Land, the mountain terminates
in abrupt precipices of immense depth, at the bottom of which is seen a glen,
as romantically beautiful as can be imagined, bounded on the further side
by mountains of great magnitude, terminating equally abruptly as thd
others; and the whole thickly covered with timber. The length of this
picturesque and remarkable tract of country is about 24 miles, to which
the governor gave the name of “ The Prince Regent’s Glen.” Proceed-
ing hence to the 33rd mile on the top of a hill, an opening presents itself
on the S. W. side of the Prince Regent’s Glen, from whence a view is
obtained particularly beautiful and grand. Mountains rising beyond
mountains, with stupendous masses oi rock in the fore ground, here strike
the eye with admiration and astonishment. The circular form in which the


whole is so wonderfully disposed, induced the governor to give the name
ot “ Pitt’s Amphitheatre,” in honour of the late Right Hon. Wm. Pitt, to
this first branch from the Prince Regent’s G!en. The road continues from
hence, for the space of 17 miles, on the ridge of the mountain which forms
one side of the Prince Regent s Glen, and it suddenly terminates in nearly
a peipendicular precipice of t>76 feet high, as ascertained by measurement,
the road constructed by Mr. Cox down this rugged and tremendous
descent, tinough all its windings, is no less than three-fourths of a mile in
length, and has been executed wdth such skill and stability as reflects much
ci edit on him. Ihe labour here undergone, and the difficulties surmounted,
can only be appreciated by those who view this scene. In order to perpe-
tuate the memory of Mr. Coxs services, the governor deemed it a tribute
justly due to him, to give his name to this grand and extraordinary pass;
and he accordinaly called it “Cox’s Pass.” Having descended into the
valley at the bottom of this pass, the retrospective view of the overhanging
mountain is much higher than those on either side of it, from whence it is
distinguished at a considerable distance, when approaching it from the
interior; and in this point of view it has the appearance of a very high dis-
tinct hill, although it is in fact only the abrupt termination of a ridge. The
go\ ernoi gave the name oi “Mount York” to this termination of the
ridge, in honour of his Royal Highness the Duke of York.
On descending Cox’s Pass, the governor was much gratified by the
appearance of good pasture land, and soil fit for cultivation, which was the
first he had met with since the commencement of his tour. The valley at
the base of Mount \ oik, he called “the Vale of Clwyd,” in consequence
of the strong resemblance it bore to the vale of that name in North Wales.
The grass in this vale is of a good quality, and very abundant, and a rivulet
of fine water runs along it from the eastward, which unites itself at the
western extremity of the vale with another rivulet containing still more
water. Phc junction of these two streams forms a very handsome river
now called by the governor “Cox’s River,” which takes its course, as has
been since ascertained, through the Prince Regent’s Glen, and empties
itself into the rivei Nepean; and it is conjectured, from the nature of the
country through which it passes, that it must be one of the principal causes
of the floods which have been occasionally felt on the low banks of the
river Hawkesbury, into which the Nepean discharges itself. The vale of
Clwyd, from the base of Mount \ork, extends six miles in a westerly
direction, and has its termination at Cox’s river. West of this river the
country again becomes hilly, but is generally open forest land, and very
good pasturage.
Three miles to the westward of the vale of Clwyd, Messrs. Blaxland,
Wentworth, and Lawson, had frequently terminated their excursion; and
when the various difficulties are considered which they had to contend
with, especially until they had effected the descent from Mount York, to
which place they were obliged to pass through a thick brush-wood, where
they were under the necessity of cutting a passage for the baggage horses,
the severity of w'hich labour bad seriously affected their health; their
patient endurance of such fatigue cannot fail to excite much surprise and


admiration. In commemoration of their merits, three beautiful high hihs
joining each other at the end of their tour at this place, have received their
names in the following order; viz. “Mount Blaxland,” “Wentworth’s
Sugar Loaf,” and “Lawson’s Sugar Loaf.” A range of very lofty hills and
narrow valleys alternately form the tract of country from Cox’s River, for
a distance of 16 miles, until the Fish River is arrived at; and the stage
between these rivers is consequently very severe and oppressive on the
cattle. To this range the governor gave the name of “ Clarence Hilly
Range.”
Proceeding from the Fish River, and at a short distance from it, a very
singular and beautiful mountain attracts the attention, its summits being
crowned with a large and very extraordinary-looking rock, nearly circular
in form, which gives to the whole vrey much the appearance of a hill or
fort, such as are frequent in India. To this lofty hill Mr. Evans, who was
the first European discoverer, gavethe name of “Mount Evans.”—P.assing
on from hence, the country continues hilly, but affords good pasturage,
gradually improving to Sidmouth Valley, which is distant from the pass of
the Fish River 12 miles. The land here is level, and the first met with,
unincumbered with timber; it is not of very considerable extent, but
abounds with a great variety of herbs and plants, such as would probably
highly interest and gratify the scientific botanists. This beautiful little vah
ley runs north-west and south-east, between hills of easy ascent, thinly
covered with timber. Leaving Sidmouth Valley, the country becomes
again hilly, and, in other respects, resembles very much the country to the
eastward of the valley for some miles. Having reached Campbell River,
distance 13 miles from Sidmouth Valley, the governor was highly gratified
by the appearance of the country, which there began to exhibit an open
and extensive view of gently rising grounds and fertile plains. Judging
from the height of the banks and its general width, the Campbell River
must be on some occasions of very considerable magnitude; but the extra-
ordinary drought which has apparently prevailed on the western side of the
mountains, equally as throughout this colony for the last three years, has
reduced this river so much, that it may be more properly called a chain ot
pools, than a running stream, at the present time. In the reaches or pools
of the Campbell River, the very curious animal called the paradox, or
water-mole, is seen in great numbers. The soil on both banks is uncom-
monly rich, and the grass is consequently luxuriant. Two miles to the
southward of the line of road which crosses the Campbell River, there is a
very fine rich tract of low lands, which has been named Mirchell Plains.
I’lax was found growing in considerable quantities. The Fish River,
which forms a junction with the Campbell River a few miles to the north-
ward of the road and bridge over the latter, has also two very fertile
plains on its banks; the one called O’Connell Plains, and the other
Macquarie Plains, both of very considerable extent, and capable of yielding
all the necessaries of life.
At the distance of seven miles from the bridge over the Campbell River,
Bathurst Plains open to the view, presenting a rich tract of champaign


country of 11 miles in length, bounded on both sides by gently rising an<l
very beautiful hills, thinly wooded. The Macquarie River, which is con-
stituted by the junction of the Fish and Campbell River, takes a winding
course through the plains, which can be easily traced from the high lands
adjoining, by the particular verdure of the trees on its banks, which are
likewise the only trees throughout the extent of the plains. The level and
clear surface of these plains gives them at first view very much the appear-
ance of lands in a state of cultivation.
It is impossible to behold this grand scene without a feeling of admira-
tion and surprize, whilst the silence and solitude which reign in a space of
such extent and beauty, as seems designed by nature for the occupancy and
comfort of man, create a degree of melancholy in the mind which may be
more easily imagined than described,
1 he governor and suite arrived at these plains on Thursday the 4th of
May, and encamped on the southern left bank of the Macquarie River —
the situation being selected in consequence of its commanding a beautiful
and extensive prospect for many miles in every direction around it. At
this place the governor remained for a week, which time he occupied in
making excursions in different directions, through the adjoining country,
on both sides of the river.
On Sunday, the 7th of May, the governor fixed on a site suitable for
the erection of a town at some future period, to which he gave the name
of “ Bathurst,” in honour of the present secretary of state for the colonies.
The situation of Bathurst, is elevated sufficiently beyond the reach of any
floods which may occur, and is at the same time so near to the river, on its
south bank, as to derive all the advantages of its clear and beautiful stream.
1 he mechanics and settlers, of whatever description, who may be here-
after permitted to form permanent residences to themselves at this place,
will have the highly important advantages of a rich and fertile soil, with a
beautiful river flowing through it, for all the uses of man. The governor
must, however, add, that the hopes which were once so sanguinely enter-
tained of this river becoming navigable to the Western Sea, have ended in
disappointment.
During the week that the governor remained at Bathurst, he made daily
excursions in various directions:—one of these extended 22 miles in a
south-west direction, and on that occasion, as well as on all others, he
found tiie country chiefly composed of valleys and plains, separated occa-
sionally by ranges of low hills, the soils throughout being generally fertile,
and well circumstanced for the purpose of agriculture or grazing. The
governor here feels much pleasure in being enabled to communicate to the
public, that the favourable reports which he had received of the country
to the west of the Blue Mountains have not been by any means exagge-
rated. The difficulties which present themselves in the journey from
hence are certainly great and inevitable, hut those persons who may he in-
clined to become permanent settlers there, will probably content themselves
with visiting this part of the colony but rarely, and of course will have
them seldom to encounter. Plenty of water, and a sufficiency of grass, are
to be found in the mountains, for the support of such cattle as may he sent


‘Ofertbem; and the tracts of fertile soil and rich pasturage which the new
country affords, are fully extensive enough for any increase of population
and stock which can possibly take place for years.
Within a distance of ten miles from the site of Bathurst, there is not
less than 50,000 acres of land clear of timber, and full one half of that
may be considered excellent soil, well calculated for cultivation. It is a
matter of regret, that in proportion as the soil improves, the timber dege-
nerates; and it is to be remarked, that every where to the westward of the
mountains, it is much inferior both in size and quality to that within the
present colony ; there is, however, a sufficiency of timber, of tolerable
quality, within the district around Bathurst, for the purposes of house
building and husbandry.
The governor has here to lament, that neither coals nor lime-stone have
■yet been discovered in the western country ; articles in themselves of so
much importance, that the want of them must be severely felt whenever
that country shall be settled.
Having enumerated the principal and most important features of this
new’ country, the governor has now to notice some of its live productions.
All around Bathurst abounds in a variety of game; and the two principal
rivers contain a great quantity of fish, but all of one denomination, re-
sembling the perch in appearance, and of a delicate and fine flavour, not
unlike that of a rock-cod ; this fish grows to a large size, and is very vora-
cious. Several of them were caught during the governor’s stay at Bathurst,
and at the halting-place of the Fish Kiver. One of those caught weighed
171b. and the people stationed at Bathurst stated, that they had caught
some weighing 25 lbs.
The field game are the kangaroos, emas, black swans, wild geese, wild
turkeys, bustards, ducks of various kinds, quail, bronze, and other
pigeons, &c. the water-mole, or paradox, also abounds in all the rivers and
ponds.
The site designed for the town of Bathurst, by observation taken at the
flag-staff, which was erected on the day of Bathurst’s receiving that name,
is situated in lat. 33° 24'30" south, and in long. 149° 37' 45" east of Green-
wich, being also 27| miles north of the Government House, in Sydney, and
94J west of it, bearing west 20° 30' north, 83 geographic miles, or 95f
statute miles; the measured road distance from Sydney to Bathurst being
140 English miles.
On Thursday, the 17th of May, the governor and suite set out from
Bathurst on their return, and arrived at Sydney on Friday the 19th ult.
The governor deems it expedient to notify here to the public, that he
does not mean to make any grant of land to the westward of the Blue
Mountains, until he shall receive the commands of his Majesty’s ministers
on that subject, and in reply to the report he is now about to make them
upon it.
In the mean time, such gentlemen, or other respectable free persons, as
may wish to visit this new country, will be permitted to do so, on making
a written application to the governor to that effect, who will order them
to be furnished with written passes. It is at the same time strictly ordered


and directed, that no person, whether civil or military, shall attempt to
travel over the Blue Mountains, without having previously applied for, and
obtained permission, in the above prescribed form. The military guard
stationed at the first depot on the mountains will receive full instructions to
prevent the progress of any persons who shall not have obtained regular
passes. The necessity for the establishing, and strictly enforcing this regu-
lation, is too obvious to every one who will reflect on it, to require any ex-
planation here.
The governor cannot conclude this account of his tour, without offering
his best acknowledgments to W. Cox, Esq. for the important service he has
rendered to the colony in so short a period of time, by opening a passage
to the newly-discovered country, and at the same time assuring him that
he shall have great pleasure in recommending his meritorious services on
this occasion to the favourable consideration of his majesty’s ministers.
By command of his excellency the governor,
J. T. CAMPBELL, Secretary,
PROTESTANT COLONIAL MISSIONS.
(From the Missionary Register for January, 1816.J
Europe
MALTA.
CHURCH MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
1815.—William Jowelt.
IONIAN ISLANDS.
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
Isaac Lowndes.
Asia
CEYLON.
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
Columbo. —lBo4.'—J. D. Palm.
Matura. —J. P. Ehrhardt
Amlamgoddy. —William Read.
BAPTIST SOCIETY.
Columbo. — 1812.James Chater.
Sailed, Dec. 20, for this Station,
Thomas Griffiths.
WESLEYAN METHODISTS.
Columbo. —lBl4.—William M. Har-
vard.
Jqffhapatam. —lBl4. —James Lynch
Thomas H. Squance.
Batticaloe. —lBl4.—William Ault,
Matura. —lBl4. George Erskine.
Pointe de Galle. —lBl4. —Benjamin,
Clough.
NEW ZEALAND.
CHURCH MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
1815.—Thomas Kendall, William
Hall, John King.




