

Meeting of the Geographical Society of Australasia
to receive the official report of Captain H. 0.
Everill, Leader of the Society’s New Guinea
Exploring Expedition.
A public meeting in connection with the New South Wales Branch
of the Geographical Society of Australasia was held in the Royal
Society’s room, Elizabeth-street, yesterday afternoon. His Excel-
lency the Governor presided, and in addition to a large audience
of ladies and gentlemen, there were upon the platform Messrs.
E. De Eaur, Thompson, M. A. (Secretary to the Queensland Branch
of the Society), Gerard (Hon. Treasurer), Myring (Hon. Secretary),
Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.B. (President), and other gentlemen.
The principal business of the meeting was the hearing of an
official summary of the results of the recent expedition to New
Guinea, under the leadership of Captain Everill. A large sketch
map of that island had been prepared, from the plottings of the
explorers, by Mr. M. Gautschy, C.E., its measurement being 16
feet by 15, and the scale 4 miles to the inch, and the tracks of
recent exploration parties were shown.
Lord Carringtox excused himself from offering any lengthened
remarks, on account of the long programme which was before him,
and he called upon the Honorary Secretary, Mr. T. H. Myring,
to read a paper which he had prepared, on “ The aims of the
Geographical Society.”
Mr, Myring having read his paper, His Excellency then said
he would call upon Captain Everill to read his official report of
the recent expedition, which was the principal business of the
meeting.
sh* 4—87




Exploration of New Guinea —Capt. Everill’s lleport.
On Wednesday, June 1 Oth, s.s. “Bonito” left Sydney in tow
of the “ Egraont ” with part of the exploratory party on board,
in charge of Mr. Hem.sworth, Nautical Sub-leader. Drs.
Haacke, Bernays, and Messrs. Senior and Yogan following with
myself in the steamer “Wentworth.” We left Sydney about
4*30 p.m. on Saturday, June 13th, the President, Sir E. Strick-
land, with the Administrative Council, and many of our friends
being kind enough to see the last of us, and bid us God’s speed,
Mr. Maiden, Hon. Secretary, accompanied us to Brisbane, partly
in connection with the departure of the expedition, but mainly to
assist in forming a new Branch of the Society in Brisbane,
which I am glad to say is now successfully formed. After a
rather rough voyage we arrived in Brisbane on Tuesday, the 18th
instant; the only notable event on the voyage being a stoppage
of some time near the wreck of the steamer “ Cahors.” During
our short stay in Brisbane, Mr. Maiden and myself called upon
such members of the Queensland Ministry as were in town. We
also were fortunate enough, through the kindness of the Post-
master-General, to obtain the free use'of the Government tele-
graphs for the transmission of news to the Society. I here found,
from the Nautical Sub-leader’s report, that the “ Bonito” had
encountered very heavy weather on her passage, and was some-
what strained by a heavy sea striking her. However, on
inspecting her I found the damage was apparently not sufficient
to delay her voyage, and made arrangement for a temporary
repair to enable her to proceed on the morrow, thus avoiding a
delay here as the steamer to Thursday Island only connects once a
fortnight. Accordingly the “ Bonito” left Moreton Bay at 2 p.m. on
the 17th, in tow of s.s. “ Wentworth.” Our party with the excep-
tion of Senior (who had joined the “ Bonito” at Sandgate) leaving
by the s.s. “ Alexandra” some hours later. I must here take the
opportunity of thanking the Queensland Government for their
kindness and the assistance so freely accorded us during the pro-
gress of the expedition.
From Brisbane to Cooktown we had a pleasant voyage,
the “ Alexandra” taking the “ Bonito” in tow from Townsville.
At Cooktown we found the steamer “Advance,” which the
Queensland Government had kindly sent to convey us to the
mouth of the river Aird, I saw Captain Williams the night we
arrived, and found that he objected to go to the Aird, and he
strongly recommended me to go elsewhere ; but as my instructions


did not permit my making such an alteration in the plans of the
Council, I of course could not discuss the question ; explaining
that the Society had matured their plans and issued their instruc-
tions after considerable deliberation, and that I could not think of
any deviation from the line laid down by them, unless I had the
direct evidence of its impracticability from some one of local
experience, which Captain Williams was unable to give me ; his
objections being principally founded on rumour, and not on
practical experience. However, I telegraphed to the Society, but
as the steamer left at daylight next morning could not get a reply.
I also, on Captain Williams’s request, put to paper what I had
previously said.
We arrived at Thursday Island June 25th, went alongside the
A. S. N. Company’s hulk to coal and tranship provisions; but
before doing this in accordance with my instructions, I had the
“ Bonito” surveyed, and found that she required some repairs;
the heavy tow, together with the high seas experienced between
Sydney and Brisbane having strained her considerably. These
repairs were effected under the survey of Captain Wilkie, Gov-
ernment Pilot, and Captain Dubbins of the “ Elsea.” While
these repairs were proceeding, the scientific staff made what
collections they could on Thursday and adjacent Islands. These
collections, together with some sketches and photos, were duly
forwarded to the Society before our departure, and I have learnt
since our return that they were very good; some novelties
having been found among them ; so that it is satisfactory to
know that our unavoidable detention was not time lost. While
at Thursday Island I received a telegram from the President
requesting me not to attempt the Aird River or to cross the Gulf
of Papua. This telegram altering the whole plan of the expedition,
and in fact forbidding me going eastward of the River Fly; but
fortunately the Rev. Mr. M'Farlane coming to Thursday Island
enabled me to obtain his valuable advice and experience; and
after some consultation with him and the Hon. Mr. John Douglas, I
resolved to go up the river Fly, and to take the first large branch
to the eastward, Mr. M‘Farlane, who was then on his way to the
river Fly, kindly offering to assist me in obtaining interpreters, &c.
This circumstance, together with that of Mr. Douglas who was
also going to Kewei in the “ Mavis,” afforded us an excellent
opportunity of going in company, and giving the Society the
advantage of the report of a good clear start.
As a great deal has been written in the Press about our equip-
ment of fire-arms, I may here state that the majority of the fire-arms
sent by Messrs. Hoffnung & Co. to Thursday Island were found
unsuitable from various causes, and did not correspond with
the copy I received from the Secretary of the President’s order
to that firm (the fire-arms not being selected by myself, or any


opportunity of inspecting them having been given me before
arrival at Thursday Island), so I called a survey on them, and
such as were condemned I sent back to Sydney, and after con-
siderable trouble, managed to replace them from Thursday Island,
Cooktown, and Townsville. But when we left Thursday Island,
our armament was quite complete in every respect, as per list,
and Sub-leader’s receipt forwarded to the Society, which I read.
List of Fire-arms.
8 Winchester repeating rifles,
3 Sniders,
6 Double-barrel fowling pieces,
1 Rook rifle,
5 Colt’s improved revolvers (G chambers)
13 Bull-dog revolvers (6 chambers),
with an abundance of cartridges and reloaders with spare powder
and shot.
These firearms were, I consider, quite sufficient for our party,
consisting of twelve Europeans and twelve Malays.
The repairs, together with the difficulty of obtaining firearms,
detained us on Thursday Island until July 14th ; our party also
here became one short—Mr. Broadbent returning to Sydney sick—
and on leaving Thursday Island consisted of the following:—
Dr. Haacke, Chief Scientist (Zoology and Geology) ;
Dr. Bernays, M.D., and Botanist;
Mr. Hemsworth, Nautical Sub-leader ;
Mr. Creagh, Land Sub-leader ;
Mr. Froggart, Zoological Collector and Entomologist :
Mr. Bauerlin, Botanical Collector;
Mr. Senior, Surveyor and Explorer ;
Mr. Shaw, Photographer and Explorer ;
Mr. Vogan, Artist and Explorer ;
Mr. M'Gechan, Engineer and Explorer ;
Mr. Waddick, Seaman and Explorer ;
and eleven Malays and one cook Cingalese, the Malay names
being difficult to remember. Some of the most facetious of the
party re-christened them by the following names, which will be
found used in the narratives. Marco Polo, Barabas, Lucy, Scotch
Lizzie, Anchises, Chandos, tkc.
While in Thursday Island, we received every assistance from
the Hon. Mr. John Douglas, and Mr. Bowden, of Messrs. Burns,
Philp, & Co. was good enough to place their jetty at our disposal,
besides assisting us in many other ways.
We left Thursday Island ; I having arranged a rendezvous with
the “ Mavis ” and “ Mary ” at Missionary Pass, it was intended
that the “Advance” should tow the “ Bonito,” but an incident
prevented it. But, however, we all arrived at Missionary


on July 17th, excepting the “Mavis,” and next morning left
for the Fly in tow of the “Advance.” At noon the “Advance”
cast us off at the mouth of the Fly, and we proceeded under
steam, following the missionary lugger “ Mary,” and at 4 p.m.
anchored off Neboo, taking our first hold of New Guinea soil.
After anchoring, found the “Mavis,” which, through the
kindness of the Queensland Government and the Hon. John
Douglas, had taken 20 tons of coal for our use, was on the other
side of the island, and we made arrangements for getting her up
next day.
Neboo, the first settlement made by the missionaries, is a large,
low, sandy island, with an abundance of cocoa-nut and other palms
growing on it. It does not appear to contain any regular
inhabitants, but the natives from the neighbouring islands and
villages come periodically to collect nuts and cut the nepa palm-
leaves for rooting their houses. The missionary establishment is
now moved from Neboo to Kewei. The anchorage is a deep
channel between two islands, where a vessel can lie in smooth
water. In the river, which is very wide here, a very nasty sea
and swell is constantly experienced during the south-east monsoons.
We remained at Neboo until Sunday morning, July 19th, when
our squadron (now consisting of the “Mavis,” “Mary,” “Venture,”
and “ Bonito ”) Avent over to Kewei, Avhich is a village situated on
the north side of the channel. After anchoring there, Messrs.
Douglas, MacFarlane, Captain Cater, and myself, went on shore,
taking four of the “ Mavis ” men with us. I intended to have
landed a collecting party, but it was not considered Aviso to do so ;
the old chief, Duropa, having attacked the teachers of the mission
a month or so previously, Avith a vieAV of making bacon or “ long
pig ” of them, wild pigs being uncommonly scarce that season.
Mr. Douglas and myself landed first, and found a few natives
completely naked, grouped in front of a large house, the principal
of Avhom Avas an old Avhite-headed man, intelligent-looking, to
whom Mr. Douglas, Avith his usual good nature, immediately gave
a neAv suit of serge clothes, and assisted him to don them. This
Avas hardly done, Avhen up came Mr. MacFarlane, Avith Captain
Cater, and to our great dismay avc found that Ave had made
friends Avith the Avrong man, and that it Avas the chief “ cannibal
himself” that avc had been making “chums” with. We remained
on shore the rest of the day, and Avalked through the villages and
plantations, seeing some curious looking graves, and some remark-
ably fine sago palms. The natives did not strike me as being
particularly friendly. We saAV no women; all the houses on
Duropa’s side of the creek being closed up, and the men and
women had gone to another Aullage on the approach of our vessels,
but I distinctly heard the voices of Avomen in suppressed tones
inside the houses.


Kewei consists of two villages, separated by a salt-water creek.
The nativeson theeast side of the creek (which is bridged by amethod
peculiar to the Malay countries) being far more friendly than those
on the west. There appears to be no fresh water near the village.
We intended to have landed some coal here, and to have formed
a depot, but the sea and surf were too heavy to attempt it, and we
concluded to make the depot at Sumauti, the next large river
further up, and after finishing our business here. We left Kewei
for Sumauti at noon, 20th July, the “ Mary” going back to Thursday
Island, and the “Mavis” accompanying us. We anchored off the
village about 4 p.m., and when about to land discovered that by
some mistake no interpreters had been brought. Sumanti lies at
the mouth of a creek, at the edge of which we saw a number of
natives waving a white flag, I landed with four Europeans and
four Malays of my own party, armed, and found the natives
exceedingly friendly, and after distributing some presents among
them returned on board. We remained here landing coal and
spare stores until July 23rd, the scientific staff’collecting. We
found the natives very docile and friendly on the whole, Mi-.
Douglas especially succeeding in gaining their friendship and I
may say affection. After the departure of the “'Mavis,” I succeeded
in obtaining the services of three Papuans, viz., Korossa, Atar,
and Gesau, who have since attained considerable notoriety through-
out the world. I left Sumanti the same afternoon about four
hours after the “Mavis,” and pushed iTp the river as rapidly as
possible, my object being to get up the river while the party -were
fresh, and before sickness attacked us. We found little difficulty
in getting through the islands at the north of the river, and clearly
made out the passage at the north end of the Kewei, hitherto not
named, and which I purpose naming Griffiths Channel, the north-
west point of Kewei, C. Dickson; and keeping the whale-boat
ahead sounding, we reached the main banks of the river Fly
on Saturday, July 25th, naming the point to the southward, which
is a good distinguishing mark, and the first point that you can
get betw r een the regular banks, Fortescue Point. Here are two or
three large villages on the south side of the river, but the water
was too shallow on that side to go close in; so standing across to the
north side of the river, we found a deeper channel. The right or
north bank of the river here appears to form another entrance
from the sea farther to the eastward. This entrance I have named
the M‘llwraith Channel, in commemoration of the first annexation
of New Guinea by the INl‘llwraith Ministry. We now steamed
between the main banks of this river. The river here is
wide, and there are at least two deep-water channels, but also a
number of shoals and sand-banks. The trees are very high and
the foliage is luxuriant. In places on the left bank are numbers
of cocoa-nut and banana plantations. We also began to get


among the pandarus, and a very bright green tree, commonly
known as the fresh water mangrove. We saw no signs of natives
on the north side, excepting a bridge across a creek. The greater
portion of the country appeared very swampy, and the banks are
only just out of the reach of high water. We passed on the north
side two lots of red cliffs, forming small hills 40 feet high. One
of these corresponds with D’Alberti’s Howling Place. Passing
through the Fairfax Group, which is formed of small islands
almost under water, very thickly wooded with high trees we
anchored for the night; next morning we proceeded up the river,
meeting the same kind of scenery, low banks, covered in places
with the fresh-water mangrove, and again we found the banks 10
and 14 feet high in detached and broken places, and composed of
red clay. We also came across immense numbers of flying foxes.
We saw no signs of permanent houses, but the remains of tem-
porary shelters, and the only sign of human life was a solitary
canoe made fast into the bank. Animal life was well repre-
sented by black cockatoos, numerous pigeons, hornbills, small
green parrots, lorrykeets, with plenty of swallows and smaller
birds. The banks of the river were a little higher (in places),
and had been cleared in places, now overgrown with coarse
grass and bamboo the remains of native houses. We found
very deep water,. 7 and 8 fathoms, no bottom The
weather was squally, with showers and strong south-east winds
blowing. Higher up the river as we neared the Ellangowan
Island, the banks appeared covered in places with a species of
long reeds or grass, of the same family as sugar-cane; and
wherever these appear there is generally a mud or sand fiat
extending a little way from the shore. We went round the
north side of Ellengowan Island, and on getting to the west of it, saw a
village on the south side, butdidnotstop. Above Ellengowan Island,
the birds appear to become scarcer ; but in some places the trees
were literally black with flying foxes, hanging like pears on a
tree. The vegetation appears the same, but there are no signs of
cocoa-nuts to be found here; and from the mast-head the country
presents a more open appearance. The river above Ellengowan
Island is not nearly so straight as it is below, it winds in almost
complete circles, so that progress up country was much slower
here. Alligator tracks are very numerous, the country
generally low and swampy, and very few birds about. We did
not see any natives for a considerable distance, until we saw a
canoe round a point ahead, with some men, apparently drawing
their bows. We stationed our party to act on the defensive, and
held out a large table-cloth as a sign of friendship. On rounding
the point we found a large number of canoes full of men, who
kept pulling ahead, close into the bank until they entered a
small creek. On both sides of the river there were a large number


of low Louses, roofed in a very primitive manner, and standing
about 4 feet high; these houses were apparently abandoned by
every body excepting one man, who extended his arms, evidently
to show that he was not armed, and was friendly disposed. He
was black, and perfectly nude, excepting the usual shell, which
the Sumautese call “ We-der-ow.” The creek that the canoes had
entered we found connected with the river round a small grassy
island. I did not stop to communicate with these natives; but
as we passed them I saw several of them in the trees watching
us, and when we had passed by the canoes came out of the creek
again, apparently greatly relieved at our not having molested
them. We now found the country altering a great deal. The
outstretching spits were now more sandy than before, and the
country appeared more open; grassy plains stretching to the
westward, where I could also see several lagoons inland, and to
the north-west there appeared higher land thickly wooded.
About 4-30 p.m. on the same day, July 28th, we came to a
junction of the river, one arm going north-east and the other
north-west. On the east point of this junction where the sand
spit extended, it was completely covered with large logs of drift-
wood, forming, in fact, a complete timber stack. I carefully
examined both branches, and finding a strong current and large
logs of wood drifting down the north-east branch, determined
uponascendingthatriver, it lying in the direction the Society wished
to explore. This branch joins the Fly, in latitude 7
degrees 34 minutes south, longitude 141 degrees 21 minutes
east, I named this the Strickland River, in honor of Sir E.
Strickland, President of the Administrative Council of this Society,
and Chairman of the Melbourne Geographical Conference, at
which the New Guinea Expedition was decided upon. We upon
the voyage wondered why this river was not noticed in Mr.
Hargrave’s notes concerning the exploration of the river Fly
(vide vol. I. of the Society’s proceedings), and unfortunately had no
copy of D’Albertis work with us; but since returning I have
read his work on New Guinea, and find in vol. 2; page 260, that
he discovered this opening, and says in his account of his third
voyage—“ For half our voyage the river appeared to be of the
same breadth, but after we had passed a large opening, which
occurs on the right bank, in a north-easterly direction, and
which I must confess I do not remember observing last year, it
becomes much narrower, and runs between two banks covered
with grass. I think the opening we saw to-day may be the river
Alice, which, after leaving the Fly River at Snake Point, returns
here. I intend on our return to explore it” (which, however,
he never did). I may here say that, on our return, we ascended the
Fly for two and a half hours twelve minutes, and found the
country above the junction much as D’Albertis describes it and


the Fly taking a westerly, and even a west-south-westerly direc-
tion ; and even the country on the south side of the Fly and
that on the east side of the Strickland River differ greatly in
my opinion. Ascending the Strickland River we stopped one day
for collecting and cutting tire-wood ; and proceeding upwards found
the current getting much stronger, and at first we saw no signs of
natives. The sand-spits became more numerous, and the sand is
of a darker colour. A little higher up we again began to pass
native shelters, and some small canoes. In the bends of the river
there were many large logs of drift timber stranded ; also many
large snags stationary in the middle of the channel, now easily
kept clear of as they were in sight. But they would have proved very
dangerous if the river had been a few feet higher. Still higher
up, the banks began to rise a little, and the trees and vegetation
changed. The river is constantly changing its channel; one side
continually being washed away, while a bank is forming on the
other; and in places the water appears,to have cut a new
channel, and formed comparatively large islands in the middle of
the river, with the stream running on both sides. The newly
formed land is covered in some places with a short bright green
grass ;in others with long reeds. The red cliffs also occur again in
small hillocks, 25 to 40 feet high. They are formed of red and
yellow ochre ; the side facing the river generally being steep, and
almost perpendicular; and it appears as if the water had literally cut
its way through them. The other side presents the usual flat
bank, with brown alluvial soil, and is thickly wooded with forest
trees. These hills occur very frequently, and wherever found the
river makes a broad circuit and comes up with them again after
some distance has been traversed. We now found the native
shelters, and abandoned houses becoming more plentiful; and,
though we saw no natives we heard them, and also heard their
dogs howling. The level of the river we found to be rapidly rising,
the current getting stronger, and its direction more circuitous.
We continued to ascend the river ; stopping in the forenoon to
collect and take observations, still passing the same scenery; but
the rain squalls were now left behind, and the air became clearer.
At 8 a.m, on Sunday, August 2nd, on rounding a bend, a change
of scenery took place ; a grassy flat appearing ahead, and to the
westward of us the country appeared more open from E.N.E. to
S.E., and a little further up I found that the river formed a large
circle, and branched to the E.S.E. and N.N.E. I kept to the
easterly one, as it turned to the north a little higher up ; but the
other branch (which I have since named the Service River) will,
I think be found to connect with the river Fly at Snake Point,
opposite the junction of the Alice River —in fact that south-south-
easterly branch which D’Albertis speaks of. The river now got much
more difficult to navigate, on account of the large snags in the


middle of the stream. The water constantly undermining the
concave bank, when the freshets comes down, very large portions of
the bank are w'ashed away, leaving the trees in the middle of the
river, where they lodge, and in places almost form rapids. For
instance, we passed close here some enormous trees grounded in 45
feet of water, and forming a fence of snags in two or three places
right across the river, leaving barely room for the “ Bonito ” to steer
between them. A few miles above Service Junction we saw some
canoes full of people, who at first showed a hostile front, but, as
we approached nearer, deserted their canoes and took to the jungle.
I showed a white flag, and made friendly signs, but without effect,
and landing a party tried to communicate but did not succeed in
assuring them of our friendly intentions. I left them some
presents of cloth, tomahawks, tobacco, beads, &c., and selecting
some articles from their canoes, which were very full of their
household goods, proceeded on our voyage. The current was now
getting too strong for us to stem when burning a mixture of
wood and coal, as we had been doing for some days, and we had
to burn all coal to get steam enough to make headway at all.
On Monday, August 3rd, our first and only serious brush with
the natives occurred. Early in the morning we saw a number of
canoes on a sand-spit, and on approaching, finding some of the
natives standing their ground, I took the dingy, and with two
Malays, pulled for the shore, standing up in the boat with my
arms outstretched to give them confidence, and to show that I was
not armed. I landed, thinking that the fact of my being unarmed
and distributing presents among them, would perhaps gain their
friendship and confidence, but I soon found myself placed in a
very critical position; the natives increasing in numbers, and
coming up in full war paint, brandishing their weapons and some
of them pointing their arrows at me. In fact, the only way I
prevented them from shooting was by walking towards such of
them as appeared the most hostile, and assuming an unconcern, which
I confess I was far from feeling. I remained on shore perhaps
fifteen or twenty minutes and thought myself very lucky in getting
off with a whole skin. The story of the attack afterwards made is
fully written in my journal, and all I will here say of the matter
is, that finding it impossible to communicate with them I steamed
up the river, the natives following along the banks. On nearing the
bend we saw a village which the natives made for. Seeing them
hostile, I blew the steam whistle, which they did not appear to
mind. They now mustered eighty to 100 fighting men (there were
only forty-six when I interviewed them on shore), and seeing them
make preparations to fire I called the man in from leading, and
sent the Malay off the bridge, taking the wheel myself. In less
time than it takes to relate we were saluted with a perfect shower
of arrows, some striking and some going over the vessel; luckily


none of us being hit. I reluctantly gave the order to fire, and
they were dispersed after some shots. The same afternoon we
grounded on the first hard bottom we had met with in the river,
and being only about 4 miles from the village, were placed in a very
dangerous position. Finding the water leaving us rapidly, with a
view to meet any emergency, after landing the coal, &c., to lighten
the vessel, I had a clearing made, and built the framework of a
house, intending to make a permanent depot there in case of the
water not rising, or in the event of anything happening to the
“Bonito.” The clearing was made, and the house ready for roofing
when, on August Bth, the water rose, and the “Bonito” was afloat
again. Taking in the stores again as quickly as possible, we pro-
ceeded up the river. We named this reach “ Douglas Bend,”
after the Hon. John Douglas, C.M.G. The bed of the river is
here composed of hard large shingle, and the current is so rapid that
it is impossible to stem it with a boat. Just above where we
stranded we found a passage with only 8 feet of water on it
during the freshet. Proceeding onwards, the river began to get
much shallower, in places giving barely water enough for the
“ Bonito” to steam over, and a hard shingle bottom formed the bed
of the river, with no anchorage for the rest of our voyage. The
red cliffs became more numerous, and increased in height as we
got further up. At 5 p.m. on August 9th, we came to a dead
stop, the river dividing, and neither channel containing enough
water for us. Here we remained fourteen days before the water
rose and enabled us proceed further up. During this time we
explored and collected round this neighbourhood, and made an
attempt to cut our way into the interior, but did not suceeed in
getting more than 10 miles. While here, also, our three Suraan-
tese, Korossa, Gesau, and Atau, deserted us. As it has been
stated that we were massacred in our sleep, and no watch was
kept (although on whose authority I do not know), I may say
that the Doctor and one Malay were on watch, and awake too
when the wiley Papuans left. We had established a camp some
distance from the vessel, and meant to try and cut inland from
there, when, on August 23rd the waters again rose, and we
steamed further up. On August 24th and 25th we again cut
inland in hopes of seeing the mountains, and attained a position
of 250 feet high, by climbing a tree on the top of a hill, but could
find no trace of high land or clear country. We proceeded
further up the river, searching vainly for the mountains, until
we finally grounded, on August 27th, where, as has already been
related, the “Bonito” remained until October 21st. But not with-
out incident, for on the 31st instant, the gravel washing away from
under her caused a capsize, and it was only by the great exertion
of the party that the provisions were landed, and most likely a
great disaster averted. The capsize taking place in the middle of


the night, and the vessel filling with water almost immediately.
The conduct of the party on this occasion is deserving of the
highest praise. After this we housed all our stores on shore, half
of us camping and half remaining on board. In the midst of our
troubles we had a visit from hostile natives, who luckily were
dispersed without bloodshed. After righting the “ Bonito,”
drying and housing our stores, we again tried to cut inland, but
found too many difficulties in the way to hope for any success in
gaining the mountains in that way ; so after two or three prelim-
inary excursions in which we could find no definite traces of moun-
tains or open country, I organized a boat expedition, and on
September 16th, left Mr. Hemswoi’th in command on board the
“ Bonito,” with the following party ;
Dr. Bernays, in charge of sick, which numbered seven.
Senior, sick.
Vogan, sick.
Bauerlin, to continue his collecting.
M‘Gechan, engineer.
Malays—Mandore, sick, boil and fever.
Carpenter, cut his leg half through with an axe.
Barabbas, foot injured.
Fireman, ditto.
Anchises, fever and unsound.
Lous, cook, troubled with fever and not fit for hard work.
We broke up the camp on shore, having previously built a house
for the provisions under the bank where it was covered by the
rifles of the “ Bonito.”
The whale-boat party consisted of Dr. Haacks, Messrs. Froggart,
Shaw, Creagh (Sub-leader), Waddick, six Malays—the only sound
ones at my disposal—and myself.
We named our station here “ Observatory Bend ”; it is in
lat. 6° 38' 30" S. long. 142° E. Our boat contained tents, trade,
instruments, &c., and with ten days’ provisions, twelve men,
sails, awning, &c., was fully laden, in fact too crowded for con-
venience. It being my intention to try and discover the position
of the mountains, and failing to do that to ascend the river as far
as possible.
Accordingly we proceeded on the morning of the 16th, some-
times using the oars in the slack water reaches, but mostly
six or eight hands wading through the water tracking or towing
the boat with a rope over the sharp stones. We frequently had to
cross and recross the river, sometimes to cut away snags to get the
boat through, the river becoming more difficult if possible every
mile we ascended ; even if the “Bonito” had not been stranded
she could not have got 2 miles further up the river. The Red
Hills becoming more frequent and rising in altitude as we ascended,
but still of the same formation, excepting that the lower strata is


very much honeycombed and of a duller colour. The birds were
represented by parrots, hornbills, many and various descriptions of
pigeons, including the Goura or crested pigeon, night herons, eaglets,
swifts, swallows, cockatoos white and black, many varieties of
kingfishers and king-hunters, small insect and honey-eating birds,
cassowaries, oriels, and occasionally we have heard the note of the
bird of Paradise. We had not yet seen any four-footed animals in
New Guinea, and only tracks of pigs, and some which we after-
wards found to be those of bandicoots and rats. There were many
tracks of alligators, which caused me considerable anxiety, as our
men were in the water fully three-quarters of the day. Also, we
found many tracks of river turtle, but although we frequently
tried the river with fishing-lines we caught nothing, and even by
dynamiting all the likely places we only got a few cat-fish and some
smaller species resembling minnows. There were many descrip-
tions of non-edible wild fruits, including a large variety of figs, a
species of bread-fruit just fruiting, which afterwards proved an
excellent article of food ; the sago palm appears to flourish every-
where about here, as we found it in more or less quantities
throughout our journey. Tree ferns also began to get plentiful;
but I leave the details of these important subjects to be treated by
the special scientists who accompanied the Expedition, and to pro-
ceed on our journey. The river must have been unusually low
even for the dry season when we ascended it, and is very notice-
able here from the immense gravel wastes or circuit of shingle and
stone that was now exposed to view from the low state of the
water; in places there being a distance of Ito 2 miles between
the banks proper of the river ; the intervening space being filled
with the dry beds of the river, and small islands formed by the
deposits of sand and silt, some of these islands being thickly
wooded. In another place the river runs between two stacks or
neatly-piled heaps of large stone or shingle, as level and neatly
stacked as if placed by hand, and in these places, nearly always
forming a rapid, the water rising its level very fast, that some-
times on looking over the narrow ledge we were tracking the boat
along we found the water to be 10 and 12 feet lower than where
our boat was floating, giving it the appearance of a lock-gate only
being parallel with the river instead of crossing it. This is of
course caused by the channel being blocked or blind, and the water
having the same level as the lower water-level of the rapid. In
some places these rapids were very difficult of ascent.* One place
notably, we were twelve of us one hour and twenty minutes in the
water holding on to the boat, scarcely gaining anything, the stones
shifting and washing away from under our feet with such force
that sometimes the bow of the boat was afloat and the stern high
* N.B.—We always had to get into the water, and drag and carry the boat
over.


and dry with the force of the current washing or wedging the
stones under her. It was only with the utmost difficulty that we
could prevent the boat from obtaining the mastery ; for the bow
to have moved round one point of the compass meant to us the loss
of arms, ammunition, food, boat, and everything else, and this at a
distance of 70 miles from the depot was at least serious. The
ascent in the whale-boat proved very trying work to the party,
made as it was under a tropical sun directly overhead, our latitude
and the sun’s declination being almost approximate. These gravel
wastes or circles form natural reservoirs, and during the rainy
season are of course full of water, and must form quite lakes or
lagoons whenever freshets come down the river. We ascended
thus for seven days without much change of scenery, during which
time we saw no natives, but passed plenty of shelters, and occa-
sionally the recent foot-prints of small parties, and although the
red hills got higher as we ascended, they still kept the east side
of the river, and we could not see the mountains. The channels
becoming narrower, and snags more awkward and numerous as we
advanced, making it very difficult to prevent the boat being stove.
On September 22nd, after coming up a long straight reach, we
dropped upon a recent camp of natives on a gravel spit where the
river makes a junction and receives a large tributary apparently
directly from the mountains. I think they must have taken the
boat for some new animal seeking to devour them, for they fled on
first sighting us, leaving everything behind them even to their
fire-sticks. This tributary goes to the north-north-east, while the
main river takes a westerley bend. I name this the Carrington
Junction, and the river the Cecilia River, named in honor of Lady
Carrington.
To me the deposit of stone and sand coming from this river
differs somewhat from that of the Strickland. There appeared to be
more of the lignite or coal mixed Avith the stone, and the magnetic
iron sand was much purer and heavier. Much as I should have
liked to examine the Cecilia I had to keep to the main stream ;
and leaving a large present close to the food the natives had
abandoned, and planting a red ensign on a pole, we proceeded.
About here there must be at times immense bodies of water
coming down. There are a number of dry channels to be seen,
looking like roads cut through the high forest trees; they are
almost as straight and regular as if made by the hands of man ;
from 80 to 200 yards wide, and many of them contain a fall of, I
should think, 1 in 100 feel.
Soon after passing this junction we saw many signs of human
life, and passed some houses and a very primitive raft. I was
also pleased to see the hills which hitherto have only appeared on
the east side are now to be found on both sides, the river hoav
cutting right through them.


The land here is swampy ; back from the river and in the
gulleys close to the hills the sago palm appears very plentiful,
and there are also plenty of natives hereabouts. The level of the
river is also rising very rapidly, it has quite become a case of
getting upstairs to ascend the rapid at all. I should estimate a
rise of 30 feet in the water-level in half a mile in some jdaces.
The current was so strong that we had to use a number of
devices to ascend, and the snags outlying from the banks made it
very dangerous; the current rushing over and round them made
it appear like a series of boiling whirlpools and breakers, and in
many places we had to pass a long rope under the snags up the
river, and make it fast to a snag or tree in the bank, then sheer
the boat outside or between the snags, and haul up foot by foot,
fleeting the rope again and again until we came to easier ground.
But on the afternoon of Thursday, September 24th, on round-
ing a point we were rewarded by the sight of a low range of hills
about 1,000 feet high, over which was a complete view of two
distinct ranges of mountains, the nearer one perhaps 50 miles,* and
the farther one 80. The river now became straighter, and ran
between high steep banks, or rather a series of small hills. I
estimated we were about 18 miles from the lowest range of hills,
and between us and their base the country formed a series of low
hill-ranges 200 to 300 feet high, gradually increasing in height as
they went north.
We were now nine days from our depot, and our pi’ovisions were
nearly finished, part of them having been spoiled by the boat get-
ting stove as we ascended a rapid; but determining to reach the
hills we pushed very hard during the ensuing three days, and
finally reached the base of the hills on Sunday, September 27th,
twelve days after leaving the “ Bonito.” The river about here
presents a most beautiful appearance ; in one place, for instance,
a long, straight reach, with the hills rising in places perpendicu-
larly 300 feet from the river, which is about 50 to CO feet wide,
and flows with great force thi’ough the gully or funnel formed by
the high banks, which are covered with beautiful trees on the top,
and even their steep sides are covered with plants and vegetation,
among which, flowering creepers, ground orchids, ferns, and tree-
ferns are numerous. The country appears to be comparatively
thickly populated. We passed a number of houses and clearings,
and a great many very small canoes. But the natives about here
appear to be a very timid race; had they been hostile they
might have easily have done us considerable damage, without us
even seeing them, as it was we ascended expecting a shower of
arrows every minute ; but instead of attacking us they fled from
their houses at our approach, and the only one we caught sight of
* Von Mueller Range.


was of a light copper-colour, well made, and clean-limbed, and
ornamented with the usual shell. We did not attempt to enter
their houses on the way up, but left presents on the banks opposite
the houses; but on coming down, on examining them, found the
houses had all been deserted for some days, and the presents un-
touched.
On arriving at the base of the highest range of hills our pro-
visions were finished, excepting one meal and a little Liebeg’s
extract, so necessity compelled almost immediate return. How-
ever, Dr. Haacke, Mr. Shaw, and myself, with three Malays and two
dogs, commenced the ascent of what we thought to be the highest
hill, and were lucky enough to gain a ridge or spur, which we fol-
lowed over one hill 310 feet high, and from there ascended
another 460 feet, where, as Dr. Haacke wished to return, I sent a
Malay back with him, and proceeding with Shaw and the others
gained the top of the hill, which the aneroid showed to be 750
feet; but to our great disgust we found that othep hill still higher
obscured our view to the N.W. and N.N.E., and as it was near
sunset we had to return. We were fortunate enough to get down
all right and reached the camp one hour after sunset, completely
done up, rifle, revolver, axe, &c., being a very heavy handicap
for hill-climbing on short commons.
I estimated the highest position reached to be latitude 5' 30"
S., longitude 142° 22' E. Unfortunately we had very heavy
thunder-storms at night while up here, which prevented good
observations being taken ; but I have a very fair position, taken
from a native house, marked on plan, taken on Monday, Septem-
ber 28th, on our homeward journey.
The country hereabouts, and right as far as we could see to the
northwards, is composed of undulating hills, very heavily wooded,
which appear to go as far as the Yon Mueller Range. The far-
ther range we saw was very high indeed, and I think considerably
above snow-level. This range will in all probability turn out to
be the northern coastal range.
The lower hills will I think be found admirably adapted for
growing coffee, cinchona, cocoa, gutta, and other valuable tropical
productions, while the lower alluvial lands cannot fail to pro-
duce rice and other grain.* But the report of Baron von Mueller,
when he has classified the botanical specimens, will be an invalu-
able proof of the nature of the soil and its probable value for
future plantations. I also expect some valuable timber will be
found among the forty specimens that we have brought back, and
which as yet are not classified. I look upon the botanical collec-
tion as perhaps the most valuable work done on the Expedition.
* Good sugar country.


On Monday, 28tli, about 10 a.m., we commenced our return,
collecting a few ethnological specimens on the way down, and
arrived safely at Bonito Depot, Observatory Bend, on the night
of 29th, and found all well there. I intended to have ascended
the river again, but the health of the party would not allow it,
most of the river party being laid up after our return. That
circumstance, together with the dangerous position of the vessel,
decided me to do all that was possible in the way of collecting
until the water rose, and then to commence our return journey,
stopping and giving as much time to the collectors as circum-
stances would permit. Keeping in mind my instructions, and the
necessity of catching the steamer leaving Thursday Island,
November 21st. This I adhered to ; and as time and space does
not permit me to detail our homeward journey, I will briefly state
that we left Observatory Bend, October 25th, leaving one Malay
buried there, and the health of the party, far from good at that
time, safely journeying down the Strickland River with a few
adventures, meeting far more natives than w r e had supposed lived
on the river. On one occasion, in a thickly populated place,
which I estimate contained 2,000 natives, what threatened to be
a serious tragedy was turned into a comedy by our blowing the
Syren whistle, which on that occasion certainly saved the lives of
a great number of natives and perhaps of some of our own party ;
but proceeding, we left Strickland Junction, November 9th,
Sumarti, November 15th, Mouth of the Fly, November 18th, and
arrived at Thursday Island at 10-30 a.m. on November 28th (up
to time). On arrival there, finding a relief party had gone to
our assistance, on consulting with the Hon, J. Douglas, we
despatched a lugger with Mr. Senior in charge to recall them.
Mr. Senior earnestly requested this duty might be allotted to him,
which I did on the Doctor’s assurance'that it would in all proba-
bility benefit his health, which was far from good, and was not
likely to stop or impede his recovery. It is only fair to the rest
of the party to say that there were plenty of other volunteers for
that service.
We left Thursday Island on November 21st, in tow of s.s.
“ Alexandra,” and arrived in Sydney on December 3rd, all well,
and on behalf of the Exploratory Party I beg to return our most
hearty thanks for the very generous and cordial reception w r e
received from the Society and public, and also for the kind and
deep interest felt for us when we were supposed to be in trouble.
In conclusion, I also report that the Expedition was entirely
dependent on its own resources. I was scarcely able to supple-
ment our provisions at all, game of all kinds being very scarce,
and extremely shy. It was from first to last conducted on tem-
perance principle, no stimulants being taken as stores excepting
as medical comforts. I hold the opinion that any hard work can
bo performed just as well without alcohol as with it.


Quinine was also taken by all the party daily from the time we
left Thursday Island until we returned there, but even that did
not prevent our suffering rather severely from fever, as four of
the Europeans were dangerously ill, but there is no doubt in my
mind that it was extremely beneficial in staving off malaria : and
finally, in conducting the Expedition, I have endeavoured to
follow out my line of instruction as well as I could, and to keep
in mind the duty I owed to this Society, the members of the
Expedition, and the natives of the country we were sent to explore,
and can at least congratulate myself that no serious complication
with the natives arose at all, and I think other parties that may
follow in our footsteps will benefit from any communications we
had with the native tribes.
Captain Everill was heartily cheered at the conclusion of his
address, and His Excellency the Chairman invited discussion.
Mr. Mann said that, after having carefully examined the map,
and having listened to the leader’s remarks, he was inclined to
think that the country which had been traversed was a series of
deltas or islands. Possibly, also, the Aird River might unite
with the Strickland. It was very probable that future explorations
would bear out this idea.
Dr. Belgrave thought that Captain Everill might well be
congratulated upon the success of the expedition. (Hear, hear.)
He was onlv away some four months, and about three thousand
specimens were collected, in addition to exploration work and its
attendant risks. He had discovered, amongst other things, most
valuable and extensive cedar forests, and also a site for what
might prove a city, from whence the interior of the island might
be explored. The expedition was a success, and it well repaid the
money and the labour which had been expended, and he heartily
congratulated the leader and his party. It would be, in his (Dr.
Belgrave’s) opinion, a mistake to continue sending expeditions,
and he advocated the formation of settlements. (Heai’, hear.)
Some central settlement could be made, for instance, not far from
the junction of the Strickland and the Fly Rivers. He would
like to be informed whether any communication had been received
from Mr. Stockdale with reference to an expedition.
Sir Edward Strickland said that he had recently received
communication from that gentleman, but he had not yet perused
it, and until he had done so no answer could be given.
Mi’. Thompson, the Secretary of the Queensland Branch of the
Society, thought that thanks were due to Captain Everill, for many
reasons ; not the least of which was the establishment of friendly
relationships with the natives, and the saving of white men’s lives.
He disagreed with Dr. Belgrave, and believed that the time was
not yet ripe for the establishment of a central depot. The Socitey


and the public now had an idea of what was really required to
explore a tropical country like New Guinea, and the knowledge
would be of extreme benefit in future. He suggested that in
succeeding expeditions there should be fewer Europeans and more
Malays. When discontent commenced in a party it was like a
cancer, and ate its way into the heart of the enterprise. He felt
certain that the world in general would hereafter thank Captain
Everill and those who had formed the expedition. (Cheers.) He
had much pleasure in moving that the Society’s hearty thanks be
accorded to them.
Mr. Du Faur seconded the proposition, and it was carried
unanimously.
Sir Edward Strickland, on behalf of the members of the
Society, then presented Captain Everill with an illuminated
address, which had been signed by the various officers, and \\as
inscribed to the leader and the members of the party. He biiefly
alluded to the value of geographical research, and highly eulogized
the efforts of the explorers. He expressed the hope that the
expedition would be supplemented by others, and that the public
would benefit greatly thereby. The present one had shown how
future trips might be carried out more economically. He looked
upon the work as a very gallant one (Lord Carrington : Hear,
hear), and he hoped that one and all would join in congratulating
Captain Everill and his comrades upon having done their duty to
their country and to those who had employed them. (Cheers.)
Captain Everill cordially acknowledged the gift, and he
referred to the sincere feelings of thankfulness which he and each
of his party had experienced, and had expressed, for the assistance
which had been offered upon the occasion of the rumour of their
massacre. He quoted from a letter from the Hon. John Douglas,
in which an absolute denial was given to a rumour, that had
emanated from Cooktown, to the effect that ingratitude had been
shown.
Sir E. Strickland, as the President of the Society, made a few
remarks with respect to the advantages of geographical know-
ledge ; and he suggested the advisability of efforts being made
to obtain copies of apparatus, &c., similar to that which was
exhibited in London in connection with the study of this branch
of knowledge. He felt satisfied that the Government would not
ignore an appeal if it were made to them for assistance in this
respect. (Hear, hear.)
A vote of thanks was unanimously accorded to His Excellency
for having presided, and the proceedings were terminated about
6 p.m.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB7.
