



f* —*'
•i- '■


WEALTH AND WANT.
Contributed by Sir S. W. G-BIFFITH to the Christmas Boomerang 1 .
There are only two sources of wealth —the
gifts or products of nature and human labour.
Capital (apart from gifts or products of nature
in private hands, which, in one sense, may be
called capital), is made up of accumulated profits
—i.e., the accumulated savings of the products
of labour, over and above what is expended
in maintaining the producer during the process
of production. In order, therefore, that an
increase of capital, or new capital, may
be produced (otherwise than by the appro-
priation of gifts of nature not already
appropriated), there must be an excess of
value in the things produced beyond the actual
expenditure or consumption in the process of
production. Let us see how and by whom this
excess of value is produced. It is not created.
Nothing is made out of nothing. I will use
the term “raw material” to signify the gifts or
products of nature to which labour is applied
to increase their value, whether the gift or pro-
duct is in its primary form, as land, or trees,
or in a secondary form, upon which some labour
has already been expended, as cotton, wool, or
lumber. In order, then, that additional wealth
or capital may come into existence, labour
must be applied to raw material in such a
manner that the value of the resulting pro-
duct is greater than the value of the raw
material together with that of the things con-
sumed in the process of production.
Take a simple instance. A is possessed of
some planks, (which are capital, representing
previously existing raw material to which labour
has already been applied). Of these he desires
to make a boat. If he is able and willing,
he builds the boat himself. Then, if the
boat exceeds in value the value of the
planks, added to the value of the things con-
sumed by him while engaged in making it —
i.e., his food and other cost of living—A is
richer to the extent of the surplus, and his
capital is to that extent increased. Suppose
that the planks were worth £5, and that the
boat is worth £l5, and that it cost A £5 to live
while he was working on it, it is plain that he
has by his labour become richer to the extent
of £5. In other words, his capital, originally
represented by £5 worth of planks and the
£5 which he expended while he was
working, has been increased to £l5. The
whole new value of £lO is clearly the product
of his labour, for the planks left to themselves
would have remained planks, and nothing else.
And the net result of his labour is a new
capital of £5,
The principle of this illustration is equally
applicable to any other form of capital existing
in the form of raw material. It can never
increase in value, of itself, except by some
change in surrounding circumstances. (This,
however, is only an apparent exception,
and need not be taken into consideration
for the present purpose.) Apart from such
accidental circumstances, any additional value
can only be produced by the acquisition of


labour to raw material. The capital of an priated, although that proportion has often
individual may, of course, be increased in
another way, namely, by the application of
part of the capital of another person, but this
is a mere change of possession, and not the
production of new capital.
Suppose now that A is not able, or is not
willing, to make the boat himself, and, instead,
employs B to do so, for which he pays B
£5, which is expended by B in the cost of
living while engaged in the work. The result
will be the same as before, so far as regards
the increase of capital. An additional value
or capital of £5 has been produced, being the
additional £lO-worth in A’s hands, less the £5
paid by him to B. A has therefore obtained
for £5 an increase of value, or a new value, of
£lO. The difference represents that part of the
labour of B for which the latter has received no
remuneration.
These figures are, of course, arbitrary. But
the illustration shows the mode, and the only
possible mode, in which a real increase of
capital can be produced. For, if the value
added to the raw material by the work did not
exceed the value of the things consumed during
the work, no new capital or new wealth would
have been produced at all. If A has himself
dime anything, by supervising or directing B,
or otherwise, which contributes to the new or
additional value, the only difference will be
that, as the labour was not all B’s labour,
but partly A’s and partly B’s, A will, of
course, be entitled to a fair remuneration for
his share of the labour. But the only actual
increase of capital, or new capital, has still
been produced by the labour.
Now, at first sight, it would appear that the
product of a man’s labour’, i.e. the new value
produced by it, belongs to himself, and not to
the man whose raw material would never, of
itself, have increased in value to the extent of a
penny. In practice, however, a much larger
proportion of this new value is retained or
appropriated by the possessor of the raw
material than is proportionate to the labour
(in the form of supervision) which he himself
contributes. The proportion of the value
retained varies, and the amount of new
capital accumulated by the owner of the raw
material, the capitalist, varies accordingly.
Probably so much as half of the total new
value is seldom now so retained and appro-
been reached and exceeded. But it is the part
so retained and appropriated, and this alone,
that builds up and constitutes the increasing
fortune of the capitalist.
I do not, of course, dispute the right of the
capitalist to a fair reward for the capital em-
ployed by him in the process of production.
But this is a very different thing from appro-
priating the whole of the new value produced
by the labour over and above the cost of sub-
sistence of the labourer.
If A’s capital is in the form of money, it
is obvious that, in order to be increased,
it must be first exchanged for some raw
material to which labour can be applied so as
to produce a new or increased value. For
labour cannot be directly applied to money,
and it is only by labour that new capital is
produced. But the principle is universal.
The preceding statement shows how it is that
wealth is so unequally distributed between the
capitalist and the producer— i. e, the man whose
labour produces new wealth. A large proportion
of the new wealth goes into the hands, not of
the producer, but of the capitalist.
But it is said that this is quite fair, and for
this reason: If the possessor of the raw material
—I still use the illustration of the boat—did
not allow his planks to be used, the labourer
could not earn his £5, and obtain the means of
subsistence. For convenience I will use the
term ‘ ‘ food” to signify the whole necessary
means of living (which, in a primitive state of
society, would be strictly accurate). And it is
said, further, that the workman agreed to sell
his labour for £5, and has no right to complain
if the value of the product of his labour is
£lO, or any greater sum. It is also said that
the value of labour—a term which is used as if
it were synonymous with the price for which
labour can be obtained—is settled by the law of
supply and demand — i.e., by competition. Of
course, where there is free competition, the
law of supply and demand does, within cer-
tain limits, regulate the price of labour.
Whether it regulates the value of labour is
quite another thing, which depends on the
sense in which the term “ value” is used.
But is the case that we have been considering
a case of free competition ? Let us examine it
a little closer. Why does B sell his labour to
A for £5, when the product of it is worth £lO to


the latter? Plainly, to obtain food. If he can- system the natural effect of unrestricted com-
not sell his labour he will starve. And Ais the
only person, or the most liberal person, from
whom he can get employment — i.e., food. For it
is immaterial, so far as the general principle
is concerned, whether his wages are paid in the
form of money or in food. The money is
merely the means of procuring food, being ex-
changeable for it. A, having the food, or the
money by means of which alone it can be pro-
cured, is therefore in a position to fix his own
price for the food which B requires, and which
B can only obtain from him, and he takes ad-
vantage of this necessity to sell the food at
more than its value.
Is this fair ? If one man is in possession of
all the food in a community, and demands
for it much more than its fair value, he is jpstly
execrated. In the middle ages penal laws
of a severe character were enacted in England
against persons who attempted such things.
And what difference is there in principle,
if, instead of directly exchanging food for
labour, a man exchanges for labour the money
which in its turn is to be immediately
exchanged for food ? One of the most
serious questions now before the Legisla-
ture of the United States is the new
form of monopoly called “Trusts.” In an
extreme and outwardly visible form the evil of
monopoly is universally recognised. But the
evilness does not depend upon the outward
form.
I have assumed that A was the only person, or
the most liberal person, from whom B could
obtain food, or money to be exchanged for
food. It is obvious that this is so. For if any
other person would have given him a fairer
share of the value produced by his labour he
would not have bought from A.
A little consideration will show that this
illustration is of general application, and that
A represents the class of possessors of raw
material, or the means of procuring raw
material, to which labour is to be applied, i.e.,
capitalists; while B represents the class of
productive labourers.
The result of our present system of production
then is that the share of the producer in
the new wealth produced by his labour is,
at most, a part only of that wealth, the extent
of his share being fixed by the person to whom
the completed product belongs. In such a
petition amongst producers must be to con-
tinually reduce their share of the produced
wealth. For each man is struggling to live
and, in the struggle, is prepared, rather than
starve, to sell his labour for any share of its
product that he can get, if it will keep him.
from starving. In other words the “food”
supplied by the possessor of the raw material
is practically sold by auction to buyers who
are made reckless in their biddings by the
knowledge that they must buy or
The “sweating” system, which is onljr
a following out of the principle of unre-
stricted competition to its natural and logical
conclusion, shows that sometimes the price
charged to the producer for his food is so high
that he cannot pay for enough to keep
him alive —and so he dies, and the weakest
goes to the wall.
Is such competition really free ? Is it any
more free than any other competition of the
weak against the strong? True, it is not a
direct competition of the weak with the
strong, but it is a competition of the weak
amongst themselves for what the strong
will, of their pleasure, give them. When the
possessor of raw material has been strong
enough, he has not always gone through the
form of giving his labourers food in the
form of wages, but has merely provided them
with as much food, in the form of food, as he
thought necessary. This was called ‘ ‘ slavery. ”
In what essential particulars does the so-called
“free” competition differ from slavery? So-
far from being free, it is the complete domina-
tion of the weak by the strong.
In countries where the system known as
the “ corvee ” flourished, the labourers worked
one or two days in the week for themselves, and
the rest of the time for their master, the land*
lord. It appears that under the new system of
“free” competition very much the same result
may be brought about, but it is disguised by
the payment of wages which profess to be a
remuneration for the labourer’s whole time.
No wonder, then, that producers have, for
their own protection, established the system
of Trade Unions, which are daily assuming
greater importance as an element in our social
and political system. But they cannot do all
that has to be done. The struggle is severe,
unequal, and often disastrous.


It will be said that these doctrines are dan- It is always a great step towards attaining
gerous, and so forth. Very likely. Truth is often any object to have the object clearly in view.
dangerous—but only to those who deny it and I
oppose its operations. Then it is not only
dangerous but likely to be overwhelming— j
Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind
exceeding small.
Can it be doubted for a moment that the
continually increasing evils arising from the
unequal distribution of the new wealth pro-
duced by labour must be remedied ? The task
is no doubt difficult, but it is necessary. And
what is necessary cannot be impossible.
What then is the remedy ?
In the first place, it must be recognised that
the only true and just measure of the wages of
productive labour is, in addition to the cost of
subsistence, cm adequate and fair proportion oj
the new wealth produced by the labour.
Secondly, that rule must be put into practice.
One of the principal functions of Government
is, I suppose, to protect the weak against the
strong, and to secure to every man real freedom.
And it is only the State, i.e. the community
in the aggregate, that can enforce the rule of
freedom.
It appears to follow that it is the duty of the
State to undertake the task of insisting upon a
fair division of the products of labour be-
tween the possessor of the raw material and
the producer. Such a function would no more
be an interference with real liberty than the
regulation of the hours of labour in factories.
Almost every function of the State is, indeed,
an interference with some undue liberty
claimed or practised by the strong to the
prejudice of the weak.
When the true nature of an evil is distinctly
realised the remedy will soon be found.
Fortunately for us, the evils arising from the
unequal and unfair distribution of wealth do
not yet exist in Australia in so intense a
form as in older countries, and the task is
therefore not so difficult. But the same laws
are at work ; and, if we are to avoid the same
results, it is time that we looked the matter
fairly in the face.
It must not be supposed that the solution
of this difficulty would solve all the diffi-
culties, or remove all the inequalities, in our
existing social system. The problems of
civilisation are complicated, and there are
many co-efficients in every factor which enters
into them. But the matters to which I
have referred enter into a much larger
proportion of those problems than is, I think,
generally believed.
I ils it not, to a great extent, an intuitive
perception, not, perhaps, articulately ex-
pressed, of these and allied principles that has
given rise to the strong and increasing sense
of the injustice of land monopoly, and the
fierce objection to competition from alien
races ? Is it not also beginning to be felt that
the unrestricted competition of labour, instead
of being the result of a natural law of good,
is a dangerous social evil ?
I commend these subjects to the practical
consideration of the people of Australia.
S. W. GRIFFITH.
Black, Keid & Co., Printers, Adelaide-street Brisbane,




■
■
: '■
