

THE MINERAL WEALTH OF
QUEENSLAND.
CHARLES S. DICKEN, Esq., F.E.G.S.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE FELLOWS OP
'A|l)e llopar §ol'ontaC institute,
11th MARCH, 1884.
Reprinted, by permission, from the Journals of the Tmiituu.
ITcmbxiit:
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS, 71A, LUDGATE HILL, E.C




THE MINERAL WEALTH OF
QUEENSLAND.
CHARLES S. DICKBN, Esq., F.E.G.S.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE FELLOWS OP
§oloniaC gnsfifwle,
11th MARCH, 1884.
Reprinted, hy permission, from the Journals of the Institute.
ITaniroit:
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS, 71A, LUDGATE HILL, E.C.




THE MINERAL WEALTH OF QUEENSLAND.
Important, and indeed essential, as agriculture is to the progress
of any people, a very powerful motor exists in mining industry,
which is necessarily the cause of manufacturing greatness; and
whenever any community is remarkable for having at once agricul-
tural resources and mineral wealth, we may confidently predict
for that community a great and splendid career. Queensland, the
subject of my paper, the youngest among the great Colonies
of the Continental group, with an area more than five and a half
times that of the United Kingdom, includes a large proportion of
the rich and productive sub-tropical zone of Australia; and, as
I am about to show, contains a wealth of mineral resources which
as yet has not been generally recognised or even known, but which,
if fully developed, cannot fail to exercise a vast influence for good
on the future fortunes of the Colony.
When it became known that the Commissioners of the Paris
Exhibition of 1878 had awarded a gold medal to a pastoral tenant
of the Crown in Queensland, for an exhibit of wool grown there,
it was to be expected that many inquiries would be made about the
geographical features of a country possessing such natural riches
as to secure the high honour of an award of an International
Exhibition ; but whatever demand there may have been then for a
general description of the boundaries and principal features of the
Colony, there has been little need for it since. Each year has seen
greater attention directed to Queensland, by its increasing products
in minerals, wool, sugar, tallow, and hides, and by its becoming a
favourite field for emigration, and for the investment of capital.
Quite lately the Colony has been brought prominently before
the public, through the press, owing to the action of the late
Ministry of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith in annexing New Guinea.
This, as may be remembered, was the primary cause for holding a
Conference at Sydney to discuss the subject of Federation, marking,


as it did, an epoch that will ever be remembered as one of the most
important in the history of the British Colonies.
To those who wish to obtain some general information about the
Colony, I would recommend an interesting paper by Mr. Thomas
Archer, C.M.G., the present Agent-General, which was delivered by
him before this Institute on the 12th April, 1881, and in which he
deals fully with its history, resources, and future prospects. Many
excellent works on Queensland have also been written, but
notwithstanding that so much general knowledge about the
Colony has been promulgated of late years, comparatively speaking
little is known outside its borders of the mineral treasures in a
virtually unlimited supply which it contains. It has therefore
occurred to me that a short account of the several mineral dis-
coveries made in the Colony, and of their subsequent development,
might be of general interest, and this idea led me to prepare the
paper which I have the privilege of reading this evening.
I feel diffident in dealing with this subject, as I do so,
not from any scientific knowledge, but from the promptings of a
taste acquired during a long official connection, as Police Magistrate
with some of the more important Northern gold fields.
I think it, however, but fair to interpolate here that the paper
is from first to last a practical one. There is a romantic side to
gold mining everywhere, and its history in Queensland might be
as much diversified by stories of wonderful “ rushes ” and fortunes
rapidly made or rapidly lost, as any that might be mentioned.
But my object is to furnish useful information, and the time,
indeed, at my disposal will admit of nothing else.
For easier reference on the map of the localities where the
principal minerals are found of which I propose to treat, viz., gold,
tin, silver, copper, and coal, I will divide the Colony into Divisions of
Southern, Central, and Northern, and will deal with them geographi-
cally from South to North, rather than by the dates of their dis-
coveries ; beginning with gold, as forming at present the principal
mining industry, and the one that supports the largest population.
It is estimated that the gold fields cover an aggregate area of
7,000 square miles, and are found in all the Divisions, the most
important and numerous being in the Northern, and scattered ovei
the Cape York Peninsula, and in the districts immediately adjoin-
ing the South-West.
In all the fields gold mining was commenced by working the
alluvial deposits, which were generally shallow, being confined
merely to the drainage areas in the immediate vicinity of quartz


reefs, so that they were, for the most part, soon worked out, and
afforded only a few months’ work to the miners engaged; they were
valuable, however, in leading up to the “ lode ” and making mining
what it now is, the permanent occupation for a considerable popu-
lation. In the Southern Division the gold fields are Enoggera, a few
miles from Brisbane, Pikedale, Talgai, Canal Creek, and Thames
Creek in the Warwick District. Of these little need be said, beyond
the fact that they find employment for a few miners in the
old alluvial workings, and in prospecting. Some reefs in Thames
Creek have been reported lately as being rich, so that no doubt
greater attention will be paid to that locality.
Gympie, the important gold field of this Division, is situated on
the Mary Eiver, about 60 miles in a direct line from its mouth,
and at an elevation of about 460 feet above the sea, from which it
is distant only about 30 miles. After it was discovered in October,
1867, many of the first arrivals were exceedingly fortunate, and
on the reports of their success reaching the Southern Colonies,
a large number of miners visited it, so that when the census was
taken in March, 1868, the population was over 6,000. A little
later, heavy rain compelled the miners to desist from working the
alluvial ground, and as quartz reefing had not received much
attention, the prosperity of the field flagged for awhile. The rich-
ness of the quartz reefs was, however, soon discovered, and large
quantities of gold were obtained by crushing in a hand mortar;
this led to the erection of a crushing machine of ten head of
stamps, driven by a portable engine. Since then there has been a
steady increase of capital for erecting improved machinery for
crushing, pumping, and the general development of the mines, and
by the Warden’s report for 1882, I see that he estimates the value
of the machinery then on the field at £BB,OOO.
Very rich yields have been experienced in some of the mines,
notably in the 7 and 8 South Monkland claim, in which the
fortunate claim-holders at one time obtained a cake of smelted
gold weighing over 4,000 ounces. At another time 739 tons of stone
yielded 5,800 ounces of the precious metal, and in 1880 a small
parcel of stone from No. 2 North Lady Mary reef actually realised
70 ounces to the ton. “ Sensational ” crushings and the proximity
of Gympie to Brisbane caused a good deal of outside capital to be
invested, and companies to be formed for working the principal
mines on an extensive scale, much earlier than in the case of the
Northern fields. The returns show that there are 112 companies in
existence, with a nominal capital of £1,476,800. Gympie is con-


nected by railway with the prosperous town of Maryborough, on the
head of navigation of the river Mary, in the midst of some of the
finest sugar land in the Colony, and the port for the Burrum and
other coal fields, which I shall mention by and by.
Around Gympie there are several smaller mining areas, such as
Kilkivan (which has risen into importance on account of the valuable
discoveries of cinnabar which have been made there), Jimna, Imbil,
Burnett, Cania, Kroombit, and others further north near Mount
Perry, each affording employment for a small population of miners
in “ fossicking ” and “ prospecting.”
The Central Division comprises the gold fields of Calliope, Croco-
dile, Eidgeland, Morinish, Cawarral, Mount Wheeler, with the im-
portant town of Rockhampton for their centre, and the mines near
Clermont on the Peak Downs, about 220 miles distant. In this
Division the real birth of gold-mining in Queensland may be dated
from the discovery of gold in 1858 at Canoona. Fabulous reports
were at first circulated about this field, so that a perfect mania for
the Far North—as the district was then called—set in ; ships were
laid on at all the Australian and New Zealand ports, and quickly filled
with an anxious living freight. The diggings proving a failure,
great distress prevailed, and had it not been for some of the pioneer
squatters generously providing rations at much inconvenience and
loss, and the Government finding passages to the South for those,
destitute of means, the roll of lives lost in the first mad thirst for
gold in Queensland would have been terrible to record. This
“ rush ” had, however, the effect of developing the resources of that
part of the country more quickly than if it had been left to
ordinary occupation with sheep and cattle, as many of those miners,
who remained made it their permanent home, and assisted in
prospecting for fresh fields. The latest addition to this division is
the Nebo gold field, situated on the Leichardt, Denham, and
Connor Ranges. It was proclaimed about two years ago, and, I
believe, the reefing prospects on it are considered very good.
The Northern Division is the richest in minerals, and comprises
the gold fields of Cape, Ravenswood, Charters Towers, Normanby,
Marengo, Mount Wyatt, Palmer, Hodgkinson, Etheridge, Gilbert,
Woolgar, Cloncurry, and Mulgrave. It will not be necessary to
describe each, but a few particulars about one or two of them
will be sufficient for my purpose.
Charters Towers, the premier field in the yield of the precious metal,
was discovered in 1872 by Messrs. Hugh Mosman, G. Clarke, and
Fraser. Each year there has been an increased yield per ton from the


quartz raised, showing that the stone does not deteriorate at the lower
levels, but at the same time more capital than is locally available
is necessary to develop the deep ground efficiently and economically.
Charters Towers is now connected by the Great Northern Railway
with the port of Townsville ; and easier communication with the
coast being thus established, it is not too much to predict that
capitalists will be induced to visit it and invest their money, and
that in a few years the output of gold will be at least doubled. It
was only in the latter part of 1881 that the first company —the
Day-Dawn Gold Mining Company, Limited, —was formed amongst
the leaseholders, with a nominal capital of £24,000. Within three
months a dividend of seven shillings on each share of ten shillings
paid-up capital was declared; and the last half-yearly balance
sheet, which the Secretary of the Company kindly sent me,
shows that 5,113 tons 16 cwt. 2 qrs. quartz yielded 11,757 ounces
18 dwts. of gold (average yield per ton 2oz. 5 dwt. 2 grs.) valued
at £39,837 18s. 6d. This enabled a dividend of £19,200 to be paid
on six months’ work on a paid-up capital of £12,000. In
the report from which I have taken these figures the directors say:
“ As the deeper levels are reached the reef becomes not only thicker
but of a richer character than any portion of the higher
workings.” The Company has increased its crushing power to
40 head of stamps, laid a tramway from the mine to the crushing
mill—a distance of about one mile and a half—and connected it
by a loop line to the Great Northern Railway. The success this
Company has experienced will doubtless encourage others to be
formed, and induce capitalists to venture in systematically mining
much of the valuable areas on the Charters Towers and other
fields which have been worked to the water level and abandoned,
solely for want of capital to procure proper machinery for develop-
ing the mines and treating the mundic stone.*
The following table from the official statistics for 1882 shows the
machinery on the gold fields during the year; and a short account
of the method of working a claim and reducing the ore may not be
uninteresting here: —
* Since -writing this I have received a tabulated statement showing that the
Company during its two years’ existence has paid £87,600 in dividends.


Reverberating Furnaces. in
i-H N • • i-H
H •
• (M
Concentrators.
Diamond Rock Drill.
Berdans, Wheelers, and -hm .h ato n -o<n o • as
Romans Pans. ' Ol rH * " rH 53
(H
fi
§
H
W
D
◄
Quicksilver and Compound
Cradles.
•S
i
9 i
S s?
9 1
o
G I
S §
m »2
SZS I*
W I
g g>
<3 J
H |
3 3
t->
0 «
O .§
>H .1
P 3 Is
H 8
£ Rl
a ■»
0 g
o ®
< h
s 1
,s
l 's
§
P 3
fi
a
@
t-H
fi
fi
fi
o
o
fi
o
fi
a
<1
A
•••••• o :
• • • •
::::::«g, : : : : : :
•••••*
: : : : : : §*3 ::::::
: :: : : : Sl iii !§ i
i:: : I :i: i| :
• ••••• 0Q • • • . •
d • • ;H •
%* ' : g *)* ■
• • a • : • s*B § :S. :
■®i & j >*•a S § o
I §!•§ § g
Sluices, Toms, and Sluice
Boxes.
o • • • o •co
IQ • • •WS •
Whips or Pulleys. l °; co lliio cq ' D **" co * So
fi
o
A
O
M
H
fi
i—i
fi
o
in
fi
fi
Whims.
,-H . r-H • • •CD •rH •CO •VO • <M
. . . •rH • • • O
Winding Washing, Pumping, . . . HOMU3 . . -o • co
or other Machmes moved hy .... co co • • • • co
Horse or Steam Power.
Buddies.
1-1 . . .Oi -cH • -CO
Boring Machines other than
Diamond Drills.
00 • o
Stamp Heads (Crushing
Quartz or other Vein Stuff). 1-1 2 o co cq h us h cq
Crushing Machines driven by
power other than Steam.
Crushing Machines driven co <n o o .hohimhcoinn • >o
by Steam Power. rH 1-1 * 1-1
„ . Aggregate .Maoooifeoooooooffi • cq
Steam Engines KorsePower • oo
employed in horsepower. _co co gj
winding, pump-
ing, crushing, _ , _
&c. Number. • g>
'S
o
H
CD
O
r—4
r—!


After the usual forms of making application and posting notices
have been gone through, and the claim has been registered in the
Warden’s Office, it is worked by sinking a shaft. For the first
eighty feet or so the dirt is shovelled out and the rock blasted, and
raised to the surface by a windlass and bucket; the water is baled
out in the same way. After this depth has been attained, either a
whim, worked by ahorse, is erected for hoisting, or else machinery,
consisting of a reel, driven by a portable engine, for the winding and
unwinding of the cable; if there is heavy water, pumping machi-
nery is also obtained. The shafts are usually six feet by three,
centred and timbered by square-framed planks in sets; and are
sunk to cut the reef, which lies usually at an angle to the surface of
from 30° to 45°. As soon as this is effected, the practice is to follow
the reef down, or, as the miners term it, “ sink on the under-
lie.”
When sufficient depth is reached levels are driven, the stone
is broken down from the unworked ground above, and sent down
to the lower floor, from whence it is taken to the shaft, and thence
to the surface for crushing. This is effected by heavy stamps
and water, and the process is termed “ wet crushing.” The
stamps—sometimes weighing as much as 800 lbs. each—are raised
by a revolving cam, which partially turns them round at each stroke,
releasing them to fall and crush the quartz on a die underneath. The
quartz is either shovelled under the stamps, or placed there by self-
feeders, and passes thence through screens over ripples and quick-
silvered copper plates, by which means all the free gold is caught.
The pyritous portion of the ore is concentrated in a circular
huddle, or concentrator, and at Eavenswood it is roasted in large
furnaces “ sweet,” i.e. until all the sulphur is driven off, leaving
only the oxides; the stuff is then put into pans charged with quick-
silver, and they are kept in motion until the whole mass is thoroughly
mixed. This amalgam is taken to the retort-room and heated,
so as to allow the quicksilver to escape, leaving the crude bullion,
which is melted, cast in bars, and assayed. The value, and degree
of fineness, are marked on each ingot, which is placed in the bank
safe until despatched by escort to the seaport to be forwarded on to
the mint at Sydney.
In consequence of the belief that a large percentage of the gold is
lost by this mode of treating the pyrites, several experiments have
been made in London and Swansea on samples of ore sent from
the Northern gold-fields. By the kind permission of Mr. W.
Pritchard Morgan, who came home for the purpose of finding some


better method of treating ores than I have described, I am able to
give a few particulars of a process which has been patented,
and is known as “ the dry amalgamation process.” It consists of
automatic machinery, whereby the bulk ore as taken from the mine
is finely pulverised, and passed in a dry state through any depth of
heated mercury, being retarded in its passage, and distributed so
as to ensure perfect contact. By this means wonderfully satis-
factory results have been obtained from quantities of ore, and it is
believed that similar results can be obtained in Queensland
at a cost not exceeding 7s. Gd. per ton, or about half the present
cost.
The following are some of the assays made between Novem-
ber 29 and December 20, 1883, at the Adelaide Engineering Works,
Stratford Market, Bow, of ore from mines with which I am well
acquainted:—
Disraeli Pyrites, Charters Towers District.
Average of many Assays.
oz. dwt. grs.
Before treatment 4 14 13
After treatment 9 2
Gold extracted from ore, 91 per cent.
This ore yields about one ounce and a half by treatment in
Queensland, equal to about 30 per cent, only of the gross assay
contents.
contents.
Mr. Joshes’ Ravenswood Pyrites.
oz. dwt. grs.
Before treatment 2 18 19
After treatment 5 23
Gold extracted from the ore, 89 per cent.
This is an extremely refractory ore, and cannot be treated in
Queensland at a profit.
This process will, I believe, supersede that at present in use
in the Colony, and by it many millions of tons of tailings now
lying waste will be treated profitably, and claims which have been
abandoned through the poor quality of the ores will be reworked at
a fair remuneration.
The Legislature, in order to encourage prospecting for new gold
fields, provided, by the Gold Fields Act of 1874, that a reward, not
exceeding £I,OOO, should be paid to the discoverers of a payable
field; the amount to be determined by the distance of the new field


from the nearest known workings, and by the population it sup-
ports for six months after the discovery. Although the reward,
when divided amongst a party of men, is small, yet it recoups
them for the actual outlay in rations, outfit, and horses, and acts
as a certain incentive to undertake the risk and discomfort of travel-
ling for six months or more in a country hardly known, or per-
haps never before traversed by a white man. In these prospecting
expeditions great tact and judgment are required by the leader, as
well as undeniable qualities as a “bushman.” Where gold is
found, water is usually scarce, so that in pitching camp near per-
manent water there is the danger of coming into collision with the
aborigines in their wanderings from one part of their country to
another. Either from want of experience in dealing with natives,
or from neglecting the needful precautions, many an unfortunate
miner has lost his life by being speared when engaged with his
pick and shovel, or intent in “ washing out ” a dish of auriferous
earth. It is for this reason that a prospecting party usually con-
sists of not less than three or four Europeans, with a couple of
civilised aborigines to look after the horses. A digger’s outfit con-
sists of a riding-horse, and a pack-horse to carry blankets,
rations, pick, shovel, and tin dish ; and a gun for killing game, as
well as for self-defence. To illustrate the danger attaching to
prospecting for gold, I will mention that Mr. Robert L. Jack,
F.G.S., F.R.G.S., Geological Surveyor for Northern Queensland,
was speared in March, 1880, while on an expedition in the Cape
York Peninsula. I had the pleasure of congratulating him on his
miraculous escape when he returned to Townsville, about six
weeks afterwards; and hearing from him the account of the
adventure, which I cannot relate better than in the words of his
report to the Government. He says : “ I arranged that the night
was to be divided into four watches by the stars. Macdonald had
finished the first, and I the second ; Love, who had been sleeping
in the same tent with me, had been on guard for about twenty
minutes (about half-past one o’clock), and was rounding up the
horses, when suddenly I felt a spear crash through my neck, a little
above the shoulder-blade. To reach me it must have passed over
the space where Love had been sleeping till he was roused to take
his watch. I sat up, and was in the act of reaching for my revolver,
when a second spear pinned the canvas stretcher from which I had
just lifted my head. I fired a shot, and called on all hands to
turn out. ... I attempted to pull out the spear, which was
about eight feet in length, and the thickest I have ever seen—being


nearly an inch in diameter. Its barb (which I have preserved) was
of quarter-inch iron, seven inches long, and the thickest part of the
spear, about six inches beyond the barb, was tightly fixed in my
flesh. Not knowing whether or not we were to have the satisfac-
tion of seeing our enemies face to face, and resolved to bear my
part in their reception if they should come, after hastily satisfying
myself that no important blood-vessel was involved in the wound,
I carried the sheath-knife to Macdonald, and ordered him to set
me free by cutting in to the spear through the flesh. To cut the
spear, which was of very hard wood, might have taken a few
minutes of time, and the integrity of a little bit of flesh might have
been very dearly purchased had the blacks resolutely followed up
their attack. After the rough surgical operation I felt rather faint
for a few seconds.” . . . Mr. Jack, although suffering great
pain from his wound, led his party in safety to Somerset, and went
south by the first steamer, without, however, being successful in
the object of the expedition, viz., the discovery of a payable gold
field in the North of the peninsula.
Although, as just seen, there is danger from the aborigines when
the party of Europeans is small, yet it disappears when
miners occupy a proclaimed gold field. The aborigines at once
make friendly overtures, which are always met in the same spirit,
as the blacks are found useful in carrying water and cutting wood
for fuel for household purposes, which they do readily for a little
tea, sugar, tobacco, or old clothing. Anything bright coloured has
a peculiar attraction for them, and nothing gives them more pleasure
than to be dressed in an old red or blue Crimean shirt, with a
coloured handkerchief tied round the head. I once saw a powerful
old warrior marching majestically out to his camp, at sundown, in
a miscellaneous collection of clothing. His hair was fantastically
arranged in a big, bushy knob, on which was perched a black
velvet bonnet with crimson flowers, the cast-off finery of a miner’s
wife, which he had appropriated from some woman of his tribe, to
whom it had been given for household service, no doubt considering
that it became him more than it did her. Beyond looking for
horses in the bush, and doing a little light work about a hut, the
aborigines are, however, quite useless to Europeans. Being by
nature hunters, they have no idea of agriculture, and are physically
incapable of hard manual labour.
In closing my remarks relative to this branch of my subject, I
will give a few statistics about the yield of gold and the number of
miners engaged in gold-mining throughout the Colony.


Queensland,
Table showing approximately the yield of gold during the years 1881 and
J. kAsUVV vvv y - »/ ,
1882, prepared by the Department of Mines from information obtained by com-
parison of Wardens' Estimates , Eeturns of Crushings, and Escort and Customs
Returns.
Gold Field. yield for 1881. Yield for 1882.
Northern Division— ozs ‘ . ° z ®'
Charters Towers and Cape River 82,324 79,695
_ ffl ACA Q 7 QQQ
Palmer .. 51,960 37,339
Hodgkinson
Muigrave .s?
10,195 *,m
Etheridge and Woolgar 23,030 1 8 > 48 1
XJi/uoimgL waava 1» _ _ ' 4 rn
Oloncurry No returns 453
VIVAAL/UJ.AJ OAO
Nonnanby, Marengo, and Mt. Wyatt 273
Total of Northern Division 183,874 157,834
Central Division—
Clermont Gold Fields 7,475 6,000
Nebo 4 > BoB B ’fo4
Rockhampton Gold' Fieids 2,132
xviGGiuxcwAiwuviA uviu a ' o r\nn
Gladstone Gold Fields 3,070 3,966
Total of Central Division 17,485 15,47/
Southern Division—
Gympie and Kilkivan 67,861 50,312
Pikedale, Talgai, Lucky Valley, Canal Creek,
Tenningering, and other small Fields 1,735 1,270
Total of Southern Division 69,596 51,582
Grand Total ;••• 270,955 224,893
Comparative Summary of Total Results from Quartz Mining for 1881 and 1882.
Total Yield of Total Value at
Gold in ozs. £3 10s. per oz.
£
1881 .. 200,134 700,469
1882 .. 172,855 604,993
Average Average Yield Average Earn -
Number of Gold per mgs of each
of Quartz Miner. Miner.
Miners. ozs. dwts. grs. £
2,750 72 10 11 252
3,419 50 11 3 178
Comparative Statement of Miners employed in Gold Mining throughout the Colony of
Queensland during the years 1881 and 1882.
E “ r °Ei." UVi “’ Ohi MtoS UT “ Gross Total.
1881 .. 3,375 .... 991 .... MJ* Ml}
1882 .. 3,454 .... 280 .... 2,026 .... 5,760
Table showing the Trices charged for crushing Quartz and Cement on the several
v,e snowing me xiwoe w , BQ9
Gold Fields where crushing machines were in operation during the year losz.
Per ton. Per ton.
Northern Division — s - m f s ‘
tnern jluvisioh — ~ , ■ . rn , A n
Palmer From 0 12 0 To
.rainier - -- i a a
Hodgkinson 2 2 }J 0
Ethfridge 10 0 10 0
Charters Towers and Cape * 010 0 _
unarxers iuwcib uru ~ -- - aiha
Ravenswood 0 5 0 0 10 0


Peak Downs
14
0
To 0
14
0
Nebo
1
10
0
1
10
0
Rockhampton District
0
18
0
0
18
0
Southern Division —
Tenningering District
0
15
0
0
15
0
Gympie
0
7
6
0
9
0
Per ton.
£ s. d.
Per ton.
£ s. d.
Central Divisions—
The mineral which, next to gold, is most extensively worked in
the Colony at present is tin. It was first found in the Southern
Division, about twelve miles from the border of New South Wales,
in the early part of 1872, and by the rich discoveries of drift tin
ore the present town of Stanthorpe then came into existence. In
July of that year Mr. T. F. Gregory, mineral land surveyor,
made an official report of the district, in which he estimated the
area of the stanniferous country at about 550 square miles.
Very soon after the discovery 74,000 acres of land were applied for,
and several companies formed to work the mines. The construction
of the railways was quickly pushed on from Warwick, and the
field soon became very prosperous. It is estimated that no less
a quantity than 34,000 tons of tin ore, valued at two millions
sterling, have been sent to Brisbane by rail from that district. At
one time the field supported a population of 8,000, but now it is
reduced to 1,000, through a falling off in its productiveness,
in consequence of which Mr. Jack, the Government geologist,
was requested to report upon it, with the view of suggesting
some system of prospecting so as to resuscitate its former
prosperity. The report is as follows: “ Although the quartz
reefs may occasionally afford bunches of tin ore, as they do on
the New South Wales side of the border, I have little doubt
that after the exhaustion of the alluvial deposits, the future of
Stanthorpe will depend on the question of the profitable working of
the stanniferous dykes. The tin ore crystals of the dykes are
precisely what, with a little attrition, would yield the stream tin of
the heads of the Severn. I should recommend to all concerned in
the prosperity of the place a vigorous search for dykes of this
character: (1) by prospecting the surface wash and following up
any’indication of its richness; (2) by cross-trenching at right angles
to the direction of the joints in the granite in the places to which
the surface-prospecting may have led ; and (8) by sinking on the
dykes, when found, to a sufficient depth to prove their productive-
ness where they are beyond the influence of atmospheric agencies.”
This recommendation will no doubt be acted upon by the owners of


mineral lands, and others interested in the welfare of the district,
with, it is to be hoped, good results.
In 1879 extensive tin lodes were discovered at the head of
the Herbert River, which flows into the sea below Cardwell.
The Herberton tin mines, as they are called, are forty-five
miles from Thornborough on the Palmer gold field, fifty-five
miles from the Port of Cairns, and eighty-five from Port
Douglas, and lie about 3,000 ft. above the level of the sea. The
Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods, F.G.S., F.L.S., reported on them
in the following words : “ The reefs or lodes are very like
those of Cornwall, and have the same variable character in thick-
ness and direction, and they are probably as rich, as abundant, and
as valuable. That they will prove permanent I have not the least
doubt. There is one very obvious proof of this before our eyes.
Reefs are found on the highest hills and in the lowest valleys, and
those in the valleys are often the richest and best, as, for instance,
the prospecting claim. Now, the valleys are due to the wearing
action of water, and they expose the lower portions of the granite,
in some instances 700 and 800 ft. below some of the tin workings of
the hills. If, then, the lodes are found permanent and good in the
valleys, it gives us reliable ground for judging of their character
many hundred feet.”
There are two distinct series of tin lodes in this locality. The
first, Herberton, just described, is on the eastern side of the granite
range. The second is on the western side, about six or seven miles
distant, on the sources of the Tate and Walsh rivers, and is called the
Great Western Tin Field. The character of the stone is similar to
that of Herberton, but the lodes are associated with very excellent
copper, making it more closely resemble the Cornwall tin deposits.
Mr. Tenison-Woods says : “ Taking all the appearances together,
there can be no doubt of the immense value and importance of this
mineral country. It may truly be called the Cornwall of Australia,
and there are no metallic lodes on the continent which can be
at all compared with those of the Wild River and western side of
the Range.” He recommends that the unexplored regions of Bellen-
den-Ker Range, Mount Peter Botte, Mount Thomas, and Mount
Bartle Frere should be examined, and concludes his report thus :
“ I firmly believe that we are only on the threshold of our mineral
discoveries in this country, and all the various seaports will become
important as time goes on.” The predictions of the reverend
geologist have been verified in less than three years from the time
of his visit to the district, as there are now five machines at work


in tin mining, and the returns show that up to last May there had
been exported from the ports of Cairns and Douglas 4,000 tons of tin,
valued at £200,000. The great difficulty that Herberton has to
contend against is its inaccessible position. Situated to the west
of the dividing range, it has been a most serious matter to find
anything like a practicable road from the coast, and even now,
after all the money and time that have been expended in exploring
the country between it and its natural port, Cairns, no road suitable
for drays has been found, and supplies have to be packed on
horses. From Port Douglas a dray-road has been made, which,
although it is longer, does not present the same difficulty in sur-
mounting the range as the track from Cairns. Preliminary surveys
for a railway are being made to both these ports, and also to
Mourilyan Harbour. When these are completed, the best route
will be selected, and the work of construction commenced, so that
it may be hoped that, within a few years, this field, rich not only
in tin, but in silver and copper, will be connected by rail with the
coast.
The statistics for 1882 give the return of tin ore raised at
27,812 tons, value £560,590. Of this quantity 26,788 tons were
produced by the Herberton mines in the Northern Division, and
524 tons by the Stanthorpe mines in the Southern Division.
I will now proceed to speak of the silver mines, which seem to
be assuming large proportions in the Herberton and Ravenswood
Districts, and in the Star River near Townsville. Some years ago
rich deposits of galena were known to exist in the Ravenswood and
Gilbert districts, the silver of which ranged from 50 to 150 ounces
to the ton, but it was not until 1880 that selections were taken up
on the Ravenswood gold field to work it. The ores in these
workings assay 58 per cent, of lead and 168 ounces of silver per
ton. It is in contemplation to connect this field by a branch to
the main line of railway between Townsville and Charters Towers,
so that there seems a bright prospect in store for this once pros-
perous gold field by the opening up of silver mines, even if the
treatment of the mundic stone fails to be sufficiently remunerative
on account of the expensive methods required for separating the
gold from the base metals. So encouraging are the prospects at
the Star River, Townsville District, and on Return Creek, Herberton
District, that smelting works are being erected in both places, and
almost daily discoveries of new silver fields are reported. One of
the latest is on the Selheim River, a branch of the Burdekin, about
120 miles south-west from Bowen, and as this is a locality kuown


to be rich in minerals, it may be fairly presumed that an extensive
field will soon be opened up there.
The Peak Downs Mine, in the Central Division, was the first
copper mine which was systematically worked by a company.
During the fifteen years that it was in existence about 100,000 tons
of ore, of an average of 17 per cent., were raised, giving 17,000 tons
of refined copper, valued at £1,275,000. The dividends paid
amounted to £215,000. The Great Western Copper Mine, near
the old Peak Downs Mine, has been worked a little, but, the ore not
being of so high a percentage, operations could not be continued
profitably, owing to the high rate of wages and dear carriage. It
will not, however, be allowed to lie idle much longer, as the Cler-
mont branch of the Central Railway is now rapidly approaching it,
and, with an abundance of good timber on the property for fuel, a
more plentiful supply of labour, and cheap carriage to Rockhamp-
ton, the disadvantages to which it formerly succumbed will no
longer exist. It is to be hoped that a renewal of work under
skilful management will not only repay the investors, but will
also restore much of the prosperity to the district which it has
lost by the cessation of operations by the old Peak Downs Company.
In the Southern Division the principal copper mine is Mount
Perry, situated about sixty miles west of Bundaberg, a port in the
northern part of Hervey’s Bay. A railway has lately been con-
structed from Bundaberg to this mine, but very little work
appears to have been done during 1882 in this or any of the
mines in the Southern Division, as only sixty tons of smelted
copper, valued at £B,OOO, were produced.
But, as in the case of the other minerals already described, we must
look to the Northern Division in the future for the chief production
of copper. The McKinlay Ranges at the head of the Gulf Waters,
portions of the Cape and Gilbert Ranges, and patches on the Upper
Burdekin, are composed of rocks of metamorphic character, their
associated minerals being gold and copper. The Cloncurry copper
lodes, situated between the 140° and 141° parallel of east longitude,
and 20° 30 1 south latitude on the Cloncurry river (a tributary of
the Flinders which flows into the Gulf of Carpentaria) were dis-
covered in 1867 by Mr. Ernest Henry, when in search of pastoral
country. A company was formed by him to work them, and opera-
tions commenced in 1869, but were discontinued a few years later,
chiefly from the want of labour, and the absence of means for con-
veying the ore to the coast, and thence to market. A new
Company has lately purchased this fine property (consisting


of 2,500 acres, in fee-simple), on which there have been traced
fifteen lodes of red oxides, grey ores, and carbonate of copper,
varying in width from 3 ft. to 16 feet. The assays of these ores
have proved them to be extraordinarily rich, averaging over 50 per
cent, of copper, and one sample lately analysed showed 79‘30 per
cent, of copper. Dr. Clarke, who made the analysis, gives it as his
opinion that the ore, “ on account of its freedom from arsenic and
other impurities, will yield the highest quality of copper.” The
opening up of this great Australian lode by the present Company
must necessarily exercise a very beneficial influence on this fine
pastoral country, which is watered by the Nicholson, Cloncurry,
Flinders, Saxby, Leichhardt, and Norman Rivers, and will also
have the effect of reviving mining on the neighbouring Cloncurry
goldfields. About sixteen miles in a south-easterly direction from
these mines are the Mount Norma copper selections; in a south-
westerly direction, about twenty miles away, are the Duck Creek
selections; and in a north-westerly direction, about seventy miles
off, are the Leichhardt copper selections. Each of these districts
contains a cluster of selections comprising an area of from 40
to 640 acres each. Mount Norma is about 800 ft. high, and a large
lode of splendid copper ore, with all the appearance of permanency,
crops out half-way up. For the efficient working and development
of these copper fields, and for the benefit of the rich pastoral
district surrounding them, it is necessary that population and easy
transit should be secured. The knowledge of the important interests
to be served by affording reliable communication in all seasons with
the coast will no doubt shortly induce the Government to undertake
the construction of a railway from some point on the Gulf of Carpen-
taria to this rich district, to be ultimately connected with the Great
Northern Railway now being pushed out from Townsville in the
direction of Hughenden.
There is a great scarcity of timber on the Cloncurry fields for
fuel purposes, and when it is remembered that by the Welsh
process it takes from thirteen to eighteen tons of coals to produce
one ton of smelted copper, and that double the volume of wood to
coal is required to produce the same heat, it will be readily seen
what immense supplies of wood will be required to carry on smelt-
ing operations on a scale sufficiently extensive to ensure large profits.
This scarcity of fuel will necessitate a vigorous search for coal in
the neighbourhood of these mines. Coal is known to exist on the
Flinders River, not very distant, and the mention of this mineral
leads me to the consideration of the closing section of my subject.


The inestimable value to a nation of the mineral fuel treasured
np in its coal measures, is nowhere better illustrated than in
England, a country which has been enabled by means of cheap
>coal to produce steam-power and machinery at the most economical
rate, and thus bring English manufactures into successful com-
petition with those of all other nations of the world, even where
manual labour is cheap. In Queensland there is at present a
sufficient supply of timber in the vicinity of most of the gold
fields, but each year sees a greater demand for fuel as population
increases, and new manufactures and industries are brought into
existence, and the traffic by land and sea assumes greater pro-
portions ; so that it is a matter of congratulation, as far as the
future progress and wealth of the Colony are concerned, that,
according to the official reports of geologists, the coal measures
crop out on the surface, over some 24,000 square miles. Hitherto
there has been very little mining, and that only in the southern
division. The Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods lately wrote a valuable
pamphlet on the “ Coal Resources of Queensland,” copies of which
Rave been on the table of this Institute; it will not be necessary,
therefore, for me to notice in detail the various coal formations
that have been discovered, and already described by a far abler
pen. I desire rather, after a brief mention of them, to carry your
attention to the Northern Division, where mining for coal has not
yet been undertaken, but where, nevertheless, the indications of
coal are promising, and about which much interesting information
Ras been lately reported to the Government by their geologist,
Mr. Jack. The principal mines in the Southern Division are
situated in the Ipswich basin, on the north and south banks of
the Bremer River, about twenty-four miles from Brisbane. Of
these, Mr. Tenison-Woods says that there are five different seams
at present worked on the north bank, viz.: (1) Garden coal; (2)
Edina coal; (3) Tivoli; (4) Old Tivoli; (5) Bell coal. The coal of
these seams is of an uniform quality, and “ the average of many
different analyses gives fixed carbon, 60; volatile hydrocarbons,
28; ash, 8; water, per cent. It may be added that the coal
has been extensively used for steam and gas purposes, and
testimonials are before me from a large number of masters and
engineers of steam-vessels, all speaking highly of the fuel, and
some preferring it to any other. From the engineers of the Gas-
works in Brisbane, there is a statement that in a trial of seventy-
one tons the average was 9,286 cubic feet of gas per ton ; while in
Ipswich the average was a little higher. The coke weighed out


nearly thirteen cwt. per ton used. Founders of iron, with brass
and locomotive engineers, give equally valuable testimonials in its
favour, while as a house-coal it is largely used.”
The seams in the south bank of the river appear to be identical
with those of the north. The principal workings here are Thomas’s
mine, on Bundanba Creek, from which the British India Mail
Company derive their supplies, and the “ New Chum Shaft ” of Mr.
Gulland, who has the contract for supplying the Australian Steam
Navigation Company. The output from each of these is about
8,000 tons a month. There are, besides, smaller collieries at
Braeside, near the “New Chum”; at Walloon, six miles from
Ipswich, at Rosewood, at Gatton, at Flagstone Creek, at the foot of
the main range, six miles from Toowoomba, and at Clifton and
Allora, on the Darling Downs. Some of these are not worked, on
account of the difficulties and expense of transit, which, however,
will be overcome as markets open up and the demand increases.
On the Burrum River, seventeen miles north-west from Mary-
borough, coal was first mined in 1866 by galleries driven into the
outcrop on the bank of the river. On account of the very limited
demand, however, work ceased for many years, until gold mining
at Gympie, the sugar mills, and the iron foundries in the district
caused a demand, when the Burrum mines were re-opened by an
English Company, under the name of “ The Queensland Land and
Coal Company.” The works are now the largest in the Colony,
rendering the mine equal to an output of 500 tons a day. It
is the opinion of Mr. Tenison-Woods, that the Burrum
coal measures belong to the same period as those of Newcastle,
New South Wales, and are capable of yielding coal of an equally
good quality. This has been confirmed in trials by the coasting
steamers. Quite recently I saw a letter published in the Mary-
borough Chronicle , from the chief engineer of the ss. Ranelagh, to
the effect that the Burrum coal from the Torbanlea Colliery as a
steam coal is equal to any Colonial coal that he had used. He
says : “ It is a bright bituminous coal, very little ash or clinker,
and I should say about 10 per cent, less consumption than the
Southern coal we generally use.” Besides the Torbanlea Mine
there is another very good one called Walsh’s, on the south side of
the Burrum River, having two good seams.
Proceeding northwards, to the central division, we first have the
opinion of the late Mr. Daintree, Government geologist, given in 1870,
when travelling from Rockhampton to Peak Downs, that “the charac-
teristic fossil plant of the New South Wales coal-fields, Glossopteris


Browniani, was detected wherever search was made. The general
trend of the measures seemed to be N.N.W. and S.S.E
The Paleozoic carboniferous gives a distinctive character to fully
one-third the surface of south-eastern tropical Queensland. With
an eastern frontier running parallel with and about seventy miles
back from the coast, it can be traced from the lower Bowen River,
a tributary of the Burdekin, down the Isaacs River, Roper’s Creek,
and other northern tributaries of the Mackenzie River, until it
passes the tropics, below which it is known to extend to the utmost
limit of the Colony. An extent of seventy miles by two hundred is
thus indicated in tropical Queensland, and throughout this tract
the characteristic fern of New South Wales coal formation, Glosso-
pteris Browniani, can be procured. . . . The measures are
known to extend to the coast at one point between the Pioneer
River and Bowen.”
Mr. Jack, the present Government geologist, made in 1878
an exhaustive report of the Bowen River coal field, in which,
after giving in detail his field notes on the various sections
observed in the carboniferous strata, he discusses the geological
position and economic value of the coal measures, and recommends
that operations should be conducted by boring at four points, which
he indicates. It will be sufficient to give in his words the position
of No. 1 bore site, the other bore sites being quite near to it.
“For the purpose of proving the coal field, I should recommend, in
the first place, a deep bore (say 1,000 or 1,200 feet), commencing
near the uppermost bed of the basin. . . . This place is seventy-
eight miles from Bowen, by Eurie Hotel, Mount Pleasant, Sonoma,
and Jack’s Creek. A bore in this position may be expected to give
a complete section of the upper or fresh-water series, and to reveal
such of the coal seams as do not show at the surface, owing to the
deepness of the soil and drift. It would also test the presence or
absence of workable seams of ironstone, oil shale, or alum shale.”
Surrounding this coal field there are considerable deposits of copper
ore and galena, which will become available when railway commu-
nication with Bowen is established. Considering this with the
opinion which Mr. Jack gives in one of his reports on this coal
field, that it “ will one day rank high among the mineral riches of
the Colony,” it seems to be a district specially suited for the atten-
tion of the capitalist, as it has the advantage of being so near Port
Denison (Bowen), one of the finest natural harbours on the east
coast of Australia. Nearly four years later, in May, 1882, Mr. Jack
reported on a coal field on the Little River, one of the heads of the


Kennedy, about 110 miles from Cooktown, in which he gives an
approximate analysis of specimens taken from different seams, and
compares it with a report on New South Wales coal by Professor
Liversidge. It appears to me so interesting, and has so direct a
bearing on my subject, that I have ventured to insert it. He
says : “ For the sake of comparison with the coals of this district,
I append below reports on New South Wales coal by Professor
Liversidge;—
Volatile
Hydro-
carbons.
[Name of Colliery.
Sulphur.
Carbon.
Mt. Keira
Berrima ,
Mt. Kembla
20-22
56-56
Dymocks Jambooroo.
Russels
44-09
49-95
Greta
55-82
Waratah
Wallsend
32-60
A. A. Co.’s Mine, Newcastle ..
Anvil Creek, ~
Comp. Little River, Queensland
47-90
26-197
62-998
It appears that the proportion of ash in the Little Eiver Coal is
higher than that in the Anvil Creek seam, but not so high as in the
Mount Keira and Berrima coals.
“In volatile hydrocarbons the Little Eiver seam compares
unfavourably with the majority of New South Wales coals. The
coal would, therefore, in its present state be not very suitable for
gas-making. It must be remembered, however, that our sample
is from the surface, and that at a depth the volatile matter will
increase, and the ash proportionately diminish. On the other hand,
the Little Eiver seam contains a very high proportion of fixed
carbon. It is only excelled in this respect by two of the seams
(Mount Keira and Mount Kembla) in Mr. Liversidge’s list. As
it stands, it will take a high place among coals for steam and
smelting purposes, and some improvement may be reckoned on as
the seam is worked away from its outcrop. . . The occurrence
of glossopteris, the characteristic fossil of the New South Wales
and Bowen Eiver coal fields, indicates that the Little Eiver coal
field is of Palaeozoic age. Only a small proportion of the coal
seams is exposed by the river and a few gullies, and I have no
doubt that many more remain to be discovered. The presence of
iron-stones among the coal seams must be kept in view, as this


circumstance will probably influence in the most important manner
the future prosperity of the field.”
Within the last dozen years the Government has fitted out,
wholly or in part, several expeditions for the purpose of prospecting
for minerals and for opening up the northern coast country. Most
of these have effected much good, either in the establishment of
permanent mineral fields, such as the Palmer and Herberton, or in
the discovery of fine sugar lands on the coast north of Cardwell.
In one of these expeditions, undertaken by the late Mr. G. Elphin-
stone Dalrymple, with the object of ascertaining how far the rivers
were navigable between Cardwell and the Endeavour River, he
explored and reported on the soil and vegetation of the Mourilyan
Harbour district, and perhaps I may be pardoned for making a
short digression to instance the rapid development of the Northern
country. In his report to the Government, Mr. Dalrymple says ;
“ The hills around Mourilyan Harbour possess a richness of
soil, a denseness of jungle, and a general gradient slope which
will render them very valuable for coffee plantations. The un-
initiated in this industry are of opinion that any good soil, with
even plains or open forest upon it, will grow coffee; but the prac-
tical planter knows that it can only be carried on profitably in the
rich vegetable loams (mixed with the detritus of volcanic tuffs,
limestone, or schists, granites, &c.) only found in virgin forests,
such as those of the central mountain zones of Ceylon, Java, or
Jamaica. I consider that the coffee lands of the N.E. coast of
Queensland, which we have just explored, are quite equal to any
of these, and I believe that climatic influences will tend to the pro-
duction of a berry of very superior quality and value.” Further
on, when describing the country seen from Observation Hill, on
the watershed ridge between the South Johnstone and Mourilyan
Harbour, he adds that “ at a rough computation not less than half
a million of acres of a soil unsurpassed by any in the world—all
fitted for tropical agriculture, and fully 300,000 acres of which are
suitable for sugar—spread far around us, penetrated in three differ-
ent directions by navigable rivers, with a fine harbour and river
estuary visible on its seaboard.”
Such is a short account of an exploration undertaken only ten
years ago, of a country then occupied entirely by the aborigines.
Contrast it with the Mourilyan Harbour of to-day ! The Toivns-
ville Bulletin , from which I have taken the following paragraph,
says : “ Messrs. Ross and Alderton, contractors for the construction
of the tramway from Mourilyan Harbour Sugar Company’s estates


to the Johnstone River, have now commenced operations, having
between 140 and 150 men employed. At present the men are
engaged clearing a track a chain wide through the scrub, which is
very dense, and getting sleepers, timber for which is abundant.
Of the timber growing in the neighbourhood, three or four descrip-
tions have been approved for this purpose, so that the contractors
are relieved of any anxiety upon the score of getting a sufficient
quantity. The length of tramway will be seven miles, and as the
country is nearly level, it is expected that in four months the line
will be ready for the locomotive which the Company are now
landing. Work has been commenced at the Mourilyan Harbour
jetty, where there is every facility for landing the plant requisite to
carry on operations. The jetty is a fine structure 187 ft. in length,
terminating in water about 16 ft. or 17 ft. deep at low tides, where
vessels of large draught can lay alongside in perfect safety.”
The result of this exploration has fully justified the expense
incurred for it, as the report from which I have quoted gave such
an excellent account of the cedar forests on these Northern rivers
that foreign capital was introduced into the Colony, and large sums
were expended in the cedar industry. The cedar-getters acted as
pioneers for the planters, who have selected land in large quantities,
and are developing—as I have just shown—the sugar industry.
When the question of labour for the cane fields, which has been
lately agitating the Colony, is satisfactorily settled, much more
of the valuable areas on the Mourilyan Harbour, and on the
Mulgrave, Russell, Daintree, and Mosman rivers, will be put under
cultivation, and help to swell the importance of these Northern
towns.
I have thus far hastily sketched the localities of the principal
minerals, and it will be as well now to say a few words about the
regulations under which mining operations are carried on.
The management of the gold fields is regulated by the Gold Fields
Act of 1874, which provides for the taking possession of and
occupying Crown lands for mining purposes by means of a miner’s
right, by payment of an annual fee of ten shillings. This entitles
the holder in a proclaimed gold field to an ordinary claim in allu-
vial ground of 50 ft. by 50, and in a quartz reef 50 ft. along the
line of reef by a width of 400 ft. Larger areas are granted as
reward claims ” for the discovery of gold in apparently payable
quantities on any new reef, the extent being determined by its
distance from the nearest gold workings. For instance, if it is
under a mile, 150 ft. by 400 ft. is granted to each miner in addition


to an ordinary claim ; and if it were ten miles distant or more the
area is 500 ft. by 400 ft.
Gold leases, not exceeding an area of twenty-five acres, can be
obtained by paying an annual fee of £1 an acre, and complying with
certain labour conditions.
The mining for minerals other than gold, is regulated by an
Act called the “ Mineral Lands Act of 1882,” which repealed the
previous Act of 1872 ; the chief point of difference between them
being that the purchasing power of the old Act is abolished, and
that mineral lands can now only be obtained from the Crown under
mining leases for twenty-one years, renewable for a further term
of twenty-one years on such conditions as the Minister deems
equitable, at a yearly rent of ten shillings an acre. The maximum
area for each lease has been reduced from 640 to 160 acres. When
gold is found associated or combined with any other mineral or
metal in land under a mining lease, and the nature of the mining
operations is such as to lead to the extraction of such gold, the
royalty fixed by the Act to be paid to the Government is 1 per
centum of the value of the gold extracted.
The conditions, reservations, and covenants of a lease for
mining for tin, copper, &c., are—
1. A reservation of all gold found in the land comprised in the
lease.
2. A covenant by the lessee to pay rent at the prescribed time.
3. A condition of the forfeiture of the lease on non-payment of
rent for thirty days after it accrues due.
4. Such other conditions, not inconsistent with the Act, as may
be prescribed.
6. A covenant on the part of the lessee to work the mine
continuously and bond fide, in accordance with the regulations.
6. A condition for the forfeiture of the lease on failure to
perform such covenant.
The regulations applicable to the lease must be written or
printed on it, and cannot be altered without the consent of the
Ministers of the Crown and the lessee.
Before the present Act was passed, some 55,000 acres of
mineral lands had passed in fee-simple from the Crown, of which
only about 2,000 were worked. It was thus apparent that the
land had been acquired for speculative purposes, with the object of
holding until capitalists should buy at greatly advanced prices.
As this was injurious to the true interests of the Colony, the
Legislature repealed the Act of 1872, preventing the further


alienation of mineral lands of the Crown, and substituting a power
to lease under the conditions stated, thus placing the mining for
tin, copper, silver, and other minerals on the same footing as gold
mining.
I cannot refrain from expressing my opinion here that the
present Mineral Lands Act will prove to he a wise measure for
securing the future prosperity of the mining industry of this
young country. The Government, by remaining landlord of the
mineral lands, will be careful not to impose regulations of a
character to check the industry, knowing that its prosperity forms
a large factor in that of the whole Colony. A lessee will be able,
therefore, to expend his capital with the assurance that, on the
expiration of twenty-one years, he will be able to obtain a
renewal of the lease for a similar period on equitable terms.
The main feature of the Bill requires that a lease should be syste-
matically and continuously worked, and a failure to do this, with-
out sufficient cause, renders it liable to forfeiture, and to revert to
the Crown. It is then in a position to be reapplied for by the
first person willing to comply with the conditions, so that the
natural wealth of the country cannot remain undeveloped in the
same way that it could, and probably would do, if privately owned.
Not long ago the attention of the Government was directed to
the immense number of mining casualties in proportion to the
number of miners engaged, and as the risks were increasing with the
deepening of the works, it became necessary to legislate on the ques-
tion. An Act called the Mines Regulation Act was passed giving
power to an officer to inspect machinery and underground workings,
and so lessen, as much as possible, the dangers arising from defec-
tive machinery and incapable management. Even with this needful
supervision accidents are numerous, and arise from many causes.
Some are occasioned by water suddenly flooding the mines, and
drowning the men engaged in the lower levels—a sad case of
which I recollect some years ago at Charters Towers; some by
heavy falls of earth, some in drilling and blasting, and others by
accidents in going up and down the shafts. Bearing duly in mind
all the risks attaching to the every-day life of a miner, it is only
right that the Government should insist upon the adoption of the
most scientific plans and the use of the best mechanical power to
avert as far as possible the dangers I have just mentioned. lam
glad to be able to say that, from the last report of the Inspector of
Mines, the number of accidents per 1,000 men employed has been
considerably lessened by the operation of the Act.


While admitting, in conclusion, that great credit is due to the
miner for his pluck in opening out new fields by dint of manual labour
and much privation, I have endeavoured to give prominent notice
to the opinions of scientific men as to the best localities for minerals,
and the means required for testing the nature of the ground as a
starting point for those anxious for further investigation. Though
it is interesting to know the past history of each field, yet it is of
far greater importance that the advantages which science offers, in
indicating the course for future operations, should be kept well in
view, so as to prevent any waste of capital. I have no doubt
that, as railways are extended to the several districts which I have
mentioned, many of the mines which are now lying idle, or only
partially worked, will be developed to a greater extent than they
have ever been before ; and new discoveries will be made, which
will tend to increase materially the mineral productions of the
Colony.
We frequently hear of investments by English capitalists in the
mines of Nevada, Colorado, and other territories of the United
States, and in the semi-barbarous Republic of Mexico. I would,
therefore, ask those who are seeking an outlet for their capital
to turn their attention to the Colony of Queensland, where, I can
confidently assert, are to be found all the essentials for profitable
investment in mining industries. The climate is healthy for
Europeans, and the mining laws —framed upon the experience of
older countries, and administered by capable and impartial officers
—are a guarantee alike to the capitalist and the operative miner
that their investments and the fruits of their industry are as well
protected as they could be in the United Kingdom. With these
advantages, and with the knowledge, too, that the Colony is literally
teeming with valuable minerals of all kinds, the time cannot be far
distant when the treasures which Nature has so bountifully
supplied to one of the fairest of Her Majesty’s possessions, will be
recognised here as they are already recognised there. There can be,
I think, no reasonable room for doubt, that Queensland will occupy
a very high position in the future history of the mining world.
Discussion.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, K.C.M.G.: I did not expect to be called
upon to-night to discuss a paper of this importance, and which I
have now heard or seen for the first time. I must take the liberty
of congratulating Mr. Dicken upon the very clear account he has
given us of the position of mining matters in Queensland. I know


Mr. Dicken well from his official career in Queensland, and I know
that no man had a better opportunity of ascertaining matters, so far
as gold mining is concerned, than he had. The information given
to-night with regard to other minerals is carefully culled from the
researches of the various geologists in Queensland. It is of a very
valuable character, and has been very well put before the meeting.
Mr. Dicken has mentioned a name which is worthy of honour by
this Institute—the name of a man who has done as much for
Queensland as, perhaps, any man who ever went out there. He is
a modest man—a man whose name does not come often before the
public except at the foot of his own reports—l mean Mr. Eobert
Jack, the Queensland Government geologist. Very much of the
information Mr. Dicken has given us is gathered from the researches
of Mr. Jack, and is thoroughly reliable. Mr. Dicken has referred
to legislation with regard to the mines of the Colony within the
last two years. It has always been a matter of considerable diffi-
culty in the Colony to legislate on the mineral question. Our land
question is the great bug-bear; but next to that, and intimately con-
nected with it, is the mineral question. It is recognised as a prin-
ciple in all the Colonies that gold-bearing lands should not be
alienated by the State, so as to give the greatest opportunities to
the gold miners of the Colony to work unimpeded by any rights of
private ownership. But other counsels prevailed with regard to
other minerals—tin, silver, copper, &c. The principle on which
these lands were dealt with by the Crown was, up to eighteen
months ago, that of pure alienation—that is, men were encouraged
to go out and prospect for different minerals; they selected their lands ;
performed certain conditions, which were mostly formal, and the land
became private property. This system gave rise to great evils,
and considerably retarded mining in Queensland. For instance,
Mr. Dicken mentioned the prospects of the Cloncurry copper mines.
I remember these lands some fifteen years ago, when they became
private property under the old Act; but if the land had not been
alienated and stringent conditions of working them had been the
law at the time, I have no doubt the mines would have been working
years ago. There are plenty of men in the world who can afford to
lay out ss. or 10s. or an acre on large areas of fairly-promising
mineral land, and to keep it unused on the chance of something
good turning up. They cannot lose much, because the population
of the Colony is constantly increasing, and the land, for its ordinary
agricultural and pastoral qualities, is soon worth what was given
for its mineral. The consequence was that until lately great areas


of mineral lands have been locked up. This state of things was
altered in 1882 by the Mineral Lands Act, by which the right to
purchase mineral lands was abolished, and leases substituted, cer-
tain conditions of working being attached. If such lands are not
worked, or sufficient reasons for not working are not given, the land
reverts to the Crown, and others can step in and work the land.
Let me make one remark as to the condition of gold mining in Queens-
land. As a rule, the gold miner in the northern parts of Queensland
spends his money as fast as he gets it, and by the time he reaches
the water, and capital is necessary to prosecute mining operations
deeper, he is without the capital necessary to proceed. Hundreds
of reefs have in this way been abandoned in the Palmer and Hodg-
kinson and Etheridge when yielding gold richly, and lie now await-
ing the erection of machinery by the capitalist. No finer field for the
investment of capital exists in Queensland than in developing proved
reefs of our northern gold fields. As population goes north, these
fields are attracting capital. Now machinery is being got ready, and I
have no doubt they will be worked with results which have not been
equalled by anything we have had in Victoria for the last fifteen
years. Mr. Dicken has referred to another mining district, which has
attracted a great deal of attention—that of the Herberton tin mines.
It is about as wonderful as anything I have seen. Situated as it is
about the 19th parallel, one would expect so far in the tropics that
there would be tropical weather, but I have travelled there in the
month of December with my coat on, in the daytime, which is a
proof of tolerable weather. Around the township, near Herberton,
the land consists of high hills and ridges, rich in mineral wealth,
now being worked. Going east, towards the coast, in about six
miles the character of the country suddenly changes, and the road
enters on some of the richest land I have seen in any part of the
globe, which has, in addition, the finest climate, reminding one of
the climate of the west of Scotland. It is, moreover, well watered,
and I have not the slightest doubt we shall see there a large
European population. I refer thus particularly to the climate,
because it seems absurd at first to invite European settlers when
w T e are told of sugar plantations in the immediate neighbourhood.
The coast land is essentially sugar land. Ido not believe it could
be worked by any but blacks. But ascending the ridges, you come to
a fertile soil, and a climate suitable to a British population. With
regard to what will be one of the most important features in the
mineral resources of Queensland, viz., coal, Mr, Dicken did not, I
think, give sufficient attention to the wonderful supply we have on


the Darling Downs and elsewhere. I had a report before I left—
and myself saw the coal—of a boring on the Darling Downs 28 feet
through solid coal without a break in it. I believe this is equalled
in some places but not surpassed. I believe the whole of the Dar-
ling Downs is one vast coal-bed. Coal has long been got all along
the railway line from Toowoomba West, in seams 3 or 4 feet thick ;
but lately, especially in the western part of the Downs, seams 7 and
8 feet thick have been found within 80 feet of the surface. This coal
is hard, and bears transportation without breaking up. This will
solve a question which has been a difficulty with us for some time.
The coal hitherto has been as good chemically as that found in New-
castle. (New South Wales), but more friable and difficult to burn by
steamers on the coast. This coal on the Darling Downs possesses all
the qualities of Newcastle coal, and is, at the same time, hard. I have
no doubt we shall soon be taking coal to the east coast for the use
of steamers there. In conclusion, I,would say that the paper we
have heard is an excellent one, and I am only sorry I had not the
opportunity of perusing it before I came, so that I might have been
prepared to deal with it more carefully.
Mr. Thomas Aecher, C.M.G., Agent-General for Queensland:
With regard to the subject-matter of the able paper that has just
been read Ido not desire to say a word; the subject has been so
completely exhausted by Mr. Dicken and by Sir Thomas Mcllwraith,
who have spoken from practical experience—of which I have none
—that it is unnecessary for me to add anything. But, with your
permission, Mr. Chairman, I will follow in your tracks—you know
what is meant by following in one’s tracks. You said you are one
of the oldest squatters resident in this country, and I am not sure
you are not the oldest in the world. I believe you are. I was not
very long after you, to follow in your tracks over the road which
you discovered and opened from Eton Yale—one of the most lovely
places on earth—to Brisbane. It was one of the worst roads I ever
travelled, and I have travelled a good many bad roads in Australia
and the backwoods of America. Never shall I forget my feelings
and those of my party when our waggon capsized on one of
your beautiful sidings, and our property —boxes, bags, desks, tea,
sugar, and tobacco —went tumbling down the steep incline to the
bottom of the gully; nor shall I forget our sensations on having
to carry them up again in a broiling-hot sun. That was on the
celebrated road called Hodgson’s Gap, originally connecting the
district of Darling Downs with Brisbane. People who could travel
on such a road showed a great deal of energy. But to quit this


digression, and come to subjects of more interest. It is strange
that those enormous mineral riches should have laid in the country
so long undeveloped, and how difficult it is to persuade the powers
that be to see what an amount of time they have lost, and are losing,
in bringing such riches to light. That country which was ten years
ago a barren wilderness, comparatively speaking, but where these
riches were lying unknown and unsuspected, is now teeming with
a population producing millions of wealth, and diffusing happiness
and prosperity, not only in a large proportion of the Colonies, but,
indirectly, through the Empire. And yet the powers that be at
home here cannot be induced to open their hands and take these
good things, and we are obliged to go on our knees to induce them
to take possession of what would be the nucleus of prosperity and
greatness to those who come after us. If the sentiments that are
so fashionable now at home among a certain party—l won’t say
they are universal in that party, but they certainly prevail among
some who have more influence in high quarters than they ought to
have—if those sentiments had prevailed in the time of our grand-
fathers, I would like to know what this country would have been
now. We should have had no Colonies to speak of in the Southern
hemisphere, and should not have been worthy of having any. The
Empire would have been confined to the old countries at home
and to Canada; and our Australasian Colonies would have been a
waste, as they mostly were fifty years ago, or would have been lost
to the Empire. But our grandfathers were too enterprising to
entertain such sentiments. They left them to our grandmothers.
But as women’s rights were not known in those days, they had not
much influence. I think I see some evidences that the doctrine
preached by the party to which I alluded is giving way to a more
enterprising spirit, which is showing itself in the councils of those
who sit in high places. That that spirit will continue to develop
as time goes on is my sincere wish, and is the wish, I am certain, of
the ladies and gentlemen who are now listening to me. Ido not
think there will be any lack of enterprise on the part of the colo-
nists ; they will do their share in the future as in the past in developing
the resources of these new countries, and I hope that those who
influence the councils of the nation will back them up, and see that
full justice is done to the exertions of those on the other side of the
world who are doing all in their power to make this great Empire
still greater.
Lieut.-Colonel E. R. Drury : I take it that the object Mr. Dicken
had in view in preparing his valuable paper was to show the people


of this country what a splendid field for investment there is in the
Colony of Queensland, and to direct their attention to the mineral
resources of the Colony. The mining industry is of course attended
with risks, as many of you know—colonists especially; but the
mining resources of Queensland have been so well tested that those
risks can very fairly be appreciated. The great thing to know is
whether the colonists themselves have a high opinion of their
mines, and whether, to use a common expression, they back their
opinion. I think in the Colony of Queensland it may he shown
that the opinion we entertain has been hacked by a whole com-
munity. Four railways, three of which are now constructed, and
one of which is in course of construction, have been projected for
the purpose of developing mining districts. The first railway, I
may mention, is from the seaport of Maryborough to the Gympie
gold-field. I daresay there are some Queenslanders present who
will remember what a poor opinion we had of that railway at first.
It was said this railway would never pay, that the passenger traffic
would amount to about 2J passengers on an average a day,
which is not large, and that the freight could be carried down in a
guard’s van. This railway is now one of the best-paying lines in
the Colony, with a very large passenger and goods traffic, and has,
no doubt, contributed in a high degree to the prosperity of Gympie.
Farther on, a railway was constructed by the Queensland Govern-
ment to Mount Perry—the centre of a very large, but little known,
mining district. Mr. Dicken has given prominence to his first love
—Northern Queensland—but the Government have taken each
district in turn, gradually working north. Then, again, we have
built a line, which was really constructed for the purpose of develop-
ing the gold fields around Charters Towers and Ravenswood. You
have heard to-night what wonderful results have been obtained at
Charters Towers. There is a fourth railway to a mining district,
and I see the contract has been taken for the first thirty miles, from
Cooktown towards the Palmer river. All this shows that the com-
munity, through their Government, thoroughly believe in the
mineral resources of the country. They have, in fact, borrowed
millions in this country to carry out a railway policy which is
based, to a large’ extent, on their belief in the mineral as well as
the pastoral resources of the Colony. We have backed our opinions.
The question of railway policy in Queensland is a national ques-
tion. As to the method on which railways should be carried out,
there are great differences of opinion, as Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
knows ; and it is probably owing to these differences that we have


the pleasure of seeing him here to-night. Perhaps his opinions
will rule some day, perhaps they will not. I need scarcely say that
it would be as well to look into things closely before you go into
mining ventures in Queensland or elsewhere. No doubt bad things
will be offered occasionally. We are a highly virtuous community
on the whole, but there may be some shady individuals amongst us.
I merely add as a word of caution to Englishmen who invest in
mines in Australia or elsewhere, that they should see that they are
associated with men who have a stake in the country—men who
have a character and something to lose.
Mr. J. Bonwick : At the meetings of this Institute we have had
papers dealing with political questions and broad questions of
policy, and we have had debates which have excited our enthusiasm.
To-night we have had a paper devoted to a very prosaic, practical
question, and very admirably has the reader dealt with it. Allow
me to supply a little deficiency. He did not say a word about
what is really very interesting to us English people—the subject of
iron. That the matter will come to the front in Australia there
can be no doubt. Our friends in New South Wales have already
determined to bring the question to the front, and we ought to be
proud to find they have the enterprise to develop their own iron.
Queensland has an abundance of all kinds of iron ore, &c. There
is one place where there is the largest deposit of chrome iron ore
in the whole world. That this will be utilised some day there can
be no doubt. In the immediate vicinity you have excellent coal
and lime. The paper referred to the Mineral Act of 1882. Let
credit be given to Sir T, Mcllwraith for his initiation and carriage
of that important measure. I have seen some of the coal to which
he has referred on the Darling Downs. I took a piece of the
cannel coal, which blazed away just like a match. There are two
sorts of coal. The true coal is that which New South Wales
possesses in such abundance, and one of the chief elements in the
future prosperity of the Colony lies in her Newcastle coal. Queens-
land has as good coal as that, and of the true Palaeozoic age. She
has not one patch alone, but several enormous carboniferous areas.
At Bogantunga I fell in with a squatter from the far western in-
terior (I allude to this as having reference to the great copper and
gold district of Cloncurry), who told me he was sinking for water,
and, at a distance of 100 feet, came upon a seam of coal. When,
some ten years ago, the late Mr. Richard Daintree—to whom we
are so much indebted for our geological knowledge of Queensland —
when he prepared the map now on the wall before us, very little


comparatively was known as to the extent of our coal supply. It
was known to be on one side of this great dividing range, but on
the other side it was not then supposed to exist. Queensland is
very much like New South Wales and Victoria —one great mineral
district—but differs from the other two Colonies in having vast
deposits of a cretaceous order, covering older formations, which
here and there raise their heads as islands in the cretaceous sea.
As Cloncurry thus presents its gold and copper rocks of enormous
value, so are there scattered all over this great western country
islands of rich mineral weath. Another thing which the lecturer
omitted to mention is, that we are really rich in Queensland in the
possession of those beautiful brilliants that the ladies so much
admire—garnets, sapphires, topazes, and diamonds. We have
just heard of a gentleman having a patch of diamond country
in New South Wales, from which he has obtained during the
last twelve months 4,000 diamonds. These facts are not
to be despised. But tin is the great feature of the country.
Up in the rich north you find men working 3,000 feet above
the level of the sea. You may have been astonished when
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith told you of the wheat growing in
these tropical latitudes, and of the country being habitable by
Englishmen ; but, knowing the great elevation, you will understand
how that can be. It should be remembered that for £1 worth of
wool there is very much less labour required and paid for than for
£1 worth of minerals. I recognise fully how much we are indebted
to the energy and the enterprise of the squatter in the development
of the country, but we are even more indebted to the miner. What
was South Australia but in a state of insolvency before the dis-
covery of copper ? What was Victoria before the development of
the gold-fields ? What was New South Wales even before the gold
era ? How wonderfully these Colonies have awakened under the
influence of such discoveries. The mining question is of the
utmost importance. Mines develop commerce; they bring popu-
lation and a demand for farms ; they originate towns, with all the
high civilisation attending them ; and let me add that to the miner
we in Australia owe, more than to any other class, that broad,
healthful freedom which makes Australia fit to be the home of
Englishmen.
Mr, W. Pritchard Morgan, F.R.G.S.: At this late hour I will
not take up the time of the meeting by going over the same ground
as that travelled by previous speakers. Having spent some twenty
years in the Colony—the last ten in the north—l can fully corro-


borate the statements made by the reader of the paper. I believe
the Colony has a bright future before her—l am speaking of the
near future—which will perhaps astonish this side of the world.
At Herberton, a district which I visited some eighteen months ago,
there can be seen, within an area of ground not larger than that
covered by Westminster Abbey, a perfect network of lodes—copper,
iron, silver, tin, and gold—all interspersed the one with the other.
It is really a marvel. Charters Towers, where I reside, is the
premier gold-field of the Colony, and there is perhaps no gold-field
in Australia at the present time that will bear comparison with it.
Every miner who gets £8 a week produces £i 2s. 6d. worth of gold,
which proves that gold mining in northern Queensland is not a
speculation, but an industry paying a large percentage on the
outlay. This being so, gold mining can fairly be considered an
industry deserving the investment of capital, and should not be
looked upon as a mere speculation. We hear of plenty of people
making large sums unexpectedly in a short space of time, and of
others losing them in an equally short time. A mine of which Mr.
Dicken spoke is a good example of that. It was originally given
away by Mr. Hugh Mosman ; it then passed through several hands,
and the shares sold at £lO or £l2 each, but this mine is now one
of the finest gold mines in the world. I would remind you that in
Queensland titles are indefeasible, that the administration is carried
on with the integrity which usually characterises Englishmen, and
that everything, in fact, is fair and square; and under these cir-
cumstances I see, as I have said, a great future for Queensland.
We know that people invest large sums of money in gold mining in
places like the Transvaal and Gold Coast, where they have to get,
perhaps, half a dozen titles from different chiefs, and where the
land changes hands with every petty civil war. In Queensland
there is nothing of that sort to contend against. The titles are
perfect, and the interests of investors in every way protected.
Mr, H. Kimber : I cannot pretend to add much to the stock of
information which has been given us by the previous speakers, who
are all Queenslanders, but as an Englander, so to speak, who has
visited Queensland a year ago, I may be allowed to state some
impressions made on the mind of one hailing straight from London.
No man has a right, I think, to draw too absolute conclusions
regarding a country unless he has spent at least the four seasons
there, and I spent only some two months in Queensland. In
September, the year before last, I found myself in Brisbane, and
made the acquaintance of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, a man who,


especially in a Colonial age, may be considered a representative
man. Accompanied by him, I made what may fairly be called a
fine yachting excursion, though in the regular steamers, along the
coast, the scenery of which in some parts equals that of the Kyles
of Bute in our own bonny Scotland. A week up the coast landed
us at Cooktown ; thence we went through the bush, crossing the
beds of several rivers, and over some ranges, for about 140 miles,
partly driving and partly on horseback, and at length found our-
selves on the Palmer Eiver, of which you have heard to-night. We
there saw the gold diggings. lam not a mining expert, although
I have seen a good many mines in different parts of Europe ; but
I am able to vouch for the presence of readily-obtainable alluvial
gold in the river, and some most interesting quartz mines and
diggings, which had been dug by working miners who had burst
into the bowels of the earth with scarcely more than pick and
shovel, until they came to water, and were stopped for want of
machinery. Gold was visible in considerable quantities. We were
told it yielded 2J ozs. to the ton. We crossed from the Palmer by
Cannibal’s Creek, four days more through the bush (entirely pri-
meval country), on horseback, to Thornborough, on the Hodgkinson
River, a little to the south, and there saw a number of other mines
—some tin and some gold. Thence on again, over the Granite
Range at Herberton, to the Gulf Watershed (Carpentaria). Passing
from the mines, I will tell you what sort of a climate we passed
through—for the first thing we are sure to ask ourselves of a new
country is, what is it like to live in ? lam bound to say that
Herberton, just on the ridge that divides the Gulf Watershed from
the Eastern Watershed, although only about 15° under the
Equator, possesses an admirable climate, and is one of the most
favoured places to live in in the whole world. Comparing the
temperature with that at Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane, I
would decidedly prefer these upper regions. The air is light, and
from 10 o’clock till evening there are pleasant breezes. It is
disagreeable for an hour about breakfast time, being exceedingly
sultry ; but this passes away, and perhaps the disagreeable feeling
may be due to improper digestion, for it did seem to me that the
pe >ple ate a great deal more animal food than was good for them.
The settlers are as good specimens of Englishmen as you could
wish and expect and exceedingly hearty and kind. When we
speak of the population of a Colony we must recollect that 100,000
people there equal more than 100,000 in these islands ; for when
a man goes out as a settler be goes a grown man, and perhaps


takes some grown-up members of his family; but here an equal
number of people would include a large proportion of young, or
helpless, or aged. From Herberton we came back 85 miles to the
coast at Port Douglas, and came south again, calling at the dif-
ferent ports, all rising into fine towns. I also went into the back
of the country in the south, across the Darling Downs. I cannot
better describe this part of the country than as a great rolling sea
of land, comparable to the great Atlantic, rolling a little and taking
it easy away to the horizon. We saw ample evidence of coal, and
although, as I have said, I am not an expert, yet the specimens
which I saw seemed to me to resemble nothing so much as the
cannel coal of Scotland. On these Downs, too, we saw many wind-
mills, an improvement on the American plan, used for drawing
water automatically for drinking purposes, and for sheep and
cattle. The thought occurred to me, “ Will this country ever be
an agricultural country? There are no great rivers constantly
running through it. Where is the water ?” It seems to me that
Nature must have provided everything necessary for every place,
and I answer my question with the reflection and belief that there
are under these great rolling Downs ample stores of water, which
only require power to bring them to the surface, and that this power
exists there also in the shape of vast measures of coal, to be con-
verted by the industry of man. The rivers when in flood run their
waters to waste, for want of attention of mankind to the command
of their Maker, to spread over the world, and to be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth. Many more interesting things
crowd on the mind to say, but the lateness of the hour forbids me
to intrude upon you further. I strongly recommend to all the
perusal of Professor Seeley’s book on “ The Expansion of England”
for a larger-minded view of our Colonial Empire than, unfortunately,
many of our rulers seem able to take.
The Chairman : I think we will now, with your permission,
bring this very interesting discussion to a close. I would like to
say one or two words in answer to what fell from Mr. Bonwick.
As you gathered from my opening address, I have been upwards of
forty years in Australia. During the whole of that time I never
knew the slightest feeling of antipathy between the squatter and
the miner, and although I am no longer a squatter (because every
inch I own in Queen>land has been purchased from the Crown), I
think you will agree with me that the squatters were the veritable
pioneers in that country. They were the men who, with great
pluck, energy, and perseverance, pushed their way into the distant


interior. They developed the country, and the miners assisted to
develop the country alter them. That is the real position of atfairs.
Ido not for one moment wish to find fault with the miner. I
admire him, I respect him, but you must not forget the squatter.
I see a number of young men present. lam glad also to see so
many ladies. Perhaps some of the young men have come doubting
whether to leave this overcrowded country, and seek their fortunes
in the charming Australian colony of Queensland, which has been
so admirably depicted to-night. I say to them, Do not hesitate
any longer, but pack up and be off. You see here a happy and
prosperous man —a man who went out at the early age of twenty,
alone, unprotected, and with a very few hundreds in his pocket, and
who owes all his prosperity in that country to an early and happy
marriage. Having said these few words, I will ask you to join
me in according a cordial vote of thanks to Mr. Dicken for his
admirable and instructive paper.
Mr. Kimber seconded the motion, which was cordially agreed to.
Mr. Dicken : I thank you very much for your kind reception,
I was diffident in bringing the subject before you, but I think, after
the discussion we have had this evening, you will all agree that the
subject of minerals is one of some importance, not only to Queens-
land, but to all Australia, The object of this Institute is to dis-
seminate information, and I only hope those who may have
occasion to read this paper and the discussion will gain some in-
formation, and if they do my object will have been attained. I
thank you very much for the kind attention you have given to the
paper. Perhaps you will allow me, on behalf of the meeting, to
accord your best thanks to Mr. Hodgson, for his kindness in taking
the chair this evening.
The Chairman : I am much obliged, ladies and gentlemen.
LNWIN BEOIHKES, PRINTERS, LITTLE BEIDGE-STBEET, 71a, LUDGATF. HILL, E.C.








