

Notified in
Army Orders for
September
1937
26
Manuals
1674
Cavalry Training
(Mechanized)
Pamphlet No. 1—Armoured Cars
1937
(Reprinted with Amendment, 1939)
Crown Copyright Reserved
(Reprinted with the permission of the Controller, His Majesty's
Stationery Office, London)
P.1108
By Authority: McCarron, Bird & Co., 479 Collin, Street. Melbourne.


Amendment No. 1. A.C.l’s. April 1938.
(Embodied in this reprint.)


If
~BmS3S~
*fJ4
Notified in
Army Orders for
September
*937
Cavalry Training
(Mechanized)
Pamphlet No. I—Armoured Cars
1937
Crown Copyright Reserved
{Reprinted with the permission of the Controller, His Majesty's
Stationery Office, London).
P.IIOR
By Authority : McCarron, Bird & Co., 479 Collins Street, Melbourne.


By Command of the Army Council,.
[?]
The War Office,
30<A September, 1937.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I.—TRAINING
CHAPTER I
DRILL AND TRAINING
SEC. PAGE
1. The principles and system of training ... .. 1
2. Dismounted drill .. .. .. .. .. 2
3. Crew drill .. .. .. .. .. 2
4. Mounted drill .. 4
5. Training in field operations .. .. .. 12
PART lI.—WAR
CHAPTER II
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
6. Characteristics of armoured cars .. .. .. 16
7. Tasks of armoured cars .. .. .. .. 17
8. Tactical organization and maintenance .. .. 17
CHAPTER 111
RECONNAISSANCE
9. General .. 18
10. Strength and composition of reconnoitring detach-
ments .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
11. The leading of a reconnoitring detachment .. 19
12. The conduct of a reconnoitring detachment .. 20
13. The conduct of an armoured car patrol .. 21
14. Obtaining information .. .. .. 22
15. Transmission of information 22
16. Armoured cars in co-operation with other arms
employed on reconnaissance .. .. .. 23
17. Topographical reconnaissance .. .. .. 23
P. 1108.—2


CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION
SEC. PAGE
18. Protection on the move, when acting independently 25
19. Protection at rest .. .. .. .. .. 25
20. Protection from aircraft .. .. .. .. 26
21. Employment with advanced and flank guards .. 27
22. Employment with rear guards .. .. .. 27
23. Employment with outposts .. .. .. .. 28
24. Escorts 29
CHAPTER V
THE ATTACK
25. General principles .. .. .. .. 30
26. Fire tactics .. .. .. .. .. 31
27. Surprise action .. .. .. .. .. 31
28. Action when opposed .. .. .. .. .. 32
29. Action against hostile armoured fighting vehicles .. 33
30. Action after a successful attack .. .. 33
31. Co-operation in an attack by other troops .. .. 34
CHAPTER VI
OTHER OPERATIONS BY ARMOURED CARS
32. Raids .. .. .. .. .. 35
33. Pursuit .. .. .. .. 85
34. Holding a position .. .. .. 36
35. Negotiating obstacles.. .. .. .. .. 37
36. Operation in towns and villages .. 38
CHAPTER VII
OPERATIONS AGAINST UNDEVELOPED AND
SEMI-CIVILIZED ENEMIES
37. General.. .. .. .. 40
38. Mountain warfare .. .. 41
39. Patrolling in mountain warfare .. .. .. 42
40. Protective duties in mountain warfare .. 43
41. Conduct of raids .. . 44
42. Action against raiding parties .. .. 45
43. Perimeter camps .. .. .. .. .. 46


CHAPTER VIII
CO-OPERATION WITH AIRCRAFT AND ENGINEERS
SEC. PAGE
44. Co-operation with aircraft .. .. .. .. 48
45. Co-operation with engineers .. .. .. .. 51
CHAPTER IX
MARCHES
46. General considerations .. .. .. .. 53
APPENDIX
The maintenance organization .. .. .. 55


CAVALRY TRAINING-1937
SUPPLEMENT—ARMOURED CARS
PART I.—TRAINING
CHAPTER I
DRILL AND TRAINING
1. The principles and system of training
1. The principles and system of training will be as laid
down in Cavalry Training (Horsed), with certain modifications
which are suitable for armoured car regiments only and are
laid down in this chapter.
2. The basis of organization is the crew. Crews and such
other personnel as do not belong to the crew of an armoured
car are grouped into troops, troops into squadrons, and
squadrons into regiments.
3. The organization of the armoured car regiment is a$
follows; —
i. The regiment consists of regimental headquarters and
three squadrons. It is commanded by a lieutenant-
colonel with a major as second-in-command.
ii. The headquarters of the regiment consists of; —
Commanding officer.
Second-in-command.
Adjutant.
Technical officer.
Quarter-master.
Regimental serjeant-major.
Regimental quarter-master-serjeant.
Technical staff.
Orderly room staff and certain other personnel.
A troop of the Royal Corps of Signals is attached.
Regimental headquarters in war consists of two groups,
the command group and the administrative group. In peace
a third group is added containing the band.
iii. A squadron consists of headquarters and three troops.
It is commanded by a major or captain with a captain
as second-in-command.
The squadrons of a regiment are designated with
the letters A, B and C respectively.


iv. A troop consists of a headquarters car and two cars and
is commanded by a subaltern.
Troops are, numbered serially in each squadron.
v. A crew consists of the commander, normally a serjeant
or corporal, and three men.
2. Dismounted drill
The dismounted drill for squads, troops and squadrons of
armoured car regiments will be as laid down in the Manual
of Elementary Brill and Cavalry Training (Horsed).
3. Grew drill
1. General. —Crew drill lays down the general procedure
from the time the crews (dismounted) enter the car park.to the
time they leave it. It therefore all routine actions
whether in the car park, on the line of march or in action;
The duties of the individual members of the crew vary with
the typo of car and are laid down in the crew drill for the type
of car concerned. The general procedure is the same for all
types of cars.
The objects of crew drill are to ensure that the necessary
actions of the crew are carried out in an orderly and systematic
maimer and in the most rapid and efficient way.
The avoidance of accidents is the responsibility of the car
commander, who will at all times be held responsible for the
safety of his crew.
No man may enter or leave a car when it is in motion.
2. Drill before moving off. —The unit, on reaching the car
park, will be halted. The following orders will then be given,
all movements being carried out at the double :
i. Crews Front.
Each crew will be marched by its commander to its
car by the<shortest route.
It will be halted in front of the car facing the front,
and stood at ease.
ii. Inspect Maintenance and Armament.
The detail laid down in crew drill will be carried
out. The crews will then form *' Crews Front " and
stand at ease.
iii. Report.
This order will be given when all the crews have
formed “ Crews Front ” on completion of ii above.
Crew commanders will report to their troop leaders,
who in turn will report to the next senior.


iv. For Maintenance and Armament Inspection.
Take Post.
Should the troop or higher commander desire to
carry out an inspection, this order will be given.
Crews will then proceed as detailed in crew drill for
the car concerned.
Note. —When the positions for maintenance and
armament inspection are the same, the command will
be " For Inspection Take Post ”.
After inspection each crew will form " Crew Front ”
and stand at ease.
v. Start Up. Mount.
The crews will proceed as detailed in the crew drill
for the type of car concerned. When the engine is
running, members of the crew will move to their
“ Alert ” stations, and the crew commander will give
the “ Call Up ” to indicate that he is ready to move.
Note.—li only the command " Mount ” is given,
the crew will mount in their “ Alert ” stations. The
engine will not be started.
3. Drill in the field.
On the line of march. —On the line of march the following
otders may be given;—" Alert ”, “ March at Ease ”, “ Salute ”.
i. At halts. —
Halt.
Cars will close up, pull in to the rule of the road side and
halt at one car’s length.
Switch Off.
The driver switches off.
Crews Front.
Crews form “ Crews Front ”.
Note. —If “ Crews Front ” is given but not " Switch Off*’,
the engine will not be stopped, and the driver will not dismount.
Inspect Maintenance.
Crews will carry out the routine inspection as laid down in
the crew drill for their type of car.
Report.
Reports will be collected as in para. 2, iii, above. The
command " Fall Out ” may then be given. To move off the
command will be “ Crews Front ", “ Start up ’’, “ Mount".
On the latter command, crews will proceed as in para. 2, v.
above.


ii. At the last halt before action.
Inspect Maintenance and Armament.
At the last halt before action (or if action is imminent)
the armament will be inspected, if time permits, in addition
to the maintenance inspection. Crews will proceed as laid
down in the crew drill for their particular type of car, and will
remain at their action stations until further orders.
4. Dismissal after drill. —When each car arrives at its park-
ing place, the engine will be switched off, and the crew will
carry out the routine inspection laid down, form " Crew
Front " and stand at ease on completion.
Troop leaders will then collect reports (reporting to their
next senior as ordered), and will give the necessary' orders for
maintenance and care of arms, sheeting up, etc. When these
orders have been carried out by any crew, it will again form
“ Crew Front ” and stand at ease. Unless other orders are
given, each crew will then be marched from the car park
independently under its commander after the car has been
inspected by the troop leader.
4. Mounted drill
General
1. Mounted drill will be carried out by signal. It is based
on the same principles as that of cavalry. Cars, therefore,
will be interchangeable within the troop and troops within the
squadron, except that the troop leader's car will always
be located in the centre of his troop in any formation.
2. Steadiness of pace and direction are essential for the
rapid and smooth movements of armoured cars. These can
only be ensured by troop leaders maintaining a steady direc-
tion and pace. They must maintain the cohesion of their
own troop, keeping the correct distance from the directing
troop leader.
3. Pace.- —All drill, both on the move and from the halt,
unless otherwise ordered, will be carried out at ten miles an
hour, for which speed the distances and intervals are laid down.
Should it be required to drill at faster paces, distances and
intervals will be doubled.
It is essential that the pace should be kept constant, any
error being rectified gradually.
4. Distances and intervals. —Unless otherwise stated, the
normal distances and intervals between cars in the same troop


■will be 15 yards. The distances and intervals between troops
in the same squadron will be 45 yards, except when in line or
column.
Distances will be measured from the head of one car to the
head of the next; intervals from off-side wheel to off-side
wheel.
5. Direction. —ln line, the centre troop leader of a squadron
will be responsible for the direction of the squadron.
The directing troop leader, after ascertaining the exact
direction that his squadron commander wishes him to take,
will pick up his point and lead straight on to it. Other troop
leaders will conform.
All errors of direction must be corrected gradually and
quietly.
Each unit moves to its plhce in a new formation by the
shortest available route and in the simplest manner.
6. Dressing and covering. —At the halt, every car commander
should take the correct interval from his troop leader, face
exactly the same direction, and see that his car is square in
that direction.
On the move, car commanders will take a point to march
on, ensure that their cars travel at a smooth pace, and keep
their proper distance or interval from their troop leaders,
obtaining their dressing by occasionally glancing towards him.
7. Wheeling and turning. —( See Plate I, page 6.)
i. Ail wheels and turns, either from the halt or on the
move, will be made on a moving pivot.
ii. A car turns on an arc having a radius of 6 yards,
and gains 15 yards to a flank before being “ square ’’
in its new direction,
iii. Immediately on the command “Right Turn”
being given, all car commanders should take a quick
glance to the right and pick up a distant point so
situated as to be exactly at right angles to the
present line of advance. This point should be
taken as the point to march on when the turn is
completed.
Signals
8. Signals for all movements will be given by the following
flags:—
i. Yellow, black centre .. " Advance or Halt
ii. White, red diagonal .. " Retire ”.
iii. Blue and white check .. “ Rally ” or “ Follow
Me".


iv. Red, yellow cross .. .. “ Right ”.
v. Black and yellow quartered " Left
vi. Blue, white centre .. .. " Line ’’ ( see Note 1).
vii. White, blue centre .. " Line of Troop
Column
iii. Red pennant .. .. “ Column ”, or if al-
ready in Column—
“ Column of Troops
ix. Blue pennant .. .. " Squadron Column
x. Red pennant and blue with
white centre (two flags) .. “ Held up by opposi-
tion
Notes. —1. For troop leaders, the " Right ”or " Left ’’
flags shown alone will indicate a turn. For a
" wheel ", the " line " flag will be shown in
addition to the direction flag.
2. Each car must be in possession of all the flags,
with the exception of the " squadron column
flag”, which will be carried only by regi-
mental, squadron and troop leader cars.
9. Signals will be given as follows :
The squadron or higher commander will indicate what he
wishes to do by hoisting the necessary flag. Subordinate
commanders will hoist the appropriate flag for carrying out
the orders ; this may or may not be the same flag. Individual
cars will repeat any orders given by their leaders by hoisting
a similar flag, which -will indicate that they are ready to act.
When the leader sees that everybody has hoisted the
appropriate flag, he will give the final executive signal by
lowering his flag. This will be repeated by all.
Drill of a Troop
10. Drill formations of a troop. — (See Plate II.)
i. Line. —
Cars in line side by side.
13 yards’ interval between cars.
The frontage of a troop in line is 32 yards.
11. Column of route. —Cars in single file. Troop leader in
the centre. Nine yards’ distance between cars.
11. Position of iroop leader. —Both in line and column he
will be in the centre of his troop.
12. Decreasing front.
From line to column of route.


To face page 6.


To face page 7.


Form Column.
The troop leader advances, the left car inclines to the right
and accelerates, the right car inclines to the left and decelerates.
On reaching their correct position, the flank cars incline left
and right respectively and assume the normal speed.
13. Increasing front.
From column of route to line.
Form Troop.
The troop leader advances, the leading car inclines to the
left and decelerates, the rear car inclines to the right and
accelerates. On reaching their correct position, the flank cars
incline right and left respectively and assume the normal
speed.
14. Movements to a flanh. —
i. From line.
Troop Right (or Left) Wheel.
The troop begins to wheel, the inner car decelerating and
the outer car accelerating, the whole keeping in line with the
troop leader, who directs and maintains his speed.
ii. From line to column of route.
Column to the Right (or Left).
The troop leader gives the signal “ Cars Right (or Left)
Turn ", when each car will turn into its new direction in column
of route.
15. Movements to the rear. —Cars will never be reversed at
drill, except for very short distances to correct dressing or
covering when at the halt.
No formation will be wheeled about as a complete unit.
When such a change of direction is required, it will be
carried out by two orders from the troop leader constituting a
double flank movement.
Drill of a Squadron
16. Drill formations of a squadron. (See Plate III.)
i. Line. —Troops in line side by side. No extra intervals
between troops.
ii. Column of route. —Troops in column one behind the
the other at 9 yards’ distance. Squadron leader’s
car in front.
iii. Line of troop columns. —Troop columns with their
beads in line and at deploying interval unless other-
wise ordered. A useful formation for working over
rough or broken ground.


iv. Squadron column. —Troops each in line one behind
the other at such distance that, if they wheeled to
either hand, the squadron would be in line.
17. Position of squadron leader and squadron second-in-
command.—
i. On inspection parades when the squadron is in line, the
squadron leader’s place is in the centre of the squadron
with the tail of his car 9 yards ahead of the centre
troop leader’s car.
In column of route, he will be at the head of his
squadron.
ii. The squadron second-in-command will ride where he
can best'assist the squadron leader.
18. Pice. —When an order requiring an increase in front is
given, it will generally be necessary for the directing troop
leader to decrease the speed of his troop, while the remaining
troop leaders increase their speed.
On completion of the movement, the directing troop leader
will assume the normal speed.
When an order requiring a decrease of front is given, the
system will be reversed.
19. The march in line. —On the command or signal
"Advance", the whole squadron moves off together. The
squadron leader is responsible for direction and pace. All car
commanders, though looking principally to their front, should
regulate their direction and alignment by an occasional glance
to their troop leaders, who will direct themselves in relation
to the squadron leader.
20. Movements from line.
i. Formation of squadron column.
(а) To the front.
Form Squadron Column.
The centre troop advances, the left troop decelerates and
inclines to the right, the right troop decelerates and inclines
to the left, following in succession, and covering.
(б) To a flank.
Form Squadron Column to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give " Troops Right (or Left) Wheel ”.
ii. Formation of line of troop column.
(a) To the front.
Form Line of Troop Column.
Troop leaders give " Form Column ”.


{b) To a flank.
Form Line of Troop Column to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give “ Ca,s Right {or Left) Turn
The squadron is then in column.
The leading troop decreases the pace and the other two troops
increase the pace and incline to the left and right respectively.
iii. Formation of column of route.
{a) To the front.
Form Column.
Troop leaders give " Form Column ”.
The centre troop increases the pace and advances, the flank
troops decrease the pace and incline inwards, the left troop
preceding, follow and cover.
(6) To a flank.
Form Column of Route to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give “ Cars Right {or Left) Turn ”,
iv. Formation of line to a flank.
To be carried out as a double movement.
The squadron leader gives “ Form Squadron Column to
the Right (or Left) ” and, on completion of this movement,
“ Form Squadron.”
21. The march in squadron column.
The leading troop leader is responsible for pace and direction.
22. Movements from squadron column.
i. Formation of line.
(a) To the front.
Form Squadron.
The leading troop decreases the pace and advances.
Succeeding troops increase the pace and incline to the left
or right respectively.
(b) To a flank.
Form Line of Troop Column to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give “ Cars Right {or Left) Turn ”.
ii. Formation of column of route.
(а) To the front.
Form Column of Route.
Troop leaders give " Form Column
(б) To a flank.
Form Column of Route to the Right (or Left).
The leading troop leader gives “ Cars Right {or Left) Turn.”


Succeeding troops turn on the same ground as the leading
troop, follow and cover.
iii. Formation of squadron column to a flank.
To be carried out as a double movement.
The squadron leader gives “ Form Squadron to the Right
(or Left) ”, and, on completion of this movement, “ Form
Squadron Column
23. March in line of troop column.
The centre troop leader is responsible for pace and direction.
24. Movements from line of troop column.
i. Formation of line.
(a) To the front.
Form Squadron.
Troop leaders give " Form Troop
(b) To a flank.
Form Squadron to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give " Cars Right (or Left) Turn
The squadron is then in squadron column and the move-
ment is completed as in para. 22, i (a), above.
ii. Formation of squadron column ”.
(a) To the front.
Form Squadron Column.
Troop leaders give " Form Troop “.
The squadron is then in line and the movement is completed
as in para. 20, i (a).
(b) To a flank.
Form Squadron Column to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give " Cars Right (or Left) Turn ”
iii. Formation of column of route.
(a) To the front.
Form Column.
The centre troop increases the pace and advances, the flank
troops decrease the pace and incline inwards, cover and follow;
the left troop preceding the right.
(b) To a flank.
Form Column to the Right (or Left).
Heads of troops wheel right (or left).
iv. Formation of line of troop column to a flank.
To be carried out as a double movement.


The squadron leader gives “ Form Squadron Column to
the Right (or Left) ” and, on completion of this movement,
“ Form Line of Troop Column ”,
25. The march in column of route.
The leading troOp leader is responsible for pace and direction.
26. Movements from column of route.
i. Formation of squadron column.
(а) To the front.
Form Squadron Column.
Troop leaders give “ Form Troop ”.
(б) To a flank.
Form Squadron Column to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give " Cars Right {or Left) Turn ".
The squadron is then in line and the movement is completed
as in para. 20, i (a), above.
il. Formation 'of line of troop column.
(а) To the front.
Form Line of Troop Column.
The leading troop leader decreases the pace and advances,
the second and third troops increase the pace and incline to the
left and right respectively.
(б) To a flank.
Form Line of Troop Column to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give “ Cars Right {or Left) Turn
The squadron is then in line moving to the right (or left).
Troop leaders then give " Form Column ”.
iii. Formation of line.
(a) To the front.
Form Squadron.
Troop leaders give " Form Troop ”.
The squadron is then in squadron column and the move-
ment is completed as in para. 21, i (a) above.
{b) To a flank.
Form Squadron to the Right (or Left).
Troop leaders give " Cars Right {or Left) Turn ”
Drill of the Regiment
27. Posts and duties of officers. —At drill, the regiment
commander will be accompanied by the adjutant, who will
act as his assistant.
P. 1106.-3


The second-in-command will ride in a position from which
he can best assist in the conduct of the drill.
On inspection parade, the regiment commander’s car will
be in front of the centre of the line or leading body, 16 yards
in front of the leading squadron leader’s car.
28. Drill formations of the regiment. —The following are some
of the drill formations of the regiment
i. Line. —The squadrons, each in line, are side by side with
an interval of 45 yards between them.
ii. Column of squadrons. —The squadrons, each in line, are
. in column at such distance that, if squadrons should
be wheeled to either flank, the regiment will be in line.
iii. Line of squadron columns. —The squadrons, each in
squadron column, are at deploying interval plus 45
yards, so that, when each squadron forms line, the
regiment is in line.
29. Drill movements of the regiment. —The drill of the regi-
ment will conform as far as possible to the drill of a cavalry
regiment.
5. Training in field operations.
1. Methods of training. —Armoured car regiments must be
trained first in the tactics of their own arm, and next in the
tactics of the other arms with which they will co-operate.
They must study the methods of co-operation and learn how
to apply their knowledge to defeat the enemy.
The principles of training in field operations given in
Cavalry Training (Horsed) are, in general, applicable to
armoured car regiments.
2. Tasks of armoured cars. —-The chief characteristics of
armoured cars are given in Sec. 6. The principal tasks which
armoured car regiments will be called on to carry out in war,
and on which their training in peace will be based, are the
following;—
i. Reconnaissance. —The primary and most important
function of the armoured car regiment is reconnais-
sance, independently or in co-operation with other
formations.
ii. Protection. —Armoured cars can delay the enemy by
attacking the flank of his columns or by opposing their
heads directly. They can also be employed to seize
localities well in front or to the flank of the main body
of their own troops, but they are not suitable for hold-
ing positions for any length of time without the
assistance of other troops.


iii. Raids. —If circumstances justify the possible loss of
armoured cars, they may be used to carry out raids on
hostile vital centres or lines of communication.
iv. Escort duties. —Armoured cars may be employed to
escort bus columns or mechanical transport convoys.
3. Training of the individual. —Owing to the nature of their
duties, the responsibility for the direction and control of
armoured cars will frequently devolve on subordinate leaders.
It is therefore of the greatest importance that all leaders should
be trained :
i. to think quickly and make rapid decisions ; with this
object officers will be encouraged to hunt and ride
across country;
ii. to find their way in all types of country even when
moving at high speeds ; this necessitates a thorough
knowledge of map reading, a strongly developed sense
of direction and constant practice.
Crews must be trained so that all members can act as gunners
or drivers as circumstances demand. Accuracy of fire from a
rapidly moving car can only be assured as a result of constant
practice in judging distance and handling the gun. In addition,
all men should be trained in semaphore.
Officers and senior N.C.Os. will be practised in the use of the
radio-telephone, and all members of crews Should be trained
sufficiently to enable them to maintain “ wireless watch ”.
Special attention must be paid to the instruction of motor
despatch riders in finding their way and carrying verbal or
written messages.
All ranks must be practised in moving at night.
4. Reconnaissance. —Since the principal task of armoured
car units is reconnaissance, the training in this duty is of the
greatest importance and must be constantly practised by all
ranks. Men must be trained to have an eye for detail, in
order that they may discover information from small indi-
cations ; for example, a small movement or a glint of light
may betray the presence of the enemy, or a gap in a hedge
may indicate a line of approach. Valuable information can
often be obtained, when moving off the roads, from the
impressions left by tyres and tracks. They must also be
trained to render reports, both verbal and written, in a concise
and logical manner.
5. Protection. —The principles of protection which apply to
other arms hold good for armoured cars also. (See Field
Service Regulations, Vol. 11, 1935, Chapter V.)


On the move, an advanced guard will be detailed, however
small the unit. If a rear guard is not detailed, rear cars will
be responsible for rear protection and will have their guns
trained in that direction. Protection will be incomplete without
regulated movement, a constant look-out and a complete
readiness for action throughout the detachment.
At the halt, the conspicuousness of armoured cars makes
concealment from both ground and air of great importance.
In addition to the ordinary measures for protection at rest,
as adapted to the special needs of armoured cars, one man in
each crew will invariably remain in his car prepared to man
the gun, and the doors 'of all cars will be closed. When dis-
mounting, those men armed with the rifle will always take
their rifles with them. At night, the value of headlights to
illuminate any ground over which an enemy might advance
should be borne in mind.
6. Movement. —The instructions laid down in Sec. 4 will
be followed as far as applicable. The exact distance between
cars cannot be laid down, as this will depend on the tactical
situation, but commanders will ensure that they do not get too
close up, and that touch is maintained.
The best means of regulating movement, and so facilitating
control, is to move by bounds. The regimental squadron
and troop bounds will be laid down in orders by the respective
commanders as necessary for co-ordinating the action of the
subordinate units.
Armoured cars will normally not move singly when the
enemy is likely to be met, except for limited distances. Single
cars will always rejoin the patrol on the troop bounds.
Cars should never lie up for the night in an enclosed space
with only one' opening. They must be parked in such a way
that any car can move independently of the others.
7. Intercommunication. —ln all marches, arrangements will
be made to maintain intercommunication throughout the
column. Any available methods will be used in the absence
of radio telephony. Despatch riders on motor-cycles are
usually the most suitable means.
Owing to their vulnerability, motor despatch riders should
not be employed further forward than troop headquarters.
They will normally be employed in maintaining communication
between troop and squadron headquarters, and between
squadrons and headquarters of the regiment or other formation
with which it is working.
8. Training in co-operation with other arms. —Co-operation
with other arms will be practised as opportunity permits.
Officers will periodically be attached to cavalry regiments


during collective training and to air force units, and will be
encouraged to fly in order that they may understand the air
point of view.
Co-operation will be arranged with the engineers, in order
to obtain practice in crossing rivers, and in the conduct of
operations involving demolitions and the construction and
destruction of road blocks.
9. Manoeuvre precautions. —During manoevures, armoured
cars will never fire their machine guns at troops or vehicles
within a range of 50 yards.
When a car or cars meet opposing cars, and no umpire is
present, both sides will retire, and the meeting point on that
particular road will not be passed by either side for ten minutes.


PART II.—WAR
CHAPTER II
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
6. Characteristics of armoured cars
1. Armoured cars combine a high speed on the road or
over level ground with the silence of an ordinary motor car.
They have a comparatively poor cross-country performance,
and give the fullest value in countries with good roads, or on
open plains or deserts with a hard surface.
2. When the terrain is favourable, they can operate at
great distances from other troops and can make wide detours
to effect surprise or circumvent obstacles.
3. Owing to the fact that their field of vision is to some
extent limited by their armour, the speed of armoured cars
is much reduced at night, except under a bright moon or when
they are able to use strong headlights.
4. The exteriors of the cars can, if necessary, be electrified
hy a simple device operated by the driver. This electrifi-
cation will normally be essential in working in towns when
danger of boarding is to be expected.
5. The armour which they carry protects the crews against
small arms fire and shrapnel.
6. They carry a machine gun mounted high enough to
enable it to fire over a normal hedge.
7. Their mobility, armour and powerful armament give
them great advantages over other troops in certain circum-
stances, and they can carry out reconnaissance and other
duties in the face of considerable opposition, provided that
they are not exposed to the effective fire of artillery and anti-
tank weapons.
On the other hand, the question of dispersion and conceal-
ment will require'much forethought, since the smallest unit is
the armoured car and its crew.
When personnel have to leave a car to make a detailed
reconnaissance or enquiry, the car should remain in the vicinity
until their return.


8. A commander of armoured cars must make the fullest
use of the speed and fighting qualities of his vehicles. By
boldly seizing opportunities he will often be able to surprise
and demoralize the enemy, achieving results out of all propor-
tion to the size of his force.
7. Tasks of armoured cars
1. The principal role of armoured cars is reconnaissance
{see Field Service Regulations, Vol. 11, 1935, Sec. 33, 1)
2. When used with protective detachments, they can deny
ground to the enemy, and delay his advance, but they cannot
hold a position for any length of time once the enemy has
deployed to attack them, as, when stationary, they become
extremely vulnerable to artillery fire.
3. In certain circumstances they may be used offensively
against hostile columns and in raids against lines of communi-
cation and rearward services. Such roles, however, will be
exceptional for armoured cars unless the enemy is lacking in
artillery and anti-tank weapons.
Boldly handled in the pursuit of a defeated enemy they may
produce far-reaching results.
8. Tactical organization and maintenance
1. The organization of an armoured car regiment is given
in Sec. 1, 3.
2. The troop is the tactical unit, and should not be sub-
divided, except for local reconnaissance or for a strictly limited
time. For independent and distant missions a squadron or a
regiment should be employed.
3. The maintenance of armoured car units is entirely depen-
dent on the organization of supply and repair frdlb the base.
Uninterrupted lines of communication are vital to them. Only
in very exceptional circumstances can they live on the country.


CHAPTER 111
RECONNAISSANCE
(To be read in conjunction with Field Service Regulations
and Cavalry Training (Horsed).)
9. General
1. For obtaining information about the country and the
enemy, armoured cars will use methods similar to those
employed by mounted troops; only certain modifications of
detail will be necessary.
2. They are fitted by their characteristics for reconnaissance
at a distance, and for providing information of the broad and
general dispositions of. the enemy, rather than for the dis-
covery of tactical details. They are particularly suitable
for supplementing and confirming information received from
the air.
3. The movements of armoured car detachments employed
on reconnaissance will normally be governed by the necessity
of obtaining information and transmitting it to the commander
ordering the reconnaissance, and will not depend on the
movements of the force from which they are sent out.
4. Aircraft may frequently be detailed to co-operate with
armoured cars employed on reconnaissance. In this case
arrangements will be made for the exchange of information
in the area of the reconnaissance to ensure that no matter of
importance is omitted (see Sec. 44).-
10. Strength and composition of reconnoitring
detachments
1. The decision as to the strength and composition of a
reconnoitring detachment will depend on the same considera-
tions as for horsed cavalry. The extent and nature of the
area about which information is required are important factors
2. The return of a reconnoitring detachment after the
completion of its mission will often require special arrange-
ments, It may be necessary to employ additional armoured
cars or other troops to hold important points on the return
route.
3. It must be remembered that the crews of armoured
cars should not be employed on duties which entail their


leaving the immediate vicinity of the vehicle, and that cars
cannot carry more than one person in addition to the crew. If,
therefore, scouts for dismounted reconnaissance are necessary,
or escorts for prisoners brought in by patrols are likely to be
required, arrangements must be made for the transport of
this extra personnel in mechanical transport accompanying
the reconnoitring detachment.
11. The leading of a reconnoitring detachment
1. The rules for the guidance of the leader of a reconnoitring
detachment of armoured cars are the same as those laid down
for cavalry. (Cavalry Training (Horsed), 1937, Chapter VI.)
2. He should receive his orders in sufficient time to enable
him to make all the necessary arrangements. Besides the
information which every leader of a reconnoitring detachment
should receive he should be told :
i. Any special arrangements about prisoners, casualties
and maintenance.
ii. Any special arrangements for i intercommunication;
whether wireless silence is to be maintained.
3. The leader will then make a careful study of the area
over which he is to operate by means of maps, air photographs
and other sources of information, and decide on a clearly
defined line of action.
In studying the area of operations, he will pay particular
attention to the probable influence of the country on the
expenditure of tyres, springs and other stores.
He will issue preliminary instructions on the following
points:—
i. The hour of starting.
ii. The disposal of any personnel or vehicles that are not to
accompany the detachment.
Normally armoured cars will move independently
of their first line transport for the necessary period,
except for lorries carrying spare petrol, spares and
fitters, but in certain cases it may be necessary for
replenishing points to be established.
iii. The amount of ammunition, rations, petrol, and other
stores, including spare parts, to be carried.
A safety margin of one-third should be allowed over
estimated requirements.
iv. The carriage of any special stores, such as explosives,
bridging material or equipment for communication
with aircraft.


4. The leader will ensure that his subordinates understand
the object of the mission, and the plan for carrying it out, so
that they will be able to fulfil the commander's intention in
the event of accidents.
12. The conduct of a reconnoitring detachment
1. It must never be forgotten that the prompt transmission
of information is as important as its collection, and may be
the more difficult part of the task.
2. Information should be sought and safety ensured by
making use of mobility, by careful choice of routes and by
secrecy and cunning in movement. Towns should be avoided
as far as possible. On the other hand, to save time, it may be
advisable to use the main roads until contact -with the enemy
has been obtained. Dust frequently gives away the approach
of armoured vehicles.
3. The primary object of all reconnaissance is to obtain
information and not to fight. This applies particularly to
armoured cars, to which a detour, in order to obtain or trans-
mit information, is a relatively minor consideration. But,
should fighting appear necessary for the fulfilment of the
mission, risks must be freely taken, and vigorous offensive
action will generally be the best course. Successful action
of this sort will establish a moral ascendency over the enemy
and facilitate further reconnaissance.
4. Reconnoitring detachments will move rapidly by bounds.
The aim will be to reach a position favourable for the col-
lection and transmission of information. From this point
patrols will be sent out, while the leader remains with his
reserve of cars to collate information received and to reinforce
or replace patrols as required.
If aeroplanes are co-operating in the transmission of infor-
mation, there must be a suitable site near at hand for message
dropping and picking up by aircraft. Precautions will be
taken for local protection of this site, dismounted sentries
being posted as required [see Sec. ly paras. 2-3).
5. A patrol will never be less than a troop, and frequently
a squadron may be necessary.
A troop, however, may sometimes be required to reconnoitre
more than one road or track simultaneously. In this case the
troop leader must fix bounds at which single cars rendezvous
and report.
6. Movements in the vicinity of the enemy should normally
be limited to the hours of daylight as, owing to their limited


field of vision and the fact that they are largely restricted to
roads, darkness puts armoured cars very much at the mercy
of enterprising troops.
At the same time the value of darkness as a means of
affording concealment from observation, both ground and
air, should not be lost sight of in, planning a long approach
march.
7. Owing to the great speed of armoured cars a reconnoitring
detachment will often be able to complete a distant mission
in 24 hours ; it may be nepessaryto start before daylight and
return after dark. When this can be done, it will obviate the
necessity for staying out for the night in hostile country. If
continuous watch has to be kept on a distant area, detachments
may relieve each other periodically.
13. The conduct of an armoured car patrol
1. The leader of a patrol must be able to sum up a situation
and decide on his plan quickly. He must be a good map
and compass reader, and have a well-developed eye for
country and a sense of direction.
2. The patrol is a reconnoitring detachment, and the leader
will require the same kind of instructions and information as
the leader of a larger detachment. He will conduct his
patrol in a similar manner. Fot details of the action of a
patrol leader, see Cavalry Section Leading, 1934, Sec. 35.
3. When approaching an area where the enemy is likely to
be met with, patrols move by bounds and in depth, from one
position of observation or other tactical feature to another.
At the end of a bound the leading car remains in observation
until the troop leader oomes up to indicate the next objective,
when it again goes forward. If a single car has been em-
ployed on a local reconnaissance, it will invariably rejoin the
troop leader on a bound (see Sec. 12, 5).
4. Every precaution will be taken against surprise ; main
roads and obvious routes should usually be avoided after first
contact has been obtained or if it is believed that the enemy is
in the immediate vicinity. Full advantage should be taken
of the speed of cars to make detours, in order to ensure secrecy
and to avoid ambush. For the same reasons cars should not
return by the same route as they advance if others are avail-
able. Information will be obtained chiefly by tapping in on
the flanks of enemy columns by routes on which flank protec-
tion is unlikely to have been established.


5. When the leading car of a patrol is held up, the leader
will normally endeavour to work round by another route.
It will be abnormal to attack unless it is known that the
enemy possesses no anti-tank weapons.
6. Whop scouts are employed to carry out dismounted
reconnaissance at a distance from the car, they must be given
clear instructions as to the time and place of rejoining,. The
rendezvous selected should afford concealment for the cars.
14. Obtaining Information
1. Sources of information and the means of obtaining it are
discussed in Field Service Regulations, Vol. 11, 1935,
Chapter IV.
2. To obtain detailed information, it may often be necessary
for the patrol leader to leave his car to enter buildings and
question inhabitants. In such cases he should be accom-
panied by one member of the crew, and his movements covered
from the car by the machine guns. The driver and the gunner
should remain in their positions, and in order to guard against
surprise attack, the door of the car should be fastened.
15. Transmission of information
1. A section of R. Signals is attached to the regiment and
this section operates the wireless sets, No. 9, which communi-
cate between regimental and squadron headquarters and
between squadron and section headquarters.
It also operates the rear link set, which communicates to
the' higher formation and contains personnel for the main-
tenance of wireless equipment throughout the regiment.
Regimental headquarters, and each squadron and section,
has its own motor cycle orderlies.
General principles governing wireless communications are
contained in Signal Training (All Arms), 1938, Secs. 143, 3, and
144. *
Owing to the distances involved, W/T, as opposed to R/T,
will frequently have to be used.
2. The choice of whether a message is sent by wireless or by
orderly depends on various considerations, and commonsense
is the best guide. The length of the message, the nature of
the country and the distance involved are normally the
deciding factors.


It a message is long and has to be enciphered and is likely
to take more than a quarter of an hour to transmit, it may be
quicker to use a motor cyclist who can travel 6 to 8 miles in
that time.
In using a motor cyclist consideration must be given to
his vulnerability and risk of capture, to the possibility of
his losing his way, especially at night, and to the wear and
tear on man and machine.
The arrival of a motor cyclist should always be reported
by wireless, unless wireless silence is in force, and. if the
distance is long, warning of his despatch should also be given,
so that the headquarters to which he is going can be on the
lookout for him and possibly make use of him on his return
journey.
When the distance is long, definite instructions should be
given as to the route he must take. If the advance is npld
and the leading squadrons are moving well ahead, it is ad-
visable for motor cyclists to travel along the main toad of
advance until they reach a suitable branching off place,
rather than to try to find their way by by-roads. They must
take care not to proceed too. far, especially in the dark.
The lack of protection on the route .to the formation in the
rear must be borne in mind. The motor-cycle orderly will
seldom be a reliable means of communication except in the
tone protected by the regiment itself.
16. Armoured cars In co-operation with other arms
employed on reconnaissance
1. In close co-operation with other arms employed on
reconnaissance, armoured cars will normally be used as
reconnoitring patrols. In an emergency they may also be
used as a mobile reserve of fire power or to assist in the trans-
mission of information.
2. For reconnaissance, they should usually be employed on
roads, unless the country is favourable for cross-country
movement. A patrol should consist of not less than a troop.
They should be given those tasks which would cause unneces-
sary fatigue to mounted troops, or which involve penetration
into localities where unarmoured troops would be liable to
heavy casualties.
3. As a mobile reserve of fire power, they can co-operate by
engaging armoured fighting vehicles, by acting as a base from
which patrols may work or by attacking the enemy from the
flanks or in the rear.
4. Efficient intercommunication between armoured cars
and the troops with which they are co-operating is of vital
importance.


17. Topographical reconnaissance
(See also Manual of Map Reading, Photo Reading and
Field Sketching)
1. Previous reconnaissance of the area in which armoured
cars are to operate will seldom be possible except from the
air. A careful study of the map is therefore necessary in
order that obstacles may be avoided or means provided for
crossing them.
2. The following are among the points on which information
for this purpose is required :
i. Roads. —Gradients, width, turning places, comers likely
to affect movement and places where cars can leave
the road.
ii. Areas where armoured cars can be used away from roads. —
Extent; nature ; whether cars can move anywhere
or whether they are tied to certain routes. If the
latter, what is required to increase the number of
routes.
iii. What obstacles to movement exist and how they can be
overcome. —Such obstacles and the particulars required
regarding them are ;
(a) Soil which may present difficulties, e.g., mud,
cotton soil, lava, drift, sand, etc. Extent
and nature. Materials available for making
crossings.
(b) Marshes, soft ground, irrigated country. Extent
and nature. Width of irrigation channels.
Materials available for making crossings.
(c) Hills—gradient and length.
(d) Ravines —depth. Nature of banks and bottom.
Points on either side where cars can enter or
emerge. Whether necessary to bridge.
(e) Streams, etc.—depth of water, nature of bottom.
Approaches. Strength of bridges, etc.
{/) Unequal surfaces—to what extent they are likely
to present difficulties.
iv. Details in connection with maintenance. —Watering places,
petrol, etc. ; supplies.


CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION
18. Protection on the move, when acting independently
1. When armoured cars are moving independently they are
responsible for their own protection. This entails the provision
of advanced guards, rear guards and, on occasion, flank guards
which act in accordance with the principles laid down in
Field Service Regulations, Vol. 11, 1935, Chap. V. These
protective detachments are responsible for the protection
of the column from the moment the march begins, and should,
as far as possible, consist of complete units or sub-units.
2. The speed at which armoured cars move affords them a
large measure of protection, as they can be attacked in rear
or from a flank only by units which possess a mobility as great
as their own, and they can break off actions at will, except
in the case of combats with the enemy’s armoured cars. This
characteristic of armoured cars should always be considered
by the armoured car commander when framing his plan for
the protection of his force.
3. During an advance in a hostile country, or when the
enemy is known to be strong in armoured cars, it may be
necessary to detach a small rear guard as a protection against
raids by hostile armoured cars and to deal with breakdowns.
The orders to the rear guard commander must clearly lay
down the action to be taken in the case of breakdowns. This
may necessitate small detachments from the rear guard, and
it must be strong enough to provide them.
4. With armoured cars it will often be possible to dispense
with a flank guard and to rely on speed to pass unmolested
through a danger area. In this case the column should move
with a certain degree of dispersion, and a sharp watch in the
threatened direction must be kept by all cars.
19. Protection at rest
1. Armoured cars at rest can be regarded as secure from
surprise only when arrangements have been made which
ensure their receiving sufficient warning to enable them to
meet attack in movement and on ground which has been
previously reconnoitred.


The measures necessary to ensure adequate warning of an
attack, and the degree of readiness of vehicles and crews, will
depend on the protection afforded by the dispositions of other
arms.
2. Armoured cars at rest in the vicinity of the enemy will
often be covered by the other arms ; but even in these circum-
stances the following special precautions will always be
taken:—
i. Vehicles will be hidden from air and ground observation,
and will face the direction in which they will be called
upon to act.
ii. The ground in the vicinity will be thoroughly recon-
noitred, with a view to movement both by day and
night.
iii. Sentries will be posted and crews will bivouac in the
vicinity of their vehicles.
iv. All ranks will be warned of the state of readiness in
which they must hold themselves.
3. When armoured cars are not covered by other arms, the
following additional precautions must be taken :
i. One or more complete units, ready for immediate action,
will be detailed as inlying picket.
ii. Sentries, either mounted or dismounted, will be posted
to watch all approaches.
4. A position to be occupied at night should be selected
before darkness sets in, in sufficient time to allow recon-
naissance of the surrounding country and the preparation
of a co-ordinated defensive plan. Arrangements will be made
to prevent the vehicle or sentries from being rushed, and for
machine guns to cover all approaches and to afford mutual
support. Various clearly defined alternative exits from the
position must be available and known to all concerned. As
a rule a position to be occupied at night should not be taken
up in daylight. Searchlights or headlights greatly assist
defence at night.
20. Protection from aircraft
1. In common with the other arms, armoured cars are
responsible for protecting themselves against attack from the
air, against which properly controlled small arms lire may be
effective up to a range (along the line of sight) of about 600
yards.
2. Their best means of defence against enemy air attack is
dispersion or concealment.


21. Employment with advanced and flank guards
1. In co-operation with detachments of other arms on pro-
tective duties, the best use can normally be made of the
mobility of armoured cars by employing them on protective
reconnaissance missions.
2. Should this be not advisable, they can be used ;
i. to seize ground in advance of less mobile troops,
provided that it is understood that ground thus
seized can not be held for any length of time in face
of opposition.
ii. to maintain touch with other troops ;
iii. in close co-operation with the mounted troops.
3. When armoured cars are used in close co-operation with
mounted troops, the two arms should each supplement the
weak points of the other. Armoured cars can save the
mounted troops time, expenditure of horse flesh and casualties
from small arms fire, and protect them against hostile armoured
cars ; while the mounted troops, by supporting the armoured
cars closely, can prevent the enemy establishing obstacles
behind them or closing with them.
The armoured cars will usually, therefore, precede the
mounted troops, advancing by bounds and waiting for them
at each bound. On encountering the enemy, they should, as
a rule, remain in observation, sending back an immediate
report. This procedure will save casualties and expedite
the advance, but if the enemy possesses anti-tank weapons,
the employment of armoured cars in this manner may be
inadvisable.
22. Employment with rear guards
1. Armoured cars allotted to a rear guard will usually be
employed in one or more of the following ways :
i. As reconnoitring patrols to keep touch with the enemy.
They are specially valuable for flank reconnaissance.
ii. To protect the flanks. It should be remembered that a
pursuing enemy will constantly endeavour to work
round the flanks of a rear guard.
iii. To counter the action of opposing armoured cars.
iv. To attack the enemy’s advanced troops with the object
of delaying them or of extricating our troops when
subject to undue pressure.
v. To maintain communications within the rear guard and
with neighbouring columns.


2. The following principles should govern the employment
of all armoured cars when used to delay the enemy :
i. They should be used boldly in order to compel the
enemy to halt and deploy at as great a distance as
possible from the rear guard. They are peculiarly
suitable for the creation of ambushes, opportunities
for which must be constantly sought.
ii. A proportion should be held in reserve to meet unfore-
seen contingencies, while the remainder, divided into
two or more echelons consisting of complete tactical
units, should be employed and withdrawn in such a
manner that the foremost echelon is always in a
position to counter-attack if required, whilst the other
echelons are able to cover its retirement and to under-
take fresh tasks. Successive rallying points should be
selected for each echelon.-
iii. A proportion of artillery should be detailed to support
the action and the withdrawal of the armoured cars.
For this purpose an adequate supply of smoke shell
is of great importance.
23. Employment with outposts
1. The normal tasks of armoured cars employed with out-
posts will be to act as ;
i. reconnoitring patrols by day ;
ii. standing patrols by night.
2. The employment of armoured cars on outpost duties
at night will be exceptional, as cars will usually be withdrawn
at dark to a position where the crew can carry out maintenance
duties and rest.
3. The leader of a reconnoitring patrol must be given all
available information about the enemy and movements of other
patrols, and definite orders as to :
i. What his task is.
ii. What time he is to leave the outposts.
iii. What area or roads he is to patrol.
iv. What time he is to return.
v. By what route he is to re-enter the outposts.
vi. Whether the information required is of sufficient
importance to justify fighting. ■
4. The officer responsible for despatching the patrol will
notify all outpost troops in the vicinity and inform them of
the time and route by which the patrol is to return.


5. At night standing armoured car patrols placed well out
in front of the outpost system may be used for watching
important tactical localities, curtailing the activities of
hostile patrols and detecting concentrations. When the
position of a standing patrol has been disclosed to the enemy,
it should move to a previously selected alternative position.
In the selection of the position for the patrol, concealment
and a secure line of retirement are ali-important. Standing
patrols should be withdrawn before daybreak, careful orders
being given as to the use of lights.
24. Escorts
1. Armoured cars are very suitable ior escorting convoys,
especially of mechanical transport. Owing to other calls on
them, it may not be possible to use the standard types of
armoured cars for this purpose. In that event vehicles of
commercial type, armed and -fitted with an armoured body
of simple design, may be employed.
2. The following two principles apply to the performance
of this duty :
i. Information of an impending attack must be obtained
as early as possible.
ii. The attack must be met and defeated at as great a
distance as possible from the convoy.
3. The armoured cars available will, therefore, usually be
sub-divided into :
i. A body providing reconnaissance patrols to give adequate
warning.
ii. A mobile reserve to defeat the attack.
In addition it may be necessary to detail some cars to
accompany the column closely.
4. A well organized system of intercommunication is of
particular importance.
5. It may also be necessary to employ armoured cars for
the protection of headquarters on the move.


CHAPTER V
THE ATTACK
25. General principles
1. Reconnaissance, where it cannot be conducted by stealth,
is itself an offensive mission (Sec. 12, 3). Other offensive
missions which can be given to commanders are :
i. Seizing ground shortly to be taken over by less mobile
troops.
ii. Co-operation in an attack by other troops.
iii. Attack on troops or transport on the march, especially
in retreat.
iv. Raids.
2. Whatever the nature of the mission, attacks by armoured
cars can be divided into two classes :
i. Those to be made by fire from positions which it is hoped
to reach unopposed.
This task, which calls for stealth, is one’for which
armoured cars, by reason of the speed and silence of
their movement, are very suitable.
ii. Those which entail overcoming opposition before the
desired position can be reached.
In carrying out this task they will have to rely on
the combination of fire and movement, unless they
have been able to surprise their enemy. The degree
of visibility and the nature of the country will influence
their tactics in these circumstances.
3. These considerations should be borne in mind constantly
alike by the superior commander who is allotting' tasks to
armoured cars, and by the armoured car commander himself
who is deciding how to employ his sub-units. Both should
remember the paramount importance of surprise.
4. Even where they cannot surprise their enemy and where
the ground offers obstacles to their movement, well trained
and enterprising armoured car detachments should be able
to overcome minor hostile parties. But against an enemy
organized and prepared, especially if he has artillery, unsup-
ported action by armoured cars is unlikely to succeed, unless
the ground is peculiarly favourable.


26. Fire tactics
1. The most valuable characteristic of armoured cars is
their ability to deliver fire when in movement and hence to
carry out a reconnaissance with the minimum of danger of
becoming embroiled in a prolonged fire fight. Nevertheless
fire from a stationary platform is always inore accurate than
that from a moving one and armoured car commanders will
frequently have to decide which method to adopt.
Except in the case of ambushes, the gun should be regarded
as a means of getting out of trouble and stationary position:;
should be occupied for the shortest time possible to minimize
the danger from enemy artillery and anti-tank guns.
2. If the ground has a particularly level surface, the dis-
advantage of fire in movement will be minimized. If the
target is a small one, or if visibility is low, only fire from close
ranges is likely to produce effect.
3. If the chief danger is from the enemy’s artillery, it will
be fatal for armoured cars to remain stationary once the
hostile guns have opened ; and risk will be lessened by rapid
movement with frequent changes of direction. It may some-
times be advisable to close, so as to reach ground into which
the enemy cannot drop his shell.
If. on the other hand, the enemy has little or no artillery,
but is suspected of being well provided with anti-tank weapons,
it should be remembered that the efficiency of anti-tank
weapons against armour decreases rapidly as the range in-
creases. The best plan then may be to deliver covering fire
from stationary positions outside the effective range of the
anti-tank weapons, with the object of silencing the latter;
while other armoured cars move forward with the objects of
forcing the anti-tank weapons to disclose themselves and of
occupying the position..
4. Sudden bursts of fire are more effective than prolonged
and desultory methods. The superior effect of enfilade fire
should be developed whenever possible.
27. Surprise action
1. In order to effect surprise, it is usually necessary to
know the enemy's position, to reconnoitre routes beforehand
and to make careful arrangements for the co-ordination of
effort. Unless ample time is allowed for these preliminaries,
and for clear orders, success becomes a matter of luck, and
the enterprise will not as a rule be worth the risk involved.
2. In surprise action armoured cars will normally attack
the enemy's flank or rear. Such action will often be successful


against hostile detachments whose attention is already
occupied by other armoured cars which have appeared on
their front.
3. Against a column of troops or transport the most effective
form of surprise action will often be what is known as
“mosquito tactics ". The force is moved as a whole to a
suitable position on the enemy s flank, whence cars are sent
down side roads to open fire, with the object of creating con-
fusion and forcing the enemy to make detachments. When
these objects have been attained, the cars withdraw and pre-
pare for similar tasks elsewhere. The delay and demoraliza-
tion produced by these tactics may well have a decisive
influence on the operations, whether such operations consist
of retarding an enemy’s advance, upsetting his rearward
services or pressing a pursuit.
4. Another method which may be used against transport
is to open fire at the head, so as to immobilize the leading
vehicles and block the road.
5. Occasionally a sudden frontal rush at the head of an
enemy detachment will prove effective. The danger, however,
of being unable to get away is very great, and such tactics
should only be resorted to in' exceptionally favourable con-
ditions, such as a demoralized enemy, or ground passable in
all directions.
6. Successful surprise action is certain to lead to the enemy
taking some steps to avoid a repetition of the incident. This
will have the satisfactory result of involving him in an added
expenditure of energy. But it will necessitate increased
caution on the part of the armoured cars to avoid ambushes,
such as hidden blocks and land mines.
28. Action when opposed
1. The first thought of sin armoured car commander who
finds himself directly opposed by the enemy should be to
institute surprise action elsewhere, in the manner indicated
in the last section. The cars already in touch with the enemy
will co-operate by distracting his attention. This is best
done, not by continuous but by intermittent activity, such as
spasmodic bursts of fire, or simulating a retirement and then
returning.
2. If no opportunity for surprise offers, it will be necessary
to try to advance under the enemy’s fire. The advance may
take the form of the occupation of additional and more effective
fire positions, or its object may be to clear away an obstacle.


3. In either case success is a question of providing fire
adequate to overwhelm the enemy’s fire and so render move-
ment possible. Certain principles governing the fire tactics
of armoured cars have been indicated in Sec. 22. The timing
of the covering fire in relation to the movement i§ of great
importance.
29. Action against hostile armoured fighting vehicles
1. Action against hostile armoured fighting vehicles may
vary from a chance encounter with an enemy armoured car
on a road or track to engagements on a large scale between
considerable forces in open country. The latter case will
however be exceptional. In all cases success will rest with
that side which most rapidly brings effective fire to bear on its
opponents.
2. The principal requirements, therefore, are :
i. Arrangements for security so that adequate warning
of the approach of hostile armoured fighting vehicles
is obtained.
ii. A plan to ensure that the greatest possible volume of
fire is brought to bear on the enemy as rapidly as
possible.
iii. Thorough training in mounted drill and manoeuvre
so that the plan may be executed successfully.
iv. A high standard of gunnery so that the armament
may be used to the best effect. In this connection
armoured car commanders must study the vulner-
able points of the various types of armoured fighting
vehicles possessed by the enemy.
3. Armoured cars will clearly be courting disaster if they
engage closely enemy A.F.Vs. which are markedly superior
in armament and/or armour to themselves. A study of the
characteristics of enemy equipment and ability to recognize
the types of their vehicles are important factors in preparation
for war .
30. Action after a successful attack
1. When the enemy has been driven from his position,
active and offensive patrolling should at once be instituted,
well to the front, with the object of keeping touch and frustrat-
ing, or at any rate of delaying, any attempt on his part to
organize a counter-attack. Such methods are, in the case of
armoured cars, much more likely to succeed than the occupa-
tion, more or less passively, of a position.


2. The occupation of a position, should it be necessary,
will be carried out on the lines indicated in Sec. 34.
31. Co-operation in an attack by other troops
1. When an attack is about to be launched by other troops,
armoured cars, like horsed cavalry, will usually be withdrawn
into reserve, or will be employed on protective duties.
2. Occasionally, however, if the ground is particularly
favourable, or against an ill-organized enemy, they can
co-operate in the actual attack by providing additional cover-
ing fire, preferably against the enemy’s flanks or rear.
3. Surprise and accurate timing will be factors of particular
importance in this case. It will usually be advisable for the
cars net to close in, but to deliver fire from medium ranges.


CHAPTER VI
OTHER OPERATIONS BY ARMOURED CARS
32. Raids
1. A raid involves a detachment from the main force and
should not be undertaken unless it is certain to produce a
sufficiently important effect on the operations as a whole to
justify the possible loss of cars and the absence of the unit
from the main body for the necessary time.
This effect may be produced either by causing the enemy
to detach a proportionately larger force to deal with the raid,
or by interfering with the command and organization or main-
tenance of the enemy’s forces opposed to our main forces.
2. The commander of a raiding force will be given a definite
mission and usually also a definite time in which to complete
it; in no circumstances will he be given a general roving
commission.
3. As far as possible the proposed routes should be un-
obtrusively reconnoitred by aircraft, agents or other means
before the raid is begun, so that the possibility of unexpected
delays may be minimized.
4. It will often be necessary to make special arrangements
for the maintenance of units despatched on a raid and for the
escort of prisoners by means of posts established within reach
of the raiding force. Mounted troops and infantry in
mechanical vehicles are suitable for this purpose.
5. The problem of the recovery of vehicles with mechanical
breakdowns must be considered.
33. Pursuit
1. The aim of the pursuit of a defeated enemy is to get him
on the run, break up his fornfed bodies and give him no rest
until he is completely exhausted and disorganized. It is in
pursuit that armoured cars can exploit to the full their special
characteristics. If boldly and effectively bandied, they may
well convert a withdrawal or retreat into a rout.
2. Armoured cars should be held in readiness to exploit
promptly any success gained by the other arms.
3. The tasks allotted to armoured cars in pursuit should
be sufficiently definite to enable control to be maintained.


but should not be such as to limit unduly the initiative of
their commander.
Thus, while they may be given a general commission to
attack and break up all formed bodies of the enemy that they
encounter, they should also be given objectives, reasonably
distant, and should be allotted such special tasks as will
enable the action of all pursuing bodies to be co-ordinated
and controlled effectively.
4. The most effective use of armoured cars in pursuit is to
attack the enemy’s rear organization, especially his head-
quarters, administrative centres, advanced landing grounds,
etc. If the enemy is thoroughly disorganized, it may be
possible to push through his covering troops, but usually it
will be necessary to take full advantage of the mobility of
armoured cars and pass round the flanks.
5. Other tasks which may be allotted are :
i. To forestall the enemy at defiles through which he
must pass on his retreat and so delay or prevent his
escape.
ii. To attack transport columns and prevent their with-
drawal by destroying the leading vehicles or creating
other obstacles on their line of retreat.
iii. To attack reserves.
iv. To seize and hold important points such as bridges,
railway stations, etc., and prevent their destruction.
In this case the armoured- cars should be supported
by other mobile troops such as infantry in mechani-
cal vehicles.
34. Holding a position
1. The characteristics of armoured cars, especially their
vulnerability to artillery fire, demand that, when operating
within reach of the enemy, they should as far as possible keep
continuously on the move. Therefore, although they are
very suitable for seizing ground, they are not well adapted to
holding it.
2. Armoured cars ordered to seize ground in order to deny
it to the enemy will normally be supported by other mobile
troops. If these consist of infantry in mechanical transport,
their protection will probably have to be provided for by the
armoured cars, and a separate detachment made for the
purpose.


3. When it is necessary for armoured cars to hold ground
until other troops arrive, their action should be on the following
lines:—
i. The enemy should be delayed as far forward as possible
by bold offensive action against his flanks.
ii. Alternative defensive positions should be selected, at
least one of which should flank the enemy’s probable
line of advance.
iii. In each position alternative fire positions should be
chosen for each car. These positions should offer as
much concealment as possible and should provide
mutual support; they should be chosen with a view
to facilitating a quick " get-away
iv. The underlying idea, subject to obtaining fire effect,
should be to make the task of the hostile artillery as
difficult as possible by disappearing as soon as they
begin to get the range and reappearing in another
position.
4. It is unlikely that cars will be able to conceal themselves
in the actual fire positions; and consequently the ground
most favourable to the operations will be that which provides
cover in the positions of readiness and facilities for movement
from those positions to the various fire positions.
5. Concealment behind obstacles, such as buildings, hedges,
etc., often restricts full use of fire power. Intelligent use of
shadow, camouflage or background will frequently produce
effective concealment.
35. Negotiating obstacles
1. When an obstacle is encountered and it is not possible
to circumvent ft, arrangements must be made :
i. to bridge it if it is a ditch or remove it if it is an obstruc-
tion ;
ii. to cover the dismounted party while it carries out the
above task. As a general rule, the enemy will attempt
to prevent the performance of this task by fire.
iii. If an obstacle is defended, it will generally be necessary
to employ a dismounted party to attack the enemy,
supported by the machine guns from the cars, before
the obstacle can be removed.
2. The following, therefore, will be the normal procedure ;
i. The troop commander will reconnoitre and issue his
orders, which -will include a plan to overcome the fire
of the defenders, and arrangements to drive over,


drag away or cross the obstacle with running boards
or other means,
ii. The rear cars will take up a position to provide the cover
for whatever action against the obstacle the plan
envisages, whether it be an attempt by the leading
car to rush the obstacle or action by a dismounted
party to clear it away.
3. If running boards are used, it may also be necessary
to cover the dismounted party while it replaces the running
boards. {See also Crew Drills for Armoured Cars.)
36. Operation in towns and villages
1. The chief dangers for armoured cars in this form of fight
ing are: —
i. Bombs, etc., being dropped on or under the car.
ii. Snipers.
iii. Streets being blocked or too narrow to turn round in,
iv. Cars being isolated and boarded when out of supportihg
distance of each other.
2. It is necessary, therefore, to plan the operations so as to
overcome these difficulties. It is first desirable to obtain
all possible information of the lay-out of the town from maps,
air photographs, etc., and to lay down in orders the route to
be followed. Orders should also include instructions on the
following points :
i. Arrangements for mutual support. A car cannot pro-
tect itself from attack from above. Supporting cars
must therefore be ready to prevent with fire any attack
from windows, roofs, etc., on other cars. Ho car
should in any circumstances operate but of supporting
distance of another car.
ii. Procedure for examining side streets, courts, etp.
iii. Arrangements for intercommunication.
iv. Procedure if cars have to reverse for some distance.
v. Arrangements for negotiating obstacles. { See Sec. 35.)
3. The following Will be the normal procedure :
i. The advance will be carried out by bounds. These
should be from one street corner to another or, in
in long streets, 300 to 400 yards at a time.
ii. In movement a speed of at least 12 miles an hour
should be maintained to prevent attempts to board
the cars.
iii. Windows, roofs, doorways, etc., likely to be occupied
should be searched with fire.


4. In patrolling in a town at night, searchlights controlled
from inside the car are of great value. They should be
flashed on at certain intervals to search side streets, courtyards,
etc.
5. When covering the movement of other arms, or the
evacuation of civilians through streets, armoured cars should
not be kept close to the parties being protected, but should,
by offensive action, keep opposition at a distance.


CHAPTER VII
OPERATIONS AGAINST UNDEVELOPED AND
SEMI-CIVILIZED ENEMIES
37. General
1. Experience shows that against undeveloped and semi-
civilized enemies, their tactics, armament, and character-
istics, and the nature of the theatre of operations, may
necessitate modification in the conduct of operations; but
the principles remain the same. A vigorous offensive is always
the safest method. The fullest information regarding the
habits customs, and tactics of the enemy, and the topography
of the country, is essential.
2. The fact that the enemy in this type of warfare probably
possesses no artillery confers a great advantage on the
armoured car, which in consequence can be employed much
more freely in offensive operations. The armament of the
tribesmen is continually improving, e.g., some tribes in desert
areas now possess motor cars and machine guns.
3. The extent to which armoured cars can operate will be
determined largely by the nature of the country and climatic
conditions. In certain areas, as in deserts or foothills,
armoured cars will have considerable latitude of movement,
while in hilly or irrigated areas they will be restricted very
largely to roads. The roads in some areas are frequently
extremely difficult owing to steep gradients and bad surface,
and in irrigated country large numbers of bridges are unable
to carry armoured cars.
Extremes of temperature and altitude may make conditions
difficult, while torrential rains or prolonged wet weather may
restrict temporarily movement in areas which are normally
favourable.
4. In this type of warfare it frequently occurs that portions
of units are separated by considerable distances from each
other and from their bases. These conditions greatly increase
the difficulties of administration and mechanical maintenance,
while enhancing the value of mobile troops so long as they
retain their mobility.
5. In addition to the operations already considered in
previous chapters, armoured cars may be required for convoy


duty, for providing protection to isolated aerodromes and
for such tasks as the relief of invested frontier posts or the
rounding up of tribal raiding parties.
6. In certain circumstances in this type of warfare armoured
cars may be required to assault an enemy in occupation of a
position. The aim should then be for the cars, by a combina-
tion of fire and rapid movement, to secure one or more
prominent features in the position. Then, whilst some of the
cars pursue the evicted enemy, the remainder sweep the
position still held.
When owing to the ground the cars cannot reach the enemy’s
position, they should approach as near as possible and subject
those portions of the front which seem likely to offer the
greatest resistance to heavy fire, with the object of assisting
the advance of the other troops.
7. When, on the other hand, the object is rather to hold
the enemy to the ground and inflict the heaviest possible
material loss on him, the armoured cars should be directed to
gain unobserved positions on the flanks from which they can
bring enfilade fire to bear on the hostile front; or be sent to
cut off the enemy’s retreat.
8. In this. type of warfare, initiative, resource and
expert map and compass reading are essential in all car
commanders, and a high standard of driving is necessary for
all drivers.
38. Mountain warfare
,1. The enemy likely to be met with are for the most part
armed with modem rifles, skilled in guerilla warfare and
thoroughly acquainted with the country over which they fight.
They rarely oppose an advance sufficiently long to allow
the attackers to close with them, but retire rapidly as the
troops approach, and lie concealed, hoping to ambush a further
advance or overwhelm the rear guard when the troops with-
draw. As they give no quarter and mutilate the bodies of
the dead, wounded and dead must be withdrawn.
2. When columns move into the hills, it may not be possible
for armoured cars to accompany, them in the first instance
owing to lack of suitable tracks. As, however, it will be neces-
sary to improve these to facilitate supply, and as the main
scene of operations will often be a broad valley, cars may be
usefully employed at a later stage.


Movement on Hill Roads
3. On hill roads the chief dangers are :
i. Boulders being hurled down on to, or snipers firing
into, the cars as they pass close under a steep
hillside.
ii. Attack at close quarters on rounding " blind ”
corners.
iii. The road being blocked.
4. It will rarely happen that the ground falls so steeply to
the road that the enemy can hurl boulders from above with-
out exposing himself. Cars should therefore pass these
places singly while the remaining cars are so disposed as to
bring effective fire to bear on the point likely to be occupied
by the enemy. After the leading car has passed safely, it
should take up a position from which it can cover the passage
)f the other cars.
Similarly, it will be by careful driving, by the alertness of
the crews and by mutual co-operation between the cars that
attempts by the enemy to assault cars or interrupt their
movements will be defeated.
5. Places where the road is wide enough for cars to be turned
round should be carefully noted with a view to possible future
use.
39. Patrolling In mountain warfare
1. Outward and return journeys should be made by different
routes whenever possible. Where only one practicable route
to a certain objective exists, cars should be left behind at
intervals to keep the return route open.
2. When patrolling with such objects as preventing snipers
approaching a camp or harassing working parties, armoured
cars should endeavour to take advantage of folds in the ground
to appear at unexpected points. If the nature of the ground
does not permit movement, the cars should be distributed so
as to command all positions likely to be used by snipers.
3. When used in support of cavalry or infantry patrols,
cars should take up positions from which they can assist with
covering fire.
4. When employed in co-operation with aircraft, recon-
noitring, or acting offensively, armoured car patrols should,
by fire and manoeuvre, cause the enemy to move about and so
disclose his whereabouts to the observers.


40. Protective duties in mountain warfare
Advanced Guards
1. Whenever the ground permits, armoured cars should
form part of the advanced guard. They should move by
bounds from one commanding position, whence observation
to the front and communication with the advanced guard is
possible, to another; and effectively cover with fire points
from which the enemy may oppose the dismounted portion
of the advanced guard.
Their distance ahead should be regulated with the object oi
preventing the infantry coming under fire at close range. All
ground in the immediate vicinity of the route, particularly
on the flanks, must be searched.
2. When the column i§ advancing through a defile, the high
ground on either side will normally be piqueted by infantry.
The armoured cars should be employed to assist the piqueting
troops into their posts by being prepared to bring fire to bear
on points in the vicinity and by searching the crests with fire
as the piquets approach. The position of the armoured cars
will be regulated accordingly and sometimes it may be possible
to send them on ahead of the infantry to take up a position
from which they can bring fire to bear on the enemy from his
rear and so impress him with the fear that he may be cut off.
Generally, however, they will not be too far in advance, as
they may then be drawn into a separate encounter and fail
to assist in the establishment of the piquets.
3. If a rapid advance is the main object and piqueting is
not being employed, it may be advisable for the armoured
cars to push on in order to drive the enemy out of positions
held by him on the route and so prevent delay to the column.
4. If the armoured cars cannot proceed by the route laid
down for the column, but can reach the objective by making
a detour, the advanced guard commander must be given
sufficient warning to enable him to protect his immediate
front. If the cars cannot proceed even by making a detour,
they should occupy positions from which they can cover the
advance of the remainder of the column with fire.
Flank Guards
5. Armoured cars may be employed to guard the flanks of a
column on the march, either by holding commanding positions
until the column has passed, or by moving parallel to it. The
nature of the ground and the length of the column will decide


which method to employ, but normally the former is the
more satisfactory. The withdrawal from these positions
should be carried out as a rear guard action.
Rear Guards
6. It is during retirements that this type of enemy proves
most enterprising and dangerous. The necessity for removing
the dead and wounded increases considerably the difficulty
of these operations. Every casualty requires three or four
men out of the firing line to remove him. These form a good
mark for the enemy and reduce the fighting strength.
7. Armoured cars are therefore of particular value in cover-
ing the withdrawal of a rear guard. They should be the last
troops to withdraw. When the other troops are clear,
armoured cars should direct heavy fire on all positions occupied
by the enemy and then retire rapidly, firing as they withdraw.
Should the enemy show signs of following up too closely, a
vigorous counter-attack by the cars must be made at once.
A few cars concealed on the reverse slope of a hill and suddenly
appearing on the crest will usually have the effect of stopping
over-bold parties from pressing on too fast. Care must,
however, be taken that the distance between tfie armoured
cars and the other troops does not become so great as to allow
enterprising parties of the enemy to interpose and block the
retreat of the cars.
Protection at the Halt
8. When piquets are required for the protection of a camp
or for troops occupied in destroying a village or carrying out
some similar operation, armoured cars can assist materially
in their establishment, being withdrawn into reserve when
this task has been completed. Similarly, they can cover the
withdrawal of the piquets in the manner indicated in para. 7,
above (see also Sec. 43).
41. Conduct of raids
1. In warfare against semi-civilized enemies it may be
decided to raid hostile villages, a task for which armoured
cars are, in favourable country, well adapted. Before starting,
full information should be obtained as to the usual habits of
the enemy in order that the raid may be carried out at a time
and in a manner to facilitate suprise and the attainment of its
object.
2. The normal procedure will be for the cars to move first
to a position as near the objective as possible where they can


lie concealed while final preparations are being made ; the
enemy meanwhile will be kept under observation by a cdrefully
concealed piquet.
3. When the opportune moment arrives, the cars push
rapidly into the village, while some go to the far side (by routes
round the outskirts if possible) to command the exits. Fire
should be opened instantly if the movement is discovered;
otherwise it should be withheld until the village is entered.
If the ground in the immediate vicinity of the village is un-
favourable, the cars should occupy commanding fire positions
and inflict the maximum damage by long-range fire, remaining
concealed, if necessary, until a favourable target appears.
4. In difficult country the most careful reconnaissance of
the ground is necessary and all concerned should be well
acquainted with the guiding landmarks. If possible, these
reconnaissances should be carried out without disclosing the
fact that armoured cars can reach localities which appear
inaccessible to them.
5. When the object of the raid is to arrest some particular
person or persons or to search for arms, etc., it may be essential
to avoid causing casualties among the local inhabitants. In
such cases the action of the cars will be limited to taking up
positions from which they can watch all avenues of escape
and be prepared to cover the search party with fire.
42. Action against raiding parties
1. Hostile raids against villages or other objectives by parties
ranging from a few men to several hundred not infrequently
occur in semi-civilized countries. Warnings regarding them
are usually difficult to obtain. Hence, action to intercept
the raiders must be rapid and often taken at very short notice.
Armoured cars cin be very suitably employed for this task.
2. Close co-operation with the civil authorities is necessary
to ensure that information of the raid is obtained as early as
possible. In addition, the entire locality must be well known
to all ranks of the armoured car units and, if time permits,
roads or tracks to threatened points, should be prepared or
improved.
3. The study of the habits and tactics of the raiders and a
good knowledge of their language are of the greatest value.
4. Intimation of a raid threatened or in progress should
include details as to the objective of the'raiders and the
routes which they will use for their advance and withdrawal.
The armoured cars should then proceed to the threatened
locality and, taking up a concealed position, attack the raiders


as they approach. If the raiders have already reached their
objective, the armoured cars should be directed to points
where they can waylay the raiders in their withdrawal.
As it is desirable to capture as many of the raiders r
possible, fire should not be opened until the last
moment.
43. Perimeter camps
1. Armoured cars forming part of a force occupying a peri-
meter camp will not generally be made responsible for the
defence of any portion of the perimeter. They should be
retained as a mobile reserve of fire power and, where the
ground permits, for offensive action outside the camp, either
to break up an attack before it starts or to pursue when an
attack is beaten off. Armoured car commanders should
therefore make a thorough reconnaissance of all ground in the
vicinity over which they may be employed.
2. Inside the perimeter the position allotted to the cars
should facilitate their rapid despatch on any mission outside
the camp, if occasion should arise, and in the meanwhile
permit the performance of maintenance duties.
If the camp is attacked, the alarm posts of armoured car
personnel will be at " Action " stations on their cars.
3. When acting independently, armoured cars may be
compelled to find their own protection at night. The decision
as to the-form and location of the camp must be taken early
in order that arrangements may be completed before dusk.
4. The site selected should, if possible, command all
approaches, to prevent parties of the enemy creeping up un-
seen, and should not be commanded by higher ground from
which snipers can fire into the camp.
5. The form of the camp, or laager, will be largely dictated
by the ground and the strength of the unit. It may be a
square, in which all cars face outwards, or an inverted “ V "
with all vehicles facing in the same direction, thus :


In the latter case some cars should be allotted to the defence
of the rear face.
In contact with a very enterprising enemy it may be neces-
sary to entrench the space between the cars and man the
trenches.
6. If the cars are accompanied by unarmoured transport,
this will be parked in the centre of the camp and an inlying
piquet detailed.
7. Searchlights or the car headlights are of the greatest
value in the defence of a camp at niyht.


CHAPTER VIII
CO-OPERATION WITH AIRCRAFT AND
ENGINEERS
44. Co-operation with aircraft
1. When aircraft are working direct with armoured car
units, successful co-operation depends on the knowledge
which each arm has of the tasks, capabilities, and limitations
of the other. The observer must be fully acquainted with the
intentions and plans of the armoured car units with which
he is co-operating, and the latter must arrange to display the
necessary signals when called for by the aeroplane for purposes
of intercommunication. The army co-operation squadron is
the air force unit which would normally be employed for co-
operation with armoured cars.
2. Aircraft can assist armoured car units to carry out their
tasks in the following ways :
i. By providing by means of reports and photographs
information of the topography of the area in which
armoured cars are about to operate.
It may sometimes be of great value if officers of
armoured car units who have sufficient air experience
are sent to take part in the preliminary air recon-
naissance.
ii. By indicating the position and movement of hostile
forces with which the armoured cars are concerned
and with which they have not gained contact.
iii. By supplementing the information obtained by the
armoured cars on reconnaissance.
iv. By providing a means of intercommunication between
the armoured car units and the main body when other
means are not available or not sufficiently rapid.
v. When no other means are available, by supplying
primary necessities when armoured car units' are
isolated, and in certain circumstances even maintain-
ing small columns for a short period.
3. Air photographs may be either vertical or oblique.
Obstacles to movement and anti-tank mine fields will probably
be revealed on vertical photographs, but not the location of
anti-tank guns except in conditions of stabilized warfare.


Oblique photographs, which are panoramas taken at com-
paratively low altitudes, are of considerable assistance to
commanders of armoured cars in the selection of routes and
the maintenance of direction over difficult ground.
4. Communication between armoured car units and aircraft
may be by :
i. Radio telephony.
ii. Message dropping and picking up.
Cases may occur where it is not possible or desirable
for communication to be by radio-telephony, or it
may be necessary for aeroplanes to convey messages
from armoured car units to formation headquarters
at a considerable distance. In these circumstances
messages in a message bag can be dropped or picked
up by an aeroplane.
5. The heroplane recognizes the headquarters of the unit
or formation with which communication is to be established
by means o I ground indicators which are displayed, in its
vicinity. The form of ground indicator for all armoured
car units is :
The identity of the formation or unit is shown by call sign
letters (which must be capable of being formed with straight
strokes), formed by ground strips placed on the left of the indi-
cator as seen by an aeroplane flying from the direction of the
enemy. These call sign letters will be changed from time to
time in accordance with the signal arrangements of the Army
and Royal Air Force.
Ground-indicators will be displayed by headquarters even
if they are on the move, whenever an aeroplane flies low over
them and fires green signal lights, or if it appears to be flying
round looking out for them.
Care must be taken that the position of headquarters is not
betrayed to enemy aeroplanes by the display of ground
indicators or the movement of personnel collecting dropped
message bags or arranging for messages to be picked up.
6. Message dropping. —Where it is not possible or desirable
for an observer to communicate a message by wireless, com-
munication is effected by dropping a report in a message bag,
which has a parti-coloured streamer attached to it.


Messages can be dropped with sufficient accuracy from a
height of 500 feet even in a high wind.
To enable this means of communication to be effective, the
aeroplane must be able to recognize the headquarters of the
unit with which it wishes to communicate. This is accom-
plished by means of " ground indicators ”.
Green signal lights are used to call for ground indicators.
The receipt of a dropped message is acknowledged by dis-
playing the ground letter “ F ” immediately it is clear that the
message can be picked up. If the message falls in a place from
which it cannot be recovered, the ground letter " N ” will be
displayed. On that letter being shown or if the letter ”F” is not
displayed, the pilot will drop a duplicate copy of the message.
7. Message picking up. —The procedure will be as follows :
A suitable open space will be selected well clear of trees,
telegraph poles, etc.
The ground indicator of the unit will be displayed.
Two poles will be placed in the ground ten feet apart at
right angles to the wind.
The position of the poles will be marked by two ground
strips 8 ft. 6 in. by 1 ft. 4 in., arranged in the shape of a
funnel leading towards the poles and into the wind.
A loop of cord will be stretched across between the top of
the poles in such a way that a pull on its centre in an
up-wind direction will cause it to come away without
difficulty. The message bag is attached to the cord
midway between the poles and rests on the ground and,
when all is ready, the letter “ M " displayed.
As soon as the aeroplane sees from the ground signal that
the message is ready, it will fly low so as to catch the loop of
cord in a crooked rod projecting below the under carriage.
This method of transmitting messages has certain dis-
advantages :
(а) An aeroplane diving to pick up a message may disclose
the position of a headquarters, unless it flies at a
low altitude for some distance before and after
picking up the message.
Care should also be taken that the movements
of orderlies, etc., making the necessary arrangements
are not observed by hostile aircraft.
(б) During the time, which may be considerable, spent in
picking up messages an aeroplane may lose the chance
of obtaining valuable information by observation.
Message picking up will therefore be confined to cases where
communication is of vital importance and no other means is
available.


8. Indication of position reached by troops.
Armoured car units can indicate their position to aeroplanes
by means of ground strips, flares, lamps or other suitable
means available. The following will be laid down in orders :
i. The means of signalling to be employed.
ii. Whether the signals will be made by sub-units or by
squadron, or higher headquarters.
iii. Whether the signals will be made at specified hours
or on reaching definite objectives.
These signals will be made only when called for by the aero-
plane observer firing a white signal light to indicate that
he is in a position to observe the signal.
When flares are used, they will be lighted in groups of two.
In exceptional cases information may be required as to the
position of units although arrangements for recognition signals
have not been laid down in orders as above.
In these cases the aeroplane will be instructed to call for
the signals by firing white signal lights, and troops in the
vicinity of the aeroplane will thereupon comply by making
signals with such means as are available.
45. Co-operation with engineers
1. Engineer work on behalf of armoured car units is specially
required in connection with :
i. The improvement of routes across country.
ii. Strengthening of existing bridges to admit of their
passage by armoured cars.
iii. The construction of bridges.across gaps which cannot
be avoided or the provision of ferries, etc.
iv. The removal of obstacles which are beyond the capacity
of the armoured car personnel.
2. Arrangements will be made to attach parties of engineers
with equipment to armoured car units operating indepen-
dently in areas where it appears probable that their services
will be required.
3. It will usually be desirable that a small detachment of
engineers should accompany armoured car units employed on
reconnaissance duty ahead of the main body, in order that
engineer reconnaissance of the area likely to be passed over
by the main body may be carried out as early as possible.
4. Engineers may be required to co-operate with armoured
cars in the demolition of routes, dumps, villages and other
points of importance to the enemy. In these operations the
responsibility of the engineers is to prepare the necessary


demolitions while the armoured car units protect them while
at work and cover their withdrawal. It is of particular
importance that the commanders of the armoured cars and
the engineers should settle in consultation the time available
for the preparation and carrying out of the demolitions. The
responsibility for ordering the actual demolitions will be
clearly defined. (See Field Service Regulations, Vol. 11,
1935, Sec. 49. 3.)
5. It will not be possible to attach engineers' to every
armoured car or group of armoured cars. They must travel
on the routes when their assistance is likely to be essential
and in vehicles which proceed at the pace of armoured cars.


CHAPTER IX
MARCHES
46. General considerations
1. General.
Armoured cars, by reason of their high speed, are
mechanically unsuitable for slow movement as an integral
part of a non-mechanized column of all arms; whenever
possible, they will move independently by bounds, either in
rear, on parallel lines of advance, or in the intervals between
other bodies of troops. Bounds should be as long as possible,
provided that due allowance is made for the capabilities of
the vehicles and the endurance of the crews.
2. Road and cross-country movements.
Marches will generally be carried out by road. Cross-
country movement for any considerable distance is difficult
for armoured cars.
In certain countries where roads and tracks are few, the
necessity for avoiding congestion on existing communications
may outweigh other considerations. In such undeveloped
countries artificial obstacles are likely to be few and cross-
country movement may be both possible and desirable.
Cross-country marches over difficult ground should be
carried out in daylight if possible ; by night, such movements
are slow, involve considerable strain on personnel* and
necessitate detailed preliminary reconnaissance.
3. Orders.
Orders for a march should, where necessary, include instruc-
tions on the following points, if these are not covered by
Standing Orders: —
i. The destination and the exact route to be followed.
ii. The composition of the column.
iii. Times or distances to be maintained between vehicles
and units.
iv. The hour of starting and the time allowed for the move.
v. Halts.
vi. Means of intercommunication‘throughout the column,
and signals.
vii. Precautions against surprise.
viii. Concealment from the air.


ix. Use of lights at night.
x. Movement of first line transport in the case of cross-
country marches.
xi. Action if vehicles break down.
4. Reconnaissance.
Previous reconnaissance of the route to be followed will
seldom be possible, but a careful study of the map and other
information available will enable difficulties to be foreseen.
If reliable maps are not available or if the country is un-
mapped, the route should be reconnoitred by air if possible.
Among other points which require consideration ( see Sec. 12,
2), it is important to ascertain the position and nature of
crossings of railways, rivers, hills hud valleys, the strength of
bridges, and at fords the depth of water and nature of the
river bed.
5. Rate of movement.
The rate of movement of vehicles forming an independent
column will vary according to whether the march is carried
out by day or night, by read or across country. It will also
depend on the economic speed of the vehicles. A thorough
knowledge of the capabilities of any particular type of vehicle
and of the circumstances of the case is the only guide to the
time that will be taken to complete a given march.
The normal rate of march, including short halts, of armoured
cars will be approximately as follows :
On roads by day .. .. 25 miles an hour.
Across country by day .. 10-15 miles an hour.
On roads in the dark- .. 20 miles an hour (with lights),
ditto .. 7 miles an hour (without lights).
6. On the march, normal distances to be maintained between
vehicles will be :
In rear of vehicles .. .. .. 15 yards.
In rear of troops and squadrons .. .. 60 yards.
These are minimum distances and may be increased as
desirable when the comfort of the troops and not the tactical
situation is the first consideration.
7. Intercommunication.
Vehicles should keep as close to the side of the road as
possible. An observer should be detailed in each vehicle to
watch for and transmit signals, and to warn the driver when
cars or despatch riders are about to pass the vehicle. Com


munication throughout a column on the road should be
maintained by motor cyclists.
8. Halts.
Halts will take place at regular intervals for the convenience
of the personnel'and to enable minor mechanical adjustments
to be made if required.
When ordered to halt, vehicles will close up on the leading
vehicles of the troop to half a car’s length, but normal distances
in rear of troops, etc., will be maintained unless the necessity
for concealment from the air makes other dispositions desirable.
If halted on the road, the column will draw up as close to the
" rule of the road ” side as possible. Dismounted personnel
must be kept dear of the road way. “ Guard cars ” must be
posted, as circumstances demand, to ensure that the column
Is not surprised at the halt.
APPENDIX
THE MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION
1. The organization for the maintenance of armoured car
units from a base is a matter of vital importance to their
efficiency. This maintenance has two aspects, viz., supply
and repair.
2. The delivery of ammunition, petrol, oil, grease, spare
parts, supplies and stores generally to the vehicles front rail-
head is effected by three echelons of transport. The second
and third lines of transport are manned by the Royal Army
Service Corps and normally form part of the formation
ammunition companies, ammunition parks and supply
columns, while the first line is an integral part of units.
When armoured car units are Transferred to other corps or
divisions, the appropriate vehicles of second and third line
transport are transferred to the corresponding echelons for
the supply of the troops of that formation.
3. It is not possible to ensure that all vehicles of a unit are
always mechanically fit for battle. In estimating the number
available at any given moment a percentage must be deducted
for those undergoing second line repairs. This percentage
should be small in the opening stages of a campaign, but is
likely to increase as a war progresses and in direct proportion
to the intensity of the operations.


4. Repairs are classified in three grades, viz., first line,
second line and line of communication repairs.
first line repairs are those which can be carried out by unit
personnel in the time allowed by the tactical situation and
utilizing the tools provided with the unit. Such repairs may
include replacement of assemblies by others sent up from the
rear, but will not normally include the replacement of com-
ponents of assemblies for which fitting entailing the use of
power tools is necessary.
An armoured car unit will have attached to it a light aid
detachment from the mobile division ordnance workshop or
from an army field workshop. The light aid detachment
renders “ first aid ” and supplements the work of the unit
fitters and maintains liaison with the parent workshop.
5. Second line repairs are those beyond the capacity of the
personnel and equipment of the unit but within the capacity
of the workshop lorries and personnel of the ordnance work-
shops. They are carried out by these latter units.
Vehicles undergoing second line repairs are not replaced in
the unit, but they return to it as soon as the repairs have been
carried out.
6. Repairs which cannot be carried out by the field work-
shops are termed line of communication repairs. The vehicles
and equipment concerned will be evacuated to formation
supply railhead or the advanced ordnance depot for repair
in workshops on the line of communication. They will be
replaced on indent by base or advanced ordnance depots.
In urgent cases corps field parks can replace non-fighting
vehicles.
(Reprinted with the permission of the Controller, His Majesty's
Stationery Office, London).
By Authority : MoCarron, Bird & Co., 479 Collins Street, Melbourne.
