

INDIAN IMMIGRATION.
ON THE
INTRODUCTION
OF
INDIAN LABOURERS,
OCTOBER, 1836.
SYDNEY:
«
PRINTED BY A. COHEN, AT THE “ AUSTRALIAN” OFFICE.


INDIAN IMMIGRATION.
ON THE
INTRODUCTION
OF
INDIAN LABOURERS,
OCTOBER, 1836.
Memorandum for the Consideration of His Excellency the Governor of
Neiv South Wales and its Dependencies.
In submitting to His Excellency a second Memorandum on this subject, I acknow-
ledge with grateful thanks his prompt notice of, and reply to my first; since which I have
been in consultation with several Gentlemen in this Colony, whose experience, property, and
station in society, as well as their wish to obtain the benefit of Indian Labourers, made me
desirous to have their opinions.
All I have heard confirms more strongly my former opinion on this subject. I will
therefore briefly state, and with all due deference, the result of my enquiries:—
Ist. —After due consideration, it appears to me that individuals of the kind I would
introduce to this Country from India, could not be brought to this Colony, under
present circumstances, for less than eleven pounds sterling for every male, and eight
pounds for every female. I would propose, the males to be, not under eighteen, nor
above thirty years of age, and the females from twelve, to twenty-five years. Males
and females under twelve years, might be brought for about four pounds.
2nd. —From all I can learn, I have reason to believe, that many, if not all the wealthy
Colonists of respectability, desirous of obtaining Indian Labourers in the manner I
have suggested, would willingly pay half of the above sum, or very nearly as much,
if the Government will defray the remaining balance, which is but little compared
with the bounty offered for European Labourers.
a In


In assumining that this may be sanctioned by His Excellency, I proceed to state —
3rd. — lt will be impossible to procure certificates of the age or qualifications of those
individuals in any case ; but to guard against all attempts to introduce useless or
diseased individuals, from age or any other cause, I would suggest that the Captain
or Supercargo of any Ship bringing Labourers, should be obliged to produce a
“ correct descriptive roll” of those persons, stating their names, height, probable
age, and any other remarkable features in their appearance.
4 th . The said “ roll” to bear underneath the superscription of one of the Magis-
trates of Calcutta; and further, that all should be examined on board the Ship, by
some respectable Surgeon in Calcutta, to ascertain as far as practicable, that the
persons in question are not in any way deformed, or labouring under any chronic
disease, and that they appear to him to be correctly described in the said document,
to which he should likewise affix his signature in testimony of his opinion.
sth. —lt will in my humble opinion be proper, that no claim shall be made for such
aid as the Government may be pleased to grant, before the Labourers are landed at
this Port of Sydney, or other Port of its Dependencies; and,
Gtii. —l would earnestly urge that a premium of eight percent, (to be deducted from
the amount above specified) be appropriated and paid over to the Captain or Officer in
command of the Ship importing Indian Lrbourers, for fiis care of their health, &c.,
such payment to be made only for individuals landed in health ; and when such
claims may be disputed, that reference for final adjustment be made to some respect-
able Medical Officer nominated by the Government. I feel satisfied that these
precautions are necessary, and that they will have the desired effect.
7th. —In rating the passage money so high for introducing a people whose wants are
of a less expensive nature than those of Europeans, and for a shorter voyage, I am
guided by the following facts which I can prove indisputably, viz :
A Native of Europe arriving here, finds no difference in the food he gets on landing,
from that he has been accustomed to, and although I am satisfied, that the Class of
Indians I propose introducing, will soon and gladly take to the same food used by
Europeans, I would not bring them here, without rice, and proper condiments, for
one year’s consumption after landing; all this, will take about one ton for every
four persons, besides the food required for the voyage—and although Sydney, by
the track usually pursued, is not much more distant from Calcutta than half the
distance


distance of the latter Port from London, be it remembered, that when the Monsoons
arc adverse, the voyages from Sydney to Calcutta, and from Calcutta to Sydney are
not unfrequently four months and upwards ; witness the voyages of the Mary, Wil-
liam Harris, and Vestal, within the last twelve months.
In England, Ships can be had in abundance, at £4 per ton; they can easily load
with many commodities required in these Settlements, and they arc always sure of
freight back. My accounts from Calcutta came down to 2nd July ; freights were
then as high as £8 per ton to Sydney. There are very few articles the produce of
India required here —nothing for dead weight except sugar and molasses, and there
is no freight whatever back ; so that Ships from Calcutta to Sydney, though nomi-
nally, only double that to London, cost in reality, three times the amount; setting
aside Port Charges, which are high in Calcutta and Sydney, compared to London
and other British Ports.
Bth. — 1 have taken measures to ascertain, as early as possible, the laws enacted in the
Isle of France, for the due protection and guidance of Indian Labourers, and their
employers ; which subject, I doubt not, will in due time, have the consideration of
this Government. In the meantime, should His Excellency wish it, I will be glad
to furnish such further information as ipay be in my power, regarding the matter 1
have had the honor to bring to his notice.
JOHN MACKAY.
ADDITIONAL MEMORANDA,
22ND MAY, 1837.
Submitted for the Consideration of His Excellency the Governor, and
to be laid before the Legislative Council, should His Excellency
consider it proper.
A period of six months has elapsed, since I had the honor of submitting my former
Memorandum in October, a Copy of which I beg to prefix* Since then, I have been assiduous
in my enquiries ; and all I have heard goes to confirm in a stronger degree, if possible, my
opinion


opinion of the necessity there exists for introducing, as speedily as practicable, as many Indian
Labourers, of a proper description, as can be procured in Calcutta, in the proper season.
In Calcuttta, and the Lower Provinces, they are denominated “ Boonahs,” —in the
Upper Provinces they are called •* Dangurs.” Unlike the Hindoos or Mahometans, the
Dangurs entertain no prejudices of Caste or Religion; and they are willing to turn their
hands to any labour whatever, as far as they are capable. Neither are they unwilling to par-
take of any kind of animal food, the worst description of which would be luxury to them.
In their own country they have but little rice, and eat snakes, lizards, rats, mice, &c.
Their clothing is simple and scanty, and they eat only once, rarely twice, in twenty-four hours.
Their habitations are equally simple and confined —any dry place, twenty feet square,
and eight feet high, would suffice for twenty men. They are unacquainted with the luxury
of a bed beypnd a dry floor, upon which they repose in their blankets in the cold weather
and a remnant of thin cotton cloth in the summer season. For any kind of labour requiring
great muscular strength, they are not equal to stout Europeans ; but since my arrival in this
country, I have seen many Europeans earning three shillings per diem, the result of whose
labour, individually, would not equal that of an industrious “ Dangur” receiving only one-
third of the European’s pay, food and every thing included. For any agricultural purpose,
excepting the plough, I consider them fully equal to Europeans, especially in using the hoe,
and grubbing roots, weeding, &c. From their patient disposition and tractable habits, I feel
equally certain of their proving (with a little care in making them understand the business)
excellent shepherds.
I have already said that their food is simple. The beef rejected here by the lowest
European, would be very welcome to them, and maize flour they are particularly fond of—they
see but little of it in their own country, the grinding alone costing more than coarse rice,
which with a little salt, chillies, and vegetables, form their best food.
With the labourers sent to the Mauritius, females are in the proportion of one in
ten. The females are not unwilling to labour, such as weeding, gathering corn, &c. The
rate of passage money quoted in my former memorandum, £ll for males, and £8 for females,
I find will be too low, in chartering a ship for the sole purpose; but in bringing a due pro-
portion of labourers, in vessels carrying as much cargo (dead weight), as will be sufficient
ballast, without materially straitening the room for passengers, and no light goods, it may
suffice. Should the rate of freight in Calcutta decline to £4 per ton, as formerly, then vessels
may be chartered for the sole purpose, so as not to be crowded.
In


In giving the subject, in all its bearings, every consideration my mind suggests, I
think I have not omitted any precaution requisite for the due attainment of the purpose in view,
further than that it is my humble opinion, it will be well in this Government, to request the
Governor General of India, to order one of the Surgeons of the Calcutta Presidency, for the
duty of examining the Labourers, as proposed in the fourth paragraph of my prefixed Memo-
randum of October, 1836; the said Surgeon to be allowed from the ship receiving the
Labourers, such remuneration for his trouble, as may be deemed proper.
I beg to add the following Extracts of Letters received in Sydney, from the Mauritius
on this subject, which I presume will be more convincing than any thing more, occurring to
me at present.
From Blessrs. Thomas Blythe and Sons, to Messrs. Bettington <Sf Co.
Sydney, dated Mauritius, ‘Find April, 1836.
“ The Planters having introduced free Indians, apprenticed generally for five years,
keeps our cultivation in as healthy a state as we have ever seen it. The experiment of free Labour
has been entirely successful; we have fifty free Indians on our own estate, and they cost, in-
cluding food, clothing, and wages, together with the expense of bringing them here, about
twenty-two shillings and sixpence per month.
“ It seems to us, that in New South Wales the deficiency of Agricultural Labour
might be beneficially supplied from Bengal.”
Extract from the same to the same, dated Mauritius, Ith October, 1836.
“ With respect to Indian Labourers, it will be interesting to you to know, that the
introduction of these people, has been attended with the most complete success. One thousand
individuals have arrived in the past week; and a cargo is at this moment coming up the har-
bour, and two thousand men more, are on their passage. They are quiet, docile, and indus-
trious. The total cost, including passage here and back, at the end of their apprenticeship,
which is generally five years, together with food, clothing, &c., is no more than five Spanish
Dollars per month, or five shillings per week, which ydi will allow is cheap labour in any
n Country.


Country. Should you feel disposed to try the experiment, Messrs. Henty and Dawson, of
Calcutta', act as Agents for the engagement of these people.
" In conclusion, I have only to add my readiness to attend, if required, and afford
any further explanation in my power which His Excellency the Governor, and the Legislative
Council may demand, touching this subject.”
JOHN MACKAY.
Remarks upon the Employment of Indian Labourers, out of their own
Country, by J. R. Mayo, Esq. Sydney, 1 May, 1837.
The Natives of India cannot, in their own Country, be induced to forego their
customs, manners, the use of their own implements of husbandry, their own modes of Agri-
culture, nor can they he stimulated to exert a continuous labor. But abroad, as in the Mau-
ritius, most of these objections are overcome; with some diffiulty in the first instance; but,
from the example which is presented to them of a large body of Negroes working in a superior
and more efficient manner to their own, and no longer trammelled in the prejudices of Caste
and Braminical Priesthood, they no longer object to use other implements than their own, to
adopt better modes of Agriculture, and to work in a more regular and steady manner.
Natives of Caste require certain kinds food, certain forms of cooking, and other obser-
vances. Of several Castes, in the same gang, one will not eat with the other, nor allow their food
to be cooked by any other than one of their own Caste. But in sever al parts of India there are
people to be found who have no Caste; especially the Hill Coolies of Bengal, a fine athletic
race of people, who eat fresh meat or any other kind of food without scruple. They are quite
free from the prejudices of the Hindoos and Mahomedans. From my general experience as
a Planter, and from the knowledge I acquired, and the enquiries I made, during my residence
in the Isle of France, I am competent to speak with confidence respecting the system of
introducing Indian Labourers into that Colony, and the probable effects of adopting the same
system in this.
When the importation of Indian Labourers into the Isle of France, first commenced
it was undertaken in complete ignorance. The Planters gave their orders to their Factors,
who wrote to their Correspondents in India (in the same manner they would for any com-
modity.


modity) to send so many hundred men. The Merchants of India give their instructions to
some Native Retainer or Agent to get so many Labourers, to go abroad for so many years and
at such a rate of wages ; the Merchants are allowed so much per head, and they likewise give
to their Native Employd a certain sum per man shipped. The Native Agent (none of whom
are to be trusted where gain is concerned) engages the first people he can find, often using
deception, false representations, stratagem, and, even, does not hesitate to employ force.
The first batch sent to the Mauritius were from Madras, and the people were
taken from the refuse of the population in the City. They turned out a complete failure, and,
I believe, the whole of them were sent back. This event, for some time, discouraged the
Planters from importing any more. Afterwards some Planters connected with India obtained
a good set of Labourers, who turned out very well. It then became a mania. Some Planters
and Merchants appointed Agents to proceed to India ; others wrote to their Correspondents
in that Country; in each case the remuneration was so much per head. Like the Native
Agents many of these thought only of the greatest profit they could make, and procured the
most worthless objects that presented themselves, or entrapped them by false representations;
the consequence was, many bad hands were introduced. In one gang, of less than two
hundred, on their arrival, sixty were found to be afflicted with venereal complaints. These dis-
graceful transactions induced the Governor to prohibit the importation of any more Labourers
without his Special License ; and it is in further contemplation that hereafter a certain pro-
portion of females should be provided ; for hitherto no women had been imported, except
such as the Labourers paid the passage for, themselves ; the Planters being in no way liable
for them. Notwithstanding all these discouraging circumstances, more than twelve thousand
have been brought into the Island ; about four thousand more were, at the time of the
prohibition being issued, already on their voyage, or ordered to be sent, and which, under
the case, were allowed to be introduced ; and the Governor has since granted his License
for the importation of many more.
I have no doubt, but that in two or three years, there will be twenty-five or thirty-
thousand Indian Labourers in the Isle of France ; which is a proof, though so many inferior
persons have been introduced, how valuable the Indian Labourer is ; and will show, at once,
the great benefit that may be derived from their employment in this Country. So important
and superior is this kind of labour considered, from the example given in the Mauritus, that
the Jamaica and Demerara Planters, who have hitherto attempted to employ British cultivators,
but without success, principally in consequence of the destructive and demoralizing effects of
intemperance, now propose, and by this time, I have no doubt, are carrying into operation,
the introduction of Indian Labourers into the West Indies.
All


All over India there are Castes of people who have pursued one occupation from
generation to generation, from time immemorial. There is the Caste of Gualah herdsmen,
the Caste of Bheriwallah shepherds ; and the Caste of Aheer, who are both herdsmen and
shepherds. These Castes are fine people, and would serve for the like purposes in this
Country; there are other Castes which would do for particular employments, such as
Gorawallahs, Domestics, &c. ; but for Agricultural, and general purposes, I should prefer
employing the Hill Coolies of Bengal, especially as they are not only a fine race of people
but free from Caste.
There is one great advantage to be derived from the Indian character —they arc
temperate, and are particularly trustworthy where sobriety is absolutely necessary. Tljc
Planters in the Isle of France employ them now, almost exclusive of the Negroes, as
Carters, especially for the purpose of carrying their sugars to town. But such is the force
of example for good, but more unfortunately for bad, that several of them have taken to the
drinking of spirits; which shows the necessity of keeping the Indians free from the contami-
nating influence of European intemperance. If European Labourers be necessary for ad-
mixture with them (which I think is absolutely necessary, to teach them by example the use
of our implements, the mode of our agriculture, and the advantages of exerting a continuous
application of labour), I would, in my own case, with the assistance of Government, import
a select set of Labourers from Great Britain for that express purpose; and would make it a
condition that they were to have no allowance of spirits. This is supposing I were placed at
Moreton Bay, or other place further North, where those demoralizing pests. Public-houses,
could not be established to seduce my Labourers.
From all I have seen myself, and from the assurances of many of the first Planters
in the Mauritius, the Indians upon the average are equal, and many superior, to the Negroes.
After a short time they become os expert, as laborious, more tractable, and far more trust-
worthy. It is true several complaints have occurred, both on the part of the Masters and on
that of the employed. But in nearly every case, I believe the cause has arisen from mis-
understanding, from ignorance of the Indian character and language, from many of the Indians
having been led to emigrate in other capacities than that of Labourers ; and, too often, either
from necessity, ignorance, negligence, or cupidity, from the Masters changing the quantity,
quality, or kind of food. There is a strange anomaly in the Government of the Mauritius, —
the Special Magistrates appointed for the protection of Apprenticed Negroes, cannot by
the tenor of their Commissions, take cognizance of the differences between Planters and Indian
Labourers ; but this is about to be remedied.
In the Mauritius, Labourers are imported without any assistance from Government,
and


and the Planters, generally, being without funds, or connexions in India, employ their Factors
to send for them. The latter in their endeavours to obtain them with as much speed and at as
little cost as possible, have introduced many very bad hands. If Labourers are to be brought
into this Colony, it is proposed to do so at the expence of the public, and not of individuals.
Government have therefore the clearest right to regulate the manner and terms of
their importation; so as to secure, by every possible means, the supply of none, hut persons
of the most proper and effective description. In the first instance, I should suppose, that only
a limited number will be introduced, by way of experiment, to ascertain whether the system
be good or bad. If three or four thousand be obtained to commence with, the system will
receive a complete and extensive trial. Government should not write to Merchants at Calcutta
to send out so many persons, for they would merely commission Natives to collect the number,
and who would take them from any source they could most easily and cheaply do so ; but
should appoint some experienced and practical person here, and under their own control, who
has the interest of the Colony at heart, and who is zealous in promoting the successful es-
tablishment of this system of Emigration,' to proceed to India, and with the aid of both
Native and European Assistants, and a Native Surgeon, all of whom he can engage on the
spot, to visit the interior and select the subjects most proper for the purpose. Restrictions
should be imposed as to the number of persons to be put on board each ship, according to her
tonnage ; and each vessel should carry a Native Surgeon, educated at the Company’s Medical
College in Calcutta. These precautions being taken, no disappointment will ensue ; and
instead of many of tbe men being worse than a loss, each would prove effective and useful.
In the Mauritius, the Labourer is bound for five years only; but in this Country the
period should be for seven years, in consequence of the lengthened voyage, the greater danger
and risk, and the increased expense. Indeed, in the Mauritius, the Planters complain of the
short apprenticeship and talk of extending the term. If a proportion of women be imported,
I have no doubt but that the Indians -would be happy to be engaged for even 10 years. The
West Indian Planters mean to extend the term to 10 years. At all events, none should be
engaged without being bound for some time; for if they come here as free agents, many will
get employed by the most worthless of the Colonists; many will not be employed at all, but
will prefer working, as they do in India, when want compels them; and the probability is,
that the whole of them will become worthless and a pest to society.
I would observe, that the importation of Indian Labourers, under judicious regula-
tions, will not only advance the interests of this Cmfntry, but will prove of incalculable
benefit to India itself. In time, I think, it would prove to be the most effectual method of
c 4 sending


sending into that vast region not only improved manners, customs, arts, agriculture and
laws, but also the blessings of Christianity.
I enclose a copy of the several items contained in the Contract entered into with the
Indians, by the parties of one of the first Houses in the Mauritius, who are both Merchants
and Planters. I also enclose two printed Letters, the one being an answer from the Colonial
Secretary of the Mauritius to an application for permission to import Indian Labourers ; the
other, a letter from the Colonial Secretary to individual Planters, acknowledging that the
system appears, not only to have worked well hitherto, but to promise improvement in pro-
portion as the Indians become acquainted with the language, and habituated to the manners and
customs of the Colony; and pointing out how the differences which have hitherto arisen, may
in future, be avoided. These documents are of the greatest importance, and will fully bear out
what I have advanced from my own knowledge, as well as from the information I have
obtained from others.
J. R. MAYO.
Sydney, May 1, 1837.
Copy of Terms of Engagement for the introduction of Labourers from
India to Mauritius .
The period for which the Labourers are engaged is for five years, to date from the
time of their leaving India.
Their passage to this Island is defrayed by the party who engages them.
Their rations are specified in the Contract; being daily for each individual 21bs. of
Rice, a little Ghee and Mustard Oil, &c. Their pay is fixed at the rate of 5 Rupees (about
10s.) per month for each labourer, and 7 Rupees for each Commander. One Commander is
sufficient for every hundred men.
One rupee per month is deducted from the pay of each, to form a fund to provide a
return passage to India in case they wish to return at the termination of the term, or in case
of bad conduct; should no such contingency arise, the sura deducted is refunded to them at
the end of their period of service.
The party engaging the men is responsible to Government for their good conduct
whilst in the Island.
Tim


The labour that they shall perform, and the hours of work are fixed by the Manager
of the property where they may be placed.
Medical attendance is provided for them, and clothing according to the Contract
annually, viz; 2 lascar caps, two dhooties, and two jackets or blankets.
The men receive six months advance of pay, to commence from the date of their
embarkation.
The engagement is unregistered at the Police in Calcutta, and at the Police here.
Mauritius, 13 th January, 1837.
(Copv.) Colonial Secretary’s Office, Port Louis, Mauritius.
SIR,
1. His Excellency the Governor has perused with much pleasure the Reports of
the inhabitants who employ Indian Labourers on their estates; and he has examined with
great care the proceedings had before the Civil Commissaries with regard to the complaints
of that class of persons, as well as those that have been preferred against them.
2. The result is highly satisfactory with regard to the general treatment, conduct,
and condition of the Indians introduced as Labourers into this Island : and the system appears
not only to have worked well hitherto, but to promise improvement in proportion as these
persons become acquainted with our language, and habituated to the manners and customs of
the Colony.
3. The Governor, however, has observed that in a largo proportion of the differences
that have arisen between the Indian Labourers and their employers, the cause of complaint has
originated from some real or fancied infraction of the engagements entered into with them ;
more particularly with regard to food. To this subject, therefore. His Excellency wishes to
direct your serious attention, and to impress upon you the necessity of the most scrupulous
and faithful execution of all the conditions of their contracts, as the point on which will mainly
depend the continuance of tranquility, good order, and obedience among the Indians in your
service.
4. . In some cases w'here the Masters have not been able to obtain the exact kinds
of food, of which the rations of the Indians are composed, equivalents have been substituted,
and even in larger and more liberal proportions than would compensate for the value of the
deficient


deficient articles; but the people have not been satisfied with the change, and misunder-
standings and complaints have followed. Now this is a difficulty which may easily be over-
come by proper precaution, in having always on hand a sufficient supply of these articles of
subsistence; and by the punctual and regular delivery of the rations, to which too much
attention cannot bo paid.
5. Similar punctuality and regularity should be practised in regard to the payment
of their wages, the issue of their clothing, and the other stipulations in the engagements with
the Indians.
G. The hours of work should be well defined and carefully attended to by the
Master on his side. Several of the engagements entered into in India are very defective in
this respect, but as the defect can readily be remedied here, no time should be lost in regu-
lating the hours of labour so as to avoid any cause for complaint on that account.
7. Whenever it may be practicable, task work will be found well suited to the
previous habits of the Indians ; and it will, in consequence, prove as much for the advantage
of the Master as for that of the Labourers to practice it, whenever the nature of their em-
ployment will admit of it.
8. The effect of a due attention on your part to obtain these points will be to
obtain for you the confidence of the Indians; and thereby to secure the regular and cheerful
performance, on their part, of their daily labour, as well as a quiet and peaceful demeanour
among them.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most Obedient Servant,
Colonial Secretary
(Copy.) Colonial Secretary’s Office,Port Louis, Mauritius, 183 G.
1. —His Excellency the Governor has had before him your letter of the
soliciting to be allowed to send to India for Indian Labourers,
and I have received the Governor’s directions to acquaint you that he is pleased to accede to
your request under the usual guarantees on your part.
2. —But it having come to His Excellency’s knowledge that engagements have been
entered jnto in Calcutta with the Indians introduced here, which are contrary to the laws of
the Colony, such, for instance, as working on Sundays, corporal punishment by the Sirdar or
Chief


Chief, unlimited hours of work; the Governor desires me to intimate to you, that every such
engagement, being illegal, cannot be tolerated here, and it is an express condition of his
assent to your request, that no such stipulations be made with the
whom you have asked permission to bring into the colony.
3. —His Excellency desires me, at the same time, to press upon you the necessity of
the utmost attention being observed in the selection of the persons who may be engaged to
work on your Estate. The disappointments and inconveniences which ■ attended the first
attempts to introduce free Labour into this Colony, are mainly attributable to that want of
selection which is so essential to the success of the undertaking; and His Excellency cannot too
strongly recommend, that especial care be now taken to ensure that the persons who may be
engaged, shall have been known as really agricultural Labourers in their own country (of the
class called Hill Coolies) when coming from Calcutta; and that they, and the Chief or Sindar
who accompanies themhither, shall have been mutually known to each other before being engaged.
4. —His Excellency further recommends it to you, to apply for a suitable proportion
of women to accompany the men you propose to introduce, as a measure which His Excel-
lency is satisfied you will find eventually to be productive of advantage.
5. —lt has also been suggested to His Excellency, that it would be very advisable, to
have each Indian separately by a Medical Practitioner, previously to their em-
barkation, in order that none but healthy subjects may be engaged; and that his certificate
should accompany the individuals when they come here ; a proposition of which His Excel-
lency highly approves, and particularly recommends you to give instructions to your Agent to
that effect.
G. —Considerable inconvenience appears also to have been experienced, from the
advance of six months wages made in Calcutta to the Indian Labourers, in consequence of
which they are a long time here before they become entitled to pay. His Excellency thinks
this a matter also well deserving your attention, and whether it would not be prudent that the
advance should be limited to three, or at the utmost, to four months wages.
7. —Recent events having fully shown the inconveniences resulting from a failure of
supplies of Rice from Bengal, His Excellency desires me particularly to impress upon you, the
necessity of your making arrangements for obtaining from India, adequate supplies of Rice,
not only for the subsistancc of those Labourers, but of the Apprentices employed on your
Estate; as well as of the other articles of food stipulated for, in the engagements with the Indians.
«
I have the honor to he.
Your most obedient Servant,
n


Letter from Certain FlocJc- Otvners in Netv South Wales, to the Honor-
able the Colonial Secretary.
Sydney, 24th May, 1837.
Sir,
Having waited for some considerable time in anxious expectation, tbe arrival of
Emigrants and Convicts from the Mother Country to supply the wants of our Establishments
in the Interior, and finding that there remains not the slightest chance of receiving from that
quarter a sufficient supply of Laborers to meet the wants of the Colonists, we beg, through
you, to submit to His Excellency the Governor, for his consideration, the urgent necessity
whieh exists of sending to Bengal for Shepherds, Cowherds, Labourers, and Household Ser-
vants, where they may be had in numbers, willing to emigrate, and of sober, honest, and
industrious habits.
Aware, that His Excellency is ever alive to the wants of the Colonists, and equally
desirous to assist them to the extent of his power, we deem it unncessary to say further on
the subject of this communication, than that the want of labor is at present felt to an alarming
extent, throughout the Colony; that in many cases the plough remains idle; and that in order
to wean the last Spring Lambs, Flock-owners have been obliged, in numerous instances, to
place two flocks of sheep in one, under the care of one Shepherd.
Should His Excellency determine on sending to India for the descriptions of persons
mentioned, and at the expense of Government, we will bind ourselves to take on their arrival
here, and to keep them thenceforth, free of expense to the Government, at certain fixed Rate
of Wag'es and Rations, to be fixed on hereafter by the Subscribers, a certain number of those
persons, and many other Flock-owners, now in the interior, will willingly do the same.
We have the honor to be, &c.
[Here follow the Signatures.']


NEW SOUTH WALES.
INDIAN IMMIGRATION.
MEMORANDA
BY JOHN MACKAY, ESQ.,
ON THE INTRODUCTION INTO THE COLONY
INDIAN LABOURERS,
AND
REMARKS,
BY J. R. MAYO, ESQ.,
ON THEIR USEFULNESS,
WITH
A LETTER
FROM CERTAIN FLOCK-OWNERS,
EXPRESSING THEIR READINESS TO EMPLOY THEM.
Ordered, by The Council, to he Printed.
