

COMMEMORATION OF
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP
THE WARD OF BREAD STREET
AND THE CITY OF LONDON IN
FELLOWSHIP WITH SYDNEY
AND AUSTRALIA
THE
CHURCH of ST. MILDRED, BREAD ST
WITH ST. MARGARET MOYSES




CHURCH OF
ST. MILDRED, BREAD STREET
WITH S. MARGARET MOYSES /
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA AND
THE WARD OF BREAD STREET
Second Annual
Srctria nf Tljanksgitiing
in tynmmr nf
Ebmual Srtijur E.B.
Founder and First Governor of Australia,
born in the Ward of Bread Street,
October nth, 1738
Thursday, October nth, 1934 at 3 p.m-
The Address will be given by
The Rt. Hon. the VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD
of Hythe
The National Historical Memorial
to Admiral Arthur Phillip is at this
Church; it was unveiled Dec. 7th, 1932
by H.R.H. Prince George, K.G.
Overleaf will be found some particulars of an organisation
through which it is hoped to make permanent provision for the
care of the Memorial and for the continuance of the Annual
Services of Thanksgiving (this is the second) in honour of one
of London’s greatest citizens
A request is made to the Congregation to stand during the Prayers


Admiral Arthur Phillip Memorial
Patron:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE GEORGE, K.G.
President:
Alderman the Right Honorable Viscount Wakefield, of Hythe,
C.8.E., LL.D.
Vice-Presidents :
The Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of London, K.C.V.0., D.D.
The Primate of Australia
The Prime Minister of Australia
The Rt. Hon. the Lord Mayor of the City of London
The High Commissioner for Australia
The Rt. Hon. S. M. Bruce, P.C.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Denman, P.C., G.C.M.G., K.C.V.O.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Forster of Lepe, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.L.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Stonehaven, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.S.O.
His Excellency the Governor-General of Australia
The Rt. Hon. Sir Isaac Isaacs, P.C., K.C.M.G.
The Chief Justice of Australia, Sir Frank Gavan Duffy, K.C.M.G.
COMMITTEE:
Alderman the Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield, of Hythe,
C.8.E., LL.D. (Chairman)
S. Mildred with S. Margaret Moyses;
Rev. J. Richardson-Eyre, M.A. (Rector)
T. G. Devas, W. L. Taylor, Herbert E. Hill, C.C.
(Churchwardens)
Bread Sheet Ward:
Deputy J. H. White, C.C., W. B. Chapman, C.C.,
J. Northcott, C.C., E. F. Donne, C.C., F. B. Coates, C.C.,
A. Mackenzie Hay, C.C., H. Meldrum, C.C.
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company,
Col. G. P. Botterill, C.C.
The Master of the Curriers’ Company, Mr. F. Burnett
D. Hope-Johnston, M.A., J.P., Mrs. D. Hope-Johnston,
Hanbury Davies
Secretaries:
F. W. Mander, M.A., Ward & Vestry Clerk, 7 Cannon St., E.C.4
The Secretary, Australia House, Strand, W.C.2
George Pilcher, The Royal Empire Society,
27 Carlton House Terrace, S.W. 1


£)rDcr of £>ertotce
3 p.m. Organ Music “Suite Gothique” ( Boellmann )
All standing
Minister: I was glad when they said unto me, I will go into
the House of the Lord. Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O
Jerusalem.
O Lord, open Thou our lips.
And our mouth shall show forth Thy -praise.
O God, make speed to save us.
O Lord , make haste to help us.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost,
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,
World without end. Amen.
Praise ye the Lord.
The Lord's Name he praised.
Psalm 100
(Jubilate - Stanford)
O be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands: serve the Lord with
gladness, and come before his presence with a song.
Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made
us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of
his pasture.
O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into
his courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good
of his Name.
For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting; and his
truth endureth from generation to generation. Amen.
The Lord’s Prayer and Collects
Prayer for the King
and all in Authority under him
Almighty God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly
beseech Thee to bless our Sovereign Lord, King George, the
Parliaments in all his dominions, and all who are set in authority
under him; that they may order all things in wisdom, righteous-
ness, and peace, to the honour of Thy holy name, and the good
of Thy Church and people; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


National Anthem
Official Peace Version , 1919
God save our gracious King,
Long live our noble King,
God save the King!
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us;
God save the King!
One realm of races four,
Blest more and ever more,
God save our land!
Home of the brave and free,
Set in the silver sea,
True nurse of chivalry,
God save our land!
Of many a race and birth
From utmost ends of earth,
God save us all!
Bid strife and hatred cease,
Bid hope and joy increase,
Spread universal peace,
God save us all!
Prayer for the British Empire
Almighty God, who rulest in the kingdom of men, and has
given to our Sovereign Lord, King George, a great dominion
in all parts of the earth: Draw together, we pray Thee, in true
fellowship the men of divers races, languages, and customs,
who dwell therein, that, bearing one another’s burdens, and
working together in brotherly concord, they may fulfil the
purpose of Thy providence and set forward Thy everlasting
kingdom. Amen.
Prayer for Australia and the Homeland
O Almighty God, whose Divine Providence ordereth all
things and guides and rules the destinies of Nations and Peoples;
We thank Thee that out of much toil and heroic struggles
our beloved and honoured Australia has become a great and
distinguished Member of the British Empire and Common-
wealth.
We honour Australia, always loyal and in times of danger
ever ready to give her full offering of Life, Strength, Means
and Resources to serve and help the Motherland in the day
of trial. We pray that every blessing spiritual and material,
may by Thy Divine Grace, follow her in the path of Honour,
Loyalty, Peace and Fidelity and Manly enterprise.


Bless O Lord and strengthen for their high duties the
governments of the Commonwealth of Australia and grant that
all therein may be united in the bond of brotherhood, in pros-
perity and peace and in the Fellowship of the Faith.
We thank Thee, O Lord, that out of recent trials and
difficulties Australia has emerged with honour and fidelity to
all responsibilities and become an example of winning through
to the admiration of the world.
Forgive, O Lord, the faults, neglects and errors of the past
in the course of our Empire development and grant us wisdom
to fulfil Thy laws of Eternal righteousness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen,
Australian National Anthem
Advance Australia Fair
Sung by Choir of 10,000 voices at the Inauguration of the
Commonwealth
Australia’s sons, let us rejoice,
For we are young and free;
We’ve golden soil, and wealth for toil,
Our home is girt by sea.
Our land abounds in nature’s gifts
Of beauty rich and rare,
In history’s page let every stage
Advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.
Beneath our radiant Southern Cross
We’ll toil with hearts and hands,
To make our youthful Commonwealth
Renowned of all the lands;
For loyal sons beyond the seas
We’ve boundless plains to share,
With courage let us all combine
To advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance Australia fair.


Should foreign foe e’er sight our coast,
Or dare a foot to land,
We’ll rouse to arms like sires of yore
To guard our nation’s strand;
Britain then shall surely know,
Beyond wide ocean’s roll,
Her son’s in fair Australia land
Still keep a British soul.
REFRAIN
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance Australia fair.
C6e Heooon
Epistle to the Romans, Chapter XII.
to be read by
The High Commissioner for Australia
The Rt. Hon. S. M. Bruce, P.C.
iDpmn
Praise, my soul, the King of Heaven;
To his feet thy tribute bring.
Ransomed, healed, restored, forgiven,
Who like me his praise should sing?
Praise him! Praise him!
Praise the everlasting King.
Praise him for his grace and favour
To our fathers in distress;
Praise him still the same for ever,
Slow to chide, and swift to bless.
Praise him! Praise him!
Glorious in his faithfulness.
“Land of Hope and Glory” (Elgar)
atJDreoo
VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD


!£)pmn
NOW THANK WE ALL OUR God”
M. Rinkart (1586 — 1649)
TV. C. Winkworth
Now thank we all our God
With heart and hands and voices,
Who wondrous things hath done,
In whom his world rejoices;
Who from our mother’s arms
Hath blest us on our way
With countless gifts of love,
And still is ours to-day.
O may this bounteous God
Through all our life be near us,
With ever-joyful hearts
And blessed peace to cheer us,
And keep us in His grace,
And guide us when perplexed,
And free us from all ills
In this world and the next.
All praise and thanks to God
The Father now be given,
The Son, and him who reigns
With them in highest heaven,
The one eternal God,
Whom earth and heaven adore;
For thus it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.
IBeneDiction


