

[?]
[?]
The Mineral Resources
OF THE
Cook District.
A RETROSPECT
OR A VIEW OF THING PAST IN THE MINING INDUSTRY OF THE NORTH.
BY JAMES DICK.
One Shilling.
1910.
— RECORD CO., PRINTERS, POST DOUGLAS, NORTH QUEENSLAND. —




[?]
The Mineral Resources
OF THE
Cook District.
A RETROSPECT
or. A view or things past in the mining ikddstrt of the north.
BY JAMES DICK.
1910.
-RECORD CO., PRINTERS, PORT DOUGLAS, NORTH QUEENSLAND.




The Mineral Resources of the Cook District.
A RETROSPECT
OK A VIEW OF THINGS PAST IN THE MINING INDUSTRY OF THE NORTH.
BY JAMES DICK.
Introduction .
It is usual for a writer to make some
introductory remarks when undertaking
an arduous task. Some time ago the
Cooktown Pastoral, Agricultural, Min-
ing and Industrial Association offered a
prize for the best essay on the mineral
resources and past history of the mining
industry in the Cook district. I under-
took the task for several reasons, among
them the following •
1, —Because I have always taken an
interest in mining, and have never lost
an opportunity of pushing the industry
ahead.
2, —I have visited and worked on
nearly every field in the Cook district,
and have written a good deal on mining
matters for the good of the district,
and, in doing so, have collected for
years information and experiences,
which have helped me-to compile this
article. .
B.—My object in taking the trouble
to write up the past history of the
mining fields and their resources is to
give honor to those to whom honor is
cine, namely to the hardy prospectors
who so often are forgotten as soon as
the field begins to die out, without any
distinguishing badge of merit to hand
down to posterity, for the benefits they
revealed to the world.
4. My view' in writing is that more
attention may be attr acted to the Cook
district,and that some of the suggestions
given herein may be acted upon, to
prospect and reopen some of the deserted
fielcfe.
5. —I shall endeavor to make these
articles as interesting and as readable
as possible, and have for that purpose
gleaned facts from every source within
my reach that the time, at my disposal
would allow, and from hi! years’ per-
sonal observations. I trust, in the
interest of the North, that readers will
carefully consider and familiarise them-
selves with the places and facts related.
o.—l intend mentioning over twenty
gold and tin fields., twenty mining
towms and camps, twenty-five to thirty
gulches, gullies, creeks, rivers and
hills, with a large number of reefs, in
fact over 100, four wolfram discoveries,
three antimony, two, copper, two coal
localities,.. and special remarks about
platinum, diamond, rubys, mica, molyb-
denite, and cinnabar, special mention
about prospectors and 120 localities in
the C ,-ok district.
The mineral resources of the (look
are so great and so numerous that it is
a difticult matter to decide what, to put
in and what to leave out of this,essay.
The past everts are so nmm-rous and
so varied, and.so many unrecorded that
one is at a loss to know where, to begin
and where to leave off. The numerous
statistics, if recorded, would fill many
columns and prove as dry as dust. I
have therefore only given samples of
ernshings and other totals.-'to show the
importance of the place and the in-
dustry. The main object will be to
show' the great possibilities of the un-
developed mineral resources of the
Cook, and to direct attention to the
best means of opening and re-opening
the dormant mining fields in the Cook
district.
Much more could be written, but it
is a questionable whether a fuller
description would be acceptable or


profitable. Much I have beard in the
past in travelling about and round the
camp fire, and a deal has been drawn
from observation and experience. I am
satisfied that the articles will be as
complete as the space allowed will per-
mit, and that they will be chock full of
information, much of it new and not
obtainable elsewhere.
J. V. Mulligan and Party.
The mining industry of the Cook
district dates from the early seventies,
when Mr. James Venture Mulligan
and party came overla id from George-
town to the Palmer River, so named
by Mr. William Haim, the explorer,
while out reconnoitring the country,
and who furnished information respect-
ing its possibilities. The party pushed
on thiough mostly wild, unknown
country, between what is now known
as Junction Creek and the Palmer, some
200 miles, and there was only one
cattle station, Mount Surprise. The
pioneer band of intrepid prospectors
forged their way ahead through many
difficulties to the far interior of North
Queensland in search of gold, a search
which was destined to change the whole
future of the north, and to greatly
influence the history of Queensland.
A retrospect of mining in the Cook
district at first glance might seem
easy, and to some might only mean the
Palmer as the principal field, but there
are dozens of large and small mining
centres in the district, some of which
have been deserted long ago, and, if
left out, would make a view of the past
very incomplete, and, to my mind, it
would be imperfect -without some
passing remark as to the best means for
future development of its mineral
resources of gold, silver, tin, copper,
and other minerals and precious stones
should also be considered. Eut, as
this might be considered outside of the
scope of the present articles, I must try
to confine myself to a view of the past.
A more comprehensive title, which
would have given a writer a wider fieid,
and call forth more mining experience
and suggestions that might bear fruit
would be : —“ The past, present, and
future development of the mining
industry of the Cook district.” How-
ever, if I occasionally digress a little, I
trust that readers will pardon the
liberty taken.
The Palmer River Goldfield.
The reported discovery of gold on the
Palmer River was made in October,
1873, and the good news flew like
magic to the four corners of Australia,
and beyond to New Zealand, and even
to China. Thousands of men came to
tlie Palmer goldfield from every part of
the island continent, and thousands
flocked from China. The writer saw
about three thousand Chinese land at
Cooktown in one day from three or four
large China steamers. The roads and
tracks from the farthest off coastal
towns and inland goldfields, a id from
the settled northern seaports, Cardwell
and Townsville, and from the more
southern ports were lined with horse-
men, packhorses, drays, and swag men,
pushing their way hastily northward,
overland to the new Eldorado, regard-
less of blacks, fever, tropical heat,
floods, and famine prices ahead. The
alluring power of gold w r as a magnet
that drew them onward over many
obstacles, sometimes leaving a round
mound of earth near their camping
place.
Steamers and sailing vessels of every
description were pushed into service
and chartered for a voyage to an
unformed town not yet established,
where Captain Cook, the discoverer of
the great Australian continent, beached
his famous ship, the “ Endeavor,” in
the river named after it, just 140 years
ago in June (1770).


The Town of Cooktown.
Even before a road was formed from
the Palmer to the Endeavor River, the
town of Cooktown sprang up like
magic. Excitement ran high, money
was abundant, and the connecting link
between the seaport and the goldfield
was quickly established, and hundreds
of starving miners—rich, yet poor —
dragged their weary, fever-stricken
to the port of promise and plenty,
leaving behind them many stranded
and wrecked miners at every camping-
ground ; some.anchored for ever along
the dangerous route. I have seen a
dozen or more graves at such camps,
and have seen men buried without burial
service or father to bless. The miner’s
poet, Joe Maine, fittingly describes the
mournful scene so often witnessed on
many a goldfield.
THE MINER'S GRAVE.
The miners stood round the new dug grave
To mourn the loss they could not save ;
Solemn and sad (he good Father r. ad
The prayers of the Chuich for the Christ! in
dead.
And, as he spoke, came a sob and a sigh
From the mates of the dead that were stand-
ing by.
But when he read of clay to clay,
They turned their eyes another way.
Too hard to bear that parting strain
From one they never would see again.
A voice \vas hushed, a S[ irit fled.
That scene of sorrow will long remain
A pulse of grief that will beat again.
Such was the commencement of the
great mining industry in the north
before the town of Cooktown received
its name. Men of energy and ability
came from all quarters and settled
down in Cooktown with the determina-
tion that they would make a fortune if
it were possible to do so, and, towards
this end, do their utmost to push the
town and district ahead. But, unfor-
tunately the northern conditions as to
climate, and the pastoral, agricultural,
and mining resources, were not under-
stood. People came for gold, and gold
only. No thought or heed was taken
of the vast possibilities the district
possessed. So the successful, and non-
successful, hastily hurried away with-
out attempting to do their share of
developing. This essay would not be
complete without giving a woid of
praise to the splendid lot of Govern-
ment officials that were sent herein the
early days to guide our destiny. They
entered heart and soul into every move-
ment, sparing neither time or money
to advance the town and district. As a
proof of the genuine character of the
men, many have risen to high posi-
rions in the Goverment service. The
reader, I trust, will pardon me for
mentioning a few, as examples, without
in anyway deprecating the valuable
services of those not mentioned. Messrs
j>. P-ihcy (Sub-collector of Customs),
Cowell (telegraph), J. Mackay (harbor-
master), Howard St. George (police
magistrate), Gloskey and Fitzgerald
(police inspectors), Prewett (station-
master), W. P>. Macdonald (shipping
agent), and a host of others, w'ho
rivalled with each other in doing their
best f r the town, and were ably sup-
ported by the then mercantile business
community and citizen. I trust these
few lines will arouse the same patriotic
spirit, and that the people of the dis-
trict will initiate the necessary steps to
open up new, and re-open old, fields by
better prospecting half-developed ones,
that now lie languishing for want of
practical assistance and experience. I
have digressed a little to show scJßie of
the causes and effects of progress, and
of progression, none.
Carriage to the Palmer Goldfield.
Notwithstanding the very efficient
road party supplied by the Government,
of which Mr. Charles McDonald was
the head, and the able protection given
by Mr. Closkey (staff of sub-inspector)
and native police, the carriage to the


Pit, liner was something enormous —un-
equalled in any of the great rushes of
the other colonies. Carriers and
packers reaped a rich harvest. £lOO,
and as much as £lBO per ton was paid
in the wet season. Weavily flour was
doled out at Is. per pannikin, and could
not be got in sufficient quantities, all
other necessaries in like proportionate
rates. Medicine, such as Epsom salts,
it is said, cost 2/6 per packet; quinine
from 20s. to 80s. au ounce bottle, and
horse-shoe nails were sometimes so
scarce, that gold was weighed against
them—as a f.ivor : such was the eager-
ness of those w T ho fortunately had
horses to push further ahead to new
finds and rough mountainous country.
Tun C olden Yield.
In 1874, '75, and ’76 and part of ’7B
yielded nearly 644,000 ozs. Over two
and a half-million worth of gold, which
sent the fame of the Palmer far and
wide, and caused a second rush from
all the colonies. In four anil a half
years it amounted to nearly £8,000,000.
From ’76 to ’BO the rich reefs began to
assert themselves, developing work
commenced in earnest, making many
riih and independent of alluvial min-
ing. In order to facilitate the memor-
ising o.f figures I have adopted the idea
of quoting as near as possible in round
numbers, giving the exact figures in
brackets. During the four or five years
mentioned upwards of 21,000 tons were
crashed for about 62,0000 z., worth over
£200,M0, averaging above 2 oz. 8 dvvt.
per ton) gold worth from £4 to £4/2/6
per oz. (21,636 tons, 51,966 ounces,
£207,264).
Mining Development.
A much greater development would
have been shown during these years;
but unfortunately for the Palmer, the
Hodgkinson rush broke out, taking
aw'ay hundreds of experienced miners
and reefers, with capital earned oti the
Palmer, to develop the adjoining gold-
field, to the district's great loss, and in
subsequent years, a much greater loss
was shown. From 1881 to 1887 nearly
15.000 tons were crushed for nearly
28.000 ozs., worth over £90,000, aver-
aging l/rozs. per ton. (14,732 tons,
22,8270z5., £91,808). In the first 12
years of reefing experience the Palmer
reefs turned out upwards of 86,000 tons
of quartz for about 75,0000 z, or includ-
ing some gold previously dollied, worth
over £BOO,OOO, with an average of 2oz.
Idwt. per ton. (86838 tons, 75,8980 z.
£801,572), obtained by the crudest
crushing appliances. The loss in tail-
ings must have been great, equal no
doubt, at a low estimate, of |-oz. to the
to the ton, run into the river and lost
for ever —over £72,000 worth.
A Bad Pkactice.
The practice of running tailings into
creeks and rivers still continues in some
places, and should be stopped by the
Minister for Mines by regulation to
Wardens on all new and old goldfields.
I have advocated this through the Min-
ing Journal and other papers for some
time. Tailings are a public asset of
great value, and Queensland has lost
millions of pounds through her neglect
to protect the waste tailings from
batteries by a single regulation without
hardship to anyone. The total output
from alluvial and reefs up to 1837 was
over £5,000,000 (1,272,172 ounces, or
£5,088,584). Three years later (1890)
it amounted to £5,864,584. Unfortu-
nately much of this was obtained by
Chinese, and which, no doubt was the
first step knvard retrogression. In '9B
and '94 the reefs stdl continued to
yield (notwithstanding the inadequate
machinery to cope with the water and
other disadvantages) nearly 7000 tons
for over 7,7000 z., worth £Bl,OOO, and
averaging loz. 2dwt. (6,990 tons, 7,752


ozs.,- £31,008). The alluvial for the
same period, although under-estimated,
was over 2,6000z5., worth £lO,OOO. -
Maytown. . ,
Five of the leading mines near May-
town, viz., the Queen, Ida, Comet, Mt.
Maid, and Louisa, turned out over-
-22,500 tons for 43,0000 z, average loz.
18dwt., .wprth £172,000 (22,549 tons,
43,0650z5., £172',260). These reefs are
mostly all’ abandoned, and could be
taken up for the marking off untit re-
cently—with a few exceptions. Al-
though it • has- been shown that large
bodies of payable stone has been ob-
tained (and still exists) in these mines,
Tittle or nothing has been done to prove
the.reefs to a depth. The deepest shaft
is little more than 250 ft to 300 ft, so
practically the deep ground has never
been prospected. Efforts should be made
to bore or sink to 500 or 1000 feet, to a
lower when rich stone probably
would be struck, as on other rich fields
such as Gympie, Charters Towers, and
Bendigo. As to the water difficulty,
many competent authorities state that
it is a mere bagatelle with proper up-
to-date-machinery, and when surface
drainage is got under. Three of the
mines mentioned are sunk nearly in
the bed of the. gullies and creeks,
naturally receiving all the drainage
from the surrounding high ground and
from old mines, which have actually
worked the reefs out up to the surface
iii the bed of the gullies, thus acting as
a sponge to receive the tropical rains to
soak the ground. Many believe that
when the, deeper ground is explored,
the water will not be at all trouble-
some. A united effort should be made
throughout the whole district to obtain
Government subsidy to sink a shaft
500 feet (or bore 1000 feet) and a
similar length of levels put in to prove
the existing line of reefs at a. depth,
with a chance of striking new ones.
THE IDA
There is not. the slightest doubt that
one of these reefs, the Idp, would have
been successfully floated and tested by
the Queensland National Bank in
Mcllwraith’s time fOr something like
£lOO,OOO, hut for political jealousy,
Which raged high. Everything, it is
said, is fair in love and war. The same
maxim appears to apply equally, well ta
politics and , mining.. Nothing seeins
to be too mean, too low, or too despic-
able to attain the desired end. A cable-
gram was sent home to. London.Jby
some one of influence warning specula-
tors to “beware of wild oats/' An
injustice was done to the district by
stopping progress, and. putting the
clock back a quarter of a ■ century,
simply to satisfy political spleen, and
most unjustly, too, because, the mine
gave an average of 2oz. per ton 13,000
were taken out in a short time, wprth
£52,000, and the depth was only about
260 feet, and the reef was, according to
the reports obtained from the-fast meli
who worked in it, 18 inches wide,
carrying gold, but poorer. Only a
small portion of the claim was worked.
I obtained all the original data pro-
curable years ago, and forwarded it,to A
Brisbane mining agent, who had not
the courtesy to return me copies. .
I must now give a description of
other localities on the Palmer Rivetv
PALMEBVILLE.
Gold was first discovered near Palmer-
ville. Then in quick sutcafsion the
upper , and lower Palmer, flfcd the
following creeks were opened in toward
and around Maytown. Let uS glance
at the map for a moment. There is
Sandy Creek and its tributaries —I was
in the vicinity in 1876 Oafrey,
MLeod’s, Greasy Bill’s, Sidney,
McGann’s, White Horse, Sweeney’s,
and others, all rich alluvial creeks, and
each having an history of its own. At


Mount Madden a big future awaits the
lucky prospector and investor. The
black and brown ironstone, not unlike
Mount Morgan stone, lies scattered on
the surface. The writer has dollied
dark brownish stone that not a color
could be seen in, yet it contained a
nice rich-colored floury gold. Very
little capital and time has been spent
on this favourably-situated mount in
the midst of a rich belt of country.
Some profitable prospecting work might
be done here in trenching and sinking,
by a locally subsidised party of say two
men fully equipped for six months.
CANNIBAL AND GRANITE
CREEK TIN.
Spring and Cannibal Croeks take
their rise and junction near the tin
lodes* being the head waters of Granite
Creek, which runs into the Palmer,
below old Gregory’s camp. From this
locality some thousands of tons of tin
have been extracted. Whitehead &
Co., prior to 1880, exported 450 tons,
valued at £22,500 —up to 1884, 2,373
tons from alluvial workings on Granite
and Cannibal Creek, valued at £102,800
was exported. The, Cannibal Creek
Lode Company got out a crushing in
1881, and from about 20 tons of ore
got over a ton of tin, so I am informed,
but, owing to expensive management,
failed in 1888. Recently Mr. D.
Twaddle endeavored to get capital to
test the lodes, and has succeeded with
assistance in proving that a strong lode
exists' below all previous workings,
their prospecting shaft being 90 feet
deep, showing fair ore. Tin has con-
tinued to come in from that district
ever since (27 years) and, in 1906 and
1907, 421 tons, valued at £13,747, was
obtained, principally by Chinese. More
will yet be obtained from its alluvial;
and its lodes will yet be re-opened by
European capital. There is a large
tract of granite country to the east, the
writer has been over, which extends to
the gold belt of Campbell Creek, a
tributary of the Palmer, on toward the
Mitchell and Wolfram Camp, which is
only two and a-half days’ ride from
Byerstown, and, from Campbell Creek
to Wolfram Camp one and a-half days’
ride. It is likely country for lodes of
tin and wolfram, but, as the Chinese
have been and are working the alluvial
tin, little or no prospecting for lodes
has been done, although indications
are encouraging for a party to spend
six months prospecting.
PURDIE’S CAMP.’
Purdie’s camp, of early fame, is on a
branch of Dogleg Creek, within eacy
distance of the exceptionally rich Alex-
ander and Roy Roy line of reef, whiph
average 4£oz. per ton. The Alexander
crushed 237 tons for 1,886 oz, worth
£5,544, soz. 17dwt. per ton, one of the
high records. The Rob Roy crushed
203 tons for 6790 z, valued at £2,716,
being 3oz. 7dwt. per ton.
GERMAN BAR.
Then there is the romance connected
with German Bar and Revolver Point,
near Echotown, once a stirring place.
The former was discovered by a party
of Germans, brothers of the well-knowm
Cooktown citizen, Mr. Mark Huge, who
did fairly well. Many others were at
the time forging ahead for better
ground.
REVOLVER POINT.—AN EXCIT-
ING EVENT.
Mr. Cameron, now of Townsville, an
experienced and adventurous prospec-
tor, in the early seventies pushed his
way up the river‘from the lower town-
ship, some 85 miles, where the Warden,
Mr. Howard St. George, had his head-
duarters. Arriving at the point on
Sunday evening he unpacked his horses
and prepared his camp, after which he


went down to the river for water, and,
to his astonishment, he saw nice gold
in the clear undisturbed stream before
him. His . first dish gave him 4oz.
Being late, and the day Sunday, and
no one about, he did not. peg off the
ground, but he knew that there were
some footmen coming up behind, who
slipped up unknown, discovered the
place and pegged it off that evening.
Next morning he got up early, and was
on the ground before the others. ' 'When
the men arrived one of them said-: “ I
am in possession. I found this last
night.” The man claiming it pointed
a revolver at' me.’ I jumped aside,
struck him on the jaw, and threw his
revolver into the river. ' Drawing inv
own revolver, I told the others Lwould
do the same to the first ’ man' who
attempted to interfere with iny’rights.
I named the place “ Revolver Point,”
in commemoration of this incident.
During the first fortnight ! l took £9OO
worth out of:it.
; MR. McLEOD...
Mr, McLeod, another prospector, was
on his way up, and stayed a little while
at German Bar, halt'-a-mile below
Revolver Point, but, like, ail adven-
turers, he pushed out and found
what is., since known as McLeod's
Creek, on Oakey, which runs into
Sandy Creek, where many rich deposits
of gold w'ere found and lively scenes
enacted. .
Echotown —(On the Palmer River.) -
Hers a number of reefs are situated,
named the Nelson, Lady Hamilton, and
Otto, but I cannot stay to dwell on
them ; further up the river, towards
the divide, and on the old survey line
from the Laura to May town, via the
Mossman,■ we come to another group,
of reefs, the old Homeward Bound,
Nonpareil, Walballa, Hidden Treasure,
Marching, and. (British Lion, averaged
loz. Hchvts.) Then the Comstock, and
Wil d Irish G>’, of some repute, on,a,
branch of Cradle Creek, Further on
one strikes the Lone, Star Creek, and
the Lone Star reef. The curse of pur
railway by endeavouring’ to take it. that,
route, up the Mossman and Lone Star
Creek; we lost our opportunity, and.
the Palmer lost its railway, thanks.to
the theu Premier .Nelson, but the reefs,
still remain yet to be exploited.
Chinky Creek.
Next "comes Clunky and Marshall
Creeks, the Star of the East, and other
reefs and creeks, also McCord’s, near
the' head of Sunday Creek, and Gran's
mines, on Chinky Creek, also Messrs
Dargin and Heath’s tunnel, and Ham-
met and ’ Keating’s tunnel under the
conglomerate (on the head waters of-
the Mossman river), at the base of the
cohglomerate.' Chinky Creek was vefy
rich,'and many a Chinaman is now en-
joying his ease in China from the golden
liarvest gathered in that locality.’ The
cohglomerate here for years past ba’S
been indicated as a likely place for the ;
discovery of rich mineral deposit, the
Chinese have worked' large areas, and
obtained payable gold, and had tunUels
under r the cOnglonlelate guarded with’
watch dogs. : ‘ ‘
Fish Greek,
Is another of those creeks with its'
rich deposits worked Out right Up tir
the foot, of the conglomerate,’ Where
three Cooktown parties tunnelled, in all
over two hundred feet under the
conglomerate cliffs prospecting for the 1
source, whence the gold came from,
till funds failed. They tried oil the
bed rock, but gold might have cattle
from some ancient bed many feet
higher up in the cliffs of conglomerate
that surrounds these creeks.
Shepherd Creek.
Is situated at the foot, or commence-,
ment of the conglomerate from the


Cooktown side, and is about 30 miles
from the Laura railway station. Like
all the other rich creeks, it has a past
history of its own; but there is a
eipecial reason for a probable greater
future, yet to be discovered under the
conglomerate and desert sandstone, or
in the alluvial flats formed by this
creek. On the authority of Dr. E. L.
Jack, J. V Mulligan, and other ex-
perienced raining men, next in impor-
tance to reefing development, is deep
leads, which is believed to exist under
the conglomerate, and in the alluvial
beds or flats, which wants prospecting
for in this and other localities. Past
prospecting efforts have proved the
existence of geld in the deep ground,
for a twenty grain spec was obtained in
a prospecting shaft 45 feet deep, many
years ago, and the tunnelling operations
have proved there is gold under the
conglomerate at Fish Creek; and at
McCord’s, Grun’s, Dargin and Heath’s,
Hammet and Keating’s workings, on
the head of the Mossman and Chinky
Creek. The writer has been interested,
in prospecting parties, both at Fish
and Shepherd Creeks.
The history of the various creeks
heading from the conglomerate proves
to almost a certainty the origina
source. The geological facts pointed
opt by Dr. Jack, and the formation of
the country leads experienced men to
the conclusion that gold will yet be
found in payable quantities under the
desert sandstone and conglomerate, and
in the valleys beyond. Dr. Jack says,
“ There are cogent geological reasons
for believing that the conglomerate
may cover extensive deep leads Of con-
centrated t£uriferous wash, which may
yet prove even richer than the old
alluvial diggings of the Palmer.” At
another time he said, quoting from
memory, “ From the situation of some
of these creeks carrying gold, it was
almost a geological impossibility that
they could have derived these source
from any other than from the con-
glomerate.” I would like to enlarge
more, and emphasis these points, but
space won’t permit. Just one word
more, here is a locality suitable for
boring operations in the flats, and on
conglomerate for the deep ground.
Cradle Greek,
And its rich tributaries heading from
under the conglomerate played a pro-
minent part in the early gold period ;
also Catalpa Creek and its reefs, a
branch of Cradle Creek, near Folder’s,
where no doubt some rich ironstone
leaders will yet be found ; the surface
carries golden specimens in many places,
but much of the past history is lost by
the removal of the old miners. Dr.
Jack’s party, who were send out by
Government, put some hundreds of
shallow prospecting holes at the base of
the conglomerate, from some he obtain-
ed fair prospects. His object was to
find the sources that fed all these rich
creeks ; believing that the conglomerate
covered some rich deposit, or lead of
gold going unxlerneath the conglome-
rate, which still remain a secret, for
some lucky prospector to reveal to the
W’orld. The heads of the left hand
branch of the Palmer come from under
the conglomerate. .
Jessup's.
After leaving Folder’s, we come to
Jessup’s rich alluvial gully, and Speci-
men Hill and its reefs, named the
Sunburst, Chance. Difficulty, Sarfield,
and St. Patrick, which latter average
over loz per ton. The writer endea-
voured some years ago, to get from the
Minister for Mines a subsidy to tunnel
the hill; some very rich specimens
were got, one with over lOOoz, worth
£4OO. I collected a lot of information
by letter respecting|the reefs, but the
Government were not willing then to


tons
0 z
Queen of the Notth
- 6,465
14,640
Queen Numbers
286
390
Mountain Maui
- 2,767
5,379
Captain Cook
296
407
Hit or Miss
- 1,327
8,729
11,081
24,545
tons
oz
Ma
6,221
13,073
Comet -
3,392
7,263
Lousia -
1,295
1,845
Heart Content
846
1,548
British Lion
628
878
King of the Ranges
825
907
Caledonian
702
1,063
Smithtield
427
1,412
St. Patrick
971
1,060
Various pther reefs
6,946
19,861
22,253
48,906
subsidy, so the arra'ngment fell through.
I visited the locality and the facilities
for tunnelling are great, and the pos-
sibilities are exceedingly' favourable, as
most of the reefs named are on the
hill. It is perhaps not generally known
that antimony has been obtained on
another branch of Jessop’s, which may
also contain gold if prospected.
Having taken a run over a big portion
of the Palmer towards the conglome-
rate from Revolver Point on the left
hand branch of the Palmer to the head
waters of the Mossman, round by
Polder’s, Cradle' Creek, Jessop’s Hill,
and Fish Creek, now let us come
back to the main Palmer River, near
Maytown,andfollowingit up we come to
Butcher’s Creek with its group of reefs,
within a few miles of May town. The
Ida, camp and reef:—Just-in-Time,
Albion, Caledonian, averaging l|oz
per ton ; the Comet, averaged 2oz.
‘Jidwts, and Heart Content loz IGJdwts
per ton, are splendid returns that should
not be lost sight of. Then there is the
Britannia, New Chum ;
and on another tributary is the Hop
Bitters, all tried in the early days
when men wanted a fortune, not a
living.
Louisa.
On one of the bead branches of
Thompson’s gully is situated the famed,
Louisa, which yielded a general aver-
age of 2oz 2Jdw r ts per ton. Many
believe this mine to be a better show
than the Ida, and is well worth atten-
tion, being situated in the centre of a
rich alluvial field. When last on the
Palmer I saw a digger two years ago
getting floaters out of the shallow
workings close by.
The Queen or Gregory Camp.
We now come to the Queen Group,
the Queen of the North, Who’d have
Thought It, Mountain Maid, Hit or
Miss, Victoria, (Smithfield averaged
3oz Gdwts), Captain Creek, King of the
Ranges, and the Viking some distance
away. The Hit or Miss is situa-
ted on a ridge, and some time ago'a
party of vninars were hauling up the
old headings or mullock and crushing
it with payable results. Now let us
look at some of the past returns of
these reefs ; to give an idea of there
richness, and extent which ought to
attract capitalists, attention ; and all
well wishes of the district.
Splendid Reefing Bet fens.
The following is an extract published
in 1889, headed “Bendigo and Palmer,”
concerning the Queen Group ;
Average 2oz 4ilwts per ton, at £4/2/15
per ounce, worth £101,240.
The warden, Mr. W. 0. Hodgkinson,
in 1883 published a return from over
100 claims, some 24,000 tons, for an
average yield of 2oz Sdwts, or £9/5/6
per ton. Bear in mind that every
pound of stone was crushed, not
picked.
Another list published in 1882, by
“ Bendigo and Palmer”:—


' Averaging from 10/. 2dwts to 3oz
Gdwts per ton, worth £’201,787, or
the two lots combined over 33,000 tons,
78,0000 z, worth £293,000, avereging
2bz 4clwts per* ton, (83,831 tons,
73,4510 z, £293,804). The lowest
returns has been over loz per ton, while
the grand average is about 2oz sdwts.
Victoria cannot show an average of
4oz. per ton, .and I question whether
any reefing field in Queensland can
show such a splendid average as the
Palmer, with its gold valued up to £4
2s 6d per oz. The average earnings of
reefers on the Palmer in 1880 and 1881
were £197 to £220 per man per annum.
A Word about Reefs, Promoters, &c.
In all reefing fields, in Victoria,
Gympie, and Charters Towers, the ex-
perience is the richest reefs after a time
generally come on to a poor belt of
country, that must be gone through be-
fore the more permanent and payable
stone is reached. The same thing has
occurred on the Palmer, a band of poor
stone came in, at about the 200 ft and
250 ft level; and the mine holders were
brought up suddenly with an increase
of expenditure for machinery and work-
ing expenses, owing to an inflow of
water for which they were not pre-
pared, many having squandered their
means recklessly. Those that had
means saw what other fields offered,
better prospects and opportunities, such
as the Hpdgkinson, but results did not
pan out as expected,-nevertheless the
Palmer lost its first opportunity for
greatness. Nature has bountifully
supplied the necessary material for a
great field, plenty of reefs, large in
size, rich in quality and gold of the
purest—and rich alluvial, right up to
‘the cap of the reef (like Bendigo) to
start with.'\ Now capital, intelligence,
and experience, is requited, together
with judicious expenditure and reason-
able promoter’s interest, of say one-
third of the shares paid up, or less, for
the -trouble and expense of flotation.
It's unreasonable, as is often the case,
for the promoters to take half for their
influence anti knowledge in floating. No
ordinary mine can stand such a heavy
burden imposed by these promoters.
The time will come when the people
will have to throw off their apathy and
do something—unite and form syndi-
cates for themselves on the small share
and payment system, and to encourage
reasonable and honest promoters.
“ Many can easily achieve, that taxes
one too hard.” Then they will be able
to penetrate the band of poor country
into undisturbed rich auriferous zones
of greater permanency, increased size,
and probably a better quality of stone.
Eoeing.
As the district may be too poor to
sink, and.to put up to-date machinery
on the reefs, it is within their power to
assist, with Government subsidy, to
bore on one or more lines .of reefs.
There are at least five lines that might
be recommended, if 1000 ft. to 1500 ft.
were decided upon :
1. The Ida, Just.-in time, Albion, and
Caledonian.
2. The Queen, Mountain Maid, Hit or
Miss, Victoria, . Smithfi.eld, and
King of the Ranges.
8. The Cornet,. Heart’s Content, Per-
severance, Britannia, and New
Chum,
4. The Louisa. ,
5. The Rob Roy and Alexandra lines. _
The c.rushings- and results of each
have been given. Some are afraid that
by boring a failure might be made at)d
thus destroy their hopes, .but the
chances are as much in favor of a
success as otherwise, and by trying
good results may be discovered. While
by sitting still with, folded arms, be-
moaning our fate, we are drifting from
bad to worse. There is not so much


risk in boring as some would have us
believe ; the reefs are all well-defined,
and according to Dr. E. L. Jack, they
generally strike west north-west, and
north north.we.-t, and undcrliei towards
south and west. There is one other
consideration which must be taken in-
to account, that is the angle or dip of
the shoot of gold, so as to determine
the best probable site to strike the reef
and gold. The reefs at Limestone are
in three groups ; Ist. running north
and southland underlying to the west;
2nd, east and west, underlying north ;
and 3rd, north-east and south-west,
underlying north-west and south,east. •
Fifty-six Tons of Gold. -
The total amount of gold got, accord-
to official returns, was estimated in
1895 to be worth nearly' £6,000,000.
But no official records can ever esti-
mate the amount of gold taken away by
the thousands of return diggers to other
colonies, and it is impossible to ascer-
tain what the thousands of Chinese
took to China. One can safely say
about sixty tons of the precious metal
has teen taken out and away from the
Palmer, probably worth £400,000 more.
Sufficient has been said to give a slight
view and idea of the past on the Palmer
proper, and to indicate what the future
held out, to the energetic, persevering,
systematic, plucky investor.
The Size of the Field.
The Palmer is a big field irrespective
of what is “ the proclaimed goldfield.”
Mr. E. L. Jack considers there is 2,300
square miles opened up, so we must
hasten on to other important mining
centres, amongst which is Limestone,
Byers town, Lower Nonnanby, Upper or
West Normanby, Campbell’s Creek, Mt.
Windsor, Shepherd Creek, and other
localities.
Limestone.
Formerly called Lovell’s Creek, of
Anglo-Saxon fame. It is situated on a
branch of the Mitchell river, distant
about 82 miles from Maytown. There
used to be three or four camps—the old
township and'Mill, Harbard township,
mill, and cyanide plant, Groganville,
and police camp. , According, to Mr.
Jack’s map, the head of Sandy and
M‘Cann’s Creek, a branch of the
Palmer, "and the head of Limestone
creek, a branch of the Mitchell Eiver,
rise in close proxmity to each other,
Another branch line Gold Creek and
St. George enter the Mitchell higher
up.
Some extraordinary crushings from
the Anglo-Saxon ;
lOXbs aol-ied lb£oz.
1 ton scwt. 8 bushels, ,03oz.
2 tons crushed, 155J0z. at the Comet''
2 tons 13cwt. cirs’ie l 70oz in England.
Total o tons 19c»vt. for 3050 z ; 51oz. per
ton, valued £230.
Up to 1890, the Anglo-Saxon crush-
ed 5,647 tons for 12,9970 z, averaging
2oz 6dwts. per ton ; worth, £52,000.
Cyanided 476 tons for 318 oz.
The followings reefs in and around
Limestone, were :—The North Cross,
South Cross, Good Hope, Little Won-
der, Gladstone, German Miner, General
Gordon, Lease 190, and some numbers.
The North Cross crushed 367 tons for
890 oz, worth £1,560. Mr. E. L. Jack
said respecting this mine ; —“I should
not be surprised if rich discoveries were
made beyond what is known at present,”
and it was the opinion of the mine
manager Mr. Harbord of the. Anglo-
Saxon, that this reef would junction
with the Anglo-Saxon at 600 ft. An
offer was made of £12,000 for this mine
and refused. Later on in 1895, 15
years ago, an attempt was made to
work this mine with a local syndicate,
but through faintheartedness in paying
up small calls, the mine was brought to a
close without a fair trial.


Warden’s Report.
The Hon. W. 0. Hodgkinson (no
mean authority), Warden for the Pal-
mer in 1883, reported to the Minister
for Mines as follows :—“ I have fre-
quently alluded to the Limestone am|
Btoney Creek with the adjacent country
as offering every inducement to explora-
tion. The alluvial deposits in the early
days were extremely rich, while the
source of tne gold bearing creeks and
gullies, reduce the arc . of such to a
reasonable extent. The auriferous
lodes are large, and from the facilities
afforded tunnelling work would pay
handsomely with comparative low
yields.”
The Anglo-Saxon is the only deep
shaft on the field, and has raised stone
with a profit at 12dwt per ton. Five
tiibutors in 1885, took from a reef 4 to
C feet wide, 388 tons fur 3770 z, worth
£1,431. At the lowest level the com-
pany cut a highly mineralized reef many
feet wide, some say 14 feet, and drove
70ft along it but they would have to
drive a considerable distance further
west for the main shoot of gold, when
funds failed them.
The whole of the tailings were
cyanided, some twice over, but I cannot
find the returns or yield per ton, pro-
bably the zinc slimes were sent away
for treatment, and the district looses
the credit of this bullion. This mine
is now' held under exemption by a Her-
herton company, and in capable hands
has a bright future before it if they are
prepared to drive to the shoot. There
was a rumor that the Chillagoe line
was to be extended via O.K. to Lime-
stone. If such was the case all aban-
doned mines would soon be taken up
and worked.
The Lower Normanby River.
This is a field of great promise, but
prematurely deserted, which wants re-
opening, by means of a State Battery
the group of reefs where the once
famed “ Monte Christo” turned out its
thousands of ounces, and the river
yielded the alluvial metal freely. For-
tunately I was the means of saving
from destruction the only records kept’
of the crushmgs, and returns of this
important deserted field. Like many
of our smaller and fluctuating fields
that have “ risen and fallen ; risen
again to suffer depression, and deser-
tion, but so surely as prosperity is
rapidly returning to Queensland, so will
these rise Phoenix-like and astonish the
world with their marvellous resources.”
These words arc very appropriate to
this deserted field, on which nineteen
reefs wore opened up, amongst the
numbet being the “ Monte Cristo,” dis-
covered by our townsman and prospec-
tor (Mr. Korn) in 1884, also the Isa-
bella, Poverty, Edith, Gilbert, Adina,
Emily May, Norton, True Blue, En-
deavor, Star of the Normanby, and
Prima Donna, on Prospector’s Creek.
The Monte Cristo
Crushed in 1885 172 tons for G97oz,
worth £2,788 ; in 1886, 206 tons for
7230 z. averaging 31-oz, valued at £l4 a
ton-—in addition to this, 169 tons of
surface stone produced 430 z., the total
value of both crushiugs being over
£3OOO. There were two small crush-
fngs—eight tons for 960 z and two tons
for 28oz—averaging 12oz. Bdwt. per
ton, not a laid yield. Thirteen other
reefs in 1884 to 1887, crushed 380 tons
for 4330 z, averaging over loz. 7dwt., or
£5 8s per ton. I estimate from the
returns collected that the Lower Nor-
manhy reefs have turned out 834 tons
of stone for 2,0430 z, worth £BOOO,
aveiaging 2oz 9dwt or £9 16s per ton.
Where that was obtained there is with-
out a doubt more. It is to be hoped
some steps will be taken to re-open
such a promising field, prematurely de-
serted, through the hasty action of the


directors in taking away the only . bat-
tery. The fact of one reef crushing
380 tons for about 15,0000 z, worth
£6OOO, averaging about 4oz, or £l6 per
.ton, should attract capitalists’ atten-
tion, especially when any of these mines
can be had for the pegging off and re-
opening, for which thousands were re-
fused in former years. There is a rumor
that in this claim (Monte Cristo) they
sank through to the shoot of gold,
which was lost. Of five other reefs 1
have been unable to get the returns,
and the others given are incomple r e,
and are confined to 1888. The Isa-
bella is a big reef 3ft. wide, and accor d-
ing to returns, went over half-an-ounee
per ton, and up to 17dwt, but owing to
its awkward situation it wan'.s a crush-
ing plant on the ground—or near it—
to save cartage expenses. Provisions
for a water supply would have to be
made. A good deal of the reef can he
seen, and could be taken out by tunnel-
ling operations. I was informed by a
worker that better stone is to be bad in
deeper ground. There is another well-
defined reef 2ft wide that could be seen
in an open tunnel. These figures
clearly prove that there is gold, and
good gold on the Normanby, which
will pay to re-open at at an early date,
the nearest goldfield to the port of
Cooktown, some 50 miles. One of the
first steps to lie taken should be the
erection of a central rrp-to-date State
battery, after re-prospecting the reefs.
Nothing can be done without a battery,
without encouragement. No miner
would attempt to re open the mines, it
would be useless for anyone without
means to go there, although meat and
provisions can be had, and conveyed
there cheaply, as there are cattle stations
near. All the tailings of these rich
crushings have all been swept away,
probably carrying another half-ounee
per ton—through the want of Govern-
ment supervision. Sixteen years ago
the writer, jpvith a guide).examined the
field, not a soul was on it, and I
gathered all the information then pro-
curable and since that have tried several
times to attract attention to it.
The Upper or West Normandy
Is about 90 miles from Cooktovvn. This
is a promising reefing field, which wants
developing. The prospector’s claim,
now held by Mr. A. J. Madden, was
originally opened by Mr. Korn, who did
renmrkaldy well out of it for inai y
years. Much could be written about
it, a-s it has been contiuuou;ly worked
off and on by different parties and tribu-
tors up to the present time, yielding a
profitable liyingand leaving behind and
throwing away a fortune to an up-to-
date mining company wi h a battery.
Others followed Mr. Korn, and now a
number of reefing claims are opening,
up. The principal mine is “ The
Brothers,” so named after the mount
in the locality, discovered by Mr
Llewellyn, who formed a small syndic
cate to obtain a battery, two plucky in-
Cooktown citizens, Messrs. A. Chinn
and Dr. Kortum, being the principal
investors. Their efforts have been the
means of opening up other reefs by
enabling miners to get their stone
crushed. Some fair crushings have
been obtained by “ The Brotheis,” and
a deal of prospecting work has been
done. A bigger and better reef has
been discovered in the deeper ground,
through the assistance of the Govern-
ment, and there is every sign of them
reaping a rich reward, which they richly
deserve for their perseverance. Early
crushings I have been unable to get. In
August 1907, 155 tons of stone was
crushed from various small show's for
198 oz, averaging IJoz. per ton. In
March, 1908, 252 tons yielded 280 oz.
A trial crushing of six tons from the
Good Hope went Boz. 2dwt. or f 12 Bs.
6d. per ton. The Try Again and J.


Goodall claims have got prospects that
have encouraged the owners to stick to
their property. On the Clyde and Mens
Meg reefs a deal of prospecting has been
done, yet the size of the reefs warrants
more prospecting, as fair prospects can
be obtained. The rough nature of the
country makes it tedious and expensive
to prospect, the distance from supplies
is a drawback. This and other fields
shows the value of a State Battery, and
the necessity for prospecting work. If
there was no private battery there the
field would now he abandoned.
Byersiowx.
Uhrstowu, Chinatown, and other
Chinese Camps were all busy places.
Abe Europeans ran over it, and thou-
sands of Chinese followed. Much gold
was got, and a few reefs opened, hut no
systematic-work has been done to prove
their worth. An early attempt was
made to open up the Lord Nelson reef,
at the head of the 10 mile creek, a
branch of the right-hand branch of the
Palmer, but through extravagance and
mismanagement its chances were
ruined. I am of opinion that many
reefs will be found and worked in this
locality in the near future, and that
the Palmer will he properly dredge 1
when its capabilities and difficulties are
understood. The Mammoth Hydianlic
Sluicing Company failed there through
not understanding the conditions. The
gild is there, and will be got when
capable practical men study the situa-
tion, and work out their plan accoid-
ingly. I visited the site six years ago
and was greatly impressed with its
possibilities. Many of the deserted
reefs only opened will be taken up
again. On many of the deserted gullies
and creeks traces are met with, and 611
some a few Europeans- and Chinese are
working. The numerous tributaries-of
the Upper Palmer, Little Palilier, Spear,
Doughboy, Blackfellbw, Campbell's,
and other creeks, showed plenty of evi-
dence of the amount of work done by
Europeans and Chinese in the early
days, and also give one an idea of the
amount of gold required to pay for all
that work. I knew one of the pros-
pectors of Campbell's and Spear creeks,
which were both very rich.
Byerstown Proposed Railway.
A side glance.
A writer in 1877 wrote a letter advo-
cating the Byerstown railway and gave
some figures that may he interesting to
give an idea cf the extent of the district
and its influence at that time. He put
down the population at 19,000 Chinese,
and 700 Europeans, and the freight re-
quired to supply both at over 4,000
tons, and fur the Granite Creek tin
fields another 4,000 tons. He also
stated that 110,000 acres of land along
the route would be available for settle-
ment, which would create another 3000
tons —in all,- 11,000 tons, thus showing
what a mining district could do. Alto-
gether he made out a good ease, show-
ing 14 per cent, profit,on construction.
But, alas, the dilatorkiess of the Govern-
ment in not pushing on the line -when
tens of thousands were scattered over
the Pa mer fields-, and encouraging the
population to stay and develop its' re-
conrces, lost to Cook town -the Hodgkin-
son, Herlerton, and Chillagoe route and
back country.
Campbell Creek.
Mr. Campbell, and his mate, Mr. T.
Ellem (late of Port Douglas), who are
now both dead, discovered this creek in
the latter end of the '7o’s. It is , situ-
ated on the head,waters of the Palmer,
about 30 -miles from Byerstown, up the
river, and it divides the golden belt
from the mineral tin and wolfram coun-
try. Speaking from experience of a
visit to that locality —on the east side
the gullies and creeks are gold-bearing.


and on the west side are tin-bearing
creeks with a little gold. This creek
once carried a large European popula-
tion till the Hodgkinson rush broke
out, which being near, the miners rushed
—leaving heaps of rich stuff stacked on
the surface, and when the Chinese
swarmed into the abandoned ground
they reaped a rich harvest. For years
they worked it, but subsequently de-
serted it in a single day through the
murder of a European, whose body was
never found—quite a romance in itself,
and for which I haven’t space.
Spear Creek.
Dan Rowan, well-known in this and
the Coen district,, was one of the pros-
pectors, and while working it, the
natives showered a number of spears
amongst them, hence its name. Luck-
ily none were hurt. They wore quietly
working it out, when Mr. Uhr with
cattle surprised them, when it was
rushed with payable results.
Beackfeelow Creek
Is about three miles up the IVmcr
River from Byerstown. Very liitle is
known about its discovery, but good
gold was got in deep sinking and shal-
low working in this locality.
Mount Windsor Tinfield.
Three parties made prospecting trips
to this field in 1887-’BB and found tin,
but the last party were the first to do
any remunerative work. The party
was.formed in Cooktown and left in
1888. They consisted of Messrs. R.
Windsor, C. Lobb, W. Jamieson, Frank
Rochefort (Frenchy) and a sailor-man.
They had six months’ rations, which
was packed by J. O’Callaghan. The
Mount was named after the plucky
leader. With the exception of Mr. W.
Jamieson, of Mareel a, all are now dead.
In about 35 miles from Byerstown the
tin tableland is reached ; where a num-
ber of men have been located for tome
time making a fair living. The field
was visited early by the veteran pros-
pector, Donald Lang, one of the creeks
bearing his name. To Mr. W. 11.
McCormack is due the honor of keep-
ing the field open for years, being one
of the first and oldest miner on the
field. The Mount and tableland and
creeks therefrom, forms another of the
numerous heads of the great Palmer
river, being part of the dividing lino
between the head waters of the Nor-
manby ; on the route to the Hcd’kin-
son and in the vicinity of Campb U’s
Creek. It carries at present a small
European population, thanks to our
popular warden, Mr. Cherry, who gave
the Chinese, who foriperly held posses-
sion notice to quit. Luckily be did so,
for the climate is beautiful and cool,
and has a bracing atmosphere, with a
plentiful rainfall, which offer many
attractions for Europeans to settle, the
altitude being very high. This finishes
my account of the Palmer. I must
now turn my attention to other parts
of the big Cook district.
Starke.
Alluvia! Goldfield, No. 1.
Better known as the old and original
Starke, discovered by Messrs. Cairns,
Lobb, and Bowden, about ’B9 and ’9O.
It is about 70 to 75 miles north of
Cooktown, via Wilton railway station,
along tbe head waters of the Endeavor
and Mclvor. This was a busy little
field when opened and employed a few
hundred miners for some time, tho
gold is good value and nuggetty. Tbe
Btarcke is situated at the head of one
of the branches of the river named by
Mr. R. L. Jack, the geologist in August
of 1877, on his first exploring trip
north, as far as the then deserted Coen
in the early days. It is strange that
on this memorable trip he unfortunately
happened to miss several mineral belts,


which has since been discovered, al-
though his party found traces of gold
and tin, they were not fortunate enough
to locate a field. I consider Mr. R. L.
Jack the best and most painstaking
geologist that has ever visited the Cook
district, and I can only look upon it as
fate, or sheer bad luck, that he did not
happen to hit some of the following,
viz., Cocoa Creek, Starcke, Munhurra,
The Jack, and some other more north-
ern fields. The Starke kept a number
of miners up till 1890, when it became
deserted for the alluvial rush, and eight
miles further north known as Mun-
hurra, and also the Ro:'ky. The Chinese
tried hard to get a footing on this
field, and nearly succeeded with the
aid of the then warden, but by the
determined efforts of the chairman of
the Divisional Board (Mr. J. L. Adams)
myself and Mr. T. Tweed, they were
forced to leave—much against their
will. The Starcke field is located in
very rough mountainous country, and
in a hollow of the mountains are a
number of tributaries (eight), creeks,
gullies and ravines carrying gold. It
is a place a geologist ought to delight
in as the various stratus and upheavals
are easily outlined : to a prospector it is
just the place he would look for gold,
and to the miner it an interesting field.
Unfortunately Mr. R. L. Jack never
was able to re-visit this district after
the fields were opened, and expressed a
wish to me that he would have much
liked to visit some tunnelling opera-
tions, that was going on in search of
reefs, which I organised. Although
the field turned out a deal of alluvial
gold (according to a pamphlet issued by
the A.U.S.N. Co. some years ago, 5000
ounces, worth from £IB,OOO to £20,000
was obtained), only one reef has been
found payable, where that is there are
sure to be others, as indications every-
where shows. Several attempts have been
made to exploit and develop reefing,
but through want of funds on the part of
miners, and want of interest by others,
no assistance has been obtained from
the Government, so a promising field
has been allowed to be prematuiely de-
serted, considering its nearness to
Cook town. Eome interest should be
taken in its revival. I am confident
payable reels will yet be found and
could show likely spots when assistance
is forthcoming. The porphyritic dykes
that fed the several gullies, have never
been sufficiently tested ; good indica-
tions and gold-bearing stme have been
found everywhere and also many speci-
mens. One private syndicate spent a
few hundreds in tunnelling operations
and gut encouraging prospects and rich
specimens, several tons of stone paid to
dolly, but they were unable to proceed
through want of funds. The experience
they gained that by sinking better re-
sults would sooner be obtained, came
too late. I have often visited the scene
and was interested in the operation, so
speak from experience. I would
strongly advisa an application for sub-
sidy, and to send two men prospecting
and sinking for twelve months at a cost
of about £l5O for provisions, tools, and
explosives. These men in a short time
might re-open a field worth from
£1)0,000 to £IOO,OOO to the State.
There is also a large body of cement or
conglomerate wash, which carries nug-
gety gold, that has never been pros-
pected to its source. These deset ted
fields are a disgrace to the intelligence
and energy of the district, and an effort
should be made to re-open them. I
seriously believe the field will re-assert
itself if prospected, judging from past
results.
M UNBURR A.
Mr W. J. Webb and his two brothers
(Mark and Jess) and Mr., W. Harley
were subsidised to the extent of £25 to
go north of the Starcke prospecting.
After travelling some hundrels of miles


without success, on their return trip
they succeeded in discovering what is
now known as Munburra. Five pay-
able gullies were opened, which have
turned out probably from £BOOO to
£IO,OOO of alluvial gold. It is hard to
arrive at exact figures, as diggers carry
gold away to other fields, and the dis-
trict' nevet - gets the credit for the
amount taken away. While on the
field I kept notes of returns', got from
miners, storekeepers and battery owners.
At one time there were about 300 horses
on the field, coming from all quarters
—hundreds of miles. The Government
got repaid many times over' for their
small subsidy. The prospectors also
discovered reefs, but they were not de-
veloped till some time after. Mr.
George Gains was the successful dis-
coverer of the rich roof know) as the
Last Hit, and took Webb Bros, and
McQainn in as partners. Some rich
surface crushings were obtainel, and
the rich stone continued to the water
level, some 70ft, turning out the hand-
some sum of £18,030. Altogether it
can be safely said that the field has
yielded from alluvial and reefs from
£40,000 to £50,000. A nice return for
a small subsidy, a fine asset, si'Cel 1 only
developed, handicapped by too s.nill a
battery which made crushing and
watching expensive, yet it did good
work and helped to open the field ;
although small it was good machine for
its size, as it only lost about sdwts to
the ton in the tailings when cyanided.
Important information.- The last crush-
ing from the-Last Hit from the deepest
level being more mineralized, the tail-
ings assayed half an ounce ; I had them
assayed On the Towers. This promis-
ing field has had the honour of two
visits from two geologist, (Messrs
Cameron and Ball); and it is to he hoped
that their reports have enlightened the
miners and general public, and that the
fruits of their labours will be seen after
many days. 'Lately the field has been
revived a little, tbanksto a few persever-
ing men, and the only storekeeper;
butcher and mill owner, Mr H. Stuckey,
who has enabled a few stickers to hold
on to their claims whilst doing dead
work, in fact he has kept the field optn
for years. A company has been re-
cently formed to work the Last Hit and
a lease of 80 acres has been taken up ;
and according to last reports were on
fair stone which had gone 4Joz, valued
x 'l7 per ton. After several fair crush-
ings, seine disagreement between local
and Brisbane shareholders has caused
the hanging up of a really genuine
mine ; which will shortly be re-opened
an 1 under caoahle, iutalligi it in wage-
men t a payable mine will be developed.
Boojieraxo P.C. Lixii.
This rich line of reef is included hr
the Last Hit lease, but to my mind is a
separate reef. Its discovery is attribut-
ed to Mr. W. Nelson or Mr. G. Gains,
hut was opened np principally by Willie
Webb jnr., and party. It was ex-
ceptionally rich on the surface, as much
as 40oz. per ton was got with other
rich crushing to the 100 feet level.
Boomerang No. 2 was also very good
being principally worked by Dyer Bros,
for a number of years. Boomerang
No. 3 proved also exceptionally rich.
Mr. Torres the discoverer and others got
out some tundsonie crabbings.
The Rio Tixto or Starcke United,
Messrs. Michael and Robins struggled
under many difficulties for two years
putting in a tunnel to cut the Rio Tin to
reef and were at last successful in
cutting the old reef, which turned out a
crushing at worth £d 12s fid per
ton. One of the paitners died and the
other got partly blind, and the claim
was sold to a syndicate, who have taken
in the St. Patrick line and other num-
bers in a lease of 29 acres, which is now 7


called the Stareke United. A crush-
ing is now being taken out, and is ex-
pected to yield well—7o tons for
1240 z, worth £496, or £7 par ton —
not a bad return. It shows what
perseverance and a little capital can do
toward re-opening abandoned reefs.
John Torres has done a deal of pro-
specting work on the field. He was
the successful discoverer of good gold
in Boomerang No. 3, and has sunk and
tunnelled on seven reefs single handed,
and when death overtook him he was
engaged tunnelling for the Alexander
line.
• Having worked on the field I know
from personal knowledge that; there are
several reefs still worth trying again,
such as the Lily of the Valley, Moun-
tain Maid, Gladstone, Monte Carlo,
the Alexandra line, and others. Most
of them offers good facilities for tun-
nelling, and only wants a conple of
men assisted for twelve months to
prove the ground.
The Gladstone
In particular offers a splendid oppor-
tunity for a company or a Iqpal syndi-
cate for tunnelling operations and with
a battery on the ground would be a
good investment and a sure dividend
yielder under judicious managment.
It is only five miles to the mine over
level country from the mouth ef the
Stareke river, where there is a good
site for landing machinery, &c. The
Gladstone has been a regular producer
for years, and was only killed through
to much handling of the stone (no less
than four times) before it reached the
top. The cartage cort 11* and crushing
25s per ton, besides heavy watching
expenses. It is believed with a battery
on the ground that hundreds of tons of
the mullock heap would pay to crush,
as poor stone was thrown away by
tunnelling, the mine could be easily
and cheaply worked, and much of the
headings recovered for crushing. At
one time an attempt was made to float
it but the owners wanted too much (half
of the shares paid up). Up till recently
it could have been taken up for noth-
ing. Since then a Brisbane company has
taken it up and imported an up-to-date
crushing plant, which if placed near
the mine and with judgment in work-
ing, it ought to turn out a safe invest-
ment and a great produeer.
Porphyry Dykes.
A porphyry dyke runs through the
field from which most of the gold seems
to have been shed; wherever this
porphyry kind of soft sandstone is
found, it is a sure sign of gold bearing.
Sometime ago a 20 acre lease was taken
u) on the range behind Munbnrra, in
soft sandstone formation carrying
golden quartz vein lets through it 20
feet wide, crushings packed yielded from
half an oz and upwards per ton, but
the difficulty is to get it down the
range; and a battery of sufficient
capacity to crush it cheaply. Here is
an opportunity for speculatioi with a
chance of success. This field has pro-
duced some sensational crushing in the
past —lOoz, 15oz, 20oz up to 40oz per
ton. I have not space for statistics
so will refrain from quoting.
Cocoa Greek (Antimony and Gold).
In 1892, two prospecting parties
were out on the head of the Mclvor.
In a branch they found colours of gold
which is the guiding star of the pro-
spector. While at breakfast having
cocoa, Mr. W. J. Webb and his brother
Jess were joined by Harry Asmus and
party, (late landlord of the Great
Northern Hotel), now prospecting at
Mt. Hartley for wolfram. The two
parties combined and followed up the
creek—which they named Cocoa Creek
from the above circumstances. They
found blocks of oxidised antimony con
taining rich gold strewed along a
narrow ridge—worth 4oz to the ton,
which was quickly collected, and 4


gully leading from the ridge was turned
over for a quarter of a mile for floaters
that had been washed in ages past and
deposited under several feet of alluvial.
In a few years this discovery though
small, turned out over £5OOO worth of
gold. The antimony was not saved.
Mostly all was spent on machinery,
sinking, dam making, and in experi-
ments to separate the gold from the
Antimony. I well remember visiting
this field -when it was in full swing
with a five head battery, a store and
butcher shop, huts, tents and goats all
around, and dozens of men trenching,
tunnelling and prospecting. But
strange to say only one payable lead
and several shafts in the prospectors
claim were found payable. When the
battery stoped, as usual the place
became deserted and remained so till
1907, about 15 years. An English
company tried and were disappointed
as they were lead to believe a body of
antimony ore was left in the face,
whereas the ore had pinched out, the
reef w 7 as there and wanted sinking on
or driving along the lode till another
bunch of ore came in or widened out to
its usual size 18m. to 2 feet. This the
company were not prepared to do, so
it still remains abandoned, untested
and undeveloped. It has been said
that the original party disagreed about
spending £lOOO in prospecting levels
as the lode is supposed to have split up
or jumped, as the miners term it, slide.
No doubt the lode is still there and
only wants exploiting to make a valu-
able again, as it is in auiiferous
country. The hill above the mine con-
tains reefs, leaders and numerous
veinlets, carrying gold throughout the
antimony. Several trial erushings
from the surface and open cuts went
from sdwt to ISdwts per ton. Colours
can be got in the surface and gullies
leading from the hill. The formation
is of a sandstone nature, but the
antimony is in dark blue slate country.
It has been suggested that most of the
hill might pay by a quick crushing
process, the material being conveyed
down to a running creek by means of a
tramway half-a-mi!e away to Yambah
Creek. The country being in a gold
bearing belt is worth prospecting.
The Jack River.
So called from being in close prox-
mity to Dr. E. L. Jack’s tracks North.
Gold was located here by the Webb
Bros., in an isolated spot. Two gullies
and a hill have been worked mostly by
Chinamen, who halted there after
they had been driven from the Starch* 1 .
No one knows what gold was got by
them, but it is believed they did well.
What was got by Europeans was of
good quality being worth £4 2s per
oz. The source has not yet been dis-
covered, some think reefs will be found,
others thinks it come from the con-
glomerate that surrounds it. Here is
an opportunity for prospectin gaud f or
a geologist to enlighten us. Not a
shaft has been sank for reefs, although
off the beaten track to the fetarcke only
a few miles. It is in a gold be- 1 ’ ,g belt
and may have a future before it, it is
healthy and has a beautiful pe..nf.nent
running stream in the driest season,
an ideal spot to recruit.
Uncle Sandy (Antimony and Gold).
Was located on the lower Starcke
about three miles from Munburra, by
the Webb Bros., similar to Cocoa Creek
and known as Uncle Sandy, but was not
as rich in gold. Several attempt have
been made to work it, but owing to the
low prUe of antimony and poorness in
quantity of gold, together with the
distance to pack the ore to the sea-
board (12 miles) it has not yet been
proved payable, although the writer got
a fair gold prospect while it was under
exemption, which has since been thrown
up. Gold has also been got in leaders
at Prospector’s gully and McKenzie’s


gully near by.
We must now leave the North West
coast and go into the interior.
The Coen.
Was first reported by Bob Sefton and
party in February, 1876, it was then
stated to be 300 miles north of Cook-
town. The distance is about 230 miles,
and 50 miles from the seaboard (Port
Stewart). It has bad a varied experi-
ences of ups and downs, first an excit-
ing rush ; £3OO was collected for the
prospectors to mark the track, and
hundreds started for the now field
which was afterwards totally deserted,
through a rush to Lukinville on the
Palmer River about 30 miles below
Paltnerville—and twelve miles lower
down there used to be a mining popula-
tion at Stewart Camp—both were dis-
appointing as far as alluvial gold was
concerned, being very fine and not
plentiful enough, the miners were dis-
gusted and left. Lukinville was
afterwards over run with Chinese who
no doubt got a fair quantity of unre-
ported gold. The Coen was however
reopened after a lapse of years by
Charley Wilson after several unsuccess-
ful attempts by others. It was he who
introduced capital and was the means
of the Lankelly being up. Other reefs
were taken up which gave it a fresh
start and it is destined to become a
large mining centre. An official record
says, in 1894 and 1895 the deepest
shaft was only 110 feet—now the deep-
est is over 600 feet—and the yield
during the years was 2,640 tons for
4131 oz—worth over£l2,ooo, averaging
loz. lldwt. per ton. During the year
1908 the banks purchased £5,839
worth of gold.
The Great Northern
Was subsequently taken up and has
since built up a proud record, and
claimc to be one of the deepest shafts
in the district, over 600 feet. It has
given employment to a large number of
miners for years, in fact it is the main
stay of the township. It has up-to-date
mining appliances, steam winding plant
and the wonder is it hasn’t its own
cyanide plant. The writer was kindly
shown through the mine a few years
back by the manager Mr Patterson, the
mine was then in first class order, well
and heavily timbered and every con-
venience to work economically, bins
and shuts to save handling the ore too
often. The reef is many feet wide with
a splendid body of stone show-
ing gold freely. Some that I
saw was very rich (as much
gold as quartz). I wrote for the returns
of this mine but did not get them. Up
to the end of 1900, 4,000 tons were
crushed for an average of 2Joz. per ton
—value £7 10s per ton. During 1901,
1,161 tons yielded 2,2210 z, averaging
2oz per ton—worth £6 per ton. The
Great Northern crushed 17,407 tons
for a value of £86,234 above the 275
feet level, with a shoot of gold about
600 feet long now worked out, the value
being about £5 per ton. From 1902
to 1906, 2,580 tons, tailings were
cyanided for 1,3710 z over
I4dwt. per ton. The total returns from
the Coen district shows that this has
been and is an important mining centre,
for over 42,2910 z. standard gold (£3
17s lOd) has been produced, worth
£164,570. Capital is wanted to work
the other reefs in as systematical and
economical as the Great Northern to
return dividends and to open up a big
field. In 1897 and 1898 three small
erushings of 25 tons yielded 143oz—
averaging about soz. ISdwts ; 22 tons
of from the same mine went
over loz. per ton. Within eight or ten
miles there is the Tadpole and Spring
reefs deserted for want of crushing
appliances. A few miles further out is
the Klondyke reef which never had a
fair trial, then on to the Rocky. From
the Klondyke line of reef 405 tons were


Crushed f0r9570z., Mr. Shields was the
prospector.
Fox’s Lookout.
Has for years afforded a quite retreat
for alluvial diggers to replenish their
stores; no returns of the gold is avail-
able, the country has not been much
prospected, although only 25 miles from
Port Stewart and 16 miles from
Ebagoolab.
The Eocky Diggings
Was discovered by Mr. Wru. Lake-
land, some 40 miles north of the Coen,
but Owing to its distance and being in
such rough mountainous country it
never had a chance of capital to develop
it. Up to 1895 something near £’2Boo
worth of alluvial gold was produced
it employed a number of men for a
considerable time. In 1899, 400 oz. of
alluvial gold was got, besides a number
of small crushings were going through.
Mr. Joe Maine, a miner, has memorised
in verse the hardships on the road at
the time of the rush. I can only give
a few lines to give an idea of'the toil.
Those who have travelled the tropical
jungle will enter fully into the spirit of
the verse.
When the Macks crossed the mountains and
finished their tramp,
And reported their find at Larrikin camp,
There'was drinking of liquer that Xmas day,
At least lor those who had money to pay,
But many were poor from duffers before
Shoeless and penniless, in debt to the store ;
The news of this gold was a heavenly I a'm
To Inen that lived weeks on the succulent
palm, *
They rush for the mountain in torrent cf iriii
Over creek, crag and cliffs the summit they
gain;
They pause lor a moment the jungle before,
For there in its depth lies the much-desired
ore ;
'Tis the darkness of death that fall on their
sight,
Or the gloom of the grave in the stillness iff
night;
jT’is the home of fever, reptile and toad,
And man in his paesion dispute (heir abode
The furies possess them, prevention is vain,
With hnrger behind them and gold on the
brain
All bleeding and torn they hew down a tract,
And reck not the rage quite c awed off their
back,
Entangled in lawyers, from trees hanging
down—
Awaiting their victim*, like lawyers in town—
Wearing a network of barbs round about.
And once you get in it, its bard to get out.
’Tis madness to rush, it is wisdom to stay,
Or leave flesh and hair on the vines by the
way,
The truth of description none will dispute.
Who’s look on these relies of man and of brute
For even the bullocks the butcher supplied
Were harmless, hoofless, and bald on the hide,
They crawl to the gallows exhausted with pain
Half slaughter’d before, to be slaughtered
again.
When the alluvial gave out, he pro-
spected for reefs and was successful in
finding payable reefs, but tho difficulty
of getting machinery into the
mountainous country through densely
covered scrub was enough to daunt the
average miner, but not Billy Lakeland,
he persevered and eventually got a
water wheel battery to crush his stone,
and has managed to keep himself and
family and kept the field alive for years
up to the present time. Queensland
owes many a debt of gratitude to these
hardy pioneers who have opened up
difficult spots and still keeps them to
the front for the rising generation.
MuNBUKKA, OB StAKCKIE No. 2
(1 OLDFIELD. ‘
Munbnrra is the nearest gold mining
camp to Cdckfown in the district, being
less than 50 miles from the Wilton
railway station 14 miles from Cook-
town. Although so near the port of
Cooktown and of easy access, very few
cf the outside public have any idea
wheie it is. Not very long ago a miner
from this field had occasion to visit
Brisbane with a view to floating a small
prospecting syndicate and wanting some
information from the Mines Depart-
ment he had seme trouble in getting it,
as this field was comparatively unknown
to them, thus showing how little this
place is advert.sed. The field was


LAST HLT
P.O.
1900
Tons
Oz.
Dwt
May
72
342
0
Decaraber
73
321
10
1901 '
August:
50
1*5
17
December
9
97
0
204
873
7
An average of over 4oz. Sthvts. per ton.
BOOMERANG P.C.
1991
Tons
Oz
Dwt
May
5
100
0
September
10
95 ’
10
_ 1902
February
8
90
0
23
215
Iff
BOOMERANG No.
1. E.
(Byers)
1900
Tons
Oz
X)-vt
September
53
1-5
1901
February
4
10
3
February
20J
201
8
September
10
- 25
0
40
400
0
BOOMEBANG No. 2. E.
(Stuckey anti Given)
1001
Tons
Ox
Dwt
March
2f
22
5
November
14
175
12
1002
20
174
13
'
37
370
10
discovered in 1896 by a subsidised
party “ Webb and party ” who found
payable reefs and alluvial deposits. The
field was not gazetted for some reason
or other till June 1898, when the
miners attention was turned to prospect-
ing and developing the reefs through
the discovery of a few good reefs, of
course at this early stage there was no
battery, the rich stone was dollied by
hand. The “ Last Hit P.C.” lam in-
formed dollied 8320 z and the ehippings,
pannings, &c, about 16 tons were pack-
ed 25 miles to the nearest and only
battery in this part of the district
(Cocoa Creek) and they yielded the
handsome amount of 2470 z. After
some delay a small syndicate of Cook-
town business and Munburra miners
started the “ Pionoer Battery ” with 2
head of stamps in the latter end of 1898,
sipce then they have increased it to 4
stamp heads and the field has been
steadily yielding its wealth to the State
without any. outside assistance. Just
lately the outside public are beginning
to wake Up and are nibbling prepara-
tory to making a big bite, there is
plenty of room for small prospecting
syndicates on shows that have been
temporarily abandoned after a few good
crushings had been taken out easily.
The dead w*rk or developing of the
mines is left to those that have capital.
The deepest shaft on the field is only
85ft, the. majority are only 40 to 50 feet.
To show that the field is genuine and
this report is founded on solid facts. I
have been fortunate enough to obtain
the crushing returns for 1900, 1901
and 1902, which are as follows :
Previous to 1900, 518 tons were
crushed for the handsome yield of 1820
oz. being an average of over per
ton. In addition to the above there
have been a number of crushings ot
seconds or headings which have returned
a profit over and above expenses.
Previous to 1901 they crushed 58
tons for 388 oz. lOd'-vts.
Since the Boomerang has been incor-
porated with the “ Queen Alexandra ”
they crushed in April 1902, 18 tons for
SBoz. lOdwts, a total of 94
tons for 712|nz. giving an average of
over 7oz. lldwt. per ton.
Averaging Boz. 14dwts. per ton.
An average ot lOoz. per ton.
BOOMEKANG So. 3. S. (Gorton and Treventi)
4 srcre leese.
1902 lons Oz Dwt
February 8 120 0
Average looz. pM' to,).
What might be termed “ Boomerang”
No. 1. W., Denman and party crushed
about 56 tons for 2650 z, being nearly
an average of 4oz. 15dwt. per ton.
This ground is included in the “Queen
Alexandra ” formerly the “ Boomerang
P.C.” and “Ruby United.” This is
also a Brisbane syndicate, they have a
12 acre lease which is good property


SURPRISE.
1890
22 tons llloz.
lOdwts
Average 5oz. per ton.
RIO TINTO.
1898
3 Jots 100 tons 250oz
1000 April B ton
2oz.
4dwts
1901 Aug.
27 tons
15oZ.
ISdwts
1901 Nov.
7 tons
lOoz.
9Jwts
137 tons
27oz
.. 8d »ts
ST. PATRICK.
1900 Nov.
48J tons
62oz.
lldwts
1901 Jftn.
21£ tons
04oz.
lOdwts
70 tons
127oz
Idwts
GLADSTONE.
1900 Nov.
44 tons
3loz.
1901 Sep.
30 tons
84oz.
1902 April
17 tons
llOZ.
91 tons
77«z
having no less than half a dozen reefs
in their ground, three of which have
been rich, and are payable. This pro-
perty was once formed into a Cooktown
syndicate under the title of “ The Boo-
merang G.M. Coy,” unfoitunately for
them I consider, they let slip a valuable
mine that only wanted about one fifth
of the Cooktown capital which has been
spent on Kulamadau to make it a hand-
some dividend yielder. Just fancy
nearly lOOOoz out of 120 tons taken
out of the present “ Queen Alexandra ”
lease, independent of what has been
dollied, and the deepest shaft on 84ft,
with a payable shnte of gold at the
bottom of a well timbered shaft, which
only wants proper appliances to take
it out.
“Duke of York ” formerly called the
“ Maid or Lily of the Valley.” This
was one of the first reefs discovered on
the field at the head of Prospectors or
Kitty’s gully by “Webb and party,”
they dollied a considerable amount of
gold out of it.
A Brisbane syndicate one time took
up a 12 acre lease and got a small trial
crushing of 3 tons which returned 2oz.
15dwt. per ton. It is under exemption
at present awaiting development.
Average over 2oz. per ton.
Gladstone in 1904, 58 tons crushed
108 oz ; 1905, 60 ton about 750 z, IJoz.
per ton. Length of reef in sight about
100 feet. Depth from present level to
water level about 80 feet. The easiest
and the most economical mine to work
on the whole field with a battery near
the mouth of the tunnel—from sdwts
to lOdwts per ton will pay to handle.
MOUNTAIN MAID.
8 tons 9oz. 7dwts.
This claim dollied 70oz.
In addition to these crushings there
has been about 100 tons of surface
headings, seconds,. Ac, put through
from different shows for an average of
■Joz per ton.
Not being able to get sufficient data
to classify the various crushings from
the different shows during 1898 and
1899, I will give the total for those
years which will show that the field
deserves better attention from the out'
side public and Cooktown in particular
than it has received. The total tonnage
crushed during those years is 1414 tons
for a yield of 55780 z, being an average
of over 2oz. per ton.
The Batavia River
Was discovered by W. Baird, and the
reports of big nuggets caused great
excitement and hundreds started r or the
new field, but unfortunately no account
has been kept of the gold obtained.
The field was suddenly deserted, like
many others that did not come up to
expectation at first, but that proves
nothing, for many deserted.fields are
turning out well. like the Coen. Bill
Baird stuck to it until he Was killed by
the natives. It has since been re-opened
and is reported to be progressing, and
that a search is being inade for fresh
discoveries in that locality, whebe many
indications invite the prospectors. The
prospector’s memory has been immor-
talised by the miner’s poet, Joe Maine,
who is also dead. He describes the place
as follows


In that wild droavy spat where the miner
was i-laiu
By the savage his country had fed ;
1. 1 the 1 ig tangled grass must his white bones
ivraim
Trusting nature to bury her dead.
Far away in the North, on the field that he
found
N it a post where the o’d cabin stoo 1.
Not a stick or a stone, or m irk on the ground
Save ille stains that were left by his blood.
This venturesome sphdt the pemlty paid,
I i life as in death still a on~;
The w 11 bird coral their hymns to his shade
Since sol.tilde takes hack her o.vn.”
■ EBAfiooi.AH (Hamilton Goldfield),
Is a large field which had been run
over by many early prospectors who
failed to find payable gold, but that
indomitable persevering prospector, Mr
•John Dickie, was successful In Ls9B
he started out single handed over
country w'hich had only been partly
prospected, and: succeeded in locating
payable gold in the centre of a large
field, which at one time carried over
1000 men in search of a fortune —this
entitled .him to a reward of £lOOO,
and up to the, present he only received
£5O0 —he has been waiting years for
the balance, which is a disgrace to the
Government. During the most of that
time he has been continually out pro-
specting and must have spent twice the
amount he received. If he had received
his last dues it would only mean £lOO
a year, in which he found two or more
fields. In 1902, the number of miners
gradually dwindled down to 500, some
managed to make rises, others fair
wages for sometime. The field was of
immense benefit to Cooktown; it
turned out over 35,5000 z. of standard
gold—at £3 17s lOd—valued, £188,228,
and was the means of opening up a
large tract of the Cape York Peninsula,
including some hundred of miles, be-
sides a number of small fields. The
field had many pecularities to other
fields, gold being found in the most
unlikely spots puzzled the ordinary
miner. In many instances the gold
was coated black and obscured in lumps
of dark quartz. The reefs dow'n to the
water level were in many cases very
rich, but like all other fields when it
came to putting on machinery and
have to contend with water, the ordin-
ary miner had to leave it for companies.
In the first half-year of 1901, 1,250
tons yielded 3,5780 z. The principal
mines were :—The Caledonia, May
Queen, Hamilton King, Hit-or-Miss,
Hidden Treasure, All Nations, Golden
Treasure, Trafalgar, Tasmanian. From
these eight lines of reefs 10450 tons
were crushed for a yield of 14,3750z —
representing a value of £4 6s per ton.
In the year 1902 the banks purchased
6,9150z —worth £17,666. During 1906
and 1907, 1,2000 z. of alluvial was
won—worth £3500. The Hamilton
King crushed 1,535 tons for 2,2580 a-
. the 60 feet level —worth £6,775,
The May Queen crushed 1,996 tons
from a four feet reef with payable
results—£6,3o6. The Caledonia from
above the 150 feet level crushed 2,574
tons for 2,642 oz—worth £7,586. The
Hit-or-Miss is a reef well worth further
development, and the following facts
should not be lost sight 0f;—1,072
tons, yielded 2,1670z —worth £6,471 or
£6 per ton. The Hidden Treasure
crushed 1508 tons which went over loz
per ton. The Tasmanian turned out
some very rich ironstone specimens
and stone to the water level.
The Alice Riveb (or Philp Goldfield).
Leaving Ebagoolah (meaning the
rock of gold) to the miners he brought
there, that persevering and born pro-
spector, John Dickie, started out again,
and in 1904 reported the Alice River.
His heart and soul is in the work cf
exploration and his sole ambition is to
open up new fields. He has succeeded
in opening up two or more fields, and
the Government should keep him per-
manently employed at the work he


loves, at a fixed salary. Unlike other
prospectors he ventures out alone,
unencumbered by mates or even a black
boy, so the expense as an experiment
would be trifling. The alluvial gold
turned out of this field was not so
great—a few thousand ounces would
cover it. The reefing shows signs of
becoming a big field, but the want of
sufficient capital to develop it soon
caused a decline. During 1905, 1,122
tons was crushed for 1,4100z —worth
£4,610, besides 1570 z dollied. The
Peninsula King P.C. crushed 59 tons
for 158 oz—worth £sos—valued at £8
10s per ton. The Peninsular King had
several other crushings. The Alice
Queen crushed 061 tons —valued at £6
11s per ton. Many other lines of reefs
are still undeveloped and arc well worth
a systematic trial. On one reef a sixty
ounce specimen was obtained, and the
writer also won a five ounce specimen
on it. Very little prospecting work has
been done to find the shoot of gold,
although the reef is over 2 feet and well
defined. The Big Blow line of reef has
turned out seyeral payable crushings.
but the distance and expense of callage
prevented further exploration work. A
few miners still remain on the field
eking out a living and keeping the
field alive in hopes of a revival.
Prospectors.
Who can estimate the benefit the
various prospectors have conferred on
Queensland by the discoveries of
mineral wealth and territory. Hann,
the explorer, cost the’country a sum of
money to fit him out, but his discover-
ies would have been lying dormant for
many years had not such men as J.
V. Mulligan and party who ventured
into the interior, tra velling hundreds of
miles through country infested with
hostile blacks to the Palmer River in
search of gold. Who can fathom the
influence which Mulligan and party
conferred on the State by their dis-
coveries, and sebseqnent extract of
sixty tons of gold from the Palmer and
other fields. Sefton and party ventured
further North to the Coen and tlis-.
covered payable gold. This field is
now returning to the State a handsome
revenue. The intei vemng country run
over by those prospectors, has been
opened by such men as the John Dickie
type, thus opening up thousands of
square miles of mm#ral country. I
published in the Croydon Record, “ A
plea for permanent paid prospectors,”
fifteen years ago, and pointed out what
prospectors had' done for the colony.
I cannot now dwell further on the
subje. t.
Yakrandex.
Yarraadeu is situated H miles South-
east of Ebagoolab, and was opened
about eight years ago by a Mr. Keating,
who was fossicking for alluvial. There
is quite a little township near two lines
of reef namely the Savannah, with a
shaft 238 feet deep, and the Golden
King. On the latter there are ten
numbers, most of them hung up under
exemption, which prevents develop-
ment. This, in some cases, should not
be allowed, unless some bona-fide
and satisfactory reasons can be given.
On the Savannah there are a few
numbers, but they never seem to be
fortunate enough to get on to the reef,
or shoot of pay ore. Both the P.C.
claims have had large crushings. The
last crushing of 860 tons from the
Savannah went over 1 oz. ‘to the ton.
Yarranden is essentially a reefing field,
which will be shown by the number of
isolated spots within a radius of four
miles (with no alluvial) where claims
have been taken up and worked, and
stone packed or carted that distance to
the nearest battery. Within . that
radius on the route to Cooktown to
this mining centre reefs can be seen
out-cropping everywhere, with not a
single shaft on any of them, which


proves it is still unprospected. Mr.
Margetts has a very complete and up-
to-date battery and cyanide plant a
short distance from the town and
mines,—but unfortunately the battery
is not kept going half of the time,
through the curse of too many exemp-
t'ons. Number 1 S. Golden King
■crushed in 1906-7 578 tons for 1,026
oz., worth £2,667, value £4 12s. per
ton. Some £6,000 has been'taken out
down to the 100 ft. level. Number 2 S.
crashed 180 tons for 228 oz. Number
8,4, 5 and 6 crushed 1,805 tons for
2,889 oz. value £6,081. The P.S.
Golden King crushed 756 tons, for
1,361 oz., worth £3,589. This line of
reef has probably turned out about
£14,000 worth of gold. The Savannah
P.S. crushed 1,359 tons for 3,616 oz.,
worth £9,040 down to the 124 ft. level,
value per ton £6 13s.
The Lukin.
The Lukin is about three miles from
Yarranden. Mr. George, Raynor was
about the first to find a payable reef.
He sold out to Wilson Bros., and W. J.
Carless elected a five-head battery for
an interest in the mine. The Lukin
P.C. crushed 339 tons, which yielded
712 oz., an average of 2 oz. 2 dwt. per
ton. The Hiakai gold-mining lease,
adjoining the P.C., and owned by the
same party, crushed 1500 tons for an
average of 25 dwt., taken from a depth
of only 50 feet, which speaks well for
the future of the mine. A number of
other crushings from different shows
were put through at this mill, some-
thing like 2000 tons in all, giving 'a
splendid return. The tailings have
recently been purchased and cyanided,
812 tons giving a return of 492 oz., an
average of 12 dwt. per ton. This,
together- with the original crushing,
shows the Lukin district is worth ex-
ploiting and investing in., I visited
and went down the mine, and saw
prospects dollied from the reef, the
gold wan fine. From No. 1 and 2
South, 218 tons yielded 275 oz. in
1906. The general value of the stone
about £5 per ton.
A claim held by Messrs. Riley and
Donaldson,’ a m.le from the Lukin,
called the Try Again crushed 159 tons
for 281 oz., average 1 oz. 151 dwt.
The Gold Mount.
The Gold Mount (or Mount Ryan)
fuither up the Lukin in the gorge, is
four miles from Yarranden. This is a
big reef, and has turned out several
hundreds of ounces by one Harry
Hannan. Several crushings were gat.
Some 274 tons yielded 705 o/.., valued
at about £8 per ton, but, owing to the
distance from a battery, much of it has
to be thrown aside, a bulk trial
crushing of the whole reef, 25 feet
wide, was taken out and averaged 14
dwt. to the ton. Here ought to be a
chance for a battery on the ground.
Lately a Mr. Pai crushed 115 tons for
IGO oz. from the same place.
The Violet.
The Violet reef is situated between
Ehagoobih and Yarranden, about seven
miles from either. From this reef 500
tons gave 1,464 oz., averaging 2 oz,
12 dwt. The gold is of poor value, but
the size of the reef and the good returns
make up for it, value per ton £5 4s.
The shoot is a long one, about 250
feet. When I visited it, in 1907, the
place was deserted. The reef appeared
to be well-defined and likely to live, as
the country rock seems undisturbed,
The workings were all shallow, the
P.C., about 80 feet, being the deepest.
No doubt some day this line of reef will
get a further trial. The whole district
is purely a reefing one, and affords
ample scope for the prospector and
investor.
Pattallah Creek, or Seventy-Mile.
Pattallah Creek, or Seventy-Mile is
an isolated field, 80 miles from the
Alice River and about 70 miles from


Ebagoolah. Mr. T. Collins and party
discovered the reef in 1902, and packed
a trial crushing of a few toils all the
way to Ebagoolah, which gave a hand-
some return of about 14 oz. per ton.
The claim is well and aptly named
the “ Perseverance,” as the owners
dave had to exercise that virtue under
trying circumstances. They arranged
for a battery in 1904, and, for some
time things went smoothly, but, unfor-
tunately a dispute arose between the
mill-owners and shareholders, which
Could not be settled, consequently the
battery, which was named the “ Vindi-
cator,” was removed to the Alice.
The shoot of gold is about 80 to 100
feet, and the shaft is only 40 feet. It
is a big reef, between two and three
feet. They crushed 584 tons for a
yield of 587 oz., worth £1,700. The
tailings have since been cynanided, and
have averagel |oz. of bullion.
The Akcheb River Tinfiei.d.
According to the report of Warden
Cherry,- the Archer River tinfield is
about 40 miles from the Coen. It was
discovered by Messrs. J. Mayers, R.
Wilson, and J. hush some 22 years
ago. Mr. R. L. Jack, Government
Geologist, discovered tin in that locality
or one of the tributaries in 1879 (thirty-
one year's ago), but, owing to a variety
of causes, including the distance from
port, and the low price of tin (£7O per
ton), it was abandoned till about June,
1906. Then it was re-opened by Messrs.
A. Boyd, J* Plumiidge, and S. Eng-
land, and they hare remained on the
field ever since. 0-hers soon followed,
and formed quite a little mining town
on Tin Creek. For seventeen months
something like 24 tons of tin, worth
£2.240 has been sent to Cooktown.
Considering the long land carriage,
shipping freight and charges to Cook-
town and Sydney, amounting to about
£lB per ton, it speaks well for the field
as a paying one.
An attempt is being made by the
miners to get direct communication
with the coast to Hayes’ Creek, which
can .be-reached within 35 miles. This
proposal deserves assistance both from
the Government and from the Shire
Council, but, like every outside place,
they are neglected and Jett to fight
their own battles against nature’s
difficulties. They have since been suc-
cessful in opening up a new track, and
more mineral country, for gold has
been found on Hayes’ Creek, a rich reef
having been discovered recently, from
which 2 tons 4 cwt. yielded 23 oz.
The prospectors are Messrs. Preston
a id Dodd.
Pascoe. — Wolfram.
The Pascoe is about 90 miles horn
the Coen, and about 35 miles from
Lloyd’s Bay. Messrs. Win. Lakeland
and Bowden and John Dickie cl im to
have been the original discoverers
twenty-three years ago, but, at that
time, the metal was not in demand,
and consequently of little value Thfe
former, however, gave sketch and direc-
tions of the route to Messrs. G. Brown,
Williamson, Even nett, Enright and
Btait, who opened it again in 1904.
Others quickly followed, and soon a
mining camp sprang up, which has
since been called Bowden. A good deal
of prospecting and development work
has been done. In eighteen months
some 81 tons of wolfram, worth £8,140
has been forwarded through to Cook-
town, besides some sent to Thursday
Island.
Molybdenite is also found on the
Pascoe, and tin. I saw a sample of
the former sent to Messrs. John Cjunn
& Sons.
Mr. Bowden, who was the principal
wolfram-getter, sfent in, in Match,
1901, £485 worth of wolfram. The
low prices of the metal, and the long
distance it has to be packed, together
with the high shipping charges, retard


tin* progress of this district.
Pascoe Tikeieui.
. Tin was originally discovered at the
Pa . 03 in the eighties by a boating
prospecting party, sent out by the
Cooktown Prospecting Committee. As
secretary of the committee I have kept
a sample of the tin brought back by
the party. .
After a lapse of years several. parties
got tim in payable, quantities. A few
years back quite- a rush set in for
wolfram in - the locality, employing a
mi tuber of miners. Gold has also .l pen
found in the vicinity recently, and the
day is not far distant when payable
gold will be found.
Extensive- Antimony Deposits.
Extensive, antimony., deposits were,
discovered by Mr. John Dickie in 1907
eighteen miles from the Alice, and
about 80 miles from.the Laura railway
station. -He estimates it will pay at
Ull per ton, for 50 per cent, ore, ami
the latest market quotations for the
metal are at about .that price. He
considers this, is the greatest find of
antimony yet found in Queensland,
It can be traced for two miles. The
cost of packing is £5. per ton to the
Laura, and the railage to Cooktown is
9s. 6d. per ton for over five ton lots.
The Metal Smelting Co., Balmain,
Sydney, give the ruling London price
for 50 per cent, oie.delivered at Sydney,
thus saving the freight to London.
They also buy 20 and 90 per cent, ore,
so that there is no difficulty ia dis-
posing of the ore. When the railway
is extended from Cooktown to ■ the
peninsula, these deposits, now lying
idle,! will then be actively, worked* turn-
ing out thousands of tons of antimony
ore.
- There is a growing demand in. Eng-
land for antimony paint. Both the
French and Italian Governments are
encouraging the use of antimony pig-
ments and color for painting,- which
has the advantage over white load of
being harmless, and over zinc paint of
being permanent and sunproof.
Wolfram near. West Nobmanby
Goldfield.
, A- few years ago Mr. J. Jepson dis-
covered a wolfram lode within five
miles of the gold workings. Others
have done a good deal of prospecting
in the locality for gold, wolfram,.and
tin, but the country is so mountainous,
rugged, and steep. It is difficult work
prospecting in such country, and it-
requires lots of time, perseverance and
capital, which the hardy prospector
cannot always afford. The country
and Government, who,reap the benefit,
are not educated up to properly estimate
the value of services rendered by these
pioneerminers, who climb day by day,
month after month, year in ( and year
out, living on the hardest fare, till
they finally pass in their cheque at
some hospital,, broken down in body
and spirits. These discoveries, when
recorded, will, be land marks for the
present and,future generations.
WoLFBAJI, NEAR ByEBSTOWN,
Another,prospector, Mr. W. Street,
has been prospecting for a long time
single-handed, by means of open cuts
and shafts, and hq succeeded in locat-
ing a wolfram lode, from which he got
eight bags of wolfram, which proves
the ore is there, and some., day, when
opened up, will give employment to
hundreds of men.
Gi.enboy Copper.
The Christie Bros, and Messrs.. H.
Hamilton, Baker, and Morrison dis-
covered copper about seven miles below
Palmerville. Several outcrops can be
seen and traced for some distance. It
is supposed to be a continuation of the
O.K mineral belt. Samples show from
3 to - 15 per cent, copper and from 16
gr. to 15 dwt. gold per ton.
.Very little prospecting work has been
done in the locality. Unlike gold


mining, the prospector must keep him-
self -without assistance, hence the work
of development will have to wait a
a more convenient season. But, it is a
step in the right direction to have the
spot and mineral located.
The St. Geoege Coppee, Cinnabar,
and Coal.
This field is situated south-west
about 38 miles from the Laura railway
station, and about 30 miles north of
the O.K. copper mine. The Christie
Bros, were the discoverers, and sub-
sequently formed a local syndicate, who
afterwards sold it to a Brisbane com-
pany, who have done a deal of pros-
pecting work, but no permanent
development has been made towards
sinking or machinery, although some
good copper ore has been raised and
exported, giving a liigh percentage,
averaging 45 per cent.
Leases of 445 acres have been secured,
and copper traced for some distance in
the area. A shaft of 40 feet has been
sunk, from which the ore was raised,
and there is every probability that a
pemanent lode will yet be found.
Cinnabar.—Another important dis-
covery was made on the same lease,
which promises to he an important
factor in the development of the leases.
Coal.-—Like coal formation and out-
crops are found within this area, with
scams varying from a foot to several
feet iii thickness. There is everything
in the district needed to help a company
in carrying out its operations---Time,
timber, and proximity to a railway, a
railway which must be extended if it is
to be made a paying' line; ■' r -
The articles have been Written in
order to. show the mineral resources of
the Cook district that have already
been opened up, and to give promi-
nence to others that are still waiting to
be developed, and also to draw atten-
tion to theimniense possibilities the
Cook district possesses, which only
require encouragement and assistance
to give it a start.
The Annan Tin Field.
The Annan Tin Field is a big tin-
hearing area embracing a number, -of
smaller ones, which has had many dis-
coverers, but-foremost of them all was
Mr.-Robert Baird. He and his party
were the first to pass through what: js
now known as Bossville, before tin was
discovered, and penetrated the big
12-mile Bloomfield scrub, cutting a
track through it, and pushing their
way on to what is now known as China
Camp, and Scrub Camp, Bloomfield.
They left Cooktown in 1882 and 1883,
following up the Annan River into
wild unknown country. There was no
Tableland, Rossville, Collingwood,
Shiptou, Romeo, or Mount Hartley ;
these followed in quick succession after
tiirwas once located by Bob Baird arid
party. Therefore Mr. Bob Baird can
be looked upon as the father of the tin
mining industry on the Annan and
Bloomfield. To assist the miners .be
opened a store and a butcher’s -shop,
arid took up land and introduced cattle.
He told me in one of,his,letters that
he had shipped as much as 60 tons’ of
tin from the field in one year.
Mount Romeo.
Mr. William Baird was the next hold
venturesome spirit to strike out on a
prospecting tour. He was accom-
panied by his .faithful hlackboy,-and
succeeded in finding a rich tin field,
:'which be named after :his hlackboy
“Romeo.” There is no doubt but
that this is the richest part of any. I
knew a miner who'told me that he, got
14 tons of tin out- of a small paddock
12 feet square, a pocket of nearly pure
tin ore. Many other miners had also
the good fortune to get on to exceed-
ingly rich patches of tin.
According to the information con-
tained in Government reperts, some
3,134 tons of tin, worth £170,000 were
exported from Cooktown between the
years 1886 and 1.889. Since that date


over £BOO,OOO woith of tin has been
produced in the Cook district. For the
years 1900 and 1907 the Cook district
has produced 488 tons, worth £54,829.
The best record, however, was made
during the years 1888 and 1889, when
nearly 2,000 tons were got, worth
<£loß,ooo. As no separate account was
kept for each field in those days, the
amount cannot he well separated.
Toe names of the creeks, mountains
and tracks appropriately indicate who
were the discoverers, such as Jones'
’Byers’, and Mulligan’s gullies and
. creeks near the Collingwood hydraulic
sluicing company’s property.
The Coi.t.ixowooij Company.
Few men know or in fact can even
realise one iota of the obstacles and
■difficulties the Collingwood hydraulic
sluicing company had to overcome when
they first commenced operations, except
the inch who worked on the race cutting-
in bringing in water over a distance of
seven miles, through dense tropical
jungle, around-the sides of steep, rugged
granite mountainous ranges, and bridg-
ing across great gorges, and hanging
fluming on to precipitous granite cliffs.
Seventy- to one hundred men were
employed for about twelve months in
various works, in felling and clearing
timber, cutting races, and blasting
rocks, sawing and erecting flaming,
getting pipes into place, &c. The
pluck and determination shown by the
Collingwood company certainly deserves
a better return than has so far followed
upon their enterprise. In the first
twelve months the yields from the
alluvial ground were about 32 tons,
worth £3,830. Owing to disappointing
results and want of capital very little
has been done to the lodes, which are
known to exist. Although these dis-
appointing results have been practically
'ruinous to the shareholders, the com-
pany has proved of great benefit to the
district in quite a number of ways.
The bringing in of the water has been
in itself a boon and a blessing to many.
The leases have been let on tribute,
and the tributors are likely to make a
good thing out of it.
Pioneers.
Other names of places which indi-
cate and serve to perpetuate the
memory of the early pioneers of the
mineral field include Riley’s Creek,
Mount Yates : Mount Shipton, Mount
Bolan, Stuckey’s Gap, and other places
all named after hardy pioneers of the
early days who have persevered and
finally overcome many difficn.ties, and,
by their patience, pluck, determination
and strenuous exertion have proved
beyond the shadow or possibility of
a doubt that theie is tin to be found on
the highest levels that water can be
brought to, and even higher. Yet half
has not been told, nor has one-halt of
the mineral resources of the. district
been yet exploited- With the aid af
capital and local experience, combined
with ,sound engineering ability, much
new ground can be proved and lodes
opened which may make this part of
the district become a second Herberton.
Mount Amos.- —Elevation 2,800 ft.
The history of this find. Mount
Amos, dates away back to the eighties,
1887. It was accidentally discovered
by an employe (Mark New) of Mr.
Amos, the district surveyor, who was
camped in the locality. He was out
horse-hunting near what is now called
Mount Amos, when he picked up some-
thing heavy, and took it to the camp.
. Some interesting discussion and excite-
ment was caused over the lode metal.
Eventually all doubts were settled by
assay, which proved it to be valuable
tin.
A rush of townsmen and others,
myself included, set in from Cooktown.
The field has ever since been a profit-
able one for stream tin. Several
attempts have been made to open up
the lodes, which have been pronounced
true fissure lodes, but shortness of


capital, want of experience, and bad
management crushed every attempt.
Dr. R. L. Jack, the Government
geologist, has a high opinion of the
lr.de, and other well-known mining
experts have also .expressed a favorable
opinion of them.
The Phcenician Lodes.
The manager of the Phcenician lodes,
Mr, Walsh, reports that the lodes were
improving as they were 'sunk on.
From 20 tons of ore shipped four tons
of tin were obtained, averaging 71 per
cent. He also says “It is a splendid
shute of ore, and shows every indica-
tiyu of opening up.” This is a Bris-
bane company. The manager has been
greatly hampered for want of sufficient
capital for ordinary prospecting pur-
poses. The mine is well worth further
expenditure to develop it, and, accord-
ing to all accounts, Mr. Walsh is an
efficient manager, and deserves success.
Mount Finnegan.
Mr. Finnegan was one of the pioneers
of the North. His tracks were always
to be found on the outskirts- of civilisa-
tion, pioneering the way through thick
.scrub, ever rushing creeks-and rivers,
and high mountains. He led the way
for others to follow.
A large quantity of tin has been -got
in and around Mount Finnegan, oven
.to the summit, and no doubt lodes will
yet be found after the alluvial is worked
out.
Mount Hartley.
Mount Hartley was discovered by C.
Lobb and party in the nineties, and
proved to be very rich to some. A
small gully yielded 10 to 12 tons, and
one claim 40 to 50 tons. Many hun-
dreds of tons of tin have been packed
from its rugged heights, and much yet
remains. The lodes or veins are
numerous, and will some day be opened.
Unfortunatelymuch of the capital got
was invested outside the district.
Mount Hartley Wolfram.
The first wolfram found in the
Annan district was discovered here
some years ago, but was only recently
re-opened by Messrs. Asmus and Sons.
It is situated seven miles from Boss-,
ville, and tin miles from Cooktown, and
16 miles from Bloomfield. The lode is
18 inches to 2ft. wide, carrying ore.
throughout. A shaft about 50ft. has
been sunk on it. The lode looks well,
and has every indication of pennany
ency. Want of water and other diffi-
culties caused the stoppage of opera-
tions for some time,
Messrs Asmus and Sons have since-
re-opened' it again by patting in a
tunnel over 400 ft. to cut the lode, also
for indication of copper. They deserve
great credit for their perseverance, and
it is to be hoped that they Will ulti--
mately reap their full measure of
success, and that in due tithe other
shows in' the locality will be opened tip-,
when the sound of the steam \vhistle
will re-echo o’er the hills and ranges.'
't r HE Tableland. —Elevation 1760 ft.
On the. high mountain tops dis-
coveries have been made, and camps
formed in Mackie’s and O’Keefe’s
creeks, where bath alluvial and, lode
tin have been worked for years. The
Tableland is only a part of the vast
Annan field. It is only a few miles
from Helenvale. A great deal of money
was spent on the Lion Den, machinery
and expensive tunnelling, which was
not really required. The company
failed through expensive management,
high salaries, &c. It had altogether
far more machinery, than was really
required for an undeveloped show,
Miners made the lode pay by means
■of a spring dolly after the company
failed. Prom. June ,to May in 1889 to
1890 the:company crushed 340 tons for
about 49 tons block tin. Many tons of
tin have been sent from these table
■ tops, and is still being sent.


HkI.KN'VVLE.
Helenvale is on the main Annan
River, 21 miles distant from Cook*
town. Parties "have worked for years
in the dry season for stream tin in the
river bed. A few years ago the whole
river for miles was taken up for a
dredging area; but no work has been
done beyond boring a few holes along
tie bank of this river. Dr. R. L. Jack,
Government Geologist, says The
deep and extensive fields of the Annan
River and and its tributaries Wallaby,
Mongnndy, and Trevethon Creeks,
which may yet rival Stanthorps, are
absolutely untouched.”
Rossvjlle.
Rossvil!# is the centre of a number
of rich alluvial tin claims, situated at
Rossville, Wallaby, Jones, and Slatey
Creek, about 28 miles from Cooktown.
A lot of money was spent on the
Native Youth, unfortunately with
untried machinery, and the venture
consequently failed through inexperi-
ence and bad judgment. The same
claim has been work ng ever since with
manual labor, for a period of some ten
years, and has proved payable, a con-
trast with affords a poor compliment to
expensive machinery and high-salaried
managers. In the same locality some
claims have been working for the last
twenty years, and are still paying.
The Home Rule Company.
The Home Rule Company only
started a few years ago. The • claim
was opened and was worked for years
by Messrs. J. T. Elliot and Bert
Francis before they sold ont to the
Home Rule Company.
Mr. J. T. Elliot, of China Camp
fame, was the first to conceive the idea
of bringing in water from the Home
Rule Falls, and, putting his ideas into
action, he commenced the big under-
taking single-handed, but afterwards
took in a mate, Mr, Francks, in order
to finish it, and it has well repaid them
for their labor.
The Home Rule Hydraulic Sluicing
Company bought them out, and put on
a splendid plant, which cost many
thousands of pounds, and is much too
expensive for their present require-
ments. They have also had many
difficulties to contend with. The mine
has not come up to expectations.
They have a never-failing supply of
water and plenty of gr; uml to operate
on, and a plant capable of lifting
millions of tons of earth under the
management of an engineer of ability.
Mr. Headley, the present manager, has.
succeeded in getting better returns
than hitherto,
China Camp; Bloomfield.
China Camp, Bloomfield, has recently
come to the front af a result of the
energy and perseverance displayed by
Messrs. J. T. Elliot and Skirving in
bringing in water from the Roaring
Meg to their lease, which has turned
out very successful.
This district was opened by Robert
Baird ami party twenty-seven years
ago, and has been continuously worked
during all those years, and other camps
have been opened, including Scrub
Camp.
Another company, the Roaring Meg
Hydraulic Tin Sluicing Company, has
•commenced sluicing operations, and
is likely to do well.
The tin resources ol this district, as
has been shown, are great, and it
covers a large area.
A few years ago tin was discovered
by W. J. Webb (July, 1907) on the
Cooktown railway line, within five
miles'of the 83-mile peg, but nothing
has been done to prove its capabilities.
I must now leave the subject of tin
to deal with that of gold m the far
North.


Copper and Wolfram.
For some time wolfram has been
raised at Noble Island, by Messrs.
Crammont and Formasine, and a. deal
of prospecting work for - copper has been
done on the island. It is to these out-
side sentinels that the district owes
much, for they keep us in mind of the
vast possibilities the district possesses.
Horn Island Goldfield.
The Horn Island goldfield was dis-
covered by Forysth and par ty. About
lOOOoz. of alluvial gold was got from
it. The field was proclaimed in the
month of September in the year 1894.
The Hon. John Douglas was warden.
In his report of 1894-5 ho says that he
did not expect the field to pay more
than,wages for a small number of men.
“Just hopes were held by many, how-
ever, that this field would turn out
well. A little alluvial,gold was obtained
from surfacing, the gold was sparsely
distributed over a wide area, although
some rich leaders were found, the gold
seeihed to be distributed through the
rock formation in numerous small vein-
lets and leaders only, as no defined
lode or reef has been found. Rich
samples were taken from a lode 20ft.
deep, -which assayed an extraordinary
amount of gold 51oz. and 270 z. silver
per ton. But assays are not always
reliable. Two test lots were sent to
Aldershot smelting works. One wq.s of
which yielded soz. per ton. A
second lot of 80tons was sent, which
produced an average of soz. per ton.
The price of gold at the smelting
works is £J. so that equals 48 per ton.
Later on a big company was formed,
Shafts sunk; and an expensive battery
was procured to crush ore in a face,
hut, somehow or other, from some un-
explained causes, it did not turn out up
to expectations. Crushings up to 1896
were 881 tons for l,oßloz. worth
£3,248 ; to 1899 5507 tons for 3,6300 z.
worth £10,877. Recently a battery
has been working on surface stone, but
the returns were poor.
Gold has also been, found on llano
niond. and Possession Island, and I saw
a rich specimen reported to have been
found on Prince of Wales Island. The
character of the stone and gold was
like that hn Woodlark.
No doubt the gold mineral , belt will
be traced through the Peninsula, on to
other islands and New’ Guinea.
Possession Island.
The development of this field was
mainly due to the. energy of Mr.
Enabley, manager, who prospected it in
'1896. A crushing plant was erected,
and, up to 1901, 6,965 tons were
crushed for 2,4800 z., worth about
47,440.
Coal.
The coal resources of the Norraanhy
has been reported on by Dr. It. L.
.Jack, Government geologist, several
times, and as far back as, 1879. Mr.
Maitland, Government geologist, also
reported on it. Recently Mr. Lionel
C, Ball, assistant Government geolo-
gist, made an extensive report, arid
since then a bore has been put down by
a syndicate,, which was subsidised by
Government. This bore was sunk to
a depth of 1,600 ft. with success, but its
failure does not prove that coal does
not exist in payable quantities in the
district, though the non-success of the
boring operations crushed the hopes 6f
litany enthusiasts. Mr. C. Green, late
assistant Government Geologist, re-
ports the coal measures on the St.
.George - as being seven feet thick, and
the discoveries of Messrs. Christie
Bros, and Mr. Ball, on the Deighton,
prove conclusively that coal exists, but
whether the game is "worth the candle is
a moot question.
Years ago coal selections were taken
up in Lloyd’s Bay, where big lumps
were exposed in a creek called Jones’
Creek. Splendid assay reports were


obtained. Other indications have been
found near the . mouth of the Pascoe
River.
Platinum.
In the early days of the Palmer
it was reported that a Chinaman
showed a European a lump of white
metal obtained from the Palmer river,
which the miner thought was platinum,
with stone adhering to it. If this was
so, the fact was a remarkable one, for
platinum is usually fine, and is obtained
.in drift wash. The wonder is that
plitinum, or odier rare metals, are not
found in tin wash. The miner tried to
get the specimen from the Chinaman,
but filled. The Celestial took it away,
and like many valuable reefs, no doubt
ho covered it up. Platinum is a silvery
white metal, the heaviest in nature,
and is worth £5 4s. 6d. per oz.
Diamonds.
Another report which was put into
circu’ation was that a miner had found
strong indications for diamonds, and
applied for assistance from the Govern-
ment in order that he might be the
better enabled to continue his search.
Rut the financial aid asked for was not
forthcoming, with the result that fur-
ther search was abandoned.
Rubies.
The writer found the first ruby that
has been found in the far North, whilst
out prospecting Byerstown way. The
.Minirut Journal dev*ted two columns
of space to the discovery, and the
Minister for Mines advised further
prospecting. But, by the time I got
the advice, I was 100 miles away, and
never went back. The ruby was of
good quality, and no doubt others will
be found in the same locality if pros-
pecting is continued. Steps should be
taken to ascertain whether this is only
an isolated one, or whether the locality
can produce more.
Mica.
Mica has been found in the Palmer
district. I have seen samples of it
obtained from the surface. The size of
the sheets was favourable, but, being
surface samples, was stained.
The discoverer, Mr. Hector Hamil-
ton, has never disclosed the where-
abouts of his discovery, or opened it up,
because he has never been able to see a
prospect of turning his discovery to
some pecuniary advantage to himself,
nor has he bad the means to put it on
the market.
Every day this non-metallic sub-
stance is in increased demand for elec-
tric and other purposes, even the. fine
ground mica is largely used now. The
uses of mica are manifold. In addi-
tion to using it in electrical works,
mica cartridges and wads are now
being introduced. Mica is a substance
which is unaffected by acids, acts as a
lubricant, is a non-condnctor of heat,
and it has many distinct advantages
peculiarly its own Over other materials.
It withstands great -heat, and prevents
rifles from fouling or heating, &c. It
would be a distinct advantage to the
Cook district to have the locality of
this mica discovery properly defined,
and its whereabouts accurately recorded
for future use. The average price of
sheet mica quoted in the United States
during the year 1907 was 33 cents, per
pound.
Caeundum.
Carundum of which rnbv is a variety,
has been found at Rossville in Kerr’s
claim, of a grey color. There are a
variety of colors. Some are valuable.
The source is supposed to be from
igneous rocks, caused by fire. In
America they are found in the vicinity
of biotite granite, pegmatites, diorites.
In some parts of Queensland, calcareous
dykes, having the properties of lime
are the supposed source. Tin miners
should keep *a lookout for precious
stones, for a small sapphire was also
found three miles from Rossville.


Finale.
I have now brought my brief resume
of “ The mineral resources of the Cook-
District” to a conclusion. In writing
it I endeavored to the best of my
ability, to give, so far as was possible,
the utmost prominence to its immense
undeveloped resources, and its many
great possibilities in as concise and
attractive a form as was practicable,
considering the vastness of the district.
I trust I have not missed a field, or
left unraentioned a mineral, or lost an
opportunity of doing justice to the
discoverers and the fields. We have
without a doubt great resources, —but
all its resources are useless unless they
are developed—lt therefore behoves all
who can to lend a hand (no matter how
small) to open up this large rich terri-
tory of mineral wealth. No doubt there
will he many disappointments in the
future as has been in the past, yet
difficulties should only serve to spur us
on to overcome them, and every reason-
ab'e assistance should he given to
encourage the whiling worker in his
efforts to develop those resources how-
ever humble. I think I have proved
that minerals of all sorts exist and
have been discovered, and many proved
payable all over the York Peninsn'a.
Much of it sti 1 ! wants prospecting,
many places want to be re-opened, so
as to give them a fresh start, and
others want developing. It is now for
the public and its public men to devise
ways and meins of bringing the in-
formation contained herein before men
of influence, and of inducing capital to
come amongst ns.
The working men can do as much as
anyone in advancing the district by his
knowledge, and being anxious to assist
all new concerns in their first stages of
development, and in setting his face
determinedly against all agitators who
strive to strangle noble efforts in their
conception. A little self-denial in the
start may mean work for hundreds and
thousands afterwards.
I have now the snthf icii m of leaving
a brief histary of the mineral discover-
ies of this district for future use, and I
hope the object that prompted me to
write it will be obtained, namely the
advancement of the Cook District, I
have now to thank the editor, Mr. Fred
Thompson, of the Port Douglas and
Mossman Record, for the kind assist-
ance he has given mo in publishing
this essay, and for the number of
papers I have been enabled to circulate
throughout the district, although by
no means enough to supply one to
each miner, considering the size of this
vast mineral fields. Yet, like bread
cast upon the waters, it may he seen
after many days. I also take this
opportunity of thanking all those that-
endeavoured to get this essay published
in pamphlet form for wider distribution,
which might have been easily accom-
p'ished by the insertion of a dozen
advertisements at one guinea a piece.
I have just been favored with a
review of the early days (1875) of the
Lower Normanby diggings by the dis-
coverer, Mr. Robert McLean, of the
Caledonian Hotel, Port Douglas. I
hive real it with interest, and I have
much pleasure in introducing it to the
public- It has filled up a gap I was
u lable to fill. No doubt there are
many others who could supplement,
early reminiscences of the Palmer early
days, which I cannot, and which I will
be glad to receive. My essay covers a
large field, and necessarily had to be
brief. Nevertheless - lam thankful and
indebted to Mr. Robt. McLean.
I must now conclude, trusting that
some good has been achieved, and
that some attention might be attracted
to the district by the useful informa-
tion which has been distributed, and
that nothing has been said that might
provoke ill-feeling.
The End.


The Normanby Goldfield.
Near Cooktown.
As the information concerning the Nor-
rnanby goldfield given by Mr. James Dick in
his essay on “The Mineral Resources of.the
Cook D strict” is very brief, the following
details, supplied by Mr. Robert McLean, of the
Caledonian Hotel, Port Dove las, the original
prospector of the field, are sure to prove of
interest;
About 35 years ago we left Kevo’ver Point
to go to the Oakey Creek rash, and, when
making across the bu-h we dropped ac.oss a
gully running i ito a creek called Sandy
Cheek. This pi ice I believe is now ca led Mt.
Buchanan. We worked there for about four
weeks, and got splendid goal. The grass was
long, and we got burnt out. Some of us made
into Oakey Creek where old mother Campbell
had a bit of a shanty, the only place there.
We could only get very litie radons there, and
had to return almost without anything, as
there was noth.i g in the camp. About a week
after that, Hairy Redmond, who was
afterwards working with Mr. Charles Mac-
donald, the Government real overseer, came
looking for two od horses that he had. He
said to me “How are you doing?” and I
showed him a dish with about 3dwt. of gold
in it. He went away, saying “Here’s for the
neddics,” and rushed over to Stone Creek and
abandoned his claim there, and came over to
the gully where we were. The people at
Stone Creek wanted to know where he was
going, and he replied “ Bob McLean and his
push are getting gold there alt right.” We
were work’ng theie for about six weeks or two
months, getting splendid gold. Dr. Bock
was working in the creek too. During this
period there was great talk about good gold
being got at the head of Stone Creek, bub that
the blacks were tremendous bad there. So we
came to the conclusion that we would go and
sight the head of Stone Creek, as we thought
it would prove better than where we were, and
we would chance the blacks. There was also
another rumor current to the effect that
German Charlie had struck good gold over the
granite range. On our way out we met
Johnny Byers, who is now acting Land Com-
missioner at Win ton, and Doyle and party.
This was 1-5 or 18 Hubs from Oakey Greek.
They wanted to know what direction the town-
ship was in, and we (old them as near as we
possibly could. Disappointed with the head
of Slone Creek, we proceeded towards the
g anite range, but could find no tiace either
of Geiman Charley or anyone else. We kept
going southwards. We found a big creek with
a fair amount of tin ami two or three grains of
gild in it, whieh would prove a fortune in any
other part of the world, but the carriage in
those days prohibited even talking about tin.
This creek was afterwards worked by a man
named Hawkins and his mate from Cooktown,
We still kept on proceeding south, and got oh
to the tributaries of the Normanby lliver.
Next morning we spread up and down, and,
on the hi st beach we came to we got three
g.ains of gold to the dish. We kept down
there and shifted down the, horses and
camped. It war only about a mile from the
main river to the junction of the creek where
we camped on to the Norman by River. We
had no iota what river it was. There war
■some speculation as to whether it was not the
Bloomfield. That afternoon some of the
party \\ent down the river and some up.
I went w.th Tom King up the river, and
fell jwe.l up to the first creek that came in from
the southern side, lleie I got a dish of dirt
among the tight slate. My mate expressed the
opinion that there was no gold in the vicinity.
We we.jt down to the river, whieh was about
500 yards distant, in order to wash the dish of
dirt I had obtained. Tom King sat on the
beach, looking out for the blacks, as they were
very troublesome in the low bushes that
fringed the river. The only gold 1 got in the
dish was a sUwt. piece. I showed this to my
mate, and, althoigh he had the scurvy in
both kgs for want of vegetable diet, it seemed
to make a new man of him. We proceeded
surther up the creek to get another dish of
wash, and we found a small hole of water
with a l .out a tubful of wafer in it, and we
took 3oz. of gold home to the camp that n'ght.
We all shifted up next day to what was after-
wards known as Prospector’s Creek. Seeing
that there were indications of the presence of
sufficient gold to keep us there through the
wet season, we rams to the conclusion that
the best plan would be for half of the parly to
stop on the ground, and for the other half to
proceed to Edwardstown, or what is now
known as Maytown, for rations. This was,,
agreed upon, and one half of the party started
with 14 horses for Edwardstown. It was
their intention to be back to the camp in 14
days, the rough estimate of the distance we
gave in those days was 110 miles. The party
left ran out of tucker, and were for four or five
days pretty tight put to it. We were consult-
ing as to what was test to be done, as our
mates might have got murdered by the Hacks
on their road in, and their horses speared.


As they were seven days behind their time, it
was finally decided that I and-another chap
who was known as Alf. should make for Cook-
town, shaping a course about north, for it was
all blind stabbing in those days. Just as we
were discussing matters we heard a shot fired,
and we all got so excited that we did not know
which wny to run first. I ran down the river,
and, when I got down about a quarter of a
mile I noticed a white mare bslonging to
myself in the lead coming up the river. They
had 14 horses when they started. Three
horses got speared by the blacks, and one
I think was poisoned. It is unnecessary to
say that the greeting* exchanged were very
pleasant ones, as we had no tucker, and they
had brought plenty along with them. Tom
King, the man in the camp who was suffering
from scurvy almost got better when he saw
the horses coming up. They introduced me
to a new man they had brought out with
them. This man's name was Tom Mackie,
He used to have a store at Kingsborougb, and
had a farm at Northcote, and afterwards
settled down for a while on a farm near the
Mulgrave Central Mill, which he subsequently
sold, and went down south to live. Then
myself and George, a young half-caste Maori,
and young Hedley, from Stanthorpe, went to
Cooktown for rations, as we could not keep
the horses at the camp owing to the blacks.
I made three trips to Cooktown. On the last
trip we picked up three men who had got lost
in the bush. They stuck to us, and we could
not get rid of them. We took them on to the
camp. They were there a short time and got
80oz, and, as they only had an old grey m ire,
they deemed it advisable to go to Cooktown,
and buy a couple of herses. They got drunk
at Cooktown, ami “blued” all their money
at “Gulgong Kates.” They spresd a report
about Cooktown to the effect that there was a
new ruth to a gold discovery somewhere near
Cardwell. Jimmy Gibbs, late of Irvioebank,
and Andrew Thompson, and his mates, man-
aged to get on to my tracks, and tracked
me to tne creek where I was washing a dish of
gold. Then the rush set in, and the three
men we picked up in the bush cam* back with
old Donald Mathieson, the packer. We got
so disgusted, having purchased 4Jton. of
tucker, and expecting that we would be able
to put in the wet season without anyone
knowing we were there, that we sold out to a
man named Col. Eeevey, from the Hawkes-
bury, who started a store and did remarkably
well. I left next morning tor Cooktown.
When we mustered the horses we found that
three had been speared during the night by
the blacks. I met Billy Little coming up with
40 head of bullocks to the new rush at Deep
Creek, 20 miles from Cooktown.
Our party consisted of myself (Eobevt
McLean), Roderick Campbell, Tom King, Jack
Drew, Jack Hedley, a tailor known as AIL,
a cockney known as Louis, and Tom Mackay
who followed our party 15 miles from Edwards,
town.
I may mention here that on this trip we
saw the first tree climbing wallaby, as we
then called it. This was about 40 or 50
miles due west from the Bloomfield, where
Mr. Hislop used to export them of late years
by steamer to Sydney and Melbourne.
In conclusion, if this should meet the eyes
of any of my old mates who were on this trip
with rue, I would be very pleased to hear from
them.
EECORD CO., PRINTERS,
PORT DOUGLAS, NORTH QUEENSLAND


