

RELIGIOUS
Box 5
CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE COLONIES.
AN ADDRESS,
DELIVERED BEFORE
THE CONFERENCE
CONGREGATIONAL MINISTERS AND DELEGATES,
ASSEMBLED FROM THE FOUR COLONIES OF
NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND TASMANIA,
IN MELBOURNE,
February 20th, 21st, 22nd, and 23rd, 1855;
ITS CHAIRMAN,
THE REV. T. Q. STOW,
OF ADELAIDE.
WITH THE CONFERENCE MINUTES
OF EACH DAY’S PROCEEDINGS.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
13, bridge street.


/
• /
.


CONFERENCE
CONGREGATIONAL INDEPENDENTS.
A Meeting of Ministers and Delegates of the Congregational Body in
the Colonies of Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia, and Van
Diemen’s Land, to take into consideration various matters relating to the
welfare of the Denomination, was held in Melbourne, in the Rev. A.
Morison’s Chapel, Collins-street East, on Tuesday, February 20th, 1855>
and following days. There were present on the occasion from—
Victoria.—Melbourne Collins-street Independent Chapel.—The Rev. A. Morison,
Messrs. John Nicoll, J. Browning, A. Arnot, J, Valentine, H. Drew.
Lonsdale-street Chapel.—Rev. Thomas Odell, Messrs. H. W. Mortimer, W. Pearce,
J. Cowell, W. P. Ashley, B. Haigh.
Oxford-street Chapel, Collingwood.—Rev, W. B. Landells, Messrs. Heley, Hills
R. H. Drew, T. P. Savill, A. T. Snow.
Richmond Chapel,—Mr. J. Padbury, C. Turner.
North Collingwood, Johnson-street.—Messrs. R. J. Bedson, H. Tewsley, E. Theo-
bold, H. Templeton.
Prahran.—Rev. W. Moss, Messrs. W. Hick, J. Dunn, J. Stockes, M.D., H. George,
R. Begg, Dukes, M.D., B. Hick, J. Story, G. Bengrey, R. Blackwell.
St. Kilda.—Rev. R. Fletcher, Rev. J. L. Poore, Messrs. F. J. Sargood, M.L.C.,
R. Smith, T. Fulton, C. H. Symonds, J. W. Roache.
Geelong.—Rev. A. Scales, Rev. J. Apperley, Messrs. Davies, Allen, Bannister,
Hendy.
Boroondara.—Rev. E. Dewhirst.
Castlemaine.—Rev. E. Day.
New South Wales. —Sydney, Pitt Street Chapel.—Rev. W, Slatyer; Messrs, .1.
Fairfax, A. Foss.
Balmain. —Mr. E. Hunt.
Maitland.—Rev. J; T. Waraker.
South Australia.—Adelaide: Rev. T. Q. Stow, Mr. A. Hay,
Encounter Bay.—Rev. R. W. Newland.
Tasmania.—Hobart Town.—Rev. F. Miller, Mr. 11. Hopkins.
Launceston.—Rev. C. Price.
Visitors.—Rev. S. C. Kent (just arrived from England), Mr. A. Fairfax, of Sydney;
Messrs. Crellin, Haigh, R. P. W. Fletcher, and Robert Fletcher.
The Rev. T. Q. Stow, of Adelaide, was called to preside over the deliberations of
the Conference. The proceedings were commenced by singing a hymn, and prayer by
the Rev. A. Morison, of Melbourne. The Rev. C. Price, of Launceston, was chosen
Secretary to the Conference, and the Rev. Messrs. Poore, Landells, and Slayter, with
J. Fairfax, Esq., were appointed an Executive Committee for preparing business to lay
before the Conference.
On receiving the names of Ministers and Delegates, much regret was expressed at the
absence of the venerable Dr. Ross of Sydney, who was disabled from attendance by an
illness which has laid him aside from his work; and also at the absence, in consequence
of the illness and death of one of his sons, of the Rev. Jos. Beazley of Sydney, who had
taken an active part in originating the Conference and in preparing matter for its
deliberations.
An Address on “ Congregationalism in the Colonies” was then delivered by the
Chairman.


ADDRESS.
Honoured and Beloved Brethren
When on my visit last year our brethren of Sydney formally
proposed the calling of this Assembly, the image could not but
arise of our esteemed and venerable friend, Dr. Ross, occupying
the chair on this occasion. God has otherwise ordained. We are
able, however, to soothe our sympathy and mitigate our regrets by
calling to mind his honourable course, his wise and active labours,
his usefulness and important influence; and though the clouds of
physical infirmity have come over the evening of life, it is pleasant
to see them gilded with the mild rays of piety, benevolence, and
Christian hope. As you have requested me to supply his lack of
service, I unaffectedly crave your indulgence and aid.
It is not to defend or discuss our polity that we now meet. Our
delegation from the four Colonies, as Congregationalists, indicates
that on the principles of our denomination we are satisfied. We
are satisfied with them, because we are convinced of their Scrip-
tural authority, and of their practical power for good. We are
satisfied that single “ congregations of faithful men” should claim
to be churches constitutionally,—separately complete in them-
selves, and not mere branches of a larger organization; for such
we believe to have been the churches which the Apostles
planted. We are satisfied that such assemblies should not be
amenable to any, save to their Divine Head; that they should
govern themselves according to the laws of Christ, manage their
own affairs, admit their own members, and elect their own officers ;
because these privileges have been granted to them, and these
obligations laid upon them. We are satisfied with the simple
Pastorate of Congregationalism, because we believe it to be the
true Episcopate of the New Testament. And that our Ministers
are divinely authorized to exercise their functions, we have the
most enjoyable assurance. We find amongst them a heart for
the calling; we find just those qualifications which the sacred
volume specifies ; we find our Pastors doing the work ; we find
them successful in converting sinners from the error of their ways,
and in edifying believers; and we find their ministrations desired
and solemnly recognised by the faithful; and we dare not con-
clude otherwise than that God has disposed them— prepared them
—sanctioned them. Without these things, we should wonder
indeed what could give authority for assuming such an office. We


are satisfied with the avowal and evidence of personal piety as the
condition of membership, since we thereby secure correct discipline,
an enlightened and conscientious selection of ministers, purity of
doctrine, sympathy of character, and freedom for effort and expan-
sion. And we are satisfied with the development of these principles
thus far ; though, confiding in their exhaustless energies and their
germinant vitality, we still think that, like other great principles,
they may wait their time of shewing forth further virtues—hidden
powers to be elicited by new conditions of society—admirable
adaptations, not seen as yet, and to be learned as new exigencies
and new facilities arise. We would not say that we are satisfied
that our system has at all times been well used by its own friends—
that it has had all the wisdom, or faithfulness, or simplicity, or loving
spirit brought to it which befits it, and on which it so much de-
pends for efficiency, comfort, and beauty. But of whatever kind
of error, or want, or evil we are conscious, it is consolatory to feel
that we are not bound to it by awe of antiquity, by hierarchical
prohibition, by State-control, by ecclesiastical compact, or by
changeless confessions. We have the power of self-correction and
self-improvement. We are not doomed to sigh hopelessly over
evils of which we are not permitted to attempt the cure. The path
of advancement is ever open.
It is not Congregationalism, then, but Congregationalism in the
Colonies, which now claims our thoughts. And from this enun-
ciation of the topic it is not to be inferred that there is any such
peculiarity or variation as amounts to a deviation from the principle
or system as maintained in Britain. Its reference is solely to the
circumstances of Colonial Congregationalism, A mongst these is—
Its History. —And Colonial Congregationalism has a history
nearly as old as British colonization itself. The Virginian settle-
ment did not long precede the advent of the Pilgrim Fathers to the
shores of New England. The arrival of the Mayflower was one of
the greatest of human events. The men who then landed and
founded New Plymouth, founded also the American nation. Con-
gregationalism gave form and spirit and destiny to the New World,
and prepared unconsciously to throw back no measured influence
upon the Old World. The North American annals of two centuries
are full of lessons for the philosopher, the statesman, and the re-
ligionist. For Congregationalists these are especially significant
instructions. Never were circumstances more favorable to the
idea of introducing the Theocratic principle into a secular com-
munity. A little band of persecuted exiles, alone on the Western
Continent, find it necessary to frame laws for the regulation and
guardianship of their worldly interests. The same men who meet
in the church meet also in the municipal assembly. And as it was
one and the same company, they thought of but one government,
which should take in all their affairs, civil and ecclesiastical. It
was, however, an error, and one which soon began to develope
itself, although it took a century and a half to correct it. It could
not reasonably be hoped that they could long close their Colony


against the entrance of men of undesirable character, and of dissimilar
notions. Persecution, in its sternest form, was one of the first
fruits of the union, so conscientiously formed of ecclesiastical dis-
cipline and secular rule. This evil indeed gradually softened down
and wore away, but it left another in full and fatal working. These
good men, though they sought to bring up their children in the
fear of the Lord, could not make it certain that all their sons would
be governed by the same pure principles. But the condition of
their assuming civil offices and honours, was their church member-
ship ! A great difficulty arose, and it was needful to meet it in
some way, or wait disruption and revolution. An accommodating
policy was adopted. The conditions of enjoying church privileges
were lowered, and again were lowered, until the guarding strength
of Congregationalism was gone. The churches of New England
had changed their character, and had become mixed assemblies.
The influence could not fail in time to spread to the Pastors, who
springing out of these mixed bodies could not fail of partaking of
the same doubtful character. An uncertain ministry invites and
conceals the approaches of error. Under such circumstances took
place the most grievous defection Independency has ever known.
It is remarkable that eminent churchmen, such as Soames and Le
Bas—-the one in his “ Reformation,” and the other in his “ Life of
Wycliffe,” should have said so plainly that it was impossible to
preserve primitive purity and discipline in national establishments
of Christianity. And it is strange that Congregationalists should
have supplied one of the strongest practical confirmations of this
opinion. At length and by degrees the unhappy compact, which
had produced so much evil, was dissolved, and the mischievous
errors which it had occasioned are no longer rife and aggressive.
Independency, freed and purified, lifts again its head, spreads
abroad, and has its representatives, as proofs and signs of its new
life, in the mission fields of Oroomiah, Syria, Turkey, Ceylon,
India, and China.
The next event approximating to Congregational emigration, was
the settlement of a number of churches in British North America
at the close of the War of Independence. But the circumstances
were untoward. It was not the time for healthy outgrowth, when
the parent stock was feeble and sickly. The New England
Churches at that period were not in a condition to supply materials
ot sufficient strength and promise. And besides, no sympathy
grew up between these new communities and the sister societies of
Britain, whence otherwise they might have drawn ministerial
reinforcements and a useful influence. These churches almost all
ceased to exist, and the merest remnant was left to welcome our
English brethren who went forth to explore those regions a feAV
years since.
Until about twenty-five years ago, no systematic effort was made
to provide for those of our body who had emigrated to the British
Colonies. About that time a few of our denominational friends in
the two elder of these Colonies of the South, cried, “ Come over


and help us.” Honored brethren obeyed the call. We rejoice to
have amongst us those who uttered the cry, and those who obeyed
it. This day let them rejoice together, and we will rejoice with
them. About the same time, and probably owing to the same
circumstances, some minds were stirred up to think of the Colonies
as presenting urgent claims and inviting fields. Your chairman
was one who sympathized in these new anxieties. He cannot
refrain from expressing the deep interest he feels in this stage of
the history, by stating that his first appearance in print was in an
article inserted in the Congregational Magazine of November, 1830,
recommending the formation of a Colonial Missionary Society, in
connection with the Congregational Union. During the next year
some degree of interest was excited by an appeal from the Rev
Messrs. Smith and Wilkes on behalf of British North America, and
although it was not on denominational grounds, yet its effects were
decidedly Congregational, as appears by appeals from ministers of
that body in the following year, as well as efforts for organizing an
Indpendent congregation in Montreal. And it appears to have
been one of the train of circumstances leading on to the happy
settlement of the Rev. Dr. Wilkes in his most influential post in
Canada. A few years passed away, and then came the simultaneous
movement of Drs. Reed and Matheson, the deputation to North
America, on behalf of Canada, and of the Rev. Mr. Binney on
behalf of South Australia, from which resulted the Colonial
Missionary Society. The reports of that Institution are no meagre
documents. In British North America, although Independency
was late upon the field, and therefore put to great disadvantage,
nearly a hundred Churches have risen up, which, with their
ministers and their two Theological Colleges, present a goodly
result, and a far larger promise. In these Southern regions, be-
sides the four Colonies represented on this occasion, our ministers
are organising Churches in New Zealand and Western Australia.
In the Colonies of this hemisphere we have, I suppose, about sixty
ministers, with the hope of a large accession speedily, to enter upon
fields already inviting them.
That as a denomination we were not sooner in the older of these
Colonies, is not difficult to account for. For a long while the
substance of the population, and for a longer period a large pro-
portion of it, consisted of criminals, soldiers, functionaries, and
dependants. We had not been accustomed to work under such
circumstances, and when we began to do so, the progress was slow
and the result small. And even when emigration set in, it became
so distributed by the land regulations that it was not easy to find
population sufficiently concentrated to encourage an effort. And
these circumstances were rendered still more difficult by the fact,
that there were four denominations relying on the proffered aid ot
Government, contending for localities which could furnish the
required number of auditors. Our operations were therefore
carried on principally in the towns, and they were carried on suc-
cessfully. Centres of action and influence have thus been prepared


for a new state of things spread over these countries. Immigrants
are arriving, facilities for settling are afforded, and population is
concentrating. It is pleasant to perceive that the Churches in
Sydney, and Hobart Town, and Launceston, have given proof that
they understand the momentous juncture*, and are taking large
measures accordingly. The case of Victoria has become peculiar.
As this new Colony shared largely in the disadvantages of New
South Wales, as it respects the division of lands, our body was
long confined to the city. But the flood of people that rolled into
the suburbs and the country has borne with it a goodly admixture
of the Congregational element. The progress during the three
years of gold agitation has been more than could have been antici-
pated, aud such as to warrant large hopes for the future. The
number of Churches, of ministers, though still inadequate, of com-
mencing congregations, of judicious plans and of manly purposes,
inspires joy and demands gratitude. The case of South Australia
stands alone. The mission of our body being coeval with the
formation of our Colony, and the land regulations concentrating
the people, there existed greater facilities for gathering Churches
and settling ministers. It was easier for ministers acting on their
own judgment to settle and gather Churches. It was easier, too, by
small aid, for the Home Missionary Society in Adelaide to originate
congregations. It could not sustain missionaries, but it could
give such assistance as made it just possible for new country con-
gregations to accomplish what otherwise they must have despaired
of effecting. We are thankful for such providential facilities.
Brought to this point it becomes us to look at
Our Position. —It is certainly one of responsibility . The fact
that we hold in common with other evangelical bodies, the great
vital principles touching our acceptance with God, and our fitness
for his eternal kingdom, imposes upon us a share of that obligation
which presses upon all who “ hold the head,” to maintain and
diffuse the precious truth, especially in these new Colonies, these
infant nations. Shall Congregationalists be slow to feel this ?
Shall we not do our part of a work which falls on many besides
ourselves ? Shall we not help to form our Colony upon the foun-
dation of evangelical doctrine and piety? There are not any who
hold these principles more strongly than we do—not any who are
more pledged to them—not any placed in circumstances calling
more imperatively for fidelity and zeal. Placed as a portion of the
Christian Church at the beginning of things in this part of the
world, we do most imperfectly understand our position, if we do
not look upon our colonization as a mission in God’s providence ;
if we do not make our undertaking a Christian enterprise, and if
we do not regard our relation to the future history of these coun-
tries as one of heavy responsibility, and our influence as one of
incalculable amount. And what shall we say of our attachment to
the principles of Divine truth, of our Christian zeal, of our dis-
interestedness, of our faithfulness, of our sincerity, if we will
recognise no special claims arising out of our new and peculiar


circumstances, if we give no hearty attention to the best interests
of our chosen country, and if it is not our joy to consecrate our
substance in such a cause ? Placed as we are in this new field of
grand experiments, of marvellous enterprise, and of social progress;
surely the pure, simple, spiritual Christianity we bring, demands a
fresh consecration to its holy interests, a heroism of our zeal, and
all but prophetic visions of the glorious things to come in our
Southern Zion. But we are responsible too for the use we make
of our denominational principles. We believe them to stand very
closely connected with the preservation, the simplicity, the success,
the diffusion of those higher principles, which we hold in common
with other evangelical bodies. It is a conviction of ours, that the
future Christianity of these lands would be powerfully and bene-
ficially affected by the prevalence of our distinctive views. If
these reign, then persecution cannot —then ecclesiastical despotism
cannot —then secular intrusiveness cannot; —nor can mystic offi-
cialism, nor barbarian notions of sacramental efficacy—nor pharisaic
ritualism—nor lax Churches—nor a worldly ministry. It is for
us, then, to hold fast these principles so truly conservative—to
defend them, though charitably yet uncompromisingly—to teach
them to diffuse them. It would be disastrous to neglect or desert
them, and with our views of their truth and importance, it would
be unfaithful.
I here is one point held by us, not exclusively, but principally,
on which we have to give emphatically our testimony. And it is
a practical and effective testimony we give. In England we said
it was wrong in a Government, under any circumstances, to give
public money in support of religion, and wrong in any Church to
accept such aid. Wfi said it was no proper function of Government
—that it was an interference supplanting one of the sacred duties
of Christianity—that its tendency was to enfeeble and corrupt the
Churches that moreover it was needless, inasmuch as Christian
truth is strong enough to make its own way, our opponents, many
of them being judges—that where Christianity does not secure a
willing support, it has not made good its own ground in the con-
victions and sympathies of its professed recipients—that the Gospel
did not require such aid for centuries, and does not ask it now—
that it has given its simple precept, to him that is taught in the
word to communicate to him that teacheth in all good things, and
allows no interference with the mandate, and in its spirit and tenor
frowns upon all exaction and coercion in its name. All this we
said, and said it honestly and earnestly. But still it was in the
power of our opponents to say: “ The offer has never been made
to you/ They cannot say so here. The offer has been made, and
made urgently. Ingenuity has been strained to put it in a form
that might win our compliance. But we cannot accept it. Our
love to Christianity and our solemn sense of what is l due to it,
constrain us to decline the overture. It is seen, it is felt, that our
antagonism to State grants in aid of religion is not envy or pique
at the favour enjoyed by others—that it is not selfishness seeking


to throw off a pecuniary burden—-but a principle which cannot be
bribed or flattered into compromise. This is one advantage resulting
from Sir Eichard Bourke’s reckless system of offering aid to all
sects—the final desperation—the death-struggle of the compulsory
principle,—that we have the opportunity of showing that our
protestations are honest. We are the consistent witnesses in this
case. Were we to protest against this modern system and yet take
the gratuities, it is affirming too little to say that we should expose
ourselves to suspicion. It would be to derision that we should lay
ourselves bare; and whilst we ourselves were laughed to scorn,
little would come of our “ witnessing.” It would be beating the
air. No doubt we shall be allowed full “ liberty of prophecying,”
if we will but uphold the system by applying to the Ireasury. I
say “ uphold;” for if those who witness would also refuse, this
offence against Christian truth —this scandal in the unbeliever s
path—would soon cease. We, at least, are clear of the responsi-
bility of its continuance.
As congregational colonists our sympathies naturally lead us to
New England history for illustrative instances. The founders of
those settlements deeply felt their responsibility. But they felt it
as relating to wants and duties then pressing. They sought for
themselves and their children, a vital ministry, a simple worship,
and a communion uncorrupt and undisturbed. But they saw little
of the vast future they were then creating. J heir principles
looked much further than they themselves did. Our case is far
different. We have insight into tendencies and foresight of results
of which they had feeble conception. It was not with them the
day of hope, nor the season of revival, nor the set time of pros-
perity, nor the age of missions. We, on the contrary, have a vista
open before us, through which we look far into a third world-
forming under the brilliant lights of expanded science, the rapid
processes of modern improvement, the surprising impulses of uni-
versal commerce, the meliorations of a widely extended philan-
thropy, and the awakened and gathered energies of the church of
God; and further still we see worn out and decayed portions of
the old world renewed, reanimated, and re-adorned. In propor-
tion to the sublimity of our position and our consciousness of
occupying it, is our accountability.
Our position is one of some difficulty and of some danger , as it
respects our discipline. Our principle of admission to the Church
is personal piety, avowed and evidenced to the satisfaction of the
Church. On this point we satisfy ourselves, in the case of candi-
dates who heretofore have not been members of Churches. Persons
bringing certificates from other Churches holding this same rule of
admission, whether of the same denomination or not, are without
difficulty received; for they are certified as having been admitted
on our own condition of membership. Iheie aie othei Churches
containing vast numbers of truly pious persons; but that they
should be such is not the condition of admission. These churches
are therefore composed of those who are pious, and of those who


are not so. A certificate then, from such a Church is not a certifi-
cate of spiritual character, it is simply a certificate of membership.
It is not then a certificate which meets our rule. This is the
certificate which far more frequently comes into our hands in
Colonies, especially new Colonies, than in the old country. The
reasons are obvious. Persons feel more free to change and to
choose. Besides which many do not find their own Churches and
ministers at hand. Now the person, as we said, thus certificated
may be truly religious or not. Will he permit it to be ascertained?
This may perhaps be done by a super-official line which the affec-
tion of the former pastor may have dictated. Or ample evidence
may be at hand, or already in the possession of the Church. Or a
specific and satisfactory testimony may be within reach. If this
can be done, it is surely better to receive a Christian of standing
and credit as such, rather than as a novitiate. So long as the grand
object is attained we need not make ourselves slaves to formalities
and rules. But suppose these facilities for certification are absent,
again we ask, will the applicant permit his religious character to
be ascertained ? Will he consent to a friendly interview with the
minister for this purpose ? Will he open his mind to a brother or
two of the Church ? He is perhaps startled at the proposition. It
is new to him. All that we ask, are the means of knowing on
what grounds he is to be taken into hearty fellowship as a brother
beloved. We wish to put ourselves in possession of just so much
knowledge regarding him, as shall secure to him our full sympathy
and confidence. He feels as though it was intrusive and inquisi-
torial. The case requires a delicate, judicious treatment. Let him
understand that his certificate is not despised. It honestly testi-
fies to his membership, to his good moral character, and to his
attendance upon Christian ordinances. More than this is not to be
expected from it. The Church which does not insist upon per-
sonal piety in the individual who enters it, will hardly attest to its
possession when he leaves it. It is simply that such a document
does not meet the requirements of a congregational Church. Let
him understand that evidence of a change of heart constitutes
eligibility in our view; that this is our principle of admission,
though we are far from professing infallibility in its application;
that though we profess not to know the heart, yet certain indica-
tions we do require in the applicant, in order that the fellowship
may be real, spiritual, confiding, and loving. Let him also under-
stand that there are multitudes of attendants in our own congregations
who well understand the gospel theory, and whom we esteem for
correctness of conduct and amiableness of heart, that are not mem-
bers of our Churches, since they do not believe themselves to be
under the vital power of divine truth, nor give evidence to others
of real, earnest piety. If discreetly and gently managed, in most
cases, a truly pious person will understand and acquiesce. But
should he still shrink, let it not be hastily concluded that he is
conscious of not being able to stand the scrutiny. It would be
very unfair to do this. Possibly he feels repugnance to the dis-


closure so unwonted in his case, as something unseemly. His
associations and habits of thinking have induced the persuasion
that no one has right to investigate his feelings. It would be un-
charitable not to make allowance for all this; and should he
retire, let him feel that he is not repulsed ; that he has been most
kindly, even tenderly treated. If, however, a person shrinks,
through a felt destitution of the essential requisites, the pain occa-
sioned by disappointment may awaken reflection and inquiry, and
the Church may thus preach effectually the great truth:—“Ye
must be born again.”
Our Colonial position is one of enlarged advantages of various
kinds. In England there were certain depressions in our social
condition, occasioned by historic and accidental causes, some of
which do not, and some of which need not to have effect here.
Religious and political convulsions left nonconformity in great
adversities and humiliations, from which it has been long in rais-
ing itself. All signs and traces of them ought here utterly to
vanish. There is no propriety in our consenting to be otherwise
than on a level with society, to take an equal stand with others,
whether in Literary Institutions and Schools of Art, or in Colleges
and Philosophic Halls, or in Courts of Law and Government
Councils, or in Legislative and Senatorial Houses. Our course is
clear, and it will be our own fault, and a great fault it would be,
if the assumption which would repel us be not rebuked by a quiet
and dignified availing ourselves of our new and equitable advan-
tages. Society in Britain, like a tree of the forest, was torn with
furious storms, and whilst there were gaunt limbs lifting their
heads to heaven, and huge branches overshadowing the land;
there were goodly boughs twisted to the earth, and kept down by
rude and long pressure ; but the offshoots transplanted to Colonial
soils shall not exhibit the inequalities and contortions of the dis-
figured and storm-injured parent, but present the free growth, the
fair proportions, and the graceful forms, which are their proper
nature.
There, for instance, is Legislation. It may be safely affirmed
that society has less to fear from us as a denomination, than from
any other sect. We have no temptations for desiring more than
our proportion of influence in the state. We could do nothing
with it; make no use of it as a sect. Our peculiarities forbid it.
Congregationalism as it now stands, cleared of its last obscurities
and healed of its last infirmity, wanting not, asking not a single
favour, cannot but be harmless. We could not desire political
control as a sect for religious purposes without a direct contra-
vention of our principles, a forfeiture of all consistency, and a
violation of all denominational pledges. If a temptation to seek
more than our proportion of influence arises, it must be created by
other parties. If a provocative exists, the good must be applied
by a hand as unwise as it is unfriendly. The only thing that could
make us desire more than our proportion of political power, would
be the hope of preventing threatened interference and wrong: and


even in this case, the increased power would be the result, not of
direct and purposed seeking, but the natural growth of those con-
stitutional exercises and attitudes of caution to which our principles
in such cases would prompt us. More than our share of control
we do not wish under ordinary circumstances, and those circum-
stances that would tend to make us of more consequence than is
seemly, we certainly could not desire. But our proportion we do
wish. We are not content to settle down under cloud or stigma,
under suspicion or contempt, under alleged disqualification or in-
feriority. We believe it right to take all significancy and force
from any existing prestige adverse to our credit, by a manifesta-
tion of virtue and intelligence, of social dignity and of public spirit.
We should not be true to our principles, it would be pusillanimous
were we to neglect to take our proper share of the responsibilities
of making and administrating the laws of our new country. Will
religious liberty have better guardians ? or civil freedom better
friends? Shall we seem to confess an unworthiness or an inferiority
of which we are not conscious ? Shall we shrink from high duties
to which Providence calls us ? And shall we despise the oppor-
tunity of infusing into the social system what we have credit for
possessing,—a stern morality, a long cherished philanthropy, the
spirit of liberal politics, a pacific temper, an attachment to order,
and a conscientious obedience to constituted authority.
Our intellectual standing also especially claims attention. Had
it been easy to destroy the tendencies to mental independence and
elevation among Nonconformists, it would long since have been
done. Colleges and schools were for awhile forbidden among
them; for a much longer period the honours of the scholar were
denied, the field for the use of varied learned accomplishments
was greatly circumscribed by civil and municipal restrictions, the
national seats of learning were closed against them, and a thousand
discouragements thrown in their path. It was hard after all this,
it was ungracious, it was unreasonable, to taunt them with alleged
inferiority. We are grateful that under all disadvantages, neither
science nor literature nor genius disowns us ; and we rejoice that
the days of injurious exclusiveness are passing away. New South
Wales and Victoria by a little, have anticipated England in opening
their Universities to all sections of the people. The other Colonies
will no doubt follow the example. For any neglect of ours, then,
we shall not have it in our power to plead the closed door. After
this, marked deficiency would merit reproach. But to take higher
ground, however true and excellent our principles, and however
valued by us, we shall fail of a successful exposition and advocacy of
them, if we have not the mental culture that would place us at least
on a level with the minds we seek to influence. We shall have
small weight in society if we have not erudition, literature, science
—if we cannot use these —if we cannot generalize, reason, draw
upon our stores, speak and write—and if these again are not graced
with correct taste and chastened refinement. We ought to feel
that we have an advantage in relation to these matters. We, who


profess to value the interests of mind as so far above all material
interests, should feel it easier to resist the temptation which a
Colony is said to present, to push our youth prematurely upon the
world" of business. Not that we would force our sons upon every
arena of literary competition, or bid them vie indiscriminately with
every intellectual aspirant. The history and habit of the Noncon-
formist mind will give sobriety, elevation, and tone to our studies.
Our preferences will be wise and our discriminations cautious. A
distinction will be preserved between the “ precious and the vile.”
Our choice will lie on the side of the solid, the true, the practical,
the useful; and of the lighter kind, only the pure, the rational,
and the really graceful to humanity will be encouraged. And
sooner far would we be reviled as rude and narrow than weaken
the faculties of our youth with frivolities, or expose their sensi-
bilities to moral taint, or spoil the simplicity of their reason by an
indulgence in whimsicalities and sophistications. Should others
choose to run wild in imaginations, to revel in sickly sentimen-
talities, or soar into transcendental mists, the gravity of our
principles forbids us “ to run with them to the same excess of riot.”
With regard to speculations, necessity may sometimes be laid upon
us to follow the tiresome coil that winds round the faculties of an
unhappy captive, in order that we may disintangle and release him.
We may be called to war with error in strange and fantastic forms,
and by resources, by discipline, by vigour should ever be prepared
for the contest. But these brief and occasional campaigns require
not an eternal parade. The strength of the mental kingdom should
not be exhausted in laborious gaieties and wasteful ostentations.
It will not be inappropriate to advert to the principles which
should be applied to the erection of those edifices for our worship,
which are now so extensively required. The architectural ideal
was interfered with and displaced, when our sorely pressed an-
cestors were glad to avail themselves of anything better than a
forest or a cellar. Taste was out of the question. The type of our
ecclesiastical buildings was the sign of our depression. And such
is habit in human minds that this type became fixed for generations,
and still it lingers. It is curious to recognise it even in these
Colonies. A gratifying revolution has commenced in. the mother
country; and surely correct principles should now prevail, and be
allowed a becoming latitude. Why spread badges of former
dishonours, and build monuments of former sorrows over these
beautiful lands ? The masters of architecture should now be fol-
lowed, and only disobeyed when they feed unseemly vanity or
waste the resources of the Churches. Adaptation for practical uses
should be the ruling aim, with so much correct embellishment as
should remove all rugged, blank, unsightly appearances, soften the
whole object to the eye, and be suggestive of the design, or at least
harmonize therewith. Whilst extravagance should be avoided,
good'taste should never be offended for the sake of economy (except
in hard necessity), as this would be to lose more by our meagerness
of style than would be saved by our parsimony of expenditure.


It is not enough that a building be large, and that it meet the
requirements of the human ear. Its exterior must not be repulsive
—must not suggest false ideas regarding its frequenters as though
they were marked by some singularity or eccentricity, or as though
they were, as in former days, half-proscribed, just tolerated, and
willing to acknowledge a humiliated condition, by the very style
and position of their erections. The interior should not be irk-
some, disturbing, incongruous, or unpleasing. No man should be
tempted to say, “ I do not like the look of this place, and therefore
will not enter.” Or should he enter, he should not be constrained
to say, “ I submit to this for the sake of what I find here.” What
he does find there should have no drawbacks provided by the
architect. Some regard should be had also to tastes, or rather
distastes, more closely conventional. It is not good policy to offer
violence to the cherished associations of a body of worshippers, and
even prejudices are not to be subdued by the hard materials of
wood and stone and iron. They should, however, yield to gentler
appliances. Whatever has attached to it a practical claim should
not be resisted without a motive founded on reason. Whilst
avoiding symbols of spiritual despotism or superstition, let us not
be slaves to blind and unreasoning antipathies. To make good the
enjoyment or prospect of our proper and equalised condition,
attention must be given to our ecclesiastical edifices. Society de-
mands it, and it is at our risk to refuse. It may be doubted
whether we shall recover our architectual standard unless without
sacrificing higher objects, a passion for appropriate style, as applied
to our places of worship, shall take possession of our youth, of our
people of taste and skill, and of our men of wealth and influence—
a passion chastened, guarded, and well directed, but still a passion
strong enough to fix the determination, to elicit the talent and to
command the means. How pleasant a mode of gratifying taste,
serving devotion, promoting principles, and of indulging a safe and
dignified munificence ! It is worth a sacrifice when resources are
not abundant, and where there is surplus wealth it is surely better
that it should rise into beautiful structures, identified with truth
and piety, than flow away in wasteful luxuries, or gather in useless
heaps.
It would be a great omission on this occasion not to notice
The Relation of Congregationalism in the Colonies to the same
denomination in Britain. That it is not one of subjection it seems
hardly necessary to shew. The Churches of our own faith and
order in Britain would as little think of issuing mandates to us on
any point, as we should of submitting to them. On both sides we
should feel that it would be an entire contravention and violation
of our principles. Nor is it a connection of arrangement or com-
pact that would embarrass or bind us. It is not an ecclesiastical
union. Nor is it a relation of slavish imitation. Our love and
veneration even do not bind us to adopt with obsequiousness every
arrangement, nor to tread with nicety in every footprint. Possibly
a Colony may be a good field for experimenting and varying on


some smaller matters, moderately and cautiously. But it is a rela-
tion of sympathy. Can we forget those with whom we took sweet
counsel together, and walked to the house of God in company ?
Can we forget our honourable ancestry, running through a long
series of struggles, of sufferings, and of testimonies ? We cannot
cease to be deeply interested in our Parent Churches. Their
principles are ours. Their history is ours. Their biographical
records are ours. Their sacred love is ours. Their historians,
their critics, their expositors, their theologians, their orators, their
reviewers, their essayists, their sacred poets, are ours. Their ex-
perience is ours. Their witness is ours. Their triumphs are ours.
But the relation is also one of influence —influence to be received
and enjoyed by us —possibly to be reflected to some degree by us
in future days. For the present we are recipients. Let us keep
the channels open. Let all that is truly good in the parent
Churches flow in upon us constantly. All the lights of hallowed
talent and learning; all the products of sanctified genius, elo-
quence, and criticism; all enlarged ideas of liberality, stronger
convictions of the duty of self-denying devotedness, and profounder
experience of the spiritual life ; any newly discovered or better
understood modes of checking the worldliness of religious pro-
fessors, of securing the discipline of the Churches, and of promoting
the piety of families ; all real improvements in the general educa-
tion of our youth, the training of our ministers, the conduct of our
worship, and the plans of our evangelization ; and all happy efforts
in elucidation and defence of our distinctive views and usages
all these should be imported, which, added to our original inheri-
tance brought from the fatherland, our own growth of experience,
our own treasury of facts, labours and results, and our own dis-
coveries of novel adaptations, will give us a strength, a simplicity,
and a maturity, that will fit us to be the Fathers of a race illustrious
in wisdom, great in goodness, and glorious in missions, of truth
and mercy.
There are circumstances in which this sympathy becomes actual
and palpable. Such are the instances in which members of British
Churches coming to our shores, seek fellowship with us. Fhey will
not forget the attestations of their membership, so that their en-
trance amongst us may be unembarassed, satisfactory, and pleasant.
And let the experience of seventeen years now give its testimony
to the importance of early presenting such testimonials. On the
ground of the very sympathy of which we speak, time should not
be lost. When his honest paper is delivered, the good man is no
longer a stranger. He is known, and will soon be loved if he
merits it. He no longer feels alone. Fie now has a home, friends,
brethren, sisters. And even should he plunge into the forest of
the interior, still let him attach himself to some Church before he
goes. He will then be remembered and seen as occasions offer.
When he visits the City or the Port, he will find his religious
home. And ere long he will meet with some neighbouring rural
band of fellow-Christians, to which he may be transferred ;or


perhaps through his first wise steps, have the honour of forming
such a band. Should he neglect this course, and deny himself the
joys and advantages of fellowship, he may long pursue a lonely,
cheerless path, certainly not without loss and danger. Specific aid
rendered to us by the Churches in England, seems to belong to
the relation we sustain to them. We now refer to the supply of
ministers, quite irrespective of the money question. It is a settled
point with us all, that we must have a ministry of our own growth.
But can it be thought that amidst the struggles, the confusions,
and other disadvantages of early colonists, that the whole of a
“ thoroughly furnished ministry” can at first be supplied on the
spot? It is vain to expect it. Is not this then a position claiming
the thoughtful attention of the Churches in Britain ? Is it not a
point of great moment as affecting the standing, the efficiency, the
progress of our Churches here ? Is it not an object worthy of high
appreciation, of anxiety, of a solemn purpose, of skilful arrange-
ment, and of able management ? Should there not be brought to
this business the wisest counsels, the most faithful discrimination,
the closest attention and the sternest simplicity ? If these are not
brought to it, then bitter disappointments and heart-achings await
us; and great damage and disaster will accrue, affecting the well-
being of these infant nations, and through them the entire vicinage
of countless islands, and of continental empires.
That the British Churches should also give pecuniary aid, at
least in the earlier stages of Colonial Congregationalism, may be
made apparent. Continued dependency would be degrading,
hurtful, and not in harmony with our principles. Such a system
would be as injurious to the assisted parties as it would be burden-
some to the benefactors, besides being impracticable, except to a
limited degree. And I must bear my testimony to the right feeling
upon this point of our Congregational friends on this side the
globe. I have witnessed an unwillingness to rely upon English
aid, and even a disposition to waive the advantage, when I thought
it would have been injudicious and hazardous to have done so.
We regard it as the completion and glory of our voluntary mode
of supporting Christian institutions, that the able assist the weak—
the advanced encourage those beginning. But as a system of
extraneous voluntary help, it is understood as a rule of pretty
general application, that the aid is rendered to the weak in order
that they may become strong, and the encouragement given to the
beginners in order that they may hold on until powerful enough to
sustain themselves—a plan of operations at once kind, economical,
and reproductive. Now we have just to ascertain what is really
the position of our interests in the Colonies, as affected by this rule.
Are the strong and the advanced who should give the aid to the
feeble and the young, here, at least here, in sufficient numbers
to meet the case ? We fear that the gold discoveries may have a
little obscured this matter to the view of our English friends. I
speak in the hearing of those who well know the real of the
case, and I shall meet with no contradiction when I state, that a


vast proportion of our friends who arrive even in this land of gold,
have no brief struggle to establish themselves ; that the instances ot
rapid accumulation among them are rare, and that even in these
instances there are serious uncertainties both attendant and conse-
quent. Our question ought not, then, to be determined by golden
dreams, nor even by such golden realities as can be established.
Nor are all our Colonies golden fields. A prosperous condition of
things, spreading over the whole of these Colonies, is all that can
be granted as the basis of an estimation of the ability of our friends
to help themselves. The obligation which this prosperity brings,
our Churches in all the four Colonies have given proof of acknow-
ledging and feeling, and, in many cases, to a very remarkable
degree. But to provide for the new comers —the large numbers
who are undergoing the probationary anxious struggle of finding
their way to comfort —draws disproportionately and too heavily
on the successful ones, and also on the few older congregations.
Imagine, for instance, twenty congregations starting up over a
Colony, small and feeble at first, with all their expenses of
ministers and buildings, and having but one or two congregations
to which they could look for help. Perhaps we might illustrate
our point by taking an English county. Let us suppose one or
two congregations which could render aid, with twenty just
organising and craving help. Might not the overburdened one or
two, in their benevolent efforts, reasonably and unselfishly hope
for sympathy and help from the contiguous counties ?Or let us
suppose another case—all the Chapels of a county destroyed or
legally lost. To preserve the congregations from annihilation,
just the same number have to be simultaneously erected. In what
position would the majority of them be, in most counties at least,
if they could not look beyond the limits of their own county?
Now as great numbers of our Chapels have to be simultaneously
erected, and we ask not help in this matter from Britain, but do it
ourselves, it is surely not unreasonable to think that, under cir-
cumstances of such unusual pressure, temporary help would not
unsuitably be bestowed in the settlement and support of mmistei s.
Besides, it is not simply the existing congregations providing for
themselves , but for those who are packing up in England; foi
those taking leave on its wharves; for those on the waters ; for
those stepping on our shores; and for those just plunging with
their resources and uncertain schemes, into the anxious conflict of
the settler’s life. That these—for the most part isolated families,
and mutually unknown, and moving necessarily with a severe
economy —that these should not need aid in obtaining and sup-
porting ministers, is very improbable. And shall the entire onus
fall on the earlier colonists, in addition to their own existing
burdens ? Shall the Churches that nursed them no longer care
for them ? Shall the families to which they belong feel no further
concern for their dearest interests ? Shall the old Non-conformists
of England care not into what fold their children wander, or
whether the wolf devour them, or whether they perish in the


moral wilderness ? It is not that we distrust the self-reliant ener-
gies of true hearted Congregationalists, even if abandoned to toil
and struggle alone, like orphans uncared for and unaided. But
we cannot forget that the best of causes may suffer through the
proper pressure of obligation not being felt in the right place—
through not well-balancing relative claims—through not adjusting
the shares of enterprise and benefaction.
But our case is stronger than this—stronger simply by the stern
requirements of Christian principle. Suppose it were granted that
emigrant Independents became forgetful of their own best interests
amidst their incipient and uncertain cares, or cold amidst their
worldly eagerness and toil, or injured by either their disappoint-
ments or their successes, or compromising amidst their new asso-
ciations ; are British Churches willing that their cause should die
or decline ? Is it faithfulness to principles to let them sink, because
some who ought to have maintained them have unworthily neglected
them ? Is this the high ground which Christians should occupy ?
Is this attachment—allegiance—constancy to truth ? If so impro-
bable a dereliction as we suppose, should occur' in our Colonial
Congregationalists, care for “ the things of Christ” in these new
fields is still obligatory on our British Churches, and the new duty
would arise of awakening those who would thus seem unworthy of
the great and honourable position they should occupy as Pilgrim
Fathers in the Southern world. Should the point we contend for
be conceded then, besides general motives of great weight, there
are some special considerations which should give practical effect
to the concession. In the formation of new communities how
important that the right elements should prevail in the earliest
stages ! And how desirable that the influence which will certainly
go forth to neighbouring lands, should be pure and healthy! And
although the question of the voluntary support of Christian insti-
tutions is not to be determined by the way in which some of its
advocates carry it out, yet many will judge it by no other test, and
occasion should not be given by our negligence here, or that of our
friends elsewhere, for an unfavourable judgment ; lest peradven-
ture our inconsistency should protract or renew our painful con-
flicts. Let it be clear, as certainly it may, to our rulers and to
men of compulsory principles, that we do not need their help in
their mode of giving it.
I must only glance at Our Prospects. The field on which we
enter presents many facilities. In a Colony there is more freedom
in the thoughts of men, more independent action, more love of self-
management, and far less of conventional restraint—a state of
society favourable to principles which seek no ascendancy in con-
trol for a class—principles which aim to establish no authority but
their own truth, and no power but their own moral force. The
tendencies of the age are towards freedom and self government,
and with stronger impulses in these free lands ; and at a time when
intelligence is spreading freedom is all the more respected and
winning when rendered safe in communities well-principled, in-


structed and disciplined, which Congregational Churches by their
constitution are required to be. .
It is also a great consideration that we work by our principles.
It is not by favour of the State, open and direct, or covert and
indirect; it is not by ecclesiastical authority ; it is not by factitious
arrangements; but by principles of truth and power—principles
which hang on no accidents, which do not wear out, which are not
jeopardized by social changes, which refuse to be cramped and fet-
tered, which are always vital and fresh—the immortal laws of Christ’s
Kingdom on earth. And we hold them and work by them as
principles—not as things strong only in hereditary usage a.nd asso-
ciation —not as things we did not so much confide in as cling to —
not as things of which we have to hide the weak parts —not as
things we have to prop up —not as things to be alarmed or anxious
about, as though any rough or any skilful handling might destroy
them. We can lean on them. We know they are strong, and we
are strong in them. And this consciousness gives us courage,
keeps us from despising any day of small things, prevents our
desponding under any untoward circumstances, and invigorates
and sustains us in every goodly enterprise. And it is because we
thus trust to principles that we are not so anxious about our actual
numerical strength. It is not necessary to complete our idea of
success that we should absorb other bodies. If our principles
spread, we are in no hurry to baptize other Churches into our own
name. If other Churches are practically learning to be indepen-
dent of secular control and State support —if they are learning to
acknowledge Christ as their only Head—to suffer none to lord it
over God’s heritage—if Churches are approximating to the free-
dom, simplicity, and purity of primitive Churches —if modifying
influences are bringing them into conformity to the examples and
precepts of the New Testament —“we therein rejoice, and will
r.ejoice.”
In our calculations of probable success, reputation must not
be overlooked. It has not escaped observation for some time
past that our denomination in these Colonies stands well in the
public eye. In this case others have borne witness of us. Un-
asked they have given this testimony, and have given it in all
the four Colonies. One ground of approbation they have them-
selves chosen to assign. Our refusal of government aid has
excited the admiration of many, who whilst they disapproved
that course, praised the disinterestedness thus manifested, and
the honesty thus proved. It is a great advantage to have the
confidence of society -when seeking to benefit it. Signs of
earnest purpose, of loving attachment, of readiness for action,
of noble generosity, auger well for stability and progress. It is
certainly a significant fact, that by a denomination so recently
known in these Colonies, and now even not numerous, £50,000
(fifty thousand pounds), in addition to current expenses, should
have been contributed during the past year ! And the coming
of our Manchester brethren is a hopeful circumstance. The


direct application to England for about twenty ministers is also
an event. And scholarships raised in Tasmania for theological
students in England, on condition of their coming to the Colonies,
tend wonderfully to charm away from that beautiful island painful
associations and desponding feelings. And our Conference to-day
has meaning and hopefulness. We meet not on questions of
doctrine or of ecclesiastical rule, or order, or discipline. We meet
not to settle differences or balance powers. We could not so meet,
and we are happy that we cannot. We assemble to ascertain what
good we can do by joint action, in such matters as cannot be so
well accomplished without it. In this object we have no tremulous
fear of adverse consequences, even from a difference of judgment.
Matters which admit not of practical combination, can be still left
to our separate action ; but other useful points there will be upon
which harmonious co-operation can be secured. On such ground
we meet, and God grant us the spirit of love, of power, and of a
sound mind, that our meeting may open a bright era of enterprise,
of union, and of prosperity !
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS.
The above Address was listened to with deep attention and universal satisfaction.
When the Chairman concluded, it was moved by the Rev. C. Price, and seconded by
Ambrose Foss, Esq.,
That the thanks of this assembly be and are hereby tendered to its honored Chairman, the Rev.
T. Q. Stow, for the appropriate instructions, and eminently satisfactory address now delivered, and
that he be requested to allow its publication by the committee. And this assembly, in its first
gathering, feels itself solemnly bound to give its most decided and emphatic expression of cordial
acquiescence in the fundamental principles of congregational independency, as clearly and
eloquently expressed in the Chairman’s address; and pledges itself to steadfast adhesion to those
principles which constitute the scriptural foundation of our ecclesiastical polity, and the distin-
guishing feature of our history, and which the urgent spiritual necessities of these Colonies require
that Congregationalists should with zeal and self-denial seek to diffuse.
The Rev. R. Fletcher, H. Hopkins, Esq., J. Fairfax, Esq., and the Rev. J. T. Waraker
having addressed the assembly in support of the resolution, it was carried unanimously.
The Chairman haying yielded his consent to the printing of the Address, placed it
in the hands of the committee, when John Fairfax, Esq., of Sydney, generously under-
took to print, gratuitously, 10,000 copies for distribution.
It having been stated by the Rev. F. Miller, of Hobart Town, that a deputation
from the British and Foreign Bible Society of England, which had recently arrived in
4 the colonies, desired an introduction to the assembly, a conversation arose, in which the
Revs. F. Miller, E. Dewhirst, J. B. Landells, J. L, Poore, and H. Hopkins, Esq., took
part, respecting the most convenient time for receiving the gentlemen of the deputation


so as to secure due attention to them and to the important object advocated by them. It
was ultimately resolved; —
That the Deputation from the British and Foreign Bible Society be received by this Con-
ference to-morrow morning, immediately after the devotional exercises ; that the Kev. F. Miller do
invite the Deputation to the Conference, and that the Deputation be introduced by the Rev.
Alexander Morison, Secretary to the Auxiliary Bible Society in Melbourne.
PERIODICAL CONFERENCES.
The proposal to hold periodically Conferences like the present, composed of pastors
and delegated members of churches from all the Australias, and the principles that
should regulate the constitution of such Conferences, was then introduced by the Rev.
J. L. Poore, and largely discussed; when the feeling seemed to be universally in their
favour, though a diversity of opinion was expressed respecting the interval that should
elapse between each conference. It was ultimately resolved, on the motion of the Rev.
J. L. Poore, seconded by the Rev. T. Odell,—
That the Congregational Churches in the Australian Colonies be requested to send a Delegation
of Pastors and Church Members to a general meeting, to beheld in Sydney, during the summer
of the year 1856, to take into consideration the formation of a General Union of those Churches,
and for the transaction of other business.
It was then proposed by John Fairfax, Esq., seconded by the Rev. J. T.
Waraker, and passed unanimously,—
That the Eey. P. Miller be requested to be the Chairman of the Conference to be held in
Sydney in the year 1856.
Mr. Miller expressed his readiness to comply (D. V.) with the wishes of the
Conference.
The programme of business for the next day having been announced, and prayer
offered by the Chairman, the Conference adjourned at half-past two o’clock till the
following morning.
WEDNESDAY, February 21st.—Second Day of the Conference.
The Rev. T. Q. Stow resumed the chair at 10 o’clock. A hymn was sung, and
prayer was offered by the Rev. W. B. Landells. The minutes of yesterday’s meeting
were read and confirmed.
BRITISH AND FOREIGN BIBLE SOCIETY.
The Rev. A. Morison, according to previous arrangement, introduced the Rev.
M. H. Beecher and Thomas Charles, Esq., the deputation from the British and Foreign
Bible Society, making a short statement commendatory of the Bible Society, and of its
solicitude for these colonies in sending out the deputation then present. Both the
gentlemen then addressed the meeting, and entered into particulars respecting the
object of their mission, and their desire to enjoy the sympathy and co-operation of the
ministers and members of the Congregational churches in common with other
Christians. They described the magnitude and importance of the operations of the
Parent Society, specially referring to the noble effort now making to circulate a million
of New Testaments in China ; they spoke of the concern of the committee in London to
meet the wants, in respect to the supply of the Holy Scriptures, of the numerous
immigrants now flocking into these colonies, and their desire to enlist and organize the
energies of Christians of all denominations residing here, in the great work of Bible
circulation, a desire so strong, that they had sent them (the deputation) on this special
mission to spend two years, or more if needful, in this important work. They stated
that it was their intention to visit Tasmania first, then New South Wales, after that
Victoria and South Australia, and then New Zealand, and even the more important
of the mission stations in the South Sea Islands. They said they had hurried to
Melbourne at this time on purpose to have an opportunity of being introduced to the
brethren now assembled, and expressed the hope of meeting them again in their several
spheres of labour, and enjoying their co-operation in carrying out the details of their
mission.


The following resolution was then proposed by J. Fairfax, Esq., and seconded by
the Rev. T. Odell ;
That at a meeting of the Representatives 'of the Congregational Churches in the Aus-
tralian Colonies, held in Melbourne, on Tuesday, 20th February, 1856, and following days, the
Deputation from the British and Foreign Bible Society—the Rev. M. H. Beecher and T. Charles,
F.sq,—appointed to visit the Colonies, attended and addressed the Assembly ; whereupon it was
resolved unanimously, That this meeting rejoicingly commemorates the goodness of God to the
British ami Foreign Bible Society, in the marvellous achievements of its history, and the mighty
results which through His grace have been secured ; and welcomes with cordial and Christian
confidence the honoured brethren now present, sent to advance its objects and interests, assuring
them of its readiness to aid their mission in every practicable way, and to cheer them by sympathy,
counsel, and support.
COLLEGIATE EDUCATION.
The Rev. R. Fletcher then brought forward, according to previous appointment,
the subject of “ Collegiate Education for Ministers of the Gospel.” He dwelt at some
length upon the history of the theological institutions of Great Britain, in connexion
with the Congregationalists, adverting to the private academies of the ejected non-
conformists, the more organized establishments of Doddridge and others in the last
century, the rise of a new order of evangelical colleges in the latter part of the same
century, and the development of the whole into the system now pevailing in Britain.
He also showed the marked local as well as general influence of such institutions, in
diffusing religion among the population. The practical bearing of this question upon
these colonies was pointed out; the need the colonies have of collegiate establishments,
and the special difficulties which stand in the way, together with some peculiar
facilities and inducements. The speaker made various remarks on the locality suitable
for a first institution of the kind, the question of residence or non-residence within the
walls of the college, the mode of support, and other topics, ending with some practical
suggestions on the best way of initiating such an institution.
After a discussion of some length, it was resolved unanimously, on the motion of
John Fairfax, Esq., seconded by H. Hopkins, Esq.;—
That, in the judgment of this assembly, the ministry of the Gospel should be sustained by
men of piety, intelligence, and mental culture : that to secure this object, and to provide an ade-
quate supply of evangelists and pastors for these Colonies, it is essentially necessary that steps be
taken to found a Theological Institution for the education of godly youth who propose to devote
themselves to the ministry, and that a Committee be appointed to consider the whole subject, and
to take such steps as may be practicable, such Committee to consist of the Revs. F. Miller, J.
Beazley, W. Slatyer, T. Q. Stow, A. Morisou, R. Fletcher, J. L.- Poore; Messrs. H. Hopkins,
Aikenhead, A. Hay, A. Foss, R. Smith, and J. F. Sargood; and the Rev. W. B. Landells as Secre-
tary and Convener.
LAY AGENCY.
It was announced from the chair that the subject of Lay Agency was next in order
for consideration. The meeting was informed that the Rev. Joseph Beazley of
Sydney, who was understood to have paid much attention to this subject, had been
requested to prepare a paper upon it to be read at the Conference. Mr. Beazley had
engaged to do this, but was unexpectedly prevented by an afflictive event—the illness
and death of one of his sons, which occurring just on the eve of the deputation’s
departure from Sydney for Melbourne, had not only prevented Mr. Beazley from
preparing the document and attending the Conference, but also from appointing a
substitute.
In these circumstances the subject was thrown in a general way before the meeting,
most of the ministers and many of the lay gentlemen expressing their views upon it:
it was discussed at considerable length ;—the great need of it—its utility—the amount
and quality of the materials existing for it—the best mode of developing and most
effectually employing such agency, were all considered, and the discussion ended with a
resolution,
Moved by the Rev. R. Fletcher, seconded by the Rev, W. B. Landells, and
carried unanimously:—
That a Committee be appointed to consider the subject of Lay Agency, and to furnish to the
Unions in the various Colonies such suggestions as may seem to them suitable to different localities,
and that the Cemmittee consist of the Revs. T. Q. Stow, W. B. Landells, F. Miller, and J. Beazley
—Mr. Beazley to be Corresponding Secretary.
The arrangements for the next day were announced, and, after prayer and the
Benediction by the Chairman, the meeting adjourned at half-past two o’clock.


THURSDAY, February 22.— Third Day of the Conference.
The chair was taken at the usual hour, 10 o’clock, by the Rev. T. Q. Stow. After
singing a hymn, the Rev. E. Dewhirst of Boroondara engaged in prayer. The minutes
of the previous day’s meeting were then read over by the Secretary and confirmed by
the meeting.
PUBLIC EDUCATION.
The Chairman stated that the next subject arranged by the Executive Committee
for the consideration of the Conference, was Public Elementary Day-School Education,
No one had been appointed to prepare a paper on the subject, nor to introduce it in a
formal manner ; but the plan which had been resolved upon was to call upon a gentle-
man from each of the Colonies, conversant with the system in use in his own Colony, to
describe the nature and the working of that system, and then to throw the subject open
to discussion. Thereupon, at the request of the Chairman, Mr. Fairfax gave an account
of the system of education as supported by Government in New South Wales ; the Rev.
C. Price, of Launceston, gave a similar account of the system in use in Tasmania ; the
Chairman described the South Australian system; and the Rev. A. Morison that in use
in Victoria. The various anomalies and peculiarities of these systems were pointed out
and commented on, and the relation of the whole question to the action of Congre-
gational Churches was considered, but no resolution was come to on the subject.
CONGREGATIONAL STATISTICS.
The next matter considered was Congregational Statistics. The propriety of col-
lecting them, the topics they should embrace, the use to be made of them, and other
views of the subject were all amply discussed; and the discussion ended with the
adoption of the following resolution, proposed by the Rev. R. Fletcher, and seconded
by H. Hopkins, Esq.:—
That it is desirable, in the opinion of this meeting, that arrangements should be made by
the Unions of the several Colonies to procure Statistics of the state and progress of the ChurcHes
connected with them ; and that the same should be recorded and preserved for reference or publi-
cation, as occasion may suggest.
It was further resolved, on the motion of the Rev. R. Fletcher, seconded by the
Rev. W. B. Landells :
That a Committee be appointed to draw up a blank Statistical Table, and submit it to the
Conference on the following morning; such Committee to consist of the Rev. A. Scales and A.
Foss, Esq. \
After prayer, and the benediction by the Chairman, the meeting adjourned as before,
at half-past two o’clock.
FRIDAY, 23rd. — Fourth and last Day of the Conference.
The last meeting of the Conference took place this morning, at ten o’clock, as
before, when Mr. Stow took the chair.
After singing a hymn, and the offering of prayer by the Rev. R. W. Newland, of
Encounter Bay, South Australia, the business proceeded.
CONGREGATIONAL STATISTICS.
A Statistical Table for future use was presented to the meeting by the Rev. A. Scales
and A. Foss, Esq., the committee appointed to draw it up. This led to a long conver-
sation, and to numerous suggestions for alteration and emendation. At length, a form
having been made out which seemed to meet with general concurrence, it was proposed
by the Rev. J. L. Poore, seconded by Mr. Foss, and resolved unanimously,
That the Statistical Table as now amended be adopted by the Conference, and be recommended
for use to the Congregational Unions in the several Colonies.
Statistical returns relating to the number and condition of the Congregational
churches in the colonies represented in the Conference, were then called for by the
Chairman from gentlemen residing in the several colonies. Accordingly, A. Foss, Esq.,


handed in returns for New South Wales, the Rev. T. Odell for Victoria, the Rev.
F. Miller, of Hobart Town, for Van Diemen’s Land, and the Chairman for South
Australia. It was stated to the meeting, however, that the returns were too imperfect
for publication.
DENOMINATIONAL LITERATURE.
It was announced from the chair that the subject of Denominational Literature for
the colonies had been entrusted to the Rev. J. West, recently of Launceston and now of
Sydney, to introduce to the Conference ; but as that gentleman was not able to attend,
it would devolve upon the Rev. R. Fletcher to take his place.
The Rev. R. Fletcher regretted the absence of Mr. West, so competent to handle
in an effective manner this important subject, but stated that having largely discussed
the subject in private with Mr. West, he had become acquainted with his opinions and
views relating to it. A literature, both of a religious and of a general kind, produced in
Australia, Mr. Fletcher advocated as highly desirable, but considered that this must be
the slow growth of time. Some few things, however, were urgently wanted and might
be attempted at once. He considered that a Hymn-Book for the use of their congre-
gations, one in which all could unite, might be compiled, and thus do away with the
perplexity and inconvenient diversity at present prevailing. He also thought that a
religious and literary Periodical, supported by all the colonies, was not impracticable,
and might be of great use, —a publication that might both stimulate and concentrate,
and then healthily circulate the intelligence of the body, and prove a convenient medium
of intercommunication. It was suggested that, besides the usual topics, it might
be made the depository of historical information respecting the various congregations
and religious institutions of the colonies, and of scientific facts and observations relating
to this hemisphere.
A discussion ensued of considerable length, conducted by Messrs. Fairfax, Foss,
Hopkins, Hay, Poore, Landells, Waraker, Slatyer, Odell, Moss, and others. With
respect to a Hymn Book, it was generally admitted that the anomalies and varieties of
usage in regard to Hymns prevailing in the British churches, were such as long usage
alone could tolerate; that it was undesirable to transfer these to a new country; that
many of the references in the old Hymns were unsuitable to the colonies; that much
inconvenience and useless expense arose to parties moving from place to place and
finding different Hymn Books in use in different congregations, that the difficulty of
displacing the old books and introducing a uniform system would increase as the
churches multiplied, that the sooner a change, if it be attempted at all, is set about
the better ; and that in all probability an Australian Hymn Book, previously approved
of by the leading ministers and friends in all the colonies, would be readily adopted
throughout the entire denomination, and continue to be used for generations to come.
The desirableness of a Periodical was admitted by nearly every gentleman that
spoke. References were made to failures of past attempts of this kind, which however
were all local, no one having been attempted with a view to embrace all the Colonies.
Difficulties and discouragements peculiar to the state of things existing in these coun-
tries were pointed out. Still it was thought that such a publication might prove
successful if all the Colonies would unite in the endeavour to find for it a sufficient
circulation, and to furnish it with a variety of able literary matter. Various opinions
were expressed as to the form, size, character, and price of the projected publication,
some preferring a denominational Magazine, others a more general miscellany, some
advocating a respectable Quarterly to elevate the general intelligence of the people,
others a more humble Monthly, designed more for Sunday reading and the edification
of pious Christians. The discussion terminated in the following resolutions :
Resolved, on the motion of J. Fairfax, Esq., seconded by A. Foss, Esq.—
That a Magazine, to be published every two months, be commenced, if practicable, on the Ist
July, 1855.
Resolved, on the motion of the Rev. J. L. Poore, seconded by Rev. W. Moss, —
That the following gentlemen be appointed a Committee to superintend the publication of the
Magazine,—the Kev. Messrs. Stow, Miller, West, Fletcher, and Nisbett, with Messrs. Sargood,
Smith, Fairfax, Foss, and Hay.
Messrs. Fairfax, Foss, Hunt, and Hay, engaged to provide for the expense of
printing the periodical for one year.
Resolved, on the motion of the Rev. J. L. Poore, seconded by the Rev. R. W.
Newland, —
That it is desirable to compile a Hymn Book for use in the Congregational Churches of Australia,
and that the Rev. Messrs. Fletcher, Poore, and Landells, be appointed a Committee to ascertain the
practicability of such a project, and tlfe best method of carrying it into effect.


FINANCE.
The Rev. J. L. Poore, according to previous arrangement, brought forward the
subject of Finance in its bearing upon the maintenance of ministers, annuities for them
when superannuated, and a provision for their widows and orphans. Time was wanting
to give this important topic all the consideration it deserved, but various suggestions
were thrown out, and the discussion ended in the adoption of the following resolution
proposed by H. Hopkins, Esq., seconded by the Rev. R. W. Newland, —
That two persons in each Colony be appointed to report at the next Conference on the subject
of Finance, in all its bearings, on the best mode of providing for the expenses of worship, the
support of ministers, annuities to them when superannuated, and provision for their widows and
orphans, and that the following gentlemen be requested to undertake this work:—For Victoria, the
Kev. J. L. Poore, and Kobt. Smith, Esq.; New South Wales, Rev. W. Slatyer, and E. Hunt, Esq.;
Tasmania, Kev. F. Miller, and H. Hopkins, Esq.; South Australia, Kev. T. Q. Stow, and A. Hay,
Esq.
ADDITIONAL MINISTERS FROM ENGLAND.
It was announced to the meeting by the Rev. R. Fletcher, that he had just received
a letter from the ,Rev. T. James, Secretary to the Colonial Missionary Society, London,
stating that the Society had sent forth two ministers for these Colonies, the Rev. S. C,
Kent for New South Wales (just arrived by the Pacific), and the Rev. H. Thomas, 8.A.,
for Victoria, the latter gentleman being now on his voyage ; and also that the Society
was making an effort to raise funds to despatch an additional number of missionaries.
STATE AID TO RELIGION.
The Rev. R. Fletcher then introduced the subject of Government grants to religion.
In the course of his address he stated that he had received by the Pacific mail a letter
from George Hadfield, Esq., a member of the British Parliament, informing him that
the Dissenting Deputies of London, and a number of members of the House of Com-
mons, were in communication with Sir George Grey on the subject of the New Consti-
tution for Victoria, with a view to securing the disallowance of the clause providing
£50,000 per annum for the support of religion. He stated that he had learnt that the
Secretary for the Colonies had stated, that the Colonists had exceeded their powers in
relation to the New Constitution Bill, which would require an Act of the Imperial
Parliament to give it the force of law. Mr. Fletcher proposed to the Conference a
resolution on the subject, which was seconded by the Rev. R. W. Newland, of South
Australia, and supported by John Fairfax, Esq., of Sydney, each of those gentlemen
delivering speeches strongly condemnatory of grants of land from Government for
Chapel building, as well as all other modes of State support of religion. Various other
gentlemen also spoke in support of the resolution, which was as follows;
That this Conference, commenced at a time when new and permanent Constitutions for the
different Australian Colonies are about to come into operation, and when free scope will be afforded
for the action of the public mind upon the affairs of Government and legislation, deems it important
to give distinct and emphatic avowal to its convictions, upon “ the relation of the State to religion.”
It is the opinion of this Conference that it is not the province of Government to do more for religion
than to throw around its adherents, in common with the whole community, the protection of law;
and that all interference in so sacred and so spiritual a department in the w’ay of legislation, perma-
nent endowment, periodical or occasional grants of money, or gifts of land, is contrary to sound
policy, repugnant to the principles of the New Testament, and injurious to that cause it professes to
aid. _ This Conference would further give prominent expression to the fact, that Voluntaryism in
religion, as opposed to State interference'to the full extent expressed in this resolution, is an
essential and fundamental principle of Congregational Independency, as understood and practised
by the Cqngregationalists of the British Empire, both in the parent land and all its Colonial
dependencies. It is further the opinion of this Conference that, as the errors committed by former
generations in the different nations of Europe on the subject of State support of religion, have been
the prolific sources of heartburning and dissensions among fellow-citizens, and of unspeakable
injury to religion itself; and, as the progress of enlightenment in Europe is at this moment strong
in the direction of correcting and even eradicating these fatal errors, it is in the highest degree
inexpedient and impolitic to transplant into new communities in this hemisphere obsolete and worn
out principles and usages, whose only influence can be to prolong unnecessary agitation and to
impede and embarrass sound legislation.
This resolution was carried unanimously.
CONCLUSION.
On the motion of the Rev. A. Morison, seconded by the Rev. T. Odei.l, the thanks
of the Conference were unanimously and cordially voted to the Rev. T. Q. Stow for his
able and admirable conduct in the Chair, and to the Rev. Charles Price for his efficient
services as Secretary to the Conference. Both these gentlemen acknowledged this vote,
and expressed the pleasure they had enjoyed in attending the meetings of the Confer-


ence, and in any degree contributing to make them useful and efficient. A vote of
thanks to the Executive Committee for their services was proposed by the Rev. C.
Price, seconded by the Rev. F. Miller, and carried unanimously. The Rev. A. Mon-
son offered the concluding prayer, and the Chairman then pronounced the benediction,
and declared the Conference to be dissolved.
EVENING MEETINGS.
A series of Public Meetings was held on the Evenings of the days on which the
Conference sat. The object of these meetings was to cultivate fraternal intercourse, to
promote a devotional spirit, and to stimulate zeal for the extension of religion in the
Colonies and in the world. The first meeting took place m the Rev. A. Monson s
Chapel, Collins Street, on Tuesday Evening, Feb. 20, the subject for consideration
being the Revival of Religion. H. Hopkins, Esq., of Hobart Town, presided. Prayer
was offered by the Rev. J. Apperley of Geelong, and addresses were delivered by the
Revs F Miller, J. T. Waraker, T. Q. Stow, R. W. Newland, W. Slatyer, and C.
Price. The topics chiefly touched upon related to personal religion, and the addresses
were distinguished by an earnest and devout spirit, and left on the meeting a hallowed
P The second public meeting was held on Wednesday evening, Feb. 21, in Rev.T.
Odell’s Chapel, Lonsdale Street. Its object was the offering of Special Prayer The
Rev R W. Newland, of Encounter Bay, presided. The Chairman and the Rev. I.
Miller each addressed the meeting, urging the importance of increased attention to
heart-religion and the cultivation of a spirit of prayer. Prayers were offered up by the
Rev. A. Scales of Geelong, R. Smith, Esq., of Melbourne, and the Rev. R. Fletcher of
St. Kilda. This meeting was also characterized by a deep and holy feeling.
On Thursday evening, Feb. 22, the third public meeting was held m the Rev. W.
B Landells’ Chapel, Collingwood, to promote an interest in Colonial Missions, John
Fairfax Esq., of Sydney, in the chair. Powerful and stirring speeches were delivered
on the great spiritual destitution prevailing in many parts of the Colonies, the exertions
already made to supply the means of grace, and the necessity for further and continued
efforts; In the course of the proceedings a party from the Pacific . steamer, which
had just arrived in the Bay from England, consisting of Mr. Alfred Fairfax, of Sydney,
the Rev. S. C. Kent, a missionary sent out by the Colonial Missionary Society, and
their ladies, entered the meeting. Mr. Kent went upon the platform, and added much
to the interest of the meeting by a devout and feeling address. .
The last service in connexion with these meetings was a United Communion, held
on Friday evening, Feb. 23, in Collins Street Chapel. A large number of members and
of various Churches assembled on the occasion, presenting an unusual and
refreshing spectacle to many accustomed to see only “the day of small things’’m
Colonial Churches. The Rev. F. Miller presided ; prayer was offered by the Rev. R.
W Newland and the Rev. W. B. Landells ; and addresses were delivered to the com-
municants by the Rev. T. Q. Stow, the Rev. R. Fletcher, and the President. The
season was one long to be remembered for the solemn feeling the hallowed joy, the
thankfulness for the past, and the believing hope in respect to the future, that seemed
to P^ d^^ rs b ; e jf visited Melbourne on this occasion from the other Colonies viz.,
the Revs. T. Q. Stow and R. W. Newland, from South Australia; the Revs. F. Miller
and C. Price, from Tasmania, and the Revs. W. Slatyer and J. T. Waraker, from New
South Wales nreached on the Sabbaths they were in town m the several Congregational
Chapels^ ami its vicinity, viz!, Collins Street, Lonsdale Street, Collmg-
wood. Richmond, Prahran, and St. Kilda. , , iV „ , . ,
The members of the Conference met for dinner on each of the four days, in a large
room over the shop of Mr. Terry, confectioner, Swanston Street. From forty to sixty
sat down each day to this repast The time after dinner was spent m social intercourse
of a very agreeable and useful kind. Much pleasure was felt and expressed at seeing
so many of the veterans and founders of the Congregational Churches and Chapels m
the several Colonies for the first time collected together, and hearing from their own lips
many anecdotes and statements illustrative of their early struggles and difficulties in
Sing a footing and an influence for the several causes God has honoured them to
establish.
Printed by Reading and Wellbank, 13, Bridge Street, Sydney.


I
I
.
