

s' I
I I
SIR C. MITCHELL,
HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR THE WESTERN PACIFIC,
U m
V IN CONNECTION WITH THE *5
11 ||
| Recent Disturbances in, and the |
Affairs of TONGA.
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty,
July, 1887.
5Kv , %
r\ |j PRINTED BY SAMUEL E. LEES, LEES COURT, KING STREET.
si Hi 18 87. |




Report by Sir C. Mitchell, High Commissioner for the
Western Pacific,
In connection with the recent Disturbances in and the Affairs of I onga
Sir C. Mitchell to Sir H. Holland.
Tongan and Fijian—each of them difficult of
literal translation into English —a double
interpretation would be certain to prove
cumbrous, and would be likely to prove
inexact.
High Commissioner’s Office,
Suva, Fiji, May 6, 1887.
SIR, —I have the honour to report that, in
obedience to your telegraphic instruc-
tions, I left Suva in Her Majesty’s ship
Diamond on the 24th March, I arrived at
Nukualofa, Friendly Islands, on the 27th
(Sunday), in the afternoon.
2. On Acting Vice-Consul Leefe coming
on board, I gave him a letter, of which I
inclose a copy, which I requested him to
deliver to the King of Tonga ; and early in
the following morning I received the reply, of
which I also inclose a copy,
3. As that reply was perfectly satisfactory,
I waited on the King on Monday at the hour
named by him, and was accompanied by the
Chief Judicial Commissioner, by Captain
Clayton, and by several of the officers of Her
Majesty’s ship Diamond; also by the
Acting Vice-Consul.
4. Mr. Baker, the Premier, interpreted ;
but very little beyond ordinary civilities
passed between the King and me, the only
allusion to the troubles made by the King
being that he considered Mr. Moulton and
Mr. Hanslip were at the bottom of the whole
matter. To this I, of course, made no reply.
5. During the interval between my receipt
of your orders and my departure from Fiji, I
had endeavoured, but without success, to
obtain a competent Tongan-English inter-
preter. There are natives who speak both
Tongan and Fijian, and there are many
Europeans who speak Fijian and English ;
but I felt that, with languages such as the
6. I know that all the Europeans in Tonga
had, more or less, taken sides in the quarrel
between Mr. Moulton and Mr. Baker; and
that, consequently, I could scarcely employ
one of them to interpret in an inquiry which
mainly concerned those two gentlemen.
7. In this dilemma I determined to adopt
the following course. As I understood the
inquiry was attributable to the complaints
made by the Wesleyan body of New South
Wales, I called upon Mr. Moulton to furnish
me with a schedule of complaints; and I
told Mr. Baker that I should look to him to
undertake the refutation of the charges made
against the King’s Government, or against
himself personally.
8. I required these gentlemen to procure
their own witnesses, and I told them that I
should expect them both to be present in
Court during the whole inquiry and to inter-
pret the evidence of their own witnesses, each
serving as a check on the other’s inter-
pretation. This mode of proceeding was
carried out with the utmost success. There
were a few disputed interpretations, all but
one or two of which were settled immediately.
Of those phrases in which they were unable
to agree the shorthand notes will show the
alternative renderings.
9. Mr. Baker and Mr. Moulton came on
board the Diamond at my request on the
afternoon of Monday, the 28th March, and


we agreed—(l.) That the inquiry should be
deemed to extend from the setting up of the
Free Church in January, 1885, until the date
of my arrival in March, 1887. (2.) That
it should be divided into three periods,
namely : — (a.) The alleged persecutions of
the Wesleyans by the Tongan Government
prior to the attempt on Mr. Baker’s life on
the 13th January, 1887 ; ( b .) The period in-
cluding that attempt, and before the arrival
of the force sent for by the King from
Haapai and Vavau : and (c.) The alleged
persecutions and ill-treatment of the Wes-
leyans subsequent to the arrival of these men.
(3.) That, although either side would be at
liberty to take its own notes, those only
taken in shorthand by Mr. Collet, the Secre
tary to the High Commissioner, should be
relied on as a record of evidence. (4.) Tnat
Mr. Moulton should hand in a list of all the
witnesses living at distant portions of the
Group and of any other persons whose
presence he could not himself procure ; and
that Mr. Baker, on the part of the Govern-
ment, should undertake that these men be
produced. (This last arrangement was after-
wards modified in the case of the witnesses
from Yavau, for whom it was agreed to send
a small interinsular steamer that was expec-
ted to an ive about that date; but as this
vessel broke down somewhere in the Fiji
Group, and did not come to Tonga, the Vavaa
evidence was not procured.) (5.) That the
enquiry should be an open one accessible to
any persons, either Tongan or European, who
might wish to attend it. (Note. —An excep-
tion was made to this in the case of the King,
who could not have been reasonably expected
to give evidence in an enquiry held within
his own dominions )
10. On the afternoon of Tuesday I went,
by appointment, to the Palace, accompanied
by the Chief Judicial Commissioner and by
the Secretary to the High Commissioner. I
had arranged that, as Mr. Moulton was per-
sonally obnoxious to the King, a gentleman
(Mr. Parker) should attend the meeting on
Mr. Moulton’s behalf, to check Mr. Baker’s
translation of my questions and of the King’s
replies. I append a copy of these questions
and replies. The King’s manner to me was
courteous, and his replies straightforward and
unhesitating. I may here remark that I saw
no indication, either on this occasion or on
that of any of the many subsequent inter-
views I had with the King, of his mental
incapacity, or of his being under Mr. Baker’s
control. On the contrary, his mind appeared
to me to be clear, his manner decisive, and
his whole bearing that of a man of strong
will and independent character.
11. Having received from Mr. Moulton on
the following (Wednesday) morning a sche-
dule of his complaints, under the heads (a)
and (c) mentioned in paragraph 9, sub-sec-
tion (2), I opened my inquiry at the Consul-
ate that afternoon, and continued it from
day to day until the evening of Saturday,
the 23rd April, excepting only on Saturday,
the 2nd April (on which day the Chief
Judicial Commissioner occupied the Con-
sulate with the tri J of Mr. Hanslip, on the
charges mentioned in my despatch of the
18th March) ; on Good Friday (on which
day it was thought undesirable, in view of
religious scruples, to sit); on Monday and
Tuesday, the 11th and 12th April (given to
Mr. Baker, on the conclusion of Mr. Moul-
ton’s case, in order that he might prepare his
refutation); and on the three Sundays. On
the Monday succeeding the close of the
inquiry, I saw all the British subjects and a
good number of the other European and
American residents at the Consulate, and
heard their complaints on matters other than
that I had inquired into. Kone of these
were grave. I impressed on all those pre-
sent the great importance of their abstain-
ing from interfering with the Tongan
Government; and I assured them that, in
my opinion, their lives and property were as
safe in Tonga as they would be in any part
of the civilised world. On Monday (25th
April) I addressed a letter to the King, of
which I enclose a copy, containing the advice
I thought it necessary before leaving to


tender to His Majesty. On the following
day I received the satisfactory reply of
which I also inclose a copy. This letter was
brought on board by Mr. Baker, who in-
formed me, in addition to its contents, that
the King was prepared to allow of the re-
opening of the Tubou Wesleyan College
(broken up by his order) with the limit of
thirty pupils, and with certain restrictions as
to the re-admission of those recently attend-
ing that institution. Matters having been
thus, in my opinion, satisfactorily settled, I
look my leave of the King at a “ faikava”
ring to which he had summoned all the
chiefs and leading men, and I availed myself
of this opportunity to assure him, in their
presence, of the good will felt by Her
Majesty’s Government for Tonga. The
King’s manner was very cordial at parting.
12. Having thus briefly recorded the
general line of my proceedings, I will now
furnish you, in narrative form, with my con-
clusions as to the origin and the history of
the recent troubles in Tonga. I shall attach
a summary of the evidence pro and con in
each complaint made, and the conclusion I
have arrived at thereon. I shall also attach,
for purposes of present reference, a tran-
script of the notes of evidence kindly taken
for me by Mr. Clarke, Chief Judicial Com-
missioner, on which the above-named sum-
mary is founded, and I shall transmit, as
soon as it can be completed, the voluminous
verbatim Report taken in shorthand by Mr.
Collet, the Secretary to the High Commis-
sioner, and calculated by him to amount to
nearly 4000 folios. In all cases the num-
bers, either in the margin, in the body of the
Report, or in the summary of evidence,
will be found to be those attached to each
witness in the notes of evidence and in the
verbatim Report.
13. For many years past there has been a
growing desire on the part of the King,
chiefs, and people of Tonga to assume a more
independent position in the Wesleyan body
than that hitherto accorded to them. I
find, in the year 1874, the Secretary of the
Toucan Government addres-ing the New
South Wales and Queensland Conference, to
which Tonga was attached as a missionary
district, a letter of which I inclose a copy.
The Conference appears to have taken this
letter into consideration, and to have made
some small concession in the direction re-
quired ; that is to say, that in lieu of the
independence asked for it allowed the forma-
tion of a Home Mission contingent fund and
the admission of the laity to a voice in its
distribution. It is to this inadequate treat-
ment of a well-founded complaint that I
attribute all the subsequent disputes, and the
eventual secession of the Tongan Wesleyan
body. I cannot think that this Conference
could have been well informed as to the
grave discontent that even then existed in
the minds of both King and people by reason
of so large a sum of money leaving Tonga
every year without the people who sub-
scribed it having any real voice in its dis-
posal. Had the concessions made by a sub-
sequent Conference (that of 1881) of making
Tonga a separate District been made at this
time, I have but little doubt but that all
these troubles would have been prevented.
14. In December, 1875, the King signed
a lease granting to four trustees, for a term
of ninety-nine years, the properties then
occupied by the Wesleyan Church, on con-
dition of the trustees executing (subject to
certain restrictions) sub-leases to trustees to
be appointed in accordance with the usages
of the Wesleyan Church as expressed in a
declaration of trust, called the “ Model
Deed,” which was signed by the four trustees
at the time of the execution of the lease. None
of these sub-leases have up to this day been
executed. I append copy of the lease and of
the “ Model Deed.” At this date Mr.
Baker was the Chairman of the District.
15. In 1879 the Australasian Wesleyan
Missionary Society Board of Management
sent a committee to Tonga to inquire into
Mr. Baker’s conduct, and its report was con-
sidered at the New South Wales and Queens-
land Conference of 1880, the result being


the recall of Mr. Baker from Tonga, much,
apparently, to the annoyance of the King,
who thereupon wrote to the Conference to
again ask that Tonga should be constituted
an independent District. The consideration
of this request was relegated to the General
Australasian Methodist Conference to be
held in Adelaide in 1881. The King had, in
the meantime (December 1880), issued a
proclamation, of which a copy is appended,
in which, after expressing his determination
that independence should be obtained by the
Tongan Wesleyan Church, he called upon his
chiefs and people who were related to him,
or connected with his Government, to abstain
from subscribing to or aiding the Church.
The substance of this the King appears to
have conveyed in his speech to his Parlia-
ment shortly afterwards. Mr. Baker about
this time (April 1881) accepted the Premier-
ship of the Tongan Government, after having
appeared before the New South Wales Con-
ference in January 1881, and resigned his
appointment as a Wesleyan missionary. Mr.
Moulton, who had been a missionary in
Tonga for many years, and who had, a few
months previously, returned from an absence
of some three years, was now appointed
Chairman of the Tongan District in the
place of Mr. Watkin, who had been ap-
pointed Chairman in succession to Mr.
Baker, the former gentleman being with-
drawn from Tonga and appointed to a station
in New South Wales.
16. The General Conference which sat in
Adelaide in May, 1881, appears to have
granted what was believed to be the desire
of the King and people, namely, the erection
of Tonga into a District of New South
Wales, and its removal from the control of
the Board of Missions; and this arrange-
ment appears to have been carried out from
the beginning of 1882.
17. I may here state that for several years
previous to 1882 the subscriptions of the
islanders in support of their Mission were
very large, amounting, in fact, to several
thousand pounds in each year. Out of this
the expenses of the mission were defrayed,
but there still remained a very considerable
sura that was spent away from Tonga;
notably in 1876 this surplus is admitted to
have reached between £2OOO and £3OOO.
The King and his supporters had, therefore,
a very real grievance, which grievance
would, as I have said before, I think, have
been rectified, had the Conference which con-
sidered the appeal of 1874 acted in the
spirit of the Adelaide Conference of 1881,
18. But it was then too late; the King
had the idea of absolute separation firmly
fixed in his mind. He had the impression
that he had not been fairly treated by the
New South Wales Conference; Mr. Baker,
who had probably used his influence to re-
strain the King’s action before 1881, was no
longer the District Chairman, nor even a
missionary of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga,
and it may well be believed was now
using his influence in the other direction ;
and, to crown all, the Conference had direc-
ted Mr. Watkin, who was high in the King’s
favour to leave Tonga.
19. Mi\ Watkin’s recall by the New South
Wales Conference, a decision, I should re-
mark, that was afterwards revoked at the
King’s request, made the King very angry,
and a communication was received by tele-
graph from Mr. Baker, then apparently in
Auckland, to the President of the Adelaide
General Conference which had closed the day
before (28th May), after having, as I have
said, created Tonga a separate District,
embodying fresh demands, viz., that Tonga
should be an independent District attached
to New Zealand, and that Mr. Watkin
should be reinstated, and threatening seces-
sion in the event of refusal. The King
appears to have been informed that this
demand arrived too late for consideration by
the Conference; and no further action was
taken until 1884, when the King again
applied to the General Conference, this time
sitting in Christchurch, New Zealand.
20. I cannot discover when the King’s dis-
like for Mr. Moulton, the newly-appointed


Chairman of the District, began. They
appear during Mr. Moulton’s former stay in
Tonga to have been close friends. It is
alleged that the King took offence at Mr,
Moulton’s having translated a petition got
up and signed by certain Tongans praying
for the annexation of Tonga to Great Britain.
This was in 1882. But, whatever may have
been the cause, the King appears to have
conceived a bitter and irreconcileable dislike
to Mr. Moulton about this period. At the
District Meeting of the Wesleyan Church in
Tonga certain charges were preferred against
Mr. Moulton, the particulars of which will
be found in the Tonga Government Blue
Book annexed. These charges were gone
into by the New South Wales Conference of
1884, and its decision was virtually an
acquittal of Mr. Moulton.
21. I have said that the General Confer-
ence, to which the last appeal had been
addressed, assembled at Christchurch, New
Zealand, in the end of 1884, appointed a
committee to visit Tonga; but before the
arrival of that committee, and even, I think,
before the news of its appointment could
have reached the islands, a Free Wesleyan
Church was started at Haapai by Mr. Baker.
Mr. Baker's account of this transaction will
be found in his evidence; and although he
denies having set up this Church, I think
the evidence bears out the contrary asser-
tion ; and I think, moreover that the seces-
sion had been prearranged with the King.
This event apparently took place on Sunday,
the 4th January, 1885.
22. The committee sent from Christchurch
appears to have done its utmost to bring
about a reconciliation, and even agreed to
the withdrawal of Mr. Moulton if Mr, Wat-
kin also left Tonga. The attachment of
Tonga as an independent District to the
Conference of Victoria and Tasmania was
agreed to by both sides, but to the with-
drawal of Mr. Watkin the King would not
consent, and the negotiations consequently
terminated unsuccessfully.
23. I have dwelt thus far on the differ-
ences existing between the Wesleyan Confer-
ence of New South Wales and Queensland
on the one side, and the King of Tonga, with
his adviser, Mr. Baker, on the other ; and I
have done so because I feel that the discord
ensuing from this quarrel has been the all-
potent factor in the events that followed.
24. Yery shortly after the institution of
the Free Church the King appears to have
held a “ fono ” (meeting at which the will
of the King or Government is declared) at
Uiha, at which he expressed his desire that
all who loved him should join his Church.
This in itself may be regarded, perhaps, as a
perfectly legitimate expression of the King’s
desire for religious unity in his kingdom ;
but it must be remembered that it is not
long since that the wish of the King was the
law of the land, and all native evidence
brought before me went to prove that the
great bulk of the chiefs and people still so
regard it. The King himself, in answer to
my questions, said that he considered that it
was the duty of all loyal subjects to act in
this matter as he wished them to act.
25. There can be no doubt that this ex-
pression of the King’s wish or will travelled
quickly throughout the islands, and “ fonos”
were held in all directions, at which the
King and the chiefs harangued their people
and pressed them to join the Free Church.
26. The great bulk of the people ap-
parently, on hearing what was the will of
the King, acted as he desired; but a con-
siderable number remained true to their
original Church, and were more or less
hardly treated by their chiefs for what was
then designated as “ disobedience to the
King.”
27. The difficulty of decision to even the
most intelligent of the Wesleyan natives—
and some of them are very intelligent—was
enhanced by the fact that there was no dif-
ference of doctrine between the Churches
that the King’s Church was, so they were
told, still the Wesleyan Church; by the very
imperfect knowledge that any of them—even


the so-called nobles, who are members of the
King’s Council—had of the provisions of the
Constitution, or appreciation of the obliga-
tions which it imposed upon the King. It
is therefore surprising to me that so large a
number still adhered to Mr. Moulton. In
many cases these people were treated with
more or less cruelty. Beatings were not
infrequent, and deportations were common,
I do not wish it to be understood that the
newspaper accounts of these persecutions
during 1885 and 1886 are true. On the
contrary, they are full of exaggerations. But
there is sufficient truth in them to justify
me in saying that during those years the
remaining adherents of the Wesleyan Church
were unfairly, and, in many instances,
cruelly treated. During all this time lam
bound to say that neither the King nor his
Premier showed any disposition to interfere.
On the contrary, they appear to have sought
by the passing of certain laws during the
latter part of 1885 to intensify the difficul-
ties under which the Wesleyans were labour-
ing. Two laws appear to me to have had
this tendency; and, although Mr. Baker has
denied that they were passed with the object
I have indicated, I have no doubt, from the
false interpretation that was allowed to be
put upon them, and from the use made of
their provisions, that they were meant to
force the Wesleyans into obedience to the
King’s will.
28. By the first of these laws it was made
penal to preach or to attend a preaching in
any place where there were less than six
residents of the same denomination as the
preacher. The word used to express resi-
dents was “ kakai totonu,” and this was, in
the application of the law, held to mean, and
I believe, in strict interpretation, does mean,
persons whose ancestors belonged to the land
on which the town had been built. The
oppressive action of this construction of the
law cannot be over-estimated. In Tonga,
where genealogies are much studied, it was
not difficult for the town Euler, or for the
police to prove to the satisfaction of a Police
Magistrate, such as Togatea (see his evidence,
Kos. 104, 106, and 113), that out of an
assemblage of perhaps thirty persons not six
had lived in the place from time immemorial,
the consequence being the infliction of a
heavy fine on all present. In one instance,
that of Foui, those present who belonged, and
whose ancestors belonged, to an adjacent
piece of ground called “Lolopoaga,” on which
no houses had ever been built, but the culti-
vators of which had always dwelt in Foui,
were held not to be “ Kakai totonu” of that
town, and twenty-nine of them were fined 24
dollars each for attending a preaching there.
Comment of this is needless. The idea of
passing this law appears to have been
derived from the old English Conventicles
Act, 22 Car. 11., cap. 1.
29. The same law contained a provision
that unless thirty persons of any denomina-
tion lived in a place it should not be lawful
for them to havs a caretaker (held to include
teacher or minister) sent to the town. This
had its meaning strained by the deportation
from the villages where land had been
granted to the Wesleyans, and churches had
been erected, of their ministers and care-
takers, and advantage was taken by the
Government, by their forced absence, to carry
into effect a law relative to the weeding and
cleaning of grounds, which law it was utterly
impossible for them to comply with, against
the responsible Wesleyan authorities; and
these were in many instances fined large
sums, and in default of payment were com-
mitted for hard labour imprisonment. Mr.
Baker admitted in his evidence that the
law contained no provision to justify these
deportations.
30.1 may here, parenthetically remark, that
imprisonment in Tonga, in default of payment
of a fine, means that the person shall be em-
ployed at Government work which he must
execute at the value of Is. a-day until the
amount of the fine is paid ; but that it does
not necessarily imply that he is subject to
any actual restraint beyond that of locality.
He may, if he pleases, sleep in the gaol, but


he is generally permitted to live in his home,
and, in that case, must feed himself.
■ 31, The second law to which I have
alluded is a Land law, under which the
chief of a district, or of a particular piece of
land, may summon to return to the cultiva-
tion of that land any persons whom he may
discover elsewhere who are “ kakai totonu,”
to his land. The law was reversed in its
application, and was held to justify the ex-
pulsion from any town or village of persons
who were discovered by the chief of that
town or village not to be “ kakai totonu” to
his land, although, in some cases, they had
cultivated their “ abis” (individual holdings)
for generations. This straining of the law
was not, I am bound to say, the result of a
judicial decision, but was the pretext urged
by the chiefs, and apparently concurred in
by the Government, to justify many of the
deportations both before and after the law
was passed.
32. In September 1885, or two months
before the passing of these laws, Mr. Thurs-
ton, as Assistant High Commissioner and
Acting Consul-General, paid a visit to Nuku-
alofa (see his Report to the Foreign Office,
No. 22, of the 30th September, 1885.) The
King was then at Haapai. Mr. Thurston
found that a large number of Wesleyans had
been collected from all parts of the Group at
Nukualofa by the King’s orders, to await, as
he had said, the coming of the man-of-war
which Mr. Moulton had threatened should
take away the people to Fiji: the assertion
that this threat was ever used rested, I may
here remark, on very slender foundations.
Mr. Thurston remonstrated with Mr. Baker
at this unjust detention, and was promised
that the people should return to their homes;
and they were in fact permitted to do so some
few weeks afterwards. Mr. Thurston appears
to have done his utmost to counsel modera-
tion on both sides ; but either his advice was
misinterpreted to the King, or the King
himself invented the stories that were put
about, for it was reported everywhere that
the Governor of Fiji had come to tell the
King that Mr. Moulton was to be at once
withdrawn; that the British Vice-Consul
was in disgrace ; that the Governor had
reproved the Wesleyans and told them they
were the cause of the trouble ; that no man-
of-war would come to Tonga, &c.
33. I attach some importance to this
matter from the fact that a paper, or rather
two papers, were put in evidence by Mr.
Moulton (attached hereto with translations),
and purported to be the instructions given
by the King, then at Haapai, to a constable
whom he had sent to hold one of the then
frequent “ fonos,” and was dropped acciden-
tally by him, picked up by a Wesleyan, and
by him given to his minister. Mr, Baker
denied the authenticity of this paper, and so,
in a hesitating manner, did the policeman
who was asserted to have been its bearer.
Not being satisfied with this repudiation, I
procured specimens of the handwriting of all
the Government writers then in Haapai, and
the letter was proved to my satisfaction, and
subsequently admitted by Mr. Baker to have
been written by a Government scribe called
Apaiata Kaitu. The handwriting of the
disputed document was also recognized in-
dependently by a former Government scribe
called Akapusi as being Apaiata Kaitu’s.
34. Mr. Baker, when this was proved, at
once sought to establish that the King was
alone responsible for the instructions con-
tained in this document, and that he (Mr.
Baker) had made no such representations to
the King of the results of Mr. Thurston’s
visit as were contained in it. Mr. Baker
produced the man who had carried the letter
from Mr. Baker purporting to contain an
account of the Assistant High Commisioner’s
visit to the King at Haapai, and this man
swore that, after reading Mr. Baker’s letter,
the King had asked him (the messenger)
whether there were any reports current in
Nukualofa, giving him at the same time a
pencil and a piece of paper, and directing
him to write them down. This the man, who
cannot write, asserted that he did by the
help of another man, and the rumours that


he stated he wrote down to a great extent
corresponded with statements in the disputed
paper.
35. I told Mr. Baker that the most satis-
factory proof to me of his not having misin-
formed the King would be the production of
his letter to the King, or of the office copy
of it, or even of the paper said to have been
written by his witness at the order of the
King. Mr. Baker was unable to produce
either of these documents.
36. Immediately after the occurrence of
this episode, the King, who was still
in Haapai, gave orders that the remaining
Wesleyans in that part of the group should
be confined in the mission premises of Lifuka,
the capital of Haapai, where they were kept
for about two months, suffering considerable
hardships. This was, no doubt, done by the
direct order of the King.
37. In the latter part of 1886, the militia
organisation appears to have been used by
Mr, Baker for the purpose of bringing pres-
sure to bear on the Wesleyans. On one
occasion we find him inspecting the mititia
with a view to the selection for discharge of
those too old to serve, and we find the ques-
tion being put to each man fallen out of the
ranks, “ Are you Wesleyan or Free Church 1”
If the former, he was directed to re-enter
the ranks; if the latter, he was allowed his
discharge.
38. There was also the enrolment of a
large number of the students of the Wes-
leyan College in the militia, and the trial and
punishment by the Magistrate of those who
declined to take the oath. Further, Mr.
Baker directed a Court-martial to be held on
two of these students, who had been acquitted
by the Magistrate, and himself directed, in
writing, that they should be sentenced to
two years’ imprisonment (letters and transla-
tion inclosed).
39. I do not know that I need further
dwell on the occurrences during the first
stage of the period under inquiry. I have
said enough to show you thit, even then,
the will of the King was deliberately sub-
stituted for the law and the Constitution,
and that no adequate protection was afforded
to those who chose to remain Wesleyans in
spite of the King’s will.
40. I now come to what I may call the
second phase of events, viz., the attempted
assassination of Mr. Baker.
41. For some months previous to January,
1887, four escaped convicts appear to have
been at large in the jungle near Mua.
Various attempts appear to have been made
to capture these men, which failed, owing, as
is alleged, to the sympathy felt for them by
the inhabitants of Mua. A petty chief,
named Tobui—who had in 1884 returned
there from banishment at Haapai, a banish-
ment inflicted on him for having originated
the Petition for annexation to England,
alluded to in paragraph 20 of this despatch—
was especially obnoxious to the Government,
which believed him to be the ringleader of
the anti-Government party at Mua. There
can be little doubt that this man, with others,
was in constant communication with these
outlaws, and I think that such evidence as
was forthcoming at the Court of Inquiry
justified the belief that he instigated the
attack on Mr. Baker which was made by the
four convicts.
42, This attack took place on the evening
of Thursday, the 13th January, 1887. Mr.
Baker was not touched, but his son and
daughter were grievously wounded.
43. The action of the King was prompt
and decisive. Efforts appear to have been
at once made to capture the convicts, the
last of whom appears to have surrendered on
the Monday following the attack, and Tobui,
with many others, was arrested for complicity
in the attempted assassination. A message
appears to have reached the King from
Tugi on the Saturday, which he appears to
have construed as meaning the breaking out
of civil war; although, in reality, the only
faction in arms against the Government
appears to have been that of these four
wretched convicts, who, for a short time,
chose to assume a defiant attitude. Tobui,


whom the Government regarded as their
leader, had been arrested at Mua that morn-
ing, and was actually seen by the messenger
from Tugi to the King, as he left the Palace,
in Nukualofa, where Tobui had just arrived
a prisoner from Mua. All the men from
Western Tongatabu were ordered to rendez-
vous at Mua, and they came with faces
blackened and all the paraphernalia of
Tongan war.
44. Whether the King believed in the
existence of a widespread conspiracy against
him or not, I cannot say. lam inclined to
think he did not. He, at any rate, acted as
though he did, and by the advice of Mr,
Baker, and contrary, as it appeared, to his
own judgment at the time, he sent for the
men from Haapai and Yavau to come armed
to him with all speed. Mr. Baker was, per-
haps, from the natural agitation following
the narrow escape he had had of his life, not
the best adviser the King could at this
moment have had; and Mr. Baker admits
that, viewed in the light of subsequent
events, the advice to send for these men was
unwise.
45. My own opinion is, that had a political
conspiracy existed, and I am far from deny-
ing that one did, the King could easily have
crushed it with the force he could have
brought to bear from other parts of Tonga-
tabu, and should never have exposed that
island to the almost certain excesses of their
old enemies at Haapai.
46. The convicts having surrendered, and
the other arrests having been made, such
tranquility as existed previous to the
attempted assassination appears to have
returned.
47. With the arrival of the Haapai men,
which commenced on Tuesday, the 18th
January, begins the third of the division of
my inquire
4a. i do not think it was proved that the
attacks of these so-called warriors were con-
fined to the property of Wesleyans; lam
inclined to believe that others than Wes-
leyans were plundered ; but there can be no
doubt that the Wesleyans were, out of all
proportion, the greatest sufferers.
50. About this time the chiefs also appear
to have considered the opportunity of view-
ing the attack on Mr. Baker as the result of
a Wesleyan conspiracy as too good to be lost.
Constant “ fonos” were held, at which the
people were beaten and otherwise ill-treated,
and in the end their fortitude generally
appears to have given way and they nearly
all went over to the Free Church.
51. The King and Mr. Baker appear to
have acted half-heartedly in suppressing
these disturbances. Tugi and Ata, in fact,
deposed that they had received from Mr.
Baker, in the early part of 1885, orders to
“ act strongly,” and they appear to have con-
sidered that these orders were still in force.
The latter, in relation to the later beatings
of his people, stated that he knew they
would be beaten at Nukualofa, and he, there
fore, thought they had better be beaten by


chiefs that these riots must stop,
they would have been at once. But there
was undoubtedly a feeling in the minds of
all concerned that any action that should
end in the extinction ot the “ Fakaogo”
(Wesleyan) Church would not be unaccept-
able to the King or to Mr. Baker.
53. These Haapai and Yavau men, how-
ever, became so troublesome at last that
the authorities exerted themselves to get
rid of them, and all but 100 were sent away
in about six weeks’ time from the date of
their arrival.
54. During all this time the requirements
of the Constitution as to the only lawful way
of establishing martial law, viz., by approval
of the Legislature, appears to have been for-
gotten. The Courts had been ordered not to
sit, and “ club law” appears to have been
the only law of the land. On the 28th
February, however, a proclamation was
issued, of which a copy is annexed, intima-
ting that the disorders had been stopped and
the laws were again in force. In this pro-
clamation also an obnoxious Pound Law was
repealed, and a tax on unmarried women re-
moved. These last two laws had, I may
here say, caused a great deal of feeling
against Mr. Baker among the people, and
may have been considered by the Govern-
ment as the proximate cause of the attempt
on his life.
55. One Court, however, had been held
during this period of general suspension of
law, and that was the Court held to try those
accused of attempting to assassinate Mr.
Baker. Many rumours have been circulated
with regard to this Court. The jury were
said to have been packed, Mr. Baker to have
assumed the position of Judge and to have
directed the jury, the jurors were said to
have been browbeaten, and the Judge directed
as to his sentence. None of these reports
were proved by evidence to be true. The
trial was, unfortunately, as I think, held with
closed doors, only four Europeans having
been admitted, two of whom were Mr.
Baker and Mr. Watkin, the third the British
Pro-Consul, who did not speak Tongan, and
the fourth the German Commercial Agent.
The reason given by Mr. Baker for thus
restricting the admissions to the Court was
that he feared the Haapai men, who, if they
had heard the evidence that was given there,
would have caused a disturbance. This
reason I consider altogether insufficient. I
am bound, however, to say that, from the
evidence adduced on that point, the Court
appears to have been fairly conducted, the
jury to have been chosen by ballot in the
way directed by law, and the prisoners to
have been allowed to challenge the jurymen,
and to cross-examine the witnesses in the
usual manner. Mr. Baker’s appearance as
prosecutor in a case in which he was so much
interested may have been indecent, but was
not illegal, and he dues not appear to have
exceeded his duties as prosecutor, nor to
have interfered with the Judge. The long
nostnonement of the sentences, and the fact


way sought to influence his decision. Eleven
men appear to have been sentenced to death,
*and one to penal servitude for twenty-one
years, the last being seven years in excess of
the punishment provided in the law. Six of
these men were executed. To five a pardon
was granted, conditional on their not return-
ing to Tonga, and the man sentenced to
penal servitude —an old and respected native
minister, whose offence consisted in his not
having revealed a knowledge of the intention
of the assassins, which he acquired just
before the event—was also pardoned on con-
dition of his not returning to Tonga for
fourteen years. These men I brought with
me to Fiji.
56. I should remark that two of these
men were proved to have been promised by
Mr. Baker and Tuuhetoka that they- should
be pardoned if they gave evidence against
the men who were first tried. They did so,
but were, nevertheless, subsequently brought
up, sentenced to death, and had a narrow
escape of being executed. More than two
months afterward they were still prisoners in
chains, and still under sentence of death.
57. The execution of Tobui and of five
other men had been described in the Sydney
Morning Herald of the 3rd March, by a Mr.
Mackay (writing, as he there says, at the
request of Mr. Moulton), as attended by cir-
cumstances of a very barbarous and revolting
nature; and I thought it only right to
depart, in this instance, from the rule I had
laid down, of disregarding newspaper reports,
in order that those concerned might have an
opportunity of clearing themselves of the
odium that would otherwise attach to them.
I examined Mr. Yan Hagen, an American
subject, M. Bindemann, a German, and
Tuuhetoks, the Minister of Police, the last
of whom was involved in the charges, and
all of whom were present at the execution.
The first, who appears to have been Mr.
Mackay’s informant, admitted, when on his
oath, that the description was “ grossly
exaggerated,” and so modified the whole
account as to deprive it of almost all that
was revolting in it. The second described
the scene as having been conducted with all
the decency possible, and said, with regard
to the singing of Tuuhetoka at the scene of
execution, that Mr. Van Hagen had told
him (M. Bindemann) that Tuuhetoka was
singing a Wesleyan hymn ; and M. Binde-
mann believed he sung to cheer the drooping
spirits of those concerned. On the whole, I
believe, and I said so in Court, that the
executions were conducted with all reason-
able decency.
58. I inclose the newspaper extract to
which I have alluded in the previous para-
graph, as a fair sample of the exaggerated
accounts that were sent to Fiji, Australia, and
Hew Zealand; and I may here say that Mr.
Moulton, in the Court, absolutely repudiated
any responsibility for them. The exaggera-
tions were not confined to one side. Mr.
Baker’s and Mr. Moulton’s parties alike
published them. The specimen I have sent
you commences with what purports to be a
description of a conversation between Mr.
Leefe, the Vice-Consul, and the Roman
Catholic priest, Father O’Dwyer. I hold in
my hand a letter from the latter gentleman,
in which he says, referring to these accounts,
“ they are painfully inexact. Many state-
ments are absolutely false, and of the
remainder there is much that is offensively
exaggerated, so that it is unjustly annoying
to us to have our names mentioned in con-
nection with his incorrect effusions.” I
attach to this newspaper report a copy of a
further statement by Mr. Mackay, which
was sent to me in manuscript by the Rev. F.
Langham, but whether published or not I
am unable to say. It would occupy too
much time were I to go through the various
statements, and sift the modicum of truth
from the mass of exaggeration contained in
them, I have only sent them to you as a
fair sample of the means that were used to
excite public opinion elsewhere.
59. I have said in paragraph 50, that, in
consequence of the active persecution used,
nearly all the remaining Wesleyans had gone


over to the Free Church. It was then that
the action initiated by Messrs. Leefe and
Moulton, for finding an asylum for the
small remnant in Fiji, was taken (see my
despatch of the 11th March, 1887); about
ninety men, women, and children were
brought to these islands in two schooners,
and I have provided them with homes. This
occurrence forms, I think somewhat un-
reasonably, the ground of two of Mr. Moul-
ton’s charges, the first two of charge 6 of the
second series. The so-called “banishment”
of these people was really their voluntary
withdrawal in order to avoid joining the
Free Church.
60, In speaking of the unfair laws that
had been passed during 1885, I omitted to
mention an Order in Council that shortly
followed them, to the effect that where two
churches of different denominations existed
within 600 yards of one another, the regula-
tion of their times of worship should rest
with the local Government authority. This
order, considering the part taken by the
Government and by the chiefs, was unfair;
and an instance of the working of the rule,
quoted by Mr. Moulton, will show this. The
Wesleyans greatly affect what are known as
“ Watch Night ” services, that is, the watch-
ing on the night of the 31st December for
the coming of the new year. In 1886-87
the enforcement of this order practically
deprived the Wesleyans of these services.
61. Since the setting up of the Free
Church the King has demanded from the
Wesleyans the return to him of a piece of
ground, held from him apparently on suffer-
ance, close to the large Wesleyan church in
Nukualofa, and on it proposes to build a
large Free church. This would bring the
Wesleyan church within the operation of the
above quoted Order in Council. I received,
however, before leaving, a letter from IVJr.
Baker, assuring me that in this case the
Order in Council would not be put in force ;
and I have received the same assurance in a
letter under the King’s hand, to which I
have already referred, and to which I shall
again refer further on.
62. I have alluded, in paragraph 11, to a'
concession made by the King, as conveyed to
me by Mr. Baker, that the Tubou Wesleyan
College would be allowed to be reopened
under certain restrictions. The closing of
this College, which closely followed on the
attempt on Mr. Baker’s life, was a very
arbitrary act. The King and Mr. Baker had
apparently long regarded this institution
with jealousy, as a rival to the Government
College established some years before. I
have referred, in paragraph 38, to the enrol-
ment of a large number of students in the
militia, and I may add that from neither the
Government nor from the Roman Catholic
College were students at this time enrolled.
I have also spoken of the severe, and, in two
cases, of the utterly illegal, punishment in-
flicted on such of these students as declined
to take the militia oath which was tendered
to them. After the attack upon him, Mr.
Baker appears to have thought, and to have
made the King think, that this College was
a focus of rebellion. I gave him, during the
inquiry, every opportunity of making and
proving this charge; but he did not avail
himself of it, and ended by declaring that he
did not now believe that either the Wesley-
ans as a body, or the Tubou Collegians as a
body, had plotted against him or the King.
The College, however, was broken up by the
King’s order, and, up to the time of my
leaving Tonga, had not been reconstituted.
I hope, however, that the promise made to
me, to which 1 have alluded, will be faith-
fully kept.
63. Having thus sketched out for your
information the sequence of events during
these troubles, I proceed to give you my
conclusions therefrom ; and I begin by say-
ing that the Constitution of Tonga, of which
I annex a copy, has, in the course of these
events, been utterly set aside, and the King’s
will substituted therefor. The theory of
freedom of worship, so clearly laid down
therein (section 5), has been practically a


dead letter from the moment the King deter-
mined to support the Free Church, and the
• provision for the establishment of martial
law, which (I think somewhat cumbrously)
requires the assent of the Legislature, was
also ignored. The fact seems to be that
neither the King, Mr. Baker, nor any one
else gave a thought to the Constitution
during the excitement consequent upon the
attack upon the Premier. The statement of
the King having declared that war existed
at Mua after he had received Tugi’s message,
is, in my opinion, an afterthought. Neither
the Cabinet, the Privy Council, nor the
Legislature was consulted then or thereafter.
The King, acting on Mr. Baker’s advice, is
alone responsible for all that followed, and
although there is no direct proof that either
of them encouraged the chiefs in their acts
of lawlessness, there is also no direct proof
that they exerted themselves to repress them.
As to the opinion of the chiefs with reference
to the carrying out of the will of the King,
without regarding the law of the land, I
would refer you to the evidence of Lajike
(No. 103) and of Haloholo (No. 96).
64. The chiefs, moreover, appear to con-
sider that their power over their retainers is
not limited by law. Lavaka (No. 90) says
he “ held a ‘ fono ’ against Government
orders, because it was amongst his own
people.” Tubouleva (No. 81) obeys Lavaka,
although he knows Government had for-
bidden him to hold a ‘ fono.’ ” Haloholo
(No. 96) understands he can “do what he
likes with his own people.” If his people
disobey him he takes the matter into his own
hands. Lavulo (No. 98) says, “ Chiefs take
matters into their own hands.” Paula
Vehala (No. 127) says, “It is true that the
people are free, and have a Constitution, but
if the people are disobedient the chiefs deal
with them (justifying the thrashing of people
for refusing to be Free Church).
65. On one point, I think, there can be no
difference of opinion, and that is on the
absolute loyalty of all the people, without
distinction of rank or creed, to King George
Tubou. The very people who disobeyed him
in the matter of the Free Church would, I
believe, die for him if he were in danger. If
a conspiracy existed in the end of 1886, and
I am inclined to believe that one did exist,
it was directed against Mr. Baker and his
Government, and not against the King.
66. Of the general dislike felt by the
King, the chiefs, and the majority of the
people for the rule exercised over their
Church by the New South Wales Confer-
ence, there was a good deal of evidence, I
think, that the dislike had been growing for
years. It is founded, to a great extent, on
ignorance of actual facts, has been fostered
by the chiefs, who saw in it what they con-
sidered to be a dangerous interference with
their own authority, and also, and chiefly,
is attributable to the dilatory action on the
part of the Conference to adequately meet
the real grievances that for so many years
existed.
67. There can also be little doubt that the
difficulty of drawing any real distinction
between the Wesleyan and the Free Church
as regards doctrine, tfec., has had a great
effect. I called upon Messrs. Moulton,
Baker, and Watkin to each give me his
views on this point, and I append these
documents. I would also refer to the opinion
of a very intelligent native minister, Joeli
Nau (No. 10), who, when examined by me
on this point, said, “ I should have had no
difficulty in joining the Free Church had it
not been for the persecutions.” The chief
Lajike (No. 103), and the Free Church
native minister Filipe Togilava (No. 131),
also gave intelligent evidence on this point.
68. The conclusion to which I have
arrived is not favourable to Mr. Baker :
although great allowances must be made for
the difficulties of his position in the earlier,
and for the peturbation of mind (caused by
the attempt to assassinate him) during the
later period. I should, undoubtedly, have
exercised the power vested in me, under the
Western Pacific Order in Council, of pro-
hibiting M r. Baker from remaining in Tonga


for a period, had it not been that I felt that
his presence with the King would, after the
warning which my visit to Tonga had given,
be the best means of preserving peace.
69. I therefore determined on writing to
the King, and advising him to at once take
steps to reverse his former action, and to
restore to the Wesleyans their religious
privileges ; also to take steps to restrain the
action of his chiefs; and I decided to show
the King that the retention of Mr. Baker in
Tonga would greatly depend on what the
terms of the answer to my letter should be.
A copy of my letter, and of the reply of the
King, have already been attached (see para-
graph 11).
70. I submit that the King’s answer is
satisfactory, and that if he keeps his
promises, and I believe he will do so to the
best of his ability, there will be no further
trouble of any importance with regard to the
religious differences in Tonga.
71. I beg to convey to you my sense of
appreciation of the valuable help afforded to
me throughout this inquiry by Mr. Clarke,
the Chief Justice of Fiji, and Chief Judicial
Commissioner of the High Commission. His
calm judgment, and power of sifting evidence,
were of the greatest use to me; and, with-
out his aid, I question if I should have been
able to complete my task in even the con-
siderable time it actually occupied. To Mr.
Collett, the secretary to the High Commis-
sioner, I am also indebted for the cheerful-
ness with which he undertook the tedious
work of taking down evidence during a
period of over six hours a-day for eighteen
days. In conclusion, I trust that the direc-
tion contained in your telegraphic message
to “ report fully ” has been carried out.
I have, &c.,
C. B. H. MITCHELL.
INCLOSURE I.
Sir C. Mitchell to the King of Tonga.
Diamond, at Nukualofa,
Tonga, April 25, 1887.
Sir, my Friend, —I have concluded the
task intrusted to me by Her Majesty’s
Government, and it only remains for me to
thank your Majesty, as I now do, for the
ready aid which you have afforded me, and
for the kindness with which you have
received me.
I told your Majesty at our last interview
that the one wish of Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, as regards Tonga, was that your
Majesty’s rule should continue to be as wise
and beneficent as, before the breaking out of
the late unhappy differences, it had always
been. I told you that the good-will always
felt by Great Britain for Tonga would enable
me to come to your Majesty as a friend, and
to tender to you such advice as to your
Majesty’s future course as would, in my
opinion, tend to blot out the memory of the
past trouble, and to confirm your Majesty in
the affections of your people, and to establish
you in the good opinion of the civilised
world. This advice I now proceed to offer,
in the full hope that it will be received by
your Majesty in the same friendly spirit as
that in which it is tendered.
I find that, during the two years succeed-
ing the establishment of the Free Church in
Tonga, many of your subjects were harassed
by their chiefs in order to compel them to
join that Church. It has not been asserted
that this was done in consequence of orders
received from your Majesty, but it was evi-
dent that, in acting as they did, the chiefs
believed that they were carrying out your
Majesty’s wishes.
I find that the attempt on Mr. Baker’s
life was not the result of a Wesleyan con-
spiracy. When, however, the men sum-
moned by your Majesty from Haapai and
Yavau arrived in Tonga, I find that they at
once proceeded, in conjunction with certain
of the tribes of Tongatabu, to beat, despoil,
and generally persecute thoie who still
adhered to the Wesleyan Church ; and that,
although your Majesty on more than one
occasion personally interfered to prevent
these actions, they, nevertheless, continued
for a considerable time—until, in fact, nearly
the whole of the Wesleyans had, under com-
pulsion, joined the Free Church.


T need not point out to your Majesty that
actions such as these are in contravention of
the Constitution granted by your Majesty to
your subjects. lam well aware that your
Majesty regards these actions with dis-
pleasure. I will, therefore, proceed to point
out what I think your Majesty should do,
now that the land is tranquil, in order to
heal the sores left by these unfortunate
events.
I think that a general amnesty for acts
done during the past disturbances should be
proclaimed, and that all political prisoners
now in confinement should be released, under
such conditions as to your Majesty may seem
right.
I advise that a proclamation be issued,
restoring, in the fullest degree, liberty to
your Majesty’s subjects to worship in accord-
ance with their conscience; and that your
Majesty should intimate to the various
chiefs that your grave displeasure would
follow any acts on their part designed to pre-
vent the enjoyment by your people of their
full religious rights.
If your Majesty could also take measures
to repeal the laws known as “of the Six”
and “of the Thirty,” I think it would be
well to do so; but, at any rate, the first-
mentioned law should be so altered as to
include hona fide residents in any town with-
in its operation.
If your Majesty would allow me to extend
the advice I am now offering beyond the
strict limits of my duty, I would suggest that
negotiations be entered into with a view to
again connecting the Wesleyan Church in
Tonga, of whatever denomination, with the
Wesleyan body elsewhere. Nothing would,
in my opinion, tend to the permanent tran-
quility of your Majesty’s kingdom so much
as the exchange of a voluntary and heartfelt
union of your Majesty’s Wesleyan subjects
for the forced union which must now, to a
considerable extent, as a consequence of
recent events, prevail. If my poor aid and
influence can in any way conduce to the
attainment of this object, they are most
heartily at your Majesty’s service for the
purpose.
I have received evidence that would, in
my opinion, and in that of the Chief Judicial
Commissioner, justify my putting in force
against Mr. Baker the power intrusted to
me, under the Western Pacific Order in
Council, of prohibiting a British subject who
is dangerous to the peace and good order of
the Western Pacific from remaining within
such limits as I may deem necessary. I am,
however, most unwilling to exercise this
power, for the following reasons :
1. I know that Mr. Baker has rendered
great and valuable services to the Tongan
Government, and that your Majesty regards
him with feelings of friendship and esteem.
2. I believe that, if your Majesty should
decide to follow the advice I have ventured
to offer, Mr. Baker would be the most able
and fitting instrument for carrying into
effect your orders thereupon.
3. That Mr. Baker is at present suffering
much anxiety from the illness of his sen and
daughter, caused during the attempt made
on his life, and that it would be, for the pre-
sent, impossible to remove those members of
his family from Tonga.
I trust, however, that the intimation of
your Majesty’s concurrence in the steps I
have advised your Majesty to take will
enable me to deem it consistent with my
duty to abstain, as regards Mr. Baker, from
exercising the powers vested in my office.
I should be glad to receive a reply to this
my letter at your Majesty’s early con-
venience, as I am unwilling to detain Her
Majesty’s ship longer than is absolutely
necessary.
I desire to repeat, on behalf of my Govern-
ment, the expression of the feeling of friend-
ship and esteem felt for your Majesty and
for the Tongan people by Her Most Gracious
Majesty the Queen and by the British nation,
and I have, &c.
C. B. H. MITCHELL.


INCLOSURE 2.
The King of Tonga to Sir C. Mitchell.
(Translation.) King’s Palace, Tonga,
April 26, 1887.
Sir, my Friend, —I received your des-
patch of yesterday, and thank you for the
same.
From that letter I perceive there are three
things you wish me to take notice of :
1. To grant an amnesty to those prisoners
who were concerned in the late disturbances.
2. To make a proclamation that it is free
for all persons to perforin their worship
according to the dictates of their conscience.
3. To repeal the laws of the Six and of
the Thirty,
With regard to the first, I am perfectly
willing to grant it, and I have instructed
Mr. Baker with respect to it.
As to the second, before three weeks are
past I will call all the chiefs of Tongatabu
together, and tell them the Constitution will
be carried out, That every man is free to
perform his worship according to the dictates
of their own conscience, and should any chief
act otherwise, he shall be brought up to be
punished according to law.”—(A like com-
mand will also be sent to Haapai and Yavau.
—lnitialled, J. T.)
With respect to the repeal of the laws of
the Six and of the Thirty. lam not willing
they should be repealed, but that the law of
the Six should be understood to mean resi-
dents who have been one year in any town.
And with reference to the further letter of
to-day in re the Free Church site at Nukua-
lofa, I am willing that the law of the 300
fathoms shall not be applied to the same.
And if your Excellency would kindly
initiate negotiations with the Wesleyan
Church in the colonies on the plan proposed
by the New Zealand Conference, I should be
glad, and that is my mind.
And, with reference to Mr. Baker, if I and
the chiefs had listened to Mr. Baker’s advice,
there would have been no persecutions.
But I am prepared to promise that there
shall be no more persecutions of Wesleyans
because of their religion, and should any
chief do so he shall be judged.
With many thanks for your expressions of
regard and friendship, my love.
JIOACI TUBOU.
S. E. Lkks, Printer and Rubber Stamp Manufacturer, Lees Court, off King Street, Sydney
