

'Digger, What Do You Know?’
AND
OTHER POEMS
By
George W. Heath
Ex. B.I.F., 1914-18
and
A.M.F. (5th Gsn.), 1941
With Acknowledgment to the Editor of “The Western
Mail,” who has been good enough to publish many of
these poems.
Profits in aid of RAAF Comforts Fund
Patersons Printing Press Ltd., 65 Murray Street, Perth.


DEDICATED
To a gracious and kindly lady,
one whom, because of her
gentleness and understanding,
many thousands of Diggers,
past and present, would be
proud to call Mum
TO MRS. JOHN CURTIN


“DIGGER: WHAT DO YOU KNOW?”
(The Second A.I.F., 1939)
From the dust of the road he came to me
Where I sat in the shade of the red gum tree,
His smile was grim as he called to me —
“Hey! Digger! Now what do you know?”
Young and tall and strong was he—
And the light in his eyes was good to see
When I answered, “Son, Free men are we—
And it always shall be so.”
“The work we did must be done again,
And many must die or suffer pain,”
And more I said in the same refrain.
But he answered, “Yes, I know.”
“But life itself is only good
When brutal force has been withstood—
And I’m proud to my soul—of my nationhood—•
That’s why 1 must go.”
He turned on his heel to march away,
But I gripped his hand, as I bade him stay.
Said I—“ You will smile when your hair is grey
And they ask you—‘What do you know?’”


ADVERSARIES
Born in the scum of the broth of Hell,
Nurtured to horrors no tongue can tell,
Loutish slaves of the Nazi creed —
Never was known such a pestilent breed.
With stealthy tread and a brutal stare
Destroyers of all that is free and fair —
Their sadistic joy is the funeral knell
And their souls are black as the shades of Hell.
But stay! Who are these in their arrogant pride,
Who stand —and stem this terrible tide?
Arrogant! Yes! in their joy of life—
Supreme in sport or bitter strife!
They come to the fight with a joyous yell
Or a “Coo-ee” —clear as a silver bell,
Warriors such as are seldom seen
Their eyes are bright and their souls are clean.
Born in the land of the southern sun
Nurtured in freedom every one —
They will fight till the whole of the world is freed
From the terrible blight of this Nazi creed.
But they count not the odds—for they know no fear,
And we in this land that they hold so dear
Mnst give all support to our glorious Sons,
We MUST find the MONEY, the MEN and the GUNS.


RUSSIA 1943
Adolf Hitler with swollen head,
Your tally is now four million dead.
And countless others who bore the brunt
Are smashed and maimed on your Eastern Front.
You came like a filthy crawling flood—
With murder and rape and lust for blood,
Nothing is safe that stands in your way,
You maim and murder the child at play.
You laugh at the maidens’ piteous prayer,
And respect not the grey in the mother’s hair,
(May the Great God of Justice strengthen the blows—
Of those who stand to such brutal foes.)
And still you mouth, and brag and threat
Of what is to come—but you forget—
Seven weeks you swore would be enough
But Ivan, you find is brave and tough.
“Come on!” he cries, “There’s plenty of room—
You Nazi Swine —Come meet your doom.
Your die is cast beyond recall, —Come on!
There’s plenty of room, TO BURY YOU ALL.”
And we in this land so calm and bright,
Will give our all to uphold the right,
Forget our politics, fight all we can,
And salute this Ivan—for here is a MAN!


THE DIGGERS’ PROMISE
Hey! You! Nippon! You dirty crook,
So you’ve taken a leaf out of Hitler’s Book ?
You may eat at his table and drink from his cup—
But remember! The people who lifted you up
Will shortly be smacking you dowm.
You know all the answers, or think that you do,
Now you’re apeing the tricks of the Nazi crew.
But you’ll wake up in the coming days
And you’ll find like your cobbers,
That crime seldom pays.
You have made your “King hit” in the true Hitler way
Bombs from the clouds at the dawn of the day.
We should have known—you diminutive squirt!
That you would follow your master
And put in the dirt.
From now on Nippon—it’s a dinkum go,
An all in fight, with blow for blow.
We ask nothing better as we take off our coat
We will make you pay handsome
For getting our goat.


THE SONG OF IVAN
We called, “Give us planes, tanks and guns
And we’ll slaughter the foe.
We will bury him deep in the crimson snow!
Help us brothers! for we fight your fight—
And we’ll prove to these Nazis that Might is not Right.
You sent us the planes, the tanks and the guns.
You sent all we asked—and your glorious sons
Have blasted the Hun from the Russian sky,
They are blood brothers all to our men who fly.
You are paying the price brothers, that we know,
Beset by a new and treacherous foe.
Bloody and battered, your backs to the wall—but
You will never regret that you answered our call.
There’s a song in our hearts as we go to the fight—
And our foe shall not rest by day or by night.
A song for YOU brother—who answered our call
For we’re fighting together—Come one! Come All!”


“Today the Prime Minister of Australia
has asked for a National Day of Prayer.”
A FIGHTER’S LITANY
From the stench and sweat and the ceaseless hum
Of the pests that breed in the jungle scum—
From the festering pools and the clinging weeds
And things that crawl where Malaria breeds—
Good Lord, deliver us.
We do not fear our stealthy foe,
His attack as swift as the winds that blow,
Give us the chance of a stand-up fight,
And we’ll show these dogs that our souls are white,
These “Sons of Heaven” we can send to Hell—
With planes, O Lord, above us.
From feckless fools who rant and shout,
Yet know not what they rant about.
From armchair critics, defeatists glum,
From all who bellow and beat the drum,
From all who play while there’s work to do—
From dodgers and shirkers—and strikers, too—
We pray thee, Lord, protect us.
Amen.


PRISONERS OF WAR
Peace! My son, let your soul be still,
You have finished your fight, for good or ill.
Stoutly you stood as your friends well know
Steadfast and true with your face to the foe.
The odds did not matter, your only thought
Was to fight the fight as your cobbers fought.
Patience and courage will still be your need
Till the fight is won, and the world is freed.
Patience to wait—with no heed of time,
With a courage born of a cause sublime.
So, keep us in your thoughts—who are waiting here
Here, in this land that you hold so dear.
Your Mother’s been brave from the day you sailed
And her faith in her God has never failed.
Through the darkest days—till the glad news came
Her patience and courage have been the same.
So with Courage and Faith and Hope, my son,
We shall wait for you here till this war is won.


ACTION STATIONS!
From coast to coast—to the out-back far
With the speed and the flash of a shooting star
Over mountain and valley—paddock and plain—
Comes the call which sets men’s blood aflame.
“The foe is here! At our very door—
It’s ‘Action Stations’ as never before.”
By riders swift—o’er the dusty plain
Through “bankers” deep with the falling rain
By grunting camel to the last mile peg—
To sleeping camps, where it’s “Show a leg!
This is no time to sleep or snore—
It’s ‘Action Stations’ as never before.”
From the north to the south where the tall trees grow
And the axes glint on each swinging blow—
The message comes and the next blows to fall
Are not for the trees so stout and tall.
“The yellow dogs are at our door—
It’s ‘Action Stations’ as never before.”
From the east to the -west the call is the same
No time to argue—“ Who is to blame?”
“Our land is in danger!” That is the call—
“We will work till we drop, and fight till we fall.
The yellow marauder shall die on our shore
So ‘Action Stations’—to the end of the War.”


“FIGHTING MAC”
There’s a beautiful land that is dour but free
Whose shores are washed by the grim North Sea,
From the border close by the Firth of Forth
Through the storm and fog to the frozen north.
Here—in hamlets far from the beaten track
Lived the fierce forbears of Fighting Mac.
Fierce and free on the moors so wide
As the antlered stag in all his pride,
His greatest joy, some wild foray—
O’er crag and fen at break of day.
And swift the w r ord, passed down the glen—
“ We’re better awa’—’Tis MacArthur’s men.’ ”
Through all the years since those far off days
The “Macs” have won immortal praise.
In every battle and every war—
The “Fighting Macs” are to the fore.
Heaven help the foe when they attack.
“Retire!” —Finds no favour with fighting Mac.
Battle worn men will smile today—
For our Fighting Mac has come to stay—
A leader who, in word and deed,
Reflects the soul of the Anzac breed.
They will follow this man and never look back
To Hell with “Retire!” —His motto: “Attack!”


JOHN CITIZEN CAN TAKE IT
We have had a flood of admonishment
Poured forth like a river in spate.
And now, to our astonisment,
We are told we must learn to “hate.”
They drivel to us of millions of pounds
When we know our own funds to a “zac”!
But the thing- which really interests us—
Is, “When do our boys attack?”
We may be short of sugar and tea
With our modest evening meal
Or, be couponed naked by the powers that be
But we don’t intend to squeal.
It’s true we gave them the jobs they hold
But we’re weary of so much yap.
They were put there not to preach and scold,
They are there to thrash the Jap.
We get on with our jobs in the usual way
With our “can’t be worried” air—
And if we should, by chance, do anything else
They would have good cause to stare,
For our will to win is as solid steel
And the enemy never will break it.
It is not our way to show what we feel
But, we’re British, and we can take it!


TO THE A.T.C. CADET
Flying high in the morning glory—
Watching the last stars fade
Or wheeling above in the sunset glow—
’Ere the last run home is made.
Sailing alone in the gloaming—
Or the stillness of the night,
When all the stars are a host of friends —
And the moon is new and bright.
Boring through the blinding rainstorms —
Hurtling through the night
With never a care for the enemy’s flak
When the target’s well in sight.
Hounded by his searchlights—
Harrassed by his guns—
But—oh! the joy—when it’s “Bombs away”
And your presents reach the Huns.
Up above the bombers, streaking through the sky
Wheeling, climbing, diving—
Kings of the men that fly,
Fighter pilots stalk their prey, to the final last mad whirl,
Turning, twisting, circling, like some crazy ballet girl.
Then, a stream of deadly fire, and a sudden fearsome
glow
Marks the end of yet another brave and deadly foe.
Is this YOUR dream, young fellow?
Is this what you wish to do?
You would be a fighter pilot—
Or one of a bomber crew?
Then you must get down to the job young man
You must swot ’til you break your heart,
You must soak in MATHS, and wallow in TRIG —
Or you will never read a chart.
You must choose the clean and the hard road
To get to your journey’s end,
Body and soul must be under control —
And your will must never bend.
For you wish to join the very cream
Of the land that gave you birth —
The men whose name will never die,
Truly—“ The Salt of the Earth.”


THE BOYS OF THE “U.S.A.”
We’re glad to know you, stranger—
With your pleasant Southern drawl,
Your charming smile and your friendly ways—
Have captured one and all.
We admire the sure and certain way
You tackle each job to be done,
And we hope that many of you will stay
With us here, when the war is won.
While we smile at your air of quaint surprise,
As you view this lovely land
And you find that the scene that meets your eyes
Is not all—scrub and sand.
We agree “It is sure worth fighting for!”
And we feel that you share our view
That this shall remain a white man’s land
For folks —like me and you.
But we must not call you “stranger,”
For we are battling for the right,
And we’ve learnt, for all your quiet ways
You are Hell Cats in a fight.
So let us call you Brother!
As we jump into the fray—
For it’s “Odds on” the Dinkum Diggers
And the boys of the “U.S.A.”


A PAPUAN SOLILOQUY
The whole thing’s just plain sense to me
It’s here that a man has got to be—
Here, with his cobbers facing the dirt,
And dishing it out to this Jappo squirt.
They told me “You don’t have to go,”
I answered, “that’s true, but Bill and Joe
Are there and they are cobbers of mine,
And a man can’t do other than toe the line.”
But Bill won’t tell me, and neither will Joe—
Just what it was that made them go,
And as we slither along the track
With a load that would break a camel’s back
Dazed with our sweat and the ceaseless hum
Of the pests that breed in the jungle scum,
Soaked to the skin by the endless rain—
We know we would do it all over again.
For we’ve met and we’ve fought and killed our foe,
And we’ve learned all about him there is to know,
And we know what he’d do to Dad and Mum—
And to Sister Sue —if we let him come.
We’re glad of the chance to stop his game
And we’re none of us out for glory or fame,
For a man who could live beneath his rule—
Would be seven sorts of a holy fool.
But we long for the air that is sweet and clean
For there’s something foul where this Jap has been.
His ways are dark —like this clinging mud,
And his trail is torture, rape and blood.
Our country is not for such as he
So it’s up to you—and it’s up to me
To meet what comes with a cheery smile
And keep battling on—for a Land Worth While.
nvz/i02%,,0.2 o>£


