

CATALOGUL
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
AND
SOUTH SEA ISLANDS
MUSEUM,
DESCRIPTIVE, HISTORICAL, AND NARRATIVE ,
AT THE
CRYSTAL PALACE, SYDENHAM,
BY
HENRY E. PAIN, F.R.S., VICTORIA,
AND CUSTOS OF COLLECTIONS BELONGING TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY
OF VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
Price Sixpence,
CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS,
CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.
1873.




CATALOGUE
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
AND
SOUTH SEAS ISLANDS
MUSEUM,
DESCRIPTIVE, HISTORICAL, AND NARRATIVE,
AT THE
CRYSTAL PALACE, SYDENHAM.
BY
HENRY E. PAIN, F.R.S., VICTORIA,
AND GUSTOS OF COLLECTIONS BELONGING TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY
* OF VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
Natural History can easily be worked into the routine of school teaching, but it
ought also to take its place among the recreations of family life, and in that position
it will be most effective in promoting a good moral end." —The Student.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED .
/
CHARLES DICKENS & EVANS, CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.
I^73=




PREFACE.
Australia, being severed by half the circumference of the
globe from civilised Europe, it is nothing surprising that the
geography of Australia is as little understood in this country as
the geography of the South Pacific Islands is understood in
Australia. The numerous groups of islands studded throughout
the Southern Archipellago appear to be all confounded as one
nationality. The Fiji’s, New Hebrides, Loyalty, Society,
Friendly, Tonga, and the Navigators, are all distinct groups—
the inhabitants of a different colour, appearance, and speaking
different languages, and governed by different chiefs. There-
fore it behoves me to be as brief and explicit as possible (owing
to the usual limits within which catalogues have to be com-
pressed) while endeavouring to describe some of the leading
features appertaining to the habits and customs of these in-
genious and clever people. It shall be my endeavour to treat
a topic which in many respects must be termed a sombre one
in such a manner as that it may not prove tedious. But for
the purposes of this Catalogue, it will be sufficient if I enable
you to form an idea of the results of my own experience among
the South Pacific Islands, and in so doing I trust there is no
necessity for me to put you in a melancholy frame of mind.
The numerous characters and sketches distributed throughout
this Catalogue will more than repay the reader for perusing it,
and convey to the mind such an amount of broad information
which cannot be enumerated under what is generally styled
prefatory essays.




CATALOGUE
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN COLLECTION.
i, 2,3, 4, 5. —Tappa (“cloth”), in various stages of manu-
facture.
Fine Tappa cloths, or mats, as they are called by the natives, are
generally made from the inner rind of the paper mulberry
tree, Moms-papyrifera , beaten out on a board with wooden
mallets. The best qualities are, however, manufactured from
the leaves of a species of Pandanus. The cloth is, when
completed, in pieces from two to six yards square, and is
woven by the native women. These cloths are used exten-
sively in barter, and are worth from five to fifty shillings each,
according to quality. Tappa.is made by the majority of the
natives inhabiting the South Pacific Islands.
6. —Common Tappa, used as floor cloth. Tonga Islands.
7, 8. —Fine Examples of Tappa Printing.
. This is effected with the aid of small wooden blocks, ingeniously
cut, the colouring used being a mixture of charcoal and gum,
and frequently the blood of their victims taken in war. These
exhibits are from Qvalu, the capital of Fiji.
g.— Tappa.
The ornamentation on this cloth is produced by the aid of a sharp
pointed stick and a straight piece of wood. The cloth is
manufactured from the bark of the paper mulberry by the
natives of Vanu-Levu, Fiji Group.
10, ii.— Tappa, specimens of Tappa Printing in Colours.
Tonga Islands, South Pacific.
12. — Tappa.
This cloth, with its very primitive designs, is produced by the
natives of Samoa or Navigators’ Group, South Pacific.


rj,— Tappu.
This very curious piece of printed Tappa shows the rapid strides
civilisation is making among many of the islands in these
regions. Tongataba is the principal port of trade in the
Tonga Islands, and governed by King George, a wonder-
fully civilised being, a lover of European habits, law, and
order, and devoted to the person of Her Majesty Queen
Victoria.
14. — Pa-k-Rangi.
Ordinary cloak, or ** mat,” made of native flax. North Island,
New Zealand.
15. — Pa-k-Rangi. North. Island, New Zealand.
, i6—-Kb-Roai, or Mat.
Cloaks usually worn by chiefs of rank ; and are made by the native
women, high prices being asked for them, but Europeans
mostly obtain them for a small sum. New Zealand.
37. — Pa-k-Rangi y or Chiefs Mat.
Since the advent of Europeans, the tribes inhabiting New Zealand
have attached a special value to articles of a showy character;
in the present exhibit scarlet worsted is interwoven, which
constitutes it a very rare article amongst themselves. These
mats are worn by the chiefs.
iS. — Ko-Rcai, or Chiefs Cloak. (See 16.)
3 9 . — Ro-Hun- Ga.
This very curious article was formerly the property of the arch-
fiend and murderer, Te-Kooti, the leader of those desperate
and excitable natives at one time infesting the country sur-
rounding Poverty Bay, North Island, New Zealand. His last
and bloody raid was the massacre of the whole of the white
settlers in that district. Since then a large reward has been
out for him, dead or alive. The last attack upon him was
made by Captain Porter and party at Tawhana, on the
15th September, IS7I, when Te-Kooti narrowly escaped with
his life, leaving behind two of his favourite wives and a
quantity of spoils. , This cloak is made of native flax and
strips of green hide of the wild goat, introduced by Captain
Cook, the great navigator. New Zealand.
20. — Fa-k-Rangi.
Cloak made of New Zealand flax and human hair, and ornamented
with young reeds. It was made by the Wuwera tribe, who
inhabit the eastern side of New Zealand, south of the Bay of
Plenty, whose dense forests have so long sheltered Te-Kooti,
who is still amongst them.
21. — Pae-Pae-Roa —Chiefs Cloak.
This rare and valuable article was made by the natives on the
western shores of Lake Taiipo (North Island, New Zea-
land), who have little intercourse with Europeans, and are
under the jurisdiction of a king. The feathers used are
those of the Kiwi Bird (. Apteryx ), which are fast dying out.


22, 23, 24. — Fringe Dresses , made of the inner bark of a tree.
These primitive garments are sometimes sixty feet in length, and
are worn by the women round the loins (the men being quite
nude). In dressing they adopt the following plan—one end
of the fringe is made fast to a tree, and carried out to its full
length, the other end is fastened round the loins of the woman
intended to be dressed ; she then spins herself round as if
waltzing, until the whole is neatly deposited round the waist.
The New Caledonians are the only people in the South
Pacific adopting this mode of dress.
2 5. — Spear.
Curiously barbed; is used only in times of war. Solomon Isles.
26. — Karo.
This ponderous and remarkable weapon is rudely fashioned, after
the head of the Bittern Bird, the imitation of the crest and eyes
being very prominent. These weapons emanate from a race
of savages inhabiting the island of New Caledonia. The
French some thirteen years back took possession of this
island ; and committed fearful depredations upon the natives,
from whom now they find but little favour. The natives are
cannibals.
27. — Carved Paddle.
This beautiful implement is the work of the Hervey Islanders.
These are not reproduced, either in the same number or
degree of tasteful and elaborate ornamentation, as formerly.
28. — Spear , or Tombak.
Formidably barbed, used by the natives of New Guinea.
29. — Paddle, made of cocoa-nut palm and inlaid with mother-o’-
pearl.
The natives of New Guinea adopt a similar mode of ornamentation.
The present exhibit comes from Samoa, a group of islands
first visited by Boigunville, a French navigator, who was so
struck with the large fleet of canoes with which he was sur-
rounded, that he designated them “the Navigators,” Samoa
being the native term for these islands.
30. — Paddle.
This elegant specimen of Aboriginal art is the work of the natives
inhabiting the Friendly Islands. The Tongans, Hervey
Islanders, and the natives of Tahiti, all produce works of a
similar character. This exhibit displays eighteen distinct
patterns, and is a wonderful production if we take into con-
sideration the very primitive tools brought into requisition,
viz., fractures of flint, obsidian, and shell.
31. —Elegant Paddle , made of cocoa-nut palm. (See 29.)
32. — Spear, carved out of iron-wood. Solomon Group.
33- — Carved Paddle. Hervey Island. (See 27.)


34. — Karo, or Club. See Bittern Bird Club (26).
35. — Tombak, or Spear.
These spears are used only in times of war; they are discharged
from the hand without the aid of a thong, or woometa, as is
usual with the Australian blacks and many other tribes.
Damley Island, Torres Straits.
36. — Trugininny, wife of Wouraddy.
These busts are portraits taken from life in 1836 by B. Law,
Hobart Town, Tasmania; they are very rare and valuable,
owing to the native tribes having completely died out, except-
ing one aged female.
37. — Wouraddy.
A native of Tasmania, attached to the mission sent out by the
Government in 1826 to surround and secure the blades, so
fearful were the depredations committed by them on the
settlers of the colony ; their complete success caused the
Government to recognise their services by awarding a pension
of per annum for life. The captured tribes, numbering
700, were then shipped off to Flinders Island, and in a few
years they dwindled down to a small number, when they were
again brought back to Hobart Town.
38. — King Billy, a portrait from life.
One of the last of the natives formerly inhabiting the shores of the
Upper Plenty River, Victoria, Australia. Very few Aborigines
are now to be seen around the settled districts of the colony.
39. — Tombak, or Spear.
A most formidable weapon, used in times of war. Damley Island,
- Torres Straits.
40. — Niiei, or Spear.
Made and used by the natives of Tanna, New Hebrides, South
Pacific
41. 42. —Clubs uted in war by the natives of Fiji.
43. — lron-wood Club, elaborately carved.
This is used by the natives of Fiji in their ceremonies and pastimes,
and is frequently employed by the leaders of their dances to
keep time.
44. —Carved Club.
Bound with sinnet made from cocoa-nut fibre, from Kandavu, Fiji
Islands.
45. — Nitei.
This spear, so-called by the natives, is carved from a solid piece of
wood by the Aborigines of Tonga Island, South Pacific.
46. —War Club.
Bound with sinnet. Fiji Islands.
47- —
A terrible weapon, carved from solid wood. Tante.


48. — Pa-k-Rangi.
A woman’s full dress, taken from one of the wives of Kereopa, at
the time of his apprehension for the murder of the Rev. Mr.
Volkner in 1865. This blood-thirsty villain demanded the
rev. gentleman from the chiefs, cut off his head, gouged out
his eyes, drank his blood, and then commanded his people to
roast the body and eat it, tinder penalty of death. Kereopa
was brought to justice and executed in 1872. New Zealand.
49. — Carved Piece of Wood. New Zealand.
50. — Mopul, or Spear.
So called by the natives of Aneiteuni, New Hebrides, South
Pacific.
51. Club.
This very remarkable implement was formerly the property of the
present King of Fiji; it was presented to Mr. Pain by a
gentleman who received it personally from His Majesty
Thakombau.
52. — Udtongi.
Club, so-called, made by the natives of Samoa, by whom it is
used.
S - — Nirum, or Dancing Club.
This splendid implement is a rare old specimen of native work-
manship as produced in years past by the savage tribes at
Erromanga, New Hebrides. This exhibit shows a bullet hole
through it, and was taken by Dr. John McGilvery after a
severe fight with the natives in 1868.
54. — Keap, or Club.
Made by the natives of the Friendly Islands, South Pacific.
This weapon is made erf ebony,' and the rings on it denote
the rank of the person who bears it.
55- — Club of War from Vanu-Levu, Fiji Islands.
56. — Nirum, or Club. Erromanga, South Pacific.
57. — Spear.
Curiously carved from iron wood by the natives of Damley
Island, Torres Straits, North Australia.
58. 59, 60, 61.— Toki-Tokr. Fine examples of Hand Clubs,
showing the roots and stems of which they are made.
These clubs are becoming very rare. Fiji Islands.
62.— Swords.
Made from the stem of the cocoa-nut palm, edged with sharks’
1 teeth, and fastened in with sinnet made of fibre and human
hair. As a weapon of war, a more terrible implement can
scarcely be conceived ; the savages inhabiting the Kingsmill
Group are the only people who make and use these novel
implements. South Pacific.


63. — Tao, or Spear. Society Islands.
The natives inhabiting this Group hold little intercourse with
Europeans, and are limited in their trade with the neighbour-
ing islands,
64, 65, 66, 67. —(See 62.)
68. — Harpoon, made from iron-wood.
These and similar spears are peculiar to the natives inhabiting the
Solomon Isles, Santa Cruz, and the northern portion of the
New Hebrides ; when discharged from the hand its great
weight enables it to pierce and secure fish of the largest size.
69. — Pishing Spear, armed with human bones.
Many native tribes adopt a similar method of pointing their fishing
spears, the bones of their victims being much sought after and
used. These spears they never lose sight of —on the
contrary, they always carry them about wherever they go.
This specimen was procured at Sandwich Island, New
Hebrides.
70. — Females Full Dress, made of sea-weed.
It is tied round the waist, leaving the arms, chest, and shoulders
bare; dresses are also made from the dried banana leaf torn up
into long shreds, and much longer than the specimen before
you. Tanna, New Hebrides.
71. 72. — Arrows, pointed with human bones and poisoned.
These arrows are discharged from a bow about five feet long, with
great precision, and death invariably ensues if once you are
struck by them; it was an arrow of this kind that struck down
the late Bishop Patterson.' They are used by the Solomon
Islanders, and in the North of the New' Hebrides. These
specimens were procured at Santa Cruz.
73. — Spear.
This very formidable weapon, armed with fish bones, is made from
the cocoa-nut palm ; it was procured after the shelling of the
native villages at Gaudalcanar, Salomon Isles, which was
done to avenge the murder of the late Benjn. Boyd, Esq.,
and party, who were sacrificed and eaten by the natives of
the island.
74. — Poisoned Arrows. Gaudalcanar, Solomon Isles. (See
7i. 72-)
75. — Shield, made of blue gum.
These objects are used with much dexterity by the natives of
North Australia, in warding off the spears of hostile tribes in
times of war.
76. — Nit el, or Spear. Tanna Island, South Pacific.
77. 78, 79. — Poisoned Arrows. Solomon Group. (See 71, 72.)
80.— Native Females Dress, from Fiji.


81. War Spear, armed with fish bones.
These spears are used by the natives without the aid of a thong ;
they are thrown with great precision—so much so, that they
can transfix a man at a distance of seventy or eighty yards.
Northern Isles, New Hebrides.
82. — Boomerang.
These weapons are used both in hunting and fighting ; the boome-
rang on being discharged from the hand is made to perform a
complete revolution in the air, while others are made to fly
straight for a considerable distance, then rise suddenly in the
air and return within a few feet of the man who threw it—so
close indeed that I have many times seen them duck their heads,
or fall flat on the ground to avoid being struck. These
weapons are used generally by the natives throughout
Australia.
,83. — Native Shield, curiously carved. North Australia.
84 . — Fighting Boomerang.
This is one of the great boomerangs from the desert; these imple-
ments are not made to return the same as the one numbered
82. From the Burke & Wills’ Expedition.
85. — Nelop, or Dancing Club. Aneiteuni, New Hebrides.
(See 53.)
86. — Fighting Boomerang, from Queensland, North Australia.
87. — Native’s Shield.
This object pretty well shows the range of the abilities of the natives
of Australia ; they are justly placed among the very lowest
order of Aborigines, scarcely possessing a sufficient capacity
for making any covering for themselves.
88. — Boomerang, made from the scented wood “ myall.” Damley
Island, Torres Straits.
89. — Spear Handle. New Caledonia.
90. 91, 92, 93, 94. — Toki-Toki. Fine examples of Native Hand
Clubs.
These weapons emanate from the whole of the islands forming the
Fiji Group, and are now becoming scattered and rare.
95. War Spear, armed with human bones, with handle of cane.
New Caledonia, South Pacific.
96. — Arrows, with points beautifully carved from whalebone.
New Ireland, South Pacific.
97. — Arrows, with poisoned barbs. Santa Cruz.
98. — Bows.
These splendid articles are made from the root of’the mangrove
tree. They are strung with the dried intestines of htunan
beings prepared for the purpose. ■ Gatidaleanar.


99- — Poisoned Arrows. Gaudalcanar. (See 71, 72.)
100. — Nji, or Spear.
Made by the natives of New Caledonia, and armed with human
bone.
101. — Female’s Full Dress.
Made from the rolled and dried fibre of the banana stalk. At
first sight it looks like hemp. Tanna, Hew Hebrides.
102. — Cane Spear, pointed with wood. Cook’s Bay, Erromanga>
New Hebrides.
103. — Club, made of iron-wood at Yitu-Levu, Fiji.
104. — Club.
Used also as a mace. Occasionally they are used as paddles.
This specimen is from the Society Islands, South Pacific.
105. — Spear.
These spears are discharged from the hand with the aid of a
short thong about six inches long. It is a very ingenious
device. The thong having a loop at one end and a knot at the
other, the little finger of the right hand is inserted in the
loop, while the knot is taken round the spear one turn, and
retained in that position by the thumb. When discharged
from the hand, the thumb lets go the knot, while the thong
is retained on the little finger. From New Caledonia, South
• Pacific.
106. — Pine-apple Club.
These objects are now rarely to be met with. The wood, par-
taking of the natural bend of the tree, renders them very
strong. They are used only by the chiefs to destroy life, in
a similar manner as the pato of the New Zealander—the
' pointed end to take the life of a man, while the blunted side
that of a woman. This is a law of custom to which the
natives of the Fiji Islands strictly adhere.
107. — Club, os Paddle.
This elaborately-carved implement shows the character peculiar to
the Solomon Islanders alone, and diametrically opposite to
the productions of the many tribes inhabiting the surrounding
islands. This may be accounted for by each tribe of natives
preserving their own peculiar style of ornamentation.
108. — Pine-apple Club. (See 106.)
109. — Sau, or Spear.
Made by the Aborigines of Dillan’s Bay, Erromanga. This im-
plement of war proves a most cruel weapon when once it is
fixed into the body of an enemy, the barbs being so arranged
that it is impossible to withdraw either one way or the other.
I have only procured these murderous articles at the New
Hebrides, South Pacific Island.


no.— Arrow-headed Club. Port Resolution, Tanna Island,
New Hebrides.
in.— War Club, curiously bound with sinnet made from
cocoa-nut fibre. Fiji Islands.
112. —Native Spear, used by the natives of North Australia.
The objects are discharged from the hand with the aid of a
woomera, or throw-stick. So accurate are these people
In the use of them, that I have frequently seen one of them
with a shield receive the spears of a dozen others from a dis-
tance of sixty yards, and break them to pieces in quick suc-
cession, whereas any one of them would have transfixed him
had he been without his shield.
ir3. —Basket Petticoat.
This dress constitutes the only article of attire used by the
females of Tutuilla, Samoa, or Navigators’ Group.
114. — Basket, made by the native women of Tonga.
115. — Spear, made and used by the natives of New Caledonia,
South Pacific.
116. —Waddy or Carved Club, made by the natives of Cape
York, North Australia.
117. nB.— Stone-headed Clubs.
There is something very ingenious in the construction of these
murderous and formidable objects. They are used as clubs
in war, and at other times to dig yams, taro,'and various
roots. These clubs are much sought after by collectors at
the present time. They are made by the natives of Kanala,
New Caledonia. Three years ago a horrid case of cannibalism
was reported from this island.
119. — Club, or Paddle, made of a species of ebony.
These clubs are not manufactured now as formerly. They are rare
even at Guadalcanar, where they are produced.
120. — Karos, or Clubs.
These implements, unlike others of a similar character, are inlaid
with small shells, in imitation of human teeth. These clubs
were brought from Kanala, New Caledonia, where they were
made.
121. — Spear, thrown with a thong. (See 105.)
122. — Stone-headed Club, inlaid with shells. New Caledonia.
(See 120.)
123. — Waddy, made of myall, a scented wood indigenous to
Australia.
This exhibit was taken from the scene of the massacre on the
station of Mr. Wills, at Nagor, in Queensland, in 1862, when
eighteen men, women, and children were slaughtered; the
murderers were pursued, and numbers of them overtaken and
shot.


124- — Ebony Spear, used for harpooning sharks, stinger-rays, &c.,
by the natives of Savage Island, South Pacific.
125. —Females Full Dress, made of the dried leaves of the banana,
Erromanga, South Pacific.
126. — Cane Spear, barbed with wood. Solomon Isles.
127. — Boomerang.
This is used by the natives of North Australia. These people
seldom fail to inflict death on their enemies if struck with
these weapons. (See No. 82.)
128. — Paddle, from Santa Cruz.
129. — Club , used in times of war. Erromanga, New Hebrides.
13°-
This very remarkable implement is fashioned in imitation of the
head of a bird, is a very rare specimen, and procured at
the Solomon Group.
131. — Club.
Sometimes used hs a paddle.. Very few of these weapons are
produced at the present time. This specimen was procured
at Sandwich Island, New Hebrides, South Pacific.
132. — Spears.
These are made by the natives of North Australia and by those
inhabiting that portion of the continent from Cape York to
Bourke Town. These savages employ their time principally
in fishing ; they prove troublesome customers when met with,
as they are well acquainted with the use of the spear, nulla-
nulla, and boomerang.
133. — Carved Clttb. Gaudalcanar, Solomon Isles.
134. —■ Boomerang, used by the natives of South Australia.
(See 127.)
135. — Too, or Fishing Spear, armed with human bones.
Northern part of the New Hebrides.
136. — Spear.
This is used in times of war, and thrown without the aid of a
thong. The women in New Caledonia use these weapons
with as much dexterity as the men.
137. — Reap, or Club, made by the natives of Tanna.
138 . Udtong (uatongi), or Club, made by the Aborigines of
Samoa, or Navigators’ Group, South Pacific.


J 3- — Spear, made of hard wood.
These implements are general favourites with the inhabitants
of Sandwich Island, New Hebrides. This spear had trans-
fixed a native engaged in the recapture of the schooner Mary
Ira at Sandwich Island. This vessel having put into port for
the purpose of procuring men to work her, the captain engaged
ten, including a leading chief. A plot was laid ; the natives
rose on the captain, and the original crew, consisting of four
Europeans, murdered them, and brought the schooner back
to Vate, where they apportioned the spoils.
140. — Toa. , as Staff or Club.
These badges are sometimes profusely decorated with feathers.
It is a very imposing spectacle to witness a gathering of the
tribes (when the Toa is most conspicuous), sometimes to the
number of eight or ten thousand. These meetings are not so
numerous as of old, owing to the internal disorganisation
amongst the natives. New Zealand.
141.
This club is used in their ceremonies by the Aborigines of the
'Friendly Islands.
142. — Paddle. *
Used by the natives of Hawke Bay, Middle Island, New Zealand.
These objects are not decorated with such elaborate designs
as are displayed on the canoes. Their anxiety to procure and
imitate many of the novelties introduced by the whites dis-
tracts their ideas, and diverts their attention in various other
ways.
143. — Club of Ebony. Uatonga {uatongl), Navigators’ Group.
144. — Neap, or Club, of the blacks. Tanna, New Hebrides.
145. — Ebony Spear.
This beautiful weapon is from Darnley Island, Torres Straits.
146. Va’a, or Canoe.
This beautiful object represents the old double war canoe, as
formerly used by the natives of Samoa or Navigators’ Group.
These canoes have now given way to the single canoe and out-
rigger. They are usually made from the bodies of large trees
hollowed out. The Samoans differ from the natives inhabit-
ing the adjacent islands in the construction of their canoes,
hollowing them out with stone adzes, and building up the
sides with slabs sewn with sinnet, made of the cocoa-nut fibre,
rendered water-tight with gum, mixed with clay, &c.
147. — Yang-Gona, or Cava Bowl. Tanna, New Hebndes.
(See 170.)
148. —Case containing Ornaments, &c. : '
1. — Necklace, made of Seeds, and worn by the natives of
Gaudalcanar, Solomon Group.


а. — Necklace, from Santa Cruz,
3. —Necklace of Shells. ,
These personal adornments were formerly used by the now ex-
tinct race of Aborigines at one time inhabiting Tasmania.
They are rare and -valuable, and much prized by collectors.
4. — Necklace.
Made of young reeds by the savage tribes inhabiting Central
Australia "Worn by the women only. This exhibit was
procured by one of the relief party sent in (juest of the Burke
and Wills’ expedition.
5. — Necklace. Santa Cruz.
б. — Necklace.
Composed of shells, strung with sinnet made with the hair of the
Flying Fox. Sandwich Island, Hew Hebrides.
7. — Necklace of Shells. Tanna, New Hebrides.
8. — Girdle, made of Shells.
These articles are worn by the chiefs round the waist as an adorn-
ment, also as a: mark of distinction. These objects have now
become very rare. New Hebrides Group.
9. —Girdle of Shells, from Vate, New Hebrides.
10. —An Ornament, composed of cowrie shells ( Omdum Ovum)>
and strung together with native string.
These objects are worn round the leg below the knee. The lady
to whom this ornament belonged could not be induced to part
with the whole length, hut, tendering her a small piece of
tobacco (smoko, as she called it), she cut the present exhibit
from the full length which adorned her leg. Levuku, Fiji
Islands.
11. —Chiefs Girdle, made of shells, with small disc attached.
(See 8.)
is, 13, 14, 15. — Armlets.
Composed of small black and white shells, the shells used being
a small species of litoritia. The various designs displayed
are commonly found on many of the clubs and_ spears used
in war. These smaments are only worn by chiefs of great
distinction (on the arm above the elbow) inhabiting the Solo-
mon Group.
16. —Fetish of Human Teeth, from Erromanga, New Hebrides.
Many tribes worship the spirits of Arema (meaning dead
relatives and friends), relics of them always being pre-
served and worn round the neck. Sometimes the fetish
is made from the bones of guilty persons who have been
detected in acts of adultery, and afterwards strangled, cooked,
and eaten. These objects are usually secured by the priests,
who use them 'as a means to extort. When a man is cooked.
16
Catalogue of the


every one of the tribe, even down to the little children, must
partake. If it is the body of a woman, only the arms and
legs are eaten. The hands, being the choicest bits, are usually
sacred to the priests. Sometimes the body is cut up and
cooked in joints, but it is more customary to double up the
body, with the knee to the chin, and then place it in the oven
in a sitting posture. When cooked, it is served up so. The
majority of the tribes inhabiting the Hebrides Group are
inveterate cannibals, their appetite for human flesh never
being satisfied.
17. —Ornament of Shells.
Worn round the neck by the native women of New Caledonia.
18. —Ornament of Shells.
Made and used by the females of Mare, New Hebrides.
19. 20. — Discs.
These ornaments, made of shell (tridacnaJ, are worn on the fore-
head by chiefs of rank in the Solomon Isles.
21. —Ornament of Shells.
Used by the native women of the Friendly Islands, South Pacific.
22. from the tail of the Parson Bird.
These feathers are much worn by men and women inhabiting the
islands in Torres Straits as a decoration for the hair. These
are from Darnley Island.
23. —Armlets of Shell {Trochus). ,
The trouble and patience bestowed in bringing these ornaments
to their present fragile condition is astounding, and cause
the natives to attach much value to them. They are now be-
coming very rare. These specimens are from Sandwich
Island, New Hebrides.
24. —Four small Combs, very ingeniously made, and used by
the native women of Samoa.
25. —Fetish made of Human Bones.
Very old chiefs after death are deified, and are supposed to
preside over the growth of the banana, bread-fruit, yam, and
other fruit-trees. When a chief dies his spirit is said to enter
into one of the survivors of his family, who always carries the
fetish about with him. Some tribes preserve the teeth,
others the nails or portions of the arm bones, which they
wear round the neck and reverence. This fetish is one for-
merly used by the savages of Erromanga, New Hebrides.
26. —Carved Ornaments of Cane.
These very remarkable sticks are worn through the lobes of the
ears by the native men of Tanna, New Hebrides.
2 7-
This carved cane ornament is worn through the septum of the
nose by the native men of Tanna, New Hebrides.


sB, 29. — Armlets, made from,the shell (Trochus).
These armlets are much, prized as personal adornments by the
natives of the Friendly Islands.
30. — Ornament of Tortoise Shell (unfinished). Tanna.
31. — Comb, made of bamboo cane. New Caledonia.
32. — Armlet.
Curiously made of tortoise-shell, and worn above the elbow by
the native chiefs of Santa Cruz.
33. — Chief’s Badge.
Made of mother-o’-pearl, and worn as a mark of distinction by the
savages of Northern New Hebrides.
34. 35. 36. — Hairpins.
Made of whalebone and cane beautifully carved. They are worn
by the native women at Tanna.
37. — Purse and Money.
This exhibit is made by the natives of Tanna, and is much in use
at the present time. The money is made of small vertebra
of fish, with pretty little tallys of mother-o’-pearl attached every
three or four inches. When using this money in barter, they
cut from tally to tally, leaving one on each length. The
purse is made of the hair of the Flying Fox and native twine.
38. — Portion of a Chiefs Girdle, composed of small shells.
Erromanga, New Hebrides.
39. — Ear Drops, made of grefen stone, and worn by natives of
distinction in New Zealand.
These articles are handed down as heirlooms to each succeeding
generation, and are much prized by them.
40. —Fetish of Human Hair and Human Bone. (See 25.)
Same case.
41. — Hairpins, beautifully carved, and pointed with whalebone.
Used by the natives of Friendly Islands.
42. —Priesfs Comb.
The priests, or disease makers, are the only persons permitted to
wear these articles in the Fiji Islands.
149. — Wig, made of human hair.
The material used in the manufacture of these .adornments for the
head is generally taken from the heads of their victims captured
in fight., The warriors in the mountains surrounding the
principal port of trade in Fiji specially pride themselves on
wearing large wigs. The mountaineers of the 11a are
cannibals of the very worst order.
15°- — Calibash.
This ornamentation is usually effected with a hot pointed stick.
These gourds are a natural growth, and much sought after
by the native tribes inhabiting New Caledonia.


i ji.— Mace, or Club.
This elaborate and ingenious production is the work of the Hervey
Islanders in the South Pacific. Many specimens of a similar
character are produced hy the Tongans and the natives of
Tahiti. This object is cut from a solid piece of wood, which
is a work of great time, as they are restricted in their tools,
which are only flint, shell, stone, &c., so it is marvellous
with what truth they are enabled to carry out their ideas.
The head of this mace or adze is made of stone, fastened on
with sinnet made of cocoa-nut fibre by the savage tribes at
Tonga, South Pacific.
152. —Water Bottle, made of clay.
The art of pottery was known to the Fijians long before the
advent of the white man. There are no Aboriginals in the
South Pacific capable of competing with them. The New
Caledonians produce a very rude kind of pottery, but by no
means to be compared with the fine and useful productions of
the Fijians.
153. — Niu, or Canoe.
Model of a New Caledonian cano.e. These vessels are generally
hollowed out with the aid of fire. The people are not very
good seamen, and seldom venture out to sea, so they have
little or no means for barter with the adjacent islands.
154. Calibash, ox'Water Bottle.
It proves a troublesome job with the natives in cleaning out these
gourds. They allow the inside to rot, fill it with water,
which they continually change, and so manage to effect their
desires. They are made and used by the majority of the
natives inhabiting the South Pacific Islands. This exhibit is
from New Caledonia, South Pacific.
155. — Basket, made of grass. Levuku, Fiji.
156. —Carved Ornament, or Sign.
This is used for decorating the exterior of doorways of the whares
or houses of great chiefs. This unfinished piece of work was
taken from a native village near Lake Taupo, North Island,
New Zealand.
157. — Shield, beautifully inlaid with mother-o’-pearl.
This specimen, so ingeniously constructed, is peculiar to the
savage tribes inhabiting the Solomon Isles. Specimens made
of wicker-work at one time were common, but these objects
are not now to be procured at any price. So rare are they,
that I have had many applications for the purchase of it.
This shield was found in the hold of the brig Wanderer, after
a desperate attempt on the part of the natives of Gaudalcauar
to capture her. This exhibit must formerly have belonged to
some chief of distinction, and one who was instrumental in
decoying the captain and a portion of the crew of the brig on
shore, and then murdering them. Solomon Group.


is%.—Mask, made of tortoise-shell.
This rude imitation of a human face is considered a great curiosity
at the present time. These masks, formerly made by the
Aborigines inhabiting Darnley Island, Torres Straits, North
Australia, were used in times past by the natives of Cape
York, North Australia, as a means of subduing their
women. This was effected by a man emerging from the
hush holding the mask with a light behind it. The
ornamentation carved upon it, together with the shells and
emu feathers with which it is decorated, stamps it at once as
a genuine production emanating from the savage tribes of
North Australia, and from whom it was procured.
359: — Image, curiously carved and ornamented with mother-o’-
pearl.
This extraordinary imitation of a human figure comes from
Gandalcanar, one of the islands composing the Solomon
Group ; these images are not worshipped by the natives, as
erroneously stated by many people who have visited this
Group, nevertheless they attach much importance to them
and are much priced, as being a means of preserving peace
and quietness amongst themselves.
tso. — Water Bottle. Ovulu, Fiji. (See 152.)
161. —Sacerdotal Bowl.
An object used in the religious ceremonies of the natives of the
Fiji Islands. They are very rare, so much so, I know of no
other collection containing one. They are used by the native
priests (or disease makers) to contain cocoa-nut oil, which
they burn. These bowls when hot in use are always deposited
in tire huts of great chiefs for safety. This specimen was pro-
cured in Fiji twenty years hack.
162. — Gourd, or Water Bottle.
Gourds are vegetable productions, and specimens similar to the
, present exhibit are always difficult to clean and purify,
which the natives manage to effect by rotting the inside with
water. This wonderful growth is from Tanna, New Hebrides,
South Pacific.
163. —Water Bottle, made of clay. (See 152.)
x 64. — Gourd\ or Water Bottle.
Ornamented with sinnet, made of cocoa-nut fibre. It is the peculiar
ambition of the natives of Fiji to decorate almost every work
they produce with sinnet.
165. — Basket, made of grass by the native women of Fiji.
166. — Fan, made of the dried stems of the cocoa-nut palm.
Fans are in general request in all hot climates, and are extensively
used in Fiji, Tonga, New Hebrides, and many other places.
This exhibit is from Fiji Islands.
20
Catalogue of the


167. — Pillow, or Head Rest, cut from a solid piece of wood.
Objects of this kind are not in general use, many of the natives
using their clubs as head rests. Fiji Islands.
168. — Box, used to contain ornaments, feathers, &c., by the
wives of great chiefs.
This box is cut from a solid piece of wood, and on its outer
surfaces are carved four rude imitations of human figures.
Although the various tribes inhabiting New Zealand are both
clever and ingenious in ornamentation, yet their powers in
delineating living figures are very restricted. This box is the
work of the Wanganui natives, New Zealand. It was pre-
sented to one of McLean’s party when invited to a conference
with the natives.
169. — Basket.
This very pretty article is made of native grass, by the Aborigines
of Tanna, New Hebrides, South Pacific.
170. — Yang-Gotta, or Cava Bowl.
This extraordinary vessel was formerly the property of the present
King of Fiji; the beverage called Cava is prepared In such a
manner as would prove very distasteful to the palates of
Europeans ; nevertheless, no greater insult could be tendered
a chief than to refuse a cup of Cava with him, Cava is pre-
pared by the young maidens, who sit round the bowl and
chew a root (Piper Methysticum) and discharge the contents
of the mouth into the bowl ; when full it is then strained off
and allowed to ferment; in a short time it is ready for use.
Many tribes in the South Pacific Islands prepare and use Cava.
(See Glass Case at the head of stairs, 280, exhibit 32).
171 — Yang-Gona, or Cava Bowl. Friendly Islands.
172. — Shield, inlaid with mother-o’-pearl.
A fine specimen of native art, emanating from a tribe of people
having a reputation for being inveterate cannibals. This shield
comes from one of the islands belonging to the Solomon
Group.
173. — Pillow, or Head Rest, made of cane.
These pillows are used by laying the upper part of the neck across
them. The exhibit before you was made and used by the
natives of New Caledonia, South Pacific.
174. —Glass Case containing Fish-hooks, &c. ;
1. — Ear-rings, made of tortoise-shell.
These ornaments are attached to the ear in a similar maimer
as you would open an ordinary key ring and then allow it to
grip the ear. They are much worn by the native women
inhabiting the New Hebrides.
21
Australasian Collection.


2. — Armlets.
These objects were lately dug up on one of the sugar plantations
in New Caledonia, and may he said to be fossil. It being
the custom to bury such objects with the dead proves these
armlets to be several hundred years old.
3. — Ornament of Shell, worn round the leg by the natives of the
Fiji Islands.
4. — Bead, made of a •whale’s tooth.
These articles are worn only by chiefs of rank. The more a chief
can procure and wear, the more wives he is entitled to have.
They are worn suspended from the neck, in a similar way as
the Fijians wear the beautiful and valuable shell, the orange
cowrie. This specimen is from Erromanga, New Hebrides.
5. — Armlet, made of shell. Santa Cruz.
s. —Fishing Line, made of sinnet of cocoa-nut fibre, and hook
made of tortoise-shell. Fiji Islands.
7, 3. — Fisk JLooks. New Zealand.
9. — Fish Hooks and Lines.
Used in one of the voyages under Captain Cook by Dr. Parry.
They are made of mother-o’-pearl and native twine. Tahiti.
i o.— Fish Hooks, from Samoa.
11 .—Shark Hook, Samoa.
175. — Mask, made of tortoise shell.
This exhibit is another of those very remarkable products coming
from those tribes inhabiting the northern side of Australia. It is
exceedingly rare, and one of the first of its kind ever brought
to this country. (See 158.)
176. — Fan, made of the dried fibre of the cocoa-nut palm. Fiji
Islands. (See 166.)
177. —Tree Climber.
An implement used by the natives of Central Australia, in climb-
ing trees in search of Apossums. (See illustration 361.)
177 A. — Native Drill.
This very ingenious and simple contrivance is used in
connection with the manufacturing of fish - hooks, and
■ perforating hard substances, is very primitive, and admirably
answers the purpose of the natives. They are not known
to all the native tribes inhabiting the islands in the South
Pacific. This exhibit is from Samoa.
178. — Yaka, or Canoe.
Model of a Solomon Island trading canoe with outrigger. It is
astonishing the distance these savages will venture out to sea
in these fragile boats. They are very narrow, and of great
22
Catalogue of the


length—seldom more than two feet in width, and, in many
instances, sixty feet in length. They are so constructed that it
would take a heavy sea to capsize them, owing to the outrigger
being composed of a huge barrel of a tree. In the construc-
tion of these canoes not a nail is used, everything being
effected by sewing together with sinnet made of cocoa-nut
fibre—the body of the canoe itself being made from a pon-
derous trunk of a tree hollowed out, by setting fire to it, and
turning the flames in any given direction by dropping water
on it. This specimen is from Gaudalcanar, Solomon Group.
179. — Glass Case containing Meri’s,
1. — Necklace, made of nut-shells by the blacks in the Moreton
Bay district, North Australia.
2. Meri, carved in wood.
These weapons were used in former times as hand clubs by the
natives of New Zealand. They are not reproduced now as
formerly.
3. Case, made of bamboo, and used by the native women to
hold hair-pins. Tanna.
4. — Meri. * ♦
Formerly belonging to one of the Waware Tribe, New Zealand.
5. — Meri.
This is a rare exhibit, and was made by Paul, a native of the
Waikapau tribe, North Island, New Zealand, at one time
in the employ of the proprietor. This implement is carved
from whalebone.
6. — Thong.
This is used by many tribes inhabiting the South Sea Islands to
aid them in throwing the spear. (See 105 for explanation.)
From New Caledonia.
7. — Fetish, composed of human hair. Fiji. (See 25, case
148.)
8. — Meri.
This weapon was procured by the late Dr. Parry in one of his
voyages under Captain Cook. It is a rare and very old
specimen. New Zealand.
9. — Bow String, made of bamboo. Solomon Isles.
ro.— Spear Heads, made of human, whale, and stinger-ray bones.
Santa Cruz.
11. — lnstruments, used to beat time to the dancers in their
corroborrees. North-East Australia.
12. — Unfi}iished Ornaments of tortoise-shell. North Australia.
3. — Bag, made of flax by the native women of New Zealand.
23
Australasian Collection.


14. —Ornament of Shell, worn by the native tribes of Erromanga,
New Hebrides.
15. — Ba%, made of native string.
These bags are worn by the men when going to fight, and are
used to contain a quantity of small stones fashioned like
eggs. These missiles can be discharged from a sling made of
twine, with deadly effect. At the massacre of M. de Langle,
at Tutuilla, the majority of the natives engaged in the fight
brought these stones into requisition, and with their aid
red, in 1787, a complete victory over the expedition under
Perouse, while it was endeavouring to effect a landing.
These objects are also used to great effect by the natives
inhabiting New Caledonia, where these specimens were made.
16. —Stones of Steatite, or soap stone, used as described in
No. 15.
17. — Sling, made of native twine, and used in discharging
stones. (See 15 and 16, same case.)
180. —Model of a Canoe. ' '
This remarkable exhibit comes from Santa Cruz. It is used as a
club in fight, and is also fashioned in imitation of some
hfrge bird. These specimens at the present time are very
scarce.
181. —Model of a North Australians Canoe, or Gondol.
These canoes are made with huge sheets of bark taken from the
trunks of the blue gum tree. They are usually made in one
piece, and sewn at either end with reeds. The natives are
not good sailors, seldom venturing outside fresh-water lagoons
and rivers. Their canoes are seldom made to carry more
than two or three people.
182. War Club, stone headed
A formidable weapon made from a stone called jade. These imple-
ments are very rare, and are handed down as heirlooms from
father to son. This was procured from its original owner, the
chief Gelima, of Kanala, New Caledonia, 1871.
183. — Wig, made of human hair.
These articles of adornment are much used by the savage tribes
inhabiting the Fiji Islands, being much more prized when
made of the hair of the victims they capture in war. The
majority of these people are inveterate cannibals, periodically
making raids upon the inoffensive families of the European
settlers, whom they murder and eat.
184. — Raav, or War Canoe.
This fine old example of the double canoe, as used in former times,
illustrates the ponderous vessels employed in times of war; the
natives will venture out to sea many hundreds of miles in
them. The specimen exhibited shows the fighting deck so
24
Catalogue of the


ingeniously arranged as to keep the crew tolerably free
from the spears and arrows of their enemies ; these canoes
are made in the usual Polynesian way, and are capable ot
carrying fifty or sixty warriors.
185. —Chiefs Staff, made of bamboo.
The very remarkable and rude representations of human figures,
together with others in imitation of tortoises and sea-weed,
will at once convey to the reader’s mind to what extent
the fine arts are practised among the savage tribes inhabiting
the island of New Caledonia, in the South Pacific. This staff
was procured from the natives by Mrs. Capt. Flinn, a lady
much accustomed to mingle freely among these savages.
Although a great favourite with them, she never could induce
them to allow her to present her husband, Capt. Flinn, to
them—in fact they would only barter with the lady.
186. Woomera, or Throw Stick.
The woomera is used by the majority of the natives inhabiting the
great Continent of Australia; it is made in various lengths,
shapes, and designs, and is used with much dexterity both
• by the men and boys, in the following manner:—The
blunt end of the spear is placed into the forked end of the
throw stick, the left elbow being well braced back, and close
to the side, and the left leg put well forward; the spear is*
then discharged from the woomera, the latter being retained
in the hand. This specimen is from South Australia.
187. — Ola, or Spear, made from the young stem of the cocoa-
nut palm.
Brought from the scene of the murder of the late B. Boyd,
Esq., at Gaudalcanar, Solomon Group.
188. — Karo, or Club, being a rude imitation of a large bird.
(See 26.) New Caledonia.
189. —An Implement, .carved to represent human heads and
birds.
Formerly used by the natives of New Zealand in their war
canoes. It would be carried by one of their number at the
bow of the boat, and flourished in some particular way, so as
to denote hostilities, or as the case might be, as a signal of
peace. This exhibit was procured at Poverty Bay, North
Island, New Zealand.
rgo.— Paddle, carved in imitation of the objects the Solomon
Islanders are accustomed to reverence in their devotional
exercises. This specimen is from Santa Cruz.
191. — Shield, carved by the natives of South Australia.
192. Karo, or Club, a fine old example of a club, carved to
imitate a large bird.
These rough examples are not reproduced now as of old; this
25
Australasian Collection.


specimen was givetirVßp to the French authorities by Titeum,
a chief possessing considerable influence, when the former
took possession of the island; this chief having now become
civilized, renders valuable aid to the Government, who have
presented him with a silver medal. (See illustration No. 67.)
193. — Le-Angles, a club, being the connecting link between the
boomerang and the ordinary club, Nulla-Nulla.
This weapon can be thrown in the same manner as the boome-
rang, but not with such deadly effect; this club was taken
from the scene of the Nogoa massacre, Queensland, 1862,
and still retains the traces of blood upon it.
194. — Tao, a spear, horribly barbed with the bones of birds.
These specimens are very difficult to procure at the present time,
the efforts of the savages being devoted to producing them
expressly for barter. From New Guinea, Torres Straits,
South Pacific.
195. — Tao, a spear, made by the natives of Damley Island,
Torres Straits, South Pacific.
196. — Dabberi, or Nulla-Nulla.
This club was brought from the scene of the Nogoa massacre,
Queensland, 1862.
197. Woomera, or Throw Stick.
Said to have belonged to a tribe of hairless men, inhabiting a
portion of the northern territory of Australia, called Ballonne
River, one of the head waters of the Darling; it is only
on the banks of the River Ballonne that the tribe is to be
found. Both men and women are perfectly hairless, and yet
have no appearance of cutaneous disease. They are few in
number, and of peaceful habits, holding no intercourse with
the neighbouring tribes, who regard them with superstitious
awe. (See 186.)
199. Woomera, or Great Throw Stick of the Desert, procured
from the savage tribes inhabiting Central Australia.
These very large woomeras are only used by those tribes inhabit-
ing Central and Northern Australia; this example is from
Cooper’s Creek, where the natives are accustomed to throw
the long and heavy jagged spear with deadly aim to a
distance of eighty or ninety yards with ease.
200. — Naivau.
This ponderous club was picked up on one of the plantations on
the river Ba, Fiji, 1872, and used in seif defence by one of the
Europeans who escaped from the terrible slaughter inflicted
upon them by the Ba mountaineers.
201. — Tomahawk, set with a native carved handle.
This iron weapon was bartered to the savages of Gaudalcanar, one
of the Solomon Isles, by B. Boyd, Esq., a very enterprising
gentleman, who landed in tins locality a few years back, with
26
Catalogue of the


a party of Europeans, for the purpose of founding a whaling
station; a dispute arose concerning the native women, and
ultimately the savages fell upon the whole of the whites,
slaughtered and ate them. Many tribes inhabiting this Group
fatten their own people for slaughter, and it was at the
landing of the late Bishop Patterson on one of the Southern
Islands of the Group, that he found several of the natives
being fattened after being condemned to death. The Bishop
begged the lives of these poor people, after making sundry
presents to the chief.
202. — Mahae, a spear, having a human head and face excel-
lently portrayed.
It is singular that savages should take so much pains to decorate
their implements, and for no other purpose than to throw them
away in times of war, implements of this class being always
retained by their enemies as trophies of war. The present
exhibit is from the Society Islands, South Pacific.
203. Woomera, or Throw Stick.
Used by the native tribes on the Jamba, North Australia.
204. Woomera. (See 186.)
205. — Lo, Spear made of the stem of the cocoa-nut palm.
It is curiously cut so as to represent snakes, and is from Santa
Cruz, South Pacific.
205 A. — Woman’s Dress.
These dresses are the only article of costume worn by the native
women of Samoa, or Navigators’ Group.
206. — Nitei, or Spear, made and used by the natives of Tanna.
New Hebrides Group.
207. — Boomerang.
This specimen is from Cooper’s Creek, Central Australia. (See 82.)
208. 209. — Rakaos, or Clubs, procured at Niua in one of the
islands forming the New Hebrides Grup.
, Clubs of this kind are now rarely to be met with. In former
times they were used as badges of honour, and carried only
by chiefs of rank. They are not reproduced at the present
time. These exhibits have been buried with men of rank
(their owners), and were lately dug up with human bones at
Erromanga, New Hebrides, South Pacific.
210. — Club , made of South Sea Island ebony. It would be
interesting to know the meaning of its extraordinary shape.
In all probability the peculiar and natural bend of a tree may
prove suggestive to savages. One thing is certain—that if
one takes and examines any implement partaking of a curva-
ture emanating from any of the South Pacific Islanders, one
can immediately distinguish the natural growth of the wood.
This specimen is from the Solomon Group.
27
Australasian Collection.


2i i.— Naivcm, or Club, used in times of war.
It is made from the root and stem of a tree, and proves a most
formidable weapon. This is another specimen from the
massacre on the Ba River, Fiji Islands. (See 200.)
212. — Kana, a spear made from a sassafras tree from North-
East Australia.
213. Ndop, or Club.
This implement is another of the peculiar weapons partaking
something of the character of the boomerang. There is no
doubt but that the boomerang was in former times made, and
its use well understood in India. Imitations of the boomerang
may also be traced through Borneo, New Guinea, and Dam-
ley Islands, and it is remarkable that its use is only understood
in the present day by the native tribes inhabiting the continent
of Australia. This exhibit comes from Aneiteuni, New
Hebrides. >
214. — Boy's Boomerang.
Native children are thorough masters of this weapon, and are
taught its use at an early age, so much so that they learn to
provide for themselves at the age of six and seven years,
their wants causing but little anxiety to their parents, however
much attached to them. This specimen comes from New
South "Wales.
215. — Kana.
The use of the spear having already been described, I need only
further remark that it is in the hands of persons of all
ages. It is the plaything of the children ; it is even the
instrument with which the savage corrects his wife in the last
extremity, for,,in his passion, or oftener in a fit of jealousy,
he scruples not to inflict death. This specimen is from tjhe
Jamba, North Australia.
216. — Woman!s Dress, made of dried banana leaves.
This primitive garment constitutes the whole of the attire worn
by the females of Tahiti, Society Islands.
217. —“ Nji,” Speax made of cane, and pointed with human
bone.
The natives of New Caledonia thoroughly understand the use of
the spear. The bonqs used as points are usually those of
the victims captured in time of war. ■ At one time the
desire for human flesh was so great that it rendered it
a matter of risk to venture among them, and even now in
the present day they will laugh in one’s face, and tell one,
, “ Woman all same as porker, ’’meaning pig. (See 105.)
218. — Nulla-Nulla.
, This club was taken by Mr. Pain from one of the Cogee tribe of
Aborigines (at one time infesting a portion of the eastern side
of Australia), with considerable risk. It was in one of the
28
Catalogue of the


collecting rambles of the proprietor in the Cogee district that
he observed a black fellow beating his lubra most severely,
having come upon him quite unobserved, and just in time to
prevent him giving the poor woman a blow on the head with
this brutal weapon. Mr. Pain threw himself between them,
and prevented the blow, which in all probability would have
killed her. Having presented the fellow with a few copper
coins and his pocket knife, which put him in a good
temper, he promised not to repeat his brutality.
219. — Pato, a New Zealand Chiefs Club..
In former times these were only carried by great chiefs, but now
they are rapidly disappearing, the firelock having been sub-
stituted for them. At one time they were used as instruments
for taking life, the chief’s pato always being selected for
the purpose. Should the intended victim have been a
woman, the thin edge would be brought into requisition,
while the blunt side would be used in the case of a man. This
instrument was presented to the proprietor by Thomas Har-
perman, a native magistrate of considerable ability, at one
time residing in Auckland, New Zealand.
220. — -Kana.
The natives always bring the woomera into use when discharging
the spear at their enemies. I have seen as many as six or
seven transfix a mandat a distance of sixty yards, in a skirmish
among natives in the Bogan district, N. S. Wales.
221. — Naivau, a Club made of iron wood, from Vitu Livu, Fiji
Islands, South Pacific.
222. — Club.
This murderous-looking object is made from the stem and root of
a young iron wood tree. It was one of the trophies taken
on the Ba plantations after the fearful slaughter of the Euro-
peans in 1872. (See 200.)
223. Udtongi.
These curiously made implements are rarely to be seen now.
They were used as badges of distinction in former times by the
chiefs, upon whose death they were invariably placed in the
same grave, a custom still strictly adhered to in many of the
islands. The present exhibit is from Samoa, or Navigators’
Group.
224. — Pato, or New Zealand Chiefs Club, decorated with the
feathers of the wild pigeon. (See 219.)
225. Waddy.
Made of myall, wood by the natives of North Australia, and some-
times used much in the same way as the Willie-Willie, a
weapon which, when thrown from the hand, 4s made to re-
bound eight or ten times from the ground, at the same time
making a forward movement, exactly in the same way as
a person would make an oyster-shell skim the surface of a sheet
of water. ,
2 9
Australasian- Collection.


226. —Spear Handle, made of bamboo.
The blunt end is so hollowed out as to be capable of receiving
a point made of human bone. This specimen comes from the
Loyalty Islands, South Pacific.
227. — Basket, made of rushes, and used in fishing excur-
sions by the natives of Moreton Bay, North-East Australia.
228. — Bag.
This very curious bag is made from the inner bark of a tree,
twisted into a fine twine. These bags are first made like a
round mat, then doubled and sewn together with human
hair. Brought from Cooper’s Creek, Central Australia, by
one of the relief party sent in quest of the missing explorers,
Burke and Wills.
229. — Kaufam, or Bows.
These splendid bows are made from the root of the mangrove tree.
They are very tough and durable. They are strung with the
usual native string. These exhibits are from Savage Island,
South Pacific.
230 . Chdeh.
A spear made of hard wood, discharged from the hand with
the aid of a thong. This specimen is from the Loyalty Group.
(See native thong, case 179, exhibit 6.)
231. —“ Kaho.”
Arrows made of strong reeds and pointed with hard-wood. The
extraordinary amount of labour and skill bestowed upon these
implements is truly wonderful, each specimen being very
elaborately carved. The whole of these exhibits were picked
up from the deck of the Mary Ira after she was recaptured by
the captain and crew of the schooner Sea Witch, by
the assistance of a few friendly natives. The manner in
which the Mary Ira was taken by the natives of Vate,
Sandwich Island, one of the New Hebride Group, will not
prove uninteresting to the reader. The Mary Ira was a small
schooner on a trading voyage among the islands. When at
Vate the natives of the place concocted an atrocious scheme
for the seizure of the vessel. The owner was anxious to get
, some assistance to work the schooner, and engaged ten of the
natives, who went on board, and she then proceeded to sea.
The chief, however, had matured his plans, and on the fourth
day out they rose on the captain and the original crew, whom
they murdered and ate.. The natives then brought the
schooner back to Vate. Here she was stripped, and the
spoils divided.
232. — Too.
A spear made from the cocoa-nut palm, and taken from the hold
of the schooner Mary Ira after her recapture at Vate, New
Hebrides, South Pacific
333. —Bathing Dress, made and used by the females of Erro-
manga. New Hebrides Group.
30
Catalogue of the


234- — Chdch.
A harpoon or boat-spear. The natives use these spears with much
dexterity in securing large fish, first taking the precaution to
drive them into shallow water. This exhibit is made of a
kind of ebony, and is from the Loyalty Islands, South Pacific.
235. — Lakau, a Club veiy much prized by the native chiefs at
Vate, New Hebrides.
236. — Uatongi.
An iron wood club, made and used by the natives inhabiting the
Navigators’, Group. The 'Samoans are more addicted to the
production of useful and substantial than ornamental articles,
their ability in carving being very limited.
237. — Kana.
A spear made of hard wood, and used by the natives on the Bogan,
New South Wales, Australia.
238. — Chiefs Staff. Gaudalcanar, Solomon Isles.
239. — Paddle.
Curiously carved, in imitation of a human figure.. One of the
paddles taken out of a native canoe after the attack upon the
late Benjamin Boyd, Esq., Gaudalcanar, Solomon Group.
240. — Chiefs Staff —Santa Cruz, Solomon Group.
241. — Spear.
This exhibit is discharged from the hand with the aid of a very
short woomera or throw stick, peculiar to the Aborigines of
, South Australia.
242. — Nirum.
This extraordinary weapon is made frorir the root and stem of the
iron wood tree, every portion of the root being inlaid with
carved human bone. This exhibit was exchanged by the
proprietor for a less hideous-looking object, by a Roman
Catholic missionary, in 1862. . These weapons generally
emanate from the savage tribes of Erromanga, New Hebrides,
South Pacific.
243. — Nirum.
A remarkable object, being an emblem of great rank among the
natives of the New Hebrides Group.
244. — Tombak, or Spear. .
This weapon is much used in the chase when hunting the emu or
kangaroo. These spears, when brought into requisition,
and discharged from the woomera by an experienced native,
seldom fail to secure their game. North Australia.
245. — Priest's Dress.
These garments are worn only by priests, or disease makers, to
whom much importance is attached. These gentry (not un-
like many of their craft in more civilised portions of the globe)
live on the fat of the land, and extort at every turn and corner
from their less susceptible brethren. > These dresses are peculiar,
to the Fiji Islanders. f V>\ 1 '


246. — Arrows, pointed with iron. New Guinea, Torres Straits.
247. — Tombak, or Spear. North Australia. (866 244.)
24S. — Paddle, made from the cocoa-nut palm. Friendly Islands,
South Pacific.
249. — Raau.
A remarkably fashioned club, produced by the natives of Tahiti,
Society Islands, South Pacific.
250. — Banana Gatherer and Pruner. ,
These implements have been described in every instance as
paddles ; these objects were originally designed and are now
used by the natives of New Caledonia, as palm primers and
banana gatherers.
251. — Ncdvau, Chiefs Club, very ingeniously ornamented with
sinnet, made of cocoa-nut fibre and human hair.
252. — Boat Spear. New Ireland, Vitu Livu, Fiji Islands.
253. — Paddle, made from a species of ebony ; a very old speci-
men. Society Islands.
254. — Paddle. —(See 248.)
255. Chdch.
It is a matter of difficulty to determine whether this spear is
the production of the New Caledonians or of the natives in-
habiting the Loyalty Group. These two localities are in
such close proximity to each other, and the many facilities
afforded for barter have given opportunities to the one race to
copy the works of the other. This exhibit was procured at
the Loyalty Islands.
256. —Femalds Dress, worn by the women of New 1 Caledonia.
257. — Nji, or Spear.
The decoration on the handle of this weapon is effected with a
burnt stick, and is peculiar to the natives of New Caledonia.
258. Waddy.
A club made and used by the natives of South Australia.
2 59- — Staff.
This beautiful specimen of Aboriginal ingenuity is the work of the
natives of New Guinea, a race of people of whom very Kttleis
knowit at the present time. They are savage and treacherous,
and Cannibals of the very worst order. Many attempts have
lately been made to form a settlement among them, but all
have failed. There is no doubt that New Guinea would open
up a fine field for the; naturalist, the gold-seeker, and the
agriculturalist, the climate (though tropical) being healthy and
salubrious.


z6o.— Shield.
This exhibit is a very fair sample of the abilities of the natives in-
habiting the southern portion of the great continent of Aus-
tralia. By early training the natives become thoroughly con-
versant with its use. In the manufacture of these rude,
shields much time and patience is bestowed.
2611 — Naivau.
Another of the terrible weapons picked up on the Ba plantations
after the terrible massacre in 1872. (See 200,)
2 62. — Shield, carved out of hard wood by the natives of Queens-
land, North Australia.
263. — Staff, or Club, used in war by the savages of the
Admiralty Islands. t
264. Waddy.
This immense club, carved by the natives, is peculiar to the tribes
inhabiting the East Coast of Australia.
265. — Spear, made of bamboo, and armed with human bone.
These objects are discharged from the hand without the aid of a
woomera or throw stick, or thong, as used by the New
Caledonians. This article is from New Ireland.
266. — Spear used by the natives ofNew Caledonia.
' 267. — Woman’s Dress, made from the dried fibre of the banana
stalk.
It is the only article of dress used by the native women in the
Tonga Group, South Pacific.
268. — Spear.
Curiously carved in imitation of the human face. It comes from
Darnley Island, Torres Straits.
269. — Arrow-headed Club.
A small implement, yet ugly in close quarters. Used by the
savages of the Admiralty Islands.
270. — Nirum.
This splendid implement is made of iron wood, and polished with
charcoal and cocoa-nut oil. Erromanga, New Hebrides.
271. — Staff, or Club, from New Ireland.
272. — Akau-toa.
This very splendid weapon, in the elaborate display of native art
shown on its surface, would do credit to any European work-
man, and shows also what grand effect can be produced by a
repetition of simple ornament. This fine specimen is the
work of the natives inhabiting the islands known as the Mar-
quesas, in the South Pacific.


viZ—Staff.
The binding of these implements forms an occupation for a class of
people accustomed to nothing else butmurderand pillage. This
club was formerly the property of the late Bishop Patterson,
who procured it from a chief of distinction at Santa Cruz a
short time before his untimely death, which was caused by a
poisoned arrow in the neighbourhood of Santa Cruz.
274.
A spear used by the savage tribes inhabiting New Caledonia,
South Pacific.
275. , or Club.
This splendid and formidable weapon is made of iron wood.
These clubs are polished by the natives, the materials used
, being charcoal and cocoa-nut oil. Used with deadly effect by
the natives of Samoa, or Navigators’ Group.
276. — Club.
This instrument is carved in a very primitive manner in imitation
of an arrow, and is used very effectively by the natives of
New Britain.
2 77- —
A most remarkable spear used in fishing; it is double headed
with hard wood, ingeniously carved.
278. — Canoe, made by the natives of New Zealand.
This grand example of Aboriginal art emanates from those tribes
at one time infesting the Waipapa River, flowing into Hawke
Bay on the eastern side of New Zealand, North Island.
This splendid work fully illustrates the ingenuity and skill
of these people, who are diametrically opposed in their orna-
mentation to the numerous tribes inhabiting the South Sea
Islands—the New Zealander invariably adopting convoluted
designs, while the Fijian, Solomon, Society, and Friendly
Islanders adhere to angular ornament. The “modus operandi ”
as followed in the production of a work of this class may
be interesting. A large block of wood is obtained, and
fashioned to the required size; after being saturated with any
oily or fatty substance at command, it is then smoked over a
fire, then again oiled, and again smoked, and so on, until its
outer surfaces are rendered amenable to the primitive tools
brought into requisition.
Case 279 at the Top of Stairs.
1. — Tappa-heater.
A curious mallet used in the manufacture of Tappa cloth ; this
implement is from Samoa, South Seas, (See i, 2,3, 4,5.)
2. — Meri-meri.
A stone club, in former days used by the native chiefs of New
Zealand. These implements of war are not made or used in
the present day, the more modern firelock having completely


superseded them—the rifle and the old Brown Bess being in
the hand of every hostile native, and their use well under-
stood. A green stone Meri has been known to sell for a high
price, and one in the possession of Capt. Padden is valued
at 250 guineas. This Meri is the production of the natives in-
habiting Middle Island, New Zealand.
3. — Adze, stone-headed.
An implement made and used by the natives of Tahiti or
Otaheite, chiefly in the construction of their canoes; this
specimen was procured by Dr. Parry, in one of his voyages
under the celebrated navigator, Capt. Cook, at Tahiti, one of
the South Pacific Group.
4. — Meri-meri.
Portion of an old green stone implement. New Zealand. (See 2,
same case.)
5. — Adze.
Made of a stone called jade, and used by natives of New
Caledonia in the manufacture of their weapons. A rare
specimen.
6. — Adze.
Stone-headed and fastened to the handle with sinnet made of
cocoa-nut fibre. This curiosity was procured at Tahiti in one
of Capt. Cook’s voyages. (See 3, same case.)
7. — Tomahawk.
Made of stone (basalt) and used chiefly by the natives of Central
Australia in climbing trees when in quest of opossums ; the
savages will climb the straight trunks of lofty trees with the
greatest ease, by the assistance of the tomahawk; this is
effected by making a small notch in the tree to receive the
big toe, which being inserted, another notch is made, and
so on until they get to the top.
8. — Axe-Head.
Made of stone, and used by the natives of South Australia.
(See 7, same case.)
9. — Aoce-Head, of stone.
Made by the natives of Cape York, North Australia. (See 7.)
ro. —Nardoo Pounder.
This round Object comes from Cooper’s Creek, Central Austra-
lia, where it is used by the natives to pound a small edible
seed called Nardoo, which when converted into a cake is
very agreeable.
11. — Axe-Head, made of green stone (Te Wai Ponamon), New
Zealand.


12. — Chisel.
This beautiful green stone implement is a rare and valuable
specimen; the ordinary steel tools of the European having
entirely superseded these objects, their value with collectors is
enhanced. This chisel was presented to the proprietor by
Thos. Harperman, a native chief possessing considerable
ability, in Auckland, New Zealand. “Te Wai Ponamon/’or
green stone water, is found in Middle Island, New Zealand,
and particularly in the province of Nelson, which is called
by the natives Te Motu Ponamon, or the island of greenstone.
For many years this greenstone, though not of any intrinsic
value, was most difficult to obtain from the Maories.
13. — Adze, made of jade.
This curiosity is so constructed as to be used without the aid
of a handle ; it is a rare specimen, and was procured by
barter by Mrs. Capt. Flinn, from the chief Gelima, of
Kanala, one of the coast tribes in New Caledonia.
14. —Stone Implenmit.
Made of rock quartz by the natives inhabiting the North-East coast
of Australia. At the death of a chief or relative, these
tools are brought into use. If the deceased person should
happen to be a favourite, the mourning of the women is
long and very general; they cut and mutilate themselves in
a shocking manner, and their lamentations are most pitiable
to hear. They cut off their hair with sharp shells, both
men and women daubing themselves with clay, the latter
crying very lamentably throughout the night.
15 • — Spear-Head.
Made of Obsidian, a kind of stone produced by volcanic eruption.
It is impossible to say from what part of the South Pacific
it came originally, owing to objects of this class passing from
tribe to tribe in barter. This valuable exhibit was procured
at Tonga Island.
16. —Fossil Pine , from Tasmania, from a block originally in
the possession of the late Sir W. T. Denison.
Case 280.
17. —-Piece of Wood , showing the action of the pholas. Port
Jackson, New South Wales.
18. Cup, splendidly carved.
This fine old specimen of native art is the work of the people
formerly inhabiting the shores of the Bay of Plenty. These
cups were used to contain the dye or liquids with which they
tattoo themselves. This specimen is from North Island,
New Zealand.


1 9. — Bottles, made of cocoa-nuts.
These objects are usually carried by the disease makers when
called upon to visit a sick person. They carry in them
scented oil, using it as a charm. The high-priests are cun-
ning gentry, and are sure to assign a cause for the patient’s
complaint. If a sick person is requested to give up his
canoe, or club, or even his daughter, he willingly complies
so that he may be freed from the disease; and as the natives
of the South Sea Islands have no recourse to internal
remedies, these disease-makers ply a thriving trade. The
exhibits are from Samoa.
20. — Sinnet.
Made of human hair, and generally by the old and infirm men,
who may at all times be seen plaiting when attending to their
religious devotions. Hair sinnet is much used by the young
maidens for the purpose of decorating their own hair when
at the toilet, a tub of clear water doing duty as a mirror.
21. — Box, made of Huon pine by one of the extinct natives of
Tasmania.
22. 23. — Swords, armed with the teeth of sharks.
These specimens are from Kingsmill Island. (See 6j, 66.)
24. Walking-stick, made of whalebone.
The only novelty attached to this exhibit is, that it was the very last
work of the very last man of the now extinct race of savages
formerly inhabiting Tasmania, South Pacific. For particu-
lars attending the mystery surrounding the body of Billy
Lannie after death, see portrait No. 35.
25. — Sword, from Kingsmill Island, South Pacific.
26. —Necklace of Whalds Teeth.
These ponderous ornaments are generally worn by the men of the
Fiji Islands. They are now very rare.
Case 281.
27. — Chunum Case.
A small gourd, used by the natives of the Solomon Group to con-
tain chunum, a powder made from lime, with which they
dye their teeth. The decoration upon it is effected with the
aid of a firestick.
28. — Chunum Case.
This beautiful carving on cane is the work of the savage tribes in-
habiting the Solomon Group.
29. —Chunam Case.
A small gourd from Gaudalcanar, Solomon Isles.


30, 3 1 - — Yang-Gona, or Cava Drinking Cups.
These very interesting objects are made of cocoa-nut shells. Much
patience and time are spent on reducing the original thick shell
to its present fragile condition. The handles attached to
them are made of sinnet. These cups were procured at Fiji,
from King Thakombau, his majesty having himself given
them to Mrs. Captain Flinn, who presented them to the
proprietor. For particulars of Yang-Gona see No. 170.
33. — Piper-methysticum.
A root extensively used by many of the savage tribes in the
preparation of a beverage called cava. This liquor has an
intoxicating effect, and although it is made by the young women
by masticating the root, yet they never partake of it. This
disgustingly-prepared beverage is always taken before, and not
after meals. When a cup is filled, it is passed with much
ceremony to the most important chief assembled, who re-
ceives it from the cup bearer, drinks it off, and returns the
cup to be filled again, each chief in order of rank having a
drink. Few drink to excess. The father, and senior mem-
bers of the family, only partake of the cava at ordinary meals.
33. —Chunvm Case.
Made in rude imitation of a fish, from a cocoa-nut shell, the eyes
being conspicuously produced with the aid of mother-o’-
pearl. This exhibit is from Santa Cruz, South Pacific.
34, 35, 36, —Nose Flutes.
These primitive musical instruments are made of bamboo. The
sound emanating from them when blown with the nose re-
sembles the lowing of cattle. They are used by the natives-
of New Caledonia, when assembling the tribes to their
religious observances, and at their dances or pilo-pilos; these
objects do not display any of those beautiful tracings or
carvings which emanate from the New Zealanders, Fijians,
or Hervey Islanders.
Case 282.
37> 38, 39, 40 .—Images.
These rude objects are made by the natives inhabiting the Solomon
Islands, and-are used as charms for the preservation of peace.
The natives do not worship them, as many people imagine,
but suspend them in their huts and dwellings, as a means to
prevent famine and disease. Curiosities of this class are be-
coming very rare.
41. — Tea-balls.
These articles, composed of native twine and red worsted, are
much used by the natives of New Zealand in their ceremonies
and religious teachings. The men, when called together for
a, particular purpose, invariably go through a ceremony of
the following kind. Forming themselves into a half-circle,


they squat on the ground with their knees crossed. One of
the number coming to the front with his pato, or war club,
commences to salute each person composing the circle by
rubbing noses together. The leader then commences a chant,
in which all join, at the same time every man using his Toa-ball
to keep time, which is done with marvellous effect and pre-
cision. It is very amusing to see so many of these balls flying
first in one direction and then in another, now before and
then behind, the ball being brought back by the string
to which it is attached. The Toa is used by the majority
of the savage tribes inhabiting New Zealand.
42. — Fetish.
This curious object, containing relics of departed friends (teeth,
pieces of human bone, hair, &c.), is much esteemed, and
looked upon with reverence. It is handed down to each
succeeding generation as an heirloom by the natives of Fiji.
The fetish is so suspended in the houses of chiefs, that the
tribes, when assembled together for prayer, may see it, and
fix their attention on it. Again, when a heathen Fijian is
killed, his relative hangs up in his house a fetish, or some
othtr object, which is supposed to call continually to him to
execute vengeance for the murder, and this the man considers
he is bound to fulfil by every principle of honour. 'He will
deem it his business to kill some member of the offending
tribe ; it does not matter whether it is the particular indi-
vidual who had committed the murder or not. This object is
from Lenuka, Fiji Islands.
43. — Sinnet, beautifully plaited by old men and women in
Fiji.
44. — Paddle.
This diminutive article, so elaborately carved, is another of the
ingenious specimens peculiar to and emanating from the New
Zealander.
45. —Nose Flute.
This unfinished article is from’ Ea, near Lenuka, Fiji Islands.
46. — Flute, made of human bone. Fiji Islands.
47. — Sinnet, made of the hair of the Flying Fox. Erromanga.
48. —Necklace of Seeds. Gaudalcanar. Solomon Group.


PAINTINGS, PHOTOGRAPHS, &c.
From Right to Left of Gallery,
1. —Bmh Funeral.
This representation of a bush funeral, with a pair of bullocks and
dray doing duty for a hearse, is common in the present day.
In the early days of the gold-fields even bush funerals were
unknown, diggers depositing the dead on any hill-side con-
venient to the tent of the deceased person, it was on the
road to Fryer’s Creek Diggings in 1853 that myself ami
party, when halting for the night on the second day’s journey,
pitched our tent near to a tilted cart, where a man was en-
gaged digging a hole dose by. Thinking he might be pros
pecting for gold, myself and another went over to him (out
of mere curiosity) and asked him what luck ; he, to our utter
astonishment, said he was digging a grave for his wife, who
lay dead beneath his dray close by. The rest of our party
immediately came over, and, finishing the grave ourselves,
we interred the body, substituting a blanket for a coffin.
This man told us he had asked several passers-by to assist
him to inter the body, but they all refused.
2. — Squatters’ Tiger.
Native black boys, when taken into the employ of settlers located in
the backwoods, soon become accomplished and daring riders.
I have seen them mount young and unbroken horses (buck-
jumpers), and retain their seat until the horse has positively
lain down exhausted and sulky. Buck-jumping is owing to
the animal not having been properly handled previous to
mounting. These young wild horses are drafted into stock-
yards, roped, and in a couple of days mounted. In saddling
a buck-jumper, the cropper is always used, the girths being
well looked to, and across the saddle in front of the rider a
strong stick is fastened. The wild horse is then led into an
open paddock by another horseman, and as soon as a mount
is effected by a second person, he is left alone with his animal,
and then commences the buck-jumping ; the horse tucking his
head between the fore-legs, jumps into the air, with his back
. arched, all four legs being brought together. 1 have known
horses of this class repeat these jumps for several hundreds of
yards, and not unseat the rider, unless the horse himself
should fall.
3. — Overlartders.
If tile mind can depict a man isolated from all civilisation for a
period of ten or twelve months, driving cattle through the
wilds of a country but little known, sleeping under a gum
tree with his saddle for a pillow, and no other luxuries but tea,
damper, aud tobacco to exist upon, then cattle driving and
bush life can be easily understood.


4. —Lost Duff Children. ■
The rescue of these truants was most timely, two of them, when
discovered, being speechless. Three children of the name of
Duff were lost from Spring Vale Station, in the Hamilton
district in Victoria, and only the faintest hopes existed of
their being alive. Owing to the rain, all trace of them had
been lost for eight or nine days, although a general and
systematic search had been kept up by numbers of men in the
neighbourhood. Knowing they must have been for the whole
of the time without food, it was thought impossible that
children of such tender years could be still alive, after such
protracted privation. Nevertheless, another search party was
formed, composed partly of white men and partly of blacks,
who carried on the search for two days and two nights
without food. On the ninth day from that on which they had
been lost the party, led by the blacks, came on their tracks
and found them. The poor children presented a most
pitiable yet interesting spectacle. The girl, only seven years
old, and the eldest of the three, was discovered in the act of
divesting herself of her little frock, and covering her two
little brothers with it, who lay speechless and almost insen-
sible. This last act was not the least touching incident of the
whole affair.
5. — Splitters.
Another illustration of the hard life some men undergo in the
backwoods of Australia ; these people seldom come into
the populated districts, and then only to “ knock down ” the
hard earnings and savings of many months in drink and riot.
6. — Corroborree.
The* scenes are seldom now to be seen in populated districts.
For description of Corroborree see No. 72.
7. —New Rush.
The wildest excitement of a revolutionary time among an ex-
citable people was scarcely equal to that of the mixed popula-
tion which composed a “New Rush. ” Such scenes as might
have been seen in a reign of terror were seen under such
circumstances. 1 Drunkenness of the most degrading nature,
wanton waste, extravagant folly, and stuck-up pomposity,
were all exemplified —men spending the money they possessed
as lavishly as if it were inexhaustible, and these poor in the
extreme yesterday being worth hundreds of pounds to-day,
and believing they could get as much to-morrow, their orgies
went far beyond anything ever conceived of by those who
have never witnessed them. The cry of “ Rush oh ! ” being
enough, half-sunk holes were abandoned, windlasses tossed
down shafts, mining tools packed up, pannican,. billy, and
frying-pan—those being the cooking utensils of the digger—
were strung together, and miners were immediately on the
tramp in hundreds, in quest of the new gold field.


8. — Bush Surveyors.
To tie professional man who has been accustomed to regular hours
and a comfortable bed, bush surveying proves hard. As in
the case of the “overlander,” it is no joke to be continually
exposed to all weathers for long periods at a time, and
separated from all the enjoyments of civilized life.
9. —Cattle Branding.
The “ yarding” of cattle is, perhaps, the most dangerous part of
this business. This picture speaks for itself, and requires but
little explanation.
10. — Prospecting.
A pursuit very pleasant, if attended with success ; yet I have seen
diggers desert a spot where they -have been obtaining from
six to eight ounces of gold daily, for a more uncertain one,
upon the cry of ‘ ‘ Rush oh ! ”
11. —Rounding Cattle, or mustering , is another arduous mode
of bush life.
The stockman is continually in the saddle, and at night has
nothing bat his pipe and blanket to console him. These
solitary individuals have a novel method of measuring a mile.
The stockman will fill a pipe with tobacco and light it, then
mount his horse, and strike off at a hard gallop. A mile is
supposed to have been completed when he has smoked his
pipe out. I have heard many of these men stoutly maintain
that they could measure , a mile accurately.
1 2. —Sneaking the Emu.
The native tribes of Australia have many plans by »hich they are
enabled to secure their game. Sneaking the Emu or Black
Swan is one of the best they put into use. With the aid. of
a large bush, which they carry in front so as to conceal
them, they creep gradually upon their prey, and when at a
convenient distance discharge a spear, which seldom fails
to strike the object at which it is aimed.
13. —The Shepherd.
The solitary and hard life imposed upon the Australian shepherd
differs altogether from ordinary bush pursuits, and proves
arduous to those engaged in it. The most difficult part of
the business is, when having thousands of sheep at one time
to drive to market, to steer the flock through other sheep-
runs without dropping any of one’s own, or picking up
stragglers from strange flocks.
14. —Kangaroo Stalking.
Europeans do not adopt the Aboriginal method of securing game.
The blacks follow the “ sneaking ” and more successful plan,
See 12.


ij.— Mi-a-Mi.
This picture shows the extent of the abilities of the Australian
blacks in the construction of their houses, if such they may
be termed. A few pieces of bark or a few boughs con-
stitute the whole of the material they use.
16. —Bush Mailman.
In past times, when bush-ranging was rife, conveying a mail on
horseback was anything but a pleasant calling. Bush-mail-
men have much hard riding to perform when in charge of a
pack-horse mail. I have accompanied a mail of this kind
through unbroken country for fifty and sixty miles at a time,
with nothing else but a Kangaroo or cattle track for a guide.
17. —Robbing the Mail.
Bush-ranging in Australia is now well-nigh stamped out. The
high rewards offered by the authorities have, in many instances,
been secured by private individuals, who have risked their own
lives. The last blood-thirsty villain who fell by such means
was “ Morgan,” when the principal part of the reward (one
thousand pounds) fell to the lot of a farm labourer and a
servant girl at Wangaratta, in Victoria.
18. —Native Tracker. See 70.
19. —Night Halt.
This picture will convey to the inexperienced mind how dreary
and long the evenings and nights must prove to bushmen in
Australia.
20. Wooldrays.
Bullock-driving is one of the hardest occupations a man can under-
take in the colonies ; he must be continually on the move, and
always walking by the side of his team, and at night every
beast must be “hobbled ” if the driver expects his services
• in the morning; yet it is no uncommon thing for them to
get away many miles before morning, even though hobbled.
I have known instances where the bullocks have strayed
away, and never afterwards been heard of.
21. —Bushmaris Hut.
It is customary, in the out-lying districts of Australia, to occa-
sionally employ some of the Aborigines; yet, at the same
time, it is necessary to keep a sharp look out after them ; one
must not leave about such trifles as axes, pots, shovels, &c., &c.
One is apt to miss them when again required ; the men are
an idle lot, always compelling their lubras to work for them.
2 2. —Natives Fishing by Moonlight.
The natives when fishing keep a fire in their canoes, and it is
surprising to witness their dexterity when spearing fish. In
this pursuit the woomera or throw-stick is not brought into use.


23. — Attack on a Store Drug.
Scenes of this description were at one time of common occurrence
in North Australia. Native tribes are now occasionally to be
seen watching their opportunity to fall upon any passer-by in
solitary places, but the very sight of a gun, and their greater
dislike to a charge of buck-shot, tends to keep them at a
respectable distance.
24. — Native Sepulchre. (See No. 91.)
25. — Scenes in New Caledonia.
26. Frame, containing portraits of Australian and South
Pacific Island Aborigines.
27. — Frame, containing scenery in Australia, New Zealand,
Fiji, and New Caledonia.
28. — Frame, containing scenery and portraits of the natives
of New Caledonia.
29. — Frame, containing scenery in the Fiji Islands.
30. — Frame, containing 25 portraits of celebrated natives in
New Zealand.
31. — Frame, containing 25 portraits of the natives of Australia,
32. — Frame, containing 25 portraits of Australian and New
Zealand natives.
33. — Frame, containing 25 portraits of Australian and New
Zealand celebrities.
34. — Frame, containing portraits of Australian, New Zealand,
and Fijian natives.
35. —Billy Fannie.
Most Australians are tolerably well acquainted wtih the atrocious
circumstances connected with the body of the late “Billy
Lannie ” after death. He being the very last male of the
Tasmanian natives, his death gave rise to an unusual amount
of excitement through so many joining in the scramble to pro-
cure some relic of him. I am fortunate enough to have in
my collection the very last work this man was engaged upon
at the time of his death. (See Case 280, exhibit 24.) 1}
was forwarded to me from Tasmania at considerable risk, so
great was the rage at the time to possess some reminiscence
of the late King Billy. Callous as we are in these days of
telegraphs and ironclads, it is impossible to repress a sigh of
pity over the dust of poor Billy Lannie. He was a whaler,
and a “jolly fellow,’’ had been to England, and had been
presented to the Duke of Edinburgh when the latter visited
Tasmania. He went to sea again in 1868, and got very fat


on the voyage ; returning to Tasmania, he took to drinking
heavily of beer and rum, and died of English cholera in a few
days.
A short time after receiving Christian hurial, it was discovered
that his grave had been disturbed, and his body taken away.
Suspicion immediately pointed to a certain medical gentleman
holding a very prominent position in the Tasmanian Legisla-
ture, and in his surgery, when broken open by the police, was
found the body of Billy, minus the head, which has never
yet been traced. In the course of a few years the natives of
Victoria will also have become extinct The result is simply
that of a law of nature. The Maories are going too.
Missionaries, settlers, and soldiers are powerless to save and
civilize these moribund races. There seems no exception to
the awful and mysterious, law that bids the man of colour
perish when the white man treads upon his soil.
36. —Australian Blacks Opossum Hunting.
37. —Kangaroo Hunting.
38. —South End of Tasman!s Peninsula.
The tourist, after having passed the magnificent basaltic formation
known as Cape Pillar, at the south-eastern extremity of the
island, comes in sight of imposing columns of gigantic
dimensions, rising abruptly from the ocean, and separated
by a narrow channel only from Tasman’s Peninsula. This
scene reminds the spectator of one of Dore’s solemnly fan-
tastic illustrations.
39. —Forest Scene. Cape Otway Ranges, Victoria.
This view is taken from the summit of a lofty range of mountains,
skirting the south-east coast of the county of Polworth, in the
colony of Victoria, and separating the valley of the Barwan
from Apollo Bay. Lying about a hundred miles from Mel-
bourne, as the crow flies, this tract of country is comparatively
a terra incognita, so impenetrable is the jungle, and so vast the
scope of the boundless forests, filled with battalions upon
battalions of towering trees, the greatest of which attain an
altitude of 300 feet. There are indications of the existence
of gold, copper, and coal in various parts of these ranges.
40. —Distant View of Ben Lomotid. Tasmania.
The forest in the middle distance borrows its name from an old
English chase—that of Epping ; and the seats of some of the
wealthy settlers in the neighbourhood will vie, both in the
hospitality they offer, and the comforts they command, with the
country houses at home. This scene meets the eye of the
tourist in journeying across the island of Tasmania,
41. —Reedy Creek Falls, near Beech worth, Victoria.
Reedy Creek is a tributary of the Ovens River, in the Beechworth
district in Victoria. The falls are only to be seen in their
strength and beauty at certain seasons of the year. Ac


cnstomed as the eye is in Victoria to )he ragged forms and
dull colour of the indigenous trees in all parts of the country,
the outline and diversified hues of the pine trees which
flourish in this neighbourhood strike the spectator as being
both novel and picturesque.
42. — Mount Kosciusko, from the north-east, New South
Wales.
The point of view chosen by the artist in this instance is the
eastern slope of the Mount Hope Ranges. The dense forests
which envelope its huge surface are as gigantic in their
character as the mountain itself, which has an elevation of
6,500 feet. Though distant from Melbourne little more
than a hundred miles, this romantic district is only accessible
by difficult routes, and under the conduct of an experienced
guide.
43. — Sources of ike Wannon, Victoria.
The Serra Range is about 150 miles distant from Melbourne, and
rises abruptly from a vast level, lightly timbered. Mount
William is 4,500 feet above the plain. Upon the verge
of the horizon, faintly visible above its level line, the outline
of Mount Rose cuts the shy. This mountain is an extinct
volcano, about thirty miles distant from the sea coast.
44. The Weather Board Falls, Blue Mountains, New South
Wales.
This noble cataract derives its name from a small public-house,
entitled the Weather Board ; it is situated on the road from
Sydney to Bathurst, which runs at a distance of about two
miles from this romantic scene. The elevation in the fore-
ground is 2,800 feet above the level of the sea. The
Weather Board hut is about 59 miles east of Sydney.
45. — Cataracts of the South Esk , near Launceston, Tasmania.
Before the South Esk, rising at a much greater elevation than the
Tamar, effects a junction with the latter river, it descends a
series of cataracts, the last of which is depicted in the ac-
companying engraving. The South Esk, it may be added,
takes its rise among the eastern mountains, near Tasman’s
Peak, and receives several tributaries before it reaches its
outfall at Launceston.
46. — Lake Illawarra, New South Wales.
This view is taken from a gentle eminence on the northern side of
a lake, about sixty miles from Sydney, New South Wales.
The outlet of the lake is visible towards the spectator’s left,
as is also the coast of the Pacific in the direction of the port
of Kiama. Stretching.away to the right is the fertile plain of
Dapto ; and the background is formed by the long line and
grand form of Mount Pleasant or Burrawang. The abun-
dance of wild fowl on the lake renders it a favourite haunt of
sportsmen ; while the forests which clothe the sides of the
Illawarra. or Merryong Range, likewise teem with game.


47. —Castle Rock, Cape Schanck, Victoria.
This bold and romantic headland is one of the most picturesque
“ bits ”of scenery on the Victorian coast. The rocks have
been worn into the most grotesque and fantastic shapes by the
action of the waves, which rush in with a majestic sweep from
the Southern Ocean. The cliffs are perforated with caverns,
of which the roof and walls appear to be covered with roughly
sculptured images. Seen at sunset, or during the brief twilight
of a summer morning or evening, the Castle Rock might easily
be mistaken for a dismantled fortress. The sand hummocks
which skirt the horizon extend to the heads, and the artist
has indicated the entrance of Port Philip by the position ot
the steamer visible in the offing.
48. —Fern Tree Gully, Dandenong Ranges, Victoria.
One of the most characteristic and beautiful features of the moun-
tain scenery of Australia is what is known as a Fern Tree
Gully. The banks of the ravine are carpeted with aromatic
shrubs and creepers, and on either side nature builds up a
vista of rounded columns, sometimes attaining a height ot
thirty feet, from whose summits spring out the exquisitely
curved and brilliantly green fronds of the fern tree, over-
arching the ice-cold brook below, and constituting one of the
finest cloisters it is possible to imagine. From the Gully
arise the giants of the forest, the lofty Eucalypti trees, straight
as a javelin, and branchless until they attain an altitude of
200 or 250 feet. The scene selected lies in the vicinity of the
Dandenong Ranges, about five-and-twenty miles eastward of
Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria.
49. View of the Murray River. Victoria,
In the river system of Australia, the Murray, with its tributaries,
the Darling, the Lachlan, the Murrumbidgee, the Goulburn,
and the Loddon, occupies a premier position. Of these
rivers, the Murray is 2,400, the Darling 1,800, and the Mur-
rumbidgee 1,000 miles long; the first being navigable for a
distance of 2,000, the second for 800, and the third for about
750 miles, at certain seasons of the year. The point of view
selected by the artist is near Moorundee, in South Australia.
The plains on both sides of the river are covered with Mallee
Scrub or Dwarf Eucalyptus.
50. — North-east View of the Top of Mount Kosciusko, New
South Wales.
This is the grandest, the loftiest, and most imposing of all the
mountain crags which constitute the Australian Alps. It is
situated about 300 miles from Sydney. Mount Kosciusko has
three principal crests running from south-west to north-east,
with an elevation of from 7,100 to 7,200 feet; while the
plateau, upon which the snow lies far into the hottest months
of an Australian summer, is from four to five miles long, and
the view from its summit sweeps over an area of 7,000 square
miles. Beneath the feet the eye plunges into a fearful gorge
3,000 feet deep.


51 • —Moroka River Falls, Gipps Land, Victoria.
la the very heart of the Gipps Land Mountains in one of the
most secluded districts of the colony, though little more than
sixty miles from Melbourne, well forth the springs which unite
to form the torrent of the Moroka. Guided by the roar of a
cataract, and penetrating with difficulty the woody fastnesses
in which it is hidden, the tourist at length reaches this
romantic spot The Moroka, after traversing the ravine here
represented, winds round the basis of the Snowy Bluff, and
finally empties itself into the Wonangatta. Before doing so,
it breaks into numerous cascades.
52. —The Goulburn River, Victoria.
The Goulhum drains an area of 6,700 miles ; and while its banks
are liable to inundation at one period of the year, many parts
of the river are also apt to disappear altogether at another.
The crossing place represented in the engraving is at the
township of Shepparton, about 130 miles north-east from
Melbourne, Victoria.
S - — Valley of the Ovens.
Nothing can be more striking than the contrast between the
amenity of the scenery in the foreground and the austere
grandeur of the lofty ranges by which it is enclosed. The
serrated ridge which dominates the group is the summit of
Mount f'erthertop, the loftiest mountain in Victoria. It is
7,000 feet above the leyet of the sea, and distant about 200
miles north-west of Melbourne. The district is rich in
mineral treasures ; as, besides gold and tin, diamonds, sap-
phires, rubies, and other precious stones have been discovered.
54. —Hobart Town, from Kangaroo Point, Tasmania.
The situation of the southern capital of Tasmania is almost if not
altogether peerless. Genoa, Naples, and Rio Janeiro may
assert their claims to vie with it in this respect, but it is
doubtful whether nature has done so much for the last three
cities as for the former. Placed at the head of a noble estuary,
and at the foot of a magnificent mountain, and overarched by
a sky of Australian brilliancy, Hobart Town fascinates the
eye of the tourist, and combines all the elements of the
picturesque. Behind it, Mount Wellington rises to an
altitude of more than 4,000 feet, and its gigantic slopes are
covered with forests, extending from its base to the edge of
the bare granitic peaks, which are crested with snow during
the winter months. In front of the city, the Derwent ex-
pands into a lake-like sheet of water, and fringed by undulat-
ing hills dotted with farm houses.
55. — Cabbage Tree Forest, American Creek, New South
Wales.
This scene is situated at a distance of little more than ten miles from
Wollongong, near the junction of the American Creek, and
at the foot of a noble range of mountains ; with the lofty


bangalaw palm, the cabbage palm, the gigantic wild fig tree,
and the fire tree, with its vividly scarlet blossoms, are inter-
mingled, the nettle trees, rosewood, sassafras, and whitewood
trees, numerous varieties of the fern tree, and parasites
innumerable.
56. —The Crater of Mount Gambler, South Australia.
Of the comparatively limited number of extinct volcanoes in
Australia, the above is perhaps the most remarkable, and
to geologists the most interesting. It is not so much a
crater, as a series of craters, about six miles in circumference,
filled with fresh water, and walled in by precipitous rocks of
black lava. These walls vary in height from 200 to 300 feet,
and are sprinkled with the oak, tea tree, and honey-suckle.
The Blue Lake Crater, which is the most distant from the
spectator, is about 240 feet deep, ancj has obtained its name
from the tint of the water, which is as clear as crystal.
57. —Junction of the Buchan and Snowy Rivers , Victoria.
The scene represented in the accompanying drawing is not the
least attractive of the numerous lovely landscapes which
charm the eye of the explorer as he penetrates into the more
secluded districts of Gipps Land. The point of view
selected by the artist is rather more than six miles from what
is known as the Buchan Station, on the road from Gipps
Land to Maneroo, in New South Wales. Faintly indicated
in the distance are the Delicate Mountains, which attain an
altitude of 4,000 feet.
58. — Falls of the First Creek , near Glen Osmond, South
Australia.
The romantic scene depicted in the accompanying sketch is
situated near Glen Osmond, and at the foot of Mount Lofty,
about seven miles from Adelaide, the capital of South
Australia ; the cascade falling over the rugged face of the
rock a sheer descent of 100 feet, and breaking into foam and
spray in the valley beneath, through which it glides away.
Higher up the mountain the same creek forms other pic-
turesque falls ; and, following the stream to its sources, the
excursionist arrives at an eminence, from which he commands
a most extensive prospect, embracing the Port of Adelaide,
the Burra Burra Ranges, the Gulf of St. Vincent, and Yorke
Peninsula. Mount Lofty attains an altitude of 2,100 feet
above the level of the sea. Immense quantities of copper,
iron, lead, and silver are procured in this district.
59. —Sydney Heads. New South Wales.
From the summit of a knoll, on the roadside from Sydney to the
South Head, is visible the lovely prospect depicted by the
artist. The miniature Bay of Vaucluse occupies the fore-
ground to the left, and to the right Watson’s Bay exhibits its
graceful curve. Travelling onwards, the eye rests for a
moment upon the Dunbar Lighthouse ; beyond which, the


narrow entrance to Port Jackson is well defined, and Manly
Beach faintly indicated. The road to the South Head is de-
servedly a favourite drive with the inhabitants of Sydney, and
the stranger passing over it for the first time experiences a
succession of demands upon his admiration. Each bend in
the road discloses to him some new combination of sea and
shore and sky, each lovelier than the last.
60.— 'View from ihe Summit of Mount Lofty, South Australia.
Within an hour’s ride of the city of Adelaide, Mount Lofty offers
to the tourist an easily accessible elevation of about 2,400
feet, from which he commands a prospect of considerable
extent and varied beauty. Eastward stretches an undulating
and heavily-wooded country towards Mount Barker, and
thence on to Lake Alexandra.
•6r. — Mount Ecdes, Normanby, Victoria.
Mount Eccles is about 200 miles west of Melbourne, and belongs
to that great chain of extinct valcanoes which stretches to-
wards the frontier of South Australia. Southward the pros-
pect is hounded by the blue line of sea, and northward by the
faint outline of the Grampians. The crater itself is one of
the most picturesque in the colony of Victoria. The waters
are of a brilliant green, harmonizing with the hjre of the sur-
rounding vegetation.
€2.— Frame , containing scenes in New Caledonia.
— Frame, ditto, ditto.
<4. —Portraits of the last four natives of Tasmania, existing
in the year 1862. (Particulars, see 35.)
<5- —Portrait of one of the last of the Aborigines of Tas-
mania, enlarged.
t>6.—Photograph of the Moon.
Copy of photograph of the Moon, taken with the great Melbourne
Telescope in April, 1872. This print is not enlarged, but
the same size exactly as the picture obtained from the large
1 speculum. It is a copy of a third trial negative. (Signed)
Robt. J. Ellery, Director Melbourne Observatory, May
19th, 1872.
When Daguerre first made known his discovery of sun-pictures,
Arago is recorded to have exclaimed, ‘ ‘ Why, it will map the
Moon.” What may be achieved here is indicated by Mr.
Ellery’s statement that, whereas De la Rue’s famous plates are
taken from negatives three-quarters of an inch in diameter, he
can obtain three-inch telescope views. This picture is the
largest ever yet taken in the world.
€7.- — Frame, containing portraits of the New Caledonians.
<)B. —Portrait of one of the last of the Tasmanian natives,
enlarged.
50
Catalogue of the


68 a. — -Frame, containing portraits of North Australian Abori-
gines, one of a Loyalty Island man,' and one of Miss
Malcolm, the last of the Botany Bay tribe, New South
Wales.
69. —The Avengers.
This painting fully depicts to the mind the horrible massacre that
took place on the station of Mr. Wiles at Nogoa, in Queens-
land, in 1862, when all the Europeans, numbering 18 men,
women, and children, residing on the station, were brutally
murdered by the native tribes (for particulars see Blackfellow.)
70 —Native Police on a Trial.
The blacks of Australia often prove invaluable aids to the police
in tracking criminals, their knowledge of bush-life, and extra-
ordinary skill in tracking, are seldom known to fail. They
will follow the slightest traces of the human presence in any
direction through the bush ; it matters not how many forests
they have to traverse, how many gullies to explore, or rivers
to cross. The scent is often renewed with nothing more than
a broken twig, a turned blade of grass, or a mark quite un-
distinguishable to an European eye, for a guide. In this way
black trackers, under the charge of a police-officer, have been
known to follow for hundreds of miles criminals who have
taken refuge in the bush.
A remarkable instance of their skill and perseverance presents
itself in connection with the apprehension of a publican a few
years back, named Serle, and his servant-man, for the murder
of a gentleman named Bourke, who called at Serle’s Hotel,
at Piggoreet, near Ballarat. Serle, knew Mr. Bourke to
have a large quantity of gold and money in his possession,
from the fact of his going his usual rounds through the gold-
fields weekly, buying up gold for one of the banks in Ballarat,
and being in the habit of staying at Serle’s for refreshments on
his way home. Soon after Mr. Bourke left the hotel on the
afternoon in question, Serle and his man mounted horses, and
taking a cross country bush track, intercepted Mr. Bourke
about ten miles from the hotel, murdered and robbed him.
The police being much puzzled in this matter, called into requisi-
tion the aid of native trackers. Mr. Inspector Stoney then
sent the two horses taken up in connection with the arrest of
§erle and his man, to the scene of the murder, with the view
of giving the trackers an opportunity of minutely examining
the action and foot-prints of the animals.
The black fellows mounted the horses and rode them about for a
while, carefully noting everything relating to their gait, and to
the traces of their foot-marks. Five of the horses’ shoes were
then removed, leaving the heads of the nails in the shoes by
clinching them. After marking the shoes, they were given up
to the black trackers. Starting then from the scene of the
murder, they followed the tracks backwards, to within 300
yards of Serle’s hotel. There, under a log, they found two
51
Australasian Collection.


revolvers wrapped up in an old shawl, which was immediately
identified hy a servant girl at the hotel as belonging to her
master. From this spot the trackers continued on until they
came to the stables in the rear of the hotel, and at once began
to remove the stones which paved one of the stalls, and there
unearthed the whole of the gold and money of which poor
Mr. Bourke had been robbed. It is unnecessary to state that
both Serle and his man were executed in Ballarat.
71. —The Zlg Zag, ascending the Blue Mountains, New South
Wales.
Additional interest will attach to this picture, owing to His
Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh having passed
through this locality, on his way to visit-the Weather Board
Falls. (See illustration 44.) .
7 2. — Corrobcrree.
This picture represents one of the most important ceremonies of
the Australian Aborigines, before the plains and forests of
the continent were visited by the white man. The Corro-
bonee has indeed survived the colonization of Australia, and
has not lost whatever symbolical meaning it possesses. The
Corrohorree, or Yapeen as it is termed by some tribes, is,
unlike the war dance of the North American Indians and
Maories, practised alike in times of peace and of war, and
indeed usually preceding discussions or any action of import-
ance. It is a ceremony common alike to all the tribes of
Australia. A number of natives assemble, each painted with
white and red ochre in the most fantastic manner; the women
seated apart, stretch across their knees dried skins, which they
beat regularly, singing at the same time a monotonous chant to
which the dancers keep time. The dance is thus commenced.
Two men come forward with slow and measured stamp,
keeping time to 'the beating of skins ; others join in the line,
and, soon warming to their work, jump, shout, and yell
in the most hideous manner. The limbs of the savage
group are stretched to their widest extent ; again they leap
into the air simultaneously, their eyes glare with savage fury ;
each line jumping first to one side and then to the other,
and then separate in different directions. The actors in these
strange scenes become frenzied with excitement; each
feature is distorted with ferocious passion, each muscle quivers
with excitement; their eyes glare, from their- mouth comes
froth ; until at last, overcome with fatigue and excitement,
the savages sink to the earth, panting and insensible.
73. —Circumstantial Evidence.
Sheep stealing is of common occurrence when the blacks locate in
thinly populated districts of Australia. This picture portrays
the unsettled and itinerant life of the Aborigines, who require
strict watching if you wish to retain anything in the shape of
farm implements, poultry, pigs, &c.
74. —Falls near Beechworth, Victoria, Australia.
52
Catalogue of the


75- — Fern Tree Gully, Mount Useful, Gipps Land, Victoria.
76. Wannan Falls, Victoria, Australia.
77. — Mount Arapelis (sunset), Victoria, Australia.
78. —The Yarra Yarra River, Studley Park, near Melbourne.
79. —Mount Sturgeon, Victoria, Australia.
80. — Parker’s River Waterfall, Cape Otway, Victoria.
8r. — Refuge Cave, Wilson’s Promontory, East Coast, Aus-
tralia.
82. — Lake Wellington, Gipps Land, Victoria, Australia.
83. — Darga Valley, Gipps Land, Victoria, Australia.
84. — Lake Carangamite, Victoria, Australia,
85. — Cape Schanck, near Melbourne Heads, Victoria.
86. — Hunts Claim on the Thames. New Zealand.
When the little band of hardy and enterprising gold seekers first
pegged out this precipitous and densely timbered gully they
had little thought of the immense golden treasures lying
beneath their feet, or how soon each of the party were to retire
wealthy men. The quantity of gold already unearthed from
this claim is almost fabulous, and, as if inexhaustible, is yield-
ing large fortunes to the present proprietors.
87. — Hunts Claim on the Thames. New Zealand.
This picture shows the claim after having been opened up and in
full work. Same as No. 86.
88. Wood’s Point Gold-fields, Victoria, Australia.
89. Wallalha Gold-fields, Victoria, Australia.
90. — The Lost Bushman.
There are frequent instances in which good bushmen get lost and
perish when once bewildered in the scrub, or on the plain,
away from water, which shows that it is no child’s play to risk
it. And it is not often'.in Australia that we hear of two sane
females voluntarily risking ther lives, by journeying alone,
across an almost unknown and bush country, lying between
the Lachlan and Darling rivers. Carcoar, by way of Forbes,
down the Lachlan, and across the Darling, is a distance of
over 600 miles, being a locality bushrangers sometimes
patronize, and it is well known that they are not so gallant to
ladies as Claude Duval was. A well known hostess, return-
ing from a visit to Carcoar, New South Wales, in company
with a female friend, proposed they should drive themselves
in a buggy. Away they started, regardless of bushrangers
or other dangers, past the locality where recently two unfor-
53
Australasian Collection.


tunate hawkers were murdered, and penetrating the bush into
the almost trackless and waterless uninhabited country, which
for ever 200 miles lies between the rivers Darling and
Lachlan. The two fearless and reckless heroines, in a light
buggy, with one horse, travelled in this manner from Forbes
to Wilcannia in twelve days, arriving at their journey’s end,
jolly, and proud of their achievements. How they had to
camp out at night, how one night they were surrounded by
wild cattle, which could only be kept off by running at them
with fire sticks ; how they started from one of their halting
places to go a distance of ICO miles with only a quart of water;
how, when their poor brute of a horse was unwilling to place
his sore and galled neck to the collar at the commencement
of their day’s stages, one being compelled to lead him while
the other pushed behind; and how at last they arrived at
Wilcannia, after losing themselves when in sight of the
township, is an adventure almost past belief.
91. — Native Sepulchre.
This painting represents another mode the Australian blacks have
of disposing of the dead who are not enemies. They select
a large tree ; if not a lofty one, and in the branches about
12 feet up, they place sheets of bark ; on these they lay the
body, with the face upwards, inclining towards the setting
sun, and over it is placed some boughs and bark, and then
logs as heavy as the branches will bear ; all this being done
to protect the body. Sometimes a running stream is chosen,
across which they erect a kind of bier to lay the body on.
Nevertheless all this precaution does not prevent the native
“dingo ” and birds of prey from finding their way to and de-
vouring the body.
92. — Aurora Australis. As seen in Melbourne, 1852.
93. — Hari Kingi Tribe, New Zealand.
94 to 101. —Scenes in New Zealand.
102. — Discovery of Buckley, thirty-two years a wanderer
amongst the Aborigines of the then unexplored country-
round Port Philip, now the Province of Victoria.
103. —Portrait of Buckley.
William Buckley was bom in the year 1780, in the county of
Cheshire, England. At an early age he enlisted for a soldier,
afterwards volunteering into the Fourth (or King’s Own)
Regiment of Foot. Shortly afterwards the regiment em-
barked for Holland, when His Royal Highness the Duke of
York was at the head of the army. In a battle fought in that
, country, Buckley was severely wounded. Buckley’s unusual
height (6ft. sin.) naturally predisposed his officers in his
favour. Unfortunately he became associated with several
bad characters in the regiment, which soon led him into
riotous dissipation. He was apprehended as being implicated
54
Catalogue of the


in an offence rendering him liable to punishment. He was
tried, found guilty, and sentenced to transportation. Shortly
an opportunity was afforded him of retrieving his character.
This was by the determination of the British Government to
found a settlement at Port Philip, in the South-East of
Australia, in 1803. Buckley being a mechanic, was selected,
and sailed in the ship. Calcutta, Lieutenant-Colonel Collins
being appointed Governor. The voyage ended, the Cal-
cutta anchored inside Port Philip Heads. In a short time
the marines and prisoners landed, and formed an encamp-
ment. Here Buckley and two other prisoners effected
their escape, but shortly separating from his companions
in flight, fell in with the native tribes, who at once
adopted him and treated him with much kindness. Governor
Collins, soon after his arrival at Port Philip, saw the im-
practicability of colonizing the place, determined to abandon
it, and removing the whole of the establishment on board, set
sail and formed the present city of Hobart Town, Tasmania.
In the year 1835 another attempt was made to colonize Port
Philip, and proved successful, although many dangers
beset the pioneers, owing to the native tribes being so
numerous and daring. The discovery of Buckley proved
most fortunate for the new arrivals. He was in the interior
with the tribes, when observing some natives one day coming
along with a red handkerchief on a stick, asked them where
they procured it. The black told him a ship had come, but
she was now gone. The next piece of intelligence was
alarming, one man saying they were in search of another
tribe to enable them to kill the white men more easily.
“That night,” says Buckley, “was one of great anxiety
to me,” he not knowing how to apprise the strangers of their
perilous situation without danger. So when the men who
brought the intelligence had left the trihe with whom he
had lived so many years, Buckley determined on hazarding
his own life for their protection. He hastened off on his
journey to where the strangers were, about thirty miles dis-
tant,' the weather being very cold and tempestuous. At
length he sighted a long pole, with the British colours fly-
ing upon it, and also a camp. Presently some of the
natives saw him, and pointed him out to the white men.
Buckley having his hunting implements with him—spears,
boomerang, and club—the white men could not make him
out, his half-cast colour and extraordinary height and figure
confounding them as to his real character. “At length,”
says Buckley, “ one of them came and asked me some ques-
tions, which I could not understand ; but when he offered me
bread, calling it by its name, a cloud appeared to pass over
my brain, and I soon repeated that and other English words
after him. My sensations that night I cannot describe, and
before I closed my eyes I offered up to God fervent prayers
for my deliverance, after having been a wanderer for 32 years
among the native tribes. " The remainder is soon told. A
pardon being procured for him, he remained with the whites
55
Australasian Collection.


as an interpreter and guide, and rendered much service to-
the settlers hy enabling them to ward off and repel the attacks,
contemplated by the blacks.
104, 105, rod, 107, 108, 109. — City of Melbourne Celebrities.
INSECTS.
This collection of insects includes many new and valuable
species of coleopterous, carnivorous, and luminous beetles, also
others of great brilliancy. The family scaraboeidcß will prove
specially interesting to collectors, as also the very fine examples
of iepidcpiera, from. North and East Australia. Entomologists
will perceive that the various orders comprising coleoptera,
kcmiptera, lepidcpiera, neuroptera, hymenoptera, diptera, and
aptera, have not been strictly adhered to, but this time alone
will remedy. In the order orthoptera will be found splendid
examples of the mantis, phasma, and locustida, tribes, one giant
specimen of the locust from New Caledonia, sauterelle being
particularly worthy of notice. In the class myriapoda will be
found very fine specimens of the scolopendrm, or centipede from
New South Wales.
1. This case contains those species of beetles commonly
known as lady-birds, corn-weevils, and tortoise beetles.
2. Case of Moths.
The smaller speciesin this case are only procurable in the evening,
they locating in underscmb and long kangaroo grass.
3. —Case containing many rare and beautiful species of but-
terflies, peculiar to Cape York and New Guinea.
4. —ln this case will be found a large variety of the wood
bug, and rare species of water beetles.
5. —The splendid examples of lepidoptera in this .case were
reared from the caterpillar. They feed upon the leaves
of the hlue gum, and chrysalis in its branches.
6. —The Mack Moths, so strikingly marked with yellow
bands, are opposite in character to most of their species,
being diurnal in their habits, and difficult to procure.
7. —The beautiful order buprestis is well represented. This
case contains many new varieties.
56
Catalogue of. the


8. —Contains many beautiful species of butterflies, only pro-
curable at Cape York and New Guinea.
9 . Wasps, Bees, and Hornets.
10. —In this case will be found some splendid specimens of
the mantis or animated straw.
n. — Butterflies, exquisite for beauty and rarity, from Victoria
and New South Wales.
12. — Grasshoppers. South Australia.
13. —ln this case will be found several new and valuable
species of scarabceidce from New South Wales.
14. —A number of new species of the ichneumon and other
flies will interest the collector in this division.
15. —The beautiful clear-wing and other lepidoptera, possess-
ing great beauty, will be found in this case, and cannot
fail to attract the notice of visitors.
16. —Examples of rare butterflies from North Australia and
Cape York.
17. — Longicornes.
This splendid collection of coleoptera contains several new species
procured in New South Wales.
18. —White and spotted butterflies, principally from the
colonies of Victoria and Queensland.
19. — Cicadce, or tree hoppers.
Are abundant throughout Australia, many species being armed
with an Ovipositor, which enables the female to deposit her
eggs in the trunk and limbs of trees.
20. — Phasma.
This beautiful order of insects are only procurable during the summer
months. They feed on the leaves of the young gum tree, and
fall to the ground and feign death if the tree is shaken.
21. —The lovely insects contained in this case were reared
from the caterpillar, and feed upon the gebong shrub.
The proprietor has never met with this insect outside
the colony of New South Wales.
22. —The dragon flies contained in this case were procured
in New South Wales and Victoria.
23. —The very beautiful and rare coleoptera in this case will
interest the connoisseur. They feed upon the young
gum.
57
Australasian Collection.


24. —The splendid specimens of butterflies displayed in this
case were reared by the collector in New South Wales.
They feed and chrysalis on the orange and wild lemon
trees.
25. —Moths of great beauty and rarity.
2S. — Cocooris eggs, and chrysalids of moths, butterflies, and
other insects bred by the collector.
AUSTRALIAN BIRDS’ EGGS—LAND & AQUATIC.
This division contains about 300 species, and includes many
specimens never before brought to Europe.
Case r. —Among the exhibits in this case will be found very
fine specimens of the eggs of the black eagle, native
companion, eagle hawks, emu, land rails, plovers, cocka-
toos, thrushes, magpies, and goat suckers.
Case 2 contains eggs of the black swan, quails, pectoral
quails, magpies, larks, owls, wild geese, shrikes, and
ground larks.
Case 3. —This case includes eggs of wild ducks, oyster
catchers, mutton birds, sea eagles, cormorants, pelicans,-
' gulls, and albatros.
Case 4. —This case contains eggs of the mallee hen, wild turkey,
bustard, lowan birds, blue wren, whip birds, fire tail, red
heads, and achanthisa.
Case 5.— In this case will be found the eggs of the butcher
bird, soldier bird, black magpie, and wood swallows.
CONCHOLOGY—SHELLS.
The collections in land and marine shells, displayed in the
Australian Gallery, are pronounced by competent judges to be
one of the finest (and certainly the most extensive and varied),
ever brought to Europe. These collections include many new
and rare species in volutes. Giant specimens of the v.
fnatgnifiat; beautiful examples of the Cyprma Aurora; the
morning dawn shell of amateur conchologists, together with
many new varieties of Cardiums, Seraphs, Trigonia’s, and
58
■Catalogue of the


several new species in land shells, viz.. Helix, Bulimus, and
Pupina.
The collections comprise—Case x, Partridge and Tretons;
2, Muricidce, 6rc.; 3, Volutes, arc.; 4, Phasianella, <Src.; 5,
Turbo’s, arc.; 6, Trigonia’s, arc.; Venus, arc., arc.; 7, Cowries,
arc.; 8, Olives; 9, Cerithiunis and Turritella, Ore.; 10, Car-
diums; 11, Fusus, Grc.; 12, Cardiums, Ire.; 13, Cones, 6rc.;
14, Harpa, arc.; 15, Haliotis, lire.; 16, Fissurella, Patella,
Chitons, <Src.; 17, Pimta, Pectons, 6rc.; 18, JVdssa, Solarium, 6rc.;
19, Area, Vnio, arc.; 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, land or snail sheHs;
25 contains splendid specimens of the Cristagalli, Valuta,
Mammilla, and Water-Spondylus.
CRUSTACEA—CORALS AND MADRIPORES.
i to n. —The visitor, in passing the order Crustacea, will be
astonished with the varied and extraordinary size of some
of the specimens; for instance, the Pseudocarcinus, a
species of Gigas. Neptunus, Peiagicus, and Acklous-
crassimanus taken from Parramatta River. Upon the
whole this department will well repay a visit.
12. —Sponges from the South Pacific.
13. Case containing Hippocampus and Starfishes, from
Tasmania and New Caledonia.
14. —Case containing a beautiful specimen of Coraline.
15. —Red Coral, from the seas round the Island of Fiji,
South Pacific.
17. —Corals, Madripores, &c., from South Seas.
18. —Case containing 16 varieties of beautiful corals, South
Pacific ,Seas.
REPTILES AND OTHER OBJECTS.
Much information has yet to be collected respecting the
•snakes found in Australia; many described as species have
since been found to be the young of one species. The majority
of Australian snakes are highly venomous, and should be
avoided by those whose occupation is continually in the bush;
59
Australasian Collection.


yet bushmea tike but little notice of them, even when in close
proximity to them. In some localities they abound in hun-
dreds; at a distance of four miles only from Sydney I
have started as many as twenty-five black snakes in one
day, some of' them eight feet in length. In this district the
death adder abounds, their bite often proving fatal to man.
1. —Death Adder, Acanthopis Antarctica.
This is very common reptile in New South Wales, abounding in
the Ranwick district, four miles from Sydney. It is highly
venomous, and death frequently ensues from its bite. It is
naoied Tammin hy the natives.
2. —Tiger Srtithe.
This highly venomous snake is very abundant in the colony of
yictoria. Three years ago a man named Shires, who was in
the- habit of visiting public-houses about Melbourne and per-
forming with tiger snakes, was importuned by Mr. Drummond,
police-magistrate in Victoria, and requested to be bitten on
the wrist. Shires at first would not consent. Being ten-
dered half-a-sovereign, and Mr. Drummond telling him that
he wished to try what efficacy there was in a snake bite,
Shires consented, and permitted one of his tiger snakes to
fasten on to Mr. Drummond’s wrist. Shires at once applied
his antidote, hut without effect, and became alarmed at what
he had done. The effects of the bite at once began to appear:
Mr, Drummond, becoming sick and faint, died in the
greatest agony on the following morning. Shires was tried
. for manslaughter, and acquitted.
3. —Death Adder. Queensland.
4.. —Black Snake, Pseudechys Porphyriacus.
This reptile is venomous, and very numerous throughout Aus-
tralia. The natives call it “ Bnlhuk.”
$. — Chameleon. Fiji, South Pacific Islands.
6. —Brown Snake, Hoplocephalus Supurbus.
This venomous species is abundant in the colonies of New South
Wales and Victoria. “Jaruk” of the natives.
f. —Fan Foot Geeko. Queensland, Australia.
8. —Carpet Snake, Morelia, Variegata.
Some confusion has taken place respecting these snakes ; hut it is
now certain that the range of the carpet snake is limited to
the northern parts of Australia. These snakes are perfectly
harmless, and, like the true boas, capture their prey from the
ground without leaving the tree.
9. Superciliosa, a species of brown snake.
This reptile causes serious and fatal accidents to men, horses, and
cattle. It abounds in New South Wales.


ro.— lguana. Victoria, Australia.
11. —Death Adder, Acanthopis Antarctica.
These reptiles are very abundant around Sydney.
is. —Diamond Snake, Morelia Spilotes.
These beautiful reptiles are dotted over the back with bright
yellow spots upon a bluish black ground, each diamond form-
ing a group of five or six spots together. These snakes are
very abundant about Sydney, New South Wales.
13. — Black Banded Sea Snake, Lapemis Curtis.
Snakes of this family inhabit the sea, and are occasionally found
thrown upon the shore by gales. They are a very handsome
snake, and, although said to be venomous, many other species
are perfectly harmless, with no appearance of poison fangs.
Eastern shores of Australia.
14. — Lizards, from New South Wales.
15. —Small Van Foot Geeko. North-East Australia.
16. — Lizards. Victoria.
17. —Whip Snake.
These snakes are highly venomous. New South Wales.
18. — Frogs. Queensland.
19. —Tree Snake, Dipsas Fusca.
This snake is quite harmless, and is very common about the woods
and gardens in the environs of Sydney.
20. —-Banded Sea Snake, Lapemis Curtis.
This reptile is venomous, and is occasionally procured on the
eastern shores of New South Wales.
21. —Black and White Ringed Sea Snake.
These beautiful reptiles are quite harmless, and are procured in the
seas around the islands of Fiji, South Pacific.
22. —Same as No. 2r.
23. — Black Banded Pelamis.
This snake does not possess any poison fangs. They are occa-
sionally washed up by the sea on the eastern coast of Aus-
tralia.
24. — Lizard. Queensland.
25. — Sea Snake. (See No. 13.)
26. — Kangaroo (young taken from the pouch), New South
Wales.


27, 28. — Devil Lizard, Moloch Horridus.
This wonderful reptile comes from North Australia. These
specimens are hut rarely procured. They are harmless, and
can be easily tamed.
29. Diamond Snake. (See No. 12.)
30. —Tonge and eggs of the Yaranus, Varanus, Bellii, New
Holland.
31. —Centipedes, Scolopendrce.
These formidable looking insects are from Queensland, Australia.
When a person is bitten by a centipede, the usual extreme
measures have to he taken, as in the case of snake bite. I
have known death to occur from their bite.
32. —Black Snake, beautiful variety. (See 4.)
3 3. —Whip Snake.
These reptiles are one of the worst species of snakes to be met
with. They are highly venomous, and not perceptible in
long grass or underbrush. They abound in New South
Wales and Queensland.
34. —Sea Horse, hippocampus, from Tasmania.
35. —Whip Snake, Diemansia Reticulaia. (See 33.)
36. —Silver Streak Lizard, New South Wales.
37. —Snake Lizard, Pseudopus Pallasii.
In this genus the limbs are imperfect, and scarcely developed.
These serpent-like reptiles inhabit the north-eastern portion of
Australia.
38. —Morelia Spilotes.
This very beautiful reptile is limited to the east coast of Australia,
and is perfectly harmless.
39. —Flying Mouse, Victoria, Australia.
40. —Lizard, New South Wales.
41. —Whip Snake possessing poisonous fangs, but with little
power to harm man, on account of their diminutive
size. New South Wales.
42. —Whip Snake. (See 33.)
It frequently happens these reptiles find their way into houses in
Sydney and other towns, owing to their secreting themselves
in legs of wood, brought in by carters as fuel.


43. —Whip Snake.
Underwood, the snake charmer in Victoria, came by his death
from the bite of this very snake, while performing with it in
the presence of the medical faculty of- the colony. Under-
wood allowed this little reptile to bite him on his
cheek, for the only one reason, viz., that of convincing the
doctors of the great curing properties contained in his anti-
dote, the sale of which always bringing him in a handsome
return. In this case, the antidote was useless, his head and
face swelling up to enormous dimensions, and he died in a
few hours. This snake Underwood permitted to bite a fowl,
and saved its life by the application of the antidote only a few
moments before.
44. —Turtle (Young). From North Australia.
45. —Tree Snake. Dipsus Fusca.
This perfectly harmless snake is very common about Sydney.
46. —Whip Snake, Hoplocephalus Nigreseens, is very rare in
Australia.
FERNS, SEA-WEEDS, &c., &c.
At the extreme right of the Australian Gallery will be found
hundreds of beautifully prepared specimens of ferns and
sea-weeds, which cannot fail to interest botanists and others
taking an interest in this delightful study.


THE MODEL OF BALLARAT
AND SURROUNDING GOLDFIELDS.
The Largest Model in the World (dimensions 21 ft. by 16 ft.); con-
structed upon a scale of 20 ft. to the inch, and is a perfect miniature of the
City of Ballarat and outlying Goldfields, containing upwards of twenty
thousand faithful representations of Churches, Banks, Hotels, Houses,
Tents, and Stores; all being fashioned with great care, and with due
regard to design, colour, and measurement. Every structure on Ballarat is
seen as distinctly as if you stood before it in its real substantial form.
The red flags studded on the surface of the model indicate the course of
the alluvial gold drift; the blue flags, the auriferous quartz veins.
THE “WELCOME STRANGER”
Was found by two men named John Deason and Richard Oates, on Friday,
February sth, 1869, near the Black Reef, Bull-dog Gully, Moliagul, and
near the celebrated Gypsey Diggings. Deason and his mate had got, in
digging parlance, so “hard-up” as to have been refused credit for a few
pounds of flour the same morning. Deason, in working round the roots of
a tree, struck something hard with a pick, and exclaimed, “D it, I
wish it was a nugget.” The object of his dearest wishes lay at his feet,
weighing 2,329 oz. iB dwt. 5 grs.
THE WELCOME NUGGET,
Found by a party of twenty-four, at Bakery Hill, Ballarat, Victoria, at a
depth of 180 feet, apparently waterworn. Previous to finding this great
nugget, the same party met with smaller ones, weighing from twelve to
forty-five ounces. It was first sold in Ballarat for ,£10,500, its weight
being 2,195 ounces. It was melted in London, November, 1859.
CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS, CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.




