

A CHANGE
DELIVERED AT HIS
PRIMARY VISITATION
OF -THE DIOCESE
OK JULY 10m 1884/
ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L.,
LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
METROPOLITAN OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND PRIMATE OF AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA.
Sufciug :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 354, GEORGE STREET.
Price One Shilling




A CHARGE
DELIVERED AT HIS
PRIMARY VISITATIO N
OF THE DIOCESE
m juiy iom im,
ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L.,
LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
METROPOLITAN OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND PRIMATE OF AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA.
JSgtJneg:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 351, GEORGE STREET.




K 3355( FeZ/r&’IZS
A CHARGE.
My Reverend Brethren, —
On subjects of general Church life and work — The piacti-
especially on such as most press upon us at this thL P Charge.° f
moment—l have already had the opportunity of
speaking in my address to the Synod. On some
of the deeper truths which' lie at the root of
our own spiritual life and our ministerial duty in
general, many of us had the blessing of mutual
conference in this Church not many weeks ago.
But it seemed well to take advantage of your pre-
sence here in Sydney at this time, first, to greet
you formally as the clergy of the diocese, and
then to suggest for your consideration some
thoughts of a practical kind, bearing upon the
actual character and conditions of our ministerial
work ; as they have been shadowed out to me in
general in the Visitation returns just received,
and as you know them in each parish by personal
experience. It is, after all, in these that the
larger questions, elsewhere considered, assume a
definite intelligible shape; it is through these
that the deeper realities of Christian faith and
life manifest themselves in visible power. How
often is much of real spiritual earnestness, in-
valuable and often irrecoverable, wasted for want
of such direction, as larger experience—sometimes


the more instructive because won under different
conditions—may supply, especially to those who
are just entering on the Ministry ! How often,
as I well know, is one who is working single-
handed in some remote district, with little oppor-
tunity of conference with his brethren, glad to
throw some of his responsibility on those who
occupy places of authority, and who are bound, so
far as God bestows upon them light and grace, to
give advice and exhortation for the common work
of our Master.
In these convictions it is that I address you to-
day. Taking for granted the great principles of
our mission and work, I will simply endeavour to
dwell, as I have already hinted, on some practi-
cal points, which seem to me urgent at this pre-
sent time, and on which there may sometimes be
forgetfulness or mistake. I speak largely by way
of advice, rather than authoritative direction, on
the work near the hearts of us all. “ The elders
I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of
Jesus Christ.” God grant me grace rightly to
speak and you rightly to hear !
(I.) First, in relation to ministerial labour in
general, the circumstances, even the difficulties,
of Church life here seem to bring home to us
very forcibly what is the true position of each
pastor in his parish. It is a position of leader-
ship, which he may not abdicate, yet a leadership
which has to draw after it the willing hearts and
lives of the people. “Not as lords over God’s
heritage, but as eusamples to the flock,” as in
4


personal faith and holiness, so also in that work for
our Lord Jesus Christ, which touches both
the body and the soul, which claims both this
world and the next. To lead is not to drive;
yet to lead is not to hesitate and stand still.
In all that touches the essence of our directly
ministerial duty—in the faithful preaching of
God’s Word, the bold, serious rebuke of sin, the
solemn pleading against unbelief—in the minis-
tration of the Sacraments of Christ, in the
opportunities given for Divine worship with all
reverence and order, in the obedience to the laws
of the Church, simple, and leaving large room
for individual and local development,—in all this
we are responsible to Christ, and to Christ alone.
We may not fear the face of man ; we must not
shrink, if need be, from facing obloquy,
estrangement, or even the persecution which in
essence never dies. In doing that solemn duty,
you, my brethren, may freely and confidently
claim all support that higher Church authority
can give you. I will add that —at any rate, in the
long run—the right Christian feeling of our
people at large, and even the natural respect felt
by all for bold, steady persistence in duty, will
support the claim of right independence ; nay
will even distinguish it from the baser admix-
tures of personal feeling, pride, obstinacy, which,
through our human frailty, may mingle with it,
as the clay with the iron of Daniel’s great
vision.
5


But in all that is simply of the form and
manner of working,—in all that touches the
fabrics, the services, the ritual of the Church, so
far as this goes beyond what is absolutely
enjoined—in all that belongs to the working of
parochial institutions, the administration of
parochial funds, the promotion of the general
well-being of the parish—here, while it is still
ours in many things to initiate and to lead
(unless we think that the initiative may be more
wisely left in other hands), we must use all
endeavour, endure some delays, make some
sacrifices, in order to secure a willing adhesion
and co-operation of all Churchmen. Many
things are good in themselves, which yet are not
worth fighting for, and are dearly purchased at
the cost of offence and division. There is a right
tenderness for old associations, even for honest
prejudices, which are bound up, however mis-
takenly, with religious earnestness ; and, after
all, if our desire be good and right, “ All things
come to those who know how to wait ” —just so
so long as it is needful to wait, and no more.
Public opinion, if it moves slowly, moves on the
whole surely and soundly ; and there is, besides,
some readiness to defer to the conscientious
desire of those who in little things know how to
yield. Strong as is my desire for the right
independence of the clergy, I believe that sub-
stantialty it is in their hands to secure it, under
all difficulties and disadvantages—if only they
show that they desire it simply for the work’s
6


sake—if they earn it by priority in devotion, in
sacrifice, and in faith.—if they respect the right
independence of others, and are content to bear
with the difficulties, which are a cheap price to
pay for freedom and energy of lay Christianity.
(II.) And now passing from this general con- n. Church
sideration to special forms of ministerial duty, 1 1
must touch naturally in the first instance upon
the Services of our churches. Yon must have
noticed in men’s ordinary way of speaking and
thinking of these Services, how disproportionate
a stress is laid on preaching—that is, on the
manifestation of God in the Word—in comparison
with the correlative idea of worship, and even
with the conception of the other manifestation of
God in the ministration of His grace. How many
in onr churches sit to listen, and hardly ever
kneel to pray ? How many seem to think that,
except in the actual Service itself, there is no call
for silence and reverence in the house of God ?
How seldom in our churches here do we find that
short but solemn pause at the close of the Service,
which commends the soul to God in silent devo-
tion ! How often is there an unwise careless-
ness, as of things of little consequence, in relation
to the decency, order, and beauty of that which
belongs to the worship of God, as worship ! Are
we clergy ourselves quite free from blame in this
As I glance over the returns sent in but re- week-day
cently, I notice how comparatively scanty is the
provision for week-day and for daily Services, and HoiyOommu-
* J J ; mon.
7


for the administration of the Holy Communion.
I do not speak of the large country parishes,
where the life of the clergy is very much that of
evangelists, visiting continually outlying churches
and stations, and where perhaps there is no popu-
lation gathered round the church to be served by
frequent services. But in Sydney and other
large towns should it not be remembered that in
our Prayer-book the Daily Service is emphatically
laid down as a rule, not to be set aside without
grave cause, and that the obvious idea of our
Communion office is that the celebration of the
Holy Communion should be the natural crown
and perfection of our Sunday and Festival services
at least? If it is said that daily Services gather
but small congregations, I cannot but remember
our Lord’s special blessing, on “two or three
gathered together in His nameand believing in
the efficacy of intercessory prayer, I cannot but
believe in the blessing drawn down on the parish,
and on those of its people who cannot gather for
daily worship. If it is said that they tax too
much the strength of our hard-worked clergy and
interfere with practical duty, I must answer that
in them there should be not labour but spiritual
refreshment, and that they are generally found
in the very parishes which, to say the least,
are not least efficient. If it is ever thought that
frequency of Holy Communion diminishes its
solemnity, I think all experience shows that,
where it is, there is always the largest number of
communicants, and generally the most solemn


and devout communions. But beyond all this it
has always seemed to me that these things belong
to the rights of parishioners, and that, if even a
few claim them for their spiritual life, they ought
to have them.*
Our “ shortened Service,” as it is called, under
the amended law of the Church of England, makes
the daily Service an easier and a much more
edifying thing; and I myself should be prepared
to construe in the widest possible sense the leave
which is given to the Ordinary to authorize for
special occasions, and perhaps special needs,
shorter and more varied Services from Holy
Scripture and from the Prayer-book. As to the
times of ministration of the Holy Communion,
surely all possible liberty should be given. I
cannot hold “ fasting Communion,” as it is called,
to have any right whatever to claim to be a law
of obligation. While personally, wherever it
may be, I prefer the early Communion of primi-
tive precedent, and while I regard Evening Com-
munion in particular as an irregular variation
from Church practice, which ought to show cause
to justify itself,f I think that the one question to
* I am unwilling to lay any excessive work on our overburdened
clergy ; but I must express my conviction that frequent Week-day
Services —one Service at least, if possible, daily—and celebration of
the Holy Communion on the Sundays and Festivals, should be the
rule in all town parishes ; and my earnest hope that, before we meet
again next year, some considerable progress may have been made
towards carrying out that rule. In this point, as in others, the Cathedral
will, 1 trust, take the lead.
f I may say at once that, so far as I can judge, that justification
is often found, in the fact that many, especially in the poorer classes,
are practically unable to attend except in the Evening, and in the
experience, which shows that Evening Communions are freely and
devoutly attended,
9


be asked is, 11 When and how can we best gather a
full band of communicants in devout spiritual
frame of mind, without scandal or profanation ?”
and that by the answer to that question our course
should be determined. Our Lord simply com-
manded the memorial of Himself for all the mem-
bers of His Church; and no consideration what-
ever should be allowed to limit the fullest and
freest obedience to this His sacred command.
Earnestly, therefore, I commend to vour con-
sideration what is our duty in this matter—
whether we shall ever sufficiently hold up the
great idea of worship—whether we shall ade-
quately rise to the spirit of the most ancient and
purest days of Christianity—if our churches are
shut up almost entirely between Sunday and Sun-
day, and the Holy Table of the Lord but rarely
spread. Happily, in this matter there is no
weight in the distinctions of school or party ; all
of us acknowledge the blessing of Common
Prayer ; all of us love the Communion of the Holy
Table. May we not even learn a lesson from those
without? The strength of Roman Catholicism
as a religious power lies, I believe, not in its
peculiarities of system and doctrine against
which, as corruptions and usurpations, we feel
bound earnestly to protest—but in the fact that
its churches are always open as the spiritual homes
of the people, and the Services are continually
embodying the unceasing duty of worship. We
who delight to have given back to the people the
privilege of really common prayer in their own
10


tongue, and to have turned the solitary mass into
a communion, in all the fulness in which Christ
ordaioedit—ought we to be behindhand in the free
opening of our churches for public worship, and,
I will add—especially for the sake of the poor
whose homes hardly deserve the name—for pri-
vate prayer ?
And while I speak of the Services of the opening of
churches more
Church, I cannot but glance in passing at another freely to ail.
subject—the opening of our Churches more freely
to the poor. lam not prepared to advocate the
free and open Church system, as a matter of uni-
versal rule, even of universal expediency. As
against appropriation, it fails to secure to parish-
ioners, as distinct from strangers, their primary
i ight in the churches. In view of financial neces-
sity, it may not be possible to rely solely on the
fluctuating and precarious resources of collections
in church. If I am correctly informed, our
Church Act recognises distinctly the existence of
the rights of pewholders. But yet I cannot
but think the appropriation of our churches
is tolerable only under these conditions :
first, that a considerable number of places—our
Church Act provides a minimum of one-sixth—
shall be free and open to all; secondly, that no
places shall be kept reserved for a single moment
after the beginning of the organ voluntary before
service ; and thirdly, that, wherever it is possible,
there shall be occasional Services, or one Service
each Sunday, in which the Church may be absolutely
free. It is useless to disguise from ourselves the


fact that the poor will not go to churches, whore
they can obtain places only by favour or on suf-
ferance, and that—as even experience in Sydney
shows —the free and open churches are those
which they most willingly throng. If our
Church is in any way to be a Church open to all,
we must do something towards practically realiz-
ing a freer and more generous system. Of course
I know well that this is not in the hands of the
clergy. Both old laws and modern necessities
recognise here especially the churchwardens as
representatives of the parish and congregation.
But yet it is a matter on which the clergy have
deep interest and no slight influence ; and there-
fore I venture to commend it to your thoughts
to-day. *
Here, perhaps, I may appropriately say a few
words as to the prevailing desire for shorter and
more varied Services, and for the improvement of
all that surrounds our Services with decency and
beauty. Both desires are, I think, natural and
good ; but only provided that they are kept in
their right secondary place. The main object in
the Service of God is not to be easy and attrac-
tive, demanding no sacrifice, calling for no exer-
tion of spirit, pleasant as a refined excitement,
learning even to rival the amusements which dis-
tract the soul. It is quite possible to idolize
* I would suggest immediate conference with the Churchwardens
in this important matter, especially where the provision of free
sittings is inadequate. It is one of those cases, in which a bold
policy, risking something for the sake of what is clearly right, will,
lam convinced, justify itself. I hope that here also the returns of
next year may mark no inconsiderable progress.
12


shortness,* easiness, and what men call “bright-
ness.” It is quite possible to make our worship
a worship of imagination, not of the mind and
spirit. It is quite possible to forget that there is
a power in simplicity, as well as in beauty and ful-
ness of ceremonial. But I do not think that as
yet we are in any serious danger in these
respects.
As to variety of services, it may be well con- variation of
tender! that the Church of England has in her our Servlces ’
worship practically a greater uniformity than
almost any other Christian body. The Presby-
terian and other Protestant churches have their
variable Services ; even in the Roman Catholic
Church, if there is an elaborate Service, yet (as I
think Bishop Thirlwall pointed out), the mass of
the worshippers merely “ assist at it” in general,
and each has his own private book of prayer or
his own private devotion. We shall not do
wrong to introduce as much variation as we may.
Our Prayer Book has been of simply priceless
value as a standard of faith as well as devotion;
it would be madness to put it in any way aside.
But variation with its limits, and supplement, so
* In connection with this idea of shortening Services at all costs,
I cannot but refer to the practice in some of our Churches of pro-
nouncing the words of Administration but once to a whole rail-full
of Communicants. Not only, is it, as I need hardly say, directly at
variance with the express order of the Prayer book, but it destroys
the stress laid on the individual and personal Communion of the soul
with Christ, in which lies so much of the solemnity and beauty of
the words themselves. No fear of tediousness can justify it. It is
true that it imposes additional labour on us Clergy, from which we
shall hardly shrink ; but for the Communicants themselves the
pauses before and after approach to the Holy Table are among the
most precious opportunities for private devotion. If, however, the
length of the Services constitutes difficulty, why should we not
shorten by a few minutes the Morning Sermon 1


far as may be, in its spirit—these I feel sure we
may freely and gladly use.
As to the advancement to all that surrounds
God’s service with beauty and solemnity—the
provision of churches (now I rejoice to see going
on) of greater architectural beauty and dignity,
built under a truer conception of what the service
of the Church requires—the improvement of the
music of our choirs, which has so marvellously
advanced in England, and in which (to say the
truth) I fear that we are perhaps behind not only
the old country, but even some of our sister
colonial churches—here also we need, I think,
have no fear to advance. Happily we have out-
grown, or are rapidly outgrowing, the idea that
these things belong to this or that party. I hope
we are coming to understand that in their right
places they never hinder, and often help, true
spiritual devotion. Everywhere in secular things
we see the advance from humble beginnings. In
our public buildings palatial grandeur replaces the
humble simplicity of early days. In respect to
private houses, you have but to sail round our
harbour, and note the beautiful villas and the
stately mansions rising at every point. Why
should there not be similar advance in respect to
our offerings to God ? Why should our churches
show a bareness and an ugliness, which elsewhere
we have left behind? “Has God” (as Hooker
has it) “ anywhere declared that it is His pleasure
to live beggarly ?”
14


(III.) But I pass on from the Services of the m.preaching
Church to the preaching of the Word. Nothing,
I trust, which I have said will be held to detract
in any way from the infinite importance of preach-
ing, and the infinite pains which its sacred res-
ponsibility demands. The sermon is still for the
mass of the people—and for them it is mainly in-
tended—the one chief means of religious instruc-
tion. It is, perhaps, even the chief medium,
through which what may be called in the higher
sense of the word ‘‘ideas” come home to their
minds. In spite of the prolific growth of cheap
literature, in spite of the great and varied power
of the newspaper press—which, no doubt, now
assume some of the work and influence once be-
longing to the pulpit—still I believe that it is
difficult to exaggerate the importance of the word
spoken; and it may well be that its power has
rather changed its direction, than diminished in
reality. Whatever may be said in popular de-
preciation of sermons, experience proves that the
addition of a sermon to a service invariably in-
creases the number of the congregation ; and that,
in the case of the servants as of the Master, “ the
common people hear them gladly.”
In relation to this important part of our duty p rac ti ca i S u g .
1 ask your serious attention. Let me take for gestlons-
granted the sense of its sacred responsibility, and
of the need of an inspiration of God’s grace if we
are to rise to it. Let me dwell only on certain
practical points. I would plead for the bestowal
of real study upon the substance of a sermon, as


distinguished from elaboration of its style, which
often mars the effectiveness of the spoken word.
I would remind you that a sermon, which has to
be listened to, not read, by a large congregation,
not a chosen few, should be in the true sense
simple, with but one or two leading ideas,
thoroughly worked out and driven home. I
would urge next the making a sermon not an
essay or oration hung on the text as on a peg,
but a real unfolding of the idea of the text and
context in the Word of God. I would venture
to suggest that the element of teaching, as dis-
tinct from exhortation, should assume a greater
prominence than it is usually the fashion to give
it; and accordingly that preachers, following the
guidance of the Apostolic teaching in the New
Testament, should not be afraid of clear and
thoughtful exposition of doctrine, in right har-
mony and indissoluble connection with enforce-
ment of practical duty, and appeal to religious
enthusiam. I would not advise that the teach-
ing of the pulpit should leave untouched the
great principles of political and social duty ; but
I would have it kept clear from party and sec-
tional struggles, free from bitterness of con-
troversy, and from the dangerous use of ridicule
and sarcasm. If it be well to speak to the times,
yet, as the saintly Archbishop Leighton pleaded,
it is still better to speak to eternity. And similarly,
while all pompous and conventional phraseology
should be shunned as artificial, yet surely the
dignity of a message from God forbids vulgarism
and over-familiarity.


And, here, popular feeling notwithstanding, I The written
. -| i-| -| « , and mrwrit-
must hold that there are pecuhar powers and ten Sermon,
advantages both in the written and unwritten
sermon. JSTo sermon, of course, should ever he
read ; written or unwritten, it should be so in the
mind and the heart of the utterer, that it can be
freely preached. But, especially to educated
hearers and for the purpose of teaching, there is
much to be said for the greater terseness, co-
herence, accuracy, and force of the sermon
written; as to a less educated congregation, and
in appeal to emotion, there is much in the
greater freedom and warmth of the unwritten.
Each man here, as elsewhere, has his own gift;
each occasion that which is specially fitted for
it. There can be nothing more painful than the
halting hesitation, or the empty fluency, of those
who, without the gift, think themselves bound to
preach without book. There can be nothing
more ineffective than the read and laboured
essay, where the spoken word alone can do the
work needful.
But, however this may be, the one thing need- The true
ful and all important is that the sermon should Oll of the
be our best and truest utterance of that which
God has put into our hearts. It is given to few
to be eloquent, original in thought, deep in learn-
ing, brilliant in imagination, masters of felicity
of expression. But all may be, if they will,
thoughtful and earnest, drawing both from the
deep fountain of God’s word, and from the living
stream of human experience; and they who so


preach, under God’s blessing, will never preach
in vain.
iv. Practi- (lY.j From such preaching there is a natural
cal Work, transition to practical work; and here, taking
for granted that which all will prize and attempt
—the diligent pastoral visitation, and the invalu-
able work of Sunday schools, and Confirmation,
Guilds or and Bible classes—l would ask those of you
Institutes in . . *1
towns. whose lot is cast in our towns to consider whether
far more might not be done in each parish by the
formation there of parochial institutes, guilds,
associations —call them what you will—for
mutual improvement and for common church
work, for study and wholesome amusement, and
above all for free Christian intercourse; and I
would even go on to suggest whether out of these
might not grow some larger central institute for
the whole city and its suburbs—some such associa-
tion of lay helpers as has worked so much infinite
good in the great diocese of London. They need
not in any sense rival or supersede wider associa-
tions, whether on the basis of common humanity
or common Christianity. But how infinitely such
parochial institutes would help the promotion
locally of temperance and social purity; how
greatly they would further better mutual know-
ledge and affection between clergy and people,
and between various classes of society ; how much
might they do to help on young men, especially
those who arc living alone without the blessing
and the guardianship of home influence; how
certainly they would yield an unfailing supply


of church workers, Sunday-school teachers,
district visitors and the like ! I have been, I
may say, in passing, struck with the dispropor-
tionately small number of boys and young men
brought to Confirmation. Might not such Insti-
tutes as I have shadowed out do much to bring
these more directly under pastoral influence, and
by Christian fellowship help them against the
false shame, which so often keeps them back from
open Christian profession ? All that gives to
each parish unity of life and feeling, all that
brings parishes together in one diocesan bond,
valuable as it is at all times and everywhere, is
surely of priceless value here, and in this present
time.*
On the other hand, to those whose work is in in countryd£
the wide and thinly peopled districts of the tricts *
country, with more churches than they can fully
serve, more stations than they can rightly visit,
I would suggest, though I cannot speak with
any weight of experience, whether there is not
need of what I may call a localized lay agency,
as distinguished from the evangelistic service,
which at so much cost of self-denying labour our
few Lay-readers now do. There may be perhaps
many places where there might be found godly
laymen, of sufficient education and social influ-
ence, of sufficient enthusiasm for God and love
* These Parochial Institutes might probably serve to unite the
various agencies for good—the Temperance Society, the Young Men’s
Institute, the Sunday School Institute, and the like —-of which I re-
joice to see Branch Associations springing up in various parishes. They
might also provide Parochial Libraries and Reading-rooms, with
classes for both religious and general study, and with opportunities
of meeting for devotion or for discussion of Church matters.


of men’s souls, to undertake, under the direction
of the parish clergyman, to supply his place in
some degree in the church and parish when he
is absent, and lo help him when he is present.
They might, like our Catechists, receive some
ministerial stipend ; they might be, like our Lay-
readers, givers of gratuitous service. jSTot with-
out careful inquiry should they he set apart and
commissioned for their work. Of such mission
it would he of course, my duty to take the re-
sponsibility. But I invite on this point counsel
from the thought and experience of the parochial
clergy, and on such counsel I should he prepared
to act. For one thing appears clear, that to some
extent in this diocese, though probably to a
greater extent in others, only by some organized
lay help can we really cover the great and often
thinly peopled spaces committed to our charge.*
(Y.) And now, having touched upon the three
branches of pastoral duty, —the Church service,
the preaching and teaching, and the parochial
work, —I desire, in conclusion, to glance at two
more general subjects, which the circumstances
of the times press upon us.
The first is the question of the religious educa-
tion of the younger generation, on which the
* It appears to be beyond question that organized Lay-agency,
both of men and women, needs a far larger development than it has
yet received. On the organization of Women’s work, the Committee
appointed by the Synod will, I trust, give us valualble information
and suggestion. Meanwhile, in the special form, to which I have re-
ferred, Lay-agency might be tried at once, and I hope for speedy com-
munication upon it from the clergy of the country districts. Such or-
ganizations would, of course, not check, but rather stimulate, the less
regular lay work of those who can spare but little time, which is of
peculiar value to “him who gives,” as well as to “him who takes.”
20


immediate future of this rapidly growing colony
depends. On the duty of the Church to this in
general I have already spoken in the Synod, and
I need not speak again. But to you, my brethren,
I desire to say how thankful I am to learn that
you are labouring so earnestly in this great duty,
and how deep is my conviction that it is imposs-
ible to give too much time, even at the cost of
other labours, to this most fruitful and needful
work. All agencies must be used to the utmost.
Our Sunday schools, more fully systematized,
leading up to Confirmation classes, and I will
add, Communicants’ classes, should be centres
of Christian influence and unfettered teach-
ing, not only in the supreme knowledge of
Holy Scripture, but in our Prayer-book, and
(wherever it may be) in the simple history of the
Christian Church in general, and our own in par-
ticular. Might we not do more for our scholars,
and secure higher and fuller aid of teachers,
if we attempted a larger and more varied work ?
In our own Day schools, where we still have
them, be it ours to use fostering care and en-
couragement, without unwise interference with
the teacher, and endeavour to deepen in them
what is their only claim to separate existence—
the reality of religious tone and high moral con-
dition. In the Public Schools I rejoice to know
that, over and above our other voluntary and
paid teachers, no less than 63 out of some
80 incumbents of our parishes are already at
work. I cannot but feel great pride, and greater


thankfulness, in the knowledge that our own
Church has confessedly taken, as she was bound
to take, the lead in this arduous and all-important
work. All I would urge is that it be still further
advanced and systematized under the guidance of
the central committee, which has, as you will
remember, the authority of the Synod. What-
ever may be the issue of the present direction of
public attention to the subject —whatever may be
done otherwise for the religious teaching of our
Public schools -it is certain that our work here
must have real force and vitality, and witness,
not for ourselves or our Church, but for our Lord
Himself, to the children whom He loved.
The other subject is the right method of
practically dealing with the doubt and unbelief,
often showing itself openly in our community,
oftener smouldering below the surface. The key,
I think, to practical treatment lies in full know-
ledge of the various forms, blended perplexingly
together, in the disease itself. There is an un-
belief of sheer ignorance, either absolute ignor-
ance, or the ignorance which does not understand
what the essence of Christianity is, and mistakes
human systems of explanation for the living truth
itself. There is an unbelief of carelessness,
worldliness, and sin, which both unfit mens souls
for any spiritual aspirations and knowledge, and
make them desire to ignore religion, lest it should
rebuke and disturb the baser life which they have
chosen. There is the unbelief of what may be
rightly called Eationalism—impatient of all
22


mystery, denying any province of faith as faith;
claiming, not only to apprehend, but to compre-
hend all the secrets of the universe and humanity,
and of the Supreme Power which rules both.
There is the unbelief of pure Scepticism, often
now of an Agnostic form, content with a lifelong
suspension of belief, demanding a kind of evi-
dence which cannot, from the nature of the case,
be given ; and because God cannot be perfectly
known, contending that He is absolutely unknow-
able. There is, lastly, the unbelief which would
gladly believe, but is repelled by difficulties—
sometimes speculative, but oftener moral diffi-
culties—in the Gospel itself, or in the orthodox
exposition of it. These various forms of unbelief
are distinct in character, though in practice they
often melt into each other. To deal with all to-
gether. or all on the same system, is false and
O / *
unscientific treatment of spiritual disease.
What shall we do ? It is necessary for the
Church of Christ at large to grapple resolutely
with them all. Ho amount of practical work, of
spiritual devotion, even of positive teaching, can
dispense her from this painful but urgent duty.
But it is not possible, nor is it needful, that every
minister of Christ shall meet them all. With
some, and these the most important, we can all
deal. The unbelief of ignorance we can meet by
study and teaching, up to the best of our ability,
of true Christianity in its simplicity and right
proportion of faith. The ignorance of worldiness
and sin we must meet by solemn warning, by
23


stern rebuke, and by the earnest entreaty of love
which our Lord Himself taught us. The other
forms, unless they so force themselves on us that we
cannot put them aside, must be dealt with by those
who have thought, ability, and learning, each
again with its own peculiar treatment. Against
Rationalism we have to dwell on the necessity
and the universal existence of mystery; we have
to assert as a great law of human nature the law
of faith; we have to show grounds for claiming
the culminating exhibition of that law of faith
for the Lord Jesus Christ. Against unlimited
Scepticism we must plead as an unnatural and
false condition of soul on subjects of high moral
and spiritual import; show (as Butler did of old)
what kind of evidence we have a right to ask, and
how such evidence is given. With unwilling
difficulties of belief we must deal in special
sympathy and tenderness; showing how many of
them attach to popular Christian teaching rather
than to Christianity itself ; showing how far they
touch the essence and how far the accessories of
the Gospel; teaching men to balance against them
the overwhelming preponderance of the positive
grounds of faith, and to understand how often
they indicate simply that imperfection of our pre-
sent knowledge, which the Hew Testament so
frankly avows.
I do not think we need fear these things;
history teaches us how often they have appeared
to threaten, and have passed away, leaving the
rock of truth unshaken by all the surges which
24


have assailed it. I think we can see how again
and again they have been overruled for good, by
clearing away much rubbish which had encum-
bered the truth, and by forcing us to consider
more deeply what that truth really is. Nor can
one who holds the unchanged position of Chris-
tian faith fail to see how often the enemies des-
troy each other, and the unbelief of to-day ex-
plodes the unbelief of yesterday. After all, the
most effective weapon against them is the positive
teaching of Christian truth, and the manifestation
of the moral power of Christian life. In that wit-
ness the humblest minister or member of the
church of Christ may take his part.
(YI.) These, my reverend brethren, arethepoints
—few out of many —which it seemed my duty to
commend to-day to your serious and devotional
thought. I draw to an end this address with the
words in which St. Paul ended that farewell at
Miletus which has been the ideal model of all Pas-
toral addresses : —“ Now, brethren, 1 commend
you to God and to the word of His grace, which
is able to build up.” Where can we realize that
commendation so deeply as at the Holy Table of
our Lord, which calls us now? There let us
solemnly dedicate ourselves as a living sacrifice to
His service. There let us find the closest bond of
the Communion of Saints, which binds all His ser-
vants, living and dead, together in Him. Above
all, there let us find His presence, which is the
new life of our souls ; for there let us so spiri-
tually eat His flesh and drink His blood, that we
may dwell in Him and He in us.
25


