

THE DEAD FLY
IN THJ?
APOTHECARY’S OINTMENT;
THE REASON WHY PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH UNION IN AUSTRALIA
HAS HITHERTO PROVED A FAILURE;
.A. LIB T TIB IRy
TO THS
REV. JAMES BEGG, D.D., &0., &c. f
EDINBURGH,
BY mwn BTOMBEI LAM, AM., Be®.,
Senior Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney, and one of the Representatives of the City of Sydney
in the Parliament of New South Wales; Honorary Member of the African Institute
of France, of the American Oriental Society, and of the Literary Institute
of Olinda in the Brazils.
GLASGOW:
GEORGE GALLIE, 99 BUCHANAN STREET.
1861.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


Just Published , hy the same Author ,
QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA ; a highly eligible field for
Emigration, and the future Cotton field of Great Britain.
With a disquisition on the origin, manners, and customs
of the Aborigines. E. Stanford, 6 Charing Cross,
London.


THIB BBA.B FLT
IN THE APOTHECARY’S OINTMENT.
Rev. and Dear Sir,
As I have been given to understand that the
subject of Presbyterian Church Union in Australia has recently been
exciting considerable interest among the ministers of the Free Church,
and is likely to be dealt with in some way or other by your General
Assembly at its next meeting, in connection with the case of the Rev.
Mr. Miller of Melbourne and his brethren in Victoria, I take this oppor-
tunity, as the senior minister of the Presbyterian Church in the Austra-
lian Colonies, to apprise you and your brethren of certain facts and
circumstances in the past history of that Church which have hitherto, I
conceive, been culpably ignored by those whose bounden duty it was to
have taken cognizance of them, both here and in Australia, but which
must now be exposed to the light of day, and dealt with agreeably to
the principles of our Presbyterian polity and our common Christianity ;
otherwise Presbyterian Church Union in Australia will long continue
to be, what it has hitherto proved, an utter failure.
I need not inform you that, about thirty-nine years ago, when I first
went to Australia as an ordained minister of the Church of Scotland —
of my own accord, and at my own charges—that Church was entirely
destitute of a missionary spirit, and took no interest whatever in the
spiritual welfare and advancement of the colonies. I had consequently to
come home myself again and again, at a serious expense, for men to co-
operate with me as fellow-labourers in our vast and unoccupied field;
but I need scarcely inform you that the men who went to the colonies in
those days, “to be put into the priests’ office to eat a piece of bread,”
were, almost exclusively, men who had no prospects at home —the lame,
and the halt, and the blind —and not unfrequently men even of damaged
reputation. In the year 1834, immediately after ray return from one
of my visits to England, I was appointed by our Presbytery one of a


committee of three to go to Bathurst, a distance of 120 miles from
Sydney, to investigate a flagrant case of intemperance on the part of one
of our ministers in that locality ;* so flagrant, indeed, that the late Rev.
Mr Marsden, the principal (Episcopal) chaplain of New South Wales, had
observed that if the Presbyterian Church did not inquire into it, and act
accordingly, its character would be ruined in the colony for ever. But
neither of the other two committee men would stir a step in the matter —
they were quite willing to let the Church sink or swim as it might—and
I had consequently to go alone. What could Ido in such circumstances
in accordance with our Presbyterian Church polity ? I felt I could do
nothing. But I heard —as it was my duty to do—what the people had
to say in detailing the repeated instances of gross intemperance which
their pastor had exhibited under their own eyes. I then called on the
unhappy man and told him all I had heard ; adding that the people had
informed me they would pay him his stipulated salary till the first of
January following, but no longer; and as the government salary
he received depended upon his getting an equal amount from the people,
it would necessarily be discontinued also. „ I attached, as a matter of
course, no weight whatever to his denial of the truth of all I had heard;
for it had been told me by people of a comparatively high standing in
society, and with the deepest regret; and when he asked me what he
should do in the circumstances, I told him his only course was to resign
his charge. He then asked me to write him the formula of resignation,
which I did accordingly, and he signed it at once.
I had the same melancholy duty to discharge during the following
year in Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land, seven hundred miles from
Sydney, whither I had gone to preach at the opening of the Scots
Church in that city, and to assist in forming a Presbytery in the colony.
A day or two, however, before my arrival, a charge of flagrant immorality
of a different character had been unexpectedly preferred against the mini-
ster of the church, who had been a licentiate of the Secession, and whom
I had actually gone to assist in admitting into the Presbytery in due
form. The charge was investigated by the Governor in person—the late
Sir George Arthur, a Christian man, who had himself been in the habit
of attending at the Scots Church once every Sabbath. “ I entered upon
the investigation,” observed his Excellency, “ with the kindest feelings
towards Mr , and I finished it with the deepest disgust.” I
called upon the fallen man immediately thereafter; and when he asked
me what I would advise him to do, I told him, as in the Bathurst case,
that his only course was to resign his charge; which he did accordingly,
signing the formula which I drew up for him at his own request. All
parties concerned, both in New South Wales and in Van Diemen’s
Land, were highly gratified at the manner in which both of these cases of
clerical delinquency had thus been disposed of. It may be asked,
* It was the second offence of the kind, the alleged delinquent having been re-
moved for the first from the district of Hunter’s River, only a few weeks after his
arrival in the Colony in the year 1831.


indeed, what right had I to advise either of these ministers to resign ?
If they ivere guilty, why not bring them to trial and prove their guilt ?
But there was no Presbytery at the time in Van Diemen s Land to tiy
the minister of Hobart Town, even if he had been a licentiate of the
Church of Scotland, which he was not; and the Presbytery of New
South Wales was ab agendo , as I have shown, from the unfaithfulness of
the other two committee men.*
In the year 1836, there were five Presbyterian Ministers in New South
Wales—myself, the senior minister, and the late Rev. Dr M‘Garvie, who
was then forming a second church in Sydney; one at Maitland, Hunter s
River, who had been recommended to me by the Rev. Dr Willis, now of
Toronto in Canada one at Windsor, about 40 miles from Sydney, and
one the Rev. K. D. Smythe at Bathurst; my congregation at the time
being larger than all the other four put together. Unfortunately, however,
two charges of intemperance, both of a very flagrant character, were
preferred almost simultaneously against the Ministers of Maitland and
Windsor; and as Mr Smythe, an empty, pretentious, aristocratic sort of
person, refused to come to Sydney to examine into these charges, while
Dr M‘Garvie, in conformity with the tactics of the old Moderate party in
Scotland, resisted all enquiry, there was no power of discipline remain-
ing in the Colonial Presbyterian Church, and its enemies loudly predicted
its speedy and utter extinction,
* In these circumstances, as the Colony then presented, inconsequence
of certain liberal measures of the government of the period, a highly favour-
able field for church and school extension, I resolved to proceed for the
fourth time to Europe, to get as large a supply as possible both of
ministers and schoolmasters for the Presbyterian Church; and I return-
ed accordingly during the following year with not fewer than twelve
ministers and fifteen schoolmasters. Four of these ministers were from
the Synod of Ulster ; for whom, as the General Assembly’s Committee
refused to grant the number I applied for, I obtained from the Govern-
ment the same advantages, in the way of passage and outfit, as were
then granted to ministers of the Church of Scotland proceeding to the
Australian Colonies ; for which I received the thanks of the Synod of
Ulster. And as a famine was raging at the time in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland, and the Rev. Dr M‘Leod, of Glasgow, had gone to
London as one of a deputation, to solicit aid from the Government to send
* A purse of sovereigns was collected by ray family in Sydney for tbe minister from
Bathurst on his leaving the colony for Scotland; and as I had endorsed a promissory
note for £2O to the late Maurice Ogle of Glasgow, for a case of theological books
with which he had supplied him when he went out in 1831, but for which he had
never paid, I had to pay the amount, with interest and expenses, (£3O altogether), on
one of my subsequent visits to the mother country. It was rather hard, after all this,
to be traduced as I was at a great rate by both of these clerical sinners, as if I had
been the cause of their misfortunes, in ridding the Church of their presence.
■f I happened to meet Dr Willis in Glasgow on my next visit to Europe, in 1 836,
and asked him how he came to palm upon me a man of known intemperate habits ?
He acknowledged that he was aware of the fact, but hoped he would reform in Aus-
tralia 1 Dr Willis’s unfaithfulness on that occasion cost mo a voyage to England.


a number of the starving Highlanders to Canada —which Lord Glenelg,
who was then Secretary of State for the Colonies informed him he
had no power to do, as there were no funds available for the purpose—l
suggested that the poor Highlanders should be sent to Australia, where
there was a fund arising from the sale of Crown Land, directly and
immediately available. After some negociation on the subject, my
suggestion was found by the Cabinet, to which it had been referred by
Lord Glenelg, to be well founded and was accordingly adopted; and the
result was an emigration during the three following years of about 4000
Highlanders to New South Wales and Port-Phillip, in eighteen ships;
several of which, in accordance with another suggestion of mine, had
ministers of religion sent out with the Highlanders at the expense of
the Land Fund of the Colony.
During my absence, however, a most unexpected and, as it proved in
its consequences, disastrous event had taken place in the Colony. The
Rev. Dr M‘Garvie—who had refused to go to Bathurst, as one of the
members of the Committee to investigate the case of alleged delinquency
there, and who had resisted all enquiry in Sydney in the two cases I
have just mentioned—was a person of superior ability as a literary man ;
but he had unfortunately no higher idea of a minister of the Gospel
than that of a moral police functionary of the State, who had certain
duties to discharge for his regular and accustomed pay from the
Treasury, and who was to wear a black uniform instead of a blue.
When my excellent friend, the late Rev. Dr Mac Gill, of the University of
Glasgow, brought forward his famous motion in the General Assembly,
nearly forty years ago, to prevent the late Principal Macfarlan from
holding his Academical office in conjunction with his ministerial charge,
Dr M‘Garvie, who was then an obscure licentiate, wrote a series of able
anonymous letters in the Glasgow Chronicle of the day, in defence of
the Principal and pluralities; and for this goOd service he afterwards
received his Academical degree. By extreme and offensive penurious-
ness, and by lending money at a high rate of interest, he had accumu-
lated a fortune, it was said, of not less than Thirteen Thousand Pounds,
when he died suddenly in the year 1853; leaving his accumulations to
people in the humblest walks of life, and without the credit of having
ever performed one generous action either during his life or at his death.
As a specimen of the man let a single example suffice: When I was absent
from the colony on the mission to which I have adverted in the years
1836 and 1837, my place was supplied, not by an ordained minister
but by a licentiate, Avho could not of course baptize or marry. And
because a few additional baptisms and marriages thus devolved on Dr
M‘Garvie, he applied for and actually received from the Government
a portion of the half salary to which I was entitled as a functionary of
the colony absent on leave.
During my absence in England in the circumstances I have stated,
Dr M‘Garvie, who was left by the other ministers to do as he thought
proper in the matter, applied to the Legislative Council exproprio niotu ,


to pass an Act, to be called the Presbyterian Church Temporalities
Act, which was to bind the church in fetters of iron for all time
coming; and discreditable as it was to the members of Council at the
time, including the late Bishop Broughton, who was personally hostile
to myself, it was passed accordingly. By this Act, the character of
the church was completely changed from what it had been before I left
the Colony; and I refused, in such circumstances, along with the majority
of the ministers who had come out with me, to re-enter into it.
I need not detail the measures that were taken at the time to ensure
our ecclesiastical freedom. They resulted in another voyage to England,
which I was requested to take in thqjear 1839. To heal the breach
which had thus been made, and to restore peace to the Church, I sug-
gested to the Earl of Nonnanby, who was Secretary of State for the
Colonies on ray arrival in England, that Her Majesty should simply be
recommended to veto the Presbyterian Church Temporalities Act, which
she had power to do within two years from the period of its passing in
the Colony. My letter, with this proposal, was sent down for their
opinion to the General Assembly’s Colonial Committee in Edinburgh, of
which the Magnus Apollo of the period was Alexander Dunlop, Esq.,
Advocate, now M.P. for my native town of Greenock. And Mr. Dun-
lop having given it as his opinion that Her Majesty should not be
advised to veto the Act, it was retained accordingly. It was the most
fatal advice, as I informed him afterwards, that that gentleman ever gave
for the character and interests of the Free Church of Scotland.
Sir John Bowring informs us in his account of his visit to the Philip-
pine Islands that the natives of these islands have a proverb to this
effect: “ A fool knows much more about his own house than a wise
man does about other people’s.” Now, taking it for granted that I was an
absolute fool, and Mr Dunlop the embodiment of perfect wisdom, I must
have been supposed to know much more about the interests and wants
of our Australian ecclesiastical house than this soi disant Solomon at
the ends of the earth. Had my advice been taken in the matter, the
breach would very soon have been healed; and when the famous disrup-
tion took place in Scotland, a simple vote of the majority would have
determined the future course to be pursued, and no loss either of place or
of character would have been sustained in any quarter. But Mr Dunlop’s
bad advice in this crisis occasioned not fewer than three disruptions in
New South Wales, and three in Victoria; condemned the Colonial
Presbyterian Church to a long period of helpless and hopeless ineffi-
ciency, and made the majority of its ministers for a time the laughing
stock of the religious world.
Before returning to the Colony from England, I paid a visit, in the
year 1840, to the United States of America, to satisfy myself as to
whether the Christian religion in its best and purest forms could subsist
without support from the State; for I saw, from the signs of the
times, that the existing connection was not destined to be lasting in
Australia. I visited eleven of the States during my stay, and em-


bodied ray experience and observations in a work entitled Religion and
Education in America; which, as it showed that Christianity require
no support from the State, gave great offence at the rime both at home
and abroad, and stimulated and prepared certain parties in the Colony
for any measures of hostility towards myself. The opportunity was
not long awanting, , , , . n *
Parin' 1- the ten years previous I had expended a pretty large Colonial
fortune of my own, consisting of valuable property which ray family had
acquired at a comparatively early period m our Colonial history, in
founding an Academical Institution in Sydney for the general education
of youth, and especially for training up candidates for the ministry m
the Presbyterian Church. This Institution was visited m the year
1838, by the Honourable Sir William Burton, now President of the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, and late Chief Justice of
Madras, and the following is an extract of the account he gave of it in a
work on the Colony which he published in England:
‘‘ The number of students in the College during the year 1838. ww Hth,»
number, 32 attended the Latin classes—one class, the third, were reading .y,
“Sfa, I lectures, illustrated by experiments, are deli-
t «„h/ectfnrLcr bed on which the students write by way of exercise; of
observation and reflection, particularly interesting am u■ > number of
natural bent of the minds of the pupils; each being at liberty, out ot a numoer o
subjects pi - oposed, to write upon that which he chose.
On my return to the Colony in March 1841, I found that.this Instl-
tntion, which I had left in so flourishing a state, had m the mtcival
been brought to the verge of ruin. The three masters, who were
licentiates of the Church of Scotland, having m a period of unusual
excitement in the Colony, embarked largely in sheep and cattle and
land speculations, their pupils and students were neglected, and the
Institution fell to the ground. It was necessary therefore, with a
view to the training of candidates for the Ministry in the Colony, ta
make a great effort for its revival; and accordingly, m the month of
October 18-11, I proceeded to Port Phillip and \an Diemen s Land,
and succeeded in raising among the Presbyterians of both of these
Colonies, to co-operate with those of New South V ales, £4OO a yeai
for four years for the support of Professors to be engaged m this work
in our revived institution; one gentleman, in Van Diemen s Land, con-
tributing for the purpose £35 a-year. But without condescending to


take even the slightest notice of this greatest service that had ever been
rendered to the Colonial Presbyterian Church, my biethren of the Synod of
Australia actually preferred a formal charge against me for leaving my
post without due authority. 1 had been absent only five Sabbaths, and
my place was well and acceptably supplied during my absence ;* I had
also got the express sanction of the Kirk Session and the Committee of
Management, and nothing more was required under our ecclesiastical
law. Nay, more than one of the men w r ho made themselves active in
prosecuting this charge had been absent themselves from their stations
for months together, without providing any supply, while looking after
their sheep and cattle in distant parts of the Colony.
Convinced as 1 was from this and various other manifestations of a
similar kind that it was utterly hopeless to carry out the objects of a
Christian church in conjunction with such men, and unwilling to bo
any longer identified with a latitudinarian and infidel system that ex-
tended its patronage alike to truth and error, and comprehended within
its ample embrace Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Methodists, Uni-
tarians and Jews, I determined to renounce all further connection with
the Synod of Australia, to leave the Colony altogether and to proceed
to New Zealand, which I had visited on my way to England in 1839,
and there form a Presbyterian Church on a more Scriptural foundation.
I accordingly announced this intention to my congregation in an address
which I delivered from the pulpit on the 6th of Feb., 1842, and which
was afterwards published on the 9th of that month, in the Colonial
Observer, a weekly paper then published in Sydney. And as that
address was subsequently made the pretext for certain enormous and
iniquitous ecclesiastical proceedings, of which the Free Church virtually
assumed the responsibility, by admitting certain of the actors into its
body without question and without enquiry, although warned of the
fact, it will not be undeserving of your attention. See Appendix A.
My congregation strongly protested against my leaving them and
going to New Zealand; and at a public meeting, held on the 22d of
February, they renounced all connection with the Synod of Australia,
and all further claim to the salary they had previously received for their
minister from the State, resolving thenceforth to support the ordinances
of religion by their own private contributions. In these circumstances
I agreed to remain as their pastor. My letter of resignation to the'
Presbytery of Sydney, explanatory of the grounds of my procedure,
will be found in Appendix B; and my letter to Governor Sir George
Gipps, resigning all further claim to ray salary from the State, from and
after the Ist of April, 1842, in Appendix C.
The position which I and ray congregation took up in thus renouncing
all further connection with the Synod of Australia, was precisely similar
to that which was taken up about the same period by the Kev. D. K.
* On two of these Sabbaths, my pulpit was supplied by the Eev. Mr M‘Kean, who
was afterwards accidentally shot by the French in a skirmish with the natives of
Tahiti. He was then on his way to the Islands.


Drummond of Edinburgh and the Kev. Sir William Dunbar of Aberdeen,
two regularly ordained ministers of the Church of England; who, finding,
after having signed a bond of union with the Scottish Episcopal Church,
that they could no longer continue in the exercise of Christian freedom,
or with a safe conscience, in that Church, renounced all further con-
nection with it, and stood thenceforth on their English ordination. Nei-
ther I nor my congregation had any quarrel at the time with the Church
of Scotland, and we had no desire to separate from its communion ; but
our longer continuance in the Synod of Australia, under then existing
circumstances, was utterly intolerable.
The state of utter disorganization into which the Colonial Presbyterian
Church had fallen at that time (through Mr. Dunlop’s Act exclusively)
may be judged of from the fact that in the year of my withdiawai
(1842) other two regularly ordained ministers of that Church, the Rev.
James Allan and the Rev. John Gregor, withdrew from it also—with-
out, however, either stating their reasons or even notifying the fact
and declared in the presence of the congregation of the principal
Episcopal Church in Sydney that they'were moved by the Holy Ghost
to renounce the errors of their past Presbyterian ways, and to accept
re-ordination at the hands of a Puseyite bishop !
No notice whatever was ever taken by the Synod of this grave and
serious offence. Oh, no!—they never mentioned it! far be it fiom
me to condemn the Synod for this ; for knowing, as I did, the character
of the men, and their utter unfitness for the ministerial office in any
church or communion under the sun, I considered their withdrawal in
any wav from the Presbyterian Church a happy riddance something
almost deserving a vote of thanks.
One might have supposed in such circumstances that the minor
offence of my withdrawal would have been passed over in a somewhat
similar way. But there were men in the Synod who were determined,
if possible, to ruin and degrade me in the estimation of the public, and
to seize upon the valuable church and other property which I had created
for the public, principally, through the sacrifice of my own. And let it
not be supposed that there is anything strange or unparalleled in this.
The members of the Synod at that period were for the most part very
inferior men; and Madame de Stacl informs ns that the strongest
antipathy in nature is that of inferior men towards those who are in any
way superior to themselves. At a meeting of Presbyterian ministers
and elders, held in Edinburgh fourteen years ago, 1 was asked by the
secretary of a Mission Committee, a man evidently of a narrow mind
and weak intellect, whether it was not true that 1 had at one time
carried out to Australia a large number of ministers, and that they had
all turned against me; and if so, why it was so ? I told him in reply
that it was true I had carried out a number of ministers, but it was not
true that they had all turned against me, although most of them had.
But taking it for granted that they had all done so, before answering
his question I would beg to ask him another ; “ Why, then, was it that


a minister of the Gospel whom we all profess to take as our example in
all things—one who planted far more churches, and settled far more
ministers in Asia Minor, than I had ever done in Australasia—was,
nevertheless, constrained to acknowledge in a letter to his own con-
fidential friend, ‘ This thou Tcnowest that all they ivhich are of Asia be
turned away from me , of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.’ ” Of
course there was no answering such a question as this. The fact is,
if men follow, however humbly and however far behind, the noble and
disinterested steps of the glorious apostle of the Gentiles, they must lay
their account with a somewhat similar experience at the hands of the
remarkably inferior and unprincipled men with whom they will neces-
sarily come into contact. Who, for instance, should ever have heard of
that insignificant tinker, Alexander the coppersmith, had he not been
condemned to an immortality of infamy for his heartless and unprin-
cipled treatment of the Apostle Paul ?
The idea of preferring a formal charge against me on the ground of
my published address to ray congregation, and proceeding upon it to
the last extremity of the ecclesiastical law, was the joint device of two
members of the Synod, whose proceedings in the matter were charac-
terised by a degree of malice on the one hand and of downright nefari-
ousness on the other, for which, they would, in any ordinary case, have
been indictable for a conspiracy, and which I am happy to say, are un-
paralleled in the annals of the Presbyterian Church in any other part of
the world: for, referring as Ido to the form of process instituted by
the General Assembly of 1707, there is nothing for which that church
is more remarkably distinguished than for the equity and justice that
pervades the whole of its legislation in regard to proceedings against
ministers.
The two members of the Synod who got up the charge against me
were the Rev. John Tait of Parramatta, and the Rev. James (now Dr)
Fullerton of Sydney ; both of whom owed their position in the Colony
entirely to me. Mr Tait had previous to his emigration been a town
missionary in Greenock. He was a person of very meagre intellect;
his want of real ability being compensated by pomposity and affecta-
tion. His undisguised and unprovoked hostility to myself had been
exhibited in a great variety of instances, and his envy and malignity
were equally evident and offensive. Nature had certainly intended him
for a Dominican Inquisitor.
The Rev. James (now Dr) Fullerton was one of the four Ulster men,
who I must say were all remarkably inferior specimens of clerical hu-
manity, and no credit to the Synod that sent them to Australia. Dr
Fullerton is one of the poorest preachers I have ever heard. It was
absolutely painful to listen to his drivelling, when it came to his turn to
preach on the passage out. He had been starving on Twenty-seven
Pounds a-year from the people at a place called Benburb in Ireland, in
addition to Seventy Pounds of Regium Donum, when 1 procured
£l5O for him from our Land Fund for his outfit and passage to


Australia, with the prospect of a settlement in New South W ales. l;o
was clerk of the Synod of Australia at this period of my narrative, and
had represented some time before to some clerical trieud in the Noitli
of Ireland how much it would conduce to the honour and gloiy of that
office if he could obtain an Academical Degree. His friend had some
time after been on a missionary tour in Scotland, when the Chuich of
Scotland was in the midst of its struggle with the oluutaries, and whe n
countenance and assistance even from Ireland were not to be despised.
So having reached the city of Aberdeen and represented the case to the
Senate of the University there, the Degree of LL.D. was sent out to
the Rev. Clerk of the Synod of Australia These particulars were all
related to me in his own house by tiie late Rev. Mr Muu ay, of the
North Church, Aberdeen, who had had them very shortly before direct
from the parties themselves. Unfortunately it is nut the only instance
in which the Northern University has prostituted its honours.
The following extract of the evidence in chief of the Rev Dr Fuller-
ton, when examined on oath before theJVlaster in Equity in New South
Wales, in a case arising out of these proceedings, now before the Privy
Council, will show with what extreme regularity, and with what scrupu-
lous observance N of all the laws of the church the prosecution against mo
for the alleged offence of slandering the brethren was conducted
“ 1 was a member of the Presbytery of Sydney in 1842. A roll is kept containing
the names of the members of the Presbytery. Dr. Lang was present at the meeting
of the Pre.-by tery of Sydney as a member thereof on the sth Jauuary 1842. . .n aa
Dr. Lang vacated his office of Presbyter, which, you say, he held in January, 1842.
prior to the second of August, 1842? Dr Lang sent in his resignation, which the Pres-
bytery refused to accept. He had not then been deposed —By Mr. Cary Do you
know whether a libel was adopted by the Presbytery against Dr. Lang ? A libel was
presented by the moderator and clerk (who bad been instructed to prepare it at a
fo mer meeting) which libel was considered seriatim on the 12th of July by the Pies-
bytery, amended, and finally adopted. What was done on the adoption of the libel ?
The Presbytery instructed me as moderator to prepare a correct copy of the libel, and
serve it on Dr Lang. . . . The citation was on the 15th July, and the reiurn on
the 2d August ... Dr. Lang was then three times called at the door of the
Church, and on his failing to appear, the Presbytery instructed the moderator to
summon him to appear before the Presbytery at the next meeting in St. Andrew a
Church— Elimination resumed, 23d December, 1857: I produce the record, of the
proceedings of the Presbytery of Sydney in the case of Dr Lang. The first action in
Dr Lang’s case occurred in the Presbytery, on the Ist of March 1842, when a letter
from Dr Lang was read, in which he declared his intention of separating from the
Synod of A ustralia, and expressed his determination to hold the Church property.
Whereupon the Presbytery appo nted a committee, consisting of the Kev. John tait,
Thomas Barker, I sq., and Dr Hill, t<> confer with Dr. Lang, respecting his proposal
to separate himself from tho Synod, and also rejecting var ous attacks upon the
character of var ous members of the Court which had been published by him Iho
next act of the Presbytery was to libel Dr. Lang. The libel (Exhibit OC) was drawn
up according to the styles, and agreed to, and was ordered to be served upon Dr
Lan". . . . The citation was returnable on the 2d August, 1842. On the 2nd
August Dr Lang was again called three times, and not having appeared the 1 resby-
terl directed him to be cited a third time . . . '1 ho next meeting was held in
Si Andrew’s Church, on 4th October, 1842, when Dr Lang was again called three
times and having failed to appear, the Presbytery found him ymlty by conjessi n. 1
was present at the several meetings of the Presbytery mentioned in my evidence
Kxamination resumed, 3d February, 1858: There was nothing done in tho 1 res-
b. tery with reference to Dr. Lang after 4th October, 1842 The case was reported


by myself as Moderator to the Synod, verbally, and at tbe same time the minutes of
the proceedings of the Presbytery were produced to the Synod It was then resolved
by the Syno 1 to proceed to cognosce the case, and the Moderator was instructed to
summon Dr Lang, that the case might be tried next day.”
The following, however, was the cross-examination of the same wit-
ness, also upon oath, conducted by William Barker, Esq., an eminent
Solicitor in Sydney. It was one of the most humiliating scenes I have
ever witnessed. No unwilling witness in a Police Court in a case of
pettv larceny, no offender in the pillory ever winced more fearfully
under the missiles thrown at him, than the witness did at the able
questioning of the learned Solicitor, in developing the successive steps
of the mystery of iniquity, and shewing from the evidence that the
whole affair was a foul conspiracy on the part of two thoroughly un-
principled men: —
“ Cross-examined by Mr Barker: When was the proceeding first instituted against
Dr Lang? In 1842. Was any complaint made to the Presbytery by any person
against Dr Lang ? I can’t say positively; but I think there was not. My impression
is, that the Presbytery proceeded without complaint. lam now quite clear that it
was so. Who were the ministers of the Presbytery of Sydney who were present at
the meeting of Presbytery when Dr Lang’s ease was first taken up ? The ministers
present were the Rev. John 1 ait and myself. Mho was then moderator of the
Presbytery ? Mr Tait. Who was then clerk of the Presbytery ? It was I. Then
there were only two ministers present at this meeting of Presbytery. That is all.
I think you have said that it was at this meeting that Dr Lang’s resignation was
tendered? Yes. What was done with reference to the letter of resignation ? A
committee was appointed to confer with Dr Lang relative to it. Does not the law of
the Church require that before the Presbytery can either accept or disallow the re-
signation of a minister they should first cite the congregation? In ordinary cases it
does require it. Was that course pursued in Dr Lang’s case? No. Who were the
several ministers composing the Presbytery at this time ? Dr M'Garvie, Mr Tait,
Mr Purves, Dr Lang, and myself. Was anything done at this first meeting besides
appointing a committee to confer with Dr Lang ? Nothing more. Who were the
ministers present at the next meeting of Presbytery? The same ministers, Mr Tait
and myself. Was Dr Lang’s case brought, up at the second meeting ? Mr Tait as
chairman of the committee, report' d that Dr Lang declined to receive them What
was done after that at that meeting ? The Moderator was instructed to summon Dr
Lang to appear at the next meeting of Presbytery on the first Tue-day of April next,
to answer for his conduct in making charges against his brethren, and for following
divisive courses By whom, and in what manner was this matter brought before the
Presbytery ? 1 have no recollection. There were only two ministers present at this
meeting of Presbytery. It was an adjourned meeting of Presbytery, held on the fol
lowing day after the committee were appointed. Is it noPthe regular course for one
of the ministers to address the Court in bringing any matter under their notice ?
There are various ways of bringing a matter under the notice of the Presbytery - by
petition, memorial, &o. 1 have no recollection of the matter, but if the moderator
did not do it, it was my duty, as the clerk, to do it. Have you any doubt that it was
one of them ? 1 have no recollection on the subject further than is contained in the
minutes. Was taere any notice given to Dr Lang of the resolution to libel him before
the issuing of the citation? None. Was Dr M’Garvie present at the meeting of
Presbytery at which the resolution to libel Dr Lang was passed ? No, his name does
not appear on the minutes. Do the ministers state the particular offence for which
Dr Lang was to be libelled? Ho was summoned to answer for his c nduct in
making charges against his brethren, and for following divisive courses. Was any-
thing more done at this meeting of Presbytery with reference to the proceedings
against Dr Lang? No. When was the next meeting of this Pr»sbytery held?
sth April, 1842, in St Andrew’s Church. Who were the ministers present at that
meeting? The II- v. John Tait, my»elf, and Mr Atchi on. What was the first thing
done at this meeting respecting Dr Lang ? The Moderator, Mr Tnit, reported that
Dr Lang had been summoned to appear this day. What next ? It was moved by


Mr Atchison, and seconded by Mr D. Johnston, that the whole of Dr Lang’.* supposed
delinquencies since January last be referred simpliciter to the Synod of Australia to
meet in Sydney in October next. It was moved by myself as an amendment, and
seconded by Dr Hill, that the case of Dr Lang be referred to the commission of
Synod. The amendment was carried. Who were the ministers who voted for the
amendment ? I think Mr Tait and myself were the only ministers The amendment
was carried by the casting vote of the Moderator. There were no other ministers
present but Mr Atchison, who voted on the other side. There was nothing further
done at the meeting. What was the first step Liken with reference to the libel ? It
was read and considered, clause by clause, and agreed to, there being no dissentients.
Who were the ministers present at that meeting, the 12th July, 1842? Mr Tait and
myself. What directions were given then ? That the libel should be served on Dr
Lang, with a citation and list of witnesses. Dr Lang was to appear on the 2d
August. On the 2d August the Presbytery met again. The ministers present as
members of the Presbytery were the Rev Mr Tait, myself, and Dr M'Garvie. What
was done at this meeting ? The Presbytery officer returned a certificate of execution
properly attested. Dr Lang not having appeared he was called three times and the
Presbytery directed him to bo cited to appear at next meeting, which was to be held
on the 23d August. Do the minutes show whether there were any dissentients on
that occasion ? No; there were no dissentients. At the meeting of the 23d August
he was directed to be served with a peremptory summons to appear on the first Tues-
day in October What was done at this meeting in October ? He did not appear,
and the Presbytery he’d him guilty by confession, and resolved to report this to the
Synod of Australia which was to meet ncxUday. Who were the ministers of the
Presbytery present when he was found guilty by confession ? The only ministers
were Mr Tait and myself Mr Tait, then, was the only minister of the Church of
Scotland who was then present? Yes.”
It was one of the statutes of the African Church, in the days of
Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, that no bishop or minister should be con-
demned in any way except on the unanimous vote of twelve other bishops
or ministers; but here are two ministers, the one the Moderator and the
other the Clerk of their Presbytery, concocting a charge between them
against a third minister, ordering themselves to get up a libel on that
charge, getting up the libel accordingly, judging of the relevancy of the
libel, declaring it proven, without any purgation on their own part, and
finding the third minister guilty by confession—and all in his absence !
Mr Tait, one of these two ministers who thus combined in their own
persons the incompatible offices of accusers, witnesses, and judges, has
since gone to his account; but though dead, his iniquity still speaketh,
and the guilt of it still lieth at the door of the Free Church for receiving
him into its body without question and without inquiry,—although the
facts I have stated were all notorious at the time, —and thereby encou-
raging him to perpetrate the same iniquity, although in a somewhat
mitigated form, as he did many years thereafter in the province of Vic-
toria, in the case of the Rev. Mr Miller and his brethren at Geelong. I
shall come to that case by and bye.
I had declined all communication with the Synod of Australia from
and after the delivery of my address of the 6th February, 1842, with
the exception of the letter of resignation I addressed to the Presbytery
of Sydney on the first of March of that year; but for reasons that will
appear immediately I attended the meeting of the Synod in October fol-
lowing. The proceedings on the occasion are reported as follows in
the Colonial Observer of the 12th October, 1842:


“Dr Ljng attended the meeting on Saturday, together with a number of his pri -
vate friends”and members of his congregation; and, on being asked by the Moderator
whether he would appear at the bar of the Synod to bo tried on the charges preferred
against him in the libel or indictment with which he had been served, he replied to
the following effect:—
“ Moderator, as 1 appear before you this day in very peculiar circumstances, 1 am
naturally desirous that the nature and object of that appearance should not be mis-
understood, and that a construction should not be put upon it, which I have no
intention it should bear. I appear before you, therefore, in compliance with your
own invitation or citation, or whatever you may please to call it, to explain or to
defend any parts of my conduct that may have been called in question by the Synod
up to a certain date.
“ I appear before you this day, prepared to answer whatever charges may have
been preferred against me, up to iho date I have referred to, or any other charges
whatsoever, that any member of this Synod may bring against me, as a minister of
the Gospel, from my first arrival in the colony more than nineteen years ago._ And
I appear before you also, because it has been publicly given out, a> well as privately
and industriously insinuated by individuals here present whom I shall not mention
more particularly, that I left the Synod because i was under charges at the time
which I was either unable or afraid to meet. Now lam here to give the lie to such
unfounded and unmanly insinuations, to show that I am neither unwilling nor afraid
to meet my accusers face to face, and to prove incontestibly to all concerned that,
up to the time referred to, the Synod neither has nor ever had anything against me.
“ You are well aware, therefore, that on the 6th of February last I delivered a
solemn address to my congregation, which was afterwards published on the 9th of
February, renouncing all further connection with this Synod as a Church connected
with the State; of which I forwarded a regular notification at the next meeting of
the Presbytery of Sydney. (Stop, said the Moderator, supposing, doubtless, that Dr
Lang was going to enter upon a justification of the measure in question.) Moderator,
said Dr Lang, resuming, you quite mistake me; I had no intention to enter into the
grounds of this measure, or in any way to discuss it. I referred to it merely as a
note of t ime —marking, as it did, an important er a in my ministerial career in this
colony. Now, as I understand that there are charges against me, founded on cir-
cumstances and events antecedent to this period, as well as others originating after
it, before I can answer your question, as to whether I will place myselt at your bar
to' answer the charges contained in the libel, I ask you, moderator, whether the
Synod will hear and dispose of all charges of an origin antecedent to that period first ?
You will observe, Moderator, that I am not at present disputing your right to
institute whatever inquiries you may think proper into my conduct subsequent to that
period That is not the question now. But as an accused party I have a right to
demand that'-whatever charges there may be against me, they shall be taken up and
determined successively in the order of time, and not disposed of in the lump. Am
I therefore to understand, Moderator, that the Synod are willing to enter upon the
consideration of whatever charges they may have against me, founded on circum
stances and events prior to the 6th ot February last ? If they are, I will instantly
place myself at your bar, to defend my conduct from such charges, of whatever kind
they may be. . .
“ Dr Lang then sat down, and the Moderator having asked the opinion of the Synod
in reference to his question, various remarks were made, pro and con, by various
members. Dr M'Garvie, in particular, observed that Dr Lang’s question was a fair
and reasonable question, and demanded a direct answer, which he thought the Synod
ought to give. The Eev. Messrs Aitchison of Wollongong, and Ada*fr r of Windsor
expressed themselves to the same effect. The Rev. Messrs Tait, Fullerton, and
MMntyre, however, insisted that the Synod should give no such answer, but proceed
with the libel forthwith.
“Dr L., however, having urged that he could not allow the li iel to be read in his
hearing till he got a direct answer to his question, and that if an attempt were made
to read it notwithstanding, he would instantly leave the meeting, a member observed
that the Synod might answer Dr L’s question, and thereby satisfy him on the point
from courtesy. Dr L. replied that it was not an act of courtesy or favour ot any
kind he asked from the Synod, but an act of unquestionable justice. There was no
maxim in British law more firmly established than this, that a party accused should
have the time and place of his offence specified, and that each specific charge against
him should be tried separately; adding, that as he was a straight-forward man, and


was always ready to give a straight-forward and direct answer to any question put
to him when it was in his power to do so, he would immediately give such an answer
to the Moderator’s question when he got a direct and categorical answer to his own.
“A member then observed, that as Dr Lang must have read and seriously consi-
dered the libel, he must bo well aware whether the charges it preferred originated
before or after the period he referred to: to which Dr Lang replied that he had never
either read the libel or heard it read, and knew nothing of its contents. Ho only
knew that there were charges against him originating in events prior to the bth ot
February, as well as others of a later origin, and all he had asked was that the for-
mer of these charges should be heard and determined first. _
«In the course of the remarks that were next offered by various parties it was
distinctly admitted by the Moderator and another member of Synod, that t.ie libel
did contain references to Dr Lang’s procedure before the 6th of February, by way of
aggravation or enforcement of the charges therein preferred, and originating in events
of a later date; but Messrs Tait and Fullerton both argued, that, as the specific
charges in the libel were of a later date than the 6th of February, Dr Lang s d.-mand
was virtually met; adding that there were other charges of a previous origin, but it
had been agreed that these should not be brought forward. Ihe Moderator being
then urged to press Dr Lang for an immediate decision, in answer to his original
question as to whether ho would appear at the bar of the Synod to answer the charges
contained in the libel, Dr Lang replied to the following effect;
“ Moderator, I have not yet got a direct answer to my question, and I cannot be
satisfied with the singular explanations now given me in reply to it. You have your-
self distinctly admitted, and so also has another member of the Court, that the libel
contains references to my conduct prior to the Gth of February, by way c f aggrava-
th>n ■ and it has also been admitted since that there were other charges against me,
originating in events prior to that date, which, it seems, are now in abeyance, and
not to be brought forward at present. Will the Synod say distinctly yes or no
that these charges were fallen from because they were either frivolous or unfounded,
and that it has nothing against me prior to the 6thof February last? For I will
allow no court on earth before which I may ever stand as a party accused to travel
over my past history as a minister of the Gospel, and to pick out whatever it may
think proper to work up into charges against me without specifying time and pDce,
and, binding up these charges in one volume, to launch it, with its accumulated
We, ‘Mr Tait then stood up—-pale, trembling, and writhing with emotion - and observed
that this discussion could not be suffered to go on any longer. There were only two
places in which the Synod could recognise any party as standing—in the court or at
the bar-and he insisted that Dr L. should bo considered as not having appeared to
answer, and the libel be r.-ad forthwith. The Moderator having then asked Dr L.
finally whether he would appear at the bar, and answer to the charges contained in
the libel, Dr L. spoke as follows:
“ Moderator, since you have refused to answer my question, as to whether you
have any charges against me prior to the 6th of February last, and whether, if you
have, you will enter on these charges first, I am compelled to put the only construc-
tion on the refusal which it can possibly bear,—viz., that you have nothing against
mo prior to that period, but that you have not the honesty to confess it, because you
wish the public to believe that you have. Like the Apostle Paul, therefore, who,
when denied justice by a company of Jewish priests, appealed to Caesar, I appeal to
“ This announcement was received with such loud and hearty demonstrations of
approval by the people present, that Dr L. was obliged to assist the Moderator m
restoring silence; the Syn d in the meantime being silent and Uck-a-daisicalenough.
When silence was restored, Dr L. concluded as follows:
» Now, Moderator, I am ready to give you a direct answer to your question, al-
though you have refused such an answer to mine. In reference, therefore, to all
charges preferred against me in your Court, founded on circumstances and events
occurring either on or after the 6th of February last, when I publicly renounced all
connection with the State and with this Synod as a State Church in this colony, 1
have only to say that I decline your jurisdiction ,
“Dr Lang then took his hat and walked off, and so did all the strangers who
were present but two or three; leaving the Synod to perpetrate their deed of dark-
ness by themselves.


“ The charges against Dr Lang, the consideration of which was proceeded with on
Saturday and Monday, were ranged under the three following heads:
“ 1. Calumny—inasmuch as in his published address to his congregation on the
6th of February last, renouncing all connection with the State and the State Churches
of this colony, he had characterised the ministers of the Synod generally, although
not without particular exceptions, as being inefficient, worldly-minded hirelings, and
their Church Courts as being for the most part little better than synagogues of Satan.
“ 2 Schism—in separating himself from the Synod, as well by the said address as
by the proceedings of a public meeting of his congregation held in the Scots Church,
on the 22d of February thereafter.
“ 3 Contumacy—in refusing to allow the Rev. W. MTntyre to enter his church or
pulpit to notify his suspension to the said congregation.*
“ At the meeting of yesterday, the Rev. Mr Hetherington, of Patrick’s Plains,
reported the result of a conversation he had just had with Dr Lang, along with the
Rev Mr Adam, of Windsor, relative to the decision which it was understood the
Synod was about to arrive at; from which it appeared that Dr Lang’s return to the
Synod on any terms, was utterly hopeless.
“ The members being then called to express their sentiments, Dr M‘Gar vie strongly
urged the propriety of adopting a conciliatory course, as being best calculated to
promote the interests of the Synod; observing that the evidence adduced was
insufficient to establish the charges, and that even though it had been sufficient,
the charges themselves were of such a nature as by no means to warrant a sentence
of such extreme severity as was contemplated. He remarked, also, that although
conciliatory measures should not have the effect of re-uniting Dr Lang with the
Synod, they would at least tend to neutralise the vigorous efforts he was making, and
the great influence he was exerting in various directions, and so prevent the growth
and extension of tbe schism that had been produced.
“ After a few remarks on the peculiar circumstances in which Dr Lang’s resigna ■
tion had originated, but which had been studiously kept out of view in the whole
course of the inquiry, although strongly calculated to bring about the very result
they had witnessed, the Rev. Mr Atchison, of Wollongong, moved that Dr Lang’s
resignation, presented to the Presbytery of Sydney on the Ist of March last, be
received; observing that any other proceeding on the part of the Synod was alto-
gether uncalled for.
“The Rev. M. Adam, of Windsor, seconded this motion; urging that the measure
proposed by Mr Atchison, in the case of Dr Lang, had already been adopted in that
of the Rev. John Gregor, whose offence in renouncing all the distinguishing principles
of the Presbyterian Church, and entering the Church of England, was infinitely worse
than any implied in the charges brought against Dr Lang,
“ The Rev. W. MTntyre having then expressed his opinion that there was no
analogy between the two cases, and that Dr Lang’s was by far the worst, Dr M‘Gar-
vie observed that there was certainly no analogy between them; but in his estima-
tion the case of Mr Gregor was infinitely worse in point of criminality, than that of
Dr Lang. Mr Gregor had been a personal friend of his own, and he had regretted
his having been placed in circumstances that had deprived the Presbyterian Church
of his services; but he could not shut his eyes to the fact that while Dr Lang had at
once tendered his resignation to the Synod, through the Sydney Presbytery, on the
Ist of March last, Mr Gregor had, without any previous intimation of his intention to
the Synod, opened and completed his negotiation for entering the Episcopalian
Church.f
“ The Rev. Mr Ross, of Patterson, then moved, and the Rev George M‘Fie seconded,
an amendment recommending deposition, which the Court having declared unintelli-
gible, was withdrawn,
“ Mr Hetherington then moved, and Mr MTntyre seconded another amendment, to
the effect that the charges against Dr Lang, contained in the libel, having been found
proven, the Court should proceed to deposition.
* As the libel setting forth these charges is quite a curiosity of its kind, and such as no
Church Court in Scotland could possibly receive against any minister —the charges themselves
being the merest generalities, and absolutely frivolous, I shall insert a copy of it in Appendix D.
■f- The reference to Mr Gregor’s case originated in Dr Lang having incidentally asked Messrs
Adam and Hetherington, when leaving his house yesterday morning, ‘ What they had done
with Gregor;” to which Mr Adam replied that “they had merely pronounced him no longer a
Presbyterian minister in connection with the Synod.” “ Then,” observed Dr Lang, “all the
malignity and opprobrium are reserved for me. I take it kindly.”


“ On a division there appeared for the motion Messrs Atchison, Adam, and Dr
M'Garvie, ministers; and Mr Blair, of Sydney, elder.
“ For the amendment, Messrs Hetherington, M'lntyre, Tait, Fullerton, Ross, M‘Fie,
and Purves, ministers; and Dr Hill, of Parramatta, elder.
“The Rev. H. Gilchrist, of Campbeltown, declined voting; but the Moderator
(Rev. W. Hamilton, of Goulburn,) volunteered an expression of his own concurrence
in the vote of the majority.
“ The sentence—which had been all pre-arranged and pre-determined long before
by the pitiful little clique of conspirators who have for some time past ruled the
Synod—was accordingly pronounced in due form by the Moderator, after prayer for
the divine blessing by Mr M'Pie.”*
I make no observations on this proceeding. My address, the head
and front of my offending, is reprinted in this pamphlet, and it can
easily be compared with the award. As to the Rev, George M‘Fie,
who implored the divine blessing on the proceeding, he had a private
grievance of his own to settle in that way. Mr M‘Fie was a most un-
couth, ungainly person, and a miserable preacher; which was unfor-
tunately rather the general rule than the particular exception. In the
place, therefore, to which he had been first sent on his arrival, the
people refused to have him on any terms. But as his wife had some
money, which, being a thoroughly worldly man, he had announced his
intention on board ship to invest in sheep and cattle, to make a fortune
in a few years and then go home, he attended a sheep sale within three
months after his arrival in the colony, and before he had obtained a
settlement as a minister, bought a flock of sheep to begin the world
with in Australia My remark on the occasion, which it seems was not
forgotten, was that “as he had not succeeded in getting a cure of soles ,
he had taken the next best, a cure of cluits."
The non-intrusion question was the great question of questions in the
Presbyterian Church generally at the time to which these proceedings
refer; and certain members of the Synod who had taken part in the
iniquitous proceedings here detailed, were loud and vociferous enough
at the time in support of the rights of the people. But when the tidings
of the actual disruption reached the colony only a few days before their
annual meeting, which lasted a whole week, in October, 1843, they
never mentioned it! The following year, however, (1844), they were
shamed by the voice of the public into some public mention of it; and
they passed, accordingly, a series of resolutions expressive of their desire
to give the right hand of fellowship to one of the two General Assem-
blies, and the left to the other. One of these resolutions, from which it
is difficult to extract a meaning, but which shows pretty plainly the
utter incapacity of the men as a body, was as follows :
" They considered the Free Church and the Establishment to bo both portions of
* It was one of the canons of the African Church, as already stated, in the days of the cele-
brated Christian father and martyr, Cyprian—and the African Church of that period was as
nearly as possible identical in its constitution with the Church of Scotland —that no bishop or
minister could be deposed from his office without the unanimous concurrence of at least twelve
other bishops; but here are seven engaged in the good work in the face of an opposing minority
of four ministers! The population of Roman Africa at the time, according to Gibbon, was seven
million, of whom about one-half were Christians. A disruption, however, took place on a point
of discipline and 400 bishops or ministers—about one-half of the whole number—were at once
cut off by the orthodox party, as they are now termed. These bishops could be nothing else
than Presbyterian bishops or parish ministers.


the Catholic Church of Christ, and that communion could bo held with both. If any
member thought right to divest himself, by a private act of demission, of a right to
hold the presentation to a parish in Scotland, the Synod would not subject him to
any disqualification as a colonial minister and a member of their Court.”
In the year 1845 these resolutions had just been re-enacted at the
annual meeting of the Synod, when the tidings of the reception they had
met with from the two General Assemblies in Edinburgh arrived. The
Free Church General Assembly received the resolutions, as Dr Merle
D’Aubiguy, who was present, informs us, with what old Homer would
have called “ inextinguishable laughter,” expressive of their utter scorn
and contempt for the men who could perpetrate such folly. The General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland treated the half and half resolu-
tions somewhat differently, as the following extract from their minutes
will shew:—
“At the evening sitting—‘ Dr Robertson gave in the report of the Committee ap-
pointed in the forenoon to consider the resolutions passed by the Synod of Australia.
The committee recommended that those ministers who adhered to the resolutions
should no longer be regarded as ministers of the Church of Scotland, and that copies
of the minute be transmitted to the Moderator and Clerk of the Australian Synod,
and to the Secretary for the Colonies.’ Agreed to.
“ The thirteen who were thus ignominiously turned out of the Church of Scotland,
for which they had nevertheless professed such heroic sentiments, were as follows:
Those with an asterisk prefixed to their names had never in reality belonged to that
Church, being legally unqualified to hold any appointment in connection with it.
Rev. C Atchison, Wollongong; * H. Gilchrist, Campbeltown, since deceased;
W. Hamilton, Goulburn; * C. Bipper, Braidwood; G. Hetherington, Patrick’s Plains,
now of Melbourne; T. Mowbray, now at Moreton Bay, and ah agendo; *M. Adam,
Windsor; * Dr Fullerton, Sydney; W. M'lntyre, Maitland; J. Forbes, Melbourne,
since deceased; * R. Blain, Hinton; J Tait, Parramatta, since deceased; 0. Stewart,
Bowenfells.”
Laughed at by your Assembly and cut off by the Establishment, there
were still certain of those half and half resolutionists who were not
unwilling to identify themselves with the Free Church, if they could
only do it with perfect safety. Apprising the Government, therefore,
of their desire, they petitioned the Legislature for a separate main-
tenance, which, as a matter of course, was refused. At length four of
the Resolutionists —Mr Hamilton, of Goulburn; Mr Tait, of Parra-
matta ; Mr MTntyre, of Maitland; and Mr Stewart, of Bowenfells—
withdrew from the Synod of Australia, and declared their adhesion to
the Free Church. But after the humiliating exhibition which these
men had given of their utter incapacity to superintend the machinery
and to guide the movements of a Christian Church, and especially after
the monstrous proceedings with which they were identified in 1842, it
was surely a manifest dereliction of duty on the part of the Free Church,
and an instance of great unfaithfulness towards our common Master, to
receive such men into your body without question and without enquiry,
and thus to give the seal of your approval to their previous iniquitous
deeds. It was this neglect of obvious duty—it was this unfaithfulness
on the part of your Church—that led to all the subsequent troubles in
Victoria, in the case of the Rev. Mr Miller and his brethren at Geelong.


As the four men I have just mentioned had taken three years to
decide between the Free Church and the Establishment, it was natural
that their people should take a great deal longer. In short, the time for
action had then past, and the iron had got cool on the anvil. Mr Hamilton
found accordingly that the people of Goulburn would not go one step
with him, and he had consequently to leave the colony altogether and
open a boarding school in Port Phillip. Mr 1 ait was almost in as
pitiful a plight at Parramatta, especially with the prospect of a minister
from the Church of Scotland to occupy the church he had vacated. He
wanted, therefore, to come to Sydney, where it was supposed there was
an opening for him / but his brethren opposing the measure, he made a
“moonlight flitting” from the colony, under the ban of the very body he
had helped to form, and landed in Geelong, the second town of \ ic-
toria, leaving his little flock at Parramatta to shift for themselves.
It is said that “ in the land of the blind, the man with one eye becomes
the leader of the people and Mr Tait was not the only small man of
his time in New South Wales who acquired a degree of prominence and
importance which could never have 'been anticipated for him in that
colony by going to Victoria. After negociations had been in progress
for a considerable period on the part of all the three sections of the
Presbyterian Church in the latter colony, and matters had been gradu-
ally advancing towards the consummation so devotedly to be wished, a
difficulty was started, on the part of the Rev. William Miller, of
Melbourne, and certain other brethren of the Free Church in Victoria,
in regard to the source from which ministers for the united church
were in future to be procured. Mr Miller insisted, before identifying
himself with the proposed amalgamation, on having a guarantee that
ministers for the united body should be supplied in future either from the
Free Church exclusively, or at all events not from the Church of Scot-
land. Now I have no hesitation in expressing my decided opinion that
this was a most unreasonable proposition on the part of Mr Miller and his
friends. If a union with the adherents of the Church of Scotland in Victo-
ria had been deemed desirable at all, had they not sufficient confidence,
if not in the soundness and value of their own principles, at least in the
numerical force of the Free Churchmen and United Presbyterians, (who
I presume are somewhat akin to them, as they are both equally de-
pendent upon the people), to ensure a supply of right men, without
specifying the particular source from which they were to come, and
thereby giving needless offence to their weaker brethren of the proscribed
Establishment? After the Revolution of 1688, certain curates of the
former regime were allowed to continue till they died out in their re-
spective parishes, on conforming to the Presbyterian establishment.
Besides, with the agitation that was then prevalent in Victoria for the
entire discontinuance of State support for religion, there was little dan-
ger of any considerable number of men coming out from what Mr
Miller and his friends would have considered an exceptionable source, to
cast themselves upon the sympathies of the Christian people in that


colony, I consider Mr Miller, therefore, and his friends to have been
manifestly in the wrong in demanding any such guarantee as they
required.
But if Mr Miller and his friends were in the wrong in the matter in
question, what shall we say of those who subjected them to the treat-
ment they actually received from their brethren? Because they refused
to submit to the majority, and go along with them unconditionally into
the Union, they were, at the instance of Mr lait, forthwith expelled
from the Synod ! It was a worthy sequel to the iniquitous proceedings
of the same individual towards myselt in 1842—those proceedings of
which the authorities of your Church hav# virtually expressed their ap-
proval. I confess, however, 1 cannot conceive how a man of high
standing, like Dr Cairns of Melbourne, could have allowed himself to
become the dupe of so inferior a man as Mr lait, on such an occasion,
by taking part in so monstrous, so iniquitous, and so disgraceful a pro-
ceeding. But this, lam sorry to say, is not the only instance in which
Dr Cairns has belied the professed principles of the Free Church in Vic-
toria, When the State support question was trembling in the balance
in that colony, and when a strong assertion of right principle on the
part of such a man as Dr Cairns w r ould have called forth the willing
support of the Christian people of all evangelical denominations through-
out the land, and given an incalculable amount of morai influence to the
movement of the day, Dr Cairns consented to have about one-half of the
Free Church ministers of Victoria transformed into mere pensioners of the
State, under the latitudinarian and infidel system of the colony, and fed
out of the same common trough, not only with Episcopalians and Metho-
dists, but with Papists and Puseyites, Unitarians and Jews ! This have
we found in Victoria; know now whether it be thy son's coat or no.
To return to Mr Miller and his friends. Common sense, if the majo-
rity had possessed that valuable quality in any conceivable degree, would
surely have dictated the propriety, nay, the urgent necessity, of dealing
with the recusant minority in a kind and conciliating spirit. It was by
no means necessary that the union should comprehend all the Presby-
terian ministers of the province from the very first. It was not even
necessary that it should be consummated at that particular time. Be-
sides Mr Miller and his friends, there are still a few other Presbyterian
ministers standing aloof from the union till the State Church question
shall be finally settled; and this, I confess, appears to me a much more
reasonable objection than Mr Miller’s. For I question whether it would
not have been better to have deferred it altogether till then. In one
word the proceeding of the majority of the Free Church Synod of
Victoria, at the instance of Mr Tait and Dr Cairns, in expelling Mi-
Miller and his friends on the occasion to which I have adverted, was
utterly inexcusable, monstrous, and tyrannical.*
* The resolutions both of the Free Church Assembly and of the United Pres-
byterian Synod, when appealed to respectively in these union cases, appeared to me
remarkably illustrative of the great wisdom of the Philippine Islands proverb already
referred to. They could not be expected to lead to any result.


I have a word or two to say in conclusion respecting another of
your eminent men in Australia, I mean the Kev. Dr Mackay, now of
(Sydney. The Colonial public have been greatly at a loss to know why
Dr Mackay should have left Melbourne, which everybody but himself con-
sidered his proper post, to go to Sydney. There was a very considerable
Gaelic-speaking population in and around Melbourne, who had given
Dr Mackay a very cordial reception on his arrival, and had built a
handsome church for him in Melbourne; for which two or three of their
number had made themselves responsible for a debt of £4OOO on the
building, when to their utter astonishment he suddenly left them. An
old Highlander, one of the 4000 whom I was instrumental in sending
out to Australia, and who had previously been a porter on the streets of
Greenock, but who has since amassed a handsome fortune in Victoria,
actually bought a curricle and two fine horse to drive to Melbourne
every Sabbath to attend Dr Mackay’s Gaelic service. He bitterly re-
gretted to me his having left them ; and as he had then no further use
for his curricle, I understood he had disposed of it, or was about to do
so. What renders the matter the moTe unaccountable is that there is
no Gaelic-speaking population now in Sydney, although there was at
one time, and no Gaelic service required there. In the meantime the
Rev. Mr Fraser, Dr Mackay’s successor in Melbourne, had joined the
union; but the congregation having identified themselves with Mr
Miller and his friends, had barred him out of the church.
Dr Mackay was honoured, on his arrival in Sydney, with a public
breakfast: and to shew my own kindly feeling both towards the man
and the cause, I attended on the occasion ; for I did hope that a man
in the position which Dr Mackay had occupied at home would prove
himself greatly superior to the petty and unworthy feelings that had un-
fortunately characterised so many other Presbyterian ministers in the
colonies, that he would accordingly exhibit a high degree of moral prin-
ciple and moral heroism, and that he would thus prove a centre of union
for the disjecta membra of our divided communion. In this hope, how-
ever, lam sorry to say, I was doomed to disappointment. In the year
1854, an Act was passed by our Colonial Legislature, of which I was
then a member, for the establishment of Affiliated Colleges in connection
with the University of Sydney—the Government giving a splendid
allotment of land for each college, and granting an equal amount, up to
£20,000, to the subscriptions of the public, provided the latter should
amount to £lO,OOO, with a salary of £5OO a-year for the principal.
In the original draft of the Bill the proposed boon had been restricted to
those religious bodies that were supported by the State; but I succeeded
in getting this clause thrown out, and the Presbyterian College left
equally open for all Presbyterians. By far the largest contributor to
the future College was a brother-in-law of my own, and a member of my
congregation, the late John Hunter Baillie, Esq., who died in the year
1854, and left the whole of his property, subject to the life-rent of his
widow, for the endowment of two professorships in a Presbyterian Col-


lege in Sydney—the one for the English language and literature, and
the other for the Oriental and Polynesian languages. As the same evil
spirit, however, that exhibited itself so remarkably in the developments
of 1842, under the leadership of that par nohile fratrum —Messrs-Tait
and Fullerton—still characterises certain Irish and Scots worthies in
New South Wales, a desperate effort was made by these parties to get me
excluded from all connection with the future College. Hole-and-corner
meetings were accordingly held for this purpose from time to time in the
city of Sydney, from all of which I was carefully kept out; and Dr
Mackay—l am almost ashamed to acknowledge it—well knowing both
their character and their object, condescended to identify himself with
these hole-and-corner men !*
Dr Johnson observes somewhere that it is as great a mark of dis-
tinction for a man to have many enemies as many friends. You will
see from the sequel that I have an unusually large number of friends—
some of them in the highest positions—in my adopted country, and it is
therefore to be supposed that I should have not a few enemies also; and
when any cause or movement affords a rallying point for this description
of persons, they are always sure to muster in force. After the programme
of the future college—a regular botch of an affair, which had all along
been carefully concealed from the public—had been concocted, a public
meeting was called to carry out the idea; and to prevent anything like
opposition on my part, the late Governor, Sir William Denison, had been
solicited, and had consented to take the chair. That functionary, with
all his pretensions, was in reality a narrow-minded and vindictive man,
who had somehow taken umbrage at myself for something I had either
said or written, and who meanly took advantage of his position on this
occasion to gratify his spleen. For when the hole-and-corner programme
had been moved and seconded, and I got up to propose an amendment, as
I had previously advertised my intention to do in the local press, His
Excellency refused to receive my amendment, which, he said, would be
converting the meeting into a debating society. In any other case I
should simply have moved that the chairman do leave the chair, as His
Excellency’s proceeding was utterly inexcusable; but unwilling to do
anything that might seem to imply a want of respect for her Majesty’s
* The honesty of these parties in their pretended zeal for superior education may
be estimated from the fact that they had never made the slightest effort in the mat-
ter from the year 1842, when their envy and malice towards myself destroyed the
fair prospect there was then for theological education, till the hole-and-corner meet-
ings they began to hold so recently for the express purpose of excluding me from all
connection with the Presbyterian College. And as to their zeal for common
education—although the population of the colony had tripled itself in the interval,
they had only added four schoolmasters, up to the close of last year, to the fifteen I
had carried out from Scotland in 1837. How true it is that one sinner destroyeth
much good; and how one can symnathise with the apostle when he says, Alexander the
coppersmith did me much evil. The worthless tinker! As for Dr Mackay; shortly
after the disruption, he published a Gaelic vision, in which, improving upon Dante’s
Inferno, he represented the clergy of the Church of Scotland in the place of torment.
How extremely liberal he had become in the interval when he identified himself with
that pattern minister, Dr Fullerton of Sydnej r I


representative, I quietly resumed my seat, being well aware that, under
our free Government, there was a higher power in the State than even
the representative of Majesty. I accordingly petitioned the Local Par-
liament, of which I was not then a member, for a Select Committee to
enquire into the case of the Presbyterian College; and that Committee
being granted, the impudent proceeding of the hole-and-corner clique
was forthwith quashed. The attempt, indeed, was repeated during the
past year; but as I was then a member of the Provincial Parliament, as
well as of the Committee on the Bill, the matter was more easily dis-
posed of.
Dr Mackay had been invited to Sydney by a mere handful of people
—a split from the Free Church of the time—the leader of the move-
ment being the head of a mercantile firm who had previously made the
grand tour of almost all the churches in the colony. Dr Mackay’s
church was to be a regular extinguisher, a Free Church cathedral for
New South Wales; and certainly no cost was spared on its erection,
for it is said to have cost fourteen thousand pounds. While it was in
progress, Dr Mackay made a visit home to collect funds for the building,
expecting, it was said, to get at least a thousand pounds ; but the people
of Scotland were unfortunately blind to the great importance of having
a Free Church cathedral in the city of Sydney, and he did not even get as
much as paid his expenses. In the meantime the leader of this movement
became insolvent, and it was then found that the Church was flounder-
ing under a debt of eleven thousand pounds,* at six and eight per cent,
interest; and it was greatly feared that it would have to be sold to pay
off that debt, and might probably fall into the hands of the Roman Catho-
lics. From these and other circumstances, which I forbear to mention,
it is evident that the hand of God is lying heavily at this moment upon
the Free Church, both in New South Wales and in Victoria; and I can-
not help ascribing the fact to the culpable complicity of your body in the
enormity of 1842. At all events it is plain enough that you have not
been represented in these colonies by “men of understanding, who knew
the times, and what Israel ought to do.”
When I stated, before leaving the Synod of Australia in October,
1842, that I would appeal to the people, I had no idea as to how that
appeal should be made, or whether it would prove successful. But Tie
who leadeth the blind in a way that they hnoiv not was at that very
moment preparing the way for my appeal and for ensuring its success.
A semi-representative legislature was at that very time conceded to
New South Wales; and as I was no longer a Government functionary
receiving a salary from the State, I was invited by certain of the
* Contrary to the principle uniformly put forth by the other Free Churchmen of
New South Wales, Dr Mackay and his friends had, in accordance with the practice in
Victoria, applied to the Government for an allotment of ground in Sydney for the
erection of tin ir church, and had obtained it. But as the situation was not a suitable
one for the purpose, the church had to be erected elsewhere, and it was expected that
they would obtain permission to dispose of the allotment, which, as it was valued at
£2OOO, would reduce the debt to £9OOO.


numerous Scotch inhabitants of Port-Phillip, who were generally wdl
acquainted and thoroughly disgusted with the proceedings of the Synod
of Australia, to become a candidate for the representation of their district
(now the great colony of Victoria) in the Legislative Council of New
South Wales. And although desperate efforts were made by the ad-
herents of the Synod to prevent the deluded people from making so
great a mistake, they elected me, notwithstanding, by a majority of
eight votes above the opposing candidate, the late Sir Thomas Mitchell,
then one of the most popular meu in the colony, I was enabled in this
capacity to render a great service to my constituents by procuring for
them, through petitioning the Queen ia the face of a large hostile
majority of the Council, the concession of separation from New South
Wales, and the rank and position of an independent colony. I have
since been elected four times, under three different constitutions, for the
City of Sydney, and always at the head of the poll, besides once for
the County of Stanley, now in Queensland. My services to the latter
colony, which I had also succeeded in inducing the Imperial Government
to separate from New South Wales, were acknowledged by His Excel-
lency, Sir George Bowen, the Governor, and of the Local Parliament,
in the following letter and vote :
Government House, Brisbane, Queensland,
17th September, 1860.
“ SIR, —At the request of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland, I have the
honour to transmit herewith a copy of the resolutions unanimously adopted by the
House on the 14th instant, thanking you for your ‘ able and successful efforts to effect
the separation of Moreton Bay from New South Wales, and to found the colony of
Queensland.’
"I beg further to assure you, on behalf of my Government, of our full and cordial
concurrence in the sentiments of the Assembly, as recorded in the enclosed reso-
lutions.
“ I have the honour to be.
“ Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed)
“G F. Bowen.”
“ The Rev. J. D. Lang, D.D.
QUEENSLAND.
EXTRACT PROM THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
(No. 58.)
(Friday, 14 th September, 1860 )
“ Mr Lilley moved, without previous notice:
“ 1. That the thanks of this House be given to the Rev. John Dunumre Lang, D.D.
for his able and successful efforts for the separation of Moreton Bay from New South
Wales, and to found the colony of Queensland.


“ 2. That this resolution Up transmitted to his Excellency the Governor, with k
request that he will be pleased to forward a copy of the same to Dr Lang.
“ Question put and passed.
“ True extract.
“ Lewis A. Bern'ays.
(. lerk of the Legislative Assembly.”
“ Legislative Assembly Chambers,
Brisbane, 14th September, I 860.”
I shall only add, in conclusion, that, at a great public meeting held in
Sydney, the evening before I left the colony for England, on the 22d
December last, the Right Worshipful the Mayor of Sydney in the chair,
an address of confidence and esteem was presented to me, on the motion
of the Honourable the Prime Minister of the colony, other two of the
ministers of the Crown taking part in the proceedings. (See Appendix
E.)
God has, therefore, been pleased, in his infinite goodness and mercy,
to bring much good to my adopted country out of all the evil that was
meant for me by the Synod of Australia. I have been enabled, at all
events, to leave “ footprints on the sands of time ” in that country that
will never be effaced.
I am,
Rev. and Dear Sir,
Your fellow-labourer,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Glasgow, 4 th May, 1861.


ADDRESS,
** Christian Friends and Brethren, — I .deem it expedient and necessary to
apprise you, thus early and in this public manner, of a circumstance of no small im-
portance to myself individually, in whatever manner it may be regarded by some of
you, which you might otherwise come to be apprised of/in a more oiyectkmablo
way.
“ You are aware therefore that a new dissension has most unexpectedly arisen
in the Colonial Presbyterian Church, and has already assumed so serious an aspect
as. in my opinion, to render indispensably necessary a step of which 1 had not the
most dis ant idea within the la>t lew weeks.
“ That tne Presbyterian fi rm of Church government is not only apostolic but divine,
that it is the form instituted by the Lord Jesus, and uniformly carried out by his
apostles—l am now more strongly convinced than ever from my own long experieme
and observation both at home and abroad. It must be evident, however, that the
peculiar character of that system of Church government, which places all the‘office-
bearers of the Church on precisely the same level as to power or authority, renders
it indispensably necessary that there should be mutual confidence on the part of
these office-bearers, mutual esteem and mutual respect. The mere master of slaves
may either hold these slaves in unmurmuring subjection, or reduce them, when in a
state of disturbance, to external quiet by the mere exercise of authority—and if a
minister of religion, invested with arbitrary power over his brethren, he may create
a moral desolation, and call it peace; he may produce the stillness and stagnation of
spiritual death, and call it tranquillity. But we have not so learned Christ; we have
not so sacrificed the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. We have been
divinely taught to call no man master , seeing one is our Master, even Christ; and all
we, his professed disciples, are brethren
“ But the office-bearers in any Church in which this truly apostolic and divinely-
instituted system of Church government prevails, must be brethren in reality, and
not merely by profession—in order to render that system either tolerable on the one
hand or practicable on the other. They must bo animated by one spirit—they must
be pursuing one object—and that spirit must be the spirit of Christ, and that object
the glory of God, and the salvation of men. In short, the Presbyterian system of
Church government is fitted only for a Church of Christ, and not for a mere syna-
gogue of Satan—a mere society of worldlings or hirelings. When administered by
men of the latter description, men who show by their actions that they are destitute
of the spirit of Christ, the Presbyterian system of Church government degenerates
into an instrument of the grossest tyranny, alike intolerable and contemptible.
“ Now it appears to me that the Presbyterian Church in this colony has fallen in
great measure into this unhappy condition. On my return to the colony about eleven
months ag , 1 immediately, and in a spirit of entire confidence in my brethren,
signed the bond of union, and entered the new Synod which had then been but re-
cently constituted, without the slightest hesitation; taking such other steps as were
requisite for placing this Church and congregation under its superintendence and
authority 1 i.id my utmost Iso immediately thereafter to give effect to an act of
Synod which had then just been passed, although without my previous concurrence,
(for I had not returned to the colony at the time), in the removal of the four fo mer
ministers from Maitland and Parramatta; and I even went personally and repeatedly
to the latter of these localities to induce the congregation to submit to the Synod,
and to elect as their future minister their present pastor (Mr Tait.) At the meeting
of Synod in October last, I am conscious also of having exerted myself in every pos-
sible way to promote the peace and prosperity, the honour and advancement of our
beloved Zion (and, as some of you, my Christian brethren, will bear witness) with by


no means indifferent success. The Synod having on that occasion agreed to recog-
nise a course of academical education for the training up of young men for the min-
istry in the institution with which I have been so long connected, I took occasion,
with the express concurrence of a majority of the elders, as well as of a meeting of
the committee of management of this Church and congregation, to visit the neigh-
bouring colonies of Port Phillip and Van Diemen’s Land, to endeavour to interest
their Presbyterian inhabitants in the accomplishment of an object of such vital im-
portance to us all, both as Christians and as Presbyterians. You are well aware of
the cordial and even flattering reception I experienced on that occasion, and of
the hearty concurrence given by our friends and brethren in both of these flourishing
colonies, towards the accomplishment of our common object.
“ It grieves me to the heart, however—not so much for myself individually, (for in
this respect I confess I am quite indifferent), as for the miserable prospect it affords
for our beloved Church in this land—it grieves me to state that all these efforts ,so
honestly intended, and carried out with so much personal inconvenience, personal
sacrifice, and self-denial, have been received by a comparatively large number of my
brethren, not only with the utmost coldness and indifference, but with a spirit of
rancrous hostility towards myself individually, which I firmly believe could have
emanated only from the Father of Evil. At the recent meetings of the Presbytery
of Sydney and Commission of Synod, held during the past month, a series of tho
most uncalled for, unprovoked, unchristian and suicidal attacks were made, not only
upon my.-elf individually but upon every object or institution with which I was
either connected or identified; in-omuch that our Chuieh Courts, instead of exhibit-
ing, as they ought to do, friendly and Christian assemblies of brethren, met for the
building up of our Zion, and the general advancement of the cause of God in the
land, had degenerated into a mere arena for the exercise and display of pitiful and
personal malignity.
“In these circumstances, I confess, Christian friends and brethren, and I do so, I
assure you, with the most unfeigned sorrow, I have lost all confidence in a compara-
tively large number of my brethren; and it is impossible, therefore, that I can regard
them hereafter with that esteem and respect which are indispensably necessary for
the welfare and advancement of a Church of Christ. It is quite possible, indeed, that
these feelings may bo reciprocal; and if so, wbo is there to judge between us ? This,
however, is obvious and unquestionable, that a house divided against itself cannot
stand. But if lam the Aohan in the camp, as is doubtless alleged by certain of my
brethren, lam not only willing but determined to leave it—to leave them in quiet and
undisturbed possession, forthwith and for ever. In short, despairing of the cause of
God in this colony—at least through the instrumentality of the Presbyterian Church
as at present c nstituted —l have resolved, after mature deliberation, to resign the
pastoral charge of this Church and congregation, and to seek some other field of
Christian exertion, where my services will be better apprei iated, and my honest and
self-denying efforts for the building up of our Zion be met with the friendly and cor-
dial co-operation of Christian men.
“ 1 have come to this resolution, I confess, with the less hesitation, after attentively
considering the manner in which the Christian ministry is supported in these colon-
ies, compared with the recent manifestations to which I have already referred; for
after nearly nineteen years’ experience and observation in this country, I am irresis-
tibly led to the conclusion that all the sordid worldlymindedness, the lamentable inef-
ficiency, the clerical delinquency, and the strife and contention that have hitherto
characterised and disgraced the Presbyterian Church in this territory are distinctly
aud exclusively traceabe to its connection with the State; for if such a connection
had not subsisted, and if Christian mini?tors in this colony had been dependent solely
on the good proridenoe of God and the Christian affections of their people, these
enormous evils would either never have existed, or, if they had, would speedily have
disappeared
*• in regard to the abstract question of a, connection between Church and State, I
ha ve already subscribed our National Standard, the Westminster Confession of Faith,
and lam quite willing to do so again. I do not regard such a connection as either
sinful or unlawful. But it is evident, the question assumes a totally different form
a id character in this country from what it does eilhei in the abstract or in Scotland.
The question here is simply this, ‘ are we by receiving State support, on the principle
and condition that that support shall be extended to all religions and superstitions
alike, to countenance, by our practice and example, the monstrous heresy that all
religions are alike, and therefore all equally deserving of support from the State?”


We may doubtless profess to think otherwise, whatever our practice may be in this
respect; but so long as we continue to receive State support from a Government that
proclaims and acts upon this principle, we are unquestionably doing our utmost to
maintain and propagate the damnable delusion. Conceiving, therefore, that the radi-
cal and fundamental principle of all the Religious Establishments of this colony is a
thoroughly anti-Christian and infidel principle, of which the uniform tendency and
result in this land has hitherto been irreligion and infidelity, I cannot be a party to
the maintenance of such a system of infidelity and delusion, or, in other words, I
cannot continue to eat the Queen’s bread as a minister of religion in this colony any
longer.
“lam the more confirmed in this resolution in contemplating the present moral
and religious aspect of the colony. You are all aware that for several years past,
through the gross and highly culpable mismanagement of our Colonial Government
in the matter of Immigration, Popery has been coming in like a food upon this de-
votee land. And where, think you, is the spirit of the Lord to lift up a standard
against this mortal enemy of all pure and undefiled religion ? Is it in the Protestant
Episcopal Church ? Alas 1 brethren, the. matin and vesper bells which we now hear
daily in one at least of the Episcopal Churches of this Colonial Capital, proclaim to
us in sufficiently intelligible language the probable and speedy advent of something
like a Protestant mass and an incorporating union with the Church of Rome. Is it in
the Presbyterian Church as at present constituted? Yes, brethren, if the spirit of
the Lord is a spirit of the grossest worldly-mindedness and inefficiency, a spirit of
envy and detraction, a spirit of strife and malevolence, it is there. To speak in sober
and sorrowful earnest, the Presbyterian Church, as at present constituted, is utterly
inefficient as the bulwark of Protestantism in this land; and I verily believe that this
curs of inefficiency will rest upon her till she puts away from her the accursed thing
till she throws back to the Government with indignant scorn their Babylonish gar-
ment of an infidel establishment of religion, and their wedge of gold.
“It is not my intention, however, in revolving to pursue this course myself, to
hamper or distract my brethren by forming a separate communion in this land.
Neither is it my intention to seek for a settlement in some other land of equal or
still greater advancement in civilization and refinement, where 1 have reason to
believe I should not be left to seek it in vain. I have no wish to enter upon tho
labours of others either at home or abroad, or to occupy ground in the great field of
the world that has either been trodden or cultivated before. With the blessing of
God I intend to devote the remainder of my life towards the building up of our
beloved Zion, without either soliciting or receiving support from the Slate, in the
neighbourii g colony of New Zealand; for it appears to me that so important a field
ought not to be occupied by a mere stripling in the ministry.
“ I have certain pecuniary claims on this Church for advances in time past which
I am sure the trustees and congregation will not be unwilling to consider, especially
as I have no prospect of a salary for years to come where lam going. 1 have only
to request that in choosing a pastor for this Church you will not confine your.-elves
to the limited choice which ihe colony at present affords. The emoluments con-
nected with this charge, will—now especially that all difficulties have been overcome
ensure you a pastor of respectable standing from the mother-country. The
Government salary of the minister of this Church has been ordered some time since
by the Secretary of State to be augmented from i3OO to aSOO per annum; ai d
although the Governor has as yet, for reasons best known to himself, withheld from
me this augmentation, alleging as his justification that the Church was in a dis-
tracted state, it will be granted as a matter of course to my successor; who, I hope
and trust, will come to you in the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, and
approve himself a workman that needeth not to be ashamed .”
Sydney, Ist March, 1842.
Reverend Sir,
In consequence of certain recent and anomalous proceedings
at the meetings of the Presbytery of Sydney and Commission of Synod, held in the
months of January and February last, my attention has been strongly directed to
the consideration of the question as to whether the Synod of Australia can be dis-
charging its 1 ounden duty as a church of Christ in this territory, professing to hold


the standards of the Church of Scotland, in continuing to receive State support from
a Civil Government, which, affords that support to ministers of religion of all
denominations, on the avowed principle of regarding all religions as aHke,
and alike deserving of public support. And the result has been a firm belief
and conviction that the Synod has in so far been guilty of a gross defection from
the universally acknowledged and received standards of the Church of Scotland:
the only ground on which, agreeably to the Larger Catechism, we are authorised to
pray that the Church may be countenanced and maintained by the Civil Magistrate,
being that the ordinances of Christ may be purely dispensed and made effectual to the
converting of those that are yet in their sins, and the confirming , comforting, and
building up of those that are already converted. A prayer which it is worse than
mockery and profanation for any church to prefer at the foot-stool of the throne of
Almighty Grace, while it continues to receive State support from the Civil Magis-
trate on the latitudinarian, anti-christian and infidel principle above mentioned.
I am therefore decidedly of opinion that the blessing of God is not to be expected
on the ministrations of the Presbyterian Church generally in this presbytery, so long
as it continues to receive such support on such a principle; an.l I am strongly per-
suaded, moreover, that all the calamities that have hitherto afflicted that Church
in this Colony—the lamentable inefficiency, the worldly mindedness, the clerical
delinquency, the perpetual strife and contention and bitter animosities that have
hitherto in so many instances characterized and disgraced it are distinctly trace-
able to its unhappy all ance with the State in the circumstances I have described
In these circumstances T resolved, solemnly and deliberately, for my self individually
to continue to eat the Queen s Bread, as a minister of religion in this territory no
longer; as also to have no further connection in that capacity with any church or
society that did. Unwilling, however, to involve others in the difficulties of my
own position, I informed my congregation, in publicly announcing the fact i n the
6th ult., that it was my intention to proceed forthwith to New Zealand, there to
spend the remainder of my days in building up the Presbyterian Church on a more
scriptural foundation than it has hitherto been built on in this land.
But the Trustees, Elders, Committee of Management, and other members of my
congregation, having remonstrated strongly against this contemplated proceeding, as
far as they were personally concerned, 1 informed them in answer to their own en-
quiries, in a letter to David Ramsay, Esq., the senior Trustee, of date the 11th ult,
that I was not unwilling to remain in this colony as the pastor of the Scots Church
and congregation, provided they were to accede to the following conditions, viz. :
1. To renounce all connection wiih the State, in the way of receiving support for
their minister from the Colonial Treasury; making such arrangements for ensuring a
moderate salary for the said minister as may be found practicable.
2. To renounce all connection with the existing Synod, simply and solely on the
ground of its connection with the State, and the hopelessness of beneficial results
while such a connection subsists on the present Church Establishment principle of
this colony.
A Meeting of the Trustees, Elders, Committee of Management, and Congregation,
haying therefore been duly called, was held accordingly in the Church on the evening
of luesday last, the 22d ult., at which it was agreed, by an overwhelming majority,
to accede to these condition-*, the meeting being all but unanimous on the subject.
It is therefore my desire and intention that my connection with the Synod of Aus-
tralia, as a Church receiving support from the State in this colony in the circum-
stances above mention d, shall henceforth cease and determ ne. And I beg to trans-
mit herewith a document from my elders certifying that such is also the desire and
intention of my congregation.
I beg at the same time to inform you that the Trustees, Elders, Committee of Man-
agement and Congregation are determined to maintain their exclusive right to tho
Church and the other property therewith connected at all hazards and against all
claimants whatsoever, saving and excepting the rights of the parties to whom the
Church is still indebted for its erection; in testimony whereof 1 neg hereby to inform
you that the use of the Church can no longer be allowed for any fur ther meetings of
the Presbytery of Sydney.
I am, Rev. Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
To the Rev. the Moderator of the Presbytery of Sydney.


Sydney, 6th March, 1842.
Sir,
I havo the honour to inform you, for the information of His Excellency
the Governor, that at a public Congregational Meeting held for the purpose on the
22d ultimo the Trustees, Elders, Committee of Management and Congregation or
the Scots Church, Sydney, solemnly and deliberately resolved to renounce all con-
nection with this State in the Colony, in the way of receiving Salary for their Mini-
ster from the Public Treasury. The reason or ground of this resolution was a firm
conviction, induced by the bitter experience of many past years, and confirmed and
strengthened by cerain recent and anomalous proceedings of the 1 resbyterian
Church Courts of the Colony, that the great objects of a Christian Church were not
to be attained through the Presbyterian Chiy-ch as at present constituted m this
Territory or, in other words, while that Church remains in connection with the otate
on the present Church Establishment principle of New South Wales ; such a con-
nection being utterly unwarranted by the Standards of the Church of Scotland, and
directly opposed to them. I beg, therefore, to intimate that, from and after the
close of the current quarter, it will not be necessary for His Excellency the Governor
to issue Salary as heretofore from the Colonial Treasury for the Minister of the Scots
Church; all claims for such Salary in future being hereby renounced
I beg to state further that while the Trustees, Elders, Committee of Management
and Congregation of the Scots Church will, both individually and collectively, endea-
vour to lead quiet and peaceable lives under the Government of the land they ive
in, and to do their utmost, in the way of voluntary contribution and personal exer-
tion, for the extension and edification of the Christian Church and the maintenance
of pure and undefiled religion in this Territory, they are determined to maintain their
exclusive right to the property of the Scots Church at all hazards and against all
claimants whatsoever. . ~
I beg at the same time to add that a few individuals, for the most part recently
arrived” in the Colony, having individually no property in the Church, and whose
temporary connection with the Congregation has chiefly been in the capacity ot
disturbers of its peace, have within the last few days been encouraged and abetted
by the Presbytery of Sydney to cab themselves the Congregation of the Scots Church
and to set up a Conventicle in that capacity in the Town of Sydney; in the hope and
expectation that they will be able to obtain, from the supposed weakness ot His
Excellency the Governor, the Salary of £3OO per annum guaranteed by Earl
Bathurst for the Minister of the Scots Church, with the augmentation ot suh-
sequently recommended by Lord Glenelg. I trust, however, that his Excellency tne
Governor, as the Guardian of the public purse, will not allow the public interest to
be sacrificed to such manoeuvreing, so contemptible in itself, and so characteristic ot
the secular policy of all Colonial Ecclesiastical Establishments, of which the main
object seems to be to obtain money from the State under any pretence.
«
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed) JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
EXHIBIT CC.
Dr John Dunmore Lang, minister of the Scots Church, Jamison Street, Sydney, in
the Presbytery of Sydney, you are indicted and accused, at the instance of the Mode-
rator and other members of the Presbytery of Sydney, that albeit, by the word of
God and the laws and discipline of the Church of Scotland, slander, as also schism
and contumacy, are offences of a heinous nature, unbecoming the character and
sacred profession of a minister of the Gospel, and severely punishable by the laws
and rules of the Church; and albeit, every minister at his ordination does solemnly
vow and promise “ to submit himself willingly and humbly, in the spirit of meekness,
unto the admonitions of the brethren of his Presbytery, and to be subject to them


and to all sup rior judicatories of this Church, where God in his providence shall
cast his lot, and that according to his power, he shall maintain the unity and peace
of this Church against error and schism, notwithstanding of whatsoever trouble or
persecution may arise, and that he shall follow no divisive courses from the present
established doctrine, worship, discipline and government of this church;” yet true it
is, and of verity, that you, the said Dr John Dunmore Lang, are guilty of the said
offences, actor or art. or part, in so far as on the sixth day of February, in the year
of our Lord eighteen hundred and forty-two, being the Sabbath previous to that on
which you dispensed or were to dispense the Lord s supper in the Scots Church,
Jamison Street, you, the said Dr John Dunmore Lang, did within the Scots Church,
Jamison Street, from the pulpit slander and calumniate ymr brethren the members
of the Synod of Australia, likewise you. the said John Dunmore L-mg, did on the
evening of Tuesday, the twenty second of February, eighteen hundred and forty-two,
form a divisive movement in the said congregation of the Scots Church, Jamison
Street, and you contumaciously declined to receive the Committee of this Presbytery
which was appointed in March last to confer with you relative to these particulars,
you also refused to appear before this Presbytery on the fifth day of April last, when
summoned to do so by the Moderator, and on the sixth day of the said April, before
the Commission of the Synod of Australia, to whifth this cause was referred by this
Presbytery, and of which reference due notice was given you; likewise the Commis-
sion of the Synod of Australia having on the seventh day of April, eighteen hundred
and forty-two, “ suspended you, the said Dr John Dunmore Lang, from the exercise
of the holy ministry, and prohibited and discharged you from the performance ot
any of the functions,” and instructed the Rev. William M'lntyre to preach in the
Scots Church, Jamison Street, on the tenth of the said month and intimate your
suspension to that congregation, you, the said Dr John Dunmore Lang, did retuse
to admit him into the Scots Church, Jamison Street, and have continued contuma-
ciously to exercise your ministerial functions in direct opposition to the injunction ot
the Commission of the Synod of Australia, all which, or part thereof, being found
proven against you, the said Dr John Dunmore Lang, by the said Presbytery ot
Sydney before which you are to be tried in terms of your own further confession, or
after habile and competent proof, you, the said Dr John Dunmore Lang, ought to be
punished according to the rules and discipline of the Church and the usages observed
in such cases for the glory of God, the edification of the Church, and the terror of
others holding the same sacred office not to commit the like offences in all time
°°The g Libel after having been read clause by clause was agreed to, and the Pres-
bytery directed the said libel to be served on Dr Lang together with a citation and
the following list of witnesses—
Mr PETER Stewart, Elder, Kent Street, Sydney.
Mr John M'DONALD, Tailor, Castlereagh Street.
Mr W. COCHRANE, Collector, Cumberland Street.
And Dr Lang’s letter to the Rev. Wm. M'lntyre, refusing to admit him. The Pres-
bytery appointed its next meeting to be hold in St. Andrew’s Scots Church, Sydney,
on the first Tuesday of August next at twelve o’clock and was closed with prayer.
JAMES FULLERTON, Moderator.
JOHN TAIT, Clerk.
DEMONSTRATION TO DR LANG, D.D., M.P.
(From the Empire, Sydney 22 d Dec., 1860.)
“A public demonstration of the colonists of New South Wales was held in the
Temperance Hall, Pitt Street, yesterday evening, on the occasion of the Honourable
and Reverend John Dunmore Lang’s departure for Europe per mail ship Jeddo.
The hall, notwithstanding the inclemency of the weather was crowded at all point-.
On the platform and in the body of the room we noticed the Right Worshipful the
Mayor of Sydney, the Honourable Charles Cowper, M-P-, Colonial Secretary, th
Honourable E. C. Weekes, M.P., Minister for Finance; the Honourable W M. Arnold,
M.P. Minister for Public Works; the Honourable the Attorney General; William
Bede’ Dailey, Esq.: Robert Stewart, Esq., M.P.; C. D. Dalglish, Esq., M.P.; Clar


Irving, Esq , M P ; J. A. Atkinson, Esq.; Alderman Spence, J.P ; Alderman Sut-
ton, Alderman Sutherland, M.P., and Alderman Raphael.
" Dr Lang, on entering the room, was escorted to the platform by the Mayor, f I-
lowed by the members of the Government present. The party, as they walked up
the hall, was vociferously cheered.
The MAYOR, who was formally voted into the chair, said, before reading the
advertisement convening the meeting, he might be allowed to observe that circum-
stances had occurred which rendered it necessary that the Rev. Dr. Lang should
visit Europe As the time approached for the honourable and reverend gentleman’s
departure, some of his friends thought it desirable that some demonstration of feel-
ing should be shewn towards him, for his long public services in the cause of freedom
and reform. (Cheers.) It was deemed necessary that a public meeting should be
called for that purpose; this Hall was engaged, and they were now participating in
that demonstration (Cheers.) Hence this meeting. He would now read the
advertisement convening the meeting. [The Chairman read the advertisement.]
He ad no occasion to remind them that of late, addresses and testimonials had
become so very prevalent an 1 so common, that it was hardly worth while to accept
them. A person could hardly move from one district of the colony to another,
without some of his friends getting up an address or a testimonial to him (Laugh-
ter.) This was a very different matter—this was a great public demonstration,
to a great public servant, for a great public purpose. (Cheers.) Dr Lang required
no testimonial at their hands—no recommendation or certificate of character to take
with him to Europe, to recommend him to the people in Europe. Dr. Lang was
well known in England, not only in his own country, but in Europe. He (the
Chairman) was pleased to see a remark the other day in one of the daily papers, that
Dr. Lang was the only man in the colony who possessed a European reputation.
Dr. Lang’s reputation was not confined to Europe; it had travelled across the
Atlantic, and was as well known on the Continent of America as in England —in
New York as in his own loved Scotland—(cheers)—and therefore there was no
necessity for any testimonial at their hands (Cheers ) It was as much for their own
credit as for the credi. of Dr. Lang to give him this demonstration, because it would
show the pe >ple of England that the people of this colony could appreciate worth and
merit, and that they had honour and candour enough to acknowledge the great public
services they had received at the hand- of Dr. Lang. (Cheers.) There was no doubt that
when Dr. Lang returned to Europe, he would fellow in the old track—the beaten track
—that he would not only recommend immigration and the growth of cotton, but he
would recommend every thing that would advance the interests of this his adopted
country. (Cheers.) Dr Lang would be welt received by every man in Europe, ex-
cept Earl Grey. (Laughter.) Proud as he (the Chairman) felt in occupying th s
position, he could not but express his regret at the loss of Dr Lang's valuable ser-
vices, when he considered the risk of so long a voyage, beset as it is with so many
dangers, and that it might occasion the loss of his valuable services (Subdued ap-
plause ) Notwithstanding the dangers, both of sea and land, he (the Chairman) was
happy to feel that the honourable and reverend gentleman’s life was in the hands of
Him, without whose permission a sparrow could not fall; however, that hope which
brought pleasure to the human heart induced him to believe that they should once
more see the doctor, and receive the assistance of his valuable services. (Cheers.)
It would be unnecessary for him to say much with respect to the doctor, or the ne-
cessity of his visit to England—of the risk he would have to run, and the loss the
country would sustain by his absence at this juncture. His services now were pre-
eminently required here—more, perhaps, than at any other period of his life; but
there was a necessity for his departure, and he hoped the doctor's absence would not
be protracted more than four or five months, when he trusted they would again have
the benefit of his services in that sphere of life which he had so long occupied. Mr
Dailey remarked the other evening that he had heard the doctor’s voice in the Senate
House, and in the law courts of the colony; he (the Chairman) hoped they would soon
hear the music of the Doctor’s voice in his church, and the Senate House—and he
b'd no objection to the courts of law. (Cheers.) The address would be moved by
Mr Charles Cowper. (Vociferous and prolonged cheers.) That address would be
printed, and left for their signatures, and it would then be forwarded to Dr Lang in
London. (Cheers.) Ho (the Chairman) hoped it would be such an address as
would be worthy the people, and worthy the gentleman to whom it was presented
that it might show the people in England that Dr Lang had the authority—the voice


of a great, community at his back, when ho advocated their cause in the mother conn-
try. (Cheers.) He would not delay them longer, as ho had no doubt their particular
pot and orator, Mr Dailey (cheers), would have something to say to them. (Cheers.).
He would now call upon Mr Cowper to read the address.
The Honourable Charles COWPER, Colonial Secretary, who came forward amid
loud and prolonged cheers, said before he presented the address prepared by the-
committee he should make a few observations expressive of the regret which he was
sure they must all feel, that Dr Lang was about to leave this Colony, although only
fir a short time. (Cheers.) An imperative sense of duty, however, called him
away, and it would argue very little gratitude on the part of the Colonists of New
.South Wales if they were to permit Dr Lang to leave them without expressing not
only sympathy, but a hope that he would, before long, return successful in the more'
immediate object of his visit. (Cheers.) No doubt he would, in addition, perform
many other public services of value to this colony. Dr Lang had already performed
many voyages to England, and he had done by those voyages much to advance
the colony. They ought not to forget that it was mainly owing to the introduc-
tion of two or three shiploads of colonists that he saved Moreton Bay from being a
penal settlement. (Cheers.) Ho (Mr Cowper) believed it was strictly the fact that
to the opportune arrival of two or three ships with immigrants the people of More-
ton Bay were indebted for the circumstance that that Colony was not then made a
penal settlement, instead of being as it was now a flourishing sister colony. Dr Lang
not only performed that service for which he received the very handsome compliment,
a vote of thanks from the Legislature of Queensland, but be had also been instru-
mental in introducing a large number of families, who looked up to his exertions
with feelings of respect and gratitude. (Cheers.) He looked upon Dr Lang at the
present moment as one of his colleagues, and it was under these circumstances he
had a melancholy satisfaction in addressing them, and in asking them to adopt this
address. (Cheers.) He hoped after it had been read and circulated that they
would with all possible speed append their names, in order that it might follow Dr
Lang by the next mail that they might give him the pleasure of receiving this
document in England, where it would be a proud satisfaction to him and would shew
his services. It would be a useful document to him at home. (Cheers.) He (Mr
Cowper) would proceed to read the address, as prepared by the committee:—
“TO THE REV. JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., M.P.
“Sir,—We, the undersigned inhabitants of New South Wales, beg leave, on the occasion of
jour departure for England, to convey to you our own grateful recognition of your conspicu-
ous services in behalf of this country, and to give expression to the regret universally felt at
your withdrawal from public life for even the short period during which you propose to be
absent.
“ The people of this country, anxious to confer upon the first of our public men the highest
distinction which our institutions permit them to bestow, have elected you above all others for
the metropolitan constituency of New South Wales with the knowledge that you were about
once more to visit England, and they have done this at a time, and under circumstances which
might have rendered consistent the highest admiration of your public character, and an indis-
position to proclaim it in a form which demanded so large a sacrifice.
“ In congratulating you upon this unexampled mark of public confidence and respect, we
venture to express a hope that your return to Australia will be as speedy as the business of
your voyage will permit, and that in the representative position which you will occupy in the
old world you may take advantage of the opportunity to justify the faith of the people of this
country in your ability and devotedness to its interests, by directing your energies to the de-
velopment of the colony which already owes you so much, and which, by this addrers, confesses
the obligation.
(Cheers.) By adopting this address they would not only be doing themselves honour
but they would shew that the services of public men were duly appreciated by the
inhabitants of this colony. (Cheers.)


I>r. Laxg, who was received with reiterated cheers, said: Mr. Mayor, gentlemen,
and follow citizens, although I have been pretty much accustomed during the past
period of my life to public speaking of one kind or another, I confess I feel a strange
difficulty in acquitting myself with propriety on the present occasion (Cheers.)
The fact is, I have been so much accustomed to the buffetings of the world (laughter)
that I scarcely know how to demean myself under its smiles. ( I aughter and cheers.])
1 have been so long accustomed to the language of abuse and vituperation from toler-
ably respectable quarters'(cheers andlaughter) that anything in the way of commenda-
tion or approval sounds somewhat in my ear like the accents of a foreign tongue
(Laughter.) There was an unfortunate countryman of mine—(laughter)—who
for some misdemeanour of a very grave character he had committed got himself sen-
tenced to death under the laws of his country, and, when walking in great despon-
dency to the place of execution, another countryman of mine was endeavouring to
keep up his spirits, when the criminal told him he would have thought nothing of it
if he had only been used to it. (Hoars of laughter.) Now I, perhaps, might have
thought much less of this demonstration if I had been used to it. (Laughter.) But
the awkwardness I feel on this occasion arises from my inexperience. (Laughter )
The honourable the Premier observed a few evenings ago, at a large public meeting
at which we were both present, that however we might differ in many respects—there
was one thing in which there was a strong resemblance- we were, perhaps, the two
best-abused men in New South Wales (Great laughter.) And if any evidence of
this fact was wanting, I am quite sure I could appeal with confidence to those two
respectable members of our community—Mr John Fairfax and the Rev John West.
(Convulsive laughter.) lam quite confident that these gentlemen could testify with
perfect sincerity how perseveringly they had endeavoured to vilify, as well as to mis-
represent both the honourable Premier and myself—(cheers) —in the organ which
they manage in concert. But, gentlemen, those days are past, (Cheers.) The
market for all this sort of dry goods is now over. (Cheers and laughter.) We have
turned over a new leaf in our colonial history —we have entered upon a new era of
our political and social existence (Cheers.) Using with all reverence, phraseology
from the highest possible quarter, I might say that old things have passed away
with us as a community, and that all things have become new. (Subdued ap-
plause.) A great victory has been achieved during the present election—for it
is not yet over for the cause of truth and justice, and for the rights of man
in this great colony. (Cheers.) I should be mterly devoid of right feeling, were
I insensible to the great honour that has been done myself by my fellow-citizens
in these circumstances, in electing me as one of the representatives of this metro-
polis, after I had publicly announced my intention of taking another voyage to
Kurope. (Cheers.) I feel, gentlemen I appreciate very highly this great honour.
(Cheers.) I trust th ,t I shall shew, at all events, by my future procedure, that I
■endeavour to merit it, however far short I may be in my deserts. (Cheers )
Uentlemen, the same overpowering feeling that 1 announced at the outset will pre-
vent me from saying much in reply to the sentiments embodied in your address.
One of the most unfavourable subjects for any literary man to take up is himself
(Cheers.) I shall, thereforo.be very brief. I have endeavoured, in various ways,
to do my utmost in time past for the welfare and advancement of my adopted
country acting in whatever way Divine Providence pointed out to me the means
■of effecting that object. (Cheers.) I trust I shall be equally willing to take advan-
tage of this opportunity. One of the sentiments embodied in the address of one of
the-Presidents of the United States ©f America was “ the strength of a -country is
its population, and the best part of that population are the cultivators of the soil.”
(Cheers ) lam happy to find from the result of the present election that there is a
prospect of getting the cultivators of the soil extensively planted over the country on
their own little domains. (Cheers.) And I quite agree with the remarks made by
the honourable the Premier, that it is the interest of this country in one way or o ' her
to encourage the influx of an industrious and virtuous population from the British
Isles. (Cheers.) This colony is as large as all the three kingdoms and France
added to them, and surely the handful of people in this country are not sufficient to
develop its vast and hidden resources. (Cheers.) I trust, therefore, that the
forthcoming Parliament will hold out a helping hand towards the importation
of our fellow-countrymen who are anxiously looking for a home and a country
beyond seas. (Cheers.) If any other result should follow from my contem-
plated voyage, I think it will be in diffusing information on this subject
—on the capabilities of this great colony, and in the prospect they afford for


the settlement of a numerous, industrious, and virtuous population. (Cheers.)
It would be out of place to enter at any length upon the present political con-
dition and prospects of the colony. We all understand our present position—we
have gained a great victory, and it is our interest as it is our duty to do the best wo
can in our several places and relations to follow it up (Cheers.) Certain people
a e perpetually croaking about the danger that will accrue to any community from
the triumph of democracy; but democracy merely signifies Government by and
for the people, and we know that one of the greatest and most illustrious States of
antiquity—the State of Athens, in the glorious land of Greece—had its political con-
stituency established on the broad principle of democracy. (Cheers ) It was the
democracy of Athens that left us the noblest monuments that the literature of any
land can exhibit; it was the democracy of Athens that left the civilised world those
architectural and other remains that have been the wonder of the world in every
succeeding age; the democracy of Athens furnished the world with the greatest
poets and the greatest orators, and some of the greatest military commanders that
ever trod the earth. (Cheers.) I have no doubt whatever of the value of the prin-
ci le thus embodied in so many triumphs in the illustrious land of Greece. I have
no fear of the supremacy of the people. (Cheers.) The present election is sufficient
to shew us that the people can exercise a right judgment as to their interests, in the
selection of those whose duty it is to promote them in the Legislature of the country.
(Cheers.) And I feel perfectly confident that the course of our colonial democracy
will be prosperous in the highest degree. (Cheers. ) I have perfect confidence in the
people. I recollect an eminent clergyman in the city of Baltimore, in America, when
talking with me on the prospects of our respective nations, observed in a sort ot
didactic style that struck me at the moment. ‘I have perfect confidence in the
ability of man to govern himself.’ (Cheers ) Yes; democracy is merely the col-
lective body of men exercising their power, as it is their right to govern themselves
{Cheers ) I have as little doubt of their ability to do so, as I have of their right.
With these desultory remarks, Mr Mayor, I shall now bid you all, very affectionately
farewell, (The honourable and reverend gentleman resumed his seat amid protracted
cheering.)
When the applause subsided, the Chairman announced that Mr Dailey would
address the meeting.
W B DaLLEY, Esq., recently Solicitor-General of New South Wales, came forward
amid loud cheers and said he was sure on this occasion they would all feel tha.t in
discharging the duty which they had to discharge towards Dr Lang, it was a pamtul
as well as a pleasurable duty. The loss of their venerable friend on any occasion
under any circumstances, would be a loss which evety right-minded citizen from end
to end of the colony ought to deplore. (Applause.) But under present circumstances
his absence from public affairs seemed to him (Mr Dailey) to appear in the light ot a
calamity. They had this consolation in these circumstances that Hr Langs inten-
tion was to return to them as early as possible And no one who knew the strong
feeling of affection he entertained towards the people of this country could doubt that
that intention would be carried out as fat as possible. They would all with
him i Mr Dailey) even in the presence of one who might be regarded as the first ot
our citizens, the Prime Minister of the coun ry, that there was no man who had so
strong a hold on the affections of the people of this country as their venerable friend,
Dr Lang. (Applause.) And why was this? It was because he was not only the
oldest, but he had been the bravest and the best of the public men of this colony.
(Renewed applause.) Public life had been no holiday matter with Dr Lang no
scene of triumphs and laudations and applause from first to last; but a battle against
the most powerful class influences and interests in this country. (Cheers.) It was
all very well in these days for the politicians rising thick and fast around them to
stand before the public and claim honours to march to victory with the country at
their back; but there had been times in this country- tunes in which Dr Lang lived
and moved and had his being, when one who advocated the principles to which I>r
I ang steadfastly adhered, would find his followers few. his enemies most numerous
(Cheers.) It might be said of Dr Lang then, as was pathetically said of an
illustrious patriot in another land “ he battled best when the flag was trampled
down” It was when in a house of nominees and ot representatives little
better than nominees-(hear and cheers)—in such a House hardly one dared to
raise a voice in proclamation of any of those principles which are now embodied in


the institutions of the country—in such unhappy society (laughter and cheers) the
venc able politician proclaimed before the Parliament every principle which at this
moment he held. .(Loud and prolonged applause.) And it was because this wa,s
the case, because the people of this colony knew it, no matter how numerous his
enemies had been, however intense their desire to vilify and calumniate him, they
could safely say now, without fear of contradiction, that there was scarcely an
electorate in this country, from end to end—even if they went to the most remote
and uncivilised of the pastoral districts-where Dr Lang could not stand on the
hustings and do battle victoriously with any other man. (Cheers.) He had
selected the first constituency of the country because it was at his
door (Laughter and cheers.) Ho might have selected Queanbeyan
(laughter) or any other electorate, and been returned easily. _ One of the most
serious charges against Dr Lang was that he was a political priest. (Laughter.)
He Mr Dailey) wished from his heart that Dr Lang was the only political priest
here (Tremendous cheering.) As far as his experience went, they were all poli-
ticians , Renewed cheering ) But it would be a blessed thing for this country if
they were all as able—which thev are not—as straightforward-which they might
be—and all as earnest politieians'(a voice: ‘and as open’) as their venerable friend.
(Loud applause.) On no occasion had they-ever found him -on no occasion had
they to complain of him making use of religion as a cry to distract the people of this
country (‘Never.’) But the same could not be said for some of those who
charged'Dr Lang with that responsibility. (Cheers.) He (Mr Dailey) did not
know why he should detain them any longer on this occasion. ,‘Go on,’and
cheers.) They were there to testify, as far as any gathering of that kind could
testify, to Dr Lang’s virtues as a public man ; to proclaim that he was leaving this
colony although for so short a period, amid the deep and almost universal regrets of
the people of this country W ith the strongest desire of the people from whom ho
was about to absent himself for his safe and speedy return, Dr Lang was leaving
them impressed with a conviction that he would do them no discredit in going to the
mother-country. (Loud applause.) They had been told by the Right Worshipful
the Mavor, who presided with so much dignity on the present occasion, that Dr
Lang was as well known on the other side of the water as here. He (Mr Dailey)
believed that it was onlv of Dr Lang that that assertion could be made with any
degree of truth. He had not the slightest doubt that Dr Lang would take advan-
tage of his temporary residence in Britain to discharge duties to the people of this
colony which would almost have as beneficial a result as his continued exercise of
his duties here He would have the means of so doing, for his influence was great
there, and he was going there as a representative man. As much the
representative of the people of this country as any one could be. (Cheers.) They
unfortunately had no ribbon to put round his neck, no order of knighthood to con-
fer; those distinctions were bestowed on the other side of the world—(laughter and
cheers) but they gave him the highest honour the people could give, they returned
him as the representative of this great city in the Parliament ot the country, to give
him an opportunity of showing to the people ot Lngland a title to be listened to on
the affairs of this country. They knew he would so speak as to command attention.
(Applause ) Thev were certain he would do this if God spai ed his life to go to Lngland,
They would miss Dr Lang in the midst of that Assembly, where it was once his (Mr
Dailey’s) privilege to hear him. But they had this consolation, that he would soon
bo back again (cheers), with renewed health and strength, with a higher title to
their admiration, and to take his place under more favourable circumstances. Ho
believed that the public life of Dr Lang had generally been characterised above all
other things by perfect consistency (cheers) in the maintenance of his opinions, and
with the most indomitable courage in their expression. Up to the time when he was
removed from public life—because they recollected he was extinguished by Act of Pa-
liament • thev recollected some people had to invoke the omnipotence of Parliament
to remove him from public affairs—he said, up to that time those principles, to which
he cave utterance there, he maintained there, and nobly battled for. (Cheers.)
Those were the principles that they had since sanctioned with their approval, that
they had endorsed, and that they had s nee embodied in the legislation of the
country. (Applause.) They cjuld have no hesitation in believing that he would
remain firm in those principles. No change could take place in him, because those
principles were the result of early conviction, and had ever been carried out by him
under all practicable circumstances. (Cheers.) They had had gentlemen known
as rank lories in this count-}’, going to Europe, and returning radicals. (Laugh-


ter.) They had no fear the reverse would take place in Dr. Lang, He was
not likely to come back to them in favour of a nominee House, or a
very strong supporter of those gentlemen, whom he had so facetiously
alluded to that evening. (Renewed laughter.) It afforded him great gratification
to be there and see so many to bid the Rev. Dr Lang good-bye—to see so many
of those who so long had known him, and who, through good report, and evil report,
had ever stuck to him as firmly as they did that night—to see so many of those
gentlemen who represented the great majority by which he was returned for W est
Sydney, who triumphantly testified to his public worth; and who, in order to com-
mend him to the respect and esteem of the people of the old world, had returned
him first on the poll for West Sydney. (Great applause )
The CHAIRMAN said it would be necessary to put the address for adoption, and
for subsequent signature. He then put the motion, which was carried enthusias-
tically and unanimously.
Several other gentlemen having then addressed the meeting, including the Hon.
W. M. Arnold, Esq., minister lor work*, and Robert Stewart, Esq., M.P., the meeting
broke up, after three hearty cheers for Dr Lang, for the Mayor, and for the Ministry.
Printed at the STeaM Press Office, 1 Argyle street.




