









;
CORRESPONDENCE RELATING TO THE PROPOSED APPOINTMENT OF
A CHINESE CONSUL
AT
HONGKONG
,HONGKONG
PRINTED BY NORONHA & Co.
GOVERNMENT PRINTERS
1908




CORRESPONDENCE RELATING TO THE PROPOSED APPOINTMENT OF
A CHINESE CONSUL
AT
*
HONGKONG
HONGKONG
PRINTED BY NOEONHA & Co.
G 0 VERNMEN T PR INTER S
i© o e




SCHEDULE.
(a.) First Series.
No. Date. From. To. Page.
I. — (a.) otli December, 1868. Prince Kung Sir R. Alcock I
j.—(6.) 14tb December, 1868 . Sir R. Alcock Prince Kung 1
I. —( c .) Ist March, 1869 Foreign Office Colonial Office 1
J. —(W.) 15tb March, 1869 .... Earl of Granville Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell 2
11. 12ih Mav, 1869 Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell Earl of Granville 2
j %) * •
HI. 17th July, 1869 Earl of Granville Governor Sir K. G. MacDonnell 5
IV. —(«.) 4th August, 1869 Lord Clarendon Sir R. Alcock 5
IV. —(/>.) 14th August, 1869 ... Earl of Granville Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell 6
IV. —(c.) 13th September, 1869. Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell Earl of Granville 6
V. —(u.) 21st September, 1869. Foreign Office Colonial Office 8
V.—(5.) 30th September, 1869. Colonial Office Foreign Office 8
V. —(c.) 30th September, 1869. Secretary of State for Colonies . Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell 8
VI. — (a.) 4th October, 1869 ... Foreign Office Colonial Office 9
VI. —(5.) Bth October, 1869 ... Secretary of State for Colonies . Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell 9
i
VI. —(c.) 9(h December, 1869.. Secretary of State for Colonies . Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell 9
VII. —(«•) 3rd January, 1870 ... Sir R. Alcock Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell 10
VII. —(5.) Bth January, 1870 ... Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell Earl of Granville 11
VIII. 11th January, 1870 ... Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell Earl of Granville 12
IX.— (a.) 22nd January, 1870... Memorial from the Hongkong Earl of Clarendon 12
Chamber of Commerce.
IX. —( b .) 2lst January, 1870 Memorial from the Inhabitants Earl of Clarendon 14
of Hongkong.
IX. —(c.) 24th January, 1870 ... Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell Earl of Granville 17
X. 22nd March, 1875 Earl of Carnarvon Governor Sir A. Kennedy 20
XI. 9th June, 1875 Administrator J. G. Austin Earl of Carnarvon 21
4
XL—(«.) 9th August, 1875 ... Earl of Carnarvon Administrator J. G. Austin 22
XL—(5.) 9th August, 1875 .... Colonial Office Foreign Office 23
XL—( c .) Bth October, 1875 ... H.B.M.’s Consul at Canton Foreign Office 23
XI. —( d .) 27th January, 1876 ... Colonial Office Foreign Office 24
XL—( e .) 18th January, 1876 ... H.B.M.’s Consul at Canton Sir T. F. Wade 25
XI. — (f.) 20th May, 1876 Colonial Office Foreign Office 25


(/>.) Second Series.
No. Date. From. To. Page.
I.— (a.) 22nd July, 1882 Marquis Tseng j Earl of Granville 25
I. —(5.) 31st July, 1882 Foreign Office Colonial Office 26
J. —(r.) 4th September, 1882. Colonial Office Foreign Office j 26
I. —(<7.) 12th February, 1883... Earl of Derby Governor Sir G. F. Bowen 27
II.—(//.) 18th April, 1883 Attorney General E. O'Malley... Colonial Secretary W. Marsh ...1 27
i
II. —(5.) 20th April, 1883 Colonial Secretary W. Marsh ... Governor Sir G. F. Bowen j 28
IT.—(c.l 21st April, 1883 Governor Sir G. F. Bowen Earl of Derby 28
__J
(c.) Third Series.
I. ! 15th November, 1890. Lord Knutsford j Governor Sir G. W. Des Voeux. 29
I
II. —(«.) 11th December, 1890 . Chinese Ambassador Marquis of Salisbury .. j 29
II. —(5.) 16th December, 1890 . Foreign Office Colonial Office i 30
11. —(c.) 2nd January, 1891 ... Secretary of State for Colonies.. Governor Sir G. VV. Des Voeux. 30
I •
■
111. 22nd Januarv, 1891 ... Governor Sir G. W. Des Voeux. Lord Knutsford 31
IV. 4th February, 1891 . Governor Sir G. W. Des Voeux. Lord Knutsford 31
V. —-(/?.) 15th January, 1891 ... Colonial Office Foreign Office 32
V. —(5.) 24th January, 1891... Foreign Office Colonial Office 33
V. —(c.) 28th January, 1891 ... Governor Sir C. C. Smith Lord Knutsford 33
V.—(J.) 7th March, 1891 Colonial Office Foreign Office 34
V.— (e.) 14th March, 1891 .... Colonial Office Foreign Office 34
V.—(/.) 23rd March, 1891 Foreign Office Colonial Office 35
V. —(</.) 26th March, 1891 Secretary of State for Colonies.. Governor Sir G. W . Des \oeux. 35
VI. 16th February, 1891... Governor Sir G. W. Des Voeux. Lord Knutsford 36
VII. 21st Mav, 1891 Lord Knutsford Administrator G. D. Barker ... 36
VIII.—(a.) 26th June, 1891 Marquis of Salisbury 1 Sir J. Walsharn... 36
VIII. —(Z>.) 7tii July, 1891 Secretary of State for Colonies.. Administrator G, D. Barker ... 37
IX.—(a.) 13th July, 1891 H.B.M.’s Consul General at Colonial Secretary Goodman ... 37
Canton.
IX. —(A) January, 1891 ... Translation of Memorial by Chi- Imperial Chinese Government... 38
nesc Minister in England.
X. 15th July, 1891 Administrator G. D. Barker ... Lord Knutsford 38
J '
XL 20th Julv, 1891 Administrator G. D. Barker ... Lord Knutsford 39
%/ ~
XII. Ist October, 1891 ... Lord Knutsford Administrator G. D. Barker ... 40
(d.) Fourth Series.
I. 16th October, 1907 ... Governor Sir F. D. Lugard Lord Li Ching-fong 40
11. 23rd December, 1907.. Lord Li Ching-fong Governor Sir F. D. Lugard 41


CORRESPONDENCE RELATING TO THE PROPOSED APPOINTMENT
OF A CHINESE CONSUL AT HONGKONG.
FIRST SERIES.
I. —(a.)
Extract from Memorandum enclosed in Despatch from Prince Kung to
Sir K. Alcock, dated December sth, 1868.
u In consequence of the numerous channels into which the route from Hongkong to
Canton divides itself, there is a great opportunity for smuggling ; and vessels are constantly
evading the payment of duties by taking a circuitous course so as to avoid the barrier. As
great loss results to the Revenue from this cause, it is proposed that the Chinese Govern-
ment should appoint officials to reside at Hongkong for the express purpose of attending
to the collection of duties in the interest of the Customs Revenue. Rules for regulating the
collection of duties.by such officials can be subsequently agreed upon.”
i— oo
Extract from a Despatch of Sir R. Alcock to Prince Kung,
dated Peking, December 14th, 1868.
“In reference to the Memorandum enclosed in Your Imperial Highness’s communica-
tion of the sth of December, divided into six heads, I have the honour to state in reference
to No. 1 : The proposal to appoint Chinese Officials to reside at Hongkong for the express
purpose of attending to the collection of duties in the interest of the Customs, that this
cannot not be acceded to in British Territories. But admitting the existence of the evil
complained of, it would seem reasonable that the Emporer of China should have the same
right to appoint a Consul to reside in Hongkong as all other Treaty Powers have, and to
enjoy the same rights and exercise the same authority in matters connected with the trade
of Chinese subjects as any other nation in Treaty with Great Britain may claim in British
Colonies. At the same time, as this right has not hitherto been conceded or claimed, it
will be necessary that steps to that end should be taken with Her Britannic Majesty’s
Government, and h will fitly form a subject for consideration and settlement in the
approaching revision of the Treaty of 1858.”
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
March Ist , 1869.
i (a) and i (ft). Siw, —1 am directed bv the Earl of Clarendon to transmit to you, to
' J 7
First series. be laid before Farl Granville, an extract of a Memorandum communicated by
Prince Rung to Sir Rutherford Alcock, with reference to the revision of the
Treaty of Tientsin proposing the appointment of Chinese Officials at Hongkong with a view
to the prevention of smuggling between Chinese Ports and that Colony, together with an
extract of Sir Rutherford Alcock’s reply.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) E. Hammond.
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.


I. — (d.)
Copy of Despatch from Earl of Granville to Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell.
HONGKONG.
No. 36.
Downing Street,
15th March , 1869,
!(«)• Sir, — I have honour to transmit to you a copy of a letter from the
FirstTseTieZ Foreign Office with copies of extracts from Despatches which have passed
between Prince Kung and Sir R. Alcock in reference to the revision of the
Treaty of Tientsin and the appointment of Chinese Officials at Hongkong with a view to
the prevention of smuggling between Chinese Ports and that Colony,
I have expressed to the Earl of Clarendon my concurrence in Sir P. Alcock’s opinion
that it would be desirable that a Chinese Consul should be appointed who would reside in
Hongkong.
o o
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Granville.
Governor
Sir R. G. MacDonnell, C.8.,
ifc, 7 (fc., eye.
11.
Copy of Despatch from Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell to Earl of Granville.
No, 701.
GovernmenT H OUSE,
Hongkong, 12th May, 1869.
1 W- My Lord, — I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of Your Lordship’s
First series. despatch No. 36 covering copy of a letter from the Foreign Office transmitting
a correspondence between Prince Kung and , v ir Rutherford Alcock, Her
Majesty’s Minister in China, from which it appears that Prince Kung had suggested the
appointment by the Chinese Government u of Officials to reside at Hongkong for the express
purpose of attending to the collection of duties in the interest of the (Chinese) Customs
Revenue ’ .
2. The Prince gives as a reason for this extraordinary request that the supposed facili-
ties afforded by the formation of the neighbouring coast for smuggling were such that
1/ O *’ • O 1 1
u vessels were constantly evading the payment of duties by taking a circuitous course so as
to avoid the harrier ”, i.e., in the Canton River.
3. I need scarcely say that it might often be very convenient for a Foreign Country to
save all expense attending the maintenance of a large Revenue Protective Service by
levying its Customs duties on goods before they had even left the place of export. This
would summarily remove any apprehension of smuggling those goods subsequently. French
Customs Officers established at London Bridge and levying duties on goods before they
were clear of the Thames would represent exactly the sort of establishment which Prince
Kung wished to form here.
4. Obviously it was not in Sir Rutherford Alcock’s power to hold out any hope of
such a privilege being conceded and it is greatly to be regretted that he did not confine
himself to the statement of that indisputable fact. Prince Kung had very plainly given the
reason why, in continuation no doubt of the Chinese Customs Policy of harassing legitimate
traders from this Colony he wished to place a Staff of Chinese Officials here, viz. : —to
collect here—on British Territory—Chinese duties, which by international usage can prop-
erly be leviable only at the Port of arrival. If unable to effect that object it does not seem


that he cared for any other ; and I am utterly at a loss to conceive what could have induced
Sir Rutherford Alcock to-go out of his way and suggest to Prince Kung the expediency
of obtaining the right to nominate a Consul at this Port—a matter which had no reference
i
whatever to Prince Kung’s original request.
5. I am not however surprised owing to my former experience, that, although no such
right as that of appointing a Chinese Consul here had ever been claimed or conceded since
the foundation of the Colony, and though the question was a novel one, intimately affecting
the interests of this place—Her Majesty’s Minister should have made the suggestion to
Prince Kung, and should have transmitted it to the Foreign Office without the knowledge
of this Government and without affording me and rny Council the opportunity of giving an
opinion on the subject.
(>. Nevertheless I can easily understand that under the circumstances, and in the
absence of any apparent reason to the contrary, Your Lordship should have treated it as a
matter of course lor China as well as any other Treaty Power” to have the right of
appointing a Consul here, and that you should at once have u expressed your concurrence
in Sir Rutherford Alcock’s opinion, &c., &c.”
7. On the 10th instant I laid Your Lordship’s despatch before my Executive Council
and 1 invited the Un-official Members of the Legislative Council to assist by their advice,
as persons who represent some of the largest Mercantile Establishments in China and whose
local personal experience entitles their opinions on such a point to special weight.
8. I have now the honour to report, that our unanimous judgment arrived at unhesi-
tatingly and without the least difference of opinion is wholly opposed to authorizing by any
revision of the Treaty of Tientsin or otherwise the appointment of a Chinese Consul to
reside at Hongkong.
O
9. First. We found that no application had been made by the Chinese Government on
the subject. The suggestion had been forced on Prince Kung, who from all that appears
may he perfectly indifferent to it —or be even opposed to it—except so far as he may think
that such an Official could—if not openly —yet actually levy secretly the duties which he
asks to lew in Hongkong.
%/ »5 o
10. Secondly. China is not in the same position as other Treaty Powers either to
demand or expect such a concession because all the diplomatic relations of China with the
rest of the world are the result of special Treaty stipulations imposed by force of arms,
whilst on the other hand China unlike France or other Treaty Powers has not thrown open
her country to Foreigners, nor admitted Foreign commerce except in a narrow and limited
manner disqualifying her thereby from expecting those rights which she withholds from
others —especially whilst she also fails to take advantage of the Treaty Provision which
enables her to establish a resident Minister at St. James.
11. Thirdly. Although the above considerations dispose of any right or just expecta-
tion of China in the matter we should have felt no objection to the concession, if it were
not certain to he attended with serious injury both to Native and Foreign interests here.
A Consul at Hongkong whilst he ought to be useless for Prince Kung’s object of collecting
Chinese taxes, would certainly cause most serious alarm to all the Native population, whose
residence here has hitherto afforded them comparative immunity from the petty espionage
and squeezing of their own Mandarins.
12. Your Lordship has to remember that whilst all the population here is in the
immediate vicinity of the Mainland, the great majority of the influential Native residents
own property and have children and other near relatives residing there. The instances are
numerous of Hongkong Native residents being compelled to pay from time to time large
squeezes and exactions to the Authorities at Canton, because a refusal to do so would lead
to the seizure of their property in China, and to the imprisonment and even torture of their
immediate relatives. In the last War with China an order from Canton recalled almost all
the Chinese and the servants in this place within 24 hours, so that the European residents
had to clean their boots and cook their dinners themselves.
i
13. Of course the further a Colony might be from China the less easy would be the
espionage and influence, which can be so directly and promptly brought to bear on residents
of an Island almost touching Chinese soil. Thus at Singapore there would be less danger


and inconvenience of increasing by the appointment of a recongnized Government Official
as Consul the influence of the Cantonese or other Authorities there. At Mauritius the risk
would disappear altogether—or be unappreciable —but with the full knowledge of the power
exercised already by the Officials and the Guilds at Canton over 9/10ths of the residents*
here, who regard the Viceroy of the Two Kwang as their ultimate chief whom they can be
forced sooner or later to obey, it seems most unwise to permit an accredited official as spy
and squeezer general of the Chinese Government to take up his residence in our midst.
14. It is quite clear at least that the question is not one ol easy solution. It is by no-
means a matter of course that China should appoint a Consul here. It is on the contrary a
question to be weighed and determined by the special and exceptional circumstances of this
very peculiar place —its very peculiar inhabitants—and most peculiar geographical position.
All these considerations in the opinion of those who are apparently well qualified to form a
correct judgment are decidedly opposed to the policy of Sir R. Alcock as being unfair even
to the Native residents, who, if they could be polled, would no doubt be found wholly
averse to the suggestion, and 2ndly as being dangerous to British interests especially in
times of trouble and impending hostilities—a consideration to which recent intelligence
from Peking gives unusual importance.
15. lam also not aware what functions such a Consul would exercise. Perhaps Sir
R. Alcock contemplates limiting the intercourse of the Governor here with the Chinese
Empire to representations made through a sub-official like the Consul —Instead of through
the British Consul to the Viceroy—a humiliation in the eyes of the Chinese which seems
more injurious than beneficial to British interests !
16. Finally I and my Council felt that in this matter and looking to the peculiar cir-
cumstances of this place and its population it was a plain duty to consider simply whether
the proposed appointment would or would not advance British interests, seeing that there
is no right to claim the privilege which had never been urged by the Chinese Authorities
and that the necessity for a Chinese Consul had never been experienced by either the For-
eign or Native Community.
17. I can only conceive such an Officer being useful in one way, viz. : —to save the-
delay of reference to Canton by at once backing warrants for the arrest of criminals or other
parties amenable to British Law, who might have escaped to or be lurking on the mainland.
Even in that respect a Consul would not be half so useful as the Mandarin at Kowloon
who despite the views of Sir H. Alcock on the subject is u ex necessitate rei” in almost
daily correspondence with the Hongkong Police.
18. Altogether neither I nor my Executive —nor the representatives of the commercial
and general interests of Hongkong in the Legislative Council —are able to see in what man-
ner Hie legitimate interests of either Great Britain or China are to be benefitted by adopting
this most unnecessary and uncalled for suggestion of Sir R. Alcock. We believe that such
a creation of an u imperium in impend ” would produce alarm and dissatisfaction amongst
Chinese residents here, and that by unnecessarily pressing on the Chinese the adoption of
such a measure Her Majesty’s Government would be taking the surest course to develop-
during times of peace the worst vices of Chinese Rule in a population under British pro-
tection, and on the other hand in the event of approaching disturbances or the cessation of
friendly relations with Peking we should be creating in our midst a dangerous centre for
rebellion, plots and hostile action. Therefore at the request of my Council 1 now respect-
fully submit the foregoing observations to Your Lordship hoping that whatever course may
be adopted in any other Colony the exceptional circumstances and position of Hongkong
may at least exempt it from the inconvenience and risk which the residence there of a
Chinese Consul would entail, and may lead to the indefinite adjournment of so very ill-
timed a proposal.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Richard Graves MacDonnell,
Governor.
The Right Honourable
The Earl of Granville, K.G.,
fyc., S>'C., S>'C.


111.
Copy of Despatch from Earl of Granville to Governor Sir R. G. Mac Donnell.
Hongkong.
No. 106.
Downing Street,
17th July , 1869.
Sir, — I have to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the 12th May No. 701
IL stating the objections entertained by yourself and your Executive Council
First series. to the appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
I have to acquaint you in reply that the statements which you now submit will
receive consideration if the Chinese Government should apply to Her Majesty’s Govern-
Not printed. ment for such appointment ; but that considering the fact stated in your
Despatch of the 22nd February No. 655, that of late the smugglers
have armed themselves heavily and go in Fleets prepared to fight desperately, it would
be very difficult for Her Majesty’s Government to refuse to accede to any such application
if made.
1 have, &c.,
(Sd.) Granville.
Governor
Sir Ji. G. MacDonnell, C.8.,
* 1 i
sc., c fa., Bfc.
IV. — (a.)
Copy of Despatch from Lord Clarendon to Sir R. Alcock.
5
No. 141.
Foreign Office,
August 4th , 1869.
Sir, —With reference to the question of the appointment of a Chinese Consul to reside
in Hongkong referred to in your despatch No. 315 of the 14th of
T December, I have to state to you that you properly informed Prince
First series. Kuug that such an Officer could not be allowed to act in aid of the
collection of Chinese duties which seems to have been the object for which the appoint-
ment was to be made.
\
It may be doubtful indeed whether the residence of a Chinese Consul in the Colony
even if his duties were limited to those ordinarily devolving; on Consular Officers in Her
Majesty s dominions would not lead to difficulty an 1 Her Majesty’s Government arc glad
therefore that, while not absolutely discouraging the idea of the eventual appointment of
a Chinese Consul you intimated that the question must be reserved for consideration, when
the Treaty is formally revised ; and if Prince Kung should revert to the subject, you will
abide by that answer.
w
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) Clarendon.
Sir R. Alcock, K.C.8.,
(|r., Bfc.


IV.—(G)
Copy of Despatch from Earl of Granville to Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell.
Hongkong. '
No. 122.
Downing Street,
14th August , 1869 .
Sir,— l have the honour to transmit to you for your information, and with reference
Nos. i (//). ii, in to the correspondence noted in the margin, a copy of a despatch which the
and IV Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has addressed to Her Majesty’s
First series. Minister in China with regard to the question of the appointment of a
Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Granville.
Governor
Sir R. 6. MacDonnell, C.8.,
§c., Ac., ( fc.
IV.- (c.)
Copy of Despatch from Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell to Earl of Granville.
No. 790.
Government House,
Hongkong, 13th , 1869.
My Lord,-I have the honour to acknowledge receipt o£ Your Lordship’s despatch
HI and 11. No. 106 of the 17th July in reply to mine of the 12th May last stating
First series. the objections of myself and Council to the appointment of a Chinese
Consul here.
2. I perceive that whilst Your Lordship assures me those objections will receive
consideration at the hands of Her Majesty’s Government you add that as I had reported in
Not printed. rn y Despatch No. 655 “that the smugglers had then armed themselves
“ heavily and went in fleets prepared to fight desparately, it would be
“ difficult for Her Majesty’s Government to refuse to accede to any such application, if
“ made ”.
3. I do not exactly apprehend how the action taken by smugglers here bears on the
expediency of appointing a Chinese Consul at Hongkong, unless Your Lordship may
possibly have supposed that large and heavily armed fleets of smugglers are fitted out here
and that in some way or other if a Chinese Consul resided here he would have an oppor-
tunity of protesting against their departure or of otherwise calling on the Executive here
to interfere.
4. Though I do not see how in a Free Port like this and in the present state of the
Law, it would be possible for either this Government or a Chinese Consul to prevent any
number of vessels leaving the Port, whether armed or not, unless suspected of piratical
intentions, it is right that I should inform Your Lordship that in whatever way such fleets
used to get together, there is no reason to suppose that they ever sailed from here unless
perhaps as single and separate vessels so as to elude observation.
5. I have further much pleasure in stating that I believe those fleets of smugglers
who were almost all equipped from Macao and Saigon have disbanded and smuggling has
apparently become too venturesome an investment to induce many to take it up in this
vicinity. As this Government, whilst protesting against infringements of either Interna-
tional right or courtesy, has always been opposed to the Opium Smuggling Trade, as
injurious to our friendly relations with the Chinese and to the character of the Colony
generally, I am glad to report that the large fleets alluded to are never heard of in the
vicinity of this Colony, and that smuggling generally is on the decline.


6. I think Your Lordship will permit me, whilst on this subject, to observe, that as
the main object of Prince Kung was actually to collect here duties on all goods exported
hence to China, and as I presume a concession of that kind is not contemplated by Her
Majesty’s Government there would probably be no great anxiety on the part of the Imperial
Authorities to secure a Consular appointment here. This would be an advantage as I am
still of opinion that for special reasons, which appl} r to no other nation and which even to
that nation would be inapplicable in any other part of Her Majesty’s Dominions, the ap-
pointment of a Chinese Consul or any recognised Chinese Official Representative here would
be dangerous, because it would aid and establish a power of intimidation, intrigue, and
corruption quite opposed to the spirit in which Her Majesty’s Government founded this
Colony.
7. It happens only too frequently that the vicinity of this City to the native Authori-
ties on the mainland brings before me the power of the Mandarins there over the population
here, and convinces me that their influence is already dangerously great.
8. As exactly illustrating the remarks on that subject in my Despatch No. 701 of
n y_ the 12th May last, I transmit copy of a communication which I directed to
First series. be addressed to Consul Robertson on the 25th ultimo relative to a demand
Not printed. by the Viceroy for rendition of a Chinese named Lai-li-heen, who had been
resident here 22 years. The man’s only crime was that he refused to give
up and compel his daughter to marry a person on the mainland and towards whom she
seemed to entertain a fixed aversion, threatening to commit suicide if forced to such a
marriage.
O
9. The Despatch sent to the Consul gives a sufficient resume of the case, as it was
necessary that I should be particular in explaining why and how it was impossible that I
could entertain such a demand, but incidentally it illustrates most aptly the position of
Chinese residents here in relation to their own Government, a position which at the
greater distance of Singapore would perhaps become so altered, as to render the considera-
tions which apply here almost inapplicable there.
10. Although Lai-li-heen has been promised the protection of this Government whilst
he remains in the Colony and though for the present I am informed the emissaries of the
Mandarins have ceased to molest him with their visits and demands for money, I incline to
think that eventually he will be forced to yield and sacrifice either his daughter or the
greater part of his fortune.
11. In a similar way I find myself much embarrassed whenever I have to follow out
any inquiry involving Chinese evidence inimical to the interest of the Chinese Authorities,
such as seizures of prizes in our waters, &c., &c. Both intimidation and bribes are fre'ely
resorted to by emissaries from Canton, and witnesses disappear or contradict themselves in
a manner which denotes their great dread of the Cantonese Officials and the power main-
tained by the latter over them by the unscrupulous manner in which they can plunder or
torture relatives on the mainland of residents here.
12. I feel assured that these considerations which as Your Lordship may perceive are
special and peculiar to this Colony, though not on that account less weighty in deciding
matters affecting this Colony, will have due consideration if ever Her Majesty’s Government
is invited to assent to an appointment calculated to strengthen Foreign influence over
residents here. Such influence is at once politically dangerous and otherwise objectionable,
because almost invariably used for corrupt purposes.
I have, &c.,
> (Sd.) Richard Graves Mac Donnell,
Governor.
The Right Honourable
Earl Granville, K. 6.,
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State,
(fc., tf-c., <SfC.


V. —(a.)
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
September 21st , 1869.
Sir, —With reference to Mr. Otway’s letter of the 4th ultimo, I am directed by the
Earl of Clarendon to request that you will acquaint Earl Granville that it would appear from
a telegram just received from Sir Rutherford Alcock, that he may find it necessary in his
negotiations with the Chinese Government on commercial matters, to make some concession
to that Government in regard to the right of appointing a delegate at Hongkong.
I am, &c„
7 *
(Sd.) E. Hammond.
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
v.-o.)
Copy of Despatch from Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street,
30th September , 1869.
Sir, —I am directed by Earl Granville to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
v 00- 21st instant to the effect that Sir R. Alcock might find it necessary in his
First series. negotiations with the Chinese Government on commercial matters to make
some concession to that Government in regard to the appointment of a delegate at Hong-
kong.
O
His Lordship takes it for granted that any such concession will be subject to the con-
IV OA ditions imposed by the Earl of Clarendon on Her Majesty’s Minister at
First series. Pekin by the Despatch to him of the 4th August last.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) F. Rogers.
The Under Secretary of State,
Foreign Office.
V—(c.)
Copy of D espatch from Secretary of State for Colonies to
Governor Sir K. G. MacDonnell.
No. 155.
Downing Street,
30th September , 1869.
Sir, — I transmit to you for your information and with reference to my Despatch No.
iv (») &v(a & ft). 122 of the 14th August, copies of a further correspondence between the
First, series. f
foreign Office and this Department in reference to the appointment of a
Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Frederic Rogers,
for Lord Granville.
Governor
Sir R. G. MacDonnell, C.8., .
(fr., tfc., <Sfc,


Vl.— (a.)
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
4th October , 1869.
Sih, —In reply to your letter of the 30th ultimo, as to the course to be pursued by Sir
v CO; Rutherford Alcock in his negotiations with the Chinese Government in
First series. regard to the appointment of a Chinese Consul to reside in Hongkong,
I am directed by the Earl of Clarendon to request that you will state to Earl Granville
that it is to be hoped that Sir R. Alcock will have receive 1 the Despatch sent to him
from this office on August 4th in time to influence his proceedings.
I am to add that, in Lord Clarendon’s opinion, it would now be of no use to telegraph
to Sir Rutherford Alcock on the subject.
1 am, &c.,
(Sd.) G. Hammond.
The tinder Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
VI. —(i.)
Copy of Despatch from Secretary of State for Colonies to
Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnkll.
Hongkong.
No. 166.
Downing Street,
Bth October , 1869.
Sir, — 1 transmit to you for your information and wish reference to my Despatch
vQ) and vi (a). No. 155 of the 30th September, a copy of a further letter from the
First series. Foreign Office in regard to the appointment of a Chinese Consul to reside
in Hongkong.
o o
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Frederic Rogers,
for Earl Cranville.
Governor
Sir R. G. MacDonnell, C.8.,
($'C., (| '€., dr.
VI. — (c.)
Copy of Despatch from Secretary of State to Governor Sir R. G. MacDoxnkll.
Hongkong.
No. 192.
Downing Street,
9th December , 1869.
Sir, —I have the honour to inform you that your Despatch No. 790 of the 13th
IV O' September, respecting the appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong,
First series. was referred by my desire to the Earl of Clarendon, and that His Lordship
has forwarded a copy of it to Her Majesty’s Minister at Pekin.
<•
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) F. R. Sandford,
for Earl Granville.
Governor
Sir K. G. MacDonnell, C.8.,
<fyc., ( fc ., Bfc.


VIL— (a.)
Copy of Despatch from Sir R. Alcock to Governor Sir R. G. MacDoxxell.
Hongkong, January 1370.
Sm, —Referring to Your Excellency's correspondence with Her Majesty’s Secretary of
Not printed. State for the Colonies No. 635 of January lltii, 642 of January 25th, and
tary of State for Foreign Affairs, I have the honour to state for your information, that in
compliance with the instructions of Her Majesty’s Government, I have been in communica-
tion with His Fxcellency the Viceroy of the two Provinces on the subjects therein discussed
during my recent visit to Canton. The result will be found recorded in the enclosed copy
of a Note'drawn up for the information of the Earl of Clarendon giving the chief beads of
the conversation that took place during two interviews with His Excellency on the 28th
and 29th of last month.
1 trust the result will be satisfactory, inasmuch as the Viceroy has given me the lullest
7 •/ '
assurance that he perfectly recognises the expediency of friendly relations being maintained
between the Colonial and Chinese local authorities at Kowloon, and such mutual exchange of
good offices as may be required not only effectively to maintain the peace on the border but
to arrest crime on each side by facilitating the arrest of thieves and other criminals, and the
recovery of stolen property without delay, on the necessity of reference to higher authori-
ties at Canton. He has accordingly promised to send instructions to that effect.
In regard to the Opium Stations and the action of the Revenue Cruizers, he has also
undertaken to issue further and stringent instructions to all the Authorities and Officers
in this service to carefully avoid all undue interference with the legitimate trade of
the Colony in Native Junks.
Having information of the arrangements contemplated in the recent revision of the
Treaty of Tientsin, with a view to the establishment of such practical regulations in Hong-
kong and China as shall place the commercial intercourse between Hongkong and the
neighbouring coasts on a more definite and regular footing, he expressed the satisfaction
with which he would promote whatever tended to this end. I fully explained to him the
views of Her Majesty’s Government on this subject with which you are already acquainted,
the object being to protect the Chinese Revenue without unreasonably obstructing the
ordinary and daily traffic between Hongkong and the mainland, and in so doing to remove
occasions of controversy and mutual complaint. He concurred with me in thinking that
the appointment of a trustworthy and responsible official as His Imperial Majesty’s Consul
at Hongkong would materially contribute to this most desirable end.
I pointed out to him, in this connection, the possibility of abuses in the exercise of the
duties of Consul by a Chinese Officer as these are regulated and understood among Western
Nations, and was glad to find that he was fully alive to the necessity of making ample pro-
visions against such dangers. I suggested the appointment in the first instance of one of
their Foreign Employes from the Maritime Customs, until there was time for their own
officers to he educated and gain experience as to the nature of the duties which devolve
upon Consuls and the limits of their power. Me seemed disposed to concur with me in
this view and in the necessity of taking especial precautions against the abuses incident to
a corrupt administration and underpaid officials.
Notwithstanding the strong feeling expressed therefore by the deputations of the
Chamber of Commerce and the Mercantile Communities of Hongkong to-day on this sub-
ject, 1 am convinced it is by such means alone that any satisfactory or permanent settlement
of existing differences and conflicting interests can be effected. There is nothing* in my
opinion in the position of Hongkong as a British Colony or a Free Port, which should
preclude the possibility of making such arrangements in accordance with International Law
;md usage which ffiall, in Lord Granville’s words, protect the commerce of the Colony which
is legitimate and discourage that which is contraband. We may differ as to the proportion
which the one bears to the other, but there can scarcely be any divergence of opinion between
the Governor of Hongkong anti Her Majesty’s Minister, both servants of the Crown, and
under the orders of the same Government, as to the imperative obligation of using every exer-
tion to attain this double end, and the necessity if possible of securing both. Looking to the
undoubted right of the Chinese Government to protect itself as Lord Granville observes by


its own methods from the smuggling which the establishment of Hongkong has necessarily
facilitated, I cannot help thinking the wisest mode of proceeding is loyally and frankly to
co-operate with them to that end. I believe Her Majesty’s Government will be disposed to
recognise the advantage of adopting this policy. If such prove to be the case the right of
appointing a Consul with all the privileges conceded to Consuls of other powers in the
comity of Nations —Turks and Persians among the rest —cannot be refused without incon-
sistency and as I believe without disastrous consequences. Among the least of these must
be the refusal of the Chinese to concede the privileges of a Treaty Port to Hongkong which
it has been the object of the recent Convention to secure.
I venture to hope therefore that Your Excellency on further consideration may see
reason to agree with me in treating as more or less chimerical and exaggerated the fears of
the Mercantile Community and colonists which have been expressed as to the dangers to be
anticipated from the appointment of a Chinese Consul for the Colony and to use the in-
fluence which its Governor must always exercise to allay unreasonable fears.
1 have, &c.,
(Sd.) Rutherford Alcock.
Governor
Sir R. G. MacDonnkll, C.8.,
ffC., sc., sc.
VII— (b.)
Extract, of Despatch from Governor Sir !'. G. MacDonnell to Earl of Granville.
No. 845.
Government House,
Hongkong, Bth January, 1870.
My I jOHd, —When Her Majesty’s Minister, Sir Rutherford Alcock, on his way to
Europe was recently passing through Hongkong to visit Canton, before returning to
Government House here, 1 brought to his notice the relations of the Colonial Authorities
with the Chinese Officials at Kowloon.
2. I more especially invited His Excellency’s attention to the fact that, although I had
Not print* a. been apprized by Your Lordship in your communication of the 14th Octo-
ber last, that Mr. Consul Robertson had previous to that date been
instructed to give effect to the views of Her Majesty’s Government for free and neighborly
intercommunication between the Officers of each Government along the common boundary
of British and Chinese territory no steps appeared to have been taken in accordance with
those instructions to carry out the wish of Your Lordship and the Queen’s Government.
3. I, therefore, requested His Excellency to bring the matter before the Viceroy, be-
cause I was anxious that the re-establishment of the old familiar relations with our neighbors
for Police purposes should be publicly recognized, as it appeared to me that the Kowloon
Authorities were cowed by some influence exerted at Canton.
-V- 4k
W *7v
9. Sir Rutherford Alcock kindly undertook to arrange this and had two interviews
with the Viceroy on the subject. I enclose a despatch from His Excellency explanatory of
vn fA . his proceedings on each occasion, and covering a full Memorandum of what
First series. had passed between himself and the Viceroy. I see no objection to the
understanding arrived at, provided it is not expected that reports of all the petty transactions
between Sub-Officials of this Government and Kowloon are to be forwarded to Canton. Such
a system would be impracticable, and if attempted, would soon lead to complaints of omis-
sions, whilst it would furnish too ready a means for developing any tendency to captious
jealousy. The Kowloon Authorities will no doubt keep the Viceroy adequately informed of
all such petty occurrences, but the occassions when a necessity may arise for this Govern-
ment to make reports must unavoidably be determinable by the discretion of the Governor.
A list of regulations on such a subject would be a list of fresh difficulties, and is a measure
which might at least be deferred till circumstances prove its necessity.


10. The determination of Her Majesty’s Government and the intercession of Sir
Rutherford Alcock may therefore be considered as having for the present re-established the
relations between Hongkong and Kowloon on a satisfactory footing.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Richard Graves MacDonnell,
Governor.
The Right Honourable
Earl Granville, K.G.,
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State,
<s•<?., Sfc.
VIII.
Copy of Despatch from Governor Sir R. G. MacDonnell to Earl of Granville.
No. 849.
GOVE R NM ENT HOU S E,
Hongkong, 11th January , 1870.
My Lord. —ln my Despatch No. 845 of the Bth instant, I had the honour to transmit
vn O)- copy of a despatch from Sir Rutherford Alcock to myself covering a Memo-
First series. randum of a conversation which he had with the Viceroy of the Two
Kuang on several topics of much importance to this Colony, and amongst them the pro-
posed appointment by the Chinese Government of a Consul to reside at Hongkong.
*
On that subject a very strong feeling exists here, and the matter was recently discus-
sed at considerable length between Sir Rutherford and the leading resident Merchants of
the Colony in a conference at Government House. I have been given to understand, and
indeed a resolution has been passed at a public meeting showing an intention to memorial-
ize Your Lordship on the subject, but I presume the short interval which has elapsed
prevented the Memorial being prepared in time for transmission by this mail.
The matter is of so much consequence to this Colony that I would respectfully request
Your Lordship to take no further action in it till I can communicate further on the subject
by next mail.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Richard Graves MacDonnell,
G over nor.
The Right Honourable
Earl Granville, K.G.,
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State,
Sfc., fyc., S)C.
IX. —(a.)
Extract from Memorial of the Hongkong Chamber of Commerce
to Earl Clarendon.
To the Right Honourable
George William,
Earl of Clarendon, K.G.,
Principal Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs.
22nd January , IS7O.
My Lord, —As the time has arrived when according to the terms of the Treaty of
Tientsin, a revision of some of its clauses can be effected, the foreign residents here, and in
the Open Ports of China, feel no slight degree of anxiety as to the policy which the British
Government intends to adopt. * * *


* * * By Article 2, it is proposed to allow the Chinese Government permis-
sion to appoint Consuls to all Ports in British dominions.
Viewed in the abstract, it appears but fair that China should enjoy such a right; and
were she to appoint Consuls in London, Liverpool, Calcutta, Melbourne, or other distant
British Ports, no disadvantage would arise ; and it is possible that some mutual benefits
would accrue to both countries. The case, however, is very different when we have to deal
with Hongkong ; and no doubt can be entertained that this danse was suggested by the
British Minister and inserted mainlv with Hongkong in view. This Colonv was originallv
t o o •/ ■ O < •'
established as an experiment ; and the views of its founders have been fully realised by its
progress and growth. It is an unproductive Island, but its geographical situation, and its
magnificent harbour, marked it out as admirably adapted to become the emporium of foreign
commerce in this portion of the world ; and the headquarters from which the large financial
and commercial transactions of British and Foreign merchants in China could best be carried
on. Its success, however, and the immunity which as a Free Port it enjoys from Customs
and other dues, have long been regarded with jealous displeasure by the Chinese Govern-
ment, which has done all in its power to interfere with its trade, especially that carried on by
native Merchants settled in Hongkong. Indeed, it has required the vigorous action of our
able and energetic Governor to counteract the undisguise 1 attempts winch the Canton
O O I
Officials have made to cripple the trade of tins Colony.
China can in no sense be considered as a country entitled to all the same rights and
privileges as Civilized Nations, which are bound by international law ; in which the life, the
liberty, and the property of all, foreigners as well as natives, are secure and respected ; and
where a recognised procedure and a regular legal system can be relied on by those who feel
themselves aggrieved. All Foreign Nations that have entered into diplomatic relations with
China, have carefully reserved their exterritorial rights ; thereby showing that in one most
important particular, they consider it as outside the pale of modern civilization. Nor can
the fact that British Consuls reside in the Treaty Ports in China, be adduced in favour of
J 7
the proposed clause, because it is manifest that in appointing them, the British Government
had two objects, in view. First to protect the lives and property of Englishmen residing
within the dominions of the Emperor of China ; and in the next place, to secure the Chinese
from the injuries they might sustain, if all without distinction who called themselves British
subjects, were permitted to resort to China, without any check upon their conduct.
In Hongkong, the Chinese residents require no Consular protection ; because though
amenable to British law, they can appeal to our Tribunals ; with this additional safeguard,
that they have an important official in the Registrar-General, to whom as u Protector of the
Chinese”, they can always have recourse for advice and assistance.
We have no hesitation in saying that if a native be appointed as Consul for China in
Hongkong, he will in reality be a spy on the Chinese Merchants residing in this Colony ;
and we have several very wealthy and intelligent men of that class—and his main duty will
be to report to the Mandarins of the adjoining Provinces, the amount that can be extorted
from them by the nefarious means which our experience shows us the provincial despots
know but too well how to use.
1 have, &c.,
W. Keswick,
Chairman , on behalf oj
the Hongkong Chamber of Commerce.


1X.—(6.)
Extract from Memorial of the Inhabitants of Hongkong to Earl Clakkndox.
vJ O
To 'i he Right Honourable
The Earl of Clarkndon, K.G.,
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
The humble Memorial of the Inhabitants of the Colony of Hongkong.
w CO
Si i i:\vkth :
1. That on the 3rd day of January instant, at Public Meeting of this Com-
munity, called to take into consideration the Convention for the revision of the Treaty
of Tientsin recently signed by Sir Rutherford Alcock, Her Majesty’s Minister to China, it
was unanimously resolved that measures should be taken to remonstrate against the rati-
fication of the Convention by Her Most Gracious Majesty, in so far as certain articles
thereof, more peculiarly affecting the welfare and prosperity of this Colony and its Com-
munity, are concerned.
#
y the most important is the 2nd clause, under which the Chinese
Government will claim to place a Consul at Hongkong, and Your Memorialists propose to
state, firstly, why they conceive the Government of China have no shadow of reason to
claim such a concession, and, secondly, why it is that the granting of such a privilege will
be injurious to their interests, and in this connection they would respectfully urge that, if
they can satisfy Your Lordship that the right of the Chinese Government to such a con-
cession is untenable, or even doubtful, Your Lordship will be bound to give great weight
to the deliberate conviction of a whole Community, as to the doing so being fraught with
great peril to the only interests at stake, —their own.
o. \ our Memorialists would first ask Your Lordship to consider the question of the
usage, for it is usage and not a right, with regard to one Power allowing another Power,
with which it is in amity, to place Consols in its Ports. This privilege of placing Consuls’
or “ National Agents ”, at places in the territory of another Nation, is accorded to all
Nations who recognize and act upon the principles of Public Law, and are in unrestricted
commercial communion and intercourse with each other, and who grant the same reciprocal
privileges. By unrestricted it is not meant that the trade is "not subjected to certain
imposts, or restrictions, of a purely fiscal or protective character, or to iimitations as to
contraband traffic, but that the right to go into and travel through a country, and to
reside anywhere in its territory is never prohibited, and where the°capital, products, and
manufactures of another Country are allowed (subject to revenue or protective imposts or
restrictions) free ingress and transit to every mart in its dominions. This general rule
applies not only to all Christian and Civilized Countries, but also to other Nations where,
lor divers reasons, it has been thought right to insist upon a preservation to Great Britain
of ex-territorial jurisdiction over its subjects resident or commorant within the dominions
of the other Power, as for example Turkey, and other Countries bordering on the Medi-
terranean. If this then be, as Your Memorialists believe, the rule, and the reason for
granting this privilege, it is necessary to see whether China complies with the requirements
exacted from every other Power with whom Great Britain is in Treaty, before Exequatur is
granted to its Consuls ; and, if she does not, is there any reason why she should be made
an exception ?
6. On this head A our Memorialists would refer to the admirable exposition of the
status of China as a Nation appearing in Your Lordship’s Despatch of 24th June, 1863, to
Sir George Bonham (covering J L M.’s Order in Council of 13th June, 1863,) p. 3.
7. “In ordinary cases of British subjects resorting to a foreign country, their persons
“ property are entrusted to the protection of the Laws and Institutions of the country to
to which they resort, in the full assurance that those Laws will be duly administered, and
“that the Institutions of such country, although they may differ from those of England, are
substantially in harmony with the general principles of jurisprudence recognised amongst
“ Christian Communities. But the case is different as regards China : and there the British
Crown has found it necessary to require that British subjects shall be entirely exempted
from the jurisdiction of the local Tribunals ”, —a description that call residents in China
feel to be singularly expressive of the position of this Nation, and which has frequently
been affirmed by successive Ministers in China, including Sir R. Alcock.


8. Your Memorialists would also refer Your Lordship to an opinion of the Law-
Officers of the Crown, given upon a question as to certain seizures for breach of the
blockade of the Canton River during the War of LSS6-57, involving a right of the high-
est and gravest kind known to Public Law or required by the comity of Nations, viz . :
The right to have such seizures adjudicated upon by a duly constituted Prize Tribunal,
and a formal condemnation as lawful Prize, before the property in vessels and their cargoes
can be divested out of the original owners. This opinion was given in January, 1860, after
the signature of the Treaty of Tientsin, (though before its ratification), and the names
attached to it are those of Lord Westbury (then Sir Richard Bethel 1), the late Sir William
Atherton, and the late Sir J. D. Harding, and the Executive of this Colony acted upon the
opinion, the proceeds realized by the sale of these Chinese Vessels and cargoes (some
$85,000) being divided amongst the captors without any investigation, judicial or otherwise.
In this opinion the following passage occurs :
u We are of opinion that, as between H. M. Government and the Government and
u subjects of China (a country which neither acknowledges nor follows the
“ Jus Gentium of European States under which the necessity for Prize
“ Court condemnation arises) no condemnation as prize is either necessary
or expedient ”.
9. Your Memorialists would point out that if China not recognizing the a Jus
Gentium ”be a sufficient reason for refusing to her what is a right or necessity under the
law, the obligations of that same u Jus Gentium ” cannot be said to render a grant of what
is only a privilege imperative. It may be said that, since that opinion was given, China has
entitled herself to be considered as within the pale of Nations, but sad experience has taught
Your Memorialists that, instead of progressing towards that desirable end, China is even
further off now than she was then, and of this, Your Memorialists would point out, no
better proof can be required than the very words of the second clause itself, which says
that u China having agreed that England may appoint Consuls to reside at every Port open
to trade”, it is then further agreed that “ China may appoint Consuls to reside at all ports
in the British dominions”. The reciprocity which alone entitles a Nation to ask for inter-
national concessions is singularly wanting here.
10. Bearing upon this claim of China to have concessions which she does not earn,
there is one reason which is applicable only to the Colony of Hongkong as distinguished
from every other British Port. In this Colony there are upwards of 120,000 Chinese resid-
ents, all of whom arc Colonists, subject to our laws, the great majority of them tax-payers,
and a very large number of them landholders, and entitled as such to Colonial Registers for
vessels (owned by them) flying the British Flag, who have been for many years peaceable,
well-conducted citizens, with a considerable stake in the welfare of the Colony, and who,
by being the promoters and managers of the large emigration to the United States and
Australian Colonies, the principal exporters and traders, shareholders in our Banks, Steam,
Insurance and other public Companies, and eager adventurers in new manufacturing projects,
do more to civilize China than fifty Treaty Ports would do. These poeple live contentedly
under our rule and are free, at present, from the extortions and squeezes to which they
would indubitably be subjected, through their families or relatives living in China, if a
Chinese Consul were placed here ; and against which, intangible as it would be, the Govern-
ment here would not protect them, nor for which could it give them redress. To say
nothing of the complications of jurisdiction that would arise, it is enough to say that the
Chinese reisidents here, now a well ordered community, are unanimously opposed to the
introduction of a Consul who will, to a certain extent, bring them under the power of their
own corrupt officials.
11. Your Memorialists submit that, while China only permits the residence of Consuls
at certain specified places, she cannot in reason expect greater privileges than she conceeds,
and that in allowing her to have the power of placing Consuls at some Ports, we are only
acting in strict reciprocity if we confine such privilege to Ports selected by ourselves.
%
12. Assuming that Your Memorialists have established the position that the abstract
rule of International Comity does not fairly necessitate such an unlimited concession, can it
be said either that China has done anything to induce us to step over the line in her favour,
or that policy and a consideration for British interests require such a measure ? Your
Memorialists with some confidence submit that both these questions must be answered in
the negative. The Convention gives but little to Great Britain that we did not already
possess under the Treaties of Nankin and Tientsin, with the single exception of acknow-


ledging the right of transhipment of duty paid goods at Hongkong, in transit from One
Treaty Port to anorher, upon the same terms as if transhipped at an intermediate treaty
Port. The other clauses in the Convention, so far as the Chinese are concerned, are prin-
cipally but renewed promises in detail to do that which, both by the Treaty of Nankin and
that of Tientsin, they had already undertaken to do in the spirit, it not in the letter, and
these advantages are but small compared with the evil of a Chinese Consul being placed in
the Colony, and to avoid which Your Memorialists would gladly give up any of the advan-
tages which erroneously seem to have been looked upon as an equivalent.
13. The end and aim of British Diplomacy in China is, without doubt, the ultimate
opening up of the whole of the Empire to commerce, and unrestricted intercourse with its
people, and the principal reason why this is not now insisted upon is, that we admit it
would be hard to expect a Nation to do so against the spirit of her traditionary policy until,
at least, she has established a Revenue service efficient enough to enable her to collect and
protect her Revenue along her sea-board ; but Your Memorialists submit that China will
never take the necessary steps to create or maintain such a service, if we enable her to place
a Consul here, to secure the taxation of the great bulk of foreign trade of her people, with-
out the necessity, responsibility and expense of such a Revenue Establishment. Ihe oppo-
sition shewn by Provincial Governors and authorities to any measure which, by strengthen-
ing the power of the central Government at Pekin, weakens their own irresponsible power,
and menaces their corrupt gains, as the establishment of a Revenue Service along the sea-
board would undoubtedly do, is one of the main reasons why it does not already exist, and
why the Government grasp at any expedient which may even partially attain their end and
secure for the Imperial Exchequer the duties and squeezes now levied by the Provincial
Mandarins as their own perquisite. So long as the present want of centralization in the
Government, and their consequent inability to carry out Treaty obligations, exists (as tl icy
themselves allege) so long will progress be retarded, and, on this ground alone, policy
should dictate a refusal to permit a Consul to be placed at Hongkong.
i
14. Hongkong has always been a free port, and, as such, has attracted a mass of Chinese
traders hither, and a consequent expansion and development of trade that, but for this cir-
cumstance, would never have existed, and which sound policy would suggest should be
maintained secure from that dread of oppression, or subjection of their affairs to the know-
ledge of their own corrupt officials, which is sure to possess the minds of Chinese residents
here.
15. If then there be no right in the Chinese Government to ask this concession, and
no reason why they should get anything to which they are not entitled, and, at the same
time, sound policy dictates a refusal of such a privilege, it only remains, on this head, for
Your Memorialists to assure Your Lordship that it is the unhesitating conviction of the
whole community, of all professions, trades and callings, of every nation represented here,
and of the Chinese themselves, that it is no mere chimerical dread of unknown consequences
that leads them so strenuously to object. As the natural outlet for the exports of the
whole of the South and Western portions of China, and as a Free Port where pro-
tection is afforded to property, and where commercial transactions are subject to the
requirements of British law, while dealing with Merchants of every trading Power in
the world, a vast quantity of Chinese produce comes here in native craft which con-
stantly ply between this Port and the Coasts East and West of the Colony, which
pays such duties or other exactions as the Mandarins along the Coast choose to
demand from their own people, and about which traders here know nothing —every
commodity having a price here regulated only by the law of supply and demand. The
establishment of a Consul here, surrounded as he would be by a staff of Chinese officials and
employes would subject this trade to a supervision resulting in the levying of taxes or
duties for the Imperial Exchequer, in addition to those paid to the local officials, and which
the Government never get, and the result would be that Chinese traders would, instead of
resorting to this Colony as their Emporium and Mart, go to some other place (such as the
neighbouring Colony of Macao as they used to do formerly) where no Chinese officials
harass them or their trade, and thus a deadly blow would be struck at the trade and pros-
perity of this Colony with really no benefit to the Revenue of China, for the goods would
still leave China, but not through Hongkong. It is no answer to this to say that duties
would not be collected here, as the Chinese officials attached to the Consulate would obtain
accurate knowledge of the goods imported or exported by Chinese traders and on the
departure of the boat outside of the waters of this Colony, she would be seized and detained
for the payment of duties or squeezes, by the Revenue cruisers which, even now, are


trying to hem the Colony in ; —Chinese enterprise would be crippled here because, through
their relatives, family, or property in China, all wealthy residents would be amenable to the
inquisitorial powers of the Mandarins ; they would not dare to embark in trade, and would
soon leave the place. Your Memorialists conclude their statement as to this clause in the
hope that Your Lordship will not advise ratification.
* # * *
Hongkong, January 21st, 1870 .
IX.— (c.)
Extract from Despatch of Governor Sir R. G. MaoDoxskll to Karl of Granville.
No, 857.
Government House,
Hongkong, 24th January , 1870.
My Loud, — I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter * from Mr. Keswick,
IX C«)- Chairman of the Hongkong Chamber of Commerce, accompanying a
. ~ i I J o
First series. Memorial to Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
*
*3v •Jv
7. I have received a Memorial on the part of this Community, addressed to Her
IX CO- Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, which 1 enclose. I con-
First series, sider it a document of great ability, and in what relates to suppression
of the Treaty Port in Hainan, and appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong, I regard
it with one or two immissions to be noted hereafter, as embodying the complete argument
in as condensed and clear a form as the subject admits. I, therefore, trust that Your
Lordship will give your best personal consideration to its reasoning.
8. As to the proposed appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong, I am of course
more fully aware than the Memorialists of Sir Rutherford Alcoek’s views, and the explana-
tion which he gives of his views, by having before me the whole correspondence on the
subject commencing with his despatch to Prince Kung of 14t’i December, 1868, —in
which he first suggests such an appointment, and terminating with his recent despatch to
myself of the 3rd instant, in which he reargues the questions and encloses Memo, of an
interview, which he had with the Viceroy on the same subject.
9. It is important to note that the idea of locating a Chinese Consul here originated
altogether with Sir Rutherford Alcock himself. He may in fact be regarded as a
travelling Propagandist of the doctrine. He made the suggestion in December, 1868, at
Peking—he pressed it on the acceptance of the Viceroy at Canton last month—he has more
recently re-argued it with me —and is now on his way to London where he will naturally
endeavour to justify a scheme to which he has become personally so much committed,
10. I regret, therefore, that the subsequent views of Her Majesty’s Government, when
modified by the argument first embodied in my despatch No. 701 of the 12th May last,
could not have earlier reached Sir Rutherford Alcock. This result, however, was inevi-
table from the old system now abolished of transmitting from Peking to London sugges-
tions affecting this Colony, without the privity of its Government.
11. The suggestion seems originally to have been made by Sir Rutherford Alcock
to meet partially the views of Prince Kung (sth December, 1868), who ‘‘proposed that
“ the Chinese Government should appoint officials to reside at Hongkong for the express
u purpose of attending to the collection of duties in the interest of the Customs Revenue’’.
As this “ could not be conceded in British territories ”, and as Sir Rutherford in his reply
to Prince Kung admits the existence of the evil complained of, viz. :—smuggling from
Hongkong, he suggests as the next best thing for Chinese interests that there should be a
Chinese Consul here.
• Not printed.


12. In ii similar wav Sir Rutherford with a view “’ to placing the intercourse between
u Hongkong and the neighbouring coasts on a more definite and regular footing so as to
u protect the Chinese Revenue without unreasonably obstructing ordinary traffic, &c., txc.,
suggests again the remedy of a resident Chinese Consul here, who is u to regularize the
u trading between the mainland and the Colony ”. V\ hen addressing myself he tells me that
it is ü bv such means alone any satisfactory or permanent settlement of existing differences
u and conflicting interests can be effected ” —and that the appointment of a Chinese Consul
here u cannot be refused without inconsistency and disastrous consequences .
13. Unquestionably if mere positive assertion could prove the necessity and expediency
of such a measure. Sir Rutherford has proved lt is not surprising, therefore, that
Prince Kung, the Viceroy and others should be willing proselytes of Sir Rutherford Alcock
and believe that in a Chinese Consul here they could find a panacea for all differences and
an equivalent for those collectors of Chinese Revenue whom 1 rince Kung more duectly
sought to establish here.
14. I must, however, beg of tier Majesty’s Government to consider whether Sir
Rutherford in the whole of the correspondence adduces a single proof that a Chinese Consul
here would reallv be able to arrange *’ differences and conflicting interests . In wnat way
could he do so ? It is not enough to assert such a thing, nor too much to insist on some
probable reason for that result in the face of the long series of probabilities approximating
to complete certainty that on the contrary a very disastrous consequence would follow an
appointment of the kind. I think no one can peruse my despatch of the 12th May iast,
expressing the opinion of the Members of Council, or the admirable argument of the enclosed
Memorial from this Community without feeling that it would be unfair to put the positive but
vao-ue and unsupported assertions of Sir Rutherford Alcock against the closely reasoned
statements and undeniable facts adduced in those documents, and against the opinions of
men more conversant than Mr Rutherford with the conditions of Chinese residence at Hong-
kong and the operations of trade here, and therefore more competent to speak of the prob-
able effect thereon of any unusual and special circumstances such*as the proposed appoint-
ment of a Chinese Consul.
15. I am unwilling tb repeat here what I have already urged against such a measure
intended as it is by Sir Rutherford Alcock to relieve the Chinese Government of the
expense and responsibility devolving on all other Governments of protecting themselves by
a competent Revenue Service against smugglers. I believe such a policy would be a great
mistake, and prefer seeing the Chinese Government driven to put the smuggler down by
more enlightened laws —a more liberal Tariff—and a more accessible sea-board. At present
from the sparsely scattered customs staff maintained by the Chinese Government, the
attempt to conduct legitimate trade by its natural channels, as for example to carry goods
direct from Hongkong to Hainan, generates contraband, because the policy, which Sir
Rutherford Alcock would encourage by suppressing the Treaty Port at Hainan, is to drag
that traffic round by Canton where alone u duty chops” are obtainable, and so compel
commerce to traverse two sides of a triangle instead of one.
Kb These and similar mistakes,'however, in political economy are abuses which an
independent Government may assert its right to maintain. This is true, and therefore I
only ask that the policy of encouraging such abuses be rejected as an unwise and a losing
policy, because in tbelong run relieving China temporarily of burdens which International
duties entail, is calculated to retard by removing the necessity for her advance to more
liberal and eventually more profitable convictions.
17. A Chinese Consul here, to relieve China of her duty to protect her Revenue by
an efficient establishment - along her coasts would encourage attempts before a vessel’s
departure to secure in Hongkong either the actual duties locable in China on the goods in
her manifest or an equivalent security in some other form. So long as no Official Consular
representative of China resides here, no one has the least pretension to inspect manifests,
give clearances, or certify to the correctness generally of a Chinese vessel’s papers.. There-
fore the abuses, which would spring from the system, cannot at present be developed.
There may be and there is already much objectionable espionage, and frequent squeezing
and exactions levied from residents here by inquisitorial and even more stringent powers
exerted over their relatives and property on the mainland. These cannot be better describ-
ed than in the 15rh paragraph of the enclosed Memorial, but they already exist, and at this
moment the Canton Officials can obtain any amount of information as to residents here.
IS


18. It must therefore be conceded that such evils appear inseparable from the close
vicinity of Hongkong to the mainland, a distance in some places of scarcely 500 yards, but
the Memorial does not sufficiently point out that a new class of evils specially connected
with the appointment of a Consul from a cause which is perfectly avoidable would be de-
liberately introduced by Her Majesty’s Government.
19. A Chinese Agent, whether native horn or not, but in either case equally surround-
ed bv an intriguing and corrupt native staff, could only be clothed by the British Govern-
ment with the official attributes of a Consul, and nothing but his official position would
enable him and his satellites to squeeze and overawe native craft eventually crippling it and
annihilating the valuable native coast trade. He could not, except as an Official, play into
the hands of the Customs so as to obtain either actual prepayment here of duties or security
for duties, satisfactory to the Customs elsewhere. In a word these official powers which
would enable the Chinese Government under guise of a Consul to establish a covert Custom
House here of the worst description with all its attendant evils would be the creation of the
Queen’s Government and despite Sir Rutherford Alcock’s assertion to the deputation here
of the Governor’s power to control such a Consul, I maintain it would practically be a
mistake beyond correction, or would lead at least to an indefinite multiplication of disputes
and differences the termination of which is declared to be the primary object of a Consul’s
appointment.
• 20. And what justification is offered for dealing such a blow to this Community,
whose opinion on the subject is as that of one person ? Sir Rutherford Alcock dwells
mainlv on the right, which China has in common with other nations to have a Consul here.
,/ 7
He told Prince Kung that it was reasonable China should have the same right to appoint a
Consul “ to reside in Hongkong as the other Treaty Powers had, and to exercise the same
authority in matters connected with the trade of Chinese subjects as any other nation in
Treaty with Great Britain might claim in British Colonies”.
j O
21. He uses nearly identical language to myself when he tells me that “the right of
appointing a Consul with all privileges conceded to Consuls of other Powers in the comity
of nations —Turks and Persians amongst the rest —cannot be refused without inconsistency ”.
I may almost say that the assumed right of China to insist on such an appointment is Sir
Rutherford Alcock’s main argument, and therefore I hope it will not be thought dis-
courteous if I at once say that not merely does such an assertion misrepresent in an extra-
ordinary manner the exceptional position of China, but that so far from being exact it is
specially incorrect in the case of that country.
22. This subject is well handled in the enclosed Memorial, independent of the proof
there given of the unfounded character of a claim by China based on the “ jus gentium ”.
China has never admitted the right long since conceded to Great Britain by the Treaty
Powers, and even by Turkey and Persia alluded to by Sir Rutherford Alcock, viz,: —the
right of unrestricted intercourse and the reception of Consuls at all their Ports. Force of
arms extorted the limited right to establish Consuls at originally live so called Treaty
Ports and as Hongkong is excluded from the privilege of a Treaty Port whilst as a matter
of fact China does not possess and has in no way merited the privileges of the Treaty
Powers, there seems not a shadow of a claim on Her Majesty's Government to do this great
wrong on the ground of reciprocity, or of a parallel between China and the other Treaty
Powers.
23. But Sir Rutherford says China now claims this privilege as the price of concessions
made to Hongkong — e.g. —a right of transhipment at Hongkong of goods between one
Treaty Port and another, which is manifestly a very limited and punoy privilege. This
community however firmly believes that no such price for that concession would be
demanded, if the negotiator had been some one else than Sir Rutherford Alcock, who
himself invented and pressed on China this projected appointment of a Consul here, and
who, when lie might by a word have prevented the existing cordon of Custom Houses round
the Island when first projected, warmly advocated it for reasons which evinced at least equal
regard to Chinese as to Hongkong interests. In any case, however, this Community which
I presume may be trusted to understand its own interests at least selfishly declares unequivo-
cally over the signatures of almost all the wealth and intelligence of Hongkong, that, if the
price to be exacted for the privileges conceded be the appointment of a Chinese Consul,
“they would gladly give up any of the advantages which erroneously seem to have been
looked on as an equivalent”, (par. 12.)
19


24. To press on a community a measure in proof of whose intrinsic advantages its
promoter, as we have seen, has not advanced one argument beyond bare assertion, and the
right to which on the part of China is clearly disproved, whilst its evil and disastrous
consequences are not subject of mere conjecture but of as much certainty as events yet in
the future are capable of, would be considered scarcely politic. To press it, however, as
being the price of advantages not otherwise procurable, although these advantages at such
cost are rejected by the Community for whom they are intended, would certainly seem a
still more unusual proceeding, and one not to be resorted to, unless some urgent Imperial
necessity imperatively required the sacrifice.
25. Finally, though Sir Rutherford Alcock himself seems to have invented the project,
and then by sedulous assertion converted Prince Kung, the Viceroy, and others to think
there must be something very valuable in carrying such an appointment, he now turns
round and {-ays —see how urgently China insists on appointing a Consul at Hongkong.
How can you refuse her request ? True she denies your right to appoint Consuls in her
ports, but nevertheless on the ground of reciprocity and consistency you must grant her
the privilege to appoint them in all yours, or expect u disastrous consequences”. For my
part I think it safer to take our chance of the latter, than accept a conclusion so manifestly
illogical.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Richard Graves MacDonnell,
Governor.
The Right Honourable
Earl Granville, K.G.,
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State,
fyc., fyc., ifc.
X.
Extract from Despatch of Earl of Carnarvon to Governor Sir A. Kennedy.
Hongkong.
No. 20.
Downing Street,
22nd March , 1875.
Sir.— * * * * 8. The Proclamation of the Viceroy of the Two Kwangs, dated
as far back as the 6th of February, 1869, shows that even at that time acts
lot pim of spoliation and extortion were practised by lawless persons who w r ere
stigmatized in that document as pirates. The evidence establishes that
Officers of the Chinese Government have been guilty of abuses, and there is too much
reason to believe that unlawful and unauthorized acts have been committed by them to
even a greater extent than is capable of exact proof. In this respect the general
indignation expressed in the Colony is not without just foundation, and I have
learnt with great satisfaction that in consequence of Sir Brooke Robertson’s repre-
sentations to the Chinese Authorities, their Revenue Steam Cruisers have been placed under
the Foreign Collectorate of Customs at Canton, and that an Officer from that Establishment
has been specially appointed to exercise a supervision over them. The Consul states that
not one case of complaint has since been brought to his notice, but 1 need hardly assure
you that, in the event of any renewed obstruction to the legitimate trade of the Colony, you
may rely upon the support of Her Majesty’s Government. In the meanwhile I may state
that the Earl of Derby will direct Her Majesty’s Minister in Peking to call the attention of
the Chinese Government to the complaints which have from time to time been made by the
Mercantile Community in Hongkong of the interference of the Revenue Cruisers with the
Junk trade, and to urge them to issue such instructions as will render the collection of their
Customs Revenue in the immediate vicinity of Hongkong as little vexatious as possible to
the Government of that Colony, and to the great number of junks frequenting its waters
for the purposes of lawful trade.
20


9. You will observe that in his Despatch the Consul also states that the Chinese
Not printed. Authorities have frequently complained to him of the expenses attending
Ist Dec., 1874. the maintenance of this fleet of Steam Cruisers and have asked him whether
means could not be devised for collecting their duties in Hongkong.
10. This brings me to the consideration of a question which underwent much discus-
sion some years ago, and which was adverted to at the public meeting held in the Colony
on the 14th of September last. I refer to the proposal made by Her Majesty’s Minister
at Peking, that a Chinese Consul should be appointed to reside in Hongkong. Without
examining the sufficiency of the grounds which were put forward at that time for rejecting
the proposal of Mr. Wade, it appears to me that looking at it now from a different point of
view, and in connection with the difficulty which has unfortunately arisen, no really sub-
stantial argument could be advanced against entrusting to a Chinese Consul in Hongkong
F'i o o o o
the privilege of collecting from junk masters the receipts for Export Duty levied in China,
and issuing to them similar receipts for duty payable on account of importations into China,
and that the practical advantages resulting from this arrangement would more than com-
pensate the Colony for the inconvenience which Ims been apprehended from the appointment
of such a Functionary.
\
11. I do not overlook the fact that generally speaking it is not the duty of one country
to assist in enforcing the Revenue Laws of another, but in view of the peculiar conditions
under which we hold the Island of Hongkong, and of the facilities offered to smuggling by
0,0. # o o J
its exceptional position as a free port in a foreign country, it would be the part of a
friendly Rower to make concessions even though unimposed by International duty ; whereas
the appointment of a Chinese Consul in Hongkong would be no concession at all, but only
the recognition of a reciprocal right which China is entitled to claim, in common with all
other Powers whose subjects resort to the Colony, if International Law and the usage of
Civilized States is to be applied in our relations with that Country.
12. The high character enjoyed by the Mercantile Community of Hongkong is due not
more to its wealth and importance, than to the ready support it has ever given for the
suppression of abuses calculated to compromise, however indirectly, the honour of the
British name, and I am not without hope therefore, that you will be successful in your
endeavours to remedy a state of things which exposes the Colony to the imputation of
giving protection and encouragement to a contraband trade, and keeps up a feeling of
irritation incompatible with the peaceful and friendly relations which Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment is desirous to maintain with China.
I have, &c.,
/ 7
(Sd.) Carnarvon.
Governor
Sir A. Kennedy, K.C.M.G., C.8.,
AT., fyc., Sj-c.
XI.
Extract from Despatch of Officer Administering; the Government of Hon^kono*
1 ° r? o
to the Earl of Carnarvon.
Government House,
Hongkong, June 9th , 1875.
Mr Lord, — * * * *
I venture, very respectfully, to express a sincere hope that Your Lordship
will hesitate to sanction the appointment of a Chinese Consul to reside at this port, until
an opportunity has been given to my Council and myself to submit our opinions upon the
nature of the duties which he is to perform. Your Lordship states that the appointment
in question is a proposal of Mr. Wade, Her Majesty’s Minister at Peking ; but, as far as
I am aware, that proposal emanated from Sir Rutherford Alcock ; while Mr. Wade has
advocated the establishment here of a branch of the Foreign Inspectorate of Customs, to
collect duties on articles exported in junks.
2 1


9. It will be readily understood that there is a vast difference between these two
suggestions, the former advocated by Sir Rutherford Alcock alone (as far as is at present
known) and opposed by every one else possessing local knowledge and acquaintance with
Chinese officials ; the latter originally recommended by an officer of this Government and
now supported by Governor Sir Arthur Kennedy, with whose opinion I concur.
10. However, before dealing at all fully with the bearings of the question I desire to
learn Mr. Wade’s views, and I have, therefore, transmitted to him a copy of the Parliament-
ary Paper on the subject with a request that he will favour me with them. Meanwhile I
have only to reiterate my hope that the matter may remain in abeyance until Your Lordship
has had under consideration whatever may be submitted for discussion, inasmuch as the
proposition has taken the Government and the community by surprise, alter the decision of
Her Majesty’s Government in 1869.”
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) J. Gardinkr Austin,
Administrator.
XL— (a.)
Extract from Despatch of Earl of Carnarvon to the Officer Administering
the Government of Hon^kone:.
o o
Downing Street,
August 9th , 1875.
Sir. — * * * *
/
“4. In my despatch of the 22nd of March last, I suggested the reconsideration,
x - under existing circumstances, of the proposal originally made in 1869 for
First series. the appointment of a Chinese Consular Officer who should be entrusted with
sucdi powers in respect of the issue and collection of receipts for Chinese export and import
duties as would substantially protect the Chinese Government against the contraband trade
carried on by their own subjects with Hongkong, and remove the grounds of complaint on
which they justify the arbitrary and unusual system to which they at present resort.
5. The progress of steam and telegraphic communication between China and all parts
of the world, the vast influx of foreigners, and the general increase of commercial intercourse
during the last ten years, have materially altered the conditions under which this proposal
was originally made, and it is a significant fact that one of the speakers at the public
meeting held in Hongkong, and who is referred to by Sir Brook Robertson as the head
parlner of the first house in China, admitted that if it had been acceded to many of those
things which are now complained of would not have taken place. lam unable therefore to
concur in your statement that the appointment of a Chinese Consul, which was so strongly
urged by Her Majesty’s Minister in 1869, is opposed by every one else possessing local
knowledge and acquaintance with Chinese officials. At the same time I think it right to
point out to you that I ha\e come to no decision on the subject, and it would afford me
much satisfaction to learn that any other proposal had been made which would solve the
present difficulty, and remedy the evils complained of without necessitating the adoption of
any measure which may be distasteful to the community. Indeed,] have had under my
consideration for some time past the scheme advocated by Sir A, Kennedy in relation to the
establishment in Hongkong of a branch of the Foreign Collectorate of Customs. Such an
arrangement, however, must necessarily involve considerable discussion and delay, and in the
meanwhile 1 am not without hope that, through the good offices of Lord Derby, the Cantonese
authorities may be willing to make such further modifications in their present system of
collecting Customs duties as may place matters on a less unsatisfactory footing.”
OJi J O
1 have, &c.,
(Sd.) Carnarvon.
- 22 ■


XL—(6.)
Extract from a Despatch of Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street,
August 9th , 1875.
* * * *
4. — * * * u Lord Carnarvon, in his despatch to Sir A. Kennedy of the 22nd
March last, suggested, having regard to the existing circumstances and to the
First series. progress of commercial intercourse and relations between China and foreign
Powers, a reconsideration of the proposal originally made by Her Majesty’s Minister in 1869
for the appointment of a Chinese Consular Officer in Hongkong, who should be entrusted with
the privilege of collecting from junk masters receipts for export duty on goods imported
into the Colony from China, and of issuing to them similar receipts for the import'duty
on goods shipped to China from Hongkong. It appeared to His Lordship that such an
arrrangement would substantially protect the Chinese Government against the contraband
trade carried on by its own subjects with the Colony, and remove the grounds of complaint
on which they justify the continuance of the arbitrary and unusual course which the
Colonists have termed a blockade ”of the island. It will be seen, however, from the
inclosed despatch that the Colonial Government and the general community are as averse
as ever to the appointment of a Chinese Consul in Hongkong, and that they would regard
the establishment in the Colony of a branch of the foreign Collectorate, urged by Sir
A. Kennedy in his despatch of the 25th of August, 1874, # as a less distasteful* alternative.
But the latter scheme, though still worthy of consideration, could hardly be carried out
without much preliminary discussion and unavoidable delays ; and Lord Carnarvon is most
anxious that, it possible, steps should be taken immediately, through the good offices of Lord
Derby, to ally the irritation which not unnaturally prevails in the Colony, and to remove any
impression that Her Majesty’s Government underrate the gravity of the complaints which
have been urged so long and so strenuously by the mercantile community, or are indisposed
to afford them the protection and relief to which they may be fairly entitled.”
I have. &c.,
> 7
Robert G. W. Herbert.
Xl.— (c.)
Extract from a Despatch of H.B.M.’s Consul at Canton to the Foreign Office.
Canton,
October Bth , 1875.
My Lord, — * * * *
“I have on a former occasion given my views upon this subject of the so-called
u blockade”, and it is unnecessary to go over the same ground, but whether the cause of
grievance which the Colonists allege exists, is or is not of the importance they give to it,
is not of much consequence. They doubtless do believe in the hardship, and their Govern-
ment supports them in it, and under such circumstances controversy is useless, and the
only resource left is to see how far it is possible to remove that feeling by remedial measures.
There can be no question but that the fiscal system of the Chinese Government is faulty
to a degree. The collection of Revenue without being farmed, as is generally supposed,
is left too much in the irresponsible hands of high provincial officers and their subordinates ;
hence the duty is performed much in the manner to be expected from a system of the kind.
The remedy of this, and the establishment of a better one, can only be found in a reform of
the Fiscal Law of the Empire, and as that is hopeless at present, the only thing to be done
is to see how far the existing system can be made to accord with the foreign element which
meets in the Colony of Hongkong.
Not piloted.
23


With this view it was at one time proposed to levy the China Import and Export Duties
in the Colony, but difficulties of a legal character intervened, and the plan was laid 'aside.
The appointment of a Chinese Consular Officer was then suggested, to collect from junk
masters receipt for export duties on goods imported into the Colony from China, and issue
to them similar receipts for the import duties of goods shipped to China from Hongkong,
but the objection to this scheme was the danger of placing the native trade of the port so
much under the control of a Chinese officer for very obvious reasons. But it appears to
me, if, instead of a Chinese, an English officer from the Canton Foreign Inspectorate with
Consular rank was appointed, the difficulty would be removed, and being an accredited
officer of the Chinese Government, the Hongkong one might discuss with him cases of
• ••• 7 oo o
seizure or injustice, and thus obviate the reference of such matters to a Mixed Court,
whether such be held in Chinese Kowloong or Hongkong, and to which I see almost
• . , O OO
insuperable difficulties. If to this was added the issue to junks trading with Hongkong of
a licence under the seals of the Colony and the Uoppo, by which their bond Jides might be
recognized, much good might result, and it would make the cruizers more careful in their
proceedings. It should by no means follow that, because a native junk or vessel has not
such a licence, she will not be allowed to resort to Hongkong, the licence is intended to be
no more than an 44 identification,” and may be taken out or nor, only if a junk or vessel is
captured, it should be discretionary with the Colonial Government and the Chinese Con-
sular Agent to take up the case, for false claims are by no means rare.
These two latter plans may be far from meeting the expectations of the Colonists, but
they are, as far as I can see, worth a trial, and may prove beneficial.”
I have, &c.,
B. Robertson.
*
The Right Honourable
Lord Tenterden, C.8.,
Sf-c., fyc., Sfc.
• \
Xl.—(rf.)
Extract from a Despatch of Colonial Office to Foreign. Office.
Downing Street,
January 27th , 1876.
\m •’ft’ w '75-
k.. ilij
“ With reference to Sir Brooke Robertson’s suggestion that an English Officer from
# CO O « J
the Canton foreign Inspectorate should be appointed to reside in Hongkong, who should
be invested with certain powers as regards the issue and collection of receipts for Chinese
Customs duties, and the discussion with the Hongkong Government of cases of alleged
illegal seizure, Lord Carnarvon will be glad to propose this for the consideration of the
Colonial Government, as an alternative which would be comparatively free from the
objections urged against the appointment of a Chinese Consul in the Colony.”
I am, &c.,
Robekt G. VT. Herbert.
21 •


Xl.— {e.)
Extract from a Despatch of H.B.M.’s Consul at Canton to
Sir Thomas Fkancls Wade.
Canton,
January 18th , 1876.
Sir, — * * * °
“ As regards the future, I am still of opinion that the remedy will be found in the
appointment of a European Chinese Consul or Vice-Consul, whose duty it would be to check
the cargoes of junks and report thereon to the Customs authorities at Canton. This at
least would be a legitimate plan, and such as is practised by the United States’ Consul in
cases of vessels arriving from and clearing for America, and mv own impression is it would
be found to work satisfactorily, and if any cause of complaint arose it could be investigated
by him in conjunction with such officer as the Governor might be pleased to appoint.”
I have, &c.,
P>. Robei tson.
XI.-(/)
Extract from a Despatch of Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street,
May 20th , 1876.
Sir,— * * * *
“15. it appears to Lord Carnarvon that it would lead to no practical advantage to discuss
XI O- the objections of Sir Brooke Robertson to Sir A. Kennedy’s suggestions,
First series. nor his own proposal that a European Consul or Vice-Consul should be
appointed to reside in Hongkong for the purposes indicated in the last paragraph of his
letter to Sir Thomas Wade of the 18th of January, until a solution has been arrived at of
the question which has now arisen as to the right of the Viceroy to levy the double duties
which he claims to impose on junks frequenting the Colony.”
I am, &c.,
Robert G. W. Herbert.
SECOND SCRIES.
1. -(a.)
Copy of Despatch from Marquis Tseng to Earl Granville.
Chinese Legation,
July 22nd ,
My Lord, —In consequence of the inconvenience which has long been felt to arise from
the absence of any efficient channel of communication between the Chinese Authorities at
Canton and the Government of Hongkong, the Imperial Government have for some time
had under their consideration the subject of the appointment of a Chinese Consul to that
portion of Her Britannic Majesty’s Dominions, and having now come to the conclusion that,
in the interests of China, the presence of such an Officer at that place has become a pressing
necessity, the Tsungli Yarnen has instructed me to communicate with Your Lordship with
the object of one being appointed.
25


Considering the geographical position of Hongkong and the large number of Chinese
subjects who either reside there, or constantly come and go between the Island and the
mainland, it is confidently believed that Her Majesty’s Government will admit that the
application for permission to appoint a Chinese Consul to Hongkong which I have now
the honour to submit for Your Lordship’s consideration, is as reasonable as the occasion is
opportune.
The increased opportunities of intercourse between the officials of the two Empires
which have of late years been established have been productive of nothing but good, never
have the relations between the two countries been so cordial as they are at present, and
every extension of these opportunities will only tend to place these relations on a better
and firmer footing. Ido not doubt, therefore, that this application to be allowed the same
privileges, as regards Consular Representation at Hongkong, as those accorded to other
Powers, will meet with the response which the acknowledged reputation for firmness and
liberality enjoyed by the British Government entitle me to expect.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) Tseng.
The Lari of Granville, K.G.,
tyctyc., Sfc.
1.— (6.)
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
July 31st, 1882.
*
Sir, —I am directed by Earl Granville to transmit to you to be laid before the Earl of
i(a). Kimberley, a copy of a Note from the Chinese Minister at this Court,
Second series. stating that the Imperial Government have for some time been considering
the advisability of the appointment of a Chinese Consul to Hongkong, and have now
determined to make formal application for permission to proceed to the appointment in
question.
The Marquis Tseng adds that his Government trust that their request to be allowed
the same privileges, as regards Consular Representatives at Hongkong, as those accorded
to other Powers may meet with the favourable consideration of Her Majesty’s Government.
I am to request that, in laying this paper before the Earl of Kimberley, you will move His
Lordship to cause Lord Granville to be informed what answer should he returned to the
Marquis Tseng’s application.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) T. V. Lister.
The Un der Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
I .-(c).
Copy of Despatch from Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street,
4th September , 1882 .
Sir, —I am directed by the Earl of Kimberley to acknowledge the receipt of your
1 (G* letter of the 31st of July last, forwarding copy of a Note from the Chinese
Second series. Minister at this Court, respecting the desire of the Imperial Government
to appoint a Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
26


2. In reply I am to request you to inform Earl Granville that the present Governor of
Hongkong is on leave of absence, and that as his term is drawing to a close, it is probable
that a new Governor will be appointed early next year, Lord Kimberley therefore while
ready to admit that the Chinese request is one which should be fairly considered, thinks
that it will be more satisfactory to postpone any decision on the subject for the present.
3. His Lordship would suggest that the Chinese Minister should be answered
accordingly.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) H. H. Meade.
The Under Secretary of State,
Foreign Office.
I --id-)
Copy of Despatch from Earl of Derby to Governor Sir G. F. Bowen.
Hongkong.
No. 41.
Downing Street,
12th February , 1883.
Sir, —1 have the honour to transmit to you, for your consideration and report, a copy
1 of a correspondeoee with the Foreign Office on a proposal made by the
Second senes. Chinese Government to appoint a Consul to reside in Hongkong.
You will recollect that I caused this subject to be brought under your notice at this
Office before you left England.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Derby.
Governor
Sir George Bowen, G.C.M.G.,
S)C., ty'C.y SfC.
II. — (a.)
Copy of Memorandum by the Attorney General.
Hongkong, April 18th , 1883.
I have never heard of any inconvenience arising from the absence of any efficient
channel of communication between the Chinese Authorities at Canton and the Government
at Hongkong. On the contrary since I have been here the British Consul at Canton has
been the channel and the efficient channel for such communication. And it seems to me
that for the purpose of interchanging such communications without risk of confusion and
cross purposes, one channel is much better than two and that the present channel is
sufficient.
At the same time if the Chinese Government wishes to have a Consul here, I do not
know of any special reason why they should not have one. It is possible too that if the
Imperial Government appointed an Officer specially to represent them on the spot we mioffit
be able through him to affect it with responsibility for the illegal acts which are sometimes
perpetrated under the alleged authority of the Chinese Government in these waters.
(Sd.) E. O’Malley.
- 27 -


IL —(6.)
Copy of Memorandum by the Colonial Secretary.
Hongkong, April 20th , 1883.
If the Chinese Government wish to have a Consul in Hongkong, I do not see on what
grounds such an appointment can be objected to.
They permit British Consuls at Canton and the Treaty Ports and though it may not
have been stipulated that they are to appoint a Consul here I do not see any sufficient rea-
son to urge against such an appointment being sanctioned. Ido not think that communi-
cations with the Viceroy of the Two Kuang will be facilitated by such an arrangement as
no difficulty has hitherto been experienced in carrying them out through the British
Consul at Canton.
(Sd.) W. Marsh.
IL—(<?.)
Copy of Despatch from Governor Sir G. F. Bowen to Earl of Derbv.
No. 35.
Government House,
Hongkong, 21st April , 1883,
My Lord, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Lordship’s despatch
1 No. 41 of the 12th February ultimo, respecting the proposed appointment
Second series. of a Chinese Consul to reside at Hongkong.
O o
2. I enclose the opinions on this point of the Colonial Secretary, and of the Attorney
General. I agree with them in the view that, whatever inconvenience may possibly arise
hereafter from the presence at Hongkong of a Chinese Functionary to whom his country-
men, comprising more than nineteen-twentieths of the entire population of this Island,
may, perhaps, look up, in some degree, rather than to the English Government of the
Colony, still it is difficult to perceive on what tenable ground England could withhold from
China an international privilege, which we have exercised for so many years past by
appointing an English Minister to reside at Peking, and English Consuls to reside at all
the chief Ports of the Chinese Empire. It appears to me that any infringement or neglect
of the “ comity of nations ”, in our relations with China, as with all other Powers, is to be
strongly deprecated.
•
3. I may take this opportunity of mentioning that I have been officially informed by
Her Majesty’s Consul at Canton, (Mr. Hewlett), that he had acquainted the Viceroy of that
great neighbouring Province, (who is one of the highest Functionaries of the Chinese
Empire), of my recent assumption of office as the Governor of Hongkong ; and that the
Viceroy had requested that his congratulations might be conveyed to me, together with the
assurance that he will always be ready to co-operate cordially with me on all occasions.
4. I may add that similar assurances were conveyed to me personally in a formal
visit paid at the Government House a few days after my arrival here, by the Mandarin,
who is the Chief Local Authority of Kowloon, the Chinese Town opposite Hongkong and
close to the boundary of the British Territory on the mainland.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) G. F. Bowen,
Governor , fyc.
T1 ie Right Honourable
iD
The Earl of Derby,
BfC ., (fc.j (j‘c.
28


THIRD SERIES.
I.
Copy of Despatch from Lord Knutsford to Governor Sir G. W. Des Vceux.
Hongkong.
No. 267.
Downing Street,
15th November , 1890.
ll C g )- Sir, —With reference to Sir G. Bowen’s Despatch No. 35 of 21st
second series. April, 1883, I have the honour to inform you that correspondence has
recently passed between this Department and the Foreign Office, respecting the desire of
the Chinese Government to have Consular representation in Her Majesty’s Dominions.
There is reason to believe that it is more especially in Hongkong that the Chinese
Government wish to be represented, as they have more than once asked to be allowed to
place a Consul there.
Her Majesty’s Government propose, subject to any observations which you may desire
to make, not to offer any objection in the event of the Chinese Government again requesting
permission to appoint a Consul to Hongkong, only stipulating that it is to be distinctly
understood that the withdrawal of any Chinese Consul causing trouble or anxiety to the
Colonial Government either by his own actions or by facilitating any objectionable actions
on the part of his fellow countrymen, would be at once required, and agreed to by the
Chinese Government, without any specific ground having been assigned.
I have, &c.,
i
(Sd.) Knutsford.
Governor
SirG. W. Des Vceux, K.C.M.G.,
fyc., <fv., sc.
11.—(a.)
Copy of Despatch from Chinese Ambassador to Marquis of Salisbury.
Chinese Legation,
December 11th , 1890.
Not on record. My Loud Marquis, —Referring to my letter of the 25th of Novem-
ber, I have the honour to inform Your Lordship that the first places in
Her Britannic Majesty's dominions at which the Imperial Government will ask permission
to appoint Consular Officers will be Hongkong and various places in the Straits Settle-
ments, and that, in view of the importance of these appointments being conferred on men
of experience and approved ability, I have submitted for the approval of the Tsungli
Yamen the names of two gentlemen in whose judgment, moderation and address I have
the utmost confidence.
for the office of Chinese Consul at Hongkong, I have proposed Mr. Tso Ping Lung
who since August, 1881, has held a similar post at Singapore, and as his successor at that
place, not however as Consul and for Singapore only, but as Consul-General and for the
Straits Settlements generally, I have recommended the appointment of Mr. Huang Tsung-
hsieo, Secretary of Legation in London.
I have reason to believe that the manner in which Mr. Tso has performed the functions
of his office at Singapore has met with the commendation of the Colonial Authorities, and I
doubt not but that Mr. Huang, who during several years served with acceptance first as
Secretary of Legation at Tokio and then as Consul-General at San Francisco will not less
render himself a persona grata.
29


The selection of the Officers whom it may be necessary to have at other places in the
Straits Settlements and who will act under Mr. Huang, is reserved for future consideiation.
T have, &c.,
(Sd.) Sieh.
The Marquis of Salisbury,
S>c., SfC., •
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
December 16th , 1890 .
Sir —With reference to my letter of the 28th ultimo, * I am directed by the Marquis of
Salisbury to transmit to you, for the information of Secretary Lord Knutsford, a copy ot a
iiG). Note from the Chinese Minister at this Court announcing that he has
Third series! submitted to the Tsungli Yamen the name of Mr. Tso Lung, who
has been since August, 1881, Chinese Consul at Singapore, for the post of Chinese Consul
at Hongkong, and the name of Mr. Huang Tsung-hsien, now Secretary of Legation in
London, for the post of Chinese Consul-General in the Straits Settlements.
The appointments cannot of course be considered as definitive until the decision of the
Tsungli Yamen is notified, but Lord Knutsford may be glad to forward this preliminary
notice to the Governor of the Colonies concerned for their observations.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) T. H. Sanderson.
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
II. —(c.)
Copy of Despatch from Secretary of State for Colonies to
Governor Sir G. W. Des \ ceux.
Hongkong.
No. 2. c
Downing Street,
2nd January ,
«
r& ii (&). Sir, —With reference to my Despatch No. 267 of 15th of November,
last, I have the honour to transmit to you, for your information, a copy
of a letter from the Foreign Office regarding the appointment of Mr. Cso Ping Lung as
Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
If as I anticipate, you have no objection to urge against the appointment of a Chinese
Consul, I request you to reply to that effect by telegraph, unless an answei has been
already sent by mail to my Despatch above-mentioned.
Mr. Tso Ping Lung, having been Consul for China at Singapore tor ten years, may, I
consider, be regarded as personally acceptable, if the principle of accepting a Chinese
Consul is agreed to.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) R. H. Meade,
for the Secretary of State.
Governor
Sir G. W. Des Vceux, K.C.M.G.,
S>'C ., $ C -
* Not printed.
- 30


111.
Copy of Despatch from Governor Sir G. W. Des Vceux to Lord Knutsford.
No. 12.
Government House,
Honokong, 22nd January , 1891.
My Lord, — I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Lordship’s despatch
L No. 267 of the loth of November enquiring whether 1 have any objection
Third series. to the appointment by the Chinese Government of a Consul to Hongkong.
On the 9th instant I also received from Your Lordship the following telegram :
“ Referring to my Despatch No. 267 Chinese Government propose to promote to
Hongkong Consul at Singapore who has much experience. I presume
there is no objection. Telegraph reply.”
After giving the matter the fullest consideration and consulting my Executive
Council and Chief Justice Russell on the subject, I telegraphed to Your Lordship on the
11th instant as follows :
“ Referring to vour telegram on subject of Chinese Consul refer to Governor of
J c 5 J
Hongkong’s Despatch 12th May, 18G9 ; situation in all main points
First series. unchanged ; I. have no reason to differ from strong objection appointment
entertained by Executive Council and Chief Justic3 Russell and shared generally in my
belief by Europeans and Chinese. I beg earnestly postponement of consideration pending
receipt of despatch.”
I have since caused enquiry to be made of the leading Chinese in the Colony as to
their views on this subject and I enclose copy of a Minute by the Registrar General, who
was entirely unaware of the views held by the Executive Council, winch show’s that they
are strongly opposed to the proposed appointment.
For myself I have seen no reason to modify the opinion expressed in my telegram of
the 11th instant to the effect that the most important objection to such an appointment
which was urged by Sir Richard Graves MacDonnell (No. 701) of the 12th of May, 1869,
still remains in full force.
»
The objections are entertained as warmly now as then not only by the Governor and
the Executive Council, but by every leading member of the European Community, while
perhaps the strongest argument against the proposal is that the Chinese w r hom it purports
to benefit are not only strongly averse to it, but are alarmed at the prospect of its adoption.
The only plausible ground which has ever been urged for such an appointment has
been now removed by the establishment in Hongkong though with nominal residence in
Chinese Kowloon of a Commissioner of the Chinese Foreign Customs under the superintend-
ence of Sir Robert Hart and under the circumstances I trust that Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment will no longer countenance a change which would bring legitimate benefit to no one
and would certainly lead to serious difficulties and complications and w r ould in all probabi-
lity do a serious injury to the Colony.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) G. W. Des Vceux,
Governor.
The Right Honourable
O
Lord Knutsford, G.C.M.G.,
SfC.
IV.
Copy.
No. 27.
Government House,
Hongkong, 4th February , 1891.
Third series. ultimo relative to the question of the appointment of a Chinese Consul
IX (")• to Hongkong, I have the honour to enclose for Your Lordship’s informa-
First series. tion copy of an extract from a Memorial addressed by the Hongkong
G-eneral Chamber of Commerce to Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs on the subject of the revision of some of the clauses of the Treaty of Tientsin.
- 31


2. Your Lordship will observe that the Chamber of Commerce expressed a strong
objection to the appointment of a Chinese Consul and adduce their reasons for entertaining it.
3. I have not brought this matter to the notice of the present Chamber, as I am
unwilling without necessity to make public the fact, that such an appointment has been
again in contemplation. But as the conditions are practically the same now as at the date
of the Memorial in question, I am quite confident that the existing Members would not
make an less strong objections to such an appointment than their predecessors.
4. The more I think of this contemplated measure the more certain I feel, that it
would if permitted have seriously injurious consequences to the Colony.
1 have, &c.,
(Sd.) G. W. Des Yceux,
Governor , BfC.
The Right Honourable
Lord Knutsford, G.C.M.G.,
Sfc., tyc., sc.
Copy of Despatch from Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street.
* •
15th January , 1891.
Sir, —With reference to the letter from this Department of 14th November last* and
ll CD- to your letter of the 16th ultimo regarding the proposed appointment of a
Third series. Chinese Consul at Hongkong, I am directed by Lord Knutsford to
*l: transmit to you to be laid before the Marquis of Salisbury copies of
First series. correspondence with the Governor of Hongkong on the subject as noted in
—__— the margin, and to state that His Lordship would propose that the matter
1 hl ii (c)! Cb * should remain in abeyance pending the receipt of the further despatch
—r —; —: which is presumably already on its way from the Colonv.
Second senes. I j j j
2. I am to explain that the despatch from the Governor of Hongkong of 12th May,
1869, mentioned in Sir G. Des Voeux’s telegram of 11th instant, was sent to the Foreign
Office in the letter from this Department of 22nd July, 1869, * and that Sir G. Bowen's
despatch of 21st April, 1883, referred to in the enclosed despatch from Lord Knutsford of
15th November last was communicated to you in the letter from this Department of Bfh
June, 1883. *
3. Lord Knutsford had not lost sight of the main objection to the proposed appoint-
ment of a Consul, originally raised in the despatch of 12th May, 1869,
First series. viz. :—that the Consul might possibly abuse his position by persecuting his
fellow-countrymen in Hongkong; but it was intended to meet this objection by the stipula-
tion indicated at the end of the letter from this Department of 14th November last,* to the
effect that the withdrawal of any Chinese Consul causing trouble or anxiety to the Colonial
%/ cj •/
Government either by his own actions or by facilitating any objectionable actions on the
part of Chinese residents in Hongkong would be at once required and agreed to without any
specific grounds being assigned.
4. I am to take this opportunity of also enclosing a copy of a despatch addressed to the
Governor of the Straits Settlements regarding the proposed appointment of additional Chinese
Consuls in that Colony.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) R. H. Meade.
The Under Secretary of State,
•/ *
Foreign Office.
* Not on record.
32


V.—(6.)
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
January 24th , 1891.
Sir, — I have laid before the Marquis of Salisbury your letter of the loth instant,
v ( g )- enclosing copies of correspondence relating to the appointment ot Chinese
Third series. Consuls in the Straits Settlements and Hongkong.
O * '
With regard to the objections which have been raised by the Hongkong Government
to such an appointment, I am to state that His Lordship concurs in Lord Knntsford’s
proposal that the matter should remain in abeyance pending the receipt of the further
despatch now on its way from the Governor of that Colony.
%
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) T. H. Sanderson.
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
V.-(c.)
Copy of Despatch from Sir C. C. Smith to Lord Knutsford.
i
Strait*} Settlements.
No. 42.
Government House,
Singapore, 28th January , 1891.
My Lord, — With reference to Your Lordship’s Despatch No. 2 # of the 2nd January
on the subject of the proposal of the Chinese Government to appoint a Consul-General in
lieu of a Consul to the Straits Settlements, I have no objection, as Your Lordship rightly
presumes, to offer.
2. At the same time I think it right to draw attention, in case it should have been
C '(?f H) 5 86 88 overlooked, to the correspondence noted in the margin, which took place
when the Siamese Government raised their Consulate in Singapore to a
Consulate-General. This was not recognised by Her Majesty’s Government and in con-
sequence by this Government, but Mr. Tan Kim Clung continues to style himself Consul-
General for Siam (See Straits Directory page 106).
3. The only Country permanently represented by a Consul-General is Holland.
There is a Consul-General for Belgium but I was given to understand that this rank was
specially conferred on Mr. Donner while examining into the trade of this part of the East.
♦
4. I venture to take this opportunity of expressing the regret which I feel at the
prospect of Mr. Tso Ping Lung’s transfer to Hongkong. He has held the appointment of
Chinese Consul at this Port for nearly ten years, and has performed the duties of his office
with excellent tact, discretion and ability. Further he has given the Government ready
and valuable assistance in many matters having for their object the amelioration of the
condition of the poorer and more helpless classes of his compatriots.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Cecil C. Smith.
The Right Honourable
Lord Knutsford, G.C.M.G.,
( fc ., 4'c., Bfc.
* Not on record.
o o
o*> '


V —(rf.)
Copy of Despatch from Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street,
7th March , 1891.
Sir, —With reference to the letter from this Department of the 15th of January, I am
v (a) and in. directed by Lord Knutsford to transmit to you, to be laid before the
Third series. Marquis of Salisbury, the enclosed copy of a Despatch from the Governor
of Hongkong relative to the proposal to appoint a Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
2. In view of the strong objections raised by Sir G. Des 1 mux, His Lordship would
suggest, for Lord Salisbury’s consideration, that it might be desirable to sound the Chinese
Government as to its readiness to appoint as Consul, not a Chinese by birth, but the Commis-
sioner of the Chinese Foreign Customs, who under the Opium Agreement of 1886 is
stationed in Chinese Kowloon, but it appears in fact to have his private residence in the
Colony, A copy of the Opium Agreement above referred to was transmitted to you in the
letter from this Department of the 2nd November, 1886.
3. I am at the same time to forward for Lord Salisbury’s information, a copy of a
v (0- Despatch from the Governor of the Straits Settlements regarding the
Third series! proposal of the Chinese Government to appoint a Consul-General instead
of a Consul to the Straits Settlements.
The question regarding the Siamese Consulate referred to in paragraph 2 of Sir Cecil
e o’ 2 786 * Smith’s despatch was dealt with in the correspondence between this De-
c’o’. B Wm* partment and the Foreign Office which is noted in the margin, but His
Lordship does not consider that the cases of Siam and China are analogous,
or that there is any objection to the proposal to raise the Chinese Consulate to a Consulate-
General.
1 am, &c.,
(Sd.) K. H. Meade.
The Under Secretary of State,
•j /
Foreign Office.
\
Copy of Despatch from Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Downing Street,
14th March , 1891 .
Sir, —1 am directed by Lord Knutsford to transmit to you, to be laid before the
v (d) and iv. Marquis of Salisbury, with reference to the letter from this Department of
the 7th instant, a copy of a further despatch from the Governor of Hong-
kong respecting the appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
2. I am to observe that the memorial, an extract from which accompanies this
despatch, was communicated to the Foreign Office in the letter from this Department of the
18th of March, 1870. *
[ am, &c.,
(Sd.) R. H. Meade.
The Under Secretary of State,
Foreign Office.
* Not on record.
34


Series No.
Date.
1 ’
Description of Document.
V (a.),
(*•),
(d.),
(«•)»
(«•),
(/•),
• '
loth January,
24th „
7th March,
28th January,
14th March,
23rd „ :
* • .
Letter to Foreign Office.
Letter from Foreign Office.
Letter to Foreign Office.
Despatch from Sir C. Smith.
Letter to Foreign Office.
Letter from Foreign Office.
Copy of Despatch from Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Foreign Office,
March 23rd , 1891.
v Sir, —In reply to your letter of the 7th instant, relative to the appoint-
Third series. merit of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong, I am directed by the Marquis of
Salisbury to request that you will state to Secretary Lord Knutsford that he will communi-
cate to Her Majesty’s Minister at Peking the objections felt at Hongkong to such an
n l; appointment as reported in Sir G. Des Yoeux’s Despatch No. 12 of the
Third series. 22nd of January and will ask Sir J. Walsbam whether he thinks the Chinese
Government would be disposed to accept the compromise suggested by Lord Knutsford,
viz.:- —that, instead of appointing a Chinese by birth, they should select for the proposed
Consulate the Commissioner of the Chinese Foreign Customs, who is stationed in Chinese
Kowloon.
I am at the same time to suggest, for Lord Knutsford’s consideration, that the Govern-
v or of Hongkong should be furnished with a copy of Sir Cecil Smith’s despatch
Third series. No. 42 of the 28th or January, testifying to the admirable manner in which
Mr. Tso Ping Lung, who has been recommended to the Chinese Government by their Minister
in this country for transfer to Hongkong has discharged his duties as Consul at Singapore.
I am, &c.,
(Sd.) T. H. Sanderson.
The Under Secretary of State,
Colonial Office.
v.-O/).
Copy of Despatch from Secretary of State for Colonies to the Officer
Administering the Government of Hongkong.
Hongkong.
No. 59.
Downing Street,
26th March , 1891.
Sir, —1 am directed by the Secretary of State to transmit to you for your information
lll and IV> in reply to your despatches noted in the margin, the documents specified in
Third series. the annexed schedule, on the subject of the proposed Chinese Consul at
Hongkong.
o O
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Robert G. W. Herbert.
The Officer Administering the Government
of Hongkong.
o O
35


VI.
Copy of Despatch from Governor Sir G. W. Des Vceux to Lord Knutsford.
No. 35.
Government House,
Hongkong, 16th February , 1891 ,
•
My Lord, — I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Lordship s Despatch
n (c). No. 2 of the 2nd ultimo, enclosing copy of a letter from the Foreign Office-
Third series. regarding the proposed appointment of Mr. fso Ping Lung as Chinese
Consul at Hongkong.
Your Lordship will already have learned from my despatches No. 12 of 22nd of
in and iv. January and No. 27 of the 4th instant that there are strong objections to
Third series. the appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong, and I have nothing
further to add to the views I have already expressed on the subject.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) G. Des Vceux,
Governor , S>c.
The Right Honourable
Lord Knutsford, G.C.M.G.,
4**., S)C., sc.
VII.
Copy of Despatch from Lord Knutsford to the Officer Administering
the Government of Hongkong.
Hongkong.
isj n iny Downing Srteet,
21st May , 1891.
v ( g ). Sir, —With reference to my Despatch No. 59 of the 26th of March
Third series. last, I have the honour to inform you that the question of the appointment
of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong has been further considered and in view of represent-
ations made on behalf of the Chinese Minister at this Court, Her Majesty’s Government
have agreed to the appointment of Mr. Tso Ping Lung at present Chinese Consul at Singa-
pore to be Consul at Hongkong for one year on the understanding that he should be
withdrawn at the end of that time if the appointment should be found not to work well.
i
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Knutsford.
The Officer Administering the Government
of Hongkong.
VIII.—(a.)
Copy of Despatch from Marquis of Salisbury to Sir J. Walsham.
No. 54.
foreign Office,
June 26th , 1891.
Not on record. Sir, —With reference to my telegram No. 36 of the 24th instant, and
to previous correspondence, I have to inform you that Sir Halliday Macart-
ney recently called at the Foreign Office, and said that the difficulty with regard to the
appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong had not been removed.
He stated that the Yamen had recommended the Emperor to refuse the offer of Her
Majesty’s Government to grant an Exequatur in the first instance for one year, on the
ground that if it were withdrawn at the end of that period, the incident would near the
appearance of a severe rebuff to the Chinese Government.
36


Sir H. Macartney asked if it would not be possible to withdraw the limitation, and to
rely simply on the undoubted right of withdrawing the Exequatur if the Consul’s conduct
was found to give rise to objections.
The matter was carefully considered but it did not appear possible to withdraw the
condition which had been made with the view of meeting the objections raised to the
appointment in the Colony, and of which the Governor had been officially advised. Sir H.
Macartney was informed that Her Majesty’s Government found themselves unable to depart
from their previous decision and he then said that he was authorised in that case to state
that the Chinese Government could not accept the condition, and would not make the
appointment.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Salisbury.
Sir John Walsham, Bart.,
. sc. } Jr-, fyc.,
Peking.
VIII. —(6.)
Copy of Despatch from Secretary of State for Colonics to the Officer
Administering the Government of Hongkong’.
Hongkong.
No. 155.
Downing Street,
7th July , 1891.
Sir, —I am directed by the Secretary of State to transmit to you for your information
with reference to his despatch No. 107 of 21st May last the documents
Third series. specified in the annexe i schedule, on the subject of the proposal to appoint
a Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
O O
1 have, &c.,
(Sd.) R. G. W. Herbert.
The Officer Administering the Government, Hongkong.
' O 7 iD
( ‘
«
Date. . Description of Document.
-6th June. Despatch from Foreign Office to British Embassy at Peking.
VIII (a.)
IX. —(a.)
Copy of Despatch from Consul-General at Canton to
Colonial Secretary of Hongkong.
No. 60.
H. B. M.’s Consulate-General,
Canton, July 13th , 1891.
Sir,—l have the honour to enclose, for the information of His Excellency the Govern-
or, translation of a Memorial presented to the Throne by Hsiieh Fu-cheog, Chinese Minister
in London, giving an account of his negotiations to obtain the consent of Her Majesty’s
Government to the appointment of a Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) J. Waiters,
H, M.'s Acting Consul-General.
The Honourable,
W. M. Goodman,
• Acting Colonial Secretary, Hongkong.
- 37 -


IX.—(0)
Translation of Post-script Memorial by Hsiieh Fu-Cheng, Chinese Minister in England,
reporting his negotiations for the appointment of a
Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
Aoain in the Island of Hongkong, a British Possession, there are 140,000 to 150,000
Chinese subjects residing. The island is close to Canton and is an important link ot com-
munication between China and Foreign Countries. All Chinese and Foreign produce goes
first to Honokong and is then distributed to the various Provinces. Ihe most important
and difficult points in the relations of Hongkong with China refer to (Ist.) escaped criminals
(2nd.) Smuggling (3rd.) territorial waters. But as there is no Chinese Official resident
in Hongkong, there is no means of mutual understanding between Chinese and Foieigneis
so that "the business of the Canton Province is often obstructed. Therefore the proposal
to appoint a Consul there is one of great moment. Your Memorialists predecessor vuo
Sung-tae had this intention, but did not succeed in carrying it into effect. 1 our Memorial-
ist’s' predecessor Tseng Chi-tse addressed the British foreign Office se\oral times on tis
subject but without result. I imagine that what really actuates them the British) in
this matter is the consideration that while the Chinese are very numerous in Hongkong
there are onlv a few thousand foreigners; and that a Chinese Official stationed there
would be in the closest relation with the High Officials of the Canton Province, a state of
things that would certainly cause them much anxiety : therefore is it that they detei mine<
not to accede to our request.
Lately your Memorialist addressed a despatch to the British h oreign Office proposing
a rule of universal application, in accordance with International Law, but not mentioning
Hongkong by name ; but the Under Secretary of State for foreign Affairs Sir f. Sandei-
son suspected that it might have reference to Hongkong and stated this to Sir H. Ma-
cartney, our English Secretary of Legation, adding further that he feared that a Chinese
Official* being unacquainted with foreign affairs might encroach beyond his authority so
that there were many difficulties in the way.
Your Memorialist remembered Tso Ping-lung, Consul at Singapore, who gets on very
well with English Officials and whose conduct has been characterized by British Foreign
Office as friendly and careful 5 and \our Memorialist therefore sent Sir 11. Macartney to
the Foreign Office to say that if a Consul were appointed at Hongkong, Iso Ping-lung
should be sent there to open the Consulate. It appears from the pm port of Sii P. Sandei -
son's remarks that the negotiation will not be difficult. However it is the invariable custom
of the Foreign Office to°endeavour to protract business, and there is no chance of getting
anything done except by repeated applications. When a reply is received from the Foreign
Office if immediate assent is not given, Your Memorialist will again open the discussion as
opportunity offers.
Dated about January, 1891.
X.
Copy of Despatch from Officer Administering the Government
of Hongkong to Lord Knutsford.
No. 229,
Government House,
Hongkong, 15th July , 1891 .
My Lord, —1 have the honour to acknowledge the receipt o£ Your Lordship's despatcli
A vn. ’ Js o . 107 of the 21st of May stating that Her Majesty's Government had
Third seriesT agreed to the appointment of Mr. Tso Ping-lung, Chinese Consul at Sin-
gapore, to be Consul at Hongkong for one year on the understanding that he should be
withdrawn at the end of that time if the appointment should be found not to work well.
2. With a view of making the announcement public, I laid a copy of Your Lordship’s
despatch before the Legislative Council at its last meeting.
38 -


3. In the previous correspondence on the subject of this appointment, Sir William Des
Voeux has referred fully to the objections which have always existed, and still do exist, on
the part of the whole community of this Colony, and as it has nevertheless been decided to
accede to the wishes of the Chinese Government I assume that what are deemed Imperial
interests have in this matter over-ridden Colonial interests.
Under these circumstances I refrain from adding my adverse opinion of the advisability
of the appointment to the protests which have already reached Your Lordship, and can
only declare myself ready to carry out Your Lordship’s instructions in the matter.
4. There are however several points upon which I should be glad to have Your
Lordship’s directions, viz.: —(1) what are to be the duties and powers of the Consul ?
(2) how will the position of the Registrar General be affected ? Are the Chinese still to be
taught to look upon him as the Protector of Chinese, or arc* they to be rather encouraged to
place themselves under the protection of the Chinese Consul? (3) Is this Government to
communicate in future with the Chinese Authorities through the Chinese Consul here instead
of through Her Majesty’s Consuls at the Treaty Ports ?
At present this Government approaches the Viceroy of the Two Kuang,-resident in
the neighbouring City of Canton, through Her Majesty’s Consul-General at Canton on all
matters in which the assistance of the Chinese Authorities is required or on Chinese ques-
tions affecting the interests of the Colony. Similarly the Government communicates direct
with Her Majesty's Consuls at the Treaty Ports in China and with Her Majesty’s Minister
at Peking.
(4) Under the Agreement of 1.886, u the Commissioner of Customs for the Kowloon
District has supreme charge of the Revenue Cruisers of the Chinese Preventive Service’’, and
this Government corresponds direct with him on questions arising out of the administration
of that Service.
In future are such communications to be addressed to the Consul ?
These are the principal points that occur to me at the moment on which are required
definite instructions for the guidance of this Government.
5. I notice that the appointment of the Consul is to be on probation at it were for one
year. With due deference I would suggest for Your Lordship’s consideration whether it
would not be more satisfactory to omit the mention of any limit to the time within whicii
the appointment may be cancelled should it be found to be desirable that the Consul should
be withdrawn.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) G. D. Barker,
Officer Administering the Government.
The Right Honourable,
Lord Knctsford, G.C.M.G.,
SC., SfC.
XI.
Copy of Despatch from Officer Administering the Government of
Hongkong to Lord Knutsford.
No. 236.
Government House,
Hongkong, 20th , 1891.
My I —I have the honour to inform Your Lordship that on the 14th instant, I
sent to you the following Telegraphic Despatch :
“ Referring to your Despatch No. 107 of 21st May a Member of Legisla-
Third series. tive Council requests that previous correspondence of recent
date and formerly laid on the table 17th July have you any
objection.”
to which on the 18th I received the following reply :
4i Chinese Consul proposal withdrawn see ray despatch of 7th of July, therefore not
# necessary laid on the table correspondence.”
39 -


I have learned with pleasure the final decision in this matter, and I may state that the
announcement (which I caused to be made public on the receipt of \ our Lordship’s
telegram) that the proposal for the appointment of a Chinese Consul had been withdrawn,
was received with general satisfaction hy the community of this Colony, who regarded the
contemplated innovation with apprehension and very considerable irritation, which were
about to find expression in public demonstrations.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) G. D. Barker,
Officer Ad mistering the Government.
The Right Honourable
Lord Knutsford, G.C.M.G.,
<|t., ()V., dye.
XII.
Copy of Despatch from Lord Knui'SFord to the Officer Administering
the Government of Hongkong.
O o
Hongkong.
No. 235.
Downing Street,
Ist October , 1891.
Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch
Third No. 229 of the 15th of July last, as to the proposed appointment of a
Chinese Consul at Hongkong.
You are aware that the request for this appointment has at present been withdrawn by
the Chinese Government, but 1 may state, in reply to the questions raised by you, that the
duties and powers of any Chinese Consul would have been generally similar to those of the
Consuls of other Nations ; that the inhabitants of the Colony would still have been expected
to look upon the Registrar General as the Protector of Chinese, and that the Colonial Gov-
ernment would have continued to communicate with the Chinese Authorities through Her
Majesty’s Consular odicers.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Knutsford.
The Officer Administering the Government,
Hongkong.
o c
FOUIiTH SERIES.
I.
Copy of semi-official Letter from Governor Sir F. D. Lugakd to Lord Li.
Government House,
Hongkong, 16th October , 1907,
Dear Lord Li, You spoke to me privately, when I had the pleasure of seeing you
here a few days ago, on the subject of the appointment of a Chinese Consul to Hongkong.
J replied that i would like to consider the matter before expressing any opinion, and you
then asked me if I would write to you privately after you ha 1 reached London, and give
you my view o£ the matter. I understood you further to say that you would not raise the
question in London till you had heard from me, and that if my view was adverse you would
not raise it at all. 1 have as you see lost no time in giving a careful consideration to the
matter and I have come to the conclusion that the appointment of a Chinese Consul here.
40 -


would not be advisable, and is not required. I made a careful note of the various points
which you urged in support of the proposal, and I could without difficulty explain to you
in what way I think that each point could be, or has been already, met. It would however
be improper for me to enter into a discussion of such a matter in detail in I a private letter
and I am sure you will understand that it would be only correct for me to submit my
views to the Secretary of State.
(Sd.) F. D. Lugard.
11.
Copy of semi-official Letter from Lord Lx to Governor Sir F. D. Lugard.
Richmond House,
49, Portland Place, W., 23rd December , 1907.
Dear Sir Frederick, —I am much obliged to you for your kind letter of
~Fourth series. October the 16th last which reached me here towards the end of November.
As regards the question of appointing a Chinese Consul in Hongkong, I am sorry that
Your Excellency’s opinion should be adverse. I know the importance which the Chinese
Government attaches to the appointment, and I cannot but think that sooner or later the
question must be decided in the sense desired by them, and that it might be wise to settle
it as soon as possible while the relations between the two Governments are so friendly.
At any time with such varied and complicated commercial and other relations as exist
between the Colony and the neighbouring parts of the Canton Province, troublesome
questions may arise which would render the urgent discussion of the question of a Consular
appointment unavoidable, and at the same time make it less easy to deal with than at
present when all is so harmonious. I will not now go into the question further but with
your permission may do so later on.
(Sd.) Li Ching-fong.
41










































