

(UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACTS).
I A HANDY DIGEST OF THE RECENT COMMONWEALTH
: STATUTORY RULES DEALING WITH LAND PUR-
CHASES, MORTGAGES, BILLS OF SALE,
|
80 ELIZABETH STREET.


♦
»'*«03g2?
, v - ':•■ • ■' — ' '"J- r"-V<V' M& V'?
• \ ■ ■-": > '-;■' ■ - . ■..
, . ' ■ : ' ■ ' •:■ ' .:■■ .- A ' . '■ : ;:
■'-■/■■ ■ • ■ ; : '< -v - ■'■■'-■' ' ■., -- .';■ "■■•• - ■. ' •
:
.
: • : ~ - i: -I ; tei
iPA . - ; . A- ■ ■ tA.AA-A:aaAAAA• A ~•'
, ... - - ; . * • • :: . - - ■ ' ■■■* .
A §?^' ? |liAAAJAAA
*' A m m 1t ISA\ >
k W I <> IP J JP f> | A r: *
, v- ; . - pf r fp; A L* \A v ' '
• ■• 'A AAA V-- |p A#8l§ AAA.
I


— BY —
E. H. TEBBUTT,
Solicitor,
SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
"THE MORATORIUM"
(UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACTS).
A HANDY DIGEST OF THE RECENT COMMONWEALTH
STATUTORY RULES DEALING WITH LAND PUR-
CHASES, MORTGAGES, BILLS OF SALE,
ETC., AS AFFECTING SOLDIERS, THEIR
DEPENDENTS, AND CIVILIANS.
WITH AN INDEX.
THE LAW BOOK COMPANY OF AUSTRALASIA, LTD.
80 ELIZABETH STREET.


Contents.
Editor's Note ... ... ... ... 3
"Soldiers'" Moratorium ... ... ... 4
Index to same ... 15
" Civilians'" Moratorium ... ... ... 9
Index to same ... ... ... 16


EDITOR'S NOTE.
" THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914-1916 " is constituted by The
War Precautions Act 1914 (No. 10 of 1914), as amended by The
War Precautions Act 1915 (No. 2 of 1915), The War Precautions Act
(No. 2) 1915 (No. 39 of 1915), and The War Precautions Act 1916
(No. 3 of 1916).
These Acts, which are to be read with the Defence Act 1903-
1912, continue during the War and no longer. Under them the
Governor-General may make regulations on a very great range of
subjects. By section 6, contravention of a regulation is an " offence
against this Act " punishable (summarily) by a fine of £lOO or six
months imprisonment,—(indictment) by fine of any amount or
imprisonment for any term, and (in certain cases) by Death. Pro-
vision is made also for trial by court-martial. The Acts themselves
are not re-printed here, in order to economise space, but, as a matter
of fact, their text chiefly amounts to a copious endowment of the
executive with a power to make and enforce regulations.
The Regulations which are " consolidated " here, were originally
published in the following order :
Number in " Statutory Rules "
and reference to Commonwealth
Statutory Rules of Practical Utility.
1916 No. 163
(C.S.R.. Vol. 6, p. 220)
1916 No. 250
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 346)
1916 No. 283
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 379)
1916 No. 284
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 383)
1916 No. 324
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 441)
1917 No. 13 ..
(C.S.R., Vol. 7, p. 6)
NAME.
War Precautions (Active
Service Moratorium)
Regulations, 1916.
War Precautions (Supple-
mentary) Regulations,
1916.
War Precautions (Active
Service Moratorium)
Regulations.
War Precautions (Mora-
torium) Regulations.
Do.
DATE.
28 July, 1916.
11 Oct., 1916.
(wholly repealed by No.
284).
10 November, 1916.
10th November, 1916.
22 December, 1916.
24 January, 1917.
It will be se6n that the " Moratorium " is of two kii
soldiers, or their dependents, and the general Regulations,
only for civilians and their property.
kinds,
ids, those applying only to
which are no doubt intended
.H.T.,
928 P
Pitt Street, Sydney.


SOLDIERS.
Regulations No. 163 of 28th July, 1916, as amended by
1916 No. 283 of 10th November, 1916.
WAR PRECAUTIONS (ACTIVE SERVICE MORATORIUM)
REGULATIONS 1916.
Short title. 1. These Regulations may be cited as the War Precautions
r! i9i™No d by (Active Service) Regulations 1916.
283.
Definitions. 2. In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention appears—
Female Dependant " means any female who is wholly or
partly dependant for her support upon the pay, or upon a
pension payable in consequence of the incapacity or death
of a person who is a member of the Forces ;
" Land " includes messuages, tenements, and hereditaments,
and houses and buildings, and also includes any estate
or interest in land (legal or equitable), and any easement,
right, power, or privilege over, in, or in connexion with
land ;
As amended by " Member of the Forces " means a member of the Common-
-283191 6' N °' wealth Naval or Military Forces enlisted or appointed for
or employed on active service outside Australia or employed
on a ship of war, or enlisted or appointed for service in con-
nection with naval or military preparations or operations,
and includes a member of the Army Medical Corps Nursing
Service who is accepted or appointed by the Director-
General of Medical Services for service outside Australia,
but does not include any person serving in the Citizen
Forces in pursuance of a proclamation under section sixty
of the Defence Act 1903-1915.
Postponement 3. Subject to these Regulations, the time for any payment of
of due date of p r i nc ip a l money secured by a mortgage (legal or equitable) of land,
Secured by contracted by a member or the female dependant of a member
As"""amended b- before the date on which he became a member of the Forces, or
R s me.Vo. y before the first day of January, 1916, whichever last happens, is
283 ' hereby postponed so that such payment shall fall due upon the
expiration of six months after the cessation of the present state of
war and not earlier.


4. (1) Subject to these Regulations, the time for any payment Postponement
of purchase-money (whether the whole or an instalment thereof) of ur d C hi S e ate of
under an agreement for the purchase of land, entered into by a money,
member or the female dependant of a member before the date on air >ended by
which he became a member of the Forces, or before the first day of lb! 916 ' N °"
January, 1916, whichever last happens, which payment has fallen
due since the first day of May, One thousand nine hundred and
sixteen, or hereafter falls due, is hereby postponed so as to fall due
upon the expiration of the period of six months next after the day
•on which it fell due or would fall due if these Regulations had not been
made, and not earlier, or upon the expiration of six months after
the cessation of the present state of war, and not earlier.
(2) This Regulation shall not apply to any amount payable as
interest, and when an instalment includes interest as well as prin-
cipal, and the agreement neither states the rate of interest nor
indicates what parts of the instalment are principal and interest
respectively, then, for the purposes of this Regulation, the rate of
interest shall be deemed to be five per centum per annum.
5. Repealed. Repealed by R.
1916, No. 283.
6. (1) When a mortgagor or purchaser avails himself of the interest to be
right conferred by these Regulations to postpone the payment of in
any sum, interest shall be payable on such sum in respect of the periodo° f
period of postponement. postponement.
(2) The rate of the interest payable at any time by virtue of substituted by
this Regulation shall, unless the rate thereof is hereafter agreed ogJ 9 * 9 ' "°*
upon by the parties before the interest falls due, be —
(ia) six per centum per annum,
(h) the rate payable on the date when such sum would have
been payable if these Regulations had not been made,
whichever is the lower rate : Provided that, if the rate of interest
payable under any mortgage or agreement is thereby fixed by
reference to rates current, in the case of some specified class of
transactions, at the times when the sums of interest respectivelv
fall due or are paid (as the case may be), the rates payable by
virtue of this Regulation shall, at the option of the mortgagee or
vendor, be as so fixed or as fixed by this Regulation, but so that
the rate shall not in any case exceed six per centum per annum.
(3) Interest payable by virtue of this Regulation shall be
payable at the close of the same intervals of time as are provided by
the mortgage or agreement with respect to the interest thereby
secured, or, if no provision is so made, then quarterly.
(4) Repealed.
Repealed by R.
1916, No. 283.
(5) In the case of a payment which fell due on or before the
date of these Regulations, the period of postponement shall, for the
purposes of this Regulation, be deemed to have commenced on the
day immediately following the date of these Regulations.
7 . When, under any mortgage or agreement to which these when one
Regulations apply, the principal or purchase money is to be repaid
or paid by instalments, and the mortgagor or purchaser avails him- subsequent
self of the right conferred by these Regulations to postpone the he postponed 0
payment of any of such instalments, then, notwithstanding that forllke penodis.


in other respects these Regulations may have ceased to operate,
the times when the subsequent instalments respectively fall due
shall each be postponed for a period equal to the period of postpone-
ment effected by these Regulations with respect to the first-men-
tioned instalment; but the interest to be paid with such subsequent
instalments shall, if these Regulations have so ceased to operate,
be at the rate fixed by the mortgage or agreement.
Proceedings
stayed, but
rights not
otherwise
prejudiced.
8. (1) These Regulations shall operate as a stay of all proceed-
ings, whether by action or any other means and whether in any Court
or otherwise, heretofore commenced to enforce the payment or in
respect or in consequence of the non-payment of any principal or
purchase-money to which Regulation 3 or 4 applies, and of all
remedies for the recovery thereof ; but shall not otherwise prejudice
or affect any such proceeding or remedy or alter or affect the rights
or obligations of any party, except so far as may be necessary to
give effect to the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) Upon the termination of the postponement effected by
these Regulations, all proceedings so stayed may be continued, and
all such remedies may be pursued, as if the period of postponement
had not intervened.
(3) In particular, but without limiting the effect of this
Regulation, it is hereby provided that the period of postponement
effected by these Regulations shall not be taken into account in
calculating the time, as fixed by any Statute of Limitations or other
Act or State Act, within which any action for the recovery of any
postponed sum is to be commenced, or any other remedy for that
purpose is to be pursued.
Provision for 9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regula-
hardsMp.great tions, any Justice of the High Court or Judge of the Supreme Court
of a State shall have power, with respect to any mortgage or agree-
ment, to order that these Regulations shall not apply thereto,
if he is of opinion that, in the special circumstances of the case,
the postponement effected by these Regulations is not necessary in
the interest of the mortgagor or purchaser, or would cause hardship
or loss to the mortgagee or vendor (as the case may be), or to any
person towards whom, with respect to such mortgage or agreement,
he stands in the position of trustee.
Substituted by (2) The application for an order under this Regulation shall
283! 916 N °" be made by motion, with notice to such persons as the Court con-
siders entitled thereto, or ex parte in any case in which by reason of
special circumstances the Court considers such procedure to be just
and equitable.
?»?«»£ & 11 - (3) Repealed.
(4) A Justice or Judge may make all such interlocutory and
r! by final orders in the matter of any such motion, including any orders
283 - as to costs, as, having regard to the objects of these Regulations
and the circumstances of the case, he deems proper : Provided that
the costs of the application shall be borne by the applicant unless,
from the circumstances of the case, the Justice or Judge thinks fit
to order otherwise.
(5) The order of a Justice or Judge determining any such
summons shall be final; and no order or direction, whether inter-


loeutory or final, in the matter of any such motion, and no other As amended by
proceeding under this Regulation, shall be appealed against, ques- f^ 916 No *
tioried, or reviewed in any manner whatsoever, or be restrained or
removed by prohibition, injunction, certiorari, or otherwise how-
soever.
10. These Regulations shall not be held to prevent, or to alter Certain
the effect of— contracts and
(a) any contract, made after the date of these Regulations, not affected,
concerning any mortgage or agreement to which Regula-
tion 3 or 4 of these Regulations applies ; or
(b) any instrument made or thing done in pursuance of any
such contract.
11. The provisions of the preceding Regulations shall apply to Mortgages and
any mortgage or agreement contracted or entered into by a member wMcifmember
of the Forces or the female dependant of a member of the Forces of Forces™/ 1
jointly with a person who is not a member of the Forces or a female dependant is
dependant of a member of the Forces in like manner as they apply a ?S rty J ointly
4- 4. I T , i •/ Jr JL J witii otner
to a mortgage or agreement contracted or entered into by a member person.
of the Forces only or a female dependant only, as the case may be. b | B ®-
12. (1) No person shall, under a bill of sale, or writ of execu- Protection from
ti°n or other process issued by a Court, or by way of distress, or means "of o '' ° f
under the provisions of a hire-purchase agreement made prior to &c-
the first day of June, 1916, or to the enlistment of a member of dependants of
the Forces, whichever last happens, seize or take possession of— soldiers.
{a) any chattels which are used by any female dependant of inserted by r.
that member of the Forces to support or assist in sup- 1916 N °" 283 "
porting herself or any of the family of the member ; or
(b) any furniture or wearing apparel belonging to any such
member or female dependant:
Provided that if the furniture and wearing apparel
belonging to the member and his female dependants exceed
in value £5O, any articles may be seized and taken posses-
sion of under due authority of law if the articles remaining
are not less in value than £5O.
(2) In any procseution for an offence against this Regulation
an order may be made for the return of any articles seized or taken
possession of in contravention of this Regulation, or for payment
of their value.
13. (1) No writ of action or other legal process shall without writs and
leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court be issued out of any s r s s a f| inst
Court in respect of any liability of any member of the Forces Or iem ale
a female dependant under any contract or agreement (not being a R
contract or agreement to which the provisions of any of the pre- 1916* No. 283."
ceding Regulations apply), where the contract or agreement was
entered into on or before the twentieth day of September, One
thousand nine hundred and sixteen.
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that having regard to
all the circumstances of the case it would be inequitable to the
other party to the contract or agreement to give to the member
or female dependant, as the case may be, the benefit or protection


of this Regulation, and that it would not inflict hardship on the
member or female dependant, as the case may be, the Court shall
grant leave to the party making the application.
(2) Application for the leave of the Court under this Regu-
lation may be made by motion, with notice to such persons as the
Court considers entitled thereto, or ex parte in any case in which
by reason of special circumstances the Court considers such procedure
to be just and equitable.
(3) Any such application may be made to and disposed
of by a Justice or Judge in Chambers.
(4) The leave may be granted on such terms and conditions
(if any) as the Court thinks fit.


CIVILIANS.
Regulation No. 284 of 10th November, 191j5, amended
by No. 324 of 22nd December, 1916 and No. 13 of
24th January, 1917,
WAR PRECAUTIONS (MORATORIUM) REGULATIONS.
1. These Regulations may be cited as the War Precautions Short title.
(Moratorium) Regulations.
2. In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention appears — Definitions.
" Mortgage" means any deed, memorandum of mortgage,
instrument, or agreement whereby security for payment
of moneys or for the performance of any contract is
granted over land or chattels or any interest therein
respectively, and includes an equitable mortgage by
deposit of title deeds, and any document by which the
duration of a mortgage is extended ;
Mortgagor " means the person liable under the provisions
of a mortgage, and includes any person who has guaran-
teed the performance by the mortgagor of any covenant,
condition, or agreement expressed or implied in the mort-
gage, whether such guarantee is expressed in the mort-
gage or in any other instrument;
" Mortgagee " means the person entitled to the benefit of the
security of any mortgage ;
" Supreme Court " means the Supreme Court of a State ;
" The Court " means the High Court or the Supreme Court H
of a State, or in the case of a mortgage in which the
principal sum does not exceed Two thousand pounds, a
County or District Court or a Local Court consisting of a
Special or Stipendiary Magistrate ;
" The rate provided in the mortgage" means the rate of
interest provided in the mortgage, or, where there is
provided in the mortgage a reduced rate of interest in
the case of punctual payment, the reduced rate ; and
shall not in any case be construed to refer to any in-
creased rate of interest stipulated to be paid in any con-
tingency.
3. These Regulations shall not apply to any fluctuating
advance exceeding Two thousand pounds which is made by way of tain fluctuating
bank overdraft secured by a mortgage, unless the High Court or Advances,
the Supreme Court, upon the application of the mortgagor, deter- As amended by
mines that having regard to the matters mentioned in sub-regulation 324,* 916 No "


(5) of Regulation 4 of these Regulations it is desirable that these
Regulations should apply.
Limitation of
rights of
mortgagees.
4. (1) A mortgagee shall not, without leave of the Court-
(a) call up or demand payment from any mortgagor of any
part of the principal sum secured by the mortgage;
(6) exercise any power of sale ;
(c) commence any action or proceeding, or continue any
action or proceeding commenced after the twentieth day
of September, One thousand nine hundred and sixteen,
for breach of any covenant, agreement, or condition
expressed or implied in any mortgage other than a cove-
nant, agreement, or condition for—
(i) the payment of interest, or
(ii) the insurance, maintenance, or cultivation of the
mortgage property, or the payment of rates, taxes
and other charges, or the doing of any acts for
the preservation of the security ;
(d) commence any action or proceeding, or continue any
action or proceeding commenced after the twentieth day
of September, One thousand nine hundred and sixteen,
for interest at any rate higher than the rate provided in
the mortgage or the rate payable under sub-regulation (7)
of this Regulation, as the case may be ; or
(e) take any steps for obtaining an order for foreclosure or for
possession or occupation:
Inserted by R,
1917, No. 13.
Provided that where interest is in arrear for not less than
thirty days and the mortgagor fails to observe the provis-
sions of any covenant, agreement or condition expressed
or implied in the mortgage for any of the matters specified
in sub-paragraph (ii.) or paragraph (c) of sub-regulation (1)
of this Regulation, nothing in this paragraph shall pre-
clude the mortgagee from entering into possession of the
mortgaged property, but in any such case the mortgagor
may apply to the Court for an Order requiring the mort-
gagee to vacate the mortgaged property, and in the event
of the application being granted by the Court the mort-
gagee shall vacate the mortgaged property in accordance
with the order of the Court.
Substituted by
R. 1917. No. 13,
(2) Applications for the leave of the Court, other than
applications for the leave of a Local Court, may be made by motion
with notice to such persons as the Court considers entitled thereto,
or ex parte in any case in which by reason of special circumstances
the Court considers such procedure to be just and equitable, and
applications for the leave of a Local Court may be made on summons,
in accordance, so far as may be, with the practice of the Court in
ejectment proceedings ;
(3) Any such application may be made to and disposed of
by a Justice or Judge in Chambers, or, in the case of the Local
Court, by a Special or Stipendiary Magistrate ;
As amended by
B. 1917. No.
13.
(4) In dealing with any application for leave under this
Regulation, the Court may, subject to this Regulation—


'
(a) grant the application on such terms and conditions (if any)
as the Court thinks fit; or
(b) refuse the application:
Provided that the Court shall not grant any application for
leave to commence or continue proceedings for the recovery from a
mortgagor of any part of the principal sum secured by mortgage,
or for foreclosure, unless the Court is satisfied that, having regard
to all relevant circumstances, including the ability of the mort-
gagor to redeem the property out of his own moneys, it would be
unjust and inequitable not to grant it.
(5) In any case where, after the date fixed by the mortgage
for repayment of the principal sum, the principal sum or any part
thereof remains unpaid, and the Court is of opinion that the mort-
gagor is unable to redeem the property, or to repay a portion of the
principal sum, as the case may be, from his own money, the Court
shall not grant leave to take any proceedings for such redemption amended by
or repayment unless the Court is satisfied —
(a) that, by reason of the wasting nature of the secmity, the
continuance of the mortgage would seriously affect the
security ; or
(6) that the conduct of the mortgagor has, in respect of any
breaches by him of the covenants of the mortgage, or in
respect of any matter affecting the rights or remedies of
the mortgagee, or in respect of dealings with the
mortgagee, been such as to render him undeserving of the
benefit or protection of these Regulations.
(6) The decision of the Court upon an application for leave
under this Regulation shall be final and conclusive and without
appeal.
(7) In any case where after the due date for repayment of the
principal sum or any part thereof, the principal sum or part remains
unpaid, the time for repayment of the principal sum or part shall,
unless and until an application for leave is dealt with by the Court
under this Regulation, be by force of these Regulations extended
upon the terms that interest shall continue to be payable at the close
of the same intervals of time as are provided by the mortgage with
respect to the interest thereby secured, or, if no provision is so made,
then quarterly, and at the following rate :
(а) in the case of a mortgage of which the principal sum or
unpaid part does not exceed Two thousand pounds—the
rate provided in the mortgage, or the rate of six per
centum per annum, whichever is the less ; and
(б) in the case of a mortgage of which the principal sum or
unpaid part exceeds Two thousand pounds —the rate
provided in the mortgage, or six per centum per annum,
whichever is the greater :
Provided that in the latter case the Court may, on the applica-
tion of the mortgagor, fix a lower rate, not being lower than the rate
provided in the mortgage or six per centum per annum, whichever
is the less.
5. In every action or proceeding by a mortgagee for the recovery courts actio°ns
of any sum for interest secured by a mortgage, the Court hearing the for recovery of
action or proceeding may, if in its discretion and in the circumstances jf y mortgage? 1


of the case it deems it just and expedient, in lieu of giving judgment
for immediate payment, give judgment for payment at a date to be
fixed, or by instalments payable at such times as the Court in its
discretion determines, and for this purpose the Court shall have
jurisdiction to cause judgment to be entered in such form as it deems
best to give full effect to the intent of these Regulations, and to
direct the method of enforcement of the judgment.
gage repayable 6. Where by the terms of a mortgage payment is provided by a
by instalments, series of regular instalments and the rate of interest is not fixed in
the mortgage or the instalments are expressed to be for principal
only and interest is stated not to be payable the instalments shall for
the purposes of these Regulations be deemed to include interest at
such rate as is assessed by the Court.
?ayabfe ge on 7 - Where a mortgage for a specific amount provides for the pay-
demand. ment of the principal sum on demand, and a demand has not at the
r S me^No. by commencement of these Regulations been made, the principal sum
284. shall for the purpose only of these Regulations be deemed to be pay-
able immediately after the commencement of these Regulations.
possession. 9 in 8 - (!) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding
Regulations, any mortgagee in possession, who entered into posses-
sion on or before the twentieth day of September, 1916, may exercise
all his powers under the mortgage without leave of the Court:
Provided that, on the application of the mortgagor, the Court may,
if in all the circumstances it thinks it just and equitable so to do,
forbid the mortgagee from exercising any power of sale or of fore-
closure, and may otherwise make such order in the premises as it
thinks fit.
(2) The provisions of Sub-regulations (2), (3), (4) and (6) of
Regulation 4 of these Regulations shall apply to any such applica-
tion in like manner as they apply to applications for the leave of the
Court under Regulation 4.
inserted b R 8a - The costs of any application under these Regulations to
i9i?, no. 13. ' the Court or a Justice or Judge thereof, or to a Special or Stipen-
diary Magistrate, shall be in the discretion of the Court, Justice,
Judge, or Magistrate, as the case may be.
mwrtgagor y to W When a mortgagor is entitled to the benefit or protection
Regulations, he may consent to the exercise by the mort-
mortgagee. gagee of any power, but such consent shall not take away the neces-
sity of the leave of the Court, unless the consent is in writing and
witnessed by a solicitor of the High Court or the Supreme Court,
who certifies in writing that the consent is given by his advice.
(2) If consent is given and certified, the leave of the Court
shall, so far as the consent extends, be unnecessary.
Regulations to
10. (1) The provisions of these Regulations shall extend and
sfie C ?rKi lts lor a PPly> mutatis mutandis, to agreements for sale and purchase of
purchase of land (including exchange), and to leases of land containing an
optional or compulsory purchasing clause.
ch!sing U ciause. (2) For the purposes of these Regulations an agreement
for sale and purchase of land shall be deemed to be a mortgage of


such land to secure payment of the unpaid purchase-money and
interest thereon, and fulfilment of the conditions set forth in the
agreement.
(3) For the purposes of these Regulations a lease of land
containing a purchasing clause shall be dealt with in all respects as
if the lessee had already notified his exercise of an option to purchase
under an optional purchasing clause, and as if the lessor were mort-
gagee and the lessee were mortgagor of the land, and as if the rent
reserved by the lease were interest and the agreed purchase-money
were principal-moneys secured. The term of the lease shall, if neces-
sary, be extended for the purpose of giving effect to this provision.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations Non-
these Regulations shall not applv to— application of
r Regulations to
certain
(a) any mortgage, or an agreement for sale and purchase, or mortgages-
any lease containing an optional or compulsory purchasing
clause, which is executed after the twentieth day of
September, One thousand nine hundred and sixteen, if
the mortgage agreement or lease contains a condition or
covenant expressly excluding the provisions of these
Regulations ; or
(b) any agreement for the sale and purchase of leasehold
interests in land only, whether such agreement was
entered into before or after the twentieth day of September,
One thousand nine hundred and sixteen; but this pro-
vision shall not extend so as to exclude from the provisions
of these Regulations agreements for the sale and purchase
of land partly freehold and partly leasehold ; or
(c) any transaction in relation to which any member of the
Forces or a female dependant is entitled to any benefit
or protection under the provisions of Statutory Rules
1916, No. 163, as amended by any subsequent regulations ;
(d) any mortgage to secure the repayment of a loan granted As amended by
by a registered building society to one of its members. 324 1916 ' No '
11a. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the last
preceding Regulation, if, for the purpose of legislation enacted
in consequence of the war, restrictions are placed upon the marketing
of any produce, and the producer is thereby rendered unable to
meet, out of the proceeds of the land, any payment of rent falling
due, or which has since the fifth day of December, One thousand
nine hundred and sixteen, fallen due, upon any land used by him for
the purpose of or in connection with the production of the produce
the right of the lessor to recover the rent or possession of the land,
notwithstanding that proceedings may have been commenced prior
to the commencement of this Regulation, shall be postponed until
with respect to any specified period the producer has received the


proceeds of his produce, or until, with respect to that particular
class of produce, the Attorney-General by notice published in the
Gazette declares that as regards that specified period the producers
have received a substantial part of the proceeds of their produce,
whichever first happens.
(2) Where any payment of rent is postponed in accordance
with this regulation, interest at the rate of five per centum per
annum shall be payable by the producer to the lessor in respect of
the period of postponement.


"Soldiers" Index. 15
For Regulations 163 and 283 of 1916, which peculiarly concern Soldiers and their
Dependants. [See R. 11 (c), at p. 12, depriving soldiers, &c., of recourse
to the " Civilian " regulations].
ACTION—
Against Soldier, restraint of . . 7
Limitations, Statute of .. . . 6
AGREEMENT—
Land purchase, payment post-
poned .. .. .. .. 5
For hire, purchase, distress, by
soldier jointly with other per-
sons, included .. .. .. 7
.APPEAL—
Not allowed on Judge's decision 7
BILL OF SALE—
Protection from seizure under.. 7
Building, included in " Land " .. 4
CHAMBERS—
Proceedings in .. .. .. 8
CHATTELS—
Protection from distress, &c. . . 7
CONTRACT OR AGREEMENT—
Restraint of action .. .. 7
COSTS—
In discretion of Judge .. .. 6
CITIZEN FORCES—
Not included in moratorium .. 4
DEPENDANT—
Female, defined .. .. .. 4
DISTRESS ON CHATTELS, &C. —
Protection from .. .. .. 7
EXECUTION—
Protection from .. .. .. 7
FURNITURE—
Protection from distress .. .. 7
HARDSHIP TO VENDOR, &C. —
Judge may order regulations not
to apply .. .. .. .. 6
Not existing, action to proceed.. 7
HIRE PURCHASE AGREEMENT—
Distress, &c., under .. .. 7
HOUSE—
Included in " Mortgage " 4
INTEREST—
Land purchase, rate charge-
able, &c. .. .. .. 5
JUDGE—
Order of, final .. .. .. 6
" LAND"—
Defined .. .. .. .. 4
LAND PURCHASE—
By Soldier or dependent, pay-
ment postponed .. .. 4
Case of hardship to vendor .. 6
Certain contracts not affected .. 7
Judge may order regulations not
to apply .. .. .. .. 6
Postponement of instalments . . 5
Legal proceedings stayed .. 6
LEAVE TO PROCEED—
When obtainable .. .. .. 8
LIMITATION OF ACTION—■
In mortgages, &c. .. .. .. g
"MEMBER OF THE FORCES "
Defined .. .. .. .. 4
MOTION—
Order made after .. .. 6, 8
MORTGAGE, OR PURCHASE OF LAND—
Case of Hardship to Mortgagee.. 6
Certain contracts not affected.. 7
Payment postponed .. .. 4
Judge may order regulations not
to apply .. .. .. .. 6
Postponement of instalments
under .. .. .. .. 5
Proceedings, Stay of .. .. 6
Interest on, postponed, period,
rates .. .. .. .. 5
By Soldier, &c., jointly with other
person, protected .. .. 7
Rights not prejudiced finally .. 6
" Moratorium " generally.. .. 4
NAVY—
Member of, included in Mora-
torium .. .. .. .. 4
OFFENCE—
Prosecution, order for return of
articles seized .. .. .. 7
ORDER—
Interlocutory or final, no appeal 6
Obtained on motion .. .. 6
PRINCIPAL MONEY—
In Mortgage, payment deferred 4
PROHIBITION OR CERTIORARI, &C.—
Not allowed .. .. .. 7
RENT—
Distress or execution for, for-
bidden .. .. .. .. 7
SOLDIER —
Definition, in "member of the
forces" .. .. .. 4
Mortgages, &c., by .. .. 4
Protection from distress .. 7
WAR—
Postponement of, Mortgage, or
Purchase to six months after 5
WARSHIP —
Service in .. .. .. 4
WRIT —
Against Soldier, restraint of .. 7
[" CIVILIANS " INDEX, SEE PAGE 16.]


For Regulations 284 and 324 of 1916, an,d 13 of 1917, which have not application
to soldiers or their dependants. (See Reg. 11 (c) at p. lo).
APPEAL, NO. —
In matters of leave to proceed.. 11
ATTORNEY-GENERAL —
Gazette action as to " produce-
marketing "
BANK OVERDRAFT, OVER £2,000
Mortgage, secured by, not affected
by Regs. .. . • • • • • 0
BILL OF SALE —
Included in " Mortgage" .. 9
BUILDING SOCIETY —
Mortgage to not affected .. • • 13
CHATTELS —
Included in " Mortgage ".. • • 9
CONSENT —
Mortgagor may waive Regulations 12
Solicitor's certificate required . . 12
CONDUCT —
Of mortgagor, if undeserving .. 11
COURT— .
Jurisdiction, in action for interest 12
Defined ,?
Leave to proceed, no appeal .. 11
Procedure by motion . . • - 10
COSTS —
In discretion of Court . . • • 12
DEPENDENT OF SOLDIER — _
Benefit under Regulation 163 . . 13
DISTRICT COURT —
Included in " Court" . . • • 9
FORECLOSURE —
Of mortgage, restrained .. .. 10
If possession taken before 20th
September, 1916 . • • • 12
Leave to commence . . • • H
INTEREST —
Varying rates allowed according
to amount of principal . . . . H
When instalments deemed to
include .. ■ • • - . . 12
Penal rate, not allowed .. . . 9
JUDGMENT —
Court may direct how enforced. . 12
LAND—
Agreement for purchase deemed a
" Mortgage" .. • • .. 13
Purchase of leasehold, not affected 13
Leases, with purchasing Clause,
regulations apply . . .. 13
LEASES —
When regulations apply to .. 12
With purchasing clause, treated
as mortgage .. .. • • 13
LEASEHOLD —
Sale or purchase generally not
affected .. • • • • .. 13
After 20th September, 1916, not
affected .. •• - • .. 14
LEAVE TO PROCEED —
How granted .. - • • - 11
LOCAL COURT —
Defined .. . • •• • • 0
MAGISTRATE —
Stipendiary, included in " Court " 9
MARKETING, OF PRODUCE —
Rent relief, after sth December,
1916 I 3
MORTGAGE —
Action for interest, allowed . . 10
Action for penal rate, forbidden. . 10
By bank overdraft (£2,000) .. 9
Building Societies, not affected.. 13
MORTGAGE. — ( Continued.)
Defined .. • • • • • • 9
Drawn to exclude Regulations .. 13
Equitable .. • • • • • • ®
Entering into possession, for-
bidden lj>
Foreclosure, restrained . . • • 10
Judgment for payment at a later
date. &c. • • • • '' I?
Leave to proceed, how granted.. 11
Limitations of rights of mort-
gagees .. -• •• .. 10
Purchase of land, treated as .. 13
Power of sale, restrained .. 10
Maintenance of property, reser-
vation .. • • • •
May expressly exclude Mora-
torium • • • • '' J T
Over £2,000, interest . . • • 11
CVCI
Repayable by instalments ..
Payable on demand, wen due . . 12
MORTGAGE ON CHATTELS —
In definition .. • ■ • • ®
MORTGAGEE —
Defined .. • • •• • •
When in possession before 20th
September, 1916, power of .. 12
MORTGAGOR —
Defined .. • • • • • •
May waive Regulations . . • • 12
When conduct undeserving .. 11
OPTION OF PURCHASE —
In lease .. • ■ • - .. 12
POSSESSION —
Court may give order for .. 10
When taken before 20th Septem-
ber, 1916 •• •• 12
PRODUCE —
Marketing of, rent postponed .. 13
PURCHASE —
Included in "Mortgage .. 9
RATE OF INTEREST —
Definition .. • • • • 9
REDEMPTION —
Ability of Mortgagor considered 11
Proceedings for, if allowed .. 11
REGULATION S
May be excluded by agreement.. 13
Application to leasehold, condi-
tions .. •• •• 13
tions .. • • • • ..
Sundry exemptions from .. 13
RENT —
Interest on unpaid .. .. 14
From marketing of produce,
relief .. .. • • .. 13
SALE, BY MORTGAGEE —
If possession before 20th Septem-
ber, 1916 12
Forbidden, generally .. • • 10
SOLDIER, EXCLUSION OF
When protected by Reg. 163 .. 13
SOLICITOR —
Costs, generally, in discretion of
Court ... .. .. 12
Certificate of consent to waiver
of Regulations .. .. 12
SUPREME COURT —
Defined .. . • • • • • 0
TRADING ADVANCES, FLUCTUATING —
Regulations not to apply (over
£2,000) 9
["SOLDIERS" INDEX, SEE PAGE 15.]


STATUTORY RULES.
1917. No. 253.
REGULATIONS UNDER THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT
1914-1916.
I THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL in and over the Commonwealth
, of Australia, acting with the advice of the Eederal Executive
Council, hereby make the following Regulations, under the War Pre-
cautions Act 1914-1916, to come into operation forthwith.
Dated this twenty-eighth day of September, 1917.
R. M. EERGUSON,
Governor-General.
His Excellency's Command,
G, P. PEARCE,
Minister of State for Defence
AMENDMENTS OF THE WAR PRECAUTIONS (MORATORIUM) REGULATIONS.
(Statutory Rules 1916, No. 284, as amended by Statutory Rules 1916,
No. 824, and Statutory Rules 1917, Nos. 13 and 76.)
1. Sub-regulation (1) of Regulation 4 of the War Precautions
(Moratorium) Regulations is amended—
(a) by omitting from the proviso the words " for not less than
thirty days and " and inserting in their stead the words " for
not less than three months*or"; and
(b) by inserting in that proviso after the words "the mortgagor
may " the words " at any time within two months after the
mortgagee has entered into possession ". i/
2. Sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 4 of the War Precautions
(Moratorium) Regulations is amended by omitting the words "by
motion with notice to" and inserting in their stead the words "on
summons which must be served on, or by motion which must be notified
to," /
3. Sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 4 of the War Precautions
(Moratorium) Regulations is repealed.
4. Sub-regulation (5) of Regulation 4 of the War Precautions
(Moratorium) Regulations is amended by omitting the words " and
the Court is of opinion that the mortgagor is unable " and inserting
in their stead the words " and the mortgagor satisfies the Court that he
is unable
5. Sub-regulation (6) of Regulation 4 of the War Precautions
(Moratorium) Regulations is repealed,
C. 13080.—PRICE 3D


6. Sub-regulation (7) of Regulation 4 of the "War Precautions
(Moratorium) Regulations is amended by omitting tbe proviso and
inserting in its stead tbe following proviso:—
" Provided tbat —
(i) in tbe former case tbe Court may, on tbe application of
tbe mortgagee, fix a bigber rate, not being higher tban
tbe rate provided in tbe mortgage or six per centum
per annum, wbicbever is tbe greater; and
(ii) in tbe latter case tbe Court may, on tbe application of
tbe mortgagor, fix a lower rate, not being lower tban
tbe rate provided in tbe mortgage or six per centum
per annum, wbicbever is tbe less."
7. Regulation 8A of the War Precautions (Moratorium) Regulations
is amended —
(a) by omitting tbe words "oy a Justice or Judge thereof, or to a
Special or Stipendiary Magistrate "; and
(b) by omitting tbe words " Justice, Judge, or Magistrate as tbe
case may be ''.
8. After Regulation 8A of tbe War Precautions (Moratorium) Regu-
lations tbe following Regulations are inserted: —
" 88. The 1 jurisdiction conferred on a Court by these Regulations
may be exercised by a Justice or Judge of tbe Court sitting either
in Court or in Chambers, or, in tbe case of a local Court, by a
Special or Stipendiary Magistrate.
Jurisdiction of
Court—how
exercisable.
" Bc. Any determination decision judgment direction order or
assessment made or given by any Court in any matter arising under
these Regulations shall be final and conclusive and without
appeal."
Decisions of
Court final.
9. After Regulation 10 of tbe War Precautions (Moratorium) Regu-
lations tbe following Regulation is inserted: —
" 10A.—(1.) Not-withstanding anything conitained in these Regu-
lations, if tbe purchaser of any land under an agreement for tbe
sale and purchase of land —
Agreements forS
sale and SI 8 ?*
purchase of land
where purchaser
makes default.
(a) is in arrear, for a period of twelve months, in respect of any
payment of principal or interest due by him under the
agreement, and
(b) makes, during any period of six months, no payment in
respect of any portion of tbe amount due by him under
tbe agreement,
tbe vendor may forward, by registered post, to tbe purchaser, ad-
dressed to bis last known place of address a notice intimating tbat
be proposes, after tbe expiration of a period of one month from
tbe date when in tbe ordinary course of post tbe notice should be
delivered to tbe purchaser, to exercise any or all of bis rights under
tbe agreement for sale and purchase of tbe land.
" (2.) After the expiration of the period specified in tbe last
preceding sub-regulations the vendor may, unless tbe Court upon
application made by tbe purchaser within tbe period so specified


otherwise directs, exercise any or all of his rights under the agree-
ment as if the provisions of these Regulations had not extended
and applied to the agreement."
10. Regulation 11 of the War Precautions (Moratorium) Regula-
tions is amended—
(a) by inserting in paragraph (d) after the word " building"
the words "or friendly "; and
(b) by adding at the end of the sub-regulation the following para-
graph :
"or (e) any loan made by a life assurance company on
the security of one or more of its policies, other than
an industrial policy, provided the rate of interest
payable on the loan is not greater than—
(i) the rate of interest usually charged by the com-
pany before the commencement of the pre-
sent state of war for a similar loan,, or
(ii) seven per centum per annum,
whichever is the less.-' r
11. After Regulation 11A of the War Precautions (Moratorium)
Regulations the following Regulation is inserted: —
" 118. —(1) Where any Court has made an order for the pay-
ment by any person to any other person of a sum of money and
the Court is satisfied that immediate payment of the whole or part
of the money would inflict great hardship on the person ordered to
pay the money by reason of the operation of these Regulations or
the War Precautions (Active Service Moratorium) Regulations
upon his property or investments, or upon the realization thereof,
the Court may, upon the application of the person ordered to pay
the money, in its discretion, if in all the circumstances it thinks
it desirable so to do, order that the payment of the whole or part
of the sum of money in question shall be deferred until such time
and upon such conditions as the Court thinks fit.
Court may grant
relief against
judgments in
certain cases,,
" (2) An order may be made under this Regulation in respect
of the payment of money made by any Court before the commence-
ment of this Regulation as well as in respect of orders made after
the commencement of this Regulation."
Printed and Published for the GOVERNMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA by
ALBERT J. MULLETT, Government Printer for the State of Victoria.


• "T-r—ir-53-TT
; ■ " '' , '
. »:•
I'.
'
.
\
,
■
: - . . ■-■' ■ ' : . " ' ' ■'
ir*vt
:
u
If'-.'*' i-tt
l;v ' " ■ '
:
fr
I «
ifch ■ ; 7 , <' . / ' ' ' 1
.
*
I
L
%■
'
i ; •
*
:
'
r-
■
. ...
. \
-
r 1 "& ■ . ;■ : "'• ,i;- v '-■
.■■. v '■ '■■■- v :"■ ■■■<■■ ■ ' ■■;."■
' ' ;
¥ '
'
.
i
L


; -
■ >, ' .. .. .. , -■ .-- . ' • \ . ;v. .
• - " • .. .
■ 'Y* .....
>' • ■ • ■ ;.■■■■ i ■- -- - ••••■--.. ' ' S-.--- '■
. " ; s ■ ■ ■
.;. '-■ .... . • .... -■ • .. , - ■; ■
" ; \' r ' : , • \ "'$■
x - • ' ' '' - - ■ ; "
*• . .. -;7 ' >.'V '• ■ • ■■■. ; • . ' ... : ■ ;... • ,
V, • - v . ' .. ;
- . -
' . - ' . ' . - , ' - • ' " - ■ - : ' ' ■' • . ■■■■:, - . ■ '
' -I-'
■ ■ • ■ ' ; -*


OF REPORTS
• . DIGESTED IN THE
Australasian Annual Digest
APPEAL CASES. QUEENSLAND.
English Law Reports Appeal State Reports.
Cases. Weekly Notes.
Justice of the Peace Reports.
HIGH COURT.
Commonwealth Law Reoorts. SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Commonwealth Arbitration Law Reports.
Reports.
NEW SOUTH WALES. TASMANIA.
s . . Ban(lrtc Law Reports.
. Weekly Not... VICTORIA.
rrCarr;^.,
Local Government Reports. Australian Law Times.
Argus Law Reports.
NEW ZEALAND.
Law Reports. ™22S5£ MSlMiii-
Gazette Law Reports. Law Reports.
Magistrates' Court Reports. Arbitration Reports.
1916 Volume Nearly Ready. Price 17/6.
Wholly set up and Printed in Australia by SIMMONS LTD.,
