

gin glntobitnarp
Robert Henbtrson Croll
6/ o
)!








gutobituarp
Robert Jlenberson Croll
BREAD & CHEESE CLUB
1946




Sutototuarp hp Jp. CroU
Our Mate has said “So Long .” We will
miss him—and remember him.
When the Bread and Cheese Club was
struggling for recognition among the Cultural
Societies of Australia, we were very heartened
to have his support and encouragement. He
was no mere figurehead. His kindly counsel,
his cheery encouragement and ready help were
always at our disposal. We are indeed his
debtors. The Club owes much to him for its
position today.
His autobituary is typical of his modesty.
Nobody in Australia has done more to en-
courage the aspiring writer. The fact that he
has written more forewords to books than any-
one else is evidence of this. A perusal of these
forewords exemplifies his kindly nature.
We send you this, his message and lour
tribute to our mate, knowing you will treasure
it in the memory of a grand Australian and
good friend.
BREAD AND CHEESE CLUB
J. K. MOIR,
Knight Grand Cheese.




“‘We marvel/ said the Parcae, ‘where old Croll
Is going to for aye.’
(Doubtless he gave them furiously to thinkl)
Survivors said, in speech of common day,
“Where’er he is, he ivill not vex his sold
If he has pen and ink!”
—HUBERT CHURCH.




t


\ *


gin &utolutuarj)
I am rather proud of that word “Auto-
bituary.” I claim to be—in Shakespeare’s words
—its “onlie begetter.” Anyway, I have not met
it before —perhaps because people do not usually
write their own death notices. With the pride,
of course, is a certain natural ruefulness —the
realisation that when/if this is published I shall
not see it . . . Well, life has been good; why
shouldn’t death be good, too? Here’s hoping!
I knew Robert Henderson Croll as well as
anyone could—but does anyone ever quite know
himself? As an introspective and extremely
sensitive boy I had flashes, at times, of self-
revelation. They always left me dissatisfied —
never complacent. My aspirations, in such
moods, were all clearly beyond my grasp, and
I went brooding for a while in contemplation of
them.
But I was too passionate, lived too vividly,
in those early Stawell days, for general moodi-
ness. Life was a procession of interesting things,
and I found myself either in the procession in
reality, or acting, in my secret mind, the part
I felt should be mine.
Is sensitiveness a boon or a curse? I en-
joyed keenly, but how I suffered too! A new
coat, once, was an out-size—overlong in body and
sleeves. My mental agony was so great when
I wore it—when I felt that the whole world
was making sport of me and my garment: in-
Page Nine


deed, had come out that first Sunday just to
jeer at me. Don’t think lam over-stating the
feeling: youth’s woes are very real. My agony
was such that at this date of writing—so long
afterwards —I tingle a little in recollection.
It was in Stawell that I was born. Mid-
night on the 4th of January, 1869 was the
auspicious hour. It is said that a man does not
waken his second child to hear the infant laugh
—perhaps it was because I was number five in
the family that father was careless enough to
register me as born on the sth. We did not
discover this till I joined the Public Service and
had to obtain a birth certificate. Many years
afterwards I found a friend celebrating her
birthday on my day. I sent her this;
We are both of us modest folk , I hope ,
Who would deprecate a fuss;
But I think that they started the New Year
well
When they started it with us.
My only school was No. 502, Stawell—al-
ways known as Dick Davies’ —‘Dick’ being short
for Richard Zerubabel. From there I succeeded
my brother as the complete staff of Messrs.
Bennett & Bristow, legal managers and insur-
ance agents, whose office was in Main Street.
Kind wholesome men they both Then
came the Public Service Clerical Examination,
and I found myself, at the age of 17, a junior
assistant in the Melbourne Public Library.
Gauche in the great city? Yes! But not
so gauche as another country lad who reported
to his Department about that time by walking
in to where the Head sat in solitary state, lay-
Page Ten


ing the family carpet-bag at the great man’s
feet, and remarking simply, “I’ve come!”
Six years in the Public Library—six years
during which I left nothing unsampled from
Theology, which began the classification in those
days, to Geography, which ended it.
“There’s some fine confused feeding in a
sheep’s heid!” said the illustrious Scot: the Lib-
rary gave me that. There too I began to write,
first for a little weekly called ‘Bohemia,’ where
I was one of a goodly company which included
John Sandes and Davison Symmons (the earli-
est to do the ‘Oriel’ column of the ‘Argus’), and
the Blair sisters, daughters of the historian
David Blair. My prentice hand tried prose and
verse: no-one was more astonished than myself
when the stuff appeared in print, as it ail did.
Astonished, but greatly heartened, I went
on after that to the Bulletin, the Argus, the
Herald, and many others. A series of news
cuttings shows that I have had matter in over
eighty papers and magazines. At one period I
filled two sporting columns a week, another col-
umn on country walks each Saturday, produced
literary articles and occasional verse as a busy
sideline, and 'acted (for five years) as Assistant,
to Dr. Leach when he was editing Australia s
greatest bird journal, The Emu. All this was
night work. Health was found in icgulai exei-
cise at Trinity Gymnasium, East Melbourne, and
in that other excellent exercise hairier lunning.
With my fellow officer of the Education Depart-
ment, Henry Amos, I helped to found a success-
ful Club —the. East Melbourne Harriers still
following trail after fifty active years.
Page Eleven


That club sent me as delegate to the Vic-
torian Amateur Athletic Association’s Council,
of which I became eventually a Life Member
“for services rendered.” Trips followed, to Syd-
ney, Brisbane, Auckland and Hobart—each time
in charge of a team competing in Australasian
Championships. Good fellows those athletes
were.
Ambulance training seemed a natural out-
come of the strenuous physical exercises—l
earned my medallion, and, later, was to take
second prize in the State Competition in the
Melbourne Town Hall. Old Dr. Neild, as Judge,
docked marks because I held a pin in my mouth
—“You’ll be the patient yourself next!”—said
he. A salutary lesson.
A fascinating new world opened when I
joined the Victorian Artists’ Society. What in-
teresting folk the artists proved! I was a lay
member of the Council for a time—never have I
enjoyed meetings more. An unbusinesslike and
lovable lot. Special friends were Jack Shirlow
(etcher) and Alex McClintock (water-colorist).
They introduced me to Fasoli’s and the Bohemia
of the day. Life was so full that a little more
added to it did not matter, so I joined a few
Societies. The Australian Literature Society was
one, and I helped to form a branch of the Uni-
versity Extension Movement: in fact, I became
President.
My father died: my mother died. Then I
had a piece of good fortune—a distant relative
came from Sydney and consented to marry me.
A wife may make or mar a man: any distinction
I have gained may be traced to her encourage-
Page Twelve


ment. I have been lucky indeed in my marriage
and in its outcome—my son.
The Melbourne Walking Club has been part
of my life since 1897. With it I have carried
the swag over much of the State, and largely
because of it I wrote my “Open Road in Vic-
toria” and its successor, “Along the Track.”
Five trips to Central Australia (they became six
in 1941; furnished more material. The result-
ant book is known as “Wide Horizons.” Those
excursions enriched my life with friendships
with both blacks and whites in the great Inland.
I had joined the Education Department as a
junior clerk in 1891. I left in 1934 as Senior
Clerk and Registrar of the Council of Public
Education. Many were the unusual jobs that
fell to me. Obedient to the high command I
wrote a full page review of the State's finances
for a London weekly (it duly appeared as by
the Premier of the day); twice I wrote sets of
verses at the request of the Cabinet; when King
Edward was here as Prince of Wales I became
assistant to the Organiser of his tour; I created
the text of a Budget (under that great Under-
Treasurer, M. A. Minogue) for Sir William
McPherson; twice I was Secretary to a Royal
Commission—the first on Fisheries, the other on
the Police Strike.
Rudyard Kipling was one of my early
“thrills.” (I met him three times). I have had
billy-tea with the Poet-Laureate, John Masefield;
have dined with H. G. Wells and Halliday
Sutherland; have hobnobbed with Dr. Thomas
Wood, and corresponded with Bernard Shaw. Be-
tween them were many other great men—writ-
ers, artists, politicians, governors, scientists.
Page Thirteen


I am (hold on, that will be “was” to you
readers, but it is “am” on this‘day of writing!)
Ex-President of the Field Naturalists’ Club,
President of the Travel League of Victoria, Vice-
President of the Australian Ex-Libris Society,
Ex-President of the Anthropological Society,
President of the P.E.N. Club, Ex-President of
the Wallaby Club, Member of the Fellowship of
Australian Writers, Life Member of the Council
of the Victorian Amateur Athletic Association,
Life Member of the Melbourne Walking Club,
Committeeman of the City Newsboys’ Society,
Honorable Trencherman of the Bread and Cheese
Club, Member of the Savage Club, Author of
“The Open Road in Victoria,” “Along the Track,”
“The Etched Work of John Shirlow,” “Tom
Roberts, Father of Australian Landscape Paint-
ing,” “By-Products” (a book of verses), “Wide
Horizons—Wanderings in Central Australia,”
“Life of R. W. Sturgess,” the “Ewing Catalogue,”
and a book of reminiscences known as “I Recall,”
Editor of the Collected Works of John Shaw
Neilson; and collaborator with Percival Serle and
Frank Wilmot in “An Australasian Anthology,”
with Dr. Roland Wettenhall in a Life of Dr. Alex-
ander Thomson —the first surgeon in Victoria—
and with C. L. Barrett in a work on the Art of
the Australian Aboriginal. In hand are two
more volumes —a further instalment of auto-
biography called “Before I Forget,” and a col-
lection of letters to Tom Roberts titled “Smike
to Bull-dog.”
With the outbreak of Great War No. 2 I
was invited by the Army to act as Deputy Chief
Publicity Censor for Australia. This I did for
two years, during five months of which I was
Page Fourteen


in full control owing to the illness of my Chief,
the well-beloved Percy Jenkin.
Resigning in July 1941, the Australian
Broadcasting Commission offered me, and I ac-
cepted, a temporary position as Talks Officer
for Victoria.
Death is, of course, a bit of a nuisance. One
gets so accustomed to life: a healthy man, as
the years go on, hates to have his regular habits
disturbed. Still, that is inevitable, and as for
the future, I share, with my old cobber Guy
Innes, the hope he expressed to George Ellery
when that talented man lay dying—
“To meet the friends I used to know, who
trudged with me in the dust;
And tvarmed their hands at the same fire,
and ate of the same erust. ,>
It has been, on the whole, a good time; never
has it become dull. From the oasis’of a family
life I have looked out upon the troubled world
of these latter years, thanking God for my wife
and son and other staunch friends. If I were
suggesting an epitaph, I should say:
“Here rests the restless R. H. C.,
Here his last journey ends;
Happy with all his tvorld teas he,
But happiest in his friends ”
Given under my hand this First Day of
June, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Forty-
Five, while still in possession of good health.
18 Russell Street,
Camberwell, R. H. CROLL.
Victoria.
Page Fifteen






