



- ,
.
BE-
f '+9t+U tf'k*
/ *
•> V j . Jg


•
■
.
■ ■■;: iit> '.•'>>.' • &*;? W* l .iv» S .Vr ■
-*
-TS-I
••••*';:•
n • • •>• •: <-■
•• «. .* **•• '
... A. . •’ %*■;?*.
- • • -1
„ /
%
' ' ’ .;• '
.
'
-
• . ;
* *
■ ’ ■ ■
.
•
\ '
.
■
*
'* 'v*V
' 1
'
'
■ .
-
•;
/
•
1
'
. ••
■' /
■>
*
.
.
• ■ • ■':m
. ■ f
. • '< ■ ■■•■ :
■.1
. .
i
' ■ ■ •; :
. .1
* J
,
v 4
:
■ '■
■ ••••-.*. • :. -.-''A.


I
*
.
-
.
,
.
. ‘ ■
\
'
v *
.
.
V
•
;
r
•
> V
*
«
■ Q '■ ..
•
*
•
'
■
•-
.
,
•
'
...
•
* . f
-
' v;
i -
-it*-"'
v
SjjjpV • ' '
'
•
.
*
•
.
■
9
. .
. • •
w -
f
-
»
H • • }•


- %


*
* ' J
i . “ «•
.
.
1
.
*
-
.
'
'
'
i
v
‘
♦
•
t -
-
'
'
✓
-
.. - > ■ ■ .1
-
,
*•
-
Jtt,
‘
•
. , '
-
- *
•
,
r.
■
*
;>
.
~
'
‘
\
, -- - - -




, [ 4
■— •. I
■
m I * '
* A






JOURNAL
O F A
VOY AG E round the WORLD,
In His Majefty’s Ship Endeavour,
In the Years 1768, 1769, 1770, and 1771;
Undertaken in Purfuit of Natural Knowledge, at the
Defire of the ROYAL SOCIETY:
CONTAINING
ALL the various OCCURRENCES of the VOYAGE,
WITH
Descriptions of feveral new difcovered Countries in the Southern
Hemisphere *, and Accounts of their Soil and Productions *, and of
many Singularities in the Structure, Apparel, Cuftoms, Manners,
Policy, Manufactures, &c. of their Inhabitants.
To which is added,
A Concife Vocabulary of the Language of Otahitee.
Ornari res ipfa negat, contenta doceri. Hor.
LONDON*
Printed for T. Becket and P. A. De Hondt, in the Strand.
MDCCLXXI,


. ■ • • . ■ ■ ■ »;*■
> .
.
-
' ■
■■
-
-
■i i ; ll . ' *
- .
'' . ,
'
f .
■
- ■' - , ■


TO THE
Right Honourable the LORDS of the ADMIRALTY,
AND TO
Mr. - BANKS and Dr. SOLAN DER.
MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,
TS.TO confideration whatever could have induced me
to publilh this journal but a confcioufnefs
of its being properly authenticated, both from the
veracity of the gentleman from whom I had it, and
in the opinion of my beft literary friends* As your
Lordfliips have been pleafed, by advertifements in the
papers, to caution the public not to be impofed upon
by any spurious account, I hope I fhall in this parti-
cular (land exempted from fuch a charge. I did not
mean to interfere with the intereft of any one con-
cerned in the voyage, but took this journal upon
a * the
Place this next the Title*


[ ii ]
the judgment of my friends, and with that right
which is in common with my brethren. I was the
more induced to it from the agreeable manner in
which it is written, as well as by the honourable
mention that is made of thofe ingenious gentlemen,
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander: and I am convinced that
it is the produ&ionof a gentleman and a fcholar, who>
made the voyage. I therefore am perfuaded that this,
publication will be an acquifition to the public, and a*
credit to,
My Lords and Gentlemen,,
Strand, Sept. 23,
Your moft obedient-
1 7 7 1 •
humble fervanty
THOMAS BECKET..
** Entered in the Hall-Book of the Company of Stationers.


JOURNAL
O F A
VOYAGE round the WORLD.
IN the beginning of the year 1768, the Britifli am-
baflador at Madrid applied to the court of Spain for
the grant of a paflport to a fhip defigned for Cali-
fornia, to obferve the tranfit of Venus, which was pro-
ofed, wiih a provifion that the aftronomer fhould be a
member of the Romilh church, and an Italian gentle-
man was confequently engaged for the undertaking;
but the paflport when demanded was refufed by the
Spaniflr miniftry, who alledged that it was repugnant
to the policy of government to admit foreigners into
their American ports, unlefs driven there by neceflity ;
but efpecially thofe who by their profeflion would be
fitted to make fuch obfervations as might facilitate the
approaches and defcents of their enemies at any future
war with Great Britain.


2 A JOURNAL OF A
It was then determined to.difpatch the Italian gentle-
man to Iludfon s Bay, and a Blip of four hundred tona
burthen was purchafed for the voyage by order of the
government. This Blip was named the Endeavour, and,
accoiding to the original plan, was to have been navigated
by a mailer, a fecond mailer, a mate, two midfliip-men,
and thirty feamen, who were engaged for the fervice
and orders were at the fame time ifiued from the navy-
office to equip her for the undertaking ; and early in the:
month of May warrants were granted to the Bril and
feeond mailers, but recalled the following day, the plan
of her voyage having been altered. But on the 27 th
of the fame month the Blip was again put in Com-
million, and her complement augmented to feventy men;
an application was likewife made for a number of ma-
rines, but without fuccefe.
On the 2i fl Oi July Oic fell down to Greenwich, and :
the next morning to the Galleons, where we received on
board fix guns, being four-pounders, together with*
twelve fwivels, and gunner’s Bores, &c. On the evening'
of the 30th we anchored at Gravefend, and the next-
morning proceeded towards the Downs, where we ar- -
rived on the 3d of Auguil, and on the fame day failed"
for Plymouth, where we came to anchor on the 14th;
a nd:i


and were ordered to receive on board twelve marines,
and three additional feamen ; which, with Mr. Green
the obferver, and his fervant, together with Mr. Banks
and Dr. Solander, and their attendants, who were con-
fidered as fupernumeraries, encreafed our number to
nincty-Cx fouls. We likewife received four additional
carriage-guns, and, having made feveral beneficial alter-
ations, were on the 20th of the fame month ready for
fea, but the wind blowing frelh at S. W. we were de-
tained until the 25th, when it changing to N. N. W. we
put to fea at four o’clock in the afternoon. The wind
.however foon became and continued fouth-wefterly un-
til the 2d of September, when it changed to the north-
ward; and at half paft five in the morning we difeovered
the land, bearing S. S. W. and at ten we diftinguifhed Cape
Ortugal, bearing S. E. by E. half E. and diftant feven
leagues. The winds were frelh but variable until the
4 th, when at eight o’clock, A. M. we difeovered Cape
Finifterre, bearing S. W. by S. at ten leagues diftance.
From tins time nothing remarkable occurred until the
i ath, when at fix in the morning we faw Puerto Santo
at N. W. half N. and .about nine leagues diftant ; and
at feven we difeovered the ifland of Madeira at W. by N.
the Defetters appearing at the fame time W. by S. half
B 2 S. At


4 A JOURNAL OF A
S. At eight the fame evening the fhip came to anchor
with her bell bower in twenty-two fathom water. At
five the next morning we weighed anchor to approach
nearer the fhore, but the wind and tide being unfa-
vourable, drove us farther difiant, and foon after we re-
ceived two fhots from the Loo< Fort, the commandant
imagining it was our intention to depart from the i
ifland without making the ufual reports ; and by this
tranfaclion he forfeited the compliment of a falxete,
ufually paid by foreign Ihips of war to all fortifications..
At length however we anchored again in fifteen fathom
water; and the Britiffi conful foon after waited on
the governoi to complain of the indignity we had re-
ceived, for which an apology was made, and the con-
ful was allured that the officer who had miffiehavedi
fhould afk pardon of Captain Cooke if he required it
but this was declined.
This town of Fonchial is the capital of the ifland, and!
gives name to the bay within which it is fituated. It is
defended by a wall, and four or five baftions towards the
bay, and has two gates. Its fireets are narrow and ill-
paved, but the houfes are high. The inhabitants are*
computed to be feven or eight thoufand in number, but
among thefe there are but few gentlemen who are not
7 ia


fn trade, the greater part being {hop-keepers, who
vend imported goods. The town contains two hofpi-
tals, one of which is appropriated for Lepers, and the
other for the general reception of the inferior people,,
who want either medical or cliirurgical afliftance. It.
likewife contains a large Francifcan college, and a fpa-
cious cathedral, but its churches in general are very
inelegant. Here are likewife two convents, one of
which I viflted feveral times, the abbefs behaving with
great complaifance, and appearing to be the mod: a-
greeable of the fifterhood, among which I did not ob-
ferve one who could pretend to more than a very mo-
derate {hare of beauty. Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander
likewife made them a vifit, and were afked many lu-
dicrous queftions, as, When it would thunder and rain ?
Where they might find a fpring of frefh water within
the walls of their convent ? and others equally pregnant
with credulous fimplicity j for they had conceived an
opinion that thefe gentlemen were pofiTefied of fome-
thing like magical or fupernatural knowledge-
Here is alfo a Britifli factory, which confifts of a con-
ful, vice-conful, and twenty-two merchants, from which
number ten are feletfted, and four of thefe are annually
chofen by rotation, to direct the bufinefs of the fa&ory


in conjunction with the conful; they all however pay
equal Shares of the taxes impofed for defraying the ex-
pences of the fadtory, of which the greatefl part is in-
curred in maintaining an hofpital, with its phyfician,
furgeon, &c. To the eaflward of Fonchial is a Smaller
town, called Santa Cruz j tliefe two are the only towns
on the ifland.
The governor, whofe Salary and perquifites amount
to near eleven hundred pounds flerling per annum, re-
futes at his feat about half a mile diflant from Fonchial ;
there is however a caflle for his refidence in town, which
is defended by Several cannon towards the bay, and is
Separated by a high wall from the town itfelf.
An officer condantly attends at Fonchial to receive
the compliments of foreigners in the governor’s behalf,
who declines them perfonally.
On our firft arrival the British conful Solicited per-
miflion for Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and their attend-
*
ants to vifit the country ; but the governor would per-
mit no more than two of them to go abroad at a time-,
until afterwards, being more particularly informed of
their errand, he gave them full liberty to purfue their
refearches


refearches at pleafure, and paid them a viflt in perfon,
and was entertained with ele&rical and other philofo*
phical experiments.
The ifland of Madeira was difcovered in the year
1419, by the Portuguefe fleet under the command of
John Gonzalies Z'areo Triftan Vaz & Perello, who was
fent out to attempt the paflage of Cape Bajador the year
after the difcovery of the ifland of Puerto Santo.
It is fituated in latitude 32° 33' 33", and longitude
1 6° 49" 4/' Weft from London ; the variation by feveral
obfervations was found to have decreafed wefterly 15 0 304
the dipping-needle being 77° 1 B*. The beft anchoring
ground is near the Loo Caftle, in twenty, twentv-ftve
or thirty fathom, the Eaft fide of the bay being hard’
rocky ground. The ifland is computed to contain flxty
thoufand inhabitants ; its longeft extent is between N. E.
and S. W. It rifes very high, and terminates in a peak,
called Pico Rucco, which is five thoufand and fixty-
eight feet in height. The land rifes by very unequal
elevations from the fea, and forms a ridge which is fre-
quently interrupted by chafms of unequal depths; thefe
extend almoft the whole length of the ifland. This in-
equality of the furface of the ground has made- it ne-
ceflary


8 A JOURNAL OF A
cefiary to extend the roads in ferpentine windings, to
avoid tliofe deep gullies which have formed themfelves
in almofl every part, of which the mod confiderable
run in pretty drait dire&ions towards the fea, and are
commonly charged with large dreams of water ; but
thefe in approaching the fea are gradually diminifhed
by the peafants, who are allowed to draw off certain
quantities of water by fmall ditches, according to the
iize of their vineyards, which are to be watered thereby.
The idand produces fix kinds of grapes, viz. the
Malm fey, two black, and three white kinds. It is the
Ikin of the black grapes that tinges the wines of Ma-
deira, the juice itfelf being white; hence the difference
of colour in thefe wines arifes from the different pro-
portions in which the black and white grapes are mixed.
It is commonly reported that no diflilled fpirit is added
to thefe wines, but I have been well affured of the con-
trary, and have feen the fpirit ufed for that purpofe.
The bed Madeira is fold at twenty-fix pounds per pipe ;
the word kind, which is made on the Noith fide, is fold
for thirteen pounds ; this is the contract wine, and is
the fame which is drank by the common people. The
Madeira imported into Great Britain is fold at twenty-
three pounds per pipe ; there are two inferior forts
which


which bear the name of Madeira, one of which is fold
at eighteen, and the other at fixteen pounds. All thefe
wines improve greatly by fea voyages j and of this the
*
inhabitants are fo well convinced, that almofl all the
wines defigned for their own confumption are fent feve-
ral times to fea.
The Malmfey is a mofl excellent wine, and is fold at
forty pounds per pipe. It is generally computed by the
merchants, that the quantity of wine produced in Ma-
deira is between thirty and thirty-five thoufand pipes
annually, of which ten thoufand are exported to Great
Britain and her colonies.
Six fhips are permitted to fail from hence to Brafil
every year loaded with wine. I faw no carriages during
our flay at Madeira, but was told of a fedan kept by
an Englifh. gentleman. We found the longitude of
Puerto Santo by obfervation, 16° 56 ' W. and its lati-
tude 33 0 oo' N.
September 19. The wind changing to E. S. E. wc
weighed anchor and flood to fea. The weather conti-
nuing favourable, on the 22d we faw the iflands of
Salvages, S, S. W. half W. diflant eight miles 5 they are
C two


two fmall uninhabited iflands, fituated between Madeira
and the Canaries. The 23d we reached the trade-
winds, then at N. E, and the fame day we difcovered
the Peak of Tenerifte, the largeft of the Canary iflands,
being forty-five miles in length. The Peak, according
to Dr. Halley, is two miles and a quarter in height ?
but by Dr. Heberden it is computed at fifteen thoufand
three hundred and ninety-five feet; in clear weather
it may be feen thirty-feven leagues at fea. This ifland
produces wine, fruits, and cattle ; its chief town is
called Laguna. September 24, we failed between the
Grand Canaries and Tenerifte, the trade-wind blowing
frefh with a thick haze. At this time we obferved
many things rufting and moulding. On the 2 7 th, the
wind and fea continuing favourable, we began to ferve
the {hip’s crew with wine and four krout. On the 2 Bth
feyeral land-birds were difcovered, of which we caught
two, nearly refembling the yellow water-wagtail.
The 2 9th, at eleven A. M. we faw the ifland of Bona
Vifta, at N. 48° W. and diftant eleven miles. Octo-
ber 2d we perceived a current fetting E. S. E. and
W. N. W. From this time nothing remarkable occur-
ed, until the 7 th, when the winds became variable
from South to Weft, with frequent {howers of rain.
This day we caught two {wallows and feveral marine
animals^


animals. All our iron utenfils rutted very much, and
every thing fufceptible of mould was covered with it;
many of our feamen were like wife affetfled with bilious
diforders. The wind continued variable until the
i 9th, when it became fouth-eafterly, and the 21 ft we
entered the S. E. trade. At this time we began to brew
fweet wort for thofe who were attested with the fcurvy*.
The wind continued favourable until the 4th of Novem-
ber, when at five in the afternoon the fun was in our
zenith, notwithftanding-it was colder by feveral degrees
than it had been a few days before ; the ihermometer,
which had been at Bo°, having fell to 77 0 . The wind
continued variable, with frequent fqualls, until the
7 th, when at fix o’clock, P. M. we founded and reached
bottom at thirty-two fathom, the ground confifting of
coral-rock, fine fand, and broken fhells. At three
o’clock the water deepened to thirty-eight fathoms, and
at four to eighty fathoms; at fix we found no ground
within one hundred fathom.
Tuefday the Bth, the winds continuing variable, at
fix A. M. we difcovered the land bearing N. W. feven
* This remedy was firft propofed by Dr. Mackbride, who by many experiments
found it fitted to fupply the want of frefh vegetables, by generating large quanti-
ties of fixed air, which is poffeffed of the moft antifcorbutic and antifeptic qua-
lities.
C 2 or


or eight leagues diflant ; we had again foundings be-
tween thirty-feven and forty-eight fathoms, with coarfe
brown fand, and coral-rock. At ten o’clock wc fpoke
with a fmall Portuguefe fifhing veflel, from which Mr.
Banks purchafed dolphin, bream, and other fifli, about
t
one hundred and fifty in number, which he gave to the
Blip’s company. This veflel was manned with eleven
people, two of whom were whites, and the others ne-
groes. She belonged to the captainiliip of Spirito
Santo; but her crew appeared very ignorant of the
eoaft, for on our enquiring the diflance of Cape Frio
and of Cape Thomas, we found they did not know one
from the other.
Our interpreters were a Venetian and a Portuguefe,
who told us that the crew of the fifhing vcilel declared
they had not feen a ihip within eight years : but this
I prefume was a miftake ; as they fpoke fuch imper-
fect Engliih that we found it almoil impoillble to un-
derhand them. I have before mentioned that fix veiTels
are annually lent from Madeira hither, befides the fhips
of war and merchantmen that arrive from Liibon.
After parting from the fiihing veflel we flood in to-
wards the land, which appeared very high in three re-
markable hills. From this until the 13th, we failed
along


along the coaft towards Ifle Frio, which is in latitude
23 0 8 X S. and longitude 38° 3 0 W. North from Cape
Frio is a flat, extending a long way from the fliore,
which we fuppofed to be irregular, having varied our
foundings greatly between Cape Spirito Santo and Ifle
Frio. In failing for Rio Janeiro it is neceflary to make
this ifland, from which the courfe to the harbours
mouth by the compafs is Weft, and it is bed to fail
pretty near the fhore.
Without the harbour, on the (larboard quarter, arc
two iflands, of which the innermoft is very high and
conic ; the other at one end has a prominence, which
appears like a third ifland.
When thefe iflands bore S. W. by W. at five miles
diftance, they appeared as but one j however as we ad-
vanced within the entrance they opened very diftindlly.
There is alfo an ifland juft without, a fugar-loaf, or
promontory on the main land, but it is not obferved in
coming from the northward. Between the higheft of
thefe ifiands and the ftiore are three or four fmall rocky
iflands.
The


The promontory or fugar-loaf is called Monte de St.
Juan, but the conical peak is Pointre de Sucre. This
promontory Rands on a peninfula at the Weft fide of
the river ; the peninfula itfelf forms a large bay ; and
within the bite, without the fugar-loaf, is a fandy
beach, which is fortified by a battery that has twenty-
two embrafures, and is defigned to oppofe a landing on
the peninfula, where there are feveral other batteries
and a regular fort, called Forte de St. Juan, which if
taken by an enemy would command the fortifications
of Rock Ifland, fituated before it in the entrance of the
river, and j ufl oppofite the fort of St. Cruz, on the other fide
of the pafiage. After landing on the peninfula, an army
might eafily approach the town, which is itfelf quite
defencelefs, by climbing over the ridge of hills, and
defcending to the plain on which it is fituated.
Ilho de Lozio, or Rock Ifland, which lies before the
promontory, has a very ftrong fortification of an hexa-
gonal form j and oppofite thereto on the Eaft fhore is
the fort of St. Cruz, which is efteemed the ftrongeft of
all thofe that defend the river. We were told that there
was a funken rock before this fort and that of Ilho de
Lozio, which together command the entrance of the
river, which is about half a mile wide.
The


The fort of St. Cruz is furrounded by a deep wide
ditch cut through a folid rock, which renders it diffi-
cult of approach by land; but being fituated on a low
point, it would be greatly expofed to the fire of flnps,
and unable to withftand the attacks of a Britifti fleet.
Above the fort of St. Cruz are two batteries, one of
fix guns, fituatcd on the main, and the other on a high
ifland called Ilho de bon Voyage.
Farther up the river and on the Weft fide is another
ifland, called Berghalion, on which is a battery with
twenty-feven embrafures, but I obferved that guns were
not mounted in them all. The courfe up the river is
N. N. W. Before the town there is an ifland called Ilhos
dos Scobros, or Snake Ifland ; this forms or covers the
harbour, and is to be ftrongly fortified. From the South
end of it there is a fihoal that extends obliquely towards
the main, and the paffage into the harbour is round the
North end.
Sunday the 13*, at eight A. M. we failed in towards
the harbour of Rio Janiero, in latitude 22 0 S 6' South,
and longitude 42° 45 Weft, having before difpatched a
lieutenant and mate in our pinnace to the viceroy, to
7 procure


procure a pilot; but as the wind continued favourable,
we failed onwards without waiting their return, and
left the iflands in the entrance of the river at our right,
at the fame time we obferved fignals from the diffe-
rent forts.
Monday the 14th, when (landing into the harbour
our pinnace returned with a military officer difpatched
by the viceroy, who had detained our own lieutenant
and mate ; and as no pilot had been fent, we flood
forwards into the harbour, and came to anchor in five
fathoms of water, near the North end of Snake’s Ifland,
and at about a quarter of a mile diflance from llho dos
Ferreres or Pump Ifland. Soon after this we were vi-
fited by a military colonel and two civil officers, who
came on board from thecuflom-houfe'boat,and examined
our ffiip, enquired the number of our empty water-
cafks, and dcfired permiffion to infpeft our log-book,
which was granted. The colonel informed Mr. Banks
and Dr. Solander that they had liberty to go affiore, but
when he faw them preparing to do it, he advifed them
to flay until the next day. He likewife told us that the
detention of our officers until after the examination of
our ffiip was a cuflomary precaution. Soon after re-
ceiving this information, Captain Cooke prepared to vifit
the


the viceroy, but was told he was then engaged, and
would fee him the next morning. A refolution was
however taken in council the fame day to grant us all
neceflary fupplies, but to prohibit every one from coming
on fhore ; a prohibition which was very mortifying to
us all, but efpecially to Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander,
who had undertaken this voyage only in purfuit of na-
tural knowledge.
It is to be obferved, that the lieutenant who had
been firft fent to the viceroy for a pilot, was dire&ed to
evade any queftions that might be afked concerning our
deftination or the object of our voyage ; or at leall to
anfwer them with great referve, Captain Cooke judging
that fuch queftions concerning a Chip of war would be
impertinent. And as the lieutenant conduced himfelf
agreeable to this direction, it is not improbable that his
behaviour partly contributed to the reftraints that were
impofed on us. We had indeed, whilft entering the
river and harbour, publicly taken furveys of the coun-
try ; and it was alfo reported that feveral gentlemen on
board were men of uncommon erudition, who had been
exprefsly fent abroad to make obfervations and difeo-
veries. Thefe circumftances, together with fome com-
mercial difagreements, which at that time were fup-
D pofed


A JOURNAL OF A
pofed to fubfift between Great Britain and Portugal,,
doubtlefs excited unfavourable fufpicions in the govern-
ment of Rio Janiero, and occafioned the prohibition
1 have before mentioned, which Mr. Banks however oc-
cafionally found means to evade, by employing a failoir
/, ■ \
to penetrate into the country by bribing the centinels,
and there load himfelf with plants and flirubs, collected
indifcriminately, and afterwards convey them on board.
But, notwithdanding all the precautions taken by
the viceroy, we obtained fufficient knowledge of Rio
Janiero during our day there; partly from our own
obfervations, and partly from the information of fome
of its inhabitants of other nations* The navigation to
its harbour is far from being difficult ; fince, though:
unprovided with a pilot, we no where found lefs than,
fix fathoms of water, but a little above the fort of St.
Cruz we obferved a ftrong eddy, that obliged us to keep-
nearer to the flarboard fhore. The river itfelf forms-
a large bay above the town, which contains feveral;
iilands, from thence it extends north eaderly a great,
didance into the country. The harbour itfelf is very
capacious, having room for dxty or feventy fail of (hips ;
and it a&ually contained feveral of four hundred tons-
burthen.
The


The town of Rio Janiero is fituated on the Weft fide
of the river, from which it extends itfelf about three
quarters of a mile. The ground on which it (lands is
a level plain**, it is defended on the North fide by a hill
that extends from the river, leaving a fmall plain,
which contains the fuburbs and the king’s dock. On
the South fide is another hill, running towards the
mountains which are behind the town. Some of its
ftreets run parallel from North to South, and are in-
terfered by others at right- angles. The principal ftreec
is near an hundred feet in width, and extends from St.
Benedict to the foot of Caftle-hill; the inferior are com-
monly twenty or thirty feet wide. The houfes ad-
joining to the principal ftreet have three (lories, but in
other places they are very irregular, though built after
the fame manner as in Lifbon. In the town are four
convents ; the firft is that of the Benedidtines, fituated
near its northern extremity ; this ftrudture affords an
agreeable profpedb, and contains an elegant chapel,
which is ornamented with feveral valuable paintings.
The fecond is that of the Carmelites, which forms the
centre angle of the royal fquare, and fronts the har-
bour *, its church had fallen fome time before, but it
is again rebuilding in a very elegant manner with fine
free-done brought thither from Lilbon. The third is
D 2 that


20 A JOURNAL OF A
that of St. Anthony, fituated on the point of a hill on
the South fide of the town ; before this convent ftands
a large bafon of brown granite, in the form of a paral-
lelogram, which is employed in wafhing. The fourth
is fituated at the eaftern extremity of the town, and
was formerly the Jefuits convent, but is now converted'
into a military hofpitah
The viceroy’s palace forms the right angle of the
royal fquare: the palace, mint, flables, goal, &c.
compofe but one large building, which has two flories,
and is ninety feet from the water. In paffing through
the palace, the firft entrance is to a large hall or guard-
room, to which there is an afcent of three ox four
Heps. In the guard-room are Rationed the body guards
who attend the viceroy, and aie lelieved every morn-
ing between eight and nine. Adjoining to the hall arc
the ftables, the prifon being in the back part of the
building. Within the guard-room is a flight of flairs
for afcending to the upper flory ; this divides at a land-
ing-place about half way, and forms two branches, one
leading to the right, and. the other to the left. The
former enters a faloon, where there are two officers in
conllaut attendance 5 the viceroy’s aid-du-camp at the
fame.


fame time waiting in an antichamber to receive mefTagcs
and deliver orders.
The left wing of the royal fquare is an irregular
building, which confifls chiefly of (hops occupied by
trading people. In the center of the fquare is a foun-
tain fupplied with water from a fpring at the diftance
of three miles, from which it is brought by an aqueducT.
From this fountain both the fhipping and inhabitants
are fupplied with water, the place being continually
crowded with negroes of both fexes waiting to fill their
jars. At every corner of the Hreets is an altar. The
market-place extends from the North-Eafl end of the
fquare along the fhore ; and this fituation is very con-
venient for the fifhing-boats, and thofe who bring ve-
getables, Btc. from the other fide of the river to marker.
Negroes are almofl the only people employed in felling
the different commodities expofed in the market, and
they employ their leifure time in fpinning of cotton.
Without the Jefuits college on the fhore is &
village called Neuftra Seignora del Gloria, which is
joined to the town by a very few intervening houfes.
Three or four hundred yards within the Jefuits convent
Hands a very high caftle, but it is falling to decay.
The


22 A JOURNAL OF A
The bifhop’s palace is about three hundred yards be-
hind the Benedidline convent, and contiguous to it is a
magazine of arms, furrounded by a rampart.
The gentry here keep their chaifes, which are drawn
by mules ; the ladies however ufe a fedan chair, boarded
before and behind, with curtains on each fide, which is
carried by two negroes, depending from a pole connected
to the top of the chair by two iron rods coming from
under its bottom, one on each fide, and relling at the
top. The inhabitants likewife ufe hammocks or rajas,
fupported in the fame manner, and furrounded with
curtains.
In this town the apothecaries fhops commonly ferve
the purpofes of a cofFee-houfe, people meeting in them
to drink capillaire and play at back-gammon. The
gentry when feen abroad are well drelled, though at
home they are but Joofeiy covered : the fhopkeepers
have commonly fhort hair, and wear linen jackets
tvnh fleeves. Beggars, who infelt the flreets of moll
European cities, are not to be found in this: and as
11)1 genteeler proAitutes here make their aflignations at
chuich, it is not uncommon for hufbands who are fo-
licitous for the foie enjoyment of their wives, to fend
7 them


them to mafs at two or three o’clock in the morning;
but the men of intrigue frequently avail themfelves of
the opportunities which thofe early hours afford.
The climate of Rio Janiero is both agreeable and
healthy, being free from many inconveniences that are
incident to other tropical countries. Theairis butfeldom
immoderately hot, as the fea breeze conftantly begins
to blow about ten o’clock in the morning, and conti-
nues until night, when it is generally fucceeded by a
land wind, though this does not always happen. The
feafons are divided into rainy and dry ; though their
ftationary periods have lately become very irregular and'
uncertain: indeed the rainy feafons had almoll entirely
failed the four years preceding our arrival, at which-
time the rains had juft begun, and they fell in large
quantities during our flay: formerly the ftreets have
been overflowed by the rain, and rendered impaffable
except with canoes* *
The adjacent country is mountainous, and chiefly
covered with wood, but a fmall part of it appearing to
be cultivated. The foil near the town is loofe and
fendy, but farther from the river it is a fine black
mould, it produces all the tropical fruits, fuch as
oranges,


oranges, lemons, limes, melons, mangoes, cocoa-nuts,
&c. in great abundance, and without much cultivation ;
a circumflance which is very agreeable to the inhabi-
tants, who are all indolent.
The mines, where they deftroy two thoufand flaves
yearly, are at the diftance of about five days journey
from the town. About twelve months before our ar-
rival, the government had dete&ed feveral jewellers in
carrying on an illicit trade for diamonds with the flaves
in the mines ; and immediately after a law pafled,
making it felony to work at the trade, or have any
tools in pofleffion, the civil officers having indifcrimi-
nately feized on all that could be found.
There are feveral courts of juftice in town, at all
of which the viceroy prefides; in criminal caufes the
fentence is regulated by a majority of voices in the
fupreme court. The viceroy has a council appointed
from Europe by the king, to affift him in his private
department, where he has two voices. The prefent
viceroy is Antonio Rolim deMoura, Conde d’Azambuja ;
he is a little old man, and has enjoyed his prefent
office about three years, having formerly been go-
vernor of Bahia for a long time.


The inhabitants of Rio Janiero maintain a whale-
fifhery, which fupplies them with lamp-oil. They
import their brandy from the Azores, their flaves and
Eaft India goods from their fettlements in Africa, their
wine from Madeira, and their European goods from
Lifbon.
Thurfday, December 8, 1768, having procured all
nccedary fupplies, we left Rio Janiero, failing along
the coaft to the fouthward, without any remarkable
occurrence, until the 22d, when we difeovered nume-
rous birds of the ProfiUaria genus, being then in lati-
tude 39 0 37 / S. and longitude 49 0 16' W. we were alfo
frequently furrounded by great numbers of porpoifes,
of a fingular fpecies ; the head having a remarkable
convexity towards the mouth, from which the lower
mandible appeared to protrude with a rounding chin.
On the upper and back part of the head appeared a
hole of about three inches diameter, through which
the animal refpires : on each fide of the head appeared
a white break, extending backwards ; and on the back
was a large triangular white fpot, its bafe being con-
tiguous to the dorfal fin. Another of thefe fpots was
feen' under the throat, and a third under the belly.
E They


They are about fifteen feet in length, and of an afb
colour. , ,
December 23d we obferved an eclipfe of the moon ;
and about feven o’clock in the morning a fmall white
cloud appeared in the Weft, from which a train of fire
iffued, extending itlelf weflerly; about two minutes
after we heard two diflincT loud explofions, immediate-
ly fucceeding each other like cannon, after which the-
cloud foon difappeared..
December 24, we caught a large loggerhead tor-
toife, weighing one hundred and fifty We
likewife fhot feveral birds, among which was an albe-
trofs, meafuring between the tips of its wings nine feet'
and an inch - r and from its beak to the tail, t\yo feet
one inch and a half*. The thermometer at evening
uiually flood at about 6 2 0 , and at mid-day between 6 6 °*
and 651 About this time we obferved lefs appearance
of rufl and mould than formerly. The 2 7th we dis-
covered feveral parcels of rock-weed. The 28 th we-
had hard gales of wind at S. E.—S. and S\ W. which
obliged us to lie-to under our mainfaiJ. The fame day
we had foundings between forty-fix and fifty fathoms,
with fine brown fand j this was in 40° 5 o South lati-
tilde*


tude, and 58° 16' Weft longitude. The 2 9th the wea-
ther was moderate, and we founded in forty-fix, forty-
nine, and forty-feven fathom, with fine grey fand.
The 30th we had variable winds, with calms; our
foundings had not differed from thofe of yefterday.
We faw a fea-lion. For feveral days about this time
we obferved numerous fwarms of butterflies, moths,
and beetles, flying round us. The 31ft we had much
thunder, lightning, and rain: this and the three fol-
lowing days we faw feveral whales, and likewife feve-
ral birds, about the fize of a pigeon, with white bellies
and grey beaks.
January 4, 1769, we faw an appearance of land,
which we miftook for Pepys Ifland ; but it difappeared
on our {landing towards it. The air was cold and dry:
we founded in feventy-two fathoms, and found black
fand and mud; and had frequent fqualls about this
time, and obferved great quantities of very long rock-
weed. The 6th we faw feveral penguins, and many
other birds. The 7th we had an exceffive hard gale at
S. W. which compelled us to lic-to; being then in lati-
tude '5 1 ° 2 / S. and longitude 62° 44" W. we fuppofed
ourfelves abreaft of Falkland-Iflands; but their longitude
was fo imperfectly known, that we were at a lofs to de-
E 2 termine


28 A JOURNAL OF A
termine on which fide they were fituated. The Bth we;
founded in eighty fathoms, and found black brown
fand. From feveral circumflances it was concluded
that we had paffed between Falkland Iflands and the
main land : the air was at this time very cold, but
healthy. The 9th we faw feveral penguins and Teals.
The 11th we difeovered Terra del Feugo*; but having
contrary winds until the 1 sth, we endeavoured to an-
chor in the bay of Good Succefs, a little to the weftward
of the ftreights, that we might have the benefit of a
whole tide to carry us from the coaft; but in fianding
towards it we found the foundings fo very unequal and
irregular, that we apprehended danger from the foul-
nefs of the ground; and again flood out to fea. The
i 6 th, having both wind and tide in our favour, we
failed into Port Maurice, and came to anchor. This
bay is furrounded by very high land, well covered with
wood: it is fituated in latitude 54 0 44/South, and lon-
• gitude 66° 1 / Wed, by obfervation : here, in a deferred
hut, we found feveral pieces of brown European broad-
cloth. The i 7 th, at ten A. M. we weighed anchor, and
turned into the bay of Good Succefs, where we anchored
at one in the afternoon, mooring our fhip in nine fa-
thoms water, with the ftream-anchor at N. W. and
immediately after went in fearch of a convenient place


ro wood and water. Captain Cooke, Mr. Banks, and
Dr. Solander likewifc went afhore to meet fome Indians,
who appeared on a beach at the head of the bay, and
foon after brought three of them on board, cloathed
them with jackets, and gave them bread, jerked beef,
&c. part of which they eat, and carried the remainder
on fhore. They refufed to drink rum or brandy, after
tailing them, intimating by figns that it burnt their
throats. This circumflarice may perhaps corroborate
the opinion of thofe who think water the natural drink
of mankind, as of all other animals. One of thefe In*
chans made fcveral long and loud fpeeches, though no
part of either was intelligible to any of us. Another
of them Hole the covering of a globe, which he con-
cealed under his fkin garment, and carried on fhore,
where he took it out in the prefence of thofe from
whom he had flolen it, and placed it on his head,
feeming to be much pleafed with his dexterity ; per-
haps his opinion of Healing was fimilar to that of the
Lacedemonians. None of thefe people exceeded five
feet ten inches in height, yet their bodies appeared
large and robuH, though their limbs were fmall. They
had broad Hat faces, low foreheads, high cheeks, nofes*
inclining to flatnefs, wide noHrils, fmall black eyes,,
large mouths, fmall but indifferent teeth, and black
flraff:


A JOURNAL OF A
ftrait hair, falling down over their ears and foreheads,
which was commonly fmeared with brown and red
paints ; and, like all the aboriginal natives of America,
they were beardlefl?. Their garments were the fkins
of guanicoa and feals, which they wrapped round their
fhoulders, fometimes leaving the right arm bare. The
men likewife wear on their heads a bunch of yarn,
fpun from the wool of guanicos, which falls over their
foreheads, and ties behind with the finews or tendons
of fome animal. Many of both flexes were painted in
different parts of their bodies, with red, white, and
brown colours ; and had alfo three or four perpendi-
cular lines pricked acrofs their cheeks and nofes. The
women have a fmall firing tied round each ancle, and
wear each a flap -of fkin tied round the middle.
They carry the children on their backs, and are ge-
nerally employed in domeflic labour and drudgery.
Thefe Indians have a village, confiding of thirteen
houfes, behind a hill on the South fide of the hay., and
about two miles from the fhore. They are about fifty
in number, and feem to be the only inhabitants here,
as the adjacent country is entirely defolate: their huts
are but wretched habitations, and their food is chiefly
4 tnufcles


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 3*
mu fcleis and feals. Their arms are bows and arrows,
which they employ with great dexterity; the bows are
neatly made from a fpecies of wood refembling beech,
and their arrows are formed of a light yellow wood,
feathered at one end, and pointed at the other with
fharp {tones of the jafper kind. They have dogs about
two feet in height, with {harp ears, and appeal 4 not
unacquainted with Europeans. From feveral rings and
buttons in their poflfefiion, we concluded them to have
fome communication with the Indians in the Streightg
of Magellan.
The bay of Good Succefs extends Eaft and Weft thred
miles, being two in breadth: its foundings within are
regular, from fourteen to four fathom, the ground,
being a dark brown fand, except within a cable’s
length of the fhore, where it is rocky and: foul, With
great quantities of fea-weed. ft is Well {locked with
wood and water, and defended from e'afterly winds by
Staten Land. At the bottom of the Weft part of the bay
is a fine fandy beach. Befide Port Maurice, to the
northward there is another bay with anchorage, be*
tween Cape St. Vincent, and St. Diego;.


32 A J, O U R N A L OF A
.• J ; j .
Le Maire’s llreight towards the North end is formed
by Cape St. Antonio on Staten Land, and Cape St. Vin-
cent on Terra del Feugo ; and towards the South by
Cape St. Bartholomew on Staten Land, and a high bluff
or prominence of Terra del Feugo, palling between
them; it is about nine leagues in length, and fix or
feven in breadth. The tide flows therein feven hours
from the northward, and ebbs five hours from the
fouthward ; and the 11 ream appears to divide itfelf, one
part running along Terra del Feugo, and the other
along Staten Land. The mountains on both fides of
this llreight are not fo very high as has been reprefent-
ed ; neither are they always covered with fnow, except
in particular places..
• Having furnilhed ourfelves with twenty tons of wood
and water, and flowed our guns and other kinds of
lumber below decks, that we might be prepared for
the tempeftuous weather which might be expected in
palling Cape Horn, we left the Bay of Good Succefs on
the 2 ift of January, at two o’clock P. M. and flood to
fea; the wind being at S. W. by W. we fleered at S. S. E.
and the 22d, the wind becoming at W. we failed S.
Monday the 2 3d, at four P. M. we difcovered the land,
at W. S. W. appearing in three iflands. The 24th the
land


land appeared making in feveral fmall iflands at Wed;
we founded in forty fathoms ; the air was at the fame
time extremely cold. The 25th we law Le Maire’s
Cape Horn at S. W. by S. live leagues diflant: it ap-
pears to be a low point, and is the S. E. extremity of
leveral iflands, called by the French Hies d’Hermitage;
near it are feveral pointed ragged rocks. This cape is
in latitude 55° 48 S. and longitude 67° 40 W. the
variation 21° 1 6' E. the dipping-needle Hood at 64° 30'.
We founded in fifty-live fathoms, round Hones and
bioken lhells at bottom. We dilcovered a point of
land northward from Cape Horn, which we concluded
to be the illand mentioned by Le Maire, and called
Bainevclts or Diego Ramiries. We had about this time
but little night; a favourable circumftance in the
fqually difagreeable weather which then prevailed.
On the 30th of January we found ourfelves in lati-
tude 6o° 2 S. and longitude 73 0 /. W. variation 24 0 54 .
E. This was our highefl fouthern latitude ; and from
thence we changed our courfe to W. N. W. without
much variation, having pleafant weather until the 1 6th
of- February, when the wind blew hard from W. by S.
S. by W. and S. Continuing our courfe N. W. between
the 4th and 10th of March at nights we had very
heavy


34 A JOURNAL OF A
heavy clews, almoft equal to lliowers of rain. On the
2 ift we obferved great numbers of tropic and egg-
birds ; two of the former we killed, and found their
feathers of a very beautiful colour, confiding of a moft
delicate white tinged with a lively reel. The tail is
compofed of two long red feathers, and the beak is of
a deep red colour. At this time we were in latitude
25 0 2 \ S. and longitude i 20° 20' W. the weather be-
ing very pleafant, and the air ferene, dry, and falu-
brious. Continuing our courfe nortli-wefterly, be-
tween the Dolphin's firft and fecond track, on Tuefday
the 4th of April we difeovered land at South, diftant
four At half paft twelve we brought too, and
founded, but found no ground at one hundred and
thirty fathoms. The land then appeared to be an
ifland, divided into four parts by reefs, and bore
S. S. W. two miles diftant. The inhabitants at the firft
divifion appeared naked, and about thirty in number ;
fome of them however appeared cloathed a little after.
On fhewing our colours feveral of them came into the
water, and by figns dclired us to come on fhore; and as
we palled towards the fecond divifion they followed us
along the water fide. Their complexion was a deep
copper colour, and their hair black and ftrait ; they
were all armed with lances. This ifland is about two
miles


miles and a half in length, and in latitude iB° 44",
and longitude 138° 58" Weft 5 we named it Lagone;
and obferved it to be covered with cocoa-nut, palm,
and plantain-trees, fome of which appeared very high.
At half paft three the fame afternoon we difcovered
another ifland, lying N. W. twenty miles diftant from
Lagone, and failed within a furlong of the fhore ; the
ifland appearing to be oval in its form, and about one
mile in length ; it was well covered with trees, but we
faw no appearance of inhabitants: evening approach-
ing we loft fight of it. The next morning at fix we
faw a low ifland at Eaft, about three leagues in length ;
the Eaft end was covered with very high trees, under
which we obferved feveral huts, canoes, and Indians.
At the Weft end there is a reef, extending three or four
miles from the land ; we called this Bird-Ifland; it is
in latitude 17 0 24' S. and longitude i42°yo / W. The
Bth we faw an ifland, which vre named Chain-Ifland,
in latitude 17 0 and longitude 145 0 26 \
Monday the i oth of April, in the morning we faw
Oznabrug Ifland, bearing N. W. by W. half W. fix
leagues diftant; and leaving it to the northward, at
noon we difcovered George’s Ifland from the maintop-
maft head, and flood towards it j but having little
F 2 wind


&/VLA* A JOURNAL OF A
/3\ wind, it was the 1 3th in the morning when we came
‘ sp,, to anchor in Port Royal bay; and immediately after
&riS~Y~ 4 ' s try
ju sfe the captain went on (hore in the long-boat, attended by
/ / the marines, but returned again in the afternoon, hav-
ing feen no perfon of any diftindtion or confideration
among the natives, though he had prefented a few
beads and other trifles to fome of them. The next
morning feveral of the officers and gentlemen landed
on the weftermoft part of the bay, where they were
treated with great hofpitality by the natives, who gave
them proviflons dreffed in their own manner, with
fome pieces of cloth manufactured by themfelves, and
afterwards conduced them through feveral parts of the
ifland.
It happened in this tour that Dr. Solander 101 l an
opera-glafs, which had been greatly admired by feveral
of the natives, and which he therefore fufpedted to
have been {lolen by fome of them; and this fufpicion
he communicated by figns to a chief of one of the dif-
tridls, informing him at the fame time that the place
where he had fill miffed it was at fome diliance. The
chief appeared much concerned at this accident; not,
as we had reafon afterwards to believe, that he had
any averlion from knavifh practices, but becaufe he
feared


feared that this early inftance of difihonefty might give
us unfavourable fufpicions of his countrymen, and
thereby deprive them of thofe advantages and emolu-
ments which they expethed to gain from us, and which
by various artifices they afterwards fecured, when our
connexion with them became more intimate. The
chief, therefore, to obviate any difadvantageous im-
preflions, gave us to underhand, with an appearance
of great probity, that the place which theDo&or had men-
tioned was not within his dihridf, but that he would fend
to the chief of it, and endeavour if poffible to have the
glafs recovered; but that if this could not be done, he
would make the Doctor compenfation by giving him
as much new cloth, of which he fhewed large quanti-
ties, as fhould be thought equal to its value. The cafe
however was in a little time brought, and the glafs it-
felf foon after, which deprived us of the merit we
fhould otherwife have had in refufing the cloth which
had been offered us. But it afforded an opportunity of
convincing the natives of our generality, by lavifhing
rewards on them for an action to which felf-intereff had
been the motive, rather than any fentiment of probity ;
to which, from numerous tranfaclions, I am convinced
they are ftrangers. And indeed we behaved with fuch
liberality, or rather prodigality towards them in the
firft


38 A JOURNAL OF A
part of our flay here, that they were encouraged to
form the moil exorbitant claims and expectations from
us, and to contrive numerous artifices to defraud us;
which, with a little early ceconomy and circumfpedtion
might have been prevented, greatly to our advantage.
Very different however was our opinion of thefe people
at the return of our boat in the evening, when every
one w 7 as agreeably furprifed at the great probity which
they feemed to have difeovered ; though we were not
a little difappointed in the expectations we had formed
of procuring a large fupply of hogs and fowls, which,
from the report made by the Dolphin’s crew, we had a
right to expedt ; but we found eventually that this report,
like many others from the fame quarter, was extrava-
gant ; as all the fupplies obtained here afforded us no
more than the inconfiderable allowance of one pound
of frefli pork per week to each man.
The third day after our arrival feveral chiefs of the
ifland came on board, and brought with them a few
hogs, and a fmall quantity of fruit. The following
day we marked out a place for eredting a fortification
to fecure us in obferving the tranfit of Venus, for
which we were to wait ; and at the fame time pitched
our tents, &c. on fhore, planting centinels to guard
6 * our


our tools and utenfils, who were directed to fuller none
of- the natives to come within certain limits ; one of the
marines however being carelefs, and willing to amufe
himfelf with their droll gefiures and attitudes, allowed
feveral of them to approach him too nearly, who fud-
denly wrefted the mufquet out of his hands, and en-
deavoured to (lab him with the bayonet, and after-
wards efcaped to the woods. One of them, however,
who was the firfi aggrefior, was (hot through the head
in creeping among the buihes, by a party fent in pur-
fuit of them ; two or three 'others were likewife wound-
ed, as we were afterwards informed, though no intel-
ligence could ever be procured of the mufquet which
they had carried ofif.
Immediately after this tranfa&ion we (truck our*
tents, and the fame evening conveyed every thing on
board j and the next morning we unmoored, and warp-
ed our (hip to a place more convenient for covering our
intended fortification j and again moored at the diftance
of half a mile from the (hore, with two thirds of a
cable extended each way; and then carried a fireamr
anchor towards the (hore for a fpring, bringing the
cable to our larboard quarter, and thereby made our
broadfide bear on. the place we intended to fortify.
The


40 A JOURNAL OF A
The next day we again fent our tents on fhore, toge-
ther with all our empty water-cafks, which were filled,
and placed fo as to form a breaft-work on that part of
the beach which was flanked by a river; and on the
other we erected banks of earth, and covered them
with pallifades, mounting feveral cannon and fwivels
which had been landed from the fhip, for our protec-
tion. Being thus fecured, we eflablifhed a market,
where the natives frequently brought fruit and provi-
fions, which they bartered with us for iron utenfils,
beads, &c. though this traffic was by an order from
•the captain foon retrained to a fingle perfon appointed
by himfelf. Having at this time but little employ-
ment, we frequently madeincurfions into the country,
vifiting the natives at their habitations, where we were
always received with great hofpitality ; though it hap-
pened not unfrequently that our pockets were picked by
thofe who had voluntarily given us large fupplies of
provifions. This ifland, which the commander of the
Dolphin twenty-gun-fliip had named King George’s
Ifland, is by the natives called Otahitee ; and confifls
of two peninfulas, joined by an iflhmus. The greater
peninfula is called Otahitee-Nua, and the leffer Otahi-
tee-Eta. The former indeed is fometimes called Obrea-
bo, in honour to queen Obrea. The whole length of
the


the ifland is Afteen leagues, and its circumference forty
leagues 5 Port Royal bay is Atuated near the Weft end.
From thence the coaft extends Eaft by South, about nine-
teen miles, to a reef of three fmall iflands, forming a bay
called Society Bay. From this the land inclines into a deep
bay at the ifthmus or juncture of the two diviftons, of
which the fmalleft is nearly oval, and furrounded by a
reef, which runs parallel to the fhore, at about two miles
diftance; this has feveral apertures or paffages which af-
ford fafe anchorage within. The North fide of the ifland
is likewife defended by a Amilar reef, but the ground
within is foul and unfafe for veffels of burthen.
The foil of the ifland, on the more elevated parts, is
dry, and conflfts of a red loam, which is very deep ;
but the vallies are covered with a fertile black mould.
The ifland is under the government of a Angle chief,
whofe authority is unlimited, and who appoints depu-
ties that prefide in different diftri&s, to preferve good
order, and colledt thofe impofltions or duties, which
by long eftablifliment have become his due. And
though no particular laws have been enabled among
them, yet certain penalties or punifliments, from long
ufage and ancient cuftom, are annexed to certain crimes
or mifdemeanors. Thus, for example, thofe who
G fteal


4* A JOURNAL OF A
deal clothes or arms, are commonly put to death, ei-
ther by hanging or drowning in the fea; but thofe
who deal provifions are badinadoed. By this practice
they wifely vary the punifhment of the fame crime;
when committed from different motives ; judging, per-
haps, that he who deals cloth or arms, deals becaufe-
he is either idle or avaricious, qualities which proba-
bly will always continue with the offender to the dif-
turbance of fociety ; but he who deals from hunger is
impelled by one of the mod importunate defires of na-
ture, and will not offend again, unlefs the fame im-
pulfe recurs, which it is not likely will often happen.
The natives of Otahitee are unequal in dature, fome
of them being fix feet and three inches in height, others
not more than five feet and a half; commonly how-
ever they are tall and large in foe, but not drong and
vigorous ; their joints being more flexible than thofe
of the mod delicate European woman I have ever feen.
From infancy they habituate themfelves to dancing, ac-
cording to their own peculiar mode, which confids of
very extravagant didortions and gediculations, together-
with various inflexions of their bodies and limbs* which'
being frequently pradtifed, feem, like the efTe£t of eaily
habit in our tumblers* to be the caufc of that enlarged-
motion


motion in their joints, which prevents their attaining a
degree of flrength proportionate to their fize. In fit-
ting they commonly incline very much forward, but
in walking they carry themfelves very erect, even
when advanced in old age.
Their completion is brown, but much lighter than
that of the natives of America; fome few among them
appeared almofi: as white as .Europeans, and feveral had
red hair, though it is commonly black and ftrait.
Their garments are made from cloth manufactured
by themfelves from a vegetable fubftance produced by
a tree, which we named the cloth-tree. Tliefe gar-
ments vary in their figure, and in the manner in which
they are worn ; circumftances, which though regulated
with fuch rigid exactnefs in European countries, with
them depend on fancy, caprice, or the fiate of the wea-
ther, as to heat, cold, rain, &c. In the day time they
have always a covering about the pubes; and in dry plea-
fant weather they commonly wear a piece of thin cloth,
about two yards in length, having a perforation or hole
in the middle, through which the head is palled, and
which hangs loofely over the fhoulders; but when in
their houfes this cloth is frequently taken from the
G 2 neck,


44 A JOURNAL OF A
neck, and rolled about their loins. The women efleem
it as moll ornamental to enfold the pubes with many
windings of cloth, which they draw fo ciofe about the
middle, and round the upper part of their thighs, that
it is a confiderable impediment to them in walking.
Both fexes indent or prick the flefh about and below
the hips in a multitude of places, with the points
of fliarp bones, and thefe indentures they fill with a
dark blue or blackifii paint, which ever after continues,
and difcolours the fkin in thofe places, rendering it
black. This practice is univerfal among them, and is
called tat-tow, a term which they afterwards applied to
letters when they faw us write, being themfelves per-
fedlly illiterate. The men have long hair, which they
tie on the top of their heads, flicking it with plum-
age of birds ; but the hair of the women is fliort, and
hangs in curls down the neck ; and both fexes fre-
quently wear pieces of white cloth of their own manu-
facTure wrapped about heads, almoft in the form
of a turban. The females with infinite labour plait
human hair into long fmall cords or threads, which
they fold into bunches, and tie as an ornament over
their foreheads; fo powerful and univerfal are the
emotions of vanity ! They, like wife wear ear* rings of
6 pearly


pearl, as- well. as the men, hut no bracelets or-neck-
laces.. v r? .. • ■ .
f . f, . # . r , * f ' t j *■ _ r J 'X
The men, unlike the aborigines of America, have long
m mm "o v. o cj jCi m
beards, which they carefully drefs in different forms.
And, notwithstanding; Mofes has represented circumci-
fion as injoined by the Deity to Abraham, for a diftin-
guifhing mark or criterion appropriated to him, and his
pofterity the Jews, yet .the natives of this iftand uni-
verfally practice it from notions of cleanlinefs, having
a term of reproach which they apply to the uncircum-
cifed, but which decency will not allow me to repeat.
fl ir j Btx oi Ojr.'f.'iiCi 03 b:-/!Oiftir/ r rr
it Jjl :■ / U Ju JU J u u '• J •j.ij i* jl v.-, iJ-m. ~ v/A ill i i .. • w'J
. Though they have, made but little progrefs towards
civilization and refinement, yet they are already di-
vided into the conditions of mailers and fervants ; fo
namraliy do. the jpaftions of mankind lead them to af-
pire to dominion ; and fo eafily do the differences- iw
their bodily and intelledual faculties enable fome of
them to obtain it to the detriment of the reft, who are
made fubfervient to them. Almoft all the freemen of
Otahitee have fever’al of thefe fervants about their
houfes, who are the moft dexterous thieves and pick-
pockets perhaps in the whole world, as we pften found
to our difadvautage 5 but yet it muft be acknowledged
that


4 6 A JOURNAL OF A
that they were not wantonly difhoneft, but as often as
they dole things that were ufelefs to themfelves, which
frequently happened, they either voluntarily brought
them back to their owners, or laid them in places
where they mufl be necefTarily found: thus, for in-
ftance, having in the night, with great fecrecy and
dexterity, found means to enter our encampment unper-
ceived, and carry away our aftronomical quadrant,
which was indifpenfably neceflary for thofe obferva-
tions that were a principal obje<ft of the voyage ; after
keeping and examining it a few days, and finding it
to be ufelefs to themfelves, one from among them was
commiflioned to intimate to us that he had feen one
of his countrymen carry and hide it under a certain
tree, which he deferibed, but declared he did not know
the thief; however, on examining the place he had
rjt'V l 1!
mentioned, we found the quadrant, a little difordered
by handling and infpe6lion, though the damage was
foon repaired.
ry 'f- \ i - “ f■ . ■' O* ;
- ..... , v . ■ ' j ;-. ~ \• '
The women of Otahitee have agreeable features, are
well proportioned, fprightly, and lafcivious; Neither
do they efteem continence as a virtue, fince almoft every
one of our crew procured temporary wives among them,
who were eafdy retained during our flay. The inhabitants
inter-


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 47
intermarry with each other for life, but with this lingular
circumftance, that as foon as a man has taken a wife he
is excluded the fociety of the women, and of the unmar-
ried of his own fex, at the time of their meals, being
compelled to eat with his fervants. For this reafon
they are not folicitous to attach themfelves to a fingle
objedt, during the earlier part of life, but purfue in-
continent gratifications where inclination leads, until a
woman becomes pregnant, when the father by long
dlablilhed cuftom is compelled to marry her.
The chief or fovereign of the ifland is allowed but
one wife, though he has many concubines : the favage
policy of government however requires that all his
natural children be put to immediate death as foon as
born, to preclude the diforders which might arife from a
competition for the fuccefiion. The badge of fovereignty
is called Maro, which is a kind of red falh worn about
the middle. When the Erei or chief is firft invelted
with this mark of his authority, the ceremony is attend-
ed with an extraordinary feftival, which continues the
fpace of three days. The Erei when he has been in-
veiled with the Maro is ever after fed by his attendants,
who take his food in their fingers, and put it in his
7 mouth r


4 3 A JOURNAL OF A
mouth, dipping them in a bowl of;cocoa-nut milk be-
fore each mouthful. r; ;r, / i
The inhabitants of Otaliitce may be computed at
feventy thoufand. They believe the exigence of one
fupreme God, whom they call Maw-we, but acknow-
ledge an infinite number of inferior deities generated
from him, and who prefide over particular parts of the
creation. Maw-we is the being who fiiakes the earth,
or the god of earthquakes. They have however no
religious eftablilhment, or mode of divine worlhip;
neither the dilates of nature or of reafon having fug-
gefted to them the expediency or propriety of paying
external adoration to the deity : on the contrary, they
think him too far elevated above his creatures, to be
affecTed by their a&ions. They have indeed certain
funeral rites, and other ceremonies, for which a cer-
tain order of men are appropriated, though they have
no immediate relation to the deity, and thefe men we
called priefls, but perhaps not with much propriety.
They have fome notion of a future life in another
ifland, to which they expert to be tranflated after
death j but it does not feem as if they confidered it as
a fiate of retribution for the actions of this life, finer
they believe that each individual will there enjoy the
fame


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 49
fame condition in which he has lived here, whether it
be that of a prince, a mailer, or a fervant. They be-
lieve the liars to be generated between the fun and
moon, and fuppofe an eclipfe to be the time of copu-
lation. They likewife fuppofe the greatell part of the
earth or main land to be placed at a great diflance
eallward, and that their ifland was broken or fepa-
rated from it while the deity was drawing it about the
fea, before he refolved upon its fituation.
Though thefe people have no particular mode of di-
vine worlhip, we frequently obferved that in eating
they cut a fmall piece of their food and depofited in
fome retired place as an offering to Maw-we.
When any difputes arife among the people concern-
ing property, the ftrongeft retains poffefiion, but the
weaker complains to the Erei, who, from a political
defire of maintaining equality among his fubjedls, gene-
rally gives it to the pooreft of the contending parties.
Their funeral rites are of a fingular kind j the dead
body is depofited in a houfe built for that purpofe at
fome diftance from the common habitation of the fa-
H mily,


mily, and laid on a floor elevated feveral feet above the-
ground, being covered with fine cloth ; then a kind of
pried, called Heavab, cloathed in a mantle covered
with gloify feathers, and commonly attended with two
boys painted black, firews the body with flowers and
leaves of bambo, and carries prefents of fifh, and other,
food, which he depofits by the fide of it, and for two
or three days after is conftantly employed in ranging,
the adjacent woods and fields, from which every one
retires on his approach. The relations in the mean
time build a temporary houfe, contiguous to that
which contains the corpfe, where they affemble, and
the females mourn for the deceafed by finging fongs
of grief, howling, and wounding their bodies in diffe-
rent places, after which they bathe their wounds in
the fea or river, and again return to howl and cut
themfelves, which they continue for three days. After
the body is corrupted, and the bones become naked or
bare, the fkeleton is depofited in a kind of done pyra?
mid built for that purpofe *
* in a retired part of the ifland we obferved one of thefe pyramids, of a much
larger fize than the reft, which was compofed of huge rough ftones laid on each
other, and which probably contained the bones of fome ancient prince or hero;
on the top were the beaks of feveral large birds, and the bones of filh, -which
bad probably been offered as pftfents to the deceafed.
A con-


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 51
A confiderable part of Otahitee is cultivated and
planted with cocoa-nut trees, plaintains, and bananoes,
cloth- trees, bread trees, yams, and potatoes like thofe
of Europe, which have however a bitterilh tafle.
Their animal food confifis of filh of various kinds,
which they take in different ways, and with great
dexterity ; thefe they frequently eat raw, a pra<stice in
which fome of our people imitated them, and thought
it not unpalatable; they likewife feed on fvvine, of
which they have a confiderable plenty, but prefer the
flefh of dogs to that of all other animals. They have
alfo wild ducks, which differ but very little from thofe
of Europe. They roafl or rather bake their meat in a
fubterraneous oven, made by digging a hole in the
ground and lining it with a flone bottom ; in this they
kindle a fire, and lay feveral loofe fiones upon it;
when they are all fufficiently heated the fire and afhes
are removed, and the meat being wrapped in leaves is
placed in the oven, and the hot loofe fiones laid imme-
diately upon it, and the whole is then covered over
-with earth ; in this manner it is excellently dreffed, re-
taining all its fucculency : they have no fait, but infiead
of it ufe fea-water. They are immoderate eaters, and
fwallow large mouthfuls at once. Infiead of bread
they eat yams, potatoes, plantains, &c. together with
H 2 a large


s 2 A JOURNAL OF A
a large milky farinaceous fruit, which when baked
refembies bread both in texture and tafle. They make
a kind of pafte from the pulp or white fubflance ad-
hering to the infide of the cocoa-nut fhell and bananas,,
which commonly ferves them for fupper and breakfaft :•
their common drink is water and the milk or juice of
cocoa-nuts. They have no kind of fpiritous liquor*
except that which is made from a fpecies of pepper
growing here, which they ferment in waterbut this
is fo fcarce that it is rarely drank, except by the chiefs
of the country. They have none among them who
pretend to any kind of medical knowledge which is
not common to every body. They have indeed but
few difeafes, and to thefe they apply but a few empi-
rical remedies, which from experience they think ufe-
ful, without knowing or enquiring concerning the
manner of their operation. Their inftruments of mufie
are a large drum, and a kind of flute, made from the
joint of a reed, having three perforations or holes,
which is blown through the nofe. Their fifh-hooks
are of various fizes; thofe for taking fharks are very
large, and made from heavy folid wood, of a proper
figure, and pointed. They have fmaller hooks, made
likewife from wood, and pointed with bones, which
are commonly barbed : befides thefe they have a variety


of very fmall hooks, made of different circular figures,,
from mother of pearl. Their lines are made from the
fibres of the bark of a tree, which compofes almoft all
their cordage.
The doth of Otahitee, of which large quantities are
manufadured, is of a lingular kind, being made from
the bark of a final! tree, which is firft freed from its
external hard coat, and then, being fcraped or rafped,
it is foaked or macerated in water two or three days,
when after a little beating it becomes glutinous and
cohefive like palte, but more tenacious ; and is then
extended or fpread by beating it with an inftrument
made for that purpofe from a very compad heavy wood.
This inltrument is about fifteen inches in length, and
from the handle at one end. to the other of equal fize,.
and about fix inches in circumference ; its form is qua-
drangular, and each of the four fides is furrowed into
longitudinal grooves or finulfes, but with, this diffe-
rence, that there is a regular gradation in the breadth,
and depth of the furrows on each of the fides y the
coarfeft angle contains about ten of thefe furrows, and
the finell about fixty: the bark is extended by beating
with this inftrument in the fame manner as gold i&
formed into leaves by the hammer. They begin beat-
7 in £


* li £ that fide where the channels are deeped and
widell, ana proceeding regularly they finilh with that
wheie they are mod numerous, which leaves the ap-
pearance of longitudinal furrows or channels on the
clom much like thofe which are vifible on paper, but a
little deeper. Ibis cloth is commonly beat until .it
becomes very thin ; when they delire it thicker two or
tin ce pieces are fpread on each other and palled toge-
ther : by bleaching they render it extremely white, and
often (lain it red, yellow, brown, and black. That
which is worn by thofe who are mourning for the
death of a relation is double, the inlide being white,
and the other brown, with black fpots laid on pretty
clofely in chequers. This cloth, though made in fo
fimple a manner, has notwithdanding a confiderable
degree of drength and firmnefs, and might doubtlefs
be highly ufeful in the manufacture of paper. They
fold it to us for triding confidcrations ; as feveral yards
might be purchafed for a fingle nail. Their bread-
plates are of a femicircular figure, and have each a
notch of a femicircular form in the middle of the
feedion. The bread-plate condds of an internal wicker
frame, which is covered with a drong cloth or clofe
plexus, made from the fibres contained in the rinds of
cocoa-nuts braided together $ over this are laid three
femi-


femlcircular rows of pigeon’s feathers, and between
each is a femicircular row of fhark’s teeth. The edge
of the breaft-plate is fringed with fine white hair, and
feveral parts of it are ornamented with round pieces of
mother of pearl, about two inches in diameter. One
of thefe plates hangs from the neck down before the
bread, and a fecond depends over the back.
Their hatchets are made by tying a fharp hard fione,
appearing like a jafper, but more like the touch-ftone,
to the end of a wooden handle, which when finifhed
is near the fhape of a fmall garden-hoe.
Their bows are round, and tapering from the mid-
dle towards each end ; they are about five feet and a
half in length, and made from a light but firong
elafiic wood. Their arrows are a fmall compact firong
fpecies of reed or bamboo, and pointed fometimes with
hard folid wood, and fometimes with a fharp-bearded
bone, taken from the fting-ray fifh. They have like-
wife a kind of fpears or javelins, made from wood, but
pointed after the manner of their arrows, which they
throw with great dexterity.
The


The natives of Otahitee vifit the iflands lying to the
eaflward, which we had difcovered in our paflage hither,
for the fake of traffic, in their canoes, waiting the op-
portunity of winds, which blow favourably about three
months every year. With the inhabitants of thofe
iflands they barter their cloth and provifions for pearl
and a fine wdiite hair, which grows on a fpecies of
dogs peculiar to themfelves, and with this they orna-
ment their breaft-plates.
Soon after our arrival at Otahitee we found that this
ifland had been fome months before vifited by a foreign
fliip under Spanifh colours, as the natives informed us,
after we had fhewn them all the feveral European flags.
And at Batavia we difcovered that this vifitor was no
other-than Monfieur Bougainville, who lately returned
from a voyage round the world, which he undertook
by the direction and at the expence of the court of
France. From the accounts of the natives it appears
that the French conduced themfelves peaceably, until
fome of the inhabitants had flolen the cloaths belong-
ing to three of the Blip’s crew, who were bathing, and
on its being difcovered had murdered them; upon which
their companions falling on the Indians, had killed
one,


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. S 7
one and taken another prifoner, who was carried away
from the ifland.
It was not long after our people began to cohabit
with the females of Otahitee, before they discovered,
by difagreeable effedfs, that the crew of the French fhip
had before enjoyed the favours of Several of their tem-
porary wives, who in return infected them with a cer*
tain difeafe.
On the 4th of June,'the fky being unufually fe-
rene, our aftronomer had a very accurate observation
of the tranflt of Venus ; and foon after we began to
prepare for leaving the ifland to proceed on our voy-
age ; and about the fame time two officers belonging
to the Ship, having been long engaged in a quarrel,
which had created much difturbance on board, agreed
to terminate the difpute by a duel; and having fur-
nifhed themfelves with arms and ammunition, they
landed privately, but after a few discharges they were
arrefted and recondu&ed on board, by a party Sent for
that purpofe, before any mifchief had happened.
Daring our flay, Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, who
were indefatigable in their refearches after natural know-
I ledge,


58 A JOURNAL OF A
ledge, had colle&ed a great variety of undefcribcd
plants and fi£h, with fome birds, Bcc. and we had
made a confiderable progrefs in learning the language
of the country, which, like that of almofl all nations
living between the tropics, is foft, ufually terminating
in vowels. We had likewife planted many European
feeds, of which none, except muftard, crefles, and
melons, were found to vegetate: and having furniflied
ourfelves with fufficient fpecimens of the cloth, imple-
ments, and utenfils of Otahitee, together with fufficient
fupplies of wood and water, on the i 3th of July, 1 769,
we failed from George’s Ifland, having on board an
Indian named Tobia, who had formerly been high-
priefl of Otahitee, but being difguiled with the prefent
regent, he voluntarily embarked on our bring-
ing with him an Indian lad named Tiato, as an attend-
ant. On leaving Otahitee we failed to a fmall ifland,
which we had feen from the hills of George’s Ifland,
and which is called by the natives Titeroah. It is a
group of feven fmall keys, and belongs to the fove-
reign of Otahitee, from which he procures fifb, turtle,.
&c. being fituated feven leagues North from Port Royal
bay, in latitude 17 0 10' S. and longitude 150° 00' W.
From


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 59
From Titeroah we failed north-weft, and the next
day faw the high lands of an ifland, which Tobia in-
formed us was called by the natives Ulyateah; but this
and the following day we had very little wind. The
1 7th we fleered towards an ifland, called by the natives
Oahcna, and a few hours after anchored in a very plea-
fant bay called Owarre, where we continued two days.
The ifland of Oaliena is fourteen leagues in circuit,
nor can the moil exuberant fancy conceive a more de-
lightful fpot: the fliores were adorned with fruit-trees
of various kinds, efpecially the cocoa-nuts, which we
faw in abundance. The foil is extremely fertile, the
trees fruitful, and affording the mod beautiful land*
f ca pes: it is one of the dependencies of Opuna a neigh-
bouring fovereign. The inhabitants are well propor-
tioned, with regular engaging features; the women
in particular are uncommonly delicate and beautiful.
They behaved towards us with great probity and hof-
pitality, felling us for trifling confiderations large fup-
plies of hogs, poultry, fifli, fruit, &c. They were
much furprifed at the fight of our fhip, it being the
firft they had ever feen 5 and it was not without great
difficulty that we perfuaded them to venture into the
cabin, where they viewed every thing with an appearance
of pleafure and aftonifhment.
I 2 From


From Oahena we failed wefterly j and the next day f
being the 20th, anchored in a bay, called by the inha-
bitants Oapoah, fituated on the North fide of an ifland
to which Tobia had directed us, and which he named
Uliateah, being in latitude 16° 47" S. and longitude
151 0 40 W. North-wefterly from this is another
ifland, called by the natives Otahaw, being ten leagues
diftant, and in latitude 1 6° 3 / S. and longitude 151°
45* W. Both of thefe iflands are furrounded by a reef
or fhoal, which defends their bays or harbours, and
affords fafe anchorage. The entrance into the bay of
Oapoah is near a fmall ifland towards the Weft end .«•
within the bay are feveral fhoals of coral rock, but as
they are vifible they may be eafily avoided,.
On the 24th weighing anchor, we fleered northward
along fhore, and within the fhoal, towards an openings
five or fix leagues diftant, through which we palled,
and being without the reef, began to beat round the
ifland of Otahaw, which employed us eight days ; in
which time we fent our boat to the fouth-weft part of
the ifland, where there is pafiage through the furround-
ing fhoal, and a good harbour within. Otahaw is.
about twelve leagues in circuit, and the land is high,.
rugged^


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 61
rugged, and woody, furrounded with fmall iflands or
keys on the Weft fide.
On the 2d of Auguft we anchored in a bay on the
North fide of Uliateah, which is called by the natives
O-a-ma-ne-no, where we continued eight days, having
moored our fhip about two cables length from the
fhore.
Uliateah is a fruitful ifland, near forty leagues in
circuit, and well watered with rivers; the natives ap-
peared hofpitable and honeft, felling us a good ftore of
hogs, wild ducks, bread, fruit, &c. On the Weft fide
of Uliateah, at nine or ten leagues diftance, we dis-
covered an ifland called Mo-ro-ah, which is near the
fize of Otahaw, but has no harbour.
In beating round Otahaw we difcovered an ifland a
few leagues to the weftward, named, as Tobia inform-
ed us, Bola-Bola, which is about ten leagues in circum-
ference, and remarkable for a high double peak; but
it has no harbour on the Weft fide. This ifland, ac-
cording to Tobia’s information, is rocky and barren,
and was not inhabited until the fovereigns of Otahitee
and the neighbouring iflands banifhed their criminals
thither,.


thither, which was praCtifed for feveral years ; and they
being increafed by others, who voluntarily fled thither
to avoid punifhment, became fo numerous that the
illand was infufficient for their fubfiftence ; and they
thereupon became pirates, feizing every canoe that fell
in their power. Their government was at firft feudal,
until Opuna their prefent fovereign had the addrefs to
deprive his fellow-foldiers of their freedom; and to
prevent them from reflecting on his ufurpation, as well
as to revenge the contempt with which he was treated
by the neighbouring inhabitants, he made a defeent
upon Otahaw, which he foon conquered; and, en-
couraged by this fuccefs, he landed on Uliateah, where
the inhabitants bravely exerted themfelves in defence
of their liberty and of their chief, who was greatly
beloved. The war however continued three years, with
various fuccefs, until at length Opuna becoming more
fuccefsful, the fovereign of Ulateah was killed, leaving
an infant fon, who was immediately invefled with the
Maro on the only eminence which remained in the pof-
feffion of his fubjeCts. But a decifive viClory foon after
putting Opuna in pofTefTion of the whole ifland, the
young king fled to Otahitee, where he was hofpitably
received and refpeClfully treated, having a part of the
ifland allotted to him and his followers, in which he
7 lived


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. d 3
lived according to the manner of James 11. while at
St. Germains.
Opuna afterwards conquered feveral other neighour-
ing iflands, which he annexed as dependencies to his
dominion of Bolla-Bolla ; and which he ftills retains
in fubjedtion, being near ninety years of age.
It was of Uliateah that Tobia was a native, and fub-
ordinate chief; and being wounded in the laft decifive
battle with Opuna, he fled to the mountains until his
wounds were cured, and then followed the young king
to Otahitee, where he ingratiated himfelf even to the
laft favours with Obrea, the then queen regent of the
ifland, who appointed him high-prieft, and purfued
his advice in almoft every particular. But foon after
Tutahaw, uncle to the young king her fon, and a man
of great courage, and highly efteemed by the people,
obferving her devoted to amorous dalliance with Tobia,
meditated a change in the regency; and the better to
effect it, he began to create divifions between the inha-
bitants of Otahite-Eta and of Otahite-Nua, which finally
produced hoftilities between them. At that time Tobia,
who had great fagacity and judgment, having difcover-
ed Tutahaw’s defigns, advifed the queen to procure his
death


death privately, as the only expedient to reftore peace
and preferve her authority ; but (he thinking his ad-
vice too cruel, refufed, for the firft time, to comply
with it ; and he forefeeing the confequences, retired
to the mountains, alledging that this retreat was necef-
fary for the prefervation of his life. Soon after the in-
habitants of Leffer Otahitee making frequent incurfions
into the greater divifion, and their numerous depreda-
tions having thrown the inhabitants of the latter into
confufion, which Tutahaw artfully improving to his
advantage, they at length offered him the regency,
thinking their affairs too much embarrafled for the
adminiftration of a female ; an agreement was there-
fore made between Obrea and Tutahaw, in which it
was conditioned, that fhe fhould preferve the title and
ftate of queen, with a certain number of attendants,
&c. and that the regency fhould devolve to Tutehaw;
who refpe<sling Tobia’s underftanding and facerdotal
character, afterwards permitted him to return from the
mountains in fafety; but he was fo much difpleafed
with this revolution, that he embraced the opportunity
of our departure to leave the ifland.
It deferves to be remembered, that when the Dol-
phin fhip of war firft difcovered George’s Illand, the
inha-


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 6s
inhabitants, having never before feen a fhip, were un-
determined how they fhould treat their new vifitors ;
and thereupon Obrea, who was then regent, called a
council on the matter ; and though it was finally re-
folved to attack the fhip, and though this refolution
was carried into execution; yet Obrea, whofe feelings
were more congenial to the wants of mankind, pro-
pofed, in direct oppofition to the advice of her coun-
fellois, that a large fupply of women and hogs fhould
be inllantly fent on board the fhip. A propofal fo
pregnant with benevolent fenfibility, that it deferves
to be recorded on tables of adamant; for what could
have been more acceptable than women and hogs to'
failors, who had long been deprived of both >
We had intended vifiting Bola-Bola, but were pre-
vented by an account which Tobia gave us of the ra-
vage and inhofpitable difpofition of its inhabitants
who he allured us would attempt our deflruaion
He likewife told us, that in the life-time of his grand-
father a fhip had been wrecked on the ifland of Ulia-
teah ; and that the few of her crew who were not drown-
ed were killed by the inhabitants ; and that from this
wreck they had procured the firft iron which had ever been
feen among them, and formed it into duffels, knives,
K & c.


66 A JOURNAL OF A
&c. and indeed they appeared to have the higheft va-
lue for this commodity, which we exchanged with*
' them for provifion, fruit,* See.
Having completed our fupply of wood, water, &c.
we failed from the bay of O-a-ma-ne-no on the i oth
of Auguft, Handing fouthwardly towards an ifland to
which Tobia dire&ed us, at more than an hundred
leagues diflance, and which we difcoveied on the i 4th.
It is called O-hi-te ro-ah by the natives, and is in lati-
tude 22 0 23 7 S. and longitude 150° 36' W. but hav-
ing no harbour, we only fent our boat on fhore with-
out coming to anchor.
Since our departure from Cape Horn we had dif-
covered fourteen iflands, all of them before unknown
in Europe ; and Tobia had defcribed nine others, lying
between W. N. W. and S. S. W. the fartheft not more
than two days fail, for a canoe, from Ohiteroah; be-
ftdes a very large one at Eaft, diftant about four days
fail; all of which he had vifited in canoes at different
times. Ohiteroah is about eight leagues in circuit,
the greateft part appearing to be covered with coarfe
grafs and fern; the bay is about a mile and a half in
breadth, and half a mile in depth, but foul and rocky.
From


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 67
From hence we failed South, fomewhat eaf wardly, and
on Tuefday the 2 9th, at four o’clock in the morning,
we faw a very large comet at North, about fixty degrees
above the horizon ; and the fame day at noon found
ourfelves in latitude 3 6° 59/ S. and longitude 4 0 00' E.
from Ohiteroah, variation 7 0 cf Eaf. The following
day we obferved a frnall green bird, which we judged
to be an inhabitant of land, together with large quan-
tities of fea-weed; and foon after feveral pentada birds,
with many others of a fmaller fpecies, about the fize
of a pigeon, having a white belly, brown back, and a
black freak from the extremity of one wing to that of
the other *. On Saturday the 2d of September, at half
after four in the morning, we again obferved the
comet between Aldebaran and Orion ; and the fame
day at noon found ourfelves in latitude 40° 14' S.
and longitude 145 0 2 6'W. The air being at that
time very cold, and having hard gales, with many
appearances of a long continuance of formy weather,
we changed our courfe, and failed north-eaferly.
* It is not the writer’s purpofe to defcribe minutely thofe things which are more
the obje&s of Natural Hiftory, as Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, gen-
tlemen of great erudition, who undertook this voyage for the fake of natural know-
ledge ; and who in almoft every place were fuccefsful, as well as indefatigable, in
their refearches, will hereafter abundantly gratify the curiofity of thofe who de-
light in the ftudy of nature.
K 2 Monday


A JOURNAL OF A
Monday the 4th, at three o’clock in the morning, we
iaw the comet again, two degrees Eaft from the bright
ftar in Orion’s right foot; and at noon obferved in la-
titude 38° 29' S. and longitude 1 45 0 14" W. The fame
day we altered our courfe to N. N. W„
Wednefday the 6th at four o’clock in the morning
we faw the comet, a little Eaft from Orion, for the laft
time. We continued our courfe north-wefterly for fe-
veral days, having good weather, and frequently fee-
ing albatrofles, pentada birds, Sec. in great numbers.
On the 20th of September, in latitude 29 0 20' S. and
longitude 1 50° 40' W. we again altered our courfe to
South-Weft, having variable winds and weather. On
the 25 th we obferved a log of wood, feveral parcels of
fea-weed, with albatrofles, pentadas, fheerwaters, &c. in
great numbers.
Sunday the ift of October we took up a piece c£
timber covered with barnacles, and faw a feal fleeping
on the water, feveral porpoifes, a grampus, numerous
flocks of land-birds, and many parcels of rock-weed ;
we founded with one hundred and ninety fathom of
line, but found no bottom. But continuing our courfe
Saturday,


VOY AGE ROUND THE WORLD. 69 /h*s
Saturday, October 7 th, we difeovered land at Weft by 7 •
North, which appeared in low hummocks $ and at four
o'clock P. M. the following day we anchored in a deep
bay, with our bell bower, having ten fathom water,
and a fine brown fandy bottom. This we called Pover-
ty-Bay, it being on the Eafi-fide of New Zealand, and in
latitude 39 0 oo" S. and longitude 17 9 0 47' Weft from
Greenwich, and the variation 14 0 30' Eaft.
/
4///^
Wednefday the i i th, at feven P. M. the wind being
wefterly, we left the bay; and failed to the fouthward,
along the coaft, keeping at four or five miles difiance
from the (here. On Thurfday feveral of the natives
came on board, and fold us fome of their paddles,
cloth, See. we made them feveral prefents, and they left
us apparently well fatisfied with their reception. About
twenty-two miles S. S. E. half E. from the North point
or head of the bay is a cape, which, from its figure,
we called Cape Table; between them we had regular
foundings from thirteen to eighteen fathoms ; but oil
{landing four miles farther off from the cape we had
feventy fathoms of water, with foft ground, being
then on the outer edge of a bank that extends from the
North head to Cape Table. About nine miles farther to
the fouthward is a frn.all ifiand, which we named
/V
Cay'L *-
For^


<ZU. /it
Portland Me : it is connected to the main by a chain of
locks, about a mile in length, which are partly under
water. About three miles N. E. from Portland are feve-
ral fhoals, which we called the Shambles ; one of thefc
we narrowly efcaped : there is however a pafifage with
twenty fathom of water between them. On Friday
four laige canoes came towards us filled with men, who
appealed to be all armed: they made feveral long
fpeeches, inviting or challenging us to battle; but
leeing themfelves difregarded, they boldly came along-
fidc, and thiew their lpears into the fhip; we then
fired a mufquet over them, which producing no effetfr,
we difcharged a four-pounder loaded with grape-fhot
above their heads, on which they precipitately retired.
But as we found the current fetting us fall towards
the fhore, we foon anchored in twenty-one fathom,
about a league diftant from the land.
On Saturday, the wind continuing at N. we failed
along the coaft, at about four miles difiance, having
from twelve to fifteen fathom of water. In the after-
noon we fent our long-boat and pinnace afhore to
found, and difcover a watering-place, of which we had
gieat need; but they were foon recalled, as we faw
feveral canoes making towards them. Soon after
about


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD.
about one hundred and fifty of the armed natives in
canoes approached us ; and, to convince them of our
pacific intentions, we threw feveral prefents into the
water towards them, and employed every expedient in
our power to allure them on board to trade; but all
our endeavours were fruitlefs; and their defigns ap-
peared more hoftile even than our former vifitors, as
they actually proceeded to an attack upon us, and con-
tinued it, until, like the former, they were difperfed
by the difcharge of a cannon, after which they fled to
the fhore. The next morning, being Sunday, we were
near a very large bay, which we named Hawke’s Bay,
in latitude 39 0 40' S. and longitude 180° 30' AY. Here
feveral fifhing-canoes came off with cray and other
kinds of fifh, which we purchafed of them for paper
and Otahitee cloth 5 but from their behaviour we con-
cluded that they had never received any fentiment of
probity, either from the fuggeftions of a moral fenfe,
or the precepts of education ; for after bargaining v» ith
us for a parcel of fifh, as often as they could get pof-
feflion of tliofe commodities which they were to receive
in payment, before they had tied their fifh to the rope
by w hich we were to draw them on board, they would
laugh at our want of precaution, and refolutely refufe
us any return for what they had received, obliging us
7 r .
//, r
- , -4
/6.
/*/•
/


A/- /J^T
to repurchafe the fame parcel of fifh with other paper
and cloth ; and this without appearing to be fenfible
that there was any thing fhameful or unjufl in their
knavery ; nor would any menace prevail with them
to alter their behaviour. While thefe fifhermen conti-
nued with us they were joined by feveral other canoes,
filled with armed natives $ and as fome of our people
were trading for fifh over the blip’s fide, they made fe-
veral attempts to force them into their canoes ; and at
length they actually feized Tiato, the boy we had
brought from George’s bland, and immediately fled
towaids the fhoie j we then fired feveral mufcjuets
among them, which obliged them to put on their
thick cloathing; and one of them feeing a gun pointed
at him, doubled up his nets, and held them before
him to intercept the ball. Several Indians however
being wounded in the canoe that had feized Tiato, he
found means to difengage himfelf and jump into the
water, but in fwimming towards the fhip he was pur-
fued by a fecond canoe, that returned to retake him ;
but to prevent this we difcharged a four-pounder a
little above their heads, on which they all retired ; and
foon after the boy was taken up in-a boat, which we
fent for that purpofe, but not before his flrength was
almoll exhaufted, as his clothes, being thick and heavy.
1 had


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD.
had greatly impeded him in fwimming. He had
doubtlefs but narrowly efcaped being eaten *, though
;. # •
at that time we did not know that the inhabitants of
New Zealand were cannibals. When this accident
happened we were oppofite the South point of Hawke’s-
Bay, which we from thence named Cape Kidnapper.
There are two rocks lying without this cape, which
are both of a conical form: Hawke’s Bay enters
within the land about thirteen leagues: near the
middle, but towards the north fide, we obferved fe-
veral fmall rivulets, and at the bottom a lagoon about
three miles in breadth ; its communication with the
fea is by a fmall inlet at the north end, where the
fea walhes over, but apparently, there is not fufficient
water for the entrance of any thing larger than canoes.
The north fide is formed by a bank of fand extending to
the fouthward ; about the middle of this, is an eleva-
tion which has been converted to an ifland by the fands
feparating or wearing away from it. It is about four
miles in length, and one and an half in breadth, run-
ning from Eaft to Weft. The land near the bottom of
the bay prefents a very beautiful profpetft ; being hap-
pily diverfified with large groves of tall ftrait trees,
branching only towards the top, and refembling ce-
dars : the more interior country rifes into mountains,
many
y/i


/lx4xJ / 4*
A JOURNAL OF A
many of which aire near as high as the Peak of Te-
neriffe, and covered on their tops with fnow. South-
weftward from thefe, the land appeared to be lefs ele-
vated and uneven; as we difcovered feveral large level
plains, apparently covered with grafs*
From this bay we continued our courfe to the fouth-
-oc/ /'/ / ward, until Tuefday noon, when we found ourfelves
in 40 0 QyS' South. It is to be remembered, that New
Zealand, before our arrival here, having been only
feen in two or three places, was but very imperfectly
known; and the Lords of the Admiralty being uncertain
whether it was an ifland or continent, had directed us
to fail along the coaft as far as 40 0 fouth latitude,
and from thence, if the land appeared to extend far-
ther, to return again to the northward. And agree-
able to thefe inftruCtions, at noon, being oppofite a
blufF or prominence of land, which we name Cape
{Uu Turna £ ain > we changed our courfe from South to
A/, $O. North; and the wind having likewife changed to the
fouthward, we returned nearly in our former tracks
failing along the coaft about the fame diftance as ufual
from the fhore. Cape Turnagain is remarkable for a
ftratum of clay of a bright brown colour ; its pra-
minence gradually diminilhes towards the north-lide,


but to the fouthward its defcent is more fudden. The
foundings oppofite to it, at the diftance of a mile and
an half, are about thirty-two fathom, with coarfe yel-
low gravel at the bottom.
On Thurfday evening a canoe came along fide with
five Indians who told us they intended to ftay all
night: we therefore hoifted our guefls on board, and
entertained them in the manner which we expected
would be mod agreeable. There was nothing like
ruftic bafhfulnefs or timidity in their behaviour j as
they familiarly tatted of every thing which they faw
us eat, even when uninvited; and appeared to have
as much confidence in our hofpitality and friendfhip,
as if they had long experienced both. Two of them
w T ere finely proportioned in their fhapes and limbs ;
and their features appeared to have an unufual femi-
nine delicacy. We difmifled them the next morning
with feveral prefents, and they left us with reluctance,
being defirous to continue with us the whole day, to
which we objected, thinking it lhould carry them too
far from their habitations.
The next morning (having patted the land which
we firft difcovered on this coaft) we faw to the north-
L 2 ward
VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 7 s
tfk/. fq'^
•V
Coj. 20 A


//Uj 76 A JOURNAL OF A
'P. / sT &
! Ptf- ~ 2'■ ward a bay with an ifland in the middle. In failing
into this bay between the ifland and the main, we had
■» -.- - - - - - > ■ r ■ * - '
very foul uneven ground, but afterwards the founding
became regular, and we anchored about half a mile
from the fhore in eight fathom, with a fine Tandy bot-
tom. Our boats were then fent in fearch of a water-
ing place, but it being very fqually, with a great furf,
they could not land. In the afternoon we made a fe-
cond attempt with more fuccefs ; and the next morning
fent our boats for wood and water, with a party of men
to protea them. But the furf running high and find-
ing great difficulty in bringing our water on board,
we gave over the attempt, and failed the next morning.
i bay is called Tegadoo Bay by the natives, who
( 5/.//. did not appear to be numerous. It is in latitude 3 8°
1 1 S. and longitude i Bo° 3/ W. The variation 1a?
' r. 0
15 E.
The inhabitants had a few houfes, furrounded by
a fence to intercept the winds, and feveral ftages for
dtying fifh near the piace at which we landed. They
appeared to have plenty of crabs, and cray-fifh, and a
gieat many dogs with fmall pointed ears. Some of
them were covered with cloth of their own manufeaure,
which will be more particularly defcribed hereafter 5
** and


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 77
and feveral females had bunches of fea-weeds tied
about their middles. Continuing our courfe to the
northward, feveral canoes came along-fide, and fome
of them venturing on board, we enquired for a wa-
tering, place, and they pointed to a bay, bearing S. W.
by W. to which we difpatched our boats, and at one
o’clock the fame afternoon they returned, having
found a convenient place for procuring a fupply
both of wood and water : and on Tuefday the 24th
we anchored in the bay, having ten fathom of water,
and a fandy bottom. The inhabitants here behaved
with* great hofpitality. At the watering place we
drew a line, and enjoined them not to pafs it; an
injunction which they obeyed with great exactnefs.
There were feveral houfes contiguous, and the lands
in the adjacent vallies being regular flats, were neatly
difpofed in fmall plantations; the ground appearing
to be well broken as if defigned for gardens. Sweet
potatoes, like thofe of Carolina, of which they have
large quantities, commonly occupy a confiderable part
of thefe plantations. In many places we obferved the
cloth-plant growing without cultivation.
The bay itfelf affords plenty of fifh, particularly
cray fifh, and fhip* jacks or horfe-mackarel, which are
larger
o' s n
%«>
1 <r/
A/:? tf.Ze y*


A JOURNAL OF A
larger than the mackarel on the Britiffi coaft. The ad-
jacent woods are very compact, and rendered almoft
impaffable by the numerous fupple jacks growing in
them. But they afford ffielter to a multitude of birds
of different kinds, among which are the quail and a
very large pigeon. We purchafed many things from
thefe people, efpecially cloth of their own manufadure,
giving them in exchange the cloth of Otahitee, of which
they were extravagantly fond.
Chaftity appeared not to be in great eftimation among
them ; or, at leaft, it was not rigidly pradifed, as
many of their young women conftantly reforted to the
watering place, who granted their laft favour to all that
follicited them, and on very reafonable conditions. In
rambling about the country we frequently met with
their habitations, and were always treated with great
kindnefs, as they never denied us any thing in their
poffeffion. In one of thefe excurfions an officer fell in
with a group of houfes, and an elderly woman came
out and invited him to enter the enclofure, where, he
found about two dozen of the natives, of both fexes,
feated at a repaft of cray-fifli and potatoes, of which he
was invited to partake ; and having made them a fmall
prefent of cloth and beads, they fingled out a beautiful
young


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 76
young girl, and gave him to underftand that he
might retire with her. Some time after, an elderly
man, with two women, entered, as vifitors, with much
gravity, and very formally faluted all the company
according to the cuftom of the country; that is, by
gently joining the tips of their nofes, which a fpedtator
might miftake for a kifs: At parting, however, he re-
peated this ceremony, which gave them great plea-
fure : and in returning the way by which he had come,
they fent a man who lead him a much better road; the
other being in many places overflowed with water; and
in conducing him to the watering place, as often as they
came to a ditch or a rivulet, of which there are many
for draining their fields, the Indian always carried him
over dry, and appeared defirous of tranfporting him the
whole way on his back. This bay is called Tolaga by
the natives, and is in latitude 38° 20, and longitude
xBl° 38" W. the variation being E-
t/f'/sr (J a Sc?/*-*.
After completing our provifion of wood and water,
and making an infcription on a tree a little to the right
of our watering place, it being Sunday the 29 th of Oc- •
tober, at fix in the morning, we failed from Tolaga
Bay, coafling to the Northward: On the 31ft feveral 3ff^
canoes came towards us, one of them carrying fixty of
7 the


//^
Sc/. $/.
A JOURNAL OF A
the natives ; but finding them determined on commit-
ting hoflilities, we difperfed them by firing two of our
cannon a little over their heads ; after which we con-
tinued our courfe, and on Wednefday morning faw forty
or fifty canoes along fhore, feveralof which came off to
us apparently with hoftile intentions, although they
were not above an hundred in number, and but indif-
ferently armed. One of their chiefs in the largeft of
the canoes, made feveral long fpeeches ; and by the
menacing flouriflies of his hepatoo fpear, feemed to bid
us defiance; but feeing us continue inviting them to
trade, they at length came clofe along fide, and he who
had been their orator, taking up a ftone, after pro-
nouncing a few words, gently threw it againft the fide
of the fliip, which apparently was a formal declaration
of war, as they all immediately took up their arms :
but Tabia threatened them with immediate deftruftion
if they began to attack us, and affured them of our pa-
cific intentions, and that we only wanted to purchafe
their fifli, at the fame time fhowing them fome pieces
of fine Otahitee cloth, which had more influence upon
t tem than all his menaces, for they had no apprehen-
ds of danger from our refentment. They had a large
quantity of cray fifli and mufcles, which we purchafed ;
but


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD.
but with more ceconomy than we had before praclifed, as
a piece of cloth which we had ufually given for a parcel
of fifh, was on this occalion divided into feven or eight
pieces, and exchanged for fo many times the quantity
we had formerly received; and yet they thought them-
felves fufficiently paid. The cloth which they received
from us, they cut into bits two or three inches fquare,
which they placed in their ears. While they were trad-
ing with us, one of them had the boldnefs to lay hold
of fome cloaths which had been fattened to a rope, and
thrown into the water to foak. Thefe he untied, and put
into his own canoe, and though every man in the fhip
had feen the tranfacTion, and though a party of marines
threatened him with their mufquets, yet he obttinately
perttfted in detaining them ; and, without any attempt
to efcape towards the fhore, or remove from along ttde
of the fhip. Two balls were then fired through the bot-
tom of his canoe, but without any efifexft, except that he
began with great deliberation to ttop the leaks which
they had made ; and though a charge of fmall fhot
was foon after fired into his back, he continued re-
pairing his leaks ; occafionally putting up one of his
hands to rub the flefli where the (hot had penetrated.
When their canoe was fufficiently repaired, they preci-
pitately removed fome diftance from us with their booty,
and
/ n
// f Are*.'*'
/ *z /*4
iOt f - DJ


A JOURNAL OF A
and there began to laugh, greatly pleafed with their
acquifition and their dexterity. A four-pounder was
then fired towards them, upon which they retired to
the fhore. In the evening a double canoe, built after
the model of thofe at Otahitee, but carved and decorat-
ed according to their own peculiar manner, followed
us a long time, the Indians appearing in good humour,
and frequently dancing and finging; at length one of
them made a long harangue, which being finifhed, they
all began to pelt us with fiones ; but feeing us continue
regardlefs of their behaviour, they retired. The next
morning, however, the fame canoe purfued and over-
took us about nine o’clock; fhe carried a fail of an odd
conftru&ion, which was made from a kind of matting,
and of a triangular figure ; the hypotheneufe, or broad-
eft part, being placed at the top of the mail, and end-
ing in a point at the bottom. One of its angles was
marled to the maft, and another to a fpar with which
they altered its pofition according to the direction of
the wind, by changing it from fide to fide. The people
in this canoe followed us feveral hours, but finding we
purfued our courfe, they laughed heartily at our fup-
pofed cowardice, and approaching nearer, threw feveral
ftones on board, fome of which were near doing us mif-
chief i we then fired a mufquet at them, but it produ-
cing


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 83
cing no effedl, a great gun was levelled, which made
them retire, though by fome accident it miffed fire.
Friday, Nov. 4, three canoes came along fide, and
an Indian in one of them threw a fpear on board at one
of our crew ; but they all fled at the difeharge of a muf-
quet. In the afternoon we failed towards an opening,
which we difcovered in the land, and the fame evening
came to anchor in feven fathom with good ground ; and
were foon after furrounded by feveral armed canoes,
which waited until dark,'and then retired, threatening
to return the next morning; however, about eleven
o’clock the fame night, we were again furrounded by
them ; but finding us on the watch, they foon retired.
But in the morning about one hundred and fifty men,
in fixteen canoes, all armed with fpears and flones, again
came off apparently with a fixed determination to begin
hoflilities; they feemed defirous of boarding the fhip,
but could not agree on the place, frequently removing
from one fituation to another, and approaching the
fides, bows and quarters fucceffively. Thefe move-
ments kept us on our guard in the rain for fome
time, in which we employed every expedient we could
imagine to pacify them; but thefe ferved only to
increafe their temerity. We then fired feveral mufkets,
M 2 on
A -
A
/A/rrJ - // •


/> , <y s 9 o.
A JOURNAL OF A
-
/ 7 on which they took to their arms, and attempted to
come on beard, but the difekarge of a four-pounder
fuddenly difperfed them.
Shortly after our boats were fent to found the bay
and difeover a more convenient anchorage, which they
executed, and returned at three in the afternoon, when
we weighed and failed nearer in towards the fouth-
ern fhore, anchoring in five fathom, with a foft fandy
bottom. The next morning we were vifited by many
of the natives, who came in a peaceable manner,
bringing large quantities of fifh, cloth, fpears, &c.
which they fold us at very moderate prices. In this
bay we procured a large fupply of wood, and of ex-
cellent water, and alfo heeled our fhip and ferubbed
her bottom, which had become very foul; the natives
treating us with great hofpitality on fhore at their own
habitations.
Thurfday, the 9th of November, being an uncom-
mon clear day, the aftronomers landed to obferve the
Tranfit of Mercury ; and during the obfervation a large
canoe loaded with various commodities for traffick
came a-long-fide, and an officer, who then had the
command, willing to encourage them to expofe then
goods, lowered down a very large piece of Otahitee
6 cloth,
2


cloth, more valuable than any they had ever feen;
whereupon the Indians in the canoe, perhaps mif-
taking his intention, but more probably defirous of
robbing him of his property, called upon a young
a<slive Indian who Hood neareft the cloth, to feize upon
it, which he at firft declined ; but afterwards taking
it in his hands as if for examination, he fuddenly
difengaged it from the rope, and was immediately fhot
dead by the officer to whom it belonged, and who
having always conduced himfelf with the flridfeft
probity, was the more irritated by this deviation from
it. But had we punifhed every diffionell attempt with
equal feverity, we mull have extirparted the greateft
part of the Indians with whom we have had any
commerce; for never were people more ignorant or re-
p
gardlefs of the principles of natural jullice. Imme-
diately after this unhappy mifcondudl, the Indians all
fled, and feveral days elapfed before we could allure
them to renew their commerce with us. On Saturday
the boats were difpatched to examine a large river,
which they performed, and returned again in the
evening. During our flay here we found great plenty
of oyftcrs and ccllciy.
Thurfday
VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. Bjr


/is # 86 A JOURNAL OF A
bream with our hooks.
/£ Thurfday morning, the 15 th, we failed from Mer-
cury Bay, fleering N. E. towards a group of iflands
- W^c k we paffedj with many others, continuing our
/f * courfe until Sunday the 19th, when we entered a
fine fireight, and came to anchor in twenty-three fa-
-2$ • thorn the fame- evening ; and on Monday we coafted
along the north fide of the fireight, about three miles
from the fhore, in twenty-one fathom of water. But
our foundings having afterwards regularly decreafed
to fix fathom and a half, we anchored in mid-channel
and difpatched our boats to found a river running
2* . from S. W. and at feven o clock the next morning wc
moored our fhip, and were foon after vifited by three
22. trading canoes. Wednefday the 22d we weighed,
and flood up the fireight, having regular foundings
from feven to fifteen fathom, with blue clay at bottom.
2#'* ° n Friday we had a frefh gale at N. W. with thun-
f der and lightning; but the wind changing to S. W.
2£. we left the bay, and on Saturday coafled to the north-
ward between feveral high iflands and the main, in
twenty-fix fathom water, and in the evening anchored
in fourteen fathom, and caught near one hundred
The


The following day many canoes, filled with In-
dians, came along fide, whom we treated in the beft
manner, and made them feveral prefents; but they
afterwards, as a return for our hofpitality, began to
afifail us with ftones ; we then fired feveral charges of
fmall {hot among the aggrefifors, and a mufket-ball
over them; upon which retiring to a little diftancc,
and thinking themfelves without our reach, they
flopped and defied us to battle ; but feveral great fhot
being fired near them, they fled towards the fhore.
The next day feveral canoes with Indians vifited
ns, but they behaving in a hoftile manner were dif-
perfed by the ufual methods. The wind continuing
north-wefterly until Wednefday the 29th, and finding
we loft way by turning againft it, we bore away for
a place which had the appearance of a bay : and the
next morning at eleven o’clock we anchored therein,
between an ifland and the main, having four fathom
and a half of water, and a fine fandy bottom. Our
boats were then fent to found, but the pinnace being
furrounded by a party of the natives, who refolutely
attempted to go on board, the feamen were compelled
to fire upon them, by which they were difperfed. At
the return of our boats, finding we had brought to
X /
/
&
sf
/// '
/ /


A • _
■ on a bank we weighed, and dropping over it, an-
chored again in ten fathom and a half: immediately
, ' " after we were furrounded by thirty-three large canoes,
containing above three hundred of the natives, all
well armed. They traded peaceably with us for a lit-
tle time ; but on a fignal given by one of their chiefs
according to a preconcerted plan, they all immediately
quitted the fhip, and removing to the buoy attempted
to raife our anchor ; expecting, as we fuppofed, that
the fhip would afterwards drift on fliore. When they
were pulling at our buoy, we fired two or three fhot
a little befide them ; but per filling in their attempt,
we wounded one of their mod adlive leaders in the
arm and fide, and alfo fired a four-pound ball a little
above their heads, on which they not only difperfcd,
but feveral returned and traded with us peaceably.
In the afternoon captain Cook, with feveral gentle-
men, attended by a party of marines, landed on one
of the ifiands, and incautioufly fufFered themfelves to
be furrounded by a great body of Indians, a party of
them at the fame time marching down to the boat to
cut off their retreat. Thefe motions being immedi-
ately feen on board the (hip, a fpring was put on her
cables, and a broadfide brought to bear an the lfland,
and


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 89
and feveral great Riot fired a little over them : our
people on the ifland were, at this time, feparated in
fmall parties, none confifting of more than three or
four, and fo clofely befet that they found it impofiible
to ufe their arms ; and the number of their enemies
was fo unequal, that they every minute expected death.
In the confiernation and diforder occafioned by their
dangerous fituation, feveral mufquets were confufedly
difcharged, but fortunately they did no mifchief. The
natives were, however, greatly terrified by the palling
of our cannon balls a little above their heads, and im-
mediately difperfed, at a time when they might with
the greatefi facility have deflroyed every one of our
people on fliore. Soon after efcaping this danger we
were vifited by feveral canoes with Indians, who traded
in a peaceable manner. The following day we landed
on an ifland at the wefl-fide of the bay, where we
found good water and cellery in great plenty ; and alfo
a town where we drew our nets, but with very bad
fuccefs, though the Indians at the fame time caught
large quantities. Their fuccefs was occafioned by
watching the approach of the fifli who came in large
fhoals ; together with a difference in the form of their
feines, which were two or three fathoms in depth, and
of proportionable length.
N Soon
A 9" A
//^<^ /
A
//


/u> £1 90 A JOURNAL OF A
Soon after the difpute on fhore feveral feamen pafT-
"7 / i ng through a plantation of the natives, took from it
a few potatoes, for which they were feverely chaftifed
by the captain ; but they alledged in their juftification
that they had only done what he himfelf and all the
officers had often pradtifed, and the captain being irri-
tated at this reply, ordered three of them to be con-
fined and punifhed for feveral days fucceflively.
Qj j Monday the 4th of December we failed from the
Bay of Iflands, and it being low water, on croffing the
bar we founded in two fathom three quarters, the wind
being from the fouth. On Wednefday the 6 th, coaft-
ing by the land, at ten o’clock in the evening it fell
calm, and a ftrong tide flowing at that time, it carried
us, notwithflancling all our endeavours, within twenty
yards of the fhore, which was crowded by the na-
tives, flourifhing their weapons, exulting at our dan-
gers, and expecting us for their prey: but at the in-
ftant when our prefervation appeared hopelefs, a gentle
breeze began from the fhore, and the current of an eddy
at the fame time, turning the head of our fliip from the
land, we happily efcaped from the dangers with which
we had been threatened. The wind having frdlt-
ened about eleven o’clock the fame night, wc t'h uck
violently


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 9 i
violently againft a funken rock, but happily fell off
without any conliderable damage. In the day time
we had obferved feveral breakings in the water near
this place, but concluded them to have been occalioned
by the refpiration of a grampus which had feen a
little before.
From the 7th we continued failing along the coaft T''*
/ /j
orth-wellerly until the 2 cth, when we difcovered the
north-wellerly until the 25th, when we difcovered the
Illand of Three Kings : in this interval we had expe- i S/, sf r
rienced a conftant fucceffion of violent gales which
greatly damaged our fails and rigging, and at a time
when our canvafs, and even twine were nearly ex-
pended.
Sunday the 31ft of December at noon, we faw JO. 3/.
Tafman’s North Cape, bearing N. N. E. and diflant
four leagues and a half: having palled this cape,
which is the mod northern extremity of New Zealand,
we altered our courfe to the fouthward, failing along
the oppofite, or eafl-fide, towards Murderers Bay, where
we propofed to fupply ourfelves with wood and wa- 7
/) 4 /n ™
ter. On Friday the 12th of January, 1760, being in *
latitude 38° '\o , we difcovered a remarkable peak. a
nearly equal in hcigth to that of Teneriffe, which was '
N 2
covered


9 2 A JOURNAL OF A
covered at its Summit with fnow. On Monday -the
15 th in the morning we discovered a bay, about ele-
ven leagues to the S. S. W. and Sailed towaids it 5 Lut
a little after, being two miles from the Shore, we weie
nearly driven upon a ledge of Sunken rocks, which
extend about a mile and an half from the land : but
it being almoft calm we hoifted out our boats, and
towed the Ship without, danger. We then Sent the pin-
nace to examine a Small cove before us, but Soon after
recalled her on feeing the natives launch and arm
their canoes. In failing towards the bay, we obferved
an Indian town, where the inhabitants, by waving their
hands almoft inceSSantly, Seemed to invite us to land.
In palling the point of the bay we Saw an armed cen-
tinel on -duty, who was twice afterwards relieved.
About noon we anchored, and were Soon after vifited
by many of the natives in their canoes ; but none of
them would venture on board, except an old man, who
was apparently of Some diftineftion among them ; but
in attempting to climb up the Ships Side, he was Se-
veral times forcibly with-held by his countrymen. At
length, however, he came on board, and Tobia join-
ing nofes with him according to the cuftom of New
Zealand, their apprehensions were thereby removed,
and beginning a loud laugh they immediately came


VOY AG E ROUND THE WORLD. 93
up the fide without the lead conftraint of timidity.
As we paffed the town an old Indian, in a fingular
kind of habit, came down to the water-fide, attended
by feveral of his countrymen, and there performed
fome myflerious rites, with a matt and feathers, &c.
Tuefday the i 6th, as we prepared to careen our
fliip, feveral Indians in canoes came along fide with
fifh for fale, which they offered to the deputy-purfer;
but on his giving them the ftipulated price, they fud-
denly withdrew their fi(h, and would have killed him
with their hepatoos, had he not precipitately efcaped.
This infidious attempt being reprefented to captain
Cooke, he feized a fowling-piece, ready loaded with
duck {hot, and fired at the aggrefifor, who being al-
mofl directly under him, received the charge in his
knee, which was thereby fhattercd in pieces, a few
fcattering fliot likewife paffed through his great toe.
His wounds producing a plentiful hemorrhage, he
bathed them in fait water, and the pain being acute,
he angrily threw the fifli which he had fold, and for
which he had been paid, into the fea. The Indians
who were in the other canoes, did not appear furprlzed
either at the report of the gun or the wounds it had
made, though they all paddled round and examined
them:


94 A JOURNAL OF A
/*/*,*£s<'/****& them: nor did the wounded Indian retire, but wrap.
ping himfelf up in mats he continued about the fhip
feveral hours. A little before this tranfa&ion, two of
** thefe Indians being prevented from coming on board
by the mailer, who thought there were more on the
deck than could be prudently admitted, they imme-
diately drew their fpears to affault him, and force ad-
mittance, and nothing but a&ual violence could drive
them back to their canoes.
The fame afternoon the captain, with feveral gen-
tlemen, went in the pinnace to the other fide of the
Bay, where they met feveral Indians, who were em-
ployed in fifliing. They had feveral bafkets in their
canoes, which we examined ; and, to our great fur-
prize, found in them feveral limbs, and other parts of
human bodies, which had been roafted, and of which
k was evident they had lately eaten by the marks of
their teeth, which we difeovered in the flelh, and which
appeared to have been recently gnawed and torn. We
had been before allured, that the inhabitants of New
Zealand were cannibals from their own concurrent tef-
timonies in many different places, but had never occu-
lar demonftration of the facT until this time.
When


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 95
When we enquired of thefe people, how this human
fiefh came into their poffeflion, they told us that five or
fix days before a canoe, containing ten men, with two
women, had been driven into their bay from a differ-
ent diftridt, and that they had attacked and kill them
all, excepting one woman, who, in attempting to
fwim, had been drowned ; and that their bodies were
afterwards divided among them, of which the fiefh we
had feen was a part. Perhaps they thought, like a ce-
lebrated philofopher, that it was as well to feed on the
bodies of their enemies, -(for by their own accounts they
cat no other) as to leave them to be devoured by crows.
It is however certain they had no belief of any turpi-
tude in this pradtice, becaufe they were not afftamed
of it; but, on the contrary, when we took up an arm for
examination, they imagined us to be defirous of the
fame kind of food, and with great good nature pro*
mifed that they would the next day fpare a human
head ready roafied, if we would come or fend to fetch
it. Some gentlemen, who never left their own homes,
have ventured, on the firength of fpeculative reafoning,
to queftion the veracity of thofe travellers who have
publifhed accounts of cannibals in Africa and America ;
treating as falfehoods every relation, which, from their
ignorance of human nature, appears to them improba-
ble :
/> Cf ? -)


96 A JOURNAL OP A
X** /'a. .-* ble: but let them not indulge the fame freedom on
this occafion; the fa6t will be too well attefted to be
rendered doubtful by their viflonary impertinent ob-
jecflions.
While we were converflng with our cannibals, we
obferved fomething on fliore roafling after the manner
pradifed by the inhabitants of George’s Ifland, which
they told us was a young dog ; but fufpefting it to be
human flefli, we were going to open the oven, when
we faw the hair and entrails of a dog, which Satisfied
us concerning the truth of their account.
Wednefday, having finifhed careening our ihip, we
began to wood and water; but in going to that part of
the bay where we had difcovered the baikets of hu-
man flefli, we found the body of a woman floating on
the water, which we fuppofed to be the fame that had
been drowned in attempting to efcape by fwimming,
as before related; but flie was foon after claimed by
an Indian, who told us flie was his flfler, and having
died had been funk in the fea, according to the cuflom
of their tribe ; a cuflom which, however, is peculiar to
the inhabitants of this bay.


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 97
ln this part of New Zealand we faw many towns,
V . v '
whofe inhabitants had either fled or been exterminated ;
fome of them appeared to have been deferted or unin-
habited four or five years, being overgrown with
fhrubs and high grafs. On a fmall ifland, lying S. E.
from the place where we anchored, was one of thefe
deferted towns, moll; agreeably fituated, and confiding
of about eighteen houfes, placed in a circular form;
it was furrounded and defended by a wall curioufly
conftru&ed, by driving two rows of long flakes or fpars
into the ground, ac convenient diftances, and afterwards
filling the intermediate fpace with what we called
broom-fluff, being a fmall kind of brufh, made into
bundles like faggots, and placed on end, in double
rows, fupported by others lying parallel with the
ground : in this manner the wall is raifed fix or feven
feet in height, and, notwithftanding the fimplicity of
its flru&ure, it is not eafily broken or deftroyed, efpe-
cially when guarded by men, who fight not only to pre-
ferve freedom and property, but their own bodies from
being cruelly butchered and eaten.
At a little diflance from this town we faw the remains
of a more regular fortification, fituated on a high hill,
near a pleafant bay. The hill itfelf was almoft inaccef-
fible,


A*; ZL/~s> 98
A JOURNAL OF A
0 an( l 011 ts tO P was a level flat, large enough for
a town, which was furrounded by a fence made from
fpars two feet in circumference, drove deep into the
earth, and about twenty feet in height: thefe were
placed in contact with each other, and without them
was a ditch about ten feet in breadth : within the fence
were feveral large refervoirs for water, and ftages ad<-
joining to the fpars for fupporting thofe who were
placed to guard the town, which appeared to have
been fpacious enough to contain two or three hundred
houfes, though none were then remaining. The Tides
of the hill in every part were To deep, that nobody
could afeend them, except by crawling, on his hands
and knees.
At the bottom of this hill we observed the ruins of
a town, which had belonged to, the proprietors of this
caftle, and which was the place of their common refi-
dence for, befides their town, the natives have always
a feparate fort or ftrong hold, which ferves them for a
place of retreat, and* a magazine for fecuring their
dried fifh, fern root, and other provifions and, to>
prevent its being taken by furprize, they always leave
a fuCticient number of armed men therein, and thither
they all retreat upon an alarm ; always keeping in
readinefg


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 99
readinefs a fufncient quantity of water in refervoirs, x
and regular piles of fpears and ftones difperfed along
the ftage adjoining to the fence; the height of thefe
ftages being fitted to afford thofe on guard fufficient
fheltci behind the fence, and fo much elevation, as not
to be impeded by it in flinging their flones or ufing
their fpears, &c.
Some of thefe cattles, which have not the advan-
tages of an elevated fituation, to fupply thofe de-
feats are fui rounded by two or three wide ditches, with
a diaw-bridge, which, though fimple in its ftrudfure,
is capable of anfwering every purpofe: and within
thefe ditches is a fence, made from fpars fixed in the
earth after the manner of that which was lafl deferibed,
but with this difference, that they incline inwardly ; a
circumftance which we thought favourable to the be-
fiegers ; but, on communicating this opinion to one of
their chiefs, he aflured us of the contrary ; obferving,
that if the fpars fhould be pointed or inclined outward-
ly towards the enemy, that inclination would afford
the affailants an opportunity of flickering themfelves
under their points, from which it might be impofllble
to diflodge them ; and that they would there be able to
dig fubterraneous paffages into the caffle. The fame
O 2 chief


A /L.O i©o A JOURNAL OF A
JT # ■ r
chief told us that thefe ftrong holds were never taken,
unlefs by furprize ; or when the enemy, being mailers
of the field, converted the fiege into a blockade, and de-
priving them of all external fubfiltence, occafioned a
famine withinj, and when this happens, the befieged,.
having no hope of foreign aid, all their friends and
countrymen being fhut up in the fame callle, are com-
pelled either to perifh with hunger, or fally out and
meet the fpears of their enemies. And hence a deci-
five victory or conquell occalions the entire depopula-
tion of that diftrid, which was inhabited by the vant
quiflied ; all thofe who are killed or taken prifoners be-
ing devoured by their enemies. I would however
hope, for the honour of mankind, that this favage
pradice has been produced among them only from the
grofTeli depravation of human nature ; for in its
mitive Hate I fhould be forry to believe it would feel no
repugnance at a meal, which brutes will not make oni
the bodies of their own fpecies.
Having procured a fufficient fupply of wood and
water, on the 6th of February, 1770, the wind being
northerly, we left Charlotte Sound, failing along the
coaft to the eaflward: but it falling calm towards
evening, we anchored about three quarters of a mile
7 from


from the Hippa in ten fathoms of water, and fent our
boats a-ffliing. The next morning we made fail, but
the tide foon after carried us rapidly towards a duller
of rocks, projecting from an llland at a Imall diftancc,
and the wind failing, our lituation became jufhy
alarming. At this time one of the principal officers
propofed endeavouring to crofs the tide, and gain a
paffage between two illands ; and this gentleman’s fta-
tion made his propofal, though impracticable, of fo
much importance at this critical feafon, that the cap-
tain, who w T as about to give orders of a different kind,
became irrefolute 5 and during the difpute which this
contrariety of opinion occafioned, we were carried fo
near the rocks that our prefervation appeared almoft
impoffible ; and at this critical juncture we could only
let go our beft bower, which we inftantly did, with
all fail Handing, in feventy-five fathom; and after
veering out a hundred and lixty fathoms of cable,
we found the (hip brought up by her anchor, to our
great joy. But had this expedient failed, fhe mull
have been irrecoverably loft, and all her crew left ei-
ther to build a veffel to tranfport themfelves to the
Eaft-Indies ; or, if that fliould be impracticable, to pafs
their lives in New Zealand, if they fliould be able to
defend themfelves from the jaws of cannibals.
VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 101


A PT* ®2r
It ought to be remarked, that Tafman, when he
vifited Murderers Bay, imagined that there mull be a
fit eight running through the country to the oppofite
flrore; and this he did from obferving that the flood-
tide ran in flrong from S. E. and therefore while ly-
ing in Charlotte Sound, we had afcended the top of a
neighbouring mountain, to fee if we could obferve the
appearance of a ftreight or paflage, which we there
difcoveied, and upon enquiring of the natives con-
cerning it, they told us it was navigable to the other
fide of the country ; and that the fouthern divifion of
New Zealand might be failed round in one of their
canoes in four days time. This information deter-
mined us to make the experiment; and accordingly
we flood toward the ftreight, which we found, and
pafted the next day, near the middle of the channel;
4 s-J? ’ thou S h the land was vifible on each fide, yet, to
/ prevent the poflibility of a deception, after pafling the
ftreight, we flood to the northward until we made
, :J . Cape Turnagain, which we did on Friday noon : and
having thus determined the reality of the ftreight,
we alteied our courfe to the fouthward, refolving to
fail round the other divifion of New Zealand. We
continued our courfe, expecting to find the land incline
to the weftward, but were difappointed in our expec-
tarion:


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 103
tation : indeed we obferved fomething like the appear-
ance of a paffage fome leagues fouth from the (freights,
but the whole company were divided in opinion about
the matter; though from the reports of the Indians,
it is not improbable that there was a paffage naviga-'
ble for their canoes, if not for veffels of burthen. We
perfifted in our defign of difcovering whether the
fouthern divifion of New Zealand was an ifland or-
continent, but were frequently oppofed in our courfe
by heavy winds from the fouth, in one of which, on
the 26th of February, our forefail was irreparably-
torn in pieces, and our main topfail divided afunder;
and the gale continuing violent for feveral days after
compelled us to lie- to. The tempeftuous feafon
vancing faff; and the air being very cold, we began
to defpair of a fouthern paffage, having been more
than a month employed on a difcovery which might
have been completed with favourable winds in a few /
days.
Oil the 9th of March, at four in the morning, af-
ter having complained of the want of wind all night,
we were furprifed to find a ledge of rocks about half
a mile forwards, and extending a*crofs both our bows.
We had then abundant reafon to rejoice at the provi*
dential
A y* /? n
/ t S /X' £ e '(
Xs.if*".
111 r>


1 t- r 104
A JOURNAL OF A
dential calm the preceding night, as a few minutes
favourable wind would have occafioned our certain de-
ftru&ion. Thefe rocks lie S. E. from the fouthern
extreme of New Zealand, and at the diftance of twen-
ty miles.
On the 10th we doubled the Southern Cape in la-^
f titude 47 0 39 S. and longitude 19 1 35 "W* an d again
67' 3 # flood to the northward on the weft-fide, with a fa-
-7 ' vourablc wind; intending to return to Charlotte Sound,
and replenifh our ftores of wood and water, if no con-
venient place was difeovered nearer. The land on this
part of the coaft afforded a mod dreary profpetf, and
confided of very high mountains covered with fnow,
and falling by the fteepeft defeent immediately into the
fea, without the fmalleft beach or landing-place. Nor
could we any where difeover the fmalleft appearance
of a human inhabitant.
jl On Monday the 26th of March, in latitude 4° 3 2 >
/ ' being thirty-three miles north from Charlotte Sound, we
flood into a deep bay or found, having illands on both
fides, and thirty-fix fathom of water at one mile dis-
tance from fliore ; and fleering in S. by W. we anchor-
ed in Admiralty Bay on the left fide in eleven fathom
muddy


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 105
muddy ground ; and mooring with the ftream-anchor,
began to fupply our flock of wood and water. We found
this place intirely uninhabited, and but badly flickered
from eafterly winds. But it afforded plenty of wood and
water, as well as of fifh, of which we caught more
than fufficient for our confumption with hooks. We
difcovered an old houfe by the fide of a mountain, at a
little diflance from the bay, and the wreck of an old
canoe lying in a cove contiguous to it. We had now
patted near fix months on the coafl of New Zealand,
had furveyed it on every-fide, and, which was not be-
fore known, had difcovered it to be an ifland near three
hundred leagues in length, and inhabited by canni-
bals, habituated to the carnage of war from infancy,
and of all mankind the mofl fearlcfs and infenfible of
dangers.
It deferves to be remarked, that the people of New
Zealand fpoke the language of Otahitee with but very
little difference, not fo much as is found between many
counties in England j a circumflance of the mofl ex-
traordinary kind, and which mull neceflarily lead us
to conclude, that one of thefe places was originally
peopled from the other, though they are at near two
thoufand miles diftance $ and nothing but the ocean in-


I O 6
A JOURNAL OF A
tervenes, which we fhould hardly believe they could
navigate fo far in canoes, the only veflels that they ap-
pear to have ever poflefled ; for as there is no natural
relation between founds and the ideas they are made
to convey by fpeaking; fo it muft be evident, that nei-
ther the fuggeftions of reafon or of nature, would ever
lead two diftindt, feparate people, having no commu-
nication with each other, to affix the fame meaning to
the fame words, and employ them as the medium of
*
communication. It muft, therefore, be inferred, that
the inhabitants of one of thefe iflands originally migra-
ted from the other, though, upon comparing the man-
ners, drefs, arms, &c. of the people of Otahitee with
thofe of New Zealand, as far as they have fallen under
our obfervation, we ffiall find them difagree in feveral
important particulars, but in feveral others they have
an apparent analogy.
The New Zealanders not only negle<st circumcifton,
but, on the contrary, conhder the prepuce as fo necef-
fary, that they commonly tie its forwards with a liga-
ture, to cover the glans penis, and preferve its fenfibi-
lity, as they themfelves alledge. They mark their bo-
dies in fpiral circles, by introducing blue paint under
the fkin after it has been pun&ured according to the
manner


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 107
manner of Otahitee ; they have likewife beards and
long hair, which they tie at the top of the head, like
the natives of Otahitee. They differ, however, in com-
pletion, being much browner than thofe of George’s
Ifland, though both feem to agree in their propenfities
to knavery; but in martial courage the New Zealan-
ders are much fuperior; and indeed it is impoflible to
fee, without aflonifhment, the degree of madnefs to
which they will elevate themfelves even in their ha-
rangues, that are preparatory to a feigned battle.
Their cloaths are made from the fibres of a fpecies of
filk giafs, wove by knotting or tying the woof together
in lines, commonly about a quarter of an inch dif-
tant f and are curioufly embroidered at the corners and
edges with black and brown figures, and fringed with
dogs hair ; and when worn are tied over the fhoulders
with firings, and depend below the loins. They like-
wife wear belts made from a kind of flrong grafs braid-
ed together.
Like the people of George’s Ifland, they never boil
their meat, but always bake it in fubterraneous ovens.
Their weapons are the Patty Petow, which is made
either of wood, bone, or done, and confifls of a handle
P 2 joined


A JOURNAL O F A
joined to a broad flat two edged blade. The battle axe,
which is made from a fpecies of very hard, heavy wood,
and has a very long handle. They have likewife wooden
fpears, with hair taffels near their points, which are
fometimes wood, and at others the fpear of the fting ray-
fifh. It is remarkable, however, that, notwithftand-
ing the natives of Otahitee ufe bows and arrows with
great dexterity, thofe of New Zealand were wholly un-
acquainted with them, until we firft taught them their
ufe : a circumftance which renders it probable that the
migration was from New Zealand to George’s Ifland,
and that the inhabitants of the latter difeovered the ufe
of bows by fome accident, after their feparation; as it
cannot be fuppofed the New Zealanders would have loft
fo beneficial an acquifition, if they had ever been ac-
quainted with it. Their trumpets are near two feet in
length, having a large broad flat belly or concavity,,
with a large hole about the middle y thefe produce a
fhrill hoarfe found. They commonly wear a fmall
wooden whiftle tied about the neck, which is open at
both ends, and has two other perforations or holes.
Their combs are made from bone or wood, and have very
long coarfe teeth. Many of them wear an image carved
from a greenifh {lone, made into an odd half human fi-
gure, which is tied about the neck. They likewife wear
final!




/? O
i o 8
A JOURNAL O F A
joined to a broad flat two edged blade. The battle axe,
which is made from a fpecies of very hard, heavy wood,
and has a very long handle. They have likewife wooden
fpears, with hair taflels near their points, which are
fometimes wood, and at others the fpear of the fling ray-
fi(h. It is remarkable, however, that, notwithftand-
ing the natives of Otahitee ufe bows and arrows
great dexter itv. ~ c
' (
*
* l **
xic miacile ; thefe produce a
fhrill hoarfe found. They commonly wear a fmall
wooden whittle tied about the neck, which is open at
both ends, and has two other perforations or holes.
* . >
Their combs are made from bone or wood, and have very
long coarfe teeth. Many or them wear an image carved
from a greenifh ttone, made into an odd half human fi-
gure, which is tied about the neck. They likewife wear
fmall


/ , Q
i s\* s( < s*
VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 109
fmall images of wood or Hone, and fometimes the teeth
of a deceafed relation, which depend from their ears.
Their axes and fifh-hooks are like thofe of Otahitee.
On the 31ft of March we left Admiralty Bay, and S>/-
failed fouth-weflerly, towards New Holland, taking
our departure from a point which we named Cape
Farewell. By inftructions, opened here, we were di-
rected to return home by Cape Hormor, and to flop at
the Eaft Indies, if neceffary.
April the i Bth, towards the evening, judging our-
felves near the land, we handed topfails ; and at night
lying-to we founded with one hundred and thirty fa-
thom of line, but found no ground. The next morn-
ing we made fail, and an hour after difcovered the
coaft of New Holland, rifing very high between N. E.
by N. and W. by S. and diftant eight leagues, being in
latitude 37 ° Jo' S. and longitude 31" oo' W. from
Cape Farewell. We then fleered N. N. E. along fhore,
at the diftance of four leagues. Friday the 20th, m
the morning, we faw the appearance of an liland at
N N. W. On Saturday we faw a fmoke on ihore, and
afterwards a high hill, which we named Cape Drome-
dary from its likenefs to the back of that animal.
7 ’ This
,rr
M $7S<rA
> r / si.


no A JOURNAL OF A
This cape is in latitude 36° 21' S. and longitude i S o°
2 8' E. variation 10“ 42' Eaft. In the afternoon we faw
two fmall iflands, bearing W. by S. diftant two leagues.
On Sunday we faw feveral of the natives kindling
fires along the Ihore; the land extending a little to the
eaftward of north, we fleered along the coaft northward-
ly, intending to anchor in the firft bay. Friday after-
noon we endeavoured to land with our boat, but found
the furf running too high. Saturday morning, the 28th,
we difcovered a bay at N. by E. and flood towards it,
fending the pinnace forwards to found ; and at half
after one in the afternoon we anchored in fix fathom
and a half, fandy ground. But on attempting to land
in our boats, a few of the natives advanced towards the
Ihore, and two of them, armed with fhields and fpears,
refolurely oppofed our difembarkation, until being
wounded by our fhot, and unfupported by any of their
countrymen, they retreated flowly to their houfes with-
in the bufhes, but conflantly faced us the whole way.
This they did to gain time for their wives to remove
themfelves and children, with their domeflic and culi-
nary utenfils farther into the woods, and when this
was done they haflily retreated themfelves.
Their


i i i
Their huts were wretchedly built, and but little
better than thofe belonging to the inhabitants of Terra
del Fuego, as they confided of nothing more than
pieces of the bark of trees loofely fpread over a few
crofs fpars, about four feet above the ground. The
inhabitants were intirely naked and black, but they
differed from the negroes of Africa in having long
flrait hair inflead of wool on their heads. On their
breads we obferved rude figures of men, darts, Sec.
done with a kind of white paint; which was alfo
daubed irregularly on other parts of their bodies.
Their arms or weapons, which afterwards fell into our
pofleflion, were fpears made of a kind of light wood,
and acutely pointed with bones barbed on different
fides, to render their wounds more deleterious: in thefe
fpears we fometimes difeovered junctures, united by a
kind of refinous cement. They had other kinds of
fpears for flriking fifh, which were forked at the
points.
Their fhields were oval, about three feet in length,
and one in breadth, being concave within, and pro-
vided with handles. In fome of them we obferved
fmall holes or apertures, defigned to afford a profpeft
of the movements of their enemies when the fhield is
employed


,12 A JOURNAL OF A
employed for guarding the head. They have likewife
a kind of fwords, made from a very folid compatf:
hard fpecies of wood. In retiring to the woods they
left behind two or three canoes of a very fimple flruc-
ture, being made from the bark enclofing one fide or
half of the trunk of a tree, which they had tied to-
gether at each end by a kind of flexible withy twig,
and fpread or feparated in the middle, by pieces of wood
placed acrofs from fide to fide : thefe canoes were about
ten feet in length, and their paddles were about two
feet long, and at the blade three inches broad : one
of them being held in each hand, they pull them-
felves forward with great celerity. But notwithfland-
ing the little value of thefe canoes, they were unwil-
ling to lofe them, and returned foon after our depar-
ture, and watching an opportunity, conveyed them
away to a different place.
The natives apparently fubfift chiefly on fifh, of which
there is great plenty, efpecially of the fling ray-fifh,
weighing between two and three hundred pounds ;
and as they commonly fwim in fhallow water, they
are eafily taken: of thefe and other kinds we caught
great quantities.
The


i i 3
The foil of New Holland we found to be rocky and
fandy in many places, but at this bay the adjacent
country appeared level, moderately elevated, and well
covered with trees, having but few fhrubs intermixed
to obftrudl the profpetT. On the furface of the earth
we obferved feveral kinds of grafs growing plentifully,
and in fome places luxuriantly. Among the trees wc
could diflinguifh but five kinds, or rather fpecies; of
which the moft common is that yielding the fanguis
draconis, or dragon’s blood : the next is the etoe tree
of Otahitee; the cabbage-tree, and two others, which
we cut for fire-wood.
We obferved the dung of a quadruped, probably of
the fame fpecies with thofe we afterwards killed at
Endeavour River. Our greyhound likewife purfued a
fmall animal, but Raked himfelf in the chace without
overtaking it. Crows and cockatoos we obferved in
great numbers ; together with a very beautiful bird
of the lory kind, which we called loryquet. Captain
Cooke, with a party, made an incurfion into the coun-
try, hoping for an opportunity of taking fome of the
natives, intending to cloath and make them prefents,
and afterwards fend them back to their friends ; ex-
pecting that fuch a proof of our pacific intentions
would


11 4
would be fufficient to engage them to pay us a vifit,
and enter into fome commerce and traffic; but they
were not fortunate enough to difcover any of them 5
however, they left fome cloaths, combs, garters, look*
ing-glafles, knives, &c. in an empty hut which had
been lately deferted: but thefe prefents were never
carried away during our continuance in this part of
the country, though we had reafon to believe the
place had been vifited feveral times after by the
natives*
A few days after two officers with a party of men
went in a boat to the head of the bay to fiffi, where
they found feveral of the natives, who fingled out as
many men from among themfelves as they had
counted in the boat, and thefe came down to the
water’s edge (their countrymen throwing down their
arms and retiring a good diftance) and there they
challenged us to battle; but this being refufed, they
fele&ed two only, out of their number, and chal-
lenged as many of us to fight them, the others re-
tiring to avoid any fufpicion of treachery : but this of-
fer being likewife rejected, they all retired ; but foon
-after feveral others came to the fhore, and an officer
fired a mufket loaded with a ball into a tree at fome
2 diflance,


diflance, that he might let them fee how far it would
carry j and being much pleafed at the fight, they de-
fied him, by figns, to let them fee another difeharge,
which he did, and they foon after retired apparently
well pleafed. The officers then determining to return
by land through the woods, difpatched the boat for-
wards, but they had not proceeded above two miles
on their way, before they were overtaken by two and
twenty of the natives, all armed, who followed clofe
at their heels, but flopped whenever the officers faced
them, and retired if they* began to advance towards
-them, but again followed them when they proceeded
on their way to the place where the boat had been di-
rected to wait : in this manner they continued their
return, until they came near the place where a part
of our crew was employed in cutting wood, when
they were joined by feveral other gentlemen who had
been {hooting, and one of them propofed a fcheme to
entrap fome of the Indians, which had near proved fa-
tal. The defign was to advance as near to the na-
tives as they would permit, without retiring ; and then
feigning a fright, to turn fuddenly and run from
them, expe&ing in this manner to decoy them in a
purfuit which might afford the working parties an
opportunity of furrounding and taking fomc of them:
2 but


11 6
A JOURNAL O.F A
but whether the Indians fufpeefled the artifice or not,
the gentlemen had not ran above twelve yards, after
their pretended fright, before the natives, giving loud
flirieks, advanced hafiily, and threw their fpears at them
with gieat force. One of the gentlemen who was near-
eft, hearing their cry, fuddenly turned his head, and
feeing the fpears in their flight, had fcarce fufficient
time to fave himfelf behind a tree, though but at a few
feet diftance: one of the fpears entered the ground
which he had quitted, and another pierced deep into
the tree behind which he had flickered himfelf. Many
others fell in different places, one flicking faft in the
branch of a tree above the head of a gentleman who
had ran the fartheft from them, and who was then at
more than fifty yards difiance; another paffed between
his legs into the ground. After this attack, they all
precipitately retired to the woods; and we, collecting
their fpears, returned with them to our fliip. And
having procured a fufficient fupply of wood and water,
on Sunday the 6th of Augufl, in the morning, we
failed from the bay, which we named Sting-ray Bay,
from the great quantity of thole fifli which ft contained!
It is in latitude 34 00, and longitude 209° \y
From thence we failed north eafterly along the coaft a
few leagues from the fliore, that we might be able to
furvey


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD. 117
furvey the land, and occafionally procure fupplies of
wood and water, or endeavour to eflablifh a traffic
with the natives ; as we could not expedt to find a paf-
fage into the Indian fea, before we fhould arrive within
nine or ten degrees of latitude from the equator. After
palling within feveral fmall iflands on the i 6th of
May, being in latitude 27 0 46" S. and longitude 2 0 1 S',
E. from Sting ray Bay, we difcovered breakers on the
larboard bow, extending to the eaftward j and imme-
diately after we changed our courfe farther from
fhore, until eight o’clock in the evening, when we
hove to in fixty-feven fathom of water. In the morn-
ing we again faw breakers on the larboard bow; and
at feven o’clock in the evening faw another ledge of
breakers at N. W. by W. and founded in one
hundred and thirty-five fathom. We continued
Handing to the northward until the 20th, when the land
appeared as terminating in a point at N. W. and fleer-
ing towards it, we faw a ledge of breakers extending
feveral miles ; we had then fixteen fathom of water, but
it gradually diminiffied to feven and a half, and after-
wards encreafed to 1 1 fathom, being then in latitude
24 0 26" S. On the 21ft we paffed over the end of a
ffioal, and obferved the land extend wefterly. The night
being calm, we found a current fetting S. W. one knot
and


and a half per hour. The next evening, being calm,
we anchored in eight fathom, and found, that the tide
did not rife or fall above two feet. Coafting along
IhOre the 23d, we opened a large bay, and at night an-
chored in it in five fathom. This was in latitude 24®
oo' S. A ledge of breakers extends from its northen
extremity or point. The 24th we made fail, coafting
along fhore ; being frequently furrounded with fhoals
and linall iflands. On the 25 th we caught feveral fifh
of the fnapper kind. The 26 th we anchored in thirteen
fathom water, and'found the tide fall feven feet, ebbing
to the eaftward. The next morning we made fail, and
pafled between a great many iflands, as we did on the
27 th, keeping our boats forwards to found. On the
2 9th we anchored in a bay in latitude 22 0 6' S. Here
we continued until the 31ft, when we failed to the
N. W. having a chain of iflands, rocks and fhoals on
our right, the branches of trees on the iflands fre-
quently extending acrofs almoit to the main land.
On the i oth of June we anchored in a bay in lat.
i6° i o S. and the next morning continued our courfe
north-wefterly : at nine we pafled over a bed of rocks,
fhoaling our water from twenty-one to eight fathom;
and foon after the {hip {truck on the rocks, and con-
tinued


tinued fad upon them. We then handed our fails
with the utmod hade, and hoifled out our boars, when
after founding round the fhip, we found her lying on
a reef of rocks running to the N. W. We then flruck
our yards and top mads, and carried an anchor to the
fouthward, and the fhip driking very hard, we car-
ried another to the S. W. The next morning all our
iron and done ballad, firewood, fpare dores, and fix
of our great guns were thrown overboard, together
with all our water, and many of our water*cafks:
and finding the fhip continue to leak very fad, we
cut off the heels of our fpare topmads, that the fore-
mad pumps might be worked. At noon the fhip in-
clined greatly to the darboard fide, and we therefore
carried the fmall bower to the wedward, lafhed blocks
to both bower cables, reeved hawzers, and hove tort
upon ail five anchors. At four it was low water, and
the fhip in feveral places was found lying dry Upon
the rocks; though we obferved the whole rife of the
tide did not exceed four feet. At half pad nine the fhip
righted, and at ten we hove her adoat, and letting go
the dream cable and fmall bower, (which were both
lod) we brought the bed bower and coading anchors
forward. And notwithdanding we had all the time
kept our pumps condantly employed, the water in the
fhip


fhip continually increafed, and wc expected either to
fink at our anchors, or be compelled to warp ourfelves
again upon the rocks, unlefs a breeze fhould fpring
up and enable us to reach the fhore, where we might
fave fo much of the wreck as would enable us to
build a fmall bark to convey ourfelves to fome Eu-
ropean fettlement in the Eaft-Indies, But when fur-
rounded with thefe unfavourable profpecfls, we happily
found means to fother our fliip in a manner which fo
far flopped her leaks, that we were able to keep them
under with a Angle pump; and a favourable wind
foon after ariflng, we failed in towards the main land,
fending our boats forward in fearch of a harbour,
which they fortunately difcovered at N. W. two or three
leagues diftant; and on the 14th at nine in the morn-
ing we anchored a little without it; finding the paf-
fage fo narrow, that it would be neceflary to lay buoys
along the channel for our direction. But about this
time, the wind which had happily ceafed while we lay
on the rocks, began to blow fo hard that we were un-
able to warp in until the 1 Bth, when, notwithftand-
♦
ing our precaution, we grounded twice in the paf
fage. At length, however, we conveyed the Blip to
the fide of a fleep bank on the north fide of a river ;
and having there fecured her, we erecfled tents on
i fhore,


t 21
fhore to receive the Tick, together with our provifions,
and immediately began to unload, that we might lay
the fhip on the bank, and there examine and repair
her leaks; this we effected by the 22d, and upon
examination found four of her planks cut through by
the rocks, and a large piece of a rock flicking fall in
a hole through the bottom, which had in a great mea-
sure excluded the water, and thereby faved us from
linking ; feveral more of her Itreaks were much da-
maged, and a confiderable part of her fheathing and
falfe keel beaten off. Having fufficiently repaired the
fhip, we lalhed many fpars and calks under her bot-
tom, that we might heave her afloat, but found it ne-
CelTary to wait feveral days until the fpring tides
fhould come to our alfillance; and in the mean tim£
we fent the boats to fearch for another palfage, which
they found, and returned on the 3d of July, and on
the 4th, the fhip being afloar, was warped to a bank
on the fouth fide of the river, that we might there
examine her allern, but finding fhe had fuffered no
confiderable damage in that part, we returned to our
former fituation, where we began to replace our rig-
ging, and take our ftores on board; and the mailer
R going


going again in fearch of a paflage, faw a great num-
ber of tortoifes, of which he caught three, each weight-
ing three hundred pounds.
July the 18th we had nearly refitted for fea \ and
the natives of the country, after various expedients had
been employed to convince them of our benevolent in-
tentions, now began to vifit us: we found them very-
low of fiature, commonly not more than five feet in
height, fmall and fiender in fhape, but very active.
Many of them had flat nofes, thick lips, and bandy
legs, like the negroes of Guinea. They were ignorant,
poor, and deflitute, not only of the conveniences, but
of many of the neeeflaries of life. They were ftran-
, gers to bread, and to every thing which can be confi-
dered as a fubflitute for it; nor would they eat of it
when we gave it to them. They were naked and flo-
venly, fubfifting moftly on filh, which they roaft on
wooden fpits ftuck into the earth before a fire. We
faw none of their women j but the men had each a
/
hole made through the feptum nafi, or divifion of the
noftrils, in which a bone five or fix inches in length
was inferted, and worn as an ornament; and however
3 u di-


ludicrous it might appear, it is but juft to obferve, tha c
many of our European ornaments have no more rela-
tion to natural fitnefs or utility, than this unexpenfivc
one which the poor ignorant New Hollanders have in-
vented. Befides the bones in their nofes, they wear
others of equal length in their ears ; which though not
fo brilliant as the ornaments that depend from the ears
of the fair fex in civilized countries, may be as ufeful
and proper.
On the i 9th of June feveral of the natives went to
the place where our tents had flood, but from which
every thing was removed, except a markee, and a part
of our ftores, and taking each a brand of fire, placed
them in the grafs, and employed every expedient to
kindle and fpread the flame on every fide; and fo fuc-
cefsful were they in this attempt, that we with great
difficulty faved our fifhing-nets and linen, which were
fpread on the ground, from this fudden conflagration.
Captain Cooke wounded feveral of them while execut-
ing this mifchievous plan, upon which they retired to
the woods, but a few hours after they returned peace-
ably.
R 2


124 A JOURNAL OF A
We continued waiting, either for a favourably wind
or a calm, until the 4th of Augufl, when we warped
out of the river, which we named Endeavour River,
and which is in latitude iy°2 6 S. and longitude 216 02
W. from thence failing into the offing, we came to an
anchor in fifteen fathom ; and the wind blowing freffi
from S. E. we continued here until the 6th, when at
two o’clock P. M. we made fail, handing N. E. by E.
and at half pad four we faw a fmall fandy ifland on a
fhoal, at N. E. by N. diftant four miles, with breakers
forwards, and on the weather bow ; we then flood off
and on, until the boats having founded and difcovered
not more than fix feet of water on the neareft part of
the fhoal, we immediately anchored with our bed
bower, veering out the whole cable; and the wind
blowing very freffi at low water, we endeavoured to
difcover a fafe paffage from the mail head, but to no
purpofe. At feven in the evening we found the ffiip
drifting, and immediately let go another anchor, and
flruck our topmafis and yards. Here we continued
until the 1 oth, when the weather becoming moderate,
we made fail, and flood towards a paffage which the
mafter had difcovered; fleering between the ifland-
ffioals and the main land in feventeen fathom. The


next day we difcovered low land with breakers at N. W.
and came to anchor in five fathom, when the captain
went in the pinnace to examine the appearance of a paf-
fage to the eaftward, and the mafter to the fouthward,
to examine a paflage between feveral low iflands and the
main land; and on Sunday noon he returned, having
found between five and eight fathom of water in the
channel.
Monday the 13 th, at eleven o’clock, we pafled to '
the northward of two reefs- and of fix iflands, bearing
S. E. at the diftance of one mile. On the fourteenth we ■
pafled another fhoal, feven miles weft from Endeavour
River; and failing north-wefterly on the fixteenth, we
difcovered high land at W. S. W. and foon after a reef
of rocks extending from north to fouth as far as we
could fee. We then flood farther from fhore ; but it ?
falling calm at night, the next morning at four o’clock
we faw breakers clofe to the lee bow, and the flood tide
fetting us toward them ; at three quarters after five the
fliip was within the furf, and but forty yards from the '
rocks, though on founding we could find no ground. -
Soon after we difcovered a fmall opening between the
rocks, through which we endeavoured to tow the fhip;
but


but the tide, by changing foon after, fruftrated our de-
fign. On the 17 th we again refolved to attempt a paf-
fage through the opening, as the only expedient to pre-
ferve the fhip ; and accordingly towed her fhort round
W. by S. to the entrance, and from thence S. W. by W.
one-half W. two miles diflance through to the oppofite
fide, the current of the flood tide being flrong in our
favour. And at four o’clock the fame afternoon, we an-
chored in nineteen fathom of water, being in latitude 12 0
38' and longitude 14 3 0 17' E. Variation 4 0 9" E.
On the i Bth we made fail, fleering N. W. and foon
after pafTed feveral iflands and fhoals; and the fame
evening anchored in thirteen fathom. On the 19th
we failed between a large flat fhoal and the main land.
On Monday the 21ft of Augufl we pafTed feveral flats,
and obferved feveral openings in the main land, which
appeared like iflands, fome of them at a great diftance;
and at half pafl two in the afternoon, we flood towards
a paflage, which feemed to extend through the coun-
try, and the fame evening anchored about the middle
of it, at the dillance of near a mile from either fhore, in
feven fathom of water, with good ground. Immedi-
atcly


VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD, 127
ately after a party landed from the fhip, to examine
the country ; and from a fmall eminence difcovered the
Indian fea ; upon which they fired feveral vollies, and
were anfwered by a general difcharge from the fliip.
We then took pofleflion of the country, &c. in the name
of his Britannic Majefly ; and the next morning weigh-
ed anchor, and fleering S. W. by W. failed through the
Strait, which feparates New Holland from New Gui-
nea ; and which we now difcovered to be parts of the
fame continent. Having palled the flreight in latitude
io° 36' S. and longitude 141 0 44', E. we failed along
the fhores of New Guinea ; and on the 31ft of Auguft
difcovered Valeh Cape in latitude 8° 2/, S. and longi-
tude 136° s° E. The coafl in this part of the coun-
try became fo very flioal, that we found it unfafe to
approach nearer the fhore than five leagues with the
fliip. But on the 4th of September we landed with
the yawl, expe&ing to procure a fmall fupply of pro-
viflons, fruit, &c. as we had feen cocoa-nut and plain-
tain trees growing in abundance. The natives, how-
ever, affembled at our landing in great numbers, and
began to attack us with their arrows, which were very
long, and fell on every fide, though we were unable
to difcover by what machine or contrivance they were
7 impelled


impelled or thrown towards us. We likewife obferved
another inflrument of a fmgular but unknown con-
ftruclion, which they frequently employed; and which,
after feveral quick revolutions or turnings, always emit-
ted a large fmoak, though without any explofion or
other effect which we could difcover.
finding the people of New Guinea unalterably de-
termined on hoflilities, and being impatient of return*
ing to Europe, we left the coafl; and, to the great joy
of the whole company, fleered W. by S. for the Indies.
On the sth we faw a long low ifland, and another on
the 6 th. The 10 th we difcovered the fouth end of Cape
Timor, where we would gladly have flopped for
plies, but for an apprehenfion of being detained by the
Dutch Government. This determined us to continue
our courfe to the illand of Sabee, where we anchored in
a fmall bay on the 18 th. Here we found a Dutch refi-
dent or fadlor, placed to purchafe rice, &c. from the Ra-
jas. The ifland produces buffaloes, fmall fheep, poul-
try and fruit in abundance, with great quantities of
toddy, a kind of fyrup boiled from the juice of palms.
The Dutch refident promifed us a fupply of provifion;
but contriving feveral unnecefTary delays, we imagined


he expected a gratuity for aflifling us with his good
offices ; and therefore gave five guineas for a bufFalo s
which being, as we fuppofed, paid afterwards to him,
we, in a little time, were permitted to purchafe as
many of thefe animals as we chofe, for a mufquet and
bayonet each.
After a flay of two or three days at Sabee, we failed
for Batavia, where we arrived the 9th of October
At Batavia it was found necefTary to careen and re-
fit our fhip; the bottom having been fo much eaten
by worms and abraded by rocks, that its thicknefs in
many places did not exceed the eighth of an inch.
And though we had before buried but one man who
did not die from fome accidental injury or violence,
yet upon our arrival here the crew foon became un-
healthy, and our furgeon, with feveral others, died ;
among whom were Tobia and Tiato, the Indians who
had attached themfelves to us at George’s Ifland.
After a flay of near three months at Batavia, we
failed for the Cape of Good Hope ; but had fcarce
* As the courfe from Batavia to Europe is already fufficiently known, the re*-
maining part of our voyage will be very curforily described.
quitted


quitted the land before a putrid dyfentery feized the
greateft part of our crew, and raged with fuch vio-
lence that not above fix men on board were capable of
duty. Of this terrible diforder many of our officers
and feamen died, together with Mr, Green the aflro-
nomer, who being infenfible of his danger until feized
by a delirium which continued till his death, left the
minutes of his obfervations in a llate of diforder
which mull render feveral of them unintelligible.
On our arrival at the Cape, a houfe was immedi-
ately hired to receive our fick, who were landed and
provided with proper diet and affiftance; and, after pro-
curing fufficient fupplies of water and provifion, we
failed to Saint Helena, where we found his majefty’s
fhip Portland, with twelve Eaft-India fhips, all bound
for England.
We failed from St. Helena the 4th of May, in com-
pany with this fleet 5 but parted foon after, and arrived
in the Downs on the 1 sth of July, after near three years
abfence, and the lofs of near half of our company.
FINIS.


A CONCISE
Vocabulary of the Language of Otahitee,
A A Ayea
A Armpits. Ayou
Armpits. Ayoue
A baremar Palm of the hand.
Abobo Tomorrow.
Abobo-durar Two days hence. Baracee
Addie A cocoa-nut. Boar
Affarre houfe. Bopotarear
Ahou The nofe.
Ahow Cloth.
Aheok Dibbe
Ahoue A paddle. Dehi
Aite Cocoa-nut Jkin.
Aiper No.
Amotear The cheek. Ea
An oho &V down. Earere
Apeto The navel\ Earrero
Arourei Hair. Eata
Ara The forehead. Enou
Aree Enopo
Arere Prefently. Erepo
Ataurremar Back of the hand. Ete.
Alvar back. Ettie
Attah Laughing . Etar
Attumata Eyebrows. Evey
Attoubono Shoulders.
Aumar Breajl.
Aupo Head. Haramy
Aupee A gift. Hare
Awatear Elbow. Hayer
A mafl.
Smelling.
The thighs.
A hog.
The ear .
A knife .
Large .
rcr.
Black.
Dirty.
Small
cry.
Erc/ft water .
Come here .
To go away .
A fjh.
Heis
The tongue.
To underjland.
Good for nothing .
Lajl night .


Mamai
Mannue
Marhe
Mattow
Madure
Mar
Sore.
A bird.
Fat
Affronted.
Apparent.
To eat.
Manoe
Mayyer
Mahanner
Malomar
Martar
Cocoa-nut oil.
Bananoes .
Matty
Marneoe
Maride
Mere
Miou
Mifou
Mity
Midde
Moerer
Momour
Moto
The fun.
Morie
Moare
Motu
Moe
The moon.
Eyes.
Monour
Moer
Muttou
Phe wind.
Calm.
Cold.
To look
A nail.
To farch.
Good.
Salt water •
A bed.
The wrijl.
A cut.
A burning-place.
A fowl.
Neanear
Oe
Opu
A J mall if and.
To Jleep.
Deep water.
An bill.
Opey
Otu
Ouna
Ouar
Ouhi
Owhy
Own
A fijh-hook.
Parahi
Papper
Pear
Perrow
Pier
Porode
Tarter
Tafher
Taumou
Taume
Tahere
Nennahidura
NefTue
Tou.
Belly.
By and bye .
Rain.
Fire.
Stones.
What.
Red.
Owrrowrer
Stay here .
A fool.
A box.
To talk.
A bellyful.
Hunger.
Man.
That thing .
Plated hair.
Two days ago .
Upper teeth.
Singing.
Rotting or fore.
Upper lip.
A breaf-plate.
Where .
Tanca r


Tan ear
Tatare
Teder
Teto
Terratarne
Terrarhanie
Tederro
Tiore
Tiporahy
Tio
Topo
Toupar
Toboi
Toa
Tomallo
Tow tow
Tourer
Toutow
Uhiane
Ule
Ure
Urn
Varer
Vete Vete
Verride
Vennure
VefTue
Above.
White.
Efiougb.
To feal.
Whatta
Whoro
Wore
A hujband.
A wife.
Whoarar
Below.
Name.
1 Atahi.
Toflrike. 2 Arour*
A friend. 3 Torow.
Blood. 4 Yaw.
Hips. 5 Remar.
Feet. 6 Vaheine.
An axe. 7 Hetu.
Sweet potatoes . 8- Wharro.
Anchor, 9 Hevar.
A rope. 1 o Hewrow.
Afervant. 1 1 Martiti.
12 Marrour.
U 13 Mortorow.
A womans 14 Mayya w.
A bat. 15 Marremay.
A dog, 16 Marheine.
Bread-fruit. 17 Marhetu.
18 Marwarru.
V 19 Marhevar.
Drejfed. 20 Arowratow.
To break.
Loft.
Tourfelf,
Well
Numbers.
A pearlfijh-hook. N. B. The fame language is
Anger . fpoke at the iflands of Otahitee,
Land, Hoahina, Uliateah, Otahaw,
Place. Bola Bola, Ohiteroah, and Ta-
buamana.




'' ' t • •








3 1508 00245057 0


