

>,"• A " S
- ■ :.‘r , ; : : = ; ■ ; : ' : : * ■ :•
.
..I.;:;. •••::• j s * " . •' j . • " ,. ' . • • • ;; :
*: • «/«• : j • : /If ; HIHIM :" : ’ HI ‘ *; |il f iff ni. 1: * |p|| * iflml j- If "a.- .7
■fclMliji
: ' :
' ’ . '• j,* : : It', i ... **•*!' • • • • , * * |
;
: . .
: ■ ■ , ■
S#B'ir.v ,i -x■: : ,
3?-‘f AS'
: ■ : .
; ||; ; j. ||s||| || - «||| | | ||gH|«|5||
■
V::U . . 1- • *; ;
. ■
I : . ' f ; ■* r * ; * ; « :
•;if:
*. - :• • i\, ,j*. i i M * ri! 1 . J i '
• . -
’-fp]r ; ; . - * ’ 1 -ii j: $?, ‘ * -r
|ife| * * t
r f= •%' S? J rV.fe. S l& ! > « >**'' 1 “s'l’. •
ft , > Js ’ ~6
"V 1 ’IP* 1 ! - V!’-!! 41 f ’ 1 ~ H
! 1 1! i! Ilf Hill ?.*/t ?liif=
■ >5’’ r r. 1* -jp ' i.- 1 * ’ 1 -
- .--r ••rfiiry' • i;h
i -ilv iHs -# v ‘ 3i,
■ v'-i; 1 ;- "
V 4 < «5,
■ .
• ' • "/ ' ' '
p. 3 1- ' i>' " , , f. aI V ■*
'
lilll - j ;.. fj : * : lit:
I ;:-:. ; ; : I::;;:;;,,
- : ■ : 1 ■ .
'
I]:]:.”: K
' 5 * t - f -
|f H||l . * * jl| • H|
: . I':' ;• s . v • •; ; / r
/ i : f; S li - i ii iiiHIfSIlfln H181 lilfilllflil 1111
:::s r -: :l::rrJZ
; ■■'■■■■; , ■ , ■■
■■ - • ,
■ ' ' : : : :
immrnummaMsmm
: ' ■;;■■= '-.-v f
;
. * :•*,•** g|5: r i’. * • g •: 1 } i
* . . -> *:/:• :
■ ■: ■ ■■
• f; : f:
■ , ■ . :• , ■: ■
i
• UUsshSii!*! :•! ■ : ■ '' ii: ::hi ' :t:a '
! ii i:::.
•■ ' • -
:* ;lj" .. :ri:: . f * - V* • * . .
J:j ("'k: : ii ‘.j |||ll
■ - ■ ■ ■ : , ' ■ . : v • '
-:- -lif• vi; /ff|f ; fi \
■ ■
k. , i uh • fli? *; liil 3
• 5 - >
r : ; ; ‘
. ■ -
:
: : . . .
. : ■ ■ ■ . : ■
J>! 4 s ’ W.-’ -r ■ -I”; = , ”fc ! ~
■ ’ • fe •• Jl J 1 ijk‘Ol=s- r
•: • niHliuUU*:? \ ‘sM:?- • - i' • :
If:|rf§|• rill : ti;i *: ]. 'i] A.\
'..=i' • : : ■ :
'




THE TALE OF A CENTURY




The Tale of a Century
KILMORE
1 «37- 1 937
J. A. Maher
NUMBER THREE HISTORICAL REPRINTS SERIES
LOWDEN 1 KILMORE


First Published by
Back to Kilmore Committee in 1938
This edition Published by
Lowden Publishing Co.
Lowdens Road, Kilmore, 3601, Australia
Index for this edition
© 1972 Lowden Publishing Co.
ISBN 0 909706 18 2
Production Details
Text
set in 10 point Linotype Baskerville, leaded one point, with chapter
headings in 18 point Monotype Colonna.
Printed letterpress on Burnie Supercal printing paper.
Printed in Australia by Jim Lowden Printing,
Kilmore, Victoria 3601.
Registered in Australia for transmission by post as a book.


CONTEN'
1. Early Land Settlement
2. The Overland Route
3. The Town of Kilmore
4. ‘The Old Survey’ and Early Rural Settlement
5. Early Rural Settlement (Continued)
6. Leaves from a Diary
7. The Days of Stage Coaches and Teamsters
8. The Goldfields
9. Municipal History
10. Political Representation and Railway Communication
11. The Kilmore Churches
The Presbyterian Church
The Catholic Church
The Church of England
The Methodist Church ..
12. Education
13. Reminiscent of the Past
14. Horse Racing
15. More About Sport
16. Down Through the Years..
17 Down Through the Years (Continued)
Index




KILMORE
ILMORE cares not who comes nigh,
But, with a calm, incurious eye,
She sees the swift cars speeding by.
Then turns again to labour.
She is content to plod along,
Now with a sigh, when things go wrong,
And now a smile, and now a song,
Or gossip with a neighbour.
Her mind dwells often in the past —
The roaring days that could not last.
When men might travel not so fast.
And all the world was bigger.
She saw the coaches clatter down
To pause at her important town,
With loud-voiced venturers, strong and brown.
And many a bearded digger.
She saw the eager traffic flow
Upon the road to Bendigo,
With talk of many a golden show.
Of finds and fields exciting.
But wisely she contrived to hold
A treasure greater far than gold.
Where her rich pasture lands unfold
A scene far more inviting.
She smiles to dream of those old days,
Of hearty men and hectic ways.
When, maddened by the golden craze.
Men sought their fortunes blindly.
But she, who chose the better part
Of patient toil and simple art.
Lives on, content of mind and heart.
And generous and kindly.
So, wealthy now, she sits at ease,
In this kind land of fields and trees.
Ignoring all our flippancies
And modern fads and crazes.
And, where old buildings, tumbliiig down,
Leave scars about her ancient town,
The hasty mock her homely gown;
The wise man waits and praises.
“DEN.”
(C. J. DENNIS.)




THE AUTHOR
THE AUTHOR, James Alipius Maher was born at ‘Annie-vale’,
Lancefield in 1869, the son of Charles and Brigid. Charles had
settled at Lancefield in 1854.
James was educated at Lancefield State School, then at Xavier
College Kew, before working on his father’s property. During this period
he was a very keen footballer and supporter of the West Bourke (Rom-
sey) Agricultural Society.
In 1902, he purchased ‘Hollymount Estate’, Pyalong, a property of
some 2125 acres which included the Cordell, O’Brien, Hailes and Ward
farms. He married Bridget Mulcahy, a Footscray girl, in the following
year, and they had three children. The first, a daughter, died in infancy,
the others being Gerald and Lucille (Mrs Kevin Butler).
In 1917, he leased Hollymount and moved to Melbourne, whilst his
children were educated. He became a partner in a Stock and Station
agency in the city, with Alan Cameron, who later entered Parliament and
was succeeded by his brother, Lochiel. Both of these gentlemen were
good friends of James Maher in his earlier days at Lancefield.
He returned to ‘Hollymount’ in 1922 and became a member of the
Kilmore Hospital Board. In 1933 on the death of his wife, he retired to
Kilmore, leaving his property to his son Gerald, and took up residence
at ‘The Rocks’. It was during his years of retirement that he compiled
The Tale of a Century, with the help of the memoirs of his many friends
in the district. The publication of the work, was a source of much pride
and joy to him.
James Maher passed away in Melbourne on 18 December 1940,
aged 71.




PUBLISHER'S PREFACE
N presenting The Tale of a Century as the third title in our Historical
Reprints Series , we gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Mrs
Lucille Butler, for compiling the biography of her father.
The original publication, in its paper wrappers, is exceedingly rare
and much sought after. Not one copy has appeared at auctions of the
important collections of Australiana in the last decade.
As Kilmore is Victoria’s oldest inland town, and a most important
centre in Victoria’s early history, it is felt that this is a most suitable
title for our series.
The purpose of the Historical Reprints Series is to reprint rare books
which are of considerable historical merit. The works will be reprinted
in their entirety with errors and inconsistencies as they originally
appeared.
All titles will be supplemented with a biography of the author,
where possible, and an index compiled especially for the use of scholars
and students of history.
Jim Lowden
Coordinator
Historical Reprints Series




INTRODUCTORY
NNO Domini 1937. On the 12th day of May in this year of
. grace, England, the historic centre of the British Empire, witnessed
all the pomp and splendour associated with a coronation ceremony.
King George VI was duly proclaimed, the Royal Coronet place on his
head, and in accordance with the time-honoured custom and tradition
of a mighty Empire, he goeth forth as the Ruling Monarch of the
Commonwealth of Nations, incorporated under the style and title of
the British Empire.
Just 100 years ago, A.D. 1837, the good Queen Victoria ascended
the British Throne, ruled wisely, and watched with all a sovereign’s
care and anxiety for more than three score years, through a most
momentous epoch in the history of the British race. During the century
that elapsed between Queen Victoria’s accession and the Coronation
Ceremony, whereat the full dignity of Kingship was conferred on
George VI, our own town and district of Kilmore (a small, yet
important corner of the Empire) has had its beginnings, its aspirations,
hopes, and fears, aye, and its achievements. Yes, it may justly be
claimed that Kilmore has established and maintained very creditable
social and material progress during the century that has passed since
the first white settlers came to this locality. Naturally, in the course
of colonisation and pioneering, there were doubts and misgivings to
dispel, periodic rises and falls to be bravely encountered, and almost
insuperable obstacles to be surmounted. Yet, in the face of all such
difficulties, foundations were well and truly laid, and a veritable home
of peace and comfort established on a very fine area of country, over
which the blessings of “health and plenty” abound. With a feeling of
thankfulness to Providence, we now cast our eyes over a scene of bright
and stirring life, where in the primeval bushland early settlers carved
out sites for their isolated homes just one hundred years ago.
Kilmore has had not only its material development in the period
now under review. It has known and realised its full-blooded development
typified by the birth of a native born population sprung from the grand
old pioneering stock that came hither from the British Isles (England,
Ireland, and Scotland) and many other parts of the Continent of
Europe. Aye, indeed, it has been a century of set purpose, of action,
and notable achievement —virtually a period of sustained effort, of
success and failure, of joy and sorrow, and all that mankind must
inevitably face in life’s daily round —and thank God the end is not yet.
For some time past it has been the express desire and the fond hope
of the residents of this town and district to celebrate in a becoming


manner the 100th Anniversary of Kilmore, the chosen and adopted
home of some of the earliest white settlers in the south-east corner of
Australia. Now the appropriate time is at hand to give concrete and
tangible evidence of such desire. Let us resolve with all fervour and
sincerity to honour the memory of the old pioneers, and at the same
time publish an historical sketch epitomising the salient features of our
march forward through the century that has sped.
Without a doubt the present-day generation at Kilmore has the
spirit to enter enthusiastically into this Centenary Celebration, and
fervently express a glowing tribute of praise to the men and women of
earlier generations. Praise for the brave band of pioneers whose indomit-
able courage won through, smoothing down the rough places and
making straight the pathways for their descendants. Let us acknowledge
our deep debt of gratitude for the goodly heritage handed down not only
to the people of Kilmore, but to the whole population of the Com-
monwealth of Australia. Much that is valiant and noble on the part of
pioneer workers has been historically recorded in all parts of the world.
With all due respect and admiration for the makers of such history in
other lands, it can be justly and fairly claimed that the early Australian
settlers blazed their tracks and established themselves in a manner that
has seldom been equalled, and certainly never surpassed. All the arch-
ways of honour, memorials, and monuments, built with lasting and almost
imperishable stone, can never adequately express a nation’s full appre-
ciation of the stupendous task undertaken and brought to successful
fruition by those big-hearted pioneers. Deep in our hearts let us ever
cherish a love and veneration for those who so wisely and truly laid the
foundations of a bright and prosperous Australia. Our progenitors handed
down to us the right, privilege, and pleasure to carry on in the same
resolute manner as they began. Let us with grim and set purpose devote
our energies to the work enjoined upon us, for thus and thus only can we
pay due homage to their memory, and manfully shoulder the trust and
confidence reposed in us.
As may well be imagined, it is no easy matter to build up a story
wherein the actual happenings and events down through the avenue of
years will be faithfully chronicled. Even the powerful searchlight operated
by the Historical Society of Victoria fails to reveal very much of an
illuminating character concerning the movements of the first dozen years
of the period now being sketched. Certainly a fairly clear knowledge of
what transpired in close proximity to Port Phillip Bay, and other parts
along Victorian coastline during a like period, has been recorded with a
fair showing of chronological order. We know that settlement was pro-
ceeding slowly, yet surely, in the inland areas of what was known as the
District of Port Phillip for some years after 1837. Yet much that would
now be regarded as of consuming historical interest, concerning the
movements and activities of those early settlers, has never emerged from
obscurity.


Whilst a prominent place in this word picture must be accorded
to the Commonwealth of Australia, and the State of Victoria in
particular, we are now out to concentrate on matters pertaining to the
settlement, development, and the general life and activities of Kilmore
and the surrounding district. Let us hope that our efforts may be
crowned with a reasonable measure of success. Even though no spectacular
literary effect be disclosed in the compilation of this booklet, the records
published are honestly intended to afford a general outline of historical
data concerning Kilmore and its people.


CHAPTER 1.
EARLY LAND SETTLEMEN
(Dealing mainly with Crown Lease Pastoral Holdings.)
ILMORE, which in Gaelic simply means “great church,” occurs
as a locality name no less than seventeen times in Ireland, being
found in thirteen of the thirty-two Irish counties. Ulster having
five, Munster, Leinster, and Connaught dividing the remainder. It also
occurs twice in Scotland. The name seems to have been given to our own
Kilmore by William Rutledge, who probably desired to commemorate
his family connections in County Cavan, Ireland. The said William
Rutledge, towards the end of 1841, obtained from the Government of
New South Wales the fee simple of 5120 acres of land. This compact
block, containing a big proportion of the best land in the Kilmore
district, was familiarly known to our earliest generations of residents as
“The Old Survey.”
Following on the tracks blazed by Hume and Hovell on their
return trip towards Sydney in 1824, the next white feet to tread
Kilmore soil were those of the overlanders, who came towards what was
afterwards known as Melbourne with their herds. The first of these
were Joseph Hawdon, Australia’s great explorer; John Gardiner, Mel-
bourne’s first banker; John Hepburn, of the Mercantile Marine. They
brought cattle solely, which were then low in price on the Sydney side,
and did not exist at all around Port Phillip. Shipment across Bass Strait
in the small vessels then in use was too costly and risky for the transport
of homed cattle. Those pioneer cattlemen reached Melbourne, then
known as The Settlement, in time to enjoy roast beef for the Christmas
dinner—lB36.
From then on there was a constant stream of overlanders with both
herds and flocks. Some settled at spots where water and feed seemed to
suggest the suitability of the country for the depasturing of stock;
others went along to trade at the Yarra. About the end of the year 1837
Dr. Richard Hamlyn made a station on the Dry Creek, and grazed his
flocks over the area where the town of Kilmore later sprang up. This
run he held (without going through the formality of taking out a
licence) for a few years. In 1841 John Aitken, of The Gap, occupied
the country on which Dr. Hamlyn had “casually squatted.” Aitken was
followed by Robert Whitehead and Edward Hurst. The property, then
known as Dry Creek, had the name changed to Glenburnie in 1855. On
the Bth day of January in that year the Crown Grant for the Pre-emptive
block (640 acres) was issued to W. S. Price, who evidently held possession
of the run for some years previously. Definite information that W. S. Price
sold his rights to Andrew Linton is recorded in a conveyance bearing


date 18th January, 1855. Linton’s equity in the estate was later transferred
to Mary Jackson, who in turn sold and conveyed to H. Stevenson 14th
May, 1862.
William T. Turner came to Port Phillip in 1842. After engaging in
pastoral activities in Goulbum Valley districts for several years, he
returned to England. In 1862 he once again sailed for Australia (per
ship “Prince of Wales”), and in August, 1863, acquired the Glenbumie
Station on Sunday Creek from H. and M. Stevenson. Twelve years later
Turner the elder purchased land at Nathalia, and his second son Stephen
Robinson Turner, was left in charge at Glenbumie. In 1888 (the land
boom period) this property was sold at a high figure to W. E. Highett.
During Andrew Linton’s tenure and previously the Glenbumie run
extended from Reedy Creek to Kilmore. In 1871, when the lands com-
prised in the run were thrown open for selection, about 2000 acres in
addition to the Pre-emptive area (640 acres) was secured by the Turner
family. After the sale to Highett in 1888, S. R. Turner sailed for New
Zealand, and later went to England. On his return to Victoria he
bought adjoining land and formed the property now known as Overdale.
There, on land that was mostly included in the original Glenbumie and
Dry Creek areas, the descendants of the old pioneer W. T. Turner still
reside.
The several conveyances recorded since 1888 are as follow: —Ex-
ecutors of W. E. Highett to Walter L. Taylor, 1892; W. L. Taylor to
Lewis Robertson, 1899; L. Robertson to W. G. and M. M. Balfour, 1907;
Margaret M. Balfour to R. A. Galletly, 1910. The late A. B. Halpin
acquired the property from R. A. Galletly in 1924; since that year the
Halpin family have been in continual occupation.
The old Magpie and Stump Inn was situated on the Glenbumie
homestead block. In the early days there was considerable traffic on the
Magpie and Stump road. Probably the bulk of such traffic consisted of
the teamster’s empty drays and wagons returning from the diggings.
When favourable climatic conditions rendered the road passable, many
of the teamsters, with full loading aboard, travelled northwards along
this track. The detour obviated the necessity of paying toll charges on
the Sydney road —hence the popularity of this alternate route.
The Magpie and Stump Inn closed it doors about 1861. As it was
partly expected that the railway would follow close along the course of
this old road, the township of Elgin was surveyed and gazetted at a spot
now known as Wall’s Crossing. The remains of an old sheep wash
structure at Glenbumie supplies a relic of the method adopted by our
early flock-masters. In those years sheep were washed before going through
the shearing process. Sixty years have elapsed since this old structure,
now crumbling to decay, went out of use.
All that has appeared in this chapter concerning Glenbumie and
Dry Creek, previous to W. S. Price appearing in the picture, has been
compiled from notes supplied by the Historical Society. References and


general particulars from 1855 onward are based on the personal recollec-
tions of interested parties, backed up by official and documentary evidence.
Changes have been traced and carefully noted down through the passage
of a full century. Such description of land occupation under Crown
Lease or Licence System, and the subsequent transfer to Freehold Title
may be regarded as fairly typical. To create local interest the writer of
these notes is anxious to deal more comprehensively with the matter.
Therefore the records of other early occupied pastoral runs within
reasonable distance of Kilmore will now be dealt with.
Notes from “Pioneering Days in Western Victoria”.
The writer of the narrative referred to above, J. C. Hamilton, re-
counts the facts that he was bom in Scotland (at Ormiston —12 miles
south of Edinburgh). At the age of five years he came with his parents,
brothers, and sisters to Port Phillip in 1841. Staying the first night after
landing at Canvas Town (now Albert Park), the second night was spent
in the virgin bushland (now Queen’s Park —Moonee Ponds). On the
following morning the family set out, per medium of horse and cart, for
the Long Hill Station, about three miles south-east of Kilmore. That day’s
journey brought the travellers to the Rocky Waterholes. Next day their
destination was reached, and a glad family reunion took place. Let the
story now be continued in the author’s own graphic language:
“I can well remember my Uncle Gibson coming out to meet us, a
fine strapping man about 30 years of age, weighing about 12 stone. This
was my mother’s brother, a nephew of David Gibson, of Pleasant Banks,
near Evandale, Tasmania; the father of the Gibsons of sheep-breeding
fame. T. L. Gibson came out to his uncle, David Gibson, when he was
only 17, and after some years of residence in Tasmania crossed over to
Port Phillip, as Victoria was then called, in 1835, and took up the Long
Hills Station, nearly 40 miles from Melbourne and three miles south-east
of Kilmore.
“Long Hills consisted of the usual buildings at station homesteads
in these days —huts, sheds, sheep-yards, etc. My father stayed with my
uncle for some time whilst he looked about to get a suitable home for us.
A short time previously the Government of the day had made a special
survey of certain lands, including a township named Kilmore, so there
my father bought a township allotment east of the Sydney road and
running down to Kilmore Greek. On this block he built a house and
brought the family to it. Soon after he secured a farm of 70 acres
adjoining the allotment on which the home stood; later another farm
of 50 acres called ‘The Round Hill’ was acquired. On these farms he
cultivated wheat and potatoes principally. The land was good and yielded
heavy crops. I remember a quantity of swede turnips that grew so large
we had to use axes to cut the turnips up for pig feeding. Maize grew six
to seven feet high, and gave heavy yields on the black soil along the
creek. Maize was used in quantities for feeding pigs and fowls. After-


wards he bought cows, young cattle, and other farm stock, and was soon
in a way of doing well as a rising man.
“In 1846 my father sold his farm, and started out to take up new
country west of the Glenelg River. The new move came about in this
way. My uncle, T. L. Gibson, hearing of a lot of unoccupied fresh country
in the vicinity of the Glenelg, sold his Long Hills Station to Messrs.
Broadhurst and Tootal, and arranged with my father to take up
sufficient country to form two stations.”
There is only slight evidence available to enable one to locate the
position of the two blocks of land secured from Rutledge by this very
early settler. It is, however, considered safe to assume that the land
situated on the north side of the Kilmore East Road, and running east-
wards from the creek, is the area referred to. A very pronounced Round
Hill is there to support this supposition. Furthermore, the method adopted
by Hamilton in dealing with relative positions of landmarks shows pretty
conclusively where his observation base was situated.
In a chapter, entitled “Aborigines —Their Customs,” the following
passage occurs farther along in J. C. Hamilton’s interesting narrative:
“My first recollection of the natives of this country was in the Kilmore
District, where in 1845 I witnessed their great national event —the
Coayang. I suppose there would be 150 to 200 of the Goulburn Valley,
Kilmore, and other tribes present: the place of meeting was in the
ranges to the east of Kilmore. We crept through the bushes until we got
within a hundred yards of the blacks, and beheld a scene that rivalled
Tam O’Shanter’s Dance of the Witches. Fires burned brightly, and on a
space cleared of grass painted warriors (naked except for a girdle around
their waists and neat bundles of boughs around the ankles) danced
backwards and forwards along the lines of spectators ranged in groups.
The women supplied music and kept wonderful time, their instruments
being stretched opossum skins beaten with small sticks, whilst there was
a chorus of not unmusical voices.”
A deal of effort has been expended in an attempt to compile an
authentic account of early land settlement within reasonable distance of
Kilmore. It is to be regretted that such research work was not seriously
undertaken fully fifty years ago, whilst many of the early comers were
still taking an active interest in every-day affairs of life in our midst.
Apparently many of those who occupied pastoral holdings, prior to
Victoria becoming a separate colony, obtained their licences from the
Colonial Office in London. Again, when the administration of lands was
transferred from Sydney to Melbourne in 1851, it is just possible that old
files relating to Crown leases in the Port Phillip District were not pre-
served. The Historical Societies both at Melbourne and Sydney express
inability to obtain reliable data that would materially help the compila-
tion of this random sketch.
The following extract is taken from a special supplement issued
with the “Kilmore Free Press” in April, 1911, when a big military encamp-


ment was temporarily located at Kilmore Racecourse: “Shortly after
Batman landed on what is now Spencer Street Railway Station, a large
area of the Kilmore District was taken up by Powlett and Green, of
Sydney. About 1838 a police force was established, and police were
located on Powlett and Green’s Station, about two and a half miles north
of Kilmore, at a spot ever since known as Green’s Pinch. After a couple
of years’ occupancy those Sydneysiders sold their interest to a Tasmania
squatter, Joseph Sutherland.”
A *
This reference to Powlett and Green, and early police protection, is
possibly based on ascertained facts and all in order. Yet there is a
shadowy dimness about it difficult to penetrate. On the other hand one
feels quite sure of his ground when the name of Joseph Sutherland comes
into the narrative, as there is abundance of contemporary evidence
relative to the movements of this fine type of old-time squatter. The
homestead of Sutherland’s Moranding Station was on the hill north-
west of Rutledge’s Survey, a spot that has been known to succeeding
generations of Kilmore people as “Ryan’s Hill.” The property on which
this hill is situated has now passed into the hands of the Dumaresq
family. The old Mclvor Road passed close by the homestead, and as
open house was kept for all respectable travellers, it can be readily
imagined that Moranding Station soon became a regular port of call and
a very popular resort.
The year that Sutherland came to Moranding cannot be clearly
stated here. However, it has been definitely proved that he was there in
1843. That he was still in possession in 1850 is also quite clear, as will
be learned from dates given in a subsequent paragraph. The transfer
from Sutherland to John Clarke must have taken place about the end of
1850, as the former sailed for the Old Country in February, 1851. It
would appear as if the Pre-emptive block of 640 acres was the sale area
left in the hands of Clarke in 1853, as all surrounding Crown lands were
sold in that year.
The Pontesford run had its headquarters where the “Woodburn”
homestead now stands. In 1849 this run was held by A. D. and A. E.
Tootal. Andrew Linton, whose name also appears in connection with
the Glenburnie run, was in possession of Pontesford at some period,
most likely after possession had been relinquished by Tootal Brothers.
The following official note, supplied by the Department of Lands and
Survey, is clear and decisive as regards dates: —“In 1849-50 the Govern-
ment Village of Kilmore (the new township) was surveyed by H. B.
Foot, Assistant Surveyor, out of the Moranding and Pontesford runs, held
respectively by Joseph Sutherland and A. D. and A. E. Tootal.”
_ .a *
In consulting the Parish Plans of Moranding and Bylands now in
use, it is not readily apparent how any portion of Moranding could be
included in the Kilmore town area. A reasonable explanation of the
position presents itself when a closer investigation is made. The southern
boundary of the original Moranding. run was about thirty chains from


the Post Office on the Melbourne side, consequently there was a fair slice
of Sutherland’s leasehold available for inclusion in this survey of town
allotments made in 1849-50. Another historic fact reveals itself when the
searchlight of reason is applied to the early occupation of the Moranding
run. As a matter of fact in 1841, when Rutledge paid £5120 into the
Treasury in Sydney and obtained the freehold right to eight square miles
of land, this Special Survey (Willowmavin) was resumed out of the old
Moranding run.
Following this same line of constructive deduction, one naturally
realises how a town was eventually formed in the south-east corner of the
run. The spot in the first instance was chosen on account of its suitability
as a camping ground. In the beginning a limited number of travellers
came along and pitched their tents in the sheltered valley, where ample
water was procurable. In the course of time the number of campers
noticeably increased, and the idea of maintaining a permanent camp
manifested itself, so the temporary shelter of canvas was gradually re-
placed by the provision of small houses constructed with sturdy bush
timber. Bush carpenters, and even regularly trained carpenters, no doubt
had their share of work in the early building operations. It is abundantly
evident, however, that the stonemasons were kept particularly busy later
on, when the building boom was at its height in this old town of Kilmore.
With these references to Dry Creek (Glenburnie), Moranding,
Pontesford (Forbes), we have now completed the circuit of pastoral
holdings that abutted on the early town of Kilmore. Even though “all
roads did not lead to Kilmore” in those far-off days, it can be said with
a full degree of truthfulness that traffic over roads and tracks from a
very extensive area of country converged at Kilmore. Thus it will be
readily perceived that reference to pastoral holdings beyond immediate
district limits should give added interest to this narrative.
In 1838 the Glenaroua Station was taken over by William Hamilton
from a pioneer named McDonald. William Hamilton was born in
Lanarkshire, Scotland, and arrived in Tasmania in 1823. From there he
moved to New South Wales in 1827. After some years spent in that
colony, Hamilton travelled overland to Port Phillip, bringing his flocks
along with him. Down through a number of years the members of the
Hamilton family from Glenaroua were intimately associated with Kilmore.
In fact some of the descendants of the original William Hamilton and his
wife only severed their connection with the district in comparatively
recent times. The solidly-constructed bluestone buildings at Glenaroua
homestead, still standing four square to winds and weather, were erected
at a very early period, some even before 1842. One would have to travel
over many midland Victorian districts to find anything better calculated
to furnish a direct link with the station home life of the pastoral era than
this old Glenaroua homestead affords.
In connection with the “Back to Pyalong” Centenary movement cele-
brated in February of the year (1937), a memorial obelisk was erected


to the memory of A. F. and W. T. Mollison, the first white settlers in that
district. In their journey overland in 1837 the Mollisons, after crossing
the Murray River, headed towards where Kyneton later sprang up, and
from there turned eastward close to the track blazed by Major Mitchell in
1835, until the stream afterwards named Mollison’s Creek was reached;
here they decided to form a station. It is extremely interesting to note in
the historical records of Port Phillip District that A. F. Mollison took a
prominent part in many lively discussions relative to the welfare of the
early colonists. As chairman at a number of meetings in Melbourne in
the forties, he exercised a restraining influence over those who were pre-
pared to go to extremes in their championship of squatting interests.
Probably it will create more local interest to chronicle the fact that the
second brother acted in the capacity of a Justice of the Peace, and sat on
the Kilmore Bench. It would appear that this worthy man had a right
conception of the “quality of mercy,” as report saith that a local resident
who had flagrantly broken the peace on a certain “festive occasion,”
was very leniently treated when hailed before W. T. Mollison, J.P., on the
following morning.
In the Bylands District Broadhurst and Tootal took over from T. L.
Gibson in 1846. This run, originally known as Long Hills Station, had its
name changed to Swynton, and later the name Belle Vue was apparently
adopted for the pre-emptive block. Might it be pertinent to refer the
housewives of Kilmore to the Tootal mark on so many of the fabrics
now so freely purchased in our drapery establishments. The firm Tootal,
Broadhurst, Lee, of Manchester, England, now so vigorously engaged in
the manufacture of softgoods, belong to the same old English families as
the Broadhursts and Tootals who held temporary landed interest in early
Kilmore.
Captain Cain’s Station was some distance farther west than the
Pontesford run. The homestead was on the bank of Number 3 Creek,
close by the Waterfall, only a short distance from the bridge over the
Number 3 Creek on the Lancefield-Kilmore road. The woolshed and
hut were closer to the road. Captain Cain was a Tasmanian business man,
who subsequently opened in Flinders Street, Melbourne, where he oc-
cupied a large bluestone store with the name Captain Cain on side of
building and door plate. From a reliable source it has been ascertained
that Cain was one of the original syndicate that secured the service of
John Batman, and equipped him to investigate the possibilities of Port
Phillip District. Donald Ferguson, who was later on well known at Broad-
ford and Flowerdale, acted as “super”, as the manager was then called
on Captain Cain’s station. Robert Fraser held this run (most probably a
reduced area) after Captain Cain went out of occupation. Fraser secured
the pre-emptive right section and several adjacent blocks in the Parish
of Springfield when the land was sold by the Crown. No definite idea of
the area of land embraced in this old pastoral holding has been ascertain-


ed. Apparendy there was a wide scope of grazing country available for
the flocks, as 12,000 sheep were shorn there in 1853.
In the early days there was a large mustering yard where the High
Park homestead has stood for many years. Once or twice a year there
was a general muster of the cattle on the run; in those musters there
would invariably be a considerable number of animals that had strayed
from adjoining runs. After an examination of brands on such strays the
rightful owners would be notified, and drovers were promptly sent along
to bring the wandering beasts back to their own pastures. All cattle not
redeemed within a stated period would be impounded at Kilmore.
Robert Fraser held on until the early sixties, when Hugh Glass got
hold of the property. George Robinson, who bought the High Park home-
stead block in 1865, secured the pre-emptive right block from the Glass
Trustees in 1870. Owing to its close proximity, it is reasonable to assume
that Kilmore enjoyed a fair share of social intercourse, and transacted a
considerable amount of business with the people living at Captain Cain’s
station.
Boyd’s station was farther south along the Number 3 (or Boyd’s)
Creek. Barrow Brothers, who have had a long connection with produce
agency business in Melbourne, were for a time interested in this property.
About 1866, however, the Moore Brothers entered into possession of the
P.R. Block and some additional area. The Moore family, from “The
Willows,” have long been very closely identified with Kilmore, and one
of the family, Alex. Moore, is still at the old home.
In the Parish of Chintin, in the midst of the fine property now held
by K. and J. McDonnell, the homestead of Purves’ squatting run was
situated. J. L. Purves, an eminent barrister who flourished exceedingly
nearly half a century ago, was born at this old station home in the valley
of the Deep Creek. The McCarthy family from Deep Creek, who were
very well known in Kilmore, came into possession of a portion of Purves’
run at an early date in district history. One of this family, W. J.
McCarthy, usually comes along to act as judge in the sheep section at
our local show.
Pastoral holdings that were much farther afield had a real live
connection with Kilmore, as the following passages will show. John
Hunter Patterson, of the Moorabbee run in the Wild Duck division of
the Heathcote District, traded mutton to the miners at Bendigo. Small
nuggets and grains of gold were received in payment, and this precious
metal was banked at Kilmore. This worthy pioneer was noted amongst
the squatting fraternity as the driver of exceptionally fine four-in-hand
carriage teams. Encounters with bushrangers were by no means rare
occurrences in those days. On one occasion Patterson and his son, whilst
on their way through to Melbourne, had a team of horses “comman-
deered” by highwaymen, and the stranded travellers reached Kilmore on
foot. George Hamilton, one of our very early residents, who had been
casually employed as a horsebreaker on Moorabbee, was appealed to for


help. A scratch team was hurriedly got together, and the travellers were
enabled to resume their journey.


CHAPTER 2
THE OVERLAND ROUTE
N October, 1824, the explorers Hume and Hovell started out from
the vicinity of Lake George about 100 miles south-west of Sydney,
and not far distant from where Canberra now stands. The avowed
object and intention of their journey of exploration was to win an over-
land way through to the coastline beyond Port Phillip District, as the
southern portion of the colony of New South Wales was then known.
In a general way it might be assumed that as Westernport was the point
to be steered for, it was decided to closely follow a south-westerly line of
march. Of course, those early explorers were quite unaware of the fact
that the contour of the country intervening between the chosen starting
point and the objective goal made it impossible to follow a direct south-
west route.
After striking the Murray River, it was found necessary to turn
downstream for a considerable distance, in the hope that more open
country might be discovered. Such deviation justified their hope, and
by skirting to the westward of the hilly country a comparatively easy
course was traversed for a time. Later, however, probably in an attempt
to regain contact with the direct south-west line originally mapped out,
the overlanders drifted out into impenetrable timbered lands, where
delays and disappointments almost completely baffled them. At this
stage of the journey they were in bleak, inhospitable country away to the
eastward of Kilmore. Once again deciding to follow the setting sun, in
the hope of finding more open and inviting country, they came out on
the ridge just to the east of Kilmore, where a memorial has been raised
to honour the memory of those brave intrepid men.
From this point of vantage, such a glorious panoramic vista met their
gaze; despair and despondency were swept from their minds as if by
magic. It is safe to assume that the astonished beholders, whilst carried
away in an ecstacy of delight, gave expression to their inward thoughts
in language worthy of the occasion. Yes, they did not merely remark in
prosy fashion, “This will be the place for a village,” as the early pioneer,
John Batman, is reported to have said after stepping from his boat to
the bank of the Yarra River. Rather might we venture to surmise that
the unpublished comment of our overlanders ran thus: “This is indeed
the most beautiful tract of country on our line of march, and none who
travel the overland route in the years to come can say that our judgment
was at fault.” Thus at that far-off time, more than a dozen years before
foundations were laid, the area on which Kilmore eventually sprang up
was rightly forecasted as a place of importance on the overland route.
Sydney as a city was scarcely out of its swadding clothes and Mel-


bourne was only in the embryo stage when Kilmore began to assume
something more than the shape of a roadside settlement. As the travelling
public were obliged to tarry by the way, and avail themselves of the
accommodation offering, it will be clearly understood that intimate
association naturally grew up and was maintained not only with Sydney
and Melbourne at the extreme ends, but likewise with all other stopping
places along the route. It may seem a far-fetched fancy to suggest a
likeness between countries so utterly dissimilar. Yet in those early coaching
days in Australia, when the signboards of the wayside inns beckoned a
cheery invitation to come indoors and enjoy the homely comforts of
cosy firesides, warm beds, and substantial meals, such an invitation made
a compelling appeal that stirred fond memories of Merrie England, Green
Ireland, and Bonnie Scotland; aye, and of many a warmly-cherished spot
on the Continent of Europe—the native centres whence those early
colonists hailed.
With an apology for digression we must now return to Hume and
Hovell, and report that with renewed hopes the exploring party resumed
their march, and fortunately found nothing in the nature of towering
hills or impenetrable forest to block their passage seawards. After the
hardships endured, it is only natural to suppose that the lure of “following
the line of least resistance” would grip the imagination of the leader of
the expedition. Consequently, after passing beyond Beveridge, the open
plain country stretching in a south-west direction towards the coast,
offered a tempting track to follow, and this track they followed. Event-
ually the long-looked-for coast was reached at a point remote from
Westernport, aye, even Port Phillip Bay was nearly missed. It was along
the shore of Corio Bay where those weary wayfarers had the satisfaction
of glancing out over the sea. Geelong, a bustling seaport and manufactur-
ing city, has since sprung up only about 12 miles westward of the spot
where the coastline halted the steps of the overlanders. After Hume and
Hovell had returned to Sydney to claim their reward, a number of years
passed by before anything of an encouraging nature transpired to lure
enterprising settlers to move far southwards beyond the settled districts of
New South Wales. However, when it was fully realised that venturesome
men had crossed over from Tasmania and settled along odd stretches of
the southern coastline, and were boldly pushing out towards the inland
country, there was a quickening of interest on the Sydney side. About
1837 settlement and travelling seem to have begun in real earnest, and
from that time a description of the wayside development along the over-
land route, or the Sydney Road as it was known later, is due for insertion
here.
The following three paragraphs are compiled from notes supplied by
the Historical Society of Victoria: —
“Meanwhile roadside settlements with accommodation houses, and
an odd smithy, were appearing along the Sydney Road. Robert Brown
was the first at Albury. John Clarke opened The Travellers’ Rest at


Mitchellstown, known later at The Old Crossing Place, in June, 1838.
He moved to Seymour in 1845, after diversion of traffic to the new route
had completely destroyed his trade. About the same time James Lawler
opened The Black Swan at the Broken River (Benalla), getting his first
licence June, 1840. Ryan also applied for a licence at Benalla in 1840.
Rattray was at the Ovens (Wangaratta) certainly in 1839, but probably
in the previous year, Peter Young, of The Bushman (Sugar Loaf Creek),
Andrew Beveridge, The Hunters’ Tryste, Mercer’s Vale (Beveridge), and
Francis Muirson, at Kinlochewe, were all established at a very early
period of overlanding activities. The overland mail to Yass for Sydney
had started, and there was a constant stream of passers-by. Lady Janet
Franklin with her entourage passed through en route for Sydney in
April, 1839.”
“The police station at Benalla was then in course of construction.
In September, 1841, Mitten, who previously had an accommodation
house between the Murray and Murrumbidgee, built a house at Kilmore,
and applied for a licence to sell wine and beer. He met with a refusal,
but opened as a boarding and eating house. In the same month Francis
Anderson applied for and obtained a licence, which, however, was de-
tained until the premises were completed. He named it The Kilmore
Inn, and held the licence until 1845, when he transferred to Henry
Morris, who remained until 1851. In 1842 an application by John Brown
to open The Settlers’ Home at Kilmore was rejected. Robert Higgins
Power opened The Fountain Inn at Kalkallo.”
“In 1843, Matthew Hayes, who shortly after transferred to Samuel
Watson, opened The Storekeepers’ Rest at Faithfull’s Creek (Euroa).
Reay Clark started the Sunday Creek Inn at a place known as Stewart’s
Station —later as Broadford. The Fergusons —John, Thomas, and Donald
—had this inn from 1847 to 1851. The altitude of Mt. Piper (The
Sugar Loaf) was stated to be 764 feet above the level of the floor of
Ferguson’s bar. (Sea level was remote from the minds of the habitues of
that popular hostelry.) At Kilmore in 1845 Mitten was again refused a
licence at the instance of Morris, who then occupied the Kilmore Inn.
Gilbert Nichol opened the Seymour Hotel, which had a run of changes —
George Lewis, November, 1846; Henry Lewis, 1848; Jomes Smith, 1850;
and Matt. Murphy also in 1850. The Black Dog Tavern, between the
Ovens and Murray (Chiltem), was opened by John Thomas, and Hugh
Middlemiss made a start at the Winding Creek (Longwood). In 1846
Mitten was at last successful in getting a licence for The Currency Lad
at Kilmore, but he parted with it to Reay Clarke the following year.
Another Clark appeared on the scene the same year—Thomas Clark,
formerly at the Retreat Inn, Brunswick; he built the Royal Mail at
Violet Town. In 1848 Thomas Hayes got a new licence at Kilmore, and
he was followed in 1851 by Mrs. Catherine Seale at the Royal Oak. The
Dunrobin Castle was opened by Reay Clarke about 1848. Thomas


Quinn, another applicant for a licence, sustained a rebuff, the Bench
holding that the town (Kilmore) was already well supplied with hotels.”
By this time (approximately 1850) the Sydney Road was well pro-
vided with convenient stopping places —Kinlochewe, Beveridge, Kilmore,
Broadford, Seymour, Longwood, Violet Town, Euroa, Benalla, Wan-
garatta, Chiltern and Albury. Practically all the foregoing place names
have remained steadfastly on the map since 1850. Probably the name
Kinlochewe does not convey anything definite to travellers of the present
day; yet on the next run northwards from Melbourne, along the Hume
Highway, they are enjoined specially to note the crest of hill some
distance from Donnybrook Hotel, on the Kilmore side. By complying
with this simple request travellers will get a fair idea of the location of
the old-time hostelry where Host Muirson dispensed wayside refreshment
in the 5 40’s of the last century.
It may seem more than passing strange to note a reference to the
Bushman Inn, at Sugar Loaf Creek, as one of the wayside stopping places
on the overland route. Be it remembered, however, that after passing over
the summit of Green’s Pinch (a few miles north of Kilmore) the
original track veered off to the left, and continued on through country
well westward from where Broadford and Tallarook subsequently sprang
up. On through the bush this track continued to Mitchellstown (where
Major Mitchell crossed the Goulburn River in 1835). This spot was some
miles downstream from where Seymour was destined to be the recognised
crossing place a few years later when a punt was installed there.
Mitchellstown, long familiarly referred to as “The Old Crossing Place,”
gradually faded out of existence. To avoid the possible and probably
dangers of a frequently curved track, the modern Hume Highway has
been straightened out in some places. Such deviation from the original
route, cutting off direct contact with old landmarks, has perhaps been
regarded as an unfriendly act, yet expediency and safety had to receive
first consideration.
Before passing away from matters pertaining to the overland route
—that is, the actual roadway or track along which travellers were borne
by horse-drawn vehicles, or by slow-moving bullock teams, or per medium
of their own ten toes —it might be considered as an oversight if no
reference was made to the stock route. In this matter it is scarcely
necessary for present purposes to extend our notes far beyond local
districts. From Broadford drovers wended their way along Sunday
Creek to the vicinity of Wan dong, thence striking westward crossed over
the Sydney Road, leaving “Pretty Sally” to the left, and afterwards
turned southward on a ridge of hills along the old Broadmeadows Road to
Melbourne. As there was no railway trucking accommodation for stock
for nearly forty years after the era of land settlement began, it may
readily be imagined that immense droves of live stock regularly passed
over this necessary adjunct to overlanding—the stock route.


CHAPTER 3.
THE TOWN OF KILMORE
N the early forties of the nineteenth century the infant town of
Kilxnore emerged from the shadows of bushland, and gradually as-
sumed shape and form. Needless to say the first buildings erected
were not imposing in design, neither was the ground plan laid out on a
pretentious scale. Rutledge sold some lots in the south-east comer of his
special survey privately soon after entering into possession. In this early
subdivision town lots embraced an area of one acre, and suburban or
outside lots had an area of twenty acres. It has been stated, unofficially,
that £lOO per acre was obtained for some portions, yet at an auction
sale, September, 1841, the highest offer was £l5. No lot was sold at this
time.
There was very little inducement for people to come along and
establish themselves in business or otherwise, until the track through
became recognised as part of the overland route. Kilmore soon showed
signs of being regarded as a favourite camping ground for travellers, so
catering in various ways for those who halted temporarily by the wayside
gave Kilmore its first fillip in the way of business. The great financial
crash of 1841 had come, and for a few years there was stagnation. Kil-
more owing to its commanding position, fared better than other places.
For information of a more definite nature reference is again made
to J. C. Hamilton’s narrative concerning early developments in the town
of Kilmore: “A good many people bought allotments and settled on
them. By the end of 1844 we had a blacksmith (L. Kelly), a shoemaker
(J. Biddle), and a boarding house (J. Mitten). Mitten later secured a
licence for a public house, and named it ‘The Currency Lad.’ This was
the second public house at Kilmore, as there was another half a mile or
so down the Sydney Road on the Melbourne side kept by a man named
Frank Anderson. This was a well-kept house, the people being very re-
spectable. A school was opened, the master’s name Poulson, who left after
a year or so, and a Mr. Abbott took his place. I attended school as long
as I remained on the farm. That would be until the early months of
1846.”
Much speculation has been indulged in with regard to the exact
location of the first licensed public house in the town. It has now been
definitely settled that the Kilmore Inn was situated on the west side of
Sydney Street, near its junction with Foot Street, on the site now oc-
cupied by Barry Skehan. According to official files Frank Anderson
secured a licence for this inn September, 1841, and transferred to Henry
Morris in 1845. After a few years the premises proved inadequate to
provide accommodation for the travelling public. An imposing stone and


rubble building containing forty rooms was then erected on the op-
posite side of Sydney Street. The new hostelry was named the Kilmorc
Hotel, and the licence was altered and amended so as to allow the
business to be conducted under proper legal sanction in the new quarters.
It is difficult to reconcile the statement in previous paragraph re-
garding transfer of licence from Frank Anderson to Henry Morris with
other ascertained facts. It is perfectly clear that the erection of the new
building, and the transfer of the hotel business over the street, were
carried out by a man named Wheeler. It is just possible that Wheeler was
in some way connected with Anderson, and operated under his licence.
However, it seems more reasonable to assume that Morris was acting as
nominee for Wheeler when the licence was taken over from Frank
Anderson in 1845.
There is no definite evidence to show when the new Kilmore Hotel
was opened. It might be taken for granted, however, that it was a going
concern for some time before the other hotels —Dunrobin Castle and
Royal Oak —were established in 1848. Wheeler, who was a bachelor, died
soon after the new building was completed, and the business was carried
on by Henry Morris and his wife. In 1856, when a beacon light was pro-
vided to illuminate the pathway leading to the Library on the bank of
the creek, this hotel was still referred to as Morris’ Hotel.
George Vinge later took over the Kilmore Hotel. Vinge was interested
in the stage coaching business, and joined in partnership with Foster,
who pioneered the mail cart service on the Sydney Road. George Vinge,
like many of the early Australian colonists, was a keen horse lover; his
son, Abbie Vinge, is still remembered by old hands as an amateur horse-
man worthy of admiration. Matthew Kelly succeeded Vinge as landlord
of the Kilmore Hotel. In the boom period of the coaching days, under
the capable management of that worthy gentleman, this hostelry came to
be regarded by travellers as a house providing superior accommodation.
In 1841 the licence for the Kilmore Inn was withheld for a month
pending the completion of premises. In the subsequent rush of building
operations someone evidently blundered. When the job was finished it
was found that the front portion of the building had encroached on the
roadway, and much confusion ensued. In 1863 we find the Kilmore
Council firmly, yet politely, requesting Judith Morris, the then owner, to
remove the obstruction. Apparently the request was not complied with,
and the old rambling building passed into other hands. In those years
this old structure was known as “Castle O’Grady,” and its obtruding
front elevation continued to offend. Well on in the eighties we remember
hearing a “local topical medley” containing suggestions for a clean-up in
the town. In this ditty the songster lustily trolled: —
“O, let us pull Castle O’Grady down,
Down, down, very flat down.”
In 1846, after having received many rebuffs, John Mitten was


granted a licence for The Currency Lad. In the following years the
licence was transferred to Reay Clarke. The building occupied by Mitten
was demolished, and the Dunrobin Castle took its place. Reay Clarke, the
new licensee, had the Dunrobin Castle built according to the plan of an
inn that flourished in his native town in Sutherlandshire, Scotland. The
Royal Oak (1848), with Thomas Hayes as landlord, opened for business
probably before the Dunrobin Castle building was completed. At the
latter place business was carried on in temporary quarters, and the
licence issued in 1846 was not allowed to lapse.
It is really surprising to reflect on the number of hotels that existed
in and around Kilmore during the period from 1850 to 1876. It has been
credibly asserted that as many as thirty-two hotels were catering for
custom within a radius of four miles. About the year 1886 the number
within the same area had been reduced to less than a dozen. At present
we have only three hotels in the town, and no other licensed premises
nearer than Broadford and Wallan, except a small hotel at Kilmore East.
Of the three hotels now doing business in Sydney Street, the Royal
Oak dates from 1848, the Red Lion from 1856, and the Railway Hotel
from the early sixties. The latter building was erected in 1861, but a
storekeeping business was carried on there for some time before the
premises were licensed and the hotel established. The Royal Oak was
practically rebuilt and enlarged by Matthew Murray in 1860. The
members of the Murray family conducted the business there until 1900. In
1887 the premises were renovated and further enlarged. Thos. F. Murray,
a valued member of this family, was President of the Kilmore Shire in
1894, and his name is permanently engraven on the foundation stone of
the Town Hall. P. A. Harrington took possession of the Royal Oak on Ist
May, 1900, and has had continual occupancy for more than thirty-eight
years.
The Hammond family entered into occupation at the Red Lion
Hotel about 1875, and had a continuous run for nearly twenty years.
Previous to the McMillan family acquiring the freehold title for this
hostelry (August, 1922), there were fairly frequent changes of manage-
ment. Patrick O’Neill, then a keenly alert young man, entered into the
hotel-keeping business at the Railway Hotel in 1874, and remained there
without a break until 1893,
Early Comers.
Before the year 1840 Lawrence Kelly, Thomas Glover, William
Ryan, and other members of the Ryan family, including a widowed
sister-in-law, came overland from Sydney and settled at Kilmore. Later
this young widow married Lawrence Kelly. Joseph Biddle also crossed
overland from Sydney, evidently as a hired servant in the employ of
Ebden, who “squatted” at Carlsruhe, on the Campaspe River. After a
few years at Ebden’s station, Biddle came to Kilmore and began work at
the bootmaking trade. (Charles. H.otson Ebden was one of the early


squatters who took an active interest in constitutional movements in the
Port Phillip District. He was a profound scholar from the Carlsruhe
University in his native Germany.)
For fully half a century of the time recorded in these pages the name
of Joseph Biddle was intimately associated with Kilmore. Once firmly
established in business, he built the shop now occupied by the Anstey
family, and remained steadfastly at his post. He heeded not the call of
far-away hills that looked green, nor did he allow the lure of the gold-
fields to disturb the even tenor of his way. In old minute books of the
Kilmore Hospital, The Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library, The Total
Abstinence Soicety, and other town and district bodies the name of
Joseph Biddle is frequently inscribed. This worthy citizen is justly entitled
to a place in the annals of early Kilmore.
Lawrence Kelly was another settler who simply refused to move out.
In the course of a few years Kelly and his good wife had a cosy home
surrounded by a neatly-kept orchard, where Joe Morrissey’s residence now
stands. (A remnant of that early planted orchard in the shape of a pear
tree of great age still flourishes there.) Kelly was one of the first men to
perceive the movement towards rapid development in the town, and
promptly brought up allotments of land on the east side of Sydney Street.
These land ventures proved profitable, and Lawrence Kelly became
a well-to-do man. Old timers still refer to the bridge over the creek on the
Kilmore East Road as Larry Kelly’s bridge.
A secondary industry of distinct value was established at Kilmore
by Robert Allen, who opened a flour mill about 1844. This mill —the
first in the Port Phillip District —was only a small building, yet it served
the purpose for which it was constructed for several years. In 1853 James
Maxfield took over the milling business from Robert Allen. Finding it
impossible to carry on operations in the restricted space at his disposal,
Maxfield considerably enlarged the mill in 1859-60. Other changes in
proprietorship came later. Patrick O’Dea assumed control for a time,
and he was succeeded by J. S. Collard. The premises in which milling
operations were successively carried on by Allan, Maxfield, O’Dea, and
Collard for over thirty years practically remained unchanged until quite
recently.
In August (1937) an extensive scheme of alteration was undertaken.
In a comparatively short space of time the old building of forbidding
aspect was completely transformed and converted into an up-to-date
motor garage. The remodelled and renovated building might well be re-
garded as an adornment to any country town. Kilmore is certainly pro-
gressive enough to appreciate this smart brightening-up scheme, and
express a sincere hope that Mrs. Adamson will be fully recompensed for
her spirited enterprise.
Some time in the early fifties the Union Flour Mill was established
on the spot where the National Bank now stands. Only very meagre in-
formation of a definite nature is available concerning the early history


of this mill, yet it is clearly evident that J. K. Trainor erected the building
and inaugurated the milling business. It is only reasonable to surmise that
considerable quantities of wheat were delivered and gristed there. In the
latter half of the 1850 decade J. K. Trainor was in the heyday of his
prosperity. Naturally such a widely-known man would have a big con-
nection with wheatgrowers.
It has not been ascertained in what year the business of the Union
Flour Mill passed into other hands. An advertisement appeared in the
“Free Press,” 30th November, 1865, in which Tully and Co. notified the
general public that they had acquired the business. In 1869 and well on
in the seventies Joseph Eager had control of the milling operations in
those centrally-situated premises. Mr. C. H. A. Eager, K.C., an eminent
barrister now widely known as the unofficial Leader in the Legislative
Council of Victoria, is a nephew to our erstwhile millowner.
It should scarcely be necessary to point out the exact location of
the Albion Flour Mill. We are all familiar with portion of the old build-
ings, still standing, adjacent to what we are wont to describe as the Mill
Road, at the south end of the town. This mill was built by Reay Clarke
and his brother-in-law, James McKenzie. In 1857 Henry Wilson pur-
chased the Albion Mill as a going concern, and under his direction
gristing operations were carried on there until the early eighties. Previous
to entering upon this business venture at Kilmore, Henry Wilson was a
partner in the firm of Cairns, Wilson, and Amos. This firm carried on an
extensive timber milling and general contracting business at Melbourne.
During the time that Wilson was interested in this Melbourne business,
John Sharp was brought out from England and appointed foreman in
the timber yards. Later Sharp acquired the business, and continued active
operations under the style of John Sharp and Sons until quite recently.
Henry Wilson originally came to Melbourne in the early fifties, but shortly
afterwards made a business trip to England. On his first voyage he had as
shipmates John and Duncan McKay, both of whom settled in this locality,
and became well-known identities at Kilmore and Broadford. Owing to
indifferent health Wilson could not remain long in any one place, and
was obliged to make several sea voyages.
During the last ten years before the Albion Mill closed down it was
difficult to continue milling operations profitably. The local production
of wheat having fallen almost to zero, supplies had to be procured in
distant localities and brought to Kilmore East by rail transport. The
changed conditions necessitated keeping horse teams constantly employed
for cartage purposes, consequently overhead charges became oppressive.
Generally it had become plainly evident that the economic working of a
flour-milling business at Kilmore was no longer possible.
At the present time, when rail and motor transport systems are so
much in evidence, it is virtually impossible to draw a picture whereon
cartage methods of pioneering days would be faithfully depicted. Let any
reader strive to visualise fifty bullock teams hauling wheat-laden drays,


slowly clustering around those three flour mills at old Kilmore. Perhaps
the suggestion of “fifty teams” may be regarded as a flight of imagination.
It is no mere fancy, however, but simply a pointed reference to an actual
fact. In the busy period of the delivery season it was quite the usual
thing to see a constant stream of such traffic passing to and fro during
daylight hours.
Probably the vast majority of present-day Kilmore residents never
actually saw a team of yoked bullocks hauling a loaded dray. Mrs Kelly,
an old-time resident, saw practically an endless procession of bullock teams,
yet never saw a railway train. This good lady left the British Isles before
railway transport had developed. When trains passed regularly through
Kilmore East after 1872 she never felt sufficiently interested to journey
thus far to see the new method of locomotion.
There is a good story told in connection with one of the flour
mills already referred to. In all probability the incident occurred when
• t
Maxfield’s mill was reopened after the premises had been enlarged. What
was then considered a very powerful steam engine had been installed,
together with new machinery. A general holiday was proclaimed, and
the residents of the district were invited to come along and view the
engine and machinery. In addition to a full muster of white people,
there were also a considerable number of aborigines present. It is not
recorded what kind of refreshment was partaken of by the whites, but
report definitely says that unlimited quantities of porridge served up in
milk dishes was provided for the blacks. The feasting was over, and
there had ensued the feeling of peace and good will that invariably
prevails when ample provender has been supplied. Suddenly the air is
rent with an ear-piercing whistle, and the throbbing engine is set in
motion. In less than three minutes not a single “abo” is visible within
range; the whole tribe is in rapid flight across country towards the east,
the nearest way back to the forest.
In 1849 the Beer Act was extended to Kilmore, and Bryant’s brewery
was forthwith registered. It is very evident that Kilmore was a fast-
growing town at that period. Bryant had a very short run without local
opposition, as a second brewery was registered by Stephen Neilson in
1850. The sober occupation of flour milling held pride of place for a
few short years, and then some people were seized with a desire to intro-
duce an industry with a “kick” in it. John McCord, who was appointed
Chief Constable in 1849, also acted as Inspector of Distilleries. Neilson’s
brewery business came down to comparatively recent times, and was con-
ducted at various periods by Alt, Fynn, Brady, and others.
The following notes are copied from the diary of Alfred Sugden, who
entered into partnership with Joseph Biddle, and opened a tannery and
leather business at Kilmore in 1850: “March 29th, 1849: Left Hebdin
Bridge, Yorkshire, England, and sailed for Australia. September 12th,
1850: Left Melbourne at 7 a.m. for Kilmore, arriving there at 3 p.m.
September 14th: Returned to Melbourne after arranging to enter into


partnership with J. Biddle. September 23rd: Left Melbourne for Kilmore;
arrived on the evening of the 26th, after a tedious journey of two and a
half days. September 27th: In association with partner commenced work,
etc.” It had been Sugden’s original intention to establish a tannery at
Melbourne, but the heavy floods in the Yarra (1849) evidently deterred
him.
Whilst Joseph Biddle successfully resisted the temptation to try his
luck on the goldfields, his partner, Alfred Sugden, decided to venture
forth in quest of the precious metal. With his good wife he went to
Forest Creek (Castlemaine), and opened a store in the mining camp.
Their son, Hugh Sugden, was born in that camp. The white child
evidently aroused the curiosity of the blacks, who carried the baby off
from the tent. Eventually the child was restored to the parents, mainly
through the efforts of Henry Fischer, another old timer from Kilmore.
After a space of time spent on the goldfields Sugden returned to
Kilmore, and engaged in active business until his death (result of acci-
dent) in 1885. (Hugh Sugden, born at Forest Greek in 1852, died at
Kilmore in October 1937.)
The Kilmore Hospital. —In 1854 Dr. F. W. C. Beavan, who might
well be regarded as the founder, conceived the idea of establishing a
permanent hospital at Kilmore. Local residents quickly expressed their
willingness to support the proposal, and carry the project forward to a
definite issue. In 1885 a meeting was held, and the following office-
bearers were appointed: President, Dr. Beavan; Vice-President, J. K.
Trainor; Treasurer, James Maxfield; Secretary, J. W. Osborn; Com-
mittee, Rev. Father O’Rourke, Rev. W. Singleton, Thos. Bossence,
Joseph Biddle, and T. Lankworthy.
The first steps taken by the committee was to make arrangements
with Mrs. Fahey to accommodate patients at her residence in Victoria
Parade. After the provision of temporary quarters, with suitable equip-
ment, had been satisfactorily settled, means were promptly adopted to
inaugurate a building fund, so that the erection of the proposed public
hospital would not be so long delayed. In addition to a local canvass for
subscriptions, an appeal was made to the Government for financial as-
sistance. At the time John O’Shanassy (later Sir John), the Hon. Member
for Kilmore, held office as Chief Secretary in the Ministry of the day.
Owing possibly to this fortuitous circumstance the Kilmore Hospital
appeal met with a generous response. Upon the advice of Dr. Beavan the
present site of the hospital was chosen, and after being duly gazetted, Dr.
Beavan, J. K. Trainor, and James Maxfield were appointed trustees.
Plans for the building were prepared by Crouch and Wilson, archi-
tects, of Melbourne, and on 2nd February, 1859, the first contract was
let to J. Mahoney. The foundation stone was laid by John O’Shannasy
on 17th March, in the presence of a large gathering of people from
surrounding districts. In the early part of 1860 the building was handed
over by the contractor. A grand ball was held to celebrate the occasion.


Through this social event, which was a pronounced success the building
fund was considerably augmented.
Right at the outset the Board of Management had the good fortune
to secure the services of Mr. and Mrs. Conran as house steward and
matron. This couple soon grasped the idea of conducting the internal
arrangements effectively and economically. Eventually furnished quarters
were provided for Dr. Beavan, the resident medical officer, a position
which this gentleman held for several years.
In those busy years the ebb and flow of life brought about frequent
changes in the personnel of Kilmore’s inhabitants, yet there was never
any lack of charitably disposed persons ready to assist this newly-formed
institution in its noble work. We are proud to recall and publish this
fact; In the fifties and sixties of the last century Kilmore was fortunate
enough to number amongst its citizens a very fine body of self-sacrificing
men who took a keen and lively interest in the welfare of their town and
district. Not only in the provision and maintenance of a public hospital,
but in divers other ways did those townsmen impress their worth on
their own and succeeding generations. In 1869 Mr. and Mrs. W. F.
Bromley were appointed as superintendent and matron. For fully ten
years previous to that W. F. Bromley had been an active worker for the
hospital, arranging many functions to raise money to be devoted to the
upkeep of that institution. Dr. Semple, who had previously acted in the
capacity of resident medical officer at the Melbourne Hospital, was
selected as visiting medical officer in 1870.
Naturally, of course, various changes in the staff and generally have
taken place down through the passage of the intervening years. It should
suffice, however, to briefly recount the salient features in the administra-
tion of hospital affairs after the institution was fairly launched on its
career. Dr. W. H. Semple continued as medical officer continuously until
the year 1921, when he resigned in favour of his son, the late Dr. J. H.
Semple, who served the hospital faithfully until 1923, when he purchased
a suburban practice, and removed from the district.
Miss O’Brien, later Mrs. T. Gearty, was a faithful and devoted
servant to the hospital in the capacity of matron for some years prior to
1902, when she resigned to be married. Shortly after, in 1903, Miss Katie
McKenzie, a daughter of old Kilmore residents, Mr. and Mrs. John
McKenzie, was appointed matron, and continued in that position till her
resignation in 1921. In 1931 the Board determined to enlarge the useful-
ness of the institution. A new wing, at a cost of approximately £3OOO,
was added, forming a private or community hospital, together with an
up-to-date operating theatre. Last year a sewerage system was installed,
and Kilmore can claim an up-to-date hospital which serves its district
well.
Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library. —On the evening of Friday,
27th March, 1863, at a meeting of the committee of the above institution,
the secretary submitted the following historical sketch, same to be en-


grossed on parchment and enclosed in the foundation stone of the new
hall then about to be erected: “The Kilmore Mechanics’ Institute was
initiated at a public meeting of the residents held on the 11th day of
September, 1854, by the naming of a provisional committee and establish-
ing terms of membership—an annual subscription of twenty shillings.
Several impromptu meetings of the said provisional committee took
place before 2nd October, 1854, when the first meeting of subscribers was
held for the purpose of electing office-bearers and committee. W. B.
Noel, Esq. (now Judge of the Insolvent Court, Melbourne), was chosen
as President; J. Kelly Trainor, Esq., Vice-President; James Maxfield,
Esq., Treasurer; and J. F. Swears, Secretary; Committee for the first year:
Messrs. Alfred Sugden, Wm. Spurling, W. E. Stewart, Thos. Bossence,
Thos. Roberts, Andrew Wilson, and W. E. Twynam.”
“The chief object aimed at by the establishment of the institute
seems to have been the possession of a public reading room, and the
occasional delivery of lectures on scientific subjects —afterwards to be
supplemented by a lending library. For these purposes a very commodious
apartment was occupied at a high rental until July, 1856. The institute
then entered into possession of a small slab building —much out of
repair—formerly used by the police as a temporary gaol. The Government
of the day, in response to a memorial presented by local residents, made
a gift of the building for use as a library. The nucleus of the library had
been formed by private donations of books, etc. J. P. Fawkner, Esq., the
steady patron of such institutions in the colony, had been generous to our
local library.
Aided regularly with grants from the Government and the Kilmore
Town Council in later years, the number of volumes steadily increased.
At the present time (1863) there are 660 volumes of standard works on
History, Biography, Science, Poetry, and Fiction, besides numerous
pamphlets of serial works, etc. The necessity of a more commodious and
permanent structure centrally situated has been forced on the attention
of tried friends of the Institute. It has therefore been determined to
erect a more suitable temple for the humble votaries of rudimental art
and science in this locality. The expense of the erection of the hall is to
be defrayed by private contributions, and in the hope that such shall be
forthcoming when required, arrangements have been made for the
foundation stone to be laid by the Kilmore Lodge of Free and Accepted
Masons, No. 1148. The date chosen for such function being the sixth
day of April, in the year of our Lord 1863, the twenty-sixth year of the
reign of Her Majesty Queen Victoria. Sir Henry Barkly, K.C.8., Governor
in Chief of the Colony of Victoria. The Chief Secretary of the Colony,
the Honourable John O’Shanassy, being the representative of Kilmore in
the Legislative Assembly.”
Down through the years 1854 to 1874 the following gentlemen
occupied the presidential chair: W. B. Noel, W. E. Twynam (3), Dr.
Beavan (2), Dr. Bindley, Dr. Nash (2), George Hudson (2), E. Wood-


ward (2), Lawrence Arcus, W. Davis (2), J. C. Hayes, John Taylor (3).
The figures in parentheses denote that some of those named in the
list were re-elected to the position of president on more than one
occasion, though not necessarily in consecutive years.
The slab building granted for use as a library in 1856 was no longer
required as a lockup. More commodious quarters for the detention of
evildoers had been provided by the erection of a log cabin goal, close
to where the Golf Club House now stands. Apparently there was some
difficulty in reaching the library in its new location after dark. On 28th
July, 1856, according to records, it was decided that a post, with lantern
affixed, should be placed midway between the Kilmore Hotel and the
library situated on the bank of the creek, at the rear of the present
Court House.
The whilom secretary, who furnished historical notes for the purpose
of commemorating the earliest activities of the institute, failed to record
the valuable service rendered by two of our pioneer clergymen —Rev.
W. Singleton and Father O’Rourke, When the first committee was
formed these worthy men were admitted as ex-officio members, and
both proved to be untiring workers for the welfare of the institution.
The “very commodious” apartment originally occupied as a read-
ing room was in a building in Sydney Street, about midway between
the Red Lion and Railway Hotels. The building was afterwards occupied
for many years by Henry Fischer, who carried on a fruit and sweets
shop there. The early citizens of Kilmore displayed very commendable
enterprise when they undertook to erect a Public Hall only nine years
after the first Library Committee was formed. Practically three-fourths of
a century has elapsed since the Mechanics’ Hall was officially opened
and made available for public purposes. Down through the avenue
of the years the building, that still weathers the storm very well, has
been made free use of, and has been the chosen rendezvous for many
a gay and festive scene.
Back in the year 1876 the M.U.1.0.0.F. Hall (for long familiarly
termed the Oddfellows Hall) was erected. Owing to its central position
this hall became a more popular resort for entertainments. In course of
time both structures lost the first bloom of youth, and as neither build-
ing was spacious enough to accommodate a big assembly of patrons, the
town of Kilmore was placed at a disadvantage in staging social events.
The renovated and enlarged Manchester Unity Hall of to-day synchronises
very well indeed with our Centenary celebrations, and provides an
excellent monument to mark the auspicious occasion.
The Kilmore Total Abstinence Society.—There are many pages in
the early history of Kilmore that simply refuse to unfold and disclose
a connected and coherent story. Likewise many of the records available
are so vague and conflicting that it is extremely difficult to reconcile
matters referred to, and submit them in orderly sequence so that such
matters will be readily grasped by readers.


With regard to the formation of the above society, it has been
gleaned from an article entitled “Early Reminiscences,” that the in-
augural meeting was held in the little wooden Catholic chapel, with Rev.
Father Clarke as chairman. At this meeting it was resolved to establish
the Total Abstinence Society, and at a subsequent meeting, 7th June,
1850, the following office-bearers were elected: Robert Allen, President;
Hugh Swann, John Chambers, Vice-Presidents; Hugh Swann, Treasurer:
D. Sutherland, Secretary; Committee —Messrs. Paxman, Foster, McCord,
Ballantine, senr., Ballantine, junr., Griffiths, Halsey, Armstrong, Biddle,
Davidson, Paton, and Campbell. In less than one week from date given
above a committee meeting was held in the Teetotal Hall. This is where
the difficulty of reconciliation comes in. Where did that hall suddenly
spring from, and why was it not used for the inaugural meeting? That
there was a hall of some sort situated in Albert Street admits of no doubt.
In the article already referred to it is described as a formidable building;
elsewhere it is dubbed as a small wooden structure.
The first sale of Crown lands in 1853 was conducted by J. W.
Osborn in the old hall in Albert Street, presumably the Teetotal Hall.
This building must have been privately owned, and let to the Total
Abstinence Society and others for the purpose of holding meetings and
other functions. Close reference to the minute book of the society reveals
the fact that the committee frequently discussed the advisability of
erecting a suitable hall at several meetings held in the first nine months
of 1851. This seems somewhat like prima-facie evidence that the society
held its meetings in rented quarters. The Total Abstinence Society,
formed in June, 1850, was unique in many respects. It certainly holds
pride of place as the first public body of any kind to be established at
Kilmore. In a report of a general meeting of kindred societies, held in
Melbourne in the early sixties, this body at Kilmore was referred to as
“the pioneer inland society.” In addition to the society’s avowed principle,
the promotion of temperance, this local body functioned as a social club.
Some of the members formed a band, and in a short space of time
musical selections became a popular part of the programme at the
weekly meetings.
There were three licensed hotels doing business in the town when
the Beer Act was extended to Kilmore in 1849. Two breweries were
in full swing in a comparatively short space of time after the concession
granted under this Act made the registration of local breweries possible.
Apparently, to counteract the baneful influences of such innovations,
the advocates of temperance banded together in a laudable effort to
promote sobriety. For a space of fifteen months the society carried on its
dual purpose, battling against intemperance and providing rational en-
joyment for its members. As might naturally be expected, some of the
members failed to keep their temperance pledge. The more reliable
class of total abstainers were frequently instructed by the executive


officers to tactfully approach their recalcitrant brethren, and if possible
bring them back to the fold.
From the old minute book of the society this extraordinary entry
is copied: “Monday, 6th October, 1851. No meeting. All Kilmore in
commotion on account of gold discovery.” Truly an unusual entry on
the records of any public body. Picture those early residents of Kilmore
quietly settling into a groove, satisfied that the routine of their daily
lives was already fashioned according to a restricted pattern. Suddenly,
“like a bolt from the blue,” the limited, cramped outlook vanishes, and
gives place to a “vision splendid” on which a welcome change of
fortune for all was clearly revealed. Let our thoughts, aided by our
imaginations, just reflect for a moment on the astounding change. Is it
any wonder that “All Kilmore in commotion” should be recorded on
that old minute book? At any rate, it is very evident that the com-
motion dealt a blow that had the effect of completely staggering the
Total Abstinence Society. Not until the month of September, 1855,
did the society regain its equilibrium, decide to reorganise, and enter
once more on its chosen work. Several of those who had been prominent
members in former years entered enthusiastically into the reorganisation
scheme. During the intervening years there had been an influx of “new
blood” to the district; and many of the recent arrivals joined up with
the society. Before the end of 1855 John Taylor was appointed secretary,
and continued to act in that capacity until 1858, when he was promoted
to the presidency and continued in that position until 1862.
No records are available to trace the trend of events in the field of
temperance activities from 1862 to 1870. In the latter year, when the
1.0. R. was established at Kilmore, it is safe to assume that the earlier
temperance body merged with the newly-formed Friendly Society. During
his long term of residence in Kilmore, that very estimable citizen, John
Taylor, was closely indentified with the temperance movement.
The Press. —On 16th May, 1855, the people of Kilmore had their
first opportunity of scanning the pages of a locally published newspaper.
“The Standard of Freedom” was the pretentious title adopted for this
pioneer journal. W. F. Bromley, whose name also appears in connection
with the Kilmore Hospital, was on the staff of the “Standard of Free-
dom.” He was the father of Frank Bromley who retired from active
work on the “Free Press” quite recently, after continuous service with
that journal for forty-five years (died 1938).
The “Free Press,” as established in 1864 by Henry Furze, had but
a short flutter, really only four months. Financial difficulties caused
disaster, and publication ceased with dramatic suddenness. A year later
a syndicate of ten men, with Thomas Hunt in charge as editor, revived
the “Free Press.” The venture proved sound and profitable, and in a
comparatively short time Thomas Hunt acquired freehold rights, and
went sailing along as proprietor and editor for practically seventy years.
The “Examiner,” described as a Kilmore and Mclvor journal, was


published twice a week in 1865. The local issue of this newspaper, as
conducted by Edward Woodward, was evidently the pioneer “Standard
of Freedom” under a new style and title.
Another local newspaper was established in 1870, then came “The
Advertiser” in 1873. The “Free Press” and “The Advertiser” gradually
absorbed and incorporated all other local publications. Kilmore con-
tinued to be served by those two weekly newspapers through a long
number of years, until both were amalgamated under one control
something more than three years ago.
The Banks. —For some years previous to 1866 the Oriental Bank
Corporation carried on ordinary banking business in premises adjoining
the present “Free Press” office. The building occupied at that early period
has been demolished, and the Oriental Bank has ceased to exist.
The National Bank opened 23rd March, 1858, in a building opposite
the Post Office, and moved to present site opposite Mill Street in 1883.
Before the merger in 1918 this bank traded under the style and title
of the Colonial Bank. The Court House Hotel was established in the
building vacated by the Colonial Bank in 1883. This hotel was delicensed
about 15 years ago.
By a merger in 1927 the Bank of Victoria was incorporated with
the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney. The Kilmore branch of
the Bank of Victoria opened for business in 1866 under the managership
of C. R. Fraser, who resigned from a similar position with the local
branch of the Oriental Bank.
Kilmore Agricultural Society.—At the inaugural meeting of the
above society, held at the Red Lion Hotel 12th May, 1858, the follow-
ing office-bearers and members of committee were appointed for the
ensuing year: President, J. K. Trainor, Esq.; Vice-President, Arch. Mc-
Martin, Esq.; Treasurer, James Maxfield, Esq.; Secretary, Alfred Sugden,
Esq.; Committee —Messrs. Jas. Mooney, M. Nunan, George Hudson,
John Boyd, Wm. Spurling, James Still, Charles Broadhurst, and Laurence
Bourke.
A ploughing match in James Still’s paddock, 25th May, 1858, was
the first function carried out under the auspices of this newly-formed
society. In July, 1858, a tender (£158) for fencing a block of land
granted to the society for use as a showground was accepted. In the
month of January, 1859, the erection of a shed within the enclosure
was arranged for at a cost of £lO5.
The subjoined resolution, which was carried unanimously at
the society’s meeting, 7th March, 1859, has been copied verbatim
from the official minute book: “That the annual show of farm, garden,
and dairy produce, also the show of stock and implements for the Agri-
cultural District of Kilmore, do take place at the Agricultural Show-
ground, Powlett Street, on Thursday, 24th day of March, 1859.” On
above date therefore the first show at Kilmore duly eventuated. During
the next few years the society staged two annual exhibitions. A Grain


Show was held in the month of March, and the display of stock and
general produce was arranged for November.
The site then occupied by the Agricultural Society was situated on
a block of land having a frontage of four chains to Powlett Street,
and running westward along the south side of Rutledge Street. The
residence of A. J. Boyd now stands in the north-east comer, whilst
Thomas Quinn’s residence is farther along the northern boundary of
that block. The railway line long since cut across the back portion of
Kilmore’s early Showground.
In 1865 an amalgamation with a proposed body at Lancefield was
decided upon, and the title Kilmore and Lancefield Agricultural Society
was adopted. Although the names of office-bearers and members of
committee hailing from Lancefield and Romsey districts continued to
appear on the minutes of meetings for some years, the comprehensive title
just referred to seems to have been quickly dropped. As a matter of fact
our Agricultural Society suffered temporary eclipse in 1870, and re-
mained dormant until 1874, when it revived under a reconstruction
process.
During the years already recorded, whilst the society was an active
force in the district, several ploughing matches were held. At those
early displays of field cultivation methods prizes were competed for by
ploughmen who used horse teams, likewise by those who used bullock
teams to haul their implements. It was also a regular thing to offer a
prize at the Annual Show for best team of working bullocks. Special
reference has been made to those facts for the purpose of showing how
essential a unit the placid working bullock was in pioneering work.
Reconstruction. —At a meeting held at Kelly’s Hotel, Kilmore, 14th
November, 1874, with Finlay McNab, Esq., in the chair, it was resolved
to again establish the society as a going concern. The list of office-
bearers and committee appointed on that occasion was somewhat im-
posing. As the names of the men then associated with the society con-
stitute an interesting link with the past, a comprehensive panel is
appended: President, James Mcßain, Esq., M.L.A.; Vice-President:
Thomas Hunt, Esq., M.L.A.; Treasurer, William Davis, Esq.; Secretary,
M. K. Beveridge, Esq.; Committee —Messrs. Finlay McNab, Joel Cooper,
William Donaldson, James Crough, Donald McLeod, Matt. Nunan,
John Bradley, G. S. Beveridge, Duncan McLean, Matt. Kelly, John
Robertson, Thomas Lade, James Notman, Joseph Wilson, Samuel Moore,
Daniel McCarthy, Hugh Doogan, A. Kearney, J. Summers, J. W.
Osborn, M. Curtain, W. H. Budd, John Paterson, George Wilson, and
Denis Griffin.
For more than a dozen years after 1874 the affairs of the Agricultural
Society seem to have smoothly moved along a groove, and there is
nothing of more than ordinary interest to recall. About 1886 a move-
ment was set on foot with a view of providing more suitable and com-
modious quarters for the holding of the Annual Show. The present site


was procured, September, 1887, and the new Showground was prepared
for the first exhibition therein.
In addition to serving its purpose for Agricultural Society events,
the Showground has been variously used as a football ground, sports oval,
picnic park, in fact the arena has been availed of for a variety of
purposes, and still continues to be a popular meeting place for local
residents and visitors from outlying districts. On three occasions since
the present Showgrounds were established Kilmore has had the honour
of entertaining Vice-Regal guests. In 1888 Sir Harry Brougham Loch
and Lady Loch accepted the invitation of the Agricultural Society and
visited the Annual Show.
Responding to an invitation from the same source Lord and Lady
Brassey were graciously pleased to come along in 1897. The present
Governor of Victoria, Lord Huntingfield, takes a keen and active interest
in country activities. His Excellency, accompanied by Lady Huntingfield,
honoured us by their presence at Kilmore on Show Day, 26th November,
1937.


CHAPTER 4.
“THE OLD SURVEY” AND
EARLY RURAL SETTLEMENT
S already noted in the chapter on Early Land Settlement, a com-
pact block of land, 5120 acres in extent, was acquired from the
h
New South Wales Government by Wm. Rutledge in 1841. It
should be of interest to present-day residents of Kilmore, to publish a
clear and exact location of the boundaries of the said block of land,
familiarly known to early and succeeding generations as “The Old
Survey.”
Let us take as a starting point the south-east extremity of the block.
That is where our golfers, moving in a westerly course from the Cricket
Reserve, scramble through a narrow opening and come out on the
road. Move right along to the main entrance gate of the golf links, then
pause a moment and allow your vision to sweep along westward down
the hill, over the Kilmore Creek, leaving the post office on the left and
Memorial Park on the right, thence on past the State School and out
along the Lancefield road. The turn off to the left at the old “Plough
Inn” (Martin Ford’s and later Mon Dwyer’s, a favourite landmark of
yester years) must be passed by, and the direct west route maintained
until the south-west corner of the block is reached at the creek, after
a distance of 358 chains has been traversed.
Let us once more imagine ourselves back at the starting point —
the south-east corner. The object is now to clearly define the eastern
boundary line. Turning our backs on the golf links, we follow north-
ward along a little used roadway, leaving the racecourse on our right
hand. Crossing over the Kilmore East road, we leave the Agricultural
Showgrounds on our left, and thence along Kelly’s lane to a point
directly east from where the Pyalong-Heathcote road turns off from
the Hume Highway. The full length of this eastern boundary is 160 chains
(two miles).
The northern boundary, stretching westward, runs for a distance
of almost thirty chains before reaching the Hume Highway at the point
indicated in previous paragraph, and continues along O’Donoghue’s lane.
The Willowmavin railway station is just a trifling distance to the left
of this northern boundary, which terminates at the Kurkurroc Creek;
the measurement of the full line is 292 chains. The western boundary of
all land embraced in Rutledge’s Special Survey was determined by follow-
ing the creek bed, and thus connecting up the northern and southern
boundaries at the respective westerly extremities.
It is, of course, quite unnecessary to point out that a considerable
29


portion of the town of Kilmore is within the boundaries described. At
a rough estimate, it might be stated that about 250 acres of the south-
east corner of the original block is assumed to be inside the town
boundary. All the land beyond the town boundary has long since passed
into the hands of freeholders. Very decided and far-reaching changes
have come over the scene since Kilmore, an important unit in the cradle
of the human race in South-east Australia, first felt the pulsating throb of
hope betokening the birth of a nation.
Would it were possible for us to recall and publish a word picture,
that would faithfully reproduce the homely scenes of family and com-
munity life on that Old Survey, when occupied by the early rural settlers
on small areas of land. Aye, and might we well express the same wish
with regard to other near-by rural areas at Moranding, Bylands, Forbes,
Bald Hills, and so on. Without any special reference to the lands whence
they came, our hearts go out to acclaim the wonderful spirit that sustained
those early pioneers who were practically destitute of this world’s goods.
It might well be asked how did they ever win through the tough battle
than grim necessity forced upon them.
To make a home for a family in the days of their early struggles
did not mean the erection of anything pretentious in the building line —
no, even huts and shacks were regarded as all sufficient. The scarcity
of money, in fact it might be said the almost entire absence of this
precious commodity, made it necessary for the home builders to procure
rough bush timber for construction purposes. Medium-sized tree trunks
were used for corner posts and sundry uprights; all such uprights were
sunk well into the earth. Straight beams with axe-hewn grooves were
used for ground and wall plates, split slabs and palings provided storm-
resisting walls. The roofing structure, with rafters and bracing timbers
made from saplings, was covered with sheets of bark carefully cut and
stripped from the trunks of bush trees. Nevertheless, those rustic dwellings
possessed a charm, and were fondly loved by the occupiers, who were
overjoyed to have some place to call a home.
Undoubtedly there was a fair showing of rural settlement over the
Old Survey, previous to Victoria being proclaimed a separate colony in
1851. Government land sales became a prominent feature in the settle-
ment of the countryside when the control of Crown lands was transferred
from Sydney to Melbourne. This more central or local control of land
settlement clashed with the disturbing influence due to the discovery
of gold and the subsequent rush to the goldfields. Consequently the
desire to take a firm hold on the land, and settle down to work as
primary producers, considerably weakened for a time. With the influx of
population that followed on the gold discoveries, there came the realisa-
tion that the food requirements of a vastly increased number of people
meant that production from the soil had become imperative. An astound-
ing change in economic and general conditions had been sprung upon
the young colony with surprising suddenness. If thousands, and ever


increasing thousands, were pouring into the country from overseas, and
the great bulk of the menfolk amongst these new arrivals went in quest
of the precious yellow metal, well, someone must keep the home fires
burning. Yes, someone had to till the soil, and grow wheat and other staple
products to help to fill the maws of those hungry hordes of miners.
At that particular juncture Kilmore and the surrounding district
was in the unique position of functioning as the granary of the young
colony. Flour mills were already established, and wheat growing had
become the staple industry amongst the rural settlers over a fairly
extensive area of the midland countryside; in fact, there are authentic
records to show what wheat was carted to Kilmore mills from Kyneton
and other places equidistant.
Owing to the dislocation caused by the “gold fever,” it was ex-
tremely difficult to carry on cultivation and general farm work. Never-
theless, it is more than surprising to reflect upon the results obtained by
pioneer soil tillers during that trying period. They had only the most
primitive implements and machinery available to their hands; likewise
there was almost complete dearth of man and team power. Yet, in
spite of such heavy handicaps, wheat was produced in fairly large
quantities, flour was gristed, and a staple article in the way of foodstuffs
was made available for consumption.
It was a stupendous problem in those days to provide a regular
supply of foodstuffs for resident and floating population, likewise for
the crowds of miners who were delving into the bowels of the earth in
a fevered search for gold, and yet more gold. The miners were expending
their strength in toil and sweat, yet their engrossing labour did not
produce even one mouthful of solid food. Someone may casually remark,
“Those miners were winning the wherewithal to purchase abundant
supplies of the necessaries of life.” Such casual folk must be reminded
that methods of sea and land transport were crude and imperfect in
those early colonial days, and getting the “necessaries of life” delivered
to the goldfields bristled with difficulties.
Let it be recorded in all seriousness, here and now, that the
farming community in and around Kilmore did true yeoman service for
the infant Victorian colony during the feverish gold boom period. It is
really a source of wonder to our present-day farmers, to reflect on the
fact that a great deal of the arable land around those districts con-
tinuously produced wheat crops over periods exceeding twenty-five years.
In almost inaccessible places in hill country, and along creek flats, plots
varying in extent from a couple of acres to moderate-sized fields were
regularly tilled and sown down with wheat. Nowadays observant men
leisurely strolling over properties in surrounding localities often find
themselves puzzled in striving to decide by what tracks the produce was
carted out. Verily, those pioneer farmers and the teamsters, with their
sturdy bullock teams, allowed no obstacles to baulk them.
Perhaps the average man and woman of the present day do not


fully realise the difficulties that confronted the citizens in those stirring
times. Cultivators, home-builders, teamsters, miners, wholesale and retail
traders, womenfolk with young families, and sundry others were living
and striving amidst a chaotic condition of affairs, yet all were hopefully
looking forward in expectation to a more orderly arrangement of life’s
grim struggle. Those elected and appointed to positions of Governmental
authority found themselves almost constantly coming up face to face
with fast-changing conditions calling for prompt attention and direction.
It was, indeed, an era when initiative, quick action, and untiring personal
effort were needed, and it is pleasant to relate such splendid attributes of
human nature were well in evidence.
Without detracting from the worthiness of Kilmore and its citizens
at any period, it might be truthfully claimed that during the two
decades —1850 to 1870 —Kilmore played a more conspicuous part and
participated more fully in the national welfare than at any other period.
Even up to 1875 Kilmore was generally regarded as a provincial centre,
to which people, spread over a wide area of country, came to transact
business, and purchase supplies.
During the ’seventies several townships assumed a fair showing
of importance in localities from where trade had previously centred at
Kilmore. Furthermore, the fast-growing city of Melbourne, less than forty
miles distant, was already establishing a stranglehold on the trading
concerns of all that portion of the young colony where population had
noticeably increased. As vast areas of Crown lands farther north were
thrown open for selection about this time, there was a considerable
exodus of population from Kilmore and its environs. The gold fever had
abated, space for rural activity was far too cramped, and the need to
engage in primary production on a larger scale was urgent. In those
days the Goulbum Valley and Northern Victoria were largely peopled by
men and women who migrated from Kilmore.
Through one cause and another, inside of forty years from the
laying of its foundations, Kilmore had spent much of its force as an
important provincial centre, and was henceforth destined to battle on
as an ordinary Victorian country town. Aye, and it has battled on very
well indeed; in fact, there has been decided signs of revival during the
last twenty years, and even more prosperous times lie ahead. Of this
hopeful forecast, more anon.


CHAPTER 5.
EARLY RURAL SETTLEMENT
(Continued)
AS previously stated, prompt measures were taken by the newly-
created Lands Department to make surveys and arrange land
sales soon after Victoria was proclaimed a separate colony. As
there was abundant evidence to show that land seekers were attracted
to the Kilmore district, the Crown Lands authorities lost no time in
preparing plans and making suitable areas available for purchase. After
E. R. White and F. W. Pinneger had made surveys, a land sale was
held at Kilmore 19th May, 1853. At this sale extensive areas in different
parishes adjacent to the town of Kilmore were offered. For present
purposes, however, special reference will be made to an area of nearly
6000 acres in the Parish of Bylands —immediately to the south of the
town.
To enable readers to visualise the location and the boundaries of the
tract of land comprised in this 6000 acre area, an effort to give a
detailed description of the ground plan is here inserted. Let anyone
interested in the matter take up a position where the Hume Highway
veers slightly to the left after crossing the Mill Road. The observer will
face southward and look right along Clancy’s road, allowing his imagina-
tion to carry for a distance of about 2f miles, where another east-west
road is reached. This road, forming the southern boundary, runs east from
where the Bylands Parish abuts on Forbes Parish, crosses the Hume
Highway near the roadside settlement (Bylands), and thence along over
the railway line until the south-east corner of the whole block now being
outlined is reached about 70 chains from where the Highway is crossed.
Resuming observations from the point first taken up on the Mill Road
(actually the northern boundary), the patient observer —with his back
towards Kilmore —is asked to realise that the north-east corner is distant
two miles on his left hand, whilst on the right the north-west corner is
distant miles. The western boundary is the dividing line between
Bylands and Forbes Parishes, really the continuation of a road turning
south from the Lancefield road beyond the Kilmore Cemetery. Perhaps
the best method of locating the eastern boundary is to repeat something
already included in the text: it is distant two miles from the Hume
Highway at the Old Mill, and only seventy chains from the same ribbon-
like track at Bylands.
There is a big proportion of good land within the area described,
also some patches of light land. From particulars at hand, it would
appear that practically the whole of the lots submitted at this initial
sale were sold. As high as £lO per acre was paid for a few blocks —in
most instances, however, from £3 to £6 per acre were the ruling figures —


lighter land was relatively lower. For about half a mile southwards
from the Mill Road a number of so-called “suburban” blocks were
surveyed. Such blocks, varying from six to eighteen acres, extended only
a short distance eastward from the Hume Highway, but on the west
side a distance of 50 chains marked the limit. Owing to proximity to
the fast-growing town higher figures were paid for these convenient-
sized blocks. Through the passage of time early notions regarding the
spread of Kilmore town failed to materialise, the “suburban” faded out,
and those high-priced blocks reverted to the class of rural lands.
The Broadhurst and Tootal pre-emptive right (640 acres) is in
the south-east corner of the block outlined in previous paragraphs; the
date of deed given for this is 25/1/55. It is more than passing strange
to reflect that out of the various names inscribed on the original Parish
Plan, only Sutherland has remained continuously in the picture.
A new generation of property owners occupy those valuable farms
to-day, and carry on the good work so cheerfully entered upon by that
valiant first brigade of landmen. In our midst rural activity is much
in evidence at the present time not only on the south side, but in every
direction radiating from the town. Let us remember, too, that there is
no lack of evidence to show that farming pursuits have been actively
followed all down through the avenue of years since the ploughshare
broke the first sod on Kilmore territory. Much information can be
gleaned from old newspaper files, relative to primary production and
stock husbandry as practised by an earlier generation of farmers. There
are none of the good folk who figured in the arena in the forties and
early fifties left amongst us. Nevertheless, there are many direct descend-
ants of these early toilers, who retain vivid recollections of stories
concerning the daily round of life in the history of parents and elders.
Like the traditions of old handed down from father to son, from
mother to daughter, episodes in which our elders figured have been kept
green in our memories, because we revered the lips whence those stories
came. To illustrate what is meant by the foregoing passage, special
reference is made to some who were unconsciously and unwillingly
associated with a stirring incident related here.
In 1853 two desperate bushrangers sprang a sudden surprise upon
the immates at the old Moranding Station homestead (on the hill
where E. Dumaresq, jun., now resides). It is surmised that those two
men, escaped convicts from Tasmania, had a grudge against John Clarke,
who was then in possession at Moranding. Clarke from a vantage point
recognised his visitors. Guessing their nefarious purpose he made a bolt
for it, and except for a bullet through his hat, got safely away to a hiding
place in the bush.
The outlaws then turned their attention to the station hands,
deeming it prudent to prevent those who had witnessed the escapade
from getting into quick communication with the police. Owing to a
diabolical crime committed farther south, the bushrangers knew that they


were hotly pursued. One man who showed resistance was promptly
tied and bound, whilst his wife was scared by dire threats against her
two children and herself if she released her husband before the des-
peradoes had a chance to get clear away.
At another home in the near vicinity a young woman was busy in
the dairy, and was totally unaware that desperate deeds were being
enacted on the crest of the hill. Although there were no house-to-house
telephones in those days, the owner of that home down the hillside had
somehow got word of something in the nature of “robbery under arms”
disturbing his neighbours. Imagine the surprise of the young woman
who was handling the milk dishes when her employer rushed into the
dairy, and deposited a double handful of gold coins and nuggets into a
dish of thick milk. Truly an excellent hiding place for such a precious
hoard.
All this transpired eighty-four years ago. The man who was so
ignominously tied hand and foot, and the good woman who was made to
tremble for the safety of husband, children, and self, were the grand-
parents of our respected townsman, James Still, whilst the milkmaid
mentioned was none other than the fondly-remembered mother of the
writer of these notes.
As this purports to be a chapter on early rural settlement, some-
one might remark that the episode recalled in previous paragraphs is
outside its proper setting. Maybe that is so, but it serves to show some
of the actual dangers to which pioneering settlers were exposed. Further-
more, as before suggested, it has been (more or less) deftly interwoven
into this story as an illustration of the manner in which we of the
present day have been kept in touch with the good folk of a bygone
period.
The first somewhat limited influx of colonial settlers that entered
what is now the important State of Victoria either sailed across Bass
Strait from Tasmania (then known as Van Diemen’s Land), or travelled
overland from New South Wales, the parent colony of Australia. It is
interesting to recall that early colonists, who came hither from the Old
World, referred to neighbours who hailed from these adjacent colonies
as “Vandemonians” and “Sydneysiders.” Even as late as the seventies,
it was a regular habit amongst “old hands” to use such terms of
definition in ordinary conversation. Furthermore, the “old hands,” es-
pecially those who came here previous to 1851, were very slow to adopt
the name of the newly-proclaimed colony, Victoria, into their vocabulary.
With them it long remained as Port Phillip.
In making themselves thoroughly conversant with the geographical
and general physical features of their adopted country, the early colonists
displayed a striking originality. This was well exemplified in the habit
of attaching quaint and distinctive names to places of special prominence.
Take for instance around Kilmore, the time-honoured reference to the
“Rocky Waterholes,” “Pretty Sally’s Hill,” “Green’s Pinch,” “The Red


Bara,” “Miss Gavan’s Sugarloaf,” “The Old Survey,” “The Old Mclvor
Road.” Probably the present generation of Kilmorians are not apt to wax
eloquent at the recall of such quaintly descriptive nomenclature. There
is not the slightest doubt whatever that the mere mention of such locality
names would thrill like music through the breasts of our district pioneers.
The chance reference to the “Old Mclvor Road” suggests that
there is much of historic interest attached to that cross-country thorough-
fare. Stage coaches and all kinds of traffic bound towards Mclvor (later
Heathcote), Bendigo, and the Murray River at Echuca, turned to the
west at Kilmore, and travelled some distance along what is now known
as the Lancefield road. In those early years there were no clearly defined
or publicly surveyed roadways leading across the Willowmavin and
Moranding country. It would appear as if it only required some venture-
some teamster to choose a suitable track, others would then promptly
follow in his wake.
It is clearly evident that several tracks wended a way through those
Old Survey Lands, whilst one in particular went even beyond the
western extremity of Rutledge’s holding before the northward turn was
made. This route, freely used for stage coaches and light vehicular traffic,
branched off where the Crooked Bridge now stands, and passed over
“Nanny’s Flat.” As the Melboume-Broadmeadows track struck Rutledge’s
southern boundary, about three miles west from Kilmore, it is safe to
assume that traffic from that quarter would link up with a fairly direct
line heading towards Moranding Station homestead.
The old bullock dray track, that turned off in a north-westerly
direction from the Kilkenny Inn (opposite the cemetery), was the most
used of all available tracks. Keeping to the higher ground, this unmade
roadway passed to the west of Lake Logie and close by Maidment’s
quarries. Still maintaining the north-westerly course, this track meandered
along through the properties now occupied by Ahearn, Ryan, and
Dumaresq, and junctioned with what is now known as the Back Creek
road near the south-west corner of the Golden Vein Estate. Crossing
the valley through which the creek flows, all traffic climbed to higher
levels and moved along where the Presbyterian church and tennis courts
at High Camp now stand. Eventually this track struck the present
Kilmore-Pyalong-Heathcote road at the old Junction Hotel, now the
private residence of J. H. Walter and family.
At the present time, in roaming over the quiet rural reaches sketched
in the previous paragraph, it seems virtually impossible to visualise or
recall the scenes of brisk, stirring life witnessed in the same vicinity in
those early colonial days. Let us endeavour to get a glimpse, no matter
if it be somewhat imperfect, of the wayside dwellers along a section
of that old track who catered in primitive fashion for travellers passing
to and fro. At a point distant about half a mile north-west of the present
homestead occupied by the Ahearn family, a public house was run by
Watt Butler, and farther along on the same ridge a man named Mc-


Donald worked patiently in his “smithy.” Close by, where the bridge
now spans the Kurkurroc Creek on the central Willowmavin road, a
general store was run by a family named Jonathan, and in a secluded
bend of the creek a “shebeen house,” or “sly grog shop,” was presided
over by an eccentric female, Janet Kirkwood (Cranky Janet). Nestling
under the lee of the Old Homestead hill the Ash, Oak, and Elm Trees
Inn, kept by a man named Flynn, was a wayside resort of exceptional
historic interest. Amongst landholders, who were settled within easy
distance of the track described above, might be mentioned Finlay McNab,
James Brady, McLean, O’Leary, Johnnie Carroll, and “Billy” Connors.
Brady afterwards moved to the Goulburn Valley, where he became
noted as a competent farmer and successful wheatgrower.
As constant heavy traffic over natural surface would render any
given track impassable, it is not surprising that deviations had to be
made. One alternate route —which presumably had become a public
road —led northward past where the Willowmavin Railway Station now
stands. By the side of this road a substantial building (McKenzie’s) was
erected with a view of securing a publican’s licence. Another stone
building (Joel Cooper’s) on the Back Creek road was designed for a like
purpose. Before licences were obtained all traffic had been diverted to
a new route, the present Pyalong-Heathcote-Bendigo road, and the would-
be applicants suffered disappointment.
In Chapter 2 it is recorded that Lady Franklin passed this way on
the overland journey to Sydney in 1839. Whilst on that eventful trip
Her Ladyship was for some time a guest of honour at the old Moranding
Station. During a stay at that delightful spot, the ash, oak, and elm trees,
still flourishing in close proximity to the old homestead, were planted by
this gracious lady’s own hands. What a truly appropriate memorial to
mark such an event in early colonial history as this overland journey
undoubtedly was.
Elsewhere in this narrative it has been stated that there is no reliable
data available that would enable one to definitely fix the year in which
Joseph Sutherland entered into occupation at the old Moranding Station.
As Sir John Franklin was appointed Governor of Tasmania in 1837,
and his good lady visited this old station home in 1839, it seems reason-
able to surmise that the prominent Tasmanian, Joseph Sutherland, had
come across to Port Phillip, and was actually living here when the Vice-
Regal party passed through in 1839. In 1845 Sir John Franklin, formerly
Governor of Tasmania, went in command of a Polar Expedition, com-
prised of 134 officers and men, provided with two specially-selected
vessels. This expedition to the frozen north ended in complete disaster.


CHAPTER 6.
LEAVES FROM A DIARY
ALL through the foregoing chapters readers have been constantly
reminded that the early pioneers had to face and overcome
difficulties. It may be contended that the subject matter of this
particular chapter unnecessarily introduces a morbid tone, calculated to
detract from what should be fond memories of the past. Maybe such
contention is justified, yet a salutary lesson may be imparted to the
descendants of the old stock by a recapitulation of actual happenings
when men and women left their native lands, sailed for Australia, and
trusting to Providence hoped for the best.
Yes, despite the hardships that were endured, there was ever a
bright ray of hope to sustain those newcomers to a new land. General
conditions of life were by no means too happy or prosperous in the
British Isles or European countries in the middle of the last century.
The actual breakaway from cramped and somewhat depressing sur-
roundings naturally inspired hopes of greater freedom, and a chance
to develop and shape a more clearly defined future for each individual.
The arrival amidst scenes of freshness, coupled with the opportunities
always deemed possible in wide open spaces, gave promise of better things
to come, and the spirits of those venturesome migrants rose to the
occasion.
This much may be freely conceded —the new life entered upon by
those early pioneers was full of promise in the way of material progress
and general living conditions. Nevertheless, to win through the banks
of fog that blurred the light ahead required indomitable courage. From
a close and intimate examination of incidents in the lives of many of the
pioneers, one would be inclined to say that their strength and deter-
mination was almost superhuman, and their spirit, unbreakable. All things
considered, it should not be necessary to offer an apology for the records
appended, which contain nothing more than truthful details in the
experiences of pioneer settlers in the Kilmore district.
Alexander McKenzie, a typical Highlander, sailed from Scotland
per the barque “Glenhuntly” (Captain John Buchanan) early in the
year 1839; the voyage occupied six months. It seems almost incredible
that a vessel of only 447 tons register carried 200 souls aboard; this total
included passengers, officers, and crew. Fever of a virulent type broke
out, and the “Glenhuntly” soon became a plague-stricken ship. The only
persons to escape the dread malady were the captain, the ship’s doctor,
a few members of the crew, and one solitary passenger, Alex. McKenzie
aforementioned.
This hardy “Highland Wight” was commandeered as doctor’s assis-


tant and ship’s barber, and as may be readily imagined his hours of
labour were not fixed according to any statute. In the capacity of barber
he shaved all heads, and as wardsman and general nurse he washed
and cleaned “all hands.” Apart from numerous deaths resulting from
the serious sickness on board, there were fourteen deliberate cases of
suicide —demented patients who flung themselves through the portholes.
Eventually Port Phillip Bay was reached, but permission to land the
passengers was refused. This band of fever-worn and exhausted way-
farers from the British Isles was quarantined for a space of thirteen
weeks on a sandbank at The Bluff (now Elwood).
Whatever reward Australia had in store for the subject of this
memoir, he certainly had to survive a trying ordeal before firmly planting
his feet on the soil in the country of his adoption. However, with the
grim and purposeful manner of his race, McKenzie took prompt measures
to fit himself in the workaday scheme of things. A stonemason and builder
by trade, he in association with a “brither Scot,” who had been trained
to practice similar craftsmanship, soon found themselves regularly em-
ployed in building operations at Early Melbourne. Some time later
they carried out what was at that time considered rather an extensive
job—the erection of a brewery at Geelong.
The next move found McKenzie and his partner —Cuming by
name —in possession of Stony Point Station, purchased at the proverbial
“old song” price from a man named Hall, who had been ruined by
scab trouble among his flocks. After some years spent in pastoral pursuits
McKenzie was lured away by the gold fever; the diggings were then in
full swing. Cuming decided to continue as a pastoralist, and from that
humble beginning there sprang a generation of Cumings, later famed
as pastoralists and sheepbreeders throughout the Western District of
Victoria. McKenzie, with a team of workmates, was fortunate enough
to win gold to the value of £4OOO from a mining claim at Forest Creek
(Castlemaine). At an early period of his colonial experience McKenzie
acquired a block of land 10 acres in extent where the suburb of Clifton
Hill now flourishes. Unfortunately the person to whom the deeds of
this valuable property were entrusted “went under,” and the rightful
owner never recovered those valuable documents.
All mining ventures are not profitable, and McKenzie, like many
others, suffered reverses. Once again he engaged in land pursuits; this time
we find him in Woodstock district, not far from Kilmore. In 1853 he
married Marian Grant, who at the age of three years accompanied her
parents on the long voyage to Australia. The Grant family sailed from
London to Sydney per ship “William Nichol” in 1837. This vessel brought
the news of Queen Victoria’s accession to the Cape of Good Elope,
where the event was duly celebrated. Those new arrivals did not remain
long at Sydney, but came along to the Canvas Town that preceded
Melbourne.
In 1866 Alex McKenzie sold his Woodstock property to the Sher-


wins of Merriang, and came to the Kilmore district with a young growing
family (the eldest son was then about twelve years old). On the journey
accommodation for one night’s board and lodging was provided for the
travellers at O’Dwyer’s Hotel on Pretty Sally Hill. The family brought
a fairly large herd of livestock along with them. To make provision for
the stock and allow a range to graze over, a camp was formed in the
vicinity of Mt. William. Here on open country McKenzie “squatted” for
some time. A farm at Willowmavin was secured later; on this farm the
family remained for six years. This property was sold to a man named
Reilly, and having passed through many hands in the interim, has
now come into the possession of Geo. Hiscock.
From Willowmavin the McKenzie family moved to Glenaroua,
and during several years’ residence in that quarter the various members
of the family were closely identified with Kilmore. In those stirring times,
when the Heaphys, Jack Allan, and others of a like daring spirit ventured
into outback parts of New South Wales, some of the McKenzie boys
cheerfully joined forces with those choice spirits. Old Kilmore sent its
bands of “good men and true” to the diggings, likewise to the virgin
lands awaiting tillage in the Goulburn Valley, Northern Victoria, the
Riverina, and elsewhere. It may be fairly claimed, however, that no
braver band of men ever went forth from Kilmore than the teamsters
who invaded western New South Wales in the seventies. For the most
part these were men of fine physique, for whom “roughing it” had no
terrors. In those days so extensive was the areas of station properties,
that it might be said a station resembled a small province. Bullock
teams were mainly used for the cartage of produce (chiefly wool) and
stores to and from railhead and river, and immense distances had to be
traversed by the teamsters. Echuca in those days was an important load-
ing depot, and there the boys of the old brigade from Kilmore and
adjacent districts frequently foregathered. Aye, the Heaphys, the Allans,
and the McKenzies were there, so also were the Kanes, the Fades,
John Halpin, Fleming, Dan Smith, Rogers, and a number of others. All
such men figured in a page of Australian history, in which the natural
development from the pioneering work of their forefathers is well
portrayed.
Whilst domiciled at Glenaroua, our old friend Alex. McKenzie, then
well on in years, once more turned his hand to the stonework, for
which his early training had so well fitted him. The handsome and well-
constructed Pyalong Shire Hall, and the near-by solid granite house,
wherein reside A. W. Brown and family, stand as monuments to his
craftsmanship. Those granite and bluestone boulders were quarried,
hewn into shape, and built into position by the fine old man whose
career we have closely followed through the bright years when Fortune
smiled, and through those dark years when Fortune frowned.


CHAPTER 7.
THE DAYS OF STAGE COACHES
AND TEAMSTERS
I) LACED in a very picturesque setting right in the heart of our town,
stands Memorial Park with its well-kept bowling green, croquet
lawns, tennis courts, children’s playgrounds, etc. The park, as we
behold it to-day, whether glistening in sunshine or with its tones
softened by shadows, is admittedly a great source of pride to the people
of Kilmore. Not only local residents, but also visitors and passers-by,
freely express admiration for the beautiful scenic attraction, and likewise
for the recreation facilities provided in the park.
How many of us are aware that in the sixties of the last century the
major portion of the land on which Memorial Park has been established
bloomed and blossomed as a w’ell-cultivated private garden? At that
period, under the direction of an experienced gardener, a heavy supply
of vegetables and fruit was regularly produced there for home use. This
garden was a valuable adjunct to the Kilmore Hotel, an imposing
building containing more than forty rooms that stood on the south
side of the present park. At the particular period to which these notes
relate, Matthew Kelly, a fine type of cultured gentleman, was “mine
host” at this busy hostelry. The hotel was a recognised stage coach depot,
and as such it was the centre of bustle and activity.
Stage coach routes were established to Sydney, and connecting up
with intervening towns and goldfields, notably to Beechworth, also to
Mclvor and Bendigo, and to the Murray River at Echuca. Picture the
scenes around the precincts of that depot, when well trained drivers
brought their coach teams safely through bush tracks, and deposited
passengers and luggage within the circle of light that shone brilliantly
forth from this comfortable inn. Ushered within doors, those weary
travellers rested and were refreshed and warmed into a spirit of cheer-
fulness before proceeding farther along what very often must have
appeared as never-ending roads. Depend upon it the edibles produced
in that well-tended garden plot were very much in favour with the
host of travellers who breakfasted, dined, or supped at the bright inn
that for a time flourished as the show place of Kilmore.
Nowadays, when any chance reference is made to the mode of road
transport that preceded our railway system, there seems to be a generally
accepted idea that Cobb and Co. had a monopoly of the carriage of
passengers on their coaches. Certainly this enterprising firm played an
important part in opening up coach routes, and maintaining an efficient
service for the convenience of passengers. Cobb and Co. had a strenuous


fight against a number of competitors engaged in the same line of
business. From the appended notes it is clearly evident that several
firms were keenly striving to get a share in the conveyance of mails and
passenger traffic then offering.
The following advertisement appeared in “The Argus,” January,
1854: “The Argus Express to Wangaratta.” Whether this was really a
coach, or merely a spring cart carrying mails and having accommodation
for a couple of passengers, is not at first glance quite clear. From the
following passage it looks as if the humble spring cart was the more
likely vehicle. Parson Docker of Bontherambo, one of the most interest-
ing and picturesque figures amongst early pioneers, overlanded from
Sydney in 1837. Seventeen years later his son, George J. Docker, was
sent to a Sydney school per medium of the Melbourne-Sydney mailcart,
actually a spring cart that took about ten days to do the journey from
Wangaratta to Sydney.
The earliest record of the carriage of mails by wheeled vehicle on
the Sydney Road is that of George Foster’s contract to Sydney, 30th
January, 1854. The following extract from the “Seymour Telegraph,”
3rd November, 1909, gives a graphic description of what travelling was
like when this old mail cart provided the means of locomotion. The article
from which this extract has been clipped was written by John Taylor, and
is merely a recapitulation of his own personal experience:—
“To get to Seymour in those days one was obliged to travel by
Royal Mail, which consisted of a strong spring cart with an outrigger
attached. We left the Bull and Mouth in Bourke Street, Melbourne, at
8.30 a.m. My fellow passengers were two young men en route for Sydney.
The pace was from three to six miles per hour. The driver was Billy
Shearer (afterwards a resident of Seymour). We got on famously until
Beveridge’s swamp was reached, a few miles north of Donnybrook. Here
we had to alight and find our way as best we could, whilst the two horses
battled with the spring cart. This mode of travelling was continued,
more or less, until we had surmounted Pretty Sally Hill. Reached Kilmore
at 7 p.m. and relished a hearty tea. Afterwards without lights we started
through the darkness for Seymour. The night was pitch dark, and it has
always been a source of wonder to me how the drivers of the coaches
in the early days used to thread their way through densely-timbered
country without having more accidents. We reached the Royal Hotel,
Seymour, at 1 a.m. I was very glad to get rid of the old cart, and said
good-bye to my Sydney companions.”
The first stage coach to Kilmore was run by O. B. Clapp (Clapp and
Co.) in November, 1854. May and McKay, who apparently had a mail
contract to Kilmore, were right on his heels. Cobb and Co. started to
Castlemaine, then known as Forest Creek, on the same date that mails
were first borne along the Sydney Road by George Foster (30/1/54). The
original partners in the Cobb and Co. business were Freeman Cobb, John
Murray Peck, James Swanton, and John Lamber. All hailed from


U.S.A., and so did O. B. Clapp, elder brother of Frank Clapp, father of
the present Chairman of the Victorian Railway Commissioners.
Through the opening of the Beechworth and Mclvor diggings in
1855, Kilmore participated in a versatile coaching boom as the Sydney
Road became as busy as the roads to Bendigo and Ballarat. It does not
appear as if O. B. Clapp remained long on the Sydney Road, as no
more advertisements appeared after 1854. George Foster opened up in a
big way in September, 1855, and Vinge came in with him in February,
1856. Following on drastic reduction of fares in the Bendigo and Ballarat
roads, Foster lowered the rates on the Beechworth road in November,
1855. At this time coach proprietors who held mail contracts were trying
to run the opposition lines off. On one road Cobb and Co. carried pas-
sengers free of charge, the opposition followed suit, and Cobb and Co.
retaliated by providing free meals for the passengers. This innovation
soon squelched the other side.
John Kelly Trainor, our own valued townsman, started a coach in
1856, apparently only to Mclvor. The following advertisement appeared
on 29th April, 1856: “Green’s Royal Mail Coaches to Beechworth leave
Bull and Mouth Hotel, Bourke Street, Melbourne,” also an advertisement
re “Trainer’s Coach Lines to Kilmore and Mclvor, booking office next
door to Bull and Mouth.” In July, 1856, Foster and Vinge, owing to
bad state of roads, reduced the trips to Beechworth to three per week
instead of six. Later in that month the coaches stopped running for nine
days as road had become impassable; on Ist August the regular trips were
resumed. The following year Foster and Vinge ran to Albury, and on
the 29th September John Clarke started a line via Kilmore and Mclvor
to the Murray River at Echuca.
On 22nd December, 1857, Watson and Hewitt, then proprietors of
Cobb and Co. lines sold the Ballarat road rights to Frank B. Clapp, and
started to Beechworth. This was the first appearance of Cobb and Co.
coaches on the Sydney Road. In January, 1858, Watson and Hewitt (Cobb
and Co.) started to run to Mclvor. In June, 1858, Clarke and Co.
advertised the Union line of Mail Coaches to Kilmore, Mclvor, Whroo,
Rushworth, and Murchison, In 1860 Bevan, Bill, and Co. went off the
Bendigo road and opened to Deniliquin via Kilmore, Mclvor, and
Moama; and also opened to Beechworth. On the 31st March, 1860,
The Ovens Stage Coach Company, with A. W. Robertson as manager,
opened to Beechworth, guaranteeing to do the trip in 34 hours. In 1862
Robertson, Wagner, and Co. bought out all the Cobb and Co. lines, and
kept an excellent service for passenger traffic going right merrily until a
gradually extending railway system provided a more speedy mode of
transport.
The subjoined paragraphs, dealing further with “The Days of
Stage Coaches,” have perhaps no definite claim for insertion in the
historical records of Kilmore. Nevertheless, there is a fascination about
those old horse-drawn vehicles that grips one’s imagination, and the


subject of coaching out in fresh, wide open spaces never loses its charm.
The good friend who supplied most of the notes from which this chapter
is compiled has had unique opportunities to get first hand information
relative to coaching in the early days. It would therefore be a mistake to
exclude any portion of the report simply because it does not deal with
traffic activities in the immediate vicinity of Kilmore.
James Rutherford (chairman and a great organiser), Walter Hall
(subsequently a Mt. Morgan millionaire), Whitney, and “Old Bradley”
opened as Cobb and Co. at Bathurst about 1864, and spread all over
New South Wales and Queensland. This new firm entered into a friendly
arrangement with Robertson, Wagner, and Co. (the Victorian Cobb and
Co., of which they had been partners), re transfers of passengers at
Albury and Urana, where the respective coach lines met.
Crawford, Connelly, and Co (Hiram Crawford also hailed from
U.S.A.), with headquarters at Wangaratta, opened coach lines all over
the north-east to the head of the Murray, to Omeo via Tallangatta and
Mt. Wills, and also through portions of Eastern Riverina. Working in con-
junction with Robertson, Wagner (Cobb and Co.), this firm held on until
railway trains and the übiquitous motor pushed the stage coaches off the
roads.
In the course of years a network of Victorian Railways spread through
the length and breadth of the land. The activities of teamsters and stage
coach proprietors then became restricted to short distance road service.
Admittedly, a deal of hard work and much risk fell to the lot of those who
assumed proprietary control of transport business in the pioneering stage.
Furthermore, the people who paid fares and freights, and generally availed
themselves of services rendered by the carrying fleet, did not always get
through without a hitch. Yet, like those who go down to the sea in ships,
an air of romance clung to travellers who were obliged through business,
pleasure, or grim necessity to journey by the road in the old colonial days.
In the introductory chapter of this historical sketch the Victorian
age is briefly referred to as a momentous epoch. As a matter of fact, in
the development of modes of transit it was one of the most progressive
periods in human history. It began with railway trains as novelties puffing
their way into public confidence. It ended with electricity harnessed to
the service of mankind. Undoubtedly giant strides have been made in
methods of locomotion, and the acceleration of speed since the beginning
of the present century. It is nevertheless true that later day improvements
sprung from the foundations laid whilst Queen Victoria still reigned.
Here in our midst startling changes in methods of transport have
been witnessed. At the present time just a momentary glimpse of Kilmore
is obtained by passengers travelling by aeroplanes that fly easily and
gracefully through the clear air overhead. Railway passengers very, very
comfortably provided for in parlour and dining carriages, are whisked
along by the Spirit of Progress, a high-powered, streamlined locomotive
with a giddy maximum speed limit. The old Sydney Road, with its flood
44


of memories romantic and real, has given place to the Hume Highway
with its carefully graded, ribbonlike roadway. Local residents who get a
transient view of aeroplanes that go floating by, and possibly hear the
rumbling of passing trains, quietly resume their avocations without feeling
inconvenienced. However, this attitude of calm indifference cannot pos-
sibly be preserved when we are incessantly ruffled by the nerve-racking
noise, clatter, and rush of motor traffic. Of late years this kind of traffic
has been very much in evidence, and the ever-increasing number of
motor vehicles is appalling. It is not a far-fetched idea to suggest that
the appointment of a traffic control officer will ultimately be rendered
necessary in our narrow Sydney Street.
“They went marching down the old road, the rough old road,
Hope singing in their hearts —making glad refrain.
We go rushing down the new road, the smooth new road.
Madly rushing ever, hearts quailing ’neath the strain.”
Sixteen years before the Melbourne-Sydney mail was carried in
Foster’s cart another mail contract was entered into by Joseph Hawdon.
Under this contract the overland mails were carried from Melbourne to
Yass, N.S.W.; the remuneration was fixed at £l2OO per annum. The first
mailman was John Conway Bourke, who had previously overlanded with
Hawdon’s cattle. This mailman travelled on horseback, and in all proba-
bility his outfit included a couple of pack-horses. Bourke remained in
Hawdon’s employ for several years, and then went into other pursuits on
his own account. In 1847 he secured the first licence for the Western
Port Hotel, at the corner of Queen Street and Flinders Lane, Melbourne,
and held possession until 1858. Joseph Hawdon, who had overlanded
cattle from Sydney side to the confines of Port Phillip Bay in 1836, after-
wards had a squatting run that included the Tallarook flats. Michael
Hogan, an uncle to Miss Hogan, of Mill Street, Kilmorc, was one of the
drovers in charge of that 1836 mob of cattle.
__ « a
The Teamsters. —For heavy haulage purposes our earliest colonists
relied on the steady team of bullocks yoked to the strongly-constructed,
old-fashioned bullock dray. For a number of years practically the whole
freight transport business was handled by regular road carriers, who used
bullock teams to supply motive power. At that time the working bullock
had a distinct advantage as a beast of burden. On the natural pasture at
chosen camping grounds the bullocks would subsist and really thrive.
Even if horses suitable for cartage purposes were available, supplies of
feeding grains and chaff could not be readily procured. The lack of such
provision made the use of horse teams impossible until conditions had
improved. The pioneer teamsters were often compelled to get their loaded
drays through miles of bush tracks where mud and mire almost engulfed
the outfit. The steady, plodding bullock teams stood up to this kind of
work, whereas quick-moving, eager horse teams would have gone down
through sheer exhaustion.


A matter of supreme importance to those long-distance carriers was
to make every inch of space available for the loading of high-priced food-
stuff's and general stores. Merchants were prepared to pay heavy freight
charges for the safe conveyance and delivery of goods entrusted to the
teamsters. The latter were eager to earn good money, and at the same
time do the job thoroughly, thereby retaining the confidence and good
will of employers.
Many of the earliest settlers around Kilmore engaged in the road-
carrying business, whilst at several places farther south a number of
teamsters were similarly employed. A bunch of early colonists settled in
the Epping district, and entered actively into the carrying business, making
several trips through Kilmore from 1848 until 1854. In the latter year
several of those whilom Epping residents settled on the land in the
Lancefield and Romsey districts. In later years the children of those
settlers were frequently thrilled by the glowing accounts of experiences on
the bush tracks, related by those pioneers of the road. “Yours Truly” still
retains very vivid impressions of such travel stories heard in his boyhood
years.
On all district properties occupied in the forties and fifties cartage
and cultivation jobs were done with bullock teams. Very often from two
to four bullocks were yolked to the dray to afford transport for the
family. Unless men and women rode on horseback or indulged in walking
exercise, there was not much chance of an outing. The bullock dray was
resorted to as a means of locomotion when women and young children
had to visit the town.
There was an enormous number of carters on the roads from 1851
onwards, and as Kilmore was a favoured camping place, retail business
prospered exceedingly at that period. Before 1860 the bullock dray was
superseded by the American waggon. Horse teams had appreciably in-
creased in number, as it had become much easier to provide regular
supplies of fodder for the animals.
There are still a few men and women in and around Kilmore who
can give a graphic description of the animation and bustle caused by the
extraordinary number of horse-drawn waggons that passed along the
Sydney Road in those days. Those old-timers become particularly interest-
ing as they recall vivid pictures of the hour of nightfall, when a halt by
the wayside was called. When teams were unyoked and preparations
for camping were in full swing, the scene presented to the gaze of the
onlooker was strange indeed.
There were a number of vacant allotments on the area familiarly
known as the New Township; owing to convenient position those unfenced
blocks became favourite camping grounds. A big proportion of the
teamsters preferred the untrammelled freedom of those open spaces. Quite
a number, however, pulled into the hotel yards, whilst others made use
of private quarters for the night’s sojourn. From farther south than the
old Victoria Hotel (now the private residence of the McDonald family),


right through the town and out to Martin Curtain’s Hotel on Freyne’s
Hill, there would be a succession of covered waggons anchored for the
night. Around the stationary' waggons, in the glow of camp fires, the
unharnessed horses —aye, hundreds of them —patiently nibbled at their
feed, rested, and were refreshed, so as to be fit to resume the steady,
plodding haulage job on the morrow.
“Hi-tra-lolley, hi-tra-lolley —life is jolly,
With my waggon and my team”
merrily sang the waggoner of old, and of a truth a little jollification now
and then was thoroughly enjoyed by our own bronzed and bearded
men, who plied the same calling as that erstwhile jovial songster. Yet in
the main, the constant aim and desire of that body of men were to guard
strictly all loading entrusted to their care and give prompt delivery. The
following vividly expressed description comes from one who took a keen
and intelligent interest in matters appertaining to the changing phases
of road traffic. “As regards the teamsters or carriers with great Prairie
Waggons (with covering tilts under which they slept), capable of carry-
ing five to six tons of goods, I well remember amongst others the George
Brothers, Tyrer, Lawrence, and Earl, the latter a very handsome,
gentlemanly type of man with a long curly beard. As a boy I much
admired their big wagons and fine teams of six to eight horses.”
This apt description throws a glamour over the class of teamsters
that succeeded the bullock drivers, and gives the impression that the
carrying business had passed into the hands of men well fitted to continue
the job.
The following advertisement, copied from the “Kilmore Free Press,”
30th November, 1856, possesses a unique historic interest. Can we of the
present day really visualise the bustle and stir caused by the enormous
passenger traffic at that bygone period? Advertisement:
Telegraph Line of Royal Mail Coaches.
Melbourne to Beechworth in 24 hours.
Passing through Kilmore daily at 4 p.m. (Sunday excepted), Broad-
ford, Tallarook, Seymour, Avenel, Longwood, Euroa, Violet Town, Bad-
daginnie, Benalla, Wangaratta, arriving Beechworth 12 noon. Branches
from Wangaratta to Rutherglen, Wahgunyah, Chiltern, and Albury.
Between Melbourne —Jamieson and Wood’s Joint —passing through
Kilmore daily at 4 p.m., and on Monday, Wednesday, Friday at 12 noon
for Broadford, Seymour, Longwood, Merton, Mansfield, Devil’s River,
and on to Jamieson and Wood’s Point.
Passing through Kilmore Monday, Wednesday, Friday, to Broadford,
King Parrot, Yea, Stone’s, Connolly’s, Aitken’s, Nolan’s, Darlingford, Big
River.
Between Melbourne and Heathcote: Monday, Wednesday, Friday,
passing through Kilmore 12 noon, through Pyalong and Tooboorac,
arriving Heathcote 5 p.m.


The latter portion of advertisement gives fuller particulars of time
table for coaches running between Kilmore and Melbourne, and vice
versa. The following regulations also appeared in the advertisement:
“Passenger’s luggage at owner’s risk. 4 lbs. only allowed on each pas-
senger. No responsibility for parcels above the value of £5 unless declared
at time of booking and paid for accordingly. —James Bevan and Co.,
Proprietors; William Henry Wood, Agent.”
Bevan, Bill, and Co. came into the stage coaching business on the
Sydney Road in 1860. Five years later, according to this advertisement,
there had been a change in the personnel of the firm.


CHAP TE R 8.
HE GOLDFIELDS
ATURALLY our minds wander back over the years that have
sped. To present-day Victorians it is a matter of engrossing in-
terest to attempt to visualise the sudden change in the fortunes
of this State. In 1851 Victoria became a separate colony —previous to that
the affairs of the colonists were neither prosperous nor promising. At the
time that separation from New South Wales was granted the task of
squaring the public ledger virtually scared the newly-appointed Govern-
ment. There was nothing heartening in the general outlook, and private
citizens had become somewhat spiritless and dejected.
The discovery of gold and the feverish rush of mining precipitated
an astounding change. In 1852 the yield of gold was estimated at
fifteen millions. Truly it was enough to turn anyone’s head. The aggre-
gate output of gold continued to be high for several years, yet vast
numbers of those who were lured to our shores failed to strike the hoped-
for patch that was to build up their own individual fortunes. Indirectly,
of course, all comers benefited by the sudden rise in the fortunes of the
colony.
A great deal has been published in connection with gold mining in
the early colonial years. As Kilmore never came very prominently into
the picture as a mining centre, such published records contain but
slight reference to this locality. Many of the early settlers around Kilmore
packed up and joined in the gold rushes. Fortune favoured some of those
who ventured forth into the realms of golden promise, yet there were
many who returned disillusioned and shockingly poor to their old haunts.
We must not pass along without some reference to the mining for
gold actually undertaken within our own district limits. At the old
Kilmore Diggings, on the outer verge of Moranding, a rich field was
worked for some time. According to old newspaper files the value of
gold taken from this mine by Laurence Bourke varies from £lO,OOO to
£28,000. At a later stage mining was vigorously carried on at Reedy
Creek. Many Kilmore people were actively interested in that quarter,
and it is a well-known fact that a considerable amount of local capital
was not too profitably employed on that field.
The following comprehensive but somewhat loosely connected notes
have been copied from an old report: —“The gold discoveries of 1851-2
made Kilmore a place of importance, as it was on the road to the Ovens
and Buckland (Beechworth and Yackandandah). It was also a centre
for Reedy Creek, Magpie and Stump, Yea, King Parrot, Big River,
Jamieson, and Wood’s Point. In the immediate vicinity were the Morand-
ing, Kilmore, Snobs and Dry Creek, and Tea Tree rushes.”


It is true that Melbourne formed the base of operations for the trade
and transport that rapidly developed in connection with the new found
mining industry. It is equally true that Kilmore functioned as an in-
dispensable stepping stone on the road to the goldfields included in the
foregoing list. Take a birdseye view of the geographical positions of the
localities named, and remember that many years elapsed before there
was any road to serve these districts other than the Sydney Road through
Kilmore. All north-eastern bound traffic mobilised at Melbourne moved
slowly along this single line of march until Kilmore was reached after
thirty-seven miles of country roadway had been traversed. Tired and
jaded beasts of burden, and weary drivers, had to be rested and re-
freshed, and various purchases had to be made ere the travellers left this
brisk and businesslike town to resume their journeys to widely divergent
outposts.
Many Victorian country towns boomed excessively whilst payable
mining operations could be carried on, but when the output of gold
slackened these towns faded out. Kilmore was never entirely dependent
on local mining operations. As frequently stated, this old town of ours
benefitted considerably from the expenditure of floating capital. Later
reduced revenue obtained from the travelling public gave Kilmore its
first setback, but as rural industries had been well established around
the district, the check did not prove too severe.
In the late sixties the gold rush to Spring Creek (Graytown)
revived hopes for a return of busy and prosperous times at Kilmore.
Traffic again came through with a rush, and catering for the requirements
of travellers gave a brisk impetus to trade. Some of our local storekeepers
promptly set up branch establishments on the goldfield, and thereby
sought to increase their turnover and profits. These enterprising business
men from Kilmore had to face fierce competition from other quarters,
notably Bendigo and Melbourne. It was at Spring Creek that the original
Mark Foy, of Smith Street, Collingwood, and his brother Francis Foy,
later at Lancefield, first entered their career as retail traders. The late
Edward Heywood, of Glenaroua and Seymour, was one of those who
carted all Foy’s belongings to Spring Creek. When the mining boom
faded out —as it did somewhat speedily —this teamster again participated
in the cartage contract. All loading, even including shop fittings, were
delivered at Collingwood. For a period the population of Gray town —
mostly under the shelter of canvas —hovered round about the 30,000
mark. Small wonder that there was a flutter of hope at Kilmore —once
again the convenient stepping stone on the high road towards where a
dense mass of humanity were domiciled on a promising goldfield. Alas,
it proved but a short-lived flutter.
From the first rush until the abandonment of the field Kilmore
was vitally interested in mining operations at Reedy Creek. For some years
round about 1880 there was considerable activity in the search for gold in
that locality. Several companies that controlled mining claims had their


official headquarters at Kilmore, and a number of our able-bodied men
toiled as miners on the goldfield. For a period the business people at Kil-
more experienced something approaching boom conditions in the sale
and prompt delivery of general stores and provisions. Signs of a trading
revival were promising, in fact “everything in the garden looked lovely.”
The hoped-for rehabilitation of Kilmore, deemed possible when
traffic rushed through to Graytown —like the false mirage—faded from
view. The discovery of the precious metal at Reedy Creek, and the
subsequent feverish working for payable results on that near-by field,
proved equally disappointing. Mining companies—perhaps not richly
equipped —but still very persistent, and the never-say-die fossicker con-
tinue to seek for “lost lodes” and “likely veins” over all the broken sur-
faced country around the old local workings. Aye, and may the best of
luck some day be theirs. May
“All their schemes and golden dreams alike come true.”
There are quite a few of our present-day residents who still retain
lively recollections of the impressive showing made by the gold escort
that periodically entered the town from Reedy Creek. It was customary
for a number of our townsmen to volunteer as deputies, and strengthen
the police guard that provided safe convoy for the precious metal to the
local branch of the Bank of Victoria. Mounted on well-groomed, mettle-
some horses, we can still recall the once familiar figures of W. B.
McLeod, John Mcßurney, John McKenzie, Patrick Hunt, R. D. McKay,
D. M. Wylie, M. K, Beveridge, Chas. Ross (Broadford), and many others.


CHAPTER 9.
MUNICIPAL HISTORY
THE district of Kilmore was constituted a municipality by proclama-
tion issued on the 14th July, 1856, and pursuant to the Municipal
Institutions Act a public meeting was convened and held in the
Library on the Bth August, 1856, for the purpose of electing members
of the Council. John Kelly Trainor, Esq., was appointed by His Excellency
the Governor to preside at such meeting. Two assessors were appointed,
namely, Wm. Spurling and James Thomas Ryan. It was unanimously
decided that Council should consist of seven members, who would receive
no pay.
Twenty-five persons having nominated, it was decided that an
election should take place on the following day, the poll opening at 8 a.m,
and closing at 4 p.m. The total number of persons who recorded their
votes was 176. The poll was declared on the night of the same day at 10
o’clock, and the following persons were declared elected councillors
for the current municipal year: —
John Kelly Trainor Reay Clarke
James Maxfield Phillip Corboy
Alfred Sugden John Butler
Henry Morris
The report of the election made to The Honourable the Chief Secretary
concludes as follows: . . the utmost peace and good order prevailed
during the two whole days. Although a keen interest had been taken in
the proceedings throughout, yet there has not been a single breach of
the peace committed, nor a solitary case of drunkenness for punishment
the next day at the Police Court. After the names of the councillors
were announced, the large concourse of people assembled gave three
cheers for the councillors and quietly dispersed.”
At the first meeting of the Council, held on the 14th August, 1856,
Councillor Phillip Corboy was elected chairman by show of hands.
Councillor Corboy resigned the chairmanship after the twenty-first meet-
ing, and Councillor Reay Clarke was elected chairman at the following
meeting. On the 20th August, 1856, Thos. John Ryan was appointed
Town Clerk and Collector of Rates. The premises of Matthew Murray
were rented as Council Offices at a rental of £52 per annum, and the
tender of Thos. Bossence was accepted for the supply of office furniture.
The following extracts from the first report of the proceedings of
the Kilmore Council, dated 4th March, 1857, indicate that much
was achieved in the face of opposition during the first few months of
the Council’s existence:— “Applications to the Government with the
results: For 20 acres to be set aside as public gardens.—Granted. For


1280 acres of land to be set aside for the purposes of a common. —
Ordered to be reserved. That a gaol might be built at Kilmore, and
suggesting a site. —Reply, Tenders called for. That an Electric Telegraph
Station be established at Kilmore. —Establishment contemplated.
“The Council cannot conclude this report without expressing their
sincere regret that the opposition with which they had to contend at
the commencement of their labours should have taken place. Whilst the
opposition effected no manner of service, it has produced much mischief
by having deterred members from entering with spirit upon the duties
of office, and by causing the resignations which have taken place, the
tendency of the whole being to mar the intentions of the Council, and
as a consequence to retard the progress of the town.” In 1857 His Ex-
cellency the Governor gave assent for the design for Corporate Seal
adopted by the Council.
During the twelve months ended 13th August, 1857, public works
carried out included the erection of bridge over the Kilmore Creek
in Mill Street, the cutting of embankment in Mill Street, and the form-
ing, pitching, and metalling of streets throughout the township of
Kilmore. In 1862 the reservoir constructed for the town water supply
was completed. It is interesting to note that during that year two large
fires, including the destruction of the Court House, etc., took place.
This fact no doubt influenced the decision to expedite the completion
of the waterworks. An application made to the Government Botanist,
for a supply of trees and shrubs for the public gardens, was granted. Thus
began the work of tree planting, which has been maintained at a fairly
steady rate through the passing of the years. The beauty of our public
park plantations and tree-lined streets is in a great measure due to the
initial effort launched by the Council more than seventy years ago.
However, as will be learned from the final chapter in this booklet, the
Municipal Council cannot claim all the credit for the splendid results
obtained by tree-planting activities.
In 1864, as the result of an agitation for a change of municipal
status, the old home town blazoned forth as the Borough of Kilmore. John
Taylor was by the vote of his fellow members elected to the proud
position of Mayor. During the years whilst this alluring designation
was maintained, others who occupied the mayoral chair were George
Hudson, John Fynn, Lawrence Arcus, Wm. Hartnell, J. J. Reilly, and
Alfred Sugden.
As already stated in an earlier portion of this chapter, the Municipal
Council meetings were held in rented premises at the rear of our present
Town Hall. Apparently a difference of opinion between landlord and
tenant occurred, as the Borough Council moved into new quarters.
Early residents have a distinct recollection of the elected representatives
of the Borough regularly meeting for a time in the two-storied building
now occupied by Mrs. Jas. Fennelly.
Nowadays we regard the area where this old building is situated as


the decadent end of the town. For several years before Kilmore was
named a borough, and on into the seventies, the northern portion of
the town flourished exceedingly. Report definitely states that the building
in which meetings were then held, and the general surroundings, were
quite in conformity with the dignity of Local Government. From reliable
sources we have received assurance that the manner in which the rate-
payers’ representatives at the Borough Council table conducted their
debates and administered the Local Government Act was worthy of
the highest commendation.
At the present time it is difficult to understand why our citizens
of that bygone period strove so hard to bring about the change over
to a borough. In 1874, when with additional area of rateable property
the Municipal District of Kilmore was proclaimed a shire, a really
progressive step was taken. Ten years previously, with a circumscribed
area and by no means a dense population, it certainly does not appear
as if the creation of a borough was justified. This virtual “pocket borough”
was also well in the picture politically for some time after responsible
government was established in the Colony of Victoria, the electors
having the right to return one member to the Legislative Assembly.
Three years after Kilmore became a Shire, political boundaries
were extended in accordance with the change of electorates noted in
the next chapter. Faced with the actual facts of a dwindling population
and a slump in general economic conditions, those who paid rates and
taxes in this hitherto self-contained centre no doubt welcomed the
proposal of an enlarged Shire.
The Municipal District of Kilmore, as proclaimed a Shire in 1874,
incorporated the Bylands and Glenburnie Road Board, the Willowmavin
District Road Board, and the Borough of Kilmore. In the following year
the Shire was subdivided into three Ridings, viz., Bylands and Glenburnie,
Willowmavin and Moranding Riding, and Kilmore Riding.
Probably it is beyond the power of human ken to visualise a sphere
wherein public representatives, whether elected on a municipal or
political franchise, have given complete satisfaction. In a general way,
however, that branch of the “Great Unpaid”—our shire councillors —
have performed prodigious service for the State of Victoria. Here in
our own Kilmore it is the bounden duty of the historian to place on
record an acknowledgment of the disinterested and faithful service
rendered by a long line of shrewd, level-headed men. Undoubtedly
mistakes have been made —no one will be more ready to admit this than
councillors themselves —yet the constant aim and endeavour of the rate-
payers’ representatives to administer the Local Government Act in
accordance with the resources and needs of the Shire have always been
clearly in evidence.
There does not seem to be any pressing necessity to give a detailed
account of the work achieved under municipal administration during
the twenty year period from 1874 to 1894. As already stated, Kilmore


was proclaimed a shire in the former year, and an elaborate Town Hall
was completed in 1894. Perhaps it might be permissible to make a
passing reference to the discussion that took place when the proposal
to erect the municipal hall came before the Shire Council. The architect’s
plans, featuring the hall as eventually constructed, won the approval of
a majority of the councillors who then represented the ratepayers. There
was an alternative scheme favouring the erection of a one-storied
building, with office accommodation in the front portion and a spacious
hall that could be made available for social entertainments at the rear.
Cr. O’Neill, with three stalwart supporters, fought strenuously for the
latter project. By a majority of one the Council decided in favour of
the hall to which we have become accustomed down through the passage
of more than forty years.
The foundation stone of the Kilmore Town Hall was laid by Thomas
F. Murray, J.P., Shire President, on the 4th January, 1894. Before the
Shire Offices were demolished to provide space for the new hall, photo-
graphs of the old building and the councillors were taken by direction
of the Council, and these historical records now adorn the Council
Chambers. The Town Hall, constructed at a cost of £1854, was com-
pleted in 1895, the first council meeting being held in the new building
at 11 a.m. on the 2nd October, 1895.
During the construction of the hall temporary offices of the Shire
were located in the Market Buildings, which were later utilised as the
Power House of the electric supply undertaking.
The official opening of the new Town Hall was celebrated with a
grand ball held in the Mechanics’ Institute on the 25th October, 1895.
The names inscribed on the foundation stone, Councillors Murray (Pre-
sident), Ahearn, Conabere, Clarke, Freyne, Goodman, Hunt, Phillips,
and Ryan, present a memorial of the members who held seats in the
Council when the building of the Town Hall was actually undertaken.
There were some changes in the list of members before the hall was
completed. Cr. Conabere resigned in March, 1894, and Cr. P. Skehan
was elected to fill the vacancy. At the ordinary annual elections in
August, 1894, Cr. F. W. Wortley came in as one of the representatives
for the Bylands and Glenburnie Riding.
On election day, 30th March, 1894, construction work at the new
hall was in full swing, and the brickwork of the hall had reached to a
height of eight feet. The valiant young Councillor Skehan climbed to
this inconvenient perch, and from there expressed his thanks to those
who had placed him in a proud position at the head of the poll.
As P. Skehan and F. W. Wortley had very short terms of service
under the old regime (only six months elapsed between Cr. Conabere’s
resignation and the first meeting in the new hall), it would perhaps be
advisable to place the names of those worthy men on the new Town Hall
list. Patrick O’Neill is virtually the only man left amongst us who sat at
the table in the old council chamber. This grand old man of Kilmore


was first chosen to represent local ratepayers in the early eighties. In
1893 Cr. O’Neill, as he then was, resigned, as he had temporarily left
the district. After an absence of five years he returned to the old well-
loved scenes, and once again interested himself in the welfare of the
district. In the year 1898 he was chosen to represent the Willowmavin
and Moranding ratepayers, and continued to be a councillor for nine
years. Taken altogether, Patrick O’Neill was a member of the Kilmore
Shire Council for twenty years, and occupied the position of President
for four separate terms.
Back in those years, when municipal affairs were under the control
of the early-formed Road Boards, and well on through the period
when Kilmore was styled a borough, W. Z. Perrott acted in the capacity
of Engineer. In the early seventies H. J. Hunt began a long and useful
term of service with Kilmore as Municipal Engineer. This well-remem-
bered man also acted in the dual capacity of Engineer and Secretary
for the neighbouring Shire of Springfield (now incorporated in the
Romsey Shire). H. J. Hunt displayed exceptional talent in drawing
plans and specifications, and was justifiably proud of his professional
work. During intermittent periods this capable municipal officer filled
the position of Secretary, and efficiently discharged the duties apper-
taining to the combined offices.
The position of Municipal Secretary at Kilmore has been occupied
at various periods down through the years by Thos. J. Ryan, P.
O’Brien, Hugh Swann (described as Secretary and Surveyor), Terence
Maidment, John Flynn, James Fennelly, The inclusion of the latter name
brings us down to comparatively recent times. Possibly some names have
been omitted from this list; possibly, too, some of those named were
entitled to the distinction of Town Clerk. In the recall of a dim and
distant past it might be excusable to suggest that it was merely a
distinction without a difference.
No record of municipal affairs at Kilmore and Pyalong would be
complete without some pronounced reference to P. F. Egan. This worthy
man first took office with the Kilmore Shire Council as Assistant Secre-
tary. A few years later he qualified for the position of Secretary by passing
the necessary examination, and thereby securing a Municipal Clerk’s
Certificate. Through all those subsequent years whilst P. F. Egan acted
in the capacity of Secretary for the Shire of Kilmore and the neighbour-
ing Shire of Pyalong, his work was marked by a high degree of efficiency.
In perfecting arrangements for civic functions, sponsored by the two
shire councils for which he officiated, he displayed exceptional organising
ability. Presidents and councillors concerned in such functions usually
expressed themselves thus: “Leave it to Pat Egan, he will have every-
thing properly set and in smooth working order.”
In a quiet but very effective way this reliable officer assisted in
matters affecting the completion and upkeep of Memorial Park. His
special interest was perhaps noticeable in regard to the formation and


maintenance of the bowling green, and in the care and attention
bestowed on shrubs and flowering plants surrounding that beauty spot.
Since the lamentable death of Cr. M. J. Butler the mantle of the
“Father of the Council” has fallen on the shoulders of Cr. A. S. McNab.
The other councillors who occupy seats at the present time were elected
in the following order: Crs. J. J. Ryan, T. Boran, D. Clancy, Alex.
Figgins, J. J. Beattie (President), J. T. Ryan, J. Tomlinson, John Butler.
Henry Davies, the Engineer, has served the Council faithfully for
ten years. M. H. McMahon, the Secretary, only joined up in 1937.
As some general reference to toll-gates appears in the course of
this narrative, it might be expedient to include a few particulars relative
to the purpose served by those road barriers. Many of our present-day
people have only a hazy notion as to the reason why a tax, in the form
of toll-charges, was imposed on road users in bygone years.
Under constitutional methods at present existing shire councils
throughout country districts in Victoria are empowered to levy rates on
all privately-owned property within the shire boundaries. The revenue
thus obtained is devoted to the formation and maintenance of all
roadways under the control of the particular council administering
municipal affairs within a specified area.
It is a generally accepted idea that shires, as we know and under-
stand the definition to-day, were only proclaimed under that specific title
about the year 1874. To some extent such an assumption is correct, but
it is not entirely in accordance with official records. For instance, the
crest used by our own municipality bears the imprint “Shire of Kilmore
1856.” To convey a clear idea of the foregoing note, the said crest is
reproduced on this page.
Altered conditions in regard to Local or Municipal Government were
introduced round about 1874. Such definite date may not be applicable
in every case, yet in a general way it will suffice. Previously the control
of most roadways was vested in the early established District Road
Boards, and these bodies obtained the requisite revenue to make and
maintain serviceable tracks by collecting toll-charges from all road
users.
Of course, the introduction of the toll-bar system belongs to an era


far back beyond the limits of this modest review. It will be readily under-
stood that the foregoing particulars relative to toll-charges apply pri-
marily to the practice in vogue in this State in the days of our immediate
ancestors. The collection of toll-charges for general revenue purposes was
suspended many years ago. However, under certain conditions this
method of raising money to pay for the construction of special utilities
in the way of roads and bridges is sometimes revived. I have a distinct
recollection of paying toll on the George River Bridge, N.S.W., in 1930,
also paid up again on the Ocean Highway along the Victorian southern
coastline in 1934. This “pay up and look pleasant” system is part of
the routine to be faced by all travellers seeking a “right-of-way” across
the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
Incidentally it might be mentioned that the petrol tax now paid
by motorists is simply a recrudescence of this age-old tax.


John O'Shanassy
3/10/56 to 11/12/65
Premier and Chief Secretary from
11/3/57 to 29/4/57; from 10/3/58
to 27/10/59; and from 14/11/61
to 27/6/63.
Richard Davies Ireland
29/ 1/66 to 30/12/67
Lawrence Bourke
20/ 2/68 to 9/ 3/74
Thomas Hunt
22/ 4/74 to 11/ 3/89
John Gavan Duffy
28/ 3/89 to 10/ 5/04
Postmaster-General from 5/11/90
to 16/2/92 (Munro Ministry):
Attorney-General and Post-
master-General from 16/2/92 to
28/4/92 (Shiels Ministry), also a
Member of the Shiels Ministry
without office from 26/5/92 to
23/1/93: Postmaster-General
from 27/9/94 to 5/12/99 (first
Turner Ministry).
Reginald Ivon Argyle
1/ 6/04 to 4/11/14
One of the Temporary Chairmen
of Committees from 8/7/14 to
4/11/14.
Allan Francis Cameron
26/11/14 to 28/12/23
(the date of his decease).
Reginald Thomas Pollard
31/ 1/24 to 22/ 4/32
Member of the second Hogan
Ministry without office from
12/12/29 to 19/5/32.
Harry Owen White
14/ 5/32 to date
CHAPTER 10.
POLITICAL REPRESENTATION
AND RAILWAY COMMUNICATION
IST of Members who have represented Kilmore in the Victorian
Legislative Assembly from 1856 (first Parliament) to date, together
with period of membership and other particulars.
Note. —Wilmore was within the Electoral District of “Kilmore”
from 1856 to 1877; Electoral District of “Kilmore and Anglesey” from
1877 to 1889; Electoral District of “Kilmore, Dalhousie, and Lance-
field” from 1889 to 1904; Electoral District of “Dalhousie” from 1904 to
1927; and Electoral District of “Bulla and Dalhousie” from 1927 to date.
Name of
Member
Period of
Membership
Remarks.
The information in the “Remarks” column covers only that time
during which the respective Members represented the Electoral District in
which the town of Kilmore was situate.
Richard Davies Ireland was Solicitor-General from 10/3/58 to
27/10/59. Attorney-General from 26/11/60 to 29/7/61, and from
14/11/61 to 27/6/63, but during those periods did not represent
Kilmore.
John Gavan Duffy was President of the Board of Land and Works
and Commissioner of Crown Lands and Survey from 5/3/80 to 3/8/80,
and Minister of Agriculture from 19/3/80 to 3/8/80 prior to represent-
ing Kilmore.


*
♦
h-* *
?oo
p. a 2
CO SLS
'o'O
tr a
tr
*
n
«
o
HJ
»
*
a %
prt
3
3
P
tr
P
o
era
CL
P
P
era
>
P*
3
3
w
A
o^
p -
v>
3
o
5 co
n O
w
0
CL
ro
3
ffi
ffi
3
3
CO
0
HJ
CL
*1
p
cr
o*
*n
ro
CO
40
M
r^*
3
co
CP
r+
in
0
•
•
•
P
CL
W
P
N
Q
co
B-
s
to
cr
•
•
•
•
4
a
C/5
o
0
•
•
•
■
•
I
5?
h* •
o
p
3
►n
o
►XJ
P
r+
tr
p
a
•
•
4
4
•
•
•
•
•
■
•
4
4
•
•
*
•
•
•
•
4
3
•
■
•
ft
o
o
a
•
cr
•
•
•
•
•
4
•
•
•
•
3
3
•
•
a
4
•
4
3
CL
•
■
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
w
•
#
•
•
•
•
•
•
►1
r*
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
«
4
CfQ
CO
4
4
4
*
•
4
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
■
a
S
♦
•
*
4
4
ft
•
•
4
4
m
4
•
•
•
•
•
4
•
•
»
•
•
•
•
w •
•
•
•
•
•
•
4
4
4
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
«
•
4
•
•
O
«
•
•
4
a
•
•
•
•
«
•
•
cr
•
4
•
•
•
■
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
4
•
4
•
«
•
•
•
«
•
*
•
4
«
•
•
•
•
2-
•
•
•
*
•
«
•
•
•
•
•
4
4
•
4
•
•
«
•
•
•
•
•
*
4
•
•
4
•
•
4
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
«
♦
m
4
•
•
«
9
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
4
•
•
•
•
•
•
*
•
ft
•
•
•
•
•
4
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
«
*
•
4
•
•
■
CO
CO
00
CO
00
00
s
CO
00
CO
00
CD
OP
O')
CD
a>
C-n
Oi
CJi
OI
Ln
Ln
i
4^
NO
O
o
CO
00
OP
CD
OP
OP
1
i
i
1
1
1
1
i
i
1
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
CO
00
DO
00
00
00
00
CD
CD
O)
00
Cji
Cjn
OP
CJi
no
K?
NO
4^
P
0
CL
CO
CD
CO
i
CO
CO
NO
NO
CO
00
p
3
CL
00
Oi
eo
1
00
00
NO
<£>
O
oo
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF VICTORIA.
Names of Members who have represented Kilmore in the Legislative
Council since the establishment of responsible government in Victoria,
together with the period of representation of each such Member.
From 1856 to 1882 Kilmore formed part of the North-Western
Province, which was represented for the periods indicated hereunder
by the following members: —
Denis Patrick Keogh 1856-1860
William Austin Zeal 1882
* Afterwards represented the Southern Province 1904-1908 (see
below), and in the intervening years (1882-1904) represented the North
Central Province.
After the Reform Act of 1881 (Act No, 702) Kilmore from 1882
to 1904 formed part of the Southern Province, which was represented
for the periods indicated hereunder by the following members:
*Sir William John Clarke
lBB2-1897
*Thomas Ferrier Hamilton
lBB2-1884
Donald Melville
lBB2-1904
1 Icnty •««••• «*•«•* ««••«« «•«»•« »««»*• 1 1887
Charles Henry James 1887-1890
Thomas Brunton
IRQD-1904
«••••• »«•••! !••••« X X V V X
Sir Rupert Clarke
18Q7-IQD4
•««••• •••«•• •••••« Xw w / Xw v X
from the South Province by Act No. 702. After the
Reform Act of 1903 (Act No. 1864) Kilmore from 1904-1937 still
formed part of the Southern Province, which was represented for the
periods indicated hereunder by the following members:—
William Henry Embling
1904-1912
Nicholas Fitz Gerald
1904-1908
George Thomas Dickie
l9OB-1910
William Lionel Russell Clarke 1910-1937
William Charles Angliss
From 1912 (still in office)
By the Redistribution of Seats Act, passed in 1936 (Act No. 4409),
Kilmore was included in the Bendigo Province.


Offices held by the Above-mentioned Members: —Sir W. H. F.
Mitchell was an Honorary Minister in the Haines Ministry 1855-57,
Postmaster-General in the second Haines Ministry 1857-58, Commissioner
of Railways and Roads in the O’Shanassy Ministry 1861-63, Chairman
of Committees of the Legislative Council 1869-70, and President of the
Legislative Council 1870-84. Hon. Alexander Fraser was Commissioner of
Public Works in the Francis Ministry 1872-74. Hon, D. E. Wilkie was
Chairman of Committees of the Legislative Council 1864-69. Hon. Sir
W. A. Zeal was Postmaster-General in the Shiels Ministry 1892, and
President of the Legislative Council 1892-1901. Hon. N. Fitz Gerald
was Chairman of Committees of Legislative Council 1903-08. Hon.
Donald Melville was Minister of Defence and Minister of Health in
the McLean Ministry 1899-1900.
The following reference to Sir John O’Shanassy is copied from a
pen sketch published by Finlay McNab, a shrewd and cultured gentleman
who was closely associated with Kilmore through several years when
initial developments were taking place:—“The early settlers were
fortunate in having Sir John O’Shanassy, an eminent statesman, and
one of the ablest legislators known to Victoria, to represent them in
four successive Parliaments. He was nominated for two constituencies
for the first Victorian Parliament —Melbourne and Kilmore. He was
elected for both, and chose to represent the latter. He was appointed
a member of the committee that framed the constitution for Victoria
after separation from New South Wales, a constitution that stood the test
of almost half a century without a flaw. As Chief Secretary he assisted in
passing the Local Government Act. It was under his administration that
the Sydney Road was formed and metalled all the way from Melbourne
to Broadford.”
It is a matter for regret that this able representative had withdrawn
from Parliament and left the colony when the construction of the North-
Eastern Railway was decided upon. Many prominent men who took an
active part in the development of our town and district held firmly
to the opinion that this powerful member would have pleaded for
direct railway service and carried his point. Of course it looked much
easier to follow the valley of the Dry Creek than to face the engineering
difficulties that would be encountered if the hill route was chosen. It is
worthy of note that another railway line, much lighter in construction
certainly, has since entered the town of Kilmore along the route that
scared our early railway engineers.
R. D. Ireland, who represented Kilmore for nearly two years, was
one of a coterie of able barristers much in evidence in the sixties and
early seventies. Archibald Michie was one of the group. Aspinall was
another. George Higinbotham, afterwards Chief Justice, was also one
of the shining lights in Parliamentary life of those days.
Lawrence Bourke in his earliest association with Kilmore, had
amassed a fortune from local gold mines, and had freely purchased
61


real estate when district sales of Crown lands were held during the
fifties. He was elected to Parliament in 1868, and continued to represent
Kilmore for six years. Quite a mistaken notion of Bourke’s ability as a
legislator seems to have prevailed amongst electors down through the
years. It must be admitted that his predecessors were hard men to
follow. O’Shanassy was undoubtedly a statesman, whilst Ireland was a
trained advocate and a scholar. Bourke was a plain man, but he
certainly possessed a deal of shrewd common sense, and after all in a
deliberative assembly no man can display better attributes than shrewd-
ness and sound judgment.
Thomas Hunt, who was intimately connected with Kilmore for
seventy-six years, first entered Parliament as representative for Kilmore
in 1874. Three years later it became apparent that the number of
electors in the old constituency of Kilmore were not entitled to return
a member to the Legislative Assembly. A change was decided upon,
and the electorate was considerably enlarged by the inclusion of the
County of Anglesey. This wider area continued to be represented by
Thomas Hunt until 1889.
A Redistribution of Seats Bill was introduced at this period, and
as a consequence the boundaries of many country electorates were
altered. In the new arrangement Kilmore became an integral part of
Dalhousie (then known by the comprehensive title of Kilmore, Dalhousie,
and Lancefield). John Cavan Duffy, who had previously represented
the old Dalhousie electorate, was elected as Member for the rearranged
constituency on 28th March, 1889. From that date J. G. Duffy con-
tinued as our district representative for fifteen years, and for nearly
half that period he occupied a seat on the Ministerial benches. In 1904
he lost the seat to Reginald Ivon Argyle, who held the position for ten
years. In 1904, when R. I. Argyle was elected, the name of the con-
stituency was briefly styled Dalhousie, and thus it remained until 1927,
when the Kyneton division was cut off and a considerable portion of
the Bulla electorate substituted.
From that time until the present day the Kilmore division forms part
of a fairly extensive tract of south-central country districts, included in
the Legislative Assembly voters’ rolls under the title of Bulla and Dal-
housie.
The period from 1904 right onwards to the present year all seems
too recent to call for extended notice here. It is, however, only fair and
reasonable comment to record the worthy service rendered to Kilmore
and its citizens by the various chosen representatives during the one-
third of a century that has passed over our heads since 1904. R. I.
Argyle, A. F. Cameron, R. T. Pollard, and the present sitting member
H. O. White have each in turn well and truly served as our political
representatives. At this auspicious season of peace and good will marked
by its Centenary celebrations, Kilmore pays tribute and warmly ex-


presses gratitude to those four worthy men, as well as the five stalwarts
who preceded them as members of the Legislative Assembly.
Although particular reference has been made to Legislative Assembly
Members who have figured in the history of Kilmore, there is no inten-
tion of ignoring those who served as Members of the Legislative Council.
Kilmore cherishes very kindly remembrances of all chosen members who
have watched over and guided its political affairs since the inception
of representative government in Victoria just over eighty years ago. To
avoid misconception it might be advisable to point out that the reference
to “chosen members” is comprehensive, and does include those who
represent us in the Federal Legislature.
When Kilmore was attached to Dalhousie, Thomas Hunt was elected
to represent the newly-named Upper Goulburn electorate, in which
portions of two former divisions were merged. In connection with the
alteration of boundaries, a discussion had ensued in Parliament just prior
to the dissolution in 1889. The question was raised as to the name to be
applied to the rearranged electorate after Anglesey, represented by
Thomas Hunt, and Delatite, represented by J. H. Graves, were combined.
In the course of this discussion Graves gracefully gave precedence to
Hunt as senior Member, and asked that he (Hunt) should suggest a
suitable name. “Let the name be ‘Gravesend,’ ” wittily replied Hunt,
with a merry twinkle in his eye. Evidently from the nature of this retort
Thomas Hunt felt pretty sure of securing a majority of votes when
election day arrived. As events proved his judgment was correct, and
Kilmore’s grand old man continued to represent the electors of Upper
Goulburn until 1892, when he lost the seat to M. K. McKenzie.
There is an old story relative to an election campaign in the
early days of Kilmore, and as the story is typically illustrative of the
party feeling that prevailed in the old colonial days, one may be
pardoned for including it in this chapter. “Larry” Bourke delivered an
address to electors at Kilmore. At the conclusion of this address the
chairman who presided over the meeting made the usual announcement
to the effect that the candidate would be pleased to answer any questions
submitted by qualified electors. There was an immediate response from
a man in the body of the hall, who evidently required to have some point
in the address cleared up. The unfortunate questioner had scarcely
begun to formulate his query when he was felled by a stunning blow.
In a moment the meeting was in an uproar, and something in the
nature of a free fight was on. When comparative order had been
restored, much hilarity was caused by the worthy chairman (Thomas
Bossence, Esq., a typical English gentleman who never permitted his
judicial calm to be ruffled) asking in a precise and very proper manner:
“Would any other gentleman care to ask a question?” Would-be
questioners felt that they had been effectively “gagged,” as the asking of
further questions would evidently suggest that someone was “looking
for trouble.”


Railway Communication. —The Kilmore Railway Banquet, to
celebrate the opening of the North Eastern Railway, was held on 16th
April, 1872. The railway had then been constructed to a point beyond
Tallarook, but only the section to Kilmore East was available for traffic.
The importance that the North-Eastern Railway afterwards attained was
phenomenal, and it is a matter for regret that the line did not come
into direct touch with Kilmore town.
Shortly after railway traffic was established on the north-eastern
line, an agitation was set on foot and a determined effort made to have
a loop line constructed to connect with the town. The futility of such a
movement was quickly perceived, and the agitation subsided. After the
lapse of so many years, it is interesting to reflect on the arguments then
put forward by the sponsors of further railway construction. Like the
present-day advocates for increased motor transport service, they failed
to take into consideration that the vital point to be determined is this:
“Does the amount of traffic to be catered for in the carriage of passengers,
produce, and live stock, general stores and merchandise, warrant the
provision of increased transport facilities.”
The fate of the Kilmore-Lancefield railway connection conclusively
shows the folly of providing transport service where a regular and heavy
bulk of freight is not assured. The line from Wallan to Bendigo gives
Kilmore a direct railway service, mainly available of for goods traffic.
There is no great bulk of such traffic to be handled, especially since
motor transport service entered into fierce competition with the railways.
As might naturally be expected the main trunk line (North-Eastern
Railway) has developed into a huge carrying concern, and greatly
benefited the State. On the other hand local branch railway lines, rushed
into construction inside of twenty years after the main line was opened,
never boomed Kilmore, and have proved a drag on the State.


CHAPTER 11.
'HE KILMORE CHURCHES
KILMORE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
THE first Presbyterian service on record in the Kilmore district was
held in the year 1843, in the residence of Mr. Joseph Sutherland,
who then occupied “Moranding” Station. A large number of set-
tlers, principally from the Highlands of Scotland, staunch Presbyterians,
had taken up tracts of land around Kilmore.
Towards the close of a hot summer’s day the Rev. Peter Guqn, a
minister of the Established Church of Scotland, came to the Moranding
homestead. We can be sure that he received a braw Scotch welcome.
He had been sent on a preaching itinerary by the Presbytery of Mel-
bourne. On this trip he covered 600 miles in three weeks, right up as
far as the Murray River and back, and all on horseback. No mean
effort. Arrangements were quickly made for a service to be held in
Mr. Sutherland’s woolshed. Presbyterians for miles around were notified
of the service. They came to it in large numbers: some on foot, others
on horseback, and many in drays, until the building was well filled.
Probably this was the first service many had attended since they left
their homeland. We can imagine the solemnity, the reverence, the
stirring of emotions as they joined together in the public act of worship
to God. Their religion was the vital part of their lives. For some years
Mr. Gunn made annual visits to Kilmore and other inland places, and
whenever possible holding public worship.
Then in the year 1846 there was a notification in the “Argus”
that the Rev. James Forbes, minister of John Knox Church, Melbourne,
was collecting funds on behalf of the Presbyterians of Kilmore, with the
intention of trying to settle a fully qualified minister in their midst. Mr.
Forbes visited Kilmore on several occasions, and held services in Robert
Allan’s flour mill. Early in 1850 a move forward was made when the
Rev. J. Z. Huie, who was returning to Scotland, was asked to secure
a minister for Kilmore. A year later word came that the Rev. John Hume
was on his way from Scotland to become the first settled minister of
the Kilmore church. After supplying in Melbourne at the John Knox
Church for a few months, owing to the illness and death of the Rev.
James Forbes, in the month of October Mr. Hume was inducted into
the pastoral charge of Kilmore by the Revs. John Tait and William
Miller, appointed for that purpose by the Synod of the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.
To Mr. D. McPherson was given the task of conveying Mr. Hume
to Kilmore. The following is his account of the trip: —“I undertook
this duty because I had two blood mares —racers in fact, and excellent


hacks. I also got from Mr. Allan, the miller, a fine powerful grey, with
strict instructions not to let any of the ministers ride him. I started off on
sth October, 1851. When a few miles on the road I thought I would
see what stuff ‘the grey’ was made of, I tied my own two mares together,
and sent them on before. Then I mounted ‘the grey.’ I had not well
got into the saddle when he started to buck in good earnest and kept
it up for about 50 yards, then after a spell he tried again to unseat me,
but failing he settled down to his work.
“On my arrival in Melbourne I duly delivered Mr. Allan’s letter
to Rev. William Miller, and after reading it Mr. Miller, with a puzzled
look, asked what ‘buck-jumping’ was. ‘Oh,’ said I, ‘when a horse bucks
it is just like sitting on a slack rope which every now and then is jerked
tight.’ This made him look more puzzled than ever. He told me to bring
the horses around at 11 a.m., the arrangement being Mr. Hume was to
follow next day on one of my mares, whilst Mr. Miller was to accompany
me. At the time appointed Mr. Miller mounted ‘Cranky Janet’ and I
‘the grey.’ I warned Mr. Miller not to lean forward, as the mare was
sure to bolt if he did, but to no purpose. We had not gone far when
he leaned forward, and the mare, thinking that a race was on, set off at
her best pace to the sore discomfort and alarm of her rider. His pockets
were filled with tracts. I could not stop to pick them up, fearing that he
would be thrown, so there was nothing for it but to follow in the wake of
A
this Australian John Gilpin. I had to follow five miles before I came up
with horse and man, both looking a good deal blown. At ‘The Rocky,’
in Donnybrook, we stopped to bait and lunch. On starting Mr. Miller had
asked me to let him know when we were half way, as he was told 20
miles was enough for one day. As I had no idea of making two bites of
one cherry, I held my tongue. After lunch he said he would walk on
before. When I overtook him he admired the easy movement of ‘the
grey.’ Knowing I had taken all the mischief out of the horse I exchanged
mounts with him, and regulated the pace of the mare so as to keep
the grey at an easy canter. We made excellent progress, and nothing of
note occurred till we were coming to the new township about opposite
the Albion Mills, when, pulling up, he said, ‘Now be sure and tell me
when we are half way.’ I of course laughed, and said we were the
whole way, and that Kilmore was before him. On coming to Mr.
Allan’s that gentleman looked in amazement to see the minister riding
the terrible ‘grey.’ ‘Why, did I not warn you not to let a minister mount
that horse?’ ‘lt’s all right,’ I said, ‘he’s as quite as a lamb—no vice in
him. Ask Mr. Miller.’
“On going in to tea Mr. Miller was so tired that he fell asleep
saying grace, and when tea was over he no sooner got into an armchair
than he went off again. ‘Why,’ said Mr. Allan, ‘you have fairly killed the
man.’ ” The other ministers arrived safely next day.
Mr. Hume entered into the work of the charge with great en-
thusiasm. He organised a sustentation scheme to aid the finances. He


made another important move when he commenced an educational
school in 1852. Aided by a denominational grant of £SO per annum,
a teacher by the name of John Rogers was appointed. In six months
he resigned. Then for some time after Mr. and Mrs. Hume carried on
the school themselves. In the meantime public worship was held in the
old Teetotal Hall, long since demolished.
The congregation flourished so well under the care and guidance
of Mr. Hume that in August, 1852, a meeting was called which un-
animously decided to proceed to the building of a church. In October
of the same year plans were approved and placed in the hands of a
building committee, who then made all arrangements for the erection
of a church. A block of land had been given by the Government on the
east side of the town for the purpose of a church building. This building
still stands. The foundation stone of the new church was laid in
September, 1852, and the structure completed in July, 1853, at a cost
of £l5OO. It is now used for Sunday school meetings and social purposes,
and is in a fairly good state of repair.
The congregation was well established, notwithstanding the numbers
of people who went to the goldfields to try their luck up to the time when
Mr. Hume, who was of rather delicate constitution, fell into ill health.
After some months of lingering illness this first and fine minister of
Kilmore passed away at the residence of Mr. William Hamilton, of
Glenaroua, in 1855. He was buried in Kilmore Cemetery. Unfortunately
during the time of his illness a serious contention arose which ultimately
cleft the local Presbyterian congregation in twain. The trouble arose when
the school teacher, a Mr. Charles McKay, was dismissed. The managers
desired to remove him, as he was considered unable to preserve discipline
in the school. The teacher protested against the action of the managers.
The matter came before the Presbytery, which confirmed the act of
the managers. The teacher was not without sympathisers; being a High-
lander many of his countrymen rallied around him. It was when the
matter of a successor to Mr. Hume came to be considered it was seen
how serious the trouble was, and how sharply the congregation was
divided. Those who sided with the teacher began to take steps to secure
a Gaelic-speaking minister for the church. Meanwhile the congregation
had sent a “call” to the Rev. A. Maxwell, signed by all the members
except four or five. No opposition being shown, the call was sustained
by Presbytery and sent on to Mr. Maxwell, who accepted it. The day
of his induction was appointed. When he learned of the contentious
feeling existing among the Highlanders, and seeing that the congregation
was by no means united, he declined to allow a settlement to take place.
It was agreed at a special meeting of Presbytery, called to deal with the
matter, that the Revs. W. Miller and A. Paul and Rev. Dr. Cairns should
proceed to Kilmore and ascertain the facts and try to create amity among
the members of the congregation, so that the induction could take
place. A meeting took place; both sides stated their case. Dr. Cairns was


all for the Lowlanders. His impassioned utterances stirred rather than
quietened feelings. He declared that “Rather than let the Highlanders
have their way he would lay his head on the block.” Never was a burst
of eloquence so effective. One of the Highlanders sprang to his feet,
waved his hat and shouted, “Highlanders, shoulder to shoulder,” and
the Celts in a body marched out of the church. The other ministers tried
to throw oil on the troubled waters, but it was too late. Nearly all High-
landers withdrew, firmly declaring they would never enter the church
again. This was in the year 1856.
Arrangements were then made with the remaining members of the
congregation for the induction of Mr. Maxwell. This was carried out
on the 25th August, 1856, by the Rev. A. Paul. Soon after this unhappy
time the Highlanders who had so dramatically withdrawn from the
meeting met and formed themselves into a separate congregation. Rea-
sons for so doing were sent to the Presbytery, with an earnest request
that they should be recognised as a separate congregation, and that a
minister of the Presbytery should be appointed to preside over a con-
gregational meeting with a view to calling as minister. The Presbytery
directed Mr. Maxwell to employ Mr. Roderick McLeod, an elder of his
congregation, to hold service for the Highlanders in “Gaelic.” The
feeling against minister and elder being very bitter, the attempt had to
be abandoned.
Services, however, were held at irregular intervals in the old
Teetotal Hall by a Mr. Donald Mclnnes. Then towards the end of 1862
the Rev. W. Mitchell was inducted as a minister of this separated con-
gregation. His stay was short amongst them, lasting only a few months.
His successor was the Rev. Donald Macrae, who came into their midst
in 1863. In 1864, during Mr. Macrae’s term, the fine bluestone church
was built on the western side of the town, and became known as St.
Andrew’s. The other church was named St. George’s. In 1866 Mr.
Macrae was succeeded by the Rev. Robert Hunter, whose ministry
lasted for more than ten years. His ministry was greatly fruitful. He was
a fine preacher and splendid pastor. It was during his ministry that the
bitter feeling that existed between the two congregations gradually dis-
appeared. Meantime the first church, known as St. George’s, was justify-
ing itself. The members rallied around Mr. Maxwell, and gave him
wholehearted support. This congregation had to stand many shocks into
which in our limited space we cannot enter. But these only served to unite
the congregation more closely together. Members increased, and the
church prospered. The present manse was built in 1859, in Mr. Maxwell’s
term, at a cost of £950. This amount was quickly raised, and the building
was opened free of debt. After nine years of patient, faithful work in
Kilmore Mr. Maxwell passed to his rest, and death for him was a
happy release. His successor was the Rev. Donald Meiklejohn. His
induction took place in 1866. His ministry lasted some six years. It ter-
minated as the result of a driving accident. He was returning from


Broadford after conducting service when the accident occurred. One of his
o
legs was so injured that it had to be amputated. He felt unfit to carry
on work as a country minister, so resigned in 1872. The charge remained
vacant for about a year. Then the Rev. Andrew Hardie was called to be
the minister of St. George’s, and was ordained and inducted on 21st
May, 1873.
Soon after his arrival the session decided to confer with the Rev.
R. Hunter, minister of St. Andrew’s, and arrange if possible a united
evening service to be held alternatively in each church. Both minister
and people were agreed, and some fine united services were held. This
was the first practical step to a reunion. In 1878 the Rev. A. Hardie, of
St. George’s, received a call from the Richmond congregation. His own
people reluctantly parted with him. Then it was when the charge became
vacant that the St. Andrew’s congregation was again approached to try
and consummate a reunion. The fortunate and wise result was that a
»
commission consisting of an equal number of representatives from each
congregation, and presided over by Mr. Henry Wilson, met together at St.
Andrew’s Church. After much patient work the commission successfully
drew up a basis of union, which was accepted by both congregations. The
United Church was now to be called the Kilmore Presbyterian Church.
In this capacity it met on the first Sunday in August, 1878, in the St.
Andrew’s Church. The manse connected with St. George’s was to be
occupied by the minister to be elected to the united congregations. The
Rev. Robert Hunter, minister of St. Andrew’s, agreed to resign, and
received as compensation the sum of £3OO.
A call was given to the Rev. D. S. Maxwell, and his induction took
place on 11th September, 1878. Mr. Maxwell was not of robust constitu-
tion. But he was a wise and able leader and administrator, and did much
to weld the congregation and smooth the way for his successor. Mr.
George Maxwell, his son, late Member of the House of Representatives,
famed for his eloquence, greatly assisted his father in the work of the
charge by frequently taking services. Mr. Maxwell, after about eleven
months in Kilmore, became minister of the South Yarra Church. His
successor was the Rev. John Steele, M.A. He was inducted into Kilmore
and Broadford charge in April, 1880. Soon after Broadford and Giena-
roua were separated from Kilmore, and became a full charge.
Mr. Steele laboured in the Kilmore charge for twenty-four years.
After he had fallen into ill-health he resigned his charge, and on sth
April, 1904, he passed away. A former writer says of him: “He was the
outstanding personality of the Kilmore Church. He could and did always
and everywhere command respect. The influence of his character and
ministrations among his people where he laboured are the best testimony
to his life and work. He was a warm son of the Church, and took active
interest in church courts. He was called to the State Moderator’s Chair
in 1897, and filled the position with dignity to himself and honour to his
Church.”


Then came a fairly quick succession of ministers. The Rev. Alexander
Hardie came in 1904 and stayed until 1907. His successor was the Rev.
C. Hay Hunter, M.A., who came from Scotland in 1892. During his
term the electric light was installed in the church. His brother, Mr. T. D.
Hunter, a merchantman of Edinburgh, sent a cheque to the amount of
£lOO for the Kilmore Church in memory of his brother, Dr. Hay Hunter,
of Edinburgh. With the money a vestry was built and communion table
and chairs purchased. Mr. Hunter stayed four years. It was decided to
call Rev. William Agnew. He was inducted on 21st November, 1911. He
was the first Victorian native to be called to the Kilmore charge. His
ministry lasted about five years.
He was succeeded by the Rev. A. H. Tolhurst, who was inducted in
1917, after having served with the Australian Imperial Forces in Egypt.
He remained about four years. During his term a memorial window, put
into the church to four fallen soldiers —viz., John C. Bowers, Colin H.
Cameron, William N. Fischer, and James N. Robinson- —was unveiled by
Colonel Chaplain D. Macrae Stewart.
Rev. Alexander McLeod then received a call, was inducted, and
stayed about three years. Rev. C. Fraser was his successor. His induction
took place in 1925. He resigned the charge in 1929. The present minister
is Rev. Harold G. Ford, who has now completed six years’ ministry.
Many improvements have been made in the church, Sunday school, and
manse grounds in these years. A stained glass window to the memory
of the parents and family of the Misses Wilson was unveiled by the
resident minister in October, 1936. Another stained glass window in
memory of the parents of the Taylor family has been presented to the
church, and will have been dedicated ere this record is printed.
Whilst the history of the Kilmore Church has surrounded the
ministry, it has not been forgotten that the church has been served by
splendid laymen. Space will not permit the recording of their fine work.
Without their generosity and devotion the churches could not have been
built and maintained.
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH
Kilmore can proudly boast of the fact that it was one of the very
few Catholic parishes in existence when New South Wales and what is
now Victoria were one colony, in those far-off days ere the discovery of
gold caused the ripple of placid contentment to burst into bubbles of
social unrest.
In 1848 Bishop Goold arrived in Melbourne to take charge of the
spiritual welfare of “Port Phillip District,” when there were only three
priests and three churches in the whole area now embraced in the State
of Victoria. In 1849 the Bishop appointed Father Charles Clarke to the
charge of Kilmore. This pioneer priest took charge of his immense parish
on 20th April, 1849, and began the erection of the first Catholic church
at Kilmore in the following year. The building, which stood on the


Brewery Hill to the north of the town, could not be classed as a substantial
structure, as it was constructed with paling slabs and had a shingled roof.
Some idea of the enormous extent of the Kilmore parish at that time
is outlined here: The circuit included Gisborne, Woodend, Kyneton,
Castlemaine, Eaglehawk, Echuca, Wodonga, Mansfield, Wood’s Point,
Warburton, Donnybrook, and back to Kilmore. The area enclosed by this
circuit has now been divided into thirty parishes, and contains one
cathedral city (Bendigo).
Father Clarke died in 1854, and his successor was the Reverend
Timothy O’Rourke, who had come hither from New Zealand a short time
previously. The erection of a small church at The Survey, and St.
Patrick’s School (which still stands firm and erect on the church grounds),
was begun in 1854. Evidently there was commendable promptitude in
building operations, as examinations for pupils took place in the new
school in July, 1855, and the small but solid stone church at The Survey
was available for use for more than two years before it was blessed by
Bishop Goold on Ist November, 1857.
In 1856 the movement to build the large and commodious Gothic
church (St. Patrick’s of the present day) was inaugurated by Father
O’Rourke. The foundation stone was laid on 23rd August, 1857. Be-
neath the stone was placed a bottle containing on parchment a Latin
inscription of which the following is a translation: “The first stone of
this church, dedicated to God under the patronage of St. Patrick, in
Kilmore, in the province of Victoria, was laid by James Alipius Goold,
Bishop of the Diocese, on the 23rd day of August, 1857, In the Pontificate
of Pope Pius IX, and in the reign of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen
Victoria, and during the administration of this Government by His
Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, K.C.8.” The church was dedicated on Bth
July, 1860.
After Father O’Rourke’s death, on 18th January, 1861, Father
Branigan was appointed to the charge of Kilmore. Father Branigan
arrived in Australia in 1857. For a time he acted in the capacity of
assistant priest at Keilor, later coming to Kilmore as curate under Father
O’Rourke. Afterwards he was temporarily in charge of the infant parish
at Mclvor (subsequently Heathcote). Then came the more important
appointment as parish priest at Kilmore. This young priest, who did not
enjoy robust health, devoted himself unsparingly to the welfare of his
flock spread over what was still a very extensive parish. Various schools
were opened, and St. Patrick’s Church was practically completed whilst
Father Branigan was in charge. As a matter of fact the solemn opening
ceremony at the church took place in March, 1871, just nine months after
the death of Father Branigan (9th June, 1870).
Towards the close of Father Branigan’s pastorate he had as an
assistant priest Father Maurice Stack (1866-1869). He was a native of
Kerry, and pursued his ecclesiastical studies in Ireland, and had the
distinction of being the first priest ordained in Melbourne (13th April,


1851). After his sojourn at Kilmore he returned to Ireland, and whilst
travelling through Europe died at Lyons in France (1888). His memory
is commemorated by a marble tablet in the Kilmore Hospital, to which
institution he left a munificent donation.
Father Branigan’s successor was Father Michael Farrelly, who took
up the reins in 1870, and continued in charge for the next 36 years.
Indeed, Father Farrelly’s name and Kilmore are almost synonymous.
Previous to his appointment to Kilmore, Father Farrelly had laboured
at Geelong and Hamilton. In 1870 there had been some appreciable
diminution in the circuit administered from Kilmore, yet the parish
was still large and unwieldy; to realise this we need only note that its
confines extended to the country surrounding Shepparton (now the
premier town in the prosperous Goulburn Valley province).
Under the care and guidance of Father Farrelly the central or home
church (St. Patrick’s, Kilmore) was completed in 1872, whilst within
what might be termed a reasonable radius of Kilmore several other
churches were erected under the same guiding hand. A church building
had been begun at Romsey in 1868; this was completed after Father
Farrelly took charge. The following list of new churches established is
somewhat imposing: Lancefield 1872, Emu Flat 1872, Pyalong 1873,
Broadford 1887, Strath Creek 1888, Wandong 1897. Incidentally this
activity in church building operations serves to indicate the rate at which
permanent resident population was increasing in the districts adjacent to
Kilmore. Father Farrelly was a man of outstanding character and person-
ality; really one might truthfully say that for a number of years no man
in Victoria was more widely known and universally respected. This good
priest never spared himself. In due performance of his sacred offices and
prompt attention to the spiritual welfare of his flock he imposed a heavy
toll on his time. In addition to all this, he seemed to press daily deeds of
charity and kindness into his life, whilst by his hearty manner and fund
of original humour he brought cheerfulness into every group with which
he casually mingled.
This good priest of happy memory passed to his reward in 1906.
Father Martin (later Monsignor Martin, of Kyneton) was then appointed
to the charge of Kilmore. It is perhaps worthy of note that Father Martin
was the only parish priest who moved on to the charge of another parish
from Kilmore. Of the seven who had charge previous to the present pastor
Father McHugh assuming control, five died at their posts, whilst Father
Gleeson was obliged to resign from his charge as he had been incapaci-
tated by an accident. Father Martin during his fifteen years of administra-
tion raised a fitting monument to his memory by the manner in which he
beautified and ornamented the interior of St. Patrick’s Church, bringing
the internal appointments into conformity with the imposing external
architecture of a noble building. Prior to Father Martin taking charge
the Kilmore parish was still further reduced in area, as a new parish was
established at Lancefield. Romsey, Lancefield, Emu Flat, and adjacent


districts, for many years an important part of Kilmore, have since de-
veloped into a self-contained parish with full local administrative appoint-
ments. (Monsignor Martin died at Kyneton, October, 1937. R.1.P.)
The period during which Father Gleeson (1921-1926) and Father
O’Sullivan (1926-1928) had charge at Kilmore is perhaps somewhat
too recent to call for extended notice. Nevertheless, both these good
priests nobly played their parts in carrying on the good work begun under
the stress of pioneering difficulties away back beyond the middle of the
past century.
Of the present pastor in charge, Father McHugh, it might well be
said that his mode of administration gives abundant promise of keeping
the Catholic Church at Kilmore a living body, virile and strong. Of a
certainty the historian of the future will have ample material from which
to construct a laudatory account of the efficiency of Father McHugh’s
work and ministrations. The humble scribe of the present day is full
of admiration (who would not be?) for the brightening up scheme in the
church gardens and grounds carried into picturesque effect under Father
McHugh’s aesthetic direction.
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
The first incumbent of the Church of England (Christ Church), the
Rev. William T. Singleton, M.A. (Trinity College, Dublin), with his
wife and family, arrived at Corio Bay, Geelong, per the ship “Tasman”
(Captain Blackburn) on 29th October, 1849. After a few weeks spent in
Melbourne, he was given the incumbency at Kilmore and Broadford.
At that time there was only two larger towns in the Port Phillip District
than Kilmore.
For 19 years the reverend gentleman laboured in what was then an
extensive parish. Travelling principally on horseback, Mrs. Singleton
accompanied her husband on most of his parochial journeys. Open
country trips exceeding fifty miles had frequently to be undertaken; those
zealous church workers never hesitated, and bravely faced the discomforts
that such journeys entailed.
The Rev. Wm. T. Singleton was a worthy citizen who took not only
an active interest in the spiritual welfare of his own flock, but was well in
the forefront of any and every movement to promote the general and
social welfare of all members of the community. Even in his somewhat
cursory research work, the compiler of this booklet has found abundant
proof of this good clergyman’s readiness to lend a helping hand wherever
and whenever help was needed. Rev. Wm. T. Singleton was a brother
of Dr. John Singleton, so well known in Melbourne for his work amongst
the poor in early days. From Kilmore he was appointed incumbent at
Cheltenham, which then included S. and E. Brighton and Mordialloc.
He died at Pellew House, Brighton, 14th June, 1875.
The following extract has been copied from the “Church Gazette,”
1864: “Christ Church, Kilmore, has been completed, except for the


tower. The first stone was laid by the Lord Bishop of Melbourne, 19th
November, 1857. Though unfinished, the church has been used for
public worship since the beginning of January, 1861, and the Very
Reverend the Dean preached the opening sermon. At the time when the
design for the church was adopted a general expectation prevailed here
that on account of the goldfields in the vicinity, together with great
agricultural resources, the population of Kilmore would increase much
more than it has done. A structure has consequently been raised un-
necessarily large for the present population. The site of Christ Church
is an elevated one on the Western Hill overlooking the town, where it is
very conspicuous and presents a fine view to travellers entering the town
from any direction.”
The article quoted from goes on to give complete details of the
architecture of the church building, and concludes with references to Mr.
Ruet, the original architect, who acted gratuitously, and Mr. Fleury, a
local architect, whose designs for much of the interior work were accepted
and copied. The chairman, Rev. Wm. T. Singleton, and the trustees
(Messrs. Bossence, Roberts, and Beckett) were perfectly satisfied with the
manner in which the work was carried out.
Herewith we submit a list of the names of clergymen who have
ministered at Christ Church, Kilmore: Rev. W. T. Singleton 1849-1868,
Rev. J. H. Watson 1868, Rev. J. B. Garlick 1868-69, Rev. H. C. M.
Watson 1869-72, Rev. A. Toomath 1873-1892, Rev. M. F. Cahill 1892-
1905, Rev. R. Leek 1905-1912, Rev. J. A. Peck 1912-1920, Rev, E. Finnic
1920-1926, Rev. W. P. Daunt 1926-1929, Rev. E. H. Pickford 1929-1936,
and the present incumbent, Canon Nelson 1936.
Apart from the Rev. W. T. Singleton, only two other ministers
attached to the Church of England had anything like a long connection
with parochial work at Kilmore. According to the foregoing list Rev. A.
Toomath had charge for nineteen years, and during the following thirteen
years Rev. M. F. Cahill was the resident incumbent.
A private hospital in Flinders Lane, Melbourne, long and familiarly
known as Miss Garlick’s Hospital, was controlled by a daughter of the
Rev. J. B. Garlick, who had charge of affairs at the Kilmore Church of
England 1868-69.
Back in the decade 1876-1886 the Right Rev. James Moorhouse,
M.A., D.D., was Bishop of Melbourne. This very able churchman had a
soft spot in his heart for Kilmore, and made several visits to the district.
An anecdote in connection with Bishop Moorhouse, in one of his lighter
moods, is admirably told in a letter recently received by Canon Nelson
from Mr. E. Stribling, of Euroa. About fifty-three years ago the writer
of this letter was a member of the Christ Church choir at Kilmore, and
took part in a concert in the Oddfellows Hall after the annual Tea
Meeting. On that occasion Bishop Moorhouse, in delivering an address on
“Careful Speech,” very humorously related the following incident: “A
night coach by which he once travelled in Gippsland was frequently


bogged, and had to be dug out by the driver, who used rather lurid
language. In the morning, recognising his passenger, he tried to excuse
himself by saying that he was a plain-spoken man who always called ‘a
spade a spade.’ ‘Oh,’ replied the Bishop, ‘ I am surprised to hear you say
so, because during the night you called it nothing but “a bloody
shovel.” ’ ”
“I well remember,” adds Mr. Stribling, “the roars of laughter when
the Bishop used a word then considered a particularly bad one.”
(Compiler’s Footnote. —Am quite satisfied that the historical sketch
of the Church of England at Kilmore, as given above, furnishes but a
mere outline of Church work and activities down through the years.
Exactly the same remarks apply to the Methodist Church. Very scant
records from which constructive copy could be produced are available.
Canon Nelson, of the Church of England, and the Rev. E. H. Coltman,
of the Methodist Church, are comparatively newcomers to Kilmore, and
are therefore unable to prepare full reports. —J.A.M.)
METHODIST CHURCH, KILMORE.
No record can be found telling of the beginning of the Methodist
Church in Kilmore, but most certainly the Word of God was preached
there by Methodists earlier than the year 1858, when the building of a
church was begun. An old record states: “The foundation of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church at Kilmore was laid by the Rev. D. J. Draper, Secre-
tary of the Australasian Wesleyan Conference and Chairman of the
Victoria District, assisted by the Rev. W. L. Binks, Superintendent of the
Melbourne West Circuit on the 20th day of October, 1858, being the
22nd year of the reign of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, Sir
Henry Barkly, Knt., Governor in Chief of the Colony of Victoria. The
Rev. John Mewton, minister in charge; Building Committee, Messrs.
Green, Paxman, Lowe, Lee, and Clark; Architects, Messrs. Crouch and
Wilson; Contractor, Mr. Wood.”
Since that time a Methodist minister has resided at Kilmore, and has
ministered to the people of the town and surrounding district. The assist-
ance of lay preachers made it possible for a large area to be covered, and
places that have since grown in importance were in the earlier days
served from Kilmore. A circuit plan of 1861 shows Kilmore, Mickleham,
Merriang, Donnybrook, Lancefield, Broadford, Spring Hill, Seymour,
Tallarook, Heathcote, Tooborac, Redcastle, and Wild Duck as preaching
places within the circuit. As time went on changes were made, and
separate circuits were constituted. The present circuit consists of Kilmore,
Broadford, Sunday Creek, Strath Creek, Wallan, and Wandong.
The following is a list of the ministers in order of time who lived
and worked in Kilmore: Revs. J. Mewton, Andrew Inglis, John B. Smith,
Ebenezer Taylor, John Pemell, Richard Hart, P. R. C. Ussher, Geo. B.
Richards, Thos. Angwin, Richard O. Cook, James W. Tuckfield, Geo.
Schofield, James S. H. Royce, James Graham, Wm. R. Cunningham,


John Leslie, Geo. S. Lloyd, Henry C. Oldmeadow, Wesley Johns, W.
Rule Jones, Alex. McKay, W. E. Crawford, Henry Richardson, John L.
Green, Charles Angwin, J. E. T. Green, L. E. Hartshorn, Harold E.
Walsh, Louis I. Fielding, L. S. Shears Saunders, Hector McCraw, and
E. H. Coltman. Most of these remained for three years. There is not a
full record of the lay preachers, whose work was of great value. Those on
the first plan were Messrs. Sidebottom, Thompson, Foster, and Calvert,
and there has not failed a succession of faithful men since those days to
the present time. Those helping to-day are Messrs. D. Lade, D. Newnham,
A. Johnson, C. Stray, A. Brooks, and several young men who are be-
ginning the work of preaching. One who was bom in the district and
began his preaching there is the Rev. Frank Lade, M.A., who was Presi-
dent-General of the Methodist Church of Australasia, and was recently
for the second time President of the South Australia Conference.
The Kilmore Church property is controlled by a body of trustees,
the present members being Messrs. J. T. Burrows, F. H. Pascoe, A. J.
Boyd, S. W. Holman, E. E. Humphrey, Robert Bowers, H. S. Opperman,
S. H. C. Richards, and F. J. Wallder. One of the early trustees, Mr.
Thomas Crane, died recently.
The witness of the Church throughout the years has been to the
great evangelical truths of the Christian faith.
Within the last few years the general appearance and lay-out of
the Methodist church grounds fronting Powlett Street have been vastly
improved. An artistically-designed building providing comfortable resi-
dential quarters has been erected. This handsome new Parsonage, which
was dedicated November, 1937, is certainly a source of pride to the
church members, and an embellishment to our town. The present in-
cumbent deserves to be highly complimented on the wonderful garden
display that has burst into bloom under his unremitting care.


CHAPTER 12.
EDUCATION
AS already mentioned in an earlier chapter, a school was opened at
Kilmore soon after 1840. In 1874, after a period of thirty odd
years, the State school was established, and one year later the
teaching staff of the Convent school entered upon their labours. Without
a shadow of doubt the training and general education of the youth of
Kilmore was not neglected during the time that elapsed before the two
scholastic institutions mentioned settled down to their mission. For at
least two decades of that thirty year period our population statistics as
regards children of school age were at a high level. Under the national
%
and denominational system several schools with capable teaching staffs
were then engaged in the good work of imparting rudimentary knowledge
to the boys and girls of old Kilmore.
A reference to one such institution might with advantage be inserted
here. The National School, familiarly spoken of by early residents as “Red
Brick School,” was situated five chains at the rear of the recently re-
modelled home of the Dumaresq family. William Kerr, father of W.
Warren Kerr (Chairman of Commissioners State Savings Bank of Vic-
toria) was for some time head teacher at this school. This old-time
teacher, the son of a Presbyterian minister, was born at Newry, County
Down, Ireland, and finished his education course at Dublin University.
After leaving Kilmore Wm. Kerr was appointed Town Clerk at Fitzroy,
a position he held until his death.
The State School. —More than sixty years have passed since the
Kilmore State school was built at a cost of £3OOO. Designed on artistic
and spacious lines, the new building must have presented a fine appear-
ance when completed. For some years the daily attendance of pupils
seemed to justify the provision of such ample quarters. At the outset
there were more than 200 names on the school roll, and all rooms in the
building were fully occupied. It soon became apparent, however, that a
drift of population from Kilmore had definitely set in, and the number
of children seeking tuition in our local State school dwindled considerably.
The first head teacher was John Charles Hayes, who had as his chief
lieutenant James Thom. These worthy men previously had control of
two local denominational schools. Other members of the original staff
were Patrick Maloney, Miss McKay, Miss Kiely, Miss A. McKay, Miss
Maloney, and Miss Good. Down through the course of years in the early
history of the school Messrs. Mitchell, Caleb Collier, and James Thom
each in turn acted in the capacity of head teacher.
The Misses McKay named in the foregoing list were the daughters
of Charles McKay, an early resident of Kilmore, who had held high


position in the teaching profession before leaving his native Scotland.
This McKay family were closely related to Sir Colin McKenzie, the
foundations of whose high educational attainments were laid in the
Kilmore State school.
The Convent (St. Joseph’s College).—On the invitation of the
Bishop of Melbourne (Most Rev. Dr. Goold) the Convent of Mercy was
founded at Kilmore in 1875 by the Rev. Mother Ursula Frayne, the
foundress of the Order in Australia, who sent Sisters from Nicholson
Street, Fitzroy.
This scholastic institution has from its inception played an important
part in the life of the district community. Since the opportunity to enter
clerical positions has been opened to young women and girls, the special
preparation and training afforded under the direction of the good Sisters
at St. Joseph’s College has enabled many of our girls to engage in con-
genial employment.
It is gratifying to be able to report that this Centenary year has been
marked by an increase in the number of boarders at the Convent. The
neat and well-kept Convent buildings and grounds, at the southern en-
trance to the town are certainly an ornament to Kilmore.
Our State school and Convent, dating back more than sixty years
of the century now being recalled, possess compelling historic interest.
The early pupils, scattered through many lands and in many walks of
life, have reached a stage whence they look back with tranquil minds
to a period when the glamour of youth was upon them —back to a bygone
time when Kilmore, though still young in the count of years, was through
some strange confusion of ideas already referred to as “Old Kilmore.”
“The boys and girls of to-day will be the men and women of to-
morrow.” How oft this simple remark induces reflection on the natural
causes that go towards the making of history. Incidentally it might be
remarked that the children, who received primary instruction in the old
schools of our home town, went forth imbued with a decent conception
of citizenship. Furthermore, it is no mere idle boast to aver that the vast
majority in mature years have worthily played their parts in the com-
munity life here and elsewhere.
Private Schools. —Quite an air of romance clings round the memories
of private schools —mostly ladies’ seminaries—that flourished at earlier
periods in our interesting old town. Back in the sixties the Misses Osbom
(sisters of J. W. Osborn, doyen of the Osbom and Hudson firm) con-
ducted a school for young ladies. These pioneer teachers and their young
charges were accommodated in a building that stood on the crown of
the Round Hill (Hamilton’s Hill), north-east of our present town limits.
Mrs. Moody (nee Lia Guild), of Seymour, now in her eighty-first year —
active, alert-minded, and keenly alive to every interest —was a pupil at
this old-time school. There are others still living who received primary
and advanced education under that roof, whose reminiscences would
doubtless be full of interest. It is perfectly safe to say, however, that


nothing could reproduce a more vivid picture of Kilmore at that
period than Mrs. Moody’s floodlight of memories.
Under the direction of Miss Armstrong (sister to Mrs. Akehurst,
wife of a very highly-esteemed resident police magistrate) a school was
established in the vicinity of the Church of England about the year 1872.
With regard to the personnel of its teaching staff", and the extent of
housing accommodation, this school underwent variation, and continued
as an active force in educational work until somewhere in the nineties.
Evidently many young ladies from distant towns attended those
early schools at Kilmore. Amongst those who were here whilst Miss
Stone (successor to Miss Armstrong) had charge of the ladies’ seminary,
referred to in preceding paragraph, was Miss Morphy, the daughter of
a police magistrate then stationed at Beechworth. In the season of
1882-83 the Hon. Ivo Bligh brought a team of English cricketers to
Australia. During the time this distinguished visitor remained in Vic-
toria he was charmed to meet Miss Morphy, with whom he fell in love
and eventually married. In due course this enthusiastic cricketer succeeded
to his father’s title, and thus the whilom boarder at this fine old Kilmore
school became the Countess Darnley.
For a period Mrs. Dacomb had charge of this seminary, then a
well-organised scholastic institution. During that good lady’s term as
headmistress the list of boarders appreciably increased, and many of
our bright and energetic present-day residents were numbered amongst
the day pupils.
The family name Dacomb is still retained at the Dacomb College,
Presgrave Buildings, 279 Little Collins Street, Melbourne, where accoun-
tancy, bookkeeping, and other business courses are efficiently taught.
In the old school the Misses Halford were the last of the line of
devoted teachers who patiently grappled with the age-old difficulty of
instilling useful knowledge into the minds of the rising generation.
Amongst other private schools that flourished in bygone years were
Mrs. Nelson’s “Classes for Junior Girls” and Mrs. Kerr’s “Young Ladies’
School.” The first-named was conducted in a modest cottage situated
almost at the extreme south end of the new township. Mrs. Kerr, the
wife of Wm. Kerr, specifically referred to in the second paragraph of
this chapter, instructed her young pupils in the home of the Kerr family
at the corner of Fitzroy Street and Kilmore East Road.
The coming of the Marist Brothers and the exceptional development
of Assumption College: —As an educational institution, with a roll call
of students far in excess of the dreams of the founders, and its buildings
expanding as the years go by, Assumption College now looms large in
the life of the Kilmore district. The Marist Brothers cannot claim an
historical association with the work of education during the first half
century of developmental activities at Kilmore. Most certainly, however,
the teaching staff at the college have laboured zealously and given
practical proof of their efficiency since their coming in 1893.
79


In that year Father Farrelly, who was then vigorously administering
the parish, invited the Marist Brothers to open a school at Kilmore.
Brother John, then Provincial of the Order in Australia, acceded to
the request. At the time considerable doubt existed as to the ultimate
result of such decision. Time has proved in no uncertain manner that
fears were groundless, and the move to establish at Kilmore was a
wise one. The infant college had to face difficulties, mostly in regard to
financial matters, yet all obstacles were bravely encountered and gradually
worn down. In the fullness of time the tide of fortune took a favourable
turn, and this splendid scholastic institution is now enjoying the pleasant
experience associated with marked success.
The Assumption College of to-day, with its list of 250 boarders and
43 day pupils, under the direction and control of ten specially-trained
Brothers, and catered for by a household staff numbering 22, is certainly
an institution that confers distinction on our town. Apart entirely from
its advantages as a seat of learning, there is another aspect from which we
may well consider the social value of this college in our midst. In several
chapters through this booklet stress has been laid on the fact that
Kilmore at an earlier period sent out numbers of men and women to
take their share of toil and burden elsewhere. Is it not a feature of
compelling historic interest to note the natural sequence of events
demonstrated in the passage of the years? The descendants of many
former residents of the district spend portion of their school life at
Assumption College. Thus in a peculiarly homely manner the com-
munity life over a vast area remains linked up with this old Kilmore
of ours.
Brother Austin was the first director at the college; incidentally this
venerable brother now lives in comparative retirement, amidst scenes
where he was actively engaged in laying the foundation of a teaching
system something more than forty years ago. On the foundation so
well and truly laid at that time a structure of great educational value
has arisen. Much credit is due to the learned and capable directors and
devoted assistant teachers, who have so diligently applied themselves
to their tasks down through the passage of the years.
In 1897 Brother Gabriel assumed control. During his term it was
decided to take in boarders. This move really began the development of
a college, which as an educational establishment was destined to rank
with the best in the State. From that time the school has never looked
back, although it was not until Brother Paulinus took charge in 1916
that the college blossomed out into full vigour. Previous to 1916 Brother
Brendan was director, and he had been preceded by Brother Bernardine,
a man whose name is revered within and beyond the walls of Assumption
College. In later years Brother Gilbert began a building programme, a
matter of urgent necessity due to the ever-increasing number of pupils.
The need for more extensive buildings was keenly felt during Brother
William’s first six years of directorship —1922 to 1927. Plans were pre-


pared and discussed without reaching finality. Still the matter had to be
faced, and the work had only begun when a depression settled down on
Victoria and the other Australian States. The Brothers were once more
involved in financial worries, but the gradual return of prosperity
enabled them to surmount that difficulty, and also to embark on further
extensions during the second period of Brother William’s headship at
Kilmore.
Assumption College has achieved much in the past forty years, and
who can tell what its future will be? Situated in most beautiful sur-
roundings, too familiar to us to be fully appreciated, with a healthy,
bracing climate, within easy reach of the metropolis, it appeals to the
city parent as it does to those living in scattered country districts. Its
past students have carried the name of Assumption College throughout
more than one of the Australian States, and this warrants the confidence
we have that this fine college at Kilmore will continue to shed lustre on
t
our town.
In the following notes concerning Kilmore natives who qualified
for and obtained University degrees, or had other distinctions conferred
upon them, no attempt has been made to give a complete and com-
prehensive list. The names appended have been chosen in a haphazard
fashion, and are here inserted with a view to creating a spirit of
emulation in the minds of the rising generation:—
Richard Fennelly, C.E. —Although not actually born in the district,
the late Richard Fennelly, at the age of two years, came with his
parents to Kilmore in 1849. In his boyhood years there was but slight op-
portunity to receive primary education. At about sixteen years of age,
with his mind definitely set on fitting himself for a professional career,
this game youngster tackled heavy manual labour, and thus earned
the money that was needed to pay for higher education. Nothing in
the way of toil came amiss to this wiry, tough young Australian, and
whilst engaged in harvesting, shearing, axe work, stonebreaking, and
such like he diligently applied his mind to the elemental studies that
were to form the groundwork for a brilliant University course.
In the early seventies young Dick Fennelly, as he then was, obtained
the coveted degree for which he had so strenuously worked. After gaining
some general knowledge of engineering and surveying, he took up
municipal work, and early in 1873 received his first appointment as
clerk to the Broadford Road Board. Practically a lifelong association
with the Pyalong Shire Council began in 1874; there he held the dual
position of engineer and secretary for 54 years. Numerous appointments
came the way of this capable and energetic young man. For a number
of years, in carrying out road-making works, his operations extended
over an area of 1000 square miles embraced in the shires of Pyalong,
Broadford, Seymour, and Goulburn. Later on, when commissioned by
various water trusts to carry out water conservation and supply schemes,


and further engaged in the work of a mining surveyor, this indefatigable
young man travelled and toiled over an extensive tract of country.
Since the advent of the Country Roads Board we have become
accustomed to those contour roads whereon vehicular traffic has been
rendered easy by a system of graded formation through hill country.
More than 45 years ago the contour cutting over Murchison Hill, near
Strath Creek, was designed and carried out by Richard Fennelly, and
will long stand as a monument to his engineering skill.
In the course of his professional practice the following special
distinctions came to the subject of this memoir: Mining Surveyor 1874,
Municipal Surveyor 1878, Engineer of Water Supply 1894. Made a
member of the Victorian Institute of Surveyors in 1878, we was twice
elected president of that institute —1895-96 and 1906-07. In recognition
of his services he received the honour of Life Fellowship after his second
term as President. In 1890 he had been similarly honoured by the Civil
Engineers Association.
Murdoch MacKenzie, M.B.- —Born at Kilmore in 1862. Educated
at Ballarat College, then considered one of the leading schools for boys
in Victoria. After a brilliant school career (Dux of college at 16), he
studied medicine, and took out degrees at Melbourne, Edinburgh, and
Glasgow Universities. After hospital residence he went to Cairns in
Queensland, where he held an appointment as medical officer in con-
nection with the men who were engaged in railway construction. After-
wards returned to Victoria, and practised at Nhill for five years; later
went to New Zealand, and engaged in private practice for 12 years. In
1900 was made Surgeon Captain of the New Zealand Volunteer Medical
Staff. Returning to Melbourne, he practised at Collins Street until his
death in 1912.
Andrew Hardie MacKenzie, M.D., 8.5., Melbourne. —Born in 1873,
he was educated at Scotch College, afterwards taking out his degree at
the Melbourne University. After a term as Resident Medical Officer at
the Alfred Hospital he went to Perth, W.A., where he held an official
appointment for the State Government. Later he joined his brother
Murdoch in New Zealand, afterwards going to England, where he
established a medical practice in South London. Subsequently Andrew
MacKenzie went to South Africa, and is at present following his pro-
fession as a medical practitioner at Johannesburg. The versatile member
of an old Kilmore family has had a distinguished military career, and
has been the recipient of six war medals. With a decided penchant for
travelling, Dr. MacKenzie has visited mostly every part of the habitable
globe. His only son, now 28 years of age, holds an important post in
the leading South African bank, a position that he has won by his
ability to speak foreign languages fluently.
William Colin MacKenzie (Sir Colin MacKenzie), K. 8., M.D.,
F.R.C.H.S., F.R.S.E., born 9th March, 1877. Educated at Scotch College
and Melbourne University, where he took his medical degree at the age


of 20 years. A residency at the Melbourne Hospital was followed by the
superintendency of the Children’s Hospital, after which he practised at
Parkville, and later in Collins Street. He went abroad to take higher
degrees, and visited the United States of America on several occasions.
Anatomy had been his chief interest, and it is recognised that he has
added many important facts to this field of medical service. He was the
author of several anatomical books. His services in the Great War were
of a medical character, being abroad from 1916 to 1918.
In 1929 he was knighted by His Majesty the King for his services
to medical science. He was the founder of the Australian Institute of
Anatomy at Canberra, and acted in the capacity of director of that in-
stitute for more than eight years. Through failing health Sir Colin Mac-
Kenzie resigned from a position which he was so eminently fitted to hold.
The distinguished career of this brilliant Kilmore boy was closed by his
death on 29th June, 1938.
William Warren Kerr, Managing Director Richardson, Kerr Pty.
Ltd. Special distinctions from His Majesty the King: C.B.E. (1918),
C.M.G. (1924), Commemoration Medal (1935), Coronation Medal
(1937). Member of Council Melbourne Chamber of Commerce; Pre-
sident of the Chamber since 1909. President of Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia 1918-20. For many years a Commissioner, and
since 1931 Chairman of Commissioners State Savings Bank of Victoria.
Occupied the position of Chairman Commonwealth War Savings
Council and the Victorian War Savings Committee; these bodies jointly
raised £5,000,000 worth of War Savings Certificates. Was at the head
of two Royal Commissions on Taxation. In 1927 was one of the three
representatives from Australia in attendance at the World Economic
Conference at Geneva. Has been President of the Charity Organisation
Society for sixteen years, and a member of the Advisory Committee on
Hospitals for Soldiers. Member of the Council of the Swinburne Tech-
nical College since its inauguration. Is a Pro-Grand Master of Victorian
Freemasons.
This worthy son of William Kerr (who had charge of the National
School at old Kilmore) has for many years been a recognised advisor
in matters pertaining to the economic welfare of the Commonwealth
of Australia. In our own State of Victoria, more particularly in its
capital city of Melbourne, his exceptional knowledge of financial matters
has definitely stamped him as a very valuable citizen.
H. B. Lincoln, G.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.). —Qualified Municipal Sur-
veyor (Victoria and N.S.W., 1915), Qualified Water Supply Engineer
(Victoria, 1915), Associate Member Institute of Engineers (Aust.), 1926.
Educated at Kilmore State school. Entered R. Fennelly’s service 1903,
and had varied experience in municipal work, land and mining survey-
ing, and water supply engineering. Under the direction of that capable
general, this young man supervised the work in connection with the
Broadford water supply scheme, also the laying out of the road leading


up to the Hume-Hovell Memorial. Left Kilmore in 1910, accepting a
position with the shire engineer at Kerang; remained there for about 18
months, and later engaged in private survey work in the Western District
for a few months. Weis appointed to a position with the State Rivers
and Water Supply Commission in 1912. With this department Harry B.
Lincoln has had a long and faithful record of service as the appended
notes will show:— May to October, 1912, surveying reservoir sites Murray
River works; October, 1912, to March, 1914, field engineer in charge
of Goulburn Levee Works extending from Shepparton to Echuca; March,
1914, to July, 1918, constructing engineer at Merbein, remodelling channel
system in concrete, and opening up new settlement areas at Birdwoodton
and Merbein West; July, 1918, to October, 1933, district engineer and
secretary at Shepparton. In addition to administrative duties, had control
of construction works carried out to cope with wide extensions. The
district under irrigation grew from 18,000 acres in 1918 to 180,000 acres
in 1933. For the past five years has been district engineer at Kerang.
From this centre an area of 200,000 acres served by water supply and
irrigation channels is controlled. Extra works carried out in the Kerang
district by the State Rivers and Water Supply Department under the
supervision of this erstwhile Kilmore State school boy include levee
constructions, river snagging, reconstruction of channels, also a huge
drainage scheme costing £90,000 designed to benefit 70,000 acres.
Whilst stationed at Shepparton, outside his official work, this versa-
tile engineer designed and put forward the idea of a lake. The lake is
now an accomplished fact.
On a Special Committee from Commonwealth and State, appointed
to investigate irrigation and drainage problems, the subject of this sketch
is one of the Water Supply Commission representatives.
Alex E. Lincoln, M. 8., 8.5., Melbourne University —Primary educa-
tion Kilmore State school, secondary school course Assumption College,
Kilmore. Obtained leaving honours from the college. After matriculation
entered in his medical course at Melbourne University, 1921. Was runner-
up in an Exhibition in Anatomy in 1924. Graduated Bachelor of Medicine
and Bachelor of Surgery, with Honours in Medicine, Obstetrics, and
Gynaecology, 1926. After experience at Melbourne Hospital, was Senior
Resident at Ballarat Base Hospital. In 1928 received appointment as
Medical Officer to the Administration of New Guinea. After service at
Rabaul, proceeded to the mainland of New Guinea, and from head-
quarters at Salamau —the proposed new capital of the territory —super-
vised the establishment of the first Australian Hospital on the goldfields
at Edie Creek. Later returning to the south, Dr. Lincoln practised for
five years at King Island. From there he crossed over to his native State,
and has since been in active practice at Woodend.
Dr. Harwood H. Osborn, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., Edinburgh, 1894.
This member of a well-known Kilmore family, after some years spent
overseas, returned to Victoria and commenced as a medical practitioner


at Boon, in !:JUB he transferred lo Melbourne, and established a busy
end successful practice in East Malvern. In that suburb Dr. Osborn
diligently applied himself to his work, and earned an excellent reputa-
tion in his profession. He died in 1934. A son, Dr. Charles H. Osborn,
is now a widely-known medico in Collins Street, Melbourne.
Dr. J. IT, Scruple (Melbourne University). —Received primary educa-
tion at Kilrnore State school, and later pursued higher studies at Ballarat
College. After receiving his medical degrees this young man, familiarly
known locally as "Doctor jack," went to Queensland. Nearly four years
of his early professional career was spent in that State. For some time
he was associated in practice with an elderly man, Dr. Macdonald, at a
country centre far distant from Brisbane. After terminating his engage-
ment in the outback. Dr. Semple became possessed of the idea of seeing
something of the open life in the northern State. Purchasing a good
hack, he rode right through to Brisbane, where he disposed of his steed
and riding equipment, and prepared to leave for his native State. How-
ever, he came into contact with an erstwhile fellow student, who induced
him to apply for a position then olFcring at the Brisbane Hospital. Having
secured the said position, I )r. Semple made a flying visit to see his family
and friends at Kilrnore, and then returned to hospital practice for more
than a year. Eventually “Doctor Jack” came along, and in association with
his father. Dr. W. 11. Semple, settled down to active practice in his
native town.
Appended arc,' die names of a band of Kilrnore boys who have joined
the Marist Order in which they have done noble work:—
Michael O’Donoghuc (Brother Gerard, M.A.) is in the front rank
of Catholic Education in New South Wales. For many years he was in
charge of the Marist Brothers’ Eligh School, Darlinghurst, which he
conducted with remarkable success. His opinions carry great weight with
those associated with him in Educational Conferences.
Tames Rvan (Brother Colurnba, 8.A.) hails from one of the earliest
•J * J \ '
Kilrnore families. He is carrying on the good work of education at the
Marist High School. Darlinghurst. New South Wales.
O ' O'
Michael Rvan ( Brother Cvril ). who has a number of relatives in
/v y / '
Kilrnore, spent many years at the Sacred Heart College, Glenelg, also
at New Norcia, W.A. As a teacher of mathematics he has few equals,
and can play a game of cricket with the best.
Robert McManus (Brother Barnabas), a member of the well-known
Kilrnore family, was one of the first local boys to join the Marist Order.
He laboured with success in Port Adelaide, Mosman, and Bondi as
Director. Later on he took charge of Westmead House. 11l health forced
him to seek a change of climate. He returned to his native Kilrnore, where
lie died in 1932.
Lawrence Corrigan (Brother Urban, M.A., Dip. Ed.), who has taken
a deep interest in matters appertaining to education, was a boarder at
Assumption College. Elis work dealing with the development of Catholic


education will be a valuable mine of information for all who should be
proud to know what the pioneers did for education.
Several other Marist Brothers claim Kilmore as their native town,
or the town in which they spent happy years. Among them may be
mentioned Ernest Doolan (Brother Thomas Francis), now in charge
of the Marist School at Hawthorn; Owen Kavanagh (Brother Owen);
Maurice O’Connor (Brother Robert); Edward Conway (Brother
Matthias), R.I.P.


CHAPTER 13.
REMINISCENT OF THE PAST
N this chapter some slight effort is made to re-sound Echoes from
our Law Courts, as heard more than sixty years ago. Likewise efforts
are made to reawaken memories of lawyers, doctors, and others who
came prominently into the picture of life, as lived in Kilmore at the
same period of our departed century.
Early Kilmore citizens enjoyed a reputation for litigation, and
the present handsome bluestone Court House bears silent testimony to
this vanished temper of our race. The first sittings of the Kilmore Police
Court were held about 1850; thereafter as the settlement grew it be-
came an important centre for the dispensation of law and order. From
as far back as 28th February, 1854, the County Court held regular sittings
in Kilmore, whilst the General Sessions also commenced on the same
date. The Kilmore Courts heard appeals from places as far distant
as Jamieson, Mansfield, and Alexandra, and prominent counsel from
Melbourne appeared regularly at the Kilmore assizes. An interesting
commentary on the social lapses of the time is provided by the perusal
of notes of the early trials held in the General Sessions. Unenviably pro-
minent are cases of assault, drunkenness, and petty larceny. Occasionally
we have the more serious and picturesque robbery on the highway com-
monly called “bushranging.”
In such cases the judges did not hesitate to apply the full severity
of the somewhat savage criminal code then in vogue, and all offences,
however small and trifling, received the monotonous punishment “six
months labour on the roads of the colony.” The Petty Sessions records
supply a continuous memorial of the more prominent townsmen, who
administered the rough and ready (often perhaps wrong) but generally
humane Justices’ Law.
The Kilmore Court of General Sessions was closed on sth January,
1916, whilst the County Court was closed on the 31st December of the
same year. The Courts are intimately connected with the social fortunes
of the people, of which indeed Court records are often the best indica-
tion. With the steady decline of Kilmore the crowded lists of the fifties
and the early sixties were replaced by the dismal record “no business.”
No longer did the Bench and Bar enjoy the social interlude of the
Kilmore assizes.
In this record it is interesting to relate that as late as 1872 the
local council preserved an old English custom, and handed to Judge
Molesworth a pair of white gloves, there being no business set down
for the March sittings at Kilmore. Kilmore has continued as a Court
of Petty Sessions, but the interest and prestige of the higher jurisdictions


have long since departed, leaving as their permanent record a building
which is probably one of the best country court houses in Victoria.
In this review of the past it is scarcely necessary to publish the
names of those who, vested with judicial authority, came along to
administer justice from the higher bench without fear or favour. The
judges, in accordance with the rules of the circuit system, accepted
direction from the Crown Law Department in the city of Melbourne,
and included Kilmore Sessions in their itinerary. Counsel who were
fortunate enough to hold briefs in cases set down for trial were obliged,
and we might add pleased, to pay a visit to a town noted for sociability.
As those high lights of the Courts simply performed their duties and
moved along elsewhere, maintaining no permanent association with
Kilmore, well they get no permanent place herein.
There is not the slightest intention, however, of giving summary
dismissal to those lawyers who practised their profession right here in
the old home town. In those early years quite a number of learned
men of the law endeavoured to elucidate the conflicting clauses of various
Acts of Parliament, and give sound legal advice to prospective litigants.
Aye, and far more readily and often, methinks, they have made the
legal course of procedure clear and easy for those who showed a desire
to avoid litigation. Owing to lack of definite information some names
will be omitted from lists published here. However, such omission is quite
unintentional.
Perhaps “The Noblest Roman of All” was Thomas de-Courcy
Meade, who came to Australia in 1852. Shortly after arrival in the
colonies he received appointment as Clerk of Courts at Kilmore. In
this position he succeeded J. M. Ardlie, whose appointment is recorded
in a very early edition of the Government Gazette. About one year’s
experience in the capacity of a clerk satisfied Thomas de-Courcy Meade,
who then commenced to practice as a solicitor. Son of a Church of
England clergyman, young Meade was born at Bandon, County Cork,
Ireland. After receiving a liberal education, he was admitted as an
attorney before leaving his native land. In the course of his life at
Kilmore he rose to a proud eminence in his profession, more particularly
perhaps as a Court Advocate. Possessing the characteristics of the old-
fashioned Irish gentleman, this legal luminary gave free play to his
sporting instincts, and indulged a fondness for outdoor pastimes. As
an ardent admirer of the thoroughbred horse he took a keen interest in
the turf, and thoroughly enjoyed a run with hounds. Having at one period
of his career amassed a considerable sum of money, he freely expended
the greater part of it in the erection of that beautiful private residence,
Melrose Hall (now occupied by Mrs. Tomlinson and her daughter).
W. B. Noel, whose name appears elsewhere in this booklet as the
pioneer president of our Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library (1854),
was an early practising solicitor at Kilmore. This gentleman later secured
the position of Chief Commissioner of the Insolvency Court at Mel-


bourne, where he presided as Judge Noel. W. E. Twynam was another
member of the legal fraternity who took an interest in the welfare of
our local library, occupying the president’s chair for three separate years.
Others whose names appear on records dated round about 1866 were
Twigg and O’Connor (James Twigg and John Dunbar O’Connor), also
William Grace. These contemporaries in legal practice occupied adjacent
offices fronting Sydney Street, on the block where the lovely home of the
Taylor family now stands. Grace was located on the corner opposite
to where Hartnell’s Somerset House Stores then stood. This latter site is
now occupied by Vincent Murray’s residence and surgery.
W. H. Whelan became associated with Thomas de-Gourcy Meade
in 1882, and after the death of the latter continued in active legal practice
until 1917.
Christopher George Plunkett was appointed Police Magistrate for
the Kilmore district in 1851. Five years later, according to an item in
a newspaper published at Kilmore 6th June, 1856, Captain Dana, P.M.,
was patiently waiting for his successor, one Captain Vignolles. The latter
was then under instructions from the Law Department to proceed to
Kilmore and enter upon his duties as Resident Magistrate. Thus on
down through the passing of the years various gentlemen came to
preside ~6ver'the local bench and exercise those judicial functions in-
cidental to a Court of Petty Sessions. Amongst others who officiated as
Resident Magistrates were A. M. McKay (1866) ; Macrae, Holmes, A.
P. Akehurst (1872).
Probably the best remembered of them is A. P. Akehurst, who seems
to have been regarded as an outstanding figure amongst the dispensers
of justice who upheld the dignity of the Bench back in those yester
years. As previously hinted, the activities of our Courts became restricted,
and the Crown Law Department ceased to appoint Resident Magistrates
for Kilmore. The control of district Court sittings then came under the
jurisdiction of visiting police magistrates.
The building already referred to as our handsome bluestone Court
House was completed in 1864, at a cost of £3600. The design was pre-
pared by J. J. Clarke, architect, and the erection was carried out by
D. Langridge, contractor. Those old bluestone buildings, the Court House
and the adjacent Post Office, present a somewhat gloomy appearance
and fail to gain the approval of up-to-date citizens, who look for some-
think more showy. A close and critical examination of the former build-
ing reveals to the eye of the beholder some exceptional features of
the stonemason’s art. Furthermore, the general workmanship displayed
in those public buildings reflects great credit on the builders who plied
their trade in Kilmore more than seventy years ago. The block of land
on which those buildings stand was practically transferred as a gift to
the Victorian Government by Judith Morris. This good lady had con-
siderable property and business interests in that particular centre, and was
then making a bold bid to have the heart of the town maintained there.


In the year 1862 the original Court House was destroyed by fire.
This was a wooden building (slab walls and shingled roof) that stood
practically on the site where the Kilmore Presbyterian Church now
stands. As the foundation stone of the new Court House was laid by
Dr. Nicholson on 28th November, 1863, it would appear as if Govern-
ment departments gave prompt attention to Kilmore and its require-
ments in those days.
Let us now endeavour to revive memories of some resident members
of the medical profession, who valiantly strove to ameliorate the physical
sufferings of their fellow human beings sixty-seventy-eighty years ago.
In those years our doctors had a bigger population to deal with, and a
much wider extent of country to traverse. How very wide that area was
may be readily gleaned from the following incident. In 1848 Groves
White occupied a squatting run in the vicinty where the town of Rush-
worth later sprang up. Somewhere in the early fifties a serious accident
befel one of the employees on the station, and a messenger on horse-
back was despatched to Kilmore 60 miles distant to secure the services
of a doctor. This is but an isolated case. Many such wearisome journeys
had to be undertaken by our doctors in the days of wide open spaces.
Elsewhere it has been noted that Dr. F. W. C. Beavan was the
prime mover in the establishment of the Kilmore Hospital. The initial
movement was set on foot in 1854, and it is clearly evident that Dr.
Beavan had been in active practice some time previous to the stated year.
This pioneer medico, who only severed his connection with the hospital
in 1870, had control of the local dispensing chemist’s business for some
time. Dr. D. N. Nicholson, a man of robust and commanding ap-
pearance, was another prominent figure in old Kilmore. This worthy
man built and occupied the original house on the site lately acquired
by W. Beaver, but previously occupied by the Proudfoot family for many
years. Dr. F. L. Bindley, on whose card was inscribed “Four Years
Resident Surgeon, County Hospital of Kent, England,” practised at
Kilmore for many years. The house now occupied by J. J. Ryan and
family, known as Bindley House, was the home and surgery of this
popular and active doctor. The apt descriptions “robust and com-
manding,” as applied to Dr. Nicholson, and the incisive “popular and
active” in reference to Dr. Bindley, have been borrowed from well-
expressed comments written by Finlay McNab. Dr. Bindley was an
active member of the Library Committee, and occupied the position of
president in 1859.
Dr. Andrew Nash proved a very useful member of the Library Com-
mittee, of which he was president in 1860-61. Apparently Dr. Nash spent
a few years in Kilmore, but definite notes of his movements are not pro-
curable. We can only present similar reports with regard to Drs. Lumsden
and Paton.
In the sixties a Dr. Yarrow was located in a house that then stood
some distance from Chinaman’s Bridge, on the west side of road. After


practising some time in Kilmore, Dr. Yarrow moved on to Seymour.
One dark night, after a late professional visit to a patient who lived in
the Tallarook Ranges, this medical practitioner got lost in the dense
bush. Four years later his remains were discovered out in the hills. After
identification was fully proved and accepted, a daughter of the deceased
came into a small fortune in England.
Dr. Brock first came to Kilmore as assistant to Dr. Bindley in 1867.
After the death of his associate he commenced practice on his own
account, and continued in active work until his death in 1908. Taken
altogether he spent forty-one years as a medical practitioner in this
town, and strongly impressed his genuine worth on the community. This
genial medico, in a peculiarly unobtrusive manner, performed innumer-
able acts of charity and kindness. No citizen of old Kilmore is more kindly
remembered than Dr. Edward Brock. A native of Chatham, County
Kent, England, he took his degree at the Royal College of Surgeons,
and then entered on a varied and interesting career as an army surgeon.
His appointments led to active service in Ireland, Mauritius, Cape
Colony, and India. The climate of India did not agree with him, and
after returning to England he sailed for Australia, and as already out-
lined above firmly entrenched himself at Kilmore.
Dr. W. H. Semple hailed from Stranraer, in the County of Wigtown,
Scotland. Wigtown is the extreme south-west Scottish county, and from
Stranraer it is only a matter of thirty-five miles across the North Channel
to Larne, on the cost of Ireland. Before coming to Australia Dr. Semple
had spent some time in the Philippine Islands, where he evidently held
an appointment as a medical officer. Engaged as a ship’s surgeon, he
arrived at Melbourne some time in the sixties. At the time of his arrival
there was no definite intention of remaining in Australia. However,
a chance meeting with an old class-mate changed all future plans. The
friend alluded to, who was then a leading surgeon in the city of Mel-
bourne, prevailed on Dr. Semple to apply for a position at the Melbourne
Hospital. This young and ambitious man was chosen to fill the vacancy,
and for few years he had a busy and active life as a Resident Medical
Office at this city institution.
Actual connection with Kilmore began in 1870, when Dr. W. H.
Semple became associated with Kilmore Hospital. This institution he
faithfully served until 1921, when he handed over the care of patients
to his son, Dr. J. H. Semple.
For slightly over half the century recorded in these pages Dr.
Semple the elder was engaged in active practice at Kilmore. No one
comes more closely into touch with the daily life of the people than
the family doctor. What a chapter of memories cling round a fifty year
period of care for the sick and suffering ones. Dr. Semple left a fine
record of service to mark his place in the history of Kilmore, The
members of his family—some of whom still figure on the list of our
respected citizens —worthily uphold the best traditions of their parents.


Many of those who engaged in retail and general distributing
business during the boom period at Kilmore because fairly prosperous.
Lured farther afield by prospects that looked sound and profitable, some
realised on their local assets, and carrying away accumulated savings
ventured out into the unknown. Almost without exception in subsequent
business undertakings disaster overtook those erstw'hile reputable citizens
who moved out from old Kilmore. After the lapse of so many years it
is useless to venture a guess as to why fortune smiled on some of our
pioneers and frowned on others. The same sort of thing is happening
in our midst to-day, yet none seem to possess a charm against the
fickleness of fortune.
Whatever ups and downs beset the paths of those worthy townsmen,
whether they left or remained at Kilmore, it would be an ungracious
act if they were not given a conspicuous place in this historical sketch.
Any attempt to paint a complete picture, or reproduce a stage whereon
the prominent figures of a vanished period would appear to full advant-
age, must necessarily through lack of reliable information fall short of
expectations. However, there is more than a suspicion of accuracy in
the subjoined list: —Lawrence Arcus, a whilom mayor, and a really worth-
while townsman, formerly traded in a big way on the premises now
occupied by Claude McConville. Thomas Bossence, who carried on
business as a cabinet maker and undertaker, was a superior class of
Englishman. As a justice of the peace, councillor, and public-spirited
citizen he had few equals. J. J. Reilly occupied the position of mayor
in 1872, when the railway to Kilmore East was opened for traffic. One of
the most active business men of the period round about 1870, he lent
willing support to every movement undertaken for the welfare of the
town. This pioneer was afterwards engaged in trading concerns at
Yarrawonga, Shepparton, and Dookie. The premises on the north-east
comer of Powlett and Rutledge Streets, where Reilly carried on opera-
tions, were taken over by Donald Kennedy, a young Scotchman of fine
personality. Later, as a member of the Council, and more especially as
chairman of that body, Kennedy proved himself to be possessed of ex-
ceptional ability.
Back in those years J. E. Dowling, a native of Kilmore, was elected
a member of the Borough Council at the age of twenty-one. Perhaps
Kilmore never numbered a more fluent speaker or better-informed
debater amongst its citizens than Joe Dowling. Both the young men
referred to, who came very much into the limelight for a brief spell, faded
quietly into the background.
T. J. Geoghegan, whose drapery establishment was regarded as
one of the show places of the town, played the part of a useful citizen
for a number of years. After disposing of his business he moved to
Brisbane, where he conducted a huge emporium for a time. The capital
city of Queensland was not at that period enjoying an era of prosperity,
and T. J. Geoghegan’s business venture did not prove successful.


R. D. McKay first came to Kilmore as a Lands Officer in the
employ of the Victorian Government. Resigning from this position, he
entered into business as an estate agent. An energetic man, with ready
aptitude for business control, he took an active part in mining companies
with interests at Reedy Creek. The McKay’s lived in the house now
occupied by Patrick Clarke and his family. One of the sons was later
well known as a bank manager, and only retired from that position
A A
within recent years. Another son, who served his apprenticeship in the
“Advertiser” office at Kilmore, became associated with “Smith’s Weekly”
a—, _ _
in Sydney, and eventually acquired a controlling interest in that journal.
For such interest he later realised for the sum of £30,000.
The brewery conducted by John Fynn in the sixties and seventies
was the scene of brisk business. A big proportion of the output was
despatched to towns that had become established northwards from
Kilmore. More than a dozen men were regularly employed at the
brewery and malthouse.
Fynn was a keen and intelligent class of man, and a very useful
townsman. At one period of his local career he held a fairly extensive
area of land in the High Camp and Pyalong districts. This land was
subdivided and sold in lots about 1880.
Patrick Hunt (a brother of Thos. Hunt) was keenly interested in
mining, and was closely identified with operations on the Reedy Creek
field. He was for some years a member of the Kilmore Shire Council, and
in many ways strove to promote the welfare of town and district. At
different periods he was associated with James Ahearn and Maurice
Dillon in the stock agency business.
Edward Maloney at a very early period conducted a storekeeping
business right at the southern end of the town. In the days of teamsters
Maloney’s hay and corn business was quite an extensive concern. Was
President of Shire Council after change over from borough to shire
in 1874.
About 1865 H. P. Harris vacated the old-time store known as
Manchester House (now occupied by Mrs. Mcßreen), and his place
was taken by William Kerr, a very capable man of business. This new-
comer worked up a very lucrative trade and prospered exceedingly.
Back in the early eighties he realised on his Kilmore property and
stock-in-trade, and invested the proceeds in the Ball and Welch business
at Carlton (later Flinders Street, City).
Thomas Gearty, a real old-time identity, who died at an advanced
age in comparatively recent times, was for many years a valued and
trusted assistant in William Kerr’s business. Another who spent some
years as an employee under the same roof was D. M. Wylie, who later,
in partnership with Henry Mcßurney, carried on the business formerly
owned and controlled by Lawrence Arcus.
In the sixties J. Benbow Key was interested in a fairly extensive
scale in the distillation and preparation of aerated waters and cordials.


For some time he had possession of the Dalhousie Hotel (on the spot
where Boyd Bros.’ bacon factory now stands). A statement appears in
an old newspaper file to the effect that the first Agricultural Show was
held in the back yard of the Dalhousie Hotel. However, there is no
reference in the old minute book of the Society to substantiate such state-
ment. J. Benbow Key was a live citizen, who entered with zest into every
community effort directed towards the entertainment and recreation of
Kilmore residents and visitors.
Fred. W. Barrett was a pupil at the National School at Kilmore.
In the late sixties he commenced work with J. Benbow Key, to whom a
short reference has just been made. After a period spent in this initial
job young Barrett transferred to the “Free Press” office; later he moved
to Seymour, where Thomas Hunt conducted another newspaper. For
several years this young man maintained a connection with journalistic
work at Seymour. In the early eighties he joined the “Age” staff, and
has been continuously associated with that important metropolitan daily
newspaper for fifty-five years. During the past year this active and alert-
minded man has made periodic visits to Kilmore. Possessed of a re-
markable memory, Fred. Barrett discourses quietly, and in a most
interesting manner revives memories of men, women, and children
who lived in Kilmore in the days of his boyhood. The full stretch of
the roadway or street from the Albion Mill to the Farmers’ Arms Hotel
(comer of Willowmavin Road), as it appeared at that period, seems to
unfold and become a vivid living picture as one listens to his lucid
description.
The following extracts from letters received from the subject of this
memoir are full of interest: “If I am fit and well next November will
make a big effort to attend the Centenary celebrations.” Yes, come along
if possible, you will be a welcome visitor. “Kilmore possessed two bands
in the sixties—the Brass Band and Scudamore’s Drum and Pipe Band,
Joseph Biddle was bandmaster of the first-mentioned; amongst the
players were Joseph Castles (father of Amy Castles) and Wm. Castles.
In Henry Scudamore’s Band Tom Castles played a pipe. Can remember
fourteen members of the Brass Band, and about half that number who
were regular players in the second band.”
“An event worth recording took place in the 60’s. This was a Trotting
Match, £5 a side, owners up, from the Union Hotel, Bylands, to
Kelly’s Hotel, Kilmore. The contestants were Dr. Bindley and W. L.
Sawell, auctioneer. The whole town turned out to see the finish. Sawell
had a very easy win.”


CHAPTER 14.
HORSE RACING
THROUGHOUT Australia wherever Englishmen and Irishmen set-
tled there, racing quickly found a home. This is essentially a true
statement as regards old Kilmore, where the nationality of many
of the early settlers promptly asserted itself by making provision to
indulge in the Sport of Kings. Long before the present day racecourse
with its well defined track and general appointments was made available,
several other racing tracks were made use of. On private properties
and elsewhere, rough and ready convincing grounds were established,
so that sportsmen could try out their steeds, and provide enjoyment and
relaxation for the local and visiting public.
The conventional idea of a racecourse usually conveyed to one’s
mind suggests an oval shaped arena with a clearly defined running track
circling such oval. Old Kilmore was daring enough to snap its fingers at
convention, and racing contests were staged on a “there-and-back”
principle. This novel form of horse racing was conducted on the public
roadway between the Royal Oak, Sydney Street, and the Farmers’ Arms,
situated at the corner where the Willowmavin Road turns off from the
Hume Highway. Later on the sporting fraternity was lured away to
another convincing ground, where there-and-back events were contested
under different conditions—that is to say —there was a “pub” only at one
end. At the first named rendezvous, with a “pub” at each end, —well
sometimes the competitors got “there” but failed to get “back.”
The spot where this novel form of racing contests grew into favour
lies about half-a-mile south from the Post Office. The starting point was
at the Diggers’ Rest Hotel. The track ran along over fields to a marked
tree near where the State school now stands. After doubling round the
said tree the competitors galloped back to the winning post in front of
the hotel. It sometimes happened that the judge was not at his post, and
“run the race over again” was the verdict of the assembled crowd. It
is just possible, that all horses taking part in these “hurry-scurry” events
were not pure thoroughbreds. Depend upon it however, some rattling
good fun was enjoyed, and many a pleasant interlude occurred to give
zest to the outing:
“As an instance, take for instance.
Just this instance.”
Two competitors had been sent off to an even start from the
northern end of the first mentioned track. As the horses pounded along
the muddy roadway, the riders espied a man getting severely battered in
a hand-to-hand encounter with a fellow-man. Soft-hearted chaps those


two jockeys were, so they promptly agreed to postpone the galloping
contest, and pulled up to quell the disturbance. A visit was made
to a mid-distance hostelry, where the victor was subdued and first-aid
treatment was administered to the victim and all ended happily. After
displaying such kindly consideration for their fellows, it is regrettable
to have to report that both riders were disqualified, because they failed to
turn up at the winning post on schedule time. Perhaps it is not all
in good taste to refer to the pleasant-natured fun of those old timers
in such a facetious strain. Readers, however, may rest assured that no
unkindness is meant, and there is not the slightest intention of belittling
the sport-loving pioneers of old Kilmore.
Steeplechasing seems to have been a favourite form of horse racing
in the early colonial days, and Kilmore was one of the first centres
where this class of event was staged. At one period a steeplechase track
was formed on the western slope of Freyne’s Hill —a very trying course
for horses. Apart from the obstacles to be jumped, the hill and dale
nature of the surface made the going very difficult. There was another
course on fairly level ground, adjacent to the Kilkenny Inn, on the
Lancefield Road. If report speaks correctly, the obstacles that com-
petitors had to face on that track were somewhat terrifying. The game
riders of that day went at those obstacles without flinching, and returned
on subsequent occasions to have another spin over the same formidable
track.
A special article on Early Victorian Steeplechasing, by “Chiron,”
was published in “The Australasian,” on sth June, 1937. From this
article, which gives a graphic description of notable incidents in the
sixties, the following passages have been clipped: —“Another stiff course
used in the old days was that at Kilmore. The Kilmore Grand National
Steeplechase was run over four miles, in which there were 36 jumps and
sticky cultivated soil. Most of the fences were raw post and rail, but
there were three log fences, which had to be jumped twice; also two
creeks which had to be crossed twice. There were six road doubles; four
of these were exceedingly difficult.” (Now, boys of the old brigade,
can any of you hazard a guess as to where that course was situated? The
writer of these notes frankly admits that he is unable to enlighten his
readers as to the exact location.) Reading farther into the article quoted
above, we learn that Blueskin, a champion cross country ran
second to Vandyke in the Grand National at Kilmore in 1864. Sporting
writers of that day refer to the Kilmore course as “fair hunting country.”
Compared with the description of other tracks this sounds merely like
fair and reasonable comment. Reference to district racecourses would
not be complete unless the old track across the road from the Union
Hotel, at Bylands, came in for passing mention. In 1876, at this old
pleasure ground, Adam Lindsay Gordon rode one of the competitors
in a steeplechase. The visit of the Australian poet is only one of many


cherished memories associated with the pleasant gatherings in that
picturesque locality.
On the present Kilmore racecourse, which dates from 1865, many
stirring contests have been witnessed down through the years. During
the first twenty years of its existence the Kilmore racecourse was a
regular meeting place for a fine class of sportsmen. At that period of
country activities and undertakings, there were several property owners
in surrounding districts who were keenly interested in the breeding of
thoroughbred horses. In the way of sport, and from the pure love of
the racing game, these men desired nothing better than to lower the
colours of neighbouring landowners with a horse bred and trained on
their own property. This class of sportsmen mostly all faded out of the
picture during the eighties.
Amongst the earliest batch interested in the breeding of thorough-
bred horses were William Moodie and R. G. Bloxidge. At Moodie’s stud
farm on the Broadford Road, The Peer, one of the stallions imported from
England at an early period in colonial history, was located. Darebin,
the winner of a V.R.C, Derby in 1879, was sired by The Peer. This
horse, Darebin, was afterwards secured for stud purposes by an American
breeder. Bloxidge, who lived in the stately, odd-fashioned house known
at “Athenian Villa” (later as “Pine Lodge”), on the north side of the
road leading towards the hospital from Hume Highway, owned the
thoroughbred stallion Athos.
George Watson, who acted as starter on the Flemington Racecourse,
and also filled the position of Master of the Melbourne Hounds for many
years, was a regular visitor at local fixtures when the Kilmore district
figured prominently as a sporting centre. Another old timer who was
then very widely known on steeplechase tracks and in the hunting field,
was also much in evidence on our local racecourse. This was Johnnie
Abbott, who rode his own horse, Walkover, to victory in the first Great
Western Steeplechase, at Coleraine, in the late fifties. The Abbott family
had large landed interests in the Donnybrook district. On one occasion
the redoubtable Johnnie journeyed to a race meeting at Kilmore; later
that same day a brother unexpectedly returned from New Zealand, and
decided to ride on to Kilmore to see the races. At the time of this late-
comer’s arrival the steeplechase event was on. Johnnie Abbott’s mount
fell heavily in front of the grand stand, and the stunned rider was carried
in to the casualty room. The brother caught and mounted the now
riderless horse, continued in the race, and subsequently won the event.
Just at the moment that the rider of the winning horse was weighing in
the injured man regained consciousness, but being unable to quickly
grasp the situation he suddenly swooned again. It was certainly very dis-
concerting to behold his brother —supposed to be in a far-off lar d-
calmly acting as his deputy. Naturally the man whose head was s'.'.ll
buzzing from the knock received in the fall thought he was “seei g
things.”


In those good old times it was a regular practice for many of the
onlookers to ride inside the course proper, and view the progress of
the race in this manner. Many of those haphazard riders became very
excited, and urged on their favourites by shouting instructions to them.
One day a young man named Vinge was riding a horse that was generally
expected to prove victorious. Amongst the “urgers” galloping pell-mell
inside the oval was an excitable lady-rider. As the competitors neared
the winning post this keen watcher called out lustily to a male com-
panion pacing beside her: “Vinge is bate, see his horse is scatterin’.”
All horsemen know that a tired or jaded animal towards the finish of a
hard run flounders and loses its even gait. I have heard this floundering
action variously described as “rolling,” “spreading,” “sinking”—how-
ever that good lady’s description of “scatterin’ ” was a very apt ex-
pression.
Away back in 1870 Norma won an Australian Cup. Norma had
previously competed in races on the Kilmore course. Nimblefoot, winner
of the Melbourne Cup in 1870, was brought along here and won the
Kilmore Handicap in the following autumn. Larrikin, an exceptionally
fine type of steeplechaser, was well-known on the local course before
winning the Australian Steeplechase, at Caulfield, in 1896. Freedom won
the Cup Hurdle Race at Flemington on the same day that the redoubtable
Carbine won the Melbourne Cup ; this horse was bred at Lancefield, and
had previously raced at Kilmore and other district courses.
Amongst horses raced by district owners in the seventies and eighties
the following haphazard list of names may awaken memories:—Fair Nell,
Honeybee, Blink Bonnie, Miss Jessie, Mark Twain, Mermaid, Diavolo,
Secret, Deceiver, Banshee, Theuge, Marchioness, Union Jack, Banathea,
Lord Byron, Alfonso, Native Girl, My Dream, Soldier Boy, Refuse, Defoe,
Laceby. In those early days most of the people who attended local race
meetings were keen on the sport —they really loved to watch well
fought-out contests between trained thoroughbreds. The coming of the
bookmaker, and the substitution of “the profits” (imaginary) for the
“pleasure” (real) proved a decided check on those of the old school
amongst racegoers. Apart, however, from any digression of this nature,
we are pleased to express a firm conviction that present indications
suggest a revival of interest in horse racing on the Kilmore course.


CHAPTER 15.
MORE ABOUT
SPORT
ITHIN the last ten years
made by the members of
periodic visits to Kilmore have been
the Oaklands Hunt Club. Such visits
afforded opportunities to our local people to enjoy something of
those thrills associated with horsemen and hounds down through the
ages. Back in the nineties we had a regularly constituted Hunt Club of
our own, with a select body of enthusiastic followers. E. Middleton, Fred
Bantock, and Joe Morrissey, each in turn occupied the position of Master
of the Hounds. Keen horsemen and well-bred horses were much in
evidence in the surrounding districts at that period. It is a matter for
regret that young Australians have, as one might express it, “gone off
the horse.” There is nothing better calculated to make country life
pleasant than to foster a love for the horse. It means a real thrill to
saddle up an animal of quality and good points, and indulge in a spin
over the fields.
Old Kilmore of the boom period regularly staged its cross country
runs with separate packs of hounds kept by Bloxidge (Pine Lodge
house), and Wm. Moodie (Highfield). These worthy sportsmen, who
brought a fine type of foxhounds to Kilmore, had doubtless been keen
followers with County Hunt Clubs back in their native England. A
good muster of well-mounted local followers, with a fair sprinkling of
visiting huntsmen from Melbourne and elsewhere, usually took part in
those cross country runs. In England and Ireland where our early hunt-
ing men came from, it was customary to trail the scent of natural game.
In Kilmore it was not always possible to find suitable game in decent
hunting country, consequently emergency measures had to be resorted
to. Here is a good story of putting hounds on a false scent. A certain
young man who lived in the vicinity of Mt. William owned a kangaroo
dog of sorts —the colour and general appearance of this animal had the
same effect on the hunting pack as the proverbial “red rag” has on a
bull. It was a regular practice to bring this dog along to the throw-off
point and then release it. Away sped the terrified animal making a bee-
line for Mt. William. Hot upon the scent of the detested quarry followed
the pack of hounds, and over the beautiful undulating country through
Willowmavin and Moranding the huntsmen had many an enjoyable run.
I have seen it recorded somewhere in old files that cricket teams from
Melbourne and Seymour made occasional trips to Kilmore in the early
sixties. As there were local exponents of this fine old game, who could
wield the bat and spin the ball effectively, the visiting teams did not
always carry off the laurels of victory.
- _ A
Football has been keenly played ever since the first born generation


of young men at Kilmore sought an outlet for their superabundant energy.
There is clear evidence, too, that our early footballers showed a decided
proficiency in the game. Were not our Tom Maloney and Ned Moore
commandeered in what was probably the first country incursion made
by a metropolitan football club in search of recruits. Aye, the Carlton
Club of old had no reason to regret the inclusion of these men in its
team. Tom Maloney was later appointed captain, and right well he did
his job for four years.
Whilst cricket and football still retain a deal of the old-time popu-
larity, other games introduced amongst the sporting fraternity of later
periods have taken a decided sway. Golf and tennis have caught on in
deadly earnest, both in town and country. As both these games afford
exceptional opportunities for good sport and pleasant social intercourse,
continued popularity is assured.
Golfing as a pastime was first introduced into the Kilmore district
about the year 1900 by Mrs. Whelan, of Range View. Whilst on a visit to
her brother, Dr. Harwood Osborn, then located at Boort, this good lady
had become very interested in the game, and was favourably impressed
with the opportunity that golf afforded for rational amusement and
health-giving exercise. After some time a few kindred spirits were induced
to take part in a quiet bit of practice. Apparently those early exponents
of the game were satisfied to enjoy themselves and await further develop-
ments. As there is undoubtedly a powerful fascination about the game
of golf, it was not long before a keen interest was aroused, and definite
steps towards the formation of a club were taken. Some time during the
next few years a meeting was convened by Dr. J. H. Semple and W. A.
Drury, jun. At this meeting a Golf Club was formed, and the two
gentlemen were appointed as President and Secretary.
From a small beginning, with rough and ready fairways and greens
on the racecourse, what a giant stride has been made. Permission was
obtained to form a golf course round the reservoir in the old police
paddock. Clearing up and general preliminary work was promptly under-
taken. Thus began the laying out of the Kilmore Golf Links that now
compare favourably with the best country courses in the State.
By displaying a keen desire for practice and play, the members of the
newly formed club soon made it clear that golf was destined to become
a very popular game at Kilmore. The Club has made very satisfactory
progress during the past twelve years —within that time a number of
new holes have been laid down. There is now an excellent eighteen hole
course over ideal golfing country. For the last seventeen years an annual
tournament has been held. This important fixture is regularly well
patronised by golfers associated with metropolitan and country clubs.
The links are maintained in splendid order — a permanent green keeper
is employed, and the fairways are kept mown. Membership has steadily
increased —more than 100 players are now on the list.
During recent years the designation lawn tennis has been practically


dropped, and the curt title “Tennis” substituted. This is not the only
change to be noted in regard to this very attractive game. Various styles
of playing courts have been designed and constructed. In such construc-
tions the main object apparently has been to provide a “dancing floor”
surface whereon fast and furious bouts are made possible. Nothing would
be gained by going into tiresome discussion as to the merits or demerits
of any particular surfacing material here. It is worthy of note, however,
that those competent to form judgment in the matter stoutly maintain
that we never had anything better than the bare clay-pan courts on the
Kilmore Cricket Reserve.
I
I have a vague recollection of sedate and serious “pit-pat” tennis
played back in the eighties. Methods of play livened up considerably
during the following decade. Towards the end of the century Kilmore
could boast of quite a few expert players. Somewhere about that time a
local team proved victorious in a North-Eastern competition. The
members of that team were Walter L. Taylor (Glenburnie), B. R. Smith,
head teacher Kilmore S.S.: P. H. V. Elliget, Clerk of Courts, Kilmore;
and Jack Wilson, Kilmore. Misses Jean and Annie Wilson were en-
thusiastic tennis players when the original courts were established on the
Cricket Reserve. Right down through the years the keen sporting pro-
clivities displayed by these ladies have spurred others on to a worthy
spirit of emulation.
Tennis courts were later established on the bank of the creek, close
to the Kilmore East road. Flood waters eroded the creek banks and
made the position untenable. Consequently another move had to be
decided upon—and a very sensible move was made. The present courts
in Memorial Park —a comparatively recent innovation —are decidedly
popular, and must be voted a huge success. The Easter Tournament,
conducted by the Kilmore Tennis Club amidst beautiful surroundings,
is undoubtedly the outstanding social event of our year. Naturally the
evening festivities associated with this annual carnival add considerable
gaiety and make a thoroughly enjoyable gala week. On a fine bright
afternoon during tournament week, let any visitor or even sober-minded
resident saunter casually across the footbridge from Victoria Parade —
they will be enraptured with the scene that unfolds to their gaze.
St. Patrick’s tennis courts, well constructed and neatly laid out,
afford another satisfactory convincing ground for keep exponents of the
game. The friendly arrangement, which permits the free and ready use
of either or both courts during rush periods in tournament seasons, is an
evidence of a true sporting spirit on the part of both clubs.
As might naturally be expected, the formation of a Bowling Green
and a Croquet Lawn went hand in hand with the development of
Memorial Park. For some time past both playing arenas have been the
setting for many enjoyable games. Neither the Bowling Club nor the
Croquet Club can boast of a strong list of members, yet enthusiasm and
a keen sporting spirit are very much in evidence amongst the players.


CHAPTER 16.
'HROUGH THE YEARS
THOMAS Hunt came to Kilmore in 1858, and had an unbroken
connection with the district for seventy-six years. Patrick O’Neill
came in 1866, and after seventy two years of close association with
the varying fortunes of Kilmore and its people, still continues to main-
tain a wholehearted interest in the welfare of our local community. Aye,
and what a source of pleasure it is, and always has been for this worthy
citizen to impress on all and sundry that Kilmore is an exceptionally
fine place in which to spend one’s life.
At Cappawhite, in the western portion of County Tipperary, in
Ireland, some time before he sailed for Australia, Thomas Hunt —then
a bright schoolboy—took Pat O’Neill by the hand on the first morning
that he attended school. With a please smile Tommy Hunt introduced
this new pupil to the teacher and scholars.
It is more than passing strange that those two sons of neighbouring
families in old Ireland should become intimately associated down through
the years in an Australian country town. H. J. (Harry) Hunt, who for
many years acted in the capacity of Engineer for the Kilmore and Spring-
field Shires also hailed from the vicinity of Cappawhite.
Most of our people probably regard the coming of Thomas Hunt
and Patrick O’Neill as the original connection of their respective families
with Kilmore. Not so, however, as the two sisters of Thomas Hunt were
already settled here when their parents and brother arrived in 1858.
Likewise Patrick O’Neill’s mother voyaged to Australia, and was com-
fortably settled at Kilmore when her son reached the land of his adoption
in 1866.
Right back in the year 1845 John Griffin cultivated the sloping
hillside paddock (where Ned Turner’s milch cows now graze), a short
distance north of the town. From that field wheat crops were harvested
continuously for a quarter of a century. A few years after settling in the
locality this pioneer farmer built the Farmers’ Arms Hotel (the house in
which Patrick O’Neill now lives). This hotel was conducted by the
Griffin family until the end of 1876, when the licence was surrendered.
Under that roof the birth, marriage, and death of the late Mrs. P.
O’Neill (nee Mary Griffin) took place.
The early-formed Willowmavin Road Board held meetings in a
spacious room in that old hotel. In that same room many an enjoyable
dance took place when Kilmore was in the heyday of its youth. At a
casual glance it might appear as if this popular dance resort was well
outside the town boundary. Such however was not the case, as there was
no less than fourteen homes on the west side of the roadway between the


Farmers’ Arms and where die creek crosses the Hume Highway. It must
not be imagined that the town presented a lopsided appearance towards
the northern extremity. The row of fourteen houses on the west side was
balanced by a goodly number of buildings on the opposite side of road-
About 1851 Thomas Quinn got a licence for an hotel that nestled in
at the foot of the hill, just beyond where the present line of houses fronting
the Highway on the west side abruptly ends. Owing to its proximity to this
hotel the bridge that spanned the creek was known as Quinn’s Bridge.
By later generations the name “Chinaman’s Bridge” has been applied to
this structure. For many years a band of Chinese workers cultivated a
garden plot on the bank of the creek, hence the appellation in use at the
present time.
Back in those early years Jim Thomas was a familiar figure at
Kilmore. According to the published statement of a mail cart passenger,
who passed this way in 1854, Thomas was then landlord at the Royal
Oak Hotel. Some time later he took a lease of Quinn’s Hotel, and during
occupancy of that hostelry he built a commodious hall or playhouse on an
adjoining allotment. Flamboyant gilt lettering proclaimed this gaudily-
painted building as the “Theatre Royal.”
We have heard some startling stories of talented artists and high
class theatrical companies that thrilled large and appreciative audiences
in that old theatre. No one would dream of shattering the fond memories
that cling round those fascinating old stories. It is a matter for regret
that no records have been preserved, setting forth the musical and
dramatic programmes presented to the patrons at that house of enter-
tainment. The only definite information relative to this old building deals
with its collapse. “Without any apparent cause the Theatre Royal tumbled
down one calm night.” Such is the simple statement attributed to a fine
old lady who came to Kilmore in the first month of 1850, lived on
through seventy-two changing years, and witnessed the collapse and
demolition of various structures. Aye, the Theatre Royal tumbled down,
and in the course of years every vestige of Quinn’s Hotel has disappeared.
In 1862 a licence was obtained for a new building across the street. This
hotel, known as the Bull and Mouth, seems to have been partly destroyed
by fire some time before 1865. There is certainly nothing definite on which
to base the supposition, but it seems reasonable to assume that Jim
Thomas secured an option over the licence whilst rebuilding operations
were in progress. Whoever bore the cost of reconstruction, it is abundantly
evident that the incoming publican had a hand in designing the new
hotel. The house seemed to reflect the strong personality of the man.
Even a casual glance at the heavy masonry fitted into the general con-
struction work serves to show that there was no lack of material ready
to the builder’s hands. At that period Jim Thomas owned the Lake Logie
property, and had control of the quarries from which a great bulk of the
stone used in building operations at Kilmore came.


Report depicts Thomas as a man of forceful character, who specu-
lated freely and dabbled in varied interests. In addition to Lake Logie he
held possession of Strathmore Estate, then a fairly extensive area of
pastoral country. Horse breeding and racing claimed his attention for
some time. Even a bit of amateur riding was regarded by him as just
something in the day’s work.
The huge fortress-like structure wherein Jim Thomas played the
final act of his hotel-keeping business at Kilmore still stands firm and
immovable after 72 years’ exposure to climatic and various other changes.
Within a stonethrow, on the same side of the Highway, another lofty
old building still presents a bold front to all, who in fleeting by perchance
hazard a curious guess as to the original purpose served by those now
practically disused piles of masonry. For a period in those stirring old
times every specious licensed house in Kilmore was severely taxed in
providing accommodation for the host of travellers that passed along the
old Sydney Road. It seems pretty safe to say that the house just referred
to —The Lamb Inn, kept by Mrs. Rouse —catered for a bigger batch of
regular customers than any other hotel. Teamsters and diggers favoured
this particular house of accommodation, consequently trade was brisk
and lively there in the “days of the diggings.”
P. J. O’Connor, who carried out a deal of contract work in building
and roadmaking in those early years, built the Shannon Hotel (now the
private residence of the Ryan family) about 1868. The remnants of the
Old Albert Street Hall were removed and re-erected at the rear of this
small hotel. About 1873 O’Connor temporarily closed the Shannon Hotel
and leased the Lamb Inn. After a few years the drift of population caused
a decided falling off in business, and the licence was transferred to the
smaller building. Under several changes of management this building
retained its licence until comparatively recent times.
Another building that has firmly stood up to the test of time is
Sam Evans’s Black Bull Hotel. The premises were delicensed many years
ago, and the title has been toned down to the softer sounding “Blue
Bird Cafe.” Evans first opened a general store on the opposite side of
the street, but the cramped quarters available gave no room for exten-
sions. After the move over the street this business expanded considerably
for a time, but when the cruel slump came trade vanished from the
Black Bull just as it did from every business house in old Kilmore.
Probably the rising generation is not keenly interested in the recall
of such landmarks as existed in the dim and distant past, but to a vast
number of Kilmore people of to-day and yesterday references to such
landmarks make an intensely human appeal. We cannot hope to
resurrect and faithfully reconstruct all edifices and utilities that served
the purposes of our pioneers. Many things concerning old days, old ways,
old roads and buildings, and such like have naturally faded into oblivion.
All than can be attempted herein is to give shadowy outlines that will


enable readers to form fairly accurate ideas as to the position of old
landmarks mentioned throughout this booklet.
In Chapter 14 the Union Hotel at Bylands has been referred to.
This building was situated in the south-east corner of the block of land
now occupied by M. Quillinan. The toll-gate stretched across the old
Sydney Road almost opposite the door of the hotel. Farther south, in
close proximity to the notice board that proclaims the altitude of Pretty
Sally Hill as 1622 feet above sea level, one of the O’Dwyer family con-
ducted an hotel. Whilst along the stock route, some distance westward
from the present Highway, the lady herself, “Pretty Sally,” openly
defiant of the law, supplied a “spot” of drink in exchange for coin of
the realm.
Another place mentioned in Chapter 14, the Diggers’ Rest Hotel,
stood on the corner where J. MacAsey now lives. I have an idea that
the proper title of this place was “The Gold Diggers’ Rest.” The old-
time public house run by Phillip Corboy, also one under the control of the
Burkes, were close up to where the Wallan-Bendigo railway line crosses
the Hume Highway. A second toll-gate steadied up the traffic on Sydney
road at the point where the Pyalong-Heathcote road turns off to the left.
Started out with the full intention of devoting this particular chapter
to a series of personal sketches. Somehow drifted off at a tangent from
the track outlined and wandered among the byways. However, the
curb has been applied, and we now swing back to our original plan.
Like many vigorous young men of his time, George Hudson was
attracted to Australia by glowing reports of gold discoveries. Hailing
from Northumberland, England, he arrived at Melbourne in 1852; he
was then about twenty-six years of age. Actual participation in mining
ventures had no fascination for this newcomer. He preferred to follow
the calling for which he had been trained in his native county. After
some time he secured an appointment as millwright and engineer with
James Maxfield, then the busy miller at Kilmore. In 1856 George Hudson
severed his connection with the flour mill, and entered into business on
his own account, and continued active association with trading interests
in the town of Kilmore for close on thirty years.
Appointments and positions, conferred by Executive authority and
by the votes of fellow citizens, have been worthily upheld by many men
connected with public and social life at Kilmore. Nothing more honour-
able, however, than the career of George Hudson has been recorded.
This worthy man ably proved the value of his citizenship in various
positions wherein he was chosen to officiate.
Back in the fifties he married Mary Hamilton, and a family of
three sons and two daughters were bom of this marriage. The eldest
son, A. G. M. Hudson, was closely identified with the business and social
life of Kilmore. For a time he was a member of the Shire Council, and
had previously captained the local football club for a couple of seasons.
Andrew Hudson left Kilmore nearly forty years ago, and eventually


settled at Griffith, N.S.W., where some of his family still reside. One
of his sons is in control of the T. and G. Insurance affairs in New
Zealand.
R. G. (Bob) Hudson remained at Kilmore, and as a livewire partner
in the original firm of Osborn and Hudson was very prominently in the
picture of Kilmore and its activities from the late eighties until his death,
1923.
That fine lady, Mrs. Hudson, and her worthy family continue to be
warmly interested in all matters pertaining to the welfare of Kilmore.
Fred., the youngest male member of George Hudson’s family was
for many years identified with the softgoods business of Murdoch’s in
Sydney. He now lives in retirement in that city. One daughter of this
old Kilmore family is now living in Heidelberg.
* * * *
Michael Fennelly and his young wife, after spending some time
at Melbourne, came along to Kilmore in 1849. This pioneer couple
settled on a block of land on the north side of the present Lancefield
road, close up to where the brothers T. and J. Chapman now live.
The original Fennelly’s and their descendants have had an unbroken
connection with the community life of this district for practically
ninety years Michael Fennelly came direct to Australia from County
Kilkenny, Ireland, but the young lady who later became his life partner
arrived here from Glasgow.
With some girl companions she crossed over from Ireland and
spent some time in Scotland; from there this party of young people
came to Port Phillip. The particular member of this party around
whom this sketch centres married Michael Fennelly aforesaid, and a
family of eleven were bom of the marriage. Two of them died in
childhood, and five other members of the family have since died.
There are four survivors scattered thus: One in W.A., one at Leeton,
N.S.W., one at Melbourne, and one, Pat. Fennelly, at Kilmore.
Some account of the youth and subsequent professional career
of the late Richard Fennelly is included in Chapter 12. Hard work
and plenty of it had a fascination for Dick Fennelly. The manifold
duties associated with engineering undertakings imposed a heavy toll
on his time, yet he willingly increased the burden of his labour by
acquiring land and personally directing and supervising work con-
nected therewith. Amongst an exceptionally wide circle of acquain-
tances and fellow workers this man of forceful character, with easy,
fluent conversational powers, was always hailed as an entertaining
companion. As a keen horseman he dearly loved to indulge in a cross
country run, or handle the reins with a spirited pair harnessed to the
buggy. For a time he made a hobby of a “quiet bit of racing.” Here
are the names of a few horses that carried his colours on local racing
tracks: Glenburnie, All Fours, Mermaid, Mark Twain, Tom Pearce.
Pat Fennelly, then a very fine horseman, did most of the riding


on the aforementioned horses. With a pleased smile Pat still recalls
an eventful week during which he had four winning mounts on Mark
Twain. Those wins included a hurdle race at Tallarook, a hurdle and
steeple double at Kilmore, and a hurdle race at Lancefield. For nine-
tenths of the century herein recorded the name Fennelly has in a wide
sense been associated with Kilmore. There are some of the direct
descendants still in our midst, yet the old familiar name seems destined
to fade from our local census forms.
Finlay McNab. —Born in or near the village of Killin, in Perth-
shire, Scotland. Finlay McNab, one of Kilmore’s early settlers, with his
parents arrived in Melbourne by the “David Clarke” in the year 1839.
then a lad of ten years. (Messrs. Daly and Cook, whose descendants,
or some of them, are still at Romsey and Rochford respectively, were
passengers by the same boat, the first immigrant ship to come to
Port Phillip.) His father had been a small farmer in Scotland, and
almost immediately after his arrival he purchased an interest in some
20 acres of land, now part of Melbourne and situate close to the
River Yarra. After a few years there he sold his interest in this land,
and leased a farm at Beveridge in the ’4o’s. This farm, situated just
across the Hume Highway from the homestead known as “The Springs,”
was devoted to wheat farming.
In those early days there was great difficulty in furnishing a young
family with even the rudiments of education, and three families —the
Beveridges, the Hearns, and the McNabs —then residing at Beveridge
joined in engaging a teacher or tutor named Ryan to instruct the
members of these families. Mitchell Beveridge (later with his brother
George, a well-known resident of Kilmore) was one of the pupils, as was
also James Hearn, the father of Mr. Bert. Hearn, who now lives on
the Boondara property on the Lancefield-Pyalong road.
Finlay McNab’s first visits to Kilmore were made in the years
1848-1849, when he carted wheat to the flour mill then known as
“Allen’s,” situate where Adamson’s Garage now stands. After a year
or two spent in carrying to the goldfields, he determined to settle per-
manently in the Kilmore district, and in the year 1855 he purchased
the freehold of a farm on the Kurkurroc Creek, in the parish of
Moranding, about five miles from Kilmore. Part of this farm is still in
the hands of his son, Councillor Angus McNab. It was on this farm
that he built the stone barn, known for many years as “McNab’s Barn,”
the remains of which still stand, and where the youth of the district
used to congregate “to step the light fantastic toe.”
For some years he engaged in wheat farming on a large scale,
and in those days had as many as 60 reapers in his fields, who cut the
grain with a sickle; but these times changed, and after 1870 wheat
growing was not for Kilmore. In the year 1871 he married Annie
Stewart, daughter of Colin Stewart, who arrived in Kilmore in 1860,


and had a family of five sons and two daughters. Two of the sons are
still residents of Kilmore. Apart from carrying on his own business
of farming, Finlay McNab took a keen interest in all matters affecting
the welfare of the district, and in matters of public importance. In
the year 1877 he selected land at Puckapunyal, near Seymour, but
returned to Kilmore in 1890, and remained there till his death in
1910.
A native of an adjacent district, who was for many years closely
connected with the Goulbum Valley, and later settled well back in New
South Wales, recently visited Kilmore. In course of conversation with
the writer this visitor freely commented on the number of men and
women with whom he had come in contact who were delighted to
receive pleasant memories of “McNab’s Barn” in the days of their youth.
In the compilation of this “Tale of a Century” frequent recourse has
been made to a lucid and comprehensive article contributed to the
“Kilmore Advertiser” many years ago by Finlay McNab. With the
most profound respect the present scribe offers tribute to the memory
of this grand old man of Kilmore, whose illuminating historical sketch
supplied a deal of inspiration.
* * * *
There are many phases of more than mere passing interest in
the family business life of the Osborns of Kilmore. At a very period
J. W. Osborn (bom 1827) and his girlish Canadian bride literally
pitched their tent on Kilmore soil. In their early colonial life this young
couple had many unique experiences, and had to face a deal of
discomfort. Once when Seymour was merely a riverside settlement a
gang of bushrangers proclaimed a state of siege, and fairly terrorised
the small band of dwellers on the banks of the Goulburn River. Such
buildings as then existed were barricaded so as to afford temporary
shelter for local residents and chance travellers. Bullet marks that
showed the determined nature of the attack were visible on the decaying
timbers of those old buildings for many years. At a very early period
Captain Louis Vanzulicam established the old Seymour Hotel on the
west bank of the river, opposite to where the town sprang up. Amongst
those who took refuge in this hastily-improvised fortress were Mr. and
Mrs. J. W. Osborn, who happened to be in the vicinity at this most
inopportune time. In due course the siege lifted. The scared occupants
ventured forth from the friendly shelter of the buildings, and one
would be inclined to say that they thoroughly enjoyed their new-found
freedom.
Having definitely decided to settle at Kilmore, this resolute young
man embarked upon a business venture wherein success could only
be achieved by force of character. That he quickly gained the con-
fidence of his neighbours and the Crown Lands Department is very
evident from the following statement. In 1853 he was entrusted with the
sale by auction of the recently-surveyed blocks of Crown lands ex-


tending over several parishes in the Kilmore district. According to a
press report of that time he very ably conducted this sale.
In an historic sense there never has been a more important day
in the annals of Kilmore than the particular sale day just referred to.
On that day, 19th May, 1853, when our original settlers secured the
freehold rights to landed property, fortunes of those early comers
and their descendants became definitely and indissolubly linked with
the future of Australia.
By establishing and maintaining direct control of a business firm
that has given close and careful attention to the interests of clients,
and stood up to every possible test of efficiency for more than eighty
years, the Osborns (later strengthened by the Hudsons) have put up
a fine record. The solvency of “the man on the land” in the Kilmore
district is largely due to the influence exercised by C. J. Osborn, from
whose shrewd advice and integrity in business dealings we learned the
value of caution in all transactions.
* * * -x-
The Figgins family (two sisters, two brothers) came to Kilmore in
January, 1924. Previous to that time this well-known family lived at
Glenaroua, where their parents settled in 1861. In coming to that
district, in search of suitable land on which to settle, James Figgins
passed through Romsey (then known as Five Mile Creek). This land-
seeker was very much impressed with a block of land at High Camp,
and decided to “peg” this block with a view of making application for
it. To his surprise he quickly realised that the special area had already
been “pegged.” Subsequent investigations showed that an application
to take up this land had been lodged by one Patrick Kenny. This was
the elder brother of John and Michael Kenny, both of whom were for
many years associated with Pyalong, and their descendants are well
known both at Pyalong and Kilmore. As already stated James Figgins
acquired land at Glenaroua, and there the family remained for more
than sixty years.
In an article that appeared in the “Kilmore Advertiser” more
than fifty years ago James Figgins related the history or tradition of
the Puckapunyal tribe of aborigines. The old chief of this local tribe
had confided the story to the writer of that article. Their forefathers
were a large tribe living on the Loddon River generations before. One
day the eldest son of the chief quarrelled with his father and ran him
through with a spear. The tribe decided to kill this erring son, so he
bolted, taking a number of the younger members of the tribe (male
and female) and started a new tribe near what is now Bendigo. The
Loddon tribe named them the Panyule tribe, meaning barbarians. Years
later the Panyule chief’s eldest son killed both father and mother,
and he in his turn made a bolt of it. This fugitive coaxed a member
to accompany him, and a new tribe was started on Mollison’s Creek. This
tribe was dubbed the Puckapunyal tribe —meaning Outer-Barbarians.


Councillor Alex Figgins, who so worthily represents the town riding
in the Kilmore Shire Council, has been one of the prime movers in
our Centenary celebrations. As chairman of the Celebrations Com-
mittee he has consistently aimed at making the Centenary Anniversary
of Kilmore an event of outstanding historic and social importance.
With his characteristic thoroughness we feel sure that Cr. Figgins will
I
achieve the result on which he has set his heart.
* * * -55-
Searching through records dealing with those far-off days, when
white people slowly assumed occupation of Kilmore and adjacent dis-
tricts, one frequently comes in touch with the name of Reay Clarke.
In 1843 this early pioneer built and opened the Sunday Creek Inn at
Broadford. Reay Clarke hailed from Sutherlandshire, the extreme
north-west county of Scotland, but his good wife, and the name Broad-
ford, came from the Isle of Skye. After transferring the hotel at Broad-
ford to the Ferguson’s, Reay Clarke came to Kilmore and secured
The Currency Lad from John Mitten. As already noted in previous
chapters, The Currency Lad was replaced by the Dunrobin Castle.
Miss Catherine Hill, a highly-respected, native-born resident of
Kilmore, is a niece to Mrs. Reay Clarke. William Edward Hill, the
father of this good lady, and Reay Clarke married the two daughters
of Donald McKenzie. This worthy man, with his wife and young
family, emigrated from the Isle of Skye, and reached Sydney in 1837.
In the year 1840 the family came along to Melbourne.
M. K. McKenzie, formerly well known at Kilmore and through-
out the State of Victoria as Parliamentary representative for Anglesey,
is still revered in the memory of Miss Hill as one of her dearest
childhood playmates. M. K. McKenzie’s family was not directely
related to Donald McKenzie, but the two families were intimately
associated in their native Isle of Skye.
William Edward Hill, who was employed as a compositor in the
infant settlement at Melbourne in 1840, came along to Kilmore a few
years later. For a portion of the time spent in this town he was
associated with J. K. Trainor in a storekeeping business. From 1861
this business was carried on for some time in the building we now know
so well as the Railway Hotel.
Except for a few years spent in Swan Hill district, Miss Hill, who
was born April, 1852, has lived continuously at Kilmore. This good
lady still possesses a clear and alert mind, and dearly loves to chat
reminiscently of events that transpired “down through the years.”
* * * *
The McLeod clan, briefly referred to hereunder, left no direct
descendants to maintain a connection with the district down through
the years. Yet no historic sketch of Kilmore would be complete without
a passing mention of this pioneer family. In 1837 Alistair McLeod, his
good wife, and their three young sons, per medium of the bullock dray,


overlanded from Sydney. Their ancestors were fisher folk somewhere
along the broken coastline of Ross-shire, in Scotland. There young Alistair
qualified as a sailor lad, and devoted some part of his youth to sea-
faring before coming to Australia. Probably the idea of becoming
actively associated in some way with sea going interests induced this
young family man to go right on to Port Phillip Bay before calling
a definite halt in their wearisome overland journey.
Some time later the family came back as far as Beveridge, where
they remained for a period. Actual residential connection with the
Kilmore district dates from the early forties, when small blocks of
land were acquired right at the western extremity of Rutledge’s Survey.
There the McLeod family became firmly entrenched and remained for
many years.
Amongst her intimate associates this “Hieland gude wife,” who
nursed everyone that became ill, was familiarly known as Nanny Mc-
Leod, and portion of their original holding on “The Old Survey” is
still called Nanny’s Flat. For many years the second son, Donald McLeod,
and his wife (nee Bella Morrison) continued to live in the old home,
and were held in very high esteem by all with whom they came in contact.
The elder son of this old time family, Murdoch McLeod, was a man
of iron constitution, who refused to take life too seriously, except
perhaps that part of it connected with heavy manual labour. He
accomplished such a share of this that he probably came to regard
periodic resting spells as a right. Kenneth McLeod, the youngest
brother, drifted back to New South Wales, where he died a few years
later.
Another Donald McLeod (cousin to our Donald) for many years
represented Daylesford in the Legislative Assembly, and was for a
period Chief Secretary and Acting Premier. This honourable gentleman
was one of the beneficiaries in the local McLeod Estate.
* * * *
MacKenzie-MacKay. —In the year 1852 Charles Mac Kay, a High-
land Scotsman from Sutherlandshire, arrived in Melbourne per the sail-
ing vessel “Ticonderoga.” On the voyage Mac Kay and his family
suffered much hardship owing to sickness on board. The passengers
were so badly stricken with fever that the “Ticonderoga” became known
as a plague ship. Official documents of the time refer to Charles Mac Kay
as a prominent figure on board. By ministering to the spiritual wants
of his fellow Scots, and by his kindness in other ways, he helped to
brighten the wearisome journey.
Being a teacher by profession, he was offered the position as Vice-
Principal of the newly-established Scotch College at Melbourne. Realis-
ing that his health had been seriously impaired by the conditions that
prevailed on that ill-fated ship, he declined the offer. On landing within
Australia territory he was met by some of his former students, and
presented with a large gift of gold. His particular friend, Dr. Nicholson,


was then practising his profession at Kilmore, and several other Scotch
families with whom he had been associated were already settled in
the district, so he chose Kilmore as his future home. The term of his
years in the young colony was comparatively short. As his death (19th
September, 1863) an obelisk was elected by local residents as a tribute
to his memory, an undoubted proof of the outstanding merit of the
man.
It is very fitting that this type of pioneer should be honoured
in Australia’s national capital. At the Institute of Anatomy, Canberra,
an annual lectureship has been endowed by his descendants with a gift
of upwards of £lOOO. The purpose of this lecture is to allow some
eminent authority on the history of mankind and medicine to journey
to Canberra, and make public his views on some particular speciality.
This oration, delivered at Canberra during March in each year, em-
phasises the importance of the prevention of disease (rather than its
cure), deals with the history of human development, and presents in
popular form recent advances in medical science. Charles Mac Kay
had a large family, but this personal sketch deals chiefly with the
daughter, Anne Mackay, who remained in Kilmore.
John MacKenzie came from Ross-shire, in Scotland, in 1850.
After spending a few years in Melbourne, where he was connected with
the softgoods trade, he came to Kilmore and opened a drapery business
(now Pascoe’s). On 2nd July, 1860, John MacKenzie married Anne
Mac Kay, and a family of five sons and two daughters were born of
that marriage. Anne MacKenzie enjoyed a wide influence in Kilmore,
where she was well known for her efforts in the cause of philanthropy
and education. Her convictions she emphasised with deeds as is
shown in the record of her family.
In Chapter we have made special reference to the three sons who
qualified for the medical profession, whilst the long and highly credit-
able association of Catherine MacKenzie as Matron of the Kilmore
Hospital is recorded in another chapter. By rising to such decided
eminence in his profession, and thereby attaining the dignity of knight-
hood, the youngest son, Sir Colin MacKenzie, has certainly shed lustre
on his native town.
The Taylor family have been closely identified with the Kilmore
district for more than eighty years. Hailing from Caithness, in Scot-
land, the brothers, Daniel and Swanson Taylor, came to Victoria in
1852. The first-mentioned joined the firm of Donaldson and Budge,
warehousemen, at Melbourne, and Swanson Taylor opened a tailoring
business in Collins Street. A few years later they came to Kilmore, where
each of the brothers established himself in business. In the latter end
of 1855 John Taylor, one of Kilmore’s grand old men, came along
and joined in partnership with his brother Daniel, the firm carrying
on a drapery business for many years. Another member of the family,
Peter Taylor, came hither from Scotland in 1858. After engaging in


mining ventures at Wood’s Point for some time Peter Taylor came to
Kilmore, and became interested in grazing pursuits.
Throughout his colonial life John Taylor took an active part in
public affairs. When this, Victoria’s oldest inland town, was created a
borough in 1864, John Taylor was the first man chosen to occupy an
exalted position as Mayor of Kilmore. For a long period of time this
judicially-minded man ably discharged the duties of a justice of the
peace on the local bench. As one of the original members of the Water
Trust, as a keen worker for the Hospital, and in various other move-
ments for the welfare of town and district this public-spirited citizen
proved his sterling worth.
Some few years ago, whilst gazing on the portrait of a clergyman
(Rev. Dr. Cairns) at the Assembly Hall in Collins Street, George
Taylor (a son of Swanson Taylor) remarked to a friend: “I was born
just across the street, my christening at which that reverend gentle-
man officiated took place in the near-by church, and just around the
corner I have been actively engaged in business for more than forty
years.” From the nature of such remark one might be inclined to
imagine that the speaker was confined to circumscribed limits. Not so,
however, as George Taylor is really well known over a very wide
area, and is quite an identity in the city of Melbourne. We have no
more highly-valued residents at Kilmore than the members of Daniel
Taylor’s family who are still with us, certainly none more keenly en-
thusiastic in matters pertaining to our Centenary celebration.
* * * *
Travelling overland from the Sydney side in the early colonial
days was an undertaking fraught with considerable risk. James Crossley,
who in later years had a long and honoured connection with the
business and social life of Kilmore, was one of the venturesome young
men who had this fact indelibly impressed on his mind. Back in the
forties the blacks made a treacherous attack on a party of overlanders
who were passing along through the Broken River (Benalla) district.
By a mere chance Crossley escaped from the massacre, and was lucky
enough to make a clear cast of direction through the open country to
Murchison. There was a primitive station homestead on the banks of
the Goulburn River at that point. Fleeing from the dreaded blacks
the fugitive rapidly traversed the long intervening miles and reached
friendly shelter in a famished condition.
After spending some time in the employ of the riverside squatter,
Crossley came along to Kilmore. Whilst at Murchison he had married
a young woman who was a fellow employee at the station homestead.
In the course of the years there was a family of two sons and five
daughters. It has been freely stated by fellow citizens of good taste and
impartial judgment that the five daughters of the Crossley family were
the finest looking bevy of young women that ever graced social gather-
ings at Kilmore. Some members of this family married here, and


remained in their native town for varying periods to time. With one
exception, however, all eventually moved away to other parts, even
as far afield as U.S.A. The Heavey family, worthy present-day residents
at Kilmore, are the direct descendants of Thomas Crossley, the second
son of this old-time family.
4\ A S\ A
Hailing from County Inverness, Scotland, the Mclsaac family
came to Australia in 1852. There were three sons in this family—
Donald, Alexander, and Angus. Donald Mclsaac was then a married
man, and it is with this brother that we are chiefly concerned. Soon after
arrival in the colony he obtained employment on Wm. Hamilton’s
Glenaroua Station. A few years later a small portion of the property on
the Pyalong-Heathcote road was secured. On this block of land the
Mclsaacs settled down. A family of seven were born of this marriage;
one of the said seven, our highly-esteemed townsman, Norman Mclsaac,
first saw the light at the old farm home in 1859.
By judicious purchases of adjoining blocks of land the farm holding
increased in area, and until comparatively recent times this fine pro-
perty remained in the possession of the Mclsaac family. The grand-
parents of the present generation now living at Kilmore were members
of the Mclsaac party that landed in Australia back in 1852. The
grandparents of another worthy townsman, Dick Glanville, were near
neighbours of the above-named pioneer family at the spot already
indicated.
In Chapter 3 the name of James Mooney will be found on the list
of original committee members appointed to manage the affairs of
the Kilmore Agricultural Society. The said James Mooney and his wife
settled on “The Old Survey” at a very early period. The block of land
on which their rustic dwelling was erected now forms part of Allan
Goodman’s well-managed farm. From the first generation of Mooneys
(four sons, six daughters) reared in that old home numerous des-
cendants have been born. Many of those descendants have their names
inscribed on present-day voters and school rolls in our own locality,
whilst a goodly number are domiciled in various other parts of the
State. Amongst others who have worthily upheld the family name are
James Mooney and W. W. W. Mooney, both of whom attained high
positions in the Victorian Police Department.
* * * *
Somewhere in an earlier chapter reference has been made to the
fact that John and Duncan McKay sailed from Ross-shire, Scotland, and
arrived in Victoria in 1852. Another brother, Alistair, had left home
two years previously, and was already settled at Kilmore. Some time
later Alistair McKay went to the Upper Murray (Tallangatta) and
entered into business there. The family afterwards became well known
throughout the North-Eastern districts. After some years spent in
mining pursuits Duncan McKay setded at Broadford, whilst the brother


John became an identity at Kilmore. Many good men and true bearing
the old Scottish name of McKay were in evidence in Kilmore in those
early years. The inexhaustible fund of anecdotes associated with the
name of John McKay and his cheerful fireside reveal a vivid and
striking picture of old Kilmore. Those entertaining old stories with a
characteristic human touch, blended with a spicy Scotch flavour, are a
refreshing reminder of a sturdy race of pioneers. It is pleasing to note
that two daughters and a son of this worthy citizen are still comfortably
settled in their native town.
-x- * * *
Daniel Sutherland, who arrived in Port Phillip in 1850, was a native
of Lanarkshire, Scotland. During the first few years of his colonial life
this young Scotchman resolutely set to work, with the idea of earning
sufficient money to enable him to secure land, whereon to engage in
farming pursuits. At the sale of Crown lands in the parish of Bylands,
in 1853, he purchased a block of land that has remained in the possession
of the Sutherland family all down through the years. Shortly after his
arrival in Australia Daniel Sutherland formed an attachment with a
young lady whom he had known in their native land, and a sub-
sequent marriage was planned. In course of time the bride-to-be
visited Kilmore to view the future home that was in preparation for
her. On the evening of her arrival, when she alighted from the coach
at an hotel kept by an impressionable young Irishman named Corboy,
she was greeted with this exclamation, “Glory be —but ’tis an outlandish
country for a charming young woman like you.”
The young woman was not deterred by the prospects ahead, and
the marriage was duly solemnised on 2nd May, 1855, at Melbourne.
Three daughters of this marriage still live amongst us, and their circle
of sincere friends never grows less. The last male member of the
family, Robert Sutherland, died ten years ago. It will, we think, be
freely conceded that Kilmore never numbered a more likeable man
amongst its native-born population.
* * * *
George Hamilton arrived in Sydney in 1842. During his sojourn
on the Sydney side a shadow was cast across the life of this young
man by the death of his wife. Later when a chance came to break
away and live amidst fresh scenes, he gladly availed himself of such
opportunity. In 1848-49 a party of pioneers decided to make the over-
land trip to Port Phillip district, and George Hamilton was chosen as
the driver who had to bring the teams with passengers and freight
safely through that hazardous journey.
George Hamilton settled at Kilmore, and remarried in 1850. Fond
memories are cherished of the second Mrs. Hamilton, a virile and
capable type of woman, whose good qualities endeared her to friends
and neighbours. This good lady, then in the prime of her girlhood,
arrived here on Bth January, 1850, married that same year, and lived


on till 1922. A family of seven were born of this marriage. Down through
the passing of almost ninety years the Hamiltons and their descendants,
from the vantage point of Hamilton’s Hill, have looked calmly on the
ever-changing aspect of community life at Kilmore. Incidentally it might
be mentioned that from such vantage point they have constantly had
the opportunity to watch the play of light and shade over a glorious
landscape view. One member of this early family still lives at the old
home, and a younger generation hold hereditary rights to the spot
hallowed by long association.
* * * *
At a very early period of rural settlement Robert Jamieson the
elder acquired a block of land two fields beyond the south-west boun-
dary of the area now included in the Assumption College holding.
Previously Jamieson was employed as a station hand by William
Hamilton on the Glenaroua Station. On 24th May, 1851, Robert
Jamieson the younger was bom at Glenaroua, and afterwards came
with his parents to reside on the block of land already referred to.
When this young Australian grew to manhood he married the daughter of
Samuel O’Dea, and a family of five children were bom of this marriage.
Mrs. Jamieson, now in her eighty-second year, still resides within a
stonethrow of her parents’ original home at Kilmore. Samuel O’Dea
was actively engaged in mining ventures for some years. He was one
of a party that was forced to abandon a promising claim at Reedy
Creek owing to the difficulty of coping with the flow of underground
water. Later a syndicate with sufficient capital to overcome the draw-
back caused by this surplus water worked this claim. Under the name
of Empress of India this mine proved a very rich property. Eventually
Samuel O’Dea carried out a considerable amount of road contract
work for the borough council at Kilmore, and for the Road Boards
in various locations.
* * * *
From Haddington, in Scotland, not far removed from Edinburgh,
came William and George Smeaton in 1852. William later settled at
Kilmore, and the brother George took up farming pursuits at Lance-
field.
There was a time in Kilmore when those who held vested interests
in the stage coaching business had much of the necessary running equip-
ment prepared locally. Extensive plants for the building and repair of
vehicles, and for harness making, were in operation. For a number of
years William Smeaton was engaged in the coachbuilding branch of the
business. In later years he followed the trade of a blacksmith and
wheelwright on his own account.
Acting in the capacity of letter carrier Wm. Smeaton, jun., was
for many years a familiar figure on Kilmore streets. Miss Janet Smeaton,
always noted for her charm of manner, is one of our most highly
respected residents in this Centenary year of grace.


About 1847 John McManus and his young wife (a sister to J. K.
Trainor, one of Kilmore’s grand old men) took up a Crown leasehold
area of land in the open country about midway between Benalla and
Wangaratta. Both these towns have since become important country
centres. At the time we speak of, however, each was only a wayside
settlement, and the intervening country was mainly peopled by aborigines.
After a few years’ residence in that lonely spot, the outlook for the
young mother and her little children seemed too dismal to endure. A
move was decided upon, and the family returned to Kilmore. In 1852
McManus acquired the holding at Willowmavin that had previously
been in the possession of William Ryan for about ten years (this pro-
perty is now held by Wm. O’Donoghue). There the McManus family
remained for many years. Later on, by the marriage of Maria McManus
to Denis Griffin, two pioneer families became united. Denis Griffin and
his wife subsequently settled at High Camp, and were closely indentified
with the community life of Kilmore for many years. Some of the
children bom of this marriage still reside in the High Camp district.
* * * *
In the preceding personal sketch reference has been made to the
transfer of a very early occupied farm property from William Ryan to
John McManus. Back in Chapter 3 the names of a few pioneer over-
landers from Sydney are mentioned. William Ryan and his wife were
amongst those early comers. Four generations born at Kilmore now trace
their genealogy back to those great-great-grandparents who belonged
to the small band of soil tillers that produced the first crops garnered
on “The Old Survey.”
It seems reasonably safe to assume that the distinction of being
regarded as Kilmore’s oldest clan must be credited to the fairly numerous
branches of this Ryan family still living amongst us.
* * * *
In the latter part of the fifties there was a wayside settlement
adjacent to where the Old Mclvor road turned sharply northwards,
about four miles out west from Kilmore. The small resident community
engaged principally in minor business pursuits. The Plough Inn at that
time was kept by Martin Ford, and a general store was run by George
Matchett. A man named Jackson worked at the blacksmith’s trade, and
one Delaney plied his calling as a bootmaker.
—__ m *
Just over the road from where the furnace gleamed and the anvil
resounded (the blocks on which the bellows rested are still there)
John Burrows, a nephew of George Matchett, still resides. About 1870,
when the opportunity to select northern lands came, George Matchett
and his brother John (who had previously followed the occupation of
a road carrier) went to New South Wales. After some years spent
on a land holding about thirty miles from Albury, George Matchett
took up a large tract of country on the Lachlan River. Later a son of
this erstwhile retail trader from the Kilmore district became a very


wealthy squatter. At his death he left a New South Wales estate valued
for probate at something well in excess of £300,000.
It would be an unfriendly act to move away from that south-
western comer of “The Old Survey” without expressing a kindly word
of remembrance for Edmond (Mun) O’Dwyer. This good man followed
after Martin Ford at the old Plough Inn. Straightforward, shrewd, and
sensible, with a word of good advice, he cheered many who became
worried with life’s problems.
In Chapter 3 some general refex'ence has been made to the activities
of the Albion Flour Mill. Henry Wilson, the proprietor of this mill, was
a jovial-natured Scot, who could pleasantly entertain an audience by the
singing of braw Scottish airs, or by the telling of good stories redolent of
the Land of Heather. The Wilson family —father, mother, and children —
were very much in the picture of the daily life of Kilmore back in
earlier years. Down through the intervening space of time the daughters of
this household have nobly played their parts and willingly lent their aid
to every praiseworthy movement.
* * * *
Andrew Beveridge, from Dunfermline, Fifeshire, Scotland, accom-
panied by his wife, six sons, and one daughter, landed in Melbourne in
1839. Soon after his arrival on Australian soil we find him located at
the Hunter’s Tryste, on the old Sydney Road. The spot where this way-
side resting place was established was then known as Mercer’s Vale;
subsequently the name was changed to Beveridge, evidently as a compli-
ment to this early settler.
In 1845 Andrew and George, two sons of the abovenamed Andrew
Beveridge, in charge of a large mob of cattle, travelled to the banks of
the Murray River. Ten miles downstream from where Swan Hill later
sprang up they formed a squatting run at Tyntynder. One year later the
elder of the two brothers, Andrew, was killed by the blacks. In 1847
Andrew Beveridge, senior, with his family, went along and settled on
the newly-formed station at Tyntynder. In that vicinity the family name
is still preserved in Beveridge Island, on the Murray River. After some
years spent at this outpost of pastoral settlement, the parent Beveridge
returned to “Woodburn,” where he died.
George Spratt Beveridge (bom 1827) and Mitchell Kilgour Beveridge
(bom 1831), who both experienced a fair share of real outback pioneer-
ing, were for many years well known and highly respected residents of
the Kilmore district. G. S. Beveridge, who remained a bachelor, made
“Woodburn” his home, maintained a kindly interest in the welfare of his
neighbours, and cheerfully lent a helping hand wherever help was needed.
M. K. Beverdige became keenly interested in journalistic and literary
work. He freely indulged in the composition of verse, and displayed a
poetic ability of no mean order. Early in the seventies he established the


“Kilmore Advertiser.” and for eight years he edited this weekly news-
paper.
Like many other good men and true, whose names are inscribed on
these pages, M. K. Beveridge came into close association with the every-
day life of Kilmore, received his share of public appointments, worked
cheerfully and unselfishly, and accepted plaudits and rebuffs with
equally good grace.
«• * * *
A very nice note has been struck in a communication received from
Mrs. Florence Rogers (nee Florence Eager), the daughter of Joseph
Eager, who was actively engaged in flour-milling business at Kilmore in
the early seventies. This good lady is the widow of the late C. J. Rogers,
formerly a police magistrate associated with the City Court. For a time
this P.M. regularly visited Kilmore, and adjudicated from the local bench.
I feel very satisfied that this sketch will be more highly appreciated
if the lady’s own version is supplied: “Have very nice recollections of
childhood days at Kilmore, and cherish many happy memories of the
old place. We children attended a school on the hill at the back of the
Presbyterian Church, and paid a weekly sum for our education; a Mr.
Thom was the teacher. On our way home from that school we frequently
heard someone singing to the accompaniment of a harmonium. The singer
was Miss Sally Castles, an aunt to Amy Castles, who later became
famous and thrilled vast audiences from the concert platform and in
operatic performances. Mr. Geoghegan, a draper, carried on business on
the south side of the mill, and on the north side our neighbours were
Mrs. Dowling, her three sons, and one daughter —the latter was very
musical. On the opposite side of the street there was a Mr. Stimson,
grocer, and Mr. Heath, draper, who had a large business (this business
was later acquired by T. J. Geoghegan). Wishing you every success in
your effort, and hoping the Centenary celebrations will prove a great
success.”
Thank you very much, dear lady, for your kindly interest and
sincere good wishes.
* * * *
Miss Isabella Kerr is another lady who has willingly lent a helping
hand to the compiler. Extracts that appear in the chapter on Education
relative to early teachers are from notes supplied by Miss Kerr. The old-
time National School was under the control of her father, Wm. Kerr,
who had Miss Ellen Kerr (a daughter) as his first assistant, whilst his
wife conducted classes in their private residence.
The subjoined passages from a letter received from this good lady
are full of interest. Nothing more complimentary to the old home town
could possibly be uttered than the concluding words of this letter: “Six
members of our family were born in Ireland, five at Ballymena, and
myself at Holyroad; my two younger brothers were born at Kilmore. I
love Kilmore. My earliest recollections are of what happened there.


Gan well remember my third birthday was spent in the old town. Our
mother was always teaching us something of interest, and doing it in such
a way that we could not possibly forget. After we left I was frequently
invited to visit the district. If I had not been enjoying good health, the
fact of going to Kilmore made me feel cheerful and well.”
* * * *
The name of Alfred Sugden appears in previous pages of this book.
Like many of the early residents of Kilmore, he proved himself worthy
of special notice. Following in the footsteps of her father, Miss Sugden
has always been keenly anxious to lend a helping hand in every move-
ment directed towards brightening up our community life. It will
certainly bring joy to the heart of this good lady to see our Centenary
celebrations prove a triumphant success.
Amongst cherished possessions in Miss Sugden’s keeping there is a
relic of early days that makes a stirring appeal to anyone with true
sporting instinct. This is a suitably-inscribed cricket ball, presented to
Alfred Sugden as the highest scorer in a match played on the Richmond
Ground, sth May, 1864. According to the inscription, still clear and
legible, the competing teams were Hides v. Leather, and the respective
captains were H. W. Oddy and Alfred Sugden.
In retail business in Sydney Street at the present time there are
only two people who belong to the first generation from the original
shopkeepers. The daughter of Alfred Sugden is one, Joe Morrissey is
the other.
* * * *
Bryan Morrissey, a native of Cashel, County Tipperary, Ireland,
came to Victoria about 1860. For a time he was employed at Kyneton,
later came to Kilmore, and for some years worked with James Crossley,
who then carried on an extensive butchering business in the premises
now occupied by C. J. Dillon. In 1865 he commenced business on his
own account in a small shop at the comer of Sydney and Mitchell Streets,
opposite to the Manchester Warehouse.
About 1882 Bryan Morrissey moved into the shop where his son,
Joe Morrissey, still carries on in a retail butchering trade. Down through
the years the Morrissey family have been closely associated with the
business and social activities of the town and surrounding districts. It
might be permissible to add that a really true and definite atmosphere
of old Kilmore has always hovered around the Morrissey family. Yes,
and this passing remark may be ventured, many happy social reunions
will take place under that family roof during our Centenary celebrations.
* * * *
Michael Skehan and his good wife came from County Clare, Ireland,
only a short distance up the River Shannon from the city of Limerick.
In 1849, per the sailing ship “Tippo Sahib,” they left their native land
and arrived at Sydney some time in 1850. After engaging in farm work
in the Wollongong district for a period, they came along to Melbourne.


Skehan went to Ballarat in 1851, and followed mining operations
for some years. In the late fifties this couple definitely settled at Kilmore,
where four out of the seven members of their family were born. Patrick
Skehan (father of a present day resident, Barry Skehan) was born at
Kilmore in 1861. Thirty-three years later he was elected as a member
of the Kilmore Shire Council, and held the seat continuously until 1917,
when he severed his connection with the district.
Ex-Councillor P. Skehan took an active part in the introduction of
the electric lighting scheme at Kilmore, and acted as secretary for the
original company. As chairman of the Water Trust, this public-spirited
citizen served the interests of ratepayers for several years.
Mrs. Conabere, the wife of one of our well-remembered councillors,
Wm. Conabere, was a member of the Skehan family. Five daughters and
one son were born to Mr. and Mrs. Conabere at Kilmore. The eldest
daughter married a son of T. J. Geoghegan, formerly one of our leading
business men.
* * * *
Eighty-two years have passed by since Kilmore was proclaimed a
municipal district. For more than half that period the late Councillor
M. J. Butler (died July, 1938) was a ratepayers’ representative at the
council table. No other councillor associated with Kilmore Shire has had
anything like such a long period of service. The particular Butler family
to which this veteran councillor belonged has been closely identified
with this district for almost ninety years. As one of the fourth generation
has now been elected a member of the Shire Council, it would appear
that the will to maintain family interests and tradition shows no sign
of weakening.
The grandparents of the late M. J. Butler came from Ireland in
the early fifties of the last century, and settled at Kilmore. John
Butler, one of the seven sons of that pioneer couple from overseas,
built the Red Lion Hotel in 1856, and had control of the business
there for several years. In many ways this young man exhibited push and
enterprise, and in time accomplished much that contributed towards the
development of the town. Henry Butler and his wife settled on a block
of land at the Bald Hills, and in the fullness of time the son, M. J.
Butler, became the proud possessor of a very fine landed estate, the
boundaries of which extend widely from the original holding.
Thomas Butler, another member of the pioneer family, was repre-
sented by two daughters and one son, all of whom were well-known
figures in the social and business life of Kilmore. In D. M. Wylie’s day,
and well on to recent times, that dapper shop assistant, John Butler,
noted for his prompt and businesslike manner in dealing with customers,
was very popular.
* * * *
The name Proudfoot has been long and honourably associated with
Kilmore. In 1858, per the sailing ship “Africa,” the parent couple, with


four young children, came to Victoria from Aberfeldie, Perthshire, Scot-
land. After a couple of years spent in Melbourne, the family removed
to Kilmore, and in due course five little Australians were added to the
quartette of Scottish-born Proudfoots who had voyaged overseas. Back
in a bygone period the several members of this family grew to manhood
and womanhood, and took their places in the daily life of the community.
James Proudfoot, who was born in Aberfeldie, came to Kilmore as
a growing boy, and the full course of his colonial life was spent amidst
scenes that he dearly loved in the town and district of his adoption. The
compiler of this booklet is perfectly certain that he would have had a
willing co-worker if his old friend Jim Proudfoot had been spared a few
more years.
James Proudfoot married Anne Macleod, of Macsfield, Wallan. This
good lady’s parents, who hailed from Sutherlandshire, Scotland, acquired
land in the Wallan district in 1852, and the Macleod family have cont-
inuously held possession of the original holding down through the years.
In the occupation that he followed the late James Proudfoot had
much to do with the building of homes in and around Kilmore. That he
likewise freely exerted himself in building up and maintaining those
organisations upon which community and social life is largely dependent
can truthfully be recorded here. One only needs to glance at the records of
the Kilmore Hospital to realise the vast amount of public service rendered
by this very fine citizen. It affords genuine satisfaction to the people of
the district to note the names of James Proudfoot and his good wife
inscribed as Life Governors of our local charitable institution.
* * * *
About the year 1862 James Clarke settled on a block of land at
Tantarboo, and in that vicinity his descendants have remained firmly
implanted all through the years that have since rolled by. For some time
before engaging in land pursuits on his own account, this young man
worked as a farm hand on that Moranding property familiarly known
as Shelley’s Farm. This property was then in the possession of an early
comer named Flanagan, who in later years proved a sterling friend to
his employee.
After becoming well set on a productive farm holding, James Clarke
consented to nominate as a candidate for municipal honours. In 1875 he
was elected to represent the Moranding and Willowmavin riding in the
reconstructed Kilmore Shire. For a fairly lengthy period in later years his
son, Edmond Clarke, occupied a seat at the council table as representative
for the ratepayers in the same riding.
Our highly-esteemed townsman, Patrick Clarke, was born at that
old Tantarboo home seventy-four years ago. After spending a considerable
portion of his life amongst the hills that surrounded his birthplace, he
removed to Kilmore, and brought some members of the family to a new
location. With the transport facilities now available, free and frequent
intercourse between Kilmore and Tantarboo is rendered easy. Back


in that period, when a rustic dwelling sheltered James Clarke and his
good wife, Tantarboo and Mt. William areas were heavily timbered
forests. Yes, and at that time, too, the journey thither, which entailed
a deal of hill climbing, was arduous in the extreme.
* * * *
A roadway that runs along the west side of the racecourse, from the
Golf Links to the Kilmore East Road, has for long years been known as
Baker’s Lane. Incidentally, something stated in Chapter 4 might be
repeated here —that particular length of roadway marks the surveyed
boundary line of “The Old Survey” at the south-east comer of the 5120
acre block.
Down through the long avenue of years the Baker family have been
domiciled within a short distance of the above described road, hence the
name applied to this little-used thoroughfare. Back before the Act of
Separation severed the Port Phillip District from the parent colony of
New South Wales, an Englishman named Beckett settled at Kilmore.
This early comer, who followed the occupation of a builder and carpenter,
appealed to a young man, a former apprentice of his in the Old Country,
to come and join forces in the new land. In response to the earnest appeal
Baker decided to marry and leave England at once. The young couple
(bridegroom 22, bride 21) embarked on the voyage to Australia on the
next day after the marriage. An unfortunate break in the trip was caused
by an enforced period of quarantine in Brisbane. Eventually, however,
Kilmore was reached in September, 1851.
This young couple from England, the immediate ancestors of the
Baker family at Kilmore, came from a place about seven miles from
Bristol, down on the Somerset side. After a short period of residence at
Kilmore, the Bakers removed to Geelong. However, after a few years at
the bayside, the family returned to Kilmore, where some of the members
have remained ever since. There were eleven children born of the
marriage; the three now living at Kilmore were bom at Geelong. Mrs.
Paxman (nee Mary Baker) was through marriage connected with
another family whose association with Kilmore dates back almost a full
century.
* * * *
John Mcßurney, from Castleblaney, County Monaghan, Ireland,
landed in Sydney in 1863, and spent two years in that city before coming
to Victoria. In 1865, shortly after his arrival at Melbourne, he came to
Kilmore to manage a chemist’s business for Felton, Grimwade and Co.
This business was already established, but the wholesale druggist firm
were having trouble; matters in connection with the management were
not running smoothly. However, the need for worry and anxiety quickly
vanished when John Mcßurney assumed control. All down through the
fifty-one years that this worthy man lived in Kilmore he enjoyed the full
confidence of the district people, and came to be regarded as a trusted
friend and adviser by the majority of the residents.


The chemist’s shop wherein John Mcßurney took charge in 1865 was
part of the old building (lately demolished) on the north side of the
National Bank. In the year mentioned, and for some time after, flour-
milling operations were in full swing on the present bank premises. After a
fairly long period devoted to business in the building already indicated on
the west side of Sydney Street, a move was made to the opposite side.
The freehold of the property, now occupied by Dick Glanville, was
acquired, and the business, by this time established on a sound footing,
was taken over as a going concern by John Mcßurney. There he actively
engaged in business for many years; there, too, a family of three
sons and eight daughters grew up. One of the sons, Francis Mathew
Mcßurney, is still numbered amongst our local residents. Robert Hunter
Mcßurney is a chemist at Berwick. Three of the daughters trained as
hospital nurses; one of them is still engaged at the Caulfield Military
Hospital.
Henry Mcßurney, a half brother to John, only obtained his final
qualifications as a chemist after coming to Victoria. His studies were
completed at a private school in South Melbourne conducted by Dr.
Grier, an uncle of the Mcßurney’s. For a short time after qualifying he
acted as assistant in the Kilmore shop. Later, however, he joined in
partnership with D. M. Wylie, and they took over the general store-
keeping business of Lawrence Arcus. Our friend displayed no keen liking
for this new occupation, and it was not long before the partnership was
dissolved by mutual consent. The opening of a chemist’s business at
Benalla was the next move undertaken by Henry Mcßurney. Some
members of his family still reside in the Euroa district.
It would appear as if very decided improvements have been made
with regard to the drainage system in the town of Kilmore. It has
been credibly asserted than even a few years later than 1865 the rush
of storm water from the western slopes created consternation and havoc
amongst dwellers along Sydney Street. At any rate it has been alleged
that the volume of water that entered through the back door of the
shop first occupied by John Mcßurney was sufficient to float bottles
out through the front door, and strew the said bottles across the road-
way.
According to a legal document submitted for perusal the stock-in-
trade, etc., contained in the original shop was transferred to Alfred
Felton (Felton, Grimwade and Co) by J. Benbow Key, who was
actively associated with business concerns at Kilmore in the sixties.
Amongst valued relics in the possession of the Misses Mcßurney
there are two diplomas dated back more than a century. Both documents
were issued to John Mcßurney, County Monaghan, Ireland —the first
by Dublin University 1824 (Medicine), and the second by the Edin-
burgh University 1826 (Surgery). Dr. Mcßurney, upon whom the
above degrees were conferred, was the father of John Mcßurney, of
Kilmore.


It is worthy of note that three of our early citizens at Kilmorc,
John Mcßurney, D. M. Wylie, and Hugh Sugden, married three
sisters, the daughters of Mr. and Mrs. Matthew Fawkner, who were early
residents of the Lancefield district.
* * *
Donald Bantock came from Sutherlandshire, Scotland, where his
father acted as head gamekeeper for the Duke of Sutherland. Born
and bred amongst such surroundings, it was very natural that this young
man should become keenly interested in sport. In his subsequent Aus-
tralian life he took an active part in all forms of sport, more par-
ticularly sport associated with the chase. He acted as judge for many of
the principal coursing clubs throughout Victoria and South Australia.
For some years he contributed coursing notes for “The Australasian' ’
under the pen-name of “Nimrod.” Around Geelong and Werribee in
the early days he was regarded as one of the most fearless riders
on the hunting field.
After landing at Geelong in 1853, Donald Bantock for a short time
tried his luck in the mining fields, but soon relinquished the quest
for gold and returned to Geelong. In that district he followed land
pursuits for twenty years, and then moved to the Summerhill Estate at
Craigieburn, now occupied by Wm. J. Hill and his son Fred.
In 1881 the Bantock family came to the Strathmore Estate, a few
miles from Kilmore. Towards the end of 1885 he acquired the butchering
business in Sydney Street, previously carried on by C. E. Wallder.
After the death of Donald Bantock this business was for some time in
the hands of his son Fred. Jack Bantock, a grandson of the original
named in this memoir, left Kilmore district only a short time ago.
The butchering business referred to above eventually reverted to
the Wallder family. A very fine building was erected by F. W. Wallder,
senior, during that worthy citizen’s tenure of occupation. “Business
as Usual” is the slogan adopted by the present occupant of the
premises, Fred. Wallder, jun. Down through the years the name
Wallder has been identified with Kilmore and adjacent districts. In the
mid-distance of the century that has passed the stock agency firm of
Wallder, Harte and Wallder controlled a fairly extensive business.
Charlie Harte was connected by marriage to the Wallder family.
Hailing from County Suffolk, England, the pioneer Poulter family
came to Victoria in 1852, and settled in the Greensborough district. In
his early colonial life one of the family, James Poulter, worked on the
Bendigo goldfields. Evidently his mining ventures proved successful,
as he voyaged back to his native land, where he married. After re-
turning with his bride to Victoria, they came along and established a
home on Pretty Sally Hill in 1857. In that home Tom Poulter was
bom in 1858. In the year 1865 the family moved along to where
another son, Edward Poulter, has been comfortably settled for many
years. At the present time James Poulter and his wife are represented


around the neighbourhood of Kilmore by two sons, one daughter, and
a fairly numerous group of second-generation descendants. (Tom Poulter
only left Kilmore recently.)
Another member of the family that hailed from Suffolk, George
Poulter, came to this locality at an early period. In and around the
vicinity of Kilmore, Wallan, and Bylands this pioneer is now represented
by five sons and several grandchildren.
* * * *
At the present period of our history there is no better known figure
in Sydney Street than Martin Tyrrell. Hailing from County Kilkenny,
Ireland, the father and grandfather of this worthy citizen came to
Australia in the early fifties. Grandfather Tyrrell, in addition to carry-
ing on as a builder and general carpenter, had control of an old-
fashioned saw-pit mill out in our timber forest. Martin Tyrrell, the
father of our Martin, followed the occupation of a teamster or carrier
on the roads.
In November, 1859, he married Jane Campbell at St. Patrick’s
Church, Kilmore. This good lady, who came from County Armagh,
Ireland, possessed estimable qualities, and enjoyed a very full measure
of popularity through the years spent in this district.
In the course of time Martin Tyrrell, who still applies himself
closely to his work, married Sarah Clancy, a member of another pioneer
family, and two daughters were born of this marriage.
* * * *
The hill whereon the old Moranding Station homestead stood has
been referred to in earlier chapters. It has also been mentioned in
passing that this spot in later years came to be known as “Ryan’s Hill.”
About seventy years ago John Ryan, who hailed from the County
Tipperary, Ireland, and his wife, a native-born Victorian, settled on
that Green Hill Farm. Mrs. Ryan (nee Catherine Fanning) was born at
Werribee, and came with her parents to the Bulla district when only
a child. The Fanning family have lived continuously at Bulla for about
ninety years. The several members of the Ryan family were bom on
the Green Hill Farm, and continued to reside there until recently.
Having disposed of the bulk of their landed property at Moranding,
the family came to live in Kilmore town, where they have acquired
considerable house property.
* * * *
Robert Nathaniel Chapman, from Dorsetshire, and his good wife,
a native of Devonshire, sailed for Australia in 1867, bringing six
English-bom children with them. In the following year (1868) the
Chapman family settled at Kilmore, in a small home on the west side
of the cemetery. Six little Australians were eventually added to the
half dozen that voyaged from overseas with their parents. The family
later moved to another home farther out among the Goldie Hills,
and several years were spent in the new location. The parent couple


and their descendants have proved very desirable citizens all down
through the years.
Robert Chapman, of Glenaroua, who has passed the four score
mark, and the late Cr. Herbert Chapman were the most widely known
members of this family. Very intimate association with the Kilmore
district has been maintained by Herbert Chapman’s family; his sons
hold a fairly extensive tract of land in close proximity to the town.
The original family holding out along the Split Staff Gully road is still
included in their area. Not a great many years have passed since the
late Herbert Chapman was taking a lively interest in every movement
connected with the welfare of the district. Nowadays his son, Tom
Chapman, is proving himself a worthy successor by exhibiting a keen
desire to give similar community service.
* * * *
The major portion of the subject matter in the sixth chapter of this
booklet has been woven round the life history of one Alexander
McKenzie. A cousin of this Highlander, another Alexander McKenzie,
came to this district in the very early days of rural settlement, and
steadfastly remained here. This particular McKenzie built the stone
house adjacent to the Willowmavin Railway Station. This old building,
though unoccupied and unused for many years, still stands firm and
erect. The surrounding property has passed into the hands of the
Aheam family.
At Willowmavin, Glenaroua, and Emu Flat the members of this
family have been well known down through the years. Two members
of the family, with their connections and descendants, have resided
in Kilmore town for several years. Another daughter, Mrs. Cook, born
in the Kilmore district more than eighty-five years ago, is now living at
Geelong.
* “X- * *
In their youthful days John Clancy and the girl that he sub-
sequently married were neighbours on the banks of the River Shannon,
County Clare, Ireland. The former sailed for Australia, and arrived in
Port Phillip Bay on Christmas Day, 1852, but a full week elapsed before a
landing could be effected. At that period of colonial history the main
portion of the menfolk of every class and condition had joined in the
rush to the goldfields, consequently every kind of service was completely
disorganised. It was on New Year’s Day, 1853, that a pilot was induced
to come along and bring the vessel into port at Geelong.
After disembarking from the sailing ship, the newcomer, whose
career we are now recording, made a bee-line for Richmond, where a
brother who left Ireland some time previously was then living. After
a short resting period John Clancy went to the Bendigo diggings, where
his mining ventures proved at least moderately successful. Returning to
Melbourne, he invested his modest savings in the purchase of a small
area of farm land at Pentland Hills. Not caring much for the work on


the goldfields, he cast around in search of something more congenial
in the way of employment. Eventually he obtained a position as engine-
driver at a brewery in Flinders Street, Melbourne. At this job it was
necessary to have steam up before 6 a.m., and continue to work until
after 6 p.m. Despite the strenuous nature of the work he manfully
“stuck it” for a few years. After an enforced period of resting and
recuperation rendered necessary through ill-health, we next find John
Clancy engaged for a term of six months as collector at the Broadford
toll-gate; later he acted in a similar capacity for six months at Camp-
bellfield, and for three years at Wallan.
After relinquishing control of the Wallan toll-gate he rented 160
acres of land in that district. After three years as a tenant farmer he
came to Bylands, and purchased 142 acres of land. This block, with
additional area later acquired, is still in the possession of his youngest
son, Cr. Daniel Clancy.
The parent couple built a small home on the Bylands property,
and came to there to live in April, 1869. At that time the newly-erected
house was surrounded by a dense growth of timber, and could only be
seen at close range. However, the trees have gone down before the on-
slaught of two worthy generations of Clancys that have grown up during
the passage of sixty-nine intervening years.
* * * *
In September, 1858, John Murray, a school teacher, of Brora,
Sutherlandshire, Scotland, married Ann Murray, of Rogart, also in
Sutherlandshire. Brora was a coastal town washed by the waters of the
North Sea, whilst Rogart was only a few miles inland.
On their wedding day this young couple left for Australia per
the sailing ship “Admiral Lyons,” and spent 119 days on the voyage
to Sydney. Whilst in that city John Murray was offered a responsible
and lucrative position at the Sydney Mint. The position he would have
gladly accepted if he had felt free to do so. He was anxious to join his
brother, Alexander Murray, who had left the Old Country some four years
previously, so he came along to Melbourne where his brother was then
living. In the following year (1859) the two brothers came to Kilmore,
where John Murray and his good wife passed the remainder of their
lives. At the time of his demise John Murray had attained the age of
83, while his life’s partner died at the ripe old age of 92. In the Murray
family there were four sons and three daughters; four out of the seven
are now living. Here in their native town we still have Miss Minnie
Murray and her brother Alex. John Murray was for many years a
prominent and devoted worker for the Kilmore Presbyterian Church,
and for the local branch of the 1.0. R.
* * * *
Very few couples have had a more intimate association with
Kilmore and its people than F. W. Wortley and his good wife. For
a period now verging on fifty years of married life these worthy folk,


by their kindly actions and unfailing courtesy, have maintained a firm
grip on the friendship of the local community. In his bachelor days
Frank Wortley, a native of Coburg, was an active unit in his father’s
produce agency and storekeeping business before he took over D. M.
Wylie’s Sydney Street shop in 1889.
Mrs. Wortley’s father, John Hammond, from Northampton, England,
came to Kilmore in 1852. A few years later he married Maria Hansard,
from County Tipperary, Ireland. The marriage ceremony was per-
formed by the Rev. W. T. Singleton. For a time John Hammond
conducted livery stables, and was engaged as a mail contractor. As
already mentioned in another chapter, the Red Lion Flotcl was taken
over by the Hammond family in 1875. This hotel had then been with-
out a tenant for quite a long spell. A few of our sedate present-day
citizens still retain vivid recollections of sliding down the banisters in
this untenanted two-storied building when “school was out.” Mrs.
Wortley is the only member of the Hammond family now living at
Kilmore.
* * * *
In the records of early pioneering days at Kilmore something ex-
ceptional here presents itself. This particular sketch of family history
goes back a full ninety-two years. In 1846 William Henry Fischer,
with his wife and four children, arrived in Australia, and almost im-
mediately settled at Kilmore. A son, Henry William, who was born
at Frankfurt, on the Oder River, Prussia, spent his school life at Kil-
more. On attaining manhood he worked on the Bendigo goldfields, and
later went to Coree Station, N.S.W., then owned by Charles Mackinnon
(one of “The Argus” family).
Henry W. Fischer married Isabella Matheson, from Kintail,
Lochalsh, Ross-shire, Scotland, and then settled at Kilmore, where he
carried on business for many years. At a later period he lived at the
old home in George Street, where his father had established a market
garden when the town of Kilmore was in the embryo stage. This garden
was carefully cultivated by Henry Fischer, the younger, for a number
of years. Previously another garden in Sydney Street regularly produced
heavy crops of vegetables when tended by this same thrifty man. The
old home in George Street was occupied by his daughters, Miss Isabel
and the late Miss Catherine Fischer, until the end of 1937—Kilmore’s
Centenary year.
* * * *
John McDonald, a typical Highlander, from Ross-shire, Scotland,
and his wife came to Victoria in 1852, and almost immediately settled
at Kilmore. Like many other early colonists, he tried his luck on the
goldfields, and engaged in road carrying work before definitely settling
down to land pursuits. The block of land on which the original
McDonald couple toiled is still in the occupation of their descendants.
Jack McDonald, a namesake of his Highland father, was for many


years a real “live wire” citizen of Kiimore. Possessing a buoyant and
irrepressible nature, and a happy knack of creating diversion and en-
tertainment, this worthy man could always be relied upon to liven
matters up when he sauntered along. The bright, jovial nature of the
father has been transmitted to some of the descendants who are still
numbered amongst our most popular residents.
Perhaps there is no landmark in the Kiimore district that makes
such a vivid and lasting impression on the mind of the passing traveller
as the Mt. Vernon farm and homestead, about three miles south of
the town. Along the adjacent stretch of roadway even a casual passer-
by will perceptibly slow down to admire a rural scene where landscape
beauty is softly toned by a mellow richness of soil suggestive of ex-
ceptional productivity.
John Butler, senior, secured this fine property in 1870, and there
a family of five sons and four daughters spent their childhood, and
grew to be men and women. There, too, the youngest son, E. J. Butler,
still resides Five more of the surviving members of the family live at
Kiimore and in districts adjacent thereto. One lives in Gippsland, and
one in the Wimmera province.
John Butler, who came to Kiimore in 1866, was a native of Cashel,
County Tipperary, and his good wife hailed from Groom, County
Limerick, Ireland. When John Butler arrived in Victoria the sum
of his wealth —expressed in money terms —was three pounds. During
the first evening, after the sailing ship “Shalimar” landed this new batch
of colonists on Australian soil, a shipmate became extra convivial, and as
a result had to face the Bench next morning. A fine and costs amount-
ing to £3 was imposed; the culprit had no money. John Butler paid
the bill, and then faced the wide open spaces of Australia in a penniless
condition.
After engaging in farm work around the neighbourhood of Kii-
more for some time, this young Irishman joined with two of his brothers
and worked on a mining claim at Wood’s Point. The brothers operated
this mine on the tributing system, then much in vogue. An all-round
clean up after something more than two years showed a substantial
profit for the Butlers. At this stage it was decided to float a company,
erect a battery, and generally extend operations as prospects looked ex-
ceedingly promising. Apparently the assumption of a good time ahead
was well founded. This mining claim, known as the Al, still goes on
as a dividend-paying concern.
Our friend John Butler, after that first clean-up, quit the gold
quest, and devoted his attention towards farming pursuits. Before
finally deciding to purchase property in this locality, he made a tour
through Gippsland and even took a trip to New Zealand. The block
of land for which he had conceived an early longing always seemed to
flit temptingly before his eyes whenever other areas were under in-
spection. Back to Kiimore was the slogan that this landseeker adopted,


and as already stated, he acquired the freehold of the homestead block
some sixty-eight years ago.
•K* vc •)!*
A name that appears in other chapters through this historical
sketch is that of P. J. O’Connor. For a number of years he was actively
engaged in building and roadmaking work. Back in the early seventies,
in partnership with Donald Kennedy, he carried out the contract of
erecting the Kilmore State school. Sixty years ago an unkind Public
Department dumped the Kilmore East Railway Station down in the
Dry Creek Valley. This somewhat thoughtless action on the part of
the Government of the day left Kilmore stranded at an altitude of
nearly 300 feet above the level of its rail transport outlet. The cutting
and formation of a roadway that rendered hill climbing possible
through the intervening two miles of rugged, broken surface was
carried out by P. J. O’Connor. After a time spent in the hotelkeeping
business, this worthy citizen moved out to “Parkview.” During their
residence in that picturesque spot the O’Connor family were very
intimately associated with the social life of Kilmore.
* * * *
The objective attempted in the compilation of this sixteenth chapter
was to give short personal sketches of pioneer families, whose descen-
dants are still living in the locality. In this instance those families that
settled at Kilmore back beyond 1870 are regarded as pioneers. At a
venture one might be permitted to claim that the names already included
represent nearly eighty per cent, of all those entitled to a place in this
page of history. Every old identity will perceive at a glance that the
list is incomplete, and probably hint that it should be possible to con-
siderably add to the number. However, it has proved a difficult task
to collect information relative to family history.
Many of the old hands frankly admit a lack of knowledge con-
cerning their own particular family tree, whilst others show a disinclina-
tion to come into the limelight. In the circumstances it is to be hoped
that omissions will be pardoned, as all such omissions are quite un-
intentional.


CHAPTER 17.
DOW
THROUGH THE YEARS (Continued)
EVERAL matters dealt with in this little volume have been traced
down to comparatively recent times. Only scant notice, however,
has been given to many important changes that have contributed
in a special way to mark our progress. During the last half of the
century recorded herein, many innovations of a practical and distinctly
useful nature have been introduced at Kilmore. Let us, in this con-
cluding chapter, endeavour to give a summary of measures and methods
adopted to improve living conditions, and render the daily round easier
and more agreeable.
Kilmore Water Trust. —The Water Trust was proclaimed in 1893,
with a source of supply from the Hazel and Myrtle Creeks, in the
Plenty Ranges, distant more than sixteen miles from Kilmore. From
the higher altitudes of this catchment area the water gravitates through
flumes and pipes, and falls into reservoirs where supplies are allowed
to accumulate. In a general way, the Trust has functioned satisfactorily
for most of the time since the installation of the system introduced back
in the nineties.
During the last few years there seems to be a growing dread that
the stream of water flowing into the reservoirs will some day prove in-
sufficient to meet the demands of water users. The obligation is on the
Water Trust to continue to bring an adequate supply for domestic
purposes —provided that sufficient water is available at the source
originally tapped. It should scarcely be necessary to point out that the
Water Trust includes all resident ratepayers, whose premises, whether
freehold or leasehold, are served by the reticulation pipe supply. It is of
no avail to try placing all responsibility on that small body of Com-
missioners elected to administer the affairs of the Trust —the obligation
to conserve, regulate, and make judicious use of the available water
applies to all who pay water rates. Naturally a reservoir constructed
more than forty years ago, or pipes laid down and flumes erected at
that same period, are not in the best condition. That our local Com-
missioners have fully realised the position is evidenced by the fact that
an extensive scheme of repair and renovation has been undertaken.
The main reservoir (Escreet’s) has recently been lined with concrete
at a cost of £570, and at present is filled to a capacity of nearly 200,000
gallons. Further alterations and additions of a far-reaching nature are
now under contemplation. However, let us be fully impressed with
this fact. No work can be carried out unless sanctioned by the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission, neither is it possible to obtain
loan money or other monetary assistance only through this public


department. The Kilmore Water Trust and all similar bodies function
only in a subsidiary fashion; the Water Supply Commission dominates
the position.
It has become absolutely imperative for householders to take a
reasonable view of the difficulties with which the Water Trust has to
contend. The Trust as at present constituted is only directly concerned
with the supply of water for domestic use; and be it noted, the ful-
filment of this contract imposes a severe strain. Those very desirable
citizens, who so dearly love to brighten their surroundings with an at-
tractive display of foliage and flowers, should remember that we have no
Irrigation Trust at Kilmore. Our ordinary supply will, no doubt, con-
tinue to be sufficient to allow a fairly generous use of the hose pipe on
our gardens, but there should be no wastage of this precious fluid. The
conservation of a good rainfall supply by the provision of a reasonable
household tank capacity should commend itself to dwellers on the
higher altitudes on the outskirts of the town. At first glance it might
appear that this is not a pertinent subject for discussion on these pages.
A little reflection, however, will serve to show that the future welfare
and progress of our town cannot be maintained, unless ail doubts
relative to the continuity of our domestic water supply are eliminated.
Let us for a moment picture the dread contingencies associated with
a shortage of water. The comfort of every home would be seriously
interfered with, a menace to healthy conditions of life would be created,
and the prestige enjoyed by our town as a favoured locality would
dwindle and fade away.
It would be a serious blunder to concentrate entirely on the past
in this sketch. Kilmore is on the threshold of a new century, and we
must consider the best and cheapest means of preserving our utility
services if we wish to go serenely on. The time is not far distant when
all Australian communities will perforce have to realise, that those
public services and general utility schemes already included in our
national and civic structure have been designed and carried out in a
big and rather boastful manner. The efficiency of our public works
can only be maintained at a tremendous cost, and the disturbing
question naturally arises—can we continue to bear the ever-rising scale
of costs?
The Swimming Pool, the Golf Links, and the Beautification of
Kilmore Creek. —Commenting on the decision to convert the old re-
servoir into a swimming pool, a writer in the “Herald” (16th December,
1936) penned this note of admiration: “There it is to-day, one of the
finest swimming pools in Victoria.” The present scribe, with a keen eye
for scenic attraction and landscape beauty, ventures to make this further
admiring comment: “Clothed in the mantle of springtime, this placid
pool and the adjacent golfing fairways make a glorious picture.” Go
where you will throughout the State of Victoria —tourist, golfer, or


mere camera fiend;, you will find no spot better calculated to satisfy
your taste or inclination.
Having enjoyed the picturesque scenery on the area that flanks
the south-east comer of our town, let us now move along the bank of
the Kilmore Creek. In this walk we can continue to enjoy those sen-
sations of pleasure that a true beautification scheme affords. How
many of us are aware that a beautiful green valley, with occasional pools
of limpid water existed, where soil erosion has since scooped out an
unsightly creek bed. Those early comers who saw that valley in its
pristine freshness never wearied of extolling its beauty. Through the
course of the years when the damp surface soil was broken by the
trampling of livestock, the rapid flow of storm water caused fissures to
the made along the centre of this pretty valley. Eventually the water-
course became pronounced and the scooping process was allowed to go
on unchecked for many years. Within comparatively recent times an
effort was made to induce our civic authorities to take necessary steps
to prevent further damage. As it appeared likely that precious time
would be lost whilst waiting for public action, other measures of a
more prompt nature were adopted. A body of private citizens, actuated
by a commendable spirit of enterprise, embarked on a judicious scheme
of tree planting along the creek banks. Thus began a work of reclama-
tion by which the town of Kilmore has been beautified beyond all
expectation.
The narrative supplied by an historian can never be regarded as
complete, if there is failure to give honour where honour is due. With
the idea of faithfully discharging such obligation, we here include some
general particulars of the work undertaken and effectively carried out
by the sponsors of that well conceived arboreal adornment of which we
are now justly proud. In February, 1912, the Kilmore Citizens’ Improve-
ment Association was formed, and this properly constituted body im-
mediately began the planting of trees on roads and reserves —a work
in which real earnestness was manifested for a number of years. As a
matter of fact, there was a decided element of thoroughness in the
methods adopted by the Improvement Association when this beautifica-
tion scheme was launched. Suitable trees were chosen, strong protecting
fences were erected, and proper provision for the care of the young
growing trees was ensured by appointing a paid attendant who
thoroughly understood his job.
The acquisition of the block of land whereon our Memorial Park
is now so well established, was one of the chief objects aimed at in the
ambitious programme of the Improvement Association. By persistent
advocacy the members of the Association eventually convinced the
Shire Council and the general body of the local public, that a decided
advantage would be gained by converting this well situated area into
a recreation reserve. From the highly commendable spirit of civic pride
implied in this general agreement our fine Park resulted.


I have casually referred to those worthy citizens who organised
and successfully carried out this beautification scheme as mere mem-
bers of an Association. A more appropriate designation would be that
of willing workers and generous contributors, as they gave freely of
their time and money to achieve the object in view. It should also be
placed on record that the Shire Council were enabled to purchase the
requisite block of land for our Park, through the generous action of
the President of the Improvement Association.
Several townspeople, by giving ready and valuable assistance in
the work described in preceding paragraphs, contributed towards bring-
ing about a highly satisfactory result. It is fairly safe to assume, how-
ever, that the brunt of the fray fell upon the Executive Committee, a
list of whose names are appended: Colin McNab, president; C. J.
Osborn, treasurer; Wm. P. M. Taylor, secretary; Rev. Father Martin,
Dr. John Semple, Messrs. F. Wallder, R. G. Hudson, M. Robinson, J.
Mcßumey, J. J. Ryan, P. A. Harrington, W. H. Booth.
Electric Supply.—On 10th September, 1907, the Kilmore Electric
Supply Company was granted powers to supply electricity to the town
of Kilmore, and before the end of 1909 the lighting plant was fully
installed. Only two other country towns in Victoria had adopted the
system before Kilmore homes were lighted by the simple process of
operating the switch attached to wire along which electric current
flashed. How calmly we accept all such innovations nowadays, yet we
would be a poor-spirited race if not duly impressed by the far-reaching
advance typified in an electric lighting scheme. The original installation
was not free from weakness in construction and detail, but time has
dealt kindly with us, and a highly satisfactory lighting system is now
enjoyed. Very decided improvements have been effected since the
business and premises of the original company were taken over by the
Shire Council on 2nd October, 1916.
Postal Service and the Telephone. —Kilmore and the immediate
surrounding district has long enjoyed excellent postal facilities. In the
prompt despatch of mails, in the delivery of letters, and all correspondence
matter, and in the general handling of departmental business every-
thing has worked smoothly for many years past. No country town could
possibly wish for better treatment from the Postal Department than
Kilmore now receives.
A passing reference to postal facilities —or rather to the want of
postal facilities —in pioneering days is here inserted just to impress
readers with the marked advance that has been made in such matters.
Back in the year 1850 a family living at a squatting homestead sixty
miles north of Kilmore regarded this as their postal town, and hither
they came twice a year to collect mail matter.
From Kilmore Post Office the first telephone line connection to a
private home was erected in January, 1910. At that time the Woodbum
Estate —still No. 1 on the local directory—was equipped with the


means to receive and transmit telephone messages. Only a matter 01
twenty-eight years have passed since that very convenient utility service
was installed in our Kilmore district. What a network of telephone
lines have been spread within our town limits and over the whole coun-
tryside in less than one-third of a century. We now enjoy the benefit
of a highly satisfactory continuous telephone service, and to mark our
appreciation of the fact we make free and frequent use of this up-to-
date method of communication.
Several references have been made through these pages to the
ribbonlike roadways constructed in recent times. A really phenomenal
amount of work has been carried out under the control of the Country
Roads Board during the past fifteen years. At the present time a motorist
can turn either northward or southward from Kilmore along the Hume
Highway, link up with other proclaimed highways, and travel over a
considerable portion of the State in a few hours. Within the last few
years short lengths of bitumen sealed tracks have been laid along roads
that radiate from the Hume Highway. In close proximity to Kilmore
there is a reasonable prospect of renewed activity in this very desirable
work of improving cross country thoroughfares.
In the rush of events do we ever pause sufficiently to enable us
to fully realise the startling changes effected as the days pass by? Let
us stop for a moment to consider innovations noted in this chapter
such as water supply, electric lighting, the increased efficiency of our
postal and telephone service, the decided boon of good roads; add
thereto radio, movie pictures, and such like. Really our assumed pose of
calm indifference receives a rude shock when we gaze upon the com-
pletely altered picture offered for inspection. Go back only half the
century under review and compare the comparatively crude conveniences
then available with the smooth-running methods of arranging life’s
daily round now enjoyed. Go back eighty years and more to the real
pioneering stage in the infant colony of Victoria; aye, back to the
time when our now important State was merely an outpost district
with its administrative affairs directed from distant Sydney and the
Colonial Office in London.
Truly there is an epic story associated with the opening up, the
settlement, and development of this fair Australian land; however,
“Yours Truly” does not aspire to high flights in literary production.
“Enough for me as with swallow’s wings,
Lightly to skim o’er the surface of things.”
I have now almost reached the end of my “Tale of a Century,”
and trust that readers will get some measure of interest and entertain-
ment from the perusal of the narrative.
At Kilmore the intention to “Ring out the old, ring in the new”
during the currency of the year 1937 had been virtually decided upon
when the city of Melbourne staged its Centenary in 1934. By un-


animous decision at a public meeting of Kilmore citizens in May, 1937,
it was resolved that this three-year-old intention should be developed
into action. On that occasion a Centenary Celebrations Committee was
appointed, and preliminary arrangements for our jubilee festival were
promptly undertaken. Unfortunately, at a later date, owing to cir-
cumstances over which the people of Kilmore had no control, a post-
ponement had to be decided upon, consequently the opening date of
our Gala Week is one year overdue.
The postponement referred to was not allowed to interfere with
one very important part of the programme originally adopted. The
appeal launched for the purpose of raising funds through the medium
of the “Miss Kilmore Quest” went merrily on, and proved highly
successfuly, in fact, one might say that the response to this appeal
exceeded the most sanguine expectations.
The three young ladies chosen as aspirants to the rank of mock
queenly distinction, and their keenly interested retinues, maintained
a good-natured spirit of rivalry throughout the quest, and, as already
stated, a splendid result was achieved. Apart from the satisfactory financial
result, there is another feature of the Queen Competition that deserves
to be historically recorded and handed down to posterity with the
“guinea stamp of approval” from a grateful community at Kilmore.
Without the shadow of a doubt the spectacular Coronation Ceremony,
witnessed in the Manchester Unity Hall on the evening of 22nd Novem-
ber, 1937, surpassed anything in the nature of a tableau setting ever
staged at Kilmore. Nothing that can be written here, or voiced abroad
by any other means, can adequately express the feeling of joy and
satisfaction experienced by the people of Kilmore in that memorable
occasion.
To recall and fondly dwell on the events of a bright and happy past
will always afford sublime pleasure to mankind. Through the various
chapters of this sketch we have, in homely fashion, revived memories
of the good folk who nobly played their part in bygone years. As a
parting Centenary gesture let us record this heartfelt wish: Peace be
to those figures who moved across the screen in the fondly remembered
past, and all happiness to present and future generations at Kilmore.
FINIS.


Australia, 1,
2, 11
, 19,
35, 39, 71
, 79,
81, 83, 91
, 95,
101,
105, 106,
109,
111, 118,
123,
126,
127, 128,
130,
136.
Index
Abbott Family, 97.
Abbott, Johnie, 97.
Abbott, Mr., 4.
Aberfeldie, 122.
Aborigines, 4, 109, 113, 118.
Act of Separation, 123.
Acting Premier, 111.
“Admiral Lyons”, 128.
Adamson, Mr., 17.
Adamson’s Garage, 107.
“Africa”, 121.
“Age”, 94.
Agnew, Rev. William, 70.
Ahearn, James, 93.
Ahearn, Mr., 36, 55.
Ahearn Family, 127.
Aitken, John, 1.
Aitken’s, 47.
Akehurst, A. P., 89.
Akehurst, Mrs., 79.
Albert Park, 3.
Albert Street, 24.
Albion Flour Mill, 18, 66, 94, 118.
Albury, 11, 13, 43, 44, 47, 117.
Alexandra, 87.
Alfonso, 98.
Alfred Hospital, 82.
All Fours, 106.
Allan, Jack, 40.
Allan, John, 60.
Allan, Robert, 65, 66.
Allen, Robert, 17, 24.
“Allen’s”, 107.
Alt, Mr., 19.
Anatomy—Study of, 83, 84.
Anderson, Francis, 12, 14.
Anglesey, 59, 63, 110.
Anglesey, County of, 62.
Anglis, William Charles, 60.
Angwin, Rev. Charles, 76.
Angwin, Rev. Thomas, 75.
Anstey Family, 17.
Arcus, Lawrence, 23, 53, 92, 93, 124.
Ardlie, J. M., 88.
Argyle, Reginald Ivon, 59, 62.
Armagh, County, 126.
Armstrong, Miss, 79.
Armstrong, Mr., 24.
Ash, Oak & Elm Trees Inn, 37.
Aspinall, Mr., 61.
Assembly Hall, 113.
Associated Chambers of Commerce of
Australia, 83.
Assumption College, 19, 80, 81, 84,
85, 116.
“Athenian Villa”, 97.
Athos, 97.
Avenel, 47.
Australia, South-east, 30.
Australian Cap, 98.
Australian Imperial Forces, 70.
Australian Institute of Anatomy, 83,
112.
Australian Steeplechase, 98.
Australian Wesleyan Conference
Secretary, 75.
Back Creek, 36, 37.
Baddaginnie, 47.
Baker Family, 123.
Baker, Mary, 123.
Baker’s Lane, 123.
Bald Hills, 30, 121.
Balfour, Margaret M., 2.
Balfour, W. G., 2.
Ball & Welch, 93.
Ballantine, Snr. Mr., 24.
Ballantine, Jnr. Mr., 24.
Ballarat, 43, 121.
Ballarat College, 85.
Ballarat Base Hospital, 84.
Ballymena, 119.
Banathea, 98.
Bandon, 88.
Bands, 94.
Bank of Victoria, 26, 51.
Banks, 26.
Banshee, 98.
Bantock, Donald, 125.
Bantock Family, 125.
Bantock, Fred, 99.
Barkly, Sir Henry, 22, 71, 75.
Barrett, Fred W., 94.
Barrow Brothers, 8.
Bass Strait, 1, 35.
Bathurst, 44.
Batman, John, 5,7, 10.
Beattie, Cr. J. J., 57.
Beavan, Dr. F. W. C, 20, 21, 22, 90.
Beaver, W., 90,
Beckett, Mr., 74, 123.
Beechworth, 41, 43, 47, 49, 79.
138


Beechworth road, 43.
Beer Act, 19, 24.
Belle Vue, 7.
Benalla, 12, 13, 14, 113, 117.
Benalla Police Station, 12.
Bendigo, 8, 36, 41, 43, 50, 64, 71,
105, 109.
Bendigo goldfields, 125, 127, 129.
Bendigo Province, 60.
Bendigo Road, 43.
Berwick, 124.
Bevan, Bill & Company, 43.
Bevan, James & Company, 48.
Beveridge, 11, 12, 13, 42, 51, 107,
111, 118.
Beveridge Snr., Andrew, 12, 118.
Beveridge Jnr., Andrew, 118.
Beveridge, George, 107.
Beveridge, George Splatt, 118.
M A - -a
Beveridge, Mitchell K., 27, 107, 118,
119.
Beveridge Family, 107.
Beveridge Island, 118.
Biddle, J., 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 24, 94.
Big River, 47, 49.
Bindley, Dr. F. L., 22, 90, 91, 94.
Bindley House, 90.
Birdwoodton, 84.
Black Bull Hotel, 104.
Blackburn, Captain, 73.
Bligh, Ivo, 79.
Blink, Bonnie, 98.
Blinks, Rev. W. L., 75.
Block, P. R., 8.
Bloxidge, R. G., 97, 98.
“Blue Bird Cafe”, 104.
Blueskin, 96.
Bondi, 85.
Bontherambo, 42.
Boondara, 107.
Boort, 85, 100.
Booth, W. H., 135.
Boran, Cr. T., 57.
Bossence, Thomas, 20, 22, 52, 63, 74,
92.
Bourke, John Conway, 45.
Bourke, Lawrence, 26, 49, 59, 61, 63.
Bourke Street, 42, 43.
Bowers, John C, 70.
Bowers, Robert, 76.
Bowling Club, 101.
Bowling Green, 101.
Boyd, A. J., 27, 76.
Boyd, John, 26.
Boyd Brothers bacon factory, 94.
Boyd’s Creek, 8.
Boyd’s Station, 8.
Bradley, John, 27.
Brady, James, 37.
Brady, Mr., 19.
Branigan, Father, 71, 72.
Brass Band, 94.
Brassey, Lord & Lady, 28.
Brewery Hill, 71.
Brighton, 73.
Brisbane, 85, 123.
Brisbane Hospital, 85.
British Isles, 19, 38, 39.
Broadford, 7, 12, 13, 16, 18, 47, 51,
61, 69, 72, 73, 75, 81, 110, 115.
Broadford road, 97.
Broadford Road Board, 81.
Broadford Toll-gate, 128.
Broadhurst, Charles, 26.
Broadhurst, Mr., 4, 7.
Broadmeadows Road, 13.
Brock, Dr., 91.
Broken River, 12, 113.
Bromley, Mr. W. F., 21, 25.
Bromley, Mrs., 21.
Brooks, Mr. A., 76.
Brora, 128.
Brother Austin, 80.
Brother Barnabas, 85.
Brother Bernadine, 80.
Brother Brendan, 80.
Brother Columba, 85.
Brother Cyril, 85.
Brother Gabriel, 80.
Brother Gerard, 85.
Brother Gilbert, 80.
Brother John, 80.
Brother Matthias, 86.
Brother Owen, 86.
Brother Robert, 86.
Brother Thomas Francis, 86.
Brother Urban, 85.
Brother William, 80.
Brothers, George, 47.
Brown, A. W., 40.
Brown, John, 12.
Brown, Robert, 11.
Brunswick, 12.
Brunton, Thomas, 60.
Bryant, Mr., 19.
Bryant’s Brewery, 19.
Buchanan, Captain John, 38.
Auckland, 49.
Budd, W. H., 27.
Bull & Mouth, 42, 43, 103.
Bulla, 59, 62, 126.
Burke Family, 105.
Burrows, John, 76.
Burrows, J. T., 117.
Bushman Inn, 13.
“Business as Usual”, 125
Butler, E. J., 130.
Butler, Henry, 121.
Butler, John, 52, 57, 121, 130.
Butler, M. J., 57, 121.
Butler, Thomas, 121.
Butler, Watt, 36.
Butler Family, 121.
Bylands, 5,7, 30, 33, 54, 55, 94, 96,
105, 115, 126, 128.
139


Cahill, Rev. M. F., 74.
Cain, Captain, 7.
Cairns, 82.
Cairns, Rev. D., 67, 113.
Cairns, Wilson & Amos, 18.
Caithness, 112.
Caleb, Mr., 77.
Calvert, Mr., 76.
Cameron, Allan Francis, 59, 62.
Cameron, Colin M., 70.
Campaspe River, 16.
Campbell, Jane, 126.
Campbell, Mr., 24.
Campbell, William, 60.
Campbellfield, 128.
Canberra, 10, 83, 112.
Canvas Town, 3, 39.
Cape Colony, 91.
Cape of Good Hope, 39.
Cappawhite, 102.
Captain Cain’s Station, 7, 8.
Carbine, 98.
Carlsruhe, 16.
Carlsruhe University, 17.
Carlton, 93.
Carlton Club, 100.
Carroll, Johnnie, 37.
Cashel, 120, 130.
“Castle O’ Grady”, 15.
Castleblaney, 123.
Castlemaine, 20, 39, 42, 71.
Castles, Amy, 94, 119.
Castles, Joseph, 94.
Castles, Sally, 119.
Castles, Tom, 94.
Castles, William, 94.
Catholic Chapel, 24.
Catholic Church, 70-73.
Catholic Education (N.S.W.), 85.
Caulfield, 98.
Caulfield Military Hospital, 124.
Cavan, County, 1.
Centenary Celebrations Committee,
137.
Chambers, John, 24.
Chairman of Committees of Legis-
lative Council, 61.
Chapman, Cr. Herbert, 127.
Chapman, J., 106.
Chapman, Robert, 127.
Chapman, Robert Nathaniel, 126.
Chapman, T., 106, 127.
Chapman Family, 126.
Chatham, 91.
Cheltenham, 73.
Chief Justice, 61.
Chief Secretary, 59, 61, 111.
Children’s Hospital, 83.
Chiltern, 12, 13, 47.
Chinaman’s Bridge, 90, 103.
Chinese, 103.
Chintin, 8.
Chiron, 96.
Christ Church, 73, 74.
“Church Gazette”, 73.
Church of England, 73-75, 79.
Churches, 65-76.
Civil Engineers Association, 82.
Clancy, Daniel, 57, 128.
Clancy, John, 127, 128.
Clancy, Sarah, 126.
Clancy’s road, 33.
Clapp, Frank, 43.
Clapp, O. 8., 42, 43.
Clapp & Company, 42.
Clare, County, 120, 127.
Clark, Mr., 75.
Clark, Thomas, 12.
Clarke, Edmond, 122.
Clarke, Father Charles, 24, 70.
Clarke, James, 122, 123.
Clarke, John, 5, 11, 34, 43.
Clarke, Mrs. Reay, 110.
Clarke, Patrick, 93.
Clarke, Patrick, 122.
Clarke, Reay, 12, 16, 18, 52, 55, 110.
Clarke, Sir Rupert, 60.
Clarke, Sir William John, 60.
Clarke, William Lionel Russell, 60.
“Classes for Junior Girls”, 79.
Coayang, 4.
Cobb, Freeman, 42.
Cobb and Co., 41, 42, 43, 44.
Coburg, 129.
Coleraine, 96.
Collard, J. S., 17.
Collier, Mr., 77.
Collingwood, 50.
Collins Street, 83, 85, 112.
Colonial Bank, 26.
Colonial Office, 4.
Coltman, Rev. E. H., 75, 76.
Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney, 26.
Commissioner of the Insolvency Court
—Chief, 88.
Commissioner of Public Works, 61.
Commissioner of Railways & Roads,
Commissioner of State Savings Bank
of Victoria —Chairman, 77, 83.
Commonwealth of Australia, 83.
Conabere, Mr., 55.
Conabere, Mrs., 121.
Conabere, William, 121.
Connaught, 1.
Connolly’s, 47.
Connors, “Billy”, 37.
Conran, Mr. & Mrs., 21.
Convent of Mercy, 78.
Convent School, 77.
Conway, Edward, 86.
Cook, Mr., 107.
Cook, Mrs., 127.
140


Cook, Rev. Richard 0., 75.
Cooper, Joel, 27, 37.
Corboy, Phillip, 52, 105, 115.
Corio Bay, 11, 73.
Cork, County, 88.
Coronation Ceremony—Kilmore, 137.
Corree Station, 129.
Corrigan, Lawrence, 85.
Country Roads Board, 81, 136.
Courts, 87-89.
Craigieburn, 125.
Crane, Thomas, 76.
Cranky Janet, 37, 66.
Crawford, Hiram, 44.
Cawford, Rev. W. E., 76.
Crawford, Connelly & Company, 44.
Cricket, 100.
Cricket Reserve, 29.
Crooket Bridge, 36.
Croquet Club & lawn, 101.
Crossley, James, 113, 120.
Crossley, Thomas, 114.
Crossley Family, 113.
Crouch, Mr., 75.
Crouch & Wilson, 20.
Crough, James, 27.
Crown Grant, 1.
Crown Lands, 5, 30, 32, 33, 62, 108,
117.
Crown Lands sale, 7, 24, 114.
Crown Law Department, 88, 89, 108.
Crown Lease, 3.
Crown Lease Pastoral Holdings, 1-9.
Cuming, Mr., 39.
Cunningham, Rev. William R., 75.
Cup Hurdle Race, 98.
Curtain, M., 27.
Dacomb, Mrs., 79.
Dacomb College, 79.
Dalesford, 111.
Dalhousie, 59, 62, 63.
Dalhousie Hotel, 94.
Daly, Mr., 107.
Dana, Captain, 89.
Darebin, 97.
Darlingford, 47.
Darlinghurst, 85.
Darnley, Countess, 79.
Daunt, Rev. W. P., 74.
“David Clarke”, 107.
Davidson, Mr., 24.
Davies, Henry, 57.
Davis, W., 27.
Deceiver, 98.
Deep Creek, 8.
Defoe, 98.
Delaney, Mr., 117.
Delatite, 63.
Deniliquin, 43.
Department of Lands, 5.
Derby, 97.
Devil’s River, 47.
Devonshire, 126.
Diavolo, 98.
Dickie, George Thomas, 60.
Diggers’ Rest Hotel, 95, 105.
Dillon, C. J., 120.
Dillon, Maurice, 93.
District Road Boards —Establishment
of, 57.
Docker, George J., 42.
Docker, Parson, 42.
“Doctor Jack”, 85.
Donaldson, William, 27.
Donaldson & Budge, 112.
Donnybrook, 42, 66, 71, 75, 97.
Donnybrook Hotel, 13.
Doogan, Hugh, 27.
Dookie, 92.
Doolan, Ernest, 86.
Dorsetshire, 126.
Dowling, J. E., 92.
Dowling, Mrs., 119.
Down, County, 77.
Draper, Rev. D. J., 75.
Drury Jnr., W. A., 100.
Dry Creek, 1,2, 6, 49, 61.
Dry Creek Valley, 131.
Dublin, 73.
Dublin University, 77, 124.
Duffy, John Gavin, 59, 62.
Dumaresq Jnr., E., 34, 36.
Dumaresq Family, 5, 77,
Dumfermline, 118.
Dunrobin Castle Hotel, 12, 15, 16,
110.
Dwyer, Mon, 29.
Bade Family, 40.
Eager, C. H. A., 18.
Eager, Florence, 119.
Eager, Joseph, 18, 119.
Eaglehawk, 71.
Earl, Mr., 47.
Early Land Settlement, 1-9.
“Early Reminiscences”, 24.
Early Victorian Steeplechasing, 96.
East Malvern, 85.
Easter Tournament, 101.
Echuca, 36, 40, 41, 43, 71, 84.
Edie Creek, 84.
Edinburgh, 3, 70, 84, 116.
Edinburgh University, 82, 124.
Education, 77-86.
Egan, P. F., 56.
Egypt, 70.
Elben, Charles Hotson, 16.
Electorial Districts, 59.
Electric Supply, 135.
Electric Telegraph Station, 53.
Elgin, 2.
Elliget, P. H. V., 101.
141


Elwood, 39.
Embling, William Henry, 60.
Empress of India, 116.
Emu Flat, 72, 127.
England, 2,7, 11, 18, 19, 82, 91, 99,
105, 123, 129.
Epping, 46.
Escreet’s, 132.
Established Church of Scotland, 65.
Euroa, 12, 13, 47, 74, 124.
Europe, 11, 37, 72.
Evandale, 3.
Evans, Sam, 104
“Examiner”, 25.
Fahey, Mrs., 20.
Fair Nell, 98.
Faithfull’s Creek, 12.
Fanning, Catherine, 126.
Fanning Family, 126.
Farmers’ Arms Hotel, 94, 95, 102,
Farrelly, Father Michael, 72, 80.
“Father of the Council”, 57.
Fawkner, John Pascoe, 22.
Fawkner, Matthew, 125.
Fawkner, Mrs. M., 125.
Felton, Alfred, 124.
Felton, Grimwade & Company, 123.
Fennelly, James, 56.
Fennelly, Michael, 106.
Fennelly, Mrs. J., 53.
Fennelly, Pat., 106, 107.
Fennelly, Richard, 81, 82, 83, 106.
Ferguson, Donald, 7, 12.
Ferguson, John, 12.
Ferguson, Thomas, 12.
Ferguson Family, 110.
Fielding, Louis, 76.
Fifeshire, 118.
Figgins, Cr. Alex, 57, 118.
Figgins, James, 109.
Figgins Family, 109.
Finnic, Rev. E., 74.
Fischer, Henry, 20, 23, 129.
Fischer, Miss Catherine, 129.
Fischer, Miss Isabel, 129.
Fischer, William Henry, 129.
Fischer, William N., 70.
Fitz Gerald, Nicholas, 60, 61.
Fitzroy, 77, 78.
Fitzroy Street, 79.
Five Mile Creek, 109
Flanagan, Mr., 122.
Fleming, Mr., 40.
Flemington, 97, 98.
Fleury, Mr., 74.
Flinders Street, 7, 93, 128.
Flinders Lane, 45, 74.
Flowerdale, 7.
Flynn, Mr., 37.
Foot, H. 8., 5.
Foot Street, 14.
Football, 99-100.
Forbes, 6, 30, 33.
Forbes, Rev. James, 65.
Ford, Martin, 29, 117.
Ford, Rev. Harold G., 70.
Forest Creek, 20, 39, 42.
Foster, George, 42, 43, 45.
Foster, Mr., 15, 24.
Foster, Mr., 76.
Foy, Francis, 50.
Foy, Mark, 50.
France, 71.
Francis Ministry, 61
Frankfurt, 129.
Franklin, Lady Janet, 12, 37.
Franklin, Sir John, 37.
Fraser, Alexander, 60, 61.
Fraser, C. R., 26.
Fraser, Rev. C., 70.
Fraser, Robert, 7, 8.
Frayne, Rev. Mother Ursula, 78.
Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
Freedom, 98.
Freehold Title, 3.
Freyne, Mr., 55.
Freyne’s Hill, 47, 96.
Furze, Henry, 25.
Flynn, John, 53, 93.
Flynn, Mr., 19.
“Gaelic”, 68.
Galletly, R. A., 2
__ a *
Gardiner, John, 1
Garlick, Rev. J. 8., 74.
Gearty, Mr. T., 21.
Geelong, 11, 39, 72, 123, 125, 127.
General Sessions, 87, 88
Geneva, 83.
George Brothers
Earl, 47.
Laurence, 47.
Tyrer, 47.
George River Bridge, 58
George Street, 129.
a -- - a —.
Gibson, David, 3.
Gibson, T. L., 3,4, 7.
Gippsland, 74, 130.
Gisborne, 71.
Glanville, Dick, 114, 124.
Glasgow, 106.
Glasgow University, 87.
Glass, Hugh, 8.
Gleeson, Father, 72, 73.
Glenaroua, 40, 50, 67, 69, 109, 127.
Glenaroua Station, 6, 114, 116.
Glenbumie, 1,2, 5,6, 101, 104.
Glenbumie Riding, 54, 55.
Glenbumie Road Board, 54.
142


Glenelg, 4.
A B *
Glenelg River, 85.
“Glenhuntly”, 38.
Glover, Thomas, 16.
Golden Vein Estate, 36.
Goldfields, 30, 31, 49-51, 61, 107,
128.
Goldfields at Edie Creek, 84.
at Bendigo, 125, 127, 129.
Goldie Hills, 126.
Golf, 100.
Golf Club Links, 100, 123, 133.
Golf Club-house, 23.
Good, Miss, 77.
Goodman, Allan, 114.
Goodman, Cr., 55,
Goold, Bishop, 70, 71, 78.
Gordon, Adam Lindsay, 96.
Goulbum, 81.
Goulburn Levee Works, 84.
Goulburn River, 13, 108, 113.
Goulburn Valley, 2,4, 32, 37, 40,
72, 108.
Government Botanist, 53.
Government Gazette, 88.
Governor of Victoria, 28, 58.
Grace, William, 89.
Graham, Rev. James, 75.
Grain Show, 26-27.
Grant Family, 39.
Grant, Marion, 39.
Graves, J. H., 63.
Graytown, 50, 51.
Great War, 83.
Great Western Steeplechase—first, 97.
Green, Mr., 5, 75.
Green, Rev. John, 76.
Green, Rev. J. E. T., 76.
Green Hill Farm, 126.
Green’s Pinch, 5, 13, 35.
Green’s Royal Mail Coaches, 43.
Greoghegan, T. J., 92, 119, 121.
Grier, Dr. 124.
Griffin, Denis, 27, 117.
Griffin, John, 102.
Griffin, Mary, 102.
Griffith, 106.
Griffiths, Mr. 24.
Guild Lia, 78.
Gunn, Rev. Peter, 65.
Haddington, 116.
Haines Ministry, 61.
Halford, Misses, 79.
Hall, Mr., 39.
Hall, Walter, 44.
Halpin, A. 8., 2.
Halpin, John, 40.
Halsey, Mr., 24.
Hamilton, 72.
Hamilton, A. G. M., 105.
Hamilton, George, 8, 115.
Hamilton, J. C., 3,4, 14.
Hamilton, Mary, 105.
Hamilton, Mrs., 115.
0 w
Hamilton, Thomas Perrier, 60.
Hamilton, William, 6, 67, 114, 116.
Hamilton’s Hill, 78, 105, 116.
Hamlyn, Dr. Richard, 1.
Hammond, John, 129.
Hammond Family, 16, 129.
mb -A
Hansard, Maria, 129.
Hardie, Rev. Alexander, 70.
Hardie, Rev. Andrew, 69.
Harrington, P. A., 16, 135.
Harris, H. P., 93.
_ - a
Hart, Rev. Richard, 75.
Harte, Charlie, 125.
M A A
Hartnell, William, 53.
Hartnell’s Somerset House Stores, 89.
Hartshorn, Rev. E. L., 76.
Hawdon, Joseph, 1, 45.
Hawthorn, 86.
Hayes, John Charles, 23, 77.
Hayes, Mathew, 12.
Hayes, Thomas, 12, 16.
Hazel Creek, 132.
Heaphy Family, 40.
Hearn, Bert, 107.
Heam, James, 107.
Hearn Family, 107.
Heath, Mr., 119.
Heathcote, 8, 36, 47, 71, 75, 105, 114.
Heavey Family, 114.
A* M A A
Heidelberg, 106.
m M
Heldin Bridge, 19.
Henty, Thomas, 60.
Hepburn, John, 1.
“Herald”, 133.
Centenary, 110, 113, 119, 120, 129,
137.
Definition of, 1.
Early Rural Settlement, 29-37.
First Mayor of, 113.
A A A
Municipal Engineer, 56.
Municipal History, 52-58.
Municipal Secretary, 56.
—b— - B m
Political Representation, 59-63.
Railway Communication, 64.
Ridings of —54.
Shire of—s 4, 57, 121.
Surveyed, 5, 29-32.
Heywood, Edward, 50.
Hides v. Leather, 120.
High Camp, 36, 93, 109, 117.
High Park, 8.
Highett, W. E., 2.
Highfield, 99.
“Highland Wight”, 38.
Higinbotham, George, 61.
Hill, Miss Catherine, 110.
Hill, William Edward, 110.
Hiscock, George, 40.
Historical Society:— 2.
of Melbourne, 4.
143


of Sydney, 4.
of Victoria, 11.
Hogan, Michael, 45.
Hogan, Miss, 45.
Hogan Ministry, 59.
Holman, S. W., 76.
Holmes Magistrate, 89.
Holy road, 119.
Honeybee, 98.
Horse Racing, 95-98.
Hotels:—
Ash, Oak and Elm Trees Inn, 37.
Black Bull Hotel, 104.
Bull and Mouth Hotel, 42, 43, 103.
Bushman Inn, 13.
“Castle O’Grady”, 15.
Dalhousie Hotel, 94.
Diggers’ Rest Hotel, 95, 105.
Donnybrook Hotel, 13.
Dunrobin Castle, 12, 15, 16, 110.
“Farmers’ Arms”, 94, 95, 102, 103.
Junction Hotel, 36.
Kelly’s Hotel, 27, 94.
Kilkenny Inn, 36, 96.
WV«V W d . A
Kilmore Hotel, 15, 23, 41.
Kilmore Inn, 12, 14, 15.
Lamb Inn, 104.
Martin Curtain’s Hotel, 47.
Mercer’s Vale, 12.
Morris Hotel, 15.
O’Dwyer’s Hotel, 40, 105 (see
“Pretty Sally”).
Plough Inn, 29, 117, 118.
“Pretty Sally”, 105.
■ A A
Quinn’s Hotel, 103.
-
Railway Hotel, 16, 23, 110.
Red Lion, 16, 23, 26, 121, 129.
Retreat Inn, 12.
Royal Hotel, 42.
Royal Mail Hotel, 12.
Royal Oak, 12, 15, 16, 95, 103.
Seymour Hotel, 12, 108.
Shannon Hotel, 104.
Sunday Creek Inn, 12, 110.
The Black Dog Tavern, 12.
The Black Swan, 12.
The Bushman, 12.
The Court House Hotel, 26.
The Currency Lad, 12, 14, 16, 110.
The Fountain Inn, 12.
“The Gold Diggers’ Rest”, 105.
The Hunters’ Tryste, 12, 118.
The Magpie and Stump, 2.
“The Rocky”, 66.
The Settlers’ Home, 12.
The Storekeepers’ Rest, 12.
The Travellers’ Rest, 11.
Union Hotel, 94, 96, 105.
Victoria Hotel, 46.
Western Port Hotel, 45.
Hudson, George, 22, 26, 53, 105, 106.
Hudson, Mrs., 106.
Hudson, R. G. (Rob), 106, 135.
Hudson Family, 108.
Huie, Rev. J. Z., 65.
Hume, Mrs., 67.
Hume, Rev. John, 65, 66, 67.
Hume Highway, 13, 29, 33, 34, 45
95, 97, 103, 104, 105, 107, 136.
Hume and Hovell, 1, 10, 11.
Hume and Hovell Memorial, 84.
Humphrey, E. E., 76.
Hunt, Cr., 55.
Hunt, H. J., 56, 102.
Hunt, Patrick, 51, 93.
Hunt, Thomas, 25, 27, 59, 62, 63
93, 94, 102.
Hunter, Dr. Hay, 70.
Hunter, T. D., 70.
Hunter, Rev. C. Hay, 70.
Hunter, Rev. Robert, 68, 69.
Huntingfield, Lord, 28.
Hurst, Edward, 1.
1.0. R., 25, 128.
India, 91.
Inglis, Rev. Andrew, 75.
Inns (see Hotels).
Insolvent Court —Melbourne, 22, 88.
Institute of Anatomy, 83, 112.
Inverness, County of, 114.
Ireland, 1, 11, 71, 72, 77, 88, 91, 99,
102, 106, 119, 120, 123, 126, 127
129, 130.
Ireland, Richard Davis, 59, 61, 62.
Irrigation Trust, 133.
Isle of Skye, 110.
Jackson, Mary, 2.
Jackson, Mr., 117.
James, Charles Henry, 60.
Jamison, 47, 49, 87.
Jamieson, Mrs., 116.
Jamieson, Robert the Elder, 116.
Jamieson, Robert the Younger, 116.
Johannesburg, 82.
John Knox Church, 65.
John Sharp and Sons, 18.
Johns, Rev. Wesley, 76.
Johnson, Mr. A., 76.
Jonathon Family, 33.
Jones, Rev. W. Rule, 76.
Junction Hotel, 36.
Kalkallo, 12.
Kane Family, 40.
144


21,
22,
23,
24,
25,
26,
27,
28,
, 29,
30,
31,
32,
33,
34,
35,
36,
38,
, 39,
40,
41,
42,
43,
44,
45,
46,
47,
, 48,
49,
50,
51,
52,
53,
54,
55,
56.
, 59,
60,
61,
62,
63,
64,
65,
66,
67,
68,
69,
70,
71,
72,
73,
74,
75,
77,
78,
79,
80,
81,
82,
83,
84,
85,
86,
87,
88,
89,
90,
91,
92,
93,
94,
95,
96,
97,
98,
99,
100,
101
, 102, 103,
104,
105
, 106, 107,
108,
109
1
10,
HI,
112
, H3, 114,
115,
116
s 1
17,
118,
119
, 120, 121,
122,
123
, 124,
125,
126
, 127, 128,
129,
130
131,
132,
133
, 134, 135, 136, 137.
Kavanagh, Owen, 86.
Kearney, A., 27.
-w 9 A J __
Keilor, 71.
Kelly, Lawrence, 14, 16, 17.
Kelly, Matthew, 15, 27, 41.
Kelly, Mrs., 19.
Kelly’s Hotel, 27, 94.
Kelly’s Lane, 29.
Kennedy, Donald, 92, 131.
Kent County, 91.
Kenny, John, 109.
Kenny, Michael, 109.
Kenny, Patrick, 109.
Keogh, Denis Patrick, 60.
Kerang, 84.
Kerr, Miss Ellen, 119.
Kerr, Miss Isabella, 119.
Kerr, Mrs., 79.
Kerr, W. Warren, 77, 83.
_ . _
Kerr, William, 77, 79, 83, 93, 119.
Kerr Family, 79.
Kerry, 71.
Key, J. Benbow, 93, 94, 124.
Kiely, Miss, 77.
a - _
Kilkenny, County, 106, 126.
Kilkenny Inn, 36, 96.
wAA A A
Killin, 107.
Kilmore, 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, 7,8, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
Borough of, 53, 54, 92.
“Kilmore Advertiser”, 26, 93, 108,
109, 110.
Kilmore Agricultural Society, 26, 27,
28, 114.
Kilmore Cemetery, 33, 36, 67.
Kilmore Churches, 65-76.
Kilmore Citizens’ Improvement As-
sociation, 134, 135.
Kilmore Council, 15, 52, 53, 56, 93,
105, 121, 134, 135.
Kilmore Court House, 23, 53, 87, 89,
90.
Kilmore Creek, 3, 29, 53, 133, 134.
Kilmore Cricket Reserve, 101.
Kilmore Diggings, 49.
Kilmore East, 16, 18, 19, 64, 92.
Kilmore East Railway Station, 131.
Kilmore East Road, 4, 17, 29, 79,
101, 123.
Kilmore East State School, 83.
Kilmore Electric Supply Co., 135.
“Kilmore Free Press”, 4, 18, 25, 26,
47, 94.
Kilmore Golf Links, 100.
Kilmore Grand National Steeple-
chase, 96.
Kilmore Handicap, 98.
A
Kilmore Hospital, 17, 20, 25, 71, 90,
91, 97, 112, 113, 122.
Kilmore Hotel, 15, 23, 41.
Kilmore Hunt Club, 99.
Kilmore Inn, 36, 96.
_ _ a A
Kilmore-Lancefield Agricultural
Society, 27.
_ • a m A .a ■'> ■ A *
Kilmore-Lancefield Railway, 64.
Kilmore Lodge of Free & Accepted
Masons, 22.
Kilmore Post Office, 26, 89, 95, 135.
Kilmore Presbyterian Church (see
Presbyterian Church).
Kilmore Public Hall, 23.
Kilmore-Pyalong-Heathcote Road, 36.
Kilmore Racecourse, 5, 97, 98.
Kilmore Railway Banquet, 64.
Kilmore Shire President, 16.
Kilmore State School, 77, 84, 85,
101, 131.
Kilmore Tennis Club, 101.
Kilmore Total Abstinence Society, 23,
24, 25.
Kilmore Town Hall, 16, 53, 55.
Kilmore Water Trust, 132, 133.
King Island, 84.
King Parrot, 47, 49.
Kinlochewe, 12, 13.
Kintail, 129.
Kirkwood, Janet, 37.
Kurkurroe Creek, 37, 107.
Kyneton, 7, 31, 62, 71, 72, 73, 120.
Laceby, 98.
Lachlan River, 117.
Lade, D., 76.
Lade, Rev. Frank, 76.
Lade, Thomas, 27.
Lake George, 10.
A
Lake Logie, 36, 103, 104.
Lamb Inn, 104.
Lumber, John, 42.
Lanark Shire, 6, 115.
Lancefield, 27, 46, 50, 59, 62, 64,
72, 75, 107.
Lancefield-Kilmore Road, 7, 29, 33,
36, 96, 98, 106, 125.
Lancefield-Pyalong Road, 107.
Lands Department, 33.
Langridge, D., 89.
Lankworth, T., 20.
Larne, 91.
Larrikin, 98.
Larry Kelly’s Bridge, 17.
145


Lawler, James, 12.
Lawrence, Mr., 47.
Leek, Rev. R., 74.
Lee, Mr., 75.
Leeton, 106.
Legislative Assembly of Victoria, 22,
54, 59, 61, 62, 63, 111.
A
Legislative Council of Victoria, 18,
60, 63.
Leinster, 1.
Leslie, Rev. John, 76.
Lewis, George, 12.
Lewis, Henry, 12.
Library, 15, 22, 52.
a a ■
Library Committee, 23, 90.
Licence System, 3.
A 11. .A .A A -
Little Collins Street, 79.
Limerick, 120, 130.
Lincoln, Dr. Alex. E., 84.
Lincoln, H. 8., 83, 84.
Linton, Andrew, 1,2, 5.
Lloyd, Rev. George S., 76.
Local Government Act, 54, 61.
Loch, Sir Harry and Lady, 28.
Lochalsh, 129.
Loddon River, 109.
Loddon Tribe, 109.
London, 4, 39.
London South, 82.
Long Hill Station, 3,4,1.
Longwood, 12, 13, 47.
Lord Byron, 98.
Lowe, Mr., 75.
Lumsden, Dr., 90.
Lyons, 72.
M
Mac Asey, J., 105.
Macdonald, Dr., 85.
Mackinnon, Charles, 129.
Macleod, Anne, 122.
Macleod Family, 122.
Macrae, Magistrate, 89.
Macrae, Rev. Donald, 68.
Macsfield, 122.
Magpie and Stump, 49.
Magpie and Stump Inn, 2.
Magpie and Stump Road, 2.
Maidment, Terence, 56.
Maidment’s Quarries, 36.
Maloney, Edward, 93.
Maloney, Miss, 77.
Maloney, Patrick, 77.
Maloney, Tom, 100.
Manchester, 7.
Manchester House, 93.
M.U.1.0.0.F. Hall, 23, 74, 137.
Mansfield, 47, 71, 87.
M A -A- *_
Marchioness, 98.
Marist Brothers, 79.
Marist Brothers—Kilmore Boys, 85.
Marist Brothers High School, 85.
Marist School, 86.
Mark Twain, 98, 106, 107.
Market Buildings, 55.
Martin, Monsignor, 72, 73.
Martin, Rev. Father, 72, 135.
Martin Curtain’s Hotel, 47.
Matchett, George, 117.
Matchett, John, 117.
Matheson, Isabella, 129.
Mauritius, 91.
Maxfield, James, 17, 20, 22, 26, 52,
105.
Maxwell, George, 69.
Maxwell, Rev. A., 67, 68, 69.
May & McKay, 42.
*
Mcßain, James, 27.
Mcßreen, Mrs., 93.
Mcßurney, Dr. John, 124.
Mcßurney, Francis Matthew, 124.
Mcßurney, John, 51, 123, 124, 125
Mcßurney, Henry, 93, 124.
Mcßurney, Misses, 124.
Mcßurney, Robert Hunter, 124.
McCarthy, Daniel, 27.
McCarthy, W. J., 8.
McCarthy Family, 8.
McConville, Claude, 92.
McCord, John, 19, 24.
McCraw, Rev. Hector, 76.
McDonald, Jack, 129.
McDonald, John, 129.
McDonald, Mr., 6, 36.
McDonald Family, 46.
McDonnell, J., 8.
McDonnell, K., 8.
McHugh, Father, 72, 73.
Mclnnes, Donald, 68.
Mclsaac, Alexander, 114.
Mclsaac, Angus, 114.
Mclsaac, Donald, 114.
Mclsaac, Norman, 114.
Mclsaac Family, 114.
Mclvor, 25, 36, 41, 43, 71.
Mclvor Road, 5, 36, 117.
McKay, A. M., 89.
A A
McKay, Alistair, 114.
McKay, Anne, 112.
McKay, Charles, 67, 77, 111, 112.
McKay, Duncan, 18, 114.
McKay, John, 18, 114, 115
* -
McKay, Miss, 77.
McKay, Miss A., 77.
McKay, R. D., 51, 93.
McKay, Rev. Alex., 76.
- m
McKay Family, 78.
a a -A
McKenzie, Alexander, 38, 39, 40, 127.
McKenzie, Catherine (Katie), 21, 112.
McKenzie, Dr. Andrew Hardie, 82.
McKenzie, Dr. Murdock, 82.
McKenzie, Donald, 110.
McKenzie, James, 18.
McKenzie, John, 21, 51, 112.
McKenzie, M. K., 63, 110.
146


McKenzie, Mrs., 21.
McKenzie, Sir Colin, 78, 82, 83, 112.
McKenzie’s, 37.
McLean, Mr., 37.
McLean Ministry, 61.
McLeod, Alistair, 110.
McLeod, Donald, 27, 111.
McLeod, Duncan, 27.
McLeod, Kenneth, 111.
McLeod, Murdoch, 111.
McLeod, Nanny, 111.
McLeod, Rev. Alexander, 70.
McLeod, Roderick, 67.
McLeod, W. 8., 51.
McLeod Family, 110-111.
McMahon, H., 57.
McManus, John, 117.
McManus, Maria, 117.
McManus, Robert, 85.
McManus Family, 117.
McMartin, Arch, 26.
McMillan Family, 16.
McNab, A. S., 57, 107.
McNab, Collin, 135.
McNab, Finlay, 27, 37, 61, 90, 107-
“McNab’s Bara”, 107, 108.
McPherson, D., 65.
Meade, Thomas de-Courcy, 88, 89.
Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library,
17, 21, 22, 23, 88.
Meiklejohn, Rev. Donald, 68.
Melbourne, 1,3, 4,6, 7,8, 10, 11,
13, 14, 18, 20, 22, 24, 30, 32, 39,
42, 43, 45, 47, 48, 50, 61, 65, 66,
70, 73, 74, 79, 82, 83, 85, 87, 88,
91, 99, 105, 107, 110, 111, 112,
113, 114, 115, 120, 122, 123, 128,
136.
Melbourne-Broadmeadows Track, 36.
Melbourne Centenary, 136.
Melbourne Chamber of Commerce
Council, 83.
Melbourne Cup, 98.
•• A
Melbourne Hospital, 21, 83, 84, 91.
Melbourne Hounds —Master of, 97.
Melbourae-Sydney Mail, 45.
m « a A
Melboume-Sydney Mail Cart, 42.
Melbourne University, 82, 84, 85.
Melrose Hall, 88.
Melville, Donald, 60, 61.
Memorial Park, 29, 41, 101, 134.
Merbein, 84.
Merbein West, 84.
Mercantile Marine, 1.
Mercer’s Vale, 12, 118.
Mermaid, 98, 106.
Merriang, 40, 75.
Merton, 47.
Methodist Church, 75-76.
Methodist Church of Australasia, 76.
Mewton, Rev. John, 75.
Michie, Archibald, 61.
Michleham, 75.
Middlemiss, Hugh, 12.
Middleton, E., 99.
Mill, establishment of, 17.
Mill Road, 18, 33, 34.
Mill Street, 26, 45, 53.
A A *
Miller, Rev. William, 65, 66, 67.
Minister of Defence, 61.
Minister of Health, 61.
_ _ A
Miss Garlick’s Hospital, 74.
“Miss Gavan’s Sugarloaf”, 36.
Miss Jessie, 98.
“Miss Kilmore Quest”, 137.
Mitchell, Major, 7, 13.
Mitchell, Mr., 77.
Mitchell, Rev. W., 68.
_ -A _ * A -A A
Mitchell, William Henry Fancourt,
Mitchell Street, 120.
Mitchellstown, 12, 13.
Mitten, 12.
Mittern, J., 14, 15, 16, 110.
Moama, 43.
Molesworth, Judge, 87.
Mollison, A. F., 7.
Mollison, W. T., 7.
Mollison’s Creek, 7, 109.
Monoghan, County, 123.
Moodie, William, 97, 98.
Moody, Mrs., 78, 79.
Moonee Ponds, 3.
Mooney, James, 26, 114.
Mooney, W. W. W., 114.
Moorabbee Run, 8.
Moore, Alex, 8.
Moore Brothers, 8.
Moore, Ned, 100.
Moore, Samuel, 27.
Moorhouse, Rev. James, 74.
Moranding, 30, 36, 49, 54, 99,
122, 126.
Moranding Station, 5,6, 34, 36,
65, 126.
Mordialloc, 73.
Morphy, Miss, 79.
Morris, Henry, 12, 14, 52.
Morris, Judith, 15, 89.
Morris, Hotel, 15.
Morrison, Bella, 111.
Morrissey, Bryan, 120.
Morrissey, Joe, 99, 120.
Morrissey Family, 120.
Mosman, 85.
Mr. Morgan, 44.
Mr. Piper, 12.
Mt. Vernon Farm, 130.
Mt. William, 40, 99, 123.
Mt. Wills, 44.
Muirson, Francis, 12, 13.
Municipal Clerk’s Certificate, 56.
Municipal Institutions Act, 52.
Munro Ministry, 59.
Munster, 1.
Murchison, 43, 113.
Murchison Hill, 82.
147


Murdoch’s, 106.
Murphy, Matt, 12.
Murray, Alexander, 128.
Murray, Ann, 128.
,/ 7 7
Murray, John, 128.
Murray, Matthew, 16, 52.
Murray, Minnie, 128.
Murray, Thomas. F., 16, 55.
Murray, Vincent, 89.
_ _ - A
Murray River, 7, 10, 12, 36, 41, 43,
44, 65, 118.
Murray River Works, 84.
Murrumbidgee River, 12.
My Dream, 98.
Myrtle Creek, 132.
“Nanny’s Flat”, 36, 111.
Nash, Dr. Andrew, 22, 90.
Nathalia, 1.
National Bank, 17, 26, 124.
National School, 77, 83, 94, 119.
Native Girl, 98.
Neilson, Stephen, 19.
Nelson, Canon, 74.
Nelson, Mrs., 79.
New Guinea, 84.
New Norcia, 85.
New South Wales, 1,6, 10, 11, 35,
40, 44, 45, 49, 58, 61, 70, 83, 85,
106, 108, 111, 117, 118, 123, 129.
Government of, 1, 29.
New Township, 46.
New Zealand, 2, 71, 82, 96, 106, 130.
New Zealand Volunteer Medical Staff,
82.
Newnham, D., 76.
Newry, 77,
Nhill, 82.
Nichol, Gilbert, 12.
Nicholson, Dr., 90, 111.
Nicholson Street, 78.
Nimblefoot, 98.
“Nimrod”, 125.
Noel, W. 8., 22, 88, 89.
Nolan’s, 47.
Norma, 98.
North Central Province, 60.
North Channel, 91.
No th Eastern Competition, 101.
North Eastern Railway, 64.
North Sea, 128.
North Western Province, 60.
Northampton, 129.
Northumberland, 105.
Notman, James, 27.
Number 3 Creek, 7, 8.
Nunan, M., 26, 27.
Oaklands Hunt Club, 99.
Ocean Highway, 58.
Oddfellows Hall, 23, 74, 137.
Oddy, H. W., 120.
— a
Oder River, 129.
O’Brien, Miss, 21.
O’Brien, P., 56.
O’Connor, John Dunbar, 89.
O’Connor, Maurice, 86.
O’Connor, P. J., 104, 131.
O’Dea, Patrick, 16.
O’Dea, Sammuel, 116.
O’Donoghue, Michael, 85.
O’Donoghue, William, 117.
O’Donoghue’s Lane, 29.
O’Dwyer, Edmond (Mum), 118.
O’Dwyer’s Hotel, 40, 105.
y, Mr., 37.
O’Neill, Cr., 55.
O’Neill, Patrick, 16, 102.
O’Neill, Mrs. P., 102.
O’Rourke, Rev. Father, 20, 23, 71.
O’Shanassy, John, 20, 22, 59, 61, 62
O’Shanassy Ministry, 61.
A AM A
O’Sullivan, Father, 73.
OM Albert Street Hall, 104.
“Old Bradley”, 44.
Old Homestead Hill, 37.
“Old Kilmore”—definition, 78.
“Old Mclvor Road”, 5, 36, 117.
Old Mill, 33.
Oldmeadow, Rev. Henry C., 76.
Omeo, 44.
Opperman, H. S., 76.
A -
Oriental Bank Corporation, 26.
Ormiston, 3,
Osborn, C. J., 109, 135.
Osborn, Charles, 85.
Osborn, Dr. Harwood, 84, 100.
Osborn, J. W., 20, 27, 78, 108.
Osborn, Misses, 78.
Osborn Family, 108-109.
Osborn & Hudson, 78, 106.
Ovens, 12, 49.
Overdale, 2,
Panyule tribe, 109.
“Parkview”, 131.
Parkville, 83.
Pascoe, F. H., 76.
Pascoe’s, 112.
Paton, Dr., 90.
Paton, Mr., 24.
Patterson, John, 27.
Patterson, John Hunter, 8, 60.
Paul, Rev. A., 67, 68.
Paxman, Mr., 24, 75.
Paxman, Mrs., 123.
Peck, John Murray, 42.
Peck, Rev. J. A., 74.
Pellew House, 73.
Pemell, Rev. John, 75.
Pentland Hills, 127.
Perrott, W. Z., 56
148


Perth, 82.
Perthshire, 107, 122.
Petty Sessions, 87, 88, 89.
Philippine Islands, 91.
, A __ __
Phillips, Cr., 55.
a _ -
Pickford, Rev. E. A., 74.
“Pine Lodge”, 97, 98.
Pinneger, F. W., 33.
~ A _
“Pioneering Days in Western Vic-
toria”, 3.
Pleasant Banks, 3.
Plenty Ranges, 132.
Plough Inn, 29, 117, 118.
Plunkett, Christopher George, 89.
Political Representation: List of Mem-
bers of-
Legislative Assembly, 59.
Legislative Council, 60.
Pollard, Reginald Thomas, 59, 62.
Pontesfort, 5,6, 7.
Pope Pius IX, 71.
Port Adelaide, 85.
Port Phillip, 1,2, 3,4, 7, 10, 11, 17,
35, 37, 70, 73, 106, 107, 111, 115,
Port Phillip Bay, 39, 45, 127.
a a -
Positions of Political Representatives,
59, 61.
Post Office, 26, 89, 95, 135.
Postal Department, 135.
~ - m - ,
Postal Service and Telephone, 135.
Postmaster-General, 59, 61.
Poulson, Mr., 14.
Poulter, Edward, 125.
Poulter, George, 126.
Poulter, James, 125.
Poulter, Tom, 125-126.
Poulter Family, 125.
Power, Robert Higgins, 12.
Power House, 55.
Powlett, Mr., 5.
Powlett & Green’s Station, 5.
Powlett Street, 26, 27, 76, 92.
Prairie Waggons, 47.
Presbyterian Church, 36, 65-70, 89,
119, 128.
Presbytery of Melbourne, 65, 67, 68.
Presgrave Buildings, 79.
“Pretty Sally”, 13, 35, 40, 42, 105,
125.
Price, W. S., 1.
“Prince of Wales”, 2.
Private Schools, 78.
Proudfoot, James, 122.
Proudfoot Family, 90, 121-122.
Prussia, 129.
Puckapunyal, 108, 109.
Puckapunyal tribe, 109.
Purves, J. L., 8.
Pyalong, 6, 36, 47, 56, 72, 81, 93,
107, 109.
Back to, 6.
Pyalong-Heathcote Road, 29, 105,
114.
Pyalong-Heathcote-Bendigo Road, 37.
Pyalong Shire Council, 81.
Pyalong Shire Hall, 40.
Queen Street, 45.
a a ■
Queen Victoria, 22, 39, 44, 71, 75.
Queen’s Park, 3.
Queensland, 44, 82, 85, 92.
Quillinan, 17, 105.
a
Quinn, Thomas, 13, 27, 103.
Quinn’s Bridge, 103.
Quinn’s Hotel, 103.
Rabaul, 84.
Railway Communication, 64.
Railway Hotel, 16, 23, 110.
Range View, 100.
Rattray, Mr., 12.
“Red Brick School”, 77.
Red Lion Hotel, 16, 23, 26, 121, 129.
Redcastle, 75.
. _ -
Redistribution of Seats Act, 60, 62.
Reedy Creek, 49, 50, 93, 116.
Reform Act-
-1881, 60.
1903, 60.
Refuse, 98.
Reilly, I. L, 53, 92.
Reilly, Mr., 40.
Retreat Inn, 12.
Richards, Rev. George 8., 75.
Richards, S. H. C., 76,
Richardson, Rev. Henry, 76.
Richardson, Kerr Pty. Ltd., 83.
Richmond, 69, 127.
Richmond Ground, 120.
River Shannon, 120, 127
Riverina, 40.
Riverina—Eastern, 44.
Roberts, Thomas, 22, 74.
Robertson, A. W., 43.
Robertson, Francis, 60.
Robertson, John, 27.
Robertson, Lewis, 2.
Robertson, Wagner & Co., 43, 44.
Robinson, George, 8.
Robinson, James, 70.
Robinson, M., 135.
Rochford, 107.
“Rock Waterholes”, 3, 35.
Rogart, 128.
Rogers, C. J., 119.
Rogers, John, 67.
Rogers, Mr., 40.
Rogers, Mrs. Florence, 119
Rolf, George, 60.
Romsey, 27, 46, 56, 72, 107, 109.
Ross, Charles, 51.
Ross-shire, 111, 112, 114, 129.
Rouse, Mrs., 104.
149


Round Hill, 78.
Royal College of Surgeons, 91.
Royal Commissions on Taxation, 83.
Royal Hotel, 42.
Royal Mail, 42.
Royal Mail Coaches, 47.
Royal Mail Hotel, 12.
Royal Oak Hotel, 12, 15, 16, 95,
103.
Royce, Rev. James, 75.
Rushworth, 43, 90.
Ruet, Mr., 74.
Rutherford, James, 44.
Rutherglen, 47.
a -a a
Rutledge, William, 1,4, 5,6, 14,
29, 36.
Rutledge Street, 27, 92.
Rutledge’s Special Survey, 29, 111.
Ryan, Cr. J. J., 59, 90, 135.
Ryan James, 85.
Ryan, James Thomas, 52, 57.
Ryan, John, 126.
Ryan, Michael, 85.
Ryan, Mr., 12, 36, 55, 126.
Ryan, Mr., 107,
Ryan, Mrs., 126.
Ryan, Thomas J., 56.
- - * ▲ M -
Ryan, William, 16, 117.
Ryan Family, 16, 104, 126.
A A -A -A -
Ryan’s Hill, 5.
Sacred Heart College, 85.
St. Andrew’s 68, 69.
St. George’s 68, 69.
St. Joseph’s College, 78.
St. Patrick, 71.
St. Patrick’s Church, 71, 72, 126.
St. Patrick’s School, 71.
St. Patrick’s tennis courts, 101.
Salaman, 84.
Salamau, 84.
Saunders, Rev. L. S. Shears, 76.
Sawell, W. L., 94.
Schofield, Rev. George, 75.
Schools (Kilmore) —
Convent, 77.
Denominational, 67.
A
National, 77, 83, 94, 119.
St. Patrick’s, 71.
State, 77-78.
Scotch College, 82, 111.
Scotch College—Vice Principal, 111.
Scotland, 1,3, 6, 11, 16, 38, 65,
70, 91, 106, 107, 110, 111, 112,
114, 115, 116, 118, 122, 125, 128,
129.
Scudamore, Henry, 94.
Scudamore’s Drum and Pipe Band, 94.
Seale, Mrs. Catherine, 12.
Secret, 98.
Semple, Dr. W, H., 21, 85, 91,
100, 135.
Seymour, 12, 13, 42, 47, 50, 75,
78, 81, 91, 94, 99, 108.
Seymour Hotel, 12, 108.
“Seymour Telegraph”, 42.
“Shalimar”, 130.
Shannon Hotel, 104.
Shannon River, 120, 127.
Sharp, John, 18.
-- - A
Shearer, Billy, 42.
Shelley’s Farm, 122.
Sherwin, Mr., 39-40.
Shepparton, 72, 84, 92.
Shiels Ministry, 59, 61.
Sidebottom, Mr., 76.
Singleton, Dr. John, 73.
Singleton, Mrs., 73.
Singleton, Rev. W., 20, 23, 73, 74,
129.
Skehan, Barry, 14, 121.
Skehan, Cr. P., 55, 121.
Skehan, Michael, 120, 121.
Skehan Family, 121.
Smeaton, George, 116.
Smeaton, Janet, 116.
Smeaton, William, 116.
Smeaton, William, Jnr., 116.
Smith, B. R., 101.
Smith, Dan, 40.
Smith, James, 12.
a - - .a
Smith, Rev. John 8., 75.
Smith Street, 50.
“Smiths Weekly”, 93.
Snobs, 49.
Soldier Boy, 98.
South Africa, 82.
South Australia, 125,
South Melbourne, 124.
South Yarra Church, 69.
Southern Province, 60.
Spencer Street Railway Station, 5.
Splat of Progress, 44.
M Art
Split Staff Gullyroad, 127.
Split Staff Gully Road, 127.
Sports, 95-101.
~a. _ _
Spring Creek, 50.
Spring Hill, 75.
Springfield, 7, 56, 102.
Spurling, William, 22, 26, 52.
Stack, Father Maurice, 71.
Stanbridge, William Edward, 60,
Stats Moderator’s Chair, 69.
State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission, 84, 132, 133.
State School, 77-78.
Steele, Rev. John, 69.
Steeplechasing, 96.
Stevenson, H., 2.
Stevenson, M., 2.
Stewart, Annie, 107.
Stewart, Colin, 107.
Stewart, Colonel Chaplain D. Mac-
rae, 70.
Stewart, W. E., 22.
Stewart’s Station, 12.
150


Still, James, 26, 35.
Stimson, Mr., 119.
Stone, Miss, 79.
Stone’s, 47.
Stony Point Station, 39.
Stanraer, 91.
Strath Creek, 72, 75, 81.
Strathmore Estate, 104.
Stray, C., 76.
- a -a m A
Stribling, E., 74.
Suffolk, County, 125.
Sugar Loaf Creek, 12, 13.
Suffolk County, 125.
Sugden, Alfred, 19, 20, 22, 26, 52, 53,
120.
Sugden, Hugh, 20, 125.
Sugden, Miss, 120.
Sunday Creek, 2, 13, 75.
Sunday Creek Inn, 12, 110.
Summerhill Estate, 125.
Summers, J., 27.
Sutherland, 34.
Sutherland, D, 24, 115.
Sutherland, Duke of, 125.
Sutherland, Joseph, 5,6, 37, 65.
Sutherland, Robert, 114.
Sutherlandshire, 16, 110, 111, 122,
125, 128.
Swan Hill, 110, 118.
Swann, Hugh, 24, 56.
Swanton, James, 42.
Swears, J. F., 22.
Swimming Pool, 133.
. A
Swinburne Technical College-
Council, 83.
Swynton, 7.
Sydney, 1,4, 5,6, 10, 11, 12, 14,
16, 23, 30, 37, 41, 42, 45, 46, 48,
50, 93, 106, 110, 115, 120, 123.
a —a -
Sydney Harbor Bridge, 58.
Sydney Mint, 121.
Sydney Road (Street), 2, 11, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 42, 43, 44, 61, 89, 95,
104, 105, 118, 120, 124, 125, 129.
Sydney Treasury, 6.
“Sydneysiders”, 35.
Synod, 65.
Tait, Rev. John, 65.
Tallangatta, 44, 114
Tallarook, 13, 45, 47, 64, 75, 107.
Tallarook Ranges, 91.
Tam O’Shanter’s Dance of the
Witches, 4.
Tantarboo, 122, 123.
“Tasman”, 73.
Tasmania, 5,6, 11, 34, 35, 37.
Taylor, Daniel, 112.
Taylor, George, 113.
Taylor, John, 23, 25, 42, 53, 112.
Taylor, Peter, 112-113.
Taylor, Rev. Ebenezer, 75.
Taylor, Swanson, 112.
Taylor, Walter L., 2, 101.
Taylor Family, 70, 89, 112.
Tea Tree, 49.
Teetotal Hall, 24, 67, 68.
Tennis, 101.
T. & G. Insurance, 106.
“The Advertiser”, (See “Kilmore Ad-
vertiser”).
“The Argus”, 42, 65, 129.
“The Argus Express to Wangaratta”,
“The Australasian”, 96, 125.
The Black Dog Tavern, 12.
The Black Swan, 12.
The Bushman, 12.
The Bluff, 39.
The Broadhurst and Tootal Pre-
emptive right, 34.
The Convent, 78.
The Court House Hotel, 26.
The Currency Lad, 12, 14, 16, 110.
The Fountain Inn, 12.
The Gap, 1.
“The Gold Digger’s Rest”, 105.
The Hunter’s Tryste, 12, 118.
The Old Crossing Place, 12, 13.
“The Old Survey”, 1, 29, 30, 36, 111,
114, 117, 118, 123.
The Ovens Stage Coach Company, 43.
The Press, 25-26.
“The Red Barn”, 35-36.
“The Rocky”, 66.
“The Round Hill”, 3.
The Settlement, 1.
The Settlers’ Home, 12.
“The Springs”, 107.
“The Standard of Freedom”, 25, 26.
The Storekeepers’ Rest, 12.
The Sugar Loaf, 12.
The Survey, 71.
The Teamsters, 45-51.
The Total Abstinence Society, 17.
The Travellers’ Rest, 11.
“The Willows”, 8.
“Theatre Royal”, 103.
Theuge, 98.
Thom, James, 77, 119.
Thomas, Jim, 103, 104.
Thomas, John, 12, 103.
Thomlinson, Cr. J., 57.
Thomlinson, Mr., 88.
Thomlinson, Miss, 88.
Thompson, Mr., 76.
“Ticonderoga”, 111.
Tipperary, County, 102, 120, 126
129, 130.
“Tippo Sahib”, 120.
Tolhurst, Rev. A. H., 70.
Tolls, 57-58.
Toll-gates, 105, 128.
Tom Pearce, 106.
Tooboorac, 47, 75.
Toomath, Rev. A., 74.
151


Victoria, 2, 3, 4, 22, 28, 30, 32,
, 33,
35, 39, 49, 54, 57, 61, 63,
70,
71, 75, 81, 82, 83, 84, 88, 110,
112,
114, 118, 120, 122, 124, 125,
129,
130, 133, 135, 136.
Tootal, A. D., 5.
Tootal, A. E., 5.
Tootal, Mr., 4, 7.
Tootal, Broadhurst & Lee of Man-
chester—England, 7.
Trainor, J. K., 18, 20, 22, 26, 43,
52, 110, 117.
Trainer’s Coach Lines, 43.
Trinity College, 73.
Tuckfield, James W., 75.
Tully & Co., 18.
a a A
Turner Ministry, 59.
Turner, Ned, 102.
Turner, Stephen Robinson, 2.
Turner, William T., 2.
- *_
Twigg, James, 89.
Twigg & O’Connor, 89.
Twynam, W. E., 22, 89.
Tyntynder, 118.
Tyrrell, 126.
Tyrrell, Grandfather, 126.
Tyrrell, Martin, 126.
Tyrer, Mr., 47.
Ulster, 1.
Union Flour Mill, 17, 18.
Union Hotel, 94, 96, 105.
Union Jack, 98.
Union Line of Mail Coaches, 43.
United Church, 69.
a _
United States of America, 43, 44,
83, 114.
Upper Goulbourn electorate, 63.
Upper Murray, 114.
Urana, 44.
Urquhart, George, 60.
Ussher, Rev. P. R. C, 75.
Van Dieman’s Land, 35.
“Vandemorians”, 35.
Vandyke, 96.
m a
Vanzulicam, Captain Louis, 8.
_ A A -a. - _
Victoria Hotel, 46.
Victoria, Northern, 32, 40.
Victoria Parade, 20, 101.
Victorian Cobb & Co., 44.
M» A A
Victorian Freemasons Pro-Grand
Master, 83.
Victorian Institute of Surveyors, 82.
Victorian Police Department, 114.
V.R.C., 98.
Victorian Railways, 44.
Victorian Railway Commissioners
Chairman, 43.
Victorian Southern Coastline, 58.
Victorian War Savings—
Certificates, 83.
Committee, 83.
Vignolles, Captain, 89.
Vinge, Abbie, 15.
a ——
Vinge, George, 15, 43.
Vinge, Mr., 98.
- A A .A -
Violet Town, 12, 13, 47
Wahgunyal, 47.
Walkover, 97.
Wallan, 16, 64, 75, 122, 126, 128.
Wallan-Bendigo railway, 105.
Wallan toll-gates, 128.
--- A. a
Wall’s Crossing, 2.
Wallder, C. E., 125.
Wallder, F., Jnr., 125, 135
Wallder, F. J., 76, 125.
Wallder, F. W., 125.
Wallder, Harte & Wallder, 125.
Walsh, Rev. Harold, 76.
Walter, J. H., 36.
Wandong, 13, 72, 75.
Wangaratta, 12, 13, 42, 44, 47, 117.
Warburton, 71.
Water Trust —Chairman, 121.
Waterfall, 7.
Watson, Rev. J. H., 74.
Watson, Rev. H. C. M., 74.
Watson, Samuel, 12.
Watson & Hewitt, 43.
Werribee, 125, 126.
Western Australia, 83, 106.
Western District, 84.
Western Hill, 74.
Western Port Hotel, 45.
Westernport, 10, 11, 39.
Westmead House, 85.
Whelan, Mrs., 100.
Whelan, W. H., 89.
Wheeler, Mr., 15.
White, E. R., 33.
White, Groves, 90.
White, Harry Owen, 59, 62.
Whitehead, Robert, 1.
Whitney, Mr., 44.
Whroo, 43.
Wigtoun, County, 91.
Wild Duck, 8, 75.
-- a
Wilkie, David Elliot, 60, 61.
“William Nichol”, 39.
~
Willowmavin, 6, 36, 54, 55, 99,
117, 122, 127.
Willowmavin District Road Board, 54,
102.
Willowmavin Railway Station, 29, 37,
40, 127.
Willowmavin Road, 37, 94, 95.
Wilmore, 59.
Wilson, Andrew, 22.
Wilson, Annie, 101.
152


Wilson, George, 27.
Wilson, Henry, 18, 69, 118.
Wilson, Jack, 101.
Ate te « A _
Wilson, Jean, 101.
Wilson, Joseph, 27.
Wilson, Mr., 75.
Wilson, Misses, 70.
Wimmera, 130.
Winding Creek, 12.
Wodonga, 71.
Wollongong, 120.
Wood, Mr., 75.
-A a
Wood, William Henry, 48.
“Woodburn”, 5, 118.
Woodbum Estate, 135.
Woodend, 71, 84.
Wood’s Joint, 47.
Wood’s Point, 47, 49, 71, 113, 130.
Woodstock, 39.
Woodward, E., 22-23, 26.
Wortley, Cr. F. W., 55, 128, 129
Wortley, Mrs., 129.
World Economic Conference, 83
Wylie, D. M., 93, 121, 124, 125,
Yackandandah, 49.
Yarra, 1, 10, 20, 107.
Yarrawonga, 92.
Yarrow, Dr., 90, 91.
Yass, 12, 45.
Yea, 47, 49.
Yorkshire, 19.
“Young Ladies School”, 79.
Young, Peter, 12.
Zeal, Sir William Austin, 60, 61.
153


roa h
flhpios,
(Sop
3 1508 01499399 7


