

Jf s I O
mv r
OPINION
OF THE
HON. ISAAC A. ISAACS, K.C., M.P.,
RE THE CASE OF
LIEUTENANT WITTON.




RE LIEUTENANT WITTON.
OPINION.
My opinion is asked regarding the prob-
ability of obtaining the release of Lieutenant
Witton, now under sentence of penal servi-
tude for life. The official evidence taken be-
fore the Court Martial at Pietersburg and
(as to a small portion of that evidence) at
Pretoria, is not before me; but I have been
referred to the report of the proceedings in
the “Times’’ weekly edition of April 15th,
1902, and have also had the advantage of con-
sidering other information, documentary and
oral, mentioned below.
1. I may at once say that in my judgment,
assuming the materials available to me fairly
represent the facts, and I feel little doubt
they do, an extremely strong case exists for
asking for the release of Lieutenant Witton.
I do not base my view upon any strict legal
ground. The technicalities were, so* far as I
have opportunity of testing them, satisfied as
far as mere legality is concerned. Formalities
were, I think, observed. Even as to the evi-
dence of Colonel Hamilton—which at first
sight appeared, amid the swift and dramatic
events of the time, to have been taken irregu-
larly —was really perfectly in order; for the
Court, after Beyers’ attack at Pietersburg,
journeyed with the prisoners to Pretoria for
the purpose of obtaining this officer’s testi-
mony, and then returned to complete the
trials
Further, I am not in possession of any cir-
cumstances which would show any disregard
of the Rules of Procedure number 20 (B), in
not including as a member of the Court Mar-
tial one member at least of the Corps of the
officers charged. See Army Act, Section 50
(1), which, with Section 178, gives very large
powers of constituting Courts Martial.
Consequently I lay aside, for the purposes
of this opinion, all questions of technical
legality; and address myself solely to the sub-
stance of the case.
2. Careful consideration of the whole of the
facts and circumstances relating to the un-
happy incidents that gave rise to the charges
leads me to the belief that, not only is Lieu-
tenant Witton’s sentence altogether dispro-
portionate to any possible blame, attachable
to him, but the great weight of testimony
makes it difficult to see where he is culpable
at all.
There were two accusations against him,
and I shall deal with each of them.
3. VISSER’S CASE was the first. Visser
was a wounded Boer captured shortly after
Captain Hunt’s death. Morant, Handcock,
Picton, and Witton had a consultation, after
which Visser was shot. The consultation did
not amount to a Court Martial or anything
like it; Visser was not afforded any oppor-
tunity of making a. defence, but was sum-
marily shot, without being charged and with-
out any form of trial whatever. When cap-
tured he wore a soldier’s khaki jacket or shirt,
and was using a. pair of Captain Hunt’s trou-
sers as a pillow. The defence of the accused
officers was threefold:—(a) that the prisoner
wore khaki, (b) that he was a participator in
the murder of Hunt, as evidenced by his pos-
session of Hunt’s clothing; and (c) that Hunt
has given distinct orders that no prisoners
were to bei taken.
Confining these observations to Witton,
certain matters are clear. He was the junior
subaltern. He had joined the Bushveldt
Carbineers only on July 13th, and the Spe-
lonken detachment under Captain Hunt’s
command no earlier than August sth. With-
in a week of his joining that detachment Vis-
ser’s case occurred. He found himself from
the first under the command of Morant and
Handcock—Hunt was killed on the 7th of
August—and these two lieutenants had been
for some time —over a month—under the
direct control of Hunt, and therefore in a
position to- know what orders he had given or
transmitted. The first witness for the prose-
cution, Sergeant S. Robertson, admitted, in
cross-exam mat ion, that Captain Hunt had
given direct orders that no prisoners were to
be taken, and had also on one occasion abused
the witness for bringing in three prisoners
without orders. Morant* deposed that not
only had Hunt given these orders, but also
that he had named his authority, Colonel
Hamilton. It is true that Colonel Hamilton
proved that no such orders had been issued,
but that does not seem to me to affect the
matter in the least so far as concerns Lieu-
tenant Witton. If Captain Hunt informed
his subordinate that Colonel Hamilton had
given such orders, and directly required obe-
dience to them, what could his lieutenants
do? Were they to require proof, beyond the
statement and command of their superior
officer, that their Captain had issued these
orders? Were they entitled—supposing that
Captain Hunt had lived and ordered them
himself- -to require production of Colonel
Hamilton’s directions? And to* carry the
matter a step further, was Captain Hunt jus-
tified in demanding from Colonel Hamilton
—if that officer had in fact given the orders
in question—some proof that Lord Kitchener
or other competent source had given the


necessary authority ? If not, and the answer
surely is no-, what was there to render crimi-
nal a young and inexperienced lieutenant,
with no previous service in the field, less than
a month with his corps, less than a- week with
his detachment, placing faith in and yielding
obedience to the distinct assurances and posi-
tive commands of two- superior officers, hav-
ing vastly better means of knowledge and
with all the advantage of rank and authority.
The circumstances of time and place too are
of the highest importance. Far from author-
ity even had he been disposed to question the
authenticity of his orders, immersed in ser-
vices of continuous activity and serious pres-
sure, engaged with the enemy under circum-
stances that lent some colour to the likelihood
of such orders, having no reason for disbe-
lieving what he was told, and led by men of
masterful mind and strong personal force,
under the influence, as Lord Kitchener him-
self says, of Morant and Handcock, what was
this young officer to do?
Lieutenant-Colonel Pratt, in his handbook
of military, law (page 113), says very dis-
tinctly : “ A soldier again, is bound to obey
the lawful commands of his superior officer,
and before a Court Martial, it would be held
that a soldier is bound to- obey the command
of his superior officer if the illegality of it
was not on the face of it apparent.” Clode’s
Military and Martial Law, page 56 (1874)
insists that the power and responsibility of
the superior officer, i.e., the Senior Officer of
the highest rank present- is always supreme.
To repeat the question, when Morant, the
superior officer present, asserted, that his late
superior, Captain Hunt, had sternly insisted
upon the orders mentioned, had reprimanded
his officers for disregarding them, had stated
he received them from still higher authority,
what could this junior and inexperienced
officer, Lieutenant Witton, do but obey?
Civil-Surgeon Johnson testified that he had
heard Hunt reprimand Morant for bringing-
in prisoners. ‘So also Captain Taylor. Thus
there was a large body of uncontradicted evi-
dence that Hunt had in fact given the orders
to take no prisoners, and that he had repri-
manded officers for transgressing those orders.
In the face of this, what reason can be as-
signed why young Lieutenant Witton should
disbelieve his superior officer’s statement and
refuse to obey orders?
Collaterally, and as appears from evidence
taken at the same time in another case, there
was much to support the. belief entertained
that such orders had in fact been lawfully is-
sued. This will presently more clearly appear
when the next case is dealt with.
4; THE EIGHT BOERS'’ CASE, Morant,
Handcock and Witton were conjointly charged
with having murdered or instigated the mur-
der of eight men, About August 20th. an in-
telligence officer named Ledeboer, in charge
of a party, captured these eight Boers, and
handed them over to a patrol. On the 23rd
they were shot. So-far as Witton was con-
cerned, he was present, but it does not ap-
pear that he took part in any decision
regarding the fate of the men. One of them
rushed at him and seized hold of him, and
then Witton shot him, apparently to protect
himself. He neither ordered nor participated
in the shooting of the other seven. Again,
the prosecution proved that Morant again
asserted his orders as his justification, and
also stated that he had been congratulated by
headquarters over the last affair, and meant
to go- through with it. Clearly he took com-
mand of the situation and exerted his auth-
ority.
The first defence was orders. Regarding
this question, strong corroboration, as it ap-
pears to me, of the honest belief of Witton in
the existence of lawful orders, was given by
showing that other corps also- believed the
same thing. Lieutenant Hannan stated that
when he was a trooper in the Queensland
Mounted Infantry, on one occasion, at Bronk-
hurst Spruit, in 1900, his squadron took some
prisoners, and was reprimanded by Colonel
Craddock for taking them. Sergeant Waller-
Asht-on deposed to Brabant’s Horse receiving
orders to take no prisoners, in consequence
of specific acts of treachery on the part of
the Boers. The reason is immaterial—the
important fact is that orders were given. I
presume that Colonel Craddock’s orders and
those of the Commanding Officer of Brabant’s
Horse were obeyed, but were these officers
court-martialled, or did they not, as Witton
must have done, honestly believe that all
necessary orders were in fact given to- justify
their action ?
5. I believe that Lieutenant Witton, in a
letter of March, 1902, states clearly that Ser-
geant-Major Clarke asked him to intercede
with Lieutenant Morant on behalf of the
men (British) in favour of Yisser. He says that
he agreed with the men that Yisser should
not be shot-, and mentioned it to Morant.
Morant, he says, would not listen to- any-
thing, and told Witton that what he wa-s do-
ing he was perfectly justified in, and said
also that if the men made any fuss he would
shoot the prisoner himself. Witton adds
that Sergeant-Major Clarke and Sergeant-
Major Hammet can corroborate him. If this


be correct, it- strongly supports Wilton's
claim to consideration.
6. In the same letter Witten, speaking oi
the second case, emphasises his obligation to
obey orders, though he went so far as to ask
Morant if he was exceeding his duty. Ap-
parently, if Witten's account of this affair, as
narrated in his letter, and as appears in his
evidence, be correct, he not only had no share
in the determination to shoot the men, but,
except firing at one who rushed at him, had
no part whatever in their death. That Morant
assumed responsibility for shooting these
men is strongly corroborated bv the evidence
of Sergeant-Major Hammet, called for the
prosecution. I should add, it was apart al-
together from the letter, which, if verified,
materially strengthens the position, that my
conclusions have been formed.
7. So far, I have dealt with the facts aa
they stood up to the commencement of the
trial, and up to the time of Commandant
Beyers’ attack on Pietersburg. Another ele-
ment, however, of a collateral nature, but as
it seems of powerful import., is now intro-
duced.
8. Early in the morning of January 23rd,
1902, and while the court-martial was still
in course of trying the prisoners, Beyers’ at-
tack took place. From the sources available,
to me, and which I accept as correct, and par-
ticularly the personal explanation given to
me by Mr. Heath, who> was a. trooper in the
Bushveldt Carbineers, the position, as far as
material now, was that Beyers advanced
from the East with about 200 or 300 men
(see "Times” for January 30th, 1902). Close
to the town of Pietersburg was an armed
camp of British, containing 800 or 900 men.
The town and camp were enclosed in a huge
ring protected by blockhouses. At or near
the Eastern side of the town was the remount
depot, and not far from this, but, of course,
outside the ring, was the blockhouse held by
the Wilts. About the centre, of the. ring was
a prison, and not far from that was a, fort,
with a gun, familiarly called a Cowgun. Near
the town stood a Burgher camp with some
150 Boers. Beyers, with no artillery, and a
comparatively small commando, could not,
and did not, as it would seem, place the Bri-
tish camp itself in any danger. The lives of
Morant and Witton were not imperilled, even
though they had remained unarmed. Hand-
cock, with the time at the disposal of the
British Commander, could easily have been
withdrawn from the blockhouse to the prison
or the fort. So small was the danger to the
camp that some of the men in the camp
nearer than Witton’s fort to the Wilts’ block-
house., which practically repulsed the attack,
did not think it necessary to go to the
trenches. According to Heath, some of the
men even stayed in bed. Not a shot, so far
as Heath knows, was fired from the camp ex-
cept from the gun at the fort. The only Bri-
tish rifle fire was from the Wilts’ blockhouse.
It is understood that Handcock actually
fought, but that is immaterial to. Witton’s
case. What is material to him is that, some
little time before the attack, the prisoners
were allowed to bear arms, they received rifle
and revolver, and Witton (for I confine, as
far as possible my observations to his case)
moved among his fellow soldiers prepared,
and permitted, if need were, to do perilous
and honourable, service for his country. It
does not appear to have been at all neces-
sary to restore' his arms for the purpose of
guarding his own life, which from the cir-
cumstances above l detailed, cannot be said to
have been imperilled; and if even those cir-
cumstances were modified to a considerable
extent, there was little likelihood, taking
numbers, position, and equipment, into ac-
count, of any real danger to the prisoners in
life or limb, and therefore, it probably
amounted to a temporary restoration of the
prisoners to the fighting force, of the British
if any exigency should occur.
Since writing the foregoing, I am instructed
that Major Lenehan confirms the statement
that the prisoners were armed not. at all for
their own protection. He adds, however,
that it was to assist in the defence of the
town and garrison, as every available officer
and man was required. The result is exactly
the same as I have already indicated.
At one period of the history of the British
Army, and not so very long ago, it seems
these circumstances would have been consid-
ered almost as a legal bar to condemnation.
Clode, writing in 1874, in his above work,
Military and Martial Law, ” lays down the
general rule (page 173) in these words ; "The
discharge of duty involves condonation.’’
There were, however, by the Queen’s Regula-
tions, even then some exceptions, but the sen-
tence above cited contains the principle. He
quotes the Duke of Wellington as writing :
“The performance of a duty of honour or of
trust after the knowledge of a military offence
committed ought to convey a pardon,” And
the author says that according to. the Duke’s
practice in the Peninsula, it. did so. Lord
Wellington, in a despatch of April 11th, 1813,
quoted by Clode, observes: “No soldier
should be put on duty having banging over
him the sentence of a court-martial/’ It is
tru© that in Witton’s case there was as yet-


no sentence promulgated, but one trial was, tion of the prisoners are correctly narrated,
it appears, concluded (Yisser’s Case), and the
other was pending, the penalty in both in-
stances being death.
The Duke of Wellington, in a General
Order of February 11th, 1811, after referring
to irregularities in what he calls “the interior
duty" of the Regiment, adds: “Where such
irregularities, and want of attention prevail
acts of disorder, and even mutiny, must be
expected, and they cannot be punished if the
soldiers should have been released from con-
finement, and particularly not if they should
have been on duty and engaged with the
enemy." In view of the foregoing circum-
stances, Witton was, one would say, as much
on duty and holding the honourable post of
defending the flag as any other soldier in the
fort. It is true no binding rule of law mak-
ing the restoration to duty in all cases a con-
donation or equivalent to a pardon can be
found, but the practice of so strict a discip-
linarian and so high an authority as the
Duke of Wellington would seem to be a valu-
able guide, more especially in these later
times, when, as Lieutenant-Colonel Pratt re-
minds us, the military code has gradually be-
come more lenient.
It may be argued that the very case is pro-
vided for by the King’s Regulations, Article
450. The Article, while enacting that an
offender is not to be required while in arrest
or confinement to perform duty, provides:
“If by error or in emergency he has been or-
dered to perform any duty he is not thereby
absolved from liability to be proceeded against
for his offence. An offender, when in arrest
or confinement, is not to bear arms, except
by order of the Commanding Officer, or in
an emergency, or on the line of march.”
Witton, consequently, could not bear arms
except by order of his commanding officer,
Colonel Carter. The “emergency,” if the
facts relating to the attack and the disposi-
could hardly be so desperate as to render re-
storation to their liberty and arms necessary to
their self-preservation. Conceding, however,
that the Commanding Officer determined
that there was an “emergency’’ within the
meaning of Article 450—and enormous dis-
cretion must in such a situation be accorded
to a commanding officer—and conceding, too,
that the service of the accused was not plead-
able as a strict bar to the charges, still,
judged by the practice of the illustrious com-
mander whose precedents I have quoted, and
judged by all those human considerations
that collectively form our sense of justice, I
think this latest service should appeal strong-
ly for clemency towards the young subaltern.
In the result, I conclude that the balance
of testimony, of inference, and of reason, is
in favour of acquitting Lieutenant Witton of
moral culpability, and that a most weighty
factor on his side is further added by the
Pietersburg incident.
I have only this to add. Now that peace
is happily re-established, when our late foes
have been enrolled among our fellow-subjects,
when even rebels can find leniency, it is most
likely that a Petition to His Majesty the
King, founded on the considerations I have
stated, would not pass unheeded, if presented,
praying the liberation of the young and in-
experienced soldier, who, at an anxious mo-
ment of our history, ardently offered to his
country the last gift of a brave citizen, and
who, if contrary ti> the views I have ex-
pressed, he erred at all, erred not from wil-
fulness of design, but, according to the great
weight of testimony, from a mistaken sense
of duty to obey the official commands of a
stronger spirit than his own.
ISAAC A. ISAACS.
461 Chancery Lane, Melbourne,
August 28th, 1902.
Edgrerton and Moore, Printers, 241-243 Flinders-lane, Melb


A--; ••> •■■- '■ '■ . Jb ’ ■ , ... Vi.
;•... iOi! ..■/ ,i . , ~ ... V.,.' , , ... >;
■ . ■ - .’ ... ■ ■ ■ r . ■ . ■ ... -: , . .
11 ■ . .'UU' • ;.v.
' ■: , 'v
■ w - ; •. .
v
r- , ’ _ • : ~'1
. - ' - ■ ; ■ ,;i : a : ■ -
■ ' v ■ a':, t . 's/;.-


1508
00247756
