

•/ A SERMON
PREACHED IN
£1 Infers (Klmiicli, M DMland.
AT THE
Annual Meeting of the Newcastle Church Society ,
ON THE
EVE OF ST. MATTHIAS’ DAY, FEB. 23, 1865,
]{EY. WILLIAM EDWARD WHITE, 8.A.,
Incumbent of St. Alban's, Muswellbrook.
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
£gtineg :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, OEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
18G5.




A SERMON
St. Matthew ix. 37, 38.
“ The harvest truly is plenteous hut the labourers are few : pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest that lie will send forth
labourers into His harvest .”
We are- all too apt to rely on our own unaided efforts in doing
any work, even Go ns work and the work of His church.
We strive, and labour, and fret ourselves, and forget that
“ except the Loud build the house, they labour in vain that
build it,” that though “we may rise up early, and late take
rest,” even in God’s work, yet after all, without His aid invoked,
and His strength relied on, our efforts will be vain ; we shall
but “ sow the wind and reap the whirlwind.” Paul may plant,
and Apollos may water, bixt it is God alone that can give the
increase.
This seems to be the principle laid down in the text by the
Divine -Redeemer. Reliance on the aid of God alone.
There was a great need, a plentiful harvest of souls, but few
labourers to gather it into the Loed’s garner. The need was to
be supplied by application to the Loed of the harvest. “ Pray
ye the Loed of the harvest, that He will send forth labourers
into His harvest.”
We have then here set before us, two things
1. A need.
2. A means of supplying that need.
God Almighty grant us His blessing, while we consider this
all important matter!
But before entering on the subject itself, let us for a moment
consider the occasion on which the words of the text were
spoken.


It was at a very important crisis in the history of the church ;
in fact at the very foundation of the church itself; when first a
constitution was given it; when the first stones of it were laid ;
when the Loud ordained His twelve apostles.
For immediately after we read, “ when He had called unto
Him His twelve disciples, He gave them power against unclean
spirits, and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of
disease.” Then follow the names of the twelve apostles in order.
When we compare this with the parallel passage in St. Luke’s
Gospel, (chap. vi. 12, 18) we see still further the importance
attached to this event by the Loed Himself. “It came to pass
in those days that He went out into a mountain to pray, and
continued all night in prayer to God, and when it was day, He
called unto Him His disciples, and of them He chose twelve
whom also He named apostles.”
Putting these two passages then together, I think we may
infer that the words of the text were spoken before that night
which He spent in prayer; that it was in fact an invitation from
the Chief Pastor to His followers to join Him in intercessory
prayer before a great work was to be done. Nor is it presump-
tuous to suppose this, for we have grounds for believing that
such was our Loed’s custom at other times. What may we
imagine was the occupation of those three who had the privilege
of attending the Saviotje on the Mount of Transfiguration?
We know what His occupation was :it was “as He prayed that
the fashion of His countenance was altered.
WTiat however do we know, was, or ought to have been the
employment of the same three, when they attended Him on
another occasion; the agony in the garden ? Was it not watch-
ing and prayer ?
When then we are summoned by the chief pastor of our
church to meet together to consult on the important subject of
framing a constitution for our church, it will not be thought out
of place, looking at the precedent set us by the Loed Himself,
to make prayer the subject of our consideration to-day.
When again we think of the purpose of our assembling here, to
celebrate the 14th Anniversary of our Church Society, whose


chief object is the supplying and supporting labourers in Cueist’s
vineyard, it will not be deemed irrelevant to consider the best
means of providing those labourers.
Nor will the subject appear inappropriate to the Eve of
St. Matthias’ Day, when we remember that his election was the
first constitutional act of the church after our Saviotje s
Ascension and that that election was made by G-on Himself
after Prayer of the church, “And they prayed and said,
‘ Thou Loed which knoweth the hearts of all men, show whether
of these two Thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this
ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell,
that he might go to his own place: and they gave forth their
lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias ; and he was numbered with
the twelve apostles.” ’
St. Matthias was chosen to supply a vacancy—a need.
11. ¥e proceed then to consider the need at present existing
in the church.
“ The harvest truly is plenteous.”
When we look abroad upon the world, we see the plentiful
harvest of souls ripe, already for the sickle. The most populous
kingdom of the east with its teeming millions, in which a door is
opened to us for missionary labour, a cry “ come over unto us
and help us,” but where is the answer to that cry P Where are
the labourers ?
They are indeed few and ill-supported.
The lands of the Hindoo and the Negro call us.
Tear by year new nations that acknowledge not the Savioue
appeal to us.
We may well take up the words of the Christian poet,
and say :
“ Souls in heathen darkness lying,
Where no light has broken through,
Souls that Jesus bought by dying,
Whom His soul in travail knew.
Thousand voices call us o’er the waters blue,
Lo the hills for harvest whiten,
All along each distant shore
Sea-ward far the islands brighten.
Then again in our dear homeland, the cradle and nursery of
our beloved church, notwithstanding all the revival of zeal,


earnestness, and holiness which has taken place, how few,
compared with the vast harvest, are the labourers! Instead of
the numbers of the clergy increasing, they are (we hear on good
authority) diminishing. Against the number 600 who were
ordained to the ministry, in England, during the year 1841, we
have only about 460 in the year 1863. A sad decrease whereas
the population is yearly multiplying. In consequence, in the
large and populous districts and towns, many thousand souls are
in almost heathen darkness, living and dying without hearing
the word of God, or receiving the ministrations of the church.
The harvest there truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few.
Then when we come home, I appeal to my rev. brethren the
clergy, and to those of the laity who know the circumstances of
the country, to testify how vast the field is, how large the
harvest, but alas how few the labourers! How ineffectual are
their efforts to stem the torrent of sin! How vain their
endeavours to gather the harvest into the Lord's garner; so
much of that seed is trodden out by Satan and his servants, spilt
on the earth, and so, lost to the heavenly garner. Thorns and
thistles grow up and choke its growth, or the young plant is
destroyed ere it comes to maturity.
When we look at the vast extent of the field, and the paucity
of the labourers, we feel almost tempted to despair. When we
see too that band of labourers, small as it is, weakened, and
diminishing in numbers, by sickness and death. One who was
present with us this time last year, called away in the midst of
his labours, by the Lord of the harvest—another whom we can
ill spare to-day and whose counsels we shall need more
to-morrow —absent from ill-health caused by the wear and tear
of the labour in this field. Another there is who still feels, and
who will bear to the grave, the marks of that labour endured
here, who now working in another part of the field, still thinks
of us and toils for us, and who will ever be loved and revered by
us, as one of the apostles of the Colonial Church.
Our own beloved chief pastor also showing evident tokens of
the severity of that of which he for so many years has
borne the heat and the burden.


I am not speaking despairingly or disparagingly of what has
been effected of late years; don forbid that we should not
acknowledge with deep thankfulness the spiritual improvement
which has been effected of late, particularly in the interior of
this vast country. Through the funds of the Church Society
and the indefatigable exertions of our Diocesan, the sound of the
gospel is going forth into all the wilds of this scattered land.
God's word is now heard where its sound was before unknown,
and His name is now spoken in blessing, where formerly it was
only heard in cursing. His Holy-day too, is observed, where
before it was utterly disregarded.
But you my Christian brethren, or many of you who enjoy the
constant ministrations of the church, whom Sunday after Sunday
the church-bell summons to prayer and praise; who have
frequent and regular opportunities of partaking of Holy
Communion ; who in sickness, sorrow, or difficulty, can have the
comforts and consolations of church ordinances and of your
minister’s presence : you can hardly enter into the difficulties of
your brethren who live in the interior, where there is seldom or
never heard the voice of God's minister to warn, comfort or
instruct, where the monthly or still less frequent service on a
week day, is all that can be given ; where often children grow up
unbaptized, or if baptized, uninstructed in the principles of
religion, where the sick and the dying are unministered to.
But some there are, who hear these words to-day, who do
understand what I say, and wffio can bear testimony to the
spiritual destitution of the interior.
On the other hand, the overtaxed strength of the town clergy
bears witness to the same want existing in their cures. The
words of one writing on this subject, in England, seem almost as
applicable to the large towns here. “ When the clergy of our
crowded towns,” he says, ‘ long since too overmatched to
exercise anything in the shape of real pastoral visitation and
personal oversight of their people, when in health, will be unable
even to visit all their sick, as indeed sometimes they are now ;
when they will scarce suffice to minister the p*ifunctory
baptism, burial, marriage or churching to the countless thousands
in the name of their (lock —in fact, utter strangers ; when church


extension must cease, and the church so far from reclaiming the
vast multitudes comprised within her territorial limits, from
neglect, ungodliness, infidelity or error —must perforce, contract
her lines as does a beaten army, and abandon from the reduced
condition of her forces, ground she now in some sort holds.’ ”
Such are the words of one speaking of the want of clergy in
England; with very little alteration they would suit our own
case.
What can the small band of labourers which we have, do to
stem the torrent of sin and crime, which is threatening to over-
whelm the whole country ?
The labourers are few; we want more men: how are they to
be obtained ? How shall we induce labourers to come out to
this distant harvest field ? Some would say, raise large contri-
butions, hold out some worldly inducement to entice men into
the ministry, or from their distant homes. Rather my
brethren, we want first the missionary spirit, we want to impress
men’s hearts with the true value of immortal souls : we want to
impress them with a burning love of their Saviour and His
people, so that when it is asked, “ Whom shall I send, and who
will go for us ? ” Then they should be ready to exclaim with the
prophet—“ Here I am, send me.”
This is the spirit we need amongst us, the spirit of self
sacrifice, of dedication to God, the missionary spirit. None can
give this but God, vainly we strive to rouse it by our own
efforts, vainly we raise contributions and try to tempt men out;
it is but lost labour. “ Pray ye the Loud of the harvest that
He will send forth labourers into His harvest.” Here is the
bridge that spans the gulf existing between this great need and
its supply—Prayer to Almighty God.
111. (1.) And this when we come to reflect, is the most
reasonable course. Eor who are we to suppose would take most
interest in the ingathering of that harvest of souls, but the
Lord of the harvest Himself? It is emphatically styled “ His
harvest.” Will He not then take care of His own? Who but
He has power over the wills and affections of men ? Who but
He, by His spirit, can move the heart of man so that He shall
give himself willingly to the work ? The inward call must come


from Him. The burning love of souls must come from Him.
He only can impel man now as He did the apostles of old, to
leave father and mother, houses and land, to devote themselves
to His work. He only can overcome their weaknesses, their
scruples, their balancing of objections.
Men are apt to think that they are unsuited for the work, that
they have some particular weakness which would hinder their
usefulness, or that they have work at home to which they feel
bound, that they would not be justified in leaving that home-
work to come hither; they seem to have some particular mission
at home from which they dare not tear themselves ; as one who
is striving to supply our needs writes concerning the difficulty
of inducing men to come out to the work.
“In some cases,” he writes, “we see the very man we could
most desire to send, but he has his own work cut out for him in
England, and he does not see it right to go.” Here is the diffi-
culty, that men may “ see it right to go,” that they may be so
impressed with the Saviour’s earnest command, “ Ho ye into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature,” that they
will allow neither father nor mother, nor even apparent duty at
home, to stop them from obeying that command; but will trust
that their place will be supplied at home. Their mission lies to
gather the scattered harvest in the wilds. Who, I say, is to over-
come these scruples P WTio is to satisfy them that in neglecting
to close the eyes of an aged father or mother, or in leaving
brothers and sisters to the protection of strangers, to take some
distant, missionary cure, they are doing their duty ? Who but
God alone; who but the Lord of the harvest, who “ giveth power
to the faint, and who increaseth strength of them who have
no might.”
It is, then, reasonable that in our need we should appeal to
“ the Lord of the harvest that He would send forth labourers
into His harvest.”
(2.) But it is also Scriptural that we should do so.
All the great missionaries of Scripture were called and sent
forth, and strengthened by Him.
Take, for instance, him, whom we may designate the first great
missionary, Moses, he was one who, we should say, was physically


incapacitated for the great mission to which he was called, he
was a retiring man, “ very meek above all the men that dwelt
upon the face of the earth,” and as he himself pleads, “he was
of slow speech and of a slow tongue.” Moreover he was
reluctant to undertake the arduous task and refused it over and
over again. “0 my Loud send I pray Thee by the hand of him
by whom thou wilt send.” What said the Loed to his
objections ? “ Wdio hath made man’s mouth P or who maketh
the dumb, or the deaf, or the seeing, or the blind ? have not I
the Loed ? Now therefore go and I will be with thy mouth,
and teach thee what thou shalt say.” And then when Moses
still hesitated, He appointed one to be his coadjutor who
possessed that very gift which he lacked. Exod. iv. 11, 12, 13.
We see again in the case of the prophet IsaiaJi as in that of
Moses, the first great essential in a missionary, humility of mind ,
distrust of self. “Woe is me for lam undone: because I am a
man of unclean lips.” He is at first utterly overwhelmed by the
responsibility; but as soon as the Divine fire has touched his lips,
and he feels that his own iniquity is taken away and his sin
purged on hearing the call, he feels irresistably impelled by the
Spirit to go forth and reclaim souls, and he exclaims, “ Here am
I send me.” Isa. vi. 8.
When we turn to the New Testament we find the Chief of
Missionaries sent forth by God Himself. “ The Father sent the
Son.” I John iv, 14.
Who again, but Divine wisdom could have chosen and what
but Divine power could have enabled the fishermen of Galilee to
do their great work of evangelising the world ?
And lastly, in the case of St. Paul, we have an instance of the
Divine wisdom discovering the latent missionary power of one,
who was a bitter enemy of the Gospel, and changing him from
the fierce persecutor, to the earnest, self-denying, zealous apostle
and missionary of the Gentiles. And lest we should have any
doubt in our minds about whose work it was in calling and set-
ting apart such for their work, the Spirit expressly says
“ Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them.”


Since then God only has the power to discern who are fit for
the work, and He only can stir up and has stirred up, men in all
ages for His work; is it not vain to rely on other means alone ?
“ Pray ye the Lord of the harvest that He will send forth
labourers into His harvest.”
(3.) This, too, is the teaching of our beloved Church. Does
she not appoint four weeks in the year called the “ Ember Sea-
sons,” during which special prayers are to be used “ that God
would so guide and govern the minds of His servants, the
Bishops and Pastors of His flock, that they would lay hands sud-
denly on no man, but faithfully and wisely make choice of fit
persons to serve in the sacred ministry of His church,” and
“ that He, who of His Divine Providence, has appointed divers
orders in His church, would give His grace to all those who are
to be called to any office or administration in the same,” and that
“ He would so replenish them with the truth of His doctrine and
innocency of life, that they may faithfully serve before Him to
the glory of His great name, and the benefit of His Holy
Church ? ”
If we all, clergy and laity, faithfully used these seasons as they
have been appointed, in prayer to Him who guides and governs
the heart, think you, brethren, that the need which all must
acknowledge as existing would not be supplied, that the Loed of
the harvest would not send forth more labourers into His
harvest ? Should we not have more labourers, and would not
those we have be strengthened to do their work more effectually.
Again, what is the object of the Church in appointing certain
festival days for the commemoration of. the great Missionaries of
the Gospel ? such days as to-morrow, St. Matthias’ Day ? Is it
not for this ? that their bright examples being brought before us
at stated times, we may be stirred up to follow in their footsteps;
that as they left all to follow the Saviour, so we may be willing to
give up all for His sake. Like St. Matthew, “to forsake all
covetous desires and inordinate love of riches,” and to follow
Cheist. Like St. James leaving his father and all that he had,
to be obedient unto the calling of Jesus Cheist. That “ all
Bishops and Pastors of the Church,” like St. Peter, “may dili-
gently preach God’s Holy Word, and the people obediently


follow the same.” That the Church being preserved from false
Apostles like Judas, “ may be ordered by faithful and true
Pastors,” like St. Matthias.
Surely my Rev. brethren of the Clergy, if our Churches could
be regularly opened for prayer and praise on those days; if we
set before our people at stated times the histories of the Apostolic
Missionaries of our faith; if we not only taught our people to
follow the blessed steps of our Divine Master's most holy life; but
if we showed them also how others had done so, how men like
ourselves had followed them; then surely we should be more
likely to excite in their minds the missionary spirit, so that they
would be more ready to devote themselves, their children, or their
means to that great work.
(4.) Not only is this the teaching of reason, of Scripture, and
of our Church, but it is proved by our own experience.
In the difficulty which is now found to exist in filling up the
newly formed bishopric, we are forcibly thrown back on the
resource. “ Pray ye the Dord of the harvest that He will send
forth labourers into His harvest.”
This new see founded several years ago, the emoluments forth-
coming, has been offered in vain to many good men. Another
post connected with the Church in this diocese was \ acant for
some years for want of a suitable person to undertake it, but has
now happily been filled.
A missionary cure still unfilled, and a want second only to the
need of clergy, of good earnest minded school teachers.
In all these cases it is not so much the means that have failed
as the supply of men.
Nor is it that apathy has been shewn in seeking to supply the
need, the greatest exertions have been used in vain. Is this not
to humble us ? To teach us how little our own exertions can
avail, how dependent we are on the Lord of the harvest, and how
much we need to pray to Him ?
Nor will this resort to prayer be at all likely, as some might
imagine, to diminish our own exertions in Hod’s service. On
the contrary, who is more likely to further by his own exertions
and his contributions the coming of Christ’s kingdom; the man
who prays earnestly that it may come, or the man who does not ?


surely the former. The reliance on prayer will not shut up a
man’s heart or his purse ; alms have been very beautifully termed
the “ wings ofpvayer," that by which prayer soars and mounts up
to heaven. It was testified of the devout Cornelius Thy
prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before Gron.
The alms accompanied the prayers. And of the other centurion
in the G-ospel, who no doubt was a man of prayer, it is recorded,
“He hath built us a Synagogue.” Jacob when offering his
prayers to Gron dedicated at the same time a tithe of his
property.
There is no better opener of the heart than prayer. Nay, I
deem it impossible for those who open their hearts in earnest
prayer to Gron for any good object to close their purses against
that object; they must use the means which Gron has given them
for that purpose. So that if any who have now heard me feel the
urgency of that need which I have been advocating, the need of
labourers in the harvest of souls, and are impressed with a true
value of the means of supplying it enjoined in the text, they will
first of all use earnest prayer to the Lord of the harvest that He
will send forth more labourers, but will they not also be led to the
additional consideration what can I myself do, to further this
great object ?
Can I give myself to the work? When I hear this call,
“ whom shall we send? ” can I answer, “ here am I, send me? ”
If not, can I not give of my worldly means towards it ? If a
father of a family is impressed with the truth of what has been
said, will he not be led to say: I cannot answer that call myself,
I cannot say, “ here am I, send me,” but I can say, here is my
child, send him, and he can strive to train up that child with a
missionary spirit, he can give him an education which will suit
him for the work of winning souls to Christ. Or if he be a man
of property, and have no child to send, he will say : I cannot go
myself, I cannot send my child, but I can provide the means of
sending a labourer into the field, that will I do by G-on’s
blessing.
If he be poorer, he will say : I can do little in the good work,
but that little I do willingly, and I pray earnestly the Lord of
the harvest that “ He will send forth labourers into His harvest.”


If impressed thus, they look around them for a machinery to
carry out their good resolves, they find it ready to their hands in
the Church Society, which has been the means under G-on of
sending out and supporting so many workmen in the harvest field.
It is with deep thankfulness that we have to notice its success
through another very trying year. For fourteen years it has
been fostered by the prayers and the alms of the church till it has
grown to its present goodly proportions. Its history is a clear
exemplification of what I have been all along urging, the power
ofprayer.
When we consider the tender plant at first raised, and how
that has grown year by year, till it has spread its branches
through the whole diocese and is now producing such rich fruits,
we cannot but marvel and exclaim that it is Gods work, that
His hand has been with it.
Let me then in conclusion ask you brethren, whether you
have done all that you should by your prayers and your contri-
butions to further the objects of the Society ? Have you given
your contributions without prayer for God’s blessing on the
designs of the Society, particularly for that great object of
providing additional labourers in the Loud’s harvest P That is
have you been trusting to the machinery without the great
motive power which is God ?
Then you now see your mistake—pray earnestly to the Loed
of the harvest; or are there any here present who have gi\ en
neither their prayers nor their alms, or who feel that their
contributions have been inadequate, not in proportion to their
means, here then is one final opportunity given you ot redeeming
your neglect. Ho not let it pass, seize the opportunity while
you may, God may never give you another ; or the good feeling
may pass away and not return ; and as you make your offerings,
make your prayers for a blessing upon them.
Finally my brethren, pray for us, pray for the clergy. Oh
how few prayers are offered for us that we may do our arduous
duty! If we had more of our people’s prayers, how much more
should we do, and how much better should we do all. Especially
pray for us now at this time of difficulty, that the consultations


of our Conference may be directed by the spirit of true wisdom .
that all that is done by us may redound to the glory of God, and
the good of His church; that He may be with us to unite us;
that our deliberations may result in measures which will further
the object of the text, the “ ingathering of souls into the
Loed’s garner.” Amen.
Joseph Cook and Co., Printers, 370, George Street, Sydney.


*
»
»
