

t
Jrt ®emoitianu
J. HOLFORD PLANT,
MISSIONARY PRIEST IN MELANESIA:
'BORN AUGUST sth, 1855;
DIED JUNE Bth, 1891;
“GATHERED unto his own people”
IN WESTON CHURCHYARD
*
ON THE FEAST OP S. BARNABAS, 1891
SERMON
Preached in Weston Church on the 3rd Sunday after Trinity
(June I3th),
THE RIGHT REV. BISHOP ABRAHAM
% ’■
AND PRINTED •' AT THE REQUEST OP THE FAMILY.
Etdjfeltr:
A. C. LOMAX, THE “JOHNSON’S HEAD.”




Jn Mtmaxmn.
Acts xi. 22, 23, 24.
“ Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the Church
which was in Jerusalem : and they sent forth Barnabas, that
he should go as far as Antioch. Who, when he came, and had
seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that
with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. For
he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of Faith :
and much people was added unto the Lord.”
Even in the minuter circumstances that marked the sad and
touching, yet (let me say) beautiful, service of last Thursday
afternoon there was much that was most suitable and appro-
priate. The simple fact that it was the Festival of S.
Barnabas threw back the minds of many of us, and specially
of those most interested, to the same Saint’s day in 1879,
when our dear brother, now departed, after being ordained by
the Bishop in the Cathedral Church of this Diocese to the
office of Deacon on Trinity Sunday, preached his first sermon
on S. Barnabas’ Day ; and then again the additional fact
that the Melanesian Mission, to which he gave himself with
all his heart, was specially connected with the same Festival
of S. Barnabas, and has for forty years held its annual
gatherings in what I may call its cradle—l mean the great
public school of Eton, where all its three Bishops were
nurtured: this additional fact made the service in this Church
and Churchyard on S. Barnabas’ Day still more striking and
fitting, as it seemed to many of us.


But still, the most suitable, the most fitting, the most
appropriate association with the Festival of S. Barnabas was
the singular family likeness, if I may so call it, of the Apos-
tolic Saint and our dear young brother. The words of the
text seem almost to describe him. The tidings had come to
the Church in this land (as it had come to the Church in
Jerusalem), that God had to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life. And, as the Church in Jerusalem had sent forth
Barnabas that he should go as far as Antioch, so had the
Church in this land sent forth her Missionaries to the Isles
of the South Pacific ; and when Bishop John Selwyn had
filled the place and office that Bishop Patteson had vacated
by martyrdom, he gladly welcomed our dear young friend,
John Holford Plant, to the work of an Evangelist to
the heathen ; and when he went, and saw the grace of God
he was glad, and gave himself loyally and thankfully to the
work, and exhorted the people committed to his charge to
cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart.
And now there comes out in the language of my text
the family likeness between S. Barnabas and our dear young
brother; the family likeness, I say, by which I mean the
likeness of both of them to Christ, and so to one another—
for the words you heard me read were these : “ For he was a
good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith : and
much people was added to the Lord.”
Those words expressed the real grounds I had for saying
when I began that the minuter circumstances of S. Barnabas’
Day, when we committed our brother’s body to the earth,
were so suitable and so appropriate. His was a very sweet
and consistent life ; it was the path of the just, that shineth
more and more from the beginning to the perfect day. It


was, as I said, a very sweet life—more like S. Barnabas’,
perhaps, than S. Paul’s. The first Bishop Selwyn, who
originated the Mission, and established it on a firm footing,
was a veritable S. Paul—bold, energetic, strong, and enthusi-
astic. Perhaps our youthful brother was all the more attracted
by him to his Mission because of the contrast he felt between
himself and the lion-hearted Bishop ; for modesty and diffi-
dence and humility were very marked features in Holford
Plant’s character. But after Bishop George Augustus
Selwyn there came one much more like our friend, I mean the
saintly, refined, and affectionate Bishop Patteson, the S. John
of the Melanesian Mission —as George Selwyn was the Paul ;
and I can well believe that Holford Plant saw in him a
pattern and a career that he might more easily sympathize
with, while he admired more at a distance the daring, dashing,
characters of the two Selwyns—father and son, —George,
who began the work, and Bishop John Selwyn who has borne
aloft the banner of the same faith, with the same zeal, the
same enthusiasm as his father. But you will, I think, have
at once recognized the features of him you knew and loved so
well in the words I read for my text from the Acts, about
S. Barnabas : “He was a good man, and full of the Holy
Ghost and of faith.”
And as we have known and heard of him since his
Ordination, such was he from the first, I believe. The words
of S. Paul to another very like-minded Saint and follower of
his—l mean the youthful Timothy—may be well and truly
applied to our brother : “ From a child thou hast known the
Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.” Not only
were they able to make him, and all of us, wise unto salvation,


but they did so in his case. And I have heard that when he
left his school as a lad, and was entering upon a further stage
of his education, all the young boys .of his school showed their
gratitude and affection towards him for his example and kind-
ness by presenting him with some token of their respect as
well as love, and expressed their appreciation of his “ Christian
manliness”; those were their own words. And so his life
flowed onwards in a pure, clear, even stream, until he was
ordained to the ministry of Christ’s Church ; and many of
you know how holily, discreetly, and earnestly he laboured at
Brereton in his curacy, and how he won to the true faith and
love of Christ many working men of rough exterior perhaps,
but with warm hearts ; and he taught them, as S. Barnabas
did the Gentiles of Antioch, to cleave with full purpose of
heart to the Lord.
I may venture to say, from my own personal knowledge
of him, how at length he divulged his earnestly cherished
desire to go forth to Melanesia, not seeking his own weal, but
that of others, who he rightly thought needed more his help,
as being ignorant of the truth, and unwillingly living without
the fear and love of God or faith of Christ, and what was
still more to begin with, without any knowledge how much
God loved them, and longed for their conversion and love to
Him; by which alone they could be brought out of the depths
of wickedness into the glorious liberty of the children of God
—liberty from sin, liberty from the bondage of Satan, liberty
to walk in the steps of their holy and merciful Saviour Jesus
Christ.
I may say that I personally can answer for the diffidence
with which he offered himself for the work, and the conscien-
tious spirit in which he set to work to test himself whether


he had any of the qualifications for the special requirements
of the Melanesian Mission. For instance, he took a voyage
round part of the coast of England to test his seafaring
powers, because if he proved to be a very bad sailor, that
would at once disqualify him for a mission, which was what
its name implied, a mission to the Isles of the Pacific. A
great part of his life would have to be passed in stormy seas,
among rude islands, or boating from one island to another, in
the greatest conceivable discomfort, as that word is understood
in our comfortable homes. Ao doubt during the first two or
three years his health suffered severely from the tropical
climate, and he was thereby much depressed ; but by degrees
his health improved, and having learnt some of the languages,
he succeeded to a great work that the preacher of this evening
had inaugurated, and he not only maintained the good work
of his predecessors, but built up on it a thoroughly sound
superstructure of his own. And knowing, as you do, that he
had to an especial degree the S. Barnabas-like gift of concilia-
tion and winningness of character, you will readily understand
that he was able to do what no one else had attempted or
achieved in any other group of islands within the Melanesian
Mission ; he gained such an influence over the chiefs and
natives of many hostile and conflicting tribes, that he brought
them together once a year for mutual counsel and conference
about the possibility and means of building up an united
system of Christian civilization for them all.
It is very interesting, as showing how far he had
advanced on these lines, to read in the very latest report that
has come from the Islands (for 1890) : “ Opposite the
anchorage to the Boli Harbour the Bishop, on his last voyage,
saw a fine new church, built by the people, and in it were


gathered teachers, chiefs, and people from every district in
Florida for the annual meeting which Mr. Plant has inau-
gurated. The captain of a man of war stood up and addressed
a Christian people in words of peace and goodwill. It was a
striking scene, and one which brought before our eyes, as well
as to our hearts, the clear evidence of the power of the Gospel
to conquer and regenerate the heathen heart.” . May God
bless and spread throughout the Isles of the Pacific this
Amphictyonic Council and promise of the Truce and Peace of
God. And the Bishop’s report concludes its account of our
dear young brother in these words, which show unwittingly
his care for his people in Florida, and his loving thoughts and
longing for his home in England : —“The Rev. J. Plant, in
charge of the district of Florida, elected to stay on till after
Christmas, in order to have longer time amongst his people
before a proposed visit to England.”
And may we not, dear friends, see the loving hand of
God’s Providence, as well as the seal of His Grace, in bringing
this faithful servant of His to his home, to live a short time
and die here among his friends, as a reward to himself for his
true service, and also to his father and loving relatives for
their having so unselfishly given him up to God for His
work and the good of His people ? And so he came to his
own home where loving hands and hearts welcomed him, and
then nursed him, and then laid him to rest, on S. Barnabas
Day, in his own English churchyard ; for so God “ bringeth
His own to the haven where they would be.” It may seem
to us a thing mysterious that he was cut off while still so
young, and full of promise for great and good work in the
Church of God ; but “he being made perfect in a short time,
8


fulfilled a long time,” and his character was stamped upon his
work soon and for ever.
I have only a few words more to say, but these are words
belonging to the inmost heart of things, belonging to the
faith, to the secret spring and outcome of all this beautiful
life and death.
Brethren, when we met the body of our dear brother at
the churchyard gate, and when his friend and former Vicar
received him with the blessed and blessing words “ I am the
Resurrection and the Life saith the Lord,” the thought that
could hardly help occurring to us again and again was this :
As we met his mortal body at the grave, so undoubtedly
did the Lord Jesus Christ Himself meet his immortal soul at
the moment of death.” Awful and overpowering as is the
thought of dying and of death to a serious and humble mind,
impressed with the sense of God’s perfect Holiness, and our
own sinfulness, yet it is the Vision of Jesus meeting us then
and there that is the most blessed, most reassuring stay of the
soul. And we who know something of the reality of our
brother’s faith and life, we could speak with joy and peace
of the sure hope and humble confidence that he had in meet-
ing his Lord and Saviour. This is the abiding comfort that
his nearest and dearest ones have to rest upon. It is the
certainty of God’s love for him, of Christ’s presence with
him, of the Holy Spirit’s fellowship with him—-and then of
his life-long response to that love and that grace. And so I
may say for all of us, there is but one way of meeting the
hour of death and the day of judgment in hope and humble
confidence. It is by living with our dear Lord in heart and
soul now and here in this life. So shall we feel it not to be
very strange when we meet Him face to face at the moment


of death. So shall we look forward to seeing again those our
dear friends whom we have loved and lost, we shall recognise
them, and they us ; for at the resurrection
Eternal form shall still divide
Eternal soul from all beside,
And we shall know them when we meet ;
And we shall be ever with them, if only by God’s grace “ we
are for ever with the Lord.”
“ Brethren, I would not have you to be ignorant, concern-
ing them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others
that have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God
bring with Him. For this we say unto you by the word of
the Lord, that we which are alive and remain until the com-
ing of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.
For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God;
and the dead in Christ shall rise first : then we which are
alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air : and so shall we ever be
with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these
words.” —(1 Thess. iv. 13—L8). Amen.
PRINTED BT A. C. LOMAX, THE “JOHNSON’S HEAD,” LICHFIELD.




