

EXPOSURE
OF
ROMAN CATHOLIC MORALS
IN
FOUR LETTERS
TO
CARDINAL MORAN
BY
JOS. SYMES
THREEPENCE.




EXPOSURE OF ST. LIGUORI.
LETTER I.
Sir, —I never in my life before addressed a letter to a cardinal priest, al-
though I have addressed ordinal ones. You, it appears, are one of the 70
so-called “ princes” of the church or sect to which you belong ; and as
such you stand a chance (not a good one) of becoming pope, when the
holy ghost alias the rest of the cardinal priests think it to their interests to
elect you, or when merit raises you to that bad eminence.”
However, as you are all such humble followers of poor Jesus, and as
your kingdom, like his, “is not of this world,” I am sure you will not
feel hurt that I do not recognise your holy distinctions and your meek and
lowly pride. It may be good for your “ soul” to be addressed in plain
language now and again by one that will not flatter you, by one who
hates priests of all sorts as the greatest buffoons when honest, as the
greatest impostors and quacks generally, that can be found.
Of course, you are far too important a man, far too much of a cunning
sharper, to make any reply to my letters ; and perhaps some of your dupes
may be ready to assassinate me for the step I take. But I don’t mind.
Ho danger will deter me—l intend to expose both Liguoriand yourself—
as far as decency permits. I say, as far as decency permi's. And, if
you give me occasion and do not keep your unbounded cheek a little in
check, I will by-and-bye publish in the plainest English the most disgust-
ing parts of Liguori’s Theologia Moralis.
You will not, I am sure, defy me to do it ; no, nor will any other
priest of your party. Of course, you have revelled in Liguori’s filthiness,
and can probably repeat from memory the most spicy portions of the work
I refer to. I daresay you have not forgotten the days when you and other
young priests, full of blood and fire, used to chat and laugh and gloat over
the time when, in the actual confessional, you could put some poor woman
through her paces a la Liguori!
But, to come to the point of my letter. In the Melbourne Age , 25th
November, 1891, I find a report of a speech delivered by yourself at some
ceremonial gathering at Ballarat, the day previous ; and in that report you
are credited with words I intend to criticise. Referring to yourself, the
report says :— *' The cardinal, during the course of his remarks, spoke in
high terms of the lives of self denial led by the Redemptorist fathers, and


tor. They were pro-
voKea by the action of Mr. Moran.
The Catholic priests are hereby challenged to reply.
It is inconceivable that any morals, savage or civilised, should
be worse than those exposed in the following pages.
It seems to me they deserve the fullest exposure ; but decency
forbids further exposure than I give.
* I respect Catholics as lellow-citizens, and have always pleaded
for fullest justice to them, no matter of what country.
I am an ardent Home Ruler, and have been for over 2o years.
But hate the Catholic priests as the worst of men, and the worst
corrupters of Morals.
JOS. SYMES.




of the great good they had done by the holding of missions in all quarters
of the world. He next paid a marked tribute to the memory of St. Alphon-
sus Liguori, the founder of the order of the Redemptorists, extolling his
virtues, works and writings. The saint, the cardinal further said, had de-
voted his life to the poor, and had taken much interest in the welfare of
little children. In the literature of the church were a large number of
books written by Alphonsus Liguori. These writings were the most
precious heritage which the church had received in modern times, and had
the effect of placing the author among the doctors of the church.’
Whether you spoke of Liguori from your own knowledge of his
works or merely canted the cant of your long-firm, Ido not know. But I
must take your words for what they are worth ; and as you give no account
of the saint—-at least, the report contains no details—l must “ supply
your lack of service.” , ~ , .
Alphonsus Maria da Liguori was born near Naples, 1696, and died m
1787. He studied law in early life, and afterwards became a priest. He
was, I understand, subject to visions more or less, which shows that his
brain must have been unhealthy. In your trading company, some of the
best articles of commerce are visions, aaid your poor dupes run as greedily
after them as ever, it seems, no matter whether they are the fruits of disease
or made to order by the sharpers of your concern. -
Liguori was made a bishop, and founded the order or gang of Redemp-
torists. He also wrote a number of books which became popular amongst
the infatuated swarms whose money keeps your bogus affair afloat.
In his latter days poor Liguori suffered much, it is said, from disease,
and was troubled by a split in his Redemptorist camp, the holy ones of
your firm falling out just as other traders might do.
After his death, the dead man was, in 1796, pronounced by the then
pope venerable ! in 1816, he was beatified ! in 1839 he underwent apotheo-
sis, in imitation of ancient pagan practices and, of course, mounted Olym-
pus and took his seat amongst the gods, the noted teachers of your party,
Aquinas, Bernard, &c. His works wore to be cited henceforth as of equal
authority with the older doctors, and to be used in schools, colleges, and
controversies.
After what your party has done and what you said at Ballarat, no one
of you, I presume, will have the impudence to say that I am exposing or at-
tacking the works of some obscure parish priest, which no more bind the
church or compromise her than the sermon of an ordinary Jack. lam
dealing with one of your highest authorities—there is none higher ; and
in exposing Liguori I expose the whole squad of you.
! I must explain that Ilu ire read no work of Liguori’s except the Tmo-


logia Movalis. His Heresies , and his love-song kind of performance called
the Glories of Mary , I have merely dipped into here and there. lam not
a worshipper of Mary alias Juno Lucina alias Isis, &c., &c., &c„ and
therefore do not feel much interested in the stuff her lovers write of her. I
never interfere with other men’s sweethearts, especially one that is the
mistress of armies of bachelor priests, monks, &c.
My edition of the work I am going to expose has the following title-
page ; —“ Theologia Movalis S. Alphonsi M. De Ligorio, Fundatoris Con-
gregationis S.S. Redemptoris Ac olim Episcopi S. Agathae Gotorum.
Cut Accedit Dissert atio P. Zacharice Et Deer eta Romanorum Pontificum
Morum Materiam Respicientia Editio omnium Accuratior Continens quid-
quid A uctor in C ceteris addidit Reformavit vel explicavit. (In two vol-
umes) Editio Stereotypa. Taurini ex Typis Hyacinthi Marietti Typo-
graphi-Bibliopoke. 1872.”
A letter of approval, &c„ from pope Pius IX, follows the title-page.
The first \uiume contains also an extract from the Bull of Liguori’s
canonisation, &c., Decree declaring that all Liguori’s manuscripts, deal-
ing with Morals, Asceticism and Dogmatics, had been examined, and in
them found nothing worthy of censure (cum nihil in Us censuva dignum re-
port urn fuerii) ; and this last clause is printed in Italics.
Such is the authoritative statement of your party, and your Ballarat
speech endorses it all. Yet I doubt much if you have the courage, I mean,
the foolhardiness, to translate the teachings of Luuori into plain English
and publish them to the world. You boast of his writings, you hold him up as
a paragon of excellence, but you dare not expose his horrible thoughts and
words to public gaze, except under the veil of a (popularly) unknown
language. And how vile must be your saint, if you dare not teach
plainly what he wrote ; and how vile must you be to praise a man before
people who know next to nothing of his works, when at the same time you
dare not put his teachings into the vernacular tongue of these colonies !
I challenge you, I defy you, to do that! If it pleases you more, I re-
spectfully invite you to tell the people in Ballarat, in plain English, or in
plain Irish, just what Liguori taught. Will you read to them, in English,
certain passages I will select for you from the Theologia Movalis? Dare
you ? Gome, be a man for once ! Drop the priest for a day ; and dare
be honest enough to do one of two things, either publicly renounce Liguori
or publicly read his horrid language, and let the people know what it
really is you priests are trained and drilled in.
Ido not suppose my appeal will draw forth any response. A man that
has been steeped in Liguoriism can have no conscience ; a man who can


praise his works, if he knows what they contain, must be too hardened an
offender to be influenced by any appeals of mine.
Before closing this letter I will give you a few of the milder specimens
of Liguori’s blessed, saintly teaching. I hesitate to attack the doctrine of
Probablism, for the simp’e reason that the public are not sufficiently ac-
quainted with ‘it to understand any brief allusions to it or any mere, quo-
tations bearing upon it. I should have to pen an entire letter to intro-
duce the subject. Suffice it to say that the teachers in your heterogeneous
assemblage called the one church are at variance upon the subject; and
that the discussion of it has left conscience a matter of cunning. Hie doc-
trine teaches a man how not to do his duty, how to evade and avoid every
possible obligation—except to bow to the priests and support them in all
thev do or say—That seems to me the sole duty of a Catholic.
Here is a choice morsel of holy shuffling. In answer to the question
whether it may be lawful to deny the true faith or to profess a faise one,
Liguori says, Nulla casu licet, sive voce, sive alio signo hat, dicente Christo:
qui negaverit me coram hominibus, &c. That is, “In no case is it law u ,
whether it be done by voice or other sign, since Christ hath said, He
who denieth me before men,’ ” &c. (Vol. I. 220).
This seems all right and straightforward ; but now note what follows ,
mark how slily the saint and doctor of the church whose works are so precious a
heritage and contain nothing censurable, having, denied the lawfulness o
denying the faith, &c., and having quoted Chiist to back him up, pro-
ceeds Interim ? ero, etsi licitum non est mentiri sen simulare quod non est,
licet tamen dissimulare quod est, sive tegere veritatem verbis, alnsve signis
ambiguis, et indifferentibus, ob justam causam, et cum non est neeessitas
fatendi. In English, that is, “ Notwithstanding, indeed, although it is
not lawful to lie or to simulate what is not, for all that, it is lawful to
dissemble what is, or to hide the truth by words, or other signs am-
biguous or careless (perhaps off-handed is a good expression for %n iffev-
entibus here) for a just cause and when there is no necessity to confess.
(Ib Ineed not point out that this doctrine opens the door to. wholesale de-
ception and imposition, In many a case it is quite as injurious to conceal
or suppress the truth as to perpetrate a positive falsehood ; and generally
there is far more cowardice and callousness in the act here permitted than
No doubt, the inserted the last clause to protect the interests of
the priest in the confessional, where the penitent must conceal not nog.
Laguori quotes this highly moral doctrine from Thomas Aquinas, &c. ;
but he entirely concurs in it.


Here follows a savory morsel, and one that has worked much mischief
among Secularists in Melbourne. Cum non rogaris de fide, non solum
licet, sed srepe melius est ad Dei honorem et utilitatem proximi tegere
fidem, quam fateri; ut si latens inter hrereticos plus boni facis; vel si ex
confessione plus mali sequeretur ; v. gr. (verbi gratia) turbatio, neces, ex-
acerbatio tyranni, periculum defectionis, si torquereris. Unde temerarium
p'erumque est offere se ultro. (Ibid.) In English :—When you are not
interrogated concerning the faith, not only is it lawful, but often more con-
ducive to the honor of god and the utility of a neighbor rather to conceal
the faith than to confess it ; as, if you are amongst heretics and concealed
(masked, is what is meant) you may do more good—or, if from the con-
fession (of the faith) more evil would follow, for example, great trouble,
death, the hostility of a tyrant, the peril of falling away (from the faith) if
you should be tortured. Whence it is often rash to offer oneself wil-
lingly.
These are mild specimens of this work you so puffed at Ballarat. You
will get a stronger dose in my next letter.
Sowers and cultivators of vice and crime ! I dub you the corruptors of
nations, the lasting curse of Europe and her colonies ; the worst evil of
the past, the greatest difficulty and perplexity of the present, and most
ominous of future evil. The world can never be at peace or improve in
morals until you sowers of discord, lies and immorality are converted or
crushed. Conversion to honorable ways is impossible ; and therefore
civilised nations must treat the whole of the Catholic priesthood as the
Jesuits have several times been treated—put down or expelled.
The Protestants do not understand you, are no match for you. They
cannot expose you without at the same time more or less exposing them-
selves. We Atheists can laugh at your mummery and grotesque impos-
tures and can mercilessly hold you and your whole round of selfish, impu-
dent roguery up to the undying scorn of honest people.
LETTER I.
Sir,— ln my former epistle I quoted a little from Liguori’s
Moral Theology , and here follow a few more passages. It strikes
me as unnecessary to quote the Latin in all cases, though I am
prepared to give the exact words of the book if you or any of your
priests call my statements in question.
No better master in the art of lying and equivocation than your
saint-doctor Liguori could probably be found. He says (vol 1., p.


220) :—“ He who, when asked privately or by public authority, is
silent, or answers indistinctly, or says he does not wish to answer,
that he is not questioned by right—that he is not bound, nor does
he wish to tell others what he himself may believe, and in like
manner shuffles, does not seem to deny the faith, but is unwilling
to betray it. Whence, if he can thus deliver himself from a
troublesome investigation, it is lawful, for generally it is not true
that he who is interrogated by public authority is positively bound
to profess the faith, unless when it is necessary, to avoid the ap-
pearance of denying the faith."
I have very freely translated the last clause from “ to avoid.”
This teaches how to be religious without being honest, a lesson
no man needed. In fact, the more dishonest a man is, generally
speaking, the more religious he is; for the man who has no sins to
confess, real or imaginary, will not be often engaged in religious
exercises. In truth, religion is of no use to an honest man. It
suits the depraved—in the way of making them worse.
On page 221 of the first volume Liguori says it is “a lawful
custom, when a Catholic is passing through a heretical place, and
in great danger of losing life or goods, for the purpose of cloaking
his faith, to eat flesh meat on fast days, because the command of
the church is not binding under such peril.”
In Germany, for example, he permits a Catholic to hear heretical
sermons, to attend a .funeral, to act as godfather for a child.
Such acts are lawful for a good cause.
What fools the martyrs were to take such a rough and horrible
road to heaven, when there was one so easy and convenient as
Liguori’s! This saint and others teach your dupes how to
shuffle and play the hypocrite without violating their conscience.
And, of course, the result is, you never know when a.Catholic is or
is not speaking and acting his genuine sentiments. In public and
private he is taught to shuffle and sham for a good cause ; and the
priest and he can always decide whether the cause be good or
not.
On page 251 the doctor-saint discusses the question, Utrum
liceat suadere aut permittere minus malum ad majus evitandum ?
—Whether it may be lawful to advise or to permit a smaller evil
in order to avoid a greater ? Some of Liguori’s authorities say no,
because to induce a person to commit a lesser sin, &c., is still to
induce him to commit sin. He himself leans to the opposite
opinion. According to this (I am giving the examples of the


book), it is lawful to persuade a man resolved upon murder to cut
off his victim's hand instead. It is lawful to persuade a man re-
solved to commit adulter) 7 to commit fornication instead, though
you must not indicate the woman, &c. You may persuade a man
to substitute theft or fornication for murder, or he may commit
bigamy instead of murder.
This reminds one of the lord’s command to redeem a young ass
with a lamb or else break the ass’s neck ! The lord is resolved
upon killing your ass unless you kill your lamb! And the
Catholic who has resolved to commit a crime of some sort is offered
his choice, provided he does not substitute a bigger crime for a
smaller one ! Delightful morality, really ! You cannot be matched
for wickedness of deed and doctrine.
The holy and infallible doctor proceeds :—“ It is lawful for a
master not to remove the occasion of theft from his children or his servants ,
when, notwithstanding he knew their propensity to theft and that
they were prepared to do it, that thus taken (in the act) they
might be punished and reform, for then he reasonably permits one
theft that more may be avoided (p. 251). . . . “ Whenever a
man having a wife suspected of adultery lies in ambush for her,
that he may be able to catch her, before witnesses, in the crime of
fornication, and thus is able to proceed against her”—this is.
lawful according to this holy book (page 252), and the words are
printed in italics.
The wife is not encouraged to treat a faithless husband the same
way.
Some doctors hold that it is not lawful of set purpose to put
occasion of sin in the way of a wife to commit adultery to test her
virtue. Liguori holds the lawfulness of it, or, at least, sides that
way, for he says (Ibid) “When a husband or a master gives a
handle for committing adultery or theft he does not truly induce
(inducit ) to sin, but affords (praebet) occasion (for sin), and permits
the sin of another for a just cause. . . . For it is one thing to
induce, another to afford occasion.
Here is a play upon words. To induce means to lead into ;
preebeo means to offer, to give, to make. To take one by the
hand and lead him right into a trap is wrong; to put the trap right
in front of him so that he shall fall into it, and you intending and
longing that he should fall into it, is quite right. An honest man
would find it difficult to tell the difference in the quality of the two
acts, although the one forbidden is less cowardly ihan the other.


I arr sure you feel greatly obliged to me for retailing this blessed
teaching, and thus showing up your own virtues. Perhaps you
will give orders for my “ soul ” to be prayed out of purgatoryfor
it. One good turn deserves another, you know ; and I really am
doing you a lasting service to publish your gospel—unless that
gospel is unfit for the public eye. In that case, of course, you will
blame your gospel, not me.
* The holy Liguori proceeds. In vol, 1., p. 254, he asks
*' Whether a servant can, because he is a servant, go with his
master to a house of ill-fame, and for that purpose harness a horse
for him.” He may, if he greatly fears loss on refusal! He may,
from the mere fact of his being a servant, without any fear of loss,
be excused for letting a loose woman into his master’s house, espe-
cially if he knows she would come whether he assisted or not.
Charioteers and sailors are also excused for conveying women of
ill-fame to their paramours.
A servant, Liguori holds (after Pope Innocent XI.) —that “ a
servant who, submitting his shoulders knowingly, assists his own
master in ascending by the windows to outrage a virgin, and often-
times renders assistance to him in bearing a ladder, in opening the
door, or in like manner co-operating, does not sin mortally, if
he do that from a fear of great injury, for example, lest he should
be badly treated by his master, incur his displeasure, or be ex-
pelled from the house.”
There is more of the 9ame sort, which I need not quote. Priests
evidently do not drop spicy themes until they are exhausted, and a
layman would think them exhausted ere your bachelor priests
have fairly begun.
Liguori devotes over 20 pages to the discussion of oaths and
swearing. If he had followed the New Testament, the whole
question would not have taken up a quarter of a page, for the New
Testament forbids all swearing as plainly and emphatically as it
forbids murder or adultery. But both Catholics and Protestants
find it convenient and desirable to swear, and so they violate the
New Testament commands upon that subject as readily as they
violate the commands to be poor, &c.
The saint saith, “ To swear with a quibble (cum aequivocatione)
when there is just cause, and when the quibble itself is a lawful
one, is not an evil; for where there is a right to conceal the truth,
and it is concealed without a lie, no want of respect is done to the
oath. Even if it be done without a just cause, it would not indeed


be perjury, since, according, at least, to one sense of the word, or
the mental reservation, he swears true ” (p. 328).
Here we see the slippery nature of your Moral Theology ! You
teach people thus to trifle with truth, and how to save their church
conscience, while violating every principle a truthful man holds
sacred.
The saint says, after varied discussion, (( It is a certain and a
common opinion amongst all (divines) that for a just cause it is
lawful to employ a quibble, in the ways explained, and to confirm
it (the quibble) with an oath (Ibid).
A confessor may affirm, even on oath, that he does not know a
sin heard in confession, by understanding (that he speaks) as a
man, not as a minister of Christ (p. 330). Say! When such a
confessor is damned as a mere man for lying, what will be the
condition of the minister of Christ ?
He proceeds—The double-dealing priest may mentally mean
when he denies that he knows what has been confessed to him,
that he does not hww it through a knowledge which is useful for answering!
It appears no one can have the right to question a priest upon
such things l The State must bow to the impudent priest, not
the priest to it. “ When anyone is bound to conceal the infamy of
another, he may lawfully say, I do not know it” (Ibid).
An accused person, or a witness not properly interrogated, can
swear he does not know a crime which in reality he does know!
(Ibid).
When a witness deems a crime he knows of to be free from
blame, he may swear he does not know it! (Ibid).
Note.—A Catholic may see a heretic murdered by another
Catholic, and as he certainly does not think such a crime blame-
worthy, he may swear he knows nothing of it. He is the best
judge, or rather the priest who coaches him up for his witness-box
performance.
An equivocal oath in court or in making a contract is not perjury,
according to this saint of yours !
To avoid great disadvantage, a man may swear falsely (Ibid).
A poor man who absconds with goods may swear he has nothing.
He who receives a loan, pays it back, and is interrogated, may
deny that he ever received such a loan (p. 331). If one has been
forced into matrimony, he may deny, before a judge, that he ever
contracted marriage ! He who promises marriage may deny the
promise. A man may deny that he came from a place falsely


rumored to be infectious, although he does come from it! A
woman guilty of adultery, if she has confessed and been absolved
by the priest, may swear she is innocent of the crime. She may
also,,apart from confession, use a figure of speech, and swear she
did not commit adultery, mentally meaning that she did not
worship idols, which in the bible is called adultery. Even a man
volunteering his evidence in court may shuffle in his swearing,.
Think of this—“ He who has sworn to a Judge that he would
tell what he knew is not bound to reveal concealed things. The reason is
obvious (p. 541).
.1 need not tell you. Sir, that I have left untouched most of
Liguori’s juggling with oaths and promises; lut I have quoted
enough to show that, Ist, a real Catholic can never be trusted to
fulfil his promise or abide by his oath. 2nd, We can never feel
sure that a real Catholic is giving us his real sentiments, no matter
what he may say. Double-dealing, equivocation, shuffling, are
part and parcel of his religious training. He shuffles religiously and
lies and swears falsely for god’s glory and his own “ soul’s” wel-
fare. 3rd, All this being true, a Catholic, that is, a man trained
and regulated by you priests, is totally unfit for any ordinary
office of trust. No matter where he goes he is your slave, your
tool, your trembling devotee, who must do your bidding to the
letter or go to Hell or to Purgatory.
lam glad you praised these horrible books so. It affords me a
good opportunity to expose them. Nor is this the last letter I
shall send you.
LETTER III.
see in the Age, December 17, that Signor Pecci, your pope
in Rome, has issued a kind of manifesto, appealing to the nations
of Europe against the Italian Government.
In the name of Truth, why does he not appeal to the saints, the
relics of the Vatican and elsewhere ! Does he find, like other
quacks, that the medicines they sell to their dupes are useless and
powerless when taken by themselves ? You monstrous quacks!
Your grace of god, your relics, your masses, your holy water and
the rest of your wares are found to be useless rubbish when put to
the test You never rely upon them. They are not for “the likes
of you," but only for your blind, crawling dupes, who are too


fully drugged by your opiates to see the trick you practise upon
them.
The history of the pope during the last 20 years demonstrates
to all but your stupidest dupes the lying nature of your trade. The
infallible pope has no supernatural power behind him, no support
except the ignorance of Catholics, traded upon by himself and his
priests. He has been dethroned; is, he declares, a prisoner; is
detested and despised in Rome; has seen Giordano Bruno’s Statue
erected near the Vatican; and now, finding the sham of the saints
and the bones and clouts won’t avail, he appeals to the secular
nations to come to his rescue ! !
The ruler of the world, the king of kings, god below, the infal-
lible pope, the turnkey of Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory, calls upon
those who despise him and his trade to rally up to his aid and help
him to keep his wretched imposture still in full swing!
You priests are the most brazen-faced scamps the world ever
bore. In spite of this despairing cry from old Pecci, this open
confession that the saints and relics are played out, you still go o»
preaching the virtues of the stuff and growing rich upon it J A«I
your besotted dupes love to be tricked and diddled so.
The pope pleads that the papacy is the greatest moral power in
the world ! Cool impudence ! If that be so, he need not appeal
to physical force. Has he lost his head ? or has necessity driven
him to the extreme of impudence ? Moral power never appeals to
physical force for protection. It is only the weak, the helpless, the
false that does so.
Pecci says he is a prisoner! That translated into English, means
that he wants money; and, of course, the Larkins will enable you
to send him some. If Pecci had said the papacy was the greatest
immoral power, or power for immorality, in the world, I should
endorse his confession, for I can confirm it from history an 1 your
own holy books, more especially Liguori’s Moral Theology , a book
you so recklessly and shamelessly commended at Ballarat. And
this brings me to the subject of my present letter, in which I will
exhibit a little more of the “moral power” of your party.
Respecting children and obedience to parents, the priests, of
course, put themselves and their interests far above the parents;
and they encourage—Liguori does so—the children to leave their
parents on the sly in order to enter a religious house or to beco m
pnestsf “Hence,” says Liguori, “if a son feel himself called by
god to a religious or clerical state, and supposes his parents would


unjustly hinder him, he conducts the affair more skilfully by 1 idin*
it from them and following the divine will ” (Vol. I. p 416.)
And this is how you teach children to honor and obey their
parents! y
I find that Lig U °ri permits suicide; and here the Atheist and
Catholic can agree, although Protestants will denounce us both.
Don t natter >ourself with the belief that I am pleased to be
found , 1 our company; lam not. But I agree with friend and
enemy alike on some points; and the worst system the world ever
knew (namely, your so-called church) has some few grains of gold
mixed up m its waggon-loads of rubbish and filth.
Your saint, in answer to the query, whether it is lawful directly
or indirectly to slay oneself, says, 3
1 -i? 1S no , t . lav^ ul without divine authority to directly and wilfully
,11 oneself. He refers to Samson and some of the martyrs who
slew themselves; and then proceeds, it is sometimes lawful indirectly
to slay oneself .... for a good end or great utility. (Vol. I.
p. 427.) . “And Elbel permits this to those who are con-
fined in prison, for the purpose of evading the certain sentence of
death or even perpetual imprisonment.” (P, 428.)
Your saint gives wide latitude to what is usually called pecula-
u° n u 0r j Stea mg ' A {or exam ple, may take money from her
husband to prevent him from wasting it in games, company, wine
or heretical books (p. 500). If your church laws gave women equal
rights with men, we could not grumble at this ; but you make the
man the owner of all the domestic property and even of his wife ;
and then you permit her to steal.
The same section of the book gives a servant the liberty to bestow
alms (on the priests 7) out of the master’s money or goods, when
the servant is too bashful to ask the mister’s permission»
He who in extreme want may steal the property of another
(posse ahenum surripere), as much as is sufficient to relieve him
from such a necessity (vol I. p. 500). Liguori says the doctors ge-
nerally so teach as Dr. Thomas. “The holy doctor’s reason is,
e^ se .’ ln SUC h a case > all things are common.”
This is remarkably like Communism or Socialism; and both Com-
the?r fad and S ° ClalistS may quote this teachin g of yours in favor of
The question is asked, whether a “very honorable man,” who is
too much ashamed to work or to beg, may provide for himself out
another s property. Some say, no; but Liguori, whose works


contain nothing censurable , takes the view that he may. He says,
“And this to me appears more probable, if his shame of begging
be so great, that he would prefer death itself to begging.” (Vol. I.
507.)
Here, then, we have loose reins given to “honorable” and “very
honorable” loafers and idlers—not to the poor and un-honorable
ones, of course—but to those extremely honorable gents who would
rather die than beg—why, the church, in its mercy, permits them
to steal, and to live for an indefinite time, upon the proceeds of
their crime ! This justifies all the “honorable” brigands that ever
infested Italy while the pope reigned. This fully justifies free-
booters and pirates, provided they be “very honorable and this
justifies Larkin and Cleary, those saintly members of your com-
munity, who have ruined hundreds in South Melbourne.
Still worse 1 On page 505 we find this; Nota hie propos. 37,
Innoc. XI. quae dicebat: Famuli ac faniula domesticoe possunt occidte
hens suis survipeve ad compcnsandam operant suam, quam majoram judicant
salavis quod recipiunt. The Italics are in the book. The English is,
“Note here proposition 37th of Innocent XI., which said, Male
and female domestic servants can secretly steal from their masters
to compensate them for their work, which they judge to be greater
than the salaries they receive ! ”
Liguori sanctions this. Here then is the fullest possible justifi-
cation of Larkin and Cleary. The former worked for a salary, and
deeming his work of more value than his salary, he stole many
thousands of pounds of his masters’ money! A cruel and unfeel-,
ing law will probably punish the innocent man ; but the church
will not condemn him. Ah ! no. Pope Innocent XI. and Liguori
fully exonerate him.
Splendid morality, Sir ! lam glad you gave your imprimatur
to this book !
There is plenty more to the same effect in the book ; but there
is one kind of theft the saint will on no account permit. You may
rob and plunder to your heart’s content, provided you keep the
faith and perpetuate your crimes with a due sense of religion ; but
in the district of Rome it is a mortal sin to steal a small
piece of a sacred relic ! ! Outside of the district of Rome, it
seems to be less than a mortal sin, unless some indignity be offered
the holy trumpery, or the relic be “rare or remarkable,” such “as
a hair of the blessed virgin !”
O, you incomparable quacks!


. 1 must next turn to Liguori’s Sexual Morality and dirt. He
himself pretends to enter upon the discussion with reluctance, &c.
“With reluctance we enter upon the discussion of this subject, the
very name of which alone pollutes men’s minds. Let the chaste
reader, I intreat, pardon me, if he shall find many questions and
circumstances here discussed and declared, which were omitted by
P. Busembaum ; oh, that it were possible for me more briefly or
more obscurely to explain myself! But since this subject is
MORE FREQUENT AND MORE ABUNDANT MATTER OF CONFESSIONS P t>”
&c. (Vol. I. p. 456.)
Here, the murder is out. 1. The discussion is so utterly nasty,
that Liguori is compelled to apologise for his conduct. 2. He
excuses himself on the ground that these dirty subjects are more fre-
quent and more abundant in the confessionals than any other. And
this shows what nasty people your church is made up of; and
what nasty beasts you priests must be to make them so.
I cannot doubt that the Catholics are naturally just as pure as
any other people, until they have passed through the hands of vou
bachelor priests. But here we are shown that sexual subjects
form the staple subject of conversation between the priest-bachelor
and his female penitent in the confessional.
Liguori pretends to be ashamed of his discussion, and he apolo-
gises to the very priests for being so outspoken, for he does not
write for the public, but for students under training for the most
disgusting work the world ever knew.
And, note, this discussion between the priest and his female peni-
tent is not carried on in the polite language of the French, but in
downright brutal, bald, matter of fact speech, such as none but
street Arabs or rakes and Catholic priests would dare to use.
If I dared to put it into the vernacular, probably the worst lay-
man in Australia would feel edified and instructed, and might be
astonished to find that you holy bachelor priests, who are too holy
to marry, are the greatest adepts in the world in point of unmiti-
gated smut!
. You won ’t defy me, lam sure, to publish your confessional guide
in plain English ; though I feel convinced I shall yet be compelled
to do that, and to use it as a weapon against you in your incessant
war upon all that is noble and good in Human Society. While my
longue and jaw can wag you shall be resisted and exposed.
When the opposition to the Chinese was at its height it
was objected that they brought no women with them, and there-


fore corrupted poor women in the colonies. It was most reason-
able to insist upon it that they should come, both sexes at once,
or the males be excluded.
We shall have to protect ourselves in a similar way, but more
stringentlv, against the Romans —I mean the bachelor priests sent
by the pope. A law will have to be passed in all civilised lands
compelling, at least, 80 per cent, of the priests to be married before
being permitted to cross the border. This is ncessary for the pre-
servation of public morals and decency. In addition, when we
become civilised, none but married priests, over 50 years of age,
will be allowed to confess female penitents.
Next week I will go as far as I am at present able in exposing
this nasty book which you had the nastiness to praise so at
Ballarat.
LETTER IV.
Sir, — This will be my last letter of this series; and, I am sorry to
be compelled to put most of it in Latin. Still, I may utilise even
Latin to expose your abominable teachings. . ,
As far as I can see, there is nothing possible, in the way ot
words, looks and actions, beween men and women, which this nasty
saint does not discuss in fullest detail. The entire round of sex-
licence and sex-sin, of venereal purity and venereal filth, is here
laid out in its most minute ramifications. David and Solomon,
the rakes of ancient or of modern Rome, or any other city, the most
lascivious brutes that ever walked the earth, could surely not de-
sire a more appropriate book than Liguori s Moral Theology for the
gratification oi their filthy imaginations. . .
Dealing with the sixth and ninth commands of the Decalogue,
this saint of yours revels to the full in nasty things, traverses the
dirty pool of human depravity to and fro, through and through
again, so long; as, a ; particle of mud can be stirred up lrom its odor-
ous depths. Because doctors—medici tangentes aut aspicientes
ex necessitate pudenda personae, etiam diversi sexus, non peccant,
esto per accidens invbluntariam pollutionem patiantur (volume 1.
4 cß-q)—that i£, because doctors have to perform necessary duties
upon both sexes, therefore—the implication is—a bachelor priest,
pndgi ho sort of necessity at all, except the gratification of his


nasty, prying, scandalous curiosity, may and ought to dissect, in
the most merciless manner, a woman in the confessional!
Maid servants are to be questioned, evidently, as to how they
handle children. Croix autem probabiliter excusat a mortali ancillas
tangentes pudenda puerorum, dum illos vestiunt, nisi cum mora
aut carnali delectatione hoc agant. (Ibid.)
A woman admittens autem tactus impudicos (ut mamillarum et
obsccenarum partium) . . . peccat (page 463).
Amongst betrothed persons tactus impudici non licent (p. 464).
You wouid like this turned into English, would you not:—An pos-
sit absolvi uxor, si ipsa est in occasione proxima peccandi cum suo
viro, qui earn contra naturam cognoscafc vel prostituat (p. 467).
Here is a choice morsel:—Qui sodomitice uxoretn cognoscit,
probabilius etiam adulterium committit (p. 468).
You nasty priest! Read the following extracts from the dirty
book you recommeded ! Est congressus inordinatus, hoc est inna-
turalis sive indebitus concumbendi modus, cum scil Servatur qui-
dem identitas speciei, diversitas sexus et debita naturae organa
. . . . cum vir succumbit, vel averse accedit more pecorum
vel a latere vel stando aut sedendo quod est contra
naturam : murtale, quando inde periculum est impediendae genera-
tionis aut effundendi semims: alias, si hoc periculum cavea ur aut
non sit, eo quod matrix foeminae satis attrahat semen et retineat,
ut fit plerumque, non contra, sed praeter naturam erit, et veniale
grave ; imo nullum, si gravit causa adsit v. gr. quia mulier est
prsegnans vel quia corporis dispositio sive utriusque sive alterutrius
conjugis aliter fieri non partitur (p. 473).
Were you honest men and true to your vows of chastity (I should
say, your vows of nastity), you wouid neither know nor wish to
know the subject here discussed.
Here is another morsel; —Mollities sive pollutio et est cum abs-
que congressu seu copula, voluntarie procuratur fluxus semmis,
sive id foras effundatur, uti in maribus, sive intus defluat in matri-
cem, ut in faeminis in confessione aperiendum est.
(Page 473.) j
I may venture to tell the English reader that the nasty saint is
prying into solitary habits of both sexes, and the last clause in-
forms us that whatever is done must be laid open in confession ! I
Of course, the beastly priest must know everything—that honest
and decent people never inquire into.
Another morsel:—Hinc infertur 1. esse veram sodomiam coitus


foeminse cum fcemina . . . hujusmodi concubitum, etiam cum
affectu ad vas prseposterum, non videri nisi sodomiam improprium,
cum inter fceminas non possit dari copula perfecta (p. 474)’
Nothing dirty escapes you, Ye Holy ones. No dog can scent as
you can scent. 'Distillatio quae est fluxus humoris quasi medii inter
urinam et semen (cum quo coloris et viscositatis simihtudinem
gerit) sine ingenti ilia delectatione, non est vera pollutio, et, si pro-
veniat sine omni commotione sensus venerei, &C. (p- 478)-
From page 6n to page 781 Liguori discusses Matrimony. And
what a discussion ! No rake could equal it. Modesty, decency,
decorum are flung to the winds ! The priest is here seen
in undress and at his ease, revelling in all that decorum forbids.
And why ? To gratify his own prurient, dirty curiosity,, arid to lit
young bachelor priests for the task of dissecting women in the con-
fessional 1 _
But there are women and women in the Catholic church, mere
are many who would not stand the priest’s insolence for a moment.
His first step towards beastlines would rouse indignation. And the
caitiff knows it. Such a woman escapes pure and unoutraged ; her
own virtue and self-respect protect her, even before a pnest. but
the cur balances such defeats and defiances by pouncing upon the
poor, the ignorant, the weak, the emotional and the recklessly
confiding. . ,
Here we have a full revelation of all that occurs between married
people, and a budget of unimaginable things (to most people such)
besides.
Unde licite talibus naturam excitant ad copulam.
Conjux venialiter tantum peccat 1. Tangendo seipsum ex volup-
tate et tactum non ita expresse referendo ad copulam . .
2. Oblectando se veneree, sine periculo pollutionis de actu conju-
gali cogicato, dum abest compars vel actus exerceri non potest.
(Vol. 11. p. 683.) . .f
Now read this and see if you have any spark of shame lett. It
you can read without some compunction, your case is hopeless—as
without doubt it is: —Peccat graviter _i vidua quse se veneree ob-
lectat de copula olim habita, quia est illi illicita per statum (Ibid).
But for public decency, you priests ought to be compelled to wear
this as a badge, in literal English, until you repent of your sins and
renounce your monstrous ways. The rule just quoted was set up for
no other purpose than to afford an excuse to bachelor Paul Prys to
worm out a widow’s thoughts !


Here is another case of your Paul Pryism:—Bigamus qui in actu
conjugali cum secunda exercito representat sibi priorem et de ea
carnaliter delectatur, quia est permixtio cum aliena. (Ibid.)
And again:—An sint mortales tactus et aspectus turpes inter
conjuges propter solam voluptatem, sine ordine ad copulam, si non
ad est periculum pollutionis . . . Omnis actus venereus, non
relatus ad copulam conjugalem est mortalis (p 683).
Quid, si conjuges ex his turpibus tactibus prasvideant pollutionem
secuturam in se vel in altero. On this most serious question there
are many opinions, he says, not, of course, amongst married people,
but amongst the nasty bachelor priests who are too holy to mind
their own business, too holy to marry, but must meddle with and
drag to light the most secret ways and thoughts of their married
dupes, (p. 684.)
The following ought to be printed in large type, in the common
speech of every nation where you are found, and posted up at the
doors of all your churches for the world to see and understand what
dirty imaginations you fellows have, and what dirty questions you
agitate in the confessional. Read it :—An autem sit semper mortale
si VIR IMMITTAT PUDENDA in OS UXORIS! ! (Vol. 11 , p.
685.) _ F
On this most nasty subject your authorities differ! Chaste Bache-
lors ! Holy rakes ! Untainted roues !
If the above is awful, what could be said of this : —Eodem autem
modo Sanchez damnat virum de mortali, out in actu copulas IM-
MITTERET DIGITUM in VAS PRzEPOSTORUM UXORIS."
(p. 685.)
Whence did you bachelor fellows derive the notion here expressed?
Is it an old custom of your church to spice the honest pleasures of
life by such indescribable conduct ? or did the bachelor priests in
their unbridled reveries invent the notion, and then resolve to utilise
it in the cofessional ?
What would you say if some one were to translate these passages
from your faultless, sainted book, and scatter them broadcast amongst
the people, gum them up at your church and convent doors, &c. ?
Have a care, Sir! Mind how you push matters too far with certain
opponents of yours!
. There * s muc h more in this book I need not refer to. The book
is in truth what one of your own theologians said of the work of
Sanchez on the same subject, it is “A guide to the mastership and
doctorship of whoredom, and all kinds of the most horrible inde^


cency.’ That is the true character of one of the books you >so
shamelessly praised at Ballarat. The book is unfit for civil me,. ®nd
one you dare not translate. And the man that can commend either
the author or the book is unfit for any place but a penitentiaiy.
The history of your church, its popes, priests, monks,. nuns, con-
fessionals, is the history of all that is vilest and most disgusting in
human society. And no one who knows your teachings and practices
can have any doubt that you as carefully and assiduously cultivate
vice and crime amongst your dupes, as farmers do the produce of their
fields. You do this for gain, for gold and unjust power over your
dupes. For your own base ends you would corrupt a world. A pure
people could not endure you ; in a state morally healthy you would
rapidly die out.
You know that. And to preserve your caste you sow and cultivate
corruption to the utmost of your power.


BY MR. SYMES,
CHRISTIANITY ESSENTIALLY A PERSE-
CUTING RELIGION.
(With Portrait.) Price 2d.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MY RELIGION.
Price 1/-
PHILOSOPHIC ATHEISM.
Price 6d.
DEBATES WITH THE REV. D. M. BERRY:—
(1) The Resurrection of Jesus. 6d.
(2) Is there a God ? 6d.
THE LIBERATOR,
The only Freethought Journal in Australasia. Nothing
like it ever Published. 3d. weekly.


From the Wesleyan Pulpit to the Secularist Platform : or,
The Life and Death of My Religion : by Joseph Symes.
Price is.
Story of a Famous Old Jewish Firm: by B. V. (James
Thomson.) Price. 2d.
Ancient and Modern Phallic or Sex Worship: by Joseph
Symes. Price is.
Philosophic Atheism : by Joseph Symes. Price 6d.
Australian Edition of the Fruits of Philosophy : with a pre-
face by Jos. Symes. Price is.
Christianity Essentially a Persecuting Religion: with a
portrait of author on front page: by Jos. Symes. Price
2d.
Four Nights Debate between Rev. Digby Berry and Joseph
Symes, in the Hall of Science, Melbourne. Subjects—
First and Second Nights “ Is it Rational to believethat
Jesus Rose from the Dead ? ” Third and Fourth
Nights “Is it Rational to believe in God ? ” Price 6d.
each.
Col. Ingersol’s Reply to Mr. Gladstone, Price 6d.


DR FOOte'S
PHIS HOME TALI aid MEDICAL COMMIE SESSw,,
IF YOU WANT TO KNOW
All about the human body, in health and disease, nature’s secrets revealed,
How life is perpetuated, health maintained, disease indi ced, death delayed,
How to marry your own mate, and transmit wea’th of health to posterity,
Read the most popular, comprehensive and useful book treating of
MEDICAL, SOCIAL AMO SEXUAL SCIEVtI.
£
priceless ia value, new, startling and very instructive.” The latest edition is
more complete and valuable than ever, having been re-written in important parts
It contains an appendix of great practical utility made up of
OVER MOO PRESCRIPTIONS OR RECIPES
E«r Acute and Chronic Disorders Common to Adults and Children
A complete table of poisons and their antidotes (from highest authorities), illus-
trated directions for resuscitating the drowned (prepared for Health Boards),
and hygienic rules for care of infants; also
ORIOIM OF LIFE AM It DEVELOPMENT OF REAM,
tracing the embryo from conception, through all stages to birth.
Illustrated by Over *© Beautiful Colored Llthtrraph*.
on fine plate paper such as are to be found only in high priced, imported medi-
cal works; and to illustrate the anatomy, and relative positions nf important
parts, each book is also embellished with
THREE ILMAFT CHROMO CHARTS of VITAL D» OAMS
PRICE, Bs. 6d., POST FREE.
A. T, WILSOI,
Mt Bourke-itrMt Vast, Melbourne.
