

£tO\io "■ fv* *
'“' /v'i-i
Irrigation in India.
Its Lessons for Australia.
A Paper Read by
Mr. W. W, CULCHETH, M.I.C.E
Before the
Victorian Institute of Engineers
June 3rd, 1891.
Melbourne :
Re-Printed from The Building and Engineering Journal.
, 84 Queen Street,
1891.




Irrigation in India.
Its Lessons for Australia.
A Paper Read by
Mr. W. W. CULCHETH, M.I.C.E.
Before the
Victorian Institute of Engineers.
June 3rd, 1891.
Melbourne ;
Rb-Printed from The Building and Engineering Journal .
34 Queen Street,
1891.




.S'3 c3 o d "g S £
+= § |j " r O 6
oqsh * a d 0 o.(> o
«g*| £ o f , g
.Sgg o a joS do
s a s a a •" s
pg't.S. a n 3 . £
g g fl | § l s 2 Soa
| sl s * | * agg s
S ® MOO ,S W b-
-3 H d 1 i^j-S s - . -g
§ < s 3 , S c, § a, s
C O -r+o «m H _M m co r\j _hd irj
525 ™ 9 <3 O R r S CU O ™ a 2 **
H «3bO°Jl « g 2° ® " I CO o 5 Prrt
gs B’E S - ® . fe 2 MrS >? ~£ O £IS
■+£ 2 <D O Pi th OD'S CD * rH CD
®o’g£3' B'tj qo &2 ® £?’« m« Mr 3
bXDnd .2 id R 3 oS ns 03 o 5 d 0 cSO
gl § o o.S
ooPllHt d oS+a +o
g O QQ O 59
A ® . ,-, 000 0000 00000 000
S ;p gq dn ■ ■ (NOffioo ■ OOCOOOO; ; coom ; : ;
g,o®Ss 50 : : : : nwkhoh : : coioh .
o £ C^P
10 *
° , CM 02 * 00 |
rtP.R < ” > n 3 "S tJ O O * °OOCO O O ‘ •OCOOS N N ■ J *b* o o I * °
** S & t; o hco w : ;cq cq : :cqcq cq cq : : rococo .
> p 3 rt 9 -+a pj
*9} _________________
<V> <n rr-i ' ca lO 05 CO C 5 CO CO (X) to N(M H 9S S? £9 *9
§0 o M S O Cq r-( S£) 05 WCOOO Oicqcpcqccj oCO b~ rH Oi
.gpgSfcj “9h" C 3 * <bd*(fq(fq j NfOl>« :•: cq 51




Irrigation In India i Its Wessons for Australia
A Paper read before the Victorian Institute of Engineers,
June 3rd, 1891, by Mr. W. W- CULGHETH, M.1.0.E.
I.— lntroduction.
NOTWITHSTANDING all that has been done, the art of irrigation in this part
of the world is still in its infancy. We have much to learn, and should look to
other countries for information. No one country can give us all we require, and
we certainly should.not rely solely on a country like the United States of America,
where irrigation has been practised for a few years only. Undoubtedly, very great
success has been attained there, but the conditions were exceptionally favourable.
Stating the case generally, the land operated upon was originally of little or no
value ; water was plentiful the demand for it being small compared with the
supply, and was easily obtained; and all who had to do with the various schemes
were willing workers and anxious to make irrigation a success. Since the demand
for water has increased the position has been somewhat marred.
2. In Victoria, conditions similar to those just mentioned are to be found only
at Mildura. Attempts have been made at other places in the colony to bring about
the same state of things, but the high prices paid for the land handicap all such
undertakings; besides which, the supply of water is not in all cases ample. In the
case of the trusts constituted under the Irrigation Act the conditions are essentially
different. The landowners are not all willing workers, or anxious to make irriga-
tion a success. The majority can at best be credited with the intention of using
the water only when some one else shall have shown them what to do. They are
certainly not prepared to experiment for themselves as the cultivators in America
have done. The conflicting aims and interests of the landowners in all the large
irrigation districts of Victoria are an effectual bar to success like that to be ex-
pected at Mildura,
3. This is beginning to be recognised, and a demand is now being made for
Government to take over the works of the Trusts and manage them like the rail-
ways. The duty was rashly undertaken by the Trusts, without proper knowledge
of what it involved. Now that there is seen to be little prospect of anticipated
results being realised, many of the landowners are anxious to be relieved of their
responsibilities. As, however, local Government has hitherto generally been
successful in Victoria, it would seem to be a retrogade step for the State to relieve
the Trusts in the way proposed.
4. It may be interesting to some of the members of this Institute—especially
those who have to do with irrigation—to lay before them on this occasion a few
facts relating to irrigation in India, where almost all the works are controlled by
State officials. It may then be seen what the prospects of irrigation in Victoria
are likely to be if a similar arrangement be decided upon here. The deductions
from the facts are based on my own experience of several years in the management
of irrigation works in that country. We may not be able to apply directly to
Australia all the results obtained in India ; but by carefully studying them and
noting the different conditions prevailing in the two countries, the higher prices of
labor, of land, and of produce generally in these colonies, the tenures of the land
and the relations of the cultivators to the State, in the two cases, the meek submis-
sion and fatalistic views of the Indian farmer, and the independence and push
of the Victorian farmer, may be mentioned—we may make very good use of the
information Where we cannot learn exactly what we ought to do, we may learn
what should be avoided—we may see what is likely to be fatal to success. And it
is very important to know the causes of failure, where such has occurred, as well as
the conditions necessary to ensure success.
5. A few years ago, when the irrigation boom was at its height in Victoria, I
ventured to urge the exercise of caution, at the same time referring to some results
of a like nature with those about to be mentioned, and was told by some enthusiasts


that irrigation was being thereby discouraged. My object was simply to show that
success elsewhere had been due to patient perserverance and careful management.
The discouragement of so many now is due almost wholly to the non-realisation of
extravagant anticipations. It was not thought that failure was possible, or with
bad management, even probable. The idea of there being any art in the manage-
ment of irrigation works never seems to have occurred to those who were anxious
to start irrigation works. Irrigation has not, however, fairly commenced in this
colony, so that works have not yet been properly tested. After a dry season or two
the outlook will not be so dispiriting as it appears at present.
ll.—The Irrigation Works oe India.
6. Irrigation has been practised in India for centuries, and official records of the
British Government may be referred to regarding the operations there during the
last three-quarters of a century nearly. Appended to this paper is a synopsis of
irrigation works in India, and the results of operations during the official year
1887-88 given in a tabular form, The following remarks are intended to explain
the main points of interest deducible from the figures given in the appendix, and
apply them, as far as possible, to our position here.
7. The classification of the works adopted by the Indian Government is intended
mainly to distinguish between those which are mainly protective and those which
are intended to be reproductive. But as this classification would not give us any
useful information, I have re-arranged the works as'follows :
CLASS A. —Works the whole cost of which is not known, as they were originally
constructed by the native rulers of the country.
CLASS B.—Works constructed entirely by the British Government, and expected
to be remunerative. This class has been sub-divided thus :
Bl.—Works from which irrigat on has been going on for more than fifteen
years.
B2.—Works which have not been in operation for so long as fifteen years.
Class C.—Works that have been in operation several years, but are not likely to
pay I per cent, under present conditions.
8. The statement has been prepared almost wholly from official documents. As,
however, only a few reports are available for reference here, it has been found
difficult to obtain full particulars on all points. The main results agree with the
official figures ; but it is not unlikely that on some minor points there may be a
few errors, notwithstanding the care taken to avoid these. It is hoped, however
that these are unimportant. Among the doubtful items are : The date when some
of the works were opened for irrigation, the capacity of others and lengths com-
pleted on the 81st March, 1887, and the irrigable area or area under command by
most of the works. The last point is often a difficult one to settle on the spot, and
is much more so at this great distance.
9, All works, or series of works, on which more than half a million sterling has
been expended, or from which half a million acres have been irrigated in a year,
are shown separately. These are sixteen in number, and of these only one half are
now paying the interest (4 per cent.) on the capital expended on them. All other
works in the country are grouped together in their respective classes as “ minor
works.”
10. On the 31st March, 1887, the capital invested in all those irrigation works
for which complete accounts are kept, amounted, in round numbers, to 31£ million
sterling. Two millions of this had been spent on works from which irrigation was
not going on—being either not finished or in abeyance. The statement appended
hereto refers only to works in operation, and accordingly shows (col. 7) a total of
very nearly 29| millions sterling as the capital on which the returns are calculated.
The Indian rupee is taken at its par value—two shillings—the rate at which cal-
culations were made when most of the works were constructed.
11. The revenue obtained during the year, 1887-88, from water-rates and some
minor sources amounted, in round numbers, to 1J millions sterling (col. 10). The
working expenses amounted to close upon a million sterling (col. 11), leaving a
net cash revenue of nearly £400,000 (col. 12) —a return of about 1| per cent, on the
capital. Adding the amount credited (by book transfers) as a share of the in-
creased land revenue due to the works —a little over £BOO,OOO (col. 13) —brings the


net return up to nearly 1J millions sterling (col. 14), or somewhat over 4 per cent,
(col. 15) on the capital. Other works not included in the statement—capital
accounts not being kept for them: —gave a net return of nearly a million sterling.
The total net return given by all the Government works in the country is 2£
millions sterling.
12. The works referred to in the appendix represent in the aggregate about
8.000 miles of large canals, having a carrying capacity of considerably over half a
million cubic feet a minute, with 24,000 miles of distributaries. Besides the
canals, there are numerous reservoirs, having a total storage capacity of over
28.000 million cubic feet, or more than 175,000 millions of gallons. There are also
many miles of distributaries in connection with these reservoirs. All these works
together irrigated nearly 1\ million acres in 1887-88 (see col. 9of the Appendix.)
Nearly five million acres in addition were irrigated from works for which no capital
accounts are kept, and, consequently, are not included in the annexed statement.
As much as 12| million acres, therefore, were irrigated during the year by the
works controlled by the Government. On 6£ million acres irrigated in Northern
and Western India, crops of the estimated value of 18 millions sterling were grown.
The value of the crops grown in one year by irrigation from works in those parts
of the country may be expected in time to be equal to the outlay on the works, as
evidenced by
Class 81.
lll.—Water Rates.
13. Confining our attention to the works referred t
water-rate of the whole for the year 1887-88 is 3s Bd.
to in the appendix, the average
. per acre. On the lower Indus
an acre, and in the Godaveri
canals it appears to be merely a nominal one of 2|d,
*6 f
© I
hs (
** S
Cj I
o \
CD \
If I
V I
Jg I
ta ]■
* I
After 1870 do.
t f
§S3 ( For the 5 years, 1860-65
1 do. 1865-70
■g §g,-< do. 1870-75
*-p do. 1875-80
gg - do. 1880-85
_sj For the year 1887.88
Before 1865, single season
do. perennial crops
aai one or 2fd. an acre, an
i acre. In these cases the
i revenue, being collected
;h are either abnormally
■orks, and the Mutha Eese]
domestic supply given), th
lually increase with the a
3S relating to some of the
,g time for the full value
p, p, .9
C 3 a fl . <o
T T §
-I d " d .3 S 3 a
cS s dS £ l-1 o
g «> g 00 s a I
" ffl ° m I'd g;
S t fix S, <u a;
P 3 o d O d os,
a® a® is o r
1-° go x,
a o rt o „ s o
■s g | g g 3 g -a
® ® cS ® 2 P 3
[S H iS w
s.d.s.d. s. d. to s. d. s, i
1/4-2/4 2 5 5 0 4 1
s. d. s. d.
B 4 to 60
10 0
s. d. s. d. s. d.
1 10 3 6
8 6 5 11
536 0 5 0
5 3 5 11 5 0
776 5 5 3
810 7 4 6 4
s. s.
3 to 5
s. d,
12 0
T 3
CD
a
CD
ft
0
1
0
eg
o
c 5
h
12 6
s
CD
ft
O
'cS
3
o
10 0
and Kistua Deltas from 4|d. to sd. an acre. In these cases the bulk of the water-
rate is included under the head of land revenue, being collected with it. Excluding
those works the water rates of which are either abnormally low or high—the
Inundation canal, the Madras Delta works, andtheMutha Reservoir, (therevenue
from which is mostly obtained for the domestic supply given), the average is nearly
ss. 6d. per acre. The water-rates gradually increase with the age of the works, a»
may be seen from the following figures relating to some of the works in Northern
India, showing that it takes a very long time for the full value of the water to be


The average water-rates include some miscellaneous items of revenue, such as
navigation dues, mill-rent, sales of grass and timber from canal plantations, &c.,
which could not be easily separated. The excess is less than threepence an acre,
generally, although in a few cases it may amount to as much as sixpence. The con-
tinued increase in the average water rate is due less to higher rates being charged
than to the gradual substitution of the more valuable crops (particularly sugar-cane)
for those which are extensively grown without irrigation.
14. Much higher maximum rates prevail in the Bombay Presidency—lBs, and
20s. per acre being not uncommon. On some projects a rate of 30s. per acre is
levied ; and on one as high a rate as 565. an acre is charged for sugar cane. Those
high rates would appear to have something to do with the poor returns from the
works generally in that province. They are too high to induce the cultivators to take
water freely. It may be remarked, however, that this is, perhaps, not without an
object, as many of the works,being reservoirs, water is stored from year to year so
that it may be available in a bad season. They are thus to a great extent protec-
tive works.
15. With the exception of the Bombay works, the water rates have usually been
low at first, and have been rasied after a few years—when circumstances seemed
to warrant this. They are, on the whole, as high as it is generally considered
judicious to fix them. It will be observed, however, that if the returns
depended on the water rates, with the addition only of a few miscellaneous items
of revenue (included in column 10 of the appendix) the net result would be much
reduced —being only £386,695 (column 12) instead of £1,211,079 (column 14).
The larger amount is due to a share of the land revenue being credited to the works
under the circumstances about to be described.
IV.— Share of the Land Revenue Credited to Irrigation Works.
16. It is scarcely necessary to remark that the construction of irrigation works,
as a rule, increases The value of property in the neighbourhood. At the expiration
of the term for which the land revenue in India is fixed, this improvement is a
factor in the estimate of future rent to be paid. A share of the enhanced land
revenue thus obtained by the Government is credited to the works. This credit
materially improves the financial aspect of works that have been in operation for a
number of years, as previously pointed out. In the case of the old works (Class
A) the improvement in the land took place before they came under the control of
the British Government. And in the case of the earliest works constructed by the
British Government in the Madras Presidency and iu Eajpntana, the water-rates
and the land revenue were combined and collected together ; the water being thus
paid for whether used or not. This would appear to be the secret of the success of
those works. It was to the interest of all concerned to use the water.
V.—Duty op the Water.
17. The duty of the water, or the result obtained by a given measure of water,
varies considerably even on the works that have been opened many years. This is
a point on which there has been much misconception. Sometimes the maximum
area irrigated per cubic foot a second of the supply obtained after a number of
years is taken as a guide for new works. It has also been overlooked that in India,
when two crops can be grown in a year, a double duty is obtained. The fact is—
the duty of the water is invariably low at first, and increases slowly as irrigation is
developed. A high duty means economy in the distribution and use of the
water.
18. Another point to be noted is that all the water taken into a canal at its head
is seldom used. At times a very large quantity necessarily runs to waste. This is
especially the case when the supply is drawn from a perennial stream, and there is
nothing to be gained by closing the head. When the supply is drawn from a
reservoir, care is taken not to admit more water than is likely to be used. But
where the channels are very long, it is difficult to prevent a good deal flowing to
waste at times, unless the lower portions are kept short of water. As a rule, a
better duty is obtained where there are storage works than where there are not. In
1879-80, as much as 43 per cent, of the supply entering the Agra Canal went to
waste. In 1880-81, the loss was 26 per cent, in the same canal, and in the Western
Jumna Canal, and was only 10 per cent, on the Eastern Jumna Canal.


19. It would not serve any useful purpose to give a long list of results obtained
on various works. Two cases will suffice. On the Eastern Jumna Canal (N.W.
Provinces), a very old work, where the best results have been obtained, and the
Agra Canal, a new work, the following figures will show the fluctuations to which
all works are liable, and the different results obtained when the water flowing to
waste is allowed for. The areas are the number of acres irrigated per cubic foot
per second of average discharge for the year—two seasons ;
Areas irrigated per
cubic foot a
second.
Eastern Jumna Oanal (In
operation before 1880).
Agra Oanal (opened
in 1874)
Years.
Pi EM ARKS.
Of head
discharge
Of water
Of head
discharge.
Of water
used.
Acres.
291
In 1868-69
„ 1872-78
„ 1876-77
1877-78
~ 1878-79
1879-80
~ 1880-81
„ 1886-84
A very dry year
3rd year, Agra canal
The figures here given
for the Agra canal,
show how greatly the
results vary in the cost
of a new work.
236 )
191
in y
182 (
311 )
given relate
to two seasons together extending over some
20. All the figures just gh
ten or eleven months of the
The following are the results obtained in a single
lin a few typical cases. The three first-canals
the year.
6 months)
supply of
season (lasting from 4 to 6
have a fairly steady
fluctuating.
of water, but the supply of the last is very
Areas irrigated per cubic
foot par second of supply
during the :
Percentage of Mon-
soon supply flowing
in the cold season.
Monsoon Cold Season.] Whole Year
Acres. Acres. Acres;
60 112 182
Agra Canal—in 1880-81
Eastern Jumna Canal ~
West Jumna Canal 1879-80
Upper Sutlej Canals ~
101 168 260
80 62 I 141
81 163 i 69
stated to be not very reliable, owing to the great
the channel.
In the last case the results axe
and varying quantity of silt in
Quantity op Water Used.
21. On all the large works in
India, a much larger quantity of water is used than
is thought to be necessary in Australia. It is very important clearly to understand
this matter, as all the irrigation trusts in Victoria have undertaken to do what has
not been done in any other country, where irrigation has been going on for a long
time. The point generally overlooked is the enormous loss in earthen channels.
The quantity of water required for irrigation is the sum of the loss in the channels
and the quantity required to water the fields.
22. Some years ago I gauged the water used for irrigation under various con-
ditions. In the case of a well, when great economy was exercised, with short
channels (not longer than about 50 yards), the quantity represented a depth of
from Bto 10 inches spread on the land in the season. The quantity used from a
reservoir for irrigation along channels some two miles in length represented a depth
of about 18 inches over the area. This was calculated on the discharge at the
sluices, and did not include any loss by evaporation or otherwise from the reservoir
itself. The quantity of water used from 13 lakes in Bundelkhand (N.W. Pro-


vinces) in 1879-80 was 1,014 million cubic feet for the irrigation of 3,272 acres, or
an average of 309,900 cubic feet per acre, representing a depth of 7'12 feet over
the area. This quantity doubtless includes loss by evaporation, &c., from the lakes
themselves.
23. A few examples of canal irrigation will suffice. On the Eastern Jumna
Canal, a very old work, which has given some of the best results in Northern India,
the average depth used has seldom been less than 2£ feet. This is after deducting
the quantity of water flowing to waste at the several escapes and at the end of the
canal. On the Agra Canal, which was opened in 1874, a depth of 5’5 feet was
used in 1879-80, and B'6 feet in the following year. On the Ganges Canal, opened
20 years before the last-named work, the average depth was 2£ feet. The depth
used in various divisions of this canal in the year varied from P 3 feet in stiff soil
to 4 - 5 feet in light soil. In the cold season only, it was 5-8 feet in one large
division of the canal ; and over 6 feet and 7 feet for some distributaries—in one
case it was as much as B'4 feet.
VII.—Proprotion op the Irrigable Area Actually Irrigated.
24. Proportion of area commanded by the works is an important factor in the
measure of the success of a scheme, and depends largely on the duty obtained
from the water. If only a small proportion be irrigated, a very high water-rate
would be necessary to make the works pay: but then irritation would be dis-
couraged, and little water would be used. Reliable information on the point is not
easily obtainable. In the Madras deltas most of the land appears to be irrigated.
The same would seem to be the case in the districts supplied by the Inundation
Canals, but this is not clear from the reports. In the North Western Provinces
about one-third of the culturable area commanded by the best canals is the
maximum irrigated. This proportion has been reached by the Sone Canal after 14
years, but probably future extensions of the works will bring a larger area under
command, in which case proportion may be reduced. The other canals which have
not been 15 years in operation do not at present irrigate more than one-fifth of the
area irrigable. In the Bombay Presidency about one-sixth appears to be the
maximum yet reached. This is probably due to the high rates in force there. In
the Madras Presidency generally, the conditions would seem to be different from
the rest of India. There the whole of the culturable areas commanded by some of
the works is reported as irrigated. Probably there, as for the old works in Raj-
putana, all the land which can be irrigated ordinarily is charged a lighter water-
rate whether water be used or not, and is not measured.
Vlll.—Cost op the Works.
25, The cost of the works per acre actually irrigated varies very much, Exclud-
ing the old works, the whole outlay on which is not known, and the works where
irrigation is not fully developed, it may be taken under ordinary conditions at
about £3 per acre, the average of class 81, The works in the Bombay Presidency
—mainly storage—which have been longest in operation, average about £2l per
acre. This is not including the Mutha reservoir, the water of which is to a large
extent used for domestic purposes.
26. Comparing the outlay with the area which it is estimated the works are
capable of irrigating, as far as this information is obtainable, those works only
have as a rule proved financially successful, the cost of which has been less than
£2 per acre irrigable— or capable of being irrigated. This holds good not only
with the large works shown separately in the appendix, but also as a rule to the
smaller works, which are grouped together as “ Minor Works.”
IX.—Application to Australia.
27. When we come to apply the results obtained in India to Australia the differing
conditions must be allowed for. We can, however, be certain that the principal
motives which actuate the cultivators are similar in both countries. No one either
in India or Australia cares to take water for his crops unless he is satisfied that the
produce will be materially increased. If the works are managed so that, as in
India, the sale of water forms the main source of revenue for several years to come,
it is not to be expected that in Australia, where irrigation is a new art, the results


will be more favourable than in India, where irrigation is well understood by
the cultivators, it having been practised there in some form or another from time
immemorial. If, then, with this great advantage, no works in India give a sufficient
revenue from water-rates alone to return 4 per cent, on the outlay, and some do not
even pay expenses, under 15 years, what prospect is there of a better result being
obtained here ?
28. All experience, not only in India but also in Italy, France, and other
countries, shows that time is required for the development of irrigation. The
quantity of water used at first is excessive—more is put on the land than is really
necessary, and much is wasted. A high duty cannot be obtained i till the
water is used economically—the result of several years’ practice. The high duty
obtained from several works in India is mainly due to the careful management of
well-designed works by officers specially trained for years in this branch of
engineering. This is well exemplified by the Agra Canal, which, in its tenth year,
gave a higher duty for the water used than the Eastern Jumna Canal which had
been in operation for more than half a century, but was not so well designed.
(See table in par, 19.) But even should a high duty, as regards area, be obtained
quickly, time is required for the water to attain its proper value. This cannot be
till the farmer has found out what he can best do with the available supply of
water—till then he cannot afford to pay a high price for it.
29. It may be noted here that in India the water is not supplied by measure to
the farmers. A suitable module or water-meter for irrigation purposes has not
been brought into general use there. The cultivators take what they require, if so
much can be had, and pay according to the area watered ; but some crops are
charged more than others. In Victoria, the plan of charging so much an inch in
depth seems to be finding favour—but it is not likely to facilitate the extension of
irrigation. Again, although depths of 10 inches and 15 inches, allowed respectively
for winter and summer irrigation here, may suffice if measured at the fields, such
depths are far too little to take for an estimate of the area irrigable by the whole
supply of any canal throughout the whole season—too little even for a long-
established work of any size. There must be several days in every season when
very little irrigation would be going on ; and, further, not only the water used in
the fields has to be considered, but also the great loss from long channels.
30. The quantity of water required for irrigation was dealt with rather fully in
a paper read by me before the Royal Society of Victoria nine years ago. The
numerous facts then brought forward seem to have been turned to very little
account, or a more ample allowance of water would have been made in some of
the irrigation schemes that have been adopted. It is only fair to admit that I have
not altogether avoided the mistake of hoping for better results than past experience
elsewhere would warrant. Too little margin has sometimes been left for con-
tingencies. I was misled by the strongly-expressed opinion that Victorian farmers
being more intelligent than those of India, there would be less waste here. Every
drop of water would, it was said be used. If necessary, channels would be lined
with puddle to prevent percolation, &c. All sorts of devices would be adopted, so
that no more water than was absolutely necessary to make up the deficiency of
rainfall would be used. These costly arrangements may be resorted to some day,
but not before water has a higher value in the eyes of the farmer than at the
present time.
31. Meanwhile the available supply of water will be used in a much smaller
area than allowed for in the original estimates. This means that the water-rates
per acre must be higher than is generally expected, unless the water is sold at a
low price. But if the price of the water is high, resulting in high water-rates,
water will not be taken freely ; if the price of the water is low, the works will not
pay even if all the water be used. This explains why the water-rates alone, as
already pointed out, will not give a sufficient return to make the works pay for
many years to.come. It also points to the conclusion that if the works here are
taken over by the Government it is not likely that the returns will be better than
in India, even if they be here, as there, managed by properly-trained officers. It
ought not, therefore, to be expected that the works here—managed mostly by men
without either previous experience or special training—will pay as they are


expected to do under 20 or 25 years, unless a special rate is paid by the land-
owners who benefit by the carrying out of the works.
32. Similar remarks will apply also to the National works, for there is very little
probability that the Trusts will either take the quantity of water or pay the
amounts fixed for them till irrigation is well developed in their districts. And this,
as already shown, takes a very considerable time. Unless, then, the Trusts are
prepared to levy a general rate, they will be unable to pay their share towards the
expenses of the National works for many years to come. The landowners will not
be better able to pay for more water than they can profitably use from the
National works than they are to pay interest to the State for loans to construct
works which they have not yet learned to use.
S 3. Reference has already been made to the success of those works in Madras
and Rajputana, where the water-rates are combined with the land revenue. (See
par. 16.) The water is thus paid for whether used or not. There is in consequence
no reason for the farmers to hold back from irrigation, and, the rates not being
excessive, there is no mom hardship than in the case of a domestic water supply—
a rate for which has generally to be paid whether the water is 'taken or not. It
may be further pointed out that the reservoirs in connection with which irrigation
is charged for in this way are the only ones in India that have paid well. Those
reservoirs in Rajputana, Bombay, and other parts which are not so assessed do not
pay 4 per cent, for interest ; many do not even pay their working expenses. The
real secret of the success of the works in America lies in the fact that the right to
the water goes with the land, and there is therefore every inducement for the
farmers to use the water and make the most of it. The way in which the principle
may, perhaps, be applied to the conditions generally prevailing here will now be
pointed out.
34. The construction of suitable irrigation works in India, as in every other
country, increases the value of property generally in the district. That this has
been the case also in Victoria, at such an early period, is evident from the last
General Report of the Victorian Water Supply Department. It is stated (at page
12) :—‘ Although water for irrigation has not yet reached the farmers, the schemes
carried out —even in their present imperfect condition —have conferred consider-
able benefits. The danger of water famines has been practically removed in many
districts, and the increase in the value of lands fir consequence of this, and of the
prospect of irrigation, is remarkable. ”
85. If the works are to be taken over by the State, power to recover from the
land-owners a share of the improved land values ought to be conceded by them.
The charge at first might be a light one, but provision should be made .for its
increase gradually, as the advantage of the works are more fully realised. Without
this the works would be a perpetual charge against the revenue of the colony. And
why should private property be thus improved at the public expense ?
X.— Concluding Remabks.
36. Comparing railways with irrigation works, first there is a probability of rail-
ways paying in time, if only reasonable care be taken in the first instance, whereas
there is no such prospect in the case of irrigation works, unless the latter are sub-
sidised by the landowners ; secondly, railways can be used by the public, whereas
only the landowners of the district concerned can use the irrigation works. It has
been proposed lately that land in the neighbourhood of new (railways should be
assessed under the American principle of “ betterment but, clearly,(there is much
more reason for this in the case of irrigation if they are to become the property of
the State.
37. The existing arrangements, under which the works are being managed by
Trusts, is likely to be more advantageous in the end to the landowners than if they
are taken over by the State. But it will not be possible to make the works pay
simply by the sale of water. The water-rates must be supplemented by a general
rate, representing a share of the increased value of the land. It would be well, as
1 urged on another occasion,* that this general rate should be devoted to the pay
* In a paper read at the Melbourne meeting of the Association for th 3 Advancement of Science,


ment of interest. Further the instalments of interest should not depend in any
way on the progress made with irrigation ; but should increase year by year till
the full amount could be paid. It was also pointed out on the same occasion that
small schemes have better chances of early success than large ones.
38. Just now the landowners may have little inclination to do anything ; but
the causes of the present depression are only temporary. It is owing chiefly to the
small demand for water during the last two or three years of good and seasonable
rainfall, which has allowed of fair crops being grown without any artificial water-
ing. This effect is experienced in India, even on long-established works; but is
less felt on them than on new works. It is very unfortunate that such a check
should have occurred at the commencement of operations in this colony. Dry
seasons will, however, be sure to come again ; irrigation will then make a fair
start.
89. The data from which the appendix to this paper has been compiled were
mainly obtained from the official reports of the Government of India in the
Melbourne Public Library. My best thanks are due to Mr. Stuart Murray.
Chief Engineer of the Victoiian Water Supply, for his courtesy in giving me
access to the records of his department. lam also indebted to the Hon. A. Deakin
for some Madras reports containing information not otherwise obtainable in the
colony. When the official reports have failed me, “Jackson’s Hydraulic Manual ”
and “ Buckley’s Irrigation ” have been referred to. The deductions from the
figures in the appendix are based on my own experience in the management of
irrigation.


1508
01026145




