









The Traveller's Guide
OR,
A Most Exact Description
OF THE
OF
ENGLAN D.
BEING
Mr. OGILBY'S
ACTUAL SURVEY
And Mensuraion by the WHEEL,
OF THE
Great ROADS from LONDON
To al l the Considerable
Cities and Towns in England and Wales ,
Together with the
Cross-Roads from one City or Eminent Town
to another.
Wherein is shewn the Distance from Place to Place, and plain
Directions given to find the Way, by setting downievery Town, Village, River,
Brook, Bridge, Common, Forest, Wood, Copse, Heath, that occur
in Palling the Roads.
And for the better Illustration thereos, are added TABLES,
wherein the Names of the places, with their Difiances, are set down in a
Column, in lb plain a manner, that meer Strangers may travel all over
England without any other Guide.
LONDON: printed for W. B. and Soid by J. Churchill, D. Brown, F. Nicbolson, JR. Knablock.
F. Wyat, F. sprint, G. Sir ah an D Midwinter, R . Rebinson, W. Taylor , F. Holand,
B. limton, B. Barker, F. Tonson , H. elements, H. clements, F. Pemberion, F. Archer, N. Clisse
R. Gosling, G. Harris , R. Meredith .




THE
PREFACE.
nn was undertaken by the
TSeft Command ob* CW»TI. and‘t wasat
his Expence that Mr.Ogdby ' Wltl, § re f t P o f a U the
an Jilaal Survey and l avma with indefa-
Erincipal Roads of the
tigable Pains and Induftry fimlned, nre fi xe d De-
Roads in a Hundred Maps, to which were p.ehxea u
fcriptions of all the Places he pa fled thro, heDedic
them to his Patron, that Judicious Pi mce, and Publilh d
,o haveU> pmpofd, Comp.W,! mean Ite tt^.on
of Travellers. Wherefore, finceitis on a l Handsg a
ed to'be a Work exceeding ufeful to that purpofe, it is ho
ped That the reducing it into this Pocket-Volume, will
be an acceptable Service to thofe Ferfons whofe Occafi-
ons require them to 1 ravel. . u
And becaufe the Reader may pofTibly imagine, a. e
Book is Abridged in Subftance as well as in Bulk ;it is ne-
cellary to.atfure him, That the Defcnptipns here are Ver-
bally the fame as in the folio i except only that in this
Edition the Style is rendredmore Intelligible as weL as,
Concife,and feveral here under Exp ame )
are made ufe of to bring the Matter into its due Bounds.
Thus the Reader has in this fmall Volume Mi * $
Defcriptions of the Roads of England entire. Nor are rhe.
totally wanting, for the Tables at the latter end con-
A 2


tain alfo all the Words fas Names of Places and Direft ions
for Travelling) that are fet down in the Maps , which be-
ing Ranged in Columns, and the Diftance§ marked, render
thefe Tables as ufefulas the Maps ; And upon the whole,
the Traveller is here furnifhed at final! Expence, with a
Guide that will conduft him through all the Principal
Roads of England. . J. ' ‘ ‘ ?
Great Care has been taken in Corre&ng the Prefs: So
that we hope no Capital Faults have efcaped.
Note , The Diftances are all along reckoned in meaTur’d
Miles and Furlongs,beginning from the Standard in Lorn-
hil\ fo that the Reader mull not be furprized when he finds
the Number of Miles fet down here, exceed the Common
Computation: For Example, from London to fork are
computed but 150 Miles, whereas by Meafure the Di-
iiance is 192 Miles. And Computation being very uncer-
tain it mull be granted, thatno Exaftnefs could be obfer-
ved, but adhering conftantly to the Standard-Mile of
1760 Yards, which contains Eight Furlongs.
- ■*- . ' *i. . | f # ; ' ■- I & 1 'l'.*, * £ *te (j-
The Abbreviations madeafe of in this Work, are thefe
that follow^
*"' • ' f * ii •v» 1 -<f i % I' y
\ • m ' 4 j ‘ 4 .'- i- - *
Afc.cr Afcent. Gr. Green. W. Wood,
Br. Bridge. H. Heath. N. North,
C .or Com. Common. K. King. S. South,
Ch.for Church. M.Mile. , E. Baft,
Chap. Mt. Market, W, Weft.
Corp. Corporation. P. Park. N. E North-Eaft.
P. Down. Par. Parifh. S. E. South Eaft.
Defc. Defcent. Pari. Parliament N. W, North-Weft,
17.I 7 . Furlong. R. Road. S. W, South-Weft,
fiv. or Riv. River, Riv. River.
Fft. Foreft, Y. or Vill. Yillase,
THE


THE
CONTENS.
The Fir ft Number (hem the Page in the Book, the SerepvH thg
Pave in the Tables,
o
npj/E Road from LONDON to Aberift-frit!ty » i*
I Cardigan-ftlire, South-Wales, faffingtbro WORCESTER.
*** r 2 I 7 J
The Roadfrom London to ßarwick Northumberland, Faffing
thro' YORK, DURHAM, &c. i? nn . f 9.1
The Roadfrom London to Briftol, with a to Hunt!* il
in Somerfet-fhire, , v . , n ,. 2 ° •n*?*'
The Road /nwLondon to Buckingham, vntb a Continuation to Ban-
Th Roadfrom Buckingham to Bridgnorth in bhrop-lbire with a
Branch from Banbury to Campden Glocefier-fhire,26 196
The Road from London to St. Da?id ; s ontheSea Coaftn Pembroke-
fhire, faffing thro' GLOCESTER, Monmouth 28 127
The Road from London to Dover in Kent, gaffing thro Rochdter,
CANTERBURY, &c. iS 198
The Road from London to Harwich m Enex, 37 *99
The Roadfrom London to Rich in Kent, including the Way by Maid-
ftone 19 199
The Roadfrom Londom to Holyhead, Anglefey, N.Wales,
Puffin? thro' Coventry, Lichfield, CHESTER, &c. 4* 200
The Road from London to the Land’s-End m Cornwal, faffing thro
Salisbury, EXETER, cK „ . 49
The Roadfrom London to Newhaven,<w tbs Sea-Coajt in bullex,
with a Continuation to New-Shoreham, } SS 2 °?
The Roadfrom London to Portfinouth,] thro' Guildford,
r "*■ 17 *°4
The


The Road from London to Rye in Suffex, 59 2oy
The Road from London to Barnftable in Devon-fhire, and from
thence to Truro in Cornwal, 6r 20c
The Road from London to Bath and Wells, 66 207
The Road from London te Bofton in Lincoln* (hire, with a Branch
from Bofton to Lincoln, 68 201
The Road from London to Garlifle in Cumberland, 70 208
The Road from London to Chichefter, with a Branch to Winchefter
73 2 °9
The Road from London to Derby, faffing thro 7 Leicefter, 7 y 210
The Road from London to Flamborough in York-ftiir thro*
Peterborough, LINCOLN, &c y 77 211
The Road from London to King’s Lyn in Norfolk, 8r 210
Theß oadfrom London to Montgomery in North- Wales, 82 212
The Road from London to St. Neots Huntingdon-(hire, a
Continuation to Oakham in Rutland- (hire 84 212
The Road from London to Norwich, 86 214
The Road from London to Oakham, and from thence to Richmond
in York-Oiire, 88 21 y
The Road from London to Shrewsbury, with a Continuation to
Welfhpool in North-Wales, 95 917
The Road from London to Southampton, with a Continuation to
Salisbury, 9y 218
The Road from London to Wells in Norfolk, &c. to St. Edmund’s
Bury in Suffolk,' 97 719
The Road from London to Weymouth in Dorfet-fhire 99 220
The Road from London to Yarmouth in Norfolk," 10 r 231
* The Road from Briftol to Banbury in Oxford-fhire, 105 221
The Road from BriftoS to Weft-Clicfter, joy 222
The Road from Briftol to Exeter, 109 223
' The Road from Briftol to Worcefter, : n o 224
The Road from Brirlol to Weymouth, 112 22 y
The Road from Cambridge to Coventry, 114 22^
The Road from Carl tile te ßarwick, ny 22 f
Tfie-Road from Chefier to- CardifFi« Glamorgan-Ibire, Xl7 227
The Road from Dartmouth in Devon* (hire, to Minhead in Somer-
ler-lbire, ' , 120 229'
The Road from St. David’s in Pembroke-(hire, to Holywell
Flint-lliire, 12 2 228
The


The Roadfrcti Exeter to Barnftable, with a Continuation to llfar-
comb in Devgnfiiire, and thence to Torrington, 126 229
The Road from Exeter to T ruro in Cornwal, 128 229
The Road from Glocefter to Coventry, *3° 2 5°-
The Road from Glocefter to Montgomery, *3* 2 3 r
The Road from Hereford to Leicelier, *3 3 2 3 25
The Road from Huntingdon to Ipfwich in Suffolk, 3s' 2325
The Rjoadfrom Ipfwich to Norwich, with a Continuation to Cro-
nier on theSea-Coaf in Norfolk, *37 2 3?
The Road from King’s-Lyn in Norfolk, to Harwich in
Effex *39 2 34
The Road from King’s-Lyn to Norwich, Continued to Yarmouth,
The Road from Monmouth to Llanbeder «*Cardigan-fii. 142 23 %
The Road from Nottingham to Grimsby in Lincoln-(hire,
14? 236
The Road from OXFORD to Briftol, 147 2
The Road from Oxford to Cambridge, 148 237
The Road from Oxford to Chichefter, 150 238
The Road from Oxford to Coventry, Continued roDerby, Is 2 239
The Road from Oxford to Salisbury, 154 240
The Road from Preftain to Carmarthen, 156 241
The RoadfromSzWshmy to Gampden *»Glocefter-fliire,iy7 241
The Road fromTinmomh /cCarlifle,! 242
The Road from Welihpool to Carnarvan, 161 243
The Road from York to Lancafter, 163 24$
The Road from York to Weft-Ghefter, 164 244
The Roads from Carmarthen to Cardigan, Cardigan roLlan-
bedcr, and from thence to Aberiftwith, 16$ 24 6
The Roads from Chelmsford in Effex, to St. Edmund’s-Bury and
Saffron-Walden, 170 247
The Roads from Chelmsford to Maldon and Raleigh in Effex, and
to Gravefend in Kent, with a Branch from Canterbury by
Sandwich and Deal, to Dover, “• 172 248
The Roads from Exeter to Dorchefter, and from Plymouth to Dart-
mouth in Devon-ftiire, *74 24S
The Road from Ferry-Bridge to Borough- Bridge in York-fhhe, Con-
tinued to Bernard-Caff le in Com, Durham, with a Branch from
Ferry-Bridg, to Wakefield, 249
7k Red from Kendal to Cckwtnouth, and from Egrimond to
Carlifle,


Carlifla 178 iyo
the Road from London to Pool ifa Dodet-fliife, a Branch
from Pool to Lemington, and a Branch from Southampton to
Winchefler, 180 2^l
The Road from Shrewsbury to Holywell in Flintfcire, with a
Branch from Chefter to Holywell, 182 252
The Road from Whitby in Yorkshire to Durham, thence Continued
to Tinmouth in Northumberland, 184 252
The Road from York to Whitby, and to Scarborough, 186 2y $
A Table of the Cities, Principal Corporations, and Market
Towns mentioned in this work, with the Roads in which
they lye, and the Page of the Book wherein they are
Defcribed.
Note, That the Great Roafrom London, 1
being carried on to the Extremity of the Kingdom, the fur theft
Place is only Named in the Title of the Rond ; mtwithftand-
jng that many much more Confider Places ate th,o
As in the Road fom London to Aberiftwith ,• Wbr.cefter is not
mentioned in.the Title, thd in you are led
through it ; the fame of York in the Bar wick-&c. Where-
forc if you want to know the V/ay to any Place, Look in the
Alphabetical Table, which follows Page 187,
find in what Road it lies, and in what Page of ibt Boo* you may
iit* with the Defection : For Example, Suppofc, I defire to Travel
from London /. Glocefter; I looking for Gloce ter m the Table,
and over againf it, I fad St. Davids u
and 30 ~wbnh isthe Page of the Book., wherein ! ohjerve the Say
to it.
itwT




A New Mapp of the Roads of
ENGLAND
Shevttia -tL> JLeputed distant# from one tenon to another
.■\^7 l~ that tht a.v& tn <trhtd thus ~t~


Itinerarium Anglic:
OR, A
BOOK of the ROADS
OF
ENGLAND and WALES, &c.
Emgm A V I N G difpos’d all the Principal Roads of
liT |3 and WALES , into a Hundred Wholefheet Copper Sculpts j
«l H divided the lame into Dire&, from LONPON to the leye-
Bj ral Cities and Great Towns, and Crofs, front Capital
pi fMm P| Town to Capital Town j and fubdivided the Firlt into la-
ilJaiLli and Dependant, the Second into and
■■-t* Accidental ; We begin with Direct ana accor-
ding to Alphabetical Order, ihew in the Firft place, .
B «


The Road from LONDON to ABERISTWITH
On the Sea. Coast in Cardiganshire, South-Wales.
For Illuftration of which, we (hall firft give you the General Hiftory as follows,
I. Point of Bearing W.N.W. 11. The direft Horizontal Dift. 177 M.
I 111. The vulgar Computation 145- M.- IV. The i99’z.
The Particulars of the two laft Accounts will more plainly appear from the
following Table ; the two firft Columns giving the Reputed Miles, One fepa-
ratdy, between Town and Town ; the other conjundfly, in a continued
Number from London 5 and the two Laft (hewing the Dirr.enfurated Miles and
Furlongs anfwerably. The refpeftive Points of Bearing, are all accurately
tlefcrib’d in the Copper Sculptures.
A Table of Computation and Dimenfuratlcn.
From London Comp. Meafure.
to A(fton cB c 6 |oB’3 083
Vxiridge , Og jj 5 io’i iS’4
Boconsjield cj\22 083 27*1
High~kf ich y am cy |27 033 32*6
*Tetiworth i° j 57 i2’o 44’d
4l {043 49’g
Tflip c 6 547 j cß’o- 57’3
Fnlipn io 5 7 123 ~o’o
iVloiton in Martin o 67] 1 [Bs ’2
Comp. Meafore,
to Broadway 05 072 07’$ o^o’/
Perjhore 07 079 u’6 102’y
WORCESTER. 06 c 8? 093 ii^a-
Bromyard 10 095 I**2 i24’4
Lemjier 081 103 113 iS5’7
Vreflain c 8 j 111 127
Ithon fiuv. 08 ! 119 127 i6i’s
Riadergovoy 66 \ 125 oq>o 1703
Aberijiwitb 20 > 145 283 199’^
’ With the Branch to the City of Oxford, thus,
From London Comp. Meafufe.
to TetfWorth* as before I? 37 44’6
Wheatly 05 42 054 so’i
Oxford 05 47 0 5*4 ss’^
You pafs thro’ thefeveral Counties of Middlesex, Buckingham, Oxford, Glou
€oer, Woreejier, Hereford, Radnor and Cardigan , and over the Rivers Coin, Tame ,
Charwsi, Avon, Severn, Teme, Ltlg, Ithon , Ifiwitb and Rydal j having a good
Road to Wickham, but Ids pleai'anc to Pr no ill way to ; but
thence to Aberiftwith, generally Boggy, yet almoft every where fupply’d
with good Towns, convenient Entertainment, and delightful Proipe&s.
*
The Road from LONDON to ABE RI S*T WITH.
THus much for the General Hiftory of the whole Road, which being con-
tain’d in three Plates ; the firft ending at IJlip in CxforJfiire, and in-
cluding the Branch to the City o {'Oxford-, the fecord at -
fire j and the third at Abe/ijiwith ; We begin with the firft Plate, containing
f? M. arid 3 furl, where thefe acute or forward Turnings are to be avoided.
At i*t, At St. Giles’s Pound, the forward way to Hampjhad, At 3’2 . At Ty-
b (jit, the Right to Padingtcn. At 20' 4, The Rightto Aleslury. At 54’?, A
little Ihort of Weft-Wickham. The Right forward. At 35’c), at the end of
Weft Wickbam, the Coach-way to Stofen-Church, on the Right. At 49’4>
Be yon d i’h: eat ly - B riJg e, the forward way to Oxford, At Jo’o, the Lett to
At n ,6 > the R#* to Odin§ton : .
Hi B* T'» e


N. B. Hhe Obtufe I fays are obfsrved at the end of the Plate.
Wefet out from the Standard in Cornhil LONDON, thro \Comhil, Cheap Me.
Newgate-ftreet,Smvp-hill and Holborn. Thus leaving the Lord Mayor’s Banqueting-
Houle on the Right, paflfing Tyburn, and to the N. of Hide-Park and Campden -
Park we come to I {enfngtm Gravel-Pits, at s M. a long butdifcontinu’d Village.
Then going thro’ Shepherd’s Bujh V. at 6’ 7 you enter Afton at 82, a noted
Thorough-fare ;ati T 3 pafs thro’ Hanwell V. on the Brent, and at 12’7 Norcoatj
another Imall Village. Whence at iy M. by Hays-Chunh on the Left, and at
if 7, thro’ part of the Town, and over HellingdonUeath, you enter Hellingdon
at xyT, and Uxbridg at iB’i, a large Town of 1 M. containing above 200 Houfes
with a good,Market on Thurfdays, 2 Fairs, anu convenient Inns; , ■
At the end of the Town, you crol's Colnflv. enter Buckingamjh. and by feveral
ftraggling Houfes on fhe Road, and Hedgly-P.on the Left, defcend for 4 F.Whence
thro’ the Woods at 27 M. you enter Becensfield or Becon-field, on a dry Hill of
no great Afc. confuting of about 100 well Built Houfes, and affording feveral
good Inns as alfo a Mt. an Wednef. and 2 Fairs, viz on Candle-mafs, Day, and
Holy-Thurfday. ■
At 28V You come to a Defc; befet with Woods, and thence by
V. (a Brook on the R.to the Left) At 32*3 you enter High-Wickham in a pleafant
Vally, a well Built Town, containing near 200 Houfes, with feveral good Inns,
as the Antelope,, the Catherine-Wheel, ,&c.’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder,
&c. fends Burgefles to Pari, and has a plentiful Mt. on Fridays, and 2 .Fairs.
Whence by feveral Houfes on the R. and thro’ W. Wickham V. at 34V, yon
afcend at 3<?’4, for- -j- M. pafs thro’ a Wood 12 F. and enter OxfordJ!)- at 3 B’z.
Thus thpo’ Stoken-Church V. at 39 M. defcend at 40T, for 6 F. with Woods
on your left.t j Whence you fet forward to V. of 2 F. at 44V, a ilraighc
Way leading to Wheatly- Br. over Tameflv, 1 F. beyond which is the Diviiion
of the Roads; That to IJlip turning(hort on the Right, and the Oxford R, pro-,
ceeding direftly to-JWheatly, a good Town of 3 F. at S 2’3, deicending i Q F. you
crofs Charwellflv at yy’j; and enter the Ancient City and Hniverfity of OX-
FORD, fea ted on the N. of Thames flu. where it receives the CkarweU.
But keeping the R. toward IJlip, you pafs by and St *obn
1 R to the Right, at, *3 M- Whence a dired Way to IJlip at 57’;, hril eroding
Rets or Bure flu. as it appears m the next Plate.
• . ; 1 : . /
« ’■ •' ' 'M , • > ) \
Backward Turnings to be avoided,
f . * V '•> f' }*4* ' • f , * > ■* f , V
'■} * * • * * / , ’• {. > , , v */ • * S 4 .»
F *, from Oxford, the Left to Heddington, IX. 1 ’3, fhort of Wheatly, the Lefc
ill. i f, Beyond Tetfworth, the Right to Henly,md the Left acute. IV 7 F b»-
yond Stokea-C h. the Left to Wickham , the Coach-way. V. At the end of u*.
fmdgtheLdt to Swakley.Vl 2F. fliort of Hellingdon , the Right to Colebrook.
VII. In HanmU, the Right to Brentford, VIII. At fonr/f-Hill, the forward
co mutton*
B £
>' 4 *■ '*
The


The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to ABERISTWITH.
Com. Cardigan, South-Wales.
Conmncing at Iflip in Oxfordfhlre, and Extending to Bromyard in Herefordlbire.
Containing 67 Miles 1 Furlong.
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 6jV, the Right to Barton. 73 T, the Left forward to Chipping Norton.
the forward to Long Compton. Si’j, the Right to at the 4 Shire-ftone.
91 ’3, the Left to Stmcrfield. the Left to Menton, roz’o, the Left to
Cheltenham. 103 T, the Right to Aulcefter. 103*3. the Left to roy’o, the
Right to Eaflon White Lady, and the Left laj’o, the Right to Edwin.
124 V the Left to Hereford.
fN the former Part, wecondu&ed you to Ijlip , on the N. Wof Bure flv- over
__ which it has a Stone-Br. of 6 Arches, a fmaJl Town, but well accom-
modated; where the two Days Stage-Coach to takes up the lirft Night.
Hence an indifferent (1 might Way leads at 60V ,to Blechindon V. of aF. and
at *a’a, you crofs Cham el flv above mention’d, and enter open Arable Land,
where at ’4, the Right-hand Way unites again at the Left-hand Way
hereabouts, leading to iHoodfiock a good Mt-Town, about 2 M. diftant.
At 6s M. you pals by Wotton- Ch. on the Left, and at 66'i, come to Glimpton
V. and thence by the Chequer-\m , thro’ open Arable, at 70 M. to V, be-
yond which you have a ftraight open R. to7j’r, wherethe forward Way leading
to C hipping-Norton ; turn to the Right, and at 74 M. by a Houfe call’d Chappel
on the Heath, 6 F. further, leave Chipping-Norton ■- M. to the Left, a large but not
Compact Town, except about the Mt-piace, yet a Corp. governed by Bay!ids
Cre. Keeping a Court for Actions under 4 /. and having a good Mf. on Wednejdays,
At 75’t. defeend a Hill ot 7F. leaving Kolright- Ch. on the Right, and afeend-
ing for y F. leave little Kolright on the Left, in which Par. but 1 M. to the Left,
Rands that circular Monument of great Stones, faid to be Eredled in Memory of
a Battel there fought by Kollo the Danetlhen by Long Compton on the Right,
and I ftde Compton on the Left,you pals between the Counties of and War-
wick-At 69 z, defeend a Hill of 4F. and at Bx’3, come to the 4 Shire Stone, the
web-known Limits of Oxfordshire to the S. and S.E. Warwick to the N. and N.E.
part of Worcefierfl). included within Qlo to the S W. and Gloce/ierjh. to
the W and SW. Here bear to the Left, thro’ a morals-way at 83 ’2 to Norton in
the Marjh, vulgo, Morton. Henmarjh, of z F. on the L of] way, a good Thorough-fare,
which had formerly aMt.on Tuefdays , now only 2 Fairs, vn at Lady-Pay , and
Alhdlon-tide. . _
84' aieend Broadway Hill of SF. on which Button op. the H/L V.ot
2 F. having enter’d the Downs, call’d Broadway HiUs,i F. beyond, leave Burton's Jjh
011 the Left, where you have a very fair Profpeft ; and at 88V by a Crofs Hand
for Direction. 7 F. farther, defeend Broadway-LMUjto the Town ol Broadway , at
well-built and f F. long, where are leverai good Inns, andtho’ no Market-
Town yet plentifully lupply’d from Campden and Evejhcltn. .
Hence ari indifferent ftraight way,for the moil part open Arable, leavingCbftd s
Wickham on the Lelt,lcadsat 56*3. to Wicienferd, aßrocklo call’d,wheie you enter


«-M and a link after, the File of Em/btlm, fo eminent lb; its Fertility,
within z M. of the Town. At xoo’e, enter a Lane leaning at lost, to Avwf.v.
atOiMe by a large Stonebr, of 6 greatand feveral (mail Arches The next Town
if ferlhm, of 7 F in a Plain, faid to be Built by E gdviri Duke of Met under IC-
fto, it contains near 300 Houfes and z ParilhChurches, has t Weekly Mts. on
Tuffl and Sami and one annual Fair on the 11ti. of-frae i 'Tis fomewhat decay d
fmce the DilToiution of its ancient Abby, but now in a lair way ot retrieving
its pridine Ludre. , . . , . . ... ,
At 1034, pafs by Ale thorough, a Houfe on the Left, giving title td the Loro,
Coventry , thence thro’ Stouten V. at 107 M. the R. diredi, and moftly d,
brings you at n I*4 to the Suburbs, and by the way ot Salary-Gate, to the
City of WORCESTER, of which take this (hort Account.
’Tis a City and County of it felf, pleafantly and commodioufly feated on the
E. Banks of Severn flv. over which it has a fair Stone-br. with a Tower; being a
Place ot great Antiquity s cail’d Br&novium by Antoninus zniPtolemy,Citer~mangon
by the Brhansymh Vigorniabythe Latins. It enjoys great Privileges and Immuni-
ties granted them by leverai K. even before the Conqued, and tho a plentiful
Sharer in Calamities; vet at this day,remains a City of Extraordinary Beauty
ahdSplendor; fending Burgdfes to Pari. Honour’d with the Title of a Marqmlate
in the Right Noble Henry Marq. and E. of I'Yorcejier ; and Digniry d with an
Hpifcopal See, fucceffively podefs’d by 88 Bidiops. Tis govern’d by a Mayor, 6
Aldermen, a Sheriff and z Chamberlains, Elefted outof 24 principal Citizens
or CapitalCounfellours, 48 Capital Citizens, or Common-Counfellois,with a
Recorder,Town-Clerk and two Coroners, befides 13 Conftables, a Sword beaier
and 4 Serjeants at Mace. ’Tis divided into 7 Wards containing befides the Ca-
thedral, gParifh-Ch. not reckoning St. M adjoining, and
others Demolifh’d. ’Tis adorn’d with 3 Grammar-Schools and 7 Hoipitass li-
berally endow’d ; a fair water Houfe and a well contriv d Key. It enjoys a great
Trade elpecially for Clothing, and its Mts. . and areyery
conf 1 derable,efpecially the lad, for Cartel,Fleft, Fifh and all forts or Provisions.
From Worcester over the Br. thro’St John's over an enclos’d way
leads by Earl's-Court on the Right, thro’aWood :by Cotberidg Ch. on the Left,
and at 1 xy’4 thro’ Broadways V. Then by hapel on the Right, at 119 4,
crofs Tetne aliens Temde flv over a Wood-Br. and by Ch, to the Left, at
no’;, you come to Herefordjh. Whence by draggling Houles, and over Bram-
yardHe&th, at 124 T, crofs the F room flv, over a Stone Bridg of 2 Arches, and
enter Brainy ari,alias Mt-Town of 4 F. as in the next Plate.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. Againd Cotherig, the Left to Hallow. 11. 6F. beyond. Horceder- Left to
Evejholm 111. At the end ot Stouton, the forward to Upton. IV. At 1 <>, fiior*
of Perjhore, the Left to Aukeflcr . V. 5?- beyond Br. the Left to
VI. 2 M. fliort of UVic'iford Br. the Right to IVinchcomb. VII. 7 F. diort of Bur-
ton's Afh , the Right to Stow. VIII. 10. F. beyond the 4 Shire done, the Right
to Chippingnorton. IX. At the end of Enflon,the Right to V.2F. be-
yond the Chequer- Inn, the Right to VUoodflodi. XL It! Plimpton, the Left to
Banbury. XII. 3F. beyond IVomn- Ch. the Left, unitig [2 M. beyond.
B 5
The


The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to ABERISTWITH, in Cardiganshire.
PLATE. III. and Last.
Commencing in Com. Hereford, and Extending to Aberifiwith, afore-
faid. Containing 7 4 M. 6F. '
r s Thele Turnings are to be avoided.
At 125*7, The Left to Webly, 136*1 the Left to 138*3, the Left to J&in-
ton, 140*3, the Right to Kington. 142*4, the Left to 149*5, the
Right to l^nighton. 160*2, the Right. 162*5:, the Left to Gmhuagh. the
Right to St. Harmon . 171*0, Left to Llannirndiffry, 175*9 the Left to Rofe-
far-1 88*3, the Left to Cardigan. 160*3, the Left to Llanrujied. 197*4, the
Reft to Llanntfled.
IN the Second Plate, We came at 124*5 to Bromyard, alias Bramyard, a Town
chiefly on theßoad, containing near 200' Houles, with agood Mt. on
at L te j> Corn, &c. and 5 Fairs, vi\. on Holy-Rood. Witfon-Mond.
uhurjd. before St- James, and Thurfd. before St. tufa. Whence an Indirect way
Jeadsat 137*3, to BridenburyY. beyond which a ftraight R. conveys you at 130*6,
thro Hockleyy. and leaving Humber 6]?. on the Left, at 134*6 to Eaton V. on the
, e -Tj WO art^er , croffing Lugflv. over a Stone-Br. of 3 Arches, you enter
Leomnlter, vulgo Lemfler , at 135*5', of only 4 F. this way, but a Mile tranfverfe ;
C > C i p Lhanßieni, i.e. Templum Monialium, a more probable Etymology
than that of Leonis Monafleriumflxovn a Lyon appearing to a Monk in a Vifion ;
tis a well-built Town, leated in a rich Soil, and upon the Riv. X«£, which in
i° r u Semi-Circle waters the N. and E. fide of it: It contains(tho’but one
Parljh-Ch.jabqat 400 Houfes, and 6 Wards, ui\. Eatcn-ftreet. High-ftreet, Grefs
&nd Pin/Iy,MidJle-marJh and Lorncr-marjh, is govern’d by a Bayliff, Recorder, e
juliices, and 24 Capital Burgefles; befides x 2 Conftablesj Eledls Parl.Men, and
has a very great Mt.on Fridays for Gattel, Corn, &c. and 4 Fairs, vi\. on St.
Simon and Jude, flt.. Peter, St. Bartholomew, and on Tuefday after Midlent Sun-
day.'Jis more elpecially noted for its fine,Wooil,call’d Lemfler Ore , as alfofor
Ks pure Wheat and fine Flower, and has feveral good Inns.
The main Body of theTowniiesupcn the Right,but poceeding at 136*2,leave
the forward way on the Left to lVeblgy,eaii an enclos’d R, by two Houfes on the
Right, conveys j'ou direftly to ffeinton, but bearing to theßight at 138*2. pais by
Rjngsland'Ch.&r.d at 140*1, thro’ Ringsland V.of 4F.and at 142*4,thr0
r” Whence at 144*4 delcending 2 F. and by flraggling Houfes, and a great Hill
on Ihe Left 5 at 146*6, Wadels fiv.y> als thro’Cemb V. enter Radnorjh. at 148*5, and
? ■ *., ai f r:er i reft ain on Lugflv in,a Pleafant and Rich Valley, in Weljh, Lhan
Andre. Fwas formerly a Imail Til!age,now a large and well-built Town of 4F.
3h this p.ace the Affixes are kept for the County of It has a good Mt.on
Satyr a, upecially for Barly r ,i which is here Malted in great quantities, and two
Fans, on St. Andrew and Midfummer Day, with feveral convenient Inns.
Hence at xsl *3, thro’ Difcoyd V. and 153*3, throCafcob V. afeenda Hill of 6F.
sna by Bleibuagb-Poiett) mdßlethuagk-Ch. on the Right, at 154*7, defeend 7G,
Whence


whence over a Heath of FF. the R. afcends again 5 F and a fomewnat lers T)e-c
brings rou to a ftraight inclos'd way. palling by a lew Hou les, an d cuffing
mmnflv. at 160 M.beyond which, palling over another Hill abou 4F. high, a
6 », you come to Ithon flv. falling into the above ;and a 132, no s
CloMckflv . which falls into the ftiw Whence repeated Afc. andD c * c . I«™g
mmd on the Left, lead at x6%'u to b f ond . whl i, , B e i ? a no „?£S
R.fo Kindergovey,vulgo Raihader, at 170*3 a Town of 3 F * s ‘" 1 '5
of the Country, and upon ’Tis govern dby a Bay I. ft, his a h,t w
Wednld. and 4 Fairs, w*. on St. day, Augufl 10, 14 Day* M?
chvlnufs, and 3 Weeks after AlhaUcntide-, with two Inns, the and the
At the End of the Town, over a Wood-Br. you crofs the Wye, ana 5 F. withe ,
come to the foot of an Eminent Afc.'of 10F. which at 174 4. oelcends 6 F.a>.d
having left the inclos’d way IM. on this fide Riadergowy, the R. continues alto-
gether open as well as Mountainous and Boggy, to
But forward from the (aid Defc. Eland flv. on the Lett 5 at cro.s Earn-
iftwith-Brook and enter Cardigan])}, afcending a Hill ot 6 1-. an equal Defc. I hta
palling Moorifhground, by fome Lead-mines,ar.d a Houle on the fug ,a
183’s call’d Moreen Glovnhfi woody Defc. leads into V. tn a _Valiey :
Whence by fome ftraggling Houfes on next Ale. and along the fucccediag par t
of the R. which ftill lies thro a kind of Morafs j at 191*5 you touch-upon
del flv* on the Right, and at 194,2.defeend 12 F. Then crofs the RtdaL at j 56 7,
aqd 3, F. farther, come to Llanbadern-Vaur of 6 F. on theß. a wed built lown
with* a fair Church, formerly an Epifcopal See, and now the Panth-Cb, ta
ABhRISTWIIH, which you enter at 198*7, being 4 F. long.
’ Aberiflwith or Abereflhvey, on the Ridal , near its Confluence with the Ijtmw,
where it falls into the Sea, imply’d by the prefix’d Aher, i.e. Oftinm llumini 4
was formerly a Wall’d-Town, fortify’d with a now ruinous Cable; and con-
tain’d many more Houles than it does at prelect, yet it is a C pi p. Gov ern d by
' a Mayor, Recorder, &c* lending one Burgefs to Pari, and enjoying a good Mr.
on Mond. lor Corn, Wooll. &c. and two Fairs, on Mend before Eafl.tr, 9 nd
on Decemb. 18. Altho* there are fcarce too Houfes in this Town, yet it is noted
for it’s Filhing Trade for Herrings , Cod, &c.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
L {. F, from Aheriflmtb, the Left to Weljhpool II At the End of
the Left to PPelJhpool. 111. 3*2 Beyond the Right to Kofi-fair.
IV. 4F. farther the Right. V. z’6, Ihort of , the Lelr to New Town.
VI. I*3, Beyond Riadergovcy , the Lift to VII. 10 F.fhort of Clme-
docli ftuv. the Left to Ludlow. VIII. 2 F. Ihort of Ithon fluv. the Left to Knigh-
ton. IX-I’4, Ihort of Cafcob , the Right to Radnor. X. At Cafeob the Left to
Rjiighton. XL In Difcoyd the Right to Reinton. XII. 5 F- beyond the
Right to Reintpn . XIII- At the End of the Right to XIV- 3F-
beyond Eaflerton,th e Right to Arlani. XV. The Left in RjngslarJ XVI- 2 F.
beyond Rjngsland,\Py& Rightto Laretcn. XVII. 1 M- fhort of the Right
to Evingm- XVII. The Right in Lemfler, to Hereford • XIX- 4. F. beyond
L»|-Bridgj the Right to Hampton, and 1F- farther the Left to PidUfl&r. .
B 4
The


The Road from
LONDON to ARVNDEL in SUSSEX.
t T HE Bearing S. W. by S. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance 49
.H M. 111. The vulgar Computation 46 M. IV.The Dimenfumion y 5 ’ 4 .
From London Comp, Meafure,
to Towring 05 05 067 c^’7
Evrcll q 6 ii 07’x j 14*0
Let unr head I\6 057 i9 5 5
O4 /20 04 <5 24*3
Comp. Meafure.
toStoneflreet 05 2 $ 05*5 1 yo’a
Biiiinghurlt jo 3$ n’3 41’$
Amberley ,08 43 097 s si’2,
Arundel 03 46 04*2 (55*4
With the Continuation ftom Arundel to thus,
From Arundel Comp, Meafure.
to Chichefier 08 M. io’4*
Middlcfex , Surrey and Suffex include the whole R. and the Thames, Mole , Ohe,
Amn and Lavant are the principal Riv. paid over; affording an indifferent Way,
but good Entertainment. 7
Ti! eic ;' ibe ' is by Doling, yet fome will pafs by 3 or 4.
. to tne Lei t,and others thro’ the more frequented way, on the Left to
k‘”g by stretham, Mkham and Sutton.
I hus much in general; the Turnings to be avoided are thefe that follow ;
to Kjngfton. i’j, the Left to Croydon , §’4, the Right forward to
1 3 25 thc ett t 0 Monfuch. 14’ 1, the Right to the Common. 1 y’y, the
n If , 7, r , t . he . Lett * *9'4, In Leatberhead, the Right to Guilford. 24’?, In
a l tije Rignt to Guilford, zz’y the Left along , uniting again.
25 3, the Right to Guilford. 347, the Left to Horfham. The by
screwvrtdg uniting again. 4 j’ 4) the Right to 5-14, the left.
The Right to Cichejler. 5:5
From tne Standard in Comhil, London , along Grace church-fireet, Fiji)-fir eet-hill
over Lonaon bridge and thro’ So;mi?ww/,:,pafsat x’4 to Kensington of z F- at the
enaol which, the acute Way on the Right to Guilford and Portfmouth
lancnes out, and another at the Gallows, to , and thence to Lewes and
mwhaven, by Croydon , or to Arundel , by Horfham or Darlfna.
Hence over Clapham-R. you come at 64, toToming-beci V. and at 7 M.
t iro Tow. tng-graveny V. of z F. Whence an Lidired way leads at io’z to
, T an r r t er -, lma!l villa £ e > and leaving Hon-fuch on the Left, ibmedme a
aLt / Home bui.t by f/, VIII, yon pals thro at 14 M. a Mt-Town of about
? i f‘'d. a . L 4 t ' : ' iro ’ part of Ebejham, vulgoEpfom, a Town much frequented for
i s ivk'G'icmai Waters; the Well lying 3F. on the Right at 1 Then going on,
*' ! 6 , s’ enfer Leatberhead 0! 3F. whence bearing to the Left, paffingat zTd, thro’
* n iithamV- F. 1 M. farther, crols Molefiv. near the Piacs where it has a fubter-
J«ncan Panage for a Mile or two, and enter Barfing, alias Darhfn. at 24T a large
( ''iy a branch of the Mole, with a Noted Market on Thurfd, efpecially for
q ,^ rom alar fin over a Hill of 3 F.fucceeded by another Afc. and woody on each
3ou come to Cold'bar hor-Vhll sic. 3F. but defc, IM. and thence at 30 M
to


to Smt-freet V. Whence a Caufey of z M.part of the old Roman Pott-way call’d
Stany-fireet, (near which is Cheeky or Aclea , where K. EthelwaldSon of K. Egbert
obtain’d an eminent Victory over the P4Hfj)leads by fmall Defc. at 30’7 to Oke-
mod-Bvidg Then afcending o\e waod.Hill, enter at the forward
Way leading thro’ Honey-lane : to avoid the Dirdnefs of which, bear to the
Right. At 347, the forward way on the Left extends to about 3 M.
diftant, a good Borough and Mt-f own, fb call’d from Brother of \
’Lis Govern’d by 1 Baylififs, Ele&ing Pail. Men, and is the place where the
Country-Gaol is kept; leaving which, Ko V. appears next, where you have
again a different way on the Left,
Hence t hro’a Cops at 36'4’ercfs Afunfiv. and leave Pef/a»-Place on the
Left, the laft way uniting at 37’54 where a direft R. thro Busman-Corn V. leads
at 4i’i ,into Billingherji of 3 F. Thence thro’ Lulfey V. and over New Bridg and
Pw/lww-Common,defc end 3F. pais over Wichford Br. and at 47’6, thro’WicSen-
holt V. Afterwards by Parham- P. belonging to Sir Cecil and the Place on
the Lett, you come to Parham V. whence 3 fucceffive Defc. convey you at ji
M* to Amberley, a Thorough-fair ot 3 Furlongs.
At yz’z, over Houghton-llx • crofs Arunflv. 4 F. farther pals thro’ Houghton of z
F.and after an Alc.ot 3 F* you come to A at by thence
to the Br. 6 F. ’Tis an ancient Borough-Town, on the N, W. of the Arun, over
which it hasa fairWooden-Er- where Ships of 100 Tun may ride: It is govern’d
by a Mayor, i z ßurgelfes, a Steward, &c. has a great Mt. on Thurfd. a fmall one
on Saturd• and 4 Fairs, vi\. on May 3. Aug . ro.Septernb. 14* and Decsmb • 6. It en-
joys a good Trade, feveral Ships being here built, as the Society and Mary, &c.
Ihe Cali Is, famous in the Saxon Times, having the Honor of an Earldom en-
tail d upon the PolTefTors of it, is leated on the E. of the Tame, and reputed 1
M. in compafs.
From Arundel thro’ the old F ifh Market and Water gate (by Hoofyswood on the
left, and Arundel great Park on the-Right, (the little one lying betwen Mar-
gate and the Caftle) at 2’7, defc. Amsford-Hillof 4F. and at 4M. over -
Br. then by Half-way-Tree, thro’ CmSerhil V. at 6f- Thence by Bexley- Church
at 7M. and Sir Will. Motley’s Houle on the Right, and Tangmere on the Left,
at B’i pafs thro Maudline V- till byHampnet-Ch. on theßight,and the place on the
Left you crofs Lavantflv. and at 96, enter the Suburbs of feated
in a Plain, and on the faid River near its Mouth, a City indifferent larce, con-
taining 4 Parilh Ch. within the Walls, befides the Cathedral, One without E.
Gate, and another without W. Gate, both demolilh’d in the late Wars. This
City has 4 Gates rooking towards the 4 Cardinal Points, to which the 4 prin-
cipal Streets lead, and are call’d E-Jireet, W-ftreet. M-ftree: and S-ffreet- ’Tis Go-
vern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, &e. lends PurgelTes to Pari, has two
good Mts. on PVednefd. and Saturd. the greateft for.Fifh in the County, and c
Fairs, hit on April 23. Wbitjun-Mond. 2j. -day, and 0 days
after, call’d Slow Pair- y
Turnings to be avoided.
I. At the End of Maudline the Left to Petvoonh 11. In Amberly the Left. 111. 1 F.
beyond Darhjng, the Right to London by Stretham. IV. In Leatherhead the Left
to Ringlion. V. At the Entring Ewel the Left to Rjngjlon. VI, At the Mid-
way between Morsdon and Touting, the Left to
The


The Road from LONDON to BARWICK
In NORTHUMBERLAND.
I, r I '''HE Point of Bearing N.bv W. 11. The direft Horizontal Difiance 280 M,'
X 111. The Vulgar Computation z6 M. IV. The Dimenfuration, 339^
From London Comp. Meafure,
to Waltham 12 12 j ia’o 12*0
/y#n? 08 20 op’4 2i’4
Moyfton 13 33 16*4 38*o
Huntingdon 15 l9 ’2 57'2
Stilton 19 57 l2 ’° 6 *’°
Stamford 12 66 t3>6 83’o
Grantham I<S 85 2P4 . [o4*4
lsewar\ i° 9> H’O liB’4r
Tux ford 10 105 H>6 x 3» , 2
Voncafter 18 123 24*0 xsj>2
Wenbridge 17 130 io>a 165*4
Comp. MeaOir.
to Tadcafler 12 J 142 i 7 ’ 0 I iB2’i
l5O 09 ’ 4 IS>2 *o
lopcliff 17 167 23 7 6 ,21 S’6
Northallerton oj 176 229’4
Darlington l 0 186 u’o 243;+
DURHAM 200 i9>o 262/4
Newcajile i 2 2t 2 14/0 176*4.
Afjrpeth 12 224 14*4.2? I*3
12
Bel ford 12 248 15*4 }M’4
Bawicli iz 160 15 <5 33^.^
Middlefex,Hartfordjh. Cmbridgjhire, Huntingdonshire, Rutlandfhire,LincolnJhire,
Notthghamjhhe, Yorkshire, the Bifhoprick of Durham and Northumberland are the
Counties part thro’. And Lea, Grant a, Owfe, Nine, Welland, With am,Trent,
Idle, Whhwater, Dun, Went, Are, Wharf, Nid, Your or Owfe, Swale, Wish, Tees,
Shjern, Were, Tyne, Blith, Wanfpech, Ale, Warne and Tweed, are the Riv. croft over.
*ris one of the moft frequented R. of the Kingdom, tho’ none of the heft way;
for after the firrt 20 or 30 M.’tis generally fo bad, that there was a certain late
Impofition upon Travellers, for 3 Years, at Stilton and elfewhere, of about a
Penny for a Horfe, See. toward the Repair of that part of it $ yet it affords
good Entertainment at moderate rates. The Computation of Port-Miles is the
fame as the vulgar Eftimation; only from Royftcn to Huntingdon they acount
17 M. and from Yorh to Northallerton but 24 M. '
- , ■" r 3 » . •
THus the whole R. is compris’d in f Plates, the firrt ending at Stilton in
Huntingdonjh. the ad. at Tux ford in Nottingbamjh. the 3 at the City
of York j the 4 th. at cbe[ier in the Street, in the Bifhoprick of and the
3th. at Harwich ; We begin with the firrt Plate containing and the follo-
wing Turnings are to be avoided.
k. i »
• <
'At y M. the Left to Wood-green. 17*7, the Left to I*3, the
Right. 27-3, the Right to Standon. 27the Right to 31*3, the
Right to WithiaU. 47 ’y, the Left to Pachfton . yß’o, the Right.
**> * ;
From the Standard in C ornhil, along Bifhopfgate-lireet within, thro’ Bijhopfgate,
and Bijhopfgate ftreet without, you come at 4 F. to the Barrs $ and enter Shorditch,
leaving London at x’2 and Hog (do a. on the Left, at 2*2, enter RjngjlandV. of zF»
and i M. farther, Newington V. having a long Street on the left,toward Islington-,
whence an eafy Ale. of 4 F. call’d Standford- Hill, often frequented by High way-
men, and equally defending leads at y M. to Tottenham High-Croft, a place much
refbrted to by the Citizens; Hence reiterated Buildings extends at 6’y, to Tot-
tenbam-jirees,&ni at about 7 M. to Edmonto a long difeontinued Village.
■ ■ At*


At 8 V you come to Ponders-End, and foot! after to final!
Viliam and at 10 M. Enfield Wajh V. whence leaving Tuttle-ftreet one the left,
at n '6, you enter Hartfordfh, and a little farther, a Poft-Town,
and a very good Thorough fare, with 2 or 3 Convenient Inns. It extends about
3 F, and a litie beyond (the Gibbet on the Right) Theobalds the King’s Ho u fe,
pleafantly feated appears 2 F. on the left.
At 13 M. pafs Croft-Brook, iM. farther. Turners-hitl V. and at 141, -
ftreet 3 F. long; whence ftraggling Houfes lead to Wormley End at i<s’i ~ M. be-
yond eroding the New-Riv. and 2 F. after entring Brokton Village.
At x 7’6, you come to Hodjdon of 6 F> near the River a good Thorough-
fare Town, with a well ftor’d Mt. on thurfd, and one Fair on St. Peters day.
Hitherto the R. appears like an entire Street of continued Houfes Travelling
forward leave Hayly on the Left, and over a Hill, Pafs to Amvcell at 2o’y,froni
which and C hadwel, the Hew-Riv, is convey’d to London .-‘The feveral Ways
on the left hereabouts, lead to Hanford, but 2 M. diftant, the Shire-Town,
Govern’d by a Mayor, 9 Burgefles, &e. Electing Pari. Men, and having a Mt.
on Saturd. this Town formerly had y Churches, now reduc’d to 3, and is much
decay’d fince the diverting the great Road from it. * ,
At 2-I’4 enter Ware of IM. eroding there firft the and next the Lea,
which at about f M. diftance has accompanied you the laft 14 M.’fis a Large
Town full of Inns; with a good Mt. onTuefd. and much talk’d of for its great
Bed ; Whence by Wades-MiU, Crofs Mimerflv. pafs thro’ High-Cnfs End, and
Collier's, End, and at 27T, enter Puc\eridg alias Fuc\rich , a good Thorough-fare
of 3 F. where the R. on the Right, leads to Standon a Mt-Town r M. diftant,
and juft beyond, the great R. to Cambridge , &c. appears on the Right.
At 29 M.repafs the Af/w?r,and at 3 x’y,come to Bmtingford, a good
fare Town of 4 F. with aM. on Mond. 6 F. beyond which, you enter Hew Chip-
ping : and at 34 Miles Bucffiand, 2 Villages. Whence an eafie Defc. leads at 38
M. to Royjion , a large T Own of 4F. feated on the Em ing ftreet in a fertile Vale,
and pare in C 2 mbridgjh. full of good Inns, with a great Corn-Market on
Wednefd.
At 3 enter Cambridgjh. and at 40V pafs V. At 43*2 Crofs Grant
alias Cam flv. and at 44’y, come to Arrington another Village; Whence a ftraight
R. by Wimple and Congrave on the Right, and thro’ a Cops at 48 M, brings
you at 49*3 to Holm, and at Caxton , of 5,F- feated in the Clay; a Poft-
Town, and good Thorough-fare, with a Mt. on
At yi’7 pals thro’ Papworth Everardy. of 2 F. and leaving or
Papmnh-Agnes fM. on the Left, enter Huntingdonjh. at y 3 ’y. Leaving Hilton 4
F.to the Right, and Beggars Bujh, on a rifmg ground on the left; a fmall Defc.
leads to Godmanchefter, at s6'z of 4 F. a Place of great Antiquity, and a large
Corp. feated in a fertile Soil, and on Ow flv, much addifted to Husbandry :
Having croft the Riv. enter Huntington, heretofore containing xy Parifti-Ch;
now only four; Govern’d by a ( Mayorand 12 Aldermen, Electing Pari. Men c
J Tis the Shire-Town, has a good Mt. on Saturd. and gives Title to the Right
Honourable Theophilm Earl of Huntingdon.
■ * 8 M. leave-the Town ;at y 9 ’7, pafs thro’ Great Stuckey V. of 2F. and
M. farther. Little Stuchjey : At 61 M. bearing to the Right, a dir eft R in-
diderently endoled and open by Stone-gate Hole, and Stone-gate on the Left,’and
bt. Andrew s Chappei and Camingm on the Right, brings you at C9'i } to Stilton ,
&S in Plats *
* ■’ * 1 . *
1 . Backward


Backward Turnings to be avoided,
I. At the End of Stilton the Right and Left to Our die and Peterborough. 11. A-
g&inft Stone-gate the Left to St .Ives. lll. In Holm the Left to BoarnTV.7F.be-
yond Holm, the Right to Pack (lone, V. 6 F. beyond Buntingford , the Right to
Upftaine. VI. At the end of Ware the Right to Hartford. VII. At the end of
Ringfland the Right to IJlingtort.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to BARWICk, Com. Northumbr,
Commencing at Stilton, Com. Huntingdon, and Extendingto TuxfordjCora. Not-
tingham, Containing 6z Miles.
In which thefe following Turnings are to be avoided.
I. At 73*2 (Trom London) an Oblique Crofs way, the Right to Allenon . 11. Bx’4,
the forward way which leaves Stamford on the Right. HI. the Left to
Stoke, the Right to Eafton. IV, 104 7, the Left to V. in’s, the Right
to Vodington. VI. the Entrance into Newarky the Right to Goddington. VII.
1104, the Left to Rellurn. VIII. xjo M. the Right to Nomonton.
IN the former Part, we arriv’d at Stilton at 69 z, a good Thorough-fare and
a Principal Poll: Town, of about 3 F. Whence an open ftraightway of 6
F. from Haddon on the Left, at 73T, leads between and Allenon, each
v M. from the R. s F. farther a way falls in from Peterborough, at a place cal-
led Wafhington-Corner, 1 M. beyond which,enter Water-Newton V. of 2 F» on the
S.W. Banks of the Ninefiv. and another M. farther, at 7 M. pals thro’
Sibforr, leaving Stibbington between you and the Riv. 2 F. to the Right. At 77’i
eroding the Nine, and entring VPantfworth of 3 F.in by
and Wittering equally z F. on the Left, at 81*4 you leave the direCier way and
between Wotbrop and Burleigh, at 82’y, enter , vulgo Stamford from Stan
and ford, y. d. Vadum Saxeum, leafed upon the Welland, and at the conjunction,
of the Counties of Northampton, Rutland and Lincoln, in which laft ’tis reputed
iituate, being the Principal Town of that divifion of the County call’d
It extends about sF. on the R. being a Town of good Antiquity 5 whence the
Reman High-Street, or High-Dikey leads to the North, and where temp E, 111. part
of the Oxford Scholars, upon a contention between the S. and N. Men of that
Univeriity, were fettl’d, and held there publick Schools for all forts of Learn-
ing ; not returning till by Order of the King’s Proclamation ; fo that the Gra-
duates were afrerwards oblig’d by Oath not to Read publickly at Stamford to
the prejudice of Oxford ; ’Tis at prefent a fair large flourifhing Town, confiding
of divers well order’d Streets jGovern’d by a Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder,
containing 6 Parifh Ch. ’Tis Wall’d about, adorn’d with feveral rairStruChares;
having 2 good Mts. on A fond. and Frid. for Cattel,Corn, &c. and trading
principally in Male, Sea-Coal, and Free-ftone from IC?ntoW'Quarry; It aifo
ElcCh Parliament-Men, and gives Title to the Right Honourable Henry Grey E.
of Stamford.
Leaving the Town, you enter Rutland, and at 84T theaforefaid flraight w r ay
falling into the Left 3 pals to C after ton alia* Bridg Caftertcn V. of 3 F. fup-
pos’<l


pos’d to be the Caulennis xn Antoninus ; at the entrance into which,juft at 8j M.
you crofs a branch of the Welland ; whence a ftraight R. generally open, leaving
Titkingtoat at 68 V and Greetbam, at 8 96, each z F. to the Left, carries you
thro’a Wocd at 90 M, and within zF. of on theßight,at 91’x and having
juft pait another Cops, you enter Limolnjb.it 91*6. Then leavings.
Ch. about 1 M and N. Witham i M. on the Left, (where flv. takes its
rife) thro’ a third Wood and Poll: Witham, you come to Coltfworth V. at ?6’z.
Whence an open direct R. crofting the faid River, at z6’z. leads between
jiotie and Eafion, by great Panton contiguous on the LefCat ioi’x where Roman
Pavements have been oftdig’d up, and by its nearnefs to prefum’d
to be the ad Fontem in the Itinerary, and Little Panton a F. diftant on the fame;
A l lO2 aicend forj F.and iM. farther, pafs by the Spital on the Left, and feme
Houles on the Right, juft at 104 M. and 3 F. farther enter , feated in
a bottom, and on the W. Banks of the Riv. Witham , a noted Town, with a good
Free School built by Rich. Fox Bp. of Winton , and a fair Ch, for its high
Spite and feeming crcokednefs, which yet is over-look’d by the adjacent Hills:
Vis a Corp. Govern’d by a Mayor and 12 Juftices of the Peace; Electing Bur-
gelies to Pari. Enjoying a good Mt. for Sheep, Corn, Malt, on and a
Fairs, vi £. on Decemb. 6th. and on the sth. Mund. in Lent. At the entrance into the
Town,a R. turns oft'to Harlexton vulgo Harl , 2M. to the Left, where temp. H. 8.
was turn’d up by Ploughing a Golden Helmet of anAntique figure fuppos’d to be-
longto at the other end of theTown,aß. on
the Left to Barobey and Belvoir Caftle, on the edge of Lekefterjhs in the pleafant
Vale ofße/zw>,abour which are found the Star-like Stones caWdAftroitcs, former
ly of great efteem, Victory being attributed to the eftedfs of their being worn.
AtioTyleave Gnmto:, whence a gentle Afc. of aboutrMdeads to
a F. beyond which, leaving Mathrop i-M.oa the Right, defcendHooc////-Hill and
having Sedbrook and Aliington on theLeft,enter F often toxofiy, aThorough-fare of
3F. beyond which Wefiborow appears ~M. on the Right, and atm’4. you come
to BenyngtonV . on tbs Right of zM. Thence the feveral Right-hand ways to Vod~
ington. iM diftant, and at 114’;,you enter Nottinghamjh. an open way extending
at 11 6 T, to Bulderton vulgo BuniertonSf. and thence a diredl way leads at 118 M*
to Newarfa or for diftindtion, Newark upon Trent, as being feated on the S. E.of
that Riv. which beyond the Town makes an Ifland. It’s a large and fair Town*
Govern’d by a Mayor and iz Juftices of the Peace; claims the Eleftion of Pari.
Men; and enjoys a good Trade, and a confiderable Mf. on for Corn,
Cattle, &c. with z Fairs, vi^. on Wednefd. ln and 22. It had
once a ftately Caftle, built by Alexander Biihop of , now ruinous; ’Tis
extended 6 F. and at the end of it,overa fair Br. you crofs Trent fiv. and leaving
liellum f M. to the Right, repafs it at izo M. or rather that leparated Branch
only, which unites about 1 M. below, and here forms an Ifland as before.
At xzi M. pals thro’S. Mu&kum, and atxzz’z.N- Mufkurn, and both Villages,
the Trent fM. diftant on the Right: Thus continuing vour Journey, at 123’6,
you come to Crwwwe/aThorough-fare of zF.and and Harwell on the
Left, at s 25 ’4, enter Carlton upon Trent another Through-fare. Then arriving at
Sutton juft ati 27M. leave the Trent, and turning to the Left, pafs thro’ at
xzBM. At 13 iTenterTioc/ord, alias Tuxfordin from itsGlaiey fituation;of
about 3F. not large, but a Poft-T and good Thorough-fare, a Mt. on Mondays*
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 3 F. beyond Tuxford, the Left to Normanm. 11. At the end of Carltonwyon Trent
the Right to Nowell, 111, izF. ftiortof Newark-, the Right to Vellum. IV, x F.
beyond


beyond the Right-hand-way. V. At the entring Lhcolnjhire, theleft ig
C laypool. VI. roF.fliort of Bennington, the Left to Doddington. VII. At. the end
•f Bennington, the Left toWeftbonrw. Vlll. iF. beyondFc/low, the forward way
IX. 4F,beyond Grantham , the Left to ßofton. X.Oppofite to Rjrkftoke, the Right
and Left. XL At the end of Coltfwortb, the Right and Left. XlLQppolite to
Stratton , the Right and Left-hand-ways. XIII. rM. fhort otStamford forward
the Street-way. XIV. At the entring Stamford , the Left to Uffington. XV. At
the end of Want (worth forward to Stilton a different way.XVI. i M. beyond
Water-Newton, the forward way to Peterborough. ' J
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to BARWICK, Com, Northumbr .
PLATE, III.
Commencing atTuxford iaCom.Nottingham, the City of YORK.
Containing 60 Miles 6 Furlongs,
; v
The following Turnings are to be avoided. -
At 134*7) the Left to Eljey. 141*1, the Right to and the Left acut£
iyi’x,the Right to Cantley. 156*75 the Left to Scaa-rfy..-167*1, the Right to
Womerjly. 170*1, the Left to Brotherten. 1714, the Right to Hillum.
V** * t* ~ ' - ’
■,";! ■ ■; t
IN the Secondplate, we proceeded to Tuxford, which leaving at 131*3 , by Little
Markham,lE.on the Left; a Defc leads to Idle f which crofs,and at 134 M.
pafsthro* little Drayton V. Whence entringtheForeft of Sherwood pafs between
Elfey and Gamefton, and at 157M.r0 the4oaks; leaving and Morton at a
little diflance on the Right; and at 141*3, entring Barnby on the Moor, aV.ofzF.
you come next at 1 a z’ 6, to Tarvt>orth,V.iVs.to xbeLeftof which appearsß/tt/; aMt-T,'
Next at 143*7, pals hySorlby on the Left ati
V.ofzF.from which an openway to a Brook at 146*6, where you -enter Torhjhire
and Baurty ; a Town of3F. with aMf,on Saturd chiefly noted foritsTrade inMil-
flones, &c.and here falls in a greatß.on the Left from Mansfield , Bother am &cj
Hence thro’a Wood ati/fSM.aftraight and good way leads
the Ch-3F. to the Left; aM.farther, leaving High Baders zF. on the fame Hand,
enter Doncaftcr at ly yM.of near SF, a Place of great Antiquity, anciently call’d
Dantm and Doneceafier , from its Caftle now ruin’d and its fituation on Don fiv.
*Jis a well-built Town, Govern’d by a Mayor and 6 Aldermen, &c. Enjoy s a
good Trade for Stockings and K,nit Waftcoats, &c. Has a gooddVL. on Saturd.
for Cattle, Corn &c. with a Fair oaAuguft 10. and gave Title to fames late Duke
of Monmouth, Earl of Done after, &c. ; / . t : *
At the end of the Town, crofs thePo», leaving about M.to the W. Rufmrtb,
Ssausby and Pigborn fucceflively. Ati6oM. the Street-way falling in on your Left,
leads by Robin-Hood’sYlell at 1 61*7, clofe on theßight, and ati 63 *z,f M on
the Left .• Then you come to Wentbriige at 165*4,0fzF.0n Went flv.i M beyond
which, pafs thro ’Darrington-, theß.inclining to the Right, and leavingtheStreet-
vray, which leads thro' Pontefract P. brings you at xyo’z to Lerribridg vulgoFeni-
iriggs,(iM.totheN.E.ofPontefratf)aPoft-Town,on theS.fide of Are fiv. over which
it has a fairStone-Br. Whence at 4 F. crofs th eMarjh, and come within 1 M-.of
Brother ton on the Left, the Birth-place ofthonm of to K. Edward I.
Between


Between Burton and Pool each M. from the R. you come to Betterefs- Hill at
i7?’i a Defcent of F. palling between, Lumney and Mon\Frifton equally rM.
from theß. Then enter Milford V. at 1747, of 2 F. and at x near
--M 3 good with 3 IVlt. on Sfitutd* 3nd sn Eminent Frsc-Schoolj
noted for its Production of Cherries, &c. . , ' • ' .
At 177’f. leave Barkflone and at 178, M. each 2 F. on the
Right, and at 179’* enter Tolton vulgo Tovcton V. ot near 2 F. where on -
Sunday Anno. 1 461 the Houte of Tw-/{,after a dubious ConfuC., obtain d a Signal
Victory over the Lancaflrian Party, both Armies confiding in 100000 Men, of
whom 3 <OOO are Reported to.be Kill’d on the place.
At iß2’3, over afair Stone-Br. crofs Warf or Wherf flv. and enter Tadcajter, the
Calcaria in Antoninus , to which, anfwers an adjacent Hill call’d a Town
of 3 F.well provided for the Reception of Travellers:.lt has a Mt, on Thurfd. ana
is noted for the abundance pf Lime-ftone here digg’d. up. Whence by Stretch-Hall
3p. to the Right, xM. farther,the Street-way from Tadeafler falls in on the Left,,
and xF. beyond, vi\. at 185’?, crofs thro St F. to the W- of which is
Bilbrough.l hen palling between As kb am and on the Left, and C
and Bijhops-Thorp on the Right, at isio’4, you come to V.of iF. and
by the Gallows and 3 Wind mills,enter the Suburbs of at 191'$,Mickle-Gate
appears 3F. farther, whence you have r M. to and as far beyond, to the
Pavement or middle of the City; which well deferves a particularDefcription.'
TO R IC the id. City of the Kingdom, anciently call’d Ebcracum or ,
by the Romans-, Everwic, and Eofemic, by the Saxons-, Caer Ejfroc by
Caer Ebranc by Nennius ; and Brigantium by as being the Chief City of
the Brigantes ; takes its Name from Tour or Jims flu. which pafies thro’ it, d.
juxta Urum ;’Tis a place of great Antiquity, Laid to be built by Ebrank a Briti(h
K. 980 Years before Chrifl's Nativity, whence fome wou’d alfo deduce the word
Eboracum-,of great Efteem in the Time of the Remans, being a Colony, and Ration
of their fixth Legion call’d Piclrix ;famous for the Death and Funeral Exequies
of Severm and Conftantius, and the Birth and Inauguration pf Conftantine the
Great, the Firfl Chri/Han Emperor; Preferving and Encreafing its Lulheeven to
a Miracle, under the various changes of the Saxons , Banes and Nomans-, and
comprehending temp Edrv*Conf.6 Divificns or Wards, and therein 1628 Manfion
Houles; but a plentiful (barer in Calamities,both by Sword,Fire and Peltilence.
’Tis pleafantly feated in a large Valley in the fnidft of the Shire, at theCon*
fluence of Owfe and F dfsflv. in a fertile Soil and healthful Air; being the Bern <tT
Tutamen of the Northern Parts: It’s well-built, tho’ for the moft part-of Wood;
Adorn’d with many fair Structures Publick and Private; and Fortify’d with
a Caftle and ftrong Walls; It extends S.W.and N.E. and as much tranfverlly ; is
divided into 4 Wards,within which are contain’d, befides the Cathedral, 32.
Ch.of which 28 in prefent life.- ’Tis Govern’d by a Lord Mayor(as the City of
London) r 2 Aldermen Jultices of the Peaces Sheriffs, 24 Prime Council-Men, 8
Chamberlains, 72 Common Council-Men, a Recorder, Town-Clerk,Sword-
Bearers, and Common-Serjeant. It enjoys large Immunities, Confirm’d by the
Succeffive Ks.of England from H. 11. Made a County Incorporate by R. 11. in-
cluding 3 $ V- and Hamlets, call d the Ai , all on the W. of the Ovcfe. EleCts
BurgelTes to parl.and is Hoqour’dby giving Titleto feveraiPrincesof theßoyal
Blood, Particularly to the late K. tfames 11. ’Tis well frequented by Merchants,
as feated on the Navigable Orvfe, dividing it into 2 Parts, conjoin’d by a (lately
Br.of f Arches, l|of which the middlemofl, is perchance the faireft in England.
It hds 4Mts. v/%. oaTuefd, Thurfd. Frfd, Saturd. well provided of Fldb, Fifli,
' Fowl,


Fowl, &c.’ And is the Seat of an Arch-Bilhop The old Cathedral, begun by
Edwin K. of the Nortbumbers Anno. 527* finifh’d by his Succeffor Ofwald , and
Dedicated to St. Peter, being Burnt } the Foundation of the prefeut, was laid by
John Roman, and compleatedby his Son , William Melton, and Tkoresby Arch-
Bifhops thereof, affifted by the Nobility and Gentry of the Country, efpecially
the Percies and Favafors ;’Tisa large Magnificent and Stately Pile of Building-,
with a curious Chapter-Route on the N. fide, ofExquifire Workmanlhip. *
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 2 F. from Tork, the Right. IL iF. from Bilbrougb, the Right to Tadcafler , the
Street-way. 111. 3 F. from Tadcafter, the Right to Wingate. IV. 2 M, fhort of
Ferribriggs, the Left to Pool, the Right to Burton. V. 7F. fliort of Robin Rood 6 *
Well, the Right to Sjielburrow , VI. 2M. beyond Robin-Hood's Well, the Left
to Adam-flreet , the Right acute. VII. I*3, beyond Voncafier the Left. VIIL f
F. fhort of (and oppofite to) Rojfmgton , the Right. IX. 3 F. fhort of Scrooby;
the Right. X. 4F. fhort of Little Dr aim, the Right. XL y F. from Little
Bratton , the Left.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to BARWICK , Com` Northumbr.
Commencing at the City ef YORK and Extending to Chefter in the Street Com.
Duaelm. Containing 76 Miles 4 Furlongs.
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At Iwithout Michjegate Torfi, the Left forward to London, the Right
to Popleton. 209’3, Entnng Bunowbriggs, the Left to the Right (for*
wardj to Aldborougb. 2l3’s, In Vis ford, the Left to Rippen. 2? 4’4, the Left to
the Coal-Pits. 2J9T, the Left to Great Merington. 267*1, the Right toLumley.
WE conduced you in this manner to the City of TORIC reckoning from
the Standard in Cornhil London , to on the S. W. of that
City ipi M. and to the middle of the City about ipz\ : Ey the direft fuper-
ficial Protradlion of the laid R. about 176 M. but the direft Horizontal diftance
not above x6z M. This we mention, for that Mr. Norwood, making the faid Ho-
rizontal Diftance 177 M. ftated thence a Degree of Latitude at y
which Mr, Oughtrei , by an Angle to the Center of the Earth, reduces to 66 %7,
and we incline to believe will not prove above 3 Miles.
Our Dimenfuration is continu’d from MiclJegate aforefaid, doubling 5 F.of
the R. from London, palling between Popleton on the Right, and Ruff'crd and
Hejhw on the Left. Crofting Nidflv. at 1997 over Skip- BrifM. below tfilftborp.
Hall, leaving Rjr\-PUmertom 2F- to the left, and Palling thro’ Green-Hamerton
V. at 2 x’7, the Road being hitherto direft, indifferently Enclos’d and open*
Hence to the Right, leave Wbixhjey 2 F.on the Left, and little Osborn as much
on the Right, between which and great Osbo/n., about i* M. on the fame Hand,
fpringsChr/e/fo'. which a little below meets the rifingnear the Confines of
this County with fEeft more I and,and palling thro Tor/j.after its Confluence with the
Trent, it bears the Name of Humber, denoting according to Leland as much as Abef
i. e. OJiinm fiuminis\P>\xi going forward, pals by Branton Green,* F.to the Right.
and


fcnii between Grafton and Qver-Vunsford , by a dire& way at 269*2 to S&otigfa
l rl fa vulgo Botrorebriggs, of 3F- on the S- fide of the Tour, over which it has i
fair Stone-Br. The Town is not laree, yet commodious, Elefting Pari. Men,and
haying a Mt. cn Saturd. THeftfaight R.from Fenibriggs by Ifetherby falling in.
here on the Left, laves the Traveller 9 M. of what the way by York enlarges his
journey: Halt a M. to the E. appears in the Valley Aldhmgb or Aldbomgh V.
ifurium in Antoninas., an eminent City under the and neat u. ceiiaui
Pyramidal Stones, 1 oppos'd to be Eredfed by them as a fignal of out
calTd The Devil'sEolfs by the Country People of thofe Parts.
At the end of the Town, Crofltng theßiv. a flraight open way leads at 21 3’y td
PisfordV. whence the R, turns to the Right, and having receiv’d a different way
frotn Torh at 214 V, extends to Topcliffzt 2l j’i,a good Thorough-fare cf >or6 F.
feated principally on the N.E.of Svmlejiv » upon aConfiderabl's Afc. thro which
the R. Raffing irregularly,at 117 M. brings you by zF. on the Left,
and at 218 Tto Canon on the McorV. of 3F. the faid River at about fM. difhncti
on the LeftjThus over the Moor, and within 1-M. of thresh,* Mt. and Borough-
Town on the Right, at zz i M. pafsthro’ S V. and now th (which
near this place falls into the Stvals) being at about a like diflance on the Left,
forfeveral M. an Encloled Way leading by New feme at 2 F. diflance on this fide,
and I {jrkhy at a like diflance on the other fide of the faid Riv. leaVe thelgjlvin-
ions on the Right, and Great and Little C between you and the Riv. on
the Left, and at 22 9T, enter Northallerton, (A. S. Ealfertoti ) on a Email Brook*
which 1 M. below runs into the Wish • ’Lis a Town of 4F. large and well Built*
Hledls Parl-Men ; has agreatMt. on VlTdnefi, for Horfes and other Cartel, Corn
and Provifions; ’lis alfo a Poll-Town of good Trade. Thus far Amo 4 Steph.
Pavidlv, of Scots, Invading Northumberland, March’d at the Head of his Forces*
and Spoil’d the Country(the K. of England being othervvife Engag’d by Maud the
Emprcfs) but was RepeU’dby Ihurftan Arch-Bp. of Tor/j, EEil/Lm Earl of A
niarlt, &c v locoo, of his Men being kill’d, and himfelf w ith his Son Henry, for*,
ced to Retreat.
Ihe Road continuingEncios’d, pafTes between Panby / Wish,, and
ton each iM. diflant 5 till by Lcwfey-Hilt V. contiguous on the Left, on the
pitch of a Defc. of 3 F. at 23 y M. you Enter Little Smeton V. of 2 F. theft at
the end of it, crofs the Whh, and rM. beyond, you'come to Great-Smeton V*
Whence a dried! R. extends at 239 M. to j a Defc. bf z F. and by
E reyhotm iF.on the Lett,at 440 M. to Feny over Teesfiv, whereyou Enter Ncy-
fomV. of 2F. and the Eifhoprick of Pmhavr, This Riv. alone, being the S. Limits
of that County Palatine; Then by Hurmrth on the Left, at Z4ST crofs S \erri
flv. which taking its rife about 10 M. to the N. falls into the Tees near Er*
aM. below th ; s Place: Having pafl the Br. enter Darlington vulgo Dumton of j*
F. upon the Road j a large Pofl-Tcwnj having a very confiderable Mt. on Mend*
for Cartel, Corn, &c. At Qxenhall near this place, are 3 Pits call’d Hell-hettles?
about which the common People relate many fabulous Stories.
At the end of the Town, over North-gate- Br. crofs a final! Brook, falling
into the Shern, which fetching a compais cn the Right, appears hear the R. a-
gain at Gcteham or Cotonmundil, which you pals thro’ at 247 V, and leaving Bras,
ford alias Braforton, f M. on the Right, come at 249*3 t 0 Ate alias Achhani W
of 2F. and at M. to iVcodham V. Then by Ru(fey-Ford, and between iVefl-clofb
and Little Chilton , yon arrive at Ferry Hill, alias Ferey futer moment , at ay y’7 a.
Vill. of 2F. on the brow of an Hill, of 3F. Defc, Whence by Hen and Crcxdde
I F. on the Right ? at 2J9 M. enter Sunderland V, and % F. SUnder I and ■ Br-
, . 9 oVefe
;


fiver Were fa, Theti by*F4rwe/Houle on the Right, at itjV’j you cars* to the
Suburbs of DURHAM. Iying SF. on the Road, leaving the City it felf almo ft
Encompafs’d by the Riv.on the Right; Tis well Compared, and contains 6
parifli C'n. befides the Cathedral Dedicated to St. Cutbbert ; ’Tis Govern’d by a
Mayor, Aldermen, isrc. and its Principal Me. Is on Satard. The City it lei f
drancls on an Eminence in a P’eafantValley, but its Suburbs extend to the
bottom :’Tis Walled about, and Defended by a Caftle, ofConfiderable Strength.
At 463 M, beyond the Suburbs, a Small Afc.between the Gallows and
Mias Crocfishal, Succeeded by another Hill, leads to Durham Moor Village at 2. rs 3 V-
\v hence bet ween He&ion on the Right, and kettle r mb on the Left, pals by Blauj
worth contiguous on the Right, at z 66 ’a, and leaving on the Left, eater
Ckejier in tlx Street at 16 8 M* ol 4 F- as in Part V.
Backward furnings to be avoided.
I. 4 F. from DURHAM, the Left. 11. 3 F. from Acl{ham, the Left to Em fori, 111.
iz F. Ihort 0 tDarling'on, the Left to B IV. F. from , the
left to Imtrn. V. IM. fnoft of Great Sme ton , the Right to and the
Left acute. VI. 11 F ftiorc of Honk tiller ton, the Right to Vanby. VJI. IF. from
Northallerton, ths Left to Tbni\\, VIII, 4 F. from Topcliff, the Left to TOR IQ.
IX. At the end of Burrow bridge, the Right to iVetketbj., X. 4 F.from Burrow,
bridge, the Right. XL 4- F. from Green Hamenon, the Right to %Jr\ Hamertiht.
til At SRip-Br. the Right to Wooi^rop-hUU.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to BARWICK, Com. Northumbr ,
PART V. and Last.
tmmndng at Cheßor in the Street, faEpifcop. Dunelm. and Extending to Barvuck
a fore laid. Including 71 Milss.
In which tire following Turnings are to be avoided.
At z 9 l ’7 the Left acute. 31a’/ the Left acute. 319*4 the Leit acute jai’o.
the Right acute. 330*4 the Right acute. 334*5 the Lelt acute.
TT X the fourth Part, ws came to Cbeflerin the Street, fallely reputed the Mid-way
| between Durham and Hewcaftle whichlali.’tis farther by iM) lo call’d
from its Situation on the Via publics ; and by the Saxons , C whence
Camden iiippoi'es it the Condsfrurn in th <t Hot ; ieated on the W. of the
and overlooking Lttmley- Cattle, the ancient Scat of the Lord L about K
4 s Ran ton the other fide of theJßiv. 5 Tis a good '1 horcugh-tare of about 4 F. and
affords corvenie’nrßecep ion: Thence at 168*4 about 6 F. farther, pals by Ptloe-
Halif fa rnewh-u to tire Right, and keeping the Screet-tway which is dirtdf,_ at
171 M. leave 'Binley, vufgo Buchjs/, on the fame Hand ;'i hen at 171*7 turning
to the Left, two Imail Dale. lead at to a Beacon, and 5 F. farther to a
Wind-miH on the Right: Whence an eahe Dele, extends at 175*6 toGatejhead,
Hi as. Gate fids, as it were the.Subhrbsof Nencajlle-, a Town of great Antiquity,
cor lid ing of a fair Street of 4 F. 5 Frs leated on the Banks of the Tine, and call d
bp the Saxons Gateskeved, i. e. 'Capree Caput, or Goat’s head, perchance from an
3nn with Inch a S gn. Whence a Rated y Stone- Br. over the Navigable
Separating the Counties of Durham wad Northumberland, leads you to. NEW-
CASTLE, of which take this brief Account,
This Town Situate car the Slide of a notableAlc. before the Conqueft wsfscalld
Min ft


Monkhefter, as belong to the Monk* 5 but at Preient Ne*-CafHe from the Oftfc
built there by Robert eldeftSon of William the Conqueror. Tis govern d by a Mayor,
iz Aldermen, a Recorder. (Fc. lends Burgefles to perils the Shire-Town for
Northumberland; and gave Title of New-
wile j It coants 4 Parilh-Ch. befides one in ; has a fam Exchange and
Cuftom-Houle; Is encompalVd with a flrongWall andyGates; but theCaltle on
the Eis now ruin’d; It has two great Mts. on and Saturd. an d 1 ndeed, is
a mod famousErapsr Zurich and populous, very muchtrequented by Mcrchams,
&c. carrying on a greatTraffick both bySea andLand,but moie efpecia ly
for its wonderful Trade inCoals, of which it tr animus feme■ thoulands of bail
yearly to the Gity of London and ocher Parcs, Domelnck and * 0 »
At 2 7 6’6\>zfs hy OldHeton,and at z?B’y Great Bent bam on theßight: At y
EntringN-GoffordV.ottF.and having before left i'-Goifati on theleft; a itreighc
and open Way leads at near zB*M. between Blake don 'he Left, and Shottonon
the Right, and atzß f 6 to BUth-Br.overßliih or Fontjlv. which rding abou the
Wall, empties it felf into the Sea at Bibb's y M. below this Place.
.At iß6’i pals thro’ Stannington V.ofzF.and leaving on the High-, a
Diredl Road lies, by aCallleon the Left, to mnfpeek atzyo 7 the Gh.and Gallic
adjoyning on the Left. Here crofs tFanfpeck flv- which taking its me ab 0 u e
middle of the County, andhaving a little above receiv’d, the Font aboUt yM.beiow,
falls into the Sea. Then enter Morpeth > a Corp. govern d by w ic
fends Burgelles to Pari, and has a great Mt. on fFednefi. for Catcel, Corn, zsrc,
Tis aPoft-Town, and a very goodThorough-lare, lying about 4F. on the oa t •
Leave the Town atz9i’<J wnere aß.generallv open, and foraewhat more indi-
re6t, leading by Heborn and Efplcy on the Left, and on the Rig
erodes Linsfiv and leaving Caujey on theLelt, paffes a Brook Cf two, and lome
Houds at zpy’y. Whence you come to a Village at joi’a of zF- and there
crofs theC ocket fiv, which riling on the Confines of this County
and running Eallward, receives the Ufwey,Ridley and and by
worth Cable, over againft Coket-lftand, difeharges it felf into the Sea.
A quarter of a M. beyond the Riv. appears Felton V.oi zF. whence by Acton
on the Right, and Newton on the Moor contiguous on the Left; pais between
S nipebeufe and FFhittel , thro’ a Cops, and over a Rivulet or two, and at 309 V
enter Alnwick, vulgoAawick,neavAln€ t Ale ovAlon flv.not above z F.onthe R.yeta
goodThorough-lare, having once a largeCaftle now ruin’d, and near it a decay’d
Abby. It has a Mt. on Saturd. and here Anno 1092, Malcolm K;of Scots making
an Inroad into Northumberland was Kill’d with Edward his Son, and his Army
defeated by Robert Mowbray Earl of that Coilnty. And Anno U74> William
K. of Scots Invading England with 80000 Men, was J’tily 7, here Encountred,
his Army Routed, himleif made Prifoner, fent to and by K. Henry car™
ry’d to Roan in Normandy, paying 4000 I. Ranfom. . -
Atj 10’a crofs th eAlne, which riling ioM. to theW.unloaos it lelt into theSe&
aboutqM.to theE-Heace fcatter’d Woods and eafie Defc, bring you to an opera!
way Reading thro’ Carleton at 315 ’6 till leaving T«»/f«J-Caftle, an®
Newjied on the Right sat 3 1 9 6 enter PFarnford V. of zF. One M. farther, leave
Edder/ton, alias Atberflen t F. on theßight, and i|-M. farther Mowjevcel zF. on the
LeftWhcncebjr the Right,at 31,3*4 enterße/M, a Thorough-
fare, and Poll Town. Then by theChappel at 3Z4 M. clofe on the Left, and MU*
dleton and Vetcham on the fame Hand 5 at 318 M.pafs by contiguous on
the Right 1 \ M. diftant from the Sea, and at 329*4 Fenwick V.zF. on the Lett.'
At 33i’i You come to Flaggerjlon Y, of zF. thence by B r Brigg-
' ' C f ' ' ' Mill


Mil! On fhe Leit, and Chefwick and Skrim on the Right] ('the laR vvithin
IM. of the Sea) at 33S’z thro’ Tweedmouth Then eroding the famous Riv.
Tweed, over a long Br. of feveral fair Arches, at 339 M. enter BARWICII
n. F. more leading to the Crofs, where our Computation ends. 1
Bewick, alias Berwick, , ancientlyr«e/j, imports, according ULeland, as much
as Aberwic, i.e Urbs adoltumFluminir, hutSornner rather deduces it from Berewic,
in Saxon, fignifying Corn-Town, of which, lee Mr. Camden at large, ’Tis nor loE*
mment for Antiquity, as for being a Town and County of it lelf; and included
in Honhumbevland, fho’ fituate on the N-fide of the Riv. Tweed. ’Tis a Place of
great Strength, having the Sea on theE. and S.E. and the Riv Tweed on the S.W.
encompals’d with a Wall, and fortify’d with a ftrong Caftle; ’Tis large, po-
pulous and well-built; Govern’d by a Mayor, Baylitfs and Burgefles; Eiedls
Parl-Men ; and has a Very great Mt. on Saturd. for Corn, Salmon,
Backward Turnings to be avoided;
5 F. from Barwick, the Right ro Cailjho, and lb to C arlijle. Oppofite to Shjrmst-
ften the Left to the Water fide. Oppofite to the Left acute. 6 F.
beyond Hagerftov the Right. The Right againft F.beyond IT an ford.
the Right. 3 F. beyond Carleton , the Left. 10 F. ftort of Alnwick, the Right.
4 F. beyond Alnwick, the Left. 1 M. beyond Cocketfiv. the Right. At the End
of Morpeth, the Left to Shields. At the End of the Right to Kdhough.
The Road from
LONDON to BRISTOL.
i. ,A ' | HE Point of Bearing W. by N. 11, The Diredt Horizontal Did a nee 107
JL M. 111. The Vulgar Computation *74. M. IV. The 11
to Brentford cBj 08 j io’i io’x
Honnllovv 02 io jo2’2 123
Colelrook. 0 5 * 5 I 06*4 j 1 B*7
Maidenhead 07 22 087*27*6
Twiford c 6 28 [o7*4! 35*2
Beading 04 32 •!05*04C J 2
Theel 04 36 04 3 : 44*5
\v 00 lb am p‘ on 06 j 4 2 ■ os’6 150 *
Thatdicc-m 03 45 { 03*2 ! 53*5
to Newbury 02 47 (03*1 05 6 6
Chilton op 56 op’s o 66'%
Kamesbury 02 58 02*7 069*2
Marlborough 04 62 o6’x 07C3
Cain 10 72 12 ’5 088’o
Chippenham c 6 77 05 6 093*6
Marjhfield* 07 84 cp*2 1030
BRISTOL xo 94 i2’2 115*2
9 4 115*2
Other-wife by Hunger ford, thus r
To Herr bury, as before 47 47 566 s6'6
- s Hwigerford 07 54 cß’r 6T$
Mar thorough 88 62 73’/
Continued to Hunt fa! y Com. Sower fit) thus
'» From BRISTOL Comp* Meafurc*
to Langford C 9 09] i'2*o 120
Axhridg : 05: 14 05’2- 18V
. Hunclpil 08 22 ilo 2^z
s > '■ '■ “J j ' * ’* V ... V. ’• V ' , ■
With ti e fevcral Actounts above fpecify’d, take aifo die Pod-miles from
Linden to Briftol, thus:
Prom London to HounjJow 10 M. to Maidenhead 16. to ra.
* •rf \ 6. to Maribmvgh 15. Chippenham xs, and to Brifkl i. In all 104 Miles.
. ■ " • - • - Mi {JU*
*> * ■*


Middlefex, Buchjnghmfti. BarkJh.Wiltj and. contain
tile whole R. which erodes the Riv. Brent, Coin., Thames , I Rennet and Avon ; af-,
fording in general,a very good way,and frequent TownsandThorough-t'ares The
Imfl-OfHce makes this one of their fix Principal Rs. of England, and branches it to
the Devices, Bcc. on the Left, and to Smth-Wales,Hereford and Oxf. on the Right-,
THF whole R. is compris’d in two Parts, the firft ending at Marlborough in
PVihfh. and the fecond at Briftol , continued to Humfpil in SomerfetJl.u We
begin with Part I. containing in which, the following Turnings are to
be avoided, vi%.
At 12’y the Left forward to. Stanes. 24*3 the Right to Wickham. 2 8’ 3 the Right
to GLOCESTER. 33 6 the Right to Wargr 36*2 the Right to Sunning. 433
the Right acute. 6i > x the forward Way to Bungerford. 6s' 5 the Right tor^
ward to Lamborn. 71 the Left a different way to Marlborough.
In the Way by At £4’4 the Right to Oxford. At the Right.
From the Standard in Cornhil , thro’ Cornhil , Cbeapfide, St.P^«/bChurch-yard, 1
Ludgate-jireet, Ludgate-hill, Fleet-(ireet, Temple-Bar, the Strand, the Hay Market
and Piccadilly,pafs toßjiighhbY.idge,Renfington andWtf»mer/»7/rb,well frequented by
the Gentry and Neighbouring Citizens. Afterwards enter Brentford at 91 both
the Old and New feated on Brent flv. at its Confluence with the Thames.
Whence by y/oa-Houfe, on the Left, over Small-beer-Green, enter at
12T a good Thorough-fare of 4?. at the end of which, the direct way to Stanes
leads to Southampton , Exeter , or any the included Places: On the way extending.
Over Homflim Heath, and diillnguifh’d into 1, 2 and 3 M.-Heaths; at 14’* go by-
Baron Windham’stto ufe on the Right, and at i6’6' enter Longford V, of 4F, white
paffing 4 feparated Branches of the Coin, at 18’y crofs the Coin it felf.
Here enter Buckingham]!), and Colebrook (the Pontes in Antoninta) a very good
Through-fare, ot about 4F. with a Mt.on IVednefd. at the end of which, lies the*
ftraighc way to Wind fori which at Slots 3*4 beyond, appears at Right Angles on
the Left, at zM« diftance. From Slots a level R. leads to Maidenhead , firfl croff-
ing the Thames at 27 M. and enrring Bankjh. and 3F. farther the Town extended
r M* on the R« It has a good Mt, on Wednefd. and a Key to which Barges come
from London. 1 ’ “ ' ■ ’ " “ “
A quarter ofaM. farther, the great R. to Glocefier extends to the Right;
whence thro the Commons and Woods call’d Maidenhead-Thicket, pafs Harsh itch.,
and at 3 j’x enter Twiford V. ot 4 F. whence a pleafant way leads at 297 to Read-
ing, fo call’d from the Confluence of the Rivers, asfeattdon the Navigable £ejf-
net near its Influx into the Thames, here crofs’d by 7 Bridges , the faireft and
largelt Town in the County, with 3 Parifh-Ch. ’Tis a Cmp. eleding Pad-Men,
Govern d by a Mayor, 1 z Aldermen, OT. Eminent for Cloathing and Malting,,
and once beautify’d with g rich Monaftery and flrong Caflle. ' ' -
Having left the Town on the Right, at 40*4 apleafapt Lane extends to Thai,
vulgo meal,q, rf.the Pale, aV. with 2or 3, good Inns, at 44*7. Thence paffingi
Inglesfieid, theMarqueis of IVincbefieri Seat near IM, on the Right, a goodWav
thro oroad Lanes and open Arable Lands, leads at yo’z to vulgo.
I] oollington. Whence a pieafant Way and Profpeft to TbatJham,vnlgo Thatcham,tt
n4>3 F. Jong and a good Thoroughfare. Afterwardshaving touch’d upon the
&Met, at y<S’y enter that part of Newbury, call’d spir.hamland, ’the Relink
of the ancient Spina, whole Rums gave Rife to tfie prefent new town. * ’
*J'L 5 r 4 pal l by Spfinon the Left, and Donn e on theßigh t * Thence be-*
P. and W/ckbam-H. at The Left
ba? tne Right. the more ulual, bsingboth.th«
’-W . • - • ' C 3 • V*'’n
, v y r.


Coach and Plow-way by Ramesbury \fo that at 6 53 you eater Wiltjh and at
66’ 1 Chilton a Thorough-fare of 4 F. Then leaving it on the Right, and fotne-
what farther, Littlecot on the Left; at 69 \ pals tnro’ Ramefbury V. of 4 F.and
1 M. farther by Ramesbury-phce , belonging to the Earl of Pembroke ; a lei’s plea-
Tant way which at 736 thro’ Middenhal V. brings you at 7 j’x to Marlborough ;
as in Part 11.
If by Hungerford ; then keeping the direfler way at 6t.\ aforefaid, crofs the
Rennet, and come to that part ol Hungerford call’d at leav-
ing which, you enter Wiltjh , and by F roxfie on theßighf, pal’s thro 5
Foreft, and over a confiderable Afc. At 73’4 enter Marlborough, and repaying
the leaner,fall in with your otherß.at 73 5 7(hortning yourjourney this way nF.
' Retrograde Turnings to be avoided.
4 F. from Marlborough, the Left to Oxford. The Left at the end of y F. from
Reading, the Right to Ohjngham.i M. fhort of Maidenhead, the Lett to Merloe.
The Road from
LONDON to BRISTOL .
PART II.
Commencing at Marlborough in Wiltfh and Extending to the fiigh-Crofs in
BRISTOL ; Containing 39 Miles 7 Furlongs ; with the Continuation to Huntipii
Com. Somerfec. Containing 29 Milesli Furlongs.
In which you are to avoid thefe forward Turnings.
At Bi’r the Left to the Devices. 11. Si’i the Left to 111. 88’i theßighc
in Cain to M almsbury. IV. 94 the Left in Chippenham to BATH. V. 107’!
the Left to BATH.
"in the Continuation to Huntfpil. _
I. At 13’j the Right forward to Church'bill. 11. iß’7 the Right to BRISTOL.
111. i9’3 the Right to Uphil. lV. »i’o the Left to V. ay’f
the Right to Caftle Brent. VI. 19 the Lett forward.
IN Part I. we conduced youby Hungerford at 73*7 and by R at 7 ft,
to Marlborough, alias Marlberge, lb call’d from its Chalky Soil, and Anciently
Cunetium , from whofe Ruins it took Rife,#nd was once Fortifi’d with a Caftle
fcy K. tfohn Sir-nam’d Sans Terre : Here was once held a Pari, and a Law made for
iuppreffing of Tumults, retains the Title of the Statute of Marlborough : ’dhs at
prelent a good Town Govern’d by a Mayor,u Aldermen,24
Pari, Men, and gives Title to the Earl of Marlborough '. It has aMt. on Satura.
and 3 Fairs; cantains a Parifh.Trades chiefly in Cheele 5 and fiace. its laft Con-
flagration (for it has often fuffer’d by Fire) Is handfomely rebuilt.
Leaving the Townat 75Y and the Lord Seywo«rVHoufe,w}th its fine Mount,
as alfo Rennet fiv. on the Left, pafs on the fame Hand, Prefhuter, Manton, C/dt-
ford, F if eld, and Overton ; Viewing, many great Stones difpers’d vulgarly call d
The Grey Weathers. Thus a Defc. leading to little Rennet at 80*3 giving Name to
the Riv. (which riling near Abury , crofles theß. 2 F. hence) you come
Hill. Noted amongfl: thofe other Eminent Hills of the County, yi\.
Anns , and Martenfal ; Here the Road to the Devices and Wells lying on the Lett,
enter Marlborough-Down ; and at 8 t’j Bechjnton alias Beclikampton V.theß.to Bath,
by Sandy-Lane, appearing j F. farther on the Left; Whence over the Downs, repeat*


ct s Afc an d Defc.by CheriL on the Right lead at 87’rto oyer
and 4 W beyond, to the Town of C :dn, on the Jaid Kiv. dirty and dilcpati-
miM hut Elefting Burgefles to Parliament and having a Manser on
Repaying theßiv. in the Town, which you leave at 88’a oneM. fanmer, pal's to
Smiley ßr. crols the Coin again, and aland a Hul of 5 h whole lop gives a
different Way on the Right to Chipnam ; Then proceeding thro .tudly A. at
9 0’7 dele, along a Stone-Caufey at 93*3 to Co/ppcabm^^M bt f”* 7 1 *
on the Avon ; over which it has a fair Br. ot 16 Arches; lis a gOCfl
f aie Ekfting Pad-Men, with a noted Mt. on Saturd. Hence an eafie Ale, fe-pfe
at s6* 1 to a well beaten R. on the Right as tar as Sodbury (and thence by Auft-
Smy into Wales.) Then at 08*7 crcß-nca Valiev and’ * Rmok, at ico’j leave
Wr ax-Hall Ch. on the Right, and enter Gltcefterjh. at tOl ’3 as alio Marfofidi
at ioz’s of 4 F. fituate in a great Corn Country, and on the Moulds,
on Tuejd. Whence a ftraight R. by CoLUEafton on the Leif, s-t toTughil a
Dele, yielding a fair Prolpeft over the Severn into S. Walts : Then *at 1104
over Biwn-Hill, pals thro’ %i»g*s-Weoi, affording ftore of Pit-Coal, and by
Dungeon'Crois enter Briftol at n4l by the way of Lavtfcrds- Gate.
BRISTOL a City am! County on Avon fiv. (where it receives the Bjome) over
which is has a {lately Br. is a Corp.fending Burgefies to Pari, and govern’d!;/
a Mayor, Alderme i, 2 Sheriffs, Tis Computed Equal to alO part of
London , but enjoys a whole 7th part of its Trade; and contains, 11 Pa rift Ch.
betides the Cathedral founded by Robert Son to a K. ot remark*
Dedicated to St. Auftin, and iupply’d with regular Capons. It was made ah Enif-
copsl See by K. HB. with 6 Prebends, andhad a Cafile in'the N. H. part cf jr,
Demol ift’d in the lateWars,andfinceßuilt into fair Streets. ’Tis encompals’d with
a Wall, and Six Gates; itspiinpipai Key is upon th e From, (whither Ships ofgboue
ifoTun arrive(extending fromFrcor/i-Br. to th e Mar fit) the other call’d the Bur/;,
upon theW. fide of the Avon., begins at the great Br. alias Briftol- Br. and extends
likewife to the Marfo, the greater Velßls riding in Hang-rods about 5 M. below.
There are about zoo Sail belonging to the Port, and the chief Trade is ma-
nag’d from Wales, and the* Midland-Countries . They allb keep a Weekly Cor-
refpondencewith Southhampton-, dealing chiefly inTobacco and Sherry .The Streets
are Uniform, the Houles well-built, and the Inhabitants Numerous ; lo that'it
may well be reckon’d the zd.City of the Kingdom; its Mrs. on and Saturd*
Plentifully provided,and its Fairs onSt.jMwzeDs well frequented.
The Continuation to Huatfpil.
We begin our Computation from the High-Crols in Briftol, which like an-
other Standard in QornbiU,is the Conjunction of 4 Eminent Streets,whence down
High-Str.over the Br. enter Smerfetjh. Then thro’ Redcliff ftreet at 7 F. leave the-
Town and 2F. farther, pa fa thro’ Bedminfter V- of z F. At z’j Deicend for y F.
and at 4 M. leave Bundrey fituate near 1 M.-on the Right.
•At y’y Afcend 6 F whence an unevenß. bringsyou at 9T to a Defc.of i.’ycrofi-
fing Ferry- Br. and at izM.paifing thro’ Langford V. Whence a continu’d ridgof
Hills on the Left extends to Axbridg , which you enter at jSJVt. ’Tis about 4 H>
long con lifting Principally of one Street; is Govern’d by a Mayor, <&ic- has a
£0 >d Mt. on Thurfd. and is fituate under the Afend/p-Hilk neac the
Rocks At 19 M. come to Grefs V. of 3F. at the Towns end crofting Ax fiv. and
vM, beyond, pal’s thro- Lower Were V. of 2 F. At 25V pals by Raft-Brent on the
Right, and at z<fz thro* Burnham V. in the Brent-MarJhj At 27*4 leave’ Burnham-
Ch. on the Sea-fide about i M. on the Right eroding High-Bridg , and by fever a I
Houles, at 29 M. enter Hunt [pH, vulgo Hinjpil. near about 4 M. below
( C 4 •• ■ . ’Bridgwater


teffdgftater, and near its influx into the Severn, a good Country-Town, tho’ not
Dignify’d with any confiderable Charadler.
Backward Turnings to be avoided. /
1 F. from Hunt [pH the Right forward to Marfa f F. fnort of Burnham the Left.
At the end of Axbridg the Left to Were. At zff beyond the Right,
to Winford, At the end of BRISTOL the Left to GLOCESTER. At 4 ’ 4 fhort
t?f Cold Ajton the Left to Dynton. At 2*3 fhort of the Left forward,
The Right in Chipnam , a different way to Marlborough, 4 F. fhort of Studley
the Right to the Devices. .
The Road from
LONDON to BUCKINGHAM,
Continued to Banbury in Oxfordfii . and thence to Bridgnorth in Shropfh.
A '“jp HI: Point of Bearing N. W. 11. The cliredl Horizontal Difiance 128 hi.
JL lII, The Computation 105 M. IV. The 142 M.
*
From London Comp. Meafure.
*0 A cion 06 06 oB’3 cB’3
Vxb idg 09 15 io*i 18 4
O9 24 n'o 29/4
"~erdovcr p 6 30 39*l
is bury. 04 34 05 'o 44 *(
■- (I Jaydon 06 40 cp’g ; 54*0
O4 44 064 j do’4
jughton 07 5 1 09'2- I 69*6
Comp, Meafure,
fo c6 057 077 077^5
Nether Filler ton 09 066 1 2rt c ? $6
Stratford c* 072 oß*o j 097'f
Cough* on c 6 078 oso 10&&
B 'Om/grovs 09 087 114 118 2:
Kedenninfht 08 095 I °p& 1280
Quoc 07 102 I °9 $‘ 1 ?7‘ 5,
bxidgnorth 03 I 105 I 04/5 , X4FO
Wiih the Branch from Banbury to Campdm Cm * Gloc.
Trom Banbury Comp. Msafure*
to Shipftcn I o io I4’° 14*0
CampcUn o$ 15 07*0 21/0
Middkfex, Buckingham]!}. Northampton!!} Warn u’Ji}.
Stafordjh and Sbropf are the Counties including the R. And the Brent, Coin*
'fame, Owfe . Charnel! , Sahvarp, Stowr, and Sever »£ he Principal Riv. pass'd
over: Affording a very good R. to Alesbury, but not lb plealant to Banbury and
Brmjgrm? yalufHciencly recompens'd by its goadnels thence to Bridgnorth.
THE whole Road is contain’d in 2 Parts, the Firft ending at Banbury Cm.
Oxsn. and the Second at Bridgnorth. We begin with Part I. comprehending
77 U. and SF. The following Turnings a.re at be avoided.
1 ' ' . r * \ J ' ■ ■ ‘ , j
\
At a’l at the Pound in St. Giles's ,the forward way to 31 at
the Right to Fadsngton.ffo the Right to iff 2. the Right to Wat-
ford. 20’4 the forward way to Beaconsfeld. 34 '6 the Left to Tame, offi
the Right forward in Wendover to DunJiable. 4 6’z the Left to Shipjton. 6-6 7
the Right to Braclffey. j6 J i the Left to BoJjcst.
From the Standard in Carr.hill London , along Cheap fide and Hclhorn, the way
lies thro 5 Vffnfmgton Gravel-Pit 3 } Sheperis-buff)? Acfon. Hamel? Hoys?
Us&ingim and Hxhidz. ‘ *
- ' ’ Whence


Whence at a o*4 omitting the forward way to Be,icons fid], leave the Laid R ;
an enclos’d way, with fev£ral Houfes, leads at 141 to St. Peters Chalfum
vuho, Cbafforn V. of aF. At rrols a Brook running near 2 R and c R
beyond thro’ part of St. Giles’s Chalfmt: Whence over a Branch of the Coin,
certain draggling Houfes bring you at 29*3 to ,
of 4 F. fo call’deither from its being fhelter d by Oaks, or Built by one Agmuni ;
being feated in the Chiltern (that part of the Country known by that Name,
and lying toward Punfiable) ’Tis a good Borough-T. fends Burgefles to Path
and contains near 200 Houfes, with a free-Scnool and 4 Almi-Houfes, aMt.
Tuejd. and z Fairs on Whitfun-mmda y 3 and on September 8, ■ t
At 3 % 1 pafs thro’ Little Miffenden V. thence by leverai Houfes, and over zor 5
Brooks to Great Miffen den at 34*2 of j-M. and a good Thorough, fare. At 387
enter Wen dove oi* 4F, a Borough-T* of about iyo Houfes: It fends Burgefles
to Pari, has a Mt. on Thurfd. and 2 Fairs vt\. on May Day, and a Week before
Miobaslrnafs. Thence an enclos’d Way for the mod part, le ids at 4 ?y to Walton,
adjoining to Alssburyjnezt the confluence or a namelels Brook with the Tame)
in Saxon Aglesburgb' 3 a well-built Borough-T. containing about 400 Houfes ;
Electing Members to Pari. The Affixes are there kept for the County ;it has a
good Mt. on S a turd, and 3 Fairs. vi\. on Saturd. before Palm-Smday, 'fiune r?.
and Septemh 4. and gives Title to Robert Earl of and Elgin,
At 44*4 leave the Town, and T M- farther, the Gallows on the Right: At
M. ctoi'sTmeflv. which rifes about 4 M. to theE. and near whofeßan h<g>uerendon
appears x F, to the Right. Whence an indirect for the moff part open, in-
differently Arable, and Failure, leads at y 4 M. to Eaji Claydon V. of 2F. At
crofs the Orvfe over a Stone-Br. of Arches and enter aCorp. govern’^
by aßailiff, 12 Capital Burgefles &c. It contains about 500 Houfes, fends Eur-
gefles to Pari, and has a noted Mt. on Saturd. with 6 Fairs, vi% on S t.Manhim, Sr.
Mark., thurfd. in Whitfon-xceek, St. Peter’s, St. Bartholomew and St. Simon and 4ude
Repaying the Ovtfe leave the T. and by the Lady Smith’s Houle and Park and
Hatley- Ch. on theßight; at 6$ M. you cometoTinewldi V.A1 64 entrins Oxfordfh
pafs thro ’FenmoreY. whence the moll part of theWayopen Paflure, ent ring North
amptonjh, at 66’y leads to Shr ought on, at 695 a V. of 2 F. and apretty Thorough-
fare. - . *
-At 717 pafs thro ’ Ayne, extending 2F. on the R. and eroding CkameU at
7 3’2 ovetHdl Br, of 6 Stone-Arches,re-enter OxfordJh.keeping theCbamel on the
right, and leaving the forward wayon the Left to Bodicot-, At enter Banbury
on the W'fide of the ChameU ; a Large and well built Town, containing feveral
goodlnns 5 Govern’d byaMayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen (of whomone isChani
berlain and 3 Juftices of thePeace)and 6 Burgefles j Its Mt; on Thurfd.is well flor’A
with Provifions; and it vi\. on Holy Thurfd. Corpus ,L am as-da v
Thurfd. after Twelfth-day, and Firft Thurfd. in Lent-, belides two others now difus’d*
. . Backward Turnings to be avoided.
|,F* from Banbury,t he Right to Adderhuty. 11, IF.beyond theßight tol.ond™'
111. y F. fliort of Fenmore the Right to Tame. IV. At theend o (Buchi*rh*™
the Left to Little Harwood. V, 2F. beyond E. Claydon the left to
VI. 4M. beyond E. Claydon the Right to Henley. VII. At the end of
the Lett to Sivakeley. , VIII. 4F. fliort of Hellingdon the Right to Colebrnnh
IX. In Hanrtel the Right to Breyitfcrd X. In AH on the Left to Wilfion Xr*
i&^nfingion-Qrafrel-pitA the Right to ■ . * A *
f - ' - * ; ' . T h e


The Continuation of the Road from
BUCKINGHAM to BRIDGNORTH
in SHROP SHIRE.
PART II. and Last
Commencing At Banbury in Com. Oxon. and Extending to Bridgnorth afore [aid.
Containing 6 4 Miles 3 Furlongs, *
With A branch from Banbury to Campden Com. Gloc. containing z x Miles.
The following Turnings are to be avoided,
Ar 78 ’3 the Right to Southam. Sy’2 the Left to Ofjerton. 10,1’7 the Right to
Afton. 104 T the Right to Au neton. 1150 the Right to n B’, the
Left to Worcefter. 118’6 the Leix to Wonelier .> the Left m Ra-
dley. 13j’ 7 the Right to CUverly. , 3 **, the Left to
In .the Branch to Cmpien'.
At 2’y the Right to Stratford. 4*4 the Left to B’x the Left to Sib-
ber ts. io’4 the Right to Stratford.
WE came to Banbury in Part I. whence an open R. at 79V to Drayton V.
then eroding 2 Brooks, an indifferentftraight Way for the mod part o-
pen,Arable and Pafture, by Wrox ton Ch. on the Lett 1 F. Hornton on the Right z
F. and Offerton on the Left 6F. entring W at 84T, leads to a
Dele, of 3 F. where K. Charles I. 23. Ocieb. 1642 , having fet up his Standard at
Nottingham, with his Forces there rais’d, fought the Parliament Army, Com-
manded by the Earl of Effex, to whom the Field was left with equal Lofs. '
Leaving Ejneton a Mt. Town about z M. to the Right, on a R. like the former,
by Tifess and Oxhul Chs. 4 E. to the Left ; at 89*5 you come to Nether
of a F. croffingthe F ofs-way at 90’6 and entring Over or Upper Eatington Vi of 3
F, at 9T3.
Hence a ftraight Way at 97*3 toaStone.Br. of 13 great and. tffmall Arches
over the Avon fiv. to Stretford alias Stratford upon Avon, a well-built Town con-
taining near yoo Houles, having a large Church and a Chapel of Eafe built by
Sir Hugh Clapton , Ld. Mayor of London , and an Alms-Houfe founded bv K. Edw»
VI. It Trades much in Malt; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, High Steward,
j 2 Aldermen, of whom 2 are Juftices of the Peace, 12 Capital Burgeflls,
has a great Mt. on Thurfd. y Fairs and feveral good Inns.
Thence thro’ an open Way generally Heathy between and crofs
Jlne fiv. at 104 1 leave Great Auneton-Ch.on the Right, and a little after
oer, vulgoAifter \M. diftant on the Left; a Town and Corp. having a Mt. on
Tuefd. At io6’i by force Houles crofs the fiv, which here joining the Aim
falls into the Avon at the edge of the County: Then thro’ V. of near
5P- t an d by the Floule and P. of Sir Francis Throgmorton on the Right, at 108’y
pdfs by Samhorn \> on the Left, and at 110’y thro 5 Crabs Crofs V. at the end
Of which enter TEorcefterJhire, leaving Jp/7e>. Church 9 Furlongs on the Right.
At in’7 pafs thro 1 Hed/eyj-Cro/j V. thence over and
leaving Fac^enham- Ch. 4 F. on the Left. At thro’ V. and bv
Tardoicli-Ch. 1F- to the Left, come at 118 M. and thro’ Tcutnel at 116 Ad. to
Bromfgrovs, on Salwarp extending 4F. on the Road ; a large T. containing a-
bout 400 Houfes, and driving a Confiderahle Trade in Clothing j’Tis Govern’d
by a Bayhff, &c. has a good Mt. on Tuefday for Corn, Crc- and 2 Fairs, vh.
on Midsummer day , and Aug, ♦. p rom


T>om Bromfmve an indireft R. by feveral Houfes leads at 123*4 to Cheddeflyy
v 7 F farther to Wmerfould V.and 9 F. beyond that t V. Whence by
other Buildings you come at 1 27*5 to Rjiderminjier,aim Reddermnjier, of about
, M on -WV* Much rifing near the Confines ot the County, receives the
SmkaL pa fifes by Smbridg, and 3 M. below, alls into the Severn) a large com-
ffi and well Inhabited Town, containing about too Houfes, driving a great
Trade in Cloths and Stuffs, and having a very good Free-School, with 2 Matters,
tn Alms-Houfe given by Sir Edmri Blunt, and another by. Sir Edward Clear •
*Tis Govern’d by a Bayliff, 12 Capital Burgeffes, zy Common-Council-Men,
Q> e% has a good Mt. on Thurjdays, and 3 Fairs, vt\. on , 5. Days
after Whitlontide, and St. Bartholomew day.
At in’ over Red Hill o' 3F. at the toot of which you enter Stafford]},, and
j*/* farther Shropff. at 13?? come to Thence by feme Houles, at 137 5
toW v. and at 1y A another V. Then palling over part of Af»/ r
Pnrdt enter BRUGES aim Bridgnorth at 141 M.on Severnfiv. over which it ha s
1 laree Stone- Br- of? Arches, that divides it into the Upper and Lower T.Tis a
Corn. Govern’d byzßayliffs, 2 4 Aldermen,4&Common Council Men,2Chambcr-
iains,andzßridg-Menj containszParifhes,hasa verygoodMt.and4Fai.rs«
K ;1 . The Branch to Camp Jen.
From Banhury thro’ the Wett-Gate, at I*3 pafs to ft Newton V. of 2 F. and at
A’jShutford V with an Inn, whence an open Way at 6% to an Afc of 6 F. lo
OWT Sibbertf-n. at 8T ent’ring ffamiclff,. .defeend a large Hill of 1 1 F. at the
Foot of which lies Brakes V. of IoF. on the R. having an Inn or two. Thence
a ttraight R leads at 13 ’d to a Stone Br. of 6 Arches over Stour fiv. where you;
enter an Included part of IVonefterfh. and alias upon Stour, a
fmall Town, yet enjoying a good Mt. on Saturdays, and one Fair on St. Bar~
™%om Shipton, the way for themoft part open, Re enter Warwicffff. atjj’r, 1
and at iB’i defeend 3 F. to Campden at 20*4 of 6 F.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 2 F. beyond Brakes, the Right acute. 11. At the entring Oxford]},, the Left to
* Stratford. 111. 4 F. beyond N. Newton, the Right to TV. At the
end of Bridgnorth, the Left to Birmingham. V. 1 F. beyond Allam-Br. the Right
to Bewdley. VI 6 F beyond, the Right to VII. At the end of
minfier, the forward to IVorcefier. VIII. 1 M. Ihort of Cbeddejley, the Right to
Rufho\. IX. x F. farther, the Left to Bell-Broughton.X. At the entring Cbeddejley,
the Left acute. XL 4 F. beyond Cbeddejley, the Right to Droituich. XII. At the
end of Bromfgrove, the forward to Coventry. XIII. In , the Left to
Warwick, xfv. In Coughton , the forward to Aulcefter, XV. In Filler ton, the
Left to l^jneton.
The Road from
LONDON to St. DAVIDS.
On the Sea-Coast in Pembrokeshire, South-Wales.
I, r T' He Point of Bearing W. by N. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance uy,
I M. 111. The Vulgar Computation zoy M. IV. The Dimenfuraiion 169*1*
Front


From London Comp* Meafare.
to Brentford 08 08 io’i io’i
ii 011 ni low 02 10 02’2 i 2 ’S
Colebrooli cj 15 06’4 18’/
Maidenhead 07 22 oS’7 27 '6
■Henley c 7 29 * c 8 t 55 ’7
Dorchefter 12 41 13*4 49^
*s4biugton P 5 46 cd’o ys’3
Faringdon to $6 13*2 68’5
Lechlade x>4 60 06 o 74 5
Fairford 02 62 03*4 78’*
; Jarnefley 04 66 05 ?6 837
GLOCESTER 15 81 iB’3 1 o 2 ’2
Micbel-Dean 08 89 ? n’s 1137
Covtrd o 5 95 os’o 1217
Monmouth 06 99 o>>i 127^0
• / .
Corap. Meafcre.
roNew.Church o? 108 , 2 v> ,
Catts-Alh 05 1,3 073' j 14L
05 i,6 04,’5 , 51 -|
Cardiff jo 126 I(J .
H. Nicholas 05 131 06’, ,4’J
Co-wbndg 05 ,56 o6> o ,75'f
Corntown 04 14° o 5 > 4 jg 0 v
Aherdvon 10 150 l5 ’ 2
Burton-Ferry c 2 r s z oj> 3 ,9/2
04 1/6 0 5 >2 202*4
LJwMy o 9 5,!= 5 21V1
y 06 J 7■ °B’r 222'4
Llanilutfan 04 275 o(’i 097 V
Haverford PVeJi -2o 195 2 J^
St, Davids 13 207 15’ 2 2^9’/
Miiilefex BM. Oxford'fb. Glocejierfo. Monmouth fh. Glamor?anlh
Carman henjh and Pembroke ft. are the Counties through which you pals and
the Brent, Coins Thames, Severn, Wye , Monona, Xhrothy, Usk, Ebway, Rempney' Tave,
Elay, Enemy, Ogmore, Heath, Tange, Thlu, Lougbor, Dulas, Gmndrath.Vaur Tom
Tave, Clethy and Dungledey , are the chief Rivers croft over: affording eC nVa!V
good way thro’ the Three ftrft Counties; indifferent thro’ Oxford and Gli-
ce ft erfh. but thro Wales more uneven and Mountainous, the latter part of it e-
Ipecially, which is often interrupted by Ferries, &c.
■ Some take the Brijiol R. to Chippenham, and thence by Sodbury,Auft Ferry and
Chepjtow : others more rarely by Framlode or Nemaham-p/faze •
;and lome again by Brecknock and Carmarthen. ■ ° ’
The Computation of Poll-Miles anlwer nearly the Dimenfuration.but the Road
varies thro Cirencefter and Us\, Extending only to the remainderbeiny
lupply d by a branch from Monmouth to Brecknock, Carmarthen and Pembroke.
i ■ "
THE whole Road is compris’d in 4 Parts, the i/i. ending at Abirgton in
Burffy}, the idf st. MotiMouto , the zd. &X Button-Ftr/v* and the* Ath Qr
• •• Mff be ßi» «.W the Pirft Containing „M. } F 'in which thtfollowl
ing Turnings are to be avoided, vt%, ■ t
At n'y the Left-forward toStanes, io’o The Right to iVer. * o ’ 4 the Left to
Windfor, 28'i the Left to Reading, and fo to 29T the Left to Readirer
V’6 In He,/, the Left to Gray,. |f •<, Ac the end of H ml,. the RighttS
lon. 4 o 2 Entermg Nettlebsd, the Right to Tame. 4 z’ 4 the left to Wallin?ford
49 5" At the end of Dorchejier, the Right to Oxford. *'
From the Standard in Cornhil, thro ’ Comb il, ,St, Church
tudgate-ftreet , Ludgate Hi//, F leet-ftreet,Temple Bar, the the Hay-Marhtold
Pickadilly, at 3 -, th* Way from by St. fal
your Left j whence by WA-P** to the-Right; much Rented bvrteNoK
gentry; at 3 * t<> I inights-kidg, and at 4 ’y to where
William 111. kept his Court. _ wnere a.
Beyond the and at ;’2 a Seat of the Earl of Holland appear
on the Right: At f, come to mmmpmhh, where,as alfoa t cfe// t; , K „,>i„ P S
Ke”fetw^ c .»re the Sommer Rehdencaof diver, of the Nobility, Gentry anf
ealehy CitiZvhs . Whence thro 1 Turnam-Green, leaving the M. nd
?“'«-Courto„ the Left, and at Sufoh* Me'intU oa?he Righ" e«er oS du,t
Ur,, or Bora ford at y i and at 9 a Hw.’Qcfytfo having a good Mt, on Tim days*.
v ; ' . ? s * “• * ? *■" ; V" . « * 1 * '«■ v » ** % '.a *
*: * ■ • * ; I# * 1 W • , « -f .«v <•> 5 >
■ . ' ■ ■ • ■ * ■ They


They lye together iM. on the Road, and are Eminent for an Aflault here gf*
ven the Panes by K. Edmund I ronfide, and an Engagement between K. I,
and the Parliament-Forces November i z tin 1647. ■ I*-
Hence by SVo«-Houfe and Ijileworth vulgo Thijllenorth on the Left, thro’ Houn*
flow, and over Hounjlow-H. to Longford and Colebmk , whereat 18’y you enter
"the Town and crol’s Colnflv. which riling near at the conjunction
of Hartford and Bedfordjh. palles by St. Albans , Watford, Uxbridg , and this plac(* s
and near Stanes falls into the Thames.
At 22*3 you are in S low. Whence z M S. appears Windfor , fo call’d from Its
winding Shore, plealantly feated on theTham Dign’fy’d with a ftately Caflle
and Royal Palace, aChappel, a College, and Houles for 18 Poor Knights; a
Park and Foreft adjoining. Here alfo is kept St.Gewge’s Feaft at theCerernony of
Inflallitig the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter. ’Tis a Corp. Govern’d
by a Mayor, &c. fends Burgeffes to Parliament,and has a Mt. onSaturdays.
From Slow, leaving Stok?, Farnam , Burnham , Hicham and Toplar on the Right,
pafs to Maidenhead , fM. beyond which, the Great R.to branches out
on the Left: Whence an indirect uneven and Woody Way, leaving Hurley- Place
on the Right, leads at to Henley , at the Entrance of which, you crols the
Thames , to Oxfordjh. ’Tis a large Town Corporate 5 Govern’d by a Warden, &c.
Its chief Trade is in Malt, having a great Mt. on Thiirfd. where above 300 Cart-
Loads of Corn are often Sold in a Day.
Leave the T. at 3 6 M- and fM. beyond, come to a W, which extends within
g F. of Nettlebed, attending only 4 F. at 374 and entring.the Place at 40*1 a noted
Poft-T. ofz F. Whence defcending 2 F. you meet wuth a like Afc. leaving
at 42 M. Nuffield-Ch.2 'F. on the Left, and having pad and
fucceeded by 4 other Defc. come at 46’z to Bexjington of i F. on the
Bank of Thames fiv. Thence at 47 ’7 thro’ Shillingford V- crols the Tame at 49 M.*
and enter Vorcbefter of y F. an ancient T. ’Twas formerly an Epifcopal See, but
at prefent not to much as a Mt'T, yet has feveral good Inns. Xhe Tame riles a-
bout the confines of Buchjnghamjh. and Hartfcrajh. paiTes by Alssbury and Tame,
and continuing a courfe of about 30 M. meets the Ifis alittle below this place,
after which Conjunction, they are call’d Tamefis, contraCledly , and vul-
garly Terns.
Hence by Bunot V. on the Left, at yz M, pafs thro’ Clifton of near 5 F. Then
by Cullum-Ch. on the Left, at 5:4*2 crofsa Branch of Thames fiv, and at yy M.
the Thames it felf or rather the Tfis , Re-entring Barkjh. and afcending Abington
on the Plain ot a Hill, a large Town Corp. confiding of 2 Pantiles. It has 2
Mcs. on Muni, and F rid. and 6 Fairs.* ’Tis Governd by a Mayor, Recorder,
jz Burgeffes, &c. and EleCts Members to Pari.
Backward Turnings to be avoided
I. 9F. fhort of Netlebed, the Left to Hunten end. 11. nF. (hort of Henly,
the Left to Marlow. 111. At the en 4 of Henly, the Right to Och v ingham. IV, z
M. y F. Ibort of Slow, the Right to Windfor,
The
I


The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to St. DAVIDS , in Pembrokeshire.
PART II.
Commencing at Abington in Berkfliire, and Extending to Monmouth.'
Containing 71 M. 6 F. ,
Tbefe Turnings are to be avoided.
At jß’i the Left to Wantage. 606 the Right acute in Kjngton-Baptifl. 6fii the
Right acute. 6&6 the Lett to Highmrtb at the end of F 74*3 In -
Ude the Left acute. 78*3 the Left to at the end of B?’4 the
Left to Cirencejter. B^4the Right to Sto Juft beyond Perrors Br.the Right
acute. 88’z the Left to Daglinfmorth, Lettto Bijley. 95N the Right to
Cheltenham 104’! the forward to Nemnt. x<h’3 the Lett to Newnbam. ioS’o
the Left forward a different Way, uniting again at no’f. no o the Right to
the Foreft. nzT the Right to Refs. i\6'6 the Right acute, n/4 the
Right acute, izi’; In Coved] the Left acute. M. the Right to
/ ‘ i
IN the Firfl Part, We proceeded to Abington, whence at a ftraight Way
lies at 57*4, to Shipton of 3 F. and at 606 to Kjngfton Bdptijt, where a different
Way from Abington byF ifield, falls i n on the Right: thence by Longmrth and Bucfc
land on the Right, and Pufay on the Left, a fmall Dele, leads to at 68’*
extending 3 F.on the R.Govern’d by a Bay!iff,lt has a good Mt. on taefd. and
Four Fairs, vi 1 on Candlemafs-Diy , IVhitfon-Tu Sr. and St. Luke.
At the End of the T. the Lett hand Way leading to Higbmrth,;deicend tor 4
F. and at 70b afeend as much: Whence by the 0 Mile-Stone at 73 'ef eroding St.'
John's‘Hr. of Stone over 2 hames fiv. and entring_ Glocefterfo. 4F. farther, you
come toL echlade, near the Confluence of Lech jiu.with the names, of about 3F.
having a Mr. on Tuefi. and 2 Fairs,on St. Lawrence, and Auguft. 29.Th.is Place and
Cteeljads are 1 appos'd to have been anciently Eminent Nurferies of Learning for
the Latin and Greek. Tongues, to which the Names ieem to allude 5 but are with
more Probability deduc’d by Mr. Stunner from their Situations upon the River;
one from Leccian, Rrgare , the Other from Crecca, , and Laidian,purgare.
At 77*7 enter Fairford of 3 p. at the End of which crofs Coin fiv nt ar its Influx
into the Thames, and leaving the acute Way on the Left to ;an indiffe-
rent ftraight R. leads at 83’v. to Bjrnfley of 2F. a Place of good Reception.
At 87 M. defeend for 3F. and over Perm’s-Br crofs Churn fiv. which rising dome
M.higher, waters Cirencejier ; and falls into the Thames at Creel-Jade ; Ac 88 M.
you afeend z F. and 4F. at 9 lb, whence by the Grey-hound Inn on the Right,
and between Elfton Ch. on the lame Hand, and Br inn field on the Left, thro’ a
Village at leave IVytcomb Ch: on the Left, crois Bur Up-Hill of 10 T. on the
R. and at thro’ Brockycnh V- at ioi’6, enter GLOQEStEK ; _
A Place of good Antiquity,.!. S. GUauceafi.tr, i. e. PulcbraCivitas, and call’d in
Latin,Colonia Glevum. not how&audm Caiar as Lome would haveif jfifuate or the
E-fideof the Severn, where by two I'everai Streamsit mikesthe Ule oiAhtey. ’Tis a
largeand wellinhabitedCity. containing 12 Gb. of which 7 in pi elent life.besides
the Cathedral of St.Pew.a fairStrufture, eminent foritshrgeCloyfler and noted
Whifperingcplacej as alfo for the Interment of Lucius the flrftCbriftian K. and of
the unfortunate K. Edw. 11. It flounfVd tinder the Heptarchy, and ever* within
this laft Century feem' 1 not to have loft its pristine Glory ; Aitho’ it be not
fully recover’d of its Loffesj yecitb Hill d CityaadCourtyofit fell, Govern’d by
a


feMatfor Recorder, 1 s Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, a Chamberlain and 40 Common 3
Council-Men ; Sends Burgeffes to Pari. Enjoys a good Trade, having I 2 iocorpo-.
rated Companies: Contains y Hospitals and a Free-Schoois j and has 2 Mts.wif
on and Saturd. and y Fairs. ’Twas fortify 3 d with a Wall till the Reftau-
rauVni or K’ Charles I!. but was then dil mantled with
1 From Giocefier, after the tirft Bridgover Sever* , pais thro 3 of 4 F.
Mere K. £rfw. Iror.fide and Canktta the a ‘ ter bloody Battels, engag’d
one another in Single Combat, and at laid agreed tolbare the Kingdom : Then
pairing a Second Stone-Br.of 7 Arches over the Severn, enter Over V. ol near z F.
on the Road 5 and at 10 a 6 leave E!q; Cook’s Houle and Ch. on the Right
Whence an enclos’d Way by Several Routes brings you at 108 M, to Birdnocd ;
at the entrance of which, leavingthe dire&er Way on the Left, uniting again
at xio’y bear to the Right thro’ the Wood, pafs over Heath and enter
Huntley at 109*3 of about 4 F. on the Road, being a Place the Hereford Carriers,
&'c. often 'make their Stage. r , , „
At 1 m 3 4 descend 3F. and pafs thro 5 Long. Hope V. 7F. farther afeend again,
and enter Michel-Dean, i. e. Dean magna at 113 J extending 3F.on t.e .in
the For eft of Venn from which it takes its Name. It has a good Mt on Mond.-
2 Fairs, vn, on Eafter-Mond. July jti.and Michaelmafs-d. Whence leaving
Man-Hall- Ch. on the Left, and Captain Houie on the Right, pals
thro* the Foreft ; descending at n 5*2, 6 F. and at 17 M. S F. moie, and alcend-
ing at üß’i for the I'pace of 4 Furlongs. .
ihe Foreft of Dean generally polfefles all that part of which nes be-
tween thzSevern and Monmouthjh . extending S.W.and N. H.aoout 20k . Hj
imich tranfverl'e,andconftituting3Hundredsot theCounty,m which are contain a
2 3 Parishes, 4 Mt-T . vW Michel-Dean,He Hexonkm and and 32000
Acres ofCommon: It has many Mines of Iron andCoal,and excellent Stone-quar-
ries: is well Wooded andV.’atecM jand replemfo’d with variety ot lILI and Fowl.
At m M. by fome Coal-Pits on the Lett, a Delcent ol y F. leads to
or Coverd, a Mt-Towo of 2 or 3 F. Ac 124 M. pais thio Stamen V. thence
down a Hill of 4 F. at the Bottom ot which, you come to and
at 1 ? y*2 another of 1 o F. at whole Foot eroding the Wye enter Monmouth, the
Account ot which fliall be given in the next Pcufc
Backward Turnings to be avoided,
t At the End of Stanton, the Lett acute; 11. In Cover d, the'forward. 111. 6 F.
(hort of Huntley, the Right to Giocefier a duhrent Way. I/. 9F. beyond
Brockworth, the Left to OXFORD. V. 2 M. (hort of Perm s Bridge, the Right
to Cirencejier. VI. At Perm's Bridg. the Lett to VII. At the End of
Fair ford, the Left. VIII. 6 F. beyond St. fohn s-Br. the Right to
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to St. DAVIDS , in Pembrokcshire .
PART III.
Commendne at Monmouth, and Extending to Burton-Ferry near Neath in Glamor*
S ganflure. Containing 70 Miles 2 Furlongs.
The following Turnings to be avoided.
At the 128*6 At the end of Monmouth , the Lett to 2ro;- Route. 15a 4 t* l ®
Right acute in TreUgh, 1 32*7 »nd isfh die ». forward ways on the Lett to


Ch'epftow. 134’r the Left to C hep flow, and 1 F, farther, the forward On the
Right to Lannijfent. 1 36’? and 1 37 ’6 the Left to.Chspftow. 139’y the Right to
Carlton. 1400 the Left to Shire-Newton. the Right acute. i47’4- the
Right to Carleon. I fi’i the Right to Rife*. 15:3 the left to
ij4’a and is6'S the Right to Ruperry. 15:9’* the Right to Tredelogh. 1616
the Right thro’ Rothe, uniting after 6 F. 1 the Left to
the Right to Caflle-Pendeen.' 181’y the Right to BridgEnd* 1840 the Lett ’
acute. ißß’i the Right to Triflyeon. i<n’6 the Left to the Sea-lhore.
IN Part 11. We brought you to Monmouth , a large and well-built T. on the
Banks of Wye fiv. where it receives the enjoys feverai Privileges; fend-
ing one Burgeis to Pari. &’c. It had formerly a Wall and Caflle, now runious;
but at prefent contains 1 Parifhes, the Monies Ch, and St, Thomas fj is the Shire-
T. Govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, and 15 Common-Council Men, has a plen-
tiful M. on Saturd. and 3 Fairs, vi\, cn WhhforrTuefJ. St. Barthol and St. Martin ,
At the Entrance into the Town, crofs the Wye , and the Monow on the W»
ever a Stone-Er. of 1 Arches; Whence a kindot Suburbs of about 4 F.to 127’?,
M. beyond which,over another Stone-Br. crofs 73 otfcyyfo. leaving TVoy-Houfe on
the Left ; Then 3 fucceffive Ale. composing a confiderable Hill; the R. proceed-
ing partly on a Pav’d Cauie way, leads at 129’tl to Houle on the Left,
within 2F, of the Top of the laid Eminence; yF. farther, by Red-water another
Houle on the Left ; and beyond that,Vo the Right, tv/o or
three Houfes lb call’d. 1 .
At 132*4 pal's thro [Tretagh V. and 7 F. farther (leaving the 2 acute Ways on the
Left to Chepjiovfjdown a Hill of above IM. At the Bottom croisOlwysflv. falling
into the Us] at Usk ; then 4 F.beyond, defeendinggently and eroding a Brook,
alcend a Hill of 1 ’4 near the Top of which you come to D ever dan a Village.
At i39’2 pals by New-Ch. dole on the Left; defeending at 140 M. for <SF. and .
eroding Throggy fiv. at 141 M. about 3M. above its InHux into the Severn:Then
afeending at 14a M. a Rile of?!*, at the Top, leave the Ruins of Strogle- Caflle
on the Right, having Went Weed for 4 ,M. on your Left; At defc. 2 M.
palling thro’ Cats A/h in the Bottom ; Whence afeending 4F. at 148 b pals by
Chrijl Ch. on the Right, beyond which 5 repeated Dele, by Fair Oak on the Left,
lead to Newport of 6 F. on the S. W fide of which riling about the Con-
fines of Brecknock and Carmarthen]!), runs by , Usk and (dark-
en ; and having receiv’d 13 other Riv. belides 2 below this Place, difeharges it
felt into the Severn- Se?* The T. laid to be rais’d out of the Ruins of Carleon, had
forir*rty*a ftrong Caflle, now Demolifh’d 5 is as yet an indifferent large, and
well frequented Place ; having a good Mt. on Saturd. for Cattle, &c.
At iyz\ defeend 7 F. leave Efq; Morgans P. cn the Lett, oppolite to a V,
,-on the Right; crofs Ebwith fly. which j> yns the Usk juft at its influx into the
Severn ; andpafsby Baffdego Ch. on theßight at 153*7. Then at it4T alcend
4 F. and thro’ a Village, defeend at is6 M. a F. leaving Ch;
and Rjrmably-HovSo both on the Right about 3 F. diflant.
At 159*1 pals thro’ St. Melons, and Rompr.ey IM. beyond, 2 Villages ; then
’eroding Rompr.ey fiv. at itfo’?, enter Clamotgar-jh. Whence by Rothe V. on the
Right, atf 1 62 M 7 F. farther you come to Cardiff, call’d Caer Didd, i, e. tubs
Didii ;by the Welfh &c. leafed on Tave fiv. in a Rich and fertile Soil; a large,
compadt and well built T own, having a Caflle, Wall and 4 .Gates. It contains
x Parifhes ; is Govern’d by the Con liable of the Caflle,' 12 Aldermen, 12
, Burgefles, isfe. keeps feverai Courts, and fends a Bnfgefs to Pari. Here alfo are
Reid Affixes and S-ffions, a great Trade is manag’d elpe dally with Brijtfl. and
i Mts* are kept on Wednefd, and Saturdays. A


At 164’4 leave tlandaff 6F. on the Right, fituate on the (aid Taff or Tave‘ } aH
Epifcopal See, with a Cathedral Dedicated to e Diocefs of which
comprehends the Counties of Glamorgan , , Brecknock and Part of
Radnor 5 yet the Town or City at prefent is very fmalland does not enjoy fo
much as the Benefit of a Market,
At i<?y*3 over a Stone-Br. crofs Elay at a Vilageof the fame Name on the
Right: At 167’y (by St. Fagons and Ltanihangle 1 M.'on the Right) defcend for
4F. and enter St Nicholas at 1 66 M. extending 2F. cn the R. Then leaving
CsmV-Houfe on the Right 3 F. you come at 172 M. toTrefimon V. of i M. Whence,
by Sir John Aubry’s Park on the Left, an unlevelWayby St. I on the left alfo,
brings you at 173*6 to a Defc. of 7F, leading to Cow-bridge q. d. Vaccarum ,
near fM. long, on the Rivulet Thaw; ’Tis a good Town, call’d by the
Weljh, from its Stone-Br. and Govern’d by a Bay Jiff. Here are kept the Eafter-
Selfions of the Peace, and a plentiful Market on Tuefdays for Cattel, Corn,
HencebetweenPenKyn-Ch.aiidCaftle,aMounta{nousVv ay extends toth
Mile at 178 M.Where defcend by fome Houfes in the Bottom on the Left,and Coy-
Ch.fM. on the Right, and pafsover another Hill to V. of y F. at 180 T.
At 181’4 leaving Wennyj M. on the Right, you come to ay and at
3824 (over New- %v)Ggmore flv which tiling in the N o< the County, runs thro*
Bridg-End a cpnfiderahle Mt-Town x M above this Place, and about iM. belov%
rolls into the Sea: Next by Trelales , 5 e. ,4F. to the Right, a Defc. of ft
leads at 187*2 toxhe PUeY. Whence over a Brookor two, and by Margum Houfe
and Park on the Right, a level R. by the Foot of a Ridge of Hills on die Right*
brings you at to Ahtravon, on Avon flv. juft at its Confidence with thehea j
a Borough Town of 2 F Govern’d by a Fort-reeve, but its Market difcontinu’d*
? Atl9 y ’s pafs by Baylan IF. to the Right and at 197*3 come, to Briton or.
Burton Ferry z F. over Neath fh. which rifing in Bredinoc\sby receives 2 or 5
other Rivers, and paffes by Neath a Borough and Mt-Town Trading in Coals,
&c, about 2 M. above, and a little below unloads it felf into the Sea,
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
1. Again# Margum P. the Right to Newton. 11. z’i Short o fNew Br. the Kigh*
to Llandidec £. 111.4 F. farther the Left acute. IV, 3F. beyond Ewsnny flv ,
the Right to St. Bonnets. V. Ac Elay flv. the Left to VI, 6 F.
beyond St Melens , the Left to Rjrmably. Vll. Againft Llanmhangle-veddo ,
the Left to Ruperry. VIII. At Cats Aft), the Right acute.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to St. DAVIDS in Pembrokeshire.
PART IV. and Last.
Commencing at Burton Ferry near Swanfey in Glamorganfliire, and Extending to
St. Davids aforefaid. Containing 72 Miles 2 Furlongs.
* The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 203*3 the Left to Cogglith. the Left into Llanelthy. 2147 the Right
acute. 2r9*2 the Right acute. 228*0 the Right to St. Cleer. 2347 the
Right to Tenby. 236*2 the Left to Haverford a different way. 243*6 the
Left to Haverford a different way. 246*2 the Left into the Wood. 248*6 the
Left to P/ffo»-Caftle. 254*5 the Left to Rflolton. 259’x the Left to Fair Caftle
±65 j the Right to Whitchurch ♦ 266*3 the Right to Whitchurch?
£> " ' j#


5 N Par till, we came to Burton alias Bmon-Ferry, of near iF« over Heath fiv]
which riling in Brechjiecksh. receives yor 6 fmailerßlv pafles by Meath a Mt-T.
about iM. above, and a little below it, falls into the Sea. The Riv. on the Left,
till at 20i 3 you pals by the Salt pits, then at toz’i by a Ferry of a F.crofs Tau f
or Taney fiv. rifmg likewile in Brec face fash- and enter i wartjey, on the faid Tavpye t
near its Influx into the Sea, call’d Aber-Taw by the mifh j a large and well-built
T. extending y F. on the R. Driving the gre teft Tradr c .my in the County*
especially for Coal, and having aGreatCorrelpor . ?ice witiT.'i/fo/jTheMarquefs
of fPorcefter is Lord of the T. and it has i great Mts. and Saturdays,
f At 203 4 pals thro TYabereV. afoend 2Hills,,and defet . g about 1 M.ovec
Pont tiers, crofs Thin fiv a Branch of the Llngho* : Wher,>,. -icending again yF.
and a little farther, defeending as far, you come to Torn a Bremiii, and thro*
Lloghor at icS’-; of 2 F. tormerlyFortify’d with aGaflle, nowßuiaous a Borough-
Town, Govern’d by a Port-Reeve y 6 F. beyond whichpalsby the Caflle, where
crofting rlcgborfiv. (that rifes about 10 M. higher) over a Ferry fordable at Low
W a ter .enter Than after a fmall Ale. at 211’y by Capet Gvelme or
Gunllo on the Lett, and at 213’5 Cupel Vorrheeon the Left alfo, you arrive at Llanelly
alias Llanelthy 2x4 M.extending«n the Left towards above 4F. between
a Creek of the Sea and Dulas fiv . fo that it drives a confiderable Trade in Coal,
n^its M ts * on Thurfdaysare well fupply’d with Cattel,Corn andprovifions.
vVhence over fevetai Aic. and Defc, and by a Wood on the Right, at aiohj.
pal’s at Spuddore over Gwendrath Paver fiv. and by another Copfe on the Right.*
enter Rjdveell or Rjdvylye at 222 V’ of about 4 F. near the Sea and on a Creek ;
a Town noted for the Cloth-Trade and Maritim Affairs ; ’Tis Govern’d by a
Mayor, (9’c. and has 2 good Mts. on Wednefdays and Saturdays.
After a confiderable Aic.Traveiling on a like R. over leveraiHills at a
Ferry of 2F. crols Toney fiv. which riling on the Confines of Cardigan and ßrgc\noe\sh<>
paffes by ttanimdiffry,Llangadoti,Llandiloh Paver, Pfceiw-Caftle, the Golden Grove
and Carmarthen 5 and having receiv’d 12 other Rivers, falls into the Sea a little
below. 1 M. farther, enter Llanjtvffan or of 2 F. on the R. where was
once a flrong Caflle now Ruinous: Whence over a Hill of 4 F. at a Defc»
of 6 F. leads ro a Ferry of 3 F.over Toveafiv.and at 230 V you come toLlacharnox:
haughern on the laid Tovea , near it’s Mouth, formerley defended by a Caflle, now
ruin’d : It extends about 2 F. drives an Indifferent Trade by Sea, and has a plen-
tiful Mt. on Fridays for Corn (srt .At Kjllmain-loyd upon the Tave (one of the y
Kiv. that fall into the Terra) abou t<s M. above, anEarthenVcflel was found full of
Roman Coin ofCoarfe Silver, of the Times fucceedirig the Emperor C enmodus.
Thence eleend a|TiUof y F. and pafs by Lla
Left 4F. descending near 1 M.Thenthro’aVailey leave
on the Right 1 F, and leaving the acute way on the Left a worle R. to Haverfcrd,
at 239 M. crols a Brook IM. above Grunrseai&b, and enter 3Fe
At 241 T pafs thro’ tan guide >V. Whence as indiredlWay Woody and Hilly, by
Ha rbanb a Mr T. about IM. to the Right, brings you at 14 to Canafion V.
There cio hClethy fiv. which about 3 M. below, receivingtheD«»,g/e$ from Haver-
ford at penner-iamb, meets that Creek of Milford Haven which runs up to Pembroke,
in Britijh Pen-brv, i e. Caput Marlnurn ; the Shire-T* flrong, large and well-built.
lis govern’d by a Mayor, &c. lends Burgeffes to Pari, and has a great Mt. on Sat.
■ But proceeding, 3 Ale. by Mid-County.Houle on theßight,leadtoaValeat2yj
defeending 3 F. At 2y5 V thro’ Pranghcrfi or Prenderherft Y. croflingth eVmgleiy
enter Haver ford{vulgo Her ford) Weft by the Britans Hid-
Pj>'di a Town and County oti i feifi dfj the fide of an Hill near Hilfordldaven.
’X <nM


?TWas formerly /drtlfyVl with. a Wall and CallSe, in the LlHf
Wars, and is now a large and well-built t'own-Corp. containing % Parifll Ch;
driving a coufideiable Trade at Sea, having divers Veil'ds, and lending a Bur-
’gels to Pari. The Affixes and County-Gaol are there kept ; arid the Town is
Govern’d by a Mayor, Sheriff, Common-Council, Juftices of the Peace, &e. je
has i good Mts. On Tuefd and Sat Uri.
At I*4’? the R. continues Hilly even to St.&jvfiTjCroffing
and Reafon-Bv» at tyy’y.Whence by Rerh-CaftJe at on the Right,at 262 Mi
you pals thro’ Creekhowel V.oh the Coaflgand by the Nine Wells ata67*3, enter:
St. DAVIDS at 169" iof 4 F.anciently call’d in Latin Msr.svi a,in Thy
Devi, i. e. Damns Davidis, from St. David, who rranHated the ArchCpifcopal See
hither, from 'Carlson upon Vs\ 3 which in Aufiins Time had 7 Suffragans 3’TWass
formerly a City of good Account, now a fmall Village fituate within 1 M. of
the Sea ; whence from the Cape you have a Profpedf to Ireland
The Cathedral and Freeischool are the only fairßuildings, the Bifliop’s Palace
and PrebendsHoufes being much ruin’d;The Walls are decay’d, the Inhabitants
few,and tho’ it frill continues if not the benefit of a Mt.
Backward Turnings to be avoided- .
t I’2 fhort of Creelibcml,theleft to Riccaffon.lU 2 V beyond Creekhmel, the Right;
acute to Simpfon.lllAV. fhon of Pelham Er.the Left to IV, At the end of
Havsrford the Lett to Prangkerli- Ch.V.l’2 beyond Pranghsyfi, the Left to
Vl.aF.beyoad Canafton, theLeft to Narbanb.V the Right to
Grove. VIII. I*4 beyond Canafton, the Right to Templeton. IX i’6 fhort of
Remen,the Right to Heva-lnn. X. V 3 beyond the Left acute.
The Road from
LONDON to DOVER. in Kent.
jt. / ’~Sp' life Point of Beating S. E- by E. 1L The diredl Horizontal Dillance 6%
S M. 111. The vulgar Computation s 4 M. IV, The Dimenfuration
rrom London Comp-* MeafiirCi
to Deptfo d 04 .04 . jo <jo 05*0
Cray Ford o 5 10 j 08*5 \^6
Dart ford 02 1 Z 1 o2’o IS** I
North fleet, 04 16 j bj’2 2£’o
Chaulkllree: oj 19 ! I c3'2j 242
# 1 «/
Comp 1 * MealTun*,
to ROCHESTER 04 23 b‘s’4 1 29^
Situnghom 08 3- r ji*2 41 '6 ]
Bodon-Street 08 39 094 59*4
C^4\ 7 43 1 ®f6 5 6 y £
Dover i 2 j 1 's'2l 7C4,
. The Poft-M.come near the Dimenfuration, accounting it toDartfordiqM. to Rd*
CHESTERI4., to Sitiinghornxt , to CANTEKBUH.T iy, and to Dover iy, in all 70,
. M idalejsx,Surrey and Rent include the whole R. which crofles Thames, Cray, *
rent, Medway and Stourflv. Affording in general a very good.and Well-beaten Way
chiefly Chalky andG r aveliy,and none better provided for conveniency of’Enteftain-
ment.being the moR frequented R, ih England 3 leading to the readied: Railage
for Hr arise, and theX?«m upon all occafions jbut thefe Turnings are to be avoided*?
.. * , _ , « ' * ' ' , $ \ % ** 4
At IM,the forward Way to Newington. the Right to Levajham. 21 ’o the Left td
Grave lend, jy’y the Left to Upchurch. Acute on the Left to P everJh arm,
the Left to Colred. .
~ From the Sfandardin C9rnbilLondon,do\vn@race-Chunh-(i
tfießridg, and along Southwark j being come to St.George’s-Gb. turn fhort on the
* * ■ D i ‘ |ef|


£eft ’F. and thro Rent fireet to Loc\- Br, There at I*4 leaving - theT cm(W
Brook call dSt. Thomas Watering : then by Half-way Houfe on the Left 'pals a-
\i to New Croft V. where you enterßm; having been hitherto in Surrey ; here
the R. branches out on the Right to Lewjha , and thence to Tmbrii?
At 5 Miles you are at Upper Deptford , which with Lower Deptford makes*a
large I. noted for its Docks, Store-Houfes, &e. At yb is an Afc to
where at 9M a Corner of the Brick Wall enclofing p. comes up to
the K. on the Left, ana at 6F.diftance lies Greenwich-,a. large pleafantT. on the
Banks or the names, Ennobl d with a Royal Palace :On that Heath Wat the T ier
or He Her, Mufter’d near 100000 Men Anno 4R.11. Jack Cade who call’d hind elf
Mortimer Encamp'd here Anno 28, H. VI. and Anno 1407. 2000 of the Corn'll)
Rcbejs were here kill’d, and the reft Defeated.
, At g M. Shooter's Hillafeends for about 7F. and its Top affordsafine Profbeft
into the 2 adjacent Counties: Whence defending pafs thro’ aW. of xM. at ir
M. enter Welltn V. and at 134 Crayford onCray flv.z good Country-T. of-■ F !
'whence adfreft R. at m’z. to a Dele.leading to Danford of of. on Patent fiv,
near its Influx into the Thames ;a large T. with good Inns, and a plentiful Mu
on Sami, for Corn, &c. and 2 Fans. Then, by Stone-Ch. on the left, the
R.hy feveral Ale. and Dele, brings you to Stone-bridg within 1 F, cf the Thames,
Juft at the beginning of Gravefend- Reach ; from which a fmall Afc leads to
North fleet V.of 3F. with a Market on T , from Eafter to
Ac 22’2 pais within 4F.of Gravefend, leaving it, the 2 Wind,Mills and Beacon
on the Left; At 24’! enter Cbaliftreet of about zF. and atzjM. leave the Ch.
on the Left; afeending Gag's Hill at i6'i whole rife continues 4F 1 hence thro”
a W. you come to the bottom of the Defc. at 21 M.andiM. farther to Stroud f
Kupon the R. reputed the Suburbs of ROC HESTER,thro' whole ftately Bridg
over Medway fiv. a fhort turn on the Left, leads up the Principal Street of this
ancient, tho’ now fmall City,yet well Inhabited,and Govern’d by a Maybr.Recor.
12 Aldermen, 12 Common-Council Men, &c. It E,lefts Burge lies to Pari, and
gave Title fo’fohh Wilmot Late Earl of Rochefter drawing 2Mrs.cn Weinefd. and
Frid. and 2Fairs t From the E.Gate continu’d Buildings extend to the Medway oir
the Left, and lb fc Chetham vulgoChttham, Eminent fonts D ck, and for being as
it were the Kepofitor.y of the Royal-Navy Thus this City, may he accounted
a’f long; fiace we leave Chatham but al3 1 ’j where a Defc. fucceeded by a larger
Kile, and a direft.R.hut fomewhat Woody, brings you at 3 y M.to Raynham V.
of z F, follow’d by draggling Houfes, for about 1 Mile.
At 3 7 ben ter Hewingtok-ftrect\zh out 2F.atfSd Key ftrest another V.whence feveral
Buildingslead at 41 M.to the middle© iSittirghorn, a noted Thorough-fare,witlu
Faffs, the R.paft cn the Left.leading to Milton a Mt-T.on the S.W.of the Ille of
Shspway, about iM. diftant; Thence thro’ feveral, Vi Sis. as Bapchild at 42b Rad-
ftcld jireet at 43M. and Green-ftreet at 43V you come to the Top of an Afc,at 45’p
c i which Beacon. At the foot of the Hill, the acute Way on the
Left,leads tof eye>Jham, 12 F. diftant, a large Mt.and Poft-T. Afterwards paffing
Boihn-Ch on the Right,aDdc.cf 3F.leads to Boffox or , alias Bam on
under Biean from the adjacent Hill fo call’d; a good Thorough-fare of 4F.
On the topof iheßJanent j j’y a Woody open Way 1 ies ova 4 1 beH ill to the bot-
tom ol theDclc.aif ys’ 1. W hence paffingby draggling 'Houfes, and thro Harpledmn
ntyf ’d yOnentcrCAMTERBURT, anElftine ntCi t y, la id 10 b e b a lit 9 0 oYea rs b e for d
the brrthcf J- C.and arthefirft Plantatibhof Chriftianity among the
Auflin the Monk, made an Arch Episcopal See; the Ar-Bp. of which is Primate
'■Usd Metropolitan Of a 1 England, and the jirft Peer of the Realm ; This City
■ pfetfantly


■Plsafan fly fsafed on Stour fliews one of the StatelieftCathedrals in England i
Contains 14Panfl1.Ch.and is Govern’d by a Mayor,Recorder, u Aldertnwi, and
Z 4 the Election of BurgefTes to Pari. and z
Mts. on Ifednejd. and Saturd.and 4 Fairs: Thence at sy’z pafs B/Jhops-Court Br. at
594 and from 60 $0 61 Sir Anthony Aucberr's.p, on theßight; lb over Barba m-D.
and an Ale. at 63 M.an enclos’d Way leading to LyddenY. Whence pa fling throf
a /alley c lnland at 70M Entering DOVEK
at 711 a weil Fortify’d both by Art and Nature, and Defended by a large
and itrong Caftie. It enjoys large Immunities, is one of the Cinvu.e-Ports : Gave
Title to sohn Carew Earl of Dover ; and yields a Profpedf to in France, ro
vi'hiC.i it is the readmit Pailage; the Chanel here being but 7Leagues over: ’Tis
Govern’d by a Mayor, 1 z jurats, 37 Common-Goundl-Men, Had once 7
now but z Panfh-Ch. z Markets, and 1 Fair. •
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
LAt St. Vunftans by Canterbury , the Right. H. the Right in Stroud to F tins bury,
liu the Left at the End of Stroud to Couham.
The Road from
LONDON to HARWICH in ESSEX.
** I h T ! 7? I !| U E. N. E. ll* The diredfc Hcrjytntfil Diftaace 61 M»
X - iu. Ibe vulgar Computation 61 M. IV. The 7 1 M.
from London Comp. Meafure.
to Rumford 10 10 1 u’S n’6
t. Burntwood 05 15 I 06*5
Chelmsford 16 25 1 lo’o :B’o
Wit ham 0 ; oS’2 / 3^5
Comp. Meafurs,
to Keldon ®3 35 I loo's 40’2
Colqhcfter 08 43 | \op6 jo'o 1
M*ning*et 08 J r Po - t
Mdl rPICO JO j | IJ| *7 7| *q
Middlesex and \E[fex include the whole T. over Lea, RcJcn, chelmeu Blxch ’
water and Coin fiv. yielding a fair Way and good Eater t ainment. ■
■a *■ ’ T et C 7 h f e fs’dowing Turnings are to be avoided-
-42. Strut ior d, the Lett to KtPinz* hj'o ths 10• ttA ti/vittin o* r ***l ?
fortk the direa Way up the fto Brainm’•*.]* I* % el ™'.
itia.ll. 49 7 lt\ Colcbejler the direct to Sudbury the j? *
water, which, riling on the W. of Hartfcrdfh mfTpc Kv u../i! ’ ’ “
**■&*» at \
v.dms £f„ from Hanfcrdjh. (as it doss here fr ; d 7
and tht o,d I now Uj.cn, and *t nZs
At 3 7 over Lome feparated Branches of the Lea enters ,1 r *t„[ ,■
Stratford at Bow of 3 F. conlifting chiefly of Inns, cmffpf/ I
mi a fare. the*ght-hand Ways'.ho^MtadtagfXw^
• f J 7 -d . *- 0
■ 3 , , M^Tpwix-


Wt’Town . a nd at g'y a Brook call’d Seven l&ngs Watering •, At9M. enter Chafa
Vof F. and by the Whales Bene , at 1 i’ of F. a large Town, Not>b
for a Swine-Mt. on fuejdays, and another for Corn, (s*c. on
An 16 pals thro’ Hare-iheet, leaving Guiiy- Hail os the Left; and part
of lipping* For eft, a Gallows to'theLeft.f At 16*3 touch at Bmkrfireet a Hamlet
to S-Weald,md ;F* farther,afeend a Hill follow’d by another,leading to Burntve.
alias Brentwood of jf, a Place of good Antiquity, with a good Mt.on Thar (days.
At 18’y thro’ Shenfidd-V. and at over chain- Br, crofs a Branch of Cbd-
mr ffy.whence at 2 /«re, come to Jagatefione vulgo Ingerfione , of 3F. Thence a
ftrajght Road (by the B«/Mnnon the Right) leads at z6’9 to Widford-Bt. and a
Village of the fame Name : AtigM- fere, by Hall, the Lord
iter's on the Right, you come to Mouljham, that Part of Chelmsford fo call’d which
lies on this fide the Bridg. where having croft the Cheii/isr, enter tne Town, an-
ciently call’d Canmium , where the Affixes for the County are ufually Held,
having a good Market for CCrn, &c. on Fridays.
Turning Abort on the Right, crofs the other Branch of tne Cheaper: A 19 z
come to Springfield, and at 30V Hew-Hall- P. enclding a ftatciy Houle belong-
ing to Cbnjfophsr Late Dake of Albemarle ; this and Audley- End being the 2 molt
Eminent Structures of the County;Thence at 3P 3 and 4 Fdarther, t.nro part of
Bonham, pafs at 3 4’3 to Hatfield-Fever el V. and at 3 6 ’3 to Wnham, alters toft-
With am, an ancient Mt-Town of 4 F.and a good 1 horough-fare, on a-Branca of
the Bl&ckysattr ;the feveral Roads hereabouts leading to
At 40 M. enter twelve don Eafierford, vulgo confining chiefly of Inns,
fomewhat draggling,except on the Weft jbut leading at 40 7 to
joining the Chelmer near Maldon ■ , ,\
At 44’7 come to Crcfs-a Hand, a Direftion Poll: fo call d, at 46 4 thro part
of Stanway 5 and by the Beacon over part of the Heath, At 41 1 cutex Lgxden
V, giving its Name to the adjacent Hundred; and at 49 3 the Suburbs of
ter, 2F. farther, turning fhort on the Left into the Town, and 1 F* beyond, on
the Right to the Croft ; ’Tis a Town of great Ant.q :ity, cad a in An*
tomhus, and pleafantly feated on C dnfiv. Famous for giving Birth Helena and
Ccrsftantin? the sirli Chridian Emprefs and Emperor ;as alfo to Lucius the nrft
Chriftian K. of England- Tis encompafs’d. with aWail,having 6Gates,9Pofterns,
and 9 Watch-Towers; had heretofore 1 y Churches, now reauc dto about S. It
fuffer’d much during the lateCivil-Wars, yet drives a good Trade tor Bays, Says,
. employing many Dutch, and is more efpecially Noted sor its excellent Oy-
i?ers ; ’ Lis Govern’d by a Mayor, u Aldermen, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, etc.
EleCts Burgeflcs to Parliament, and has a good Market on Saturdays.
At yoS* crofs the Coin, the Road to Jpfmch and Yarmouth turning ftort off
©n the Left; x F.beyond which, leave the Town, whence an enclos d and gen?
frallyWoody Way leads at 44’4t0 Ardley-V nd at'.yyMAhro Lawford-ftrestj to
Msningtre vulgo Maintre, at 59T on the S. of Stour fiv. which is here aivided
into 2 Branches; the Town not large,yet enjoying a Market on Tuesdays.
Hence an indirect Road leads again to the Stour at Cy which keeping fey
32 F. vou come a' 64 M. to Wrabnefs, and leaving Stour- W on the Left, pals by
Street at 67'1 and over Kamfsr-lir. near the Ray a Peninfula- Thence leaving Eem-g
ft, and Eco.rC.ar, Ch. on the Left, an enclos'd Way lies co HARmOH, which
you enter at 70 '6 the Town is final!, but compaCl, and well inhabited ; tis a
well Fortify 5 d Garrifon and Sea-port, with a commodious Harbor, lormtimt
the Station 1 of the Royal Navy ; whence the readied: paftage for the Pa fleet-.
Boats to the Brill >n Hsjland : ‘ fis a Ccrp» Electing Burgelfts to Pari!arnen,|
and has a Market on Tuefdays. , • •


Backward Turnings to be avoided.’
I the Left to Wicks. IT. i r F.fliort of the dire®
5 * South to Mifiley. 111. At the end of the direft to Catwade-Br.
IV. At the End of Lexden , the Right to Halfted V. A t Crofs-a-Hand, the
Right to C ogfhal. VI. At the end the Left to Maldon, VII- ? F.
beyond Chain- Br. the acute on the Right. VIII. In Rumford, the Lek to
Dagenham. IX. At Seven icings Watering, the Left to Dagenham.
The Road from
LONDON to HITHE in KENT.
Including the Way by
THE TTbint Bearing S. Eb, E. 11. The direft Horizontal Diflance 5-4
M. ill. The Vulgar Computation 49 M* IV. the Ditnenfaration 4. *
Jprom London Com p. "Meafure
to Eltham 06 oV$ f
Fa sTiJnghara 08 14 xo’i iS’6
Trofcly •/ o 6 20 08*4 27*2
iUis%4 05 25 07’! 34*3
Comp. Meafure.
to Berfled 04. 29 105*5 4.0*0
AJhford . ii 41 *72 57*2
Jiitbe :} 08 49 12’2 4
• 1 f
49 cp %
Otherwife by M , thus,
From London Comp. Mra r uf«.
to Farmingham, as before i4j>4[ iB’6j »B’is
Wrotham ;• 19 06*5 25’^
Maidflott 08 27 io’7 3^*2
Merited, as in the Table* 02 25 1 o3’<s 40’o
* >- Mf
MUdlefex, Survey and include the whole R. and the R avert sh urn t
Cray, Derent, Medway, and Stem are the principal Kiv, croft over, affording a
good way to Farmingham, but lefs commonable to Hithe, being generally rough,
hard, narrow, and not much frequented ; Travellers chullng rather at pals by
Rochefter to Maidfion than by either of thefe Roads.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At iM. the forward Way to Hewington. 2’7 the Right to Peckham. 4*l the
forward to Deptford, fs the Right in Lewfitam to Bromley. 91 the Left
acute. 1 a’l the Left acute, 13V the Left acute, jy’o the Left acute, 1
190 the Right to Ainsford. 2 1 ’6 the Left acute. 2 3’ l the forward Way
to iVrotham and Maidfion. 33 ’6the Right to 41/0 the Left to
HoUingborn. 48’s the Left to F everjham and Canterbury. 61Vthe Right to
Smede. 611 the Left acute. 66"$ the Right acute. 6%'z the Right acute. .
From the Standard in Cornhill, London , over the Br. and along
St. George's Ch. where turning fiiort on theLeft,thi lyfat-Street, pafs by Half-.
way-Houfe, and at 4M. to Mew Ctofs ; i F. farther, enter %ent, but leaving the
forward Way to Deptford, Rochefier, &c, bear to the Right, and at $ 5 pais thro*
part of Lewjham, the Town before you on the Right; thence thro* ter-V.at
6' 4, to Eltham at Belying 3 F.on theß, a well-frequented Town, efpecially by
the Gentry in Summer, At 9 $ thro* South-End by feverai Houfes on the R. at
116 enter Foot’s Cray to diftinguifli it from N. Cray, Paul's Cray, and St. Mary
D 4 .■ Cray %


Crd'j adjoining; Tis 2 F long, and in it you crofs Cray thence thro Bin hen*
W» ot above 2 M.at 18 M. defcend 4F. to F arrningbam of 3F, leated on Drent fiv.
•s-j* 2,l tbro> Xingrimn V. and at 23’! leaving the forward Wav to
Matif.on, bear to the Left: At 24 M. thro* Stanftead V amending ,p. an<f def-
cending as much, at 26*3. enter Trcfeley , alias Trottefdiff at 27 M aV. of 3F. Then,
th'io Aauirgton at 28*5 and between Ryberli and alias fVeft-Mailing, a
?; t ; -' oltefo™eriy^or 0 l tefo ™ eriy^or ’ tsAbbe y s at 3»M. F. and after,
by Etfron-th. on the Right, aTurntothe N, leads to Ay It sj or dht 34 2 of 2F. where
over ab tone-B r. cf 7 Arches crofs Medway flv. a PLce remarkable fc r a BattieFought
between the Britans and Saxons, in v hichCtfrgcrwßrother toVerrimerK- ot thcßrf-
tans anu Hot fa 8r0..t oHengtfl ¥.o> the Saxons, kill’d oneanothei in fingleCombaf.
At M (touching again upon the River) pJs by AUington, on the Right«
wnc-nee over Pickendon- H. where the Road from Maidftcn tails in on the Right,
come to Thunham flrset contiguous tc Berfled,ci 6 F.Thence between leeds-Ch.
on the Right, zndHeUingborn on the Lett, at 42A pats thio’ Pan's-Gate V.thea
by Leed’s-Caftie on the Right, at 44 M- to , of 3 F.
ano at to Sand may V.leaving Clifton” Houle on the Right.
At 47 2 pais thro 5 Lenham haugh, tome tiragglingHoufes fo call’d,and jF. far-,
taer, Bardens-haugh, leavingEgemw Ch. 4F.cn theßight ; Whence an indirediß.'
by leveral Houles leads at ysM.toHothfield-haugh.Jben at 53*4 thro 'Rothfield aud
at SS’s by the lord Topham's Park on the Lett, enter Ajhford at ?7’i of 4 F.
where is kept a Court of Record every Tuefday 3 Weeks, for all Adtions unde?
20 Marks 5 witbaMarket on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs, on 6. and Augu/i 19.
At the end ot the Town, crofs the Stour ; then at y 9’2 thro
y. at (3r Mby Sr, Norton Innatehbuli’s P. on the Left, and iM. farther, Sr. Thomas
Scot sP. on the Right; defcend at 6 3 M. for 2F. and pafs thro Sdlingt V.
Whence by Efq; Gimbleton s-P&rk on the Right, at come to
I-ark accompanying your Road x T M.on the Left. Then thro 5 , 3
°r 4 Routes fo call’d; at 6%'i defcend 4 F. and at 70 M. enter Hide
Pali-tilth,formerly containing 4 Pariflies,but by the die akSng up of its Haven
and other Accidents reduc’d to one. ’Tis one of the Cinque Ports, govern’d by
a Mayor, s Jurats, 12 Common-Council-Men; has 2 well endow’d Hofpitals; a
good Mt, on Saturday, and 2 Fairs, vi\. on St. Peter's Day, and November zo»
The Enclos’d Way by Maidflon.
At the parting of the R. at 23T take the Right-hand or forward Way, and
at 24R defending 4F- enter Rotham or Wrotham of 2 F. with a Mt. on Tuefd ,
At a 6 M. by Nebucan-Honk on the Right, pafs to Off am, alias at 28T of
3- R. whence an indifferent ftraight Way but very Woody (leaving Mailing at
50 M between this and the other Road) brings you at 35V to a Stone-Er. of
S Arches ->ver the Medway, leading into Maidjion of 6 F but tranfverlly much
more, large acd well-built. ’Tis the Shire-Town, fends Burgeffes to Pari. &c.
Is Govern’d by a Mayor, 12 Jurats, (Me. Has a good Free-School, a plentiful Mt.
on flburf days, and ? Fairs,with leveral good Inns. Hence bearing to the Left, at
17 6 you joy a the laid Road by Alesford.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 2 F, fiiort of Pedlinftreet, theLeft acute. 11. In the Right to
Hi Ufa eI. HI. At the End of Caril or Calehil-haugh, the Left acute. IV. 2FT
fhort of Bradens-bangh the Left to Egertcn. V. At the Entring Lenham
haugh, the Right to lenham. VI. 4F. beyond , the Left to
VII. y F. beyond Addington, the Left £0 Wmhm. '
The


The Road from
LONDON to HOLYHEAD ,
Com. ANGLESEY, North-Wales.
r T"'HE Point of Bearing N.W. 11. The Direft Horizontal Didance 224 Mr
I HI. The vulgar Computation 2oB M. IV. The
From London Comp. Meafiire.
to &arnet 10 10 n 7 IC7
St. Albans io 20 09*6 2i’s
Dunftahle Io 30 ' 12*5 34’2
jßrickhill 07 $7 09’$ 437
Swny Stratford 07 44 09*2 53’ 1
T ocefter 06 S° °7’4
Daventre 10 60 i2’2 727
Dunchurch 06 66 08*0 Bo'7
COVENTKT 08 74 »I 5 2 92,’c
Colejhil 08 82 n*4 l°3’s
I.IC HE IE LD 12 94 Vs’o * 185
Rugeley 05 99 07*5 126*2
Haywojd 03 102 04*4 130*6
Comp, Mcafure.
to Stone 08 n° *° 5 x 140*7
Stabieford-Er. 05 115 os*s *47*4
Wore os 12.0 o6\\ 154*0
Namytwich o 6 08*4 1624
Torperiey 07 133 io’i 172*9
CHESTER 07 140 0 9 ’4 182*1
Harding os 14s ( 7’‘ I*9’^
Northop 03 148 05 ~2 f
Denbigh 12 160 I4 5 6 | 209*2
K.4berconwey 14 174 207*229*$
Beaumaris 10 184 i2’o *241 *5
Boddedaf 17 201 ipi 1 260'6
Holjhead 07 208 08*4 269*2
Middlefex , Hanfordjh , Bedfordjh■ Buckingham]]). -
fordjh. Shropjh. Cheshire, Flintjh. Denbighjh. Carnarvar.fi) and Anglejey are the Coun-
ties thro’ which the R. lies; and the Coin, Lowj el, Owfe, Learn, Avon, Sherborn, Cole,
Tame,TrentfiVever,Dee,Wheeler, Elway and Conway are the princi pal Riv. croft over.
The fird 30 M. very good Way, whence ’cis indifferent thro’ and
Northamptonjh. Dunchurch Lane has 2 M. of bad Way, and .
no ill Road. WALES tho’ Mountainous, yet (the Tide being out) gives a plea-
fant Way over the Sands for feveral Miles.
This being another of the fix prime Pod-ways,and readiedPadage for Ireland,
is one of the mod frequented R. of the Kingdom. However as the Stage-Coaches
to Cheftsr mifs Lichfield, and pafs thro’ Newport and Whitchurch in Shropjh. fo on
the other Hand Hgrfemen will fometimes ride by Northampton,mi Carts keep
the Watlingjlreei.
THE whole R. confids of 4 Plates 5 the fird ending at Tocefler in North-
amptonjh. the fecond at Lichfield the third at Chefter, and the Fourth
at Holyhead :We begin with Plate I. containing ’f.
The following Turnings to be avoided,
At 10T the Right. 12T the Right to Hatfield, 21’r In Sf. , the Right to
Luton. At zz’z In St. Albans, the Right to Redbourn . 47*7 the Right to
Hanflop. fp’s the Right to Eajton
"Ix'' V ' ' r i .
From the Standard \nCornhil,London, thro’ Cornhil,Chsapfide, Blow-bladder ftrestf
Ncwgate-ftreet,Giltfpur-jireet,Pye corner,miSmithfield to S .tfohn-ftreet. Atx’6 crofs
the New-Riv. and enter Ifiington above iM, upon theß, full of Inns,jand ocher
pubiickHoufes: Whence atj’2pafs h'jßing to Lower Holloway-V. of
above zF.and at~M farther to Upper Holloway .-Thence afcend Highgate bill, and
enter the T.at jT confiding in leyeral fair Houles of the Nobility and Gentry
and


and goad lans j buc before yon come to the Gate, the Way from Grafs-Inti*
June by Patter is and Rentijh Town falls in on the Left. Leaving Highgate at fd r
defend yMiles to Finchley C.and by Brown's Well on the Right, pafs thro’ Colt.
Harbor at B’4 to Whetstone at y'i Extending near 4F. withTeveral good Inns,
At JO4 Enter Hartfordjh. and by an eafie Afc.Barnet,alias High Barnet, at 1 ve,
a well frequented Town of 4F. on theß. noted for it’s Medicinal Waters, good
Inns, and aSwine-Mt. on Mend. where K.Edw- iy. obtain’d a Viftory over the
'Houfe of Lancajier. Then re-enter Middlej and thro’ a part of S-
Mims: At 1 y’3 come to N-Af fms. of 3F. and at 16 M. again to Hartfordjh. iM-
beyond which,a fteep J>efc.leads down Ridg-bill j whence palling Coney at iß’6,
a ftraight R. brings you at z 1 ’z to St. Alb , a lar§« and well-frequented Tho-
rough-fare, Corp. and Mt-Town,govern’d by a Mayor, 10 fends
Btirgelfes to Pari, gives TitW to a Duke, is divided into 4 Wards, and contains
3 PgrilhCh- whence Stage-Coaches pafs daily to London:- ’Tis a place of good
Antiquity, Rais’d out of the Ruins of that Ancient and Eminent Roman City
peryUm, and denominated from one Alban a Citizen thereof
1 Thence at zz’4 a ftraight enclos’d Way brings you at if 7 to , a
good Thorough-fare Town, (the Left-hand Ways leading to Hempjted and
jyimJfed,two adjacent Mt-Towns)andat 30 M f to of 4R full of good
Inns 5 where ent'ring Bedfordfo. an enclos’d Way leads at 34 M* to Dunfiable, fo
Gall'd from one Dun a notorious Robber, anciently Afagtoninium and Magintum.
"fis feared on a Hill in a chalky dry Ground, and has many Inns, with a
good Mt. an Wednfd. for Corn and CatteJ. Here is a crofs R- vi\. the Left to
Leighton and Oxford ,and the Right to Cambridge. 5
At 34‘3 the R- gently afends to 3 f’4 where a fteep Defc. leads down •
hiii, and thence a ditty Way to Hoc\uy aim Hoc lily in the hole , (from Hoe i. e.
lutum) confiding chiefly of Inns and Puhlick Hoafes 5 Here the R. to Woburn
lies on the Right. And hence the Watling-jtree way brings you to the entrance
Into Buctiingamjh, at 4z’4 9F. farther ent’ring title Bridjiil of 3 F. a Poft-
Town. Then defending at 45’y crofs Lowfelflv. Branch of the Ow/e, and en-
ter Fenny-Stratford of zF. full of Inns. Thence by Ricljey-Wood on the Left, over
B/nfe-Hill and Harford- Br. a ftraightßoad leads at jz to Stony Stretford, on
the Owfe, anciently Laftotadtm, a large Town containing z Parilh- Ch- and well
accommodated with Inns. It has y Fairs, and a great Mt. on _ Fridays. At the
grid of the Town, having paft the River, enter Old Stratford in Hmhamptonfh.
affording fpme good Inns, both together making 1 M. in extent. Here the
great Road to Northampton, and foto Nottingham, and Derby, extends on the
Right 1 whence at yy’y by Potters-perry End, the Road keeps ftraight, but lome-
what Woody, (hewing feme vifible remains of the old Roman, way; Thus by
putth-mill on the Left j and Havencote-Houfes on the Right, comeat 6o'z to
torn offer, vulgo Tcffeter, and Tofter, anciently Tripontium from its Bridges, a handi
fom Town, with a good Market on Tueflays.
r-
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
1 F. from C««/f-mill, the Right* 11. Againft the Left to
Stoko-P- 111. At the End of Fenny Stratford, the Left. IV. 2F. beyond Little
Bricfibil, the Left. V. Juft beyond the Gate at , the Right to -
Inn-Lane, Lwden t VI, At the Entrance of Iflingm, the forward to Ringjhnd*
Th‘e


The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to HOLYHEAD, Com. A ngle s ey .
PART II.
Commencing tftTocefterQww, Northampton, andExtendingmhe
r 6 Including $6 Miles.
Where you are to avoid the following Turnings.
At 61 M. the Left to Warwick. 6 8’ 3 Wat lin forward to
87% the Right in Ryton. the Left to Brimingban ana Salop. 103 M. the
Left to Briminghara. 107 T the Right to Bratton. Baflets , 108 5 tneßig. o
tamvconh. 109Vthe Left acute, in the Lett acute entnng Ba/fets-Eeath,
n j’j theßight acute by theßilhops ruckofStones* x 160 iheßighc to
FROM Tocefor a ftraight open Way, part of f ailingfoeet, continues to For-
lier’sßooth, an Inn or tw» and 3or 4 Houles fo call d, at 633. Whence
the R, by intermittentAfc. and an eaiieDefc. leads to
and Ifannovantia, feated in a Bottom, andfubje6f to frequent Inundations. It
has one or two Inns, but the R. leaves it on the Left, and 4F. lurcher, at
s9l the Wailing foeet,at the Crofs o’th’ bearing to the Left, ©ver Rye bill,
and by brings you at 7 16 to Daventry. vulgoDaentrs, 3F. on the R. and
on the fide of Borowhill} a good Thorough-fare with leveral Inns. Fis aCorp.
Govern’d by a Baylsff, Aldermen, Steward, (tfc. has a good Mt. on Wednefd. for
Horfes Catted, Corn, &c. and gave Title the R H. Heneage Finch, Baron 01
paintry, late Ld. Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
j From 74 M. an open Way leads at 76*1 to Berry-bridg neat Branjton 9 at 6F.
farther, entring Warv:icl{sh> At 2F. more, crols Lean l fiv • a few M- Irom its
Head, repafsit at 78M. and enter Dunchwc Lane, uiuady very bad Way, of
about iz F. 6 F. beyond which, you come to Vunchunh, of 2 F. with z or 3
good Inns, as the Dun Cove, &c.
Thence at 81 M. thro’ Dunfmere- H, of about 4M.at 8y 3 pafs the Fofs-way,
which at High-crofs in Leieeforjh . meets Wat ling-forest and by at
87*3 enter Ryton (fuper Dunfmore j V.of 2 F, xM. beyond which, over Kj7ck-Br»
(crofling the Avon from Rugby) pafs thro’ Wymal, and by the Seven Stars a well-
known Inn, and Whitely-m ill, come upon the Pavement ; which xM. farther,
leads at 91V to the City of COVEHTRX, extending with the W- Suburbs 10F.
on the Road; and feated near the Middle of England, on Sherborn fiv whofe W a tec
Is peculiar for the Blue Dye : A Corp. .of great Antiquity, as appears by a
Charter of Leofrick E. of Mercia ; enjoying Privileges Granted by E.
of Che for,ha* augmented by Hen .ll. and the fucceffive Ks. and Qs. of England.
?jj s a City and County containing 19 Villages and Hamlets; Govern’d by
a Mayor, 2 Bayliffs and Sheriffs, a Recorder, 1 o Aldermen, a Coroner, Steward,
two Chamberlains, two Wardens, &c. Holds Pleas for all Aftions; has a Gaol
for all Felons as well asDebtors; Sends Burgeffes to Pa v\.&c. comprifes 10Wards
and 3 Parifb-Ch. was Enclos’d with a ftrong Wall,demolilh’d Anno near
3M. in compafs, with 12 Gates and 16 Turrets. It has a Grammar-School
well Endow’d with three Maftersand Exhibitions in both UniverTitles, with a
free Mufick-School for Poor Boys 5 divers Hofpitals, One for 10 Old Men,
another for 20 Blue.coat Boys, a Third for 8 marry’d couple, and a Fourth
ij? WtfoQnhri'foift* ; V; ’■ ■
In


In the Mt-place Hands the ffatelieft Crofs in the Kingdom, being Poe*
high, adorn’d with the Statues of leveral Kings, Repair’d and Beautifv’d
A. D. 1667. The Citizens (whole chief Trade is Gloathing) are of 18 Com-
panies -, have 3 Mts. vi%, on Frid. for Cattle, Corn, <&'c. and on Wednefd an,l
Saturdays, for Provifions, with 4 Fairs. ] *
At 514 V pafs thro’ Alefly, vulgo Aujley V. and then an afcent of Clayey Way
fucceeded by a Rocky Defy, leading at 9 8 ’2, to Meriden , of z F.confifHn« chiefly
of Inns, but remarkable for that, having juft enter’d the Heath, the great Road
to Shrewsbury by Birmingham, Dudley and Bridgnorth, and from Coventry to
Worcejier , &c. lies on the Left.
Thence by Packington , pafs between the z Parks, crofs Blitb flv. and at 102
M. enter Cohjlnlof 1 M. on a Hill by Cole flv. a Noted Thorough-fare with a
good Mt. on Wednefd. On the Left of the Town, is the Hall fometime the Seat
of the Lord Digby of GeafhiL in Ireland-
Along Grmfcot-HiW, the Defc. brings you at ic s’j to Cutdvronh-Bx. over
Tame a fair Riv. giving Name to Tamworth an adjacent MtTown ; a little below
which, ’tis receiv’d by the Trent: Thence hyDunton, and McxhuU the Seat of Sir
Andrew Haslet on the Right; by Wbifjhaw-Grcen and the Rtd Cap, a well-
known Inn ; at x xo’y. leave Middieton-Nev/-l\ on the Right, and enter
the Pole at 11 T 4 dividing the Counties of Warwick and Stafford-, die Right-
Hand-Ways hereabouts leading to Sutton-Colefield,a Mt-Town; whence by
W i on the Right, and the Bifhops Ruck of Stones, a Heap fo call’d, a Sandy
Valley leads to Black-Brook and the Crofs dth Hand,
At nyT Wat I ing-ftreet-W ay left at Wedon, paffing by High-Crofs and Atherton,
crois the R„here,and proceeds to Shrewsbury, &c. At palling thro’ Swinfen
V. enter the County of LICHFIELD ; at 1 xy’o crofs another Roman-way call’d,
Icfneld fireet s and by Boropghccp-hill on the Right, come to the Suburbs of the
City at i xß’z of 1 M. on the Road, and as much tranfverfe, yet not containing,
above £OO Houfes: ’Tis a Place of great Antiquity, anciently call’d Licidfieli,
i. e. Campus Cadaverum, from the many Martyr’d Bodies in the Perfec-
tion ;to which the Arms of the City probably allude, viy. ThreeJlain Rings. The
Cathedral was firft Built by OwfyK. of the 556. and
was its firfi: Bp. Under Offa K. of the Mercians,' twas madea Metropolit-See, the
Bps. of Winun and Hereford with thofe of Siinacefter,Dorcefier, Elmbalm and Dun-
vpich appointedfor but determin’d with that Prince: In ioyy, ’twas
tranflated to Chefler, afterwards to Coventry, and back toL ichfield hy Reger Clinton
who Erefted the prefent Struftore, Dedicated to the Virgin Maiy and St. Chad\
a curious and fplendid Pile, efpecially its W-end, where by the late Bifliop
Hacket , is placed a Statue of K,Charles 11, The County of the City is about
jo or xa M. in compals, furrounded every Year Sept. 8. by the Sheriff, who
then feafts the Corp. and Neighbour-Gentry: ’Tis Govern’d by a Bailiffs, and a
Sheriff, chofen out of z 4 Burgeffes, a Recorder (who is Judg upon Occafionj a T-
Clerk, <W'c. fends Burgeffes to Pari, and has a Gaol for Felons and Debtors
apprehended within the Liberties (but not without the Clofe> There are a Mts.
on Tuefd. and F rid. and 4 Fairs, viy. on Friday after Twelfth-day, May x„
Jjhwednefd. and Friday before St. Simon and sude ; alfo a Free Grammar-School
with two Mailers, an Hofpital call’d St. ffohns, and another in ’Tifi
well frequented by Gentry, and contains 3 ParifhChurches 5 the greateft part
of the T. lying on the Right-hand of the Road : The Two Gawfey-Br. joyn the*
main Town to the dole and Bacon fireet reputed the chief Street in the Town
till burnt in the late Troubles, in which this City appear’d io Eminently Loyal,
'Backvi arcl


Backward Turnings to bs avoided.
V, At the Crofs o'tb' Hand the Left to lVeejor .At green, the R : gbs
'to wisjhavc 111. iF.beyond Colejlnl, the Right to W'armck- IV.the forward
Way in Coventry. V* 2F. beyond Ryton~Bt, the Rigntto Soutbam, Vi. agamic
tim PBeJ.on, the Right to IP'edon.
&
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to HOLTHEAD, Com. Anglesey.
PART III.
Commencing at the City of LICHFIELD, and Extending to we City of CHESTER
Containing 63 Milos
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 119*7 the Left (direft) at Crejs o'tti Hand to Famel. x 28*4 the Left (direft)to
Stratford. 131*6 the Right to ifttoxeter. l4l*l the Right (forward) in Stone to
Olton. 142 V the Right to Nerv'Caftle and 147*3 the Right forward
to the Right to Madeley p the Right to
the entring Tor per ley, the Right acute. 173*0 At the end of Tor per ley, the
Right to Utk.inton.n fo the Left to Chefter. 179$ the Right to Chriftleton.
s
\ I
FROM Lichfield you come to Crofs o*th*H few' Hotfes fo call’d from aDi-
redion-pod there plac’d,reckon’d iM.from the City 3 Ibpaffing by Longway-
Houfe on the Right, and crofs Biljon- Bros a Dcfc. leads to Long and
thence an ealie Ale* to Longdon,vulgo Long-Ch on the Right at 122 5 hence a
Reeper Defc. carries you thro’ part of the Town, and 1 M. farther, to Breretcn-
Hill, defending 3 F.and leading at 124*4 to Bereton , vulgo Bremrton, iF.long
with a good Inn : Whence a direft Road to Rugeley, vulgo of F. a
good Thorough-fare-Town, with a Market on Tuefdays.
Thence at l i6fi a fandy Way by Sir Charles JVoljelefs, on the Right, toJfol-
feley vulgo Oujley, with one good Inn; where at 128* j crois the Trent, to Var-
lafton-Bv. on the Left. At 119*2 pafs thro ’Colledgi at 12 9’y Little-Hay mod, and
at 1 30’4 Great Haynfeod V. of above 4 V. on the Road, with 2 or 3 good Inns.
Whence leaving Tixall 1 M. and Ingeftre f M. on the Left, pafs by a Salt-work,
vulgo the Brine-Pits ; and clofe to mfton on the Left at X34T. Then a gravelly
Way leads at 136*1 to Sand-Crofs, from the Direftion-Poft at the Crofs Way,
leading from Stafford 3 M. an theLefr,to UttoxetereM* on the Right. In the Ch-
of Sandon,vulgo Sand,is on theßighr,is a ftately Monument of S ,
and the adjacent Hill is the Seat of George Bigby , Efq; whole Daughter and
foie Heir rnarry’d Charles late Lord Gerard, of Gerard's Bromley .
Thro’ the Village, and a little farther, part of and 158 leave Carr-
houfe on the Left, a well-known Inn : Thence thro’ and by
and Park on the Right*, at 140’? enter Stone of 4F. aThorough-fare with s cr6‘
good Inns, aMr on Tuefd. and a Fair on St James's Day; eminent for that IC.
mlf her (fuppos’d to rehde at Bwy-bank, a Hiil near Darlafm) here Murder'd
his two Sons U'ulfald and Rufin, tor embracing the Ctfriftian Faith.
Turnlhorton the Left,and att42M.over Darlaftm-Br, crofs the Trent, and thro
Parlajion ; whereat 142 V the R, leading to Her: c aft le, Warrington, Lane after and
Car lip, lies on the Right; At i4j’i alcend Hill, whe&ce bykHue Houles
you


you come at 147*4 to Stdbleford-Br. affording ilnn for Carriers* &c
by Side-way Hall on the Left, at 1* 2V appears Pipe-rate, 2or 3 Houles lb call’d
and there crols a Corner of Sbropjh, leading at ij 4 M, thro’ Wore, vulzo Cure
with an Inner two; 6 F. beyond, at an *
At 1 jj’7 thro’ Bridgmore aF. on the R. and IM. farther, by a pool, and Dod
dington- Hall, on the Left, you come to Stapeley at 1 p 9 ’6 and by fotne Houfes at
i6i’z to Namptwich of 6 F. on the R. Wever fiv. paffmg thro* the midft of it- ’Tis
a large and well-built T. with a fair Church, Great quantities of White Sale
here made; and the Spring, as thole at Middkwich and NoHhwkh, He onthe Banks
of a frefti-water Stream; It has a good Mt. on Saturd, for Corn and Cattel.
’s on the Left, you come at \ 6-fii to Afton*
thence to Burford-Green, and Hurlftone at 1 M. thro’ Stefa, leaving the Hall on
the Right. At its’* pafs Bar-bridge, and Wat field- Pavement continuingto i6%\
Whence by Lome Houfes on the Right, call’d Highway-fide, and on the”
left, leave Beefione-Ctfile about 2 M. on the Left, and at i 72 5 z enter Tartjprlev
a good Thorough-fare Town of above 4F. * ' ,
At i 74 5 i thro 5 Cotton, 6F. farther, leave Dutton-HdU ort the Right; theacute
Way on theLeftfslling in again at 179’3 ; ’tis fbmetimes travelled by Carts, as is
another acute Way on the Right 3 F. thence, juft beyond Comn-V. AtiyS’S
thro 5 HockeeLV. pafs over 3 Stone-Br. as many Riv. and enter Cottcft-Heath.
1 .At 178’y by fome Houfes call’d Bmvi z-H. and 4F. farther, a Gibbet on the
Right; touching the Banks of the Dee on the Left, you come to AtxSi’j
pals thro’ Fore Etfi fir'eet of 4 F.and thro’ Eafl-Gate enter the City.
CHESTER, alias Weft CHESTER, from its Weftern fituation, anciently Call’d
X>eva from Deeflv.tmdCaer Legion by the Britans t’Tis a place of great Antiquity*
of a Quadrangular form 5 the Walls, excluding it’s large Suburbs, about 2 M. in
compels, with 4 Gates towards the 4CardinalPoints; defended by a ftrong Caftle,
in which is a f ately Shire-Hall,where all Caufes belonging to the County Palatifi
are determin’d. It contains 10 PariflvCh. befides the Cathedral, and had for
itsfirft Earl Hugh Lupus Half-Brother tothe which Title is now in the
Crown, It has a xair Water-Houfe by the Bridg, and the principal Stt’eets a!*
dorn’d with Pia\%tx ; maintaining
tlolylead being the principal Places of taking Shipping for ’Tis a City
’and County, Govern’d by a Mayor, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Aldermen, a Recorder, Town-
Clerk, &c. fends Rurgefles to Pari, and has iMts.on There’s alfo a great
fair at Micbaelmafs ,well furnifh’d and frequented by the Tradelmeh of Londod
«ind Dublin,
*. * _ %
Backward. Turnings to be avoided.
» „ ' , • * • : ,;. _
Chefier, the Right,to the holt. 11. I’jF.from Chefier the Right toWhit-
church, the Left to Chnjileton. 111. zM. from Chefier, the Right to Namptwich
the Cart-way }V. 7 F fnoi tof High-way-fide Houles, the Right to Tilfton. V.
4F.beyond Namptwich, the Left to Befley_ and SarJ-hach. Vl.jF.fhort of St apely,the
Right to Aidm, VH.At Pipe-yate, the Right to Drayton. VHLsF.fliortot Sandon,
the Right acute. IX. 9F. fliort of the Brine-pits, the Right acute. X. The
Jlight in Great Haywgod. XI. Theßight in Rug to Canfmod, XII. 1 Fi
beyond Bremen, to fiar.fareod* XIII. j F, beyond Brereton , the Left.
Till


The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to HOLTHEAD, Com. Anglesy.
PART IV. and Last.
Commencing At the City of CHESTER} And Extending to Holy head} aforefdid%
° Containing 87 Miles 1 Furlong.
In which the following Turnings are to be avoided,
iAt 186*6 the Left at the end of Emm. 2056 the Left to Ruthin, to 9*; the
Leftdireft. 2 x2V the Right acute. 225 M. the Right, being the Foot-way
the Ferry. 2 29*5the Left thr o' Ahmonmj to Bangor. 23 the Left to Bangor,
264’y the Right to Holyhead when the Tide is out. z6j the Left to Holykii
by the Bridg.
FROM Chefterovet the Bt. omitting the Left-hand. Way to Eton and Wrexhml
leave the Suburbs; and at 184 3 enter Flintjh. an open Way leading to Bf ft"
ton-V. at x 8 6’s •' Whencean enclos'd Way by Hardeng-P. the Left, brings you at
189 M. to Hawarden, of 3 F.on the R. agood Thorough-fare, with
theCaftle on the Left: thence between Tmley andTcw/ey-Caftle, each zP.diftatif,
over Pantrey- Br. by feveral Afcand Deic. at 194*4, you come to Morthop a Toft*
T. where the R. to Holynelt lies on the Right: At 196 M. by Cravat a
Floufe or twofocall’d, defend Skybough-haggin Hill, at 1974, and4F. be*
yond,afcendpartof Lagin-haggin- Hill, the Top of theHminencelying to theLeff,
■ At roo'6S\iviog Ch. on the Left pafsby the and at 201’s, leaves
Pulgum-Hall on the Left, and Cam-ms a Mt-T. near xM. on the Right .* TheflCi
by Mafmunnam- Hall on the Right, and AbsrviUs, Hill,to Pontuary, and at 10S *5
Ponm;f^-Br.wherecroffingC/Mj'dj l fo.(whichalittlebelow, pafles by St. AfapkJt
Eifhop’s See and Mt-T. juft at its Confluence With Elvcy jiv.) enter Venbigbfih
and by Lmewy-Hall and the Five on the Left at 209 M, come to
on a Branch oftheC/«r<f, once a place of great Strength, with Walls and a Caill©
lately Demolilh’d j the T. indifferent large, efteem’d the heft in
gives Title to an Earl; is Govern’d by two Aldermen* 2 Bayliffs and zy Capital
ele&s aParl-Man, and has a good Mt. for on PfednefdtyH
At 209*7, pafs by Foxall- Hall, and Hen on an Eminence j whence
over feveral Brooks and Afc.at 215*3 thro’ , you comf
at 2x7*3 to Pentgwithj-Er.over the Elwy, where are 3 or 4 Houfes; 3 F. beyond
which, afe* a Hill for 6 F. defeending about 4F. At 220 M. come to BsttM*
alias Betlmfe-Y. and 5 F. farther, by Bet'tus Flail on the Right. At 221*4 ovtf
Polven-Br. thro’ fome Woods, at 227’!, come to and enter
banfh. at 228 M. of which only a Corner lies on this fide * where at
229 M. you arrive, and by a Ferry of 3 F pafs to alias Ahet^
Conrvar 5 by K. Edw.UL Rais’d out of the Ruins of theQld BrAifi.Chy Caif~
Saen, alias Camvium , on the Mouth of the Conway , as Imply’d by the prefix’d
Absr, i. e. Ofiium Fluminis. *Tis a Large, Well-built and fortified Town,Govern’d
by an Alderman and 2 Bayliffs, with a Mt on Friday's*
Thence on the Left fun Ids the Tide being in, youare oblig’d to pafs by
keep the and over a Skirt of Fen mien-bye an, or
bead, come upon the Sands at 231*5 were you continue to 234*2, unleis the Tld@
being out, you can ftill go along the Sands: elfe at 23 SM. afeending far 6P, %
Skirt e. Th'egrsat Stony Hud } a Path difficult and dangerous,
m


the Afc. rough and Keep, with a perpendicular Precipice on the Right to the W
and in over-hanging Rock on the Lett towards the Land: ADefc of about if
leads xrome the Top to 23 6 M. where again at a Houle or two on the Lett lies
the Way to Bangor, thro’ which, as before hinted, you mu ft take your W a V ‘ if
the True be in. Otherwise, re-enter the Sands, bearing wide to the Left of
Beaumaris. At z+o’s arrive at the Meriay- Strefghtj, leparating (by a Fretum of
2 M. Mona Infula or the Hie of Ang from on the E lideof
which Straight, (lands C arnarvan, and Bangor before mention’d, anciently for
its largenefs, call’d Banchor-vaur, i.e. Bangor the Great, and defended by a Krone
Cattle long fince Ruin’d, ’ris an Epifcopal See, including the Counties of
Carnarvon and Anglefey, with Part of Denbigh, Merioneth and Mom? omen (h The
Town, or City is Govern’d by the Bilhop s Steward 5 its pfincfpal Buil-
dings are the Cathedral Built circa Am. ji* ; the Bilhop’s Palace and Free-
Ichool.Houle ; and its Mt. on mdnejd. is indifferent good : The Ferry over the
Menay of about s F. brings you to Beaumaris, anciently q. d. Pulehra
Palus, fortify’d with a Caftle by K, Edvs I. ’Tis a well-built Town, Govern’d
by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Bay lifts and u Common-Council-Men 5 clefts one
Parl-Man. Here the County-Gaol is kept, and the General and Quarter
Selfions, with 2 Mts. vi\. on IVsdnefd and Saturd. and a good Harbor for Ships.
Leaving the Town at 142 M. iM. farther, pafs by an Alms-houfe on the
Tight; whence over Ejn ceugh-Er 00k a direftß. to -V. at 2 +6'6. Then
eroding Several Brooks at zw’3 pals by Pen-wraw-Flalfiandat 2jo’4. Hildravaght-
Mill both on the Lett, and Afcend a fraall Hill, a Gibbet on the Right, AC
251 7, you come to 2or 3 Houfes part of Llangaveney ; thence at zfS’q to
Maffalan a ftW Houles on the Left, and by a long upright Stone, at 2584,
cross RudbranJ- Br.entring Boddedar a Thorough-fare at z 606. Leave Ltenengb-
kernell | M farther on the Right, and bearing to the Left, at oblerve
the Right-hand Way to Cleveoc\ Sands, leading to Holy-Head when the Tide is
out; Oi.nervviSe, go on by Way ot the Br. uniefs 4 F. farther, you pafs over
the Sands and Rocks, all uniting before you come to HQITHEAD, at 2 69 M.
a J own confuting chic fly of Houles for Entertainment of fuch Perfons as are
bound, tor IKE' ,AN.D, or lately arriv’d thence ; Tis leared direftly oppoiic
to Dublin, being the fhortell and fafeft Paflage over St. George's Channel.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 3 F- from Holyhead, the Left over the Sands when thaTide is out, 11. Againft
Haneglous Ch. the Left to Dubatmare. 111. 4F. fhort ot Aberconrvey, the Right
into the Town. IV. IF. beyond Grc , the left acute V, i’j fiiort of
Dalvoen- Br. the Left acute. VI. At Elway f.v, the Right to the Mountains.
VII. s F. beyond Hen-Llan, the Left acute. VIIL At Hill, the
left acute. IX. 2F. beyond the Smell-Mills, the Right acute. X.Againft
Sfiiviog-Ch. the Lett. XL 1 F. beyond Northop, the Right acute* XII. 9 F ftorC
cl Harding, the Lett acute, XUI. At’theEnd of Harding, the Left to Save try.
XIV. In Bretton, the Right acute.
The Road from
LONDON to the LANDS-END
In CORNWAL.
g Point of Bearing W. by S 11. The direft Horizontal Didajjce if 9M.
JL 111. The Computation BM, The Pmenfuwim 3003. From


From L*te» Camp. M»r“re-
■» »"<»’' 51 t3> 1
S tunes. °? J lQ > -h*o
*a*fho* P 8 23 , <9
Hanley-RoW ob 31 °9° 30
? »• «■>
Andover *o 55 82 (5
SALUBVKt 15 7° 7+ °3
Shaft shnrj 18 8S J ,
ShJrbor « 12 ico »/4 «♦
Cm#** io no i 4 tf |J|*
Axmmftef 05 “9 3 5
Monhon o 7 126. oy+ 5J°
Rock here 07 133 *°° *f°
EXETER 05 1 US'* od4 ,1 7 2 '+
Meste'
toCheikigh 08 1 4<S o?’4 iB2'd>
O7 153 osTo 191 5 d
Brent 06 l9B’^
Pli mouth 14 *73 17*0 2a s *£
Xoire *2 185 l£ 5 2 2320
07 192 oB’4 240 V
Trewardretb c$ 195 03*4 244*0
Tregonej 10 205 12 2s«<’<£
phily 05 2io 6 60 26 1* £
Martyr ft# 18 228 242 287^
penfance 2o 230 bS’o 2?o‘o
St, Burien 05 296*?
Senan JO3J 2 04* 3,
”258 300*3
' . - «
TV Poll-Office making this one of their Principal Roach of reckoit'
to W to I. and to MHtft-fm the larthefl extent of the
MaiL tVM diteSing tothel/lee/ Wight, Sec. on the left; and to IV,lts
the Counties pafs’d thro 5 , and the Brent, Thames, Loddon, Dttford,left, Burn, Avon*
Stour, Pamt, Ax, Tare, Clyji, Ex, Tygn, Van, Hareborne, June, Ame, Taint,
Tamer, Lemari, Low, Foy t Pale, Cohor and Ha are the Principal Rivers croft over ,
affording in general a very good Road, and fuitable Entertainment.
THE whole Road is Compris’d in 4 Parts, the 1/?. ending at Andmritk
Hamplb. 5. at C mkhorn in Somerfetjh: the 'jd. at Plymouth in
&nd 4 th at Senan at the Lands-End in Corn ; We begin with part, he 1
but avoid thefe following Turnings, ■■ .■ - i
At n’sthe Right to Col eh rook. 19T the Left to Chert(ey. 22 o the Right to
. different way j ’ ? the Right to Mr. *W* •»«•»*** the Ufc
to Overton. 600 the Right to St. Maryborne.
the Standard in CoraW/ Lwioff* pafling along Cornbtl, Cbeapfide, SCi
. H p*ui’s Ch -Yard-, Ludgate Hill , Fleet-Street, the Strand, Hay-Mt. and
£ leave Suburbs at 2V. Thence thro’
Uhh Turnam Gr Brantford and Hounjlow, At the End of Hounjlow keep the
trd-way O ZSkZfZvO omitting the acute way on the Right; to><»*•*
and at ITi crofs Baber-Bt. over a Brook, the Powder-Mills on the Right, an A-
'Sword-Mills on the Left; then crofs the Channel that runs thro the Pari;,
beloneins to Hamptcn-Court at 15T end pafs thro Bedfont-V. at 16 Miles, .v
enter Stafies A. 3 F. a well-built Town on the
Thames with a Mton Friday, and a Fair 8. having femal good lans.
This T took its Name (as fome luppofe) from the Stages call d
fix’d IntlfThames & for preventing fulm Army to crofs
the River, and near it is Runing Mead, where the Barons Aflembl d. Anno 12ifj
to require their Liberties otK.fohn : then Crofs tne Thames, over a Wooden-Br,
maintain’d by a, Toll on Waggons, Cattel, Barges, and come tj
Ethan V, Atzi’tf an eafie Dele, by the New-England .lnn on tjie Left jafid
Windfor- P. on the Right, leads over Bagjhct-H. or /T'/ndjorForcft Whence by mn~
(ham Ch. on the Left, and the King’s Houle on the Right, come to Bmgh-wough,
and Bagflot at 19 Mites, a place with feveral good Innv | .* , ,
Then pals over aAfc.omitting the acute way on South-
*— ■ * E " {import 7


miofty the Way hence generally open and Heathy; till 1 Defc. leads at 3 3 M to
a Imall place withan Inn op two,and there crofs Loddon fiv. Alcead a
imall Hul at 3 4 M.anddefcend at till at 38M,you pafsthro*
crols Hartford-Br. over a Brook. Then by leveral Houles and on the
Lert, and thro Manard Gr-Y. come at 4xT to Holfom- Br. over Vitsfordfiv. Pro-
peed tnro at 4 1 M.and liembam-Y.it 43*3 and defending to
StyWgjtvftf 47 7 on theT. and on a Brook in which is good ftoieof
Trouts; Its Govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 7 Aldermen, 7 Burgeffes, &c. has
d Mt. on If ednjd, for Corrg &€• and a Fair on Mich&slwitijs-d<iY*
Near Bafingftofa on the other fide the Brook, Rood an ancient and fair Chap.
I now ivUiooils) Dedicated to tne feoly Gooft, in the Roof of which were the
. Portraitures of the Prophets, Apojiles and of se[m Chri/i At fome di-
ftance, is BdjS«g-Houfe a ftately Structure, belonging to the Lord St. tfobn,
which fufter’d much in the Late Wars.
Thence thro’ Worting-Y. at yo’ 4 alio by Chunh-Oa\ly on the Left, at u’i s
and iome Houles come at 56*4 to Sethcrton-Y .Whence by cn the Right
and-taverftj*- Houfe on the lame hand at *BT and on a fmall Afc. pals at
to Whitchurch of near 4F. on Tejl fiv an ancient Mt. and Borough-Town,
Govern’d by a Mayor, and choofing Burgeffes for Pari. *ris now much decay’d,
yet has z Fairs, vi on Oftokr 23. and UUhitfon-Muniay.
Hence by Charlecot-C h. on the Left, and a Park on the Right, for a Mile to-
gether, crofs a Valley at 6i’s and pafs t Then over another Valet
lomewhat Woody, you come at 66 M-to Andover, an indifferent large Borough-
"Tbwn extending 3F. on the Road, and about as much tranfverfe.’Tis feated on
a Branch of the left, affords good Accommodation to Travellers; and clefts
Pan-Men ; having a great Mt. on Saturd, well ftor’d with all forts of Provi-
lions, eye. alio z Fairs, vi\. on May ift. and November 6lb.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
1. 4 F. beyond Setkerton the Left to Reding. ll. I*4 beyond the Right
and Left acute. 111. Againft Church Oakley the Left acute. IV. I*7 Short of
iVcrting the Right to Skjppords-Inn. V. iF. beyond Worting, the Lett to Baling.
VI. iF. beyond Bafmgfioke, the Left to Bafing. VII. 2*4 Short of Newham,the
Right to Odium. VIII. I’3 Short of Newnbam , the Left acute. IX. At the End
of Newnbam^ the Lett to Reding, and the Right acute. X. I’y Short of
water, the Right to F rimley, XI. 4F. beyond Bagfhot, the Right to Cher fey, the
Leltto lUindjor. XII. At the End of the Left acute.... -
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to the L ANDS-END in Coinwal.
PART II.
Commencing at AndoVer in Hamplhire, and Extending to Crookhorn in Somer fetflh
Containing 57 Miles.
~ , . Thefe Turnings are to be avoided.
At 66 4 the Right to Amesbury,Bcc.6 §’3 theßightacute^’+tteßighttoO^/M^
84 , 7theLett to Hommingm and Coom. 103*1 the Right to Hendon. 104 6 the Left
to Stoner Prottft. 118*7 the Left to Bradford, 115 V the Right acute, 131*0 tha
Left in Hiftlbere to
T Andover leaving the Right-hand-way to AmSshti rjr,&c*bear totheLeft, and
/>aMfi’icroffihg aßrook leave Up Catford- Ch.on the Left, and Abbots Ann on
taeßtght 5 Atjo-M. alceiid a HiU of 4F. and another of the like height j at the
Tor


.of which, go down 5 F. a«d at 727 pals thro’ V. oil a Efanch
*pf the left. Thence over feme Hills to the entrance or at yy’o where
you dekend yF,to a noted Piace call d Lobe cdi s Corner.
Henc e lever a 1 Ale, and Dele, lead to Hurret Br. at 81 ’4 then crofs Bourn fiv. and
kt gj’2 to the Entrance of the City of SALTSBU RT, which this Way extends xMi
ion the R, and near as much tranfverfe: A City of great Antiquity, anciently
rail’d Sorbeodunum and SmUbrig , from thedry fituation of Old whence this
took
the chiefßuildingsare the Cathedral aftatelyStru6ture,with a latgeCloyfter; the
Eifliop’s Palace and the T-Hall in a fpacious Mt-place. This City contains befides
the CathedraljParifh-Ch Is Govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, otc. Burgefte*
to Pari. Its Mts. are-qn Tue[d. wdS'aturd: alfo its 4 Fairs on after Twelfth-
Day, Mund. afterUs ;Day y Hicbaelm*fs-l>ay y znd one in the Ctofeon
they are well furnifh’d with all forts ofprovifions. It gives Title to the Noble Fa*
mily of the Cecils Earls of Salisbury,, and has a good School and Aims-Honfe.
; Thence crofs the forefaid Avon io Salisbury-Pl ain, and afeehding leave Lang*
ford Houfe on the Right. Then eroding 2 Valleys come to feVeral Race Polls*
i u\. the 12 3 M-Pofts; leave Ugford and Burccmb-Qh. bn the Right; Whencd
by Esbourn , Alve(lon and S-BanvicfaCh. fucceftlvely on the Left, and Anjl) oti
the Right, at 97’y come to IFhitelheat- Hill of yF. Hence eroding a Vale leavd
Vonet- Ch. on the Right; pais thro’ a Village at ioo’i and alcend a Hill of ± &
At roi’j enter Borfetjh. and at 101*6 Shaftsburyot Shafton lying near 4F. oh thd
R. and as much tranfverfe, A S.Steaftsbyrig from its Spire-Steeple; 'Tis feated oil
a high Hill quite dedicate of Water, Which is ufually brought there on Horfes
from the Foot of the Hill, and for which at a certain time of the Year, the In*
habitants pay Homage to the Lord of the next Manner: ’Tis an ancient T. faidi
to be built by K. Alfred who had here his Palace*which was after Converted into
<a Monaftery.Here K. Edward 11. Murder’d at Crof-Cattle was Interr’d,who being;
reputed a Martyr and a St. his Shrine was fo vifited by Devotills, that the T i
for feme time bore bis Name, and Canutus the Dam, the firft that Sway’d thd
Englifi Sceptre, was alfo Intomb’d in this T. which when in its greateft Glorf
contain’d to Pirilh-Ch.now reduc’d to 3. ’Tis Govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder*
12 Aldermen, &c. fends Burgeftes to Pari, and gave Title to Anthony late Earl of
Shaft jbury, oc. Its MX. bn Saturdays is very confiderable for Corn, Cattel,
, Thence ddeeading 6F. and over feveral Ale, and Defc. by
above IM. on the Right, cothe at 107 M. to Stou'r-Eajiovsr-Viflaze. Theil
defeending 3 F. crofs Stour fly- leave Stour F Cb. on the Left; and at 108*4
pals thro’ Stow-Wcft-over, Whence over feveral Brooks by Henliefbidg-Ch. and
Dunmeer-UovSe on the Left crols part of to Milbourh-Fart at ny’j ol
3 E; oh a Branch of Parretftv. a Borough-Town eledling Parliament-Men.
From Milo curn-F on over an Afc. and Defc leaveOsof«?-Ch.on theßight,and Sher*
iara-Caftle on the Left, ent’ring the T» at 11 §’3 of 3F. A. S. i. e, Fon£
Limpidus , ’Tis large and well-built on a Branch of the Farm, divided into 2 parts*
one call’d Cajiie-T ’Twas.formerly a Bifliop’s See, and contain'd 3 Churches*
now reduc’d to 13 but reputed the heft in the County, It has a good Free-Scbool
founded hyK.Edw.Vi. and an Alms-Houfe by Richard Beauchamp Bp, of fdlithurfi
alfo 2 Mts. on Tbnrfd. and Sami. well furniih’cl with all forts of Provifions, & J c,
teiringSberfan# ftraightWay leads atxio’y to the fide of anHill, b
Middle Compton, Trent and Afutfordon the Righti At ii 1 and
at the bottom, en teTSomerjttJh. where crofting aßranch okhoParret sat r 23’y comd
21 li!M* M2 W $*T; V* *5 p - onEvilfiv a Branch of the laid turret * ha-
B *


vine a on Frid. for Corn, Chee(e,Hemp, (tfe. Next appears
Hiltofa fteep and difficult accefs,and on theToptheßuinsof an ancient Caftle
with triple Rampam and deep Ditches, call’d by thtpeoplel^fl
Hence at 124*3 a fend a Hill of 3 F. and leave on the Right. At
ns’7 thro’ U'tft'-Cdudor V. at 128’y Eafl-t a£ 130*6 come to
V. of 3 F. Thence 2 Afc. and Defc. lead at x 33*0 to Cmkhorn or Cookhern of above
3 F. call’d Cruccerne by the Saxons, perchance from the Words Cruje, Crux and
Herne Cafa ; *T»s feated on the Farret near the Confines of and has a
coniiderable Market for Corn, Sheep, &c. on Saturdays.
Backward Turnings to be avoided. ■
I At the end of Croohjmn the Right acute. 11. jF. Short of the Left to
* Merrite. lll.lnHafdbere theßight to Burport. IV.i *2 beyond the Right
acute the Lett to Oirow. V. In Evil the Lett to lUhefte r .V,W. beyond Shaftsbury
theßiV ht to Blandford. Vll. At the bottom of White fleet ■ Hillthe Le ft to Sain bury
a different Way. V111.2M Shortoftheßace-Pofts, theßight X,
i’s bevond Salisbury, the Left to Oxford, X. at the Right to
StccJlßr. and Winchefter.Xh 1*4 beyond Mid.de Wallop, che Lett to Way Hill.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to the LANDS-END in Cornwall.
PART III.
i Comtnencit? <»Crookhorn in Somerfetfh. and Extending to Plymouth in Devonfli,
Containing 81 Miles 4 Furlongs
The following Turpirigs are to be avoided.
At 125*7 the Right to George- Henton. 138 2the Right acute. 139 7 the Right-to
Chard. 159 7 the Right to larkrpeer, 1 6a*6 the Right ? cu , e ‘ 173l 7 3 » the ieita
the End officer. 176 7 the Right to 1784 the Right to Puns fori
191*1 & 3 the Right to the Moor, Buc!ifajtle:gh f the Right totne i,
WE came to in Parc 11. at the End ot w hich, ascend a F ill of 4F*
and 2 other Afc. Whence eroding a Valley to a Deic. ot ,9 F. at the
Bottom* pais thro’ Street-V. and leave Chard a. Mt. and Poll-Town about IM.
ciiftant on theßight: Then at i2o’y go down 4 P. toanincios d part oiVevonjh.
where you croi's Axflv. and pals by leveral Houles and over a trnall fee. Then
leaving Efq; Tithed)’s Houle on the Right, thro’ Ford- V.ent ring a part of
■ jPorfstjh. at 144*2 by Hanks- Ch. on the Lett, and a Beacon on the Rigor.
Hence by Cooks on Houle on the Lett,down a Hjll at 145 1 and over JVemfu
Pr, enter Vevwfiu Then Waving iVecraft- Houle on the Left, and Sifter hood on t e
Right, come to Axmifter or Axminfter at 145*2 a 1 own lying 3 F. on the Road ;
and on Ax flv.' near the Edg cf the County, towards Somerjetjh Twas a Place
of good iSlote under the Saxons., whole Princes kill d at the Battel ot we)
were here Intern’d. it now enjoys a good Market on Saturdays.
Thence crois Tare flv. with leveral Hills and Brooks, and by Cn. on
the Right, and Widwonby on the Left, come to part of at if 2, 4.
At 154’ 5 defend 7 F. enter Han it on a Borough-Town of 4 F. which leans
' Surge lies to Pari, and has a coniiderable Mt. for Corn, Cartel, OT. on
Hence pafs byfeveral Houles on theß.and by Ch. on the Right j then
at is fiOStxHmm Br.viofsCnfr or Antreflv. Whence aninegulafß.clpwnariii,


£© R ecktoe-V. where oyer a Valley and. Brook, and at i*»’i thro ’Homton Chi/.
V.Sdcrofs dys flv. Then afcend leveral Hills, and by lome Houles, come a t
T d,» r to Exeter, of which take this fhort Account; ,
EXETER, or Excefter, a large cornpaft and well Inhabited Of V, cz.v&hy
Ptolemy, Ifca s by Antonirtm, ifcaDammrum ; byhe Saxowr,
Monkemla Monaco ; by thefi«wiw,C*«- and ;it flandson a •mall
Afc. and on the Banks of Ex flv. fM. in Compsfs, containing Ijr P
befides the Cathedral, which is a line Structure. The Wads were firfl B u i
K. Athenian, with y Gates: Near the Eafl Gate are the Ruins of
formerly the Palace of the Wefl Sam K* and after of the tan 01 Cornwall.
This City has been much harafs’d and fpou d, by the Varies,
Devonlh. PerhinWarheck,the Cornijh- Rebels, and the Pari. Forces, and it.s RlSf,
Choked up by the faid Earl, To that at prefent the Goods are Loaoxd and Un-
loaded at Topfhm about 3M. diftant: Yet it continues in a flourifting Con-
dition, drives a good Trade, and is well frequented by Merchants,
Govern’d by a Mayer, Recorder, 24 Aldermen, &c. lends Burgeffes to P •
is Dignif y ? d with the Title ot an Earldom, has Great Markets, on nej.-
days and Fridays. „
Overafair Stone-Br crofs the Ex, and at i?4’S thro’Affington-V. or z F. Tn n
afeendingand defeending thro- Shillingford-Y .at1 7 7 ’t come to a Hill or 9F an
eroding a Valley go down another oHthelike extent. Whence again crols a VaTe)f
to Chidleigh or Chidlat, of 3 F. on Teignflv. having a good Mt. on hence
crofs the Teigne defect)d a Hill, leave Bovy-Tracy-Ch. on the Right and Knighton
on the by leveral Houfes, and New-Inn on the Lett, and oyer a Hill
come toßeccington-V,zti%7’6 where’you crols Lemanflv . and alcend a ImallHiU-
At 190*7 come to Ajhburton a Eorough-Town,on a Branch of Vert flv. beau-
autify’d with a Fair Church. It clefts Parl-Men, and has a Mt. well itor 4,
with Corn, Cattel, &c. on Saturdays.
At 193 M. in a Valley crofs the Pert, and 1 M.beyond, thro B faftlejg -V.
Hence at spy's to Vean-Prior-V. and at 196*7 111 a Vale crofs Harbon flv. and
enter Harbuton Village. • . , ,
'At 198 V proceed thro Brent a Mt. and Poft-T.and f F. farther, over Brent-
Br.crofs Aune flv, whence over’ feveral Hills and Brooks leading at zoi. M. to,
IPrangatin-V.and at 2 30’3 by a Crofs in the Road, come 1 M. farther, to Ivy-Br/
over Aum flv. Then thro*’ WoodUni-V. at 20 f 7 enter a Valley at 207 M. and at
28’a over Lynam- Br. crofs "Talme flv. At 21 o’y thro’ leaving St,
Marf s-Ch.on the Left, defeend 3 F. and at 212*3 P»fs over Then
afeending and defeending, come to PUmouth. a Port-Town at 21 f’3. _
Plymouth or Piynmoutb fo call’d from Plineflv. on which and the Tamer is fituatq
at their Influx into the Ssaj and well Fortify’d botn by Art and Nature. Upon
Occalion of its commodious Port and Haven, from a poor V. ’ds become a fair,
large and well-inhabited Borough and T* Corp,’Tis a Place (tho’ containing
but 2 Parities) of great Importance; Where Men of War, and Merchants Ships
may ride free from the Danger of the Sea or Enemies. The Haven Is Fortify a
on both fldes, and defended by a flrong Fort, having on the $. a P&r, and ia
the midft St. Nicholas ifie, with a Chain to Lock over K. Charles 11. built a
fair Cittadel there which is well Man’d, has many Pieces of Ordnance. This
Town drives a great Trade, Is Govern’d by a Mayor, Aldermen, Common-
Council, (fs. fends Burgeffes to Pari, and has 2 Mrs. vi\. on Mondays and 1 hurfd^
' ■ Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. I’6 Beyond Blimmb, the Left to Afford. 11.1 M. fliort of llhoiUtnL }h?
E 3 ‘W*


slght to 'Evertm* TIL In Woodland, the Right to Arahtgtm. IV. 4F. fhott of
Brent, the Right to Tot res. V. 4F. beyond Afiburisn, the Left to Alfton, VI. jF*
fhort of Chidley , the Right to Nsnston the Left to Linton. VII. 6F. fliort of
Ajlnton, theßight At the End of£x«er,t deleft tofivjrton, &c.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to the LANDS-END in Cornwall.
PART IV. and Last.
tymmeming at Plymouth Extending to Senan at th [aid Lands*.
End. Containing' B4 Miles 7
The following Turnings are to be avoided,
lit 227 V the Right to Sbsvioke. 232*7 the Left to Furls?. 241* 7 the Right to
Liftwitbiel. 245’ 6the Left to the Sands. 147 ’6the Left to 272*3 the
Right to Qr&monL 274*3 theßight to Penzance. 259*6 the Left to Greats,
2,67*0 the Left to Peri#. 267*6 the Right to Truro. 269*4 the Left to St.
Sethians , 274*2 the Right to Redruth. 290’4 the Right to Alvsrton. 292*4 the
Right to Rinbier. 293*l the Left to L 296*6 the Left to Barnavel. 1
FROM Plymouth by Sioh x e-I)arr.crcn on the Right, at 217*1, come to
V. of 2 F. and 7 F. farther, to Crimble- Pillage over Tamer fiv. which is here
croft by a Ferry of 4 F Hence leave Mount on the Left, afeending and,
del’cending, alfo Artiom Place on the fame Hand: Then eroding a Sand enter
Cornwall at 220*2 afeend a Hill, and go down to MillbroolfV. of 2 Furlongs.
In Millhmk afeend an Hill of 6 F. and at 223 M. thro’ pal's an-
other of 3 F .alfo a like Dele At 224*4 enter Croflbole-V. and at 226 M. afeend
an Hill of aF. a Beacon on vour Left 5 then a Dele, of 9F. leads to Kecli(fi-Y.'.
■whence palling 3 Valleys, in a 4 th, crofs the Low fiv. over a large Stone*Br. of
many Arches, to Lcr-.e alias Loos, divided into E. and W. Lae, commodioufly
feated near the Ocean. Their chief Trade confiding in Piffling, and they are.
both Towns-Corp. lending Burgcdes to Pari. Towards the Sea, they are fenc’d
with a Garreted Wail , and E-Lcce has a good Me. Near the Mouth
of the Riv. is a final! Ifland, call’d St. George , on which great ftoreot Sea-Pyes
breed. Thence over 2 Ale. and by Flir.le- Ch. on the Right, crofs 2 Valleys and
leave Woodvil- Houfeon the Lefty Thence feveral Houfes at 240 M. go down a
Hill, thro* Treienniclf, and crofs Fcy fiv. to the Town Foy or Foye, on an Afcent;
well fortify’d, and its Haven fecur’d with Block-Houfes; _ the Town had for-
merly 60 Sail of Ships, and was noted for Sea Fights. ’Tis at prefent a good
Trading Place, and has a plentiful Me. for Corn, Cite, on Saturd. Whence over-
feveral Hills, come at 244 M. to Trewardmb V. near the Sea, and a Bay of the
fame Name; and eroding a Ferry Blais Church on the Left.
At 246*2 enter Trenawry-Y, and eroding a Vale pafs thro’ Tregonicb-Y. leaving.
St. Avlfle’s-Ch. on the Right: then over a Brook afeend a Hill, and thro*
Jpelthooth-Y, Where afeending and descending leave Mcwan-Ch. on the Right;
and bearing to the Left, over a fmall Hill crofs a Valley At 2 76*2 down an Hill,
enter tregny alias tregony , near the Sea and on Vale fiv. y F. long. ‘Twas for-
merly ftrengthened with a Caftle, but is much decay’d ; yet as a Town-Corp.
fends Burgeffes to Parliament, and has aMt, on Saturdays.
Hence the Road is Hilly and Sandy, palling thro* Trevan-Y. at 179*3, and Tye-
mufiraj'Y&t 261*2: ats6a’6, to PbiUyY.gqiqy(n


a n', J'l to High P4J fage, and 3F. farther, thro’a V. Thence a Rending pa
over a Vale 3 at 167’3 defcend again 3 crofs over another Valley, thro’ Blow
the Cold (Vind, aV. fo call'd 5 and leave Peryn-Ch. op the Left: thence pafs y
leverai Ale, and by the Slew Stone on the Right, till 2 Dele, bring you by
£mr<2«-Church on the Left. . '
* Then by fome Houfes on the R. and by aW. on the Right crofs a large Valley
at 284 M. where thro' aV. defcend a Hill,x M. beyond, and at the Bottom pals
thro’ anotherV. lcavingSt.f/i/<t r y-Ch. on theßight: At 2857 thvo" Henborn-Y .and.
7P farther, another V. enter sit 18 6°6 oi 4P* Q' l * Arrn of the Sea cail d
S Bar, and on a Defeat; a mean Town yet enjoying aMt on
Thence crofs a fmallßiv. by St Michael's Mount on theLeft,call’d theffwr
sad repara ted from theMain-Land byaSandyPlaln, which atEbb-W a ter is pafs'cf
over on Foot : This Mount is of a great height, the Entrance of it being an open
Plain, that leads to a winding and craggy Path, on the Top is a Fort or Cattle,
with Lodgings for the Captain and Soldiers, and a Chapel. At a little dill a nee
from the Cattle, is St. Michael's Chair a craggy Place, and under it a good R.
for Ships, call’d Monts Bay, near which was teton others of a
ftnaller f.z?, and fo equally counterpoiz’d, that it might be ftirr’d with aFinger*
but not mov’d out of its Ration. It was thrown down in the late Civil Wars.
Hence the Bay accompanies the ,R. on the Left to Penfance or Penmans, where
you arrive at 298 V ffirftpaffingby Gulfary-On. on the Right#) The Name of the
Town fignifyingan Head of Sands: It extends aboutyF.on theß.and wasalmoft
dettroy’d by the Spaniards, A. B. 1595' but being lince Re-built, drives a con.
fiderable Trade,and has a good Mt. on T , more efpecially for Fifh, <Vc,
; Then pafs by Laregon- Houle on the Right and bearing dp the Lert, thro New*
Un-V. on an Hill) of 4F. whence by Sr. Paul's-Ch. on the Left, turn to the
Right, afeend a Hill, and eroding 2 Valleys, come to St. Burien-V. at 296 M*
Then leave Lea houfe on the Right,Boftena, Trevodran, and Pondrc-Houfes on the
Left, crofs a Valley 3 pafs thro’ Redberth-V. and by TVna-Houle on the Left, at
ioo’3, enter SEN AN a Village on the utmoft Promontory or Cape, call’d tb©
Lands-End in Cornwall, wgfh'd with ths Wefi Sea. # - -
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. IF, beyond St, Burien, the Left to Talsrivean. 11. At the End of Golfenna the
Right to Trefnerna- 111 4M. beyond , the Left to Redruth. IV. x’y
Short of the Blew Stone, the Right to Helfion. V. At the Blew Stone, the Left
to Truro. VI. 2’s’ Beyond Blow the Cold Windy the Lett to Truro. VI I. 6F.
beyond Tregony, the Left to Grampond. VHl. z’z Beyond Tregony, the Right to*
St. Tue. IX. i’x Short of Folbooth, the Left to Mewan. X. r’j Short of Polbmbs
the Lett to St. Auftle. XL i F. fhort of Tregerrick., the Left to St. Auftle. XII.
yF. beyond the Right to Polmeer. XIII. In Truredreth, the Left to*
tiftitbiel, XIV. 1 M-beyond Truredreth, the Right'to Men.bille. XV. *’4 Beyond
iredenicli, the Left to tauncefton. XVl. F. Short of Woodvily the Lefc
acute. XVII. 7F. Short of IVoodvil, the Right to Lanfolis XVIII. 7 F.beyond
Croftholeths, the Left to Saltajh. XIX. 2 F. Ihort of the Left acute.
The Road from
LONDON to NEW HAVEN,
On the Sea-Coast in Sussex.
, Point of Beating S. 11. TRe Dired Horizontal Diftance 49 M. IlJa
JL The Vqlgaf amputation 45 M. IV. The Pimenfuutum ■
....... , t . E 4 ‘ - : • - . * From


ffcm Jjndm Comp* Veafore
10 O6 q 6 06*2 5^2
Croydon 04 10 04*3 10*5
guf-Qyimfted 1% Z 5 ij** 29*6
Comp Meafeie,
to Lewes I $ 4.0 2a , 2 I §A’a
New haven
4i . 5 *’s
Continued to New*Shoram thus>
from Newhaven Comp, Meafurc.
Brivhthelntfiftm o j 07 I 09*1 j 09*1
diew Shoram 12 I 06’ j {
'MMdhfex, Surry and Suffix include the whole Road, and the aßranel*
of che AfeWay and the Owfe that r uns hr lews to Htvohaven, are the Rivers cro&
OV.I- 3 ’lii no confiderabiy frequented Road, nor otherwife commendable.
Acute Turnings to be avoided.
At i 3 6 the Right to Wanfwo/rtb. 2*3 the Right to Touting. 6 3 the Right to
Micbam.. n’t AttheEndof Croydon, the Left to 12 V the Right to
My gate. 14 M. the Left to Farley. 31’a In Foreft, the Left acute. 44
■the Right to Vkhling. y4’? the Right down the Hill.
In the Continuation to New Shram.
(At 140 the Right to Starting. At lyT the Right forward to OUShoreham.
From the Standard in CornhiU London., palling Fijh-fh set"-
Will, over the Er.and along Southmrk j leave the Town at n,and at 1 4ente?
Hemngm*V. of i F. on the R. 1 F. beyond which the acute Way on the Right*
deads to iVanfmrtb, Kingfien*Guilford, and Ip t 0 PonfmuiK
At leaving the acute Way on the Right to lowing, a. the
Gallows hear to the Left, and 1 Farther crofe the N £ w-Rxv. enter
wav at 45- which at * M. leads to Stmham about 3 F. where the acute \7a t
on the Right, beyond the Town extends to Micham, Sutton and Var.jng, and
AtS’y pafs* by a Gallows on the Left, 10T to of 7 F. a lange and_ welj
Ibuilt T.having'a fair Seat of the Arch- Biftop ©1 nc-fpual ans
Iree-School, with a good Mt. tFairs, H a 21.
Here is a direa Road at 12V to an acute Way on to Kigate ; and
thence at izh coaie to a fmall Afc.fromrh.eTop.of Straiguc vv ay, at.
SS L the Left brings yoa to a Defc. of 4 F. with feme Woods on the-
Right. At xBM. defcend an Hill of 4P- and another 0. tne like ex ten*:. At a*.
M p»fs thro’ a Village, oppofite to which .appears F. to the Left..
A. io'l afcend 4 F P dowa about j I ari at M -, enter Nm
v of z p. Whence by a Wood on the Left, eroding a Brook at 26 7. aic ? R 3F-
to Suffer m at a 8 M. a Brook with a Bridg call'd fewranag
Surrey: Then by the Gallows pafs to Eafi. Grmfiead
long, where the Afe for the County are generally held, } the R»G«W} «S
W a Bay lid, ParbMen, and has a good Maiket on, rhwjday*.
' I 'Beyond the Town, defcend 4F. to the Foreft of 3
another Hill of 4 F- thro On the Top 01 an Ale. at
51 Stone-Quarry on the Left, and defcend at 3yy * M. Ac 37 * e& Sbefpelfc
come to a Dele, of 4 F, at 38 M. wWnrtcKir
-At 39V by fdmeHoufes on the Left, crofe a «* wt <Lj/4
« Wood on the Left, an irregular Road, over another HtU J*« 3 1
Jn the Right, leads over a Brook a,t y ■s t&Q %Q O P S 4 At
other, ail Branches of the Qwf&


At 48 M. pals thro’ Offam-ftreet-V. of 2F. beyond, afcend a Hill of yF. ind
defcend at to Lew/V on Owfifiv. a Place-or good Antiquity, large, and Well-
built, containing 6 Parilh-Ch. and efteem’d theßeft Borough-Town ot the GQUd-
tv Tisßeautify’d with handfomStreets, and a fair Suburbs ; Elects Pari-Meti,
and has a good Trade, with a Mt, o tiSdturd. This place is noted ter the Miftfe
under K .Athenian, and for a Bloody Battel fought agamit K. Henry. 111. by
the diftoyal Barons, who met together in the Caftle.
From the T. on the Left, a ftraight R. brings you (by Tver on the Left) at
at y i M. to a Houfe or two on the Right, call’d and about yF* far-
ther to an Afc. of y F. at the Foot of which, lies and at the Top St*
Lees] each about 2 F to the Left; Whence by theEdg of a Defe. to the Right |
pafs at t yyVthro’ Piddenboo-V, of zF. on the Riv. and about farther, to
NEV/HAVENAt the Mouth of Owfe fiv. but the Name of the RiV. is _ novy dm
folete. The Town isfaiall, inhabited chiefly by Maritim People, having a Key-
on the Eaft-flde of it, where Ships may ride fecure in foul Weather.
f ’ .
■* > ■* ty w x % *
The Continuation to Hew Shorebam.
FRom New haven a ftraight R. leads to New shorebam ; for after jM.cdfitiftil-
ingon the-Sea-Coaft,pafs under and Hills, and Ratted
den-C h. and Beacon,all on the Right; Tbenceat 9’z to Brighnhelmefton , indiffertaj
large and Populous, chiefly inhabited by Fifhermen, with aMt.on and
a good Harbor: The T.lies moft on the Right, being only 2F.cn the R. Whence
at°io’y by Hoove on the Right iM. farther, pafs by leaving
Alderton , Angleton unA-Portjiade fucceflively on the Right ;to which Fland inclin-
ing, leave Weefi and Rjngfton between you and the Sea 5 and at ly’r turn ftiorfc
on the Left, ent’ring New Shorebam at 1 (to diftingufh it from Old
hard by) aT. Corp fendingßurgeffes to Pari, but deftitute of a Mt.lt extendi
about 4F» on the Eafl-fide of a Creek, on the Adur according to
and would be well frequented were its Harbor better.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 6 F. from News bore bam, the Left to Staining. 11. Againft Chaylj, the Right to
Norwich. 111. 2’y Short of Dane bill , the Right to Fleuhing IV. y F. ftioft Of
Sheffield-Green, juft at the Foot of Pane-bil , the Right to Sheffield-Place.
The Road from
LONDON to PORTSMOVTH, Com. Southampton,
t. r I "'‘HE Point of Bearing S. W. 11. The Diredl Horizontal Diftance M,
I- HI. The Vulgar Computation 6c M. IV, The Dmenfuration 7 fly.
From LONDON Comp. Meafure. Comp. Meafore.
tp W?.nfworth 05 05 06’4 od’4, tp Liopocle io j3l Is'2 .
Kingftan io 06’o 13*4, Petersfeld 07 147 0 8’4 5 s‘‘i J
O7 17 q7 5 4. 2o’o Harndoa c 6 1 51 62*4
Guilford oS 25 10*0 3o 5 o Portfey-Bndg o6\sy 06*4
G&dalmm pj aS 04/4 34*4 O3 f6O I 044 73'4
frMMefex, Smre/, Stfffiz and include the whole Roqd j aid the Ihimk'i
» : .ni' ; * Waniil


fPandle, Mole., Wey and Ann are the principal Rivers croft over; affording
fleraliy a good Sandy Way, well frequented and accommodated. & °
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At i ’7 the Left to Croydon- the Right being the way by
the Right t o Ham-Hall. 25’4 the Left. 3 o’y the Right to Farnham. 54’s the
left to C biding fold. 34’y the Right. 42’© the Left to T the Right
to Steep. the Left to Havtnt. the Right to Baft-Mean. the Left.
€z 4 the Left to Havant. theLek toßlendworlh; 71 M.theLeft to Portfey- Ch.
From the Standard inCarnhil, down Grace Ghurch-firest, over
t«Kdfla~Br. and thro 1 Southward at I’a leave the Town, and at x’y come to Hero-
tngton of 2 F. At the End of the Town, omitting the acute Way on the Left
to Croydon,Bcc. bear to the Right; Then leaving Fox-Hall juft, upon the Bank of
the Thames-on theßight, and Car rott-Houfe on the Lefts at 44 pafsby Clapham,znd
Sr. penis Gauden's Houfe IF. on the Left. Whence over E alterfay-W. a fmall
liefc. leads at 6M.-to Wandelefrvorfh vulgo Wan on near its In-
flux into the Thames, a good Thorough fare-Town of Furlongs.
Hence a Ate. to P/tfjsey-H.ofatbout xM.over.leaving the Bowling-Green on the
Right, and Wimbleton about iM.on the Left: then 'defeending jF.at yM. come to
Mm-Parf, enclos’d with a Stone-Wall, and accommpanying the R t near aM on
the Right; oppofite to which, isCmb 1 M.diftaat on the Left •, Whence over aHili
pften infefted by Robbers, a Defc. of 3 F.deads at raM.to Ringflon juper Thames,
Call’d Regiodunum by Leland, the Seat of the Saxon Ks f (of whom 3 were here
Crown’d and before known by the Name of Hereford'.Wsa- large and well built
T, and had tormerly a Caftle belonging to the E. of Glocefter : The Affixes
for the County of Surrey, are foraetimeskept here. It has a good Mr, on Satmd.
Thence the Thames on the Right, till at i4’3 you pafs thro’ part of Thames -
Pittm ; oppofite to which, on the other fide of the River, is the {lately Palace
of Hampton-Court, Then omitting the Right-hand-way at 14 '6 by EJher-Ch- let
forward thro’ Hare-Lane, leaving Efbar vulgo 4F.on the Right; and
pa fling over a H of 3 M. enter Cobham of 3 F.a T. well furnifh’d with Inns ,at
the End of which, crols Mole fiv. which Rifingat the Edgof Suffix, pailes by
Par fin, and at Moulfey, fails into the Thames.
At a I’4 defeend 3F.to aH. between a Ponds and by feme Iron-Mills on the
Right,come to Ripley-Y.on the Left at a4’4. Whence over a Brook call’d St
ssfsif Watering at 204 leave Send-Ch. and Sutton Place on the Right, and enter
Guilford at 29’7 on Wey fiv. riling about Aulton in Hampfi. and made Navigable
by SUices; ’lisa large T.Corp.containing 3Pari(b-Ch.Giovern’dby a Mayor, &c
and fends Burgeflb to Parl.The Affixes for the County, are fometimes kept here ;
aad a goodMr.on Saturd. with feveralgood Inns, as the Red Lion, White Hart, See.
Thence over Wey at the End of the T. leave the acute Way on the Right to
farnham, &c. and afeend Ifatharine vulgo FjUtern-Lllll, the Chapel on the Left {
Skai/ord or Sbaxeford farther off on the Tame Hand; and Loathfiey-Place about -~
M. on the Right ; then thro’ an open Road on the Right, by the Hofpital on
the Left, repafling the Wey at 34’t enter Godalmin vulgo Godliman, a well in-
habited Mt-Town 4F. on rhe Road.
. Here crolfirg 3 Branch of the Wey, fet forward at 3SI thro 5 Milford a Thoro-
fare of aF.Whence over a large H. and an Hill of 4Fdeave on the Right,
end thro’ Rood Lane, comeat4o’?to cheFootof Hind Head, an Hxllofgreat height,
with a remarkableßo tomon the Right, which a Foot-Man keeping may lave near
iM.the Road fetching a great Compass on the Left; the Top of the Afc. is at
■•iU. s ' '■ v ' ' ' 41'7


i,*7 Whence an eafie Defc. leaving the Left-hand Way to Midhurfl, &c. leads
?bv an open Road) at 44*3 to the pitch of another Dele, where you come to
'Hmpfh, and by ßramjhot on theßight, to LippocfV. of iF.on the Foreft ot WuL
the “Foreft on the Right, pafs to Rake-V, on the Right, aty’z enter
Suffex, Aicend jFdand at 57.’4 defeend to Sheet- Br. at *3*7 where crofting
fiv. re e-iter Hatnpfo. and iM.farther, arrive at Petersfield ot 4 F. on the Road, an
indifferent large Town, with a Market on Saturdays.
Hence reiterated Afc. and Defc. by Buritonzn&Cbarleton on the
jkWand Rfaterington on the Right, leads ac6a 4 to wneie bearing to
the Right thro’Bere-Fft. and over and Portfey -Di you come at 6Z’s to
Colham-V. of 3F. and aF. thence, to Portfey*. Br. over an Armot the Sea,guarded
by a Fort ;W here ent’ring Portfey-lfo, pals over H/7/ej-Green and thro’
at 706 to \ingftm of 3 F. Whence to the Right, leave Port fey Ch. on the Left,
and enter PO RTs at 73M, over 4 Draw- Br. a well Fortify’dGarriron and
Sea port, and the ufual Station of the Royal Navy; ’Tis a large, well-built T.
Defended by aftrong Caftles and other Works to fecure the Haven ;’Tis alfo a.
Corp. electing Parl-Men ; and has z Mts. on Tburfdam] Saturdays.
-Backward Turnings to be avoided.
1.3 F. fhort of Ringflon, the Left. 11. Earring Forts-Down,the Left to Southveeefc
IIT, Entering Bers Foreft, take the middle broad Way. IV. Ac the End of
fianuhn, the Right to Blendvoortb and EMean.N. At the Bottom oi Mufiers-
crofs Hill, the Right to Buriton. VI, aF. Br. the Right to Rotate.
VII- r M.beyond Rake ,the Left to the Foreft. VIII. At the End of Lippock, the
Left to the Foreft. IX i'z Short of Mil , theßight to Willey. X. At
(Jw//W-Town-Encl, the Right th New' z F. beyond Fdsgjion, the
Right. XII. Beyond New-PM-Wall, the Left to Futney.
The Road from
LONDON to RYE, in Com. Sussix.
THE Point of Bearing S.E.b.S. 11. The dire# Diftance yi. M,
111. The Vulgar Computation 4 6, M. IV. the Dimenluration, M.
Prom London Comp* Mcafurc.
to Lew Siam 04 °4 [ °6’4 J 06*4.
Bromley 02 06 03*2 J 096
Farnburow 03 09 040 1 13 ’<5 .
ScveKofe °5 15 09 2<29 o
Comp. Meafure*
to Ttinbridg OS |2o 06'$ 2<?’s
Lambcrherft 08 21 io*i 39#
Newendfn jo 31 14*0 s3^
Bye c 8 Hio’o 6^o
Surrey, Rea t and Suffex are the Counties including the R.and the Thames, Raf
vensburn, Derent, Medway and Rother, the principal Rivers croft over; ’Tis a well
frequented T. leading to the readieft paffage over to Diep , and Havre du Grace
in Normandy in France 5 whence the ftiorteft Land paftage to Paris ;But the Way
is not altogether fo commendable, especially beyond
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
£t St. George sQb. in Southwark , the forward to Newington, and fo to Stretham,
or Rjngflon. fz the Left to Deptford, and fo to &c. s’y the Left to'
Eltham, and lo to Afe/df/fftw,&c. 74 the Right to Croydon, 14*1 the Left to
St. Mary Cray, a9'7 the Right to the Wells at the End of Tunhridg. 37*3 the
Right acute. 40’i the Right (forward) to Leves. 44’y the Right to Robert's-
sr. $44 the Lett thrtf om ßrud-lAne, uniting at 5 From
V? * * V . *•


From the Standard in Cornhil, down ovef
tendon Br. and thro’ Southward omitting the forward Way on the Right to
fir.rington &c.turn fhort by St.George’s-Ch, and along i(m-ftreet. At 4M. pafs
thro 5 kew- Crofs-V. iF. beyond which, leave the forward Way to , Ro-
gh»:ter, Canterbury, scc. bearing to the Right, crofs fir ft County-Br. and next
levfbay sj-3r over Ravensburn fiv. iF. farther, enter Lewjham a ftraggling T. of
7 F. yet well furnifh’d with Inns, <&c. ’
At 9 ? 4 by the Aims-Houfes on the Left, come to Bromley of iF. a well fre-
anented T. with a Mt. on Tharfd, Whence over Tenner’ s-Br. and Bromley C.and
thro’aWood ot 4F.at pal's thro 5 F a , of 3 F. Thence
(avoiding only the Left-hand way to St. Mary Cray by Oak) a direft R.
fit i6’6 to the Foot of Rujhmore- Hill, afeending 4F. with the Percupine-ltm
pear the Top on the Right, and Halfted -P. on the Left, at 19 M.overthe Top of
?he Eminence, defeend Madaty’s Court-Hill near 1 M. (a fteep and difficult paf-
fagej leaving Madam’s Court at the Foot of it on the Right.
Then over Darnton-Gr. atii. crofs Longford- Br, over Derent fiv, to River head
ft Thorough fate of iF. Whence by the Lady Bofmll's Park on the Left, afeend.
|rig 1 p.at(aincome to Severest vulgo Sennolie, fo call’d from 7 Oaks, a good T«
4 F, with a plentiful Mt. on Saturd. and an Alms-Houfe and Free-School
founded by William Severn\e fometime Lord Mayor of London.
Hence defeending and afeending 3F. leave l(»ff/TPlace on the Left,and pafs at
I4*i to River-bead Hill of 4F. at 29 z oyer enter , fo call’d
from its Bridges on the Medway fiv- where it divides it felfinto feveral Streams;
*Xis a large, and well built Town, has a good Mt. on F rid. and is famous for
Its Medicinal Springs, much retorted to by the Gentry, &c.
At the End of the Town, eroding the Medway, and avoiding the foi>
Ward Way on the Right to the Wells, an indirect Road thro’ S. Frith W. leads
by Woodgate to Copembsr-G reen-V. and at 36M. to .Whence at
lyf, thro’ Lyndridg V. at 3 Tj enter Suffer and aT.of 2 Furlongs.
* At 41*4 by a S.tone-Quarry on the Right, come to Br. and re-enter
Rent j At'43’7 thro’ Stone Crouch-V. and at 44’y thro 3 an Ale, leads
fo the T. in which at a well-known Stone re-entpring Sufiex, and at 45*5 juft
beyond the Frith, on ths Left, and theßoyal-Qak-Inn on the Right, Rent again t
Thence over seacock ll and thro ’High /freer,by High-Gate and on
fhe Highland Mr. Kjlburns Houle on the Left; a Woody way by the Watch-
Houfe,and thro’ Field Gr. andCefceef/HSr. leaving the Right, 4F.
brings you at 53*4 to Ncwenden a good Thorough-fare ot 3 the End of
which, crofting Rather fiv you once more enter Sufiex.
At avoiding the forward Way thro ’White Bread Lane on the Left, bear
totheßight;6F.farther,turn (horton the Left; and at yM.pafsthro’ Horiian
of 2 Ron the Rife of an Hill, leaving Brick™ allWonfe on the Right. At M.
g(bend a Hill, on which to the Left; whence by Brown*
(mith'i, Oak (where the Way thxo'Wbitft-Bread-Lw e falls in again) leaving Peaf-
fitarjh on the Right,and S'aicote alias Playden, between you and the Riv.on the
Left; come at 6 34 to RTE alias R\}h> from the French Rive, Rip a, 2 F.
farther entering the Gates extending in all 6 F- One of the Cinque-ports, forti-
fy’d and Wall’d temp. Edw. 111. a fair, well-built T- Govern’d by a Mayor and
fyr3ts,witha commodious Haven, and iMts. vt\ on Saturd, Hence is
fb? rgadjeff Pair, g? t» Dfepiz
Backward


Backward Turnings to be avoidedJ .
t tM. from Rye] the Right (forward; iolden.lL 10 F. fhort of Bukin, the
i thro’ White Bread-Un*. 111. 4 F- beyond the Left a Field-way.
k fv 0 jF. beyond the Watch-boule, the Left to 3 F. farther, the
Right to Cranbroofi . Vl.iF. beyond F limwel, the Left to Tifehtr/t, v li. j R fborS
ofLamberherft, the L?ft to the Bonn. Villi W/*fCrojs ; the
Right (forward) to Pembury. IX.6F. fhort ofTunhfidg, the Rjg»>t to TndcLy.
At the End of Tunbridge, the Right to Sbeybofn, XL At the End of , the
Right. XII. 6F. beyond^«4e,the Right. XIII. iF.fjmrt of J
to Sundridg. XIV. At the Foot of Madam s Court-giH, the_ Right .0 HalfieL
XV. 2 M. farther, the Left to Hoc\wel. XVI. iF, fhort e ,lprt
to Down XVIL 2F. beyond F arnborow, the Right to Boadftreet-Qx. XVIII. At
the End oi Bromley, the Right to Dartfcrd. XIX. At the End of Lewjham, the
Right to Deptford,
PART II
the preceeding Part having Illuftrated fo many of the Vireff Roads com*
I pris’d in XfV. Itineraries and XXXI Parts, as fell under the Title of Me-
pendants : We come now to the remaining Part of the Vireft Road call d Vi*
pendants , being fucb as at feveral Diftances branch out # of the former Iniepen*
dams : of which there are XVII. Itineraries contain’d in XXIII Parts, and ail*
posM. likewife into Alphabetical Order.
The Road from
LONDON to BARNSTABLE in DevonJhire y
Commencing at Andover in the Land’s-End~ Road.
THE Point of Bearing W. 11. The direft Horizontal Difiance i«SS M»
111. The vulgar Computation 15:4 M. IV, The Dimenfuration M.
From London Comp, Measure*
#0 Andover 55 057 6<5’2 o<s6’2
idmeshjiry jo 065 x 4*3 080 5
Sbrawton oj 070 057 086*4
WnrminfteT 10 080 13*0 099*4
Maicea-Eradleyc 5 085 c6’y i°6’3
Bruton 08 093 09*2 11 5 5
Wefion Regis 09 102 10*5 *26*2
Comp. Me afire*
to Afeot t>6 108 107*5 1337
BudgvMter 08 n£ , 094 143’?
Hanrow-houfe io 126 13*3 1 55*7
DulvertoH 10 136 137 I^9*®
Southmeulton 10 146 i3*4 185*2
Barn ft able 08 154 io’<s 194*0
* 154"
Extending from Barnflable aforefaid, to Truro in Ccrnml 94 Miles 6 Furl, thus,’
From Barnjiahle Cortip. Meafure.
to Torringion 8 08 n*2 ix *2 '
Hatberley 7 iS i°’2 2i*4
Ivy 5> 14 xo ’3 33’7
Newport 6 30 o8 } 2 4^l
Hall. Drunkard 8 38 09*4 5 1 >
CambUford 44 2 05’4 57 1
Comp. Mcafurc*
to S’*. I r dull; on 7 49 °B*s
Padftovp y 54 c 6 $ 7 2 $ 1
Sr. Colomh 6 6° °B** 80 4
Michael 5 65 °7 ° 4 .
Jraro 5_ 70 07* 2 S 4
70 9^6
Mddlefex , Sumy, Httnpjh, mhjh, Smr[etfi,Devwfi t w& Corrmal, are the Coun-


tics *W which fcheß.lies;and the Brent, Tha
FroomP arret, Ex, Dunsbmk, Made, Bray y Tau, Touredg, Tamer, kfnfy, Emm and
Vamd xhe Principal Riv. it crofils 5 affording in general a good Way, el'pecially
to Bridgwater, where you have near 20 M. otexcellent Way over Salifbury.plain
irom Amsbuty to Wat mi-after 5 but beyond Bridgwater thro 5 the remaining
P art of Smcrfetfh. Bsvorjh. and Cornwal, lefscommendable; yet the whole Road
hill of good Towns, affords every where convenient Entertainment.
The Road from LO NDO Nto BARNS TJBLE.
npHE whole Road, confiffs of 3 Parts ; the Firft ending at Bridgwater hi
JL Somerfstjbire , the Second at Hetherley in Pevmjb, and the Third at Tmc:
with Part 1. containing 142 M. and 6F.
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 66*6 a little beyond Andover , the Lett to theßight to
Left to Hatthberry, 9 9’ the Right to i6’z the Left to
Shtrborn. 1330 the Left to Taunton, the Right to BrijicL
, >■ r . ' . it
The Way fi on London to Andover InHampJhire, appears in the Lands-Eni
Road ■> whence proceeding,'leave the Town st 66*4 and 2F. farther, the great
Road to Salisbury, Exeter, &c. lying on the Left, bear to the Right, at
pafs fhh>’ Monk(m.\. of 2 Furlongs. :
At 72’y by Great-ley Ch, 2 F. to the Left, entering open Way Arable and Pa*
jtlure, Let forward by the Foot of an Ale. on the Right, and at defending 4
F. enter Wil’.jh. Then by Challertofi-W . in the Bottom, dole on the Right,Come at
78T to a Dele, of 12 F« call’d Beacon ur HdJnwm-HilljThere crols the R. lead-
ing from Oxford and Marlborough to Salisbury •, and enter Ames bury or Ambers-
iury at call’d from Atnbrvfs a Britijh K.there kill’d,an indifferentlargeT.of
2 F.on rheE-lide of the/h/o»,with feverai good Inns,aMt. on Fridays and 4 Fairs.
Then ent’ring Salisbury-Plain, pafs oVer a Hill of 2 Furlongs and alcenda
Second. Whence between the 7 Burrows or Smalt Hills at 82M. and by the fa-
mous Stone-herge about 3F. diliant on the Lett, at 83’2 a ffraight open Way to
the leads at 86*4 to Shravtton or Maeden-Shrarrlcn vulgo Shmton-V, of zF.
in a Valley on a Branch of Witliehournfiv. having a good Inn. ;
Hence between Madenton and Onhejhn pafs thro’ a Valley fot2M.and by Kortcri
Bovaat r M. to the Left. AtpS’j (leaving theP/afrt)yhro’ enter Waminjier
alias Werminfter anciently of4F. indifferent large jhavingiCh. with
a Cha prel,a great Mt. on SatwdJot Corn /.Ac. 2 Fairs,and feverai good Inns.
AtiooTpals thro’ Shambern V.defcend 4F. and at xoz’ictofsshcrewaterflv. the
Head of which,is abouti F.on the Right; then leaving fome Hills on the Left art
enclos’d Way brings you toMaiden-Bradley of 2 F. formerly a Mt-T. 2F beyond!
which, ent’ring Somerfetjh.nt ioy’4 pafs thro’ and at xo a
Vs. Whence an indiredt Wayover EJngfuttle-'niU, a Dele, of near 3M. thro’ part
ot Selrcscd Fit. and Bruhatn-\ T at 11 z'6 alfo over 2Al'c. fucceedcd by a Defc.of
jF. leads at 11 y’3 to Burton on Brew f of 6F.well*built, with a good Mt. on
Saturd.und 3 Fairs. It has a fair Ch. a Free-Schooi Founded by K. Edw. VI. and
a ffately Alms-Houfe; and drives a great Trade in Serges and Stockings.
, At 117 M, (by an Me. on the Left) pafs thro’ C ole V. where the Lett-hand-
Way near the entrance into Button falls in again ;and at mBV to Ainsford-V.
■Of 3F.Whence thro’ c lanvil V, at uoM. Alfcrd-Yi at j ’3 anti Uvjrgtcn V.«f
•■■■ ■" Hi i


enter E -Lidford, at 123*4 and at i:6’i Regti, contiguous on ths
Right. Then by ivythorn and Walton Wind-mills, at 13 36, c0me to slfcot of aF.
At 134 V on Bolton- Hill, a Caufe-way deicending principally on the Left, ex-
tends to Jtyoll-V. of zF. at 140 T. Whence by G. and S/ifey-Hcafe oa
the Right, at 142’y enter Bridgwater, 6F. on the Road, as in Part 11.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
forward to Wal and 11. jFdbortof
/oKRe£/j,theßighr.lll.iM beyond/nfj/ori,theßight. fy 11 F.lhort of
the Right Deverel-Longbridg, V.7F. beyond Straw ten, the Left to Het her haven.
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to BARNSTABLE in Devonshire.
PART II.
. Commencing at Bridgwater in Com-. Somerfet, and Extending to BarnflabSe.
Containing 54 Miles 4 Furlongs.
Extending thence to Hatherley in Devonlhire, 21 Miles 4 Furlongs,
In which the following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 144*0 the Right to Spaxton. 147*0 the Left to Taumon.i s o’ $ the Left forward tot
Bps .Lediard.i y o’6 the Right to MindbeacLi y 1 ’y the Left to Lediard, 1y 3T theßighC
toCroliham. iy the Right and Left to Luxborough zndTiverton. t6o*4 the Left
|o Bampton. 167 o the Right acute. xtfS’i the Lett to Exeter. 173*0 the Left to
Kenfione.iy 6 the Left to Bijhertoa, 181*7 the Right to 182*6 the Left
to Ring’s Hemet. 184*2. the Leit to Bedtford, 190*3 the Right acute* lyi’i
the Right to HewUnd. 191’j the Left to Venn.
In the Continuation to
At 3*4 the Right to Brumfey, ,4V the Right to 1 r’s the Right to
the Common. 12*4 the Left to Efq; Copftones. 1 y’o the Right to Jknsker*
Houle. 2x z the Lef t to Mm^-Oaldington,
4 * * . ♦
%
IN part I. We catne to Bridgwater , a large and well-frequented Town, on
Barret fiv. at whofe Bridg, Ships of 100 Tun often ride, 40 Sail belonging
to the Town, befides Foreigners j *tis govern’d by a Mayor,Recorder, 2 Aider-
men, 2 Baylifrs and 34 Common-Council-Men ; fends Burgeffes. to Par Lank
gave Title to the R. H. ffohn Earl of Bridgwater , &c. It has 2 Mts. on Tburfd. and
Saturd. and 3Fairs,on77;ar/4.fevenighc in Lent, Midfummer Day, and Sc Mat-
thew ; with a fair Ch, Dedicated to St Mary, and feveral great Inns. &c.
Thence at 144*5 pafs thro’ DurlayY. and xoF. farther, thro’ Faa/t»-V*alcending
a Hill of 4F. Thence at 146’y thro’ Enmore, the Lord Roche]ler’s Houfe and K
on the Right, 3F. beyond, afcend again, and at i 4 B’i go down a Hill of BF.
Then over Worleig-Q. leaving Sr. John Howe Park on the Left, at 1 yo> defcenti
another pafs thro’ W, Bagboro-Y. till by feveral Houfes on the Road, ait
open Way leads to miet at iyy’3. There afcend an Hill of 4 F. by Hartrm*
Houfe the Seat of Efqj Lacy on the Right.
Ati yg’y an eafie Defc.extcnds to the Foot of a large Afc. of 8F
the Way generally Hilly and opem Atx y 94 pafs by IcmeStQnescall’dßaW/VsCrcft
m mv-m»mm %&*!& leaving th*


open way, go down 10 F. afcending and defcending fdyeral Hills, and at
thro’ H'ilcot-V, Then at xtfy’a by Herw-Miil on the Right, erofs a Brook, and
leave Brumton Rtgis-C\>. yF. on the Right.
At crofs Heal-Br, of Wood over Ex and at 169*4 enter Dulverton
on Punsbmli a Branch of the Ex, over which is a Stone Br. of y Arches :lt has
a Mt. on Saturd. and 1 Fairs, vi\. on St. Simon and and St. Peter’s, chiefly
for Oxen and Sheep: It contains about Iyo Houfds, with feyeral Inns.
Thence crofs theDunsbmfi an indiredWay up and down Hills over Aljhm-V*
plmwore-C.3.ndioverStnallaconC.Durliford-'Wa.ter,Bromer-C.Broadgate.VJa.tex,& J c.
byßuJh Mill oh theßightand overßa/fc-Br.pafs at 181’dtoa Stone-Br.of 5 Arches
wciMdulfiv. (which rifes in Extnore, but receiving th eßrdy 4M.below,falls into
> Taw nearß«mo«)and enter S.Mculton,a. T.Corp. with feveral Inns; Govern’d
I■>, , Mayor,Recorder,and sCapital Burgefles:The Mayor is a Jufticeof the
tor one Year after his Mayoralty* and theeldeft Burgefs likewife; They
i:>e 3 good Mt.on Sat. and 1 Fairs, vi\ on Saturd. before St, Barnaby, and Sat .
before St* Bartholomew', their chief Manufactures aie White Serges and Felts.
At the End of tke T. delcend a Hill of 4F. and eroding Adder- Brook leave the
.jscute Way-to Bediford on the Left, and y F. iarther, pafs thro Southalla-V.
iSy’d crofs Brsnch- Brook; 3F. farther, Bray flv. over a Wooden-Br. and at 186 4
bv Fhitley-Ch.on the Right: Whence an indirect Way fomewhat Hilly to
at 191 M. Then at 193 M. enter Newport of 2 F.a good Thorough-fare, having a
well-pav’dCauleway ; andiF.farther, Barrliafleoti the Taw j
alarse T. Corp fending Burgefle’s to Pari. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder,
ii Aldermen and izßurgeflesj has 3 Pretty Mts on Tuejd. Tburjd and
Saturd. and one great Mt. on Friday, for all forts of live Cattel, (sc, and x Fair.
’ > rr 'T - •
the Continuation to . .
FROM Barnflalle crofs a fair Stone-Br. olxyArches over Taw anci at 3M.
thro’ Round[hil-V. At 4 *a in a Valley thro’ St.fofcnT-ChappeZ-y.at6M. in ano-
ther Valley thro’ Newton-Tracy , and yF. farther, by Alvsrdijcot- Ch. on the Left.
Whence a ftony Way over feveral Hills, at n M. to or iorrington
magna, on the Towridg ; a large, but poor T. ’Misgovern’d by a Mayor, 8 Alder-
itien and 16 Burgefles ; Its chief Trade is making of Stuffs, It has a good M *
onll.larf for Fleth, Corn, 07V. alfo jFairs, onSt. George f-Duy Midjummtr-
pay, and Muhaelmafs-D&y ; and gives Title of Lari to Admiral t.
Then crofs the Towridg over a Stone Br. of 4 Arches 5 al “”t‘ n f e fs lo v'hence
Vattiwum- and at 1 z’a by another part of Little Torungton on the Left. \» hence
at ri pafs bv Potheridgz Noble Structure of the Duke of Albemarle on the Lefty
and at iVy thro’ A Urttn-V. Here defeending a Hill crofs Bro ok leaving
UeJl r h and Lieut. Col. Terr’s HoUfe 4 F .on the Left. At 19*3 come by
Houle on 1 the Right; and ,F.farther,thro*M#-V. Thence at zo’ 3 in a Valley
over aStone Br. of 3 Arcbes crofs the Towridg andyF.farther, enter t
VliL mherly, on a Branch of the laid Towridg; a fmall Town, containing a.
bout joo Houles, with a Mt. on Friday, and 1 good Inn.
Backward Turnings to be avoided. -
t r Wand Hither ley, the Left to Shipwajl). 11. 7F. Ihort of Mejh, the Lett *0
1 Pktherlhfa* HI 6 F. fliort of St John's ChappeV* the forward to
S vAt the end of Lankey, the Left. V. 9F. fliort of
to Brumptori Regis. VI. At Rawlins Crofs, the Left to Monhjdver. \ 11. 1» F-
ihoft of \v. Baibvh the Left to Bridgwater a diferedt way.


The Continuation of the Road from
BARNSTABLE in Devonsh . to TRURO in Cornywall.
PART III. and Last.
%kiiiencing at Hatherley, in Devonlhlre,. and Extending to Truro afbrefaii.
Containing 73 Miles 2 Furlongso
" *'« . •' *
A ' The following Turnings are to.be avoided. - *
At the End of Hatherly, the Left to Fl month. M» the Right acute. 31 M. the
Right to Virginftow. 4l’f the Left to 43 3 the Right to
the Left to Bodman. 570 the Right to the Left to ,
the Rightto Tregargut.Oi. ‘4 the Right to Tifafa*’* Le & acut , e - i?’,4
.the Right to Saers and lawa.ngef.7z’ 4 the Left to IVtroridg. 78 1 the Left td
Rofe-Camon. 793 the Right to Skeytbey. the Left to Tregndy.
Vv .• r. » A V, ;* *, v , a•• ‘ • \
FROM Hatberly (defcrib’d in PafMl.) over a Stone-Br. of 3 Arches crols,a
Branch of tomidgHv. Then leaving the acute Way on the Left to Plymouth,
attend a Hill and pafs by a Wood on the Left. Where an indirect Way, for the
mo ft part open, over Nonhliew- Moor, tfiovert-Moor, &c. crofting Cere flv, at
At 28 M. by Bemrthy-Ch. 3 F. on the Left, come to Ivy-V. at 33V oaths
Right, and at 37 M. crols Dericary Brook: At 39’$ defeend yF. andat theßpy-
,tom, over a Stone Br. of 4 Arches pafs Tamer flv, to leaving Werrentou
vulgo Werrington-Ch. and Sr. William Afor ices Houfe 4F. on the Right. ~
. At 40’f oyer a Hill.of 6F.at 42 0 enter Newport alias St. Stephens, an ancient
Borough-Town 5 .eleding, Pari. Men, with z Pairs, vi%. on A&y-pay and St*
Margarets. On the Left appears Lamfton alias Launcefton, a large Towir formerly
Defended by a Gaftle now Ruinous; It enjoys feveral Immunities, fends
Burgefles to Pari, and is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder and 8 Aldermen : It
has a.good Mt. on Saturd. and 3 Fairs, vifr on
and St. Leonard's. Here alfo the County-Gaol and Aflizes are ulaally kept. ,
v- From Newport. an uneven Way by feveral Houfes on theßoad, leads at 45*3 to
Eglesherry-V. then by Trefmere-Ch. on the Left, and trcneglos.on the Right, and
over R/w-Mobr; At yi’4 come to Hall Drunkard alias Halwmby , a noted Inn;
At Vi’4 by Trefoak-V. on the Left; and at ffz by Daviiftow-V. on the RighiAt
V enter Cambleford , on Camel flv, afmall T. I'carce containing yo Houles, in
the Parifh of Lanicolas xM. diftant; it lends Burgefles to Pari, and is govern’d by
a Mayor, Recorder, and 8 Magiftrates; having a Mt. on Fridays , and 3 Fairs*
vit. on May if. July 7. and St, John's in Auguft , with fome good lans. . .
At y B’r by tremagny on the Right, at. 59 M. pafs thro’ Helfon in Trig-V. at £o*4
thro’St. Teapb-Y. and 6F. farther,, by feveral Houles on the Road. Thence at
b ytregearV. on the Left, and at 63*7 thro leaving Trefpngog*
Houfe on th,e Right 4F, at 64’$ came to St. Endulion alias EndeUionV, and at
<?B’3 leaVe St. Minver-Ch. on the Left, ? ... . .
■ At 69'$ by fome Houles on the Right call’d at 70 M. enter a great
Sand-Plain drove up (as ’cis commonly reported; from the Sea by a N. W.windi
having cover’d about 350 Acres of Land, and feveral Houfes ;parc ofaCh. being
ftillvifible. Near the Riv. appears Preiilly.fjn .,or Chap, on the Left, and 3 014
Sheds built onthe Sands for Entertainment of people that refort to the Hurlings,
and for Direction of Palfengers: At 71 ’2 come toCamelfly. which Rifing near D&
vidfton'V- gaffes by Cgmelford, antf jfM. below, fails into' tnc Ocean, ’Tis hefe 6F,
f ivef


I* *• - ; -V
over and crofs’d by a Ferry to Fadftov? i ~ M. below which, in the Mouth of
the Riv* is New Ijland, of Note for its goodCamphire and Sea-Fowl taken there.
Padjiow, a Port-Town, Trading chiefly to Ireland , enjoys feveral Immunities,,
fends Burgeffes to Pari, having a good Mt. on Saturdays.
Thence St. Merryon- Ch. on theßight, and St. on the Left,each diffan1 4 F.
at 7 5’2 pals by Trevilada Houle on the Left, and 4F. farther, by Treviblin on the
Right. Whence over a large Down generally Boggy,enter a Land at y%'6. Then
over Ale. and Defc. by lome Houles on theß. at 80 M. crofs a Rivulet over a
Stone-Br, ol 2 Arches, and alcending 1 F. farther, enter St majer of 3 F.
end about ibcHoufes being the nlualPlace where the Juftice -of the S. Diviiroa
Sit; who have Privilege to keep a Court once in jWeeksfor all Actions under 40
Shillings: it h?sagoodMf* onThufrd. and 1 Fair,-yi^.on Thurfd. nhwAlhoUamide.
At 81 M. by a Houfe on the Lett call’d Sir John St- Davtd ; and oyer ieveral
Hills, at SyXcome to Michel alias St. Mi a mean T. of about 30 Houles*
yet having the Choice ol Parl-Men, and a Court-Leet twice aYearj one half of
whichis inNewland, and the other inSuTinead ’Tis govern’d by a Port-
reeve, and has 2 Fairs, vi\. on St. Fr4B£tf’s-Day, and 5 Days after
- Thence by Trutham on the Right, and St. on the Left, at 5>3’4 delcend
to TRURO on Foy fiv. the chief T. of the County, and the Place where the
Jullices of the W. Diviiion keep their Court: ’Tis a large and well-built Sea-
Port, lends Burgefle- to Pari, and is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, and 24
Capital Burgefles, of whom 4 arechofen Aldermen, and.outofthero the Mayor.
The Tin is Coin’d here, and it has 2 good Mts. on Wedneld. and Saturd. with 4
Fairs, vi^% on Wednefd. in Whitfon-Week. November 19. St. Day, &c.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. q F. beyond Truro, the Right to St. Clements,. 11. 10 F. fhort of , the
Left acute. HI. At the End of Michel , the Right to Renhal. IV. 6F. fhort of
ISt. Co iamb,the Right to Tregney. V. 2M. beyond St. Colomb , the Right to St.
Tiffey. VI. x F. beyond Treviblin , the Right to Sr. Ti(j'ey. Vll. xM. beyond St.
Minver , the left to Pontea. VIII. At the End of St. Teath, the Right to Michael -
Story lX. 7F. fhort of Davidjiovr the Left to Straiten. X. iM.beyond Trefoali>
the Lett to 11 ou I [worthy XI. xM. beyond Hall-Drunkard, the Right to Exeter.
XII. 6 F. beyond Newbridg, theßight acute. XIII. jp. fhort of Dericary fiv. the
Lett to Ajbwatcr. XlV. 10. F. fhort of , the Left acute. XV. On Stoven-
Moor, the Left to Honljwonhy , XVI. At the End of stoi>m-Moor the Lett to
.. bhipnajh. XVII. 6F. Short of Rjylahe, the Left to Shipwajh,
The Road From
LONDON to BATH and WELLS.
—— _ •. < Bath. U'ells
I. I Point of Bp firing . . /// jy 9
A 11. The direct Horizontal Diflance 98 M, Cno M
IU. The Vulgat Computation g 7 M> < 96 M<
iV. The Vimenfuration 108 T. /12.0^2
Commencing at Chipcnham and Marlborough in Wihjhire, in the Brijiol Roach
Prom London C omp, ca lurc.
to fPfavhm 77 77! 94-01 19.4’0 I (
I! wi'£H 30 8i I i 4’x j i 1 *
. Comp. Meafure.^
toPqulton - c 8 94! 091 j 117*2
WELLS 08 t ic 2 j io’3 j i2fs
From


i:
, from Lorah't Comp. Weafure
to MarlLvrovgh 6> 62 ! 75*2 75’2.
Devizes 10 7 2 Ss’o
Troubridg 01 8a 1 og’6 98 ’6
Com h'calvtc.,
Iro Philips Norton o\. 84 05 ’i- io4’o
Chilcomproa 07 cB’4 n»’4-
1 WELLS 05 196 1 1 o y’6 1201
* - r q 9
Middhlex , Buckinghamthirty BarkJh. friltjh . and Smerfetjb, are the Counties
thro’ which you pais, and the Brent, Thame l £&»" «n • Frame- aie
the Principal Rivers croft over j affording an indifferent; good Roau to Coipen-
ham, thence to B.«4I& fomething rough, and ftony, and after
d/p-Downs, a bad Winter-Road; the Road from Marlborough is likewiie good till
you come to the laid Downs. # ,
, , Forward Turnings to be avoided in the Road j- .r
At p7 5 <S the Right acute, the Right to Box. 117'x the Left acute in Fault on.
11 y’o tbs Left to Stone-Ajhton.
: f, • ... Intheßoid to KP'E L t-S'. , V. , t
At 82 M. the Right to Sandy-Lane. $4 6 the Right to te. 891 the
to Chipenham. the Right acute to Trouhridg a different Way. 94 4 t [ ,e
Left to Revel, iox’o the Right to Bradford. 104*3 the Left acute. 109 s the
Right to Lipyard. ny M. the Right to Chertton,
■ , . * 4 * •*•- «. • -
FROM London to Qhipgnbafn, as in Road; where letting for ward
omit theß. on thellight tp that City, and bearing to the Left, by Ccjhan-
jCh and Hall, at 98’3 enter Pickwith-V. of i ,F. Then over an Hill of 3 F. by
Hajlebury- Houle on the Right,, and Chap, of Plaijier on the Lett, crofs a Valley;
leave Bwc-Ch, on the Right \ and defeend a Hill of 4 F. to Somerietfh, at , 104 o
,Then,ce thro Bathford-'V. cro&Avonflv. oyer a Stone-Br» to Bane,
'ftm. V. at xos’4 an d leave Batlpampton-Chwcth .o.n the Left, ■ ; , _ -■ \ >
Hence at x 37 > 4thro 5 IVallcotpf. 3F.farther.Come to BATH on Avon flv. and m
aValley befet with high Hills; A Place of great Antiquity, call d by
tiydata Tbema \ by Antoninus, AquaS oils ;by the Caer-Babdon ;and by, the
Saxons , Bath ante after, This City isfiot large, containing but one Par-Ch.befides
the Cathedral or Abbey.; yet coiAparii and well-inhabited, upon .account of its
Medicinal Baths; It gives Title on an Earl 5 is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder
Common-Council, iste. arid has a M% vi%. on Wednesday and Saturday. ,
Thence over a ftone-Br. crofs the-IjyoH, and leave Witcmh-Qb. on che Leit;
Here a Afc. lead at 11 o’j by Inglefcomb and Pri/hm-Ch. on the Right, ant. by
Oddorcr.' Houfe, Bunderton and Camerton Ch. on the Left. Then t pa's lome Hu Is,
thro’ Tunley-’V.to Poulton-V. at x 17M. and by Farirgdon on thellight, and ssoniy
and Hall on the Left; at 115’3 to Chuton wider .Whence
over Afe«d/p-Down, by the Lead-Mints and Houfe, come at 127 '* tq
the fmall, but. noted City of WELLS, which fends Burgeffes.to Pari, is govern’d
by a Mayor, Recorder, 7 Aldermen ; and 16 Gown-Men j having a Mts. era
TPednefd. and Saturd. arid. 4 Fairsi
. ~ . In the Road to Wells # > • ■ , y
'fl 7 ROM London to Marlborough,and l’o to Silhury- Kill, ds in the Br!ftol-K* On
JP Mailborcugb-D.pzis IPanfdikeoxtbeDev which runs crofs the
Country,and as feme fay,was caft up by theDeyil on a {fed. but by fup-r
pos’d to be theßounds between theW-S4x»MJ and 1 .ai.cend
,4p.thea deicend Strand xM. beyond, leave the b. At 88’z enter the Devices an
Indifferent large T. containing 2 Parifh-Ch.befides a Chap, ori the Gr. ,’Twas
.formerly of confiderable Strength.and is govern’d by ,a Mayor, Recorder, and
11 Mailers: It fends Burgefles to Pari and has,a goo dWt.obTfj.itr with 7, Faus.-.
I Herice by Poljhed and Brunanr Ch • on the Right, atj?i 4 crols
f z arid


, * ,
and yF. farther, Sean-V- Then by Boni-Ch. orf the Right, and Sikmd’h and
Helpertm 1 Villages on the fame Hand; come at pS’j to Troubridg of 4 F. having
a Mt. on Saturi. and a Fair on St. -f Ames’s Day. . . >
Beyond the T. crofs Bifs flv. over a Stone-Br, of 3 Arches, and leave Studley-V,
and N -Bradley on the Left. Then over a Brook and Horfe-Br, call’d Br.
and by Trov I V and Winfold-V'O omff at lor’4 to Somerfetfh. Where eroding the
f feme, you have larley<aiWet and Park on the Right and the Vill. onxbe Left.
enter Fbilips-Norton of 4F. havirga Mt. on f and iFairs, one of
which for a Whole-laleTrade,is reputed as great »tair as any in for i Day.
Thence over a Brook pafs thro’ Falkland at 1 o£‘ 1 ttflmefJen at 1 opT and Charlton
at no’i all Vs. leaving BahingtM i-Ch. on the Left. At 11 r’a crofs the ,
and IM. farther, thro’ CbileomftM-V .Whence by fever at Houfes, and over
dovtn-Vl come to Evboro-V. at 1 14’4 « l»g«Pond on the Left, and Biniger- Ch.
Jotil** distance on phe fame Hand; Then over Mendip-Down, and by Fenbil on
the Right, defcend a large Hill* and enter the City of WELLS.
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Wells and Marlborough.
I At the End ol7K°i/r,the Left acute.ll. Right wltarminfier-
'-H . At the End Left tqßAmW.^.beyond thePw t e/,the Left
to Runaway. V. At Wanfmnh-Dike.thQ Left to Marlborough, a diilerent way.
Between Wells and Chippenham.
I. r M.fhort of Faulton.lhjt Left toEarington 11. At tbeEndoffiitft,the Right acute,
ill 4F. beyond Banejlon, the Left to Box. IV. At the entring Fichwith, the
the Right acute. V-10 F. fhort of Cbipenha the Right to Lay cock..
The Road from
LONDON to BOSTON in Lincolnshire.
Commencing at Stilton in the Barwick-Road.
I. '~'pHE Point of- Bearing N.by W. 11. The Diredf Horizontal Di (la needs' M»
X UliTbe Vu! gar Commutation 90 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 114’^.
From Lmdon Comp. Meafere.
to Stilton • . 57 57 idjfijdp’t
I't.'S’ KBOKO'VGH 05 6 2 07’3 76’4
,'vVirimngton 03 6/ 03’d so 2
c6 7i(Jo7’d Si>’o
Coir.p. Meafurc.
to Sfaldivg 07 7 8 lo‘o 098*0
Set her ton 07 85 ic’3 iob’2
Bofton 0$ 90 c 6 *» 1 U4‘3
90 n4'j
With a Branch from Bojfon to thus 5
Trom Ty'Jhm temp. Mtafure.
ioHtc ikgzon +lO jo n’s *3 3
SlC'ford 05 16*J 194
LINCOLN 14 29 iB’o 57’4
\ r f • . > . t . V ’i . •
MiddUfex , Hartfordfo. CatnkUgjb. Hunt ini? dorfl. and Uhcclnjb. contain the whole
ft. and the Lea, Granta, On-jo, Nine, Welland and IF'itham, aje the principal
Riv. croft over; the R. is generally good, the h nny Part being rai’d with
Cauls-ways, and in tooft Place* arc good Tov. ns and Pabiick inns* Fdr


Forward Turnings to be avoided. f
At the End of Stilton, the Right td Stamford. 8? M. in Pff-Kfrko the Lett to
5 Mt veetinz. At 94’ 4 1n Cowbit, the LefttoJ*%W«k 111 i the Right to Frampm.
In the Branch to L JNCOLN.
At 30 M. the Right acute. At 30*6 the Left to Hamit-on.
■I7ROM London to Stilton, as in the Barceick-% Whence a ftraight open Way.'
t/ toTdx/eyat 74V aMt-Town on the Right, Then over a Brook and a Hal,
leaving Faflat, F leton and Stanground on the Right, and on the Left, at
76 M. crols Ninefiv. over a Wooden-Br. Where you enter North ampt orjh. and
the City of PETERBOROUGH, a Place of great Antiquity, call’d by tne Saxons*
Medejbamplied. ’lis not very Urge, containing but one Ch. beiicies the Cathedral,
yet Its Houfes are well built, and Streets regular, withahne Mt-Place over
which the Affiaes and Seflions for the Hundred ol Naffaburg are kept; It lepds
Bnrgefles to Pari and gave Title to the R. H. Henry Mordaunt late Earl or Petet-
borough, &c. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, (ft, and has a good Mt. on
SaturJ. with 3 Fairs ,vi\ on June 29. Augaji 6, an dSepremb. iy» ,
Thence by the Gallows on the Left, atytf’z come to and y F. farther,
to Wedringtw-V. of yF. Then leaving Clinton on the Left,at 82*7 enter
y. of a F. where avoid the acute Way oh the Left to Market-Deeping, bear to the
Right; the Riv. Well and tlonfl the R on the Left. Thence by Dmbeer Houfc on
the Right, come at 87’y to Cron I and in Lincolnjh . a Mt-T. of y F. with a Fair,
on St. Bortholomew’s-Dz, : This Place was formerly famous for its Abbey,
Founded by Ethelhald K. of the Mercians, Anno 71 6. ’Tis lituate very low amidft*.
deep Perms,almofl after the manner of Venice, the 3 Streets being leparatedfrom.
each o'her by Wa tcr-Coar fes, and the Banks fecur’d by Piles. The Lpwnels of
its Si t nation ad nits of noCarriages,vet ’tis well-inhabited, by res for of the great
quantities of pifh, and Fowl taken in the adjacent Pools and Marftiet*
There: the Welland ftill on the Left, by Brother bouje and Pi{ale t
on the Right, come at 94 M. to C owbet-V on the Right alio, of 1 M. on the R.
W hence an irregular Way at 97 ML to Spalding, an ancient and weJl-built-T* ly-
ing above t M. on the the R. and mod on the Right*. There crols Welland fiv*
and Longtofi- Drain: The former being here Navigable, and having feveral Veflels
and Barges on it, belonging to the Town, which enjoys a good Mt. for Corn,
Cartel, &c. on Tut [days, and 2 Fairs, on September 1. December 6,
From Spalding,firft: crofs the little Drain, then the Phdnetus or Jso/fc«-pain,'
and at ioo’4 thro 4 PinchbeclfM. of 2F. Whence by leveral Houfes on the-R. pals
at loz M. oyer Bojfow-Dike and to Surfleet-y of near 2 F. Then by Gosbe' ton* V.
on the Left, and*Dunington 1 M. diftant on the fame hand, comeat 108 M. to
Setherton-V . of 4 F. moil on the Right; Thence by Aldermod-V. on the Right,
thro StrugjhilV. at 109 T Part of Kjrton-V at 1096 and Teuton it felf at 110*4,
leaveFr4w/>ton, Wilberton and Sherbeck on the Right, and by a Gibbet on the
over a Stone-Br. crofs a River to Soften.^ of which ta|ce this ihort Account,
BOSTON y i.e.F ammßotolphi, is commodioully feated on both fldes
flv, near its Influx into the Sea, and on that account drives a conflderable
Trade : ’Tis a large,-neat and well inhabited BoroUgh and Town-Corp with a
ftately Mr-p!ace and Church, whefe Tower i* of a great Height and ferves as
a Land-Mark to Sailors,: - ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor,' Recorder, r 2 Aldermen
Bmgtfles, (sfe. and has t Mts, on Wednejd. and Saturd. wellftoi’d with Fltfh,
riflj, Fowl, (pc* and 2 on fuly zy. ft aiNwetnbsr 30, *
i - 1 4. ' - •,
v* X * * 0
F 3


In the Branch from Bojion to Lincoln.
“OROM Bojion crofs yfeveral Drains,and by Rjnon Holm-V. oh the Left, enter
X' 1 Swnejhead at 64 a large Village lying molt on the Left, and about 4F. on
the Road. Whence over 3 other Drains pafs thro’ at n’3 j and at
13/2 thro 5 KfhJnton-V-oi SF. Then by Ajgery and Ch. and Old Hall on the
Right, enter Sleaford a Mt-Town at 19’i wher you fail in with the Road from
London, and fee'forward to Lincoln. ' > ;
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Lincoln and Sleaford.
J. 1 M. from Lincoln, the Right to Ancajle JL At the End of the
! Right to Bourn 111. in Smufaead, the Right acute. ,
Between Bojion and Stilton."
At Gosbsrtcn, the Right to Sleaford. In the Left acute.
The Road from
LONDON to CARLILE in Cumberland.
Co-rnmaicing at Darlauon-Br. near Stone in StafTordfliire;» the Holyhead-Koai-
~>HE point of Bearing N- N. W. 11. The Diredl Horizontal Didance 143
I- JL M. ill. The vulgar Computation 23 jM« IV.,The 301*2,
V’ . •* , * "t v.
Prom Barnfiable Comp, Meafure.
to Darlffoa 11 1 1 11 j I i 4i r 2 |
' toewsafiU 605 11 c? I I 007 * 1 149*3 1
Brewer ton 00S 124 |o* 5 > 4 162’?
Cm lira 006 130 j oop’o 171*7
WdringtQn 00 6 >3 6 oio'i 182*0
Nervi on 005 146' ®os , 2 187*2
tV’gan coy 153 008*2 195*4 •
vibede 005 158 006*2 20 1*6
Prtft in cop 167 oio’o 2u ? 6 fl
Comp. Meafure.
to Gorjiang 10 117 jJ 1 i’c 2227 .
Lavcnjler 10 187 I | i6’o 232’/
Eoulron 03 190 I 04*1 237*0
Burton. 05 Ipj 07*4 244’4
Kendal 08 203 j2l 256'5
T brumby" 13 216 , 19*0 275*$
JBenriib 05 221 07*0 282'$
Hosker 07 228 00*3 392*0
CARLILZ 07 235 jOp’2 5 oi'Z
i'iddlefeXy Hanfordfbire, Bedford]]). Buckingham]!). Northampton]!}. JVarwicJish,
Stafford fa. Lancajh. WejimmUnd and Cumberland include the whole R, and the
Vorzjel, Qivfe, teams, Avon, Shsrhorn , Cols , Tame, Trent, Dane, Met fey, Farrow*
Carvoev. ) Kibble, Wire, Lune,%ent, Lowders Eden , and Fetterd , are the Principal
lliv. craft-over : Affording thro C hejhire no ill way, but moftly Sandy > thro*
Lancajh. lomswhat more deep hard and Hilly ; but rou?h, harder and more
M diifitainoiis thro’ Weftmoreland and Cumberland.
AscothePoft-R.it varies in this, that iin the Way fromßwwei’-
ton Green to iVarrinton, proceed inn; thenceto feudal only; but fupplying Penrith
and Carliie by a branch from Northallerton thro’ Richmond out of the Northern R.
HE whole R. is Gompris’d in II Parts, the I. ending at Com. Lane.
JL fad the 11. at the City of Carliie. We begin with the Firft Part contain-
-1 Kio - Q I •> ' ’; i’. . ’» "I ■„ •, ; i
i **s 01 j
Whare the following Turnings are to be avoided, vi%.
At i4i’o At the end of Barla/ion, the Left to and ifi’y the.
Lett to Auilej ahd Nonbwicb i yy’o the Left to Sandbach, the Right to
Mx«chejier 169'6 the Left-forward to Baneham. 190*3 At the End of Ajhtcn,
the Right to tamo'll. 195*1 In Wigan the Right, 196*0 At the the Right
acute, ioj’b the Left to Laland. '■ ■
Having croft’d Trent flu., at Battalion- B r . and pafs’d the Town, avoiding the
great R, to Chejier and "Haljhtii on the left j bjf the Banks of the Trent.covae at 144’*
x v: - ' ■ . ’ " M. to


it, t 0 fiitiafsr-V. of sF. an 3at 1 4 5’3 Trnthm-V-f 4 F.At 1 47 AT. croft Hwfenfc
Rr and .M. farther, enter HmcifUt (tlada Urn) fo call a either from theiUv. of
“hat name, or the quantity of Lime here got; A large T. Govern aby a Mayor,
,luftlces, .Bailiff* , 4 Common-CouDdl-Meii. &t. Holding Pw» for Acnor.s
under 4of.and ElrfUng Parl-Men. It has a Mt on Mai every M»d. Fortnight
a great Baaft Mt. and 4 Fairs, with » noted Mts. or Fairs, Mt- On
-~a Mord afict Crofs'lVeek. lt. had formerly 4Ch reduc ato One , lutur d
notch in the Barons' Wars s and the New Caftie whence >t was Denominated,
h now derhoißhed. The adjacent parts yield good do re of Pi-Coal. ,
At 1 jzM. thro’ cklienonY- otzF.a fought way leads at If4M- to on-
the Hill, of »F. with one or two Inns: Whence a deep to Sandy-
lane ; where ent’rlng Chejhire zt mM. and tliro . Odrode~\ . Jv 147 7. gj *tj
a Wav on the Right, to Gonghm an adjacant C°rp.adireftß.exweads: at: 160 -
Jfytcles-'Sf Whence, leaving mndhach iM« on the Left, notec ,foi 1 .
akz’d,come to Bra«p»-Gr.-V. and IM. farther, to Holmes Chap.
with one Inn; Then over Crantge-Bt. crokDmfiv. to
yond which, the R. to Manchefler lies on the Right : W here over a Lea .h,, p-G
thro’ StubUge, lach-Gr. and Lafloct 3 Vill. t 0 Thorough fate, at
j 1 ? 6 leaving Horthmch a Mt-1 own i M. j on the Leit. 7
Hence betwe. a Xhtftop and Budmrth, alfo thro’ V. and (7r4 oc f
V.by Stmon-Chappel on the Right, pafs thro’ cro s to
st iVrV, and ifarther, to a Mt. Town. Whence over
thro’ tfo/we-V. and fVinmckrV- at 187 M, enter Newton of *F. having tht E.e&oii
af Parl-Men, and 2 Fairs. . , T „,v rr-fc
At it 9 7 come to Ajhm \\ of 4 F. and over jeveral Rivuset* at^ 94
Cowls flv to of 6F. a well-built Towfi Govern dby a May , . .“ »
Ia Aldermen, &c. and elefting Pari Men. It has zMts and
the former discontinu’d; with 3 Fairs,and is noted for > ,
Works, avid other Manufactures.
' At 198’? pafs thro’ stand® of zF.with 2 Fairs’; at zoo /..at
aoi’t , Whittle-V. next at 202’x CbarnoefrMoor, and at 203 M. Chs.rncc,{-K J ,
|p. farther, coifing ixrro* fiv. ovtt Ftnwmt. Thence over by
Exw»-Chap.and Renjhmore on the Right, and Inland on tm- y V f
-.i-n Gr- V at 200 5. Then crofs Dnrnenflv. and 7 F. farther, Kibble flv to
mat nn of 6F. a large and well frequentedlT. Govern d bja sviaym,
Afevermen, 4 Under Aldermen, and r» Common-iGounciMen j ai^
Pari Men. Here are kept the Chancery-Courts, &e. tor th : Coun U
Lane after, with Several Aims-houles, and 3 Mts. wt- on hedneji. ai.a . . .
Provisions, and on Satnrd. for Corn, Cat tel, <?c. Hills hv
Hence to Unufler the R.is Jomewhat hilly,with a continuel R«d^°r Hiils by
it on the Right,at gor 4 M. diftance. At 214 M. tnro
Brougbm*lthe Ch.on the Right, at 217 M- pafs to
Thence over and Btocli flv.at 281 7 oßaugrav •. -• ‘ ,
r/7^ y . which waters that large Traa of Barren andMofly Ground call JM*
dtfte, and at 212’ 4 , enter Gurflarg a good Thorough tare, as m the uext It.
Backward Turnings to he avoided.
I. At the end of Prejien, the Left to Kibble 11. At Piirwent the Rigm
1 ill iM. beyond Kxrdsn-Grcen, the Right to IW jimt of
Re.njhmore, the Left t acutc. V. 4 the i L
Holme,the Left acute. V 11.5 F.bcyondJtocfcn, tne Right to DeiUmo)ejim\ Acton-
BnVHI. Againft Budmth Qh, the Right to Button. IX At the end of Odro- e^
y . : \ l.f ; - \. v f 4 -- --- -G ' • • - !


the Left to Cmgkm. X. t a F. beyond O the Left acute. XL zF. fiiort o|
Mswcaftle, the Right to Vfnuton. XII. x F. fhort of Trinjham, the Left to Hanford,}
'pie Continuation of the Road from I
LONDON to CARLILE in Cumberland.
PART II.
Commencing at Garfiang in Lancaftdre, and Extending to CARLILE.
■' ' '' Containing 78 Miles 3 Furlongs.' ,
In which the following Turnings are to be avoided.
4f i 33 '4 a little beyond Lancafter , the Left. 167’2 the Right toApplehey. 274’®
' the Right to Strickland. 283 V the Right to Salfalfa -and 4 F. farther, the':
Rtgljt to Mafs. the Left at the End of Carlton. •'
IN the Firft Part, \ye proceeded to Garfiang ataii’4 of about zF.a good Tho-
rough-fare, with a Mt. for on Thurfd. Leave the T.at 223 M J
Green,- about PM.to the Right now Ruinous; and IFyrefJale at 2 2 6’t
1 M. to the Right, in a part oft lie Country to which the feveraf Right-hand
Ways hereabouts lesdyAt 2 a7*<?pals thro’ whence a direft way over
on the S-lide of Luna flv.n Place ofgood Antiquity, fuppos’dto be thslongovicum
in t heMotitia\ containing feverai handfomStreets.with a large Ch-which together
with theCaftle, where are kept the general Affixes and County-Gaol, ftand on the
$• WLof the T. ’Lis a Corp. govern’d by a Mayor, % BayliffSv is Mayor-Peers oc
Brethren, 24 Statutes-Merchants afe herb acknowledged, arid Pari-
Men deified; this T. has a great Mt.onf4f«rd. for Cdrn,Cattel, Fifb, (etpecially
Salmon) and other Provifions ; and has given Title of Earl arid Duke to
Several Princes ofthe Royal Blood for'fome Genturies of Years, ‘ ; ■
* Thence pais the River over a Fair Stone-Br. at 23 j’7 to Slyne-W, and 7F.
farther, to Burtcn of neat 3F. a good Thorough-fare. At 239 V come to Cran-
ford-V. Whence over Dare-B t. and by Lig Hall on the Right, at 243 ’y enter
Westmoreland, and 6 F. beyond Burton of 2 F. on the South of Farletcn-Fjict 3 art
indifferent Thorough-fare with afylarket on Tuesdays. '* ' \ ■
' This is reckon’d theMid-waybetween Lancafter and , the reft very
Mountainous. Then palling between ffo/»;-Ch.and P, and x'M. beyond ,
upon Holton-Crag about iF. to the Right; a 4ire£tß. eroding 2 or 3 Brooks leads
01 er S all at-Brew and by Groue-Chappel on the Right, at 263 H. to Sidwich alias
FigifwicfaV., At 244 M.’eqm to Noreliff-V, of a F. and to I fandal at »f6*i ex J
k-i ding jM. on theßoad.jf ' : ’ ' 1
Jfanddy a fair, large T. pleafantly feated on Can or fQJ»r fi v - is °f R 0 €
Antiquity, but noted for its Manufa&uresof Cotton, Druggets, Hats,Stockings,
It has a large Ch. with 12Chaps, of Ea(e,and on the E. of the Riv. former-
ly {food a Ca(Ue } of which the ruinous Walls now only remain:’Tis govern’d
by a Miyor, 12 Mayor-Peers or Aldermen,izCommon-CouncU-Men,aßecorder,
&c. Near the Ch. is a Free-Schopi well-endowed, with Exhibitions to
College in Oxford: Here, is kept a great Mt. On with on April
ij. Ochh 28; and between thofe Terms, a great Beaft*Mt’. every Fbrtuigi t.
Repairing the Riv.heirce toPenrithi very Mountainous R.leads oyer Betome-JAni
y Ttir* of sfaefmore-VeWy Benejdale-*. Hqrfe, and feveral other namelefs-Eminen-
t much way. Then by the Horfe Houle cntheleft, at a and Idmy
'-f ■ , : , % " . ...... , ■' . J ./r ■: ’ '/■; - V. «' Stone*


C tnn > u eaos otjthfi Right,ata7Q*3 come.at 27a Ito on theßight-hanJ
whence open way again at to thumby alias Thurmby, a Thoroughfare of jF.
twe more open Way be C/ifm-Chap. on the Lei t, extends at 281*1 to Low-
, " e , vvhprice leaving Bmghamvulgo Bmiw-Gaftle on the Right, at ;81 *y over
fed bTcrofs ESflv to^mberlak and yF.farther, toFor**M of
*V- Lritvinz in Bvitifi>theßed-head y alarge and well built T. efteem’d the id ol
the C § ou ty?dith a lirChurch and in the Church-Yard an Old Pyramidal
Monumentlt lias a good Mt. for Corn, &c. on and a greater for
JLiA i-iv ?rv Tuefdav fortnight, from Pflnt[unday to Augujt i/r.
® Hend anfjlifemit levefEoad generally open to CrKfc; firfi palling over a
Place eaira i ? Vwfcx-Rents, and at 287, M- Salfalds vulgo 6ancold-yAU\ on .ne
Mt S e /iA Telf lying abou’t iM. on the Right upon and noted
£ J ScS JfonumatofWry- ereded near it, confifting of 77 huge Stones,
each about high, and oL call’d by the vulgar her
daughters. Whence a fhaight way #o’ Eng W-Foreft part of Hwfcj-V and t
M. farther, a late Mt. T. about i M. on the
Rieht, but on the farther fide the Rivet. , _ , . . _ , *
At z9B’3 appears Carlm-V. of 3 F.aad at wto-Bwr% of
%F. at the End of which croiTmg, Fettsrelfyp. at 3 oo 7at the Engbjhgate «.n ef
of great Antiquity,EminentundertbCpTIWaif-
vary Tables LuguvaUum ; interperted the Tower by the ■ theP/ffjWall,
hear which it ffandsfwhence contradedlyG?er*/«e/ and Car/«/or Garble. Iw as
encorhpafs’d with a Wall,about by Egfred K.oft,heNorj/?«»jkrf,andFom-
fy’d with a Cattle byK.r.Ki#:M*de an Hpilc. See
nify’d with the Title of an Earldom, belonging to theNoblt Fainiiy of tbeHw-
drds.’Thßated on theS.ofEi?w#y- and between the and thtCaud on the L.
sod Wiand liesTriangiila ,theCeftle ftanding in theN-W.corner,tiLeCathedraiis,
a fine Qtrudute «nd the-Houles well-built -.’Tis govern d by a Mayor, 12 Aiderm.
ffnds Purgefles to Pari; Trades chiefly in Fuftians, ana keeps a
tonfiderabß Mt. oa Saturdays having 3 Gates, tne Caldo or ate,
Bother or ’ Engbfh-Gzte, and Richard or Scotcb G ate.
; ■ - • Backward Turnings to be avoided. . f
I 10 F fhort of Sauccld-yate, theßight toHutton-Hall. lL In
Ito Hum Hall IXI. roF.beyond to Hutton-Hall. W. 2F.
bevond Penrith, the Itk to Appleby, V.k\ktkheyondShof,theUnto Appleby. VI.
InKeniaLtheforward way on theßight. VII. Atthe'entringiS’/dwic^,theßight a-
tute. Vftl- Oppofite to Holmes- P. the Right to Holme. IX. 6 F. fhort of Care-Br.
the Right to Walton. X. 3 F. beyond C<rre-Br. the Right acute. XI. a F. beyond
Boulton, the Right acute. XII. IF. beyond Burrow, the Left acute. XIII jF.
fhort of Elhil, the Right acute. XIV. a F. beyond Elhily the Left to ffyrejdalea
1 ' 1
The Road from
LO NDON to CHICHESTER.
A i * . . . * . ...
' ■ ' j • -' v v*
Commencing at Guilford in the Pflr?yz»fl»/&-Road.
* ' ■ '» V • «. , V,»
'"fpHE Point of Beating S. W. 11. The Dired Horizontal yy M.
i I Ul.The Vulgar '-Computation yo M, XV, The Pmenfuration 631.
T I v • * vr* ‘V-; v : *, , '' ■ From
*■ » •> * •• ' - ' ''


f-rom London Comp, Meafure. Comp. Meafare,
to Guilford 25(25 [to Midhurft 10 1 10(45 [! io’i 52b
Codalmn &t 2 S 1 34b' CHICHESTER 07; 07, 50 ij n’2 £,'3-2
Cfaidmgfold c 5 33 os’4Ui’2. 50 65b t
The Branch to WINCHESTER, s
from Midhurfi m:afnfe..
to Petersfield oßjoß'
WINCHESTER 12 J2O l j! o'2'2p’o
Middlefex, Surry, Suffix and Hmpjbire , are the Counties palled thro’, and the
Thames, Wandle, Mile, Wej, Amn and Lavant, are the Chief Riv, croft over, the
firft Parc of the R. is very good, but the Latter more unpleafant, yet in ail
Pieces provided with good Towns, tfc.
Forward Turnings to be avoided-
At 30V the Right to Farnhant. 3 z’a the Right acute. 34 the Right to
nmtb, the Left to Petword.
Ina Branch to WINCHESTER
At pVfthe Rightxto Winchefter, a different Way. iz’j the Left to Ifamfiean, 13%
the Left to E-Mae». a G’4 the tight to Aires ford.
eRGM London to Guilford** in the Pm[mmb-K. Whence crofting Wey omit
the R. on the Right, to Farnham, and bear to the Left,Then by Several
iloufes on the Road,; a'Hceud tsjuhafine-Hul, at 3 i’y leave Sbawford on the Left
«od re-crofting t heWey, enter Goddmin vulgo G oil matt, a Mt-Town.
Beyond the T. the Way is generally open 5' by Bus bridge Houle and -
P. on the Right, and HafcombCh. on the Ldft: Whence a ftrsight W,iv at 29.
M. thro’ Hmhletw-V. Then defeend a Hill, leave feme Brick-Kilns on the RiVhc •
"and over another Defc- pafs to Chiiingfoli-Vdof Furlongs
* Enter Suffex at 43 ’ 4 where by Longdowrfl Beacon on the Right, and N.
and Lurgtjhu! on the Left 5 _ defeend a Hill, and crofs z Brooks. Then thro’a
W- at 48’s Tfcend Besley-VLW], and by Cm dray -P. in the Defc'. on the I efßpaft
thro’ tyr M- 6F. farther, Cmiuj-Place on the Left, crofs Ant'fiv
to Midhurfi of 3F, a Borough-T. ele6lii|g Parl-Men, with a Me. on Thttrfd, and
a JFair on .Whit fon*Tuef day.
; Thence the Way being generally Heathy, afeend and hy W -Dean on
the Right, and Singleton on the Left, pafs at jSV to St. by a Bea-
con on the Left, and near the Bottom, a Marl-Pit on the Right
Hence by Eaft-Lavant*Ch. and Earner Houfe on the Right; at £3 M. come to
CHICHESTER, on Lavant flv. fir ft Built by Second K. of the S and
by him call’d CiffanCeafter ; where he had His Royal Palace, yet before the
Conqueft, this City was of little Note, containing only S t. Peter's Monaftery and
a little Nunnery :’Tis at prefent an Epifcopal See, and the Cathedral was firft
Founded by Bifhop Radulph , but before the Finifhingof it,was totally conl’um’d
l)y fire ;Yoc the faid Bifhop began to - Re-build; it, and by the Afiiftance of K.
Henry I. the Fa brick was quite compleated; However ’twas Burnt again under
Richard 111. with the Bifhop’s Pilacs and Prebends Houfes ;• which were all
Rebuilt by Bilhop £f/?Wi the lid. of that Name.
%'*,*• / ' ■ In the Branch to WINCHESTER,
FROM Midhurfi by Wool bed Irg $ t eiham and Trcttcn-Chs.on theßight, crofs
ceding’ Br.of Stos3ovefaßrook } 3i!d Armfimtfa oysr Trmw ft cae^r.Then
■ 'i- * -■' wby


w TurwichCb. Vinhg Uwk, and Kogate-Cb. on the Left, and by MaideH-O&k
bn the Right, enter Hmpjh . at 9 M. where by Durford- Houfe on the Lefr, croffing
Sheet- Br. and Brook, come to Petersfieli a Mt-Town at 10 j j Whence crols 2.
Brooks, and pafs by fome Houfes on the Road. , r r
At 13’z thro’ L angridg-Y. and at x'4*a by fome Houfes on the Lett, call cL
Bordean, and by Brevet Ch. on the Right, come at too to Bramdean-V .Then by
flenton Cheriton and Cbilcotnb-Chs. on the Lett; Magsalen- Houle
on the Right; and tome ffraggling Houfes on the Road, pafs at zß’z to
WINCHESTER., call’d Care-Gwent, by the Britans ; and Vent a Bulgarum by the
Romans. Seated on Itchin flv. an ancient City Bdilt about 900 Years netore the
Nativity of ff. C.li t has been twice conlum’d by Fire, yet at-pcelent has jr
Cs. betides the Cathedral; the Walls being x fMv-in compafs where the Affixes
are kept for This City fends Burgeffes to Pari, ana gives Title or
Marquefs, to the Noble Family of the’ Faulets. Here alfo are kept i plen-
tiful Mts. on Wednefd. and Saturd. and 1 Fair on the Lent.
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Wine heifer, ana Miimrfi. _
I. yF. S'norC'6f Cheriton,the Right to Waltham. 11. F. beyond chertto^ the Right
to Waltham. Hl. 2 F. Beyond Bor dean, the Left to F IV. a E, from
Rogate the Left to F arnkam. V. Againft Maiden-Oak, the Right acute. VL At
Trotton Br. the Right acute, . ■ > • f ■ i -
Between Chkhefier and Guilford,
y F. from Chichejier, the Left to Peters field. 11. 8 F. from the Left
acute. 111, At the Entring Easborn , the Right to Petwortb. IV. rF. nevond
Easborn, tbs Left to Lippoek- V. 7 F. Beyond Easborn, the .Left acute. VI. 9 Fi
Short ofLeckford-Br. the Lett acute VII. At r. the Left acute- VIII.
Againft Blackdown- Beacon, the Left acute. IX,The Right and Left at the End
of ChidingfoM. X. At the Foot of Catharine-Hall, the Left acute.
The Road from
LONDON to DERBY.
L npHEPoiatof Bearing N. W.by N. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diflance 1 1®
1 J_ M. 111. The Vulgar Computation 94 M.IV. The Dimcnfuration laa 4.
prom London Comp.’ Meafure.
to Stony-Stratford 44 44 53 J| [sS*i
, Klngs-Qraftoa 04 48 04*7! 58*0
Lorthawpton 06 54 08*7 |66’7 i
Brickiwonb 05 1 59 oy’o 173*7
Daverhorougb 07 66 io’6'B4*s
Great Gienti 07 73 J j 08*4 | 93*1
Comp. Mcafure.-
to Leicefter .05 yB \ o O9B 'S
Mom for el 83 \ 05*4 io4’2
Loughborough 03 86 i °3* 1 io 7’3
Kegworth °4 90! °5 51 11 &
Derby 08 98] xo’o i22’4
98 iz2'4
Middlejex, Hartfordfh. Bedfordfh. Buckinghamfh . Northamptonfh. Leicefierfb. and
Verbyjh. are the Counties part thro’ 5 and the Coin, Lowfel, Owfe , Nine ,
Sour and Trent, are the principal Rivers croft: over, Tisfor the moft part a bad
deep Way; but the frequent Towns affording good Accomodation make
iamends for that Inconvenience.
■■ Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 5:7*7 the forward in GidStretford to Coventry, y6’y the Left at the End of
Tadley Guben, to Tcccter.' 761 At the Entring Lamport , the Right to Oakham,
78 M. at the Entring Meadwel, the Right to Haverborougb a different way.
yS’i In Meadwel, the Left to Hafelbieh. At 93*4 the Left acute. 99*7 the
Right to Newark, no’r the Left acute, nzV At the End of Regwonb, the
the left to Belton. 1 n’7 the Right to Nottingham j ij’y the Left to lockenton,
? the Left to Smrkfim* . v< ■■■ •. % u c From


and at y6’y th xo'Tadelry-Guben-y . of a.F. T hence over d fj
thro%tngs.Grafm-y.crsis*Vaiky with another Defr r, T 58M.
theleft itol, . Afc byKm4i,° t ?
croft.Stoiie Jr. of » Areiw.nd aßrcjok: Where leaving olatnmb on thelift
alfo Wotm pardenJioH and on the Right de .ceml a fmi rf c**
At €6 $ crofs St. Lhnard’s-Stom Br. of 2 c r °* 5 ,
€ Archesover Nine flv. to Northgmp tm ; 3 place of great anorh . er .
4 Pari(h-Ch, within the Walls =
4 Aldermen, 48 Common<knincil*Mcn. fends to Pari I'IIt!’
the Coanty-Gaol and Aflijes are kept, with , Mtsfon
Wednefdays, Fr/dajj and Saturdays, and 7 Fairs. . . h 3
Thence the wa v is generally open, over a Brook and Valley, and at CVt over
lyteg s-Tborp-U. learetheCh. on the Left, and by theLzdyßanbrough’s.p orWiider-
e3“r of t F.and c ofs
I£„7u 1 / w 7 j 3 r° L Lampcn-V. andat 77 M.overaStone-Br.andßrook
afcendaHni of 4F. and pais by Sr Will, Hafleveoti’s iloufeand Boulton-Ch on
Right,th»-A6«f«fcV• oftF. at vs’.and^ ,lm,Jb at 7 ,\: Then“"r rßmoks
ty hirdinnmh-Ch. on the Right, come to OxfrJon at 81M. leaving the Ch. on
the Lett, ane Bvtbroueh and Lmle-Bovcdm on the Right* At 84*4 ov°r a Stonc-
*f. teiceflerjb, and laverbZu^, indent T
■with a good Free School j a Market on Tue/days, and a Fair 8.
'■ £ rom n^ wcr^ rw f \ by Fexen-Ch. on the Lett to Ribworth -V at sr’a
and crofting by Burton-Overy on the Right, come to
P ‘ j; ■ n M - 1 w ™* * on the Left, and Sro«t<m on the Right to
Oadbey-V.cf 4P. at 9y. 3•• Whence by Evington and Humber ft al on the Righ'r. -*r»d
on the Left, outer twryfcr at 98’y, extending this wav, 4 F or C V
and more trantverfe : *Tis a Borough and Town-Coro. with Vch% Gove-VL
by a Mayor, Recorder, 24 Aldermen, 48 Common Council-Men. -& e . If enjoys
feveral Privileges, fends Burgefles to Pari, and gives Title to the R. H-
Sidney E of Letcefler. <&>c_ It has one Alms-houfe, 2 Hoipitaisand a Free-School,
with 3 Mts.On fVednejd. Frid. and Saturd. and y Fairs.
By the Abbey oft the Left - , over a Brook, at 100% pafs thro’ Belgrace V. and
there, over a Stone-Br. of 7 Arches^crofs Sour flv. then over an Ale bv Buttat
Trmerfen, mnileps, Syflon, .and .Cofenton on the Right, an on the Left, crolk
r/^ B /- a ft Bro * aIC ? nd c a Hlll l Snd 3t 104 M, enter Mont for el alias Mon-
flrelo 1 Mount-Soar-Hill, of 4 F. on the S 3 formerlv noted for it's Caftie
and at prelent for a Mt on Mand, and a Fair on St. Perm’s Day. Hence at roy’;
thro over a Stone-Br.of y Arches crofs a Brook, and leave upon
Sour on the Right. • v t
At 107’r appears Loughborough, feated likewife on the Sour ; a Town of 4F,
tUocnd with air and ft large Ch. It has a Free-Schcol. a very
good Mt. on Thurfd. and 2 Fairs, vi % . on Augufk 1 ft. and Novemb. id. Thence
crofting 3 Brooks, by Stanford, Hormmen , Vitchier, Hathern and Sutton , on the
Jpight, am! Wsatton on the Left (Ovpfefiv, keeping part of the Wav on the Ri pht)
't 0 ™ t 0 Zfgvorth-V. of 4F. Thence by Rout iff, Soley and Witten, on the
Lament on ana Bonenton, on the Left, over trStone-Br.and Bhookpafs
y 11 1 fivlhhsn- Ferry over Trent flv. 1 ■ ■ , , Hence


Hence the R. lying generally overMarlh ground; thro’ Shadhe-V. ti6*i by
'Afenon the Left and Eherpn on the Right, comeat up’s to Then
cj-ofs a Wood-Br. and Brook, at Izr’7 *0 DERBYvulgo Darby, a large and well-
buik Borough-T. containing 5 Pariih-Chs. call’d by the Saxons, Deorby, and
fometmes North fort big from Derwent fiv on which it is feated, y. a. Derwent-byi
The T. drives a contiderable Trade j and is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder. 9
Aldermen, and r4CommonCouncil-Men It fends Burgeffes to Par),’
holds the Affixes for the County, and gave Title to the R. H. Charles Earl of
Derby, &c. Here are 2 Hofpitals, 5 Mts. on and Saturd. and yFairj.
Backward Turnings to be avoided
I. At the End of Derby, the Right to Coventry, lL $ F. beyond Alverfton, the
left to Elverfton.lil. 4 F. beyond the Trent, the Left to Soley. IV. 10 F. ihort
of Regworth, the Left acute. V. 1 F. beyond Have*boough, the Left to Little
Bowden. Vi. 1 F. beyond Queens Crofs , the Left to Hardenfhn,
The Road from
LO NDON to FLAMBOROUGH in Yorkshire.
Commencing at Stilton in the Barwlck-V^os-d,
And jhe&tng the Way to Stilton hy Tamesford.
THE Point of Bearing N. IL The d I reft Horizontal Diftance 16Z M*
111. The Vulgar Computation 168 M. IV. The Dmsnfuration 212 ’6.
y
From London Comp. Measure.
to Stilton „ s 8 058 jote’i 1 |
TETERBOROVGH 05 c<s3 07*1 076*2 I
Mnr{et~Deepng c 8 071 1 c’6 017*0
Born 05 07 6 c <>*4 093*4
Morton 02 078 02*3 c>93’4
Sleaford u 089 i4’s xi°’4
LINCOLN 14 103 18’o 128*4
Bedbourn IS 19° *47 4 j
C lam ford’Bridges 05 j I2J 05*5 Jis3’» >/
Comp. Meafure*
to Barton 8 iji [ OI ’x l6i’2
Hull 5 i 0 5’4 1
1* ever ley £ 141 o p’2 179*0
Bdeck 5 147 o j’o lB£’o
KUm*n 9 156 is’o i?8’o
Burlington $ \62 07*4 205*4
FJamborough 4 166 05*0 210*4
Fl *Hca“ , “ S h'} 2) i<Bl joa’2
Middlefex, Hart for djh, Camhridgsh. Huntingdonjh . Northamptonfh. tincolnjb. and
Torksh. are the Counties pafs’d thro’; and the , Nine, Welland,
Wit ham, Humber and Hull, are the principal Rivers croft overj which ia
general, is no ill Road, and fupply’d with good Towns for Entertainment.
•'*’ * 9 9
THE whole Road is compris’d in two Parts; theFirft ending at Lincoln, and
the Second at Flamborougb: Thd'e forward Turnings are to be avoided*
• * "9 ’ « V
Between Tamesford and Stilton.
At the Right to St, Neats. j6’4 the Right to St. Neots. y<rthe Left
South am. yj’i the Left to Stamford-
Between Stilton and LINCOLN.
At the Left to Stamford. 8i 3 7 the Right to Crew land. the Left acutei
izi’i the Right acute.
■■ ■ ■ ;


THE Firft Part of the Road, v» to Tamtsford and ,J Eaton, is defcrib’d in thd
fiom London to St. Neots. Whence at <74 over a Wooden Rr r
Branch of o*Je flv to Then by Lift ft Peckbam^d
the Right, and bout ham on the Left, over a Wood-Br. and Brook • -L a ?
* * to Bugden* T, of 4 F. affording a Seat to the Biihop offi Thence
an indifferent diraight R. croffing y levera! Brooks, leads at 6f 7 to Aukirtbni
turn mon-V . ftrft leaving the Ch. on the Right. Afterwards alcend a till of 4 ?
and by Upton ontheLetc, pais at M. to a Deft, of 3F. iM. farther, to
Holeon the Left and a little beyond to ;on the fame Hand
Hence by St. s Chappel and Cmnington on the Right, Salt* Glutton
and on the Left, croft a Stone-Br., and Brook, to a good
rhorough'fare-1 own, at 74 7. 5 ° uuu
. « Jn the Road from Stilton to
A T Stilton (as in London to Earwig) omitting the forward Way to Stafford
jf\ beat to the Right and come to the City of PETERBOROUGH that
took .ts,N.m. from a Rately Monaftery Dedicated to St. fere,, and Silt by
h^ttVlT ?*“ b , w f «f% deftroyd by the Dane., and Re-
bunt b ; EthelmMh rfhop of Wine better, about C. with the Affiffanceof
K. l Jgar, and Adulph the Chancellor s K. H. VIII. made it a Biflioprkk wfth a
Cnapter, confifting of 1 Dean, 5 Prebends, and an Arch-Deacon 0
thrJu^h' 3 M C ,r deS the , C D OU f , ot Thence pals
thro Walton, Millington and Peaktrk, (as in London to BoftonS
InPeab’rb, avoid the Road on the Right to Cropland- bear to the Left, paft
ro Narbcro V. at 84 6 and come to Market Deeping at 26*7 on Welland-fly
where u parts Nertcamptonjb. from LimolnJh.'Tis an indifferent good Town, and
has a Market on Thurfdays. 5 #
L Jbence by Redim- Houle, Langtcjf and Bajion-Chs. on, the Right, Stow-Y, and
Y‘ cn tne Left, at jo’i ever crofs j 6F.
farther, thro n; V. a flraighc Way leads at 9 f z to Born or Bourn , a large
t T. noted nor tne Coronation of K. Edmund y and for a : good Mt on Saturdays*.
? F.om Born a uraigat Way by Dife-V. on the Right, and on the
V ' f ° of 3 F. Beyond which, lies on the Left,
and Halimbey-i .on the Right: Then aicending and deftending, Sr. ley's
Houle, a \c,Hi}dby-C b. appear on the Right; whence .croft 4 fevers! Vailevfa
Beacon on the Left, and m the Laft, have on the Right: Here*
hy Bellingbor and Marbling- Chs. and Simpring-Y. on the Right, hekingham
Osburnbey,Aferhey and V/illoughbey Chs. on the Left, crofs z or 3 Brooks and
down a Hih, at no’, to Sleaford of *F. >Jis a large well-built Town, ’on a
Riv. of the lame Name, formerly defended by a Cable, now Ruinous; It eniovs
a coiifiuerabK* Market on Mondays for Corn. Caere], &c, :
Hxdtr.gha.m-Y.Lipngbam Cfa. P«jM/-Hall, Branfmle and
An C u-u CelnV€ly °. n the K, § ht sthe Way generally flight and' Heathy •
S-e W «lIy r L -° We a * C I2 J f tQ the .B*”-G*te cf the City of LINCOLN, a Biftop’s
« 4 d r L? tf?, Dy Z 10l * m y™a Antoninus , Lindcoit by the /Te/Jr, Collin &
c/arfff’ L ' ru ;'- }hm Ce flf er b Y and by the Ncmands. ’pis
‘\h V T ers an f i and formerly was a Place of great Note,
C.iMcf" iifteteciena Staple for Wool, Leather and Lead: This City has
bisfh lr U fv ° y r - re ’,. War an «. Earthquake, yet is at prelent large and well.
Lilt. The is thebtggeft in England, containing xz j 7 Pariftes, of which
Mfj&S^/ tTi| iv Upna i irn f ; - hayin Arch-Deacons, o Bedford,
Btufyngbm, Unejur and i'rcir ; The Cathedral orMinlkris a ftatelg
V, ■ VN V-
Struct Bid


v- - v t ■ ’■
Strafture of fogreat height, that it may befeen N.wafd yo M. and S. about 30
M This City is dignify ’d with the Title of an Earldom in the Noble Family
of the Fines- ’Xu govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen,
4 Chamberlains,, &c, Sends Burgefles to Pari, and keeps a Market on Fridas
weii ftor’d with all forts of Provrfsonsv * ;
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I 1, M. beyond Lincoln , the Right to Anc after. 11. At the End of Peterborough,
the Right acute. Between , and
Itf F.fhortofaa^l'ar/, the left acute.ll.iF.fliort of theßight to Bed for dJ?j k
The Continuation of the Road from
LONDON to Flamborough-Head in Yorkshire.
PART II. and Last.
* i
Commencing at and. Exte Flamborough
Containing 84 Milts 2 Furlongs .
t The following Turnings are to be avoided.
Ati 5:5’0 inGlamford,theKight acute. i 8o 5 2 in Mufgrove, theLeft to Markon. i<n'£
the Left zoSehngham.zo6 : the Left t oFlamborough a different Way#
, tj
FROM Newpcrt-G&te in Lincoln, a diredl open R. leads over aH. whereby $
Beacon on the Left, and by certain Alms-Hotifes 142 M. leave Wanon-Y.
fi Wind-Mill, and Smhherby-Ch. on the Right. Then eroding 2 Brooks, enter 4
Redburn at i4?’3 of about 2 Furlongs.
Thence by a Wind-Mill on the Left, over a Brook, pafs thro 5 atf
149 T leaving Newjfrcp-H&ll near 6F. on the Right 3 a Wind-Mill 2F. on the
Left 3 and Seaubit-Ch. equidißanton the fame Hand ; Then over 2 Brooks, %
Wind-Mill near the R. on the Left, bear to the Right, crofs Ankhamfiv. over »
Wooden-Br. and 3 F. farther, over a Brook, enter , a Town of
5 F. with a good Market on Thurjdays.
■ Thus by Wranghy-Cd. 1 F. on the Right, and over aC (a Wind-Mill near 6K
on the fame Hand) at if fM. come to a Lane :Where leaving another Wind-Mill,
and IM. farther, E/fwn-Houfe, both about 2F. dill ant on the Right; afeend near
3 F. till a Wind Mill appears, 4 F. on the Left, andE//ow-Ch. 2 F.oa the Right.
On theTop,leave another Hill,near 3 F.on the lame Hand,on which Rands a Bea-
con,and fo thro 5 a Common, crofs 2 Valleys, the Way on Moorifh-Ground 1
Then at i 6i > 6 by a Beacon on the Right, delcend about 6F* to Barton, lying
moR on the Right san indifferent good T. on Humber with a Plentiful*
Market on Saturdays.
From Barton, pafs the Humber to Hull by a Ferry,the Riv. being here above tfM.
oyer,and Compos’d of the Trent, before deferibed, and theOw/e or To«r, which a-
rifing onHufeat-Morvel-ViiU,m&t the Edg of the County, towards Wefimoreland ,
paffes by Midlarn, MaJham.Rip?on,Murrough-Briggs;York and Se lb ey,and then joins
the laid Trent, receiving ift. the Semere , a d. the Comer , 3 i. the Swail, and therein*
t\u> Barney, Ark, Holgat y Mars\, Refdale, Wis\, Codbecli, and lViUorvbecl>, 4th, the-
Njd.and therewith th? Rfbecfc ftbAke ffbarf, and therein th tfhsbmk. M the.


Dement, and therewith Harford, Rye, Dow , Rial, tlodgkck, Severn and Co ft owl
Laftly, the Are, and therein the Calder, Du , and Went.
Having croft the Humber , enter Torlisb. and H«//, alias Ring ft on upon , a
large well-built Borough Town-Corp. built by K. Edw. I. who granted it large
Immunities. It’s Trade, is hardly inferior t& any in England, being furhilh’d
with Shipping and all forts of Commodities.’Tis very well fortify’d,and keeps a
continualGarrifon, with a good Mt. on tfaWi.’Tisa T. and County Incorp; of
it felf; fends Burgefles to Pari, is govern’d, by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aider-
men, &c. and gave Title to the R.H. Henry Marquels of Earl of King*
fton upon Hull, &c. r . ... , 4 ...
From Hull a direct Road lies by Howland, where are feveral Wood-Er. over
Dikes. At ryy’y leave Thom. Ch. near 3F.cn the Right,and at enter Bever-
ley of 9 F. on Hull flv. a Urge and well-built Town-Corp. containing a Parifh-
Cb. befides its Minfter. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder,- i-x Aldermen, (?c.
Sends Burgefles to Park and has a Mts* on Tourfdays and Saturdays.
. Leaving the Town at 179*4. 4F.farther, afcend y. F. thro’ Mujgrove-V. of SF.
anddefcend near BF. Then crofling a Wood-Br. (call’d ) and Brook,
3F.farther, pals thro’ Bechjngfield R. Beyond which,, over a Brook, at 18a
leave Sr. Jp. Hethams Hall a F.on the Right, and eroding a other Brooks; a Mill
on the Left ; come to Beafecfi of 3 F. at ißy’<y.
; Thence a Brook running near the R, on the Right, crofs .it at rSy’x and thro"
Wotton-V. at 188 M. a ken da Hill of 4F. call’d Then by
land Heveden-C hs. on the Right, and Sunder with another R. on the
Left; crols aßrooks,leave LittleDrifeld Ch. near 3F on the Fame Hand, and pafs
thro’ another Village. Whence by Hortbam near 6. F, on the Right, at 194 af-
xend y F. and crofs a large Valley with a Defc. ofyF. to the Entrance of Rilhant
at 197 7of near 4F. feated in the JVoulds and having a Mt, on Tburjdajs, .
Here afcend near 9 F. a Beacon and Ch. near 4 F. on the Left; and cfoffitjg i
Vale,leave Burton on the Right. At xox M. defeend 3F. and pafs by Boy’
ington- Ch. about 4F-on the Left. At 203 over a Brook, the R.indines to the
Xett, and 1 M. farther, to the Right again; leading at xoy M. to Burlington dr
Bridlington , of about yF. on a Creek of the Sea; where it has a fafe Hairbour for
Ships. It gives Title to the R. H, Richard Boyl Earl of Burlington and &c.
? Tis a Place of good Trade, and has a plentiful Mt. on Saturdays.
Beyond to T. at zoyV by a Wind-Mill tF. on the Right, and a Water-Mjll on
the fame Hand, enter Bridlington at 206’y bf about yF. the place where
Goods are Loaded and Unloaded,chieflyinhabited by Maritim People. Whence
the Sea on the Right, till you come to Suerby~V. ot near 3 F. ’JThence over a Valley,
at z 10*4 pals thro’ FLAMBOKOi!GH-V. of 1 F. and by a Pond near the R. on
the Left. Then afeending aF. a diredi Road leads by the Light-Houfe ori hard-
iorougb-headat jn’y a Place well known by Sea-men.
Backward Turnings to be avoided. , •
At Bridlington-Key » the Left acute. 11. Beyond Burlington , the forward to
Boyington 111. yp. Beyond G lamp or d- Bridges, the Right to IV. 3 M.
|eyond Redboxrn , the Right to Braughton, v
i i * *
Hie


The Road from
LONDON to KINGS-LYN in Norsolk.
Commencing at Puckeridg in Hartfordftiire in the Barwick-Rwd.
i * '
I, n|p He Point of Bearing N. by E. IT. The Direft Horizontal pittance 8i M.
X 111. The Vulgar Computation 80 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 98’4.
From London Comp. Meafure.
to Tuc\eridg 25 25 27*4 ] 274
Bnrkway °7 32 oB’o ■ 35%
Fowlmere c 6 j 8 o 42’5
V [Cambridg 06 44- 09’3 ya’o
Strediam 10 54 • il'j 64'5
~ ixr 03 57 04*2 j dS’y
» 0
Comp. Meafure,
to Littleport 04. | 6xl oj’2 74*r
Southery 05 j o So’4.
Downhavs 05 |7 * °6 ’4 87’c?
Seeching o 6 |77 °7'2 94’2
■ Kjngs-JLyn 05 5 80 ! oi'2 ?3’4•
80 4
Middlesex, Hanfordjh. Effex, Cambridgjh. and Norfolk are the Counties that In»
elude the R. and the Lea, Mmer,Cam y Owfe, and Helgay , are the Principal Riv.
croft over : Affording a very good Way to but thence to Cambridge
and tyn indifferent j yet is every where fupply’d with good Inns, &c.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 17’j the Left in Puckeridg, to Torfc. 37*4 in Barley y the Right acute, the
Right acute, the Left acute, 597 the Left acute. 71*3 the Right to the
Meadows. 74’ i the Leftin Linlepon. 79'$ the Left to Downturn. 84’a the Right
to Stoke .Bß’j the Left acute,
>• ’ , . > * >| *
From the Standard hi Cornhil London, to Puckerid (as in the Whence
emitting the great Road on the Lett to Tork and at 2 8’a pafsover
ferebridg IM. farther, thro’ a Village, and 5 F. beyond, thro’ another V. Then
leaving Little Hormeai 4F. on the Right, at 31’3 come to kare-firse:-V. fftuate
moft on the Left. By Great Hormead 4F. on the Right, at leave Bingham-
Houle on the Left 3 F. then by Aa/iys on the Right, Withial and an Old Chapel
on the Left, each dsftant about 4 F. at 374 pals thro’ Barkway of iF. formerly
enjoying a Me. on Fridays.
Thence defending and afeending at 37*4 thro’ Barley of z F. on the Left,'
having an Inn or two*, at 38 z go down a F. Then an indifferent ftraieht Way
for the moft part Arable (leaving Haychn-Qh. * F. on the Right) leads at
to F owlmere a ftraglmg Village with an lan or two 4F. on the Road ; Whence
keeping a way like the former, at 47’* b y Haffen Mill on the Right } at 40V
pals thro TnmpmgtwV, and at n*4to Cambridg 5 call’d Gromceafier aad
Grmhrycge by tne Saxons, from its Fenny fttuadon, Camboritum by Antoninus*
from Camflv.ii&nnying crooked or winding, and Cantabrigia by uthors,
lupposd to have Its Name from one Cantaher a Spaniard, who iV’ed the
Seat of the Mufss 37? Years before the Birth of Chrift 5 the Gofpel Vine
Preach d here under the Emperor Hadrian . It has been twice Ruin’d ‘ vi* T f
by the Saxons, yet re-built by one of their Ks. 5 but ’twas quite laid watte by
tne Danes, not recovering till the Normans became Matters of the Kingdom
woenit Toon became a Famous Univcrfity : Tis at prefent a large and welN
budtT.containing r 4 Panfliesbefides x6 ftatelyCollegesand Halls,well furnilh’d
With Profeflors of all Arts and Sciences: It had formerly a ftrong Cattle now
rumous 5 and is accounted a T. within ar Uuiyerfity • the Colleges and Halls
® being


Vmg Built on the out-fide. It enjoys feveral Privileges, fends 4 Burgeffes to
Pari.
by a Mayor, &c. and has a plentiful Market on Saturdays.
From Cambridg thro’ operi Way, at 5:4 M. leaving Chefterton on the Right 3F.
come to Melton a t$6 M. of 3 F. Thence at 58 M. by 2 Wind-Mills on the Right,
fome the fame Hand.
by Venby- Abbey on the Left, and at 607 by a Village on the Right, enter the
Fenns. Whence at 6z’7 crofs the Ferry,to the Ifle of Ely: at 64’ j palling thro’ Stret-
ham a Mt-T. of 4F. at 66' 3 by a Village on the Left, and at 88’ j to the City of
ELT; call’d by Leland Anguillaria,hy the Saxons and by theßritains
fcated in a Fenny part of the County on Owfe flv. ’Tis a Place of great Anti-
djity.Built under Egbert K. of the Northumbrians , and then containing 600
Families. ’Tis at prefent much Decay’d, yet ftill enjoys great Immunitiesj and
;s govern’d by a Mayor, &c. having a good Market on saturdayi.
By Newbury on the Right, at 706 thro’ ChetJham V. of z F. and 1 M. farther,
by Wuodhouje-Y. on the Left. Then after an Afc. at 74 M. appears Littleport,
formerly enjoying aMt.now difus’d: Hence Travellingon a high Bank and Caufe-
way ( Owfe flv . 01/the Right, and feme draggling Houfes on the Left; at 7
Ferry over the Owfe to Norfolk > and 5 F. farther, Come to Souibery of 3 F.
At 83*3 thro’ Helgaye-V. and 2 F. farther over Helgaye flv. pafs by Snows-
Hall on the Right, and Hardham' Chap, on the Left, and thro’ fome Woods. Then
at By’y by Ruffen-Hall zP. on the Right, and at 8 M. by part of Venber on the
Left; leave the Ch. on the Right, and 4F. farther, by Crows-Hall on the
Right, at 87 M. enter Vcwnham on the Owfe, fltuate z F. on the Road, and
andhavingagocdMt. cn Saturdays. . x
Hence at 88M. hzveWmboifham on the Left 2 F. at 80 M. Stow on the Right
sF. and ~M. farther, the Hall. Then by Watlington- P. on the Leit, by Houghton -
Chap, on the Right, at 90V by Watlington on the Left, and Totnal on the Rights
cometoSeechy or Seeching at 94 M.of 3F. on a fmall Navigable Riv. It has a Mt.
on Tuefdays , much referred to once a Fortnight, for the Tale of Bullocks.
At thro’ Weft-Winch, and at 97M.thro’ Hardwick , 7 F. farther, enter LTN
alias Lyn Regis, formerly call’d Bijhops-Lyn , by the Weljh Llyn lignifying a Lake 5
feared near the Mouth of On je ftv. an ancient Borough-Town large and well-
built, containing 3 Parilh-Chs. ’Tis encompafs’d with a Wall and deep Trench j
fends Burgeffes to Pari. Is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, (?c.
and has z good Mts. on Tuefdays and Saturdays.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. the Left in Hardwick , to Swaffham. II the Right in Littlepori. 111. 4 F.bevond
Ely the Right, a different way to Cambridg. IV. In , the Right. V. AC
the End of Trumpington, the Right. .
The Road from
LONDON to MONTGOMERY in North-Wales.
Commencing dt the 4 Slure-ftone in Olocefieifliire, in the Abcrilhvith-R«wL
sj - > ■
i. '“IP HE Point of Bearing N W.by W.ll.’fhe direft Horiiontal Difiance i 44 M.
JL HI. The Vulgar ComputMm in M. IV,The Vmenjuritieh jjg’y.
Fro nf


i .J; - * 's'. * ~ 1 ' ,
froth London Comp« Meafure*
to the 4 Shire-Stone 66166 81*3 081*3
Campden 05 71 otf’i 087*4
jtyejbolm 06 77 07*7 o^s*3
WORCESTER 10 87 I4’i2 iop’s
TlieHundred«boufeo7 llB’s
Cbmp, Meaftirfc,
ioTehluty 08 102 io’o } l2 rs
Ludlow 05 107 07*j1i^<5 > 2
Bifhops - Cafilc 10 1 17 14’o 115o’ 2,
Montgomery of 122] 08*3 li 58*5
*l*2 ”158*5
Middlqfexj Buckinghamjhire , Oxfordfh. JVar Wcrcefterfh. Shrcpfh'
find Montgomery]!), include the whole R. and the Brent, Cola , Bure , Cbarwel, Even "
4 We, Piddle, Stonebow , Re<t, Corvi? and (7ney, are the principal Rivers croft o-,
ver; A good R. to Wickham, not fo pleafant to the 4 S hire (tone, and from thence
Veiry bad to Worcejier ; then to Ludlow indifferent, better to and
thence to Montgomery bad again, yet it every where affords good Entertainment
to Travellers.
; Acute Turnings to be avoided',
At 81*3 the Left forward to Morten-Inmarfh. Bß *o the Right to Stratford. 95*6 the
forward, to Auleejter, r oo’tf the forward in Piddle, to Perfhore. 138*0 the
Right to Gunfloc. 141*0 In Onibery, the Right to Shrewsbury 143*3 the Left
acute. 146*0 the Right to Shrewsbury . 147*4 the Left acute. 1 yo’z the Left td
’ Clun, at the End of Bijhopi Cafile, 1 jz’z the Left to .
JTj'Rom London to the aShire-ftonefas in London to Aberifiwith
V the forward Way on the Left, thro’ a Gate leading to Morton-lnmarjh y
Perfhore , &c. keep the Hedg on the Left; at Bz’6 crofs the Pofs way j and zF.
farther, Virnton- V, At 84 M. defcending 3 F. over Evenlodeflv. at 84*7 enter open.
Arable Land. Then at 86*4 pafs thro’ Bread and 6 F. farther Campdefs,
vulgo Camden j a large tho’ poor T. containing above 2,00 Houles : However ic
Title to the R. H Baptifi Noel Vifcount Campden ; *tis govern’d by z Bailiffs,
Iz upper and iz inferior Burgeffes; and has a Mt. on with 2 Fairs,
; Thence afcending 3 F- an open Way call’d Broadway Hills, leads at 89*1 to-a
Defc. of 9 F. leaving St. Berry on the Right, and ent’ring at 91*3 of
t. whence open Way for the moft part, to at 93*2, and at
94*7 of z F. Where over a Stone-Br. of 7 Arches,crofs . to Evefholm vulgo
Efam ; a Town Corp. efteem’d the Second of the County; formerly noted foe
a ftrong Caftle Built by Egwin with the Afliftance of King Son ta
Wolpber K- of the Mercians , and now converted to a Ch. call’d Bengwonh. ’Tis
a large and well-built Town, containing 3 Parilh Chs.fends Burgeffes to pari, i£
govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 4 Juftices and 15 Common-Council-Men 5 and
has a Very good Market on Mondays, and 3 Fairs. 1 ’
* From Evefholm by Col!{nave-\M\\ on the Right, at 99*1 leave Plddbury-CJui oh the?
Left 3 F. enter Piddle at 100’y of 2 F. and at the End, crofs At ipz’<£
over a Stone-Br. of z Arches, crofs Stone-Bow fiv and at 10’5 M- leave Overfloe*
iVind-Millcn the Left. Then at 106*z ihro’Spechley-V. the Lord Berkley’s Hpufe
on the Left, at 107*1 leave S/wWey Green on the Right, at 108 M. uniting
with the London Road from Perfhore , and 7F. farther, come to the Suburbs of.
WORCESTER ; an Eminent City, Built by the Romans for their fecurity
againft the and now enjoying great Privileges and Immunities granted
hy the Ks. of England,even before the Conqueft, both Vanes and Saxons, as high
as Hengifl and Horfa : It has fuftain’d many fhocks of ill Fortune, efpecialljr,
when fir’d and moft of its Inhabitants kill’d by Hardi-Canute the Vans, A , Vi
Jo4i, Being re built and Peopled again Amo 1113. it fuffer’d extremely by
fudden Conflagration, and was twice burnt in the Civil Wars by K. Stephen i fc>
that it lay almoft walk, even beyond hopes of Recovery, However it arofe
G % " ' gradually


gradually to a far greater Luftre; and the Buildings were rais’d more (lately,
eipecially the Cathedral Dedicated to Chrift and the Virgin In the Quire
aie feveral noble Monuments, as that of K. John, Arthur Prince of Wales, &c.
From PTorcefler over the Bridg avoiding the forward Way thro’ St. John’s,
b?ar to the Right, by feveral Houles on the Road, at m M. leave on
the Right j and a little farther, pafs thro a V. of the fame Name. At n j M.
leaving Grmley Gh. on the Right 3 F. by fome Houfes on the R. and a Pond on
the Left jat 117*7 pafs by fVitley Ch. and Mr. Cooley’s Houfe on the Left, and ac
by the Hundred- Houle on the Right, a noted Inn.
At iz t’z pafs thro’ Stockton-Y. at izz’e thro’ another Village, 1M- farther,
by Lyndridg-Ch. on the Right, and then by on the Left. At izy’4 by z
or 3 good Inns, over Hewnham' s Wood-Br. evois Rea flv. riling in Shropf) • and
he, e falling into the Temd, which Riv. accompanies you on the Left to Ludlow,
At Izy ’z enter ShropJ!}. and at 12.8’y pals by Tenbury z F. to the Left, on Temd
fiv having a good Mt. on Tuefdays. Then leaving Burford on the Left, crofs
Ledwicli-litook at j jo’i and by ieveral Houfes on the R. ccme to at 1
Thence over Carve fiv. an indifferent (IraightWay, by on the
Right 6? and Bromfisli on the Left 4F. leads at 141 M At 142 V
leave Sioi^e-Ch. C'aftie and Park on the Left, and 4F farther, pals thro’
V. Whence the Way is much up and down Hill, thro’ Barfords Gate V. in a
Valley, at 146’! and hy Eigton-Qh. on the Right, at 1 jo’i come to Bificps Caftle
moll on the Right; which T. tho’ not large, enjoys feveral Privileges ; fends
Burgefies to Pari. ftfe. lt’s govern’d by a Bailiff, and has a good Mt. on Fridays,
well frequented by the IVeljh - At lya’za large Aic. leads to Bijhops-Mott a noted
place, being a fmall round Hill on the Right 5 where you enter
Hence by feveral Houfeson the R. and z Dele. by bou[e an Inn on the Right,
and at 1, i M. by the Lord Herbert’s Park on thefame Hand, pals aF. farther to
MONTGOME&fy difcribM in to Montgomery .
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
J. At the End of Montgomery, the Left to Bri ll. At the the
Right fo Clun. 111. aF. beyond Ludlow ,the Left to Bridgnorth. IV. Again#
Tenbury , the Left to Bewdley. V. IF. beyond Nennh&m s-Br. the Right to the
Ferry VI. y F. (bore of Stosli, the Right forward. VII. I*6 beyond Witlsy, the
Right to Cotheridg. Vlll. x M. beyond the Left to Eerjbore. IX. 5 F.
beyond Specbky , the Left to Saunton,
The Road from
LONDON to St. NEOTS in Huntingdonshire.
Continued to Oakham in j
Commencing xt Barnet in Hartford Hi "re the Holy head-Rwd>
I. HT' HE Point of Bearing N. N-W. 11. The Diredt Hmyrnal Diftance 8© M.
i ill. The Vulgar Computation 67 M, IV. The Dirnsnluration s^’z*
F'. om LOS DON Comb, Me, fore,
to B,tract 10 |l9j | 1 i’/ i» 7
Bitfield c 7 } 17*1 oS\] 20’3
Stevenage c 8 {25 11*4 11 ’7
Baidock , 04 |29 06’, jS’q
Bigglrfk'tde c> j ®7*“ 4C7
Ifciuesford 04 !38 j ctf'2 s^l
Comp Meafure.
E*t<n by St. A eois ol >4* s °s7 $6 J o
Ctftwonh c 7 1 1 4 °
J yford o$ 53 c 7 6 74*^
Hat' im* (worth o 8 61 12 6 874
Ofikbam c 6 joß‘6 s6'2
If;
Middlefix


MidJlefex , Hartfordjh. Bedfordjh. Huntir.gdonjh. and ar e
the Counties pafs’d thro 5 y and the Lea, and Welland the principal
fivers croft over: Thefirft part of the Road is good Way,but Baldockr Lane is
notorious for its badnefs y neither is the fuceeding part at all commendable y
yet to St. Heots ’tis well frequented by Carriers, &c. who from orcen
travel this, and leave the great Northern Road.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
A t 12’ 4 the Left forward to St. Albans, i y’y the Left forward to St. Albans, 22 z
the Left to Vunftable. ay’y the Left to Hitching. the Right in Balded*.
a.6*z the Left forward attheEnd of Bigglejwade. yz’3 the Right forward, the
great R. to St Heots, yy’i the Right to Stilton, in the tne
Left in Great Stoughton , to Bedford , &c. 77*4 the Right forward to Oundle.
FROM London to Barnet , fas in the Holyh Whence crofting a Corner
of Middlefex , and leaving the Road to Holyhead on the Lett, over the Com-
mon, re-enter Hartfordjh. At 17’S by BeU bar ; at 18 M. by Mi eve I bar y am. at
iB’7 by H<ufie/i-Wood-Gate all on the Left ; pafs by Hatfield-!K lame
Hand. Then at 20 M. enter Hatfield of 4P. on the Road, widi a Market on
Tburfdays, and a Fair on July 23 d. .
From Hatfield delcend a Hill, and at the n oot oi it, you crois Lea fiv, f the
Way Hilly and fomewhat Woody) ent’ring at 25 ’y of 2 F From 26 2,
by IVoodbal- P. on the Left for IM. alcending and defeending pafs thro
Green Y. of 2 F. where the Road ftill Hilly leads at 30 M- to and
at ji’y to Stevenage, of 3 F. confiding in feveral good Inns, &c, It formerly
had a Mt. on Fridays y and ftill a Fair on suly 17th , -
Hence a Woody Way to Gravely at 33’y of 2 F. beyond 1 wnich, ieverai Ale.
and Defc. lead at 37*4 to Baldocfi of y F. on the Road, driving a great i raae
in Malt, with a Mt, on Thurfd. and 2 Fairs, vi%. on Feb, 24. end July 23.
Beyond,'the T. lies Baldocli- Lane a deep and ill Way, continuing even to
glefvsade , at the Entrance Into which by Horton and Radwel on tne Left, in tne
Bottom, beyond the firft Hill, enter Bedfordjh. at 39*4. Then oyer % other Hills,
Leaving Stofoli, Afiwic\ and Langford* Chs. on the Left, and Edworth on the
Right, comeat 45:’4 to Bigglejwade of yF. near Ivel fiv. a Branch of the
It has a good Mt. on Wednejdays and 4 Fairs, on Whit ion- Menu ay 3 the
Monday after Lorn-Sunday, OBoler 23. and November 1.
At 47’i pals thro’ Heither-Calcet V*at 48’s by Beching-Crefs 3 or 4Houles on
the Left, and by Sandy on the Right; At 49’! over a Wooden Br. crois a Brootf
to Ter ford of y F, with feveral Inns,
At y \6 an open Way to Tamesford or Temesford of 3 F. near the Connuenae
of the fwJand Owfe; full of good Inns, aud formerly noted for its Cafiie, and;
for being a Vanijh Station. Two F. beyond which (the dire® Way to St. Heots.
lying forward) crofs the Owfe y leave Rokefdon- Ch. on the Lefty and at y4j
thro’ a Village, comeat y 5*4 to a Stone'Br. over a Brook, where you enter
of 6 F. a good Thorough-fare, on Owfe fiv. which hence paffes to St. HEOTS
near IM. diftant; fo call’d from Meet us a Monk of Glaftenbuty y a large and
well built Town, with a good Market on Thurfdays. and 4 Fairs.
At y7’x the R. to Bugden and fo into the great Road to Tor\, &c. proceeding
forward y fall in with a well-beaten R. from St* Heots y bear to the Left at 5 B*3
and enter Huntingdonfh. and Great Stoughton at 60’3 of 2 F. where the R. to Bed-
ford, &c| extending oh the Left, turn to the Right, and at y leave RJmbolto ».
on the Left, a Mc-Town y the Caftle being the Seat of the Ear) of Manchefter
Whence an open Way for the moft part Arable, brings you at 66'6 Co Great Cat-
4|r «p* s-a -v dk ' \ f ' J Vi .• .*' TJt 4 . •4 \ \d ?’ "i y, ' :e '* ’•' ',M** .


worth of zF. and at yg’f to Brynton-V. ofzF. entering at 70’*;
*At7l '6 thro’ a Cople, come to CI apt on-V. Whence an open Way to Lyford-.
V. at 74V, at the End of which, over a Stone Br.crofs Ninejiv. palling between
Ay and Piling ton, and by 3. Defc. at 79 M. thro 5 of iF. Then thro 8
pean-Thorp at ’renter bean at 83 M. of 2F. on the Road, adprn’d with a
fair Seat beloaging to the pari of Cardigan.
At 84T defcend a F. then thro’ part of principally on the
left, by fome Stone-i<uarries, on the Right and Laxton on the lame hand defcend
like wife 3 F. and at 87*3 enter Harringfvforth of • Ki F. beyond which, over 3.
Stone-Br. of 3 Arches crofs Welland jiv,to ■
Then afcendin? and delcendingby SeytonWh* on the Left, at 90M. pals thro ■
GUyjioa- V, Whence the R. continuing Hilly and generally open, by Prefton on
the Left, and Wing: M&nton and Egleton fucceffiveiy at lome diftance on the
Right 1 at 9 6 hi. enter OAI\HAM the Shire-T. indifferent large, having a good
Mt. on Saturd. and on March 4. April, zf. and Auguji a?.
Backward Turnings- to be avoided. ,
I. 3 F. beyond Dean, the Left to Oundle. 11. At theEntring Right
to Bedford. 111, In Benyfeld, the Right to Brigjiock- IV. I’7 beyond Benyfidd,
the Right. V. At thd end of Brynton , the Right acute. VI. 1 3 beyond
ford, the Left to SandyM ll. At the End of Baldocki the Left to Wefton, VIIf.
In Broadwater, the Belt to Hartford. .
The Road from
LONDON to NORWICH
Commencing at Fuckeridg in the B^wt/fßoad.
TH E Poi nt of Bearing N. E. by N. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance 88 M,
111. The Vulgar Computation 90 M. IV. The Vimenfuration r oSfy.
y . ■■ ' *
Fr m London Comp, Meafure.
to Puc{eridg 251 25 27H 27’4 I
; 1 £.ir{ivay 07 52 08 0 35*4 ■
Wir lesiord-Bf. 10 42 lO *4 4^ 0
Hew-Mar\ei 12 54 <4’ s 6°’s
lerton-Miys °7 ■ 3 I
, Coir.p. Measure*
to 1 bet ford g 70 io 9 f 079" 5
6 76 cB’o 087*5
j4uleborough 4 £0 c6’o 09V $
Windham 5 85 06’i 099*6
NORWICH 5 90 I 09*1 (“108*7
•JiT
Ii v (
MiddUfex, Hartfordfl). Effex, Cambridgjh. Suffolk and Norfolk contain the R, and
the f €4, Mimtrf Cure or GrantafOwfe parva and Tare are the principal Riv. crolt
over ; The way for moft part Good, efpecially in Norfolk > .with a fucceffion
pf Towns affording lui table Entertainment,
Acute Turnings to be avoided.
At a7’y at the End of Fuckeridg, the Left to Tork , Barwick, &c. 35 '6 At the End
' tf Dailpvay, ths Left to Royffon, See. 3gV At the Entrance into Efjex, the Lett
to'Cambridg. 61 4 the Right to Bury At Berfon-Mills, the Left to
Brandon, yy’y in Thetford, the Left forward. 87 5 o the Left acute. 9 9'5 In If imam
the Lett. io4’i the Right forward. j
IT? ROM Leaden to Fuckeridg at 17*4 as in <the IfcnapVfc.Road. Whence thro’
|j* Hare fir ect at 3L4 Barkway at 5 5’4 and Barlee at 38 M. (as in London to
Yjngs-Lyn,) omitting the acute or forward Way on the Left at s%*6 to Cm--
bridg. Ely, &c.enter Effex, and after a imall Afc. at 40’4 pals between Hadon-
btiry and H&foafcary-Houle, to Cambridgjb, at,4»’j. 1 ' ‘ : lienee


Hence an Afc. of a F.by a Watch-hoyfe on,the Left, (the Way direft, Open
and Heathy, between Wittlesford&vA Duxworth each 4F. diftant) leads at46M.
to Winks fori Br. Where are 3 or 4 Houles, and where crofs Cam or Grant flv.
leaving Sawfien, Pampnorth and Badburnham-Chs. on the Left, alio Hinson and
Abbington on the Right, oyer a Hill and an eafie Afc. at 49:4 ofz F. enter Hero-
Market-H at yoV continuing to New- Market ; a Place much frequented for the
convenience of the Ground for Horfe-Races. s
At yy’zpafs by a White-Poft on the Left, and about M. thro tui?y
Ground call’d Hare-Park '• At 57V afeend 3 F. and at 58V crofsa great Ditch,
commonly call’d the DeviV s Ditch ; the ancient Limits of the Eaft Angle and
itfercLwKingdoms;Then by theßace-Houfe on theLelt j 2F. farther, come
to New Market, a T. not large, but well-built, of z F. on the R. but more trani-
verfe jadorn’d with the K’s.Houle,and z Parifh-Chs. viq. 1 in the other
in Suffolk. It affords good Entertainment, and is much reforted to by the Gentry.
At 6 1*7 a long green Bank erodes the R, (where you are actually in Suffolk)
and extends W. towards Ixning 1 M. diftant, retaining in Sound lorn what of the
ancient Iceni: aHilhand leaving at 65*2 almoft contiguous
on the Right, but lituate in Cambridgfh. (a fmall Corner of which you heie
crofs) at the next Brook 3 F. beyond, re-enter • Whence by Red-Houjeoti
the Left, and a Lodg on the Right, pafs over a Warren, and leaving Badhngbam
€ F. on the Left, and Hering[wel on the Right z F. over a Hill and thro open
Arable Land, at 96 M. come to Berton-Mills-Y. on a Rivulet, which rifang near
Bury palfes by Mildnal or Mildenhal , a good Mt-Town, 1 Mile below this Place.
‘ Here theß, to Brandon iflues out on the Left; whence over a Heath keep a
ftraight Way, by leveral Afc and Defc. at 76’r leaving ■ z!• on the
Right: At 79*3 crofs Owfe parva, to the County of and T. or
6f 4 F. on the R. call’d Theotford by the S axons from its Situation on Thetfiv.
and Sitomagm by the Romans :’Twas formerly an Epifcopal See, and is at
prefent a large Borough-Town, eleftmg Parl-Men, noted for i?s C om pany W
Muftctans, and having a good Market on Saturdays. jl r
At Bi’i leave Ulverfton Ch. on the Right 3 Fat 84 f pafs by a Stone-Crols,
and IM. farther, by Roudham- Ch. and Hall on the Right 4F. an open Arable
Way leading at 87*3 to Larlingford of 2 F. Thence # M. farther, to
Br. over a Branch of the Little Owfe ; and thro’ open Arable at 89 3by a beacon
on the Right z F. At 90*4 come to Harpham a little-diftance on the Right 5 and.
1 M. farther, to FrefiZeßr. over a Brook .- Whence a ftraight Way at 93 31 to
Attleborough of 4 F. having a good Mt. on Thurfd- for fat Bullocks, Sheep, (ire.
At 94*3 leave Attleborough- Hall qn the Lett, and at 94 7 Bumvel-Cn. on tne
Right 4F. crofting Attleborough Mere at 9S'T. Whence leave Sutton- Money-Co. on
the Left 6F. o9er Sutton-Com. pafs to
by WindbamHAl on the Left z F. at 99 3 enter Wimundham aim Windham or 5
F. on the R in a Bottom, notedfor the Interment of th tAlhines Earls of Arundel,
and a great Rebellion Ann . 3. Edw. VI. Headed by Rober l&t a Tanner cl tins
Place. The Manufactures of the Town are Stockings and fome Woouen W ares.
It has a good Market on Fridays for Corn, &c.
At 100 '6 crofs Mile-Br. at that diftancefrom the T. and over Hether } et-Com.
extending from Windham to Hetherfet. At 103*1 leaving Woodhal on the Leu,
come to Hetherfet of zF. Whence at a Wood on the Right, leads a jc6
M. to Cringleford-V. and at Wy to Eam-V. between which, an A Cruder
at the Stone Br. over the Brook, enter the County of the City of NORM C h ,
Whence a ftraight Way at 108*3 to St. Stephens Gate, and fo to the City it leu•
■ + G + "• '


A Place of great Eminence and R, Norwich, i. e. Septentrionslk
sinus, fo call’d from its Northern Situation: During the Heptarchy, ’tw&s the
Seat of thzEaji Angles ■, and tho’ it has been a considerable (barer in Pubhck
Calamities, by Fire, Sword, Famine and Peftilencefby which laft j7io4Perfons
a.e reported to have perifh’d Anno 1348 between July and yet it is
prefeat,a large and Populous City, commodioufly feared on Rictus ot Tare,
flv. dividing, and almoftencompaffuigit; Itextends above x M* in Length, and
nearas much in Breadth, encloling manyfair Orchards and Gardens, that render
,rt vesy beautiful; ’Tis eneompals’d with a Wall, giving Entrance by iz Gates,-
and contains 3a Parifh Chs. Its chief Buildings are the Cathedral, the Bilhop’s
and Duke of Horfol}(s Palaces, &C. ’TisaGity and County, govern’d by a Mayor,
&c. Eicdfs Pari •Men. and is the See of a Eifhop, whofe Diocefs includes the
Counties of Ncrfofy and Suffolk, and therein 1111 Parities: ’Tlsalfo Dignify’d
with the Title of a Dukedom in the Perfon of the R- H. Howard Duke of Norfolk ,
Earl Marlhal of England, &c. lt has 3 Mts. on Frid. and Saturd. and
drives a great Trade in Stuffs and other Manufactures.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I At the End of Norwich, the Right acute to Ipfveicb* 11. 4 F. beyond Windham,
the Left acute. 111. at the End of Attleborough, the Left to IV. 1 z F,
beyond Frm/e-Br. the Left to Bury. V. At the End of Tbetford the Left to Bury .
VI. At Burnbridg , the Left to Bijhops Stratford.
The Road from
L O ND ON to OAKHAM in Rutlandshire .
Extended to Richmond in Tor\shire.
< ' ■ * % '■> 4- .
Commencing at St. Albans i*h the Holyhead- Road.
I. THHE Point of Bearing N- by W. 11. The Direft Diftance 193.
JL M. 111. The Vulgar Computation' 100 MU IV. The
;■ \ * \
From londm Comp* Meafure.
to St. aihans 20 » 020 | ’ 21*5 o2i’j 1
Luto?t 08 I j oS’o c29’5
Sel fee 06 I 034 j 09 s o oS& # 5
Bedford 06 jo 4° j 08 7 0474
Ok Kinston t O6 | 046 c?’o 050*4
WcUinfopugh 06 j 052 cp'i 055*5
lettering 05; o7’i 072*6
ilok’ngbam 08 j o6> | io T 2 083*0
Vpp ; ns><i/h* ; 04 c#9 jO4 6 cB/ : £
O.akfajn 05,074 | 05*2 094*0
MiiPm-MowhTdyoS ; 082 | i'o’4 1044
Flam‘-tree to j c? 2 j i2’6 I r-7 5
O4 j 096 j 05*2 M 22’4
i } ap lewick c 6 i 102 |j 07 5} i>o’i l
Conif. Meafurc.
to Mansfield 04 106 1 2
Clown 09 I 's n’? ‘^7'S
Aughton 08 12? ov’3 ' < 7'°
Roihsram C 3 126 04*4 <6l *4
Wombel 06 132 08 ’5 170*2
Barnejly 04 ijd i?j’ £
ll 147 H*7 ! 9°°
07 tJ4 ■ 59 2 ,
Kw ley 09 16$ 12-6 2120
Si;ipton 07 170 05 6 22 6
Cuniftoi 09 *79 I2 ’' 2 33/
Carton 09 188 'S’ 1 24 7°
Midi am 40 >92 050 252*0
Richmond 08 200 10 2 262 1
t ' f .. ■% ♦ -
hiiMleftx, Hahfyrdjhire, Bedfordlh. Northampton}}). Rutlandjh. IdcefivjO.Hoitivg*
ham (I) and T or\sb. are the Counties paft thro 5 ; and the Orvfe : Nine, lVelland s Ey *
IVadelmi* Wtzakt H €rt ? Lyne , Meden,Gunno, Cover,Tour,
and S are rhe principial lliv* croft over: Which in general is no
ytc fupply M with frequent To was., and Places of convenient Accommodation.^
! '•:':„ V I * ' %
* > ■:’&
/ > d %


whole Road is compris’d in Three Paris; the I. ending at Oakham in
I Rutland ; the 11. at Barnftey, and the 111. at Richmond in Yorkshire :We
heein with Part I. . , •. ,
• B Thefe forward Turnings are to be avoided.
At the end of St. Albans , the Right to Hitching, 2y ’2 the Left to Redbourn. 37’s
" the Left acute. 41 ’y the Left to Horton. 4*’o the Rightto Hairnet, y 3 3 the Left to
Steventon.is’s theLeft to Northampton, 66' 0 theßight scute. Si 5 tLeLe.t acute,
FROM the standard in Cornhil, London, to St. Albans, (as in the Holy-head-R.)
Whence, leaving the Town at ziT, juft by Harding alias at
ir’z on the Left, comeat 28*2 to an Afc. and 3 F.farther, to a like DeR. at tne
Bottom of whichi, eater Bed for dp. and y F. farther, Luton of y F. with a Mt. on
Afoni. for Corn &’c. and one Fair on Augu Iy. ,
Beyond L«tw crofs a Brook, and pafs by a Gallows, and on the
Left: Thence a directß.over Lwtoa-D.(where the Fofs-Way is crolsd to a Dele.
,of 4F. and at the Bottom of it, leaving the Doum, thro Bamn-Clay-V. At
aß’4bv Selfoe-V. on the Right, and over a fmall Afc.and Dele, comeat 39 7to
a Stone-Br. of 4 Arches over a Brook, and x M. farther over another Ale, and
Defc. the Road being fomewhat Woody: At 41’f living the tor ward Way to
Horton, bear to the Right, and 3 F. farther to the Left again. Then delcending a
jF. by WUjumJed Ch . on the Left, pafs at 44 M, to a Vxll. of the fame Name,
extending 2 F. on the Road, and at the end of it crofs a Brook.
Hence V ftraight R. leading at 4 6 M.thro alias ot near a F.
enter Bedford at 47 M. of 7F. ’Tis the Shire-Town, Situate on Owfefiv. which
divides it in the Middle; containing y ParHh-Churches; *Tis Govern dby a
.Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen* 2 Bailifts, 2 Chamberlains, (pc, lend* But genes
to Pari, and gives Title to His Grace William Duke of Bedford, Here are z
conliderable Mts. on Tuefdays and Saturdays, and 6 Fairs.
Leaving Bedford at 47V, pals thro Clapwn at 49 6, and at y i 2 Oc\hy or Ocle-W
of yF. Beyond the Town, crofs Staffer, Br. over the , and leave Mjlton and
Petonham-Ch’s on the Right. At yfii thro’ Part of Fetonham, bear to the Right,
and leave i’tf'ufwroji-Ch. on the Lett. At y 4 M. turn again totlieLcfc, an^aiCciid,
3F. to Chellingtonat ytf’a of y Furlongs, _ r
Thenc by Woodbil y F. on the Right, and at y7’r. over a Stone-Br. crols Owfe
fiv. Harold-C b. on the Left, and Sir The. Alton's Houle on the Right, here a di-
re# R.thro’ a Wood of 9 F . alio by Feddington near iM. on the Right, and Farn-
dijh, a little diftant on the fame Hand, leads to the Entrance of
at 62*4 Then by Wool aft on alias Woolerton and Vodinton-Ch’s on the Ltfr, and ny
Hilluton on the Right; at 6 4*4 over aWooden-Br. crofs Nine fiv. and at y y’3 enter
Wellingborough of 6 F. a large and well inhabited T. on the Banks of the faid
Nine. ’Tis noted for it’s Medicinal Waters; having a fair Ch. and a good Free-
School,with a Mt. on Wednefd. and 1 Fairs, vi\. on Eafter-Tuefd. and Oflober 18.
Beyond the Town over a Brook, leave the forward R. on the Right, bear to
the Left,and 6F. farther, crofs a Vally and Brook. At 67' 1 pafs thro’ Gr.Haridon-
Wof 3 'F. and at the End ot it, leave Little Haridon on the Left. Then thro 5
Higbfham at crofs a Brook at 70 M. at 71T another, and afeend. 4 F. to
Retiring at 7y’3*of 8 F. an indifferent good Town, where the Juftices of the
Peace of the County lometimes meet. It has a good Mt. on , wellftor’d
with Corn, Cattel/&T. and a Fair on Jburfday in E^er-Week.
Leaving theT.at 73’3, alio Thorp- Ch. on the Left; at 7y’s over a Stone-Br.
crofs a Brook to Rot’Jtigbam- Foreft at 7 9 M. At $2 M,. leaye it, and at 82 7 pals
: ■ ■ 1 ' thro’


thro’ Rokinghm-V. of a F. beyond which, crofs Welland fiv, to a part of Let*
Eyefiv. i M. beyond to Rutland]!), and fo thro’ Csldicote-V. Whence
keeping a ftraighc R. to Luddington at 86’r of 4F. at the end of it, afcend 5; F.
and over a Valley enter Uppingham at 87 ’y of 3 F. on the R. but more tranfverle;
a well built Town with a Free-School and Hofpital. Its Mt.on Wednefd. is well
provided with Cattel,Corn, &c. befides 2 Fairs. Thence a direft R, lying
on the Left, defcend a Hill, at 90’1 crofs a Brook, and pafs between 2 Hills.
Then at 92 M. over Wadeland fiv. afcend 4F. to OAltfiAMat 93’$ the Shire-T.
indifferently well-built, in the Vale of Camus ; having a good Church, Free-
School,and Hofpital.ln thisT. are kept,and it has a peculiar Privilege
of getting a Shoe off of any Noblean’s Horle that palfes thro’ it; which is ulually
Redeem’d with Money.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I, At the End of Uppingham, the Right to Stowcray. |I. At the Ent’ring Wellin-
> borough, the Left to Peterborough .lll. IM. Short of C the Left acute.
IV. At I*7 beyond Wilfumfted, the Left to Hd/jwer. V. 3 F. farther, the forward
to Harton. VI. 9 F beyond Barton Clay, the Right acute. VII. yF. Ihort of
Harding ,the Left acute.Vlll. the forward on theßight t
The Continuation of the Road from
OAKHAM to RICHMOND,
PART II.
Commencing at Oakham jnßutlajjdfhire, and Extending to Barnfley in Yorkibire*
; Containing 8x Miles i Furlong.
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 96'6 the Right to Wbitjonden i %6’q the Left to Harilmk 130,1 the Right to
? Bledmrth. 1 3 1 ’4 the Right to Bledworth. 13 j’o the Right to Winckborn. 13 6'%
In Mansfield, the Left acute. 147’? the Right to Ellington. 149’2 the Lett
thro’ Barlborpugh. 1 fz *6 the Left to Echjngton.
Oakham, thro’Berley thorp-Vat 95*3,and at 96’3,thro’L<XH£6<m-y.leave
|Hi Bmow a high Hill on the Left; where on the Top appear the Ruins of a
double Trench and Wall, with fome Remains of a Town, which took up about
3 8 Acres of Ground; At 97’d on the Right; crofs
i Valievs, defcend a Hill; and at the Bottom, pals over a Brook to
There leaving Ejirap-V- on the Left, at ioo’6,godown 1 M. and at the Bottom,
crofs a Wooden-Br. and Brook, Then 6F. farther, thro’ Burton or Burton-Lasers-
V. which took its Name from an IJofpital there rais’d, in the Beginning of the
Norman Corrqueli , by a voluntary Contribution over England, for the Cure of
the Leprolie, which then infe&ed the Kingdom; Whence over a Stone-Br. crofs
Wreak flv. to Milton-Mowbray of 6 F. and near as much tranfverfe: Tis a large
Town of good note,efteern’d the beft in the County, next to
At 10 6% Efq; Bonnet's Houle on the Left, at 107’ 1, in aValley enter
V. of Then delcendingto Bimr-Vale, and crofting a Wooden-Br. and Brook,
at 109’6 come to Neither Broughton-Y. of zF. Hence oVer a Stone-Er. and Brook,
enter Nottingham(l). and afcending.th.ro’ Over Broughton, kaveS<mn-Vale: whence
along a ftraight opea W*ay by Widmerpole- Ch. on the Left, crofs the Fpfs-Way,and
:. t ■ afeend


afcend an Hill : Then over a Vale, defcend again, pafs thro’ Nomantpn-Y. at
ii6’u wdFlmtreerV, at ny’z.
At r 18M. leaving Peter in Afiies on the Left, and on the Right j at
iioV, over a Stone Br. crofs Trent ftv. and 4 F. farther, another Part of it. At
iii*7,over a Stone-Br. crofs Lyneflv. to Nottingham, on an Afc. a T. and County
of it felf; call’d Snottengaham, by the Saxons ,afid by the Britain r s,Turogobauc,\.t.
Speluncarum Domm: ’Tis large and well-built, containing 3 Parifh-Chs, and was
formerly defended by a Wall and Caftle now Ruinous : 11 fends BurgelTes to
Parl.and gave Title to theß. H. Charles Earl of Nottingham, &c. ’Tis the Shire-T.
where the Affixes are held, with the County-Gaol; It drives a confiderable;
Trade, is Govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 6 Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, % Cham-
berlains, &e. and has 3 Mts. on Wednefi . F rid. and Saturdays.
From Nottingham, alcend a Hill and by a Gallows on theßfght,croft 3 Valleys,
leaving Basford-Ch, on the Left. At 126 M. down a Hill. P. lies by the
R.on the Right for 3M. and on Sherwood Fft. L/wesv,likewife on the Left. Then
by BulweUY. HuckaaUni Lynby-Chs. on the Left, crofs ?appkme\- Moor to
Pappkvticfi'Y. of 3F. at 129*7. Whence theß. Woody and Hilly, by the Lord
Byron’s Hou ft and Robin hood’s Stone on the Left, crofs a Wood-Br. and Brook
at ro Mansfield, a Town of 6 Fon the R. large and well-built. It drives
an indifferent good Trade, and has a Mt. on Thurfday's, for Corn, Cattel, &c.
: Thence bear to the Right, crofs a Vale to Verbyjh, and leave PleJlyY. at 139*7
alfo Houghton-Y. at 141*1 oh the Right. Then eroding aValleys by on
the Right, and Boulfover on the Left, at 147’f pafs thro’ .V. mod on the
Right; Afterwards by Barlbrough- Ch. and Hall one the Left, defcend a Hill,
and by a Lake on the Right, over a Moor, leave Rjlmarjh-Ch , on the Left. At
15-3*2 in a Valley crofs Gunnofiv. to Torfah leaving at fomediftance
on the Right. In a fecond Vale, by the Lord Parry’s Park on the Left, along
the Road for above iM. leave Beghton- Ch on the fame Hand.
At i M. leave the P. and over an Hill of 3F. at 157 M come to Aughton-Y
of 3 F.; Beyond which, defcend a Hill of 6¥. and afeending another, pafs thro
Celby-Y. At 15:9*4 in a Vale, pafs thro’ iVhift and leave the Ch.on tbeßight,
Then thro ’Neither Moor and Upper After-Gate, enter Rotheram at 1 6 1 ’3, a Town of.
3 F. on Dunfiv. noted forgiving Birth to Thomas Rotheram Arch-Bilhop of Tor fa
where he founded a College, a good Mt. on fpr Corn,Cattel,
&c. And hard by,is Conisbrough ; where a Battel was fought between the Sax-
ons and Britans , in which Hengift the Saxon General loft his Life. 1
. ■ At the Had of Rotheram, over a Stone-Br. crofs the faid Von or Dunfiv, then
afeending and defeending, pafs thro’ Granshorough-Y .and crofting a Brook,thro*
Nether-Harp-Y- Thence an uneven R. afeending and defeending to at,
aV. beyond which, defcend a Hill of 10 F. and at i7o’z come to Womb-
jvel-Y. of 4F. Whence a ftraight R. leading at 172’<? to Adfley-Y. afcend and
defcend, leaving Burton-Grange-Y on the Right, and on the Left;
Then crofs aßrook to BARUSLET or Blacfi-Barnjley at a T. of j F. on the
fide of an Hill : It drives a confiderable Trade in Wire, and has a good
in JVednefd. for Provifions and all forts of Grain.
'V ’ ' » •' .
Backward Turnings to be voided,
I. At the Entnng AdJly, the Left to Done after* IT. 3F. from Wombwel, the Left
: to Wath. HI. 7 F. Beyond Aughton, the Right to Derby. IV. In the
Left acute. V.7F. from Mansfield, the Left to Bledworth. VI. At the End of
Neither Broughton, the Left to Claufion. VII. In Abhetleby , the Left to Helwel,
VIII. zF. fhort of Burton-Lasers, the Left to Staple ford* The
jr 1 . ' 4 / * ~i *. i * *. ,*■ * . '• f : Z ‘ . \ \ ■.


The Continuation of the Road from
OAKHAM to RICHMOND.
PART III. and Last.
< commencing at Earnfley in Yorkshire, and extending to Richmond aforefaiil
' / * Containing 87 Miles i Furlong.
* /
In which the following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 177 M. the Left acute. 17/3 the Right acute. 177’? the Right acute. 181’*
? the Right acute. iBi’o the Left to lB6 7 the Left to Shaker ley.
188 V theßight acute. 1 90’3 the Right to Colen- Br. 1931 the Right to Rajiruk.
the Right to R aftrick. r 9 6\ the Left to Stanmore. i 97 ’6 the Left to
Lane after* - 98’tf the Left to Lancafier. zoo’y the Right acute. znV the Right
w Mo’ton zxz’o the Left acute. zi 4 ’y the Right acute. zzz’ 4 the Left to
Settle, - a *’o the Right acute, z 36 V the Left to Milam a different way. aj z o
the Right acute, zy 3*7 the Right acute zy 4 y the Right acute, zy y the
Right to H/fjtvel.
lEavin" Barnfiev deferib’din Part 11. come at 176*1 to a Defc.of y F. at
“!gi to CaUborough-V. and thro 1 a Wood to V. at 180 4 : Whence
- aJc. and Defc. lead thro 1 a Valley to Camlenthorp V. at 184 M. vvhe ’ l e croffing
a n roo k an d alcending, pafs over another Vale, and leave taef/y-V. on the Rights
Then defceod 7 F thro 1 litkßmfrV. of » F. thro 1 Smitbipland-Y.zt 187 V and
£ H“^X« V aWo«lm'Br. and Brook by »W(i».Hall on the. Left, .landa
HißaolTa Valiev and enter AlmndbwrV « iSyV.ofjF. formerly call d
33 1 7 bv a Fort and Caftie now rum d ; fwas iometime
Seatof the Englifh.Smns, and had a Cathedral dedicated to St. Alban >
built bv Paulina 4, who firft Planted Ch rift lain ry in thofe Parts.
Beyond thlv. defcend ,F- croft a Wooden Br.and Brook; leave Hull
Oh on the Left; and afeend again as far. Ac the Top, Pafs thro Pmtm- V.
whence a Afc. by Firciy-Hall on the Lett, and a Wood at lorae niftaoce on the
•R.'tfht Jpads at t 94V "to a Defc. of 3 F.and ati9y 7to Edand-Y. or z tuiiongs
R ThenS croffinS aValley, and in it Calderflv. over a Stone-Br. leave EJland-
H 'uf* on the Left, and Ajhley-V. on the Right. In a ledond Vale, crofs a S.one-
S and Brook ; defeend a Hill at 198V,and over a Brook, come at 1 99 M. to
formerly Horton , q.d. Halig-feax , i. e. Holy-Hair, it pm the Hair of a Re-
K T v/s Virgin ot this Place, who was Beheaded by a certain Clerk, ior refufing
If hearken io his unchaft Solicitations, and afterwards Honour’d as a Martyr:
J 3 1 Town is Seated on a Branch of the aider, and noted ior being tae Birth-
VTre of Johannesde Saero Bojco , the Inventer of the Sphere j and tor the ftncl
?* in Beheading thole that are taken in Theft; ’Tis large and well-built, (the,
Padth containing 11 Chappels of Eafe, and tzooo Inhabitants who drive a
. Trade in Cloth, &c.) and has a good Market on
& vim HiUifaM crofsLM-Br. leave N .and Hddnonh,
fftice clthe Right, alfo Ovendon Houle and EUinworth-C happel on the
V£T< < F. farthw
f/,. hv mherHrn- Yateon the Right, and over iome hi Us, leads*- .00 1
rJiiLmfv of * F. Then by R mm on the Right, and
SfW.itato* tome I Hills, iome .t.u’;» ttWf'V.ot , l-urlongt.
i i


Thence by May and Steton on the Right, tft/4y*Gieen-rlead and the Red Lion-
in Jo? theLeft, crofs a Stone-Br.and Brook j and leave. Oimbtnoa the left .
At Zl6’4 over ire flv. pafs thro 5 V.and at 217 V. leaving the
“ , n the reft and a little after, Humbleth P. on the lame Hand. 1 hen by 3,
Hn"o» tt alx.r, enter »*B<r-V.of. F. Whenceby yf*Br*k V o
the Right, andOr/tw on the Left, come in Cr«vw, , <u «i » a |«wa
of 7 pfindifferent large and well-built; which gave Title to the R. ft.
late Earl of Craven, &c. andhas a good Market Saturday f. - *
Ftom cA/M C M,afcend a Hill, leave Sturtcn-V. on the Lett, croL jB ooß^and
Lord Park on th e
above I M. Whence over 3 Brooks afcend a Hill, pels thro of 3 r.
and by CrMm .on S.y Mahro'U«K-
vTnVover a Valley arrive at There crolfing Uatea-Stone Br. over
Whufflv. fet forward by Girfngtm-'l. on theßight. thro a large Wood, by a
Hill on the Left, to Cuniffen-'V . cf near » F ® r }°Jf s ® t f . a ||/’ to Keuelewel-V
Henceover 3 Brooks, and by anlnn on the .36 y
of 2 F« where afcending, and croffing a Valley, f' bro *^4 a^
At 229 V defcend to a Moor, and leave Coverhead-V. on th. Left. T
houfe-Chappel ffflh*; fbffeverakMv
° At 2*; V paV throTVto JyV. and
lord St!John on the Left. Whence a ftraight Road over a
Mldlehamnzu'4 of 6F. on the R. feated on Tear aMu
Thence over the Town sfeend a Hill, pals thro and ove. crols
fever a I Waters. At 2yy’7 over a Hill of 7F.and aValley ; and at 25 8 M. come to
a Defc. of roF.at the Bottom of which crofs a Brook, and leave aLead-Hoidc on
the Left. Thence thro’ a Valley defcend, and crofs Smjeflu, over-a ta
RICHMOND, a large and well built T. containing 2Chs- Tis ioiUiy
Wall and Caftle inhabited by Gentry, and Honour d with
domj in the Perfon of his Grace Charles Duke of Richmond &c.
It fends Burgefles to Pari is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 1 a Aldermen, {?e.
Keens Courts for all forts of Adions, and has s very good Mt. on Saturdays.
Backward Turnings to be avoided,
I. 3F, from Richmond, the Left to Hipfml.U. At the end of
to QlvAborn . 111. 7F. beyond Rjghley, the Left to londsa. IV. Atthe Entrmg
Hailifax, the Left to Pontfrafi. V. At the End 0 the Right acute. VI,
7 F. beyond Eland, the Left to Cc/«-Br. VII. 4?- beyond Portem the left to
Dighton,Vlll 6F.fhortof Almondbury, the Right acute. IX. yF. Short of
burr, the Left to HorJefeU- Br. X. At the End of Almndbury, the Left to mod-
fom- HaII.XI.4F. Short of Dudley -gate, the Left to XII yF beyond
Camlenthorp, the Left acute.XUl. At the Entrmg HuUm f, the Le.t to Wakefield,
The Road from
LONDON to SHRESBURY,
Continued to Welfopool in North-Wales,
f. , X
Point of Bearing N. W. 11. The Dire# Horizontal Diftance i44'M.
A ill- The Vulgar Cimfumm 138 M. IV. The Vimenfuritm 176 M
■ From


From TLonAon Comp Meafurc.
10 Meriden 78 078 98*4 098’4
Bermnghant 10 088 n*i 109*5
Dudley c 8 096 io*i 119*6
Bridgnorth i 2 1081 ISSV
; Coriip; McafureJ
to Wenloc\ o 6 114 oB’o 143’^
Shrewsbury 10 124 13*2 157*0
Abberbury 06 130 07% 164/0
hVeljbfool 08 I IsB 11*4 176*0
Middlefex , Hartfordjh. Bedford]}). Buchjnghamfh.
tefierfh. Stafford]!). Shropjh. and Montgomeryfh. are the Counties paft thro’, andthe
Coin, Low [el, team, Avon , Sherborn , Sme(ial, Rea , and Severn , are the principal
Rivers crofs’d over; affording in moft Places an indifferent good Road ana
fuitable Entertainment for Travellers.
•; ■ ; - ■v”
Forward Turnings to be avoided. - ;
At the End of Meriden, the Right to Chefter, the Left to Hampton, xoy’4 the Right
toTdrdley.ioff.t In Bermingham, the Right to izi’y the Left forward.
Ixy 6 and iaß’a the Right to New-Ina and Newport. 130’6 the Right acute.
FROM London to Meriden, [as in the Holyhead. Road] whence at 518*7 keep the
Middle Way, and pals by Gamer s-Oali on the Left. At 99'6 crofs -
Br. over a Brook, and leaving Hampton on the Hill and on the Left,
go by Little Bicknall-V, clofe on the Right; Then thro’ a Wood of 3F. and by
feveral Houfes on the reft of the Road, crofs 2 Bridges and Brooks, and at 103*6'
a Green, with another Br. and Brook, 7 F. farther ; till by Seldoh 4 F. on the
Right, you enter iPorcefterJi. at ios’4 and iy M. beyond, re-enter lVarvpicl(sh. At
come to Bermingham vulgo Bromicham of iM. on Rea flv. a large and well
built Town, which drives a great Trade in moft forts of Iron-work, and has
a confiderable Market on Thurjdays:
Whenceat no M. adired R. leads to the Entrance of at 1 t.i’j*
Then thro 5 a Copfe and Smethwicli a difeontinu’d Village,pafs at 115 M. hyßlaise-
fy-Hall iF. on the Right, and 7p.far thereto Oldbury.Cbappel-V. of about 3 F.Hence
by Brade-HzU on the Right; thro’ a few draggling Houfes, called, Twedale-Houfes
at 118 M. where you leave Pullens-Ha\l xF.on the Left, and at 1 by theCaftle
on the Right, and in an enclos’d Part of come to Dudley of SF. a
Place of good refort, enjoying the benefit of a Market.
At 1197 re-entring Staffordjh. 4 F. beyond the T. pafs between Hills, feveral
Houfes and Coal-Pits; Then a fmall Afc. with a Defc.by Garnet- Hall 3F. on the
Right,brings youat m’i to a W.lying moft on the Left,and at 113*3 to Himky-
V.at the Entrance of which,the LdJfW s-Hall appears on the Right; Hence an
open and direft Way, leads hyWomhorn Ch.on the Left over Smejialflv. and by
TrejfeLCh. on the Right: At 127 *3 over an Afc. to a round Oak on the Left', and
thro an enclos’d and indirect Way, hyHeathton- Place on the fame Hand, come at
nffS to Shropjh. There crofs a Brook; leave Ctaverly Ch. 3 F, ontheßight; and
at r3i’3 enter theFft. of Morfe-. Whence a ftraight Way by 2 or 3 Race-Pofts ort
the Left, over a fmall Afc.and Defc, to Bridgnorth at 135 M. of 7F. a large Corp.
and Mt-Town 5 which was built by At hel fie da the Mercian Lady, and was
fortify’d with a firong Wall and Caftle now Ruinous.; It enjoys the Privilege
of elefting Parliament-Men.
Thence by Fajly-Ch. on the Right, and JWroa-Hall on the Left, alfo thro 5 -
viUW. ati38 5 2 leave Crffr-Houfe on theßight.Then pafs by Audndm-P.on the fame
Hand, Afoclfc/ej-Hdlf n the Left, and thro’ a fmall W. at 151 M. Whence an Afc.
4idDefc,lead at 143*4 to or magm ; an indifferent good Town,
for-


formerly famous for its Nunnery, where Milhurga the Holy Virgin liv’d a
Devout Life Tis at prefent a Town-Corp. govern’d bya BayliflTand Burgeffesj
and fends Burgefles to Pari. It is alfo noted tor the great quantity of Limeandl
Tohaco-Pipes here made, and has a good Market on Mondays,
From the Town defcend a Hill of 3 F. call’d JVenlocli- Pitch, and at i4y’f go
thro’ Harley. V. of 2F. then over a Valley by Belfadme-UzW 4F. on the Right,
come to Crefedg at 147’? of 3 F. Whence an indifferent ftraight Way by the.
Lady Newport’s Hall on the Right, and thro* Upper Cund,Cund and Crefs'Houfes , 4
V. alfo by Eufion and St. Giles’s on the Right, and Betton on the Left, leads at,
iys’i to SHREWSBURT, a large Corp. Mt. andShire-T. call’d by
the Saxons ; but Pengwern and Tmwithig by the ’Tis govern’d by a
Mayor, Recorder, 24 Aldermen, and 48 CommomCouncil-Men, &c. Sends
Burgefles to Pari, and has a good Free-School, with 2 Mts. on Wednejd, and
Thurfd. It gave Title to the R.-H. Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, &c.
Thence a direft Road with ftraggling Houfes moft on the Right, and a Copfe
on the Left, leads at itfi’z over a Br. and Brook. There leave about 3
F. on the Right, and after, Carfton- Ch. and Hall on the Left, about the fame
diftance; Whence an indireft Road by Ronton-Caftle and Wattleburgh- Hall on
the Right, and feverai Houles on the Road, come at 2to the Nag’s Head-
Inn on the Right, and palling over Wattleb H. leave Ch. on the
Left, alfo Wilfon and Trivenant-hUlls on the lame Hand; Then by 7
on the Left, and a great Ok on the Right enter at 170*2 and by
Mallagolm-HdW on the Right, over a fmall Afc. leave long Mountains on the Left:
At 172*4pafsby Buttington-E{&\\ 1 F. onthe!eft,and thro’ Buttington-V.
Then to a Br. over Severn fiv. and 2 F. farther, crofs the Riv. again, till leaving
Turge-Ui\l on the Right a direft R. leads to the Entrance of WELSHPOOL at
17 yV of jF. call’d by the Wtljh , Trellin: ’Tis a Town-Corp, the largtft and
heft: Built in the County; govern’d by Bayliffs; and has a good Mt. on Mondays ,
’Tis alfo adorn’d with a very ftately and well-built Caftll call’d Poms-Cajtle.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. In Weljhpool , the Right to Montgomery , the Left to Ofwejlry, 11, 1V Short of
Trivemnt , the forward to Criggin. 111. 4*4 Beyond Ro«ro«-Caftle, the Right
forward. IV. InWenlock Magna, the Forward to Brofely, V.3F.Beyond Wenlocfa
the Right to Callaton. VI. 1 F. Beyond Bemingham, the Right acute.
The Road from
LONDON to SOUTHAMPTON,
Continued to SALISBURY.
I.npHE Point of Bearing W. S.W, 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance 6$ M.
I lIL The vulgar Computation 62 M. IV. The 78 M.
From London Comp. Meafure.
to 23 I 2311 29*0 2p’o
Fanihiari 09 j 321 I ii'f j 40'6
'yiHon. 07 j 3pj j c>’J | Jo’i
Comp. Meafure.
to Aires ford oi 147 00' 6 50*7
Twiford 07 1 54 oH’6 di’S
Southampton 08 | j, 178^3
The


the Continuation to SA LISBUKY.
From Southampton Comp. Meafure.
t® Rum fey c 6 o 6 oB'j oB’3
White-Pariflt o 5 12 o 9 ’o
SULISBVRI oi S lB o8»2 1 2 5’5
Middlesex, Sumy, fiantjhire, and Wiltfl. are the Counties including the R. and
the Thames „ fVey, It chin, Tcfl, and Bourn, are the principal Rivers croft over; A
very good Road to Southampton, and thence to indifferent.
Acute Turnings to be avoided*
At 3 o’? the Right to Andover and Exeter. 33’j the Right to the
Left to F arnborough. 3B*o the Rs. on the Left to 38’! the Right to
Cninals. 5 o'7 the Left to Portfmouth. 60*7 the Right to Ovington. 640 the Right
to mnehefter. 6 7'7 the Left to Uorml. 68’f the Right to Salisbury . 69*7 the
Left to Biflops Sto\e. the Right to Rum fey.
In the Continuation to
At r’i the Left forward to Ringwood, 2 7 the Left to 5 o& 7 6 the
Left to Nurjlin. S’i the Right to Andover . 9*2 the Left to Fcrden-brjdg. ro’o
the Left to Ridg, the Diiedt to Pool . 12. 6 the Right and Diieci Ways, 184
the Right to Salisbury, ij’y the Right to and Mivord.
T7ROM London toßagflotflusia thetrf«f’s.E«i*R.) whence at 29*3 over
H. at 33 M, enter Frimly, and at the following Water, At 34 6
(’havinn firft croft F arnborough- G.} by the Lord Anjloy » Hoofs ana Ghap. on tne
Left, come to Farnham C of 4 M. re-ent’ring Surrey \t 39 3, and arriving at
Farnham at 4 o’j, aT.of4 F* on the N-W.fide taking Its Name from
the great quantity if Fern hereabouts: s tis Govern dby 12 Mattersof whom 2
are Bailiffs 5 and has a great Mt. on Tburfd. with 2 Fairs, .on Midfummer-Daj
and All-Saint s-Dzy» „ . ~ „ „, r „t.
At 43*2 re-enter Kantflire, and at 41*0 fet forward by rome i-ioules on the R.'
call’d Bentley. Green. But 12 F. farther, defeend by Fr«/*Gh. and „ir ‘Dents
G union’s Houfeon the Left; and if trend again, till a dir eft R. with .urne Houles,
leads to Alton at so M.of 4F* on the laid well Woodea, and having a
great Market on Saturdays too Cat tel and Provmons. ,
From 52 M. thro’ Woods, and up Hill at 53 2 theß.a 547 . ii>.
foma ftragling Houfes at 58 M* At ?9 6 crois alar _o c fi .
Ahe, thro’which the R. went 1 M. before, and which feeds the gieat Pond on
the left • enrrin* Almford vuko a large Town of above 3 P. oa the R.
Govern’d bVa*BaTlJlf and 8 Borgelfes: It hasa.greatMt. on tburfd. efpecially for
Sheep and Provisos, and 2 Fairs, %i% on Holy-Tburjdmd Day.
At 60V paCs tfwerx o>4«r, and anotner Branch ot tne i.- ’ t
great R.on the Right leads to iFincbejler, as do tneft 0 o.e w * '*
Tvifori: Here ent’ring LonglVoolV. at 66 ? come to -Ch. on^]- e "* an g
at £B*y to Tveiford-V. of aF. on the R. near Itchm ; which by 0l f ,
on the Right, crofs at 7 oV over High-bridg. Ten
and Houfs on the Right ; at 7/7 pafs thro
with IVveral Houfetheßiv, on the Left, leading
in which a direft Street ot 6F. extends to the Key, where Ships a ccnu-wi
Burthen may aflive. ’iis


Tis a Town and County govern’d by a Mayor,9 Juftices, a Sheriff, 2 Bailiffs,
24 Common-Council'Men, 24 Burgeffes, CSV. having a Right to chtife Parl.Men.
’Tis large and well-built, containing 6 Chs, fenc’d with a double Ditch and ftrong
Walls. It has 7 Gates and feveral Watch-Towers; and is a Place of good Trade
defign’d for a Mt. under K.Sdw.VI. Its Mts. are on and its
Fairs on St. Mart’s Day, and Trinity-Monday. It gives Title to the Illuftrious Charles
Fh%-l(py, Duke of Southampton, &c. Here the Affixes for the County are often held.
From Southampton to Salisbury.
FROM the Mt-place in Southampton, after 2F- turn fhort on the Left,and over
Fumfey Com. and a Brook at 2V, leave Half-Way Oak on the Right at 3’7.
At SM. pafs thro’ Upton V. and at to W. ofabove IM. Whence
thro’ a Copfe and by a few ftraggling Houfes, leave JBroadlands Houfe on the
Left; and at B’x enter Fgmfey, a large and ancient Town of SF. on the Road,
govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder,6 Aldermen, 12 Burgeffes, CSV. ’Tis much inha-
bited by Clothiers, and has a good Mt. on Saturd. with 3 Fairs,on Eafter-Monday,
Auguft is. and St. Simon and 'fade.
Beyond the Town, crofs Teft j-v. which rifmg about paffes by Stoke~
bridge and 4M. below this Place, falls into the Sea : Then atS’y the Right hand
Way after 16 F. unites again. Here afcending for 3 F. and keeping to the Right,
at 10 M. come to Bluck on the Heath , a Common of 2 M. leading by an indirect
Road and fome Houfes. At i4’6 enter oiltjb, where an open Way brings you to
Cowsfeld Green , fome Houfes focall’d.
At iy’2 pafs to White PurifhY. of 2 F. and at 19 M. Cleaving Counsellor s
Houle on the Right) thro’ open Way to VVbaddon V. at2o’7. Thence over
bury Com. to Alderbury another Village, at 22T Clarendon P. on the Right, and
the Lord Colrain" s Houfe on the Left. At 24 M. over a Brook, and afterwards 3
other Rivulets, all Branches of the Bourn, which is to be crofs’d at 24’6 and a little
lower falls into Avonfiv. At 25’! enter the City of SALISBURY or Nevo-Sarum
£as in London to the Land’s End. 3
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Salisbury and Southampton.
I. At the End of Salisbury , the Left to Milvnrd., 11. i M. beyond Salisbury, the Left to Mitvord
and Layjiock. 111. fF. Short of Alderbury $ the Right to Welthrington. IV. In Kumfey, the Left
to Andover and Winchejier.
Between Southampton and Bagjhot.
I. The Left in, and at the End of Fwiford to Southampton. 11. 2*7 Beyond JBighton, the Left to
Mayjied. 111. Iw Farnh the Right to Fetersjield.
The Road from
LONDON to WELLS,
In Norfolk; and St. Edmunds-Bury in Sussolk;
Commencing at New-Market in N 0 C H~ Road.
■ * Z- ■ ' ,<e- i • ’ {. ’ « *
Wells. Bury.
I. ’■’"lp H E Point of Bearing N. N. £. N. E. by tf,
11. The direft Horizontal Diftance 98 M; t. 55 M.
111. The vul gar Computation 95 M* > <?64 M.
IY. The JDinenfuration isi’i. \ / 75’©*
H Wf / From


From London Comp. Meafurc.
to New-Market 54 60’ 5 60’ 5 '
Berton-Mills 06 60 .08*5 69’ 2
Brandon-Ferry 07 67 \ 09 ’2 78*4
Hilboro 06 75 op’i 87^5
StvafflMm 04,77 J , 05’3 , ?4’o ;
Comp. Meafurc.
to Tittleihal 07 84 10*4 1044
Fafyenham 04 88 n 0 ’ 5
Walfingham 04 92 05 ’6 116'$
WdU °3 l2 x 3 l
?5 1211
In the Road to Bury.
Prom London Comp. Mcafure.
to New~Mur\et 54 154 60’ 5 6o f $
Kenford 03 57 04*5 65*2
St. Edmunds Bury 07 <54 05/6 75*0
Suffolk and Norfolk include both the Roads; and the Owfe and I are the
principal Rivers crofs’d over; affording generally a very good Way thro’each,
and no mean Entertainment.
Forward Turnings to be avoided in the Road to Wells,
At the End of the Right to Bury the Left to Ely. 59*4 and 70*2 The Right
to Thetford, 88’o The forward to Ifirfmgham. 97’ 1 The Left to no’y The
Right acute. 1 16’ 7 The Right to Old Walfmgham. nß’o The Left acute.
FROM London to New-Market fas in the Norwich- R.) and at the End of the
Town enter Suffolk ; whence aftraight Way over a Heath and Furzy Ground,
by Efnnet-Ch. and Grange on the Right, at 66 M. to cambridgjh. Then by fed-
houfe on the Left, at 67T re-enter Suffolk ; go over a Hill of 2 F. with a like Defc.
leave Fakenham, Mildnal and Berton Ch’s on the Left; and at 69*2 pals thro
ton-Mills-Y. of 2 F. at the End of which crofs a Brook, and leaving the R. on the
Right to Thetford , bear to the Left.
Hence over a Warren, at 7T2 attending 2F. by Del-hole y and Hobs Crofs , alfo
by Efvoel, Wang ford and Brandon- Ch’s on the Left, come to Brandon- Ferry or a
Part of Brandon at yS’x of 3 F. a Place of fome note for its convenient Situation
on Owfeflv. where feveral Commodities are loaded and unloaded to and from the
Ifle of Ely. The Town formerly had a Mt. nowdifus’d; yet at prefent gives
Title to th el{.H.Charles Gerard Baron Gerard of , &c. and has 3 Fairs,
vh. on February 14. ffnns 11. and November xx.
Beyond the Town, crofs the Owfe, to the County of Norfolk , and leave Westing-
Ch. on the Left: Whence an open Way over Sheep D. at 83 M. to JAmford-S- of
near 3 F. Then crofs a Rivulet and leave Ch. on the Right; till 2 Afc. by
Bedney- Ch. and Hall gn the Right, lead at By’4 to Hilboro-\ . of 2F. There turn
to the Right; and at 88 M. omitting the forward Way to bear to the
Left. At 9<d’3 crofs a Valley ; 4F. beyond, defeend 2 F. and at 92*3 afeendas
At 93’6 enter Swaffbam of about 5 F'.and as much tranfverfe,reputed one of the
belt Towns in the County; its Mt. on Saturd . being well furnilh’d with all forts of
Provilions. Whence at 96 M. down a fmall Hill, and 9 F. farther, avoiding the
.forward Way on the Left, bear to the Right, and leave Cafile-aker-Ch. and the
Ruins ofanOldCaftlc on the Left. Atpß’4 cometoAeroioM-V.of2F.at 100 M.
crofs a Brook ; leave \N-Lexham-Ch.on the Right,and pafsthro’a Valley; wheie
a ftraight, open and heathy Way, by Suffkam~Ch. and ledge on the a


Wood on the Right, leads at xo4’4 thro’ Tittlejhal-V. of 2 F. leaving the Church at
feme diftance on the Left.
Hence fay fome Woods on the Right, and by Houfe, Hall, and
ToftS'Ch' and Beacon on the Left, alfo by Oxley and on the Right;
defeend 3 F. at ioß’3 and at ixo’3 crofs Winfderfiv. to Fahenkam of 3 F. having
a Market on Thurfdays.
Thence bear to the Left, and at 1 ia’6 to the Right again; till by Great Snoring
on the Right, at 114’x you have E-Bajbam~Ch. on the Right, and the Hall on the
Left. Then thro’ Houghton-V. at 115 M leaving the Church at fome diftance on
the Left, come at x 16’x to iValfingham or Great Walfmgham of above 3 F. perhaps fo
call’d from the Saxon Word We life, Ab rot on urn ; a Place heretofore much frequent-
ed by Pilgrims in their Devotion to the Virgin ■, and noted likewife for its
College of Canons; It at prefent enjoys a good Market on Fridays.
Hence turning to the Left, pafs by Old Walfmgham and Wighton- Chs. both on the
Right: At xxS’6 defeend 3F. and at i afeend as much. Then defeend again
4 F. to WELLS at 129’? an indifferent large Town, on the Sea-lhore of 4 F. and
fome Accommodation.
In the Road to
FROM London to Nevo-Marht, as before *, whence the Road is generally open,’
defeend 2F. at 62’4 and at 63 M. afeend as far. At 64 M. over another Afc*
defeend 2 F. at 64’9 crofs Kjnford-Br. and Brook, and pafs thro’ J^enford-V.
Then by Heringv>el-C\\. and a noted Tree on a fraall Eminence on the Left, alfo
by Garsbly and Bareoro on the Right, at 69 M. pafs to a Defc, of 2 F. with a like
Afc. At the Bottom of a Bridge crofs a Brook, thence by Little h. and
Hall, and Weftly- Ch. on the Right *, Fiyby and Farnham on the Left (feveral Woods
on both iides) come at 74’2 to BVPf or it. Edmund's Bury, fo call’d from K.
rnund the Martyr, A.S. Bederies gueord, i. e. a large, well-built Mt-
Town and Corp. formerly .famous for its Abbey which exceeded all others in
England, having 3 lefs Chs. in its Ch-Yard, of which 2 remain fair and fpacious;
but are too few for the numerous Inhabitants: This Town is lituate in a very-
healthful Air, and on that account much referred to by the Gentry. Here the
Affixes for the County, and the Quarter-Seffions for the Liberty of St. Edmund's
ufually are kept; befides a Grammar-School, and a fpacious Market-Hill, a fine
Fair-fted and Corn-Crofs: ’Tis govern’d by an Alderman, Recorder, &c. fends
Burgeffes to Pari, and has a very great Market on Wednefdays for Corn, Filh,
Fowl, Cfc. with 3 Fairs.
' ' - • .4
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. BF. beyond F *\enhatn, the Right acute. 11. 3F. beyond Hllboro, the Left acute.’
111. 2’2 fliort of Brandon-Fetiy, the Right acute. IV. 2’ 3 beyond , the Left
acute.
The Road from
LONDON to WEYMOUTH, in Dorsetshire:
Commencing at Bajingfloh in ffmpjhire, in the Lands-End-Road.
I. "T“H E Point of Bearing W N.W. IT. The Direft Horizontal Diftance rl9 M.
1 lII* The Vulgar Computation 104 M. TV, The Dimsvfiration 13 2’ <.
H 2 Prom


From T /pfidon Comp. Mcsfutc.
toßafmgjtoke 39 39 I 48’* |
Sutton 10 49 6i’o
Stcckbridg 06 ff °fs 69*3
Broughton 03 1 73 1
Dounton 09 J 67 J 11*2 84/3
Comp. Meafure.
to Crtinhorn 09 076 ii'z 097’jf
Blandford 09 ;c>Bf 107*2
JDorcheJier 12 j 097 16*4, 12$’ 6
Weymouth 07 I 104* 08*3 132*1
104- 132*1
■. ■. s ■ /; ■ V : ■ - j [*/ ;.. ■ '■ r' ? w , v . jm ’ '*' ’"• "*■ ' - i. ,■ *
Middlefex, Surrey, ffampjh. iVihjh. and Dorfetp. are the Counties pafs’d thro’, and
the Brent, Thames, Ditsford, Teft, Avon, Stour, Fiddle and Froom, are the Principal
Rivers crofs’d over : being, for the moft Part a good and well-beaten Road.
Acute Turnings to be avoided,
At 4,9*6 The Right to the Bovins,ft 1 The Left to Whichever, f The Left acute. The
Right to Barton. 6 I*7 The Left acute in Sutton, to Winchester. 6<i’~ The Left in Scockhridg, to
Southampton, f o’f The Right to Salisbury. 74’ 2 and 4. The Left to Bojjington and Hampton. jS’o
The Left to Rumfey. Sf’f The Left acute. SS’y The Right acute. Joi*4 The Right acute,
xOi’o The Left acute. 102*7 The Left acute. 1 cß’y The Right to iii*4 The
Left to Froom. i2&’o Th.e Right to JJpviay. 130*1 The Right acute.
FROM London to Bafingftohe ; [as in London to the Land’s End'J whence an indi-
rect and partly Woody Road by Altham Ch. on the Right, - M. leads at
to a Defc. of 4F. At 60'6 thro’ Cramborn V. and over a Brook afc. 3F. to Sutton
at 6x’7 of near 3 F. Thence croffing feveral Rds. that lead from Southampton and
Whichever to Andover, &c. at6y’2 pals thro’ a Valley, and at 68’a defc. 4 F. iM.
farther, ent’ring Stochbridg , a Corp. which fends Burgeffes to Pari, affords very
good Accommodation to Travellers; and formerly had a Market, now difus’d.
At 70 M. an Afc. of 2 F. appears with a like Defc.at 73 M. pals thro’ Broughton
of 3F. and 3F. farther, afeending 2F. go down again 4F. At a fmall
Defc. leads thro’ W-Tytherly V. and 1 - M. farther thro’ E -Dean V. to Wihpire.
Here croffing the Road between Southampton and Salisbury, at 80*4 afeend 3F.
7 F. beyond, defeend 4 F. and at 14*1 enter Dunketon or Dounton of 3F. on Avon
fiv. a Corp. of great Antiquity, fending Burgeffes to Pari. ’T was formerly noted
for being the Habitation of the Famous BeavoU of Southampton, and at prefent
enjoys a fmall Market on Fridays.
Thence crofs the Avon, pafs by feveral Buildings, and afeend a Hill at Bs’-;.
At 9T3 defending a Hill of 2 F. go thro’ Tipput V. and 1 F. farther, enter
fetjh. Whence afeending at 92’6, 3F, 2 Defc. lead at to Cranborn , an ancient
Town; where Alward, an Englifh Saxon, built a Monalfery. ’Tis feated very
pleafantly, and has a fmall Market on Wednesdays.
From Cranborn, an indireft Way by St. Gffirx’s, 2F. on the Left, extends at 97’$
thro’ Alhallows Wimborn, a difcontlnu’d Village. Thence a ftraight Way by Knolm
on the Left 4 F. and Lower Gujfef on the fame hand 1 F. At 100 M. enter
Cujfet of 2 F. and at the End of it a fmall Afc. leaving on the Left,
and Chattel on the Right. At xoi’4 afeend 3 F. and 2 F. farther, go down again,
till at 103 M. a fmall Defc. leads to Tarrant Monkton V. of 2 F. Then over feveral
Hills at 107 M. come tb Blandford on Stour fiv. govern’d by 2 BaylifFs and Aider-
men, CSV. having a good Market on Saturdays.
Thence crofs the Stour, afc. a Hill, till over 2 large Valleys and by fome ftrag-
glingHoufes,at xx3’6 you afc. again 2F. Then after 2 Defc.pafs thro’ M ilfordV.
and at 11 y’i go down another large Vale. At the Top of the Afc. defeend again,
and at 1 X9’4 come to Walter]hw V. Whence over a Hill of 3 F. pafs by a Wood
on the Right, and at i2i’4afcend again 2F. At i23’3 croffing Froomfiv. enter
Dorehefier ; a fair and large Mt. Shire-Town and Corp. of SF. on the Road.
, - - , Leaving


t nordeft&r, pafs between Monketon Ch. on the Right, and Herrington
K™re onTe Left, ealh diftant 2 F. At .2,’fi afeend 3 F. and at .26-7 defend
I S Then omitting the forward Way on the Left, which unites again at 129 M.
Irsbv reveral Heals, alfo by a on the Left, and a Wind-Miil on the
£ I?J to Meho.vb-Regu at 131*7 join’d to IVETM.OVTH bya Wood-Br. 1 hey are
La ted on an Arm of the Sea, and formerly were 2 diftmft Corp. but upon account
of their Law-Suits, were by Ad of Pari, under Q. Eli X abeth incorporated in one,
hv the Name of a Mayor, Aldermen, (£c. Both Towns had very fmall Begin-
nings till of late by the convenience of their Harbour,they have arny dto great
Splendor; each fending 2 Burgeffes to Pari. In the Chappel ftands on
fo fteep, that ’tis afeended to by 60 fteps. They have 2 Mts. viz. on
Tuefdays and Fridays, and drive an indifferent good Trade to France, Newjomd-
Weymouth , lies the Ifle of Portla taking its Name from one Ton a
Saxon ’Tis about 7M- in Compafs, well Fortify d both by Art and Nature j
and gives Title to the ft. H. M. Renting, Earl of Sc.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
T hevond Melcowh-Revi*, the Right to Sutton. 11. 4M. fliorrof Dorchrjler the U£t to Up way.
Til l/ Dorchi'lier the Left acute. IV. 7F. beyond , the Right to Stinshorow. V- 7F.
beyond Walteijiow the Left to Develijh. VI. i’f F. Jliovt of the Rightto
VS 2>7 Fbeyond Milford, the Left to What comb. VIII. 1 F. beyond AhallowsWmborn, the
Right to St. Giles. IX. 2 F.lhortof Cray,born, the Right to lJmKtfJham. lL
'Tihh/rf- the T forward XI. f F.beyond DuncHton, the Left to Salubiivy. Xll. A he iLnd
siJ-y. X ! m. .F. beyond S M c, .he Left .o
The -Road from
LONDON to YARMOUTH, in Norsolk .
Commencing at Coldefler in Effex, in the Harwich Road.
I "IT'H E Point of Bearing N. E. 11. The direa Horizontal Diftance 97 M.
I j[[. The Vulgar Computation 92 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 122 5*
From London Comp. Alcafure.
to Colchejier 4*5 45 S' 0 ' 0 f 0
Statford 05- 4.8 °7’° f 7 ? °
O7 77 n’o 68’o
Woodbridg 07 62 07*3 7f’3
Saxmundbam 08 70 n’4 86*7
Comp. Meafure.
to BlyLorough o 6 7 6 io'i 1 o 97 r
Beckles 07 8$ 104 1
Hadsko 03 86 ofz ii**7
Xarpiouth 06 92 J I 122 *t
92 122'y
Middlefex , Effex, Suffolk and Norfolk, include the R. and the Cbehner ,
Blackwater,Celn, Stour, Gipping, Waveney and Tare, are the Principal Rivers crols d
over. 'Tis one of the 6 prime Poft-Roads, travel! d thrice a Week, but to Col-
defter daily ; and according to the Poft-account reputed of 104 M. vt\, to Burnt-
roood 16, to Witham 18, to Coldefter 12, to Ipfwieb x 6, to 16, to Esales
16, and to Tamouth 10.
Acute Turnings to be avoided.
At fo*6 the Right to Harwich. The Right forward, fft The Left to Sudbury. The
Left to Sadify. The Left acute. 91’a The Right acute. 9 i’j The Right acute. 93 ’4
The Right acute. 10 Pf The Left forward. 1 o y’j The Left fti\vard.
II 3 From


F’R 0 M London to Cokhefier ; [jas in the Harwich- Road]] thence at 5 3*3 thro’
Ardley-Oak-Y. (_Ardley-C. on the Right 6 F.) pafs by feveral Houfes on the
Road, and at s6’i defcend, leaving Ltmgkam on the Right; alfo a little farther,
Dedham on the fame Hand 4 F. and Boxfied on the Left 2 F. Then crofs
to Stratford-ftreet-Y. whereby the Church on the Right, at <5 7’s and at
5S’2 on the fame Hand ; travel thro’a hollow Way call’d Wenham. leaving the Ch.
4F. on the Left: At6x’6 having Capei-Ch. at a final] diftanceonthe Left, come
by the White-Horfe-lnn on the Left, and a on the Right. At thro’
White-Elm-Y . and 5 Furlongs farther, by on the Right.
Thence an indifferent ftraight Way crofiing Hanford- Br. over Gippe or Omel fiv.
leads at 67*4 to Jpfwich, in Saxon Gyppwic and , fo call'd perchance from
Gippe or Gyppin fiv. from Geap incurvttt,F alluding to its winding Courfe:
The Town extends from St. Matthews to St. Helens near 1 M. on the Road, and as
much from N. to S. and is pleafantly feated on the raid Paver, over which it has
a Br. leading ro that part call’d Stoke. ’Tis a Place of great Antiquity, once
fenc’d about with a Wall or Rampart, the Foot-ftepsof which are ftill to be feen.
It had 800 Burgeffes in K. Edward the Conjeffbr' s time, with 6or 7 Monafteries,
but at prefent ’tis divided into 4 Wards, containing 12 PariOi-Chs. belides feme
Chappeis yet Handing, and 7 or 8 other Chs. and Ghappels long fine® ruin’d. ’Tis
alfo a Corp. enjoying feveral Privileges, fending Burgeffes to Pari, and holding
Pleas for all A&ions, &c. ’Tis govern'd by 2 Bayliffs, 10 Portmen, 24 Common-
Council-Men, two Chamberlains, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, CSV. It drives a good
Maritime Trade, has 6 Mts, for Flefh,Fi(h,£sV. with feveral Gaols for Felons and
Debtors; The Qparter-Seffions for /p/zwV/;-Divifion arc held in this Town,which
is noted for the Birth of Cardinal Woljey. Here are alfo 2 ftately Houfes, vi\. one
of the V ifeount Hereford , and another built by fome time Mailer of Re-
quefts, befidesa fair Guild-Hall, a Hofpitals, a Free-School with a good Libra-
ry, feveral Alms-Houfes, and a convenient Key and Cuftom-Houfe. •
From Ipfwich , the Way is generally Heathy, at 70T leave i?ejh>nere-Ch. on the
Left 4F. at 71’r pafs by on the Right,then by a Beaconand Saxford- Hall
on the Left. At 74’! thro’ Mertyljham-Y . having an Inn or two, enter Woodbridg at
7 2 of 4F. on the Road, a large Town on Debenfiv. about 6M. from its Influx
into the Ocean. It drives a good Trade with feveral Ships,Pinks,Hoys,£Sk. Their
chiefeft Commodities are Butter,Cheefe,Sack-cloth,Plank, &c. which are tranfpor-
ted to divers Countries. Here the Quarter-Seflions for the Liberty of St.Etheldred
and Audry areheldswith a conliderable Market on Wednefday,e[pec\z\\y for Hemp.
Thence at s6’<s thro’ Milton-ftreet leaving the Ch. a little diftantonthe Right,
and by Vfford- Ch. 2 F.on the fame Hand,at 78’r pafs thro’ Whence
a ftraight Way by Peflrie- Ch. on the Left, at 79*7 to Wickham alias Market-Wickham
an indifferent large Town, tho' now deftitute of a Mt. ’Tis noted for the Gene-
ral and Spiritual Courts held here by the Arch-Deacon of Suffolk , for the Eaftern
part of the County; and fer its Spire, a Sea-Mark to Sailors.
At Bo’4 crofs Wickham- Br. 2F. farther, paffmg thro’ Parham-Aff-Y, and at 82*4
thro’ Marlsjord-Y. Then thro’ Little Glenham at 83T the Ch. and Hall bn the
Right, at 84 M. pafs by Stradjord- Ch. on the Left. Afterwards by and
Strenf.eld on the Right, and Benham on the Left, enter Saxmmdham alias Saxling-
ham at 86’6 of 3 F. with a Market on thurfdays.
! Then by feveral Houfes, and Helfale- Ch. on the Right, at 9 1 ’4 pafs thro’ Tox-
ford, leave Park and Ch. on the Left, and thro’ Bruffhl- Gr at 93’4
and Henton-ftreet at 94’d) come to Blyborough at 97 M. on Blythfiv. of 4 F. former-
ly a Mt-Town, and Hill affording fome good Inns; Hence by Henham- Hall and
■ • ... Park


Park on the Right, alfo by Vggefial, Brampton and the fame Hand, at
mft bva Sun-Dial on the'Left. Then between mfirn-CU. and Hall enter
tell} at .07-4 of 3F. on Wwv'jjh. whence a f
a large Town with a good Mt. on Saturdays. the Quarter-Scllions
for BEOCLES-Divihon are ufually held. , TT r
Bevond the Town, crofs Waveney to Norfolk, and by GtttmgbamfHouk on the
Right, and St. M*rjrV and All-Saints Chs. on the Left, come at ii\ j to Hadsko-Y,
wifh a very good Inn; where the Road from Norwich to Yarmouth falls in on the
Left: Whence over Hadsho-Dam rc-palTmg the Waveney at 115’3 re-enter ,
and come at 115’$ to St. Gloves * alfo at 116*4 to Britton, and at 120 6to Gorlejton-
V, A t 121 ’6 to Little Yarmouth , croffing the ?Ve at x22’4 to Norfolk and Great YAK:
M.OVYH a large ftrongand well-built Mt.and Sea-Port Town, enjoying kveral
Privileges and Immunities: It has a great Fifhing-Trade, and yields a ready
Paffageto Holland.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
J. Againft RrtdmL the Right and Left acute. 11. 2F. beyond Beetles, the Right to
Hal'.[worth, the Left acute. 111. IF. beyond the Left acute. IV. At t e
End of Ipjmcb, the Right to Norwich. V. 3F. Ihort of Stretford, the Right to Hud ley.
PART III.
HAVING already clefcrib’d the Direß Roads, under the Title of
Independants and Dependants ; We come next to the Crofs Roads di-
ftinguilh’d into Principal and Accidental ; and begin with the former ;
obferving the Alphabetical Order from the Initial town of each
The Road from
BRISTOL to BANBV RT in Oxfordshire.
j, "THE Point of Bearing E. N. E. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance M.
JL 111. The Vulgar Computation M. XV. The Dimenfnration 74/7.
From BRISTOL Comp. Meafure.
to Sodbury I o 10 1 12*0 12 o
Tethury op l% 2 2$ 2
Cirencejler 07 2(5 1 10 2 35 4-
Comp. Meafure.
( to Bur ford 12 38 J | I£>3 51 ’l
South-Newton 12 $0 17*°
' I -J y
Banbury 05 *55 106 o 74.7
Gloceflerjhire and Oxfordjh. contain the whole Road, and the Froorn, Churn, Coin,
Leach, IFindrujh and Evenlode are the Principal Rivers crofs'ci over j affording for
the molt part good way, and the like Entertainment. ,
l *
•<e ‘ . - . ■
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At the End of Briftol , the Right to London. I’6 The Right to
The Left to Glocefter. s’2 In Hanborow, the Left to Glnceßcr. 24.’7 The Right
forward. 31*0 The Right to Kemble, 2AO The Right to The Left
to Barmjley. 52 M. At the End of Burford, the Left to 6S’6 At the Ent’ring
S~Niuvton } the Right forward. The Left
C.- d)
H+ FROM


r ROM the High Crofs hi Brijhl, fet forw. thro’ Caftle Gate and Lauford' s Gate'
x n where leaving the forward Way to London, bear to the Left, and at a’2 crofs
a Stone Br. of 2 Arches over Froomfiv. and 4 F.farther, pafs thro’ V. Then
by S r. Maurice Berkley's Houfe on the Left, thro’ at s’3 repafs the
W hence over fever a I Brooks thro’ May's Hill V. at s)T,and 4 F. farther, thro’ Wib-
ht V. leave Wefterley and Wapleigh Chs. on the Right, and come to Tate V. at 11T.
At 11 '6 enter Sodburyaim Chipping Sodbury of 3 F. on the Road, in a Bottom*
an ancient Borough Town, with a great Mt. for Corn, Cheefe, r dc. on Thurfd.
Whence at I=s ! over a Hill, at 17 3 pafsby Badminton P. belonging to the Mar-
quis of Worcefrer on the Right, crofs a Valley, and at 10*3 thro’ ' Didmerm Y. of
3 F. juft upon the Edge of the County.
At 21’6 over a Vale by Burton and Weft on on the Right, at 25*1 come to Tet-
bury of 3 F. on the Road, and as much tranfverfe, near the Confines of ;
an indifferent large Town, govern’d by a
Trade, and its Mt. on Wednefd. is ftor’d with Corn, Cattle, Cheefe, Malt
At 3 2 M. pafs to a fmall Afc. and 4 farther, over a Valley, a ftraight Way leads
at to Qireticefier vulgo Cijfeter, call’d by the , and
by the j ritains , as fxtuate on Churn fv. ’Tis a Place of great Antiquity, and of
good note under the Romans. lts Walls 2 M. incompafs, were defended by a
Cafthg now ruinous, and here the Roman port or Fofs-ways met. ’Tisat prefent
a fair To wn, lends Burgefies to Pari, and has 2 Mts. on Mondays and Fridays, well
provided with Corn, Wool, Yarn, &c.
Beyond the Town,crofs the Chum, which riling on Hills near ,
falls into the Thames. At 37 M. by HoJyrocd-Amney on the Right, alcend a Hill fe«
conded by 2 Defc. At 38’6 attending again, leave Branjley Ch. fomewhat on the
Left, and crofs the great Road from London to Clocefler at 39’7. Then at 40’6 de-
feend a little, pafs thro’ Byroel or Bybury Y. at 42’2 and there over Colnfiv.
At 44’6 crofs Leach fv. in a V alley, and 3 F. beyond, go down a Hill, by Aulf-
worth Ch. a little on the Left. At 47*7 come to the 3 Shire-Stones, and
fan enclos’d part of Barkfb. lying between the 2 Counties on the Left.) At4B’3
by Wejion Ch. on the Right, at 5 x’d enter Bin ford. . a Corp. and Mt. Town, on
Windnifofv. which is to be crofs’d at 52 Miles.
Leaving the Town on the Right, pafs by on the Left, at 54’4 defeend
4 F. and at 56’i bv Shipton-Vnderwood,a. little on the Right 5 alfo by Bruern Abbey
on the Left, crofs Evenlode fv. Thence a direct Way, crofting the great Road from
Loftdon to Worcejler at 63 M. leads at 66T to a Defc. by ; ’afterwards by
Wiggintm and Swackling Chs. on the Left, and to S. Newton V. of 2F. at 68’6. ’
Hence by Melcornb Ch. on the Left, at 71T pafs thro’ Bloxham V. of a F. on the
Road. Whence by Wickham on the Left, at 74’3 enter BANBVRf , which fends
one Biirgefs to Parl.and has Privilege cfkeeping Courts for theTryal of all A&i-
ons under 40 1, It gave Title to the !{. H. Edward , Earl of Banbury, &c.
having a fair large Church, which, with the Town, not long fince,fuffer’cl much
by Eire ; noted for being the place, where K. of the W. Saxom put the
Britains to flight; and for a Battle fought between the Houfes of fork and Lancafter y
in which the Lancaftriwis had the better, and took R. £dxv. IY. Prifoner.
Backward Ttimings to be avoided.
I. 1 F beyond Banbury y tbe Left to London, 11. 5 F. beyond Bloxham ? tbe Right forward. 111. In
' S~Newvo7iy tbe forward to JViginto??. IV. F. Ihort of the great Worcejler ~ K. the Right acute,
V. heyend the 1 faid R the Leit to Ctialhury. VI. 2F. Beyond Kvenlodc fiv. the Right to Mil-
ton. VII. At the ent fing Barford, the Left up the Town to Lechlade. VIII. 3F. Hiort of Bybury ,
the Left acute. IX. 5 F. beyond Bybury , the Right acute. X. A gainft Bar njiey, the Left forward.
XI. 7 F il.grt of the Right to Winkrborn, XII. 1 F. beyond Jlambrook } the Left to
iitnfhaii}
The


The Road from
BRISTOL to West -CHESTER.
I. THE Point of Ewing N. 11. The Direft Hortxontal Diftance 112 M.
i HI. The Vulgar Computation 102 M. IV. The Dmenfurafion 145 5*
From j ßrijlol Comp. Meaiure.
to A oft-Ferry 10 10 n’o u’o
ChejpJJow * of if 06*0 18^°
Monmouth 10 2 f 13*7 3F 7
HEREFORD 12 37 iB'6 fof
Leomtnjier 10 47 14’} 6f J o
Comp. Meafure.
to Ludlow 08 f? io’6 IS &
Church-Stretton i o 6y I f , *f 9*5
Shrewsbury 09 74. *3*7 lO s* *
Whitchurch 14 88 20 ’ 0 I2 f *
C HESTE Rl4 102 I 20 ? 4 HrY
Gloccfterjh. Monmouthfit. Flerefordjh.Shrcpjh. and , include the whole Road;
and the Froorrt, Severn, Wye, Frothy, Mono Arrow, Fupg, Corve, Oney, ,
Roddon and Dee, ate the Principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Way to Monmouth
not very pleafant, nor indeed, throughout, being generally rough, hard, and un-
ealie, even to the end. However, the Guodnefsof the T owns pafs’d thro, make
fome amends for the Fatigue of the Journey.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At iM. the Right to Kidland. r(j’+ The forward to MicheUean. 17’+ The Right_to at
Chepjlow- Br. tS’z The forward to Newport , at the End of Chejijio I zv. 24.’ 2 The Lett to KAg~
land. 28’z The Left acute, zi’f TheXeft in Monmouth to Ahergeveney. 22 ’i TheKightto
Coverd, 36*4. The Left to 'lrexvorgan. 5" The Left acute, f 1 J The Left to j?eon JUgo
£ewn. 6y’y At the End of Lyjton 3 the Left acute.
FROM Brifiol thro’ St. Johns Gate and over Froom Br. go up a fteep Afcent,
leaving the Gallows on the Right, pals by feveral Houles, at 3 M. delcend-
ing to Weftbury V. alcend again j whence an enclos’d Way by lome ftragglmg
Houles leads at 7 M. to Compton\. Then over Corn, by Houle
and Aunsbury Cb. 6 F. on the Right, an open Way lies over feveral Dikes, and
by fome Houles to Eylberton at xo’3, and at 12 M. to Aufl Ferry (where on the
Right, are 2 Houfes for Entertainment of Paflengers when the Boats are not
ready) a Paffage near 3 M. over, to Batefl V. with 2 very good
Inns.
Hence between the Severn and wye at i6’4 avoid the forward Way to
dean, and bear to the Left, by feveral Houfes. At 17 2 defeend, and at 17 6
crofs the tVye over a large Wooden Br. to Monmouthjh, and in
Caftle-Went, an ancient Town, faid to be rais’d out of the Ruins of kenta Silurum.
It Hands in a Bottom on the faid Wye, near its Confluence with the Severn, and
was formerly wall’d. ’Tisat prefent fortify’d with a Caftleand Garrifon, has
a Mt. on Saturd. (formerly very confiderable, but now with the I own much de-
cay’d) and 3 Fairs, vi\. on Frid. in Whitfon Week, 1. and before St.
Luke's Day. ■ ’
The River Wye rifes on Vlmllmon Hill in Montgomeryp. pafies by Ryar dergowye,
Bealth, Hay , Hereford, Rpfs, Monmouth , and this Place, and by Batejky falls into
the Severn Sea ; receiving into it, ifl. the Darxoen, 2 d. the Clarwen , and therein
the Clanhy and Eland, %d. the Ithon, and therewith the Comaron, Clavoedok and
Haroye, 4th. the Weverny , s th. the Irvon, and therein the Dilas, Comarch and
Delia, 6th . the Edwie, ith> the Machwie, 8 the the
■ ■ I CTO.


icth, the Lug and therewith the Somergif Wadels, Oney, Arrow and Emm, i nh,
the Garra, and therein the Gamer , 12 th. the Monow, and with it th eEJcle, Okon,
Jdothny and Holer, and lajily, the frothy.
Beyond the Town leave the forward Way to Newport ; bear to the Right;
afeend 4F. and at 20 M. pafs by St. Ann’s Ajh on the Left; 2F. beyond afeend
again 4F. at 2 1’6 go down 6F. and over Br. leave the Iron-Mills on the
Right: Th£n thro’ part of Wife-Wood, at 23’3 fet forward thro’ Trelagh-Grange-
V. aifb by feveral Houfes, and an open Way on the Right, at to frelagh of
2F. whence a Hilly and for the moft part open Way, by the on the
Left, and I ediard- Houfe on the Right, over a Defc. of 8 F. leads to a Stone-Br.
In the Bottom, over frothy fiv. leaving Troy-Houle on the Right about 2 Fur-
longs.
At 51*1 come to Monmouth of 1 M. on the Road, at 33 M. by the Gallows on
the Left, and IM. farther,by Buccol- W. on the fame Hand; enter Herejordjh. At
36 M. leave Weljh-Newton-Ch. on the Right, and Lady-well on the Left; at 37 M.
defcend 3F. and at 99 M. pafs by frepenbennet-H fc on the Right; Then crofs
Carr an fiv. paffing at 40 M. between friago-Uoufc and At 4F2
by Hendry -Houfe on the Right, a ftraight Way extends to Hill an Afc. of
2F. Whence by Grove- Houfe on the Left, at Houfe on the fame
Hand, at 46’$ C*&w-HiU and Aconbury- Hill on the Right; alfo by Callow-Ch.
on the Left, at 47 M. pafs to Zed- Hill on the Left, at by and
at 50T to the City of Hereford y rais’d out of the Ruins of the ancient
and feated on the Wye. It had formerly a ftrong Caftle, now Ruinous, and ftill
has feveral good Buildings. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 5 Juftices, and
26 Common-Council-Men, fends Burgeffes to Pari, and gives a Title to a Vif-
count. Here are 3 good Markets, on Wednejdays, Fridays y and Saturdays-, and
3 Fairs. .
Thence pafsrby lAv.Comb/s Hofpitalon the Right, by Holmer s-Ch. on the
Left at s2’6, and a little farther, by Brundle’s Oak in the Road. At 53 ’<5 leave
Tips Ch, on the Right, and at 5 5 M. go by upon Lug on the fame Hand :
Whence between Wellington and Marden, each diftant about 6 F. at 58 M. come
to the Foot of Dinmore Hill, afeend SF. and defcend 7F. Then by -
Ch. and Hampton Court on the Right, touch upon the Banks of Lug fiv. and pafs
to Wharton-W. at 61’2, there leaving Mr. Whitehall Houfe on the Right: At 62’ 1
pafs thro’ Evington-Y. and 2 F.farther, crofs to Leominfter vulgo ,
at 64’3 of xM. on the Road. .
. Then crofting the Lug at the End of the Town, at 6f 2 enter Lyfton of 4F.
At 70 M. leave Orleton on the Right 3 F. and by the with Tome
other Houfes on the Left, and Richard’s Caftle and Ch. 4 F. diftant on the fame
Hand ; at 73’2 pafs by More-Houfe, alfo Overton, Hitchborn and
fucceffively on the Right: At 75*3 enter Shropjh. crofs femd fiv. to large,
ftrong and well-inhabited Corp. and Market-Town.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 2F. beyond Moor-Houfe, the Left. 11. 4 ihort of Laiywel, the Left to Ro/>.
111. 3 F. beyond Monmouth, the Left to Troy* Houfe. IV. 2 F. beyond Trothy- Bridge,
the Right to UicheUTroy . V. At the entring TreUgh,t\ut Right to Ragland. VI. Ac
the End of \Aylherton 3 the Left to Tuc\sington m VIL 2M. iliort of the Right
to Shire-H&rvpon*


The Continuation of the Road from
BRISTOL to West - CHESTER.
PART II.
Commencing at Ludlow in Shropfhlre, and Extending to Weft-CHESTER aforejaid*
Containing 96 Miles 7 Furlongs.
In which the following Turnings are to be avoided.
At the End of Ludlow, the Right to Henley and 4 The Left to
77*4 The Right to Glocefier ,the Left to Broomfield, -jy'i The Left to 83*4
The Left to Bijhops Caftle. p6’2 The Right to Lon&nor. 110*2 The Right to Aflley,
1 18 ’6 and 7 The Right to Stanfor LHail and 125*4 At the End ofWfcif-
church, the Right to Hinton- Hall. 128 M. The Right to Wlllorvmore. 135 M. The Left
acute. 137 M. The Left to Thouley. 142*5 The Left acute. 143*0 The Right acute,
IN Part I. we proceed to Ludlow on temd and Corve flv. a large well built Corp.
. and Mt-Town ; containing 4 Wards, Caftle-Jtreet, Broad-ftreet, ,
and Garford and Corve-flreet. Parl-Men are here chofen, and the Court kept for
the Marches of Wales, with liberty of Hanging and Drawing diftinft from the
County : The Town is fortify’d -with a Wall having 7 Gates, ni\. Gar ford-0 ate %
Corve-Gate , Liney-Gate , Dinm-Gate , Mill- , Broad-Gate and , and a
ftrong Caftle; alfo beautify’d with a fair large Church formerly Collegiate, be-
fides an Alms-Houfe for 30 Poor People: ’Tis govern’d by 2 Bailiffs, a Recor-
der, 12 Aldermen, 25 Common-Council Men, £SV. and has a great Mt. on Mond.
with 3 leffer on Wednefd. Frid. and Saxmd. and 4 Fairs, vi\* on Wednejd. in Whitfon -
Week, Auguji 10. Sept. 17. and Novemb.i^.
From Ludlow , crolftng the Corve , pafs by Stanton-Lacy on the Right; Sromfield I
on the Left; and thro’ Onibury at 8o’<;. Then Caftle and P.oa
the Left* and thro’ Newton at 83*4 : At 84’!, fet forward by the Red-Lyon-Inn
on the Right, and over Onyfiv. at 84’6 by Winflanftow-Ch. on the fame hand at
85*3 ; till by a Wood on the Left, and fome Houfes on the Rt. a ftraight Way
leads at 89’5, thro’ Little Stretton, (feveral great Hills appearing on the Right and.
Left) and at 91 M. to the entrance of Ch. Sof 4 F. on the Road, having a
good Market for Corn, cSV. on Thurfdays.
Beyond the Town, leaving Sir George Norton's Houfe on the Left, at 92*3 pals
thro 5 All-Stretton V. and at 94*3 , Leborwood-V . moft on the Right, there crofting
fiv. at 96*3 leave Sir B, Corbet's Houfe on the Rt. and at 98 M. go thro’
Dedington^S . Then by Stapleton-Ch. on the Left, and over Puley-C. at io3’3 crofs
Melcflv. near its Conjunction with the Se , whence by Ch. on the
Left, come at 104’$ to Shrewsbury lying this way 1® F. on the Rt. but more tranf-
verfe; ’Tis a large well built Corp. Mt. and Shire-Town, formerly noted for its
ftately Abbey; that and the Caftle being built by Roger Earl of Montgomery. ’Tis
fortify’d both by Art and Nature, hiving a ftrong Wall and Bulwark, with Gates,
Towers and Bars : ’Tisalfo well-inhabited both by Englifi) and IVelJh ; and drives
a great Trade in Cottons, Frizes, Cloths, CSV. fent thence to London.
Leaving Shrewsbury^ you have Battlefield at 108*4; Hadnal at 1 io’2 ; Afton-fiynol,
Sx. Vincent Corbet's, at ii2’d,and Lee at 115*2; all on the Left; Jaur palling over Had-
nal-H. and by Eosjord- W.at fome diftanceon the fame Hand, at 115*2 crofs
3-v. which rifing on the Edg of Flintfib. where it joins to this County,paffes by
,t< w■■ • - - Morton,


Morton, Corbet and Charlton Cattle, and receiving the tern, and feveral other
fmaller Brooks falls into the Severn, near Accham. .
At x l s ) 4. obferve & Ro&d on the Left to Town tibout 2m» diftsntj
and over Frees H. at xao’i pafs thro’ part of Frees ; the main Body of the Town
lying on the Right. Thence by trees Lodge on the Right alfo, at 125*2 enter
Whitechurch of 2 F. near the Confines of the County, with a good Mt. on End.
At 126*7 erofs Crinfley Br. over a Brook, to Cheshire, till paffing by feme Houfes,
you have Mr. Dod of Bellow Hill's Houfe on the Left, and the Bell-Inn on the
R At C ’i2Q M. afeend Callow Hill, pafs by Majfon and ßirch Houfes on the Left;
and leave Coffir Hill on the Right. At 131*3 you text Hampton Pott on the
«isrht and the Black Griffon-Inn on the Left. Then by and
Hills on the Right, alfo by Ur. Bird and Mr. of Broxon's Houfes on the
Teft' at 126 "M. Pzirfe-Houfe appears on the Left; 4F* farther, croffmg
Jbmiey Gr. leare' the Plume of Feathers-Inn on the Right, and Jte.kv-Oak
Cn At^having Warier Ch. on the Right; over Milton Gr. Golhn Br.
Hmm H. and by %um V. on the Left and
fall in with the Road from London at 144 6. Two F. farther, enter the Suburbs
of CHES tE R and 4F. beyond, the City itfelf, on or Dev a j>v. over
which “as a k Urge MainM by 7 o°f cor-
fiid Br is a Gate the chief of wdnch is call d w ater-Gate, where V eiiels ot cor.
fiderable Burden did formerly arrive ; but fincethe choakmg up the Charme*, it
will fcarce bear fmall Boats, lb that the Ships come : a h the Waiu£
about 6M. diftant. Befides its 4 Gates it has 3 Softer .and orl the Wall le
veral Watch-Towers and Battlements for the placing of 1
t-hpdral was founded bv Leofrum , an Officiary Count in theie 1 arts, wno oem
cared it to Vlßa^un lit. *£ was in
good Efteem; when 7 Monarchs of the ant '’ I wfme L'lrtTofd’
row’d his Barge from St. Johns to Ins Palace; Himfelf, as Supreme L. rd, hold*-
50 hence, is the famous Foreft of in which the
xcmwrl-d Lrm« Lady, built a fmall City, long Cnee turn d i the Place is now
call’d by the Inhabitants, the Chamber tn the Forejt.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
1 1 T 1
Way-IS, Left toKamptvnch. Y.Ag
farther, the Right to Malpac. VI 4 -A sh^o{ Cr Sjky-Bt. the Right to Chefier, a different
Birch-Haute, the Left acute. VUI- 'vivhttieU X iF. beyond Wbitchurch, the Right to
Way. IX. The Left m Whitchurch, .to ia \t{ At Frees the left to vray-
Wrexham. XI } F. Rialto wtm' ZTV.‘ Againft Sir Vincent Corbet’s
S" r *SIISXT .H. UftiawtahC. XVI. A;
Zk £ XV dI» 0«4-he W*
The


The Road from
BRISTOL to EXETER.
j # -jpH E Point of Bearing S. W. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance 63 M.
X 111. The Vulgar Computation <soM.
From London Comp. Meafure.
to Biihops-Chue 6 06 07*1 07*1
WELLS 9 if iTy o
Glajienhury 4- 19 of’6 24/6
Gre inton f 24. 31^3
Lyng 7 *i oB’z 1 3 s>’j-
Comp. Meafure.
to 'Taunton 6 37 oB’o j 4-7’f
Wellington f 4*2 07*1 j f4-’6
Weliand 8 fo io ? o 6476
Bradirch f 5*4. of’o . 6*)’G
EXETER 6 60 oS>6 1 78^
Somerfetjhire and Devonshire contain the whole Road, and the Avon, Chue, Farret.
Tone and Colurnb , are the Principal Rivers crols’d over j The Way in general not
being ill, is indifferent well frequented.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At io*7 The Left to Weft-Hay try. 13T The Right to Triddy. 19 M. fn Wells, the Right to
Huntfyil. 24 , 9 6 The Right to Glaftenbury 5 to Bridgwater. 2f M. The Left at the End of Gla-
ftenbury, to Fennard. 25**4. The Left acute 26*4. The Left in Streat to Sovierton. 31*3 The
Right in Greinton to Shapwick. 3 y > 7 The Right to Bridgwater. 37*6 The Left to jLangbort ,
4.2*6 The Left to Charlton. 4.8’1 The Right acute. The Left to Blackdcn. 77*6°The
Right at the End of Whithal, toThurlfton. s*B*7 The Left to Columb-Stoak. 6 2*o The Right
at the End of Whithal, to Xhurlfton. s*B*7 The Left to Columb-Stoak , 62*0 The Right tQ
Satnford. 6 8*o The Right acute.
FROM the High Crofs in BRISTOL, over the Br. bear to the Right, down
Fedcliff-fireet , and leave the Suburbs at xM. where crofs a Brook; and 4F.
farther, pafs thro’ Bedminjier V. At g’a thro’ Bifpon V. of 2F. at 43 a-
feend 4F. and leave Dundry Ch. to the Right, on an Eminence. Then eroding
a Valley by VVinfori on the Left, at 6 ’3 defeend 4F. and at the Bottom enter
Bijhop’s-Chue Village of 4 F. on Chuef.v.
Thence at B’i afeend 3 F. pafs by VVeft Ch. on the Left, and at n’6
over a Hill of 7F. with a fmall Defc. Thence over Mendip Downs, and by the
Lead Mines at i<6’7 go down a Hill of 12 F. at the bottom of it enter the City
of WELLS, beyond which, crofs a Brook, and go by the Gallows on the Right;
whence, over Cockley Br. and Cranky Br. both of Stone, at 22 M. pafs thro’
Jham V. to a Caufe-way, having Cranrvel Moor on the Right, and Moor on
the Left, where you crofs Hanky Stone Br. over a fmall River.
Leaving the Moors at afeend 4 F. and by the Ter on the Left, 2 F, farther,
enter Olafienbury of 6F. on the Road; heretofore call’d Ink Avalon , from the Bri-
tish Word Ajel, i.e. Pomum , and Glaftn-ey , i. e. Jnfula Vitrea, by the Saxons ; famous
for its ancient Abbey, in which (as is fuppos’d ) were interr’d the Bodies of Jofepb
of Anmathea , of R. Arthur, and R. Edgar as alfo for the Tor near adjoining, of fo
great a height, that it may be Teen feveral Miles diftant round the Country.
The Town at prefent is large and well-built, containing 2 Parifh Chs. with a
good Mt. on Tttefd. and 2 Fairs, on Septemb. 8. and Michaelmas-Day ; the chief
Commodities then fold, are Horfes and fat Cattle.
Thence amending omit the forward Way on the Left to Fennard, and bear to
the Right. Then defending, pafs thro’ jSfonhover V. and crofs 2 Stone-Bridges to
Streat V. at 26’3 of 5 F> on the Road j at the end of which, turn to the Right,aud


r * —^
at aS’a ceme to Wuhan V. of 3 F. where croffing the Road between Brum and
Xridgwater, at 30’$ pafs thro’ another Village ; 6F. farther, thro’ V. of
ti F. and at 35’! thro’ Middlefey V. of 4 F. leaving Andre Ch.on the Left.
Hence at 37’$ crofs Barret jiv. by St. M Ch. on the Left. At 39*5
pafs thro’ Lying aliasLyng of 2F. on the Road,and by feveral Houfes
at 42 M. Then a Defc. by fame Houfes on the Road, by Ch. on the Rt.
and by Bar Pool, leads at 47 M. to Taunton ok call’d from its fituation en
Tone or Thone fl-v. a large well built Mt. Town of 1 M. on the Road, containing 2
Parifli Chs. and formerly defended by a Caftle, now ruinous. ’Tis govern’d by
a Bailiff, &c. drives a great Trade in Serges, being the beft Town in the County,
where are 2 good Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
From Taunton down a Hill, at so’3 pafs thro’ Pamwel V. and defcend again :
Whence by the Black Lyon Inn and Buckland Ch. on the Left, come to Chejjon at
53*3. Thence a Defc.at 54’2 to Wellington, on Tone flv. of 6F. on the Road,having
a Mt. on Thurfd. Hence 2 Defc. lead at 5 y’4 to Devonp. and 2 F. farther, to Whit-
hal V. Then paffmg 2 Defc. alfo by Burlofcomb Ch. on the Right, at 64’4 enter
Welland V. of 3 Furlongs.
Thence down a Hill, and thro’ Five Bridges V. at 66'6 come to Columbton alias
Colehampton of 4F. on the Road ; near Columb flv. with a Mt. on Saturd. Leaving
the Town, afcend a Hill; at 69*3 pafs over a Valley ; and 1 F. beyond, to
mch of 5 F. feated likewife on the Columb , which before its ruin by Fire, had a
Mt. now difus’d : At 70’d crofs another Valley; at 71 M. defcend a Hill; and
l M. farther, crofs the faid Columb , paffingthro’ of 2 F. at 72’?:
"Whence by BroadeJiflCh. on the Left,afcend a Hill at 75’5 and defcending at
enter the City of EXETER at 78’2.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
J, At Columb flv. the Left to Columb-John. 11. At the End of Bradimch , the Left acute. 111. In
Columbton , the Rightacut£. IV. 2 F. beyond, the Left to Halberton. V. In Welland , the Right
to Ufcolumb, VI. 2 , 2 beyond Welland, the Left to Ajhford. VII. 6F. farther, the Right to
Ufcolumb, VIII. 4. F. beyond Wellington , the Left to Minhead. IX. 2F. from Taunton, the
Right to Langjiort, X- Oppolitc to Monkton~Qh. the Left acute. XI. At the End of GlaJUn l
bury, the Right acute. XII. 3M. beyond the Lead-Mines, the Right to Weji-Hartyy.
The Road from
BRISTOL to W ORCESTER.
I. -pH E Point of Bearing N. N. E. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance $r M.
X 111. The vulgar Computation 50 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 62 M.
From BRISTOL Comp. Meafure.
to A£ton 08 oB °9 ,< f °9 , 4
Tuvjley 10 18 it.* 6 zz’z
*Whitminfter c 6 24 oj’z *94
GLOCESTER 06 30 ofo 3^4
Comp. Meafure.
to 'Tewksbury 8 38 t 0 ’ 1
Scvernftoke 6 44* 080 f4*^
WORCESTER fo of 2 _
fQ 6z’o
Gloceflerjhire and IVorceflerjhire contain the whole Road ; and the Stroud,
Swilyate, and Avon , are the principal Rivers erofs’d oyer ; but the Way in gene-
«l is not very good. Wa


Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At the End of Srtjiol, the Right to London. 2M. The Right to Wejierley, Tackle-Church, &c.
The Left, the direft R. to Glocefter. 6’ o The Right to Sodbury. 9’? The Right in Acton, to Sod-
bur y. 22’6 The Left to Stinchcomb and Cambridge the Hill-way. 3 6’f The forward in Glocejier ,
to Cheltenham. The Right in Tewksbury , to Evejholm. 48*4. The forward to AJh-churcb.
thROM the High-Crofs in BRISTOL, pafs thro’ and
|H and at 7F. leaving the forward Way to London , bear to the Left, by fome
Houfes. At 2T over a Stone Br. of 2 Arches, afeend 3 F.and
at the Top go thro’ Stapleton V. Then by Sr. Maurice Berkley’s Houfe on the Left,
thro’ Hamborottgh V. at 5’4 omitting the Road on the Right to Sodbury at 6M.
bear to the Left, and 6F. farther, come to Wmterborn V. Thence by Frampton
Ch. on the Right, to Ailon Y. at 9*3 of 3 F. with a good Inn.
From Afton, pafs thro’ fcveral Houfes on the Road, and at 11’g thro’
V. Then by other Houfes, crofs 1 Brooks, to Crumhal V. at 14T. At 14*5 afeend 3
F. by Tortworth P. on the Left, for near IM. and at 15’7 defeend 4F. At 17T in
a Valley, over a Woodßr. crofs a River, and leave a Fulling-Mill on the Right,
Hence an irregular Road thro’ a large Wood, part of Mecklemod Chace, and
by fome Houfes, leads at 20 M. to pan of Tort-worth, and 2 F. farther, to an Afc,
of above x M. on which, pafs thro’ Stinchcomb Bottom V. -Then by P. on the
Right, and the Beacon on the Left, thro’ a Wood, defeend a Hill, to
at 22T a good Town, with a large Ch. In the Ch. Yard rifes a Spring call’d
New Elm, that drives a Mill within 4-F. The Town chiefly inhabited by Clo-
thiers, is govern’d by a Bailiff and Under-Bailiff, having aMt. and
2 Fairs, vi\. on Sr. Mark’s Day, and St. Clements.
Thence at 22 ’6 defeend 3 F. to Cam V. of above 1 M. on the R.oad, and there
over a Wooden Br. crofs a Branch of Severn flv. Whence at 26*4 pafs thro’ Cam*
bridge V. and here falls in the Road from Briftol which iffu’d out on the Left at 4’6,
At 2y’3 over a Wooden Br. crofs a Brook •, at 28’?,over another Wooden Br. crofs
Stroud flv. (not far from its Confluence with the Severn') and leave Eaftingtm H.
4F. on the Rt. palling thro’ Weflminfter Y. at 29’4. Then thro’ F utley and Parkin
both Villages with Inns; eroding a Stone Br. and Brook at 31*5 and by Uardwich
Ch. on the Left; come at to Ouodgley Green the Ch. on the Left. After-
wards eroding a Wooden Br. and Brook at and Stone Br. and Brook at 3
M. enter the City of which here extends 1 Mile on the Road.
Hence pafs thro’ FfingflolmN. alfo at 38 Miles thro’ Longford V. of 3 F. eroding
fome Brooks to Twigwonh V. at 39 M. of 3F. Whence by Bijhop’s Norton on the
Right; by Lye on the Left; and by fcveral Houfes on the Road; fet forward by
Tredington Ch. and a great Houfe both on the Right: At 46’3 to a Stone Br. over
Svoilyateflv. and 2F. farther,to Tewksbury , a Mt. Town of 4F. on the Road, and
as much tranfverfc; , call’d Theocsbury by i. e. the Town or Temple
of Theoc a Religious Hermit. ’Twas famous formerly for its Monaftery founded
by Dodo the Mercian, A.C. 715, and for a bloody Battle fought between the
Houfes ofTork and Lancafter, in which the latter receiv’d a total Overthrow, and
Prince Edw.the only Son of K .Henry Vl. of about 12 Years of Age, had his Brains
dafli’d out. ’Tis a large Town Corp. with one great Ch. dedicated to St. Mary ;
containing about 500 Houfes, and feated on Severn fiv, where the Avon and Sxci-
lyate empty themfelves into it. This Town enjoys feveral Privileges, fends Bur-
geffes to pari, is govern’d by 2 BaylifFs, 24 Chamber-Men, and 24 Afiiftants;
and has 2 good Mts. on Wednejd. and Saturd . with 5 Fairs, vi\. on St. Matthias’s
Day, May 3. Sr. harnaby, St. Bartholomew, and St. Michael, It drives a conflderable
Trade in Clothing, and is noted lories Muflard-Balls.
From


From 'Terohbury crofs Avon f.v. over 2 Stone Br. one of 3, the other of 2 Arches.
Whence the Severn runs by the Road on the Left to Worcefter. At over d
Stone Br. crofs a Brook to worcefterjh. and at 50’5 come to Fjpple alias lijppelV,
Then leaving Vpton a Mt. Town on the Left, on the other fide the Severn , pafs
by fome Houfeson the Road, aqd at have the Lord Coventry's Seat on the
Left; 4F. farther, thro’ Sevemflole V. and by feveral Houfes come at 58 M. to
V. of 2F. and at 61 to the Suburbs of the City of wo J{C ES TE
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. In Worcefter , the forward to London, by Ferjhore. 11. iM. beyond , tlie Left to Firinn.
111. In Kemfey, the Right to the Severn , and the Left to Draycot. IV. 2F. beyond Sever ■
the Left to Ferjhore. V. beyond Severnjioiie, the Right to Upton. VI. 2F. beyond Tewkf-
bury, the Rightto Southzvick. VII. i’6 beyond Tew’Jhury, the Left, to Cheltenham. VIII. IM.
Ihort of Faridn, the Left to Standijh. IX At the End of F alley , the Left to Haresfield. X. In
Cambridge the Right, being the direft R. to Brijhl. XI. In Darjiey , the forward Way to Vley,
XII. At the Entring Tortworth, the Left to Wooton-Under-edg. XIII. At the End of Xortwortti,
the Left to Kingmood. XIV. 1o F. ihortof Tortzvorlh-F. the Left to Tedzvorth .
The Road from
BRISTOL to WEYMOUTH.
In Com. Dorset.
I. THE Point of Bearing S. 11. The Direct Diftance 56 M.
A in, The Vulgar Computation 57 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 74’4-
From B RISTO L Comp. Meafure.
to Bilhops Cliue 6 06 1 oj’o | o7 J o
WELLS 9 tf iz’o { ip’o
Glafienhury 4. 19 2 4*6
Somerton 6 2f o8 ? o 32 ’6
Martock 5* 30 J j 39^
Comp. Meafure.
to Crokhorn 05* 35* % 07*3 47’ 1
South Parret 02 37 ! 49’f
Frampton 10 47 12*7 I 62*4
Weymouth 10 f 7 I I 12*0 * 74^4
If y 7+’*
Somerfetjh. and Horfetjh. are the Counties pafs’d thro’; and the and I room
are the Principal Rivers crofs’d over. ’Tisan indifferent well-frequented Road,
as leading from the Severn, or North Sea, to the South Sea, yet a great part of it is
a bad, deep W ay.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At Si M. tbe Rigbtto AJhton in Wells, the Right to Huntfjpil. 2 4.’6 The forward Way in Glajten-
bury, to Bridgwater. jj’o AttheEndof Somerton, the Right to Langport. tf’i Theforward
• Way on the Right to Langport. 4.0’ o At the End of Martock, tlie forward Way to Fetherton.
41*2 The Rightto Fetherton- Br. fo’6 The Left acute. fo’7 The Left to N-Farret, ft’t
'The Right to Cheiington. 66’q. The Left to Bradford.
FROM the High Crofs in F riflol , over the Br. and along KedcUff-ftreet, at i M.
leave the Suburbs; then thro’ Bedminfter at I*4, at 3T, at
7 M. (as in triftol to Exeter ) to the City of WELLS at 19 M. an Epifcopal See,
under whofe ]urifdiffion is alfo that of BATH. The Cathedral is a moft beautiful
Structure with 3 Towers, faid t© be built by Ina R. of the w- Saxons, about A. C.•
704 ; befides which, it has feveral graceful Buildings both Publick and Private,
as


as the Bifhop’s Palace, Wall’d and Moted ; the Dean’s Houle; with thofe of the
Prebendaries. The Chapter confifts of 50 Prebends, 8 Canons, 14 Singing-Men
and 6 Boys, with a Dean, Chanter, Chancellor, and 3 Areh-Deacons, of
Bath, Wells znA Taunton, ; .
Leaving Wells, pafs thro’ Poljham at 22 M. Glaftenhury at 24*6, and Sweat at 26*4
(as in Briflot to Exeter.) In Streat avoiding the acute Way on the Right to Taun-
ton, &c. and at the end of it, the great R. on the Right to Bridgwater, &c. pro-
ceed by the Wind-Mill 2F. on the Left. After 2 Afc. with a Defc. of 3F. come
at 29’3 to Compton-DundoY . leave the Beacon 6F. on the Right, and at 30’/pafs
thro’ Littletod V. Then over an Afc, crofs a Valley, and at 32’3 enter Somenon of
5 F. on a Branch of Turret fiv. a Town formerly of good note, from which the
County took its Name. ’Tis now large, but poor, yet has a well ftor’d Mt. on
Mondays, once a fortnight, efpecially f®r lean Cattle.
At 34*4 by a Wind-Mill on the Right, at 3s’2 enter Long-Sutton V. of 2 F. ly-
ing moft on the Right, but the Ch; on the Left. Whence at 36’4 over the Teove! t
about 3M. below Ilchefter, come to Langlade of 6F. At 38*2 pafs thro’ a Village
of 2 F. and at 39 M. to Martock, which with Bower V. adjoining,extends 12 F. on
the Road, but moft on the Right. ’Tis a good Town on a Branch of the Turret ,
and over-againft it appears Hamden, a noted Hill, 1 Mile on the Left.
From the Town, pafs between Norton and Chijfelborow on the Left, alfo byS.
Tetherton, a Mt. Town on the other fide the Turret, on the Right; and at 43’6
thro’ W. Chinotk V.of 3 F. Then over Bow Br, crofs a Branch of Turret fiv by
Meryot, beyond the River on the Right: Whence afeending 4F. and equally
defeending, at 46’6 enter Crookhorn,or Crookhern, of 3 F. and as much tranfverfe;
a good Me. Town, on the great Weftern Road.
Thence by feveral Houfes on the Road, crofting the Turret at 48*2, -fM. be-
yond, come to Vorfetjh. and after a fmall Afc. at 49’$ to S. Turret V. of 3 F. Then
afeending a Hill of 11 F. leave the Long A on the Left; a ftraight Way leading
by Crofs-comb Ch. 4F. on the Left, by Efq; Penny's P. on the Right, and by the
Three Siflers, certain Trees fo call’d at <j4’4 # At 59 Miles deicend 4F. and at
59’6 enter Maiden-Newton V. of 2 Furlongs.
At 6T4 pafs thro’ CrokewayY. and 6 F. beyond, to Framton or Frampton of 4 F*
on the Froom, a Riv. well ftor’d with Trouts and other Fifh. The Town has a fmall
Mt. on Thurfd. at the end of it crofs the Froom, and afeend a Hill of 4F. Then o-
ver a Valley at 65’4 come at 66’y to Stapleton V. Whence over a Hill of SF.
with a fmall Defc. at 68’2 afeend 3 F. equally defeending $ till by on.
the Right, and feveral Houfes on the Road, an indifferent ftraight Way leads at
73’y to M elcornb-BggU, and at 74’3 to Weymouth, united and incorporated together.
They are lituate on the Southermoft Point of the County, near Portland- llle, and
are fecur’d by Sunds's-foot and Portland- Caftles. This Illand contains but one Ch*
built fo near the Sea, that for its defence, the Inhabitants were forc’d to raife a
Wall about it of a great Height. The Soil produces good Corn and Pafturage*
but, above all, that excellent white Stone, fo much us’d in the City of
and elfewherei There are alfo feveral good Springs, but little or no Wood.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. beyond Melcomh-M.egh, tlie Right to Dorchcjier. 11. i’y beyond that, the Left to JVaddon,
the Upper-way. 111. 'i'he Right m M aiden-Liewton, to Everjholt. IV. IF. beyond
Barret, the Left acute. V. 6F. fhort of Crookho , the Left acute. VI. In tne
Right to Hafelmere. Vll. 4. F. lliort of Bower, the Right to VIII. la
the Right-hand Ways to Evil and Ilchefter. IX. 2F. beyond Long-Suiton, the Right to
Ton. R. 4F. fliort of Compton-Dui.do, the Left to Bridgwater. XI. 4 F, beyond
Land), the Left acute. XIL At the End of QUJienbary, the Right acute*
X. The


The Road from
CAMBRIDGE to COVENTRY.
I. TH E Point of Bearing W. N. W. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance 63 Ms,
Jl 111. The vulgar Computation s 4 M. IV. The Dimenfuration Bo’6.
Ttom Cambridge. Comp. Meafure.
toEHIey 8 08 § u’f n y f
St.Neot’s 4 12 I oy’4 17*1
Great Stoughton 5 if 1 22*4
HigKam-Fcrries 7 22 | 12*5 344*
Comp. Mcafure.
Ito Northampton 10 *2 f*| ir’i i
Watford o 8 40 i 6i J z
o 6 <\6 o7 J 7 69^
COVENTRY 08 5-4. Bo’6
Cambridgejhire , Hunt!ngtonjh. and tfanvickjh. are the
Counties pafs’d thro’; and the Cam, OwfeNine, , and Sow, the chief Rivers
erofs’d over. The Way, for the moft part, is deep and unpleafant, but the good
Towns and Inns on the Road make fomfe amends for that Inconvenience,
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At the End of Cambridge, the Left to Barkway, &c. IThe Left to Bedford. 14.’7 The Left
acute, at the End of Higham-Ferries. 3 I The Right to Wellingborough . The Left acute,
fo’j At the End of Northampton, the Left acute. f} ? 2 The Right acute, The Left to
JDaventry, 62*4 At Watford-Gap the Right to Shrezvjhury , the Watlingjheet-W ay. 67*0 At
the End of FLilmorton 3 the Left to Du?jchnrch . 69*1 In B*ugby y the Left to Dunchurch .
\
FROM Cm£r/4£e (already deferib’d in London to Lynj leave the forward Way
on the Left to Barkway, &c. and thro’Common Fields, at2’i afeend 3 F.by s
More-barn’s Houle on the Right, and Cotton Ch. on the Left. At 3’4 Ma-
dinghy Ch. and Hall on the Right, and 1 M. farther, Hardwick Ch. on the Left.
At 6’<; leaving Burn Ch. 1 M. on the Left, and at 9*2 Caxton 4F. on the fame
Hand; 2F. farther, crofs the great Road from London to York.
At io’4 by Boxworth Ch. 4F. on the Right, IM. beyond,pafs thro’ Elfley V. At
I2’y by Croxton Ch. on the Left; 5 F. farther, enter and at i4’2 pafs
by Weald V. IF. diftant on the Left ; 6F. beyond, by Wentringham Houle, at a
fmall diftance on the fame Hand, come to St. a Mt, Town of 4F. at 16’y.
Thence over a Stone Br. crofs Owfeflv. to Bedford\Jh, and 7F. farther, the Road
from London to Lincoln, York, &c. re-entring at xg ,f j leave Weft on Ch.
2F. on the Right. Whence the Way is open, till at 2C2 over a Stone Br. you
crofs a Brook, and pafs thro’ Great Stoughton Y. Then crolfmg another Brook,
fet forward between the Ch. and Hall, by Little Stoughton at 24*4, ’-Mile on the
Left.
At 25’3 re-enter Bedjordjh. and at 26 M. pafs thro’ V. of 2F. Then a
fmall Ale. with a like Defc. leads at 2y’2 to Huntingtonjh. again; where, by Swin~
head Ch. 3 F. on the Right, at 28 M. alcend 2 F. | M. beyond, delcend 3F. a-
gain, entring Bedjordjh. and leaving Mihhborn Ch. on the Left 2 F. Whence, at
3°’3, down a fmall Hill, leave Yelding Ch. and Hall on the Right, alfo Newton
Ch. on the Left at 31’3, and afeend xF. to
At 3 2’5 defeend 3 F. and between Chejion and J{ufbdown, at 34’2 come to Hicham-
ferries, or Higham-ierrors of 3 F. on Nineflv. an ancient Corp. fending one Burgefs
to Pari. T’was formerly fenc’d with a Caftle, now ruinousj and has,at prelent.an
A Ims-


Alms-Houfe for 12 Men and one Woman, with a good Free-School. ’Tis go-
vern’d by a Mayor, Recorder ; 7 Aldermen, 13 Capital Burgeffes, CSV. Here is
kept a Mt. on Thurfid. and a greater on Saturd. with 6 Fairs, on St. Matthias
Tuefd. before May-Day, St. Buti6Tph\ Tuefd. before St.yames’s Day , Michaelmas Day
and St. Katharine’ s Day. y ’
At 36’! over an Afc. and Defc.pafs by an End of 37’-;,
and at 39 M. Crofs Nine fiv. with the Road from London to Oakham , leaving welling,
boro, a Mt. Town on the Right. At 39*7 afeend 3F. and crofs a Valley, by With
Ch.on the Right, and Dorringt on on the Left. At 43’! pafs over another Vale,
and 7F. farther, by Ecken Ch. and the World's-End, an Inn on the Left. Then
arcending crofs a Valley, and leave BiU'm Ch. on the fame Hand.
At 45 ’6 afeend a Hill, and pafs by wefton Ch. and Hall on the Left; after-
wards by Abbington Ch. and Hall on tine fame Hand, ent’ring at 49
M. a large and well-built Gorp. Mt. and Shire-Town, which, this Way, extends
above 1 Mile on the Road.
Hence by Kings Thorp and Dallington Chs. on the Right, and Du ft on on the Left,
defeend a Hill at 52 M. and crofs a Valley at 53 M. 6 F. farther, palling thro’
Halftone V. At <55 M. you have Althop P. and Houfe on the Right; 6 F.beyond,
afeending a finall Hill; where,at fame diftance leave Holmby Houfe on the Right,
and Brington Ch. on the Left. Then over a Defc. of 2F. at 577 afeend as much,
and IM. beyond, leave Long Buckby Ch. and Hall on the Right. At IM. far-
ther, afeend again, and at 6i’2 pafs thro’ Waterford Village.
Thenee by the fide of a Park on the Left, afeend at 62 Miles; SF. farther,
crofs the Watlingftreet- Way that leads from London to Shrewsbury ; and pafs by
Watford-Gap a Houfe on the Left. Then thro’ fiisby Village to WarwicLjh. at 66
M, Whence an Afc. to Hilmorton V. of 2 F. at 66’6 entring at 69 M. ex-
tending this Way, near 3F. but more tranfverfe; an indifferent large Town. It
has a Free-School, and 4 Alms-Houfes; with a good Mt. and 2 Fairs*
vi\. on Lammas-Day , and St. Martin I s.
From Eugby, pafs by Newbold, Church-Lawford , and Long-Lawford on the Right,
and Bilton on the Left. At 72 ’6 defcejid 2F. and at 74’! crofs Avon fiv. to Bred*-
ford of 2F. leaving Brinklowf M. on the Right. At 77 M. you have Comb Park
on the Right, and 6 F. farther, by Bingley on the fame Hand, crofting Sow fiv. at
78’2 afeend 2F. and sF. beyond, pafs thro’ Stoke V. of 2F. Whence a Caufe*
way leads to the City of CoVENtEf.
Backward Turnings to he avoided.
I. At the end of Coventry, the Left to Lutterworth. 11. Againfl: C mb- P. the Right acute. 111. At
the End of Bradford, the R : ght acute. IV. 2F. beyond Hilmorton, the Left acute. V. At Wut~
ford-Gap, the Right to London , the Wailing fireet Way. VI. 2F. beyond Watf ra, the Left to
Weft Jiaddon. VII. At the eroding of the Oxvfe againlt Wellingborough, the Right to Newport,Sec.
VIII. Beyond the Entring Bedford/}]. the Left forward. IX. Againil Wqjion-Ch. the Left acute.
X. i F. beyond Eljley , the Right to Caxto?*, the Left to St. Ives.
The Road from
CARLISLE to BARWICK, in Northumberland,
I* TH E Point of Beating N. E. It. The Direfl Horizontal Diftance 69 M,
* 111. The vulgar Computation ss M. IV. The Bo’,|.
I 2 From


From CARLISLE Comp, Meafure.
to Brakcnhill c 6 06 °9 *\ t °9 , 4*
the Entring Scotlajid 06 12 09’ 2
CalHcton 04- 16 of '6 24*4*
Jdrdborougb 16 32. 22*0 4.6*4.
i&//a 07 3? io’6 5-7*2
Comp. Mcafurf,
to the re-en- ■>
txing England 5 °S 4- 6i’6
Cornnii 5 4 4 c^i
Wcfel 2 4-8 03'j - o >l
Berwick 7 ff io>2 8 o’*
Cumberland ; fart of Scotland and Northumberland include the Road; and the
Eden, Leven, Kgrfop, LiddaJe , fed, Tweed, Reddinburn and Till, are the Principal
Rivers croft’d over ; yielding very rare}y an enclos’d Way, or any Entertainment
for a Traveller, except in fedborough and d(jifo, both in Scotland ; the R. being
chiefly Mountainous and unfrequented, yet not to be better’d, unlefs doubling
the Length of the Journey, you go by New-Cafik.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 10*4. The Rigiit to JVhitchfe: jB’s The acute on the Right to Wolly. j - t’l The Left acute.
56’-J The acute Way on the Right, at the ent’ring Kelfo. 64 The Right to Etal. 3 The
acute Way on the Right to Heaton, j'j’y The acute Way on the Right, to 7 1’6 The
acute Way on the Right, to New-Biggins. yf’z The acute Way on the Right, to Thornton.
», '* , + u,- v f
»v <r-_ v-q t* * W ; ‘ ;* > * C .* ; 1 ' *" f v - ’ ' .* ‘ • - •''' * \
FROM Moor-Hall, in the City of CARLISLE, pafs thro’ or
and crofs Ituna or Eden fiv. which riling in IVejt morel and, on the Confines of
Torkjh. paffes by KLrkby-Stevenmnd Appleby, and receives the Below, Troutbeck
and Livennant ; next the I dies ; and therein theGknkwen and Gleroden, by Penrith ;
then the Irthing alias In, from the Borders of Northumberland and Scotland ; and
therein the Celt, Gambek, Pouofe and Troatbek ; afterwards the Brufcath : And, laft-
ly, the Petterel and Can da ; then with the great River Esk, from Eskdale in Scot-
land, and the Rivulet Sark, it empties itfelf into the Itunian Bay; where we meet
with Burgh , or Burgh upon Sands, fuppos’d to be the eld Exploratorum, and
Boulnefs or Elatum Bulgium, near the End of the Pills Wall, another Roman Sta-
tion mentioned in the Itineraries.
At To by Stanix alias Stanwicks Ch. on the Right, an enclos’d R. leads at to
Blakeford V. on the Left- At 3’4 pafs by New-Pown V. fomewhat diftant on the
Left; leave the Lane, and enter the open Way; and fucli indeed, is generally the
whole Remainder of the Road. At pafs by Garrijion V. on the Left, and at
about 5 Miles, thro’ an enclos’d Way for 6F. At 7*3 over Leven alias Line fiv,
falling into the Elk, and giving Denomination to iQrk-Leventon on the Right, and
W. Leventon rM. behind, on the Left. At B’3 by fome Houles on the Right,
come to Bratchneth,alias Brackenhil Y. at 9’q on the Left; at io’2 afeend a Hill
of 2 F. and by the Skirts of others, arrive at an Afc. of 3 F. call’d Netherhurji at
12’r. Whence at ifi6 pafs by fiingsfield V. to the Left about 3F. and at 16’4
by Lethel Y. likewife on the Left.
At rß’i leave Sxonegarth, alias Stangart'tck, a little to the Right, and at filrfop
fiv. croft'd at 1 B’6 enter Scotland: Then by fome Houfes fo call’d, on
the Right; at 2T2 croft LiddaJe fiv. falling into the Kfefop a little below, and
both into the Esk. At appears Caflleton-lQrk 4F. to the Left, and IM. far-
ther, pafs thro’ CafiktonM. At 25 ’6 leave Dunky-bire, a Houle fb call’d, on the
Left; at 2cp’3 re-pafs LiddaJe fiv. and afeend a Hill; a little farther, afeending
and defeending alike. Thus, by repeated Afc. and Defc. at feveral diftances, at
38’2 pafs by the Houfe of Sr. Gilbert Elliot, to the Right about 3 F. call’d Woorly ;
and keeping a Road like the former, arrive at fedborough, on fedd flu. which ha-
ving receiv’d 8 lelfer Streams, bearing Names; is one of the 10 principal Ones
that fall into the Tiot or Tiviot, and thatagain is one of the 21 prime Branches that
conftitute the Tweed, fo defervedly Eminent among the BritiJl) Rivers.
, . - *Tis


- w ———
Tis a handfomeTown ef 3F. with a final! Mt. Thence at 4 Cat forward by
Cfahn' or Crelin V. of 3F. on the Right at 50*2, crofs a Brook at 41 M. and by
alias Sachford, on the lame Hand, at <5 2 6 pafs thro’ that part ofd’tot-
land call’d Tividale, from Tiot or Tiviot fh>. with which it is water’d.
At s4’s thro’ Highton or Hilton V. of 3F. at 56’7'come to part of Kjlfo alias
At 57 M. crofs the tweed by a Ferry, not much below the place where it
receives the Tiviot ; and enter Igailfo, a well-built Mt. Town, pleafantly fcated
on the North-ikle of the faid Tweed, and fcarce inferiour to any in the South-part
of Scotland, extending 4 F. on the Koad, and as much upon the River.
Hence by Sharphlaw 0:1 the Left, and Sproufton 3F. diftant from ss>’2 on the
Right, repals the Tweed at 60’$ and come to Fydam alias Reddin at 62 M. on the
Left,a Village fo named from Reddingbum which crofs at 62’6 and re-enter Eng-
land, about 1 M. from its Influx Into Tweed, which afterwards is the Limits of
the 2 Kingdoms, dividing Scotland from that Province of England, call’d
thumberland .
At 63*3 thro’ Carrhoom aliasCanam-Caflle V. leave Wark-Ca file on the Left, be-
tween you and the River, which at 1 M. diftance, more or lefs, accompanies you
to Barwick. At 6.6’ 7 come to Cornhil alias and between on the
Right, and TUlyJly- Hall on the Left; at 70 M. crofs which watering this
N. part of Northumberland, pafles by Wooller, a Mt. Town, and having receiv’d the
Bowbenny , Better born and Boanijh, a little below this place, falls into the Tweed*
Then hy Wefelon the. Left, and Crimdun Y. to the Right, about 4F. from yi’2
enter an enclos’d Way.between 73’4 and 7s’2. Where, at the crols Road, Thorn?-
ton appears to the Right, about 4 F.and at y6’2 Lingridg-HoaCe fomewhat nearer
cn the Left: Whence proceed to Orde Y.of 2 F. near the Banks of the Tweed.
At 79’2 fall in with the great London- Road, and at 80 M. crofs the Tweed oyer
a fair long Br. to a Town and. County of itfelf, the Pofleffion of
which, (during the DUcords oetween the 2 Kingdoms,before the Union) was ve-
ry vigoroufly ftrove for by the oppofite Parties, ’Twas taken by the King’s
Forces, from the invading Scots, and 25000 of their numerous Army were (lain,
Ann. 25. Edw. I. bucTjn cetemp. Edw. IV. it has been conftantly poffefs’d by the
LngHjhi and elects Parliament Men.
Forward Turnings to be avoided,
I. 6F. from Berwick the Left, being the great R. to Tork, London, &c. 11. Againft Thornton, the
Right acute. 111. Againit Gri-mdon, the Right to the Borders of Scotland. IV. 6F. fhorjt of
JbraHenhil, the Right to the M.ole.
The Road from
CHESTER to CARDIFF, in Glamorgnashire.
I. : "TpH E Point of Bearing S. by W. 11. The Direct Horizontal Diftance 108 M.
JL 111. The. Vulgar Computation 110 M. IV, The Limevfnration 145 M.
%•> ,j- t. ' :;:v' * < « **■ r %
From CHESTER Comp. Mcafure!
to Wrexham 09 o*9 11*4* t 11*4
Sallatyn 10 19 is’6 j ly’i
Llanfylen 044 2j , oy’6 31*0
Llanvclling 29 1 08*2 39*2
Llantair 08 37 n’o yo*2
Tregimnon 04, 4.1 060 ytf’2
■ Comp. Mcafurc.
to Nezv-Tozm 04, 045* | \cf 7. o Ci\
Llanbeder-vunncth o j j 05*2 j °9 , 4* °7 i *°
Llanbeder-vaur ob | 0 60 J \ lo’o c6i'o
Bealth * 08 ' * 19 6 Psi’6
Brecknock 12 j OSO » i6’q . \ ic~>6
Cardiff - . 30 | Ixo | J 37^
J 3
Cheshire,


»
Cheshire, Flint]}. DenbighJh. Shropjh. and Montgomery]}. are the Counties pals’d
thro’ •, and the Tagidog, Gwenuro, CUvedock , Chriflioneth, Dee, During, enletjivot
Viintwjy , Kite, Bechnn,Severn, Ithon , Clow deck, Dulat, , Howthy, and Tm*
are the principal Rivers croft'd over. The Way, in general, is very Hilly and
Rough, affording little Accommodation to Travellers.
TH E whole Road confifxs in Two Plates, The Firft ending at .
vunnsth, and the Second at Cardiff aforefaid.
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At i 5 The Right to Harden, and the Left acute, f’4 The Right to Burton-Qt. 17’} The For-
ward to the I ord. to 4. Ihe forward to Oflvejlree. tt’t The Right to the Hills, a 2 The
two forward, one to Ircbont, the other to Chink- CaMc. z6’6 The Right to LlanharPal.
32 >6 The Right to Llamtod. 3 f’o Ihe Right acute, j 6’j_The Left to Ojw'Jiree. - 3 9 >4.The
Left to Llatilkae. + i’j The Left to LUnfanflaid. 43*7 The Left to the Hills. U’l The
tcit to the Mill. 4 , 7 0 rhe forward, being a By-way. 48 2 The Left to Trolaph'. yo*2 The
Kigtrt to Lla/tyrllii’g. The Right to Lleanrg. yß The Left to Bettus. 64T The Left
to 6fz The Right to Llanidlos.
QEtting forward from Cheflcr, crofs Dee Br. leave the Suburbs at T 3, and at SU:
O* come to Puljord V. of about 4F. At the End of it enter Flintjh. and thro*
Pojpt V. and Merford V. crols Tagidog fiv . at 8 M. to Denbighfj. Then leaving Grefs •
ford Ch. and a Pound, a little on the Right,alfb Pentioken and >4ffcw-Houfes on the
Left, proceed at IT2 to IVrexhm at 4F. a Market Town.
I hence, over Prejion Br. crols Guenurow fiv. and at 14*1 CUvedock flv . over a
Stone Br. Ac beyond J{uabonY. crofs Chriflioneth flv. and IM. farther, pafs
tluo Trafcnutree V. whence a direil R. leads at 19*1, in a Valley over Neve-Bridge
and Dee fiv.- by a Smith’s Shop on the Left. Then afeending, pafs by Sir Thonurt
Middletons Kail on the Right. At 2C2 afeend 2F. and on the Top, leave the
two Right-Hand Roads; defending 3F. Flence, by Chink Ch. about 3F. on
the Left, at 22 6, crofs leering flv . to Shropjh . whence three Ale. with aDefcent,
lead thro Selatyn y a finall Village. ' 4 ‘- ’ *
Then over 2 Afcents,crofs off as Ditch, re-enter Denbyfh. crofs a Valley, and at
28*2 afeend an Eminence of SF. follow’d by a Defc.of 3F. There crofs Kenlet
fi v * afeend 3F. fbon alter making the like Dele, and at 30*4 pafs thro’ LUnfyien V*
Thence, defending 3 F. over a Brook, at 3a’3 crofs another, and thro 3 a fmall
Vill. alcend 3 F. equally defeending; till by Llangedwin Ch. 1 F.on the Right,
you crofs Tavot flv. at 34*3 enter Montgomeryfh. leaving a few Houfes clofe on
the Right; whence an Ale. feconded by a Defc. of BF. and after 2 other Defc.
lead at 39T thro’ LUnvcUing of about 2 Furlongs. y s
Frorti the lown,ac 4°’2 afeend near 4 F. the R. inclining much to the Left,and
again to the Right, T. here leave a few Houfes clofe on the Right, afeend 3F. e-
qually defeending, and pafs by Evan af Fowl's Well,- near the R. on the Right,
and Alyuer-Houleon the Left; croffing Vurnvody flv. at 45 ’6 over Pont-Muiheravale -
Br. Fhen by a Ch. clofe on the Left, go over a fmall Afc. on the Top of which,
Lave tne forward R. bear to the Left, and little beyond, again to the Right,al-
lo by Lhngunnue Ch. clofe on the Right ; till 2 Defc. lead at 50*2, thro’ Llmair-
y. of about IF. T hence after feveral Afc. and Defc. at 2 palling over an in-
line rent large Valley, crofs Rue flv . and then the Bechan at ; where, by fome
ouies and Tregonnori Ch. at g6 } 2 on the Right, the R. continues very indirect; in
w rich traveling (feveral Afc. at 58 M. defcVnd about 5 F. Then eroding a Brook,
make the like Al'cent, and at 61’3 crofs Severn flv. to Nerv-Tovoft or ‘Trenevifh, of
tear 3 to formerly a Corp. and ftiilenfoys a Market on Tuefdays • 7
*- * *v « i»t .... , .. ..... c ... *v; ; t r J a
* * -A
«. A


A Mile beyond the Town, afcend on the Top of which, ftands a
Houfe on the Right, another on the Left: Then over the like Afc. crofs a large
Valley, and come at the Top, to a Beacon near the R. on the Right; whence
thro’an indifferent direft R. after 2 or, 3 Defc. and a fmall Afc. pafs at 71 M.
to Lhnbder-Vmmth S. of 2 Furlongs,
; ■; H • $ * " ' *
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 14 F. beyond Llanbeder y the Right. 11. 14. F. beyond Nezv~Town, the Right to Aberdeen.
111 I nTregmmn, the Right to Jf 'eljjjpooly after cyofling Bechanflv, IV. 7F. Beyond Rne flv»
the Right to V. Near the End of Llantaird the L*eh to LJanve lit ng. VI. jF. Be-
yond Langunnue, the forward to Font-tucoad. VII. 6F. beyond Vurnway flv. the Right to My
vot. VIII. 12 F. beyond -MyHoufe, the Right to Llanfanfratd. IX. 10 F. beyond LJan*
gedwin~Vlo\x{c y the Left to Ter hides . X At LlanfyUn Town’s End, the Left tp Terkuks. XX. 6F*
beyond the Left to Chejter .
The Continuation of the Road from
CHESTER to CARDIFF, in Glamirganshire.
PART II.
Commencing at Llanbeder-Vunneth in Radnorfhire, and extending to Cardiff afore >
faidy containing 74 Miles 4 Furlongs,
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 72*7 The Right to TJanano. 74*7 The Right to Font-Llanhijler. 76*1 The Left to Knighton ,
77*6 The Right to Treviot. jy y 6 The Left to Kineton. 80 9 6 The Right to Kiadergowy. 81*8
The Left acute. 82 M. The Left to Bettus. 92 ’2 The Left to the Flay, 97 M. The Left to
Vangoid . 107*6 The Left to Llandooe. 110*7 The Lefc to Jbergaveny . üß’i The Right
to Tavow. 120 M. Right to the Houfes. 12 i p l The Left to Fair-TKaine. 121*2 The Right
to Mortertidvil. 127*2 The Right to Llanvibor. 127*7 The Right to Llanvabor . 1 j I*o The
Left to Kethfegzvain. 13 I*2 The Left to Llanvabor. 13 s**4 The Left to Thevan . 13 B*7 The
Left to the Coal-Works, 139*7 The R ; ght to the Iron-Works. 141*2 The Right to Llandajf*
142*2 The Right to Wkiichurch. 142*7 The Right to Llandajf.
FROM Lhnbeder-Vumeth go up and down Hill by fome Houfes at 72 "6
(the acute Way on the Right, leading to LUnano) and thro 5 Llanbifter at 74*2*
At 77 ,£ ) pafs thro 5 LUniervy, and 3F. farther, over hhon flv* At ?B’6 crofs the
R. from Frejinin to Riadergowy , and 2F. farther Cloxvdockfiv. 1 M. beyond, down
a H ill, come to Lhnbeder-Vaur at So’ 1 ;, and 2F. farther, crofs Bulat flv* Whence
an indirect Way by feveral Houfes brings you at 86’i, over the hhon again; then
by fome other Houfes, the Way Up-hill and Down-hill, thro’ a Woody Country,
arrive at 90*7 by Llanelway on the Left, and <5 F. farther, crofs Wye flv. over a
Wooden Br. entcing Brecknockjh. and Bealth allot Leahy a fmall Town amidft the
Woods, containing about 80 Houfes. It has a great Mt. on Mond. for Live Cattle,
and 2 leffer on Thurfld. and Saturd. for Provifions, with 3 Fairs, on 16.
Septemb. 21. and St. Katharine’s Day.
Thence afcend 3 F. 2 F. farther, defeend 4 F. and at 93’3 pafs by
Coomb Ch.on the Left: At 94*6, over a Hill of BF. by Capel Cnnoke Ch. on the
Left, crofs a Valley at to a Hill of 11 F. and at 100 M. defc. a Hill ot 12 F.
then by a Houfe on the Right, and a Wood on the Left, come at 102*3 by Llani-
hanele-Vececban Church and fome Houfes on the Right, and 1 F. farther, eroding
X 4 Hovothy


Homhyfiv. pafs thro’ a great W. After a fmall Defc. at 104*6, thro’ Llandivilog V.
enter Brecknock at 107*0, at the Confluence of Vsk and Hondy flv. call’d Aherhondy
by the Emms. ’Tis a large Town Corp. containing 3 Parifh Ch. vh. St. Mar/s,
St. John Evang. and th e Colleg e; and is divided into 11 Wards. ’Twas formerly
fordfy d with a Wall and Caftle, and is at prefent the Relidcnce of the Bifhopof
St. David's. ’Tis govern’d by a Bailiff, 2 Aldermen, 12 Common-Council-Men,
fends a Burgefs to Pari, and enjoys 3 Markets, on Wednefd. Frid. and Saturd. with
3 Fairs, vi\. on Midfummer-Day,Aug. 29. and Nov. 5. ’Tis alfo honour’d by giving
Title of Earl to his Grace fames, Duke of Ormond, CSV. and has feveral good Inns.
‘ "3 here crqfs the fa id Hondy and Vsk, at the end of the Town, afcend a Hill of
6 F. and after the Dele, of 2 fmall ones, crols Tavy flv. to Bullavan , a Moun-
tain above 2M. high. At the Top, go down 6F. and re-pafs the which
accompanies you on the Left, the R. lying between a Ridg of Hills. Whence
by fome Houles on the Left; after a fmall Afc. and Defc. pals by Capel-Tevechan
Ch. on the Right, and crofling a Brook at 119 M. afcend SF. Then over ano :
ther Brook after a fmall Defc. crofs the Tavy over Pont-Stucketb Br. to Glamorgan!]}.
and 2F. farther, afcend 4F. At 1212 pafs thro’ a Vill. on the R. leave the
Ruins of Moriefo Caftle on the Right, about 4 F. and 5 F. farther, delcend, crof-
fmg the Tavy again; Whence over feveral great Hills and large Valleys, and by
feveral Houfes crofting fome Brooks at 138 M. leave CarfiUy Caftle on the Left,
about 3 Furlongs.
At 138 2 afcend 5 F.anddefcend again 5 F, At i39’5 go down a large Hill of
30 F. on which are feveral Mines of Iron-Oar, and at r42’3 the r<n>y accompa-
nies you on the Right; tillat 145*3, you enter CARDIFF,a. Town Corp. on Toff
or Tove-Vaurflv. which rifes at Monuchdowy Hill in Brecknockjh. paffes by Llandaff
and this Place; and about 3M. below rolls into the Severn-Sea. ; having receiv’d
the faff-vachan , the Cmnon, and the Avon.
_ v 1 Backward Turnings to be avoided.
■ • Beyond Cardiff, the Right acute. 11. 6F. beyond, the Left to Newport. IH e F fliort of
■’ WMines, the Right to CarfiUy IV. Near Irfilly -Caftle, the Right touAvfy
ihort of the Entrance into Brechiockf,. the Left to Merther. VI. Aga.nfi Cabel-Tevechan , the
VI fc L 7 a T Y heyoud Brecknock, the Right acute. VIII. from
the to Pon.-Jberuskel. IN. jo F. iliort °f Cagel-Cunoke, the Left to Llamivechan. X. A-
?'iTe heW), p Co 7fi C t‘ ‘u' t Cft a t U . tC - Xl vt T r be y° nd Beakh, the Right to Kiadergowy.
I? 1 !, 3 Bealth, the Right to Kineton. XIII. j’f beyond, the Right to Kineton. XIV.
5 F.beyond LUmdor, the Right acute. XV. i'i fliort of Ckwdock-jiv. the Left acute.
7 ' r. t :t ■ " V , . • S
The Road from
DARTMOUTH in Devonshoure,
to Minehead in Somersetshire.
f* I tearing N. N. E. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance 60 M.
JL HE The Vulgar Computation M. IV. The Dhnenjuration 71*2.
From Dartmouth Comp. Mcafure.
to New'on Bujhel it uI ( 1 6> 0 . 16’o
1 B-enford c 8 lo io'i 2 <>,
Zf&VE* or 22
Siberian ,k *6 z 8 o 7 ’y
Tevertsn o 6 \ | 0? > 0 J
Comp. Meafurc.
to Bampton cj* J 07*2
Berry ' 03 +2 I 04/0 I yy’a
-tanbercomp 08 fo J 67^6'
Minbead : cz Ifz I 7l*2
71^2
Devonjhire


j OevonMre and liomerfetjh. include the whole R. and the Ting, Ex, Colomb, Burn ,
Zm<tw, and Bampton, are the Principal Rivers crofs’d over ; affording in general
no very good Way, as being exceeding Hilly, but every where fupply’d with
Inns,Cw< Tis a well-frequented R. yielding a ready Paflage from Dartmouth, a
Port-Towm on the South-Sea to the City of Exeter ; and from thence to Minbead,
a Port-Town on the North-Sea.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 3 The Right to Lyft 0n. 9’6 The Right to King’s Kefwel. i6’i The Left to
ij M. The Left to 2 ingrace. 17*3 The Right to Tingmouth. 23 M The Right to Powder-
ham. 31*5* The Right in Exeter to London. 4-o*7 The Left to BickUy. 4.7*1 The Right to
Chettefcnmo , and the Left to Boldham. 5*3*3 The Left acute. 5*4.* 2 The Right to Langford*
<*s**2 The Right to and IF. farther, the Left to Dulverton. 61’6 The Right to Lux-
lorow, 66 M. The Leit to Wbton-Courtnay. 6j’6 and 68’l The Right to Dunjiar.
EEfore we proceed to the R. take a fhort View of Dartmouth, or Dartmouth, at
the Mouth of Den flv. a large well-built Port Town, with a fafe and com-
modious Harbour. It drives a confiderable Trade at Sea, and is well provided of
Shipping. ’Tis an ancient Corp. containing 3 Parilh Ch. fends BurgeiTes to Pari,
is govern’d by a Mayor, OV. and has a good Market on Fridays.
Thence ferry over the Den (which is here 3 F.) and on the other fide, pafs
thro’a Vill.ofabout 2F. AtsM. by Cmp on the Left; defeend<s F.
at4’»; and at the Bottom,leave Cherflon Ch. 2 F.on the Right. Whence an indi-
rect Way by Way ton-how fe on the Left, leads at B’6 to a finall Defc. 3 F. farther,
amending again, go down 4F. and on the Defc. leave Marldon' Cn. on the Left.
At lo’y thro’ ComeY. and by feme Houfeson the R. defeend a Hill at 13^3,
and leave Abbots Kjefwel Ch. on the Left. Thence afeending 3F. 2 Defc. by Ot-
her Ch. on the Right, bring you at to Newton-BuJheJ , or Newton-Abbots, of
SF. on Leman fiv. a Branch of the Ting , or Teing, having a well ftor’d Mt. on
Wednefd. for Cattle, Corn, &c. About <5 M. below this Town, is Tingmouth, or
Teingmomh, noted for being the Place where the Danes firft landed.
From Newton-Bujhel, afeend a Hill, and defeend again, by Hewyb Ch. 2 F. on
the Left. At iy’2 crofs the Ting, which riling on the Edg oiDanmore near Gyd-
Jay Y. pafles by Chidlay, and at Tingmouth aforefaid, falls into the Sea. Then lea-
ving King's Staimon 6F. on the Right, alfo Ting race 4F. on the Left; at iß’2 by
Tom the Trumpeter' son the Right, and 2F. farther, by the Red Lion on the Left,
both good Inns, afeend a Hill of 6 Furlongs. Whence over fcveral Afc. and Defc.
at 24 M. over a large Valley, and at 24’<5 defeending of 7 F.at26’6
crofs Kjtnfiv. which about 4M. below, runs into the Ex. Where afeending, en-
ter Kgtnford of 2 F. thence 2 Defc. palling thro’ a Village, and leaving
houfe 2 F. on the Left, lead over a Valley at 28’4.
At 2j’4 pafs thro’ Affington V. at 30’2 to the Suburbs of EXETER-, and over
theßr. to the City itlelf; leaving -'which, avoid the great R. to London , DV. and
bear to the Left, thro’ a Suburb of 4 Furlongs,
At 32’7 over a Brook, afeend Stoke-h\\\ of 5 F. and by fome Houfes at 34 M. a
Defc. of IM. brings you to a Stone Br. of 9 Arches over Columbfiv. juft at its
Confluence with the £x; 2F. farther, pafs thro’ Stobe V. then by Bramptford Ch.
on the Right 4F. and at 36’4 thro’ Rew V. At 38’! afeend a Hill, and at 38’6,
enter Silverton, a good Town of 3F. ’Tis govern’d by a Portreeve, and has 2
Faits, vi\. on 'Midfurnmer-Dzy, and St. Bartholomew.
Beyond the Town,afeend Silverton- hill of 1-M. on the R.go down at 4T2,8 F.
and at the Bottom, crofs Burn Brook. At 43 M. by fome Houfes on the Rt. at 44
M.afcend LongCaufeway of 1 M. well pav’d j and after a fmall Defc. at 4s’=;, enter
'■ 4 * , : " ’ • " ' ' Tevenon,


fever ton, or Tmrton-q. d. fwyfori-fown, as being feated at the Confluence of the
Leman with the Ex a large Town, containing above 500 Houfes. It has differ-
ed much by Fire, yet, at prefent, drives a confiderable Trade in Clothing, it
lends Burgeffes to Pari, and is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Elders, and
12 Afliftants. It has 2 good Free-Schools, and 3 Alms-houfes, with a confider-
.able Market on Tuefd, and 2 Fairs, vi\. on the fuefd, fe’nnighc after
and Michaelmas Day.
From Teverten, over a large Valley, and after 3 Defc, come at 53 Miles to Bath-
■ Hampton vulgo Bampton , or B aunt on, of 4 F. on a Branch of the Ex, and in a Bot-
tom environ’d with Hills. It contains above too Houfes, and has a large Ch.
■where are intomb’d feveral of the Family of the Earls of Bath, ’Tis govern’d by
a Portreeve, and had formerly 2 Mts. on Wednefdays and Saturdays, but now only
one on Mondays, with 2 Fairs, vi{. on Whitjo and St. Luke’s Day.
At 54 M. defcend a Hill, and at 55T pafs thro’ V. where a Defc. of 3
F.(by Gilbertson the Right) is feconded by an Afc. of 8 F. at the Top of which,
enter Somerfetjh. and down a fteep Hill at 57% come to Berry V. Whence, over
two large Afc. call’d Brunnam Hill, being generally open, Heathy, and Furfe-
Ground, pafling by Brumpton Begk 1 M. on the Right, at 64*3 defcend 4F. and
leave Cutcomb Church on the Left.
At 65*7, pafs by forae Lime-Kilns on the Left, and at 66* 7, down.a large Hill,
thro’ Emhercumox. Tmbercomb V. Whenceafcending 7F. thro* open Way,at 70*6
enter MIMHEAD, a Borough and Port-Town, whofe convenient Harbour occa-
fions an indifferent Trade to Ireland, &c. It clefts Pari. Men, and has a fmall
Market on Wednefdays.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 3 F. from Minheud, the Right to Selzoorthy. 11. i’6 beyond Embercum, the Left to Taunton.
111. f F. beyond Murbath, the Right to Exbridg. IV. At the End of Bampton, the Left acute.
V. At the End of Tewnfow, the Left to London, &c. VI. 3F. beyond Silverton, the Right to
Uptick. VII. At the Bridg at Exeter, the forward to Truro, &c. VIII. 2F. fhort of Kenford,
the Left to Mamhead, IX. At the Top of Jdaldon-iliil, the Left acute. X» *F. fliort of Crup*
Ijwd'ii oufe, the Left to Booth .
The Road from
St . DAVI D’S Com. PEMBROKE,
to Holywell Com. Flint.
I. ’TT HE Point of Bearing N. E. by E. 11. The direct Horizontal Diftance 118 M.
JL 111. The Vulgar Compulation u 2 M. IV. The Dimenfur ation i56’4.
From St. David's Comp. Alcafurc.
to Fif card 12 12 | 16*1 16*1*
Newport 05* 17 I 06*7 23*0
Cardigan 07 24. j 10*4* 33*4,
Llanarch 14. 38 18*1 71*7
JLlanrufted 08 4 6 11*3 63*0 J
Llanbadam-vaur 06 72 08*4. 71*4,
Talabont 07 27 06*7 78*3 I
Comp. Meafure.
to Machenlsth 07 0641 [ 10*7 089*2
Aberangel 07 071 io’j °99’f
Llanum-mowtby o f 076 07*7 107*2
Balia 10 086 *3*4- 120*6
Ecttus 07 095 ’ 10*2 151*0
Kutbyn 07 100 J 1 o’o 14.1*2
Holyzvell 12 112 J if’2
Pembrokejktre , Cardigan]!). Montgomery fh. Merioneth]!}. and Flintfb. are
the Counties, including the whole R. and the Grvyn, Nevern, thy, Aaron, Arth,
,


Weray, Ijlwith, Kidd, Saleh, terry, Cletter , Kmver, Artgel,
pee, Tavor , Gyrow , and Clwyi, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. ’Tis,
for the moll part, a very Hilly and Mountainous Way, feldom affording fo good
Entertainment as other Roads, except in Cardigan, Holywell, &c.
I k t *: ■> £
THE whole P.oad is compriz’d in Two Plates, the Firft ending at in
Cardigan<Jh. and the Second at Holywell. The former contains 78 Miles,
3 Furlongs.
The following Turnings are to he avoided.
At} 9 1 The Left to Xhanuny. The Right to Haverford Weft, i o*6 The Right to Cardigan,
* a different Way. 16’f The Right to Carmarthen, zz’o The Left acute. z6’o The Left to
jTrewethel. 27*5* The Left to JVLolgrove. 4.9’ o The Right acute, The Right to Trega~
ron. s*7*o The Left acute, The Right to Ltanbeder-veagh, The Right to Llanyler .
The Right to Coggerthan.
SEtting forward from St. David's, at 16 crofs Gorid Br. over a Brook, and pa Ist
by Gorid Chap, on the Left: Whence an indirect Way by lome ftraggling
Houfes on the Road at sM.to an Afc. of F. and an ealie Defc. at 6’a leads at
7 ’6 to a Defc. of 6F.- M. farther, afcending again, a Defc. extends at to M.
thro’ Menh alias Mottbry V. Whence over a Valley, having on the Top a Profpeft
to the Sea about IM. on the Left, crofs another Vale at i2 = 3, and at 1 an
cafie Defc. fucceeded by a more unlevel Way at 15’<5. About 2 F. farther, come
to Fijcard, q. d. Fijh-guard, of 3F. on the Road, call’d Abergwdin by the as
featcd on Groynflv. near its Confluence with the Sea. ’Tis a Mt. Town, go-
vern’d by a Mayor, Bailiffs, dc. and has a good Harbour.
Beyond the Town, crofs the fa id Cwyn\ whence 2 Afc. follow’d by a larger
Defc. brings you over 2 Valleys. At 22 M. having a Profpefl to the Sea, de-
fcend 5 F. to Newport of 3 F. near Nevem flv. where it empties itfelf into the
Ocean, and where there is a Wear for Fifhing. ’Tis a Market Town, govern’d
by a Port-reeve, Bayliff, do.
At 23 ’6 crofs the Nevern ; and over a fmall A Ic.leave Ch.on the Lt.
about 3 F. Tbert defc. 4 F. at 2 6 M. pals thro’ Velindra V. whence 2 Afc. lead at
28*4 to a large Valley. At 3 1 ’4 defc. a Hill of 12 F. pafs by St. on the
Left, and at the Bottom, over a fair Stone Br. crofs 77 which riling in
ganjh. near the Confines of Eadnorjh. fucceffively receives the Wyryk, Brenyg,Mathern ,
Dettor , and l\each \ and about 4M. below this Place, falls into the Sea.
Here enter Cardiganjh. and Cardigan the Shire. Town, call’d by the Briiains Aber-
thy, i. e. Ojiium Flurninis Tivij and Caer~Decan, i.e. Vrbs Decani ’Tis indifferent
large and well-built, containing 3 Wards, 1 Church, and the County-Gaol. The
Affixes are alfo held in this Town, which is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 13
Aldermen, 13 Common-Council-Men, d fends one Burgefs to Pari, has a good
Mt. on Saturdays , and 5 Fairs yearly, wj. on $ of the Lady-Days.
From Cardigan pafs over 3 Afc. with a large Defc. and at the Bottom, at
37 M. omitting the Way on the Right, which unitesagain at 38*5 over a Brook
afcend 4 F. Ac 39 M. leave Blainpon V. on the Left, and 6F. farther,afcend 3 F.
At 45’5 a fmall Afc. leads thro’ fevcral Valleys*, and by the Four Brothers, or Tumuli.
At 46’? keeping the Road over feveral Mountains j pafs thro’ Llanarcb V. at 5 F 4.
Then defccnding, and afcending at go by Chap.on the Lt. Whence
an Afc. feconded by a larger Defc. bringsyou at 5 5’4. to Aaron flv. juft at its Influx
with the Sea ; which eroding, fee forward thro’ a fmall V. the Sea on the Left
for feveral Miles. Ac 5 5 M.omit theacuteß. on the Left,leading over the Beach,
a different Way,to LUnrujted, and pals thro’ V. there crofs Anh
>■ • .. '* •'■ • • ■


■ftv- then amending 7F. go down BF. and at the Bottom, over a Brook, at 60
Miles,pals thro’ Molinamore V. 3F. farther, leaving Llanjanfraid Ch. on theßwbt.
At 62’6 crofs Werbyfiv. to Llanrufted V. of 2F. on the Road, and go by a <»reat
Houfeon the Right, where the Road between Cardigan and Abe rift with falls in.
At 64 M. afeend 6 F. leave Llanyler Ch. 4F. on the Right; and at 6$ ’< pafs bv
Stones plac’d on a Hill about 2F. At 6f6 2 Defe. lead at 69’! over or
Wuftmithfiv. not far from its Mouth. Then afeending by Llanachdrn Ch. on the
Left, pars over a Valley; where, after an eafy Deft, of \V.at ~ wTcro™ U.
ddeftv. which (with the Wye and Severn ) rifing about the Top of Plinillimon-Hil],
paffes by Aberiftmith at near xM. diftance, and falls into the Sea. About 2F.
farther, enter Llanbadern-Vaur V. of 2 F. on the Road, but more tranfverle, and
leave Aberiftmith ~ M. on the Left.
Profecuting the Road over an Afc. of 6 F. follow’d by 2 Defc. crofs Saleh fiv.
At 75’4 by Fuddypene- Houfeon the Rt. over pafs by
gualter, on the Left. A tj6'6 defeend 4F. and at yB’2 in the enter Fa-
JabontY. of 2F. on the Road, therein croffing Cletter fiv. a Branch of the Domy.
Backward Turnings to be avoided..
I. At Saleh fiv the Right to Aherifiimth. I*. 4F. beyond Tfiwithflv. the Left to Tregaron. 111. 6
b . mottoi LUnrufiedthe Left to Cardigan, a different Way. IV. 4F. beyond Molinamore, the
R’ght. V. th - beyond Blatnbort,the Right to Mount drey. VI. 12 F. fliort of Velindra,the Right
to Aenpri-Paffage. \ 11. IF. beyond Velindra, the Left to Havcrford-tC.fi. VIII. fF. beyond
Vdtnara, the Rigntforward. IX. z’l fliort of (JonWChap. the Left to JJlford.
The Continuation of the Road from
St. DAVI D’S in Pembroksh. to in Flintsh.
PART II. and Last.
Commencing at Talabont Com. Cardigan, and. extending to Holywell aforefaid.
Containing 78 Miles 1 Furlong.
a o . jo IT wll ‘ ck tke following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 80 4 and 81’1 The Right to Machenfetb, a different Way. Sj’z The Right acute. 90’+ The
forward to Dolpelhe. i°j’j The Left into the Bottom. 1 cij’6 The forward to
*he Right to Balla y the worft Way. 113*1 The Right to the Mountains, no’o The
Right to Ijlanrtllo. 123*7 The Right to Llanvorval 12**6 The Left acute. 126*2 The
Right to Wrexham, 132*3 The Right acute. 13**0 The Right to the Hills. 12/0 The
“fr %^o n ~?* rro ™: T The Ri g ht to Bulla-Branch. i f **i The Right to Cheller.
Is**f The Right to Northoj). & J
FROM TaJahont, pafs by the Silver-Mines on the Left, and over a Defc. of 4 F.
having a continu d Ridg of Mountains on the Right, for feveral M. At Bo’i
COl T e o° % cbari Price ’ s Park . extending about x Mile on the Left.
At ß3 M. over Kgriverfiv. another Branch of the Dow?, pafs thro' V.
rSilver-Mill on the Left. Then defeending 2F. crofs Eyncnfiv, a Branch
D°y°y likewife; and at 84’4 leave Garrick on thefaid Dowy to the Left;
f.ru * artker .» crofs Levenantflv, falling into the Dowj, and enter Montpomeryfo.
Whence an mdireft Way* over feveral Hills, and another Brook, leads at 89
Jv nes to Mahunleh alias Machenleth of 2 F. on the Road, and about as much tranf
xer e, leated on the powy, and call’d Mag by the where once they
had a Garnfon. Tis,, at prefent, a fmall Town, but has a Mt. on
.°, u . 1 ,.. beyond the lowr, crofs Dowyflv. which riling aboutthe Footof
gro'rS-M] mMemnethJh. on the Confines of runs S. W. and receiving


j 2 leffec Streams, moft of which are crofs’d in this Road, here divides Menod
fiethjh from Montgomery'jh. as ic does below, from Cardigan]}), rolling into the Sea at
Jberdoroy. About 2 M. from Mdunleh is or the Ridg of a City,
where the Ruins of a Wall inform Circular, and the Homan Coins there digg’d
up, fpeak its Antiquity. _ ; , , ;
A t 9'o’4 crofs Dulnasfiv. but avoid the forward Way to Dolgethe. At 92*6 pals
thro’ Jberfuddon V. and crofs Kytrygflv, falling into the Whence continu’d
Mountains are rang’d on the Lt. as the faid accompanies you on the Right;
6 F. farther,go thfo’ Llanvoring V. and at 95 M. leave Mathavsrn- houfe on the Left.
About \M. beyond, ale. 6F. defc. 2F. and leave Remis Ch. xF. on the o-
ther fide of the Dowy. At 98 M. come to Abenwydo Y. and at 99*2 to Aberan*
gel V. of 3F. on the R. Whence crofting Angel fiv. juft at its influx into the
Dowy, enter Merioneth]}). . .
At iox’4 leave M alloyd,alias ManUoyd , 4Fv oh the other fide cf the Dowy ; at
io2’6 pafs thro’ Dinas-Mouthy V. and then over Garijifv. Whence over feveral
Afc. and Defc. at- 107 T come thro’ Llanam-Mouthy V. and at ioy’6 repafs the
Dowy , running from Machenleth hither, clofe by the Road bn the Right. Then a*
reendingßulla-grois, a great Mountain of 2 M. go down 7 F. whence the R. holds
level for 2M. having the Mountains on the Right, and the River on the Left,
A Defc. leads at H4’3 to tichan, a Bridg over a Brook, the
Mountains ftill continuing on the Right, and Dee fiv. on the Left; which at xxd
M. falls into the adjacent Lake, call’d Llyn , , receiving
likewife the Rivers Line and Llavern. Of this Lake’tis reported, that 'Dee fiv.
running thro’ it, does not mix with the Waters. being never found in
the Lake, nor the Fiih Gwyniaid (a kind of in the River..
The Road continues along the fide of the Lake, for 4 M. palling thro’ I Jan-
gower alias Hanover V. at Ix7’s and eroding the Doe at 120 M. juft at its iffuing
out of the Lake. At 120’$ come to Bal of2F.cn the Road; a fmailTown
Corp. enjoining feveral Privileges. ’Tis govern’d by Bayliffs, 6V. and has a
Mt. on Saturdays.
At 130’5 croCsTrowerm fiv. which riling out of a Lake of that Name, and ha-
ving receiv’d the ifielyn a ndMcnouch-dowr, falls into the , a little below. At
i2i’6 pals thro’ Llanvaier alias Llanvor V. and 6 F. farther, over Tavor flv. the
Way being very Mountainous, till eroding Gyrowfiv. at X2B’7 over Pont-Mairthree
Br. you enter Denbighjhire. - :
At 121 M. crofs Alwenflv. which having receiv’d the faid a little lower
falls into the Dee\ reentring Merioneth]}), and arriving at At 122 T
come again to Denbigh]}), over Chtydfiv. and keeping a mountainous Road like the
former, leave Clocanog Ch. IM. on the Left. Then thro’ a Wood at 139 M.
pafs at 140*4 to Llanvarog M. contiguous to Puthyn , a large and well-frequented
Town Corp. on the faid Cluyd, ’Tis govern’d by 2 Aldermen, £&. and has a
very good Mt.for Corn, Ssc. on Mond. It had formerly a large Caftle, now ru-
inous ; and is, at prerent, adorn’d with an Hofpital and Free-School, Founded by
Dr. Goodman , temp. Eli
From Puthyn, an indireft R.by Cluydfiv. on the Left, and Llanganhaval on the
Right,leads at 147 M. to Llavgwiven Ch. on the Left. Whence aftending a great
Mountain of 2M. at the Top of it, enter and defc. 1 x F. There crols the
great Holyhead R. in the Bottom; leave Ch. xM. on the Rr. and a little
farther, Caierwity or Cajerwis, a (mail Mt. Town 7 M. on the Lt. At xyb M. by the
Lead-Mines on the Left, defc, 4 F. and enter Hu LTiV ELL, a Imall Town cr
Village,fo call’d front bUlh'iniped’s Weil, lying tomeu hat lower on the N.BTide ot
it •,


it; a Place ftill much reforted to, by thofe who for their Health’s fake coisie to
bach there ; as heretofore by Pilgrims paying their Devotions to the Chriftian
Virgin Winefred, whofe Name fignifies a Winner ox Gainer of Peace. She was court-
ed by a certain young Prince, who meeting with a Repulfe, at laft furpriz’d and
ravifh’d this beautiful Maid •, and afterwards, having kill’d her, cut ofFher Head,
which rolling down hither (as the Story goes) from the adjacent Hill, gave Rife
to the faid Well. The Spring is cold, and has a fair Chap, built over it upon
Pillars; on the Windows of which, is pourtray’d the Hiftory of St. It
guthes forth in that Quantity, and with fo great Impetuofity, that it foon turns
a Mill,and empties itfelf into the Sea, about i- M. below. The Mofs growing in
the Well, of a fweet Scent, is taken for St. Winefred’s Hair. <
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. I’a beyond Holywell, the Right to St. Afaj>h. 11. Againft Caiervns-Chureii, the Left to Skiving,
and the Right to Llannelloyd. 111. y F. -hort of the Left to IV. a F. be-
yond Ruthyn, the Right to Bala, a different Way. V. j’y iliort of , the Right to
neth. YI. At the End of Llanviaier, the Right to Llanroofi. VII. 1 1 F. beyond
the Left. V 111. 1 At. beyond Aberfuddon, the Left to Mahurdeth , a different Way.
The Road from
EXETER to BA RNSTABLE,
Continued to Ilsarcomb in Devonshire.
I. 'X’HE Point of Bearing N N. W. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance 83 M«
A 111. The Vulgar Computation 4oTvl. IV. The 49’u
From EXETER Comp. Meafure.
to O'editcn 07 |O7 ? J oB’o og’o
Chimleigh u | 18 | 1 ij’f zi*f
Comp. Meafure,
to ßarrtfiahle 14. ] 32 1 t jv 0 1 -gv
Jlfarcomb 08 1 4.0 I | 10’+ 1 jjy*
Extending to 7 omngton in Vevonjhire, thus: .
From Vfarcotnh Comp* Mea£ure.
toßedifard 12 J 12. T I 16’y | 16’y
Torrington of [ 17 [ [ of a \ ify
The County of Devon, contains the whole Road; and the Ex, Fortm,Moul, taw,
and torcridg, are the principal Riverscrofs’d over. ’Tis generally a rough, hard
\fray, yet not deftitute of neceffary Conveniences for Travellers. 5
Acute Turnings to be avoided.
At 6’f The Right a different Way to Kerton. fj The Left to Wejlon. 11’(5 The Right to Mot.
chard. i+’7 The Left acute. iS’j The Right forward. i+’6 The Right forward. 28 a The
Right to South-Moulton. 3 1»* The Left to Athrington. j.t'j The Lett to Teuton. The
Right to Lankey. <f ° : 7 The Left to Brunt on. 4.l'a The Right to
In the Continuation to torrington .
At jF. the Right to Morthay. j'.f The Reft acute, i’j The Right acute. ?’7 The Left to
BarnfiabU. 7*j The Right acute 11*7 The R ght to ijfo The Left to South-
Moulton, The Lett to £*xeter, . *
i. FROM


FROM Exeter, firft pafling 2or 3 Brooks, crofs at i 56 having a little
above receiv’d the Credy, and over another Brook, touch upon the laid Credy,
Then wver 2 Brooks, at 4'? come -to Syar-Newton alia/! Newton Syres V. near the
Credy. Whence over 3 other Brooks, and by Dunfim Houle on the Left, crofs For-
ton fiv . and at y’3 enter crediton vulgo Iferton, on the Weft of the Credy at a little
difiance* near its Conjunction with the Fonon ; a Town of 5 F. on the Road,
divided into the E. and W. Quarters. It has a great Mt. on Saturd. trades much in
Serges, fhews a fair Church, formerly a Bifhop’s See, with a Free-School; and is
noted for giving Birth to Winefred, the Apoftle of the &c. in Gemary.
Thence over a fmall Hill, and 2 Brooks at io’3, afeend a Hill of 6 F. on the-
Top of which, pafs thro’ New-Buiding V. and defeend 7M. Whence an unlevel
Way, fucceeded by a more fertile Valley ; where crofting 2or 3 Branches of
Tawfiv. by the Beacon on the Right, come at i9’2 to Chawley V. of 4 F. Thence
over a Valley, and a Branch of the Taw\ on the Top of an Afc. at 2V2 enter
Chirnleigh or Chulmlei h , a fmall Mt. Town of 2F. at the Confluence of the faid
Waters with the taw. t '
At 22’5, in a Valley, crofs another Branch ofthe7*iw,afcending 4 F. and paf-
fing by Chington Houfe on the Left at 2$ M. Then over an ealie Defc. to 26 M.
you have a more eminent Rife for near 1 M. leading at 2 y’2 thro’ Chiding ford V.
Here from Wortley 3 F, on the Left, crofs a Brook by Beatford- Houfe dole on the
Left; defeend 4F, pafs another Rivulet at 3o’x, and leave Ch. at
a fmall diftance on the Right. At 3<d’6 over 2 Brooks, pafs thro’ Bathing V, at
35’$ and Rpnfon V. at 37 Miles.
At 37’2 appears Newport of 4 F. where you fall in with the Road from
water, and 3 F. beyond, enter BARNSTABLE, or 38T a large Corp.
and Mr. Town. The main Body of it lies on the Right, extending only 3F,
upon this Road ; 4 F. beyond which, crofting 2 Brooks, or Branches of the
pafs thro’ PiltonY. and 3 F. farther, Bradford Village.
At 40 M. afeend 6 F. pafs thro’ Prickworthy V. and crofting a Valley at 42 M.
leaving Bittaden 3F. on the Right. Then by Stoford, at the bottom of another
Afc. of 5 F. defeend at 48 M. for 4F. and at 48’? enter JLFARCOMB , vulgo Ilfra-
comb, a good Mt. Town, on the Shore of the Severn-Sea, almolt oppolite to Swan-
fey in Glmorganfhire, having a fafe Harbour.
The Continuation to Torrington aforefaid.
FROM nfareomb, crofs a Brook, at 1 M. afeend <5 F. and pafs 2 other Brooks.
Then over a Valley, comeat 5 M. to itracumY. on a Rivulet in a Bottom.
At 6M. a Defc. of 6F. leads to Bara of 2F. Whence thro’ Ford V. at the
Bottom of an Afc. and by Sant on Court on the Left, on the other fide of the Hill,
pafs at 11*4 to St. Am' s Chap, on the Right. About 3F. farther, by a Ferry of
above 1 M. crofs the Taw at its Conjunction with the Towridg,
At 14*6 go thro’ Nonham of 3F, on Towridg fiv. Whence crofting (everal Wa-
ters, at 16 4 enter Bedford , or Bytheford , on the laid , over which it has a
large Stone Br, of 24 Arches, fo high, that Ships of 60 Ton may pafs under. ’Tis
a large and flourilliingTown, enjoying a good Trade, with a plentiful Market
on Tuefdays.
From Bediford oyer the Bridge, an irregular Road, afeending at 17’$ for 3 F.
and at for SF. leads to a Defc. at 2oy of SF. Whence by feveral Afc. and
Defc. over 2 or 3 Brooks, a hard ftony Way extends at 23*7 to TO RRJ NG TO N
wagna, a large Mt, To wn, on the fa id Towridg .
Back-


Ji y „ ■ .. .
Backward Turnings to be avoided, in the Continuation from Torrlngm.
I. i’f from Toning.on, t! c Riglu to Bartijlable. 11. In the Left to Ajigledore. I’ll, The
Left in Ham. lV. 2M. fhort of Ilf ar comb, the Left and Right acute. , .
• ! ■ % •:* f. ... . 'y
In the Road from Ufarcmb towards EXETER.
I. At the End of Newport, the Left to South-Moulton. 11. 2 M. beyond Koundjbam , the Left to
Touting. 111. I*7 fhort o£Cftimleighj the Left to Moulton. Iv. aF. fhort of Crediton, the
Right to Wejton Town.
The Road from
EXETER to TRURO, in Cornwal.
I. 'T'H E Point of Bearing W by S. 11. The Difeft Diftance M.
111. The Vulgar Computation 75 M. IV. The
From EXETER Comp. Meafure.
to Dunsford 05* jof oj’o off
Ch eg ford 05* 10 07*5 if’o
Tavljfoke 12 22 iB ; 2 33*2
JLifcard 12 j 32 iff
Comp. Meafurc.
to Lijtwithiel 07 4.1 1 08*7 S?’6
Gramjjond 10 13*7 7 i'j*
Truro 06 57 , 077 7?’*
75* 79’*
Devonjhire and Cornroal are the Counties which include the whole R, and the
Ex, Dart, Tavy, Tamer and Toy, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Way is
indifferent good to Chegford, tho’ Hilly, but after over Moor to ,
exceeding bad, being Hilly, Boggy, and Stony. Thence to Truro ’tis indifferent:
good again, and is every where (except on ) furnilh’d with good Inns.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 4*2 The Left to Chidley. y 96 The Left to Morton, n’o The Left to Morton. ly’i At the
End of Chegford , the Right acute. i6 9 o The Right to the Moors. 17*4 The Right acute.
2 s**4 The Left to Plymouth. 38'! The Left forward. 42’7 The Left acute. 43 ’i The Right
to Launcefton. 49*0 The Right acute. The Right to Liftwithiel. 6 2 4 The Right
acute. 6 4*5* The Right to Bodman.
FROM the Great Conduit in to the Weft-Gate ; where over a fair
Stone Br. crofs Ex flv. which rifing in £xmore,pa ffes by Tevenon and this place;
receiving, ift. the Dunsbrooh, and therein the Bark, id.’i he Leman. 3 d. the Columb ,
and therewith the Wever. 4 tb. the Credy, and in it the Forton. jth. th eCJyft. 6th.
the Ken, and falls into the Sea at Exmouth. Beyond the Br. enter St. Thomas , a
Suburb of Exeter of 4 F. on the Road. At 2 M. crofs a Brook in a Valley, and pals
by forne Houfes call’d Pocon, to Longdown-H. At leave the Heath, go thro’
Longioxvn-End Y. and at 4’4 defc. SF. palling in the Bottom thro’Crew Village.
Hence at 7M. crofs a Vale, leave Reddey V. clofe on the Left, and at 7’5 go
thro’ DunsfordV, At s’3 defcend 3F. and over a large Valley, aleend at 10T,
6F. At 11’5 afcend likewife, then 2 Defc. lead thro’ a Valley. At i4’4 defcend
a Hill to Chegford, formerly a Mt. Town, now difus’d. At prefent it contains
about 80Houfes, and is adorn’d with a fair Church, in which are the Tombs of
Sir Willi am Whiddon, and ftames Pron\, Efq; About 3M. cliftan ton the Left, is’
Morton, or Mon.n-TJampfteed, having a good Market on Saturdays.
From


From Cheg ford crofs a ßfook in aYale to Dartmoor at 17*3,a net at 19'M.mectfvtth
a Stone for Direction on the Right, call’d Heath-Stofte. Ac 20'4 croffing Turnabout*
Brooky 2 F. farther, come to a Stone on the Left, ca ll’d Merry-Pit, 2nd <5 F. beyond,
to a Houle on the Right, of the fame Name. At 2 i’y crofs a Stone Br.of 9 Afches,
call’d Poft-Bridg ,over a Brook, and at 23’4 another Stone Br. over Cherry Brook :
Thence by Crockham-Tor , a Hill of Rocks on the R ight, at 25’3 over a Stone Br*
crofs Han fiv. and at 27*2 pafs by Trundle, the laft Direftion-ftone on the Right.
At 2p’2 in a Vale over a Stone Br. of 2 Arches crofs a Brook, and 2 F. farther,
pafs by 2 or 3 Houfes on the Left, call’d croffing another Brook at 30*3*
There defeend a Hill of 3 F. and leave the Moor. Whence over a Stone Br. of five
Arches, crofs Tavyox Teaveflv. to Tavifluck , of 4 F. on the Road, but more tranf-
verfe. ’TB a large Borough-Town, formerly of great account for its Abbey,now
divided into Tenements. It fends Burgeffes to Pari, has 2 Alms-houfes,and is well
water’d; a Brook running thro’ every Street. ’Tis govern’d by a Port-reeve, and
8 Magiftrates, having a great Mr. on Frtd. and 5 Fairs. The D. of Bedford being
Lord of the Town. Leaving which,erdfs a Stone Br. of 2 Arches,over a Brook at
34’y and afeend a Hill of 7 F. At in a Valley,crofs New-Bridg of Stone,with
6 fair Arches over Tamer fiv. to the County of Cornwal, and 7 F.beyond pafs by Den-
fen V. clofe on the Right. Then over Henfha owns, at 40’6 defeend 6 F. and at
42’6 defeend again. Whence croffing a Stone Br. of 3 Arches, over a Brook a-
feend a-Hill of 1 M. and an eafie Defc. by Ch. on the Right, leads at 45’7
to a Defe. of 3 F. at the bottom of which, pafs thro’ Combrow , a iina II Village.
A Furlong beyond, crofs Combrow-water, a Rivulet, afeend 4 F. and at the top,
pafs thro’ Merry-meet V. 7 F. farther, crofs another Brook, and over an eafie Ale.
to Lifcard , or Liskerd, of 3F. on the P_oad, but more tranfverfe. ’Tis fituate in a
Level, and had formerly a Caftle,now ruinousbeing an indifferent large Town-
Cotp. driving a confiderable Trade in Yarn, vended at Exeter, fsV. It lends Bur-
geffes to Pari, and is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 6 Magiftrates,fsV. Here is
a good Free-School, and a confiderable Mt. on Saturd. with 5 Fairs.
Thence paffing over feveral Afc. and Defc. and feveral Brooks, alfo by the
'Eaflern-Middle and Weftern-Tap houfes ; leave Broddoek Ch. on the Left, and Lejtomy -
Caftle on the Right, now ruinous; but formerly the Seat of the Dukes of Cornwal,
Then at 56’/ thro’ Polfco V. 7 F. farther, over a Stone Br. of 9 Arches crofs Toy
fiv. to Lijtwiihiel, call’d in Cornijh, Lefi-Vthiel , and by Ptolemy V\eUa. ’Tvvas here-
tofore feated on a Hill, but now in a Bottom, and was of greater Note then now
it is , the Riv. being choak’d up. However, ’tis at prefent a Town-Corp. enjoy-
ing feveral Privileges : For it fends Burgeffes to Pari, has a (hare in the Coinage
of the Tin, and is the only Place where the Gaol and Courts for the Stannery are
kept. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Csc. and has a good Market on Fridays.
From Lifinithiel crofs feveral Hills and Brooks, paffing thro’ St. Blais V. at 61 ’4
Tregorrick V. at 66 and Polbooth V. at 67*1. Thence to or Crampont, at
72’3 on Vale fiv. ’Tis a Town-Corp. fending Burgeffes to Pari, and govern’d by
a Mayor, Recorder, and 8 Magiftrates. It contains about 100 Houfes, is in the
Parifh of Creed, and has a Market on Tuefdaysy with 2 Fairs. .
Whence thro’ Some at 72’/, Probm at 74 M. and Trefill-n at 7s’s, all fmall Yil*
lages, enter TRVRfi at 78*7, a large Corporation and Me. Town. '
Backward Turnings to he avoided.
I, 7F. beyond Trefillon, the Left forward to St. Earn. 11. 2 Al. beyond Right
'Tregny. 111. At the Entring Freggorick, the Left 10 St. Aujtle. IV 7 . lAI 2b. beyond St.
Hats, the Left to Lanlivery. V. oF. ilioit of the Left to bar.-Jiable* VI. 7f-
leyond Longdovm-End , the Right to Aoivgton, The


The Road from
GLOCESTER to COVENTRY.
I. THE Point of Bearing N. E. 11. TheDireff Horizontal Diftance 47 M.
X 111. The Vulgar Computation 41 M. IV. The Himenfuration 5S’2.
From GLOCESTER Comp. Aleafurc.
to Cheltenham y oy 09*4 °9’4
Winchcomb f 12 oy’o 164
Camgdcn T \ l 9 n’+
Comp. Meafure.
ttt Stratford 8 27 1 i’j 394
Warwick 6 2$ 084 47*6
COVENTRX 8 41 104 f K
Clocefterfhire and Wamukjh. contain the whole Road ; and the Stour and Avon
are the principal Rivers crcls'd over *, affording in general no very good Way,
but fupply'd with frequent Towns, good Inns,
. Forward Turnings to be avoided.
■ * t
At 7*7 The Left to Hathertey. B*l The Left to Winchcomh y a different Way. 9’s* The forward
in Cheltenham y to Charlton Regis . The Left to South am. 17 M. the Right at the End of
Winchcomh , to Camfden y the Hill-way. iS’f At Hales-Crofs , the Left to Bradway. 20 M. by
Stanway- Ch. the Left to Staunton, ji’x At the End of Mickelion y the Right to Cap'on. 3 9*2
At Stratford Br. the forward up Stratford -Town. <fß M. at the End of Warwick } the Right to
* The Left to Kenelworth , f I*3 The Left to Kenelwofth,
SEtting forward from GLOcEStEl leave the Suburbs at i M. at 2’3 crofs a
Stone-Br. over a Brook, and leave Churf Ch. about 6F. on the Right. At
4 M. pafs over another Stone-Br. and Brook, and i M. farther, a Wooden-Br.
and Brook. At y’3 crofs a Stone-Br. and Rivulet, 4F. beyond, pafs by fome
Houfes on the Road, call’d Bedlam ; and at 9M. enter Cheltenham of 6F. con-
taining near 200 Houfes, with a fair Church : It has a good Mt. on ,
and 2 Fairs, vi\. on Holy-Thurfday and St. James’s Day.
Town,bear to the Left,and at 11 M. come to Treftbury V. ©f 3F. Whence
thro’ an irregular Way over a Hill of x M. by a Beacon on the Left, and by Toft-
lip on the Right, at i4’4 a Defc. of 4F. leads at i6’x to Winchcomh, .S.
tomb, of 6 F. on the Road, near Sudeley Caftle, formerly noted for its Abbey,built
by JQenulph, R. of the Mercians ; who, the fame day, he confecrated it, releas’d
Edbricht, R. his Prifoner. ’Tis a large Town, containing about 300
Houfes. Here, and at Cheltenham ,the People are much addifted to plant Tobacco,
tho’ they are fupprefs’d by Authority. The Town is govern’d by 2 Bayliffs and 10
Burgeflesj has a good Mt. on Saturd. and 2 Fairs, vi\. on April 25. and July 17.
Thence the Way is, for the moft part, open, palfmg by Hales Crofs at iß’s.'
Didbrook at i9’3. Stanxvay at 20 M. and over fome Brooks leads at 21T to an
Afc. of 6F. where you have Lidcomb W. on the Right. At 22 M. defcend ;
and at the Bottom, go down again; pafs thro’ Smwjhil V. of 2F. Whence over
Broadway Downs, eroding the great Road from London to Worcefter at 25 ’2, and
defeending at 26 7 a Hill of 4F. come to Wejftngton. There fall in with the
Road from the 4 Shire-ftone to Montgomery, and crolfmg a Brook, enter Campden
at dy'd, an indifferent large Mt. Town.
Leaving Campden,attend a Hill of 3 F.whence the Way is,for the moft part,open,
palfmg thro Mickleton at 31 M. and then by Whineton or Ch. on the Right.
At 32 2by Clifford Y.ciofe on the Right,and 3F. lar thereover a Stone Br. of three
Arches


Arches crofs Stour flv. near Its Conjunction with and enter W’arwiclflu
At gp’a, thro’ a part of crofs a large Stone-Br. of 13 great and 6 (mailer
Arches, over Avon flv. leaving the mairi Town of Stratford on the Left*
Hence again, the Way being moft part open, crofs fome Brooks, and by a
Toft on the Right* at 43’! come to Clopton P. on the fame Hand, which ranges
on the Road for above IM. Then over a Brook at 45*2, pafs thro’ *
at 46 M. crofs another Brook, and at 47’x enter Warwick , extending this Way
1 M. on the Road, and as much tranfverfe, which well deferves a particular
Account.
Warwick, call’d Warryngwic by the Saxons, and Caer-Guarwic by the Brhalns,
is fuppos’d, by Mr. Camden, to be the Pmfidium of the Romans, where they kept
a Band of Dalmatians. ’Tis a Place of great Antiquity, faid to be built by
ftungm, about 375 Years before the Birth of Chrift. ’Tis pleafantly feated
on Avon fiv. all the Paffages into the Town being over a Water, up a Hill
and thro’ a Cut Rock. ’Twas fortify’d with a Wall, now ruinous; but ftill has
a ftrong and ftately Caftle, fome time the Seat of the R. H. Robert Grevil, Ba-
ron Brook of B eauch amp-Comc ’Tis alargeCorp. and Shire-Town, con-
taining 2 Parifh-Chs. tbefides fome that are demolilh’d) that of St. Mary’s,
having feveral ftately Tombs in it of divers Perfons of Quality, the Houfes
are well-built, the Streets fpacious and well-order’d: In this Town, the Affixes
and general Quarter-Seffions for the County are held. ’Tis adorn’d with a good
Pree-School and Mt. Houfe, befides a noted Hofpital call’d St. fames’s, founded
by the Earl of Leicefier, for 12 decay’d Gentlemen, with an Allowance to each,
of above 20 /. per Annum, and 50 /. per Annum to a Chaplain. It drives a gteat
Trade, enjoys feveral Immunities, and fends BurgelTes to Pari. &c. ’Tis go-
vern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, and 12 Affiftant-Burgeffes; having
a great Mt. on Saturd. and 2 leffer on Tuefd. and Frid. with 5 Fairs, vis. on the
day after the Ift Sunday in lent, May-Day, Midfummer-Day, St. Bartholomew's*
Day, and St. Simon and fade.
Beyond Warwick, omit the forward Way on the Right to Rugby, &c. and bear
to the Left. Whence Avonflv. runs by the Road on the Right, for 4or 5 M. At
<53 M. you hwe Stonely Ch.on the Right 3F. and at 54’5 crolhnga Brook, leave
Bagginton Ch. on the fame Hand 6 F. Then over a Brook, pafs thro’
vulgo Stichel V. and at qy’6 come to the City of COVENTRY [Already defcrib’d
in London to Holyhead-'}
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 4. F. from Coventry , the Right to Kenelworth. 11. At the End of Stithel , the Right to Kenel*
* worth . 111. In Long-Bridge the Left to Sherborn. IV. Again!* Clopton- P. the Right to Aulcejier,
V. At Stratford-B r. the forward to Banbury. VI. 2 F. beyond the Right to Gloc Jicr+
a different Way. VII. In Campden , the Right forward. VIII. yF. from Waljwgton, the Left
10 Stow. IX. 6F. Ihort of Snozvfhile the Left to Winchcomb , the Hill-way. X. At the Beacon
beyond Wurchcombe the Right to Swindon . XL 4F. beyond the Beacon 3 the Left to Burford*
XII- At Bedlam the Right to Haze, the Left to Arle.
The Road from
GLOCESTER to MONTG 0 ME RT, North-Wales.
I* 'T" M E Point of Bearing N. E. by E. 11. The direfl Horizontal Dlftance do M«
• JL HI. The Vulgar Computation IV* The Dimenfuration 70*3.
}i 2 From


From GLOCESTER Comp. Mcafure.
to Huntley 04. 04. 0 6’6 o<£’6
&°Js 06 10 cB’4 15**2
Aluch-Birch o 6 16 o 22*7
JIERKI* O&D 04- 20 °s* 5* 28*4*
iembridg 10 30 ( 1 2*7 4,1*3
Comp. Mcafare.
to Prrjiaine of jf • 06’f
Knigton cj } 8 04’j j yi>,
Clurni 04. 4.1 cf’7 i j.g >2
Montgomery 08 fo j j z >j j o >^
f° 7°'?
Clocefierjhire, Hereford]!). RadnorJl). Slropjh. and Montgomeryshire, are the Counties
pafs’d thro’, and the Severn,Wye, Arrow, , Lug, Ternd and are the prin-
cipal Rivers crofs'd over ; affording for the moft part, a hard Way, tho’ Hilly*
neither is the Entertainment fo good as in the forward Roads. ’
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
The Right to Kevrent, and the Left to Newnham. fy The Left forwards, if 2 The
, Rigl't in Rfiji to l.idbury. 1 fy The Right in Wilton to 16’} The Left to
mouth. 2o’.f The Left to Monmouth.2<-/o The Right to jo’j The Left to Hun-
tington. 43’3 The Left to Kei/tton. 44’j The Right forward, 48*2 In Frejiaine, the forward
to Radnor. 49’; The Left to the Forelc. s2>-j The Left to Skipora. f 6’6 The Left acute
6f } The Left acute.
T7ROM the CTy o{G LOGESLR Rctofc Sei an fJv. and pafs thro’ Over and
ley fas in London to St. David’s.) Whence bearingto the Left, foon turn again
fo the Right; crofs a Valley; and leave the Church on the Right. Then pafs
• thro’ Durley-Crofs V. and Lea-Line V. allb by feveral Houfes on the Road, come
at it M. to Lea V, of 3F. on a fmall Hill. At n’s enter and by
IVejion Ch. on the Left, pafs at ? 5 M. to Rofs of 4 F. and as much tranfverfe on
Wyeflb. a fair large Borough-Town,containing about 300 Houfes. It has a good
Mt. on Thurjd. well ftor’d with Corn, Cattle, OV. and 4 Fairs, on
JDay, Corpus Chrifti,St. Margaret’s, and St. A
Thence at 15 ’6 over a Stone Er. of 6 Arches crofs flv. toWilton V. of 2F.
and pafs thro’ Peterftone at 174. Then over Pitchers Com. and by Selock-Htmland.
Ch. 4 F. on the Right, alfo by Harwood V. at 21*3 moft on the fame hand ; and
by ftraggling Houfes, come at 22’6 to Much-Birch V. of 2F. At 24*3 leave Dew-
church 1 F. on the Left, and by feveral Houfes arrive at the Suburbs of
REFORD at 277. Two F. farther, over a Stone Br. ofß Arches, crols to
the City itfelf, fometime containing 6 Parifh Chs. befides the Cathedal, 2of
which were demolifli’d in the late Civil War. The Cathedral was firft built by
K. Miljride, and deftroy’d by Gruffith Prince of and Algar an Evglifo Man
during their Rebellion againft K. Edw. the Confejfor .’Twas re-built by Bilhon
Rgmelin and his Predeceffors, to which now belong a Biffop, Dean, Chancellor
6 Canons, 27 Prebends, a Chanter, Treafurer, 12 Vicars Choral, with Deacons*
Chorifters,or. This City drives a great Trade in Gloves, tranfpofted to •
don-, and has feveral well endow’d Hofpitals for the Poor.
Leaving the City at 287 1 F. farther, crofs a Brook, and leave Holmer Ch. <F.
on the Right. Thence by feveral Houfes,and over Rivulets, by King's Peon Ch. on
the Left, thro’ Fynappers Green, and by BerJey Ch. 2 F. on the Right. At 387 over
a Stone Br.of 4 Arches, call’d Stratford Br. crofs a Brook, where is a pood Inn
and enter Pembridg at 4T2 of 3 F. a Jmall Town on Arrow flv. with a Mt. on TuefcL
Beyond the Town, over a Wooden Br. of 7 Arches, crofs the Paid Arrow, and 2
F. farther, a Brook over a Wood Br. the Road being indirect, Then by
t/rj the Right,at46 M. come to Comb V. d hereover a Wooden Br. crols
Wadehfly. to Radnorjh. Whence a direct Road to Preftain at 47’6 of 6 Furlongs.
Leaving the Town at 48’4, 2F. farther, crofs Lug flv. over a Wood Br. and by
Fulbrook- Houfe on the Lett, pafs thro’ Norton V, at 497. V/hence 3F. farther,
a fee ml


1 afcend <5 F. and at $ 1 M. afcend likewife 3 F. equally defending to IQtigbton at
<2l of 3 F. on lemdflv. a well-built Town, containing above 100 Houl.es; with
aolentiful Mr. on Thurfd. and 2 Fairs, vi\. on and 23. Nigh un-
to this Town, is chat noted Ditch call'd Dike.
Thence crofs the Temd to Sbropjh. afcend a Hill of 6F.at 53 M.at *> <5 ’ x defcend
2 F. crofs a Brook, and paft by the I{ofe andOcmwlnn on the Right, There afcend
a Hill of BF. 3F. beyond, defcend as mjich; and at the Bottom, enter Clun V.
of 2 F. in which, over a Scone Br. of 4 Arches, crofs Onkflv. and at the End, leave
a demolifh’d Caftle on the Left. At 2 afcend 3F. and pafs by Blyn V . on the
Right; Whence fome Houfes lead at 62 Ivl. over a Brook, where you afcend
6F. and leave Bifops Caftle IM. on the Right. At 637 delcend 3F, and at
<54’2 by tijhops Mott-Hill on the Right, enter Montgomeryfire.
Hence 2 Defc. by feveral Houfes, bring you at 5 thro’ Y. Then
by Cherflock Ch. 1 M. on the Right, and by the Lord Herbert's Park on the fame
Hand, come to Montgomery at 70T on a fmall Afc. taking its Name froin Roger
4e Montgomery , its firlF Founder, and former of more Note than now it is; ha-
ving had a ftrong Wall and Caftle, now ruinous. At prefent it fcarce contains
100 Houfes, yet is the Shire-Town, fends aßurgefsto Pari, and gives Title to
the R. H. Philip Herbert , Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, ’Tis govern’d by 2
Bayliffs, a Recorder, &c. having a Mt. on thurfd. and 4 Fairs, vi%. on March ij,
May 17. St* Bartholomew’s Day, and All-Saints.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I, At the End of Montgomery, the Left to Bridgnorth. IJ. At the Entrance of Shropjh the Left to
BiJfjops-CaJile. ILL 7F. beyond B/yn, the Left to Ludlczu. IV. xo F. beyond Clun, the Right
acute. V. At the Kofs and Crown Inn, the Left acute. VI. In Knighton , the Right. VII. 1F„
from Knighton , the Right. VIII. 2F. from J the Right to Kinston. iX. In Comb, the
Right to Kinston . X. F 5 beyond Comb 9 the Left to Lemjier, XI. i 96 Hiort’ of P embridg y the
Right to Stanton. XII, Hereford , the Right to Egyn-Czte. XHI. *M. fliort of
Much-Birch , {he Right to £ ajion Br. XIV. In Rofs, the Right to Monmonth. XV .2 F. fliQrf
of Huntley , the Right acute.
The Road from
HEREFORD to LEICESTER.
I. 'TP 9 E Point of E - N - E * ll* The dire# Horizontal Diftance 71 M,
J_ 111. The Vulgar Computation 67 M, IV. The Dimenfur alien 86’6.
F tom HEREFORD Comp. Meafure,
*o Fromfhill 10 10 ll’? 1 1’j I
WORCESTER 10 20 j 12'y 2 4’4 I
Droitzoich ©y zy j 3 0> f
Bromfgrove oy jo ! oy ? 4 I
Alchurch 03 35 j °4 7 4 10 '
Solihui 07 40 1 oj'o yo’o }
<
Comp. Mcafurc.
Jto Meriden oy 4y 06*4, y^4
I COfENTRT 05* s*o 6 z>6
Wooivey 07 f 7 o</i 7F7
. Shamford cj 60 ! 04*4. 76^
Lcicijier 07 (>7 [ io’j b6*S
~7T »
Hereford fire, Worcefterf. IVdrwickf. and Leicefterf. inetude the whole Road}
and the Lug , Loadon , Proem, Temd, Severn, Sal warp, Arrow, Blcjfomfield, Blith, Sher-
bom. Sow and Sour, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Way is bad to
IVorcefisr, thence to Coventry indifferent, and bad again to Leicejter.
li 3 Forward


Forward Ttimings to be avoided.
At 14. The Left to Shehvick. 2’i and z’l The Left to Bromyard. o’4 The Right to V( W*
if d The Left to Sucr.ley.. The Left to Shrewjlury: 36’4- The Right 10 London." if? 7
The Left to Birmingham, jb’i Ihe Right to London, yo’i The Right to Warwick ci’(S
The Right m Hampton on the Hill, jS+’j The Left to Nuneaton. 6f j The Left to Hinliley
6 j: 7 Th « R.ghtto Rugby. 7 2’ 3 The Left to Hinkley. 74.’ 2 The Right to London , the
Iratling-Jtreet Way. *
fROM the Town-H3.1l In HE]{EFOI{Py psfs out 3 t Byjiyers-Gtztd* and teuve the
City at SF. At i’7 over a Stone-Br. of 3 Arches, crofs ue and leave
Lxigvoa.rd.me Ch. 4F. on the Right: Then by feveral Houles and Wethington Ch.
on the Left, come at 5 M. thro Shecknal V. at 7*5 to a Stone Br, over Loadonfiv •
and thro’ Lower Ivgleton Y. Thence again by feveral Houles on the Road oafs
at 10*3 a Wooden Br. over Froomfiv. and 3F. farther, afeend a Hill of 6 F. Af*
ter wards by fome Houfes, call’d Frame’ s Billy defeend again 5 F. and at the Bot-
tom crcfs a Rivulet.
At 14 M. over a Brook enter Worcefterfh. whence by feveral Houfes, and 2 Defc.
pals by Aufrick Ch. on the Right, and Efq; Sand’s Houfe on the Left, thro’ a Wood
and by a Park on the Right. At 19b to Simon V. and at 26b to Braunsford Y.
ot 3F. A t 21’6 over Braunsford Br. of Wood crofs 7 end fiv, which arifing in Bad-
fiorjh,' pafles by Kyjighton, Ludlow and Ten , and about 2 M. below this Place
falls into the Severn ; receiving into it, tft. the Brad field, 2d. the Clime, and there-
in the Onk j 34. the Ony, and therewith the Warren and 1 4 the ,
sth. the Led wick, and, 6th. the Rea»
At 24 M. come to St. John's, or Part of the Suburbs of WORCESTER, and 4 F.
farther, over a Stone Br. crofs Severn fiv. to the City itfelf, deferib’d in London to
Aberijtwhh.
At 25 M. leave the Suburbs call’d Forefireet,2nd at 2fi<y over a Stone Br.crols a
Rivulet. Thence by feveral Floufes on the R.arrive at 27b at .hard
by Henlip -houfe, about 3F. on the Right '. Then thro’ Part of M arton, a ftraight
Way leads at 30’4 to Droitwichalias Dunwich, perhaps 4 cxnofo on .
a Town Corp. noted for excellent White-Salt. It contains about 400 Houfes,with
4 Chs. St.Petcr s, St. Nicolas s, St,Andrew's, and has Privilege to Ar-
reft for any Sum ; and is govern’d by 2 BaylifFs and 4 Juftices. Its Mt. is kept on
Frtd. behdes 3 Fairs, vi^. on St. Thomas's Day, Cood-Friday, and St. Simon and
At 3 1 3 over a Wooden Br. crofs Salwarp fiv. at 33 M. pals thro’ or Hen-
brook V. and leave the Ch. on the Left. Then by P. on the fame Hand,
repafs the Salwarp over a Stone Br. and 1 F. beyond, enter , a Mt.
Town, of 6 Furlongs.
In the Town, crofs Salwarp again ; thence thro’ Bur me V. at 37b an indifferent
ftraight Way,leads at 41 oto Alchurch of 2 F. havinga Fair on Day.
Beyond this Town, crofs Arrow fiv. and at 43b pals thro’ With, a fmall Village.'
. Hence over Witho H. at 45 2 come to Warwickjh. then over Dickens H. and
ley H, and by feveral Houfes, at 49b to Solihul, a Town of 2 F. formerly enjoy-
ing a Mt. ddus’d by reafon of a great Sicknefs; but ftill having a Fair on -
mas-Day. Thence again by fome ftraggling Houfes, thro’ Harm on on the Hill,
j 3 6 crors Blnhfiv. and enter Meriden V. at <5 5’5. Afterwards over fome Afc.
and Defc. pafs thro Aufley at 60 M. and at 62b.
rom that City at 62 2 thro’ Torkjhul, crofs Sow fiv. and at 69 M. leave Sheldon
1 t e on the Right. At 71 7 thro’ Woolvey V, of 2 F. and over Woolvey- Warren,
come at 74 M. to the Watling-flreet Way, leading from London to Shrewsbury, and
iro Smoikmton Y, Ihus entring Leicefterfh* by Troutfwonh on the Right, and
‘ ‘‘ ’• ■" ‘ .. ■ '■ . . ' ■ " Aft on


'Aflon on the Left, at pafs thro 5 Sham ford V. of 2F. and croft which
runs by the Road on the Right to Leicejler.
Hence by Sapcoat and Croft on the Left, and over feveral Brooks, alfo by
and Elfin on the Right; at 86 M. appears a Stone Kr. of 4 Arch. There crofs the
Sour, and enter Leicejier a Corp. Mt. and Shire-Town, of more Antiquity than
Beauty, faid to be founded by K Heir B44 Years before the Birth of and call’d
Caer~Lerion ; where he likewife built a Temple of sanm, and plac’d therein a Fla-
rnen,or High Prieft, according to Geffrey ap Arthur. However, ’tis certain, that it
Requeft under the Elmans, and was made an Epifcopal See, A. C. dBo, by
Ethelred , R. of the Mercians , re-edify’d and encompafs’d with a Wall by the Lady
Edclfled, Anno 9l4; which, with its Caftle, are long lince fallen to ruin.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
j 4 F. fhort Smockinton, the Left to Little Wiljion. 11. 2F. beyond Smockinton, tbe Right to
' Shrewsbury the Watling-Jireet Way. 111. At the End of Hampton, the Right to Colejhill. IV.
10 F beyond Hampton, the Right to Colejhill . V, At the End of S')libul, .the Right to
mingham VI. In Jlchurch, the Right to KeJermnJier. VII. 2F. beyond Bur cote, the Right
to Kederminjier. VIII. In Droitwich, the Right to Kederminjier. IX. In Worcejier, the forward
to London. X. In St. John’s, the Right to Bromyard, the Left to XI. In ,
the Right to Lye. XII. BF. from Sutton, the Right to Lulfey. XHL yF. fhort of the entring
Hereford]}}, the Left to Lidbury.
The Road from
HUNTINGTON to IPSWICH, in Sussolk.
I. “TH E Point of Bearing E. S. E. 11. The direft Horizontal pittance <5B M*
A 111. The vulgar Computation 54 M. IV. The Dmensuration 71’6.
' ' 1
From Huntington Comp. Me afore.
to St. Ives of of of *6 of’(s
of 10 o(T4 12^2
Sutton 03 13 04’4
£LT of 18 06’f 23'j
Soham 04 2? of J $ { 28'©
. . 1
Comp. Me afore,
to Bury 14 3 6 iB’o 4^**?
Wulpit of 41 f<f-£
JVeedham 06 47 *>2*6
JfywicA 07 f 4 I 7<’s
f+ 7?’*
HumhmonMn, Cambridgeshire, and Suffolk, include the Road; and th and
Or vo el are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. Altho’ the Way be, mfome Part, fen-?
nv, and generally deep and dirty; yet, the of good Thorough-fares
renders it not altogether uneatte or unpleafant to the 1 raveller.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At i M The forward Way in Godmanchejier, to London. fmtfflg St. the Right to Cam-,
6 M The forward Way, at the End of St. Ives. 6’6 The Lrft to Houghton 13 M,
The Left to Cambridge. ,2’+ The Right. * f j The Left acute. f s’i The Right to
_The Left. 6o’f The Right in Comesford. 6i’6 In Need hunt, the Left to Codnam,
FROM Huntington. crofs Onfofiv. and 2F. after, enter Godmmhcflcr, an an,
cient Corp. of 6 F. There turning (hort on the Left, and leaving the Tow a
at 12 an open Way leads thro’ Kerning sford- Abbo y. the pi. on tne Rigat; and
< F. farther, thro’ Herningsford-Grey, the Church on the Left.
At 5’2 repaffing the Owfc over a fair Stone Br. to St, Ive *> v 1 t
Ivo , a perftan Bilhop; a large and well frequented Town, with a\ei y D rtat ,«
on Mond. for Cattle, Prorifioas, r dc, , « ence
li. 4


_ Hence over open arable Lands, leave Holywell to the Left on the River, vlvins
Name to the adjacent Fen, and at 8a pafs thro , Needenworth V. of 2 F. Whence
a i.rai|ht open VVay,arable and common, brings you to Tome Houfes on the Left,
can d Par [on age-End , and after by Erhh Ch. on the Right. Then over arable and
femny Gronnd, part of Holywed-ken aforefaid ; at xa’o enter a large Town
or 3F. (apply d with 2or 3 inns; but net enjoying the Benefit of a Market.
At 12 6 pafs the tuft great Cut or Drain, and at 13’c) the fecond;' where en-
tnng Cambndgjh. and leaving the Riv. bear to the Left along the fide of the
Drain upon hath Can fey. At 14 6 leaving the Drain, and palling over Sutton-
, n » a Bl "® ok at and a * cend Kill of 3F. to near iM.
™S’ .r h eve y a Cherry-Gardens. 1 hence at 17 M. a ftraight and open Way
by Wuhan on the Left, leads at 19 M. to Wentworth alias Win?ford of 2F. at
2 V '°}u lC: t d *-?}' and at 2 t 7 rotlie Cit y of ELY ; -fa-id to be built by Ethel*
udXy Aldietn, or Audrey, fir ft Wi.e to one Tombret, a Prince of this Province, and
after wards- of Egjrid, K. of the Nonhurnbers. It fuffer’d much by the Danes., but
yvas i-oon rebuilt by Ethelwold , Bifhop of and planted with Monks.
Twas made a Bilhops See under K. H. I. w h o fe Bilheps, till temp. H. VIII.
"f. t “. e ICghts 0 f a , County-Palatine, and ffcill in part enioy the fame. The
loce e ( ormeily Pair of Lincoln) includes the County of Cambridge and Iflejof
. 011 y*. Tbo CatheuraJ, dedicated to St. Ethelred , is a ftately Srudiure, Ihew-
mg a curious lofty Lanthern or Turret; yet this City is of no great Splendor or
Frequency of Inhabitants. - 0 r
Fr°*h ElJ 7 over the Draw Br. crofs the aforefaid having Common
on the Lett, and Efyßt. Fen on the Right; whence thro’ Part of Stontnay , lea-
ving tne Hall and Chap, on the Left, come to Dulbndg at 26’4 over a Drain,
nc 10 over Common Fen, arriving at 28 5 4ac Sobam* a. large Town of <Fi
extent* very dirty, but affording one good Inn, ■ >
. Hence hySobam Mere of about 1000 Acres on the Right, and over a Brook,en-
ter open arable Lands. At crols Fordham Br, leave Fordham Ch. on the Left,
and pafs thro open Way, conhfting indifferently of Arable and Pafture; At 32*4
Bro . ok ’ and by Ped-houff, an Inn on the Left; at 36’2 come to the
Grange Water, and the County of Suffolk. W hence by rennet and Kmford at feme
;‘>^ e r^‘ Sht: ’ 39 atcencl 3F. and over Sheep-Downs • having a
If v n fpe » ° f 6 T °v ton hlgh Trees Eaftward. At 4C3 defeend 3F. eroding in
the Ya ley Barrow Br. over a Brook, then by Sax ham and Weftley at fome diftance
S bfl p’h • 4 1 5 pafs dy the spittle on the fame Hand, to St. Edmunds-Bury
at 40 1 of 6 h. this,Way ; a large Corp. and Mt. Town. ■. <
fhJfmfiw/ 4 thro> ?' J^‘ G . ate ’ and at the End of the Town Gate, croffmg
£': n ; a ' R ‘ V ’ er ’ ‘S nll , n§ a little h ‘» her Southward, paffes by r df.
Hence thru aq open Way, between Eenon and Puff brook, come to a Lane at so’4
?in.i mC ‘«"d Pla c =i at , 2 'ol&' V.ofaF.Tcai
,° n ?, e R 'S ht - y l,ence *>y and Ch. on the Left;
call’d from a f»> P lt Watei , 2 F. farther, enter e. Luporum Futons , lb
©f 4F, on theßoadf? 1 ? Wo^ves W £re ufually bury’d ; a large and fair Town,
2 « alCe .T l if having a fair Pror P eft round the Country. Then go down
to nit. t? ?! W v r ? n ‘ Dy P * clofe the Road, for 7F. comelt 5 7*4
Stow Mil r ’ | ea ving Hay ley near xM. on the Lefr. At 5 9’5 appears
welT the Conjunction ot Gapping and Omelflo, a large Town, with a
roiki ?nf oa rhu,<jd ; and a fair on St. Peter's Day. Its chicfelt Trade is
wakipg of Tammeys, and it has Cyeral good -Inns. ............. >
w *■’ 4 '* v '> 4 * v « -v . v< A t


At 6s)’2 crofs the Gipping ; pafs thro Comesford V. at do’-; and by-W .Cremg-
Hall and Church on the Left; over Bailey Brs. to Needham at 62’ 4, a poor 1 own
of 3 F. on OrmJ fiv. It has a fmall Mt. on and drives a Trade in ma-
kins Blews, Broad-Cloth, tie. , _ r
Beyond the Town, repaying the Orwel, leave Codenham ßeacon on the Left;
at 6sT go thro’ Codenham, or Coin am V. of 3 F. and 10 F. farther, thro Bar-
ham V. At 67T over Claydon Br. and 3 F. farther, to of 3 F. with 2or 3
Inns. Whence by Claydon-Hal] on the Right, a direct Way leads at 71 2to IPS-
WICH, an ancient Corporation and Market Town.
Backward Turnings to be avoided. , .
I. At the End of Claydon, the Right to NORWICH. II. At Owes ford the Left. 111. At the End
• oiHayley New-Jireet, the Right. IV. 4F. fliott of Barow Br, the Left to Aetu-Market. V. The
Right forward in St. Ives. VI. At tlie Lnd of St. Ivss y the Left to St. Jxcots.
The Road from
IPSWICH in Sussolk, to NORWICH.
Continued to Cromer , on the Sea-Coaft, in Norfolk.
I. THE Point of Bearing N. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftancc 49 M%
‘ * 111. The Vulgar Computation 46 M. IV. The Dimen far mm 664.
From Ipfwich Comp. Meafurc.
to Clay don 03 °5 ! °V 2 o^2
Thwait 0$ u i2’o 162
Ofmondfton 05- 16 07*4, 23*6
Lorsg Stratton 66 2 2 , 32*6
Comp. Meafurc.
Ito NORWICH o& 30 n’o 43*6
Alejham $9 i
Creme? °7 i°’* 66^
Suffolk and Norfolk contain the whole Road; and and 17><?are toe
principal Rivers crofs’d over; affording in general a very good Road, except
between Codnam find Thrum.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At o’j- The Left to Colchejler. 4.’* At the End of Clay don, the Left to B«;t. ft The Left to
Needham. n’z The Left forward. i«’7 The Right acute, n’l The Right to Aye. +6 a
The Left to Cajion. 57’f The Left to Holt, fB’6 The Left acute.
a i >■ •. • V . .*. ’" ‘
FROM Ipfwich thro’ GmUG ate, or Bar- Gate, a ftraight Road leads at 3 M. by
fome Houles on the Left; after by Claydon- Hall on the lame Hand; and at
4’ 3 thro’ Claydcn V. of 2 F. leaving Barham Ch. 5 F. farther on the Right.
Whence by feveral Houles, and a Wood and Ridg of Hills on the. Right, on
which ftands Codxnharn Beacon ; croffing a Brook at 7 leave Codeneam vulgo
Coinam Ch. a little on the Left. „ _ .
Hitherto a good Way; but for the next 8 M. lefs commendable, hor palling by
feveral Houles on the Road, and croffing a Brook, at 9 M. you enter the Woods,
and that Part of the Way call’d the Fye-Epad. When between Earl s Stonharn and
Jpfol-Stonham,znd by feveral Houfes on the Road; at n’2 have the on the
Left, and Little Stonham -f M. on the fame Hand : There omitting the forward
Way,bear to the Right, till an indifferent ftraight Way, butvery Woody for lev tr-
ial M. by ftraggiing Houfes on the Road (leaving Mendlejham, a M'.l own a 6
) M. on the Left, alfo £>eknlmn } another Mt. Town, 2 of 3 M. to aie Right; leads
i . • . 1 *» '< v- •t ■ < •* x** * > * » . , ‘•* Y'' ' ’


at 15*$ to Jhwah. Then leave the Church and Hall on the Left, and 6F. far-
ther, pa fs thro 5 Thwuit-ftreet.
Hence by rhe Queen’s Head.- Inn on the Right, and lome Woods on the Left,
crofs a Brook; at fi go out of the Fye-Fpad and dirty Way; pafs by Smk Ch.
and Hall,a little diftant on the Right; and at iß’i to the in the Roadj
directing the 4 Ways. Thence by fonje Woods on the Right and Left, paffing
thro’ Taxleyftreet at 1 ST6 ; leave Tioc/ey Ch. and Beacon on the Right, and
Hall at 22’f, IM. on the fame hand. Whence a Road on the Right, extends to
Aye or Eye, an ancient Mt. Town, about 3 Milesdiftant.
At 22’4 crofs Waveney flv. to the County of Norfolk, and Scale alias Ofmondfton,
a Thorough-fare of 3F. with 1 good Inn, the White Hart, noted for its fine
Carv’d Work. Here crofs the Road from Bury to and leave a Mt.
Town, about 2M. on the Left. Thence between Ch. and Hall, a
ftraight Way thro’ a Wood, by Titjhall-Mary Ch. on the Left, lies over a Common-
of IM. and at 29 M. to a Brook. Then thro’ another Wood, crofs a Brook a-
gain at 30’4, and thro’ a third Wood by Fulham Ch. 6 F. on the Right, come at
32’6 to Long-Stratton V. of near 2 Furlongs.
At 34 M. thro’ a V ill. 4 F. farther, crofs Stratton Brs. of Stone, over Wentfarflv.
and 3 F. beyond, pafs thro’ Tasboro V. leaving the Church on the Left. Whence
defending at 36 M. crofs Newton Stone Br. repairing the Wentfar , to Newton V.
where you afeend a Hill, and leave Newton Ch. 3 F.on the Left. Then by Swerft-
horp on the Left, Nun ft on and Cafter on the Right, afeending and defending; and
over a Heath, which was enter’d at 39’x; come to Hartford Brs. at 40’y, and at
43’i join the Road from London . There crofs Tarejlvt to the City of NORWICH at
St, Stephen's Gate, and leave it at St. Auftin’s Gate, lying 1 Mile on the Road. '
From the City this Road proceeds over the faid Heath, extending this Way
almoft to Hemingham, by Wcftward towards , and computed 100 M, in Com-
pafs; paffuig by a great Stone on the Right, at 45’6, and by Ch. on the
fame Hand, 1 Mile diftant; oppofite to the branching out of the Road to Cafton,
or Caufton. At come to Sr. Faith’s V, of 4F. with a very great Fair towards
the latter end of the Year ; and leaving the Ch. on the Left, at 40 M. pafs by
St. Faith’s Newton V, on the Right. Then by a Copfe on the fame Hand, crofs
a Brook at 50’x and leave Stratton Houfe and Church on the Right; the firft
near, the other more remote from the Road.
At I’2 a Pond lies on the Left; 2F. farther, crofs a Brick Br. over a Brook,
and paffing thro’ a Yillage at 5 2 M. leave the Heath. Then by Hemingham on the
Right; at 53’6 thro’ MaJhamY. and a little beyond, crofs a Rivulet or two. At
55 M, is a very good Profpeft Eaftward, to the Sea; and at an acute Road
bn the Right, leads to N. Wal(ham near the Sea, having a plentiful Mt. on Thurfd.
Two F. farther, enter Alefham of 3 F. in length, and more tranfverfe. ’Tis a
poor Town, chiefly inhabited by Knitters, but has a good Market on Saturdays.
Then pafs thro’a Village at 5 6’4,2 F. farther, a Brook, and 3F. beyond that,
over Ingwonh Br. crofs Bure flv. that falls into the Tare at Tamouth. At avoid
the acute Way on {he Left to Holt , and bearing to the Right, leave Ingworth and
Erpingham Chs. on the Left; where entring open Arable Grounds, a fair Profpeft
appears to Weft. Whence the Road generally open, paffing by Suffield Ch. and
Gunton Hall on the Right, alfo at 61’5 by Thorpmarhet Ch. on the Right, and Han-
worth Crofs clofe on the Left, leads IM. farther, to Fouton V. of 2 Furlongs.
At 64 M. go thro’ N. Reps V. of near 4 F. and at 65 M. by feme Houles on the
Left; 2F. larther,defcend a large Hill,and atbb’x enter CflONlEl the Sea ;
formerly a larger Town than now itis,containing2 FarifliChs.one of which,with
feveral


feveral Houfes Is fwallow’d up; yet it is, at prefent, an indifferent Mt. Town,
well frequented by Fifher-Men, £SV. ,
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I, At tlie End of Cromer, the Left to Yarmouth, along the Beach. 11. yF. fhort of Ch.
' the Left acute. 111. Againft Eryingham Ch. the Left acute. IV. Againft Ingworth Ch. the
Left to N. WalJljam. V. 2F. beyond Alejham Ch. the Left to Yarmouth. VL }F. fhort o£
St. Faith’s, the Left acute. VII. At the End of Norwich, the Right to London, the Left acute.
Yin. 2 F. fhort of Newton Br. the Right acute. IX. y F. beyond Stratton Br. the Left acute.
The Road from
KING'S-LYN in NORFOLK,
To Harwich in Ess ex.
I. HTHE Point of Hearing S. E. by S. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance <59 M.
‘ *■ 111. The vulgar Computation 59 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 76’1.
From Lyn Comp. Meafure.
to Swajfham 12 12 15*’° 15*’°
Stanford 07 19 24.^0
Thetford 06 25* 07*5* 31*5*
Ickfworth 07 j 2 09*4* r 4* I ' l
Comp. Meafure.
1' to Stow-Market oS 4-0 u’o s*2*l
1 tyfwich 09 4.9 12*0 x
Harwich , ■ 10 ! 5* 0 I '* 2 ’° 7^ x
S 9 I 6 ’ 1 .
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Effex, include the whole Road, and the
and Stour, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over.” The Way, for the mold part,
is hard and gravelly ; the Lanes being here and there a little walhy, but not in-
commoding the Traveller, who, every where, meets with good Entertainment,
and often with very pleafant Profpe&s.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
i’4- The Right acute to Vownham,Scc. 10’f The Left acute, at the Entring Norfolk, i+’j In
Swaffham, the Left to Fackenham. 19’* The Left acute. »£* The Right to Brandon, * the
End of Stanford. 51 ’y The forward Way in Thetford. +o’a The Left acute, y 1 M In Comef-
ford, the Right acute. ' y yTThe Left in Needham, to Codnam. 6f 6At Bone Br. the forward
Way to Colchejler.
Klng's-Lyn, was fo call’d upon account of its Loyalty to K.. s fohn and Henry 111.
by the firft of whom ’twas incorporated, and by the latter its Privileges
were augmented. It enjoys, at prefent, a good Maritime-Trade, being well fre-
quented by Merchants, Tradefraen, CSV.
> From the Mt. Place, thro’ S.Gate, palling on a Caufeway, fet forward thro
Hardvoick V. at \\. Then leaving Rimton Ch. on the Right, and all
on the Left, go thro’ Middleton V. at 4/2 and by an old Caftle on the Left, thro
Raft-Winch Y. at s’2. Whence a ftraight open Way leads at f* to a Stone Br.
over a Brook, and foon after, thro’ Biiney V. 5
‘ At 9*2 croffing 2 Brooks leave Narboro Ch. 3F. on the Right,and at to 3 come
to Lony ßr. over the Riv. which falling into the Ovoje at bears the Name
of the Town; 2 F. farther, pafs thro’ Nerford Y. and at 12 M. alcend 3F.
Thence over a Valley, a. ftraight Way, at to Srvaffh<tw 7 a good Mt. Town
of 3 Furl. • 1
■ Thence 3 Defc. extend at 18 M. to an ATc. of 3F. where you leave Ch.
IM. on the Right, and at i9’2 Great Kdrfmghm near as much on the Leh. Ac


2i M. pafsby Hilhoro Ch.and Hall, lomewhat diftant on the Left; at 23*2 Eedney
i M. on the fame hand, on the other fide of the Brook, and then by L anp forth Ch
and Hall, at a final! diftancc on the Right At 23 M. crofs a final] Branch of
Ovefe ftv. uniting with it above Downham, and at 24*1 come to Stand fo-d Village
with one good Inn. J b
Hence a ftraighc and open Way by 7Ch. about 4 F. ®n the Right, after
by a ndg ofHdls and Croxton P.on the fame Hand, leads at 29’; thro 'Croxton V
of 2 F. there leave Croxton high Trees on the Right (which yield a very fine Pro-
fpea,efpecially towards Lyn) alfo Lylverfton Ch. on the Left, and by Clays I ode
on the fame Hand, enter Thetford at 3T 3 an ancient Borough and Mt. Town on
little Orofeflv. In K.. Edw. the Confeffor's time, it contain’d 947 Burgefles and
under Wilium the Conqueror's 720 Manfions; the chief Magiftrate being a Con-
ful. It ftill fhews an high Mount which has been wall’d about and fenc’d with
a double Rampart; and here are ftill kept the Lem Affizesfor the County
In the Town,turn fhorton the Left,and crofs the little
about 10 M. Eaftof this Place, feparating the Counties of Norfolk and
Suffolk, which laft is here enter’d. At 33*6 croffing a Brook, and at 34*3 leaving
Burnham Y. on the Left, pafs by a Pond on the Right. At 36 M. leave Eufion Ch
and Had 1 M. on the Left, and at 3 8’2 Hon the Right, and Frqflon on the
H* ,4 ; faffing thro- Iclymni-Uorf V. at t'l oppofiS to which
* Church without a Steeple,, F. on the Right. At 40’, mby feme Hon.’
fes on the Left, and 3F. farther, to Ickfworth alius lx worth, a very good Town, lv-
■mg principally S. W. on the tranfverfe Road between Bury and Yarmouth. ’Tis an
ancient Place, the Name of it Teeming to retain fomewhat of the keni ; and has
an indifferent Mt. on Fridays. It (hews the Relicks of an old Priory : and within
thefe lew \ ears Epman Coins were here digg’d up.
From Ickf l worth paß by Fachnham Ch. and Hall on the Right, viz, one 1 M the
other about *M. diftant, and at thro’ a Village, part of the
Ch. 4F. on the Left. At 43’? Utlo Houfe on the Right, and at A M
Netm Ch. 4F. on the Left; after paffing between Wulpit, a Mt. Town near 1 M*.
on the Right, and Emfwell Ch. almoft adjacent on the Left.
Hence by Tome Houles on the Road, 3148*4 come thro’ Wetherden V. and < F
farther, to Hayky-Newftreet V. of 2 F. at the Entrance into which, the Road from
■Bury falls in on the Right. Thence an indifferent ftraight Road leads at <l’ 7 to
Stow-Market, of 4. F. on the Road; a well-frequented Mt. Town. Whence over
Orwelflv. pafs Comesjord at $ 3 M. Needham at 55*1, Codnamat <7’s, Barham at <B’?,
and Llaydon at 60 Miles. > '*
At the Entrance into Claydon, the Road from Norwich lies on the Left; from
winch, by CUydon-Yladd, a little on the Right, a direft Way, altogether enclos’d
fas this laft part of the Road has been likewife) brings you at to iuft
entnng which, fall in with the Road from Colchefter on the Right, and upon that
part of chat from London to Yarmouth. 1
,? ron ! jL he Cvn-HiUxvJpfwich, down Qngs-fireet, at 64*5 to Stoke Br. over Gippe
or Orwelfiv. pafs thro that part of the Town call’d Stoke. Then by St. Georye's
Chap, now ruinous, and feme Alms-Houfeson the Left, at 65’2 come to the River,
and 3 F. farther, to Bone Br. w here the Liberty of the Corp. ends! W hence bear to
the Left along the Bank, and pafsby Frefton, leaving the River at 6f 1, till entring
the juanes on the Right, an enclos’d Way leads by a Turret about 2 F. diftant on
theLefc; by Chempton about 6F. on the fame Hand, and by a Gravel Pic at
: 1 hus b y Avert on-Yiah and Park,at a final! diftance on the Right, come at 73*7
to i parr of Shot ley, the Church lying ~ M. to the Left; and at by the Beacon
on


on the Right, to the Ferry-Houfe. Here pafs the Riv. which, at this Place, is
about 1 M. broad, and 1 i M. upon a S. E. Line to a well fortify’d
Sea -Port and Market-Town.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I, 9F. .beyond Averton-V. tie Right acute. 11. In the Right to Norwich. 111. At the
End of Rawley-Newjireet , the Left t<“> St. Edmunds-b IV. In Iheifoid, the forward Way.
The Road from
K I N G’s - L Y N to N ORWICH,
Continued to Yarmouth , in Norsolk.
I. "T-’H E Point of Bearing E. by S. 11. The direfl Horizontal Diftance 48 Ml
JL 111. The vulgar Computation 48 M. IV. The .
From King’s-Lyn Comp. Meafure
toGayton of of \ 0 7*5 \°7 3
Mileham 09 14 J u’o zo’s
Billing ford 04 1# 1 06’2 • 2 6’s
Compi Meafure*
to NORWICH 12 |3O if 6 42’!
Hodsko 14 42 iff ff 6
Tarmoutb 06 48 of 6 6fs,
Norfolk and part of Suffolk are the Counties that contain the Road, and the
Windfor , Tars and Waveney, are the principal Rivers croft'd over. The Way is
every where very good, much open and heathy; infomuch that ’tis reported,
that Ring "fames j. once pleafanrly laid. He would have all Norfolk cut out into
Zpads, to fupply the reft of the Kingdom.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At j’6 The Left to MaJJinghani. 9*3 The Left acute., ty’i The Left acute. 19*1 The Left to
Stanfeld. 19*4- The Left acute. 20*4 The Left acute. The Left tv Billing ford. 29’f
The Left acute. 3 7*4 The Right to Hdfdon . 40*2 The Right acute. The Left to
€arleton. fo’6 The Right to TftHrJton. ,
FROM the Mt. Place in Kffng’s-lyn thro’ Cate) at iT pals by Maudlin's
Almes-Houfe on the Right, and 3F. farther, thro’ Gayweod of 2F. W hence
o.ver a large Heath at 2’2 leaving Bawfey on the Left; at sM.go by Chap,
and at 6’2 by Grimfton Ch. both on the Left, at a (mail diftance; crofting a Brook
to forae part of Gayton at 6’6, and thro’ the remainder of it at y’2.
Hence over a Hill of 2 F. at 10T by Lcdg on the Left at 14 M. come
to a fmall Ale. at i4’2, the Way continuing Heathy. Then leaving
ham Ch. on the Right, and Great Lexham Ch. on the Left, each diftant about
3F. from the Road, pafs at xy’2 to part of Lucheham alias Lycham y and 2F. far-
ther, thro’ Lychamoi - M. formerly a Mr. Town, but difufed fmee its Devalua-
tion by Fire.
At 19 M. crofsa Brook, and 4F. farther part of Mileham ; 3F. beyond, entring
the Town itfelf of near 3F. Hence an indifferent Way, by Stanfeld , Brifley ,
ElmhalmV. and Ch. all on the Left, leads at26’2 (having tirh croft'd IVimljor fv.
a little above its Confluence with the Tare) to Billingjo'd 0(4 F. alfo by Beck- Hull
and Baudfwuk on the Left. At 29 M. arrive ac Spurharn-Lorner ; bear to the
Right, and thro’ a Village at 31’a croft the Riv. over Br. Then by
Tyes-Hall on the Right, at 32*4 go thro’ Manon alias Martov juper Moment v. and
6 t, farther, (repairing the River} thro’ Aukbridg- Village.
At


At S') 5 ! over a Hill of 3F. and by 7 a on the Left, pals thro’ Drayton at
57’3. Whence afcending a Hill at 38 M. and leaving on the
Right, traverfe a Heath, and by a Stone-Crofs on the Left, at 41’4 thro’ St.
Martin’s Gate enter the City of NORWICH , which fuffer’d extremely by Sword
and Famine under K. Edv>. the Confeffor • and, in oppofing K. William the Con-
queror. ’Twas alfo harrafs’d by the Earl of Flanders , and Hugh Bigod, A. D, 1174,
by K. John for yielding to Lewis the French K. in 1216, and by the Barons in
1266. Laftly, ’twas much impair’d by Fire in 1508, and by that Arch-Rebel
who pitch’d his Camp at Muf-well-liiW adjoining, but being fubdu’d, was at
laft bang’d on his own Oak of Reformation. The chief Buildings are the Mt.
Houfe, Crofs, and Houfe of Correftion ; beiides an Hofpital for 100 Poor Men
andW r omen.
Five F. from Norwich., thro’ a Village, crofs Went far flv. at 44’2 to Trowfe of
2F. leaving Bixley and Kirby at 47 M. by a Smith’s Shop on the Right. Whence
by Carkton on the Lefc, and feme Houfes on the Road, at 49 M. pafs between
Ajhby and Hellington , and at 51 M. to Th of 3F. Then by Ch.
on the Right, and Hales clofe on the Left 5 at 55 ’4 leave Hocklinharn Ch. 2 F.
on the Left, and $7 M. Norton Ch. and Beacon, as much on the Right; 4 F.
farther, palling thro’ Fhurlfion Y. of 2 Furlongs on the Road.
At s9’6 by thorp on the Left, enter Hadsko, and fall in with the Road from
London : Whence over Hadsko Dam, and Waveney jlv. come to Suffolk , pafs thro’
St. Glaves at 6TI, Frinon-Jireet at 63 M. and by Belton Chap, and Bradtvel on the
Left, to Gorlfton at 66'j. - At6B’3 appears Little Barmouth, confifting only of a
few Houfes about the Bridg.
At 60’3 crofs Tare jlv. which a little above receives the Waveney and Bure , re-
entring Norfolk and arriving at Great TARNLOVTH ; anciently Garmuth and Jier-
tnuth, i. e. Garienis Ojiium, leated within 1 M. of the Tare's Influx into the Sea;
a Place of great ftrength, efteem’d the Key of the Coaft; incorporated under 2
Bayliffs by K. Henry 111. wall’d about in the iyth Year of his Reign; and lince
wellfortify’d. ’Tis a large and well-built Town, compos’d of many narrow
Rows or Paffages, and fome fair Streets. As a Corp. it fends Burgelfcs to Pari,
and is well inhabited, especially by Maritime People. ’Tis alfo an ancient Mem-
ber of the Cinque Forts , and drives a great Trade by Herring and Mackerel*
Filhing. Its Mt. on Saturd. is very conliderable, for Corn, Flefh, Fifh,<sV. It
has only 1 fair Church, founded by Bifhop Herbert under Will. Rufus, and ferv’d
by 2 Minifters. Altho’ the Inhabitants have no Poffeflions peculiar to moft
Corp, yet they maintain a Pier againft the Sea, at the yearly Charge (former-
ly of* ©o /,) but now at 4 times that Sum.
I
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 7F. beyond Gorlfton, the Left acute. 11. I ’6 fliort of Ffitton-Jireet, tbe Left acute. 111. In
Hadsko, the forward to Lo?2don. IV. fF. beyond Hadsko, the Left acute. V. In Thrift on ,
the Right 'acute. VI. SF. fhort of Hales-Ch. the Left. 5 beyond Thurjion , the
Right to AJhhy. VIII. 2 M. beyond Ipfwich , the Left acute. IX. At Sjurham-CorncT, the
Right to Bawdfwick. X. i M. beyond Billi?igford, the Right. XL Againfl Dunham CH.
the Left. 3m* Againft Ruff ham- Ch. the Left acute. XIII, I*7 flioxt of Gaynton } the Left
acute.
The


The Road from
MONMOUTH to LLANBEDER,
in Cardigan shire, Sout-Wales.
I. nr HE Point of Bearing N.W.by W. 11. The dire# Horizontal Diftance 61 M.
A 111. The vulgar Computation 48 M. IV. The Bimsnfuration 68*4.
From Monmouth Comp. Mcafure*
t 6 Llandilo-CruHemy j 107 og’i 08’i
* Ahergaveny fSI2 I 07*1 1
Crecozvel 4- ]l6 \ ofj 1 2i J 2
Brecknock 8 I 24 < I iz’j \ 3^l
Comp. Meafure-
to Redbrue 06 3° f I cg’o 4.2*1
Llanimdofiy ° 8 3 8 lO ’7 fj’o
Llanbeder 10 ,48 , if’ 5 ,
ii i r - nj^
+S <SB^
Monmouthjhire, Erecknockjh. and Cardigan/!), contain the whole Road;
and th e Monnow, frothy , Gr annoy * Vsk, forvy and fivy 7 are the principal
Rivers crofs’d over *, affording but a bad Way to Abergaveny, from thence to
Llanmdojry indifferent, and after to Llanbeder very Hilly. There are feveral
Inns on the Road between Monmouth and but from thence no Ac-
commodation till you come to Llanbeder .
• ' v Forward Turnings to be avoided.
t 0 R^ n /'r K 2 T,IC Ri S ht acute - f’ 6 The Left to B’j The Right
to mn-CaJile. i o’7 The Left to Usk. xf f The Right to Hereford, ifo The Left to lL-
,go»zie>' s o The Right acute. }4’7 The Left acute. 5 7’o The Right to <fi’»
‘T'U tQ evtno \ f® 4- The Left to Llangadock. fi’s The Right to Llanhrane. fi’*
The Left to Carmarthen, f The Left to Llangadock . 6 i’j The Left to Llandilovazvr.
LEAVING Monmouth 4 F. crofs Monnova fin* at 2’3 pafs thro’ fiockfield V. and
at 4 2 thro 1 Part of Llangadock. Whence an enclos’d Way over fome Hills
and 5 W ooden Brs. and Brooks, by Llanihang Ch. 4 F. on the Left,
leads at B’2 thro’ Landilo-CruJJeny, a dilcontinu’d Village with an Inn.
Hence a direft Way to Llanvapky at 10*4 defending a Hill and eroding frothy
pv. over a Stone Br. Then omitting the forward Way on the Left to Vsk, a
ftraight Road extends by Llanthevoerytherch Ch. on the Left, crofs a Valley, and
over a fmall Afc. at 13 *6 to Hill, and a Defc. of 8 Furlongs.
At 15 Ivl* crofs fienvey or Geveny fiv. over Vunter-Cwyn Br. to Abergaveny vulva
Abergeny t formerly Gobannium, feated at the Confluence of the Riv. Vsk and
ny ; a large and well-built Town, of about 500 Houfes, compris’d in 2 Parifties,
vi\. St. Mary s and St. s, and 8 Wards, vi\. Highftreet, Cow flreet , Butcher-
Low, and Kother-jbeet, within , Frog-More, and with-
out. ’Tis well fortify’d with a Wall, and an Old Caftle built by Cadwalader ;
and govern dby a BaylifF, Recorder, 12 fuperior and'ls inferior Burgeffes. Its
M ts *on Tuefd. and krid. are well ftor’d, as alfo its 3 Fairs, viz, on May 3. Tuefd. af-
ter Trinity-Sunday, and September 14, It has leveral good Inns, and a large Br. of
15 Arches over Vsk fiv. ' &
From Abergaveny crofs fiebhy Brook, and at x 7 ’i Part of them
running by the Road on the Lett. Ac 18’2 over a Stone Br. and Brook, at 19*2 en-
ter Brecknockjh, and 2F. fan her, pais thro’ Llangrenay V. Thereover a Wooden-
Br. crofs Grannay fiv. and 11 F. farther, Crecowel on the Vsk, a fmall Town, go-
vern'd


rern’d by a Bailiff and 2 Burgefles; it has a fmall Mt. cn and ? Fairs, vfy
on May-Day, St. Ikomu and St. Laurence 5 containing about 100 Houfes, with an
indifferent good Inn. , „ , , - . . 1 "xi > •
At 22’? by fevera.l Houfes on the Road, and over fome BrooKS leave Llmu
banple-Ycombdy Ch. on the Right, and by other Houfes on the Road, call’d 7re-
tuivre- at 25’6 pals thro’ ttolch V. on an Whence a ftraight Way
leads over fome Rivulets, thro LlanJ"anjraid V. at 27 4> V. at 28 and
1 lanhamich V. at 30’4« Then crofs 2 Brooks, and at 3 3 ’6 enter Brecknock the
Shire-Town of <5 F. on the Road, and as much tranfverfe.
Beyond the Town, over a Stone Br.of 7 Arches, crols (which runs by
the Road on the Right, as it has done from hither on the Left) and
pals by feveral Houfes, leaving St. David s Ch. on the Lett. At 3 6 3 thio Llan-
fpetheid V. and by fome draggling Houfes, come at42’M. to a Stone Br.of 5
Arches, over the faid Vst. Thereen er V. and leave Ch. about
IM. on the Left. At 43 1 crols the TJsk a3d time, and again at 44 4 palling
thro 'Trecajile Y. w ith an Inn. Then afeending Hill of IM. on the
Road, a ftraight and open Way, brings you at 48 to Whence
an indirect Road leads crols a large Valley to a Defc. at 5* 3 of o F. at the bot-
tom of it crofting the Rivulet Gvoddig. .1
At <2’s enter Llanimdofrj, crolfing Brane and The Name lignihes
3 Thtvn in the If ater , being lituate in the Tarifh of llandingad, and govern dby
a Bailiff, and 12 Capital Burgeffes, all the Freeholders being inferior Burgeffes.
It con lifts of about xoo Houfes meanly built, yet has 2 conliderable Mts.on Wed-
tiefd. and Saturd. and 3 Fairs, vi\. on Decemb. 17. Whitjon-Tuefd. and St. Georges -
Day, with feveral Inns. At crols Towyfiv. leaving Handing ad Ch. and the
forward Way to Carmarthen on the Left. I hen afeending and defeending feve-
ral great Hills; crolfing divers Rivulets, andpaffmgby fome Houfe, leave
Ch. a little on the Right at 59*3, and bear to the Left. Then 3F. farther,
turn again to the Right, and over 2 Brooks pafs at 60’6 thro’ Fmfam V. ol 2
Furlongs.
At 62 M. by a Rivulet on the Right; afeend a Hill for 2M. and at 64’? de-
feend as much. At 67’6 pafs a Wood Br. and Brook, 2F. beyond, over a Stone
Br. of 3 Arches, crofs Fivy flv. to Cardiganjh. At 6T3 enter or
Llanbedor Font Steffan, a fmall Town govern’d by a Portreeve, Steward, 2 Con-
ftables, CV. having a Mt. on Fuefd. and 3 Fairs, on Whitjon-Wednefd. St. Pe-
ter’s, and OBob. 8. ’Tis meanly built, conftfting in about 50 Houfes, yet affords
one very good Inn.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. e F. from Llanbeder, the Rlg'-t to Llandilovatvr. 11. 3’+ beyond the Right t®
Llandilovanr. 111. s’i beyond Kayo, the Left to Health. IV, The Left. t the Entnng Lla-
mmdofry to Bealtb. V. 2F. beyond Llanhamich , the Left to VI. the
Right to Llaneattock. VII. At the End of Crecowell, the Left to Llangeny. VIII. At the
End of Llangrenay, the Left to Ccmyo. IX. }F. fhort of Ahergeveny, the Right to Cardijf , Cfcc.
X. In Ahergeveny , the Right to Usk. XI. At the Entnng Llanvafley, the Right to Uni. All.
14 Hum of Llangadeck, the Right t® Kagland.
The


The Road from
NOTTINGHAM to GRIMSBY, in colnshire.
t. 'T' HE Pointof Fearing N.E.by E. IT. The direft Horizontal Diftance 56 M.
X lII* The Vulgar Computation so M. IV. The Dimenfuration 6f 2.
If tom NOTTINGHAM Comp. Mcafurc.
to Newark i 2 [ 17’! 17*1
LINCOLN 12 24 31^7
Walton of 29 06*7 38 y 6
Market-Raijing 07 36 09*7
Comp; Meafufe.
to Stanton 4 4° I o f’f s*4* *
Briggefly 6 4 6 1 °7’4 6 !’<£
Grmsby 4 f o , 05**4 *>7*2
fd 6fz
Nottinghawjhire and Lincolnjhire contain the whole Road, and the Derbick, Trent,
Snite, Witham and Ankham, are the principal Riv. crofs’d over. The Way, in many
Places deep and clayey, not affording thofe Conveniencies that are to be met with
in the direft and more frequented Roads.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At s’f The Left at the End of Charlton, to Codling y’l The Left at the End of , t»
Xhargarton. 14. M. the Right in Stoall y to Grantham* 28*1 The Right to Canzvicll. yj’i
The Right to Kh*mond in the Mire,
FROM Nottingham, a large Corp. Mt. and Shire Town, at 7 F. afeend a Hill
of 3F. and leave a Beacon on the Left; and at x’7 defeending 4F. pafs thro’
charlon V, At 3’x croft a Stone Br. over a Brook, and by feveral Hills on the
Left; come to Burton-Goofe Y. at 5T where you enter open Way Trent jlv. run*
ning for feveral Miles clofe on the Right.
Next by Shelf ord Ch. the Lord Stanhope’s Houfe, and Bridgford Ch. all on the
Right *, on the other fide the Trent, at 7 M. pafs to Hmtfpil Br. and at 7’s Gun*
thorp V. on the Left, eroding Derbeckfiv. at 9*2 where it difeharges itfelf into the
Trent. At 9'7 leave Horningham Ferry-Houfe on the Left, and a little farther*
j{eeton Ch. on the Right, on the other fide the Riv. likewife. At 114 arrive at
Bleasbj Ferry; where crofling the Trent (which keeps on the Left to Newark) and
at i3’2 attending 3 F. enter Stoak, a large Town of 6 F. on the Road.
Thence leave Bowlefion Ch. 6 F. on the Left, over the Riv. at 15 M. Thorp V.
and Hawton Ch.at a good diftance on the Right; alfo , between you and
the River on the Left. At i6’3 pafs Mark am Br. of Wood, over
a little above its Confluence with the Trent ; and 4F. farther, to Newark , a
large welhbuilt Mt. Town and Corp. extending 5 F. on the Road, but more
tranfverle; and on the Banks of the faid Trent, which riling near Mowcop Hill
in Stajfordjh. paffes by Stoned-Burton, Nottingham, Newark, Littleburge, Ganesburge
and Burton, and falls into Humber Haven, near having receiv'd,
tft, The Sow, and therein the Venk. 2 i. The BUth. 3 d. The Tame, and with
it the %ea, Cole, Bourne, Anker and Mefe. 4 The Dove, and in it the Mani-
fold, Churnet and Tajne. s th. The Sore, and therewith the Wreak. 6th, The
Darwent, and therein the Now, Burbrook, Wje and Amber . jth, The Erewajh*
%th, The Durbeck. <pth. The Snite, and therewith the Dean. 10 th, The Flete.
11th, The Fofdike. 12th, The Hockdike. i%tb, The 14th, The Dun,
and therein the Idle and Whitwater.
At iß’4 afeend 2F. and foon defeend, by Winthorp Ch. 3F. on the Left, near
the Trent, Whence an indifferent ftraight Wayj partly Lanes, and partly open to
L, Lincoln <,


Lincoln , fir ft entring Lincolnjh. at 20*4 and afcending a Hill at 22’r. Then pafs by
a Wood on the Left at 2$ M. 6F. farther, leaving Wisby Cb. fM. on the Left,
and at 27 M. North-Hikeham on the Right, at a like diftance on With amfiv At
28 M. go by a great Stone on the Right, and at 29'3 by Boultham Ch. on the fame
Hand, 2 F. farther, crofling the Whham, over a Stone Br. to Brace-Bridg Vil-
lage. • n
Hence by 2 Pofts on the Right, fall in with the Way from London at 3©’3 and
at Goat-Eridg, repafling the With am, enter the City of LINCOLN, extending this
Way about 2M. on the Road, but not near fo much tranfverfe. ’Tis a Place of
great Antiquity, and was formerly much larger than at prelent, faid to contain
50 Parifh Chs. now reduc’d to 15, befides the Cathedral. ’Twas of much Note
under the Britains , and in Dooms day Book ; it accounted for 1070 Manfions, and
900 Burgefles, with 12 Lage-men, having Sac and Sec. ’Twas reckon’d in the
Nomans time, to be one of beft peopl’d Cities in the Illand; driving a great
Trade both by Sea and Land: And here, Vonimer , the Valiant Captain of the
Britains, was interr’d.
Leaving the City, enter a large Heath crofting a Brook at 3s’i, and 4F. far-
ther, by Netilham Ch. on the Right. Then the laid Heath leads at 38’4 to Wal-
ton V. of 3 F. oppofite to which, appears Dunham- Houfenear 1 M. on the Right,
the Way being open arable on the Left, and enclos’d on the Right. About
9 F. farther, by on the Right, at 41*3 come to a Wood Bf. over a
Branch of the VV'itham , and 2F. beyond, to Snarford P. on the Left. There
leave the Hall and Church on the fame Hand, the Park ranging 1 M. along
the Road.
At 43’y pafs between LiJJlngton Ch. on the Right, and on the Left,
whence an indireft Road, by Middle-%aifing, 4F. on the Left, brings you at 48’3
to Ankhamflv. juft at the Entrance into Market-Fifing , or Kafen, of 4 F. having
a good Mt. on Tuefd. for Corn, &c. Beyond the Town, enter a Moor, and at
50 M. leave Hamlinton-HiW on the Left.
At $ I’4 crofs a Brook to 7 evelby V. of 3F. at the End of which, afcend 2F,
and come upon the VVoulds, and over a large Valley. Whence defcending at
$3 ’6 near the Bottom, pafs thro’ stamen in the Hole V. of 2F. and leave Esmond
in the Mire IM. on the Right. On the top of the Afc. at $ 5 M. a ftraight Way
by Croxby Ch. 4 F. to the Left, extends at 56’6 to another Defc. of 6 F. and near
the bottom, to Thurganby V. Thence afcending 4F. and crofling another Val-
ley at 6o’i F vev^s vulgo F m dale V. appears likewife in a Bottom.
Hence at 60’$ leaving the VVoulds , defeend 4F. and go by As bye V. on the
Right; 2F. farther, crofling a Brook to Briggefiy V. of 2F. and as much tranf-
verfe. At 63’2 pafs thro’ Waltham V. of 2F; and at 65*2 thro’open Arable
Lands to Stanb V. of the fame extent. At 66’$ enter GSJMSBT, or Grimsby
Magna, a large Town near the Sea, where it formerly had a Caftle, to fecure its
now almoft choak’d-up Harbour; yet it is ftill a Corp. and Port-Town, enjoying
feveral Immunities; as keeping Courts, fending Burgefles to Pari. &c. ’Tis
govern’d by a Mayor, 2 Bailiffs, a Recorder, 12 Aldermen, C sc. The Mayor’s
Courts fare ufually kept on Tuefd. and the Bailiff’s on Frid. befides 2 Mts. on
VVednefd. and Saturd. and 1 Fair on St. Bartholomew’s Day.
j, Backward Turnings to be avoided.
X. At the End of Thurganby, the Right to Ci-oxhy. 11. In the Right to Middle-
Raiji:g. 111. At the End oi Lincoln, the Lett to IV. 11 F. beyond the
Right to Wn)y % \ , The Left in fitQak, to | a different Way,.
The


The Road from
OXFORD to BRISTOL.
E Point of Bearing W. by S. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance62 M.
X 111. The vulgar Computation 48 M. IV. 68 M.
f”rom OXFORD Comp. . Meafure.
to Fifield 6 f 06 o&6 J o8 ? 6
Faringdon 6 12 iy*6
Hiwortb 4* 16 2 s’6
Purton 6 22 oB’o 31^
Conif. Meafuifc.
to Mafmflury 8 3° f | 10,2 f 4* 2 *®
Luckington 5* 37 I °7 r 2 j 4-9 >2
Puckle-Cnurch 8 * <\x ; j 6o’o
BRISTOL $■ *8 1 o8 ? o ! 68 ? o
0 . _ _ *
Oxfordfhire , Parhjh. IViltjh. and Gloccjierfh, contain the whole Road ; and the
Thames, %ea and Avon, are the principal Rivers crofe’d over ; affording in gene*
rai, no very good Way ; yet well fupply’d with Inns, £SV.
.• I- I -5 ' ' ,
Acute Turnings to be avoided
A* * 3 The Left to Ahington* 96 The Right to Longworth. 17T The Right to LecMads*
The Left to 23*4. The Left to Stuinden, The Right to Cteeklade,
The Right to Tethury , and Cirencefier. 5 The Left to Marlborough. 4 2-4, The Left to Cdjlte -
comb. 4.9’2 The Right to Sodbnry. 60*3 The Right to Auji. 6o’f The Left to Doynton.
,' " - ,1 ’ .
BEfore we proceed, let us take a view of the famotis City and Uniyerfity of
OXFORD • a Place of great Antiquity, re-edify d by K. Alfred-, and fa id to
be confecrated to Literature by the Old -Britain* but Whether tranllated-hither
from Creeklade in IViltjh. as alfo whether the Etymology be from Vadim Ifidos.,
Oufeford •, or Vadim Bovum, Ox ford, were needlefs to difpute. It fuffer’d much
by the Saxons and Danes, little remaining, but the Monument of St. FriddftdU'Si
Virgin-Conc~ till R. Alfred built 3 Colleges, for Divinity, Phildcpliy, and 0-
ther Liberal Sciences ; fending thither Ethelvoard , and, by that means,
drawing to it the young Nobility from all Parts of the Kingdom. ’Tis a ftate-
ly City, adorn’d with well-built Houles, 16 Colleges, 8 Halls, a curious Libra-
ry, a noble Theater, and a large Cathedral ; made an Epifcopal See by K.
Henry y 111. A.D.' 1541 the Chapter contifting of a Dean, 8 Prebends, and
1 Arch-Deacon. It contains 14 Parifhes is govern’d by a Mayor, £SV. enjoys
ample Immunities, as keeping Courts for all Actions without Limitation ; clefts
4Burgeffes to Pari. vi\. 2 for the Univerfity, and 2 for the City ; has 2 Mts.
on VVednefd. and Saturd. well furnifh’d with allLfprts of Provisions, £SV. and
drives a great Trade in Mauif, convey’d then in Barges. Upon
the whole, for Statclinefs of the Schools, Theater and Publick Library; for
Beauty of particular Colleges and Halls, all of fair polilh’d Stone 3 for liberal
Endowments, and large Salaries allotted to the feveral ProfelTors , for the
Number and Oeconomy of Studies, £sc. at is not to be parallel’d in the Chri-
ftian World. This City gives Tide to the R. H. Aubrey de Vere, Earl of
Oxford, &c. defeended of one of the molt ancient Families fiuce the Ccn-
queft. . .
From Cairfax in Oxford, thro’ the S.Gate, at I’4over a Stone Br. of 2 Arches,
crols Part of Thames fiv. to Barkjb, .Then pafs hy: 11 fey Ch. on the Left, a
the Right, and thro’ Bagley W. At y’3 faU in with the R. from London ; at 8 6
some to Fifield V. with an Inn or two, and, IM. farther, thro’ Part of iQngficn-
h % A apiiji:


Bxptift: Thence an Indifferent ftraight R. by Lmgwonh and Buck]and Chs. on the
Right, leads at \fi to a Defc. and at the Bottom, to Faring don of 5 Fur-
longs.
From Faring don at 21*4, thro’ Colefel V. of 2F. by the Lady Prat's Houle on
the Left, enter Wiltjh. at 21 ’6. At 23 M. afcend and pals thro’ V. of 4 F.
come to Hiwonby or SF. on the R. fo call’d from its high Situation. ’Tis go-
vern’d by a Mayor, and an Alderman ; has a Mt. on and 2 Fairs, vi\.
on Lammas-Day, and Michaelmas-Day.
Thence by Hamington and Bury-lihmfdon Chs. on the Right, and after, by feve-
ral Houfes on the Left; at 29*4 over a Stone Br. of 2 Arches, crofs Rayjlv. At
3P’4 leaving the R. to Ledbury and Cirencejier on the Right, bear to the Left; pafs
over .Purton Gr. and at 31 ’> thro’ Pur ton itfelf. Then over Punon C. crofs a
Brook, and go thro’ Bradens Foreft. At 38T thro’ Guerfden Gr. and thro’ Cuerf-
den V. at by the Lady Washington' s Houfe and Park on the Left.
At 40’6 pafs thro Milborn Gr. V. and at 4t’2defcend3 F. At the Bottom,
over a Stone Br. crofs Avon jlv. to Malmsbury , of 6 F. on the R. an ancient Bo-
rough-Town, formerly defended by aCaftle, now ruin’d. It fends Burgeffes to
Pari, and is govern’d by a Juftice (call’d Alderman , and chofen every Year as a
Mayor) and 12 Burgeffes. Here is an Alms Houfe founded by Mr. Genner, for
4 Men and 4 Women, with a good Mr. on Saturd. and 5 Fairs, vi%, on March 17.
April 17. May 2s. fuly 25. and Oclob. 17.
From Malmsbury ,a ftraight enclos’d Way, leads at44’6 to Foxley V. of 2 F.at
the End of which, appears Efq; EgUafion' s H. and Park on the Right. Whence by
She/fion Ch. on the Right, at 4?’x enter LuckingtonV. with a noted Well in the
middle of the Way. At 51 M. come to Glocefterjh. at 51’6 thro’ a Vill. belong-
ing to Tor m ant on, and over Tomamon Warren, the Ch. and Town on the Right.
Hence an open Way brings you at 57*3,down a Hill of 5 F.on which is Hinton Y.
with one Inn.
Then afcend a little, at <,6'6 to Pulchar , allot PuckleCkurch , of 2F. with feveral
good Inns. Whence an enclos’d Way, by ftraggling Houfes on the R. leads at
62’2 to MangresfieldV. near which, are feveral Coal-pits; 3F. beyond, arrive
at iQngfroood Foreft, noted for its Coal, OV. with which Briftol and the adja-
cent Parts are fupply’d. Then by a Pond on the Left,and Stapleton on the Right,
fall in with the R. from Glocefter at 66 M. and at 67 M. enter the Suburbs of
BSJSTOL.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. At the End of Brfftol , the Right to London, 11. IM. beyond Briftol, the Left to Stapleton.
11l- I*7 /hortof Mangersfield, the Left to Sodbury . IV. 4, F. fhort of Buckle-Churchy the Right
to MarJJjjield, V. At the End of Buckle-Churchy the Right to Apfon. VI. At the End of Hin-
ton y the Right to Marjhfield . VII. 3F. farther, the Right to Marfljfield, VIII. F. fhort of
Burton y the Left acute. IX! z’t beyond Ray flv. the Right to Marlborough . X. At the End
of Kingjion-Baptijly the Right to Abmgton .
The Road from
OXFORD to CAMBRIDGE.
I. “|*'H E Point of Bearing E. N. E. 11. The direft Diflance 57 M.
JL 111. The vulgar Computation 52 M. IV, The 80 M.
From


From OXF 0 JR. V Comp, Meafure.
toßurceJier 10 I io 13*0 13*0
Buckingham 09 Jl9 2**6
Kewfort-Fainel 08 }27 13*7 38^
> Comp, Mcafure.
to Bedford ©7 f 1 *3*s 1 f l ’**
Gamlingliay ©y I , 1 > ° I 6pV
' Cambridge 09 pi I ip'o ' so*o
Oxfordshire, Buckingham])• Northampton]]). Bedfordjh. and Cambridgjh. include the
whole Road ; and the Cbarwel,owfe and Gw,are the principal Rivers croft’d over.
This is the chiefeft Road between the Two Univerlitics, being for the moft part
very bad, deep Way ; but the Convenience of good Thorough-fare Towns very
much alleviates the Fatigues of the Journey.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At }’2 The Left to Banbury The Left to Wejion. n’t The Right forward. ti 9 f The
Left acute, ij M. The Right in Burcefler . 13*4 The Left to Banbury, 24*3 The Right at
the entring Buckingham. 36 6 The Right acute. 41*2 The Right to Amp'bil. a The Left
to St. Neot’s. 6 o’ 7 The Right to Botton. 6 4*3 The Right acute.
•CROM Cairfax in Oxford , thro’ the N. Gate, leave the City at ■; F. Whence a
* ftraight Road at 4*3 to Lorvfe-Hall, a noted Houfeon the Left, (b call'd by the
Oxford Scholars. Two F. farther, pals thro’a ftraggling Village, and at the End
of it, crofs charweUfiv. over Gosford Stone By. Then thro’ open Way, leave Ijlip
Ch. IM. on the Right; and at 6’j croft the great Road from London to Wor~
after. Thence palling betvyeen Wejion Ch. and Park, and thro’ WendleburyV. at
i2’y enter Burcefisrvulgo Bifceter, of 3 F.on the Road, a final! Town, yet having
an indifferent good Market on Fridays.
From Burcejter, avoiding the forward Way on the Left, to bear to the
Right, by Casfield Houfe on the Left. At 16 M. pafs thro’ Stretton-Audley V.
and at the End of it, crofs the Road from London to Banbury. Whence a ftraight
Way at iß’2 to Buckingham]}). Then between Newton-Purfel and Chickwood, alfo
thro’ Tmgewick W. and by Tinge wick Ch. on the Left, and a Pond on the Plight;
at 22’ 5 come to Gaynat V. of 2 F. and at 24’4 over a fair Stone Br, crofs
to Buckingham, a Corp. Mt. and Shire-Town, having 2 Hofpitals, a Free School,
and 4 incorporated Companies, vi\. the Mercers, Butchers, Taylors and Tamers,
It gave Title to George Fillers, late Duke of Bucks, &c. and has 1 fair Church, de-
dicated to St. Peter.
Thence Owfe flv. running by the Road on the Right for feveral M. a ftraight
Way, leads by Borton Y. and Thornton Ch. both on the Bight, and on the other lids
of the Owfe ; alfo by Morton, Fofcot and Leckbamjled, on the Left; entring Nor-
thamptonjh. at 28’y. Then by Eeckhampton Ch. on the Right, re-enter
at 30’6, and crofs the faid Owfe. Whence by Pajfmgham and Wulverton Chs. on the
Left, and 1. eigbton on the Right; crofting the gr.eat Road from London to Chejier,
Holy-head, &c. come at 34’<$ to a Defc. of 2F. At the Bottom, crofting a Broo|t
over Stanton Br. leave Haverjham vulgo Hajme Ch. on the Left, and afterwards
Stanton Ch. and Hall on the fame Hand. Then a Defc. by Great Linford on the
Right, and Little Linford on the Left, extends at 38’? to Newport or Faig-
nel, of 3F. and as much tranfverle. The Town is indifferent large, and has a
good Mt. on Saturdays. The poor People are here employ e! in making great
Itore of Bone-Lace, &c.
Beyond the Town,appear Moulfo and Chichley Chs, on the Right; alfo Lathbury
zxufHarintere on the Left. At 4 pafs thro’ V. to Bedfordjh. aft 45*3, and
at 47 M. thro’ Stagfden V. of 2F. re-crofting the Owfe at 49 ’j . Then by Bfddenham
Gh.and Fordend-houfc on the Right,alfo by brumkam Ch.on the Left; at 5 1 ’3 enter
Bedford, a Corp. Mt. and Shire-Town, where,not far from the Bridg,on the Owfe ,
formerly ftood a ftnall Chap, in which (as they fay) off a the K. was in
L 3 terr’d ;


terr’d; whofe Monument remain’d a long time, till the over-flowing of the River
wafh’d it away. The Townhas been much harraft’d, <u/y. firft by the Danes \ next
in the Civil Wars, by the Barons; and laftly, by K. Henry 111. Its Caftle was
laid level ro the ground ; apd, in the Place of it,’ is a very fine Bowling-Green,
much referred to by the Gentry of thofe Parts.
From Bedford, by Cardingtcn and Cuphul Chs. on the Right, alfo by VVillivgton
Ch. Park and Hall, on the Left; at 58 M. pafs thro of 2 F. Then
by Blunham on the Left, and Sandy on the Right. At do’y omitting the forward
Way, on the Right to Potton , bear to the Left, and by Ever don Ch. on the fame
Hand: At 63T entring Cambridgjh. as its Conjunction with and
fordjh. p;}fs by Woodberry Houle and Gamlinghay P. on the Left; 'and at 64/4 to
Garnlinghay V. of 2F. Whence an indirect Road,fomewhat woody, by Stow on
the Right, and Little Granfden on the Left, brings you at 69*4 to Stow V. conti-
guous on the Left.
At 70*2 croft the great Road from London to Tori:, Harwich, Sac. pafs thro’ fome
Woods, and down 2 Hills, leaving Krngfton Ch. on the Right, and Cawcote on the
Left, at equal diftance from the Road. Then croffmg a Brook, at 73*4 go thro’
Softs V. of 2 F. on the Road ; and 10 F. farther, thro’ Comberton V. of 3 F.
Whence by Con non the Left, an indirect Road leads at 79 ’6 to C AMBBfDGE,
an University, Corp. Mt. and Shire-Town Qlefcrib’d in London to Lyn.~]
Southward from Cambridge are Gogmagog Hills, of great heighth, formerly a
Sfacion of the Dams ; of which, the Country-People relate many fabulous Sto-
ries. On the Top, is to be feen a Rampart furrounded with a Three-fold
reputed impregnable. , . : .
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I- 3 F. from Cambridge, she Left forward. 11. i f Short of Comberton, the Left forward. 111. i’6
ftort of Comberton, the Rght to Cotton. lV. iM. Ihort of the Left acute. V. IFI
! beyond the Left acute. VI. At the End of the Left acute. VII.
(Of Bedford, the Lett acute. VIII. iF. beyond Owfejlv. the Right to Wellingborough. IX.
jiliort of Newport-F ainel, the Left to Wboburn, X. IF, beyond viewport-Fainel, the Right
■acute. XI. 1 3 fliort of the entring Northampton/?}, the Right acu*te. XII. At the entring jS«c&-
, j rnghixm, the Right forward. Xllx. At the end of Buckingham, the Left forward. XIV. iM,
fceyond Buckingham, the Left to Fadhury. XV. iF. ihort of Bnrcejier, the Left acute. XVI.
he Left in hurcejier. XVII. 2F. beyond Burc?Jier. the Left acute.
I • *■ A
The Road from
OXFORD to CHICHESTER.
I. HE Point or Bearing S. by E. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance 63 M.
HI. Ihe Vulgar Computation 60 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 80M. *'
Fiom OXFORD Comp. Meafure.
to Ahington 5* [of 06’4
• JLaJiilfley 8 13 10*5* 17*1
Newbury 7 20 26*4.
King's Cleer 5* 125 J | 33^
Comp. Mcafure.
toßapngfloke °7 )3 2 I °9 >l
* Alton 08 4.0 I 10^
J Peterrfield 10 s*o I iz’f 66’b
CHICHESTER 10 60 J So’o
Oxfordfoire, Bsrhftj. Hamjb and Suffix, are the Connties thro’which you pals;
tr ‘ £ Barnes, Och , and Auborn, are the principal Rivers croft’d over:
The Read is, for the moft part, indifferent good, and every where furnifh’d with
convenient lans, ; - , • '*
Forward


Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At t 9 i The Right to Far in&don, Is* M. the Left acute, af’i The Left acute. 2(?’} Sn Newbury %
the Right and Left acme. ln King's Cleer , the Right to Andover. The Right to Sa-
lisbury. 45 M. I nßajingJioke, The Right to Andover. 43*4 The Right to Andover. 4f6 The
Right to Jp rejion. 47*0 The Right acute. The Left to Odiam. 49 >2 a nl Teh;
acute, The Right to T Vinchejier. The Right to Froxfield. 6s’6 The Right acute,
jo’i The Right and Left acute. 74*4 The Left acute. 7 The Left acute,
FROM Ca/V/Bc-Grofs in OXFO^the S.Gate,crofs the Thames or
and leave Hinkfey- Ch. on the Right, and on the Left. Then afeending
a Hill, and crofting a Valley, pafs thro’ Bagle Whence leaving on
the Right, and Kodeky on the Left, at 6’ 3 come to Abington of 3F. this Way, but
more tranfverfe; a large Corp. and Mt-Town.
At the End of Abington , crofs Ockflv. and leave Drayton-Day Ch. on the Right,
zKoCulkm and Sutton on the Left. At 9*4 over a Stone-Br. and Brook, pafs thro
Mifton-\. afeend a Hill.; leave Harwell and Chilton- Chs. on the Left, and a .Beacon
on the Right; and crofs the Vale of White ,or Then afeending
apd defending, at 17 M. enter Eafl-Ilfley, of 2 F. in a pleafant Valley, having a
good Market on Wednesdays.
Leaving Eafi-11/ley, over a Hill,at 19*4 fet forward thro’ .Hence the
Way b®ing generally Woody, pafs by Clevely- Ch. and jPow/wgtow-Caftle on the
Right, Fryer's-Qouxt, Harlington- Houfe, and Shaw-Ch. on the Left; to Spivbam-
Land, and Newbury, on Rennet flv. govern’d by a Mayor, 6 Aldermen, 24 Bur-
geffes,ffr. This Town is eminentfor the Cloathing-Trade, by which Jack of New-
bury,temp. Hen. VIII. got fo fair an Eftate, and noted alfo for Crayfijb: It has a
great Mt. on Thurf. and 2 leffer on Tuef. and S with 4 Fairs, vi\. on Holy
Midfummer-day, S. Bartholomew’ s-day, and S. Simon and Jude: It has a Free-School,
3 Alms-Houfes, and an Hofpital well endow’d. Here, in Sept. 1645
Army gain’d a confiderable Vidory over the Pari. Forces commanded by thebari
of Elfex ; and in Oil. 1644, returning vidorious from the Weft, again encounter d
them and their New City-Forces, but with left Succeft. ■ . .
From Newbury, a ftraight Road, leads at 29’? over Great and Little Knightj-
bridge, to Hampjh. alfo by Benham Court, and Stottery Ch. on the Right, at 33 3
to King’s Cleer, a Town of 4 F. and as much tranfverfe ; feated in the ,
and amoving the benefit of a Market on Tuefdays.
Thence after a Dele, after pettum Hill, and pafs by another Hill to the Right,
on which is WiUouphsby Lodge. Then going down, leave Woolvemn Ch. on the
Left and at 3?’2 afeend a Hill, which at 38 M. is feconded by another. Thence
bv taneier. Houfe, Wooton Ch. and a Wood on the Right, crofting Ppoks-down, , and
by ParhPrivet Warren on the Left, alfo by Holy-Gboft Chap, on the fame
Hand, come at 42*3 to Bajingftoke, a Mr. and Poft-Town.
From Bafimfioke, avoid the forward Way on the Right to ; bear to
the I eft • oafs by Harwood Hall dole on the Right at 44*4, and 2 F. farther,
Wenfted Ch. on the fame Hand. Then by Ch. and Mkft on Ra\\ on the
Left, and thro’ a ftraggling Village, an indirect Way, by ferae Houfes, Rings
to >4/fow, Town of 4 Furlongs.
Whence thro’ Chawton V. leave Sir Kjchard Knight’s Home on the Left, and at
<6'-> oafs thro’ Panin?don-(beet V. Afterwards Newton W. and Kutherjick P. ran-
gfngChe Road of the Right, and Sgi-Tyflei and Colmert Ch. appearing on
the Left; an indited Way by feveral Houfes, and on the Left, leads
at 65 ’6 to Petersfield, a Mt. Town ot 3 Furlongs.
L 4


At 67'4 over a Stone Br. crops a Rivulet to Sujfex, and at 6g'i afcend St.
Richard Hill, feconded by another at where leaving Eafi Hatting Ch. on the
Left, go down 3F. and by Haning Hills on the Left. Then by North Merden
Ch. on the Right, and a Wood on the Left, come at 73*2 to a Defc. of 2F,
paffing by feveral great Hills on the Right, and Chilgrove Houfe' on the Left.
Hence, you have Crowjhal Houfe, und WeJl-Levant Y. on the Right; Binder-
ton Houfe, Middle and Eaft Lav ant Chs; Raimare Houfe, and the Alms-Houfes
fuccelfively on the Left, and at 80’$ enter the City of CHICHESTER at the"
-N. Gate. ~
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
ff. . F ; from 'II. IF. fhort of Crow/hal-HouCe, the Right to
htnderion. 111. AgimbN-Meyden Ch. the Right to Traford. IV. x’ f beyond, the Right acute.
V. At the End' of : Peter field, the Right to Steep. VI. aF. beyond Peters/,eU, the Left to Win-
C rfc «j , + be y° nd Petersfield, the Right to j a different Way. VIII. t’y fhort
°* E -TyJied, tlie Left acute. IX. In Alton, the Right to London. X. 2M. Jhort of
the to BaGngfioke ■ a different Way. XL Againft Wenjied., the Right acute. XII. In
Eafngjioke the Right forward to London. XIII. 6F. beyond Bafmgjloke, the Right to Reding.
tYr In the Right to Reding. XV. At Knight bridge y the Right acute. XVI,
la Aexvbury, the Left to Wungerford. XVII. iM. heyond Newbury 3 the Left to Wantage* '
The Road from
OXFORD to COVENTRY, continued to Derby.
k T H r £ B earif! g N. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance 77 M»
HI. The Vulgar Computation 68 M. IV. The Himenfuration 87 M.
From 0 JCTO Rl> Comp. Alcafurc.
' * * * *
to Kidlington ©4 ©4 » o f> o C f’o I
jD edin'gton 09 13 ii’4 I^4
Banbury o f ijj o<{'4 I3 > 0
Sontham 10 28 | 14,’! .7’! 1
mu] Is|«:♦ 1
Comp. Mcafurc.
to Nuneaton 7 4.6 ofj
Athevjion 3 4.9 04/2 62*$
AJhhy de la Zouch 9 y 8 u’j 74,’ 1
Swarktfon 6 64. 6fy 82’ o
Derby 4 g fo
68 Sfo
Oxfordjhire , mrntckfh. Leuefierjh. and Derbjfr.. are the Counties pafs’d thro’:
and the Avon, Sow, Anker and Trent , are the principal Rivers crofs’d over; which,
in general, is no very good Road, yet, every where fupply’d with good Towns
and convenient Accommodation. ■ ' ®
; > ‘ . • ■ . • • ■> •. » . '
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
■ el[ the Right to Water-Eaton, Cambridge, &c.
to Lit%dd W &tt Tfc E " d Left to Stratford. In Coventry, the
, . . , 4 ’ + The Left to Hartjel. 78’j The Left to Ticknel.
fet forward to the #. Gate, and leave the
MiS? h f • be,n S generally open, indifferently Arable and
M and C iP’ 6 f* 0n the Left > P afs thro’ Xjdlingtm Gr.V. at 5
I e’fr to Iwlm f Ch If F * 0n the Ri s ht « At 6’? omit t& acute Way on the
the R frnm fm?’ a ,. nd t£ ear i° theßl S ht » where a ftraight open Way ferofling
Cho fuccefll vel v°on fht* orcefier at B’s) leads by Tuckley, and Steele Afton
r. * uccUllve ly on R 'ght, and Dunjio on the Left. -• -1 ■ ♦ f
t f ’ ‘ J ’ ' '* ' ' ' v j


At i«;M. down a Hill of 4 F. at the Bottom, crofs a Stone Br, of 2 Arches
over a Brook, and 4F. farther, afcend 2 F. to Dcdington ; an ancienr Town, go-
vern’d by a Bailiff; having an indifferent good Mt. on Saturd. and 2 Fairs, vi\.
on St. Laurence and St. Martin.
Afterwards on open arable Land, defcend <; F. and at the Bottom, over a Stone-
Br. crofs a Brook. Whence an indifferent Way brings you at i9’7, thro’
bury Y. of good Accommodation; in which are the Seats of the Lord Rpchefter
and Sir Thomas Cobbs. At 21’3 come to Weeping-Croft, a noted Place, where 4
Ways meets; leave Bodicot Ch. on the Left ; and at 22*7 enter Banbury.
Thence a ftraight Way, over a Brook, at 24*2, lies by Great and Little Brough-
ton, an ACropdry Chs. on the Right, alfo by Ch, and Hall, and
wel and Mollington Chs. all on the Left. At 28 M. come to Warwickjh. and be-
tween Clay don and Farmborrow. At 31’3 defcend 3F. then by IP emleighton
Ch. on the Right, and Water-Gall Houfe on the Left, pals at 34*7 to the Defc.
of a Hill; at 35’4 thro’ LidbrookY. and 1 M. 2 Fs. farther, to Southam, of
SF. on the Road, having a confidcrable Mt. on M and a F air on St. Peter s
Day. . . ,
From Southam the Road is indifferent ftraight, defcending a Hill at 38 $, and
pafling thro’ Long Itchington at 39 6. Whence go down again at 41 4 thro Mer-
fomY. at 42*3, and 1 M. farther, thro’ Princethorp V.of 2 F. croffmgthe R. from
Torkt o Briflol . Then over an Afc. crofs Dunftnoor H. by R inton Ch. on the Right,
and come at 47’6 Winford Stone Br. Whence over Avon fiv, and thro Winald V.
crofs Sow fiv. and by Whitley Hall on the Left; enter the City of COVENTRY, ex-
tending 1 M. on the Road. , ,
Thence an indirect Way leads by Forkfel on the Right, and at <,2 7 thro Long-
ford V. At 55*3 pals by BedworthY, on the Right; thro’ Y. at 56 4> and
CottonV. at 57 ’6 to Nuneaton at 58T, of 5 F. on the R. and on a Branch of Anker
fiv. ’Twasformerly noted for its Abbey, and has, ax prefcnt, a good Free-School,
with a Mt. on Saturdays, and a Fair on May 3.
Beyond the Town, appears the Abbey on the Left, and 2 F. farther, Barr-Tool
on the lame Hand. At 60 M. defcend 3F. at 62T pals thro a final!,
tho* ancient Place, laid to be rais’d out of the Ruins of Manduffedum ; and 4F.
beyond, to Atherfton ; leated likewile near the Anker of 3F. and more tranfverfe,
in the Par. of Mancefter aforefaid. The Town is indifferent large and well-built,
and has a Chap, of Eafe, a Free-Shool, a Mt. on Tuefday, and 4 Fairs, <vis. on
March 27. July 7. September 8. and December 4,
At63’4 crofs a Stone Br. of 6 Arches over Anker fiv. to 1 M. far-
ther, pafs thro’ Shepy Y. and at 66’4 thro’ 7 V. of 2 F. between
Gopjhil Hall, and Hogs-Norton Ch. come at 69T to SnareftonY. Wnence by
Msjham Ch. on the Left, an indifferent ftraight and open Way, brings you at
73 ’7 to Ajhby de la Zouch, a Town of good Note, and of 3F. on the R. but more
tranfverfe ; having a good Free-School, a plentiful Mt. on Saturdays, and 4 Fairs,
vi{. cm E after-Tuefday,Whitfun-Luefday, St. Bartholomew’ %-Dzy, and Sc. Simon and
Atthe End oftheTown, pafs by Calcs Y. clofeon the Left, to Derby ft. at7s’4;
there leave Smithsby Ch. on the Left, and 1 M. farther, defcend Hill, on
which are leveral Coal-Pits. Whence by Tinknel Ch. on the Leic, at 81 2 come
to a large Stone Br. of 39 Arches, with another of 9, over fiv. and
the Br. to Swarkfton Y. of 2F. Then over Synfold-Yi oor, crols a S.one Bridge ol
3 Arches, over a Brook, and enter D B RJ> 7 at 86*4.
.. . • Backward


Backward Turnings to be avoided.
Lln Derby, %he Left to London. IL At the End of Swarkfton-Br. the Left to Leicefier and Lon-
brough. 111. In Twycrofs, the Left to London. IV. In Nuneaton , the Left to Hinckley. V. In
Coventry 9 the Left to London. VI. At Weeging-Crofs, the Left to London . VII. At the End
of Dedington y the Left to Alisbury .
The Road from
OXFORD to SALISBURY.
Continued to Pool in Dorsetshire.
I. HPHE Point of Bearing S. W. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance 76 M*.
* 111. The vulgar Computation 61 M. 7*3.
From 0 JTF 0R D Comp. Meafure.
to Abingdon of of t ofz ofz
Sheltord 12 17 16*6 24/0
Hungerford 04 21 of’o j 2 9’°
North Tudworth iq 31 14*4 1 43’4
Comp. . Meafure.
to SALISBURY ioi 41 14*2 ff 6
Cr unborn 09 !fo iz'f 70*3
Wimbjorn 07 |f 7 jo'f 8 i’o
iw 04} B7^
Oxfordshire, Barljh. Wiltjh. and Dorfetjh. include the whole R. a>nd the Thames,
Ock, Rennet, Avon, and Sto«r, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Way
to Hungerford is not very good, and thence to Pool, but indifferent.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 2 J 2 The Left to Aldington , a different Way. 4*6 The Right to Wantage, 9* 6 The Right to
Wantage. n ; o The Right to Wantage . n’f The Left to Newbury . 17*2 The Left to
Farnborougb. 27*7 The Right to Lamborn , in Great Shelford. 24. M. The Left forward, in
Great Shelford. 28 ’6 The Right to Brifiol. 29*4. The Left to Winchejier, 31*7 The Left to
Whichever. 7 o*3 The Right to Salisbury. s*B ’2 and 3 The Left to Fording Bx. f B’f The
Right to Harnham and Wuton. The Left acute.
FROM Cairfax in OXFORD, thro’ the S. Gate come upon a Caufe-way, and at
i’4 crofs a Branch of Thames fiv. to Whence an indirect Road be-
tween Binkjey and Elfey Ch. and over 4 Afc. with a Defc. of 3 F. at (omit-
ting the forward Way to Wantage at 4/6, and bearing to the Left) leads at 6’y to
Abington, a Corp. and Mt. Town, which formerly had a magnificent Abbey de-
ftroy’d by the Danes, and was afterwards beautify’d by K. Edgar. ’Tisthe Shire-
Town, where the Affizes are often kept; and has 3 Hofpitals, with a Free-
School.
In the Town, bear to the Right, and at the End of it at 6 F. avoiding the great
Weftern Road to Giocefter, &c. turn to the Left, crofs Ock and by Sutton and
CuUum each 1 M. diftant on the Left, at <fit come to Drayton V. on the Left. At
nM. go thro’ Steventon Y. and a Rend a Hill. At i2’«; over 2 Afc. crofs a
Valley, and lea v&Barwel Ch. on the Left about x M. alfo Weft-Bendred on the
Right fomewhat more. Whence over feveral Afc. and Defc. (the Left-hand
Ways, generally leading leading to Bgdmg, and the Right to Wantage) by Earn-
borough Ch. a little on the Left; and at iß’4 down 3 Defc. a direft Road, ex-
tends at 23’6 to Great Shelford Y. on a Branch of which is crofs’d at
the Entrance into it.
Here omitting the direfter Way on the Right to Lamborn, bear to the Left,
?.nd presently to the Right again. At 24*3 afeend a Hill of 2F. and by a Wood
on


Oil the Right, defending 2 F. at 2pafs by feveral on the Left.
Whence 2 Defc. lead at 28’$ to Chamham-ftreet, thro’ which paffes the London-
Road to Briftol. There crofs Kemmflv. at 29 M. to Hungerford, of 4F. on the
faid Kernel, in which (as they fay) are taken the beft Trouts and Cray-fijh in Eng.
land. Several Privileges were granted to this Town by John of Gaunt. It has
fome good Inns, with a Mt. on VVednefd. and a Fair on St. Laurence s Day.
From Hunger ford , pafs by Major Goddard’s Houfe on the Right, and SbabomC h.
on the Left, to VViltJh. at 33*4. Whence over feveral Afc. and Defc. thro’ a
Wood, by Colling born Ch. 6F. diftant on the Right, and about IM. on
the Left; af,42’« defcend SM. and at 43 ’2 enter H. Tudmrth Y. of 3 Fur-
longs. / ’ ■ . ' f r „
At44* 1 come to Hatnjh. and 3F. farther, thro’ S. Tudvoorth V. of 2F. on the
Road. Then by Shipton Ch. at a fmall diftance on the Left; at 46 2 afeend a
Hill, and re-enter Wiltshire. Again, over feveral Afc. and Defc. crolfmg part of
Salisbury-Plain, by Wimerborn Ch. on the Left, pafs at ss’2 to ford V. Whence by
Brightford Ch. 4F. on the Right, at enter the City of SALISBVRf.,
Thence by Harnham Ch. 4 F. on the Right, and Odftoke 1 M. on the Left,
crofs Huntington Br. and 1 F farther, viz. at 6o’j pafs thro’ Huntington , a fmall
Village: Whence over another part of Salisbury-VXitvt, by Tweed-Farm on the
Right, and Black-V'/arren Lodges on the Left, a ftraight Way leads at 66’3 to
Tippot V.-and about IM. farther, to Dorfetfb. Then by the Lady Hooper's Houfe
on the Left, pafs at 70’1 to Crunborn, i. e. AmnisGruum , a Mt. Town of 6 Fur-
longs. r
From Cranborn, leave Tovfoyne Clu on the Left, alfo Winborn , St. Giles’% Ch*
and the Earl of Shaftsburfs Houfe on the Right; and at 76 M. Chabury- Houfe
on the Left, and Hinton-Marten Ch. on the fame Hand : At 78 M. pafs by
Ajhton- Farm on the Left, and 2 F. farther, Stanbridge Chap, on the fame Hand.
Whence by VVihford Court on the Right, at 80’ 3 crofs a Branch of and
at Bo’6 enter Winborn or Wimborn-Minfter , anciently in BmijhVVin-
dugledy,i. e. aTownfituate between two Brooks. ’Tis indifferent large, wa-
ter’d by the Stour , and having a confiderable Mt. on Frid. but a greater on -
Friday for Cattel, continuing 7 Weeks. The Town was formerly noted for its
Nunnery, built A.C. 712, by Lutle Burga, Sifter to In a, K. of th e Weft-Saxons,
who being divorc’d from her Husband, K.of the Northumbers , retir’d to this
Monaftery ; upon the Diffolution of which, a large Collegiate Ch. with a fair
Spire-Steeple was erefted in the Place. f
At 81*7 over the Stour and Canford Br. an indifferent ftraight Way, by Hid.
ford Houfe on the Left, leads at By’2 to POOL, a Town and County of itfelf, en-
compafs’d by the Sea, except on the N. fide, and wall’d about. It has a fafe
Harbour ; fends Burgcffes to Pari, is govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, CSV. and
keeps 2 Mts. vi\. on Mondays and Thurfdays.
» *
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I e F lliort of Stanbridge-Chz-p. the Left acute. 11. In the Right acute. 11l At tile
’ End of Cranborn, the Left forward. IV. In Huntington, the Left to Odjtoke. V. 4F. than of
Ford, the Right to Andover and Stockbridge. VI. IF. beyond Ford, the Right aiute, and ti c
Leftto Amefbury ." VII. a’x beyond Ford , the Right to Gamelton. VIII. Ju N. Judwtrcb, tl.e.
Left to Collinpborn. lX- At the End of N. Tu , the Right to Lurg'JhaJ. X. Ib.
of the Entring EarkJfj.the Right to Shaborn. XL l’ s beyond Farnborougtj the Right to RiMrg:
XII. IM. lliort of Steventon, the Right to Abingto * a different Way. XiiL At the Latmg
jlbivgtQP) the Left forward. XIV, ia AbivgtQP) the Right forward to LOJSii OA.
<4 '• i f ' ’ • ’ . .. ■ ■ d - •
•* ♦ »~rr’ t
T he


The Road from
PR ESTAIN to CARMARTHEN.
hTHE Point of Bearing E. N. E. If. The direft Diftance 6c M.
X lII*. The vulgar Computation 46 M. IV. The 6 1 M.
From JPreJiain £omp, Meafurc.
to Kexv Radnor 4 , °4 °5' , 4 °f > 4
r Bealth 8i 12 io’i ly’tf
Ludlowvaugh 9 a 1 12*0 27*6
JLlanimodofry f 26 c y’o 34/6
Comp. Meafurc,
to Abermarles fls i I 0 6> 2
Rue-Raddor £( j 7 oS’o
Carmarthen $ J n’o 6i’&
4 <Ji , o
Radnorshire, Brecbmckjh. and Carmarthen]}). are the Counties that include the
whole Road ; and the Semergil, Edway , Wye , Vervar, Brane , Tony, Dulas, Cothy and
G willy, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Way to Llanimdofry is but
indifferent, yet thence to Carmarthen very good; with feveral Inns on the Road
befides thofe in the Towns pafs’d through. *
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At SF. The Right to Riadergozoy. j’6 At the End of the Left to Kineton. y’z The
Left to Llanirangle-nant-Melon. y’6 The Left to Hereford. BM. The Right forward i --V
At the End of Cavenaheth, the Right to Llanavan. Jf M. The Right to Cardigan. Aj’i The
Left to L’a-.tgadock. The Left to Llandilovawn, fo’o The Left to the Golden Grove.
FROM the Town-Hall in Preftain , at 3 F. avoid the acute or forward Way on
the Right to Riadergoway ; bear to the Left; and at i’i over a Hill of F.
at the Bottom, leave Beggers-Bufh, a noted Place on the Right. At 3’4
pafs thro’ Kinerton V. and at 4*3 by fomc Houfes on the R. come at 5’3 to New
Radnor of 3 F.on the R. the Shire-Town, which formerly had a Mt. was Go-
vern'd by a Bailiff and 25 Burgeffes, and enjoy’d large Immunities. 'Tis at pre-
fent a poor Town, confifting in about 40 Houfes, yet has 3 Fairs, on Trinity,
tuefd. St. Lukes-Day, and Auguft 3. with one good Inn; fending one Burgefs to
Pari. About xF. to the Right, flood the Caftle, now quite ruin’d; and IM.
to the Left, Old Radnor, call’d Maifeveth-hean in Britijh, and from its eminent
Situation Pen-crag , fuppos’d to be the Mag nos, or Magnim, in ; and to
give Denomination to the Majfegetes, ancient Inhabitants of thofe Parts.
From Radnor, crofs feveral Brooks; at fi afeend a Hill of 1 M. leaving Lla-
nihangle-nant-Melon Ch. a little on the Left; and at the Top, defeend IM.
Whence by fome Houfes, and over Edway fiv. pafs at 12*5 by an Inn call’d
Matt’s, on the Left. At 15’x go thro’ Lla V. at 15’$ crofs Wye fiv. oyer
a Wooden Br. to Brechnochjh. and health alius B a final! Mt. Town of 3 Fur-
longs. ! ;
Ac i6’3 over a Wood Br. on Vervar fiv. at ifj pafs thro’ Cavenabeth V. and
by feveral Houfes, alfo by Mr. Price’s on the Right, come at to Llanavar V.
and at 21 M. to Ponteridgley, over a Brook. Again, by fome Houfes, at 22 M.
defeend 3 F. at 23 M. leave Mr. Lloyd's Houfe on the Right, and crofling 2 or
3 Brook, by fome Houfes on the Left, afeend a Hill of 3 F. Whence a ftraight
open Way with Houfes, leads at 2y’<s to Ludlowvaugh Houfe, on the Right, at
Carpiarthenjhire.
At 28*7 go down a Hill of 12 F. and at the Bottom, by feveral Houfes on the
Road. At 3i’3 come to Mr. Gwynn’sP. on the Left, extending IM. on the
Road, and a little after, to his Houle on the Right, call’d Lhnbram. Whence
ftraggling


ffraggling Houfes bring you at 3 to Era at 34*2 to V. and
3 F. farther, to Llanimdofr h a fmall Mr. Town, and noted Thorough-fare.
Beyond the Town, omitting the acute Way on the Right, to , crcfs
tovoy fiv. leave Llandingad Ch. on the Left, and fo forward by feveral Houles,
touch upon the Tovoy on the Left, at 38 M. Whence over feveral Rivulets, the
Way being indifferent ftraight, leads at 40*2 to a Wood Br. over a Brook, and
3F. farther, to an Inn on the Left, call’d Mas-Goodrvin. Two F. beyond, crcfs a
Part of Dulasjlv. leaving Abemarlos, Sir Francis ComvoaUis’s Houfe, on the Right.
Then by fome Houfes, and over a Brook, afcend a Hill of 4F. and pafs thro’
CavenGloffen V. At go down 3F. by fome Houfes on the R. and 4F. be-
yond, thro’ Cowen-Gathbury V.
At 45 M. over a W T ood Br. crofs another Branch of the Dulas\ at 46 M. afcend
a Hill of SF. and defcend. 2F. At by fome Houfes on the Right, call'd
Van Lloyd ; and after, by feveral Houfes on the R. come to Kue-F\addor V. There
crofs another Part of the Dulas alfo, over a Wooden Br. and afeending a H ill, pa fs
by fome ftraggling Houfes on the Road. At leave Houfe, 2F.
on the Left; whence again, the Road is befet with Houfes. At crofs a
Brook over a Wood Br. to a pav’d Caufe-Way, continuing about 6F. At 5 5 M.
pafs by fome Houfes, and crofs Cothy fiv. over a Br. of W ? ood.
At 58 M. fet forward by the Whitt Mill, a Ridg of Hills lying along the Road
on the Right, and tovoy fiv. on the Left. At 59’4 enter Aberguilly, an indifferent
large Village, chiefly inhabited by Fifher-Men, in which is Houfe, a
Seat of the Bifhop of St. David's. At 5 crofs a part of Gmllyflv. over a Wooden
Br. and 2 F.farther, the other Branch of it over a Stone Br. of 4 Arches, to CAl{-
MAKtHEM, or Caer-Marden at 60’4, call’d Caer-Eirdhin by the Britains , Marjduntm
by Ptolemy, and Mnridunum by Antoninus. ’Tis the Shire-Town, large and well-
built, on tovoy fiv. over which it has a large Stone Br. and Key, where fmall Vef-
fels arrive to unload their Goods, &c. ’Tis Paid to have given Birth to Merlin the
Britijh Prophet, or Sooth-Sayer ; and was once fortify’d with a Wall and ftrong
Catftle, now ruinous. ’Twas alfo made by the Princes, the Chancery and
Exchequer of South-Wales. Tis-, at prefent, a Town and County incorp. and en-
joys ample Immunities, as keeping Courts, Alffzes, Cfc. and electing a Pari. Man,
CV. Tis govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Sheriffs, and 16 Aldermen, cloth’d
in Scarlet, (tie. and has 2 good Mts. on Wednefd. and Saturd, with 4 Fairs, on
Lanmas-Day , Augufi 23. Michaelmas-Eve, and Alhallon-Day.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. fF. fliort of Aberguilly, the Left forward to Cafile-Biggeth, 11. Againft the TVLite Mill, the
Left. 111. tF. beyond the pav’d Caufway, the Right to the Golden U rove. IV. In Kue-Kad-
dor, the Right to Llandilovawr. V. In Llanimdofry, the Right forward to Brecknock. VI. iF.
beyond Llanimdofry, the Left to Killcomb. VII. At the Entting the Left acute. VIII.
At the End of Bealth , the Right to the Hay. IX. 9F. beyond Edtvay-Bvook, the Right to
JCeinton, and the Left acute. X. fF. ihort of Llanihangle-nantMelon, the Left to Llauidlos.
XI. 3 F. ill oxt of Beggers-BuJJ), the Left to Knighton.
The Road from
SALISBURY to CAMPDEN, in Glocestershire.
I. TPHE Point of Bearing N. by E. 11. Thedireft Horizontal Diffance 63 M,
_ 111. The vulgar Comymation 56 M. IV. The Dimsvfuration 76 M.
F rom


jr ro m SALISBURY Comp. * Alcafare.
toEverley 12 12 f j l S'6
Burbich 04. 16 °f 5 6 I 21 ’4*
Marlborough 04 20 of 6 I 27*2
Jiiworth 12 J 30 * 43’$*
Comp, Meafure.
to Lechlade 4 \6 off ±a’z
Burford 6 42 08*3 fff
Stow 7 4.9 io’o 6ff
7 f 6 08*3 76*0
Wiltshire) Barkf). ox[ord(b. and Glocefterjh . include the whole Road; and the
garnet, Thames , Leech and Windrujhy are the principal Rivers pafsM over; afford-
ing a good R. over Salisbury-Plain, but lefs pleafant thro 5 Savernah Foreft, to
Marlborough: The Gobdnefs of the Way thence to Campden, and the Entertain-
ment to be met with in mo ft Places, makes amends for that Inconvenience.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At I*7 The Left acute. The Right acute, The Left acute. 20*4 The Left to Weji-
aate. zff The Left to Bath, 31*2 The Right to Ramjbury . 51*4 The Left to Wcotton -
JBaffet. 3 2*2 The Right to Wantage . 5 8’ 7 The Right to LLighivorth , a different Way. 3 9*2
The Left to Stratton. 47’* The Left to Inglejham Ch. ff 7 The Right to Shiyton. 74*0
The Left to Worcefier .
the Council-Houfe in SALISBVJ(f, turning firfton the Left, and then
|H on the Right, at SF. leave the City, enter Salisbury-Plain , and at i’6 pafs
-** by feme part of Old. Sarum on the Right; whence appear feveral Croft*
ways leading to the adjacent Towns, vi\. the , Winchejier, Idmerfton,tkc.
on the Right; Stretford , Amesbury, Nomanton &c. on the Left. At 15 ’6 go by
gverley on the Left, where is a fraall Inn or two, for the Refrefhment of Tra-
vellers, after their Journey, over the Plain.
The Way thro’ open arable Lands, and by on the Left, at x 8 M.
leads at 2i’x to Burbich , a long but difeontinu’d Village, with x or 2 indifferent
good Inns. At 22’3 come to Savernake Foreft, and at 24’4 by a noted Tree on
the Right, call’d Fair-bough. At a6’2 defending, leave the Foreft, and 6 F.far-
ther, enter Marlborough.
Thence avoiding the forward Way to Bath &c. at 29’5 pafs thro’
horn-MaJfeyV. and at 30’$ leave Ogborn Si. Andrew, a little on the Left, entring
Ogborn St. George at 31T, a long Vill. of 7F. on the Road, with 1 fmall Inn.
Whence a ftraightopen Way leads at 3s’2 by , 4 F, on the Left; and
to a Lane at 35 ’6 leaving Badbury V. 2F. on the Right, and at 37 M. Wanbo-
rough, on the fame Hand.
At 38 M. pafs over part of Wanborough Com, and at 40*4 thro’ Marjham V.
Whence, for the moft part, open Way brings you at 43’4 to Biworth, of 3F. on
the Road.
Then defeend 3F. the Way being open Arable; at ’3 enter a Lane, and a
46’3 Inglejham Y. At 47 M. crofs a Stone Br. over a Brook, to Barkjh. and at 48T
St. fohns Br. of 4 Arches, over Thames flv. to Glocefterjh. a little before, meeting
the Road from London to Glocefter , &c. At come to Lechlade, a Ivlt. Town
of 2 F . on the Road.
At <jo’2 over Leech flv, on a Wooden Br. re-enter Barkjh. and leave Little Far-
rivgdon on the Right; pafling over Farringdon Com. at 51/3 to Oxfordjh. and BF.
farther, to FilkinY. of 4 F. on the Road, with a good Inn. Whence the Way lies
indifferently thro’open Arable and Pafture-Grounds, and thro’ Bradwell Grove
leading at 5 *s’4 to a Defc. of 4F. There pafs by a Village, and sin at-Elm on
the Left. At 57’4'enter Burjord, -of 3F. on the Road, and on the fide of a Hill;
a Town Corp. govern’d by 2 Bayliffs, 24 Burgelfes, It has a good Mt. on
Sauird, and 2 Fairs, viz. on Midfummer^Day , and 14 Days after St. •
Beyond


Beyond the Town, crofs Windrujhftv. over a Stone Br. of 4 Arches. At <o’2
pals by a Stone on the Left; and over Black-Heath , leaving Fifield, Edburp, Weft cote,
and Iccornb Chs. fucceffively on the Right; alfo Barrington and Chs. and
Ejftington Beacon on the Left. At 62*4 re-enter Glocefterjh. at 65 M. defcend 4F.
afc. 1 M. and come to Stow alias Stow , on the at 67’3 on a bleak Hill • a
large, t,ho’ poor Town, containing about 200 Houfes, and deftitute boih of Wood
and Water: Neither have the Inhabitants the privilege of fetting Stalls before
their own Doors, at the Fairs. ’Tis govern’d by 2 Bayliffs, and" has a Mt. oa
Thurjd. with 2 Fairs, vft. on May-Day, and 14 Days after Michael-Mafs.
From Stow, an open Way leads by Lower Swell and Upper Swell Chs. on the Left
alfo by Longborow Ch. Sir William fuxons Houfe and Ch. on the Right *
over Broadway Hill or Downs, to a Conduit at 7s’2, 2F. farther, to Wejftngton vl
at 75 ’6 to CAM?DEN, a Mt. Town, having a well-built Alms-Houfe founded by
Sir Baptift Hicks , for 6 aged Men and 6 Women. There are 2 curious Tombs in
the Church, vi\. one of the faid Sir Baptift Hicks, and the other of
Yifcount Campden , &c. The Town is of great Antiquity, the Danes being fun!
pos’d to have their Camps near it, and thence its Name feems to be deriv’d.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. At the End of Campden, the Left to Broad Campden. 11. yM. fliort of the Left to Bur-
ton on the Hill. 111. i’6 Jhort of Stow, the Right to Upper Swell. IV. 4F. ftort of Stow the
Left to Denynton. V: 1o F. beyond Burford, the Left to Aujier. VI. At Little Farington ’ the
Left to Kempfcot. VII. The forward in Lechlade to VIII. yF. beyond
the Left to Faringdon. IX. i’y beyond Marjham, the foiward to X. At the End
of Burbich, the Left to Andover. XI. a’t beyond Burbich, the Left to CoVingborn. XII. At
the End of Everley, the Right acute. XIII. On Salisbury-Flain, the Left to furton. Xiv'. In
Savernake-Forefi, the Right to Forton and Hifiterjlow.
The Road from
TINMOUTH Com. Northumb. to CARLISLE,
in Cumberland.
I. TH E Point of Bearing W. 11. The direft Diftance <o M.
JL lII* The Vulgar IV* The 6^^*
From Tinmouth Comp. Meafure.
to ]\[ew~Caftle 07 j 07 o9*2
Ovingham 08 jif 2I 5 i
Hexam 08 I 2j ji'f
Haltwefel 10 }33 14/7 i 4,6*4,
Comp. Meafurc.
to Chapelbourn 06 59 1 o g> 2
Corby 07 46 oo’fi L’4
CARLISLE 4 . fo ' o?’i 1
f° 6s*?
Northumberland and Cumberland comprehend the whole Road; and the Tine ,
Alkn y South-Tine, Bippal, Irthing, Eden, and Fetter el, are the principal Rivers
crofs’d over ; the Way in general being bad and hilly.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
~M ™ , the U£t to Shields. 7F. The Right acute. s>6 $ >6 The Right acute.
,) y- lhe^ 1 S ntto < Vernon.22l The Left to Btwel. j 1 M.. The Right to an I
Carlijh ; a different Way. 41’y Beyond MeV.is, the Right to Narford. .] 6’z The Right it
w L r to /^KK The^ Left acute * The Left a.ute. C6’f Thi
Ltit to Codoy. 6-j 6 ine Left to Botenerby.
■ ' FROM


FROM Tinmouth,cvbCs a Brook at 6F.by N. and S. Shields on the Left, and the
Church on the Right. At 2’ i by ChiM V. on the Left, and 3 F.farther,
by Chirms V. on the Right, defcend a Hill of 3 F. and by fome Houfes, go
over a Valley at 4.%- Then by Pikeweß Hall on the Left; and at 7 M. by Biker v.
on the fame hand, ctofs a large Valley, thro’ Vfeburn V. and at B’<s enter New-
Caftle, or Nero-Caftle upon Tine, a large Corp. Mt. and Shire-Town.
Thence over a Hill of 4 F. and a large Valley, pafs by -Dmow-Hall on the Right,
and near the Top of the Hill, W. Demon V. on the Left. On the Top, thro’ Pig-
(hal V. defcend a Hill of 8 F. and at the Bottom, pafs thro’ V. of 2F.
having the Tine on the Left, and Right on Ch. on the other fide of it. At 16*7
crofllng a Wood Br. and Brook, and over a Hill, go thro’ Wilm V. in a Vale.
Then defcend another Hill, and crofs a Stone Br. and Brook.
At 2o’y Prudor Caftlc appears on the Left, Tine flv. pafling between it and the
R. About 3 F. farther, pafs thro’ Ovingham V. of 2 F. and at the End of it* crofs
a Stone Br. and Brook. At 22’2 on a Hill of 9 F. go thro’ Ovington V. and at 24*4
crofs a Valley, and leave Newton Ch. on the Right. Over another Vale, come
at 27 M. to a Defc. of 7 F. and thro’ Gorebridge dim Cerbridg/Y . of 2F. Thence
by a Water-Mill on the Right (where part of Tine runs in the Road) and by
Sandy V. on the fame hand, pafs at 29 M. to Beftrick , a fmall Village*
Hence by Anwick-Grange, and Anwick on the , both on the Right, come at
3 i’i to Tine flv. which you pafs over, and 3 F. farther, to Hex am or Hexham , of
above 3 F. call’d Hanguftald by Beda, Alexodunum by the Romans, and Hagulftdl-
delham, by M. Somner ; a Town of great account in former Time, being dignify’d
with an Epifcopal Sea. The Cathedral was a raoft ftately Structure, built by St.
Wilfred, and poffefs’d by loßiihops fucceffively, but being fpoil’d by the Hanes,
the See was remov’d to Tork. ’Tis, at prefent, a well-built Bailiwick Town on
the Tine, and has an indifferent Mt. for Corn, on Tuefd. ’l'was formerly fa-
mous for its Abbey and Church; one of which is now decay’d, and a great part
of the other was pull’d down by the
Leaving Hexham, afcend a Hill of 10 F. to a Moor, and traverfe 2 Valleys. In
the latter, over Haden Br. crofs South Tine )Zv.and pals thro Hadon, leaving the Ch.
on the Right. Then bv Sapwood V. on the Right, alfo over 3 Valleys; at 41 M.
defcend SF. and go thro’ Me Bis V. At 42’$ thro’ V. leave V.
on the Left, and let forward thro’ Milcriche at 44*4. At 4‘5’2 amending, crofs 2
Valleys, to Haltvoefel of 5 F. a Town indifferent well-built, and affording good En-
tertainment. At4B’2 pafs thro’ Redbath V. and leave on the Left.
Thence thro’ a Wood, and by Blenkenfop Caftle on the Right, alfo by Goomhoh
V. at <o’3 Thirlwal Caftle at 50’6 Longbuyer Caftle at 5 1 M. and Burley V. at 51’}
all fucceffively on the fame hand. Then by Belton and Crook, 2 Villages on the
Left, come at sa’2 over Poltrofeflv, to Cumberland. There afcend a Hill of SF.
and touch upon a part of the Pitts Wall on the Right. Thence by Dearington V.
clofe on the Right, pafs thro’ a Copfe, alfo thro’ Chappelbourn V. at 54*6, and crofs
a large Valley. At defcend a Hill, and over a Wooden Br. and Brook,leave
Milton V. fomew'hat on the Right.
At 60’2 afc. 4 F. and prefently defc. 1 M. where a Park ranges along the Road
on the Right. Whence croffmg feveralßrooks, come at 64’2 to V. of 3F.
beyond which,crofs Warwick Stone Br.over Eden flv. and afeending a Hjll,pafs thro
Warwick, afmall Village. Then leaving £g//ow£«ry V. on the Right; thro 'Wheel-
hrou'h-HaßV.ats6’6,and over Fetter el flv. at 68’i fall m with the Road from Lon-
don f d nd arrive at Boxherftreetji Suburb of CARLISLE at 68 7,4 F. farther, ending
the City itfelf; a Place of great Antiquity and Strength, tortify’d with a Cattle,


Wall and Bulwarks, ’Tis well-built, well water’d; and much refbrted to, by rea*
fon of its nearnefsto Scotland ; enjoying ample Immunities and Privileges.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. 2F. from Carltfle, the Right to Penrith, Lancajler, Sec. 11. 2F. Jliort of V^oty-Houfe, the Left
to Nar ford. HI- 7F. beyond Hadon-Br. the Left acute. IV. i’c fhort of Chilliuatoti. the
Right to Shields.
The Road from
WESHPOOL to CARNARVAN.
h' I 'HE Point of nearing Ni W. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance <59 M«
I 111. The Vulgar Computation 64 M. IV. The Dimenfuration 822.
From Weljhpool Comp, Meafure.
toLlanvair 06 ©6 08*2 oS’2
Dinas-Alowthy 14- 20 18*3 26’f
DoJgethe 08 28 09*4 36*1
Llaudura 09 37 IF6 *^-7 > 7
Comp. Meafure.
to Harlech of o6’z f
Dolbenmer i@ f* iz’q* 66’f
Camay van 12 64 ; if’f , Bi’a
64 Sa’it
Mowgomeryjlnre, Merionethjh. and Carnarvanjh. are the Counties pafs’d thro’, and
the Lkding, Dovy, LUnbeder , Lleveney , Gar-way and Saint , are the principal Rivers
crofs’d over ; which, for the moft part, is no good Road, nor well frequented.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At IF. The forward in WelJJjpool. 7F. The Right to Afyvot . B’j The Right to Lanvelling<
ifz The Right the New AV ay.
FROM iP'eljhpooi, leave Poww-Caftle on the Left; at the Eiid of the Town, af-
cend a Hill, and at crofs over Golway Mountain* Then pafs Lkding flv,
at 3’6, and by Dollanhin Village clofe on the Left at 4’4. Whence over 2 Hills,
enter an open Way; which leave at 6’6, and pafs over another Hill, a ftraight
Way, leading by Pinfold Houle on the Left, at B’2 to Llanvair Village of 2 F.
Then an indirect Way,fomewhat woody, over Derreta-tege , a Hill or Mountain fo
call’d, lies at i3’4 by the Lord Herbert's P. on the Right. At M. turn Ihort on
the Right, and by Cannons-Office) a noted Houfe on the Left. 2F. farther, avoid
the new Way on the Right; leave Lt angadw an Ch. On the Left; and at iy’4
(where the Ways meet again) pafs by Garth Ch. on the Right.
At 19 M.over a Riv. pals by Howhew's Houfe on the Left, and then over
geivoel Mountain, come to Merionethjh. at 21’3 where you crofs a Brook over
Nant-tede-godh Bridge.
Thence by feveral Woods arid Hills, at 2?’4 fomc Houfes on the Road, call’d
Digodg : Again, thro’ fohie Woods, and by Hall at about 2 F. on
the Left, crofs Dovy flv. over Pontrusk Br. and 5 F. farther, pafs thro’ Vinos Mow-
thy Y. of 2F. Then thro’an open Way between Hills, crofling a Br. at 33’2 pafs
by foraeHoufes on the Road, 1 M. farther, defeending, andafcendingXrmt/et/j
Hill. Afterwards leave C’/iiwi* a great Houfe, about 2 F. on the Right, arid en-
ter Dolgeth at 36T of 2F. on Avon flv. It has an indifferent good Mt, on Tuefd .
for Provilions, (sV, and drives fome Trade in Cotton.
M From


From the Town, afcend a Hill, and - M. farther, go by Dellachongrid Hall on
the Right; thro’ Llanyltyd V. at 37’6, and 3F. farther, to Mafgarna V. leaving
Peat Moor on the Left. A£ 41 Ms pals between Rocks, along a Woody Way ;
then over a Stone Br. leaving a Mill on the Right, after leveral Afc. and Dele,
come at 47’7 to Tarapum Br. where you crofs a Brook, to Llandura , a ftraggling
Village. v
Hence by feveral Houles on the Road, and Ch. on the Left,
about 4F. at 5T2 crofs Llanbederflv. over a Stone Br. pafs by Llanbeder Ch. on
the Right, and IM. 4F. farther, by Llanvaier Ch. on the fame Hand. Then
afeending a Hill at 54 M. enter Harley alias Harlech , or Harleyh, on a Reck,
near the Sea-Shore; a froall Mt. Town, govern’d by a Mayor, oV. fending 1
Burgefs to Pari, and holding the Alfizes for the County of Merioneth. It former-
ly had a ftrong Caftle, built by K. Edward I. of fo great height, that it com-
manded the adjacent Sea and Land, being fenced with a double Bulwark. The
Conftable of the Caftle is, by Patent, always Mayor of the Town. This
Caftle was a Garrifon for K. Charles I. under the Command of Col .WiEiam
Owen , and held out the longeft, againft the Affaults of the Rebels, who dif-
mantled it. Near this Town, are two In-lets of the Sea, call’d Traeth-Bicah
and Traeth Mawr.
Atss’4 pafs thro’a Village, moftonthe Right, at 57'e by Llanihanyleytrath
Ch. about 3 F. to the Left, and on the Sands 4 F. farther; crolfing a Brook.
At 60’3 thro’ a V. go on the Sands again, to Then by a Ridge
©f high Rocks and Mountains on the Right, at 63’4 enter Penmorvay of 3 F.
At 6f% crofs two Brooks; 2F. farther, leave Clemnay Houfe about -M. on the
Right, and at 66' 4 crofs a Bridge, to Dalbenmer V. of 2 F. Whence by leve-
ral Rocks on the Right, and at SB’2 by fomc Houfes call’d Tygarn, diftant near
2 F. from the Road, at 70 M. crofs a Brook, and afcend a great Hill, leaving
Bodichen on the Left.
At y2’4 g® up a Hill, and 9 F. farther, by LlanUavenay Ch. on the Left; crof-
fing lleveney flv. At 78*3 pafs by Llanmda Ch. entire fame Hand; 4F. far-
ther, by Dinas \ a little beyond, by Mr. Lewes’s Houfe, all on the Left; and
over Garwayflv. on Pont-Newed, or New-Bridge, at 79’3- Whence afeending and
defeending, at Bx’6 crofs Saim flv. leaving the Gallows on the Left, and at 82
M. come to CAgNARYAN, or Carnarvon, fo call’d from its Situation oppofite to
Mona, or the Jjle of Angle fey, and Jfasrn-Arvon, by the Britains. ’Twas rais’d
out of the ancient City Seganthm, mention’d by Antoninus', and is commodioully
featedon the Sea-lhore. ’Tis noted for the Burial of Conflantius, Father of the
Emperor Conftantine the Great, and for the Birth of K. Edward 11. the firft Eng-
Ujh Prince of Wales. Here alfo were formerly kept the chancery and Exchequer
Courts for the Princes of North-Wales. The Town is well fortify’d both by Art
and Nature; tho’ not large; and gave Title to the R. H. Charles , Earl
of Carnarvon, &c. It fends a Burgefs to Pari, is govern’d by the Conftable of
the Caftle, who, by Patent, is always Mayor ; having for Afliftants, an Aider-
man, two Bailiffs, SSV. and enjoys a good Market on Saturdays.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
i- aF. from Carnarvon, the Left acute. 11. At the End of Llandura, the Right to the Ferry.
111. z F. beyond Vinas-Elowthay, the Right to IV. Againlt
Right acute. V. At Nantdraditb-Vn. the Left to Llanterhedth. .VI. A tGarth~j)ibo Ch. the
being the New Way. VJX. ip F. beyoiscj the Lo*4 Herbert’'* Right a.ute.
The
w...«^-


The Road from
YORK to LANCASTER.
t. T'HE Point of -Bwr/wf W. N. W. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftailce 68 M.
x HI. The vulgar Computation 68 M. IV. The Vimevjuration SS’y.
ftromTORK Comp. Meafurc.
toAllcrton 10 10 ij’i 13’*
KnaresbiO'gh 04 14 04*7 iB’o
Ridley 04 18 oy’o 23’©
Boulton 12 30 iy ? 7 38*7
Shilton ©y 3y 4f , o
Comp. M^afure.
to Coniftbn y <fo | 07*0 yi’«
Settle 6 46 08*2 60*2
Greersby 7 yj o S’6 6y’o
Ifornhy 8 61 io'o 79^0
Lanctjier 7 68 oy’y ( 88 y j
Torkfhire and Lmafhire include the whole Road ; and the Owfe, Nyd, Wharf,
Are, Winning, and Hank beck, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Read
in general is bad; yet, the Goodnels of the Towns, and Entertainment met
with, in moft Places, make feme amends for that Inconvenience*
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
t
At the End oFtLeLeft to London, 9*4* The Right to Borouphhrig&s. 13’* Tlie Right Tor-
.*3 7; The Right to Boroughhriggs. 23*0 In Ripley, the Right to Kippon. The
Left to Leeds. 4.2*0 The Right to Eajtoy. 76*4. The Right acute.
' *
Cfitting forward from WJ(£ y omit the direa Way to and bearing
Oto the Right, pafs by Ackharn, IQtapton, Rufford, Heflovo, and M oor-Monkton, Vil-
lages ; alfo Woolflrap Hall on the Left, Popleton, Overton , Nun-Monkton Chap, and
.Hall on the Right. At B*4 over Skip ßr. crofs pafs by
Cuthal, and Hopper ton, on the Left, and Green Hamenon on the Right; avoiding
the Road on the Right to Boroughhriggs , &c. At 13T come to AUerton V. fall iri
with the London Road to Barwick, &c. and bear t® the Left, thro’ Flaskev Y. at
i 4 ’4 leaving Goulsburgh Ch. and Hall on the Left. At-xy’y arrive at
burgh ytilgo Kn a through, of above 3F. on Nyd fiv. and on a Rock. s Tis ftrength-
ned with a Caftle; is a Corp. fending Burgefles to Pari, and has a good Market
for Corn, £SV. on Wednefdays.
Thence Nyd fiv. running near the Road on the Left, for feveral M* pafs by
Beeton Hall on the Left, Skooton V. and Nid Ch. and Hall on the Right, and by
fome Lime-Pits, at 22 6 to fiipley, of 3 F. feated llkewifeon the Nyd, and having
a Market on Fridays.
From Ripley, fet forward by Clynet V. to the Right; at 24^on Hanfwonh Br*
ever the faid Nyd, and 2 F. farther, to Hor Hanfwonh, a long Vil-
beyond which, come upon Grafes-PU Moor, by feveral Houfes on the
Right and Left. Then over Baskin Moor, leave Eafl.End Houfes V. and Stra~
ling V. on the Left, and two long Polls on the Right.
Hence, defending and a lending, by Fofton Ch. Swinfiey Hall, and Blub arrows
Houfes on the Left, at 32T crofs Wajhburn fiv. the Road continuing over Tfeskin
Moor. Here the Way is hilly, leading by a Pool on the Left, at a6’4 thro’ Somer-
Scales V.and 7F. farther, Heffel V. Then the Way being ftill hilly,pafs by Sturry
V. and fome Alms-houfes on the Right; DerriJtonY. t eamfiey Hall and Hooher Hill
Beacon on the Lt* At 98’<5 come to BoutonV. and and over Wharf fiv. Whenceovef
fome Hills,leave fiwghtonS * on the Right, and at 42*5 go where
M 2 * afeend-


a fee ruling a Hill; you have Haugh P. by the Road for iM. on the Right, and at
44 6 enter Skipton in Craven, a confiderable Market Town.
From Shipton, afeend a Hill, crofs a Valley, and defeend 4F. At the Bottom,
pals thro’ Sturm V. and 2 F. farther, Tholby V. an indifferent ftraight Way,lead-
ing by Eljlon Gragg Hill on the Right, and Gary rave Ch. on the Left; over an Ale.
and Defc. at 52 M to Covifton V. of 4 F. in which, over a Stone Br. crofs Are fiv.
Then attending and defending, fet forward thro’ Nelli field PeJe at 5 s’2 and a
Chap, with 8 Alms-Houfes on the Right at 56*5. Three F. farther, croffing a
Stone Br. and Brook, enter Long-Vrefton V. of 5 F. beyond which, come to a
Moor, afeend a Hill of 10 F. and prefently defeend BF, At the Bottom, ap-
pears Settle, a good Town, with a Mt. on 7 At the end of it, over a Stone
Br. crofs Kibble fiv. to Giglefwick V. of 5 F. formerly noted for feveral fmall
Springs, ebbing and flowing almoft every quarter of an Hour.
Leaving Giplefwid r, go up a Hill of BF. down again 4F. alfo by a Village,
and Lakeland Hall on the Left, Yoke Laid V. and on the Right, and
crofiing a Brook, afeend and defeend. At 67 5 pafsthro Claphara V. crofting a
Brook, afeend a Hill; at 69 M. leave Greenby V. clofe on the Right 5 and ent;r
a Moor. Hence at 75 M. defeend a Hill to Lancajh. and go thro iVennwgton and
Tatham, 2 Villages, leaving Tatham Hall on the Left, and the Ch. on the Right.
Then thro’ the Lord Nlorlefs P. come to a Town of 4 F. on IVtiming fiv. a
Branch of the Lufie. It has the Ruins of a decay’d Caftle, and an indifferent
good Mt. on Mondays. r .
Thence thro’ Far It on V. amending and defending, arrive at CUughton V. ot
SF. by the Hall on the Left. Then by a part of Catcn, down a Hill, leave the
Ch. on the Left, and on a Stone Br. over Hanlcbeck jlv. come to another patriot
Caton. Whence by a Wood on the Left, attending and defending, pafs thro a
a Park, and by Book V. on the Right, at 88 4to LANC a noted Corpo-
ration, Market and Shire Town.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. At the End of Hornby , the Left to Kirby-Eaunfdale. IL i h. from HeHi field-Tele , the Left
acute. 111. 2F. from Skipton, the Left forward. IV. Againft BlnborrowKoui§s, the forward
to Fateley-Briggs, V. 2F. from Ripley y the Right to Leeds. VI. At the End of the
Right forward to Wet her by.
The Road from
YORK to WEST-CHESTER.
hTH E Point .of Bearing W. S. W. If. The direct Diftance 86 M.
I 111. The Vulgar Computation 74 M. IV. The JDmenfuration 106 M.
From TO KK Comp- Mcafure.
to'TadcaJier 08 ©8 { 09 ’6 09*6
Thorner 06 I <f ©B*l 17*7
Leeds o 6 20 07*1 zfo
Burftal of . 2f °7 >0 5 2 ’°
Eajaud of 30 08*2 t \,v’2
Rochdale h’6 f^ 0
Comp. Mcafure.
to Manchester 08 4-8 [ «’<* °&7’ 6
Eccles 04 f 2 °4V
Warn'ngton i o 62 1 3 7 7 0062^
FrodJJjam 06 68 °5 )J 4 4 Q< JS
CHESTER 06 i n 10 ’ 6 [ \° 6 ’*
74 106*4
From


From Manchejler Comp. Ale a flue.
to Stopford °p of o^’f,
CHancrafs 08 13 tCo 1 7*4*
Buckfton 08 JlB J of’f 1 23’!
Comp, Meafure.
to Br ailing ton 12 {3O 16*3 s9’4<
Wefton-Underwood o6> j 3 6 09*4. 49*0
Derby of , 4.0 J o6'<f ‘ ff’fy
Torkfhire, Lancashire and Chefhire, contain the Road, and Lancajh. Chcjh. and Der-
byjh. the Branch ; the Orofe, Wharf Are, Colder , goik, Jrk, Invel , Merfey , Wever ,
Medlock and Latbkel , being the chief Rivers croft'd over! The Road, in general,
is not good, but the Entertainment in the Townspafs’d thro 5 , fomewhat alleviate
the Fatigues of the Journey,
TH E whole Road is compris’d in Two Plates, the Firft ending at Wsr-
rington, and the Second at Chejier.
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 6F. The Right to Marwick, i’i The Right to Green- Hamerton . 7 JvT. The Right the Street-
way to T adcajier. 1 The Left, the Road to London . The Left forward. 24 .’6 Ihe
Right forward in Leeds . The Left to Oldam. The Left to AJhton. jo’o The
Right forward to Belton .
FROM to Tadcafler Qas in London to Benviebf where croffing Wharf fly.
.omit the forward Way to London, and bear to the Right \ leave Newton and
Br are, ham, with fome Woods on the fame hand. At i y’4 come to Tbornet , a
long Village, and by JQd Hall on the Left: Then over Winmoor , leave Red Hall,
the Seat of St. fiohn Sav'd, on the Right; and at 2i’i pafs thro’ Seeroft V. with an
Inn or two. Thence by fome Coal-Pits, and the White-Horfe Inn on the Right, at
24. M. to Kjrkgate-Lees V. and 4 F, farther, defeending Hill, enter ot
iM. on the Road, and on Are fly. a well-built T. own Corp. honour d by giving
Title to his Grace Thomas Duke of Leeds,tk c. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Aider-
man, &e. fends Burgeffes to Pari, and has 2 Mrs. on Tuefd. and Satin d, well fur-
nifh’d with all Torts of Provilions, and great Quantities of Cloth. _
Leaving Leeds, pafs by Hamlet Hall on the Left, alfo by jiolbcck alias Hwnjlet V.
Beefton Chap.and Hall on the Right, and by fever a 1 Houfes at 2 7*7 to Chembil V.
Then by Morley Ch. and Hall on the Left, Cilderfon V. and the Quakers Burymg-
piace on the Right, come at to Snivel if V. Whence down Hill,
leave Tome Coal-Pits and Atherton V. on the Right. At 32 M. pafs thro Bivjtal
V. of 2F. Gtimerfel V. at 32*4, and Hem-G V. at 33’5 leaving Little
fel and Long Leverfage on the Left. Afterwards over Moor, go thro
ton V. at 36*4 and at over brighwfi Br. croft Calder fly.
Hence, by Loothil and Eajhick V. on the Left, leaving Hall on the
Right, at 39 M. go down Ealand, or Leiden- ; at 40 M. thro’ Ealand
len V. of 3F. and by the Hall on the Left, 1 M. farther, croft Br, Then
by feveral Houfes, leave Gretland and Bradle Houles, with Barfand V, on the Let 4
and Sorhy V. on the Right •, till croffing a Moor, you defeend Barfand Bank, and
at 44’3 come to bfponden Y. Thence the Way being very hilly, by Lhruni Hall
and Battings Inn on the Left, at alcend Blackflone-Edg , a great Eminence ,
At the Tof) of it, enter Lancafh, delcend again 14 F. the Way continuing hilly,
and croft Windy Bank. _
At cj x’4 thro’ Littleborough Y. leave
Clay , Hamer , and Wadkwonh Houfes, all fucceffively on the Right; Hall,
Studfhaw V. Short and Bedford Houfes on the Left; and at 54*6 come to
bf SF. on gnebfiv. with a good Mt.on Luefd. From down aH; 11 pa ft b y
Gold-lane Houfe and Caftlem Flail on the Left; croft Sudden Br. and Caftleton-
' vM3 Moor;


Moor ; and at s7' <s have Smhhiford V. on theßight: Then by StanruclyMonfc
Bopway Hall and Hebert V. on the Right, arrive at at Middleton V. by Sir
Robert Alton's Houfe on the Left. '■
Hence, Irk fiv. running by the Road on the Left for fevcral M. leave Ockinm
Houfe and Blackley Chap, on the other fide of the Riv. alfo Smiley Y. and -
hurft Hall on this fide, and pafs thro’ Henton V. at 63*5 ; leaving the Hall on the
Right. Then by Chetham Green, defending a Hill, crofs Jrkflv. to Manchefter, feat,
ed between the the Irk and Jewel', a Town of great Antiquity. ’Twas a Station
of the Romans, call’d Mancmium by Antoninus, and is, at prefent, large and well-
built. It drives a great Trade in divers forts of Manufactures; ’tis beautify’d with
a fair College, Mt. Place, and Collegiate Church, and gives Title to the R. H.
Eiw. Montague, Earl of Manchefter , &c. Its Mr. on Saturd. is very confiderable. '
Thence thro’ Oldfield, Lane Houfes, Pendleton Gr, Pendleton, and Brewer-Lane, all
fmall Yillages, come at 72’2 to Eccles V. of 3 Furlongs.
Whence Irwel and Merfey fiv. run by the Road on the Left to Warrington. Then
palling thro’ Erlow , Erlow Green, Caddijhead, Hollin Gr. and Fiftleton Gr.Yillages;
leave Mix by Hall, Chat Mofis, OufonMofs, Hall, and Birch Hall, fucceffively
on the Right; alfo Barton, Barton Hall, Benclows, Flixton, Raxon, and Mafcrats, on
the Lett. Afterwards thro’ Church ftreet, come at 86 M. to Warrington, a large
and well-built Town, on Merfey fiv. which drives an indifferent good Trade, and
has a plentiful Mt. on Wednefd. for Corn, Cattle, Linnen-Cloth, £SV.
Backward Turnings to be avoided.
|. In Erlow Gr. the Right acute. 11. 6F. fhort of Eccles, the Left to Bolton. 111. 2F. from
Chetham Gr. the Right acute. IV. In Bnrftal, the Left to Bradforth. V. At the End of TPhor-
wer, the Left to IVetherby.- VI. 6 F. fhort of K.iug-Houfes, the Right to
The Continuation of the Road from
YOR K to West - CHESTER.
PLATE II. and Last.
Commencing at Warrington in Lancafhire, and extending to CHESTER aforefaid \
containing 20 Miles 2 Furlongs, ’
With a Branch from to Deri).
The following Turnings are to be avoided.
At 87*3 The Left to London. 89 M. The Right to Norton. 91*7 In Leftto DuU
ton Sail. 92*7 The Left acute. The Light acute, iqo’j* The Left acute. ibiT The
Left to Nlickle iraford.
In the Branch between Manchefter and Derby.
At 6F. The Right to Didshury. 2’l The Left acute. 7M. The Right to Brawer-Hall. B*2
The Left acute. 9’6 The Right acute. *6*3 The Leftto Chattel Frith. 22*6 The Left acute,
a^4.The Left to Chelmerton . 26*0 The Right acute. 28'o The Right acute. The
Left to Neither Biggin, The Left to 'Turnich. s*o*4, The Left to Little Breton. The
Right to Little Ore. .
T ROM Warrington, over a Stone Br. crofs Merfey fiv. to Chejh. 5 F. beyond which,
avoid the forward Way to London, and bear to the Right. At 88 M. leaving
Crapnee V, on the Left, pafs thro’ Lower Walton V. at the End, over a Stone Br.
crols a Brook, and leave Walton Hall on the Left. At 88’6 fet forward thro’ Higher
Walton j


If aim • i F. beyond, go over Fenners- Rook, and by Wah on V. on the Left, Hof
laved# Houle; Moor V. and on the Right, over Thurjhaugh Brook*
At qo’6 come to Dareshury V. and down a Hill, leave Norton V. on the Right*
and Hervton, and Hollow Hall on the Left.
At q i’d enter stoekhamV. of 2F. at the End of it, defcend a Hill, and far-
ther, another ; leaving Hauhon Caftle on the Right. 1 hen by the Saracen s Head.
Inn on the Right, and Rock-Savage Houfeon the fame Hand, pals thro V *
and by Aihon Hall on the Left, at 95 M.crofs over a Br. 4 F. farther,
entring Frodftam aliasFroddefium, of 4 F. an indifferent good Town, with a Cattle,
and a Market on Wednesdays. , , ,r -n ,<• , „
Thence by the Caftle on the Left, at 96 3 pa ft to Hethemn Y. of 2 F. aho by
Gods-Croft Houfe V. HeljhyV. and Wimble Staffed V. on the Right; Woodkmifts t
Aulney, and Dunham on the Mount, 3 V illages, and Hall on the Left. 1 hen
over Hapsford Br. come at 102 M. to Trajord V. of 2 F. and beyond it, croft a Bi.
over a Rivulet. W hence by Titian and Hewton, 2 Villages, and C Hall, on
the Right; Pleinfiow Ch. Mickle Trajord V. and Howe V. on the Lett, arrive at
ic6T at the City o UVefl-GHEsTEr,
In the Road hetmen Manchefter and Derby.
TTbOM Manchefter , croft a Brock, and afcend Bank Top-hill. Then over a
Ip Bridge croft Medlockflv. and over Hardwick Green, by had on the Lett,
■ at 2M.pa ft thro’ Grimlow V. W hence crofting feveral Rivulets, by Slead-
hall on the Right; Gorton Chap, and Reddijhhall, on the Left; at 4 2go thio
Blakebrook V. and 6 F. farther, Heaton V. leaving tradftone-baJ oil the Lett.
Then over Mmchefter-hill, enter Stokfort alias Stopford , a 1. own of 5 I • on Me ‘
fey flv. at the Entrance of Chejh. having a confiderable Mt. for Corn, or. on
fr From Stopford, by Swemans, Miles-End, and Halls, zndßttUGchSmnb>
Inn on the Left, and Brcroer, Gr. on the Right; come at 10*4
Then by a Wood, and Lime-hall, on the Right, afcend a Hill, to V.
atl2T Thence up a Hill at i 3 ’ 3 , feconded SF. farther by another
longfide Hill; paft by Erdley Hall on the Left, defending a Hill at 5 *
4F. farther, come to Wbeley Lane head V. and at 163 croft Coyte flv. over a
St Hence by TaxhaU V. and Shatter as Hall and Ch. on the Right,and
amending a Hill, by feveral great Rocks, come at 23 M. to Buclf on of 2 F. where
on the Right Hand, under a fair Stone Building, anfe 9 Springs cut of a I ot. c,
within the compafs of 8 Yards; Bof which are warm, and the other very cold.
■ Thcfe, about 6 Paces from their Rife, receive another hot Spring, and a little
ftrrher another very cold; which Waters are accounted very good for the Stc-
behind Nerves, E’rom b y MHan V. on the
Right, alfo by Fairfield and Chelmenon Chs. and Flag-Houjes V. on the Left, and
nvpr a Hill, at 30 M. croft Lathkd flv. , ,
Hence,bi Uaica/b Ch. Tikehm and Pipers Ton. on the Left ;by a tong Wan on
the Rjyht; and over feveral Afc. at 39 M. come to a Defc. and at the B . >
KS»Lm V. of 2F. Whence by Carfton V.on the Left; and over
i rinn- hill o-o thro’ a Village of the fame Name. At the End of it, delcend,
a’ Srook. pars 3kl 1 taving HottM V. and Uug £ imm Ch. on the R.glu,
wTth vpjer Bigih ,NeiLr Big S m, and Tumtieb, 3 V illages on the Left. At 49 M-
enter V. gftb an Inn or two, and by .^4 ! S’
at 3i’6 a V ill.of 2E. beyond ivhicMppear Sitjoto Ca>f«» »,


the by on the Right, and
Mefirj on the Left, at 55 M. come to DEpßf a Corp. Mt. and Sfee Town?
t xt , Back , lv Turnings to be avoided between Derby and
1 a™" ni° A d Wefion-Underwood,the Left acute. 11. beyond Hognafton, the Right to Car
'Hall. ' A thC MrlnS Shm f s > thc Left acute. IV. In Heaton, the Right to fradJhZ-
TT x- Bef ween CHE s Te and Warrington,
I. In Frodjham, the Right acute. 11. ,F. beyond the Left forward.
* * ' • * i * * ‘
* •; ,
• t '
PART IV.
A F T E R- the Defeription of the D/reff under the Title of
Independants and Dependants, and of the Crofs Ponds under that of
Principal or Crofs Independants: We come now to the latter Part
or the Crofs ppads , call'd Occidentals, i. e. fuch Roads as are
, Q . I , n . a 1 Direft Line, but comprife either Two or Three Hori.
lontal Bearings ; of winch, in Alphabetical Order. - • •
The Roads from
CARMARTHEN to CARDIGAN 5
Cardigan to Lhmhedcr , and Llanbedcr to , in Cardiganjh.
I-THE Points of Bearing 1
TTT xi n * 7* he '‘ direa Horizontal Pittances M.* 23 M. 18 M.
lv* lB M. 20 M. «M.
IV. The Dmensurations ■ 26 M. [ 2 f 7. j 23’4.
From Carmarthen , Comp. Meafure.
to Killvah-Killreadcn 10 |10 ( , , , 4 , u
Cardigan 08 118 j | ,1 [*£
From Cardigan Comp. Mcafure.
toTredraier 8108 [ I io'o I io’o I f
Red Owen 6 J j { oB’i j iB'i J J
Comp. Alcafurc.
to ZAanoeder 8120 II 1 2^*7
to zy’j
*om Tjlanheder Comp. Meafure.
to Tailafayem fl cy ( | 07V o 7 ’i I j
Llanrufted fJI9 J j eB’y ifj j
* * r.
Comp. Mcafure.
to Aberijiwith flxs: 11 07'f i 23*7
if 23’*
• A C % Ctrdiganjh, contain the Roads, and the Kerry, Dinar,
Avon, Wuftwith and l{uld, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Road to
is boggy and mountainous, to LJanheder fomewhat better, and thence to
fhtTrT/ bad / 7 § r; Ne f 7 is i hcre an y Accommodation, except at Carm*
afford ing;!t 7 l L Jan d f r> £ nd 4benft mr h ; the Roads between thofe Places, fcarce
affording the leaft Refrelhment to Travellers. - ■ -
Forward


Forward Turnings to be avoided between Carmarthen and Cardigan.
At the End of Carmarthen, the Left to Haver ford- Weji, o*4, The Right to New Cajile in Emhn
2 i f 7 The Left to St. DagmeVs.
Between Cardigan and Llanbeder.
At 7F. the Right to New Cajile in Emlyn. n\ The Left to Aberijiwith. xy’i The Right to
jLlandiJfel . The Right to JLlanwetinock.
Between Llanbeder and Aberiftwhh.
f Lilian, 2 y j The Right to Tregaron, 3*2 The Right to Tregaron, The
Right to Llanyler .
FROM Carmarthen, avoiding the forward Way on the Left to
bear to the Right, afeend at <5 F. and crofs a Valley with 2 Brooks. Then
going'up again, epofs another Valley, and in the Bottom, a Brook; the Way
being generally open, indifferently arable and pafture. At 3*5 afeend a Hill of
4F. leave Llanellwith Ch. on the Left; and at 6M. crofs a Brook in a Yale.
Whence the R. is moll part heathy, boggy and hilly ; till crolfing fome Rivulets,
at i2’6 you come to a Crofs-Road, leading from to New Cajile in
Enlyn\ there at a long Stone, entring Pemb
Hence oyer % Hills, pafs at 14 M. iQUvah- Y. at 16’3 in a large Val-
ley crofs a Brook, and go thro’ Velindra V. At 18 M. defeend 4F. (the Way be-
ing generally open, arable) and over 5 Rivulets, come at 23 M. to Bridel. Here
omit the forward Way on the Left to St. , and bearing to the Right, foon
turn again to the Left; omitting the forward Way on the Right to
Thus a great Hill or Mountain lying along the R. on the Left for 2 M. leads at
25’4 to a Defc. At the bottom, over a fair Stone Br. crofs I‘ivyl ‘ivy flv. to Cardigan-
shire, and the Town of Cardigan,
In the Road, from Cardigan to Llanbeder.
FROM Cardigan,Livy flv. running by the R. for IM. on the Right; pafs at
I’2 by Fenner alt Ch. on the fame hand ; and by fome Houfes, at 3 M. crofs
a Brook in a Valley, the Way being generally open Arable. At 5*4 de-
feend 3F. and over 3 Rivulets, come at B’6 to on the Right; then go
down a Hill, allb thro’ Tredrair V. at 10 M. and afeend ■; Furlongs.
At 13 M. in a Valley, crofs a Brook, at 15’4 in another Valley, part of Dettor
flv. and over a 3d Vale, pafs at xy’4 to Fonter David, a Houfe or two on the Left,
fo call’d. At 38’! to Red-Owen, another Houfe or two on the Left; there over
a Stone Br. crolfing the other Part of the Dettori Whence an open Way leads
down a Hill of 7 F. till by Llanwemock Ch. on the Right, you crofs 2 Brooks, lea-
ving Llannunnen Ch. at 25 M. a little diftant on the Left. Again, crolfing feve-
ral Rivulets by a Stone on the Right, and feveral Houfes, come at 2 to -
beder, or Llanbeder-Font-Steffan.
In the Road from Llanbeder to Aberiftwith.
FROM the Mt. Place in Llanbeder , omit the forward Way on the Right to
Llanimdojry , &c. and bearing to the Left, pafs by Sir Francis Lloyd's Houfe on
the Right, and a Foreft on the Left. Then avoiding the forward Way on
the Right to Tregaron, turn again to the Left, and by llraggling Houles on the
Road, come at 2’3 to an Afc. of SF. with a Defc. of 14 F. Ac 6M. go thro’
LJanleir V. and 6 F. farther, over a Wooden-Br. crofs Aron flv. to or Ve-
lindra, a long Village. -
At


At ?’7 afeend a Hill of n F. and defeend 9 F.till by feveral Houfes, and over
fome Rivulets, the Way moft part heathy and hilly, brings you at 16 M. by Um-
rufied Ch and Efa; Herbert's Houfe on the Lett. There afeend a Hill of 2M.
2fi on the Right, and at , 9 ’i defeend 15,F At *’4 croft
Wuftwhh flv. and 6 F. farther, If dal flv. over a Stone Br. of 8 Arches, entnng
Aberijlwith, a Mt. and Port Town.
Ra ckward Turnings to be avoided between Aberiflwith and Llanbeder,
I At the End of Aberijlwith , over the Br. the Left to Rofefair. 11. IF. Ihort of Ef«j; Herbert s,
’ the Right to Llanrujhd and Cardigan.
Between Llanbeder and Cardigan.
I. 2F. from Llanbeder , the Right acute, 11. 12 F. beyond Llanbeder, to Hanumbether.
Between Cardigan and Carmarthen. _
I. At the End of Cardigan, the Left to Haverford-Weji. 11. i’4 Ihort of Veltndra, the Left to
Cagel-Eaven.
The Roads from
CHELMSFORD in ESSEX,
to St. Edwunds-Bury in Sussolk, and Sassron-Waldo n in Essex.
Bury. WalioVf
X. “TT H E Points of Bearing *?y
I 11. The direft Horizontal Diftances 35 M. 2 5 m.
111. The Vulgar Computations 35 ? M. 22 M.
IV, The Dimenfurations 43 3* I 2 7 3-
From Chelmsford Comp, Meafure.
to Braintry °9 !°9 I | * l? ° I 110
Sudbury n,21 [ j i^ >2 1
'1 * 1
Comp. Meafure.
to Lavenhant S 1 2 6 I ? °^ , 4*
St. Edmunds Bury 9 1 if I I ‘ tt’j
♦ - f
From Chelmsford Comp. Meafure.
to Dunmoto 10 1 10 I I 12611 s 5
Thaxted 06 ,16 I °7 0 J 9 f
Saffron-Walieu 06 x zz J » °7 f 1 2 7 5
Effex and Suffolk contain the Roads; and the Chelrnsr , Backwater, Coin , and
Stoitr* are the principal Rivers croft’d over j affording, in general, an indifferent
good Road, and, in moft Places, good Towns for Entertainment of Travellers.
Forward Turnings to be avoided between Chelmsford and S t. Edmund s- Bury.
At 4F. the Left to the Ad odwgs. 4’ 1 The Left to Du,mow. 1 j’f The Left to Go f eld. 18 a
The Left to the Maplejieds. zi’j The Left forward. 2J 1 The Right acute. 57oTheLctt
forward, The Left acute.
Between Chelmsford and Saffron-lValdon.
At 4. F. the Left to the Readings. 4M. The Right to Braintry. f’7 Ihe Right to
X The Right acute, if’4 The Right acute. i6’i The Left acute. 164 The Right; to
shbbing. ifi The Right to Lynfey 1 97 The Left acute. 20 i The Right to Hemmed.
24’4 Th f Left acute. if’ 6 The Right to Wmbiffh,
, FROM


FRO U Chelmsford, avoid the forward Way on the Left, to Hooding, and bear
to the Right •, a Branch of Chelmer flv. running by the Road for feveral M.
on the RHht: By BrumfeU Ch. on the Left, croft the faid Branch at 4*2
and leave Link Waltham Ch. on the Right. Then by a Wood on the fame
Hand, crolftng 2 Brooks, leave GreatLeig and St. Ann' s on the Right, alfo
Little Leighs on the Left; and thro’ a Wood at B*3 come at io’6 to Branny, a
Town of 6 F. on the R. and on Blackwaterfiv. with a good Mt. for Corn and
Provilions, on Wednefdays.
Thence paft the Black-water, and thro* fome Woods, to Haljted, at 105,3 i own
of 6F. on Coin flv. which divides it in the Midft. It has a good Market on fri-
dap for Corn, 6V,‘ , ,
Beyond Halfted , -Boy’s-Hall appears on the Right; whence you fet forward
thro’ a Village at 20 M. by a Wood on the Right at 20’6 ; and another on the
Left at 22*4. Then over Bulmer Gr. go by a Wood, and bulmer Ch. on the Let ,
defending an Hill at 24’2. At the Bottom, enter BaWmgtott-yjeet ; £r oiling Stour
flv . to the County of Suffolk and Sudbury ; fuppos’d to have been rSTHMIy the
Shire Town, and ftill being one of the Arch-Deaconries. ’1 is indifferent large?,
and well-built, containing 3 Parifli Chs. and driving a confiderable Trade in
Sayes. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor, Recorder, 7 Aldermen, 1 Baylifr, 24 Bur-
geffes, £SV. Sends Burgeffes to Pari, and has a plentiful Mt. on ’Twas
fometime of Note for its Priory of Black Monks.
From Sudbury , by Chilton P. Great and Little Walling field Chs. on the Right, and
Aclon on the Left; alfo by feveral Houfes, pafs at 31’6 to Lavenhara or
an indifferent large Town on a Branch of Bretton flv. It has a fair Church and
Steeple, with a good Market on Thurfdays.
Beyond the Town, pafs again by fbme Houfes, where the Road being very
Woody, over feveral Brooks, leads by CockfieU and Chs. on the Right,
and Pepper's Houfe on the Left; at 37’4t0 Bradfleld V. Then by Monk-Bradfleld,
and Little Waltham on the Right; by a Chap, without a Steeple, an old ruin’d
Priory, Great Waltham and Noroton Chs. on the Left; alfo by draggling Houfes,
and a Stream running in the Road; come at 42*6 to or St. Edmunds ,
a large Corp. and Mt. Town.
IW
(
Jn the Bpad from Chelmsford to Saffron-Waldon.
FP.OM Chelmsford , proceed for the firft 4M. as in the Road to St. Edmunds -
Bury ; whence bearing to the Left, by Langley’s H. on the Right, and
Great Waltham Ch. on the Left, an irregular Road leads by a little Park, and
Clack Cbappel on the Right. Then over feveral Brooks, and by difunited
Houfes, comeat 12*4 to Dun mow, or Dunmawg , q. d. Collis flgcundm ; of 4F.
an ancient and large Town, pleafantly feated on an ealie Afc. ’Twas for-
merly noted for its Priory, and has, at prefent, a good Market for Corn,
on Saturdays.
Thence by Great Eaflon Ch. and Hall on the Left, and over a Brook, pafs at
-i9’3 to 7 haxted, near 6 F. on the Road, a large Mayor Town, having a fmall
M arket on Fridays.
Whence thro’a Wood, at 27’! enter Waldon alias , on an Afc.
amidft delightful Fields of Saffron: ’Tis a large and well-built Town Corp. en-»
joying feveral Immunities. ’Tis govern’d by a Treafurer, two Chamberlains,
and the Commonalty ; and has a very great Mt. on Saturd. well furnilh’d with
all forts of Provilions. This Town was formerly noted for its famous Cuftle,
and Abbey, built by the tAagnavilks.
BciCiv*


Backward Turnings to be avoided between and Chelmsford.
I. At the End of Sajfron-Waldon, the Left to AJhdon. IT. 3 F. beyond, the Left to AJhJon.
111. 2*2 beyond Sajfron-Waldron, the Left to Wimbijh . IV. 3 AI. fhort of Thaxted, the Right
acute. V. At the End of Thaxted, the Left to Bradfield . VI. 9F. beyond Black Chappd
the Right to Fleftey. VII. 3F. fhort of Great Waltham, the Right forward. VIII. 2F r fliort
of Chelmsford, the Right forward.
Between St. Edmunds-Bnry and Chelmsford.
I. 2F. from St. Edmunds-Bury, the Left to lyfzvich. 11. At the End of Bulmer Gr. the Right to
Kenningham. 111. T J beyond Bulmer Gr..the Right to Eedmarjh. IV. I*4 beyond Haljted,
the Left to Styjied. V. In Braintry, the Right to Dunmov). VI. At the End of Braintry the
Left to Witham . VII. Againft Little Waltham, the Right to Runmow.
The Roads from
CHELMSFORD to
And Raleigh, in Essex: And to Gravesend, in Kent.
* Maldon. Raleigh. Grave fend.
I, -pH E Points of Bearing by E. by W,
JL 11. The direft Horizontal DiHances 08 M. 09 M. 2olvl.
111. The vulgar Computations 08 M. 10 M. 20 M.
IV. The Dimenfurations 09’ 1 ). 5,3 M. [ 23*4.
. From Chelmsford .Comp. Meafure.
to Maldon S 1 08 II c 9’f 1 09’$*
From Chelmsford Comp. Meafure.
to Raleigh lo 1 10 11 13*0 1 is’o
From Chelmsford Comp. Meafure.
to Billericay . oj |O7 | T 08*6 j oß’d>
Gravefend 13 < 20 1 1 14/6 J 23*4
With a Branch from CAN'T E EJB V by Sandwich and Deal, to Dover,
* *
From CARTERBUT Comp. Meafure.
to Sandwich 10 10 | ij’y 13’?
Deal 04 14 oy’o iß’y
Rover 06 26 08*3 zfo
The Counties of Ejfex and l(ent, contain the Roads; and the , ,
Thames and Stout » are the principal Rivers crofs’d overj affording, in general, a
very good Road, and the like Entertainment.
Forward Turnings to be avoided, between Chelmsford and Maldon.
At I'3 The Right to Raleigh . 4*4 The Left to Graces ,
Between Chelmsford and Raleigh,
At I*3 The Left to Ranbury. 10*3 The Left forward.
Between Chelmsford and Gravefend.
At i 9 x The Right to In gatJl one. 4’7 The Left acute. The Left to Stanford U Hoy?,
i <f The Left to Weji Tilbury.
Between C ANtE I{ B V Eff and Dover.
At 6 y 3 The Right to Godmerjham., The Left to Rrejfvth l<{’l The Right to Eattle-Marjh,
ifz The Left to SandQivp,
FROM


FROM Chelmsford, crofs Chelmer flv, to Mouljham , where omitting the forward
Way to London,he ar to the Left,and at i’4 come to Great Baddow V. Whence
by Sandown Ch. and D anbury WI ace and Park on the Right, an Afc. leads to
Danbury V. of 2F. affording the beft Profpeft into the County and Sea. Then
over Danbury Com. pafs thro’ at 5’7, and by it Woodbam-Water Ch.
and Place on the Left, to M aldon at p’4 an indifferent large Town, on an Ann of
the Sea. ’Twas anciently call’d Camalodunuw, and was raz’d to the Ground by
Queen Boodicia , who kill'd, at the Head of the Forces, 70000 Romans, un-
der the Emperer Nero. 'Tis govern’d by 2 Bailiffs, 6 Aldermen, 18 Brethren,
£SV. fends Burgeffes to Pari, and has a well-ftor’d Market on Saturdays.
In the Road to Raleigh .
FROM Chehnsford, fet forward as before, and at j'3 avoiding the forward
Way to Danbury, bear to the Right, and thro’ of 2F,
Whence an irregular Road by a Wood, S. Hanningfield, and Chs,
on the Right, and E. Hanningfeld on the Left, brings you at 9*3 on Bale's Br.
over Crowchfiv. Afterwards by Rywreth Ch. on the Right, and a Copfe on the
Left, come to Raleigh at 12’y, a final!, yet ancient Town, with a Market on
Saturdays .
In the Branch to Gravefeild.
FK.OM. Chelmsford, keep the forward Way *, and at 6F. leave the Lord
Walter's Alms-houfe on the Right, and Mculjham-HaW on the Left. At i’i
omit the Road on the Right to Ingatftone , and bear to the Left, by Baxfdd ,
on the Right. Then over Callaway Com. thro’ a Wood, and over Stock Com.
come at 5’4 to Stock V. of 2F. noted for the great ftore of Earthen-Ware there
made. W hence an indifferent ftraight Way by Flint* Houle on the Right, leads
to Eillericay at §’3 of 5 F. having a good Market on Tuefdays for Corn, &c.
Thence by Great Burfted on the Left, and Little Burjied on the Right, at 11T
crofs Note's Br. over a Brook, and at i3’4 of 4 F,on the Top
of which, is a Beacon on the Left, and Langdon Ch. on the Right. Then defend-
ing 6 F. an Afc. brings you to Horndon , or on the on a Branch of
Thames flv. with a fmali Mt. on Saturd. Whence croffing , and leaving
chadwel Ch. on the Right, at 2o’i go down a Hill, and by W. lilbury Ch. on the
Left, over Tilbury Marfh. At 2x’6 come to Tilbury Fort, a Place very well for-
tify’d, and built by K. Charles. ll. to defend Thames flv. which you here ferry over
to Gravefend ; an indifferent large and well-frequented Town, affording very
good Accommodation, having feveral Inns, Taverns, &c. ’Tis a Corp. govern’d
by a Mayor, Jurats, tfc. and has 2 plentiful Mts. on Wednefd. and Saturd. Near
the Town, and oppolite to Tilbury Fort, is a Block-houfe, where a continual
Guard is kept likewife for the Security of the Thames,
In the Branch to Sandwich, Deal and Dover.
LEAVING the City of CANTERBVRT, pafs thro’a Wood; at4’7thro’a
fmali Vill. and eroding a Rivulet, at6’3 thro’ Gamlyn-fireet, alfo xM. far-
ther, to Wingham V. of 3F. At 10’5 thro’ Afh V. of the fame extent, arrive at
Sandwich at i3’2 of 6F. on the Road, one of the Cinque-Ports, fortify'd with
Walls, Ditches and Ramparts. It enjoys feveral Immunities, fends Burgeffes
to Pari. CSV. and has 2 Mts. on Wednefd. and Saturd. This Place is noted for the
Overthrow given the Danes , by Ethelfton, younger Son to K. Egbert , and for af-
fording a Title to the R. H. Edward. Montague, Earl of Sandwich, See.
Thence


Thence by a Wind-Mill, and Sandown Caftle on the Left,at 18’g enter Deal of
4 F.on the Road, a Town of good Strength* and of Note, for being the Place
where tfulim Ceefar firft Landed., ’Tis alfo a Member of Skidvoich: Whence by
Deal and Walmer Caftle on the Left, thro’ Walmer V. of 3 F, alfo by Ifcngfok on
the Right, and St. Margaret’s on the Left, a ftraight Road lads to Dover.
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Veaiihd CANtERBvyr.
I. <5 F. fhort of AJhy the Right to Brook. IL 5* F. hcyoM Brook 9 the Right to Siourmoatb*
Between Gravefend and Chelmsford.
1. i’6 beyond Tilbury -Fort, the Left forward. 11. At the Entring Stocky the Left to Ingatjlonf.
Between Raleigh and Chelmsford.
I. i*7 beyond Raleigh , the Left to BUlerciay. IL IM. beyond that, the Left to Kawreith .
Between Maldon and Chelmsford.
I. 1 F. beyond Maldon , the Left to Woodham-Mortimer, 11. 4. F. Ihort of Chelmsford , the Left
forward.
The Road front
EXETER to DORCHESTER,
And from Plymouth to Dartmouth, in Devonshire .
Dartmouth,
I. TPH E Point of Bearing by 1 E,
I. 11. The direfl Horizontal Diftances 45 M. I 27 M.
111. The vulgar Computations 40 M. \ 22 M.
IV. The Dimenfurations » 51’6. 1 30 M.
JTfom £XETE R Comp. Meafure.
toßifhops-Clyft 3 05 °3 fi°V S
Newton Popler 6 09 °7 5 | 110
Cullyford 8 17 i© } 2 j 21*2
Xiff/g S 22 \ 46*6 I 2 B^o
Comp* Meafure.
toChiddiok of 27 otf’f 34’J*
Jbridport 02 29 02*3 37'®
Dorcfrejier 1 1 40 14*6 fi J £
4® f
From Tlymouth Conlp. Meafure.
to Med bury lo 10 I 14*2 14’ 4
Holwel 07 17 I c&’f 22*7
Dartmouth of 22 | , ofi t so } o
Devonjhire and Dorfetjhire contain both the Roads; and the Autre, Ax,
.and Talm, are the chief Rivers crofs’d over. The Road, in moft Places, tho‘
fomewhat hilly, affords an indifferent good Way, and the Entertainment in the
Towns pafs’d through is fuitable.
\
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At i’i The Left to Honiton, jo’y The Right to Collator 271 The Left to ßridgort. M.
The Right to Martinfiow.
In the Road to Dartmouth.
At i’j The Left to IJpfo- 6'f The Right acute, t4.’4. The Right to Kii’gs-lridgt I 4 f
L:ii a. ute- i7’7 The Lett a;ute, 26’4- The Left forward.
FROM


FROM the City of EXEfER, at i’ i pafs thro’ Hevltre V. Then by feme Houles, 1
and a final] Afc. and Defc. come at 3’5 to Eijheps Clyft-, firft croffing Clyjiflv.
Which leaving, go up a final! Hill, and by St. Mary-Clyft on the Right. Again, by
ftraggling Houfes, croffing feveral Brook, an Afc. and two Defc. lead at io’6 to
Nervm-Vopkr V.of 5 F. at the End of which, crofs Autre flv. and leave Hanford
Ch. on the Left. Then afeending, over a Brook at 13’4 go thro’ V. a lit-
tle beyond which,, afeend 2 F. and at i4’6 bear to the Left. At 20’4 defeend 3 F.
over a Brook, enter Cullyford V. of SF. beyond which, crofs 3 Branches of Ax .
not far from its Influx into the Sea, and pafs within 1 M. of Axmouth, a fmall
Port Town on the Right, alfo by Seuttum-Houfe on the fame hand.
Hence an irregular Road over 2 Afc. brings you at 27 M. to a Defc. of 6 F. At
the Bottom, crofs a Rivulet, to Dorjetft. and Lime or Lime ; a large and well-
built Town of ‘5 F. on the Road, near the Sea,and on a good and well-known H-
aven: ’Tis a Corp. and Mt. Town, govern’d by a Mayor, Ck. fends Burgeffes to
Pari, and is a Place of good Trade ; its Privileges beinggranted by K. Edv>. 111,
Whence, the Sea lying near the Road on the Right for feveral M. bear to the
Left. At 30 M. enter Shaderfon V. of 3 F. and 3 F. beyond, by the Church on the
Left, crofs Steymag Br. over a Rivulet. Then by Stanton-Gabriel Ch. on the Right,
and fome Houfes on the Road ; come at 34’$ to V. of 3F. and at 30*7
(firft leaving Sinsbororv Ch. on the Left) to alias Birtport or fituate
between 2 Rivulets, near their Influx, into the Sea. ’Tis a Corp, and Mt. Town,
fending Burgeffes to Park-and is govern’d by 2 Bayliffs, CSV. ’Twas formerly
the only Place for the Twifting of Cordage for the Royal Navy of England,
At the End of Bridpon , crofs Aldington Br. whence an indifferent ftraight Way
by Waldich and Lytton Chs. on the Right, Lother and Askatham on the Left,
leads at 46’y to a Vill. of 2F. At 51’<; enter , a Place of great Anti-
quity, and heretofore a Station of the Romans \ on Froom flv. and on the Fofs-Way,
’Tis a large and well-built Corp. Town, containing 3 Parifh Chs. and govern’d
by 2 Bayliffs, a Recorder, 8 Aldermen, It fends Burgeffes to Part, and as be-
ing the Shire-Town, holds the Affizes for the County. It has a good Free-School
and an Alms-houfe; and gave Title to the R. H. Henry Fierpoint, Marq. of Dor-
chefter, &c. Its Mt. on Saturd . is well ftor’d with all forts of Proviticns.
In the Road to Dartmouth.
FROM Plymouth , pafs over 2 Afc. and Defc. and at 3M. thro’ Buckland-Cral-
tree V. where you crofs Ferra Br. over a Brook. Then by Suntrum,Plimpton,
(which fends Burgeffes to Pari, and has a fmall Mt. on Saturd.) and Plimftock
Ch.on the Right, and by Burrowton-Houft on the Left; at 6’s go over a Valley,
Whence by fome Houles on the Road, call’d Brixton and , at 9’s crofs Taira
flv. Afterwards, by Adfum-houfe on the Right, and Amington Ch. on the Left, at
j2’6 afeend a Hill of 2 F. and at 14’! come to a Town of 4 F. feated
between 2 Kills, and having an indifferent Market on Saturdays.
Hence by Shaft on and Tarncomh-houfes on the Left,and feveral Houfes on theß.
alfo thro’ Luckbridg V. at iB’4, and thro’ a Wood, crofs Gary Br. and leave the Ch.
on the Right. Then afeending 3F. pafs by Morley Ch. on the Rightat 2i’6, and
thro’ Holveel V. in a large Valley, at 22’7. Whence an irregular Road brings
you at 29*3 to a Defc. and at the Bottom, to Dartmouth, a Mt. and Port Town.
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Dartmouth and Plymouth .
I. 48. beyond Dartmouth, the Right to Dytejham. 11. 3*4. fhort of Holwel, the Right to 'Totnefs •
111. At the End of liolwel 3 the Right w urud, IV. At the End of Modern y, the Right and
Left acute,
Between


Between Dorchtfter and E X EfEl^
I. fron* Dorchefler , tbe Right to Axminjler. 11. s’7 beyond Dorchejier , the Left to AhhoUhury .
111. 4/5* fhort of the Left to Tongbrudy. *IV. 4/y beyond Chidiok, the Right to
Whitchurch. V. At tile End of Sbaderton , the Right to Axminjhr, VI. y F/beyond Lime,
the Right to Axiubifier. VII. 2F. beyond Callyford, the Left to Seaton,
FERRYBRIDG to BOROUGHBRIDG,
Continued to Bernard-Castle in Com. Durham.
I. npH E Point of Bearing N. N. W. 11. The Direft Horizontal Diftance <56 M.
I 111. The Vulgar Computation 57 M« IY. The Himenfuration 75’2.
From Ferry hr idg Comp. Meafurc.
to Ab erf or d 08 08 io’j 10*3
Wetherby ©y 13 ©7*3 1 7*6
Roroughbridg 09 22 ii’j 30*1
Kigyon ©? 1 27 3 <>’2
Comp. Meafurc.
to Lemyiig io 37 I 1 3 ? 4 < 49*6
Richmond io 12*4* 62*2
Bernard'Caftte 10 fj ij’o jfi
5*7 77’*
Comp.' Meafure.
With the Branch from Fenybridg to Wakefield 8 I n’s
Torkjhire, and the Bifhoprick of Durham, contain the whole Road; and the Are t
War/, Myd, Tour, and Swail, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over. The Road, in
general, is indifferent good, and every where fupply’d with Towns, &c.
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At Vf The Left to Leeds, } i’6 The Right to Lmyng. } 6’6 The Left to C»fihton. 68’+ The
Left to Do'Jion. 6y’i The Lett to XcvjJham. 72’j The Left scute.
4
FROM Fenybridg over a Stone Br. crofs Are ftv. which accompanies you on
the Left 2 M. leaving Ferryfamon Ch. and Yill. on the Left, and on the
other fide of the Riv. At T 4 pafs thro’ Brotherton and Farnborn at 2’6
both Vill. of about 3F. At 5*4 amending sF.go by Ledftm-Ual] xF. on the
Left; and at 6’<j by a Beacon, at a like diftance, on the fame hand. Then
crofs a Valley to Michel]Held V. of near 4F. and pafs between fome Hills, at 9 M.
to a <*entle Afc. but prefently defeend 5 F. and at the Bottom, enter Aher-
ford, or Abyforth, of IM. a Town indifferent well-built, with a Mt. on .
and 2 Fairs, vi\. on St. George's Eve's and likewife 2 days before St.
Matthew. , ■ , T ~ , . ..
Thence afeend to BramumYbAoov , and at 13 4 crofs a Valley, leaving the
Moor. Then go down 4 F. and on the Defc. thro’ Bramum V. ot 3
Whence over Clifford Moor, pafs by a Wood on the Right to at 17 |
of 4F. on Wurjy or Wherje jlv* It has a. Mt* on Jburfdctfs, and a tair on
rfdimes's Day. _ xi
From Wetherby , at 19*3 pafs by S. Dighton on the Left, then over a Moor;.crib
Myd Av. over a Stone Br.and t F. farther,thro’ of a F. to another Moor}
w hich leave at 23*6, and go by an Inn on the Left. At 25 o Alenon 1 . lies by -
Road on the Right,near iM. and at 28’6aicer a Ddc.of 4F. a ftraightWa)


at 3© M. to Boroughbrldg of 3F. and more tranfverfc; a Corp. Mt. and Pofta
Town. 'w
Hence by a Mill on the Left, over a Stone Br. crofs Tour fit. 4 F. farther, afcend
a Hill of 4 F. and at the Top, enter Kirby o the Hill of 4F. Beyond the Town,
omit the forward Road on the Right to Lemyng-lane , a different Way, and bear to
the Left, thro’open Arable. At 34*2 by Hevoick V. clofeon the Right, and 4 F.
farther, over a Wooden Br. repaisthe Tour, which before ran bv the Road on the
Left, as it does now on the R ight. At 36 M. appears Nippon , a large Town Corp*
of 6 F. on the faid Tour flv. a Place of good Antiquity, and of much Fame for its
Religious Houfes. ’Tis at prefent well-built, and govern’d by a Mayor, Aider-
men, CSV. It fends Burgeffes to Pari, and is-beautify’d with a very fine Cathe-
dral Ch. having 3 lofty Spires. Its Mt. on is well furnifh’d with Provi-
fions, CSV.
From fijppotiy pafs over a Stone Br. 1 F, long, and crofs the Tour again, Which
now keeps on the Left for fome M. At 37’2 afcend 2F. and go thro’ Hum V. at
38’d. Then by Nonh-hall on the Left, come to Wath of 4F. and over a Wood Br.
crofs a Brook. At 42 M. pafs by Middleton V. on the Left; then by Kjptbimoni
2 F. on the fame hand, and Pickhal, 3 F. on the Right, crofs a Stone Br. and
Brook. Afterwards by Burniflon, 4F. on the Left, and at 47’4 by the Bull Inn on
the Right, enter Lemyng of 4 Furlongs, at49’4.
Then over a Stone Br. and Brook, a ftrait Way, for the moftpart, lies by Fen-
coteV. on the Right at <5 2*3, and over a Wood Br. and Brook at 56*5, to Cdtterick
Y.of 2F. At 58T, a direft Way leads to Catterick Br. of Stone, over Smallflv.
which accompanies you on the Left. Ar 5 B’y go thro’ Brunten upon Swail V. of 2
F. crofs a Brook over a Storte Br. and by Sandbeck V. on the Right) after a fmall
Afc. repafs the Svoail to Richmond , of 7 F. a well-built Corp. and Mt. Town.
Beyond Richmond, afcend 4 F. and crofs 2 Valleys, the Road being fome what
woody. At likewife afcend <5 F. and on the Top, lea V. IF. on the
Right, alfo fiavenworth Caftle 3F. on the fame hand. Thence thro’ Kirby on the
Hill V. defcend SF. leaving Gaiks V. on the Left, and Dolfton Y. at 69*2 IF. on
the fame hand. Then over feveral Brooks, come to Greatabridg at 72 M. of 2F*
alfo by RpughbyY. clofe on the Right, at 72’$, and Eaglefionby on the Left,at 73*7*
Whence the Tees runs on the Right, till at 75*6 you crofs it, entring the Bi*
fhoprick of Durham and Bernard-Caflle , an indifferent good Town, driving a great
Trade in Stockings, and having a fmall Market on Wednefdays.
The Branch from Ferrybridg to Wakefield.
FROM Ferrybridge an open Way, leads at 2M. to Or
Pomfret , q. d» Pons-fraftus, in a dry Traft of Ground, and on a Branch of
Are flv. ’Tis a large and well-built Town Corp. of tM. on the Road,
and had a ftately Caftle, ruin’d in the late Wars. ’Tis govern’d by a Mayor,
Recorder, Aldermen, Cfends Burgeffes to Pari, and has a good Mt. on Saturd.
for Corn, Cattle, C fie.
Whence by Warnfield V. about t M. diftant on the Right, and at 9*2 by Horfe~
Race-End V. on the Left, defcend a Hill of SF. leaving Sir William
Houfe on the Right, and at the Bottom, crofting a Stone Br. and Brook. Then
by Sandal i 4 F. on the Left, at io’7, over a Stone Br. crofs Colder flv. to Wakefield ,
a large and well-built Town; where R. Edward IV. builta fplendid Chap, in re*
remembrance of thofe who loft their Lives in Battle. ’Tis noted for its Cloth*
Manufacture, and for two good Markets on tburfdays and Fridays»
K Backward


Backward Turnings to be avoided.
I. In n the Left acute. 11. 12 F. beyond Great abridge the Left to C<tytY<tc\~hrtdg>
111. 4. F. farther, the Right to Nevcflktm, IV. 2M. flvort of F encotv, the Right to
Eeiol. V. 3F. beyond the White-Lion In% the Left to Boroughhridg ; a different
Way. VI. In Kip/on, the Right forward. VIL 3F, beyond Wetherbj, the Right
Ifb Titdcaflcr. VIII. In %Akyfwthy the Right to Leeds*
The Roads from
KENDAL to COCKERMOUTN,
And from Egrimond to CARLISLE.
Coc\ermouth. CARLISLE*
1* ~f" H E Points ©f Bearing N, IV, by N, N. E. by E.
« 11. The direct Horizontal Diftances 32 M. 35 M.
111. The Vulgar Computation &32 M. 29 M.
IV. The Dimenfur4tions 43’7» 39’4*
i i # . 0 ,V» '< .j 9 '-i I.* i'l » j ’ i j'v a ?•• \
From Kendal Comp. ' Meafure.’
to Stanley 4 1 04. I j j 05*3
xAmhlcjide 6J,10 J J os’o j 13'3
Comp. Meafure.
to Ksfaidi 17 I 22 I j » 29-5.
Cocker mouth 10 * 32 ; t 14- 2 , 43’7
From Egvimont Comp, Mcafurc.
to Win nick 5j 05 06’ 3 06*3
Coc\er mouth 510 07’® 14.'1
Bodel $ , 15 06*7 I 21'6
Comp* Meafure.
toThursby 9124 } f 12’4 1 33’4
CARLISLE $\ 29 [ * 06*6 | 3?'4
29 *99^l
Weftmoreland: and Cumberland Include the Road, and the Think, Coker r
Eh, Wampul and Cauda , are the chief Rivers crols’d over. This Road, In.gene-
sal, is as bad as any in England, being very hilly, ftony and raoeriftu
Forward Turnings to be avoided. . J
At i’j The Lcfc acute; 7*5 The Left acute. 31 M. The Right 35’j
The Right to ldon>.
In the Road to C A ISLE.
At the End of Egumond, the Left to Wh a bavin, The Right acute. 1 The R ight
to %efmck K . 7*3 The Right acute. B’2 The Left acute. is’j Thc Left to
iVtfThe Right acute. 22 '6 The Left to Blin-Beffit. 3F2 The Left acute.
FROM genial, afcend a Hill, and at 2 f 6 leave Barnfide V. on the Right; then
bearing ro the Left, over an Afc. and Dele, at 5 M. enter Stanley V. of SF.
At 6T by CaJionV. on the Right, and 5 F. farther, by Chappel on the Inges, on the
fame hand •, pafs between Grafs-Gate and Broad-Gate , 2 Villages. At 7’s go over a
Hill of 7 F. with a Defc. of 3 F. and at the Bottom, by a Wood on the Left.
At 9’5 thro’ Wimndermere V. defeend St. leathern’s Brew-hill, and at the Bottom,
over a Stone Br, crofs a Brook ; W'inaniermer Water lying by the Road on the
Left ] which Lake is the biggeft in England , and is plentifully fupply’d with Filh,
Whence over a Stone Br. and Brook, alfo by a Wood on the Right, and feme
Houles, come at i3’2 to Amblefide of 4 F. feated near the faid Lake, and having
a Mt. on Wednefd. indifferently well Itored with Provilions.
Thence feveral great Hills ranging on both tides of the Road for feme M. pals
thro’ Eidal P. and over a Br. and Brook, leaving on the Right, At 147
thro’


thro 1 Ridal V. bver an Ale. and Dele. by Ch. on the Left, crofl fame
Brooks, and afeend a Hill of BF. near Grefmerehill of a great height, on the Left-.
At i9’6 over a Stone Br.and Brook, enter Cumberland ; where, on the Left, is a
great heap of Stones, call’d Dimmail Raife-Stones, fuppos’d to have been call up by
Dunmail, K. of Cumberland, for the Bounds of his Kingdom.
Hence by IVyburn Chap, and Ihurlfpot V. on the Right, and Brook on the
Left; at 25 M. crofs Smathods Stone Br. over thurkmireflv. and leave the Hills on
the Right, which lye along the Road on the Left,to 27*2. There over a Brook,
go up a Hill, and at 28 5 2 thro ’Cufi V. Then defending, pafs thro’ Cartherit V.
and at 29*4 to of about 2F. on the Road, but more tranfverfe; and oa
Lhurkmireflv. as its Influx into the Darwen. ’Twas a Town of good Note in for-
mer Time, now much decay’d; yet it has a Market on Saturdays.
From Kjjwick, over a Wooden Br. crofs the Paid , by other great Hills
along the Road on the Right and Left; Derwen flv. running between the Road and
the Hills on the Left* Then by Crofthwate Ch. on the Left, and Milbeck-hall on the
Right, at 33 ’ 1 pafs thro’ Little Crofthwate Y. afterwards by V. on the
Left, and the Chap, on the Right. At 37 M. bear to the Left; leave Colebeck and
Amanthwate on the Right, and at 38 M. over a Wooden Br. crofs the Paid Dar-
ken. At 38’4 go thro’ LawbercuaY. and at 39’2 Larbfield V. Where, over a Hill
of IM. defeend <5 P. and at 43’4 enter Cockemoiith , on Derwen and Coker flv. a
Place of good Account, with a fair Ch. and ftrong Caftle. As a Borough-Town
it eletls Pari. Men, and has a Mt. on Mond. with 2 Fairs*
In the Road to Carlifle.
FROM EgrimoU , the initial Borough-Town near the Sea,having the advantage
of a ftrong Caftle, and of a good Market on Satmd. pafs by Clint-hill on the
Left; crofs 2 Brooks, and come at i’<s to Clearer V. of 2F. Then over Pome Hills,
and by feveral Houfes, leaving the Fells on the Right, and Winick V. with Lamp-
ley hall on the fame hand, at 7*5 afeend 3 F. and crofs a Valley, where you have
a Lakeon the Right} alfo at 9M. Egksjield V. on the fame hand; and at 10 M»
Brldgham V. on the Left. Thence a ftrait open Way leads by Coker flv. on the
Right, at 14 M. to Cockemoiith, a Mt. Town, as before.
Hence oyer a Hill at i6’a, follow’d by another, crofs a large Valley; defeend
1 M. at 2o’2,and near the Bottom,come to V. Then by
land Guard , Lamod Nook , on the Right, and Cowtland Guard on the Left, at 23 M.
crofs a Stone Br. and Brook } leaving Adderskip , White-hall, and Thurlmillgate on the
Left. Afterwards over a Hill, crops 5 Valleys, and Eln flv. by Bolton, Crojhil and
Gromhil Villages, and the Ruins of old Carlifle on the Left, and by the Red-Dial
and Somer Villages on the Right.
At 30’4 over a Defc. crofs a Brook, and at 31’6 leaving War fide V. on the Left,
and Rpfeky-Fell on the Right; go down a Hill. At the Bottom, over a Stone Br*
crofs IVample flv. and by Croft onY. How-hill and on the Left, at 3 3’3
enter Thuresby V. of 3F. Thence by Nealople and a Brook on the Left, a ftrait
Way over a Moor, leads at 38’<5 to the City of CARLISLE,
Backward Turnings to be avoided between CARLISLE and
1. 3F. from Carlifle, the Right to Brook- If. Thuresby, the Left to Rofedel. 111. At
wood-NOOR, the-Left to Tor penny. IV. iF. beyond , the Right acute.
Between Cockermouth and R^ndaL
I. 3F. from Qockermouth , the Left to Ireby. 11. Agamlt a part of Bafmthrvate, the Left
acute. 111, la Krfwicß) the Right to Burden, IV. tM. beyond the Left to
St* ]fohn’9t
The


The Road from
LONDON to PO OL, in Dorsershire.
Commencing at Alretjord in the Southampton Kozd.
t ’
T T'H E Point of Bearing W. S. W. 11. The direft Horizontal Diftance 98 M.
JL 111. The Vulgar Computation 88 M. IV. The Dmenfurmon iio’s.
From LONDON Comp. Meafure.
to lAlresford 47 47 5 9 71 5 9,7
WINCHESTER 07 54 °7 4 I
Bum fey 09 6\ *»’3 |7» «
Caftlc-Malwood 06 1 07 5 , 06 3.
Comp. Meafure.
to Ringrvooi c 8 77 lo’i o s6*s
Knafton 06 83 08*0 104’5
Fool 05 38 o6’o 110*$
8.8. 11 o’5.
In the Branch from to Lemington.
From Tool Comp. Meafurev
to Chri(l*Churcb 91 °9 (1 104. jlO 4:
Jucmifigton 9" 1 * 11 4 • 22 o
Comp. Meafure.
In the Branch from Southampton to WINCHESTER io’o 1 iz’a.
Middlefex, Surrey, Hmjh, and Dorfetjh. are the Counties pafs r d thro’; and the
Brent , Thames, Wey, Teft and Avon, the principal Rivers crofs’d over ; affording,.
m raoft Farts, a good Road, and fitting Entertainment for Travellers.
. Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At to '6, The Left acute. 67’ 5 The Right at the End of to Salary.
The Right acute. 75*0 The Left to Btddefley. 7 1 6 The Right to Rumfey, a diffe-
rent Way. 79'X and 79*6 The Right to White-Panjh and F ordmg.Bndg. 82 1 The
Right acute. 88*3 The Right acute. 97*1 The Right to Wtmborn. 101*4 The
Right to Wimbom, ioi’ 7 The Left acute.
In the Branch to
At 3F. The Left to Wimborn. 7 ’t The Right to Pc%/Soa>». u’4. The Right to tturJU
' CafUf. i6'o The Rightto Hordel. i 7 ’ 5 The Right to Burton.
In the Branch to *
At 6F. The Right to BotUy. 2*4 The Right t® Bothy.
tPI
FROM London to Almford,[ as in the Southampton R-3 whence, for the moft part
an open Way, over Sewers ßr. at fio’y, and by houfe on the Right,
leads at 67% to a Defc. of 2. F. to WINCHESTERS an ancient and fair City,adorn’d
with fine Buildings, both publick and private. Its Cathedral dedicated to the
Holy Trinity , is a large and ftately Structure, in which fevers! Kings and Queens
of England were interr’d, befides the Prebends Houles, the Bilhop’s Palace call d
Woolvey-houfe , and the Hall where the Affixes and Seffions are held v and where
K. Arthur's Round Table is kept. In the Suburbs is Winchefter College well en-
dow’d, and govern’d by a Warden, Mafter and Ulher. The Bilhops of
are Chancellors to the See of Canterbury , and fucceffively Prelates of the Noble
Ufa£2


Order of the Garter. This Bilhoprick is reputed the beft in the Kingdom ; the
Diocefs containing the Counties of Hamfiu and Surrey, with the lllands oiwtg. »
G wZ f Z'(ier, afeend a Hill; at 6 9 ’ 4 pafs thro’ V. and at 724
V. Then bv Hurfley Loclg ®n the Right, thro’ Enfield at 75 2i by a Pond
D , 'he Ri°ht,at 76’?, come to Lumfey, a Corp. and Mt. Town 01 4t. at 7^5.
ever a Stone Br. crofs Teft ft and at a F. Whence
avoiding the Way on the Right to Fording Br. White &c. crofs Br. at
§x’7, and enter New-Foreft at 84’6, formerly call’d 7re»e. Tis about 30 M. m
compafi, and affords great variety of Game. K. WUmOc Cm ,«r«r, lto make
this Trail a Harbor for Wild Beafts, caus d 36 Panfh Ch. with «11 the Houles
belonging to .them, to be demolifh’d ; but that- ralh Africa cud not go up> -
nilli’d 8 : for bis Son Rjchard was there blafted, R. 11. firnam hi
other Son, was Ihot with an Arrow, and Hen his Grand-Son, was hang d
m by t&gei-to tv on the Right, and at 86*4 tht
mod V. on a Hill. Then by Mtnjied on the Left, go down a Hill at 88 4, a.cena
•ingat 8/4 and 90*4. Whence by Bonner Y. on the Left, at 95 7 lea , v ' ul JL
Foreft; 7F. farther, come to Rjngmocd of 4F. and of good Account in the Tin
of the Saxons. ’Tis feated near the Sea, and has a good Mt. onWednefd. tor
Cattle, Corn, OV. From the Town, palling 2 Brocks, defeend a Hul at 9b 7,
and over Palmers Br. crofs Avon flv. at xoo’7. Then by Prefton Ch. on the ICgru,
come to Long Ham V. at 104’x entring Horfetjh. and crofting a Brook over Ham
Br. At io4’6 pafs thro’ Kjujion V. where an irregular R. by on dx-
Right, leads at uo’g to Pool, which, under K. Edward 111. from a fe * * ilher-
mens Houfes, grew up to be a Mt. K. H VI. granted it the Pnvi &
Haven, with Liberty to the Mayor to wall it in. Then the Inhabitants la in
in Splendor and Wealth, purchas’d the Immunities of a County; and fo ft <m a
mean Hamlet, it became a Town and County incorporate, which, at prelent, is
gone much to decay.
In the Branch from Pool to Lemington.
LEAVING Pool, avoid the forward Way on the Left to Salisbury, Wimborn , &C.
and bear to the Right. Whence an Afc follow’d by 2 Defc. brings you at
<T to Hamfh. Then thro’ I fiord V. at B*s come at to’2 tochrift-thunh ot jt.
and Avmfiv. formerly fenc’d with aCaftle, now ruinous; yet it enjoys a Mt,
and fends Burgeffes to Parliament. _ , „, . „ ,
Beyond the Town, crofs the fa id Avon , which arifmg on the Edg of SevernAe-
Foreft in Wiltjh. paffes by Amesbury,Salisbury, Dunhon, Ling-mood, and this 1 lace,
and falls into the Sea 1 M. below ; receiving into it, ifl. The mlly, and therein
the trader and Dyver ; 2d, The Bourn ; 3d, The Stour, and therewith the Lydden,
A?i?3 pafs thro’ a Vill. of 3 F. at 14’? thro’ Somerford V. and 4 F. beyond,
thro’ Milton V. Thencean irregular R,by ftraggling Houles, and amongoihers,
by Evilton and Ejfiord, leads at 2i’6 to Lemington , a Me. Town, neaftthe bca, Ha-
ving Piivilege to elefr Parliament-Men.
In the Branch to VV IN CHESTER.
FROM Southampton , an indirefr Way by feveral Houfes, extends thro’ St.
Crofis's V. at n M. to the City of


Bacward Turnings to be avoided between Lemington and 8001.
I. At the End of Lemington , the Right to 11. x’j fhort of Milton, .the
Right to K ingwood. Hl. 5 F. fhort of Milton, the Left to Hordel. IV. At the End
of Chnji-Cburch, the Right to Ring-wood.
From Pool to LO NDO N.
I. At the Entring %nafton, the Right to Chnjl-Church. 11. At the End of Long Ham,
the Left to Canford, 111, In Ring-wood , the Right to Cbrijl-Church.' IV. 9 F. fhort
of Malwood, the Left to Salisbury.
The Road from
SHREWSB URY to HOLYWELL, in Flintshire.
I* THE Point of Bearing N. N. W. 11. The direfl Horizontal Diftance 41
A 111. The vulgar Computation 39 M. IV. The 52’4.
From Shrewsbury Comp, Meafure."
to Ellefmere 12 f 12 | I [ i6’o
Wrexham 09 |2l | J i3’4 J 28’4
Comp. Meafure.
to Mould 10 f3l f I 13*0 | 41*4
Holywell 08 j 39 1 n’o 1 52*3
With the Branch from CH E StE to Holywell, thus;
From CHESTER Comp. Meafure.
to Flint oß 108 I I 12*4 j 12’4
Holywell 04 112 | | 05*0 J i7’4
Shrppjhire, Denbighjh. and Flimjb. contain the Road, and and the
Branch : The Dee, Gwenurow, Tagidog and Alien, are the chief Rivers crofs’d
over; the firft part of the Way being indifferent good, and the remainder of it
(even thro’ Wales) not fo difficult or mountainous as fome of the Neighbouring
Roads. a
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 4’/The Left acute. s’4 The Right to i6’2 The Right acute. 23*0 The
Left to Ruabon. 42’5 The Right to Northof 44,'x The Left to . 45’j;
The Left to Carts, 45*4 The Right to
In the Branch from CHES'fERJ.o Holywell.
At tjie End of chefier, the Lelt to Wrexham, 12*5 The Left to Northop, x\'6 The Left
to Holywell, a different Way.
LEAVING the Town of Shrewsbury, at 4 F. alfo. Battlefield Ch. at 2’4 on the
Right; and 6F. farther, Everton Chap, on the fame hand, with Efq; Ire-
land's Houfe on the Left; hence a Ridge of Hills on the Left, over Harmon Com.
and by PrinhiU W. on the Left, leads to HamonMU, an Afc. of 4F. At the Top,
leave Newton on the Right, and at 7’6 Meddle-Church on the Left. At 9*3 pafs
thro’ Burlleton V. and at 12 M. thro’ Cookshot V. of 2 F. leaving the Chap, and
Coolmeere on the Right.
At 14 M. you have Ly-Mere on the Left, and at 15 M. Oatly P. on the Right,
with Birch-hall, on the Left. At 16 M. pafs thro’ Elfmerc V. (the Meat on the
Right} and at iß’4 by Crench Ch. without a Steeple on the Left. Then over
DiddleftonGt. and at 20’ 5 thro’ Onny V. of 2 F. leaving the Cli. on the Right;
whence an indirect Road leads at 22 '6 over Dee flv. to Denbighshire,
■’ Hence


Hence a ftrait Road at 24’a by the Zios-Inn on the Right *, F. farther, over
Pm-Cafioeer Br. and x M. beyond that, over Pontf/oud Br. Then by MarkwelC h*
on the Right * at 28’ j crofs Cwenurow fiv. to of 3 F. en the Road, and
on the faid Gwtnurow, a Branch of Dee fiv. in a part of the Country call’d by the
Wellh, Mailor-G'mraig, i. e. Brow field., which affords good ftoreof Lead. The
Town is large, well-built, and beautify’d with a fair Church, Here are alu>
2 Mts. vir. on Mondays and ihu.rfii.ays. ,
From Wrexham, pals by S tanty and P hce-Coch on :$e Right at 30 2by tl.e
Crifpin-lnn on the Left, and Mr. Foiled Houle at 32 M. on the lame hand. At
33 M. crofs Pont-Kenuthyeri ßr• over Tagidogflv, near its Confluence with the Al-
im, and enter Flintjh. whence a Ridg ol Hills accompanying you far fever aI M.
on the Left,at 34’3 gothro’ {hjeen-hupe V. by the Ch. on the Right, and
refs Caftleon the Left. At 36*2 leave Sir Trevor s Houfe on the fame hand j
a ftraight Road leading by LeefwoodTiouie on the Left. Af erwards between
Pemre-hsbel Houfe and Mr. WimC s j and at 41T by a Bowling Gr. on the Right,
to Mould V. at4.x’3.
At 42’3 over Cotfid Br. crofs Allen fiv. which arifing near m .
receives the Allen-Vachan and Tagidog, and falls into the Dee near Ahncre. Here
you have a Lead-Furnace on the Right, a Mill on the Lett j and a little after, Gwy~
fanna-bowhe on the Right; Then fet forward by Parch-Buchan, a Ridg of Hills on
the Right, and by Pryn-Gallon Diggry-Houfe on the fame hand ; alfo over Roffomor-
Com. Whence a continued Ridg of Hills, call’d Holchen, and Moun-
tains, lies along the Road on the Left, as far as Holywell. At 49’g pal's by Mr.lC/7-
Uam’s Houfe on the Right (near which, on the fame hand, is a fteep craggy Rock
with a Wind-Mill)and at 50 M. by Mr. Moftens on the fame hand. About IM.
farther, by Pevy-Pulle-boufe on the Left, and a Tree on the Right, call d Derwin -
Holben at 5 2’2 enter the Town of Holywell, defcrib’d in the St. David s Road.
In the Brahch from CHESTER to Holywell.
FROM the City, crofs Dee fiv. which arifing at in Denbighfh,
palTes thro’ llyn-tigid, or Teg it, by Bala, and this Place; where it empties it
felf into the Ocean, receiving into it; 1 The 2d, The L id.
The Troweryn, and therein the l{ely and Monock-dour, 4th, The Kuedock. s tb , The
Cleton. 6th, The Alwcn, and therewith the Cyrow. jth, The Griftioneth. %tb } The
Keryog, with the Morin, gib. The Clarvedock, and in ic the 1 otb, The
Allen, and therewith the Allen-Vachan, and Tagidog.
At 1 M. defeending a Hill of 5 F. an Arm of the Sea lies by the Road to Holy-
well V. At 5’4 obfervea Direftion-Poft fet in the Road 3 then palling by a Caftle,
HamdenCb. and the Star-Chamber Alehoufe on the Left, an irregular Way brings
you at i2’3 to Flint, of 3 F. on gn Arm of the Sea ; formerly noted for its Caftle,
now ruinous, founded by R. Henry 11. and finilh’d by tdw. 11. which, not long
after, gave Entertainment to that unfortunate Prince Richard 11. upon his arrival
from Ireland ’ r bat having quitted it, he was taken Prifoner by Henry Bulling brook,
Duke of Lancafter-, who put an end to his Liberty and Life. The Town fends one
Burgers to Pail, and holds the Affixes f®r the Country 3 yet it does not enjoy the
benefit of a Mt. Thence by fome Coal-Pits, and by feveral Houles, at x6’3 crofs
the Riv. that runs from Holywell, and bear to the Left, entring the Town at 1 7’3,
, f < - v.
I ■■■ <$ ' £ ‘ ‘ ' • ' f M 4 ■ ' , \
Backward Turnings to be avoided between HolyneU and CHESTER. ■
I. IM. beyond Flint, the Left to chefter •, the belt Way when the Tide is out. 11. At
the £ntrmg Chefter. the Right to Wiexlum.
■ N 4 Between


Between Holywell and Shrewsbury.
I Againft Mr Mrjien's Houle the Left to Wrexham $ a different Way. 11. Agamft Guy [amt a*
H :fe the Leit acute 111 2F. beyond sw>en*hoji*, the Left to Harden, IV. 7F. beyond
Wrexhcw, the Lett to JPeMreveliv.
The Road from
WHITBY, in Yorshire, to DURHAM.
I. npHE Point of Bearing N.W.by W. IT. The direft Horizontal Diftance 38 M.
1 111. The Vulgar Computation 42 M. IV. The Dimenfuration <j6’6.
from Whitby Comp. Meafure.
to Skillingdam 9 09 ( n’j 11*7
GisbroHgh 8 17 io’o 21*7
Marton f 22 06’ 7 28*6
Comp. Mcafurc.
to Norton 6 28 1 | I 37**
Sedgfield 6 54* 1 ! oß’ l j < Vf’s
DURHAM 8 4.2 j ii’j 1
Thence continued to Tinmouth, Com. Nor thumb. 22*4, viz,.
From DURHAM Comp. Meafure.
to Sunderland 10 10 | j| ij’o j ij’o
Tinmouth 07 17 11 09*4. f 22*4*
Yorkshire, the Bifhoprick of Durham and Northumberland, are the Counties paf>’d
thro 1 ; and the Tees, Skern, Wear and Tme, are the principal Rivers crofs’d over;
affording, in general, an indifferent good Road, and fome Towns of Aecommo-
dation. "
Forward Turnings to be avoided.
At 7F. The Left acute. >*’s' The Right to Leverto»-Ch*j>. At the End of Stockdon, the
Left to Darlington. jß’a The Left to Charlton. <ff 3 The Left to Darlington. 4 - f’7 The
Right to i'ijhbourn.
In the Continuation to tinmouth.
f 9 /
At 4. M. The Left acute. At ijTf The Left acute.
'• Mr \
FROM Whitby , in that part of Torkjh. call’d Cleaveland, leaving the Town at
4 F. fet forward, til} at I’7 the Sea appears on the Right, and a Ridgof
Hills on the Left. At 3’s bearing to the Left,leave them; afeend a Hill of
7F. and at the Top enter Lythe V. of 2F. Thence an open direft Way leads
over an Afc. of B F. on the Top of which is a Beacon on the Hight. Then de-
scending as far,and croffing a Moor,go up another Hill of SF. follow'd by a Defc.
of 9F. There paisa Rivulet,and prefently afeend again,equally defeending over
another Brook. At n’7 come to Skelingdam V. crofs fome Rivulets, and traverfe
feveral Afc. and Defc. among which, on the Left, is on 6 more eminent, call’d
Freborgh Hill. Hence over 4 Brooks, arrive at an Afc. of 2F« on the Top of
which, is an AllomMine, on the Right, Then defeending as far, and croffing
2 Brocks, enter Guburgh alias Gitbdrough , at 2i’6 of 4F. near Tees flv. ’Twas
formerly noted for its Abbey; and, at prefent, enjoys a good Market on Mondays,
with 2 Fairs.
From the Town, pafs by a Hill near IM. on the Left, call’d or Fpfe-
berry-Topping, an high Eminence, which ferves as a Land-Mark to bailors. Then
by Sir William Chatnevo's Houle 2 F. on the Right, at 23’3, and Vpjhar Hall, equi-
diftant cm the fame hand, at 25 XI. Whence over an Afc. of 6F. and a Defc. of
4 F. leave Hamlington Hills on the Right, and Houfe on the Left; a
ftraight


ffraightWay leading at 28*4 to MartonY. of near SF. Then an indifferent ftrait
Way,croffmg 3 or 4 Brooks, extends a P 37'7 t0 the Ferry j over entring
the BUhoprick of Durham., and 3 F. beyond, Stockton of 3 F. noted for its Good
Ale, with which it ferves the City. ’Tis a Town Corp. govern’d by a Mayor,
6 Aldermen, CSV. enjoying a conliderable Trade, and a Market on
Thence at 3 6’a pafs over Ncmw Stone Br. and Brook to Norton at 37 M, of near
3 F. and bearing to the Left, crofs a Stone Br. and Brook at 38’4. Then defeend
a Hill of 3 F. and at the Bottom crofs a Wood Br. and Brook, by a Mill on the
Left. Whence an open and direft Road leads at 40 M. by Grindon V. by a Wood,
and by Layton Chap, all on the Right. At 43 M. pafs thro’ Layton V. and at 45
M. to SedgfieU V. of near <5 F. Then after a fmall Dele, at 47 M, in the Bot-
tom, over a Stone Br. crofs Skemflv. amending and defeending continually for
7M. Afterwards by Coxml Hall near 3F. on the Right, over feveral Stone
Brs. and Brooks in the Bottom, and by an Houfeor two call’d Sunderland, dole
on the Right, come to Skinkley V. near 3 F. having Hall on the Left.
At 55 M. crofs a Stone Br. over Wear flv. and leave bid Durham 3 F. on the
Right. Whence by an eafie Afc. equally defeending, enter the Suburbs of DVR»
NAM, and at 66' 4. the Ciry itfelf; crofling the Wear again, over a Stone Bridge.
In the continuation to Tinmouth.
*
LEAVING the City of DVpHAM, at I M.and at 4*2 palling by Haimon V.
near the Road on the Left, afeend 4F. Then 4F. farther, by E.
V. clofe on the Right, defeend 4 F. and in the Bottom crofs a.Stone Br. and
Brook. At 6’5 come to Helton V. afeend a Hill of 3F. and defeend as far, by
Nevobottle Y. 2F. on the Left. At B’6 fet forward between 2 Villages, viz, E.
Harrington on the Right, and Middle Harrington on the Left.
At ic’2 go up 3 F. and prefently down 5 F. by Barns V. near the Road, on
the Left, and 2 high Rocks about 6F. on the Right. At 11 ’7 crofs a Stone Br.
and Brook; and at i2’2 pafs thro’ Weremouth V. of 2F. alfo thro’ Sunderland at
13 M. of 3F. on Wear flv. near its Influx into the Sea. This Town drives a
conliderable Trade in Sea-Coal, has the Benefit of a Mt. on Frid. and is digni-
fy’d by giving Title to the R. H. Robert Earl of Sunderland, &c.
Thence by a Ferry, crofs the Wear, and 2 F.farther, go thro’ V.
of 2F. Then by Fulmll V. clofe on the Left, at x 4 ’6, and by Ch. 4F.
on the Right, come at 16’6 to Cleydon V. of 2F. At 18’y by Hanon V. on the
Right, and 6 F. farther, by Weft on V. on the fame hand; pafs at 21 M. to Sheali
Y. extending about ~M« along Tineflv. which ariles on the Edge of the County
near Scotland , and palling by Hexham and Nevo-Cajile, a little below this Place
rolls into the Sea ; receiving, i/f, The Sheble ; 2 d. The Read, and therein the
Chetlop and Pel op ; 3 d, T he Work shorn, and therewith the 4 The
Fojeborn ; The S. Tine, and with it the Vent, Ain, Giderdale, Fjppal'
E. Allen and W. Allen: Laflly, The Dermn ; which Riv. is here crols’d by a
Ferry., 1 hen thro’ N. Shiald, and over a Brook, pafs by a Light-Houfe on the
Right, to Tinmouth at 2T2 5 a Town indifferent large, and of feme Note; forti-
fy d with a ffrong Caftle, ’
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Tinmouth and DVR HAM.
I. In Tinmouth, the Right to New-Caftle. 11. f J'. beyond Rainton, the Left to Hanhbool.
Between D V A M and Whitby.
I. In Durham,the forward to QU Durham, and the Right to LONDON. 11. fF. beyond Sunder-
rand V. the Right to T-ornford. 111. j’i beyond Suelingdam, the Left to R:usoy.'
t I ''' 1 The


The Roads from
YORK to WHITBY and SC ARBORUGH,
in Yorkjhire.
Whitby. Scarborough
i TTHE Points of Bearing . N.E. hy E. N.E. by £•
i 11. The direft Horizontal Pittances 38 M. 34 M.
111. The vulgar Computations *
IV. The Dimenfumions 2 - « 43
From TO RK_ Comp. Meafure.
to Whitwel 10 110 | I 1 3*5 1 1 3,5 1
New Mdton 04 114 I 105 6 \ t-9 3 1
Comp. Meafure.
1 to Picturing 06 120 1 I oB’7 1 28’2
I Whitby 15 135 I I 22’ 0 I 50’ 2
In the Road to Scarborough.
From TO Comp. Meafure.
to New Melton 14 f*4l. I 3I l 9 3
Kollington 04 j 18 j 1 05*2 124 5
Sherborn 0$ j231»°6 6 • 3 1 3
Comp. Meafure.
toSeamor SI2B J ] 07*3 I 3®’^
Scarborough 3 ' 31 ; * 04’3 I 43* 1
— 1 •* 1
31
The Countv of Tort contains the whole Road, and the , Derwent, Bye, Esh,
J W Ire the principal Rivers «AU over. This Road ,s .nd.ffereot
well frequented, and fupply’d with good Towns, Inns, &e. It is, in general, a
hilly and bad Way.
Forward Turnings to be avoided between YORK and Whitby.
At I9’a in New Melton, the Right to Scarborough, 42 M. The Lett to SUte. 4$ 2 The
Right forward. 48*6 The Left forward.
Between Y o and Scarborough.
At iv’3 In New Melton, the Left to Whitby, being the former Road. 34’4 The Left
to Bentngton* 35*3 The Left acute.
SEtting forward from over a. Stone Br. crofs and at 2j repafs
it over a Wooden Br. Whence the Way, generally open, leads at 4 6 to
Staton on the Moor V. of 2F. Hence palling over Stockton , near 4M. long,
a- the end of it enter a Lane, and at xo’4 another Moor j beyond which, over
Br. c?ofs a Brook ? and a’t 12% afcend a Hill of 7 F. having on the top, a
Profpeft to Tork-Minfter. Then by WhitweU V. on the Right, crofs two Valleys,
and, in the firft, a Brook over a Stone Bridg. • „ .
Hence 2 Defc. extend at 19 M. to Mahon alias New , of 4 F- on the Road,
and more tranfverfe j an indifferent good Borough-Town, divided in
and.Vew; in both which, are contain d 3 Parilh Chs. lis water
fiv. clefting Pari. Men, and having 2 Mrs. w?. on Tuefd. and latte
efteem’d as good as any in the County; forHorfes, Live-Cattle, F ,
and the Lords of this Manner keep a Marker on that Day by Prescription.
Beyond New Mahon, the Lord Ewers’s Houfe appears on the Right, and at 203
OU Mahon of 3F. on the Road. There bearing to the Left, pals thro H**
Hon V. and at 23 M. over a Wooden Br. crofs an open Way, mdifteren^


Jy Arable and Failure, leading to Pickering, ataS’s a good Town, call’d the Ho-
nour of Pickering , belonging to the Dutchy of Lancafler. It ftill fhews the Ruins
of a famous Old Caftle; keeps Courts for all A&ions under 40 A commenc’d
within the faid Honour of Pickering-Lith ; and has a plentiful Market on Mondays
for Corn, <SV.
Thence paffing 2 large Afc. by Tarworth V. on the Left, alfo a Dele, of above
IrM. at the bottom, Lockton V. appears about 2F. on the Left. Then afeend
a Hill crofs 4 Valleys, and go by Sothergate V. clofe on the Right. Whence a
Dele, of SF. brings you at 47 M. to Sneton V. of 2 F. At 48 M. crofs a Rivu-
let, and enter Rufhworth V. of 3 F. on the Road,
From fiujhwonh, an irregular Way leads at 49’; to Whithy, or Whitehy, j. e.
Oppidum Album , call’d by the Saxons Streanjheale, i. e. Sinm Phari, formerly of great
Note for its Abbey, ’Tis,at prefent, a well-built Town on Esk fiv. near its In-
flux into the Sea. It drives a confiderable Trade, having about ipo Veflels,
with a convenient Cuftom-Houfe; and its Mt. on Saturdays is well ftor’d with
all Provilions, of Flefli, Fifli, Fowl, &c.
In the Road to Scarborough.
FROM Tori to Hero Mahon, [as thence to Whitby'} where crofTing a Stone Br.
over Derwent fiv. pals thro’ Norton V. of 3 F. in which is Efq; Ellct' s Seat on
the Right. Then leaving Old Mahon on th® Left, over 2 Brooks, at zfiu Scakle-
thorpy. appears on the Left. Thence crofs a Rivulet, (the Wold or great high
Hills ranging along the Road for feveral M. on the Right) and at 24*5 come to
fipllington V. of near 2 F. leaving thorp-Baffet Chap, on the Right, and Wtntrim-
bam Ch. on the fame hand. 6
At 2 6 M. crofs 2 Brooks, by %anefton and Knapton, 2 Villages on the Left*
and at 29’$ thro’ E, HafehonM. ot 2 F. pafs at 3**3 to Sherbom V. moft on the
Left. Then over a Brook by Browhon V. on the Right, come to Canon at 33*<
and to Staxton at 35*7, leaving Willorby Ch. on the Left, alfo the Wolds and
ton Y. on the Right. Afterwards pafs Great and Little Harford Brs. over Harford
fiv. and at 3§’4 to Semere V. of 4F. Whence defeending a Hill at 40’2, go bv
a Lake on the Right, call d £yards Water , and at 42 d enter Scarborough call’d
Scearburgh by the Saxons \ a ftrong well-built Town Corp. a 1 moft furrounded
with the Sea. It fends Burgeffes to Pari, is govern’d by 2 BavlifFs, Common-
Council, &c. has 2 Mts. on thurfd. and Saturd. and drives a good Trade • beins?
much reforted to, for its famous Spaw. 0 1 ®
Backward Turnings to be avoided between Scarborough and TOPS,
I. 4 F- from Scarborough, the Right to F alferave. 11. At the End of Staxton, the Left
to Beverley. 111, Againft the Left to Wintringhant.
Between Whitby and
f r F * of dickering, the Left to Kinthorp. llf In Kew the to
Nerv-CaJUe* / *
A


A TABLE of the Cities, Principal Corporation
Market Towns, &c. treated of in this Work, with the Roads
to which they belong.
Cities and Towns. Roads. Tig.
A Beta von St. DavidV 4 33
Aberconway Holyhead 47
Abergaveney Llanbeder 43
Aberiftwith Aberiftwith 7
Aberford Borough-br. x? 6
Abington St. David s 29
St. Albans Holyhead 42
Alesbury Buckingham 25
Almondbury Oakham 9 2
Alnwick Barwick *9
Alton Southampton 90
Alresford Southampton 96
Amfalefide Cocker mouth 178
Amesbury Barnftabie 62
Amerfham Buckingham 25
Andover Lands-End 50
Arundel Arundel 9
Afhburton Lands-End 53
A&by de-la-Zouch COVENTRT 153
Afhford Hith 4°
Atherfton COV E NTRJ 153
Attleborough NORWICH 87
Axbridg BRISTOL 23
Axminfter Lands-End 52
Aiesford Hith 40
B
Bala Holywell 125
Baldock St. Neot s 5$
Bampton Minhead 122
Banbury Buckingham 25
bath bath : 67
Barkway Lyn Si
Barnet Holyhead 42
Barnftey Oakham 9»
Barnftabie Barnftabie 64
Barton Flamborough 79
Barwick Barwick 20
Bafwgftoke Lands-End 50
Bantry Barwick 14
Beaumaris Holyhead 4^
Becklcs Yarmouth 103
Cities and Toxoits. Roads. Pag.
Beeonsfield Aberiftwith 3
Bedford Oakham 89
Bediford Barnftable 127
Bermingham Shrewsbury 94
Bernard *Caftle Borough-br. 177
Beverley Flamborough 80
Bigglefwade St. Neot’r 22
Billericay Maldon 1 73
Bilhops-Caftle Montgomery 84
Blyborough Yarmouth 102
Bofton Bofton 69
Bcrough-bridg Barwick >7
Bourn Flamborough 7 s
Bradinch E no
Braintry Bury _ *7*
Bramyard Aberiftwith 5
Brandon Wells 9®
Brecknock Llanbeder 1 44
Brent Lands End 53
Brentford BRISTOL 21
Bridgnorth Shrewsbury 94
Bridgwater Barnftable 63
Bridlington Flamborough 80
Bridport Dorchefter 175
Brighthelmefton New haven 57
\BRISTOL BBJSTOL 23
Bromley Rye 6c
1 Bromfgrove Buckingham 2 6
Bruton Barnftable 62
Buckingham Buckingham *5
Buntingford Barwick n
Burcefter Cambridg *49
Bur ford Banbury *°4
Burntwood Harwich 38
Burton CARLISLE 72
Burton Lazers Oakham 90
Bury Bury 99
C
Cain BRISTOL 23
Cambleford Barnftable *7
Cambridg Lyn 81
0 Campden


Cities and Toms, Rods. Tag. |
Campden Montgomery 83'
CA NTERBVRY Dover 36
Cardiff St. David’s 32
Cardigan Holywell 123.
CARLISLE CARLISLE 73
Carmarthen Carmarthen 157
Carnarvon Carnarvon 162
Caxton Barwick n
Chard Lands-End 52
Chegford ’ Truro 128
Chelmsford Harwich 38
Cheltenham C 130
Chepftow CHESTER, 105
Holyhead 46
C HIC HE STERC HIGHEST. 74
Chidlcigh Lands-End 53
Chimleigh Barnftable 127
Chipenham BRISTOL 23
Chrift-Church Pool 181
Clreucefter Banbury 104
Cockermoutb Cocker mouth 179
Colchefter Harwich 38
Colebrook £ RJS TO L 21
Coldhil Holyhead 44
St. Columb Barnftable 66
Columbton EXETER no
COVENTRY Holyhead 43
Coverd St. David’s 31
Cowbridg St. David’s 33
Cranborn Weymouth 100
Crecowel Llanbeder 143
Cromer NORWICH 138
Crookhorn Lands-End 52
Crow land Bofton 60
Croydon Newhaven <6
D
Dartford Dover 36
Dartmouth Minhead 121
Darking Arundel §
Darlington Barwick 17
Daven ry Holyhead • 43
St. DAVID'% St. D AVIV's 35
Dedington COVENTRY 153
Denbigh Holyhead 47
Derby Derby 77
Dev izes BATH & WELLS 6 7
Dolgeth Carnarvon i6r
Don ca Iter Barwick 14 1
Dorchefter Weymouth 1001
Dover Dover 37]
Cities and Towns, Rods'. Tig,
Downham Lyn 82
Droitwich Leicefter 134.
Dudley Shrewsbury 94.
Dulvertoa Barnftable 64.
Dankcton Weymouth ico
Dun mow . Bury 171
Dunftable Holyhead 42
D V RH A M Barwick 17
E
Egrimond Cockcrmouth 179
ELY ■ Lyn 82
Evefholm Montgomery 85
Evil Lands End 51
Ewel Arundel &
EX eTe R Lands-End <3
F‘
Fakenham Wells and Bury 99
Faringdon Sr. David’s 30
Farnham Southampton 96
Flint Holywell 183
Fifcard Holywell 123
Foy Lands-End 54.
Framptou Weymouth 113
Frodlham CHESTER 167
Q ,
Garftang CARLISLE 71
Gatefhead Barwick 18
Gisborough M 184
Glamford-Bridcs Flamborough 79
Glaftenbury EXETER 109
GLOC ESTER, St. David s 30
Godalmin Portfmoutfa 58
Grampond Truro §29
Gravefend Maldon 173
Grantham Barwick 20
Eaft-Grirafted Newhaven
Grimsby Grimsby M 46
Guilford Portfmouth 58
H
Hallifax Oakham 92
Halftead Bury tji
Flarlaxtoa Barwick 13
Hatfield St. Neot’s 85
Hatherly Barnftable 64.
Harding Holyhead 47
Harlech Carnarvon 162
Harwich Harwich 38
Haverborough Derby 76
Haverford Wcft St. David’s 34
lieuley St. David’s 29
ii E R,£ FORD


Cities and Towns, nods.
HEREFORD Montgomery 132
Hexham ' CAR.LISI.Ex6q
Higham-Ferries C 114
Hith Hith 40
Hi worth B 148
Hod felon Barwick 11
Holyhead Holyhead 4^
Holywell Holywell 125
Honiton Lands-End $2
Hornby Lancafter 164
Horndon Maldon *73
Hounflow Eriftol 21
Flamborough 80
Hungerford BRISTOL 22
Huntington Barwick 11
1
Tedborough Barwick x\6
Ilfarcomb Barn liable 127
Eaft-lliley C lsl
Ipfwich Yarmouth 102
St. Ives Ipfwich *35
Ixworth Harwich 140
K.
Kailfo Barwick 117
Kederminfter Buckingham 27
Kendal C A
Kerton Barnftable 127
K-efwick Cockermouth 179
Kidwelly Lands-End 34
Kilham Flamborough 80
Kingfclear CHIC HE Si. 151
Kingfton Portfmouth 58
Knaresborough Lancafter 163
Knighton Montgomery 133
L
Lancafter CARLISLE 72
Lavenham Bury 17 1
Launcefton Barnftable 17
Lechlade St. David’s 30
Leeds CHESTER 42
Leicefter Derby 76
Lemington Pool 181
Lewis Newhaven 57
Leominfter Aberiftwith 6
LICHFIELD Holyhead 44
Lime Dorchefter 175
LINCOLN Flamborough 78
Littleport Lyn 82
Lilcard Truro 129
Liftwithkl Truro 129
Cities and towns. Roads* Pig*
Llacharn St. David’* 34
Llanbeder • Llanbeder 144
Llanelthy St. David’* 34
Lanimdofry Llanbeder *44
Lloghor St. David’* 34
Loughborough Derby 76
Looe Lands-End 54
Ludlow CHESTER 106
Luton Oakham 89
Lycham N 141
Lyn Lyn 82
M
Mahunleh Holywell 124
Maiden-Bradley Barnftable
Maidenhead. B 21
Maidftone Hith 40
Maldon Maldon 173
Malmsbhry -B E^lSt 0 L 148
Manchefter C 1 66
Maningtree Harwich 98
Mansfield Oakham 91
Market-jew Lands-End 55
Marlborough BRISTOL 22
Marfhfield B 23
Melcomb Regis Weymouth 101
St. Michael Barnftable
Michel-Dean St. David’* 31
Midhurft 74
Midlam Oakham 93
Milbourn-Port Lands-End <;t
Milton-Mowbray Oakham 90
Minhead Minhead 122*
Modbury Dorchefter 175
Monmouth St. David’* 32
Montgomery • - Montgomery 133
Montforel Derby 7 6
Morton-Henmarfh Aberiftwith 4
Morpeth Barwick 19
South-Moulton Barnftable 64
N
Namptwich Holyhead 4
Needham Ipfwich 136
St. Neot’* St. Neot’j 85
Newark Barwick 13
Newbury 21
New-CaftleL. CARLISLE 7 1
New : CaftleT. Barwick 18
Newhaven Newhaven 57
New-Marlton Whitby 186
New* Market /-* RW 87
Newport


Okies and fawns. Roads. Pag.
Kewpart St. David $ 3 2
Sewport-Painel Cambridg *49
ew-Radnor Carmarthen 156
New-Shoreham . Newhaven 57
Newton C A R_L ISLE 7 *
Newton-Buftiel Minhead • 21
New-Town Cardiff 118
Northallerton Barwick i?
Northampton Derby 7^
Northfleet Dover 3 6
NORWICH NORWICH S 7
Nottingham Oakham 9 l
Nuneaton CO V ENTRY 153
O
Oakham , Oakham 90
OXFORD BRISTOL 14
P
Padftow Barnftable 66
Pembridg Montgomery 132
Penrith C A RL LE 72
Penfance Lands-End
PETERBOROUGH Bofton 69
Petersfield Portfmouth 5 9
Perfhore Aberiftwith 5
Philips-Norton BATH & WELLS 68
Pickering Whitby 187
Plymouth Lands End 53
Ponteftaft Borough-Br. 177
Pool Pool 181
Portfmouth Portfmouth .-^59
Preftain Aberiftwith
Prefton CARLISLE 71
Puckeridge Barwick
R
Ralegh Maldon 173
Redaing B S T 0 L 21
Riadergowy Aberiftwith 7
Richmond Oakham 93
Ringwood Pool 181
Ripley Lancafter 163
Rippon Borough-Br. 177
Rochdale 165
Rochefter Dover 36
Rofs Montgomery 132
Rotheram Oakham 9 1
PvOyfton Barwick 11
Rugby ' COVE Nt RT 115
Rugeley Holyhead 45
Rumford Harwich 38
Ramjey Southampton 25
Cities and Toms. Heads,
Ruthyn Holywell 135
Rye Rye 60
S
Saffron-Walden Bury 171
SALISBURY Lands-End 51
Sandwich Maldon 173
Saxmundbam Yarmouth to&
Scarborough Whitby 187
Seeching Lyn 8*
Sevenoke Rye 60
Settle Lancafter 164
Shaftsbury Lands-End
Slierborn Lands-End 5c
Shrewsbury Shrewsbury
Silver ton Minhead 12*
Sittingborn Dover 3
Skipton in Crpy. Oakham 93
Sleaford Flamborough 78
Sodbury Banbury., 104
Solihul Leicefter 134
Somerton Weymouth 113
Southanj COV& NT R 7153
Southampton Southampton 96
Spalding Bo ft on 69
Stamford Bar wick 12
Stane Lands-End 49
Stevenage St. Neots 8$
Stockbridg Pool 181
Stockton DURHAM. 185
Stone Holyhead 45
Stony-Stratford Holyhead 42
Stopford CHESTER 167
Stow Campden 159
Stow-Market Ipfwich 136
Stretford Buckingham 2
Stretham Lyn 82
Sudbury Bury 171
Sunderland DURHAM. 185
Swaffham Wells and Bury 98
Swanfey St. David s 3#
Tadcafter Barwick x<;
Taviftoke Truro 129
Taunton E no
Tcnbury Montgomery 84
Tetbury Banbury 104
Teverton Minhead 122
Teuksbury W 11
Thaxted Bury 171
Theifurd Harwich 140
Tolton


Cities and Towns. Roads. Pag.
Tolton Barwick 15
Torrington Barnftable 64
Toffeter Holyhead 42
Town-Mailing Hith 40
Tregony Lands-End 54
Troubridg BATH & WELLS 68
Truro Truro 129
Tunbridg Rye 60
Tuxford Barwick 13
W
Wakefield Borough-Br. 177
Walfmgham Wells and Bury 99
•Ware Barwick 11
Warrington C A RL ISLE 7 1
Warminfter Barnftable 62
Warwick C
Wellingborough Oakham 89
Wellington EXETER no
Wells bath & Wells 67
Welfhpool Shrewsbury 95
Wendover Buckingham 25
Wenlock Shrewsbury 94
Cities and Toms, Pag*
Wetherby Borough-bf. 175
Weymouth Weymouth toi
Whitby Whitby 187
WhitechurCh
Whitechurch Lands-End 50
High-Wickham Aberiftwith 3
Market-Wick ham Yarmouth 10 SL
Wiggan CARLISLE 7 1
Wimborn i<<
WINCHESTER CHESTER 75
Winchcomfa CO 130
Witham Harwich 38
Windham NORWICH 87
Woodbridg Yarmouth 102
Worcester Aberiftwith
Wrexham Holywell 183
Wrotham Hith 40
Wulpit Ipfwich 13d
Y
Yarmouth Yarmouth 103
Yaxley Bofton 69
T 0 RR' Bar wick 15
FINIS.


TABLES
#
Containing an Exaft Delineation
f'y "p | | p
ROADS of ENGLAND,
ACCORDING TO
Mr. Ogilbys
ACTUAL SURVEY,
And Mcnfuration by the Wheel.
Wherein the Names of all Places in the MAP S
of his BRITANNIA are fet down, with the Diftances
from Town to Town; and all other Remarks neceffary
for the Inftruflion of Travellers.
*■ ~ * ; v
As the Roads, the Mountains, Hills, :
Valleys, Rivers, Brooks, Rivulets, Houfes, Forefts;
Woods, Copies, Commons, Heaths, Moors, &c. that
occur in Parting the Roads from LONDON to all
the Eminent Towns in England and Wales,
Together with the Crofs-Roads from one City or Confi-
derable Town to Another.
to N » ON,
Printed for William Bray in Exeter-Conrt , n£af
Exeter’Change in the Strand, M DCG Xl*.


Directions to the READER.
FOR the better underftanding the following Tables, it
is reqtrifite briefly to explain the Method of tfcem.
At the End of every Line, are fet Figures fhevwfcg the
true Diftance in Miles and Furlosg*rf%m the Plae/menti-
oned in the preceding Line,; where Roads Divide dis
lb exprelfed, with a Remark which Road is to be follow-
ed, intimating, Bear Right or LefL At every Confiderable
Market-Townpts from and in the
Crofs-Pvoads it sDidance from tltelnkial Towns,whence you
fet out, is noted on the Left Hand, at the Beginning of the
Line, within a Crotchet: For Example,(in the Fird Table)from
the Exchange in LONDON to /(fn/ington-Gvavel-Pits are
Five meafured Miles,thence to Shepherd's Bujh (the next Vil-
lagers i .M. &7. Fur. thence to Acton, 1 . M. and 3. Furl, the
Didance from Acton to London being B.Miles and 2.Eurlongs;
and fo on in the fame manner till you come to Wheatley*
Bridge; Two Furlongs beyond which,the Roads Divide;the
Right continuing on to Iflip, and the Left leading to Oxford:
Where the Branch toOxford beirrgCoHatera!,rauft of neceffi-
ty be fet oppofire in the fame Column, and fo from con-
tinue on r lie Grand Road through Worcefyr to Jberijhvitk
And in regard, that conformably to the DcTcription in the
BookjtheGreat Roads are ufually divided intofeveral Farts,
the Reader may cake notice,That theßeginningofthe fecond
Fa rt is a Iwa ysßeckened from the Place lad named in the fird,
and fo in tlie Third Part, &c. the Didance being fet down,
as if it had been continued without any manner of Interval.
Sometimes lor want of Room ’ris requifite to ufe a few Ab-
breviations, as R. for,Right; L. for Left; V. or Vill. for Vil-
lage; Com. for for Rrver;Riv.for Rivulet,
For the more clear Illudration of thefe Tables,the Reader
jnay bepleafed to turn to the Defcription of the Refpedive
Roads in the Body of the Book, according to the Refe-
rence, fet at the Title of every diftind Road, or Part*to the
particular Page in the Paid Book.


The Road from LONDON to A BERISTWITH,
Wherein is Comprehended the Road from, London to Oxford. [See Pag. 2.]
Miles, F. 1
From LONDON to
Kenfmgtm Gravel-Pitts s*°
Shepherd's Bujh I*7
B*2] Adton i*3
Hamvell 3 1
Korcoat I 4
/Lw .3*°
Hellingdon * 2*o
18’1] Uxbridge i'o
Gerard's Crofs 6’o
27*0] Keconsheld 2*7
Loudivater j 3*o
32*4]High-Wickam 2*4
V/tckflam 2*o
I Stolen* Church 44
Tet[worth 5 *6
\Vheat Icy -Bridge 4*o
49’43 Roads Divide ° 5 2
Wntatly To j Quarreys I*3
| For eft-Bill o’6
Shot-over-B. 3 o 1 Stanton ? .
c V 1 ‘ c 1 2
ot. -john 3
55*i30XF0RD [s7*3] Iliip a
2*o 4*3
PART 11. (P. 4]
From Ijlfp to Blechindon fly
[62’4-] Roads Divide ; Right flz
Ke-uni ted 2T
By Wot ton-Church 3*o
Glimpton I *3
Chequer-Inn I *4
Enfhn 3 '$
73*0 Roads Divide 5 Right 3*l
Clipped on the Head) 6 0
Defcend a Hill I*2
Afcend o'y
! •
M. F
Divifion of the Roads. Left 1 ’o-
Dcfccnd 2*x
Four Shire-Stone 2 1
Roads Divide j bear Left o’i
83*2] Morton in Mar fit 16
Afcend Qroddway- Ml I*4
Burton on the Hill o’ 2
Crcfs-hand for Direction 3*6
Defcend Broadway-Hill fly
50*4] Broadway iT
Stone-Bridge and Brook 3*l
Wickwftrd- Brook 2*6
Enter a Lane 4V
von flv. 6c Stone-Bridge I*3
102*2] Perfhore oT
Stone-Bridge and Brook 2*2
St cut on 2*4
Suburbs of WORCESTER 4*4
Croft Laughern flv. 2 2
Broadwayi»\'i Page 3 6
Wood-Bridge over Temde flv.flo
Enter Hereflrdjhire o’7
Come to Bromyard- Heath 2*5
Stone Br. o \cxFroom flv. I*2
P A R T HI. f?. 6]
124*3] Bramyard o’i
BWdmbury 3’o
Hockey 3*3
&ii»-Bridge and Brook I*3
Eaton 2’ $
Storys Bridge over Lug. flv . o*2
t3s' 5 3 Leominfter Vul~ ?
ga Lem her
I Roads Divide j bear Right 05
By Kmgfiand-C hurch Right 3*o
Croft O/zey flv. o 4
M; F.
King[la?jd* Village o' 3
Lifter ton Z*3
Defend a Hill of 2 Furl. 2’o
CtoUmdetsflu. to CowL-V, 2*2.
Enter Radnor/hire I ’ S
1484] Preftain on Lug. flv, o’x
Difioyd ‘ 2*7
Over a Brook to Caflcp 2 : o
Afcend a Hill of 6 Furl. o’x
Defccnd 7 Furl. I*3
Crofs Common ftv. 6 t
Afcend a Hill of 4. Furl. c’4
Croft Ithenflv. I'x
Pais over Clewed: cf flv . i’s
Over feverai Afc. dc Defc,
Crofs DuUs flv. s' 3
lyo’s] Riadergowy 1 H
Croft a Rivulet, "fc. a Hill o 5
(ot 10 Full,
Deicend 6 Fur . 3*4
Enter 4*4
Croft Eromi/i w;tJ;-Bmnk ~o i
Afcend a Hill of 6 Furl. iW.
Defcend as much
Croft a Brook X'3
Another Brook i\
Mowen-Glowth- Houfe 1 y
A Woody Defcenc thence to
Brunant o*j
Croft a Brock ox
Another Brook 07
Touch upon Ridal flv, y'z
A Deftentof 12 Furl. I’4
Crofs the RidaL 3*5
Llmtindern-Vaur ©’2
1987 J Aberiftwith • i’6
The Rond from LONDON to Arundel in Sussex, and
thence to CHICHESTER. [P. B.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
Newington 1 *4
5 ’o
Towtmg-Gravehy o*4
Wandle flv, o'y
More don 2*3
14*0] Ewcl 3*6
Epfim 1 ’4
Epfom. Welli on the Right 3 Furl
/
iMherhead 3 7
*M, F.
Mickjcham 2’ 2
Croft A/c/e j?t/. i*°
24/1 ] Darking **4
Over tw<> Afccnts come to
Cold*Harbor- Hill 3 3
Afcend 3 F. & Defc* I Mile
Stone fireet 3 4
Over the Caufeway
Oi[€Wood‘ Bridge 1 7
Over
Enter Sujjsx to
M. F,
Roads divide at Honey*Lane ibid.
Bear to the Right
2*o
Roads divide again •, Right
Pa fs through a Copie 096o 9 6
Croft flv o*6
By Detjhm- Place on the Left
Roads re-united jT
Riifcknian Com y. o
Bdlmghurfi I ’4.
JtfulfO . 1 *7
Q 2


tliles, F.
Ntw~hridgt o*2
Over ?#/foro#£/j-Common
Defend 3 Furl, to
Wckford-Bridgz 3 ’5
Wukeniydt o' 7
Parham Village 2’x
Three fucceltive Defeats
M. F.
lAmherley 1 T
Houghton- Br. over fly, . I*2
Houghton o*2
An Afent of 3 Furl. I*3
55*2] Arundel I*3
The Continuation to Chicheftcr
kAw fiord- Hill 2*7
j
Halfway-Tree o’t
CWV-Hill j’s
Man d line x*s
Crofs Lavant fly. j ’ 0
i o’o] CHICHESTER o J 6
The Road from LONDON to BERWICK, [Pag. 10.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
The Bars in BiJhopfigate~llreet o*4
Kingjland ’ l’6
Newington To
A Wood-Bridge and Brook
Thence over Stanford-HdL
A Wood-Bridge and Brook T$
Tottenham High-Crojs oT
A Stone-Bridge and. Brook To
Tottenham-flreet 05
Over a Brook to Edmonton o*3
A Foot-Bridge and Water o*6
A Wood-Bridge and Brook o*6
Ponder s-End oT
tjackmore-End o*3
Erf field- Wujh To
A Brook and Foot-Bridge I 1
Enter Hartfordlhire o’ 5
ka’o] Waitham-Crofs, Poft*T o*2
Crofs brooks ftreet I o
Turners- Hill-Village o*2
CLefion-jlreet . o’ 7
A Foot-Bridge and Brook I*o
Warmly-End I ’o
the New- K iver o*3
Brockton o*2
Brockton Mill o*3
17*6"] Hodfdon o’s
lAmwell 2 7
21*4] Ware o'y
Crofs Mimerflv. by Wades- Mill2*2
H>gh-Crujs-End.
Colliers End T 6
27 ’23 Puckeridge T 6
Kepais the Mimer 1 ’6
Bunting ford 2*s
New Chipping I*2
Auckland ■ iT
An eafy Defc. to
38*0] Royflon 4 3 o
Enter Cambndgejhirs 1 7
Xntefiwonh ‘ 0 7
Croti Grant a alias ’ 2 ? 4
Afrwstt** Ty
M. F.
Through a Copfe 3*3
Hs/w x*3
49 6] Carton o*3
Papivorth-Everard 2*o
Enter limit mgdonihire 3*7
Godmanchefter 2*5
Crofs 0///e fly, to
5 7 Huntingdon iT
Great-Stuktley 2*4
Little Stukeley o’6
Stone- gate-Hole 5'5
By Stone gate. Left I’6
By iS'. Andrew’s Chappel R. i’o
By Ctmnington Right I*2
6p 1] StHton a Poll-Town I*7
PART 11. [P. 12]
An open (height way of 6 Furl.
Pals between Chefterton 1
and 'Allerton 2 F, from S* 4*o
the Road j
Wajhihgton Corner o*s
Water’Newton i* o
Silfln 1 ’j
Wunrf vorth on Nine-fly, I ’4
Crols a Brook * 3*5
Road Dividesj bear Right o*4
8 2*5 3 Stamford on ? ,
j Welland fly, 5 1 1
Roads Re-united I*s
Defend a Hill there* and
Crofs Welland fly, to
Bridge Caflertm o*6
By Tckincote 2F. Left i 9 y
By Greet ham 2 F, Left 3*o
Through a Wood o’i
By Stratton , 2F. Right i’i
Through another Copie I*3
Enter Lincolnshire o*3
Through a Wood I’l
Celts worth 2*2
Crofs VAtham fly. x'o
Over a Bridge between? ,
Kirkjhke and Eafton J 1 3
Crpfs another Water 1 ’ 2
M.F.
Great Panton f 2
An Afent of 3 Furl 07
A Defent
The Spittle
Grantham q 93
A Gentle Afc. of 1 Mile ?o’s
Over two Brooks there.
Gunner by x’ o
E>efcend Hooclf- Hill oT
Fofron 3 ’ 6
benyngten j’j
Enter Nottinghamshire 3*l
Balderton vulgo Bodderton \*s
iib’o] Newark upon ? ,
Trent fly. j 1
Crofi a Branch oftheTVm 2*3
South Museum o’^
North Museum To
Crumwel x
Cio(j* a Branch of the Trent iT
Charlton upon Trent o's
Sutton , •
Wflon x » 0
Tuxford 3’j
PART in. [p. X4 ]
By Lfme Markham , 2 F. LefciT
A Defent 0 v
Crofs Idle fly. o>6 0 > 6
Little Drayton o’2 0 ’ 2
Eater Sherwood - F oreft i’o
The Four Oaks 2*o
Barn bury on the Moor 4/3
Tarrvorth j
Kavenskel o '^
Scruby t ' 6
Bautry T 3
Crofs a Brook there and enter
Torkfhire
T hrough a Wood 1 T
R&ffmgton 3 'o
By High Eaders , 2 F. Left 2*2
155’0J Doncaßer i’6
Pdfs by X/// worth , Left 1 ’6
By S cattily ibid, o’i
And


Miles F.
And by Vighom ibid. *
The Street- way falls in 2*l
Ro bin ‘ Hood’s-Well * 7
Went bridge 3 $
Defcend a Hill of 2 Furl. o*s
Barrington 1 0
Ferry-Bridge, a Poft-ToWn 3 1
By Brotherton 1 1
Defcen d Betterefs-Hill 3* *
Milford I*s
175*7] Sherborn °*6
Te//6» alias Towtcn 3 6
182*4] Tadcafter 2*7
Street-Houfes 3*2
King Hcufies 4*6
192*0] YORK -Suburbs Ti
PART IV. CP. 16]
Skip-Bridge over Nid-flv, B*2
Grew Hammerton I*6
209*2] Borough bridge 7*5
Ditford 4*3
A different way from? «
tails in 3
Topclfjf 4*o
By Newby-Hall) 2 Furl* Left T 6
Cat ton on the Moor I*2
Sand- Hut on 2*5
229*1 ] Northallerton B*2
M. F.
Lowfey-Hill 3*7
Thence a Deftent of 3 Furl.
Li-1 tie S met on 2*o
Over Bridge ibid.
Great Smetcn o*6
Breatyorfe Deftent 3*2
Ferry over Tee; flv. to
Myfom Com. Durham Tl
Croft Skgrnflv. 2$
243*0] Darlington 2 Q « 2
Vulgo Darnton 5
Cctonmundil 4 6
Mcle alias Mckljam I*6
Woodham 2* 4
Ferry Hill 3*7
Sunderland 3 I
Farewell-Hufe I*s
362*3] l*6
1 Over two (mall Hills to
Burrow-Moor I*4
Plaufwcrth 2*l
in the Street 2*o
PART V. CP. 18.]
Over 2 frnall Defcencs to a
Beacon 6*o
Gatefhead 1
Croft Tine flv. to o*2
276*0] Newcaftle
V v M. F.
Enter Northumberland To
North- Gosfcrd 3* 2
Blith- bridge 5*4
Stainington o*s
VVdnfpe.c\ 4*4
29T3] Morpeth o*4
A final! Deftent 7*l
Caucot or 2*S
Felton o*2
Ne vet on on the Moor 2* j
Enter a Copfe 3*S\
309*6] Alnwick vulgo
Anwick - iV
Croft Mine flv* o*4
An cafie Descent o*7
Another Woody Deft. o*7
Chariton 3*6
Croft a Brock w 2*2
Wainfrd I*6
Belfird , a poft-Town 3*6
Chappet o*4
Button 4*o
By Far], Left T 4
Higgerjicn 16
mouth 6*6
339*0] Bar wick i‘o
The Road from LONDON BRISTOL continued
to Huntspill. [Pag. 20.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON by
Hide to
Knights-Bridge 3*5
Kenfington To
Counters'Bridge of Brick To
Hammerfrmth o*3
Turnham-Green I*4
9*i] Brantford on Brent flv. I*s
Small beer-Green 2*l
Hounflow o*6
Roads divide 3 bear Right
One Mde~Heath To
Two MUe-Heath and
Three MU-Heath (ucceffively.
Longford 3*6
Paft 4 Branches of Coin fly, and
Cr<sfs the Coin it (elf to,
18*5] Colbrook I*7
I Slough 3‘5
Wood Bridge over Tlsames? .
fin* & enter 2*
Miles, F.
27*3] Maidenhead o*3
Roads divide 3 bear Left o*2
Har that eh 6*2
Tan ford I*2
39*7] Reading t 4*6
Theal vulgo Dheal s*o
Wioihampton vulg. Wollington 4*3
Thatjham Vulgo Tnacham 3*2
Croft a Brook 2*l
Spinham-Land To
Spein o*7
Dele, a Hill betw. Craven-'? «
Park 8c Wtckam- Heath j
Halfway Houfetothe Heatn 2*o
The parting of the Roads I*2
Croft Kennet flv.
to Charnham-
ftreet in
64*4)Hungeiford
Encei JVJt/hs* 2
Chilton o*s
Croft aßrk.Ty
Kame shirty To
ixamestury-
Fiace I*2
A Brook 2*4
by Froxpeld o*2
Enteric
L or eft 2*o
A fteep Aft.2‘s
Deft.a Kill o*7
Mile?, F,
Over an Accent,
and Dc'cenr.'
Ate. a Hill 2*2
Deftendanother
(o\s
Mid den ha 11 o*4.
73 Marlborough 7 s'll I*4.
The Roads Reunited tbid. *
PART IJ. CP. 22.1
Ddccnd a Hill by Ffidd L. 3'2
A Wood-Bridge and Brook o*y
Little Kennet o*s
Stlkury-HyW o *S
Becbmgton alias Beckfiampton o‘s
Roads Divide 3 bear Right °*y
Several Accents fcnd Ddcenrs
By Cheril on the 2 *6
Gum irvan~ Bridge Tt
s7*s] Oln 1 014o l 4
Stud Ay Bridge 1 S
• T* W
Attend a Bril there
On


Miles, F.
On the Top the Plow* Road to
C%pnam m
Studley o*6
Dcfccnd a Stone Caufe-way o c 6
93 £ 3l Chippenham
Chipnam 2*4
Defcend a Hill s*r
Crofs a Brook to an Afcent o*4
By *kmr/74//-Church Right I*3
Enter GLcefter/htre l‘o
102*5] Marfhheld I*2
By Cold lAjton 2*o
Tvghtll-Defcait i*3
Miles, F.
AfcendaHill 2T
Barton- Hill 2*3
Through King’s Wood and the
Coal* pits
Dungeon-Crofs
1 i 4 I*2
The Continuation to HV NT*
SPIL *
Bedminjler j‘i
A Defcent of 5 Furl. T 6
By Dundrey 1 M. dift. Left Tl
An Afcenc of 6 Furl. i's
Over feveral AccentsDefcents.
Miles, F,
A Defcent of IM, 5 Furl. 3*4
Crofs P cry- Bridge
Langford 2*7
A continued Ridge of Hills,Left.
i8,0.l Axbridge 6‘o
Crofe !* 0
Lower Wmt of
By Ea ft-Brent, Right fi
Crofs a Brook if
Burnham in Brent-Marfh o*4
High-Bridge if
-Aft on o*2 0 * 2
29 < o]Hunt(pill vulgo Hinfpill Tr
The Road from LONDON to BUCKINGHAM.
Continued to Banbury, Bridgqnorth and Campden. [Pag.24.]
Miles, F. j
From LONDON to |
Kenfiugtin- Gravel-Pits s*o |
Shepherd's Bujh T 7
billon I 3
Hanwcll 3*l :
Norco at I *4
Lfoyj 3*o
Hellingdon t*2
18‘i 3 Uxbridge To
Roads Divide: Bear Kighr^2*3
St. Teter's Chaffmt vulgo? 3 <
Chefrsn 5 3 5
CroG a Brook of near 2F. Ti
Sr. Giles's Cnalfunt of
A Brook and Mill if
25G31 Agmondefoam ?
vnlgo Amerfhara 3 3
Cr®G a Brcok I*6
Little Mijfendin l : o
Over three feveral Brooks
Great Mffenden 2*l
38*7! Wendover 4*5
CroG a Brook i*2
Ales bury 3*4
CroG Tame fiv'. 2 4 3
By Onerendm 1 F Right
Uneven Road molt part open to
Eaft CUy don B*o
•A Word Bridge and Brook 2‘7
Another Bridge and Water o‘6
6o* 2 ] Buckingharn 2 £ 5
A Scone-Bridge and Water 2T
Tmtv?u\ o*2
Enter Oxfrdfhirc , and Fenmcrei* 3
Enter Nrthamptonfiure zf
Tbr*ughu>n alias Fraught on T 6 •
Miles, F.
2*2
Nell-Bridge if
Re-enter Oxfordjhire
Roads Divide : Bear Right 3T
77‘6l Banbury I*3
PART- 11. [p. 26.)
Drayton if
Crofs two Brooks by Wroxton o*3
By Horn ton 2 Furl. Left
Enter Warwickjhire 2 ‘6
Edge- Hill of 3 Furl. I*2
By TUves- Church 4 F. Left I*4
By Oxhull-Church ibid. o*7
Nether Tflerton if
CroG the FoG way iT
Over, or Upper E xtington of
Enter Worceferfhire 0 6
A Stone-Bridge of 19 Arches 5*2
27**3 Stratford upon ? o<
iAvonflv. 3
By Hafeler J F. Left and ? *
*Afton Right 3
Crofs uAlne fLv . by Great ? <
on Church Bight j 1 1
CroG Arrow fiv, to Co lighten 2*l
Pals over a Brock 0 6
Samborn T*l
| Crabs-Crofs 2*l
I Enter Were eft erfhire
\ Hedley's-Cnfs > an dw : l-Heath iT
Over feck-?j ham-For eft to? <
F:x~Liddet 3 1
By TardbickrChurch I F. Lett. I*s
Font net i‘o
CroG a Brook p x 4
f Miles, F.
u3 f o] Bromfgrove on ? <
Salwayp, iiv. v 1 4-
Crofs a Brook I*3
A Gro' f e of Trees 2*4
Chedderley j %
Winter fold x ‘ o
Two Brooks and a Mill o*7
1 2 Kidderminfter T 2
A(c.S taffordjh* 3*3
Come to Shropjhtre i*6
vAlam-Bridge of Stone 2 4.
S*** 2*o
Quatfird 2'l
Over part of Morf-Foreft
J 4 r J Bruges at. Bridgenorth I*4
The Branch to Campden.
From through the
Weft-Gate to
A Brook and Paper-Mill 2*l
North-Newton o*2 0 * 2
CroG a Brook T$
Shut ford ’ I*o
Crofs a Br. to an Afc. of 6 F. l ‘5
Over Sibhert's-Heath
Enter Wartxncfyfhtre T$
Defcend a Hill of 1 1 Fur lotfgs.
Rrailes if
1 Shipfton on Stour jiv.
A Stone-Bridge, 6 Arches 4*2
An includ. part of Worcefterfhire
Re-enter WarroichfjhiYe • I*2
Enter Glocejierjhtre 2*3
A Descent of 3 Furl o*s
A Brook and Mill o*s
Another Brook q s
204} Campden iT
The


The Road from LONDON to St. DAVIDS in
Pembroke -shire. [P. 27.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
Knightsbridge 3 5
del fry Town and College Left
Kinjington I o
Earl of Holland's Seat
Bricky Bridge over a Brook o' 3
Hammerfmitb o 4
Through Turnham-Green
s>’i] Brantford 3’o
New Brantford o' $
Over SmalNbeer Green
Hcunflorv 2'2
Over 1,2,& 3 Mile-Heaths
Lonrford 4*6
1*53 Colbrook I*7
Slough 3’ 5
Crofs a Brook 2T
A Wood-Br. over Thames flv.2*s
Enter Bark:fl)ire
27*33 Maidenhead o*3
Roads part i bear Left o’2
An Afcenc and Defcent b’o
Another Hill o*3
By Hurley'Place
Several Aflents and Defcents
3 5*43 Hcnly upon Tham. flv. 4*4
A Wood of 3 Miles and half To
An Afc. of 4 F. in the Wood To
Nettlebed a Poft-Town 2 6
Defcend 2 F.& afcend as much
By Nuffield-Church 2F. Left I ? 6
Crofs Hunter ton Com. 5c
Pafs over 4 other Defcents 13
Benfmgton 2*7
Shilling ford * 5 5
Donhejier on Tame flv. Ti
Burcot i 5 5
Clifton 1 *3
By Odium Church Ty
Crofs a Branch of the Thames o’s
55*03 Abingtonon Tnames o’6
PART 11. CP, 30J
Shipten 2 4
Kingftone-Baptifi 3'3
RQtw.LongworthK.dc Pufay L.2'5
By Buckland Right X* l
68 2] Farringdon 3*5
At the To. end Roadpartsjßighr
A Defcent there of 4 Furl.
A like Afcent 2T
By the 2 Mile-Stone o’6
St. Johns Bridge over fhpmss 2’5
Miles, F.
Enter Ghucefter/hire
74*2] Lechlade o*4
Eatrford 3*5
At the end Crofs Coin flv. and
leave the acute Way on the
Left
Barnjley 5*6
A Defcent of 3 Furl. 3*3
Crofs Perrot's Br. over Churn flv.
Afcend 2 Furl. i’°
A Hill of 4 Furl. 3’*
The Greyhound- inn o' 6
Betw. Elfton and BrimsfitUL
Through a Village s*6
Cro Cs Bur lip-Hill of io Furl.
Brockyoorfih 3*l
[IOTOJ GLOCESTER 30
Through Mint-lfle
A St. Br.of 7. Arc to Over-VtU I*3
By Efqj Cook's Houfe,& Hinamt’ t y
A Wood-Bridge and Brook 2’s
Through Bird-Wood o*s
Roads Divide ibid. Bear Right
Huntley 1 * 3
Re-united I*2
Defcend 3 Furl to Longhops i’o
Crofs a Brook o*7
Afcend a Hill °*2
£113*53 Michel-Dean o*7
By t Ahenhall-Church * Left 1* *
A Defcent of 6 Furl. °\
Another Defcent of $ Furl I*6
An Afcent of 4* Furl. I*3
Defccnd 5 F. by the Coal-pits 2’s
1 2i*63 Covered o*6
Stanton 2 2
Thence down a Hill of 4 Furl
At the Bottom enter Mcnmouth/h,
Another Defcent of 10 F. \2
12 6’y3 Monmouth on Wye and
Monow flv. I*s
PART 111. CP. 31l
Come to a Sr.Br.over Trothy fl. I*3
By Troy-Houfe
Thence 3 fucceffive Afcenrs
Ledyard-Houfe T$
Red-ware-Houfe o^4
Gogheker <>’2
Trelagh \ 2* o
Roads Divide: Bear Right o’6
Ac the Bot. Cr obOnvy flv.
A Gepde Defcedf Bfook I*7
Allies F
Afc. a Hill of i M. & half to o’;
Devonian near the Top
New • Church ’5
A Defcent of 6 Furl.
Crofs Threggy flv, I*o
A Hill of 7 Furl. i*o
On the Top, Strogle-Caflk Ruins
A Defcent of 2 Miles 26
in the Bor com
A (tend thence 4 Furl.
By Chrift*Church , Right 3*7
Over 3 (ever. Hills by Pair-Oaffi
Newport on o*2
A Defcent of 7 Furl. I*2
Betw. Efqs Morgan $ Park
and a Village o’6
Crofs Ed with flv. o*7
By BajfaUgerChurch Right
An Afcenc of 4Furl. o'S
Through a Village
A Defcent of 2. Furl. I*3
By Llannihangle-veddr O
Church , 3 Furl. o*s
Right C
St. Melons 2*3
Hampney x’o
Crofs Rompney flv. to
Glamorganshire o'6
By Ref/;« Right Tf
[1627] Cardiff on Taveß. o’ 7
By Land ajf 6 Furl. Right T 5
fly. & V ill. o*7
A Defcent of 4 Furl. 22
St. Nicholas
By Cotrtl-Houfe 3 Furl,Right o*7
Irefimcn o*4-
Afcend a Hill ]*s
By St. Kary Left I*3
A Defcent of 7 Furl.
174Cowbridge i*x
Betw. Penellyn Church & Call t * t
Afcend a Hiii o*3
The Golden Mile 1 f 5
Defcend by CoyK'hurch Right To
Over a Hill and Valley to
Corn-Town l 2
Crofs Ewenny flv, I*2
New Bridge over Ogmcre flv, I*o
Afcend a Hill \’z
A Defcent of 6 Furl 2*4
The Tie To
over


Miles, F.
Over feme Brooks by Mar gum*
Moufe and Park
The Foot ofaßidge of Hills R.
3 2
By Bay lan I Furl. Right I* S
197*3] Burton aVu Briton-ferry 2*o
PART IV. [P. 33 ]
The Salt-Houfes: Left 4’°
Kerry Crofs, Tawny flv, 06
202*3 J Swanfey o*2
Trahere 1 ©
Afcend 2 Hills
A Defcenc of I Mile I*s
Pont-blew Br. over Thlu flv.
Aicend again 5 Furl.
A Dtfcent to 2*l
Pont a-Eremin > o 5
JLUghor Borough-Town i‘l
Llcghor- Caftle >• • o*j
Ferry over Lloghor flv.
And enter Carmarthenshire
A finall Afcent
By Cape I Gwelvcee Left I*7
And Capet* Dowhee ibid. I*7
Miles, F.
214*0] Llamelly alias,
Llanekhy o*4
Several Afcents and Defeents
A Hill of 7 Furl 4*l
A Wood on the Right T 7
Spuddore* Br. over Groen- ,
drurh'Vawr flv. *
By another Copfc Right
222*2] Kidwelly 2*7
An A (cent of about 1 Mile o*s
Over (everal other Hills
A Ferry over Towy flv. • 3*5
Llanjiujfan alias Llaftephen I*o
A Hill of 4 Furl
A Defcenc of $ Furl 2‘i
A Ferry of 3 o*6
230*6] Llachamor
Laughem o*6
Afcend a Hill of 5 F. o*2
A Defcenc of near 1 Mile i‘7
Through another Valley 2*l
By Egloys*Ksmen-C\\- Right 0%
Road Divides} Bear Right o*7
_ . .. MilesF 5 *
CroG a Brook & a Hill of 3 F,2 c s
There enter Pembrokefhire
Llangtiido 2*l
Defeend a Hill 3*o
An Afcenc and Woody Dele. I*o
Cana ft on T$
Crofs Clethy flv. 3c 3 Afc.
By Mid- County .Houle 2*s
A Valley of 3 Furl 3 ‘y
Prangherfi or Prenderherfi o*6
Crofs Dmgledy tlv. to
254*1] Haverford-Weft o*3
The Road Hilly throughout o*4
Pelham bridge I*2
Keafm- B ridge 2*6
Afcend a Hill of 1 Mile
By Koch- Caftle Right 2*l
CreekhoweL 2 *o
An Afcent of about 1 Mile
Crofs a Brook 2*6
Nine Wells 2*6
269*2] St. DAVIDS. i*6
The Road from LONDON to DOVER in Kent.
[P.35.]
Mile?, F,
From LONDON through
and Kent'finer to
Lockrßridge and Brook I*4
Sr. Ttscmas Watering o‘6
A Wood-Bridge and Brook o*7
Hair way-Houfe ©‘2
At New Crofs enter Kent To
Road Divides: Bear Left
U pptr Deptford I * 5
A St. Bridge over Raytnsbcrn flv.
An A (cent to Blacky Heath o' 3
Greenwich - Park-Corner 0< 5
Shooters- Hill 2*o
Through a Wood of l Mile o*7
Welle)! 2 1
Crayford on Cray flv. 2< 5
A Defcenc to I*s
15*4] Dartfofd o*2
Over feveral Afc. 6c Defc.
A Stone-Bridge s*i
A finall Afcenc
Miles, F.
21*0] Northflcet o*3
Two Wind-Mills & Beacon L.TS
Chalkyfireet I*4
The Church on the Left I*7
Afcend Gad* s-Hill of 4F. i*t
Through a Wood to the
Bottom of a Ddcent I*7
Stroud To
Over the Bridge to
3°*o] ROCHESTER i‘o
Chat harts, contiguous
A Defcent and A (cent I*s
Road direiT and Woody to
Kaynham
Straggling Houfes for i Mile
Nervington-finet 2 .*y
Key-ftreet I*l
Several Buildings on the Road
Sittinghorn 2*o
Btpchild Tf
Kudfield fired d*y
Miles, F»
Green-fireet ©S
Ofpring- Beacon on a Hill I*7
Road divid.at tht Bottom : Right
A Village and Brook I*2
A Defc. by Bod on Ch. Right 2*7
BocUn alias Bauton-ftreet o
Blean~HilL o*J
Road open and Woody to
The Bottom of a Defcenc 2*o
Straggling Houles to
Harpledorvn 2*7
5 5*61 CANTERBURY o‘6
Bijhops Court Bridge s‘6
By Sr. s Park 1 M. I*4
Over Barr am Down
Afcend a Hill
Lydden 3*7
Through a Valley
Bwol I*7
Buckland I*2
71*13 x*x
The


The Road from LONDON to HARWICH in Essex.
[Pag. 37.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
Mile-End’Green 1 °
Mile’End-Village o*s
ifriv X*2
Crofs a St.Brid. over I** flv* o*2
And enter EJJex
Over feveral Branch, of the Lea
Stratford Langthorn ©’6
Croft Rodon flv. to
Great Ilford 3*o
Seven Kings Watering I *6
Chadwell-ftreet I*3
The Whale s Bone o*7
11,2] Rumford 1 9 3
Hare-ftreet *’4
By the Gallows, and part i> 6
of £/>/?/«£-Foreft, Left 5 \
Bmk^ftreet 2*7
Afc. a Hill follow’d by anoth. o> 3
17*5 3 Brentwood 7 c *
Burntwood 3 7
Shenfield l’o
Chain-Bridge over Chelmer flv. I*7
Miles, F.
Over two (mall Brooks
Ingateftone Vulg. Ingerjtone 22
The Bull-Inn on the Right 2*o
f Vtdford-Bridge 2’o
by Mouljham-Hall 5 Right
Mouljham I*2
Croft the Chelmer to
?B*2] Chelmsford o*2
Turn fhorc * Right over
Another Branch of the Chelmer .
Springfield I ’o
By Afcw Park i’2
Monkj-Head o 4
By a Water-Mill
Bcreham ©S
Hatfield- Peverel 26
36*3] Witham a’o
Croft a Brook *’s
Kelvedon-Eafterford vul. Keldoni'o
Confluence of Blacky water £ .
and Chelmer flv. S '
Roads divide 5 Bear Right o' $
Crofs a Hand,a Dire&ion-PoftS’j
Mite?, F.
Stanway \
By the Beacon and Heath I’o
Lexden o *6
The Suburbs of
49*33 Colchefter x*t
Come to the Croft ©*3
Over to flv. Bear Right i’o
Enclofed and Woody way to
lArdiey 3’^
Lawford ftreet 2 \
(59*0] Maningtrec \ ,
x/a/go Maintree 6 2 1
By the Banks of Stour flv. X. ,
for 12. Furl. S 2 4
I Vrabnefs 2*5
By iSVoar-Woodj Left
Street 3*2
Roads parts 5 ibid. Bear Left,
And over Ram/ey-Biidge.
By Dover-Court-Ch . Left I*4.
7o’6[] Harwich 2*o
The Road from LONDON to HITH with that by
Maidstone in Kent. [Pag. 39.]
, Miles, F*
From LONDON to
Kent~ftreet in to
The & Brook x 4
St. Thomas Watering , & the $1.0*6
A Brook and Wood-Bridge o*7
Half-way-Houfe o*2
New-Crcjs I*o
Enter there, and obferve
The parting of the Roads 3 Bear
Right.
A Stone* Bridge jr
Crofs a Brook to Lewjham 1 5 °
Ley I>o
A Wood*bridge * s x
Eltham o*6
South-End I* l
Another Wood bridge o P 6
Foot's Cray 2*3
Enter Birchen’ I Wood 2’x
A Defcent of 4 Furl* 3**
Farming am an Dertnt flv- ° ? 4
Miles, F.
Roads divide 1 Bear Leafc
By Ensford I*6
K ingfdown I 8
The Roads divide 3 Bear Lcfa’i
Stanftead * ’4
An Afcent of 3 Furl.
Defcend as much x*7
Trojeley a Has Trottef i iff o ’4
*Addington * 5
Croft a Brook °’3
Between Ryherft and Tc wn-MaU
ling I *o
Larkin 2’o
Croft a Brook o’;
w Aylesford I*s
By lAllington, Right x’6
Over Pecktndon- Heath
The Roads Re-united , I*7
Fenrum ftreet and Barnfied I*2
Over feveral Rivulets & Brooks
Parrs'Crfe 3**
P
Wiles, F.
Harierfham vulgo Hare/ham i'6
Sandway j
Lenham-Haugh i's
Braden S’ Haugh o' f
By a Park and over a Brook i
Another Brook i’j
By feveral Houfes
Hot hfield-Haugh 2 ' I
Hath field c ’»
Over a Brook fl ’y
By Ld Tcpham’s Park* Left 12
Sy'il Afliford I's
At the end of ft croft Stour Bv.
Wellesborough j 'y
S water S’Bridge o * 5
By Sir N*Knat Mull's Park 5 L.l’3
By Sir T* Scot's Park * Right x*o
Croft a Brook o*2
A Decent of »Furk
Selling o*4,


Miles, F.
By Efq; Gimbletons Park; Right,
and a Brook 1 4
Over a Brook and by Oftenhan-
jreK.Park, Left * 0
Pedlin-flreet l 7
A Defcent of 4 Furl. oh?
Gioft a Brook o'6
Miles, F.
69 61 Hith o*i
The Enclofed Way by MMID-
ST ONE.
At the Parting of the Roads ;
bear Right 23*1
A Defcent of 4 Furl. ft*
' 2 J’2] Rothim or Wrotham ©’4
1
Miles, F,
O6
Offamdlias Of ham *’l
The Way very Woody.
Mailing between this and the
other Road I*7
A St. Br. over Medway flv. 5*6
36VJ Maidftone o*2
The Road from LONDON to HOLYHEAD in
the County of Anglesey, North-Wales. [P.45.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON through
St. Jchn-ftreet, crofs the
New-River to ,
J (Unfit on
Ring-Crofs
Lower- HAloway °, 6
Vpper- Holloway 0 2
Afcend the Hill to #
Highgate °J
Half-Mile Tree; Right 16
By Browns Well; ibid. I ©
Over Binchly Common -
Afcend a Hill by a Windmill ft©
Cole-Harbor 02
Wnetftone °f
Enter Hart for d-Jh ire I l °
The Chequer- Inn 0 S
n‘6] Barnet alias High-Barnet
C°s
Re enter Middlefex f
End * t s
South-Mims 0 3
North-Mims
Re-enter Harford-{hire _ 0 4
A fteepDefc down Ridge-Hill 1 ’©
on a Rivulet I > 6
Two Afcems \3
2ft2] Sr. Albans i’i
By Shafird-Houte} Left 2/6
Redbttrn 1 7
C oft a Rivulet or two,
Market-ftreet 4 1
Enter Bedfrd-Jhirc .
34 o] Dunftable 4*o
A fteep
By Vlejmrth ; Right
Hockley in the Hole ft 4
By Berry- Hall Right 2 0
By King* Wood ; l4
Enter Buckingham-jhire ©'4
little BrickfnH a Pott-1 own I
Croft Lowhl tiv. 10
Miles, F.
Fenny- Stratford 2 ’©
By Rickley- Wood ; Left I*7
Over Bunch Hill
Harford- Bridge and Brook °*s
By Laughton- Church ; Right fti
Several A (cents and De (cents.
52*6] Stony*Stratford s’*
Cro(s Orvfe flv. to Old-Stratfordpb.
And enter Northampton-Jhire.
Potters Perry-End 2*7
Robin - Hood- Houle I 3
By Paulers Perry Ch. Left I’o
Cuttle- Mill o' $
Havencot e*Hou(es 06
60*2] Towcefter vulgo Tof
(eter ©-7
P A R T 11. CP. 43 3
Man and Boy Bujh 2*2 ;
Bofters Booth o*7
By Patejhul- Church $ Right ©’6
Several (mall A(cenu
By Stow Left 17
By Sfow-Church 5 ibid. o' 6
By Weedon 5 ibid, fti
Crofs o th’ Hand ©’4
Roads divide; bear Left
By Upper Weedon j Left T4*
Over Rye- Hill fto
By Hooke Woo d; Left o*7
yft6] Daventry ' vulgo Daira-
tre 1 ‘o
Open Way ft 2
Berry-hndgz 2'2
Enter Warwief{hire o' 6
Qoft ilv. o’2
Repaft it o' 6
Ccme to Dmclmch- Lane 0 1 3
1A Stone-bridge and Rivulet 1 4
Dtmchurch o' 7
T hrough Dunfm ore - Heath 0> 2
Miles, F*
Paft the Foft-way 4*3
Knightly - Croft 1 ©
Ryton fuper Dunfmore fto
Ryton- bridge over Mvon fl v. I*4
WymaL I*4
Seven-Starsrlnn o*4
Wnirley- Mill o’s
Over the Pavement to
9i’<n COVENTRY 1
Spongate-bddgz i’i
Mlejfly vulgo Mujley I 7
A Clayey A(c. 6c Rocky Defc.
Meriden 3*4
Roads divide ; bear Right o’l
By Pactyigton Right ; Paft
Between two Parks 2'©
Croft Blith flv.
103’©I Coleftiil by Cole flv.
(2 ’6
Grim foot- Hill ,14
Curdworth-Bv. over Tame flv, ftr
By Duntvn- Hall-Park $ Right o*7
By Moxall- Parks ibid. iT
Red-Cap Inn; by Wijharo-Gr- 1 0
Roads divide 1 bear Left o’*
By Middleton New-Park ; Ri. ft 6
Baffets-V ole* ibid . fti
Enter Stafford {hire
By Word; Right fto
Bifhops Ruck of Scones o*7
l*o
Croft o’rh* Hand o*2
Watting-ftreet croffes theßoad©’?
Svoinfen o'6
Long bridge and Rivulet ftr
Croft Ickneld-ftreet- Way o 6
By Borough-cag- Hill; Right o'a
iiS’2] LICHFIELD <?'*
PART 111. CP. tf.l
Croft o'th 5 Hand 1$
Rgads divide i bear Right.
By


Miles, F. |
By Ungway-HouCe jHighc o’ 5
Crofs Btlfon- brook °7
A Defcent to Long-Green 02
An Afccnt and Defcent o 7 ,
/>«£dw-Village °*41
Brereton- Hill I ,° I
Brereton vulgo Brewerton 0 4
Hangman’s Oak ° ) 7:
126’0J Rugeley vulgoKidgley I ’s
vulgo o*/ky 2 3 1
At the End, crofs Trent flv, I
Roads divide 3 bear Right
Coliege
Little Haywood o 5
Great Haywood °’^
Hoads divide j bear Left I*3
By Ingeftrey 4 Furl. Left I o
The Brine-Pits o*s
Left o’y
&j»d-Crofs a’x
Bnrftcn o* 5
Gwr-Houfe-Inn ) Left 2*o
And Lofton- Hall 2 Furl. Left
£*o4? # o*7
By Stone-Hall and Park 3 Right.
140*5] Stone o*7
Roads divide 3 161VL bear Left.
A Bridge ever Trentflv, to
Darla (ion l\
Roads part again 3 bear Left o*6
Sandiford I 7
Warren- HiM O 4
Roads divide } bear Left 2*l
o’i
Roads part again 3 Left I? 3
The Bell-Inn 2*l
By Sideway-HdW o f 6
Tipe ■ Tate I *o
Crofs a Corner of Shrcp-flnre,
Wore vulgo Owre i’ 2 -
Come to the Afh-tree, and Che-
shire o’6
Bridgmore
By a Pool 3 Left o*7
By Lea- Hall 3 Right *’ 2
Clofe 3 Lef. o*7
A Stone* bridge and Brook o*4
Stapeley o*3
162*23 Namptwich 2> 4
I ’5
Burford-Gveen o*3
Harlftone
i’o 1
Miles, F.
Bar- bridge and Mill o 4
Enter Wat field- Pavement of 2 M.
Highway-fide-Houfes 2*4
By Ti Ift on-Hall •, Right l *3
Tcrperley *’7
Cotton ' * 7
Between the Red-Cap and Dut-
ton Hall °y
Roads divide $ bear Right 01
Clotton 0 1
Hackjvili
Three Stone-bridges 0, 5
Over Cotton 9 Heath,
Brown- Heath I J 2
By a Gibbet $ Right 0 4
Roads re-united ° t 2
The GlaG-Houle 1°
Boughton 0 3
181*3] Weft-CHESTER o*3
P A R T IV. [P. 47-1
Pals by the Brick-Kilns Right 2*o
Crofs a Rivulet °*J
Enter Plintjhire 3
A Stone-Bridge and Brook o*4
Brett on
By Broughton $ Left
By Hardtng-Pdtk j ibid. oj
Hawarden vulgo Harding o 7
Betw# Tovoly dC Towly- Caftle 1,6
Several Accents and Defcents
Pantrey bridge
The Boar's- Head-Inn ° # 7
Nortbop a Poft-Town i*
Afc. by Cravat-Clough Mill ° # 7
Cravat- Clough ° t 5
Dele. Sky bough-Haggm-YixW * f 4
Afc. Lagm-Haggin- Hill O f 4
By Skiviog- Church 5 Left
The Smelt -Mills ° t 6
By Ptflgum-liall s Left
And Mafmunnam -Halli Righto 4
j 1
By Potuary • Church 5 ibid. 1 7 3
Pontriffi h-hr. over Cluyd flv. x’o
Enter Denbighjhire $ ibid.
by Leweney-Hdft.} Left
' The Five-Oaks j ;W. o*4
209’0] Denbigh *’4
By Left 2^
Hen-Llan on a Hill 1 o
Overfeveral Brooks and Ale.
Llanufydd alias LUnwith 3*2
CroG a Brook o’y
Miles, F,
Pontgwlthy -br. on E \Doy flv, I*l
Afcend a Mountain o’4
A Defcent of 4 Furl,
Bettus alias Bethoufe 2*l
By Right o*s
Dolven-bridge and Mill o’7
Ascend a Hill 2*3
A Defcent oy
The Roads divide j bear Left q"z
Through (brae Woods.
Cnfworth 2 9 1
Enter Carnarvanjhire o*7
Ferry over Conway flv. To
22T4] Conway alias Abercon-
way 04
Roads divide there; Left to
Bangor .
When cheTide is out s keepßighc
Over a Skirt of Pen-maen-bycan:
Come upon the Sands 2 ’s
Continue there to Menay $ buj:
When Tide is in, turn Left 2 S
Afc.a Skirt of Pen-maen-manr o 6
A Houfc or two I
When Tide is in,turn Left agair*
Otherwife re-enter the Sands.
Arrive at Menay-St reight 4*6
Ferry over to
24T3] Beaumaris o*s
Enter >Anglefey
By the Alms-Houfes j Right IMr
Crofs Kmcough- brook 1 o
By LUnfadarn s Left 196I 9 6
Tmcohet Ta
Over fcveral Brooks
By Pen-menis-HaMi Left 2*4-
Hddrav aught ~M\\\ and Brookl ’i
An Afcent by a Gibber $ RighN
Llangaveney 1 3
Over fbrae (mall Afc. & Defcent*
Majfalan 4*5
By a long Scone * Left 1 4
Rudband- bridge and Brook v’S
Boddedar 2 9 l
By LUneng-hennel 1 Right 1 4
The Roads divide 2*3,
Right to Clevsnck? Sands; when
the 1 ide is our, otherwife
Turn to the Bridge ; Left o*4
Or psfs (freight over the Rock*
and^, Sands to
2690} Holyhead s’j
f t
P 2
The


The Road from LONDON to the LAND’S END
in Cornwall [Pag. 48.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
Hide Parkis Bight to
Kmghts-bndgs 3*5
Kenflngtcn 1 o
Counters bridge i*o
Hammerfmhh o 3
Tarnham -Green I*4
5>’ j 3 Brantford
Small- i?av-Green 2*l
Hounjlorv
Roads divide $ zdd. bear Left
Clole by a Pond 5 Left *3
Baber- bridge over a Brook o*6
Powder-Mills, Right $ Sword-
Mills, Ltfr.
CroisHampton- Court- Channel *
Bedfont
Over a Brook 2 5
*B*6] Stanes °’ 2
Wood-brid. over Thames flv. o’s
(Roads divide 5 ibid, bear Right
Bgham t fl
Roads divide again $ Left 1 6
Crols a Brook I*3
NeW-England-lnn O I
By Windflor- Park $ Right, ibid.
Thence over ifag/hot-Heath
By Bagjhot- Park 5 Kight 4*6
Bapjhot 0 6
Over two Alcents.
Roadsdivide* bear Right 1 *
Way open and Heathy to
Blackyoater 2 7
Crols Loddenflv. there.
And enter Himjmre . ,
Alcend a fmail Hill I > °
A like Ddcent 3 5
Hartley -Row 0 3
Crofs Hartford-hvidge & Brook
By Ha rt/ey-Church j Left 1? 5
Green a Village °*7
Heljom br. over Dittfordflv. o’y
o*7
Newham 1 ‘ 2
A Delcent of 6 Furl. 3 5 2
47'7*] Balingftoke i ? 3
liurting 2’ 5
By Church- Oakley j Left 2 ’4
Setherton 3 ’4- j
By Fight n
t Miles, F.
Clofe by Lavirfloke~Uo\xfeflb. ©’4
On a (mall Alcenr.
594] Whitchurch I*3
Betw.cWWwCh. &a Park o*s
A Valley * j’o
Httsbotri
Over another Woody Valley I'4
66'il Andover 3*l
part ij. cp. 50.3
Roads divide j ibid . bear Left.
Up-Crt/ord-Church j Left I*7
By Right I*o
Alcend a Hill of 4 Furl. *’o
Another of the like Height o 9 6
Defcend 3 Furl.
Middle Wallop on Teft flv. z'l
Over Co me Hills.
At the /flh-tree enter Wdtflh. 30
Defcend 5 Furl.
Corner o*s
Over feveral A (cents and Dele.
Hurcote bridge over Bourn flv., s*o
83*23 SALISBURY z*6
Over the Plain
Pvoads divide j bear Right I*s
By Langford- Houle, ibid. o‘i
Crols two Valleys, and come
To (cveral Race*Pods 2*4
Diftant 1 M. one from another.
By Bur comb- Church 5 Right 2*o
By EHesborn Church j Left s*l
By j Right o*6
By Church $ Left I*3
By St. Church 5 /W. i‘o
Over Wmtefheat-Hill of 5 Furl.
Enter Dorfetjhire 3*5
102*63 Shafcsbury I*3
A Dcfcent of 6 Furl.
Several Alcents and Defcents.
£f(?//r*Eaftover 2
Delcend 3 Furl, and crols o*s
Stour flv. c *2
St our -Weft over o*3
Over leveral Brooks.
By Henkflridg-C hurch 5 Left 4*3
By Dunmere-Houie, ibid. l‘o
JMilbourn-V ovt i*y
An Aftent and Ddcenc.
Miles, F.
By Obcrne- Church 5 Right I*6
By Sherborn- Caftle $ Left o'6
i l B*3] Sherborn o*2
An HilHide, by Compton 2*3
By Middh-Cempton, ibid. o*3
Delcend Babylon* Hill o*7
Crols a Branch of Parret flv. o*4
And enter Somerfetjhire
*23*4] Evil or Yeovel l*o
Attend a Hill of 3 Furlongs.
By Prefion Church $ Kight I*4
W efaCaudor X‘7
Ea i‘6
Hafdbere 2 1 *
Over two Alcents.
A Defcent of above 3 Furl. *‘7
*33 l c] Crookhorn o*3
PART 111. CP. 52]
Alcend a Hill of 4 Furl.
Several other Accents and Delb.
A Dele. of 9 Furl. s' 3
Stm* I*3
A Defcent of 4 Furl o*7
Crols w Ax flv. o*4
An incloled Part of Devonshire.
A fmall Eminence l 3
Ford i‘o
Come to Part of Dorfetjhire o*4
a Beacon.
By Celefin-Houie * Left o*7
Delcend a Hill o f 2
Crols Weecraft- bridge o*2
Enter Devonjhire.
By Sifterhocd j Right o*s
146*1] Axminfter on flv.o *i
Crols Tare flv, & Come Brooks.
AfcendaHill 2*6
By Dal wood- Chur chs Right i‘i
By Widworthy~ Church« Left x‘6
Off-welt o‘s
A Defcent of 7 Furl. 2*3
1 55*63 Honicon o*7
By Buel^reJ-Church§ Right 2*6
Homton- bridge over Otter flv, °7
Delcend a Bill 3*7
A Village and Brook 1 *7
Kockberc 0 ‘7
A faail Dcfcent and Accent.
Umiun


Miles, F.
Honiton-Clyft, 2 , x
172*2] EXETER 4 1
Stone-Bridge over Ex fiv .
Afcend and Defcend to,
Shillingfird 0 6
At the bottom cr©ft Ken. fiv.
A Hill of 9 Furl. 20
Crofs a Valley 1 6
A Defcent of 7 Furl. o’ 3
Crofs another Valley 2*6
181*6] Chidky or Chidlas o'6
Lemna- bridge 2*2
By Bovy-Tracy- Churchjßight o*4
New Inn 2*3
Becktngton o*7
At the end Croft Leman fiv.
Defcend a Hill 2*3
191*7] Asburton I*6
Crofs a Valley and Dert.flv, i’i
Bnckfird or Buckfaft* Leigh I*o
Dean • Prior 1 ’©
Harburton in a Vale i*j
Croft Harburn flv.znd an Afcent.
19 86] Brent i’7
%rent bridge over fiv. o’j
Over fcverai Hills ana Brooks
Wrangalin I *5
A Croft in the Road 2*3
Ivy-bridge over Mulm fiv. 1 ®
Woodland I*4
Croft a Brcok in a Valley o’l
Anoth.Brook & fbme Houfes ©’7
Dww- bridge over Palm fiv . o*3
Ridgway 2*3
Defcend 3 Furl.
Over fome Brooks ,
New bridge and Brook I*6
Crofs a Brook and Hill 2*o
A (mall Defcent o*4
215*4] Plymouth o* 5
PART IV. CP. 54.]
Eysn%-Churchi Right o*7
M. F.
Stone-Houfe o ’6
fmwfc/e-Paflag.overlkwdr flv.o’s
By Mount Edgcombi Left o’ 5
And xAndorn-PdLQ£ t ibid . i’i
Enter Cornwall o’6
Over an Afcent and Defcent
©’4
Attend a Hill of 6 Furl.
Tregantha 2'l
An Afcent and Defcent 3 Fur*
longs each.
Croft hole I ’$
A Hill of 2 Furl, and Beacon,
Left 14
A Defcent of 9 Furl.
Roechjf 1 ’6
Over fcveral Valleys.
232*0] Lowe Love on Low
fiv . , 4*2
Croft two Afcents and pa ft
By P Unit* Church 1 Right 3 5
A Defcent and Afcent.
By Woodvil-Ronfe $ Left 1* 3
Defcend a Hill 3*o
©’2
Foy on Foy fiv, ©’3
Over feveral Hiils
Trewatdreth 3 '3
Ferry over the Bay
By St. Blau } Right *‘o
Tycnawry 1, l
A Ddcent and Afcent
By Sr. sAuftle' s Church $ Rightl *7
Theroricl^ alias Tregorru 4 o*4
Croft a Brook and
Afcend a Hill ©’4
Polebooth 1 ’°
Over fcvera] Afcents and De*
fcents.
A fmall Village 4*7
256*5] Tregny 4/4* Tregony
( x> 4
Road Hilly and Sandy
Erevan 3 o
Trtnuftry 4
. i jv
Defcend a Hill to
Ring’s High Paffage
Through a Village ©‘^
Over a Valley i‘i
Defcend again 1
Come to another Valley o € s
At the Bottom croft Cuher fiv.
Afcend a Hill to
Blow the-cold-Wind , a Village I*3
Over 4 fevcral Afcents.
By the Blew ft one , Right s*o
Roads divide, tfod. Left.
Another Afcentand Defcent I*s:
A Dcfc. of above 7 Furl. 2*o
by Crowan* Church * Left 09
Ac the bottom crofs Hale fiv;
By a Wood on the Right 2*£
Croft a large Valley 2*2
Through a Village o*4.
Afcend a Hill and defcend to
Another final! Village i 4 *
By St. Hilary' Church $ Right.
Henhorn ©*<£
Through another Village ©‘3
286*5] Market-Jew ©‘s
Croft a Rivulet.
By Sr. Michael's-Mount 5 Left o*7
By G«//«ry-Church * Right 2*o
289*6] Penfcnce o*2
By LaregwChurcJi j Right I*s
Newlin, on a Dcftent o*i
By St Paul s-Church ; Left ©‘s
Over fcverai Ale. and Defc.,
Tregedath 3*o
St. Burien o*7
Clofe by Pendre-Roufc $ Left o*4.
Croft a Valley ©‘4
Fen-Berth ©‘s
By $ Left i*©
300*3] Senanon the Land*s-End
i‘6
The Road from LONDON to NEWHAVEN in Com.
Sussex, continued to New-Shoram. [P. 55.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON through
to
Newington 1 *4
Roads divide ibid , bear Left o*2
By the Gallows, Right o*s
Roads part again ibid . Left
Croft the New-River
M. F.
BriftclCdiikway 2*l
Streth&m I*3
At the Town’s End
Roads divide 5 bear Left o*3
By a Gallows $ Left 2< 2
10*21 Croydon
Roads divide 5 bear Left 2'4
M. F.
A finall Afcent ©‘s
A Defcent of 4 Furl. I*2
By fome Woods 1 Right.
Ddc. 2 Hills of 4 Full, each 3*5
Through a Village 2‘o
By Godjhnc* Church $ Left
Afc. of 4F, & Ddc. of 3F; o*3
Ncw-


Miles, F.
NeW-ChappeiGvtsn a Village 4*l
By a Wood Lefc o*4
Over a Brook alcend 3F. I*7
Feibridge on a Brook I*l
Enter Sujjex there
By the Gallows o*6
29*4} Eafl-Greenftead o*6
A Deleent of 4 Furl o*4
l‘o
A Deleent of 4 Furl, o*7
Foreji-Row a Village o*4
Afcend a Hill I*2
By a Stone-quarry on the Topo‘3
Defcend a Hill of 4 F. i*s
Sheffield-Green a Village I*7
Defcend Dane-H ill of 4 Furl.o*4
By fome Houfes i Left g i‘6
Crofs a Brook o *s
By a Wood * Left
fl M. F.
Another Rivulet 3*o
By Chaley‘ Ch. Right o*i
Crofs a Brook in a Copfe 2*l
Over another Brook I*3
Offam-d reet i‘ o
Afcend a Hill of 5 F. 1 o*2
A Defcent i‘i
49 € slLewes on Ovofe fiv. o*2
By Swan-Borough j Right I*3
By Church 5 Lefc o*6
North-Hees 2*o
An Afcent of 5 Furl. o*y
By Radmel 2 F. Left, and
By St. Lees on the Top ibid, o*6
By the Edge of a Defc. Eight 2*5
Ptddenhoo o *^
56*5] New Haven i‘i
f . # M. F.
The Continuation to
A Jew Shoreham .
By the Beacon &Windwill Right
Under Moreftage Hill j Right 3*o
Under Salt den* Hill $ ibid. i‘o
By RattendQn-Chwxch. j iHd i‘o
By the Beacon 5 ibid. o*3
By Offendon- Ch. ibid, o*6
By the Windmills 2*o
S>‘o] Brighthelmefton o*7
By Hoove ; Right i‘y
By yAlderton^Bcacon } ibid. To
By singleton j ibid. o*6
By P or fade $ ibid. o*4
By Kingffon - 9 Left iV
Buckingham* Houle 1 ‘ I
Roads divide 5 bear Lefc o*l
*s*6l New Shoreham Q< s
The Road from LONDON PORTSMOUTH
in Com . Southampton. [Pag. 57.]
' Miles, F.
From LONDON thro’
Southwark to
Newington I*4
Ac the end of the Town/
Roads divide i bear Right o*2
By Fox-Hall t Right o c 6
And Canon- Houle* Left
By Clap ham j 2 F. ibid . 2*o
Over Batterfey- Heath
A fmail Deleent I*2
Wandklworth 'gaWandfworh
(o*2
Crofs two A feents to
Putney- Heath I*4
By the Bowling-Greenjßight o*4
And by Wimhleton 1 M Lefc
A Deleent of 3 Furl. o c 4
By o*4
Alcend a Hill o*7
A Deleent of 3 Furl. i*6
1 2*0] Kingfton upon Thames o*3
Tuimes-Ditton 2*3
Over againft Hampton-Court
Roads divide ; bear Lefc o*3
Thro* Hare-Lane
By Ejher vulgo Sandy-Chapel *
Right i c 2
Over a Heath of 3 M,
Cobham 4/0
Cobbam- Br. over Mde flv. o*3
A Deleent of 3 Furl. I*l
M. F.
Enter a Heath
Between 2 Ponds and the Iron-
Mills j Bight o‘7
Crofs a Rivulet I*s
RipUy ' o*4
I Roads divide bear Right J*x
1 Sr, Thomas Watering Brook o*7
By (SW-Chap. 6c £«rtow-Place j
Right o*7
29*7] Guilford on ff£y flv. 2*4
At the Town’s End
Roads divide j bear Lefc
Afcend Kattern-H\\\ I*l
By Shalford 5 Left I*o
I By the Hofpitalj ibid , I*4
Repafs the Wcy o*4
34*0 Godalmin vulgo Godliman
•(o r i
Milford o*2
Over a large Heath
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. 2*7
Defcend by ThurLey ; Right o*4
Thro 1 Rood-Lane
Hind-Head- Hill |*i
An eafy Defcent
The Roads dividejbear Right I*3
Another Defcent 2*3
Enter Hamjhire ibid.
' By Bremjhot 1 Right i*6
Wa!mere-Fared o*s
Enter Sujfx.
M. F.
Rake o‘l
Afcend there $ Furl.
A Defcent of 4 Furl. 2* o
Sheet- bridge over ±Arm flv. I*3
Re-enter Hamjhire
5 Pctersfield I*o
By Heath-Houfe $ Lefc o*6
By Bur it on $ ibid* 2*2
Several Ale. asd Defcents over
Downs
By C halt on $ Lefc 3*l
By. IWfoo-Windmill; ibid . i‘o
By Katerington * Right o*3
Hamden j‘i
Thro’ /foty-Foreft to
Pur bee kz Heath 3's
By South-IPegik Right o'y
Afcen. a Hill of 4 F. o*3
Portfey-Down o*4
Cojham o ‘6
Perr/ey-bridge over an Arm of
the Sea o*s
Enter Port fey- Ifle
Over Hi I fey Green
Hilfey-\ iiiage q*6
Kingffon 1 ( q
By Portfey-C hurchj Lefc
By a Houle and Wind-mill;
Right ' 1' 7
73*o] Portfmouth o*s
The


The Road from LONDON to RYE in Com , Sussex.
[P.59.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON thro’
Southward and along Ktftf-ftreet
over a Brook I*4
St. Thomas Watering o’&
Wood- br. over a Rivulet 0,7
Half-way-Houfe
New-Crofs » i'o
Enter Kent ibid.
Roads divide* ibid, bear Right
The County-bridge o'i
Lewjham- br. & Brook i’o
Bear Right thro 5 the Town
By the Altns-Houfes $ Right 4’ o
s’sl Bromley °’i
Tanners-ht. & Brook o’s
Over Bromley Common
Thro* a Wood of 4 F. 2’o
Fanburgh alias Farnborow i'6
By Fi/hers Oak j Left
The Roads part * Turn Right o’ $
Afcend Rujhmore- Hill 4 2 *3
Porcupine-Inn near the Top
By Halfted- Park 5 ibid. Left
Defcend Madam s-Court- Hill 2 2
Clofe by Madam’s-Court jLeft i’o
Over Darnton or Dunton- Green
Long fir d-bv. on fiv. o’y
M. F.
River-Head a Thoroughfare o’i
By Lady BofiweU’s Park $ Left
Afcend 2 Furl. i’i
Sevenoke vulgo Sennoke o'y
A Defc. & Afc.of 3 F.
By Knoll- Place j Left i’o
I>efcend River-Head-Hill oT
Over Hilden-G reen
Crofs a Rivulet 4*6
29*2} Tunbridge on Medway
fiv . o’ 3
At the End of the Town
Roads divide 5 bear Left
Thro’ South' Frith Wood 3*7
Woodgate l’l
Copember-Green a Vill. ° 6
Kipping-Crofs 1 o
Lmdrtdge 2’o
Crofs a Brook 1 5
Enter i Sujfex ibid. &
Lamberherft o I
The Road partss bear Left o*3
By a Stone-quarry 1 Right I*3
Beaut’s Bridge and Brook o’2
Re-enter Kent $ ibid.
Stone-Crouch * i’i
Flim well z’o
M. F.
At a Stone re-enter Sufiex
Between the Frith & KoyaUOaL
Inn o 7 s
Come to Kent again
Over Seacock^- Heath
Thro* Htgh-i ireet j’t
Htgrj-gate i ’o
By a Windmill and Hurokhurft-
Ch. Right o’2
The Watch-houfe I*2
The way fomewhat Woody
Thro* Field-Green o’j
Cobeech-G reen 2*o
By £d«d/;crj?-Ch.Right
New end en 1 ’4.
Crofs Pother fiv at the End o’s
Enter Sujfex again ibid.
The Roads part 5 bear Right o ? 6
Nordiam 1 *3
Afcend a Hill * i*<>
By clofe Left
Brownfmiths Oak I*4.
Wntte Bread- Lane-way falls in
By Peafimarjh 5 Right 3*o
AndSalcote alias PUyden-, Left I*7
63*4] Rye or Rhie o’r
The Rond from LONDON to BARNSTABLE
Devonsh. Continued to Hartly and to Truro in Cornwall.
[P.6l.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
66 0] Andover in Hampjhire:
(As in the Land's End Road)
Leave the Town at o*4
The Roads part 1 bear Right o*2
Crofs a Rivulet 2*6
Monl{son o’2
By *Apwort-Cl\, Right 22
By %4%-Ch. 2F# Left 0%
M. F.
The Foot of an Afcent, ibid. Right
Open Way Arable and Pafture
A Defcent of 3 Furl. 2*6
Enter Wiltshire, ib.
Challerton in the bottom 0 3
Beason-H ill or Harrodon* Hill
of 12 Furl. 2’3
80’43 Amesbury or Ambeif-
bury 23
M. F.
Enter Salisbury-Vh in &
Afcend Two Hills
Between the 7 Barrows
By Stone- Henge 3F. Left *3
Maiden Shravpton vulgo
Shruton 3 t
Between Madenton fkOrcheftono 4
Between a Ridge of Hills on both
fide?# 8 3
Bf
s.


v •. .. _ ... Mile?, F.
By Norton-Bovant Left s’o
Leave the Plain.
Bor eh am o’6
Warminfter or Werminfter I*i
A Brook beyond the Town
Samborn I ’o
A Defcent of 4 Furl, 13
Crofs Sheerwater flv • near the
Head o*s
By tome Hills 5 Left o’i
The Way enclofed to
Maiden-Bradley 3*7
Enter Somerfetjhire o's
Tarnfield o’s
Grange-Barm * clofe Right 036o 3 6
Kdmanton o*7
Defcend King-[buttle- Hill near
1 Mile 2 ’o
Sc Vill. j’f
Over Two-HiHs i’3
And a Defcent of 5 Furl. o*3
11 5 J Bruton on Brew flv. o’y
Cole I *5
Crofs a Stone Bridge Sc Brook.
A Rivulet and fmall Afc. I’o
lArasford o’6
Crofs a Brock to Clanvil o 3 3
Alford 2 3 2
Lsvingtm o’y
haß* Lid ford fa
A Qjjarry i’6
Weflon Regis j’o
By lyythorn- Wind-Mill 4*2
Defcend a Hill of 3 Furl. I*4
Bv iValtan Wind-Mill} Left o*2
Ajfot 1
Afcend ?c//o«-HilI 2’7
On a Caufeway of 5 M.
Thru’ B/oxley-Wood o*3
By Cat-gate Wind-Mill I*4
Stoic Vv ind-Mill ' <> ? 6
By Cuffington- Church and Wind-
Mill j Right I‘3
Knoll 1 ’2
Crofs a Brook I’j
By Horfey-Green } Right
By Sidney- Hcufe} ibid i’o
M 2> 53 Bridgwater on Parret
o ’5
P A R T 11. [p. 63.]
Durlay on a Brook l’6
Va idly 1 5 2
Over a Brook & Afcof 4 F. ©’3
'Em?; ore o’y
A final! Afcent o*s
Defcend a Hill of 1 Mile o’6
By Park *Htrns Left 1 ’4
hi. F.
Over Wcrledg-Commorx
A Defcent of 6 Furl. x’3
W efaßagboro o*7
Wdlet 3*5
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl.
By Hrf^row-Houfe } Right.
An eafie Defcent t*2
Foot of Brunnam- Hill of I Mi.
Thence the Way Hilly & open.
Kawltns’s Crofs fj
Thro’ Holwelflade Bottom I*4
A Defcent of io Furl. I*3
Beofom- br. Sc Brook x '2
Over an A teen t
Wdcot p>s
Down a Hill
Wdcot- Water a Brook o*4
Hewk» Mill j clofe Right o*4
A Stone br. over a Brook ibid.
Brumptcn Regis-Ch, Right.
Over feveral Afcents.
Thro’ Brumpton-VHood 2*2
BW-Wood-br. over Ex flv. o ’7
Defcend a Hill of 6 Furl. o’s
1 Dulverton 04
Crofs ibid.
Several Afeenrs Sc Dc(cents.
Over Alljhar e-Down Sc
Whitmore-Common.
Roads divide 5 bear Right 3*4
Enter Devonjhire 0 3
An Afcent of 6 Furl. Sc Riv. 0 5
Over Smallacon~Common
A Defcent of 7 Furl. o’y
Dur hford- W a r er 1 4
Over Bormer-C ommon
By a Beach-Tree 5 Right 2’2
Defcend a Hill i’j
Broadgate- Water ©’4
Bufh- br. 6c Mill i J 2*
o ’2
Defcend thence to a
Stone-br.ovcr Maul flv. 2’6
1 8' 2 ’?] South- Moulton o’i
At the End a Defcent of 4 Furl.
bidder- Brook i*z
Roads part ibid, bear Right.
South alia o *£
Crofs Brench- Brook o’y
Wcod-br. over Bray flv'. o’ 3
Clofc; by PhdleyCh. Sc Houfe 3
Right o’3 0 ’ 3
Over Philley- Brook an Afcenr.
A finall Hill and Defcent of 4 F.
Honycot-B rook I*3
j » 2
Newport 1 ’ 0
193*43 Bamfoble rtiW
Barftaple 04
The Continuation to Hathrly,
Over the Stone-br. on Taw. fiy.
An Afcent and Defcent.
Rounjhdl a Village 3'©
St. John sChappel in a Valley I*2
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl.'
A Defcent of 5 Furl. I*2
Nemon-Tracy
uALverdifcot Ch. clofe Left o 3 5
Crofs a Brook in a Bottom o’y
Some other Brooks and Hill?,
u’o] Torrfngton 3*4
Stone-br. over Towridge flv. ibid.
A (bend a Hill
Little Torringtm I*4
By Potheridge * Left 20
Marion
A Woody Defcent
Kmgsf rd brook © ’3
By Hewijh-Ch* Left o’2
By Stokeley-Houih 5 Right I*2
Mefl) o 's
Defcend a Hill 1 ’o
Stone-br. over Towridge flv. o*3
21 3 2} Hatherly o’y
PART 111. CP.6SJ
Crofs a Branch Towridge flv , ibid.
Roads divide ; bear Right.
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl.
By a Wood} Left i 9 t
Crofs Keylock? brook o’y
Over Northlie tp-Moor
Wood br. over Care flv. 2*2
Thro* St over l -Moor.
By Be worthy- Ch 3 F. Left 2*4,
Way open thro' Paftures to
fry 5 9 6
Dericary- br. 6c brook 3*2
A Defcent of 4. Furl. 2 ’s
Kew-br. over Thames flv. o*4
Enter Cornwall : ibid.
By Warrington- Church. Right.
Afcend a Hill of 6 Furl. o*4
Newport alias St. Stephens i’6
By Launceflon , ibid . Left.
Roads part} bear Left i’o
O ver St. St evens'Down,
BLmdwell- Rivulet & Hcufe o'7
Egleskerry i’i
By Trefmere* Ch. 2 F. Left. 2*4
By Treneglos-Ch. Right i’s
Over Ketts~ Moor.
Hail-Drunkard- Inn 2*2
TreJoa\i clofe Left i s o
Crofs a Brook, ibid.
David flow-, clofe on the Righto/
Cambleford on Camel flv 3 V
Trmagnq


' Miles, F.
Tremagney , I *3
Helfon in Trig °*7
KwmVMill & Brook i*3
St. °y
Several Houfes on both fides o*6
7 regear 1 7
Peadegget 06
By j Right 13
St, Endulion or Endellion o*3
Roads divide; turn Right 2 6
By St. Minver~Ch. Left ibid.
Roads part again; bear Left o*s
m ° t s
Enter a great Sand-Plain o*3
U. F.
By ?mW/y-Chappel; Left o*3
Ferry of 6F. over Camel fiv . o *6
71*71 o‘6
By St. Merrion- Ch, Right I*4
By Sr. Tijfey 4 F. Left i‘o
By Trevilnda* Houfc ibid, o*6
Roads divide i&d. bear Left
Jrevtblin o*s
Roads reunited i*i
Over a Boggy Down
Come to a Lane and Afc I*7
A Defcent of 4 Furl. o‘6
A Stone* Br. over a Brook o*4
Afcend I Furl.
p a
80*2] S, Colomb Mayor o*s
By St. St. David\ Houfe s
Left o*7
Crofs Neheley-Bvodk in a Vale o*6
And three other Rivulets o*6
Over feveral Ale. and Defc. o*4.
Michel alias St. Michael 4*2
An Afcent and Defcent i‘6
By Trutham Houfe $ Right I*3
By St. Ern 2 F. Left o*4
Defcend a Hill of 6 Furl. 2$
94*2! Truro o*s
The Roads from LONDON to BATH and WELLS
in Com, Somerset. [Pag.66.]
Miles, F. J
From LONDONto
94*0] Chippenham (as in the
Briftol-Road )
At the end of the Town
Roads divide ; bear Left.
By Cot/ham- Ch. & Hall Left 3*5
o’6
Afcend a of 3 Furl. 2*2
By Hafelbury- Houfc 5 Right
And Chappel of Plaifter ; Left |
A Defcent of 3 Furl. G ’3
By JSox-Ch. Right i 3 3
Defcend a Hill of 4 Furl. 0 5
Enter Somerfetjhire I o
Bathford o’ 3
Stone-br. over fiv. o’ 3 |
Boneajlon alias Banefton 056o 5 6
By Banehampton-Ch . Left
Walcot a ’o
107*7] BATH c*3
Stone-br. over fiv. o 6
By Witcomh- Ch. Left ibid •
Over Two Afcents
Between Oddown-Ho\x& and a
Cbpfe 2*x
A Smith’s Shop 5 clofe Right 2 0
Between &Prijion-Chs.
Tuniey . *2
Over Two finall Defcents
A Stone-br. 6c Brook *’6
A (mail Afcent
Fault on j’ 2
Miles, F; |
By &fWwfd<w-Ch. Right I’2
A Smith’s Shop Left o’2
By Stone-*Ajhton~Ch, and Hall,
ibid* i’b
Chut on under Mendtp 1 \
A Smith’s Shop 5 clofe Right o’ 5
By the Lead-Mines on Mendip -
Hill o’3
Green-Oar Houfc I 3
Over the Heath
A Defcent of 9 Furl* 1? 5
127*21 WELLS 17
Another Road to If*//*
From L O N D O N to
15*1 J Marlborough ( as in the
Briftol-Kmd )
Manton 1 3
IBy Clatford , Left <*’6
I By Fijield, ibid.
A Wood~br. 6c Brook 1 o
A Defcent of 3 Furl. 1 y
Little Kennet ° 3
Crofs a Brook 0 3
SilburyHxW
Roads divide; bear Left o 2
Over the Downs
Wanjvoorth or Devil'*'* Ditch 3*4
Afcend 4 Furl. & Defcend 6.
Leave the Downs £6
88 # a] Devizes 0 6
By Poljhed~Ch. Right 2’6
By BrnnaurZ h. 0 6
Miles, Fi
Crofs Someron- Brook o’4
Sean t , op
Baldam Mill & Brook
By Bond- Ch. Right o’i
A Brook by Sinnenton-, Right it
Helpertcn 2’t
98’4] Troubridge i’i
At the End, crofs Bifs fiv.
By North- Bradley ; Lett o*7
London Bridge 6c Brook 052o 5 2
Over 'Travel- Common
Stcvert- Houle and Mill l*i
Enter Somerfetjhire
CvoCs Frcom flv. o' 6
Farley o’ I
103*si Phllips-Nortcn J*4
Cre Is a Brook 1 J
Falkland on a Rivulet 1 o
Heywood-Farm I 5
By Babington -Ch Left o*7
Kdmarfton alias Kilmerfden ° S
Charlton °*7
CroG a Brook & Foflway I*o
Chilcompton * 2
Over Old dovpn-ttezth
Enboro
A Pond of $ Acre? ; Left
By Bimgtr- Ch, ibid.
Over Mendtp- Down
By Penhill ; Right , 3*3
A Defccnc of about 9 Fuit ° $
lIP 7] WELLS
Cjk
the


The Road from LONDON to BOSTON in Lincoln-
shire, Continu'd to LINCOLN. [Pag. 68.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
6t}' iJStilton (afrin
At the End of the Town
Roads divide j bear Right
Streighc open Way to
71 *6] Vaxly 2*4
Cro(s a Brook To
A Fend a Hill of 3 Furl. o’d
l y Fajjit-Ch, Right
Ly Flctcn- Ch. Hid. I*6
By St angrcund-Q h. Hid . , o*4
Wood-br. over N/»« flv. o*2
Enter Korthamptonjhire
7 6*2] Peterborough o*2
By die Gallows 5 Left T 2
AWil low-Grove j dole Right Ti
Pa fen o*4
Widrmgton o’6
By a Wind-Mill 5 Left Ti
By Glinton-Ch, dole Right I*3
Peafrf o*4
Roads divide ibid . bear Right
] y Dunbeer-Honih y Right s*r
f 7*5 j Crowland I*s
Enter Lwcolr.Jhirt
Miles, F.
By Clout-heufe i Right 3*4
By Brother : kz*/?, ibid. 1 * 1
By Pikaies dole, Hid< To
Gwfor 5 dote on the Right o*s
P7’y3 Spalding 3T
A Stone-br,-over a little DrainT6
Stonc”bi\ over o J 2
1 # 3
Wood-br. over x *5
Surfieet , ibid.
G* short on j ’7
By DUnington 1 M. Left 2*5
Sethertcn T 4
By c Aldervcood * Right o*4
St rug fly I o ’y
Past of Kir ft on o’y
Kir ft on it fclf 0 9 6
By Brampton * Right To
Thro* a Village o’y
By Wilberton*Z h. Right
By a Gibbet 5 Left T 2
S:onc-br. over a River
113 6] Bofton o’2
The Branch from £c/?c?z to Lincoln,
Miks> F.
Between a Gibbet & cht Wind-
Mills I*2
Crofs 5 Several Drains
Over Bojiorrßcn
By Ktrton-H*im j Left 3*6
Srvinfhead I*7
Over 3 other Drains
By Park-Houfe; Right 2*6
Garricf 2 *o
Keckintcn j’j
By h. Right 2*7
lOV%-Ch clo(e Right I*l
ip’ij Sleaford s'x
At the Entrance
Roads divide 3 bear Right
Haddir.gham i’y
By LifinghanrC h. Right I*2
By Dm serially ibid* I*7
By Branfivdl , ibid. o’y
By Temple'inter j Left °*s
Over the Heath
Dcfcend a Hill of 3 Furl, io’o
A Stonfbr, 6c Brook o’6
Enter the Suburbs of
36*33 LINCOLN.
The Road from LONDON to. CARLISLE in Com.
Cumberland. [P.70.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
!.* 2*l ] Darla flan (as in the Holy*
head Road}
At she End of the Village
R« adi divide : bear Right.
O \r the Heath
Tu U it fir I*7
AB:idge& Brook o*4
Jituikt-m on Collins Brook 0 7
By / /Ird-Ch. Rig lit o’6
IT J YfS ’or. 6c Brook Ty
By PinvU Ch. Right *>’4
Go* a Brook o*4
•y' 1.1 \eweaftle u ndevLhsc i 3 o
y • ei cu.o.her Brook Tp
M. F.
defer ton j ' 0
Gammots-Woufe 1\
Talfon the Hill ©’4
A lieep Descent of 3 Furl.
Enter Chejhire To
By I Sandiach-Butts $ Right 2 6
0 dr ode oT
Bear s-Head Inn 192I 9 2
Knclcs iT
Saudbach-C\\. Right I*2
£reivtrtcn*Greett' Vill. T 3
H-lmes Vill. & Chappcl To
over Bv. o*4
Cranage alias Cramdge 06
The Road div idc* * bear Left Q*y
M. F.
Over a Heath
Stublage 2 1 o
Lach- Green Vill. 2’o
o’v
Crofs a Brook o’6
Gy mam o’g
Between/ Dutton & Budvoorth 2 5 i
VAdtley I*2
Fra nkje) -Storks c' 7
By Stenon-Chappel 5 Right I’6
Afcend CA/Z-Hill Tr
Stock.cn I*2
Prefect-hr, on Mcrfcy Bv. Ty
Enter Lancafhire
181*7] Waringron o’x
Lanfotd*


Miles, F.
Unford-hr. & Brook i’a
Holme 12
°S
By aW a ter-Mill 5 clofe Left x’a
Newton 0 6
By HaSoch; Hall 5 Right
lAjhtcn 0 4
Crofs Two Rivulets &
iS>»/>6y-Brook 3 5
By Ifor/ky-Hail 5 Left ®’?
lAdam br. over Dowle fl/. 0 4
Wigan °’*
The /torn* f Left
The Hee-Buck Inn 0 4
Standijh 2? °
By , Right o 6
Coppen- Mcor i’o
Whittled ridge ° ? 7
Whittles- Village 0 3
0 4
Charncch-Kuhard s on -
Brow o*7
Tincock-h r* over Turrorv flv. o’4
Over
By £*f<m-Chappel & R enjhmore $
Right o’ 5
Crofi a Brook 10
By LaU?id $ Left 0 4
Over another Brook 0 3
Harden-Green , a Village I 6
Ba umber- br. & Brook o’ 2
VlWton-bmv . I’4
M. F.
Crofs Darwent flv. o’l
Bridge over Kibble flv. i’°
211*2]] Prefton °’s
Cad ley-Moor I*6
Brought e? j-br* 1 4
Barton * 4
Maslsgy~ br & Brook 22
Bridge over 0 4
Another Bridge & Rivulet s’6-
Baug*ave 0 5
Crofs flv. c 4
222 ’ 4 ] G aiftang o’ l
PART IT. CP. 72J
By Wyrefdale 5 I M. Right 3*6
Elhill 1 ’4
Gaugur br. 11
Burrow 1 2
Scot ford *’4
232*4] Lancafter ©’7
Stone-br. over flv*
■Slyne 3*3
Boulton °7
Carnfcrd 2 f>
Care* br. & Brook * 7
By £,/g/)nw-Ha!l $ Right
Birins ti?ie °f>
Enter iVefimoretand o 1
244*4] Burton °’7
Between Holm-C h. & Park 1 7
By Brandon upon Bhlton-trag 1 o
' Crois 2 or 3 Brooks
M. F.
Over SallatLrorv 4’t
By j Right i’o
Stdrvick^ or o'4
Not cliff 1 'o
256*1] Kendal c* Kent fiv, 2’i
CroG a Brook 2 5 2
Over Betome Hill i’6
A Skirt of o’ 7
Banefdale-Hituje- Hill I>
Several other Alcent^
H*#/* Houle ; dole Left 2 6
A Bridge and Brook o’4
Some Stone heaps } Right 4'a
Shop I
The Way mod part open.
Tmrnby alias Tarumby 3 3
Fy Chffton Chap, Left 4*3
Crofs Lowder flv. 1 *2
£ws«-br. over ilv. ©’4
Enter Cumberland, ibid,
282 2] Penrith vulgo Perith 05
The Way generally open.
Over 13 Towns*Rents 3' 6
Saiktlds ov l*o
Thro' Englewood- Eoreft,
Heikft ,5 3
War-Hesket I I
Crofs a Brook 4 4-
Carlton o 5
Botcher by vulgo Burrahy l ’ 3
At the End crofs Better el fiv,
Soo’y] CARLISLE X I
The Road from LONDON to CHICHESTER
in Com . Sussex, with the Branch from Midhurst to
WINCHESTER. [P. 73.]
■Miles, F.
From LONDONto
297] Guildford (asia the Portf-
mouth Road)
Crofs Wye dv, ibid .
Roads divide j bear Lefc 0 7
Adend Katharine* Hill o 7
By Shave ford $ Lefc
Over a Common
An Hofpital $ dole Lefc 2's
Repafs the Wye to
34.’5]Godalmiai/«/.GoJlimmo >
Open Way over the Common.
£y Bashridge- Houle, &
> Right 1 3
,Om* a Sandy Heath $ Lefc
Miles, F.
Between Hafcomh~ Ch* & a Farm-
Houle 1,1
T *
Htmhistcn * 7
Deicend a Hill by fume
Brick kilns 5 Right o’j
Thro' a Common
Over a Dedenc to a Stoae br.l’3
Chtdingfold o 4
Eater SttjJ** 22
Between a Smith's Shop j Lei:r,&
Longdown- Beacon j Right d 2
A (mall Scone-br. & Brook o*2
By Lurgifh t/-Ch. Lett o’ 3
Leckfjrd-hc. & Brook I# o
Taro* a Wood.
7 a?
Miles, w
Adend Bedey* Hill i’ 2
A Delcent of 3 Furl. 1 o
Cowdrny- Park f Left
Ea shorn T$
By Coivdray - phce c 9 6
Crcf? lArun. Hv. to
517] Midhurlt c’t
The Way Heathy
of 5 Furl. 2 4
By Singleton $ Left 3$
St. of 4 Furl. I’o
A Beacon j Lefc
And a Marl-Pic 5 Righs o\»
By Eaft~ Lav ant -Ch* &,
Hou(es ibid,* J’4
LcatUy i
*


Miles, F. |
Beauty 1 * Bank i’o
An Alms-Houfe * Left o’s
CHICHESTER o’3
The Branch from to
Wmchefter
sif) Midhurfr, Turn Right
By Woolbeding- Ch. Right ©’4
Woolbeding- br. 150l 5 o
)ty Stodham } Right.
M. F.
By T rotten Stone-br. over *Arun
flv. 20
Turwickz Ch. Left T 3
FimVfg-Houft, o's
Rygate‘Ch» ibid, o*4
And Maiden Oaki Right I*7
Enter Hamjhrre o’l
By Durford- Houft, ibid .
Start-Stone -br, 6c Brook i*i
io’s3 Petersfield I*4
M. F.
Croft Two Brooks
Langridgc o*s
Bor dean \ ’ 0
Brevet- Ch. Right I*7
Bramdean 3*7
5 Left I*4
And r/;m>o»-Ch. ibid. ' of
Magdalen vulgo Maudlin- Houfe
s’o
28’2j WINCHESTER o 7
The Road from LONDON to DERBY. [Pag. 75.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
5 2*63 Stony-Stratford
(As in the tioly-Head Road)
Two Stone-brs. over Qrvfe flv.
Enter Northamptonshire 6c
Old-Stratford I*2
Roads divide ibid . bear Right
Crois a Brook o*3
Roads part again 5 bear Left
By Goofe-grave- Ch. Right
tadely-Guben 2*2
Crofs a Brook o’3
Over a Water,Afcend a Hill ©'4
Kings-Grafton o*3
Several Afcents 6c Deftents
A S:one-br. 6c Brook 1 ’o
Stoke Park 6c Lodge 5 Left
Over a Brook * Afcend a Hill o' 6
Another Rivulet 6c Afcent of
By Stefa j Left.
Road- Ch. 2 Furl. Right of
Coten-Hall-Ch. ibid. o’6
*AWind-Mill6c 2 Ponds* o*4
.Stone-br. 2 Arches 6c Brook T 4
By Colentrough-Ch, Left
Wotton- Ch. Right c? 2
And Hardenfton ; ibid. o ? 5
fHueen-Crofs 5 clofe o*6
Sr. Lednard's Stone-br. o’6
Another St one-bridge over Nine
fiv. o’l
66’43 Northampton oT
A Deftent of 3 Furl. T 3
A Brook at Bottom 6c Aftenr.
The Way generally open.
Over King's Thorp - Heath of
By King’s-Thorp Ch. Left iT
And Lady ganbrough 9 s-Park.
Croii a Brook in a Valley I*s
v ~t ■ . .
Miles, F.
Pitfcrd-C h. Right of
Another Brook in a Valley o*3
By Brickfxoorth I*3
A Third Brook in a Valley I’o
Lamport 1 f
A Stone-br. 6c Brook o’6
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. ibid.
Meadwell i’ o
By Boulton- Ch# Right
Kelmar/h 1 f
A Stone-br. 5c Brook o’tf
By Hardenwcrth- Ch. Right o*3
Stone-br. 2 Arches 6c Brook o*s
Oxendon ' o's
Betvv. the Church & Brabreuch ;
Bight o’3
By Little Bowden 2 F. Right j*s
Stone-br. 6 Arches over Welland
fl>. o*4
Enter Leicefier/hire
84’$! Haverborough ©T
The Way mo(l part open.
By Boxen Ch. Left T 6
Croft a Brook Ti
Stone-br. 2 Arches Sc Brook i’o
Ktbworth 2 o
Crois another Brook Ti
Cult on- Brook i’i
By Burton • Overy * Right
Great Glenn 1 *2
A Brook at the End.
Between Wxen2 Spires;Lefr ? .
And Stoughton $ Right 3 2 °
Ondbey o ’3
By Evington * Right Ti
Humber fall * ibid. To
And a Gallows * clofe ibid. oT
98*3 3 Leicefter o*6
By the Abbey 5 Left, over
Miles, F.
Two Stone-brs. & Brooks
The Roads divide $ bear Left i 9 f
Belgyace o*2
In the Vill. Roads part $ Left
Stone-br.7Alch.over Sourßv, o*2
An A (cent of 2 Furl. o’3
By Buftal 5 Right o*3
Wonlep ibid. o*7
And Rothley 1 F. Left o*7
Stone-br. s Arches & Brook
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl.
i°4*°] Montfbrrel or Mount-
(oar-Hill o's
Quon ,
Stone-br. 5 Arches 5c Brook ibid.
By Barrow upon Soar 5 Right
Stone-Bridge and Rivulet I*4
r®7 f i] Loughborough o’2
Stone-br. 2 Arches & Brook o' 6
By Stanford $ Right
Another St.-br. Brock &Mill o’6
By Diehly 1 F. Right oT
Hathern 5 do ft ibid, I*2
Roads divide * bear Right 04.
Kegworth I*6
By Rot cliff * Right o*2
Roads divide ; bear Left 04
By Lockenton Left To
Stone br. 2 Arches 6c Brook o*4
By Soley 5 Right o*4
Widen- Ferry over 7 rent flv. o*s
Enter Derbyjhire
Over Marfliy-Ground,
Shadloe j’o
By fen $ Left o'6
And Elverfion j Right o’6
lAlverjicn ~ j 4
A Wood-br. & Rivulet To
1 12T7] Derby on Derwent f1v.12
The
. ! 4


The Road from LONDON to FLAMBOROUGH-
HEAD in Com . Ebor. [Pag. 77.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
51*6] Tamesford , or Temsford (as
in St. Neets- Road)
Roads F. beyond thcTown
Bear Left 0 5
Crols Ovofe flv.
Rcckjdon- Church j Left o 2
Arable Land on both fides.
Crofon 1 6
A Stone-Bridge & Brook I’o
Eaton ) ibid.
St. Neots , 1 Milej Right i’i
A Wood-br. over a Branch of
Owfe flv. I *o
Enter Huntingdonshire .
Little Peckjoam j Right x'o
Southam 5 Left o’s
Dcddjngton j Right l*o
A Wood-bridge 8c Brook o*s
Bugden o*s
A Stone-bridge & Rivulet 3*l
Another Sr.-br. 6c Water o*3
A Wood-bridge & Brook o’6
xAukingbury- Brook 8c V ill. 1’ 3
A Wood bridge 8c Bridge to
cum Wejion o*7
Alcend a Hill of 4 Furl. o’i
By Vpton ; Left 07
ADelcentof 3 furl. o*l
Stone-Gate-Hole I*o
Stone-Gate-Clofe $ Left o*6
Bet Saltry 8c 5. *Andr. Chap. o*7
Cunnington j Right j*7
A Stone-bridge & Brook I*o
By Glatton $ Left there
And Denton $ ibid. o*4
Stilton , Thorough-fare <>’7
The Road from Stilton to Flam-
borough.
From LONDON to
69*1] Stilton (as in the Berwick
Road)
At the end of the Town
Road§ divide s bear Right.
Yaxley 2 3
By Forfeit 3*o
P/efow-Church 5 ibid. o*6
Cfols Nine flv. to B*s
Northamptonshire y and
76’o] PETERBOROUGH oh
5* * . . v * v. - •*
Miles, F. 1
By the Gallows 5 Left 1 4 I
By a Willow-Grove & Walton - I
Church I*4
Village ' o*2
Wellington o 6 1
By a Windmill 5 Left I*o
1 9 $ 1
Near the end of the Village
Roads divide * bear Left.
Narborow
8 6 7] Market Deeping 2*l
Ctoil Welland flv. in the Town.
And enter Lincolnshire.
Redam- Houle I*4
Betw. Stow 8c Langtoft* Church.
By Bafton* Church 5 Right i’o
And Wilt hr op 5 Left o’i
Ket- St on e~ Bridge over Bafton -
Drain o*4
Thurlby
93 2] Born or Bourn 2*4
Betw. Cathorp 8c l*3
Morton i’x
Hauthorp j Left
Hackjngbey- Ch. Right o*s
Several Alccnts 5c Defients.
llafdby- Ch. Right 2’l
Some other Defients Sr Afients.
By a Beacon 1 dole Left 3*3
dole Right o*4
Simpnng , dole $ ibid . o S
Tokingham-Ch. Left o*7
ADefienc of 3 Furl. i’i
Osburnby Ch. Left o*3
fer by-Ch. ibid. I’o
Over two (mall Brooks o*2
Willoughby Ch. Left I 6
A Wood- Bridge & Brook 5 iW.
lio’i] Sleaford l’6
Thro’ Cornfields.
Hadingham 2*o
Lifmgham - Ch. Right i* l
Hunsby- Hall, dole 1 ibid. 20
Branfwell-Ch. IF. Right o’6
ibid. 133I 3 3
Way ftreight and heathy.
A Dele, of 3 F. by a Windm. 9’2
A Stone-br. over Wit ham flv.
The Bargate of
127*4] LINCOLN o*7
M. F.
P A R T 11. CP. 79 1
From Newport Gate
Over a fpacious Heath.
By a Beacon 5 Left 12*0
or Alms-Houfes I*4.
Whartcn , or Norton * Right o*6
Heathy on both Sides Bill.
A Windmill 5 dole Right 1$
Smitherby- Ch. ibid . o*7
Over a Brook or two*
Redbourn 3*o
A Windmill $ Left o*^
Hibeiftoiv 1 *0
AVn?/ftc;>-Ha!l 6F. Right o*7
And a Windmill 2 F. Left
Scaubit~C\l. 2 F. ibid. o*7
Over two final! Brooks.
A Windmill 1 F. Left o*6
Wood-br. over xAnhjaam flv. o*6
Over a Brook juft to
152*5] Glamford*Bridges o*2
By Wrangby~Ch. I F. Right I*4.
A W indmill ibid . I*7
| Enter a Lane there.
Elfcm-HzW 2 F. Right - o’6
A fiend a Hill of 3 F. o*3
By Elfom-Ch. 2 F. Right
And a Windmill 4 F. Left.
Moor or Common on both fides.
Some Defients & Afients 2 ’5
By a Beacon ; dole Right 2*o
A Deicent of 6 Furl
162*5] Barton on Humber Rv.6* $
Enter Yorkshire ;
And Ferry over to
169*3] Hull cr Kingfton upon
Hull 6*6
Newland 25
Several Wood-br. over Dikes.
7W#-Ch. 3 F. Right 3*5
178*3] Beverly Hull fly. 2*6
Mufgrove I*s
Alcend 5 Furl. iW.
A Defient of near 8 Furl. o’s
Pump-BvidgQ 8c Brook, at the
Bottom.
Beckenpeld I *3
Crofi a Brook at the End. 17
By Sir J. Hotharns-HdWy Right
A Water-Mill 8c Brook o*7
Roads


Miles, F.
Roads divides bear Right o*2
o*6
Tope- Wood-br. & Brook I*2
Witten o’3
Afcend Swicker’i- Hill o’y
By Right 3 ’i
Heveden-C h. ibid, o 5
And Sunder land-wicl{s Left X*o
Crofs two Brooks.
By Sellingthorp 5 Left To
By Little Drifield-Ch- ibid, o*2
Thr6* Great o*s
By Northaton 6 F. Right I'2
Afcend a Hill of 5 Furl. o*3
M. F.
Crofs a large Dele, of i o F. o*s
Afcend agsin 4 Furl.
Another Defcent of 7 Furl. 2’o
197V] Kilham To
An Afcenc of 9 Furl. o'6
By a Beacon <k Church; Left I*4
Crofs a Valley * ibid .
By /?«rtcK-Ch* 4 Furl. Right.
Afcend a Hill of 7 Furl.
Enter a Moor o*7
A Defcent of 3 Furl. To
By %mgro*-Ch. 4F. Left 07
Over a Brook o*6
M F
Rmd tarns Left rhro* a Lane
20 s’l] Burlington d/hw Brid-
iingron I*4
By a Windmill 2F. Right 0 7
By a Water-mill | ibtd. o*s
Bridlington Key o*3
Suerby 2*l
Afcend a Hill of 3 Fuel. X’o
Elamborough o's
By a Pond * Left at the End.
An A (cent of 2 Furl. o*4
212*5] Light-Houfe on EUmho-
ro«g6-Head T 6
The Rond from LONDON to KING’S-LYN in
Com. Norfolk. [P.81.]
Miles, F.
From LON DON to
27’2~1 Puckcridge (as in the
Berwick-Roid')
At the End of the Town.
Roads divide 5 bear Right
F/jv-br. & Brook To
By Hamels- Houle ; Left
Bcu^htbn- Ch. ibid. o*4
Thro* a Village o*4
Over Hollow Way.
Anorhcr Village o*s
Little* Hoy mead 4F. Right To
Hare-ftreet o‘s
Great-Her mead 4F. Right To
Bingham- Houle 7F. Left o*7
Crots a Rivulet ro a Lane o*s
Between Wtthial o'2
By an old Chap pel * Left o‘6
The Lane ends s ibid.
Barkway I*l
A Windmills Left °*4
Over a frnall Defcent & Afcenr.
Barley I ‘4
Chijhall f Right.
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o*6
Open Way moft part Arable.
By Hagdon-C h. 4F. Right x*3
Torvlemere- Green s Bank I*4
fowl mere ji 2
Becw. Sh-pcrheath & Turyplo l*s
Crofs a Brook or two.
Between Foxton Sc Newton I*4
liarlftor.t 5 Let; I'l
Miles. F.
A Caufc-way & Common on
both (ides.
By Hawk ft one * Right o*6
H’Jfen-M ill, ibid. o*3
A Hawthorn-Tree 5 dole Left o*s
Trumpwgton I*2
Open Way on each fide,
yi’od Cambridge I*7
Roads divides bear Left 2*3
By Chefterton 1 F. Right ibid,
i mint on j Left i*o
Milron To
Horfevoinfey j Right I*o
A Windmill & Alras-Hou(e,iW.
By a Windmill & Water beach-
Church, ibid. o*i
Enter an enclosed Lane I*7
Denby or Denny- Abbey $ Left o*2
The Lane ends s o*6
A Village; dole Right.
Enter the Fenns, ibid*
Ferry to the I fie of Ely 2*o
64*4] Stretham I 5
A village j dote Left To
ELY 2*3
By A ewberns 3 Right To
Chstjham Ti
Wuodhoufe i dole Left T©
Afcend a Hill of 2 Furl. Ti
Lhuepo/t Ti
Over a high Bank or Caufc-way.
Great Owfi tiv. Right.
M. F.
Between a Copfe 8c Brandbricl(s
End 4/ r
Ferry over Orofe to l*4
Scut hery o*s
By a Windmill, Left To
Crofs a Rivulet Ti
By another Windmill; Left o's
Crofs a Kivulet Ti
By another Windmill j Left o*s
Helgaye o*s
Wood-br. ovet the River o*4
By SwowVHal! 5 Right o*3
Roads divide $ bear Left.
Hard ham- Chap. Left o*3
Thro* Come Wohd?.
Kujfen Hdllj Right * To
Denber ©‘3
Cem’s-Hall ; Right ©‘4
87*0] Downham on Orvfe flv. o*4
By Wi-mhotjham 2 Furl. Left To
Stow 1 Furl. Right To
£f<m7-Hall ibid. o*3
Watlington* Park j Left o‘r
He ught on-Chzp. Right I*3
Watiington j Left Ti
Totnal 5 Right o*6
Over Totnal- Heath.
A Bridge 8c Rivulet 1 * t
94*0] Seechy or Seeching oh
W zb-Wmch T 6
Hardwick\ 1 *2
97*73 Lyn or KingV Lyn o f y
The


The Rod from LONDON to MONTGOMERY
in North-Wails. [P. 82.]
Miles, F. I
From L O N D O N to
The 4 Shire-Stone 1
Bi*3l(as in 1
Roads divide * bear Right by a I
Hedge. j
Crofs the Fefs-way I*3
Darnton °*2
A Defcent of 3 Furl. J ‘°
Crofs Evenlcde fiv. o*7
Broad - Campden I*s
87*2] Campden vul. Camden o*6 j
An Afcent of 3 F. ibid.
Over Broadway■ Hills , to
A Defcent of 6 Furl. I*6
By St. Berry , Right I*o
Wilier fly °*2
The Way moft part open,
Crofs 2 Imall Brooks 2*7
Bengworth I*s
Stonebr. 7 Arches over Mvon fiv.
S>s*ol Evelholm vulgo Efam o*3
A Stone-br. 6c Brook o*s
By Celkpave-WWy Right o*2
And Eiadbury- Ch. 3F. Left 2 1 0
Fiddle 1 ‘4-
At the End crofs Fiddle flv.
Stone- br. 2 Arches ovz:Stofje*Bow
flv. 2*l
By Overflloe- Windmill, Lefc 2*2
Speihly 1 2
By Lord Berkley s, Left.
Spechly- Green G 7
M- F.
London- Road falls in o*7
Suburbs of
109’c] WORCESTER i‘o
A Bridge over Severn flv.
Roads parr, bear Right
By feveral 'Houles, Right 3*o
And HaZ/ow-Park, ibid. o*7
EialUwX illage o*4
A Mill 8c Brook 2*2
By Grunity Ch. 3 F. Right o*3
Some Houles on the Road 2*o
By a Pond,Left croft a Brook o*4
And Whitdc -Ch. ibid, o*3
Hundred-Hi uft- Inn o*6
I Afcend a Hill of 4 F, ibid .
Stockton 2*5
Wcod-br. 6c Rivulet i*3
Thro* a Village* Hid.
By Lyndndge-Ch. Right j‘i
And Eft ham. Left I*o
Two or Three Inns o*6
Newnham s-hv. over Rea fiv. o*l
Enter Shropjhire yi s
Crcls a Brook, ibid.
128*5! Tenbury 2F. Left I*3
By Burftrd, Left i‘o
Ledwickc Wood br. 5c Brook o*s
Another fmall Brook o x 6
By fome Houles i‘o
And an Elm Tree o*7
Thro* a Village 2*o
M. F.
By a Water-Mill, Left o*7
Ludlow o*3
Stone- br. over Ccrve flv. Hid.
By Stantcn-Lacy- Ch. Right 2*4
And Bnmfield 4 F. Left o‘2
Over a Rivulet o*7
Onibury I *2
By the Side of a Hill* Right.
And Stokf- C.Caflle 6cPark,L.I f 6
Newton o*4.
Alcend a Hill of 4 Furl i*i
Over feme other A fie. 6c Defc.
Barfcrd's-Gate in a Bottom I*7
By jEWgtcn-Ch. Right
A Ddcent of 8 Full. o*4
A (tend again 3 Furl. * I*l
By Deppery- Ch. Left.
Dele. of 3 F. o*7
Alcend a Hill of 9 Furl.
1 so’o] Bifhops-Caftlc I*2
An Alcent of 1 Mile . o'f
BiJh'jps-Mott V 3
Enter Montgomery (hire, ibid.
A Brook 6c Defcent of 2 F. o*3
Another Defcent of 3 Furl. y< z
Over a Rivulet or tv/o.
lied-Houfe Inn o*7
Crcls 3 levcral Brocks o*7
By a Houle or two i*l
And the Ld. Herbert's Park,R.J‘2
lyS’sj Montgomery o*2
The Road from LONDON to St. NEOTS Hunting-
donshire. Continu'd from Oakham in Rutlandshire. [P.37.]
Mile?,F.
From LONDON to
11’63 High-Barnet:
( As in the Holy-Head- Road.)
Croft part of Middlesex * ibid.
Roads divide 5 bear Right o*7
By Kicky Inn * Lefc o*3
Over the Common.
Fetter's-Bar 2*5
Rc-cmer Hjr f tordJhire.
Bell-Bar 2*o
M. F.
Michel-Bar o*3
Harfeld-Woodgate o*7
Park 1 Left.
20*0] Hatfield I*l
Beyond the Town, croft Lea fiv.
A Delcenr of 7 Furl. 2*3
Wood-Bridge 6c Brook at the
Bottom.
Alcend again near as much.
Another Woody Defc. of 7 F* 2*l
M.F-
Wtllinon a Frock i'■'*
By Wicdhall-l' avk 5 Left o*4
An equal A leer, c & Deicent.
H'Wjwr-Green, a Village 1%
Broadwater 2'2
Over 6 Knolls or Imall Hills.
or Stevenhaugh l*S
The Way Woody.
A (mall Dele, by a Windmill I*s
Gravely K o's
i'sv


Mile>vF.
By a Beacon on a Hill { Right
Great Wimley * Left ©’4
An Afc. 6c Dele, of 4 F. each ©*3
A like Afeent & Defcent *’3
3 7'4] Ba Idock I*s
Thro* Baldock: Lane
By Norton j Left I©
Over an Afeent 6c Defcent.
Afcend again 4 FurU i*l
Enter Bedfordjhire ibid.
By Storfild- Ch. Left I*4
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o*3
Grey Hcmd-lnn $ clofe Left o*4
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. o*7
By Edworth * Right 0 5
A Defcent of 4 Furl. o*3
By Bleaks Hall { Left o’i
And Langford ibid. ©’7
45*4} Biggleflvade *’s
Stone-br. & Brook at the End.
Neither-Calcot l$
Bechtng-Cvcis 5 clofe Left I*4
By Sandy * Righr.
Crofs a Wood-br. 6c Brook, to
Terford o*4
The Way generally open.
lamesfcrd or Tern ford 2*5
Roads dividej bear Left ©’s
Crofs Owfe fiv. ibid *
By Kokefdon- Ch. Left ©'4
Miles, F.
Thro* a Village i’4
Stone-br. 6c Brook, to
Eaton ' i'i
By St. Neot’s I M. Right I*o
Roads divide 5 bear Left I*s
Enter Huntingdonshire I*2
Stone-br. 2 Arches 6c Brook, to
Great' Stoughton 2 *o
Roads part 5 /W. bear Right.
By a Copfe 5 Right I*s
By Kimboltcn {Left o' 5
Thro* Begram-LauQ,
By Eaton 2*4
Several Windmills and
Arable Lands on both fides.
Great - Cat worth 1 ’ 5
Crofs a Brook I*3
By Layton-f ont* Ch. Right.
Brynton o*4
By Moulfworth $ Left o*3
Eater Northamptonshire 1 *2
Thro’ a Copfe o’6
Ciaptm 6
Open Way thro’ Arable.
By TtcbmarSh- Ch. Left i’6
Lyford alias Li ford i
Stone-br. over Nine flv. ibid.
Betw. <Ay 6c Pilkington'Ch . o*4
SysVo4<?Ch. f o*6
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o*2
„ „ Miles, F.
By a Copfe ; Left
Another Defcent of 6 Furl. i* o
Benyfield " \*j
Crofs a Rivulet i’o
By a Grove * Left I’o
Dean-Thorpe \*o
Stone-br. 2 Arches & Brook yibid,
A Wood-br. & Brook o*3
i’o
A Defcent of 2 Furl. I*o
Thro* part of Rokingham- Foreft.
By the Stone-Quarries* Righr I*2
And Laxton} Right ©’4.
A Defcent of 3 FurL i*6
Haringfworth o*3
Stone-br. over Welland flv. o*4.
Crofs another Brook o’r
Entet Rutlandshire ; ibid.
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. ibid.
Seyton-Ch* on the Top * Left
Over a Brook in a Bottom 1* 1
Glayfton o*7
Way continues Hilly & Open.
A Stone-br. 6c Brook 2/0
Between Preffon 6c 5 ibid.
By Manton * Left I*o
A Stone* br. 6c Brook bottom o*2
By Egleton; Right 2*2
9t’oJ Oakham o*4
The Road from LONDON NORWICH Nor-
solk [Pag. 86.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
27’2] Pucker id ge Cas in the
)
Beyond the Town.
Roads divide 5 bear Right
Pore-bu 6c Brook i’o
By Hamel's- H oufe j Left
And Bought oft-Ch* o*4
Thro* a Village o*4
Enter a Hollow-Way.
Another Village .o*s
By Little Hormtad 5 Right i’o
Hare-Jlrcet o's
By Great-Hormead 5 Right o*3
By Houfe j Left o*7
Over a Rivulet to a Lane o*s
Between Wthial 6c u Anffy o*2
By an Old Chappel 3 Left o’6
Barkway 1 i
M. F
By a Windmill 5 Left o*4
Over a fmall Defcent 6c Afeent.
Barley J’4
TheKoads part? bear Right 12
Enter Ejfex 5 ibid.
A fmall Afeent o*2
Between Hadenbury- Farm 6c
Houfe I*s
By F owlmere I M. Left o*3
Enter Cambridgfhire o*s
An Afeent of 2 Furl. o*3
Between a Watch- Houfe 6c Farm.
Way Straight Open 6c Heathy
By Dux worth 5 Right s’o
By Wrt ties ford Ch. Left o*4
vyittlesford-h ridge o*4
Crols Cam flv* ibid.
Between Sawfien- Ch 6c Hlnkston*
By Fampwmh'Qh. Left l I
M. F.
A (mail Afeent 6c Defcent.
Between Badburnhan j-Ch. Left
And $ Right
Burn- br. & Brook, ibid.
Over a Hill or two i’o
Enter Newmarket- Heath oV
A Ditch crofs the Heath I*6
By a Grove of Trees, Right Co
By a White-Poft, Left 2*3
A (mall Afeent o' 4
Thro* Hare- Park I*l
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl. o *6
Crofs the Devtfs Ditch i’o
By the Race-Houfe, Left I’2
40*2] Newmarket 6'2
A Green-Bank croffing the
Road l*S
Enter Suffolk » ibid.
Defccnd a Hill of 2 Furl o’tf
By


Miles, F.
By Chipnam I M. Left 2*2
By Rennet ? clofe Right 03
CpDfs pare of Cambridg{hires ibid.
Over a Brook °*3
Re-enter 3 ibid.
Betw. 6c a Lodge o*2
Over a Warren.
By Badlingham &F. Left o*s
By Heringfwel 2F. Right o 7
Thro* open Arable Land.
Berton-Mills x*s
Crofs a Brook ibid .
Straight Way over a Heath.
And ieveral Afc. 6c Deft.
Between two Lodges x*4
Over a Warren.
By Elden-Ch. 2F. Right 5*5
By Bernham i M. ibid, x*x
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o' 6
M.F.
Crofs Little Owfe flv.
79*3] Thetford I*3
Enter Norfolk 1 ibid.
By a Windmill 3 Left i*o
Ltlverfton*Ch, 3F. Right o*6
A Stone-Crofs3 lieft 3*4
Ro«d6a;»-Ch< 6c Hall j Right I*o
And a Row of Houfes 3 ibid. o‘6
Larling ford i‘o
Lar ling ford- br. 6c Brook o*3
By a Windmill f Left o*s
By Hookam 3 Right o*s
And a Beacon 3 o*3
By Harpham 3 Right i*i
Fr#t/«-br. 6c Brook i*o
By a Fall-Gate? clofe Right i*o
97*3! Attleborough o*7
By 3 Left i‘o
By B unwell- Ch. Right o*4
M.F;
Crofs Attleborough' Meet o‘2
Over Sutton-Common,
By Sutton- Morley -Ch. Left 2*3
\Vmdbam-C aufeway 3*2
By the Hall j Left.
99*3] Wimundham alias Wind-
ham I*s
Mile-bv, 6c Brook I*3
Over HetherfeuC ommon.
By a Wood 5 Right o*2
Hetherfet 2* 2
Bv Woodhall 3 Left
A bane 6c Inclofures o*7
By a Wood 3 Right.
Cringle ford I *7
A Stone-br. 8c Brook 3 ibid*
Eaton o*s
Sr. in
los’sl NORWICH x*6
The Road from LONDON to OAKHAM in Rut-
landshire continu'd to RICHMOND in Yorkshire.
[P.88]
Miles, F.
From LONDONIO
2i > 2l St. Albans Qasin the Holy-
Head- Road.)
In the Middle of the Town.
Bear Right, and leave it at x‘o
By Harden alias Harpenden 1 F.
Left 3*o
A final! Afcent s‘o
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o‘3
Enter Bedfordshire, at the Bottom
29’sl Luton i*o
Crofs a Brook at the End.
By a Gallows and Stretley-Ch.
Left i'3
Crofi the FcfTway o‘6
And enter Luton-Down,
A Defcent of 4 Furl. 5*2
Barton-Clay in the Bottom.
By Selfoe 3 clofe Right I*4
A fmall Afcent 6c Defcent.
AStone- br 4 Arches 6c Brook I*3
Way Hilly 6c Woody.
The Roads part $ bear Right x*6
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o ( 6
By Wilfumfiedr Ch. Left I*l
Wdfumfted- Village o*4
Stone-br. 6c Brook at the End.
Eljiow alias Elvifhvo 2 f o
tfcl Bedford on Qwje flv, **o
M. F.
Clapum 2‘6
or Ocle I*4
Stafford- br, on Ovcfe flv.at the End
By Mylton-CB. Right o‘6
By Fetonham-Ch. tbid, o"6
And Fetonham o' 3
By St event on* Ch. Left.
The Road turns to the Right.
And again Left o*7
An Afcent of 3 Furl. o't
Chellingon 2* I
By Woodhill 5 F. Right ®*s
Stone*br. over Owfe flv. 012o l 2
Betw.Harald~Ch.Bt SitT.Alfton’t,
Thro* a Wood of 9 Furl. x ‘x
By Paddington IM. Right 2*3
And Farndifh 2 Furl, ibid . **3
Enter Northamptonshire D< 4
By Woolaflon- Ch. Left <>‘2
Becw. Dodington 6c Hilltiton o*4
Wood-br. over Nine flv. x 42
6 5*3 3 WeHingborough o*7
Crefs a Brook at the End.
Roads pare, ibid . bear Left.
Another Brook in a Bottom n
Great Haridon 0 7
By Little Haridon 2 F. Left.
Crofs a Rivulet x *3
I H'g'Sham c< 6
R
M. F.
Over a Brook 0 3
Another Brook Cx
Afcend a Hill of 4. Furl, ibid .
72*3] Kettering I*2
Leave the n 1 ‘o
By Tnorp-Ch, I F. Left ? ibid.
Stone-bridge 6c Brook 2*2
By a Windmill ? Right 2< o
Enter Rokingham- Foreft 1 * 3
Leave the Foreft ac 3‘o
Rokjngham-'V illage o‘/
Welland flv. at the End, to
Parr of Leicefterfhire o‘i
Croft Eye flv. 10
Enter Rutlandshire, ibid, and
CaUecotc
Between two Windmills 1 *x
Luddington l‘o
An Afcent of 5 F. at the End.
Over a Defcent of 2 F.
87*5] Uppingham I*4
By i Aiflon ? Left X‘ *
Descend 2 Fud. ibid .
By Ridlingtcn Left o'/
Crofs a Brook 04
Between 2 Ridges of Hills, ibid.
By a Village > Left i 6
Brick br. over WadeUnd flv. o‘i
An Afcent of 4 Furl, ibid
A Wind-


M. F.
A Windmill on the Top * Left
93 5 J Oakham I*s
part n: cp. 90.1
Bcrley-Tljorp a Village I*s
Wood br.Sc Brook in the middle
Laugh am o*7
Stone bridge Sc Brook, ibid .
By Ranks* Burrow-Hill s Left i*o
An Afcent of 2 Furl. ©‘s
By Wtntfonden- Ch. Right o*2
A Def. Sc Afc. of 4 F, each.
Another Def Sc AC 1 F. each i‘o
Defcend again 3 Furl, at o*4
Enter Leicefterjhire o*4
By Ejirop 5 Lcfc o*3
Defcend a Hill of 1 Mile o*3
A Wood-br. oc Brook at bottom
Burr err Lasers I*6
Stone-br. over Wreak flv* to
MiL r on* Mowbray ~ I*4
By Efqj BennePs 5 Left 2*4
%A bkstleby o*s
A Defcent of 2 Furl l‘i
Tire Vale of Beavoir
A Wood-bridge Sc Brook i*i
Neither Broughton o*3
A Stone-br. & Rivulet o*s
Over Broughton o*2
Enter Nottinghamshire } ibid.
Leave Beauvoir Vale o*3
Open Way over a Common.
By Widmsrpole- Ch IM. Left 2*4
Oofs the Foflway oT
Two fucccfllve Afonts Sc Dcfc.
Njrmanton 3‘o
Plttmirce o*4
By Peter in M/hes } Left l‘o
Roads divide, ibid, bear Right
By Bridge ford } 2F. Right 2*o
Stone- br. over Trent flv. ©‘s
A Wood br. Sc Brook o*4
Stone-br. over Lyre flv. o*s
i 22 o] Nottingham o‘i
A fond a Hill of 5 Furl. o*7
By a Gallows on the Top.
Overfevcral Dcfcents Sc Afcenrs
By Basford 1 Mile 5 Left 2
A Defcent of 3 Furl. I*7
By Baskwocd* Park of 3 M. Right
And SherwccdrpGiQid $ Left.
By .Bulwdl, ibid. o*6
By an Iron-Mill, ibid, i*o
By Huckaal-Ch. tbtd. l*o
Over PapplewickrMocr.
Papp c wu k- \ i 11^(?e I * I
B) Licbm Hooai Scone j Left I*7 I
'] he Way Woody and Hilly.
M. F
A Dcfc. Sc Afc. of 3 F. each 1 f 7
A Wood-br. Mill 8c Brook I*7
*3s*6] Mansfield o*2
A Water-Mill & Brook 3*6
Enter Derbyjhire, ibid.
Plefley •, dole Right o*3
Houghtm 5 dole tbid. I*21 * 2
A Def. of 2 F. 8c Afc. of 6 F.o *y
By Scar dig 2 F. Right i'i
By Boulfwcr * Left I*2
Clown 5*2
By a Windmill dole, Left °'6
By Barlbrough $ dole Left o*6
By the Ch. & Hall, ibid. o*2
A Defcent of 2 Furl. I*o
By a Lake 5 Right
Over a Moor
By KtlmarfhrCh. Left 2‘ 2
A Defcent of 6 Furl, ibid*
Crols Gunna flv. in the bottom
o*6
Enter ibid.
Afcend a Hill of 6 Furl. ibid.
Wales* Village on a Defc. R. o*7
A Wood bridge Sc Brook, at
the bottom o*3
Afcend again $ Furl.
By Lord Darcty s Park ; Left
By Beighton-Ch. ibid. o*3
Leave the Park, and Afcend a
Hill of 3 Furl. i‘o
Aughtcn j* 0
Defcend 4 Furl, at the End.
A Stone-br. Sc Rivulet i‘©
Afcend again 3 Furl.
Cdby o*7
Wmfion in a Defcent o's
Afcend a Hill of 5 Furl. ibid.
I hro* Nether Moor • 1 *4
And Upper Moor-Gate o*2
I^l *s] Rotheram oT
Stone-br. over Dun flv. at the End
Over a final! Afiv Sc Defcent to
Gramborough \ f y
A Wood* bridge Sc Brook o*2
Nether Haw i* 2
Road much winding.
Over a Rivulet or two.
An Aicent of 4 Furl. 2*o
Brafield o ‘s
Ddcend a Hill of 10 Furl. o*2
By Henninficld} Left i*6
Ho mb well o *4
Water-Mill, two Stone-Arches
Sc Brook x ‘7
Adfiey j 4 0
Between Burket * Left
Apd BtirtowGrange f Right o‘x
Aft Afccm & Decent of 3
ibid ,
Thro* a Moor
174*4] Barully or Barnfley I*s
PART 111. CP. 92.}
A Defcent of $ Furl.
A Wood-br. & Water I*4
Caisborough
Thro* a Wood.
HuUnd I*s
Several (mall A fonts 8c Demerits
By a Water-Mill; Right 2*4
Camlenthorp j * Q
Crofs a Rivulet,’ ibid.
By Sheliy-Ciofe 5 Right
A Decent of 7 Furl o*s
Kirton-Burtm at the bottom.
Smithipland I*s
Eafi-Ludly-Gate o*2
A Wooden br.Sr Water-iftill o*s
By Woodfom*Hall $ Left o*l
Over a Wood & Hill.
.Almondbury I*2
A Defcent of 9 F. (at the End )
AWooden-br. & Brook I*s
By Hutherfield- Ch. Left o*3
Afcend again 9 Furl.
Forctm (at the Top/ i‘o
Over two Afcenrs.
By a Wood } Right.*
By Rxfy-Hall j dote Left x'o
A Defcent of 3 Furl. * o*4
Elland I*4
Stone-br. over Calder flv. o*4
By Elland-Houie - y Left o*3
dole Right o< t
A Stone-br. Sc Brook o *4
Another Rivulet in a Defc. i‘r
199*0] HalUfax o*4
Lea- Bridge 8c Brook i*o
By Byes- Town, Right o*4
By OverdwHoufc, Left o*3
By Shaley , Right o‘r
By Elltnroorth-Q hap. Left i*o
Halworthy Right 0 6
Defcend 1 Furl. o*4
Over a Rivulet.
Defcend SwilhKiW o*7
Debenham or Denham-Tate I*o
Crofs a Brook o*7
Over tVvo (mall Dcfcents*
Colhngworth on a Brook
Between (brae Cow-Houles, Left
And Roycrofi 1 Furl. Right l‘o
By Haner t ibid. o*6
Over a Defcent or two.
Kighly 2*l
Between


Miles, F.
Betw. Green-Head * Left
And Village* Right I*2
; clofe Right 1 6
By the Red-Lyon- Inn 5 Left.
A Stone- br. 6c B rook o*7
KtUwickl on flv,
Barnhill 0 S
By Humblethorp- Park * Left.
Bradley I 2
By Upper- Bradley * Right ©,4
22.1’1] Skipton inO*4t/<?* 2*2
Afcend 4 Fu.il. at the End.
Over a Common and (everal
Rivulets.
By L. Burlington's Park ) R. 3’3
Rtbfton l ’4
By CVoecf ft on * Right I*o
Over ari Afcent & 2 Defcents
By Team-Lake * Right 2’6
Lwfftl o*2
M.F.)
A Stone-bridge and Brook in a
bottom o*4
Rufhby on Wharf flv °*s
Over bridge, ibid .
By Girjlngton ; dole Right o*2
Thro* a large Wood.
Cum ft on 1 2's
Over three Rivulets.
By an Inn 1 Right I *s
Kettlewell I ’2
Stone-br. and Brook, ibid .
A Defcent and Afcent of 3 Furl.
each °*4
Thro* a Park.
Defcend to a Moor 2*5
By Coverhead $ Left x’f
A Stone-br. and Brook oh
Croft another Brook p*l
Enter a large Valley.
Woodall o*6
M. F.
Bradley o’y
Horfe-Houfe- Chappel ih
Gamerfgill 1 *0
Leave the Valley i’4
Carlton , ibid.
Mehnerby I ’ r
Ocklethorp I 'o
Over a Moor
25ih] Midlam or Middkham
* )
Croft flv. at the End
Harneby ' 2’o
Croft fcveral Waters.
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. 2’5
A (mail Defcent and Afcent.
A Defcent of I© Furl. I*7
A Lead-Houfe,Left t & Brook J’3
Croft three other Rivulets.
Stonc-br. over Swale flv. to
261*4] Richmond 2*2
The Road from LONDON to SHREWSBURY con-
tinu'd to Welshpool ni North-Wales. [P. 93.]
Miles, F,
From LONDON to
9 3’2] Meriden (as in the Hp/y.
Hiwd-Road.)
Beyond the Village, keep the
middle-way.
Between two others * Right &
Left oh
By Gunner’s*Oak j Left °’s
Sta?i-bridgG over a Brook o*4
By Hampton on the Hill, Left oh
Little Bicknal * dole Right o*4
By Bicknul*Ch, Left i'j
Thro* a Wood of 3 Furl. o*2
By the Cock-Houfe 1 Right I*o
A Bridge & Rivulet *h
Over a Green 0 4
Another Brook o*3
By Sheldon 4 Furl. Right oh
Enter Worcefterjhire © 3 6
Hemil- bridge & Brook x*4
Re-enter Warwickjhire , ibid.
109*0] Birmingham iw/fo Bro-
micham 2 >o
Crofs a Brook to
Staffordshire 3*3
Thro* a Copfe, ibid «
l’p
Over a Brook or two
By * Right I*s
Miles, F.
0/d£#ry-Chappcl o*7
By $ Right x 2
Twedale- Houfcs o 9 6
By Pullin'* Hall I F. Left, ibid.
An enclofed Part of Worcefter-
{hire 2 I
By the Caftle * Right
119*3] Dudley °*4
Re-enter Staffordshire 0 3
Between ieveral Hills,
And the Cele-Pics.
By Garnet- Hall 3F. Right 2 1
Thro* a Wood, moft Left oh
Himley m 1 2
Way open and (freight.
By Womborn IM. Right i*2
Croft Smeftall flv. 1 *
By TrelJel-Ch. Right o*2
Afcend by a round Oak, Left 1 ’3
By Heathton-VUct, ibid, © 6
Enter Shropshire 1 2
Croft a Brook 0 *
By Claverley- Ch. SF. Right oh
Come to Morfe- Foreft * 1
By 2 Race-Ppfts * Left **4
By another Racc-Poft, ibid .
Afcend Gataker- Hill of 2 F. o*7
Defccnd again as much °*s
135 'olßrugesah^Bridgnorthoh
R 2
Miles F,
Between Bafley~Ch. Right, and
Walton-HaW 3 F. Left 2’r
By Right o 's
MorviL o*4.
By *Audnam-Park * Right o*s
By a Water*Mill * Left x’r
By Muckjey- Hall, ibid* o*2
Thro’ a final! Wood o’s
A fmall Afcent & Defcent I*2
143*41 Wenlock I*2
1 Vtnlockz Pitch* Defcent x’o
Harley i'l
By Belfadine* Hall 4F. Right 1 5 3
Crefedgs o' s
By Lady-Oak $ Left o’6
By L. Newport's Hall 5 Right x*r
Upper-C#wi o 7^
Cmd o*4,
By a great Elm at the end.
Croft-Houfes I*4.
By a Grove# Right i’o
By EuftonjXm Teuftrey , Right 1* r
By Betton * Left o*2
By St. Giles's * Right o’6
155*4] Shrewsbury o’3
The Continuation to WelJhpooL
Over bridge, ibid*
By the Bull-Inn * Left 2’*
The Crofs in Hand* Right °h
Some


_ Miles,'F.
Some ftragling Houfcs o*s
By a Copfe 5 Left To
A Bridge over a Brook 22
By Ford- Ch. 3 Furl. Right, ibid.
By Carfton~Ch. Sc Hall j Lefc o’y
By Komon-Caßle $ Right i’o
Thro* the Village o*3
By Wattleburgh - Hall; Right I *3
By the Nag s-Hcad-h\i\ ibid, o*2
Mf F
Over XVattleburgh* Heath
By 7F. Left o*s
ibid . a f 2
By Trivenant-Hal], ibid, o' 4.
Trivenant-Village, dofe ibid, o' 3
By a Great Oak 5 Left.
Enter Montgsmeryjhire o*4
By MaUagolm- Hill 5 Right I’o
u-■ « • —<— — F.
By the Long Mountains; left
By a Green 5 Right o ’s
By Buttmgton Hall 1 F. Left I*2
Buttington- Village 04.
Two Bridges over Severn flv. o’2
Right o’*
By the Smithy , ibid, o’2
lys’tf] Wellhpool i’s
The Road from LONDON to SOUTHAMPTON
continu'd to SALISBURY. [P.95.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
29*0] Bagfhoc
Over the Heath. .
Roads divide,* bear Left I*3
Ftimley on a Brook 2 $
Wood-br. and Rivulet o*3
Enter Hamjhire , ibid.
By a Windmill; Left i’o
Crofs Famborough-Cominon.
ByLd, s Houfe * Left o' 3
EnterFarnham- Common of 4 M.
ibid .
And Parc of Surrey 4*5
40*5! Farnhim on Wey flv. I*2
By a Water-Mill 5 Left 2 0
Re-enter Hamjhire o*s
By a Paper-Mill } Lefc o*2
Over a final! Afcent.
Bentley-Green a Village I*4
Defcend by Frail* Ch. Right I*4
Afcend again 2 Furl.
CroG a Rivulet I*7
Some Houfcs on both fides o*3
By theFree-School* Left o*7
49*73 Alton alias Aulton o’2
By Chavoton ,* Lefc i’6
Thro’ a Woo 1 o*3
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl. i’?
Miles, F.
Road lies flraight i\s
Some Houfcs on both fides 3*l
By Bight on ; Right o'2
Road goes thro’ the Water o*2
By a great Pond; Left I’o
Stone-br. over *Alre flv. to
59 6]Alresford x/a/goAilsford 9’2
Crofs Sewer's Water Ti
Roads divide * bear Left 2*s
Over Lcngwood-Down .
By Morfted-Ch, dole Left 3*l
Over the Common.
Ti viford 2*o
Ryßrambridge’s Houfe; Right x’a
High-br. over It chin flv. o*7
§ dofe Right o*s
By North-Stoneham, ibid. 3*2
SvoaUnd ©’3
By South-Stoneham ; Left 0> 2
Bcrjbvood o’6
By St. £>f«yf $ Left o*s
By Bittern 5 ibid. I'4
Crofs a Rivulet o’i
78’03 Southampton o’y
The Continuation to Salisbury ,
Two Furl, from the Mt.-Place
Tumfltort; Left
By a Houfe , Right i’o
Miles,
Over Rumfey»Common
Cro Cs q (mail River i \
Half-w^y- Oak j dofc Right i’i
Upton j* r
Enter of I M. o*3
And a Copfe i ’ 0
By Broadlands- Houfe i*o.
B'i3 Rumfey 0 5 3
Crofg Teft flv. at the End
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl. o ? y
the Heath of 2M, i J o
By a Poft 5 Left ©’s
Crofs a Rivulet 3^
Enter Wdtjhire o'S
Paßure 01#-both fides.
Ccwsfield-Green Houfes j’6
iVhitc-PariJh 3*^
By Counfellor Houle »
Right x’j
Whaddon 2 *&
Over Common.
xAlderhury- V iljage j’ 2
By C/drcndo»-Park 1 Right, ibid.
By Ld. Cclram’s Houfe 1 Left o’ 5
CroG a Brook
And 3 other Rivulets.
Alfo Bourn flv. o >£
2So] SALISBURY o’*
The Road from LONDON to WELLS in Norsolk
and St, Edmound's - Bury. [ Pag. 97.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
&o'2j New-Market (as in the
AVrp;W/«Road )
Enter Suffolk at the End
Over a Meath & Furzy Ground.
Miles, F.
A Defcent of 2 Furl. 2*3
By Chipnam I M. Lefc 2*2
By lOflfltf-Ch* Right o*3
CroG part of Cambrtdgfhire o’6
By Ked- fiouj: ; Left fW.
m ; FJ
Re enter Suffolk i’ t
An Afc. & Defc. of 2F. each. '
By Frectygham~Ch. Left o*3
By MildnaU-Ch, tbtd . I’2
■ By Btrm'Qh* ibid. o’*


Miles, F. I
r ßtrton* Mills ® 2 J
Crofs a Brook at the End* I
Roads divide j bear Left o 3 1
Over a Warren. I
An Afcent of 2 Furl. i’6
By Del’hole-Crofs * Left 0> 4 [
By Efrvell’Ch, ibid. ° 5 2 I
By Hobs Crofs * Right °*7 I
Thro’ a Warren on both fides.^
By a Lodge j Right 2*l 1
Heath on both fides.
Between IVagford-Ch. Left.
And a Farm-Houle $ Right x’y
Between Brandon-Ch. Left.
And a Wind-Mill* Right 2*l
Brandon* Ferry o’l ;
Crofs Orvfe flv. at the End.
Enter Norfolkj ibid.
By Weeting' Ck* Left o*6
Open Way over Stop-Downs,'
By a Copfe 5 Right 3 6
Munford o*3
Crols a Rivulet at the End.
Mmford Stone- br. & Brook o’6
By Tgboro* Ch. Right 0 2
Afcend 2 Furl. X’o
Langforth. Lodge on a Hill o'7
By Bedney* Ch; & Hill 5 Right I*l
Htlboro x *4
Road turns to the Right; ibid .
Roads divide * bear Left o*4
By Lodge on the Hilly Left o’6
A Def. 8c Afc.of 2F. each I*2
Another Defcent of 2 Furl. o*7
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl. I*4
By a Pond* Right o*s
By a Wind-Mill* Left o*3
Miles, F.
93*63 Swaffham o*s
By a Wind-Mill $ Left o’6
A Defccnt of 2 Furl. *’4
Roads parts bear Right 2*3
By Cafile- aker-Ch . Left o* 1
By Ruins of an Old Caftle j
ibid. o*3
Newtcn o*s
A Cottage 5 clofeLefc I*3
Croft a Brook o’i
By Weft-Ley/;^-Ch. Bight ibid.
Between finall Hills on each fide.
By Ruffham-Lcdgz 5 Left x’s
Heath for many Miles.
By Ruffham-Ch . Left oV
By Hedge-rorc-Grov e; Right o*3
Between Tittlejhal-Ch. Left /
And a Wind-Mill 5 Right *5
Tittlejkal-' Village °*4
By a Copte* Right o*4
Crofs a Brook 12
By a Wood Right.
And Pat chley ~Hou& j Left o*2
By OxleyCh. Right i’o
By Raynham- Hall j Left o*4
Cockham-Ch. Right o*4
By a Beacon on a Hills dole Left.
A Defcent of 3 Furl. *&*/.
Tofts-Ch, Left. o*2
By a Houfe and Gravel-Pit*
ibid. o*s
A Water Mill on Windfder fiv.t’o
110*4] Fakenham o' l
By Great Snoring ; Right 3 2
By Jiaß:*Bafham~Ch, ibid. o*3
And the Hall; Left.
A Smiths Shops dole Right o’3
# - Miles, F*
Houghton o\
Crofs a Brook at the End.
n6’i) WaUingham i’t
By Old WalfwghamrCh. o'j
Roads part 5 ibid . bear Left.
By WtghtonrCh. 3F. Right !**>
Defcend 3 Furl o*4l
Afcend «s much
Over a Sheep-Down,
A Defcent of 4* Furl o*4
i2o’6) Wells o'j
The Road to Bury,
From L O N D O N to
60*2) New-Market (as before)
Heath on both hdee,
A Defcent of 2 Furl. 2*2
Afcend as much
Another Afcent of 3 F. qj
Defcend to Kenford-bv. 8c Brook
i’i
Kenford- Village o’x
By Herringvodl , Lefr-
Between a Tree and Wind-Mill
*Y
By Garsbley , Right o*7
Sheep-Downs on both fide?.
By Barrow, Right 1V
Defcend 2 F. by a Wind-Mill o*4.
Barrow br and Brook o*4
By Little Saxham~Ch, Right l ’4.
By R«*y, Left o’*
By \Veftly-Ch. Right x*o
Woods on both (ides, ibid,
74*2) St. EdmundVßury vttfp
Bury) 16
The Road from LONDON to WEYMOUTH
in Dorset-shire. [Pag. 99.]
Miles, F.
From LOND ON to
[4.B*o] Bafingftoke (as in the
Land's End-Road)
Roads divide ibid . bear left
Enter a Wood 3*o
By yAltham 4 F. Right 2*o
The way ftill
A Defcent of near 4 F. s’o
Cramborn on a Rivulet 2*6
Afcend thence 3 F,
Sutton xi
Miles, F.
A Defc. of 4 F & Afc. of 3 F. 5*3
Another Defcent of 4 F. I*o
Stockbridge a Corp. Town o‘6
Crofs ibid
An Afc.& Defc. of * F.each x‘o
Brighton 3*°
Afcend a Hill of near 3F. o' 3
A Defcent of 4 F. o'*
Weft Tytherley in a Bottom x*7
EaftDw* X*4
Enter Wfafhin ibid*
Miles, F.
An A (cent of 3 F. 34.
Defccnd a Hill of 4 P i’°
[B4’i]Dunketon or Dounton2 7 5
Crofs lAvonfly* ibid, and
Several Houles on both lides
An Afcent of 2F. i\
By a Well near. Left 5 1 5
A Defcent of 2 F. o' t
JippUt °*2
Enter Dorfet-Jhire o'l
An Ale. of 1 F» and
2 Defcents


_ , Milei,F.
3 Defcent* of 3 Furl, each 1 ’o
Cranbourn 2*5
By St. Giles' 9 2 F. Left# 1 ’2
yAlhallovos-Wimbourn l’o
By Knolton 6 F, Left
And Lower Gtfj/cr 1 F. ibid. o$
Middle Gujjet o’y
Over a (mall Afcent at the End.
By Vp-Churchill near Left oV
And Chettle near Right o*s
An Afcent of 2 F. o'z
A Defcenr of about 2 F. o*2
Another Defcent of 2 F. I*2
larrant-Menton o*3
Croft a Rivdtet, ibid.
And fcme final! Afc. & Deft. I
[
1070] Blanford
Pa(i sVo« r flv. at the End.
A Defc. & Afc. of 5 F. each j'»
Another Defc. of 4 F.&Afc. of
Afcend a Hill of 3F. 2 >° !
O/er a fan 11 Deftest*
Mtlfo*d j,
A Defc. of 5 F. & Afc. of 3F.t ’ < 1
Defcend thence again 3 Furl,
By Fiddle- Hinton 6F. Left r’,,
miterfion A
Croft Fiddle flv. ibid . &
Afcend 3 F. at the End
By a Wood , dofe Right
An Aftent of 2 F. x ' 3
U p 1
Crofi From Qv* to
123 3J Dorchefter x’ 7
| Between Moncton* Ch. 2F. O
( and C 2
I Herrington- Houfe 3 F. Left C
Pafs a Rivulet, ibid, J
Afcend a Hill of 3 F. c * 2
A Defcent of 4 F. j > 2
Roads divide j bear Right o>6
The Roads re-united x*3
Several Hou fes on both fides, ib .
By a Sweep-Well near Left 20
And a Windmill 5 dofc Right o*s
Melcomb»Kegis .
Thence over a Wood-br. to *
X32o] Weymouth q s *
The Road from LONDON, YARMOUTH in
NorsolK. [Pag. 101.]
Miles, F.
From L O N D O N to
49*3) Colchcfter (asintbetfar-
mch~ Road*)
Roads divide* bear Left is
By a Windmill f Right o*4
Over w>4rd/cyCommon-
Foot-br. 6c Brook 2 0
a Village o’2
h. 5 F. Right
Thro 5 a Lane and Inclofores.
Cro£ a Brock 2'S
A Ddcent of 2 Find. 03
By Langham 5 Right o'2
By Dedham 4 F. Right o’t
Crofs Stcur fly. o*2
Enter Suffolk, ibid.
By Boxfted 2 F. Left
Stratford-jlreet © s 1
By the Church $ Right o’6
By Brantham , ibid. o’j
Thro' a Copie o’y
A Smith s Shop, dole Left iT
Crois a Brook o’x
Defcend Wenham-Hill ©'4
By the Church 4 F. Left o*2
By Capd-Ch. 2 ¥. iff id. o'y
Wijite~H<jrfc‘\nv\ o ’i
By a Coppice, Right 04
White-Elm a Village x’o
By Capdcc\', Right p’s
A-Smkh’s Shop i dole Left 04
inclolure* op bothiidp*
„ , ~ Miles. F.
fird.hr. over Gippt fly.
674] Ipfwkh o’ 4
Heath on both fides.
By Rnjbm<rrCh. 4 F. Left 2$
Kf/g rave, clofe Right i’o
By a Beacon j Left 1 ’©
By S*xford* Hall in a Park 13
A Stonerbr. Sc Rivulet o’2
Mertyljham ©',
yf’sJ Wood-bridge i’i
Milton-jlrtet j
By Vfffd-Ch. 2 F. Right i*x
Vffard-ftreet e ' 3
By Pellrie-Ch. 3 F. Left x’o
7J>’7l Market-Wickham o’fi
Wickham-br. & Brook o’j
Parham-Afti ©*2
Croft a Brook j *2
Marbford Q * 3
Little Glanham ©’/
By the Hall * Right o*s
By Stradford-Ch t Left o*4
Over a Brook o*3
ByFarnhami Right, ibid.
Benhall-Lodge ; Left ©‘s
The Church, ibid. ©’4
And Strenfield Right 0 5
8 6 6 J Saxmundham ©’s
Thro* a fma!! Village I*2
By Right ©v*
By. a Windmill, iW, 2’4
Between
Cockfield in Telford
Toxfcrd Q » 2
By Dar/hant- Hall Park, Deft
By the Church. M
BwJfeL-Green a Village o*2
Henton-ftreet j».
By Wood-Dodge, Right i's
o>|
Bridge over Blith o’j
Bulcumftrcet D ’i
Over a Common.
By Hinham.p it k j Right o’ 7
By the Hall, ibid. o’6 0 ’ 6
A Smith s Shop; cloie Deft I*o
And Vggejhall j Right
By Brampton, ibid. jV
Way fomewhat Woody.
By Stanfield t Right j’i
Crois Burn Houfe t dole Right o’s
By a Stone & Sun-Dial } Let: o’ 2
Between mfton- Ch. Si Hall i\
By the Park } Right o’i
By a Windmill, Left j' 3
i°7’3J Beekles o'*
Bridge over Waveney fir. c's
Enter Norfolk, ibid.
By Gitlmgham-houCe, Right oV
By St. Afcr/s Ch. Deft o ‘t
By Ull Saints- Ch. ibid. o'a
By a Windmill, Right c‘6
By Bsritv a p, o‘+ 0 ‘ +
4


Miles, F,
A Smith’s Shop # clofe ibid. o*3
Hadskp 2*o
Over Hadskg- Dam J * 1
Re-enter Suffolk: ibid.
Marfh-Land on Boath fides.
Bridge over Waveney flv . I*3
(Sr. Olave o’i
Miles, F.
Crofs 2 Brooks o*4
Britton o*4
Over a Rivulet o*4
By Kelton- Chap. Left I*4
And Bra dwelt 2 F, ibid. i’o
Between a Wind-Mill & Houfe
o*4
- . - - Miles, F*
Gorlefton <
Little Tarmouth
Crofs j tare fiv.
Enter ibid ,
121*4] Great Yarmouth o’r
The Roadfrom BRISTOL in Glocester-shire to BANBURY
in Com, Oxon. [Pag. 103.]
Miles, F.
From BRISTOL thro’
CaftlerGate 8c Lauford* s-Gate.
Roads divide # ibid . bear Left.
By a Wind-mill# Left i’o
Stone* br. 8c Arch over Frome
flv. I *2
Stapleton ©'4
By Sir M. Berkley’s- Houfe # Left
l‘s
By PuckU-Ch, IM. Right o’6
Hambrooi\ or Hanborow X’o
Re-pa ft Frome flv. at the End.
Over feveral Rivulets
May s~Htll a Village 4’o
Wtblet o*4
By Wapleigh- Ch. Right o*s
Tate o’ 7
n’o] Chipping-Sodbury o*s
By a Wind-Mill # Right 3*2
An Afcent of 3 Furl. o’i
By feme Trees# Left i’y
By Badminton or Bcdington-Park $
Right o’4
Afcend a Hill of 3 F. o*3
Didmenon I’a
M. F.
By SapwoYth # Right ibid*
By Oldbury # Left o’ 5
A (mall Deft. 8c Aft. i|6
By Burton # Right o*4
And Wtfton # ifod. ©’2
25*1] Tetbury 2*7
A (mall Afcent 6*7
Croft a Brook in a Bottom o*4
By Cotes 4 F, Left 04
35*3l Cirencefter vulgo Cicefter
2*3
Croft Chum flv . at the End.
By Holy wood-*Amney # Right 2*3
A finall Afc. 8c 2 like Deft. o|i
Aftend again 2 F. o*7
By Barnfley-Ch. Left o‘6
Croft the Road from Glocefl, to
London o*3
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o’y
By well or By bury **4
Croft £•/» flv. ibid,
A Defcent of 3 Furl. 2*l
teach flv . in the Bottom o’3
.Aftend again 3 F.
A Defcent of 2 F. o*4
m. f;
By xAulfworth-Ch. 1 F. Lefr. o*2
AndjD»tnw-Lodge 1 M .ibid, i’o
Three Shire-Stones
Enter Oxfordshire j ibid .
By Weflen-Ch. Right j’r
51*6] Burford 2*6
Croft Windrufli flv. o*2
Fulbroofa near Left o*4
A Defcent of 4 Furl. 2*o
By Shipton-Vnderwcod # near
Right 1 9 6
By Bruern - Abbey 4. F. Left o*s
And 1 M. Right o*3
Croft the Great Road.
From London to Wore eft er 6*o
A finall Defcent 3*2
By Swayford 2 F. Left.
By Wigginton $ F. ibid. ©*4.
And Srvack{ifjg~Ch, ibid. o*7
South-Afefl9to;* o’ r
By a Wind-Mill 5 dole Left o’S
And Mdcomb-Church, ibid,
Bloxham 1 ’3
Wickham; dole Left I*3
74*ii Banbury ,20
The Road from BRISTOL to West CHESTER
[Pag. 105.]
Miles, F.
From BRISTOL through
Sc John's Gate, over Freer? Br,
And a fteep Accent of 3 Furl.
Gallows on the Top j Left.
by ftveral Houles both (ides i # o
Through Failure*Grounds.
Wefthury on a Defcenc , 2'o
Afcend again 4 Furl.
Miles, F.
By Straggling Houfts I*4
Campion 2’ 3
Over SwanfeyC ommon.
By Knowl- Houfe 6 F. Right I’o
A Sr one-bridge and Brook ibid.
By lAnnsbury- Ch. Right o*3
Croft three other Stone* bridges
and Brooks.
Miles, F.
w Aylberton 2.’i
A Scone- bridge and Brock i* i
Aufl- Ferry over Severn flv. i
Barefley vulgo Beaihley 2*5
Between the Severn and Wst.
Roads divide 1 bear Left 2*o
A (mail Defcent o' 7
Weed bridge over Wye fiv. o'l


Mile*, F.
*7’6l Chepftow o’i
Enter Monmouthfhire , ibid.
At the Town’s End
Roads part * bear Right.
Afcend 4 Furl. ibid.
Alh-treej Left 2*2
Another A (cent of 4 Furl. o*2
A Defcem of 6 Furl. *’*
Twliern’ bridge & Brook 6*6
The Iron-Mills near 5 Right o*i
Thro* part of
Trelagh- Grange o*6
By leveral Houles
Trelagh 2*2
Way open & Hilly,
By the Gegheker, Left 2’6
Ledtard- Houle* dofe Right o’y
A Defcent of 1 Mile, ibid .
Stonc-br. over flv. I*3
By Trothy Houle 2 Furl. Left
3i’i 3 Monmouth o*4
By the Gallows * dofe Left I*7
By BuccoL-Wood, ibid • l o
Enter Herefordshire.
Betw. WelSh-New ton- Ch. Right,
And 5 Left 20
A Delcent of 3 Furl. i’o
ByTrepcn-bennet-Houtejßight I*7
Bridge over Garran flv. 1 ’i
Between Tmgo-Houfe, & St.
Wanner da- Ch. 1 *0
By Hendry- Houle $ Right I*2
Alcend Lyfin-Bi\\ of 2 Fur!. I*6
By Gteat Dew? $ Left I*3
And Grove- Houfe, ibid. 62
Betw. Callow- Hill & Houle 2*o
By Callow-C h. Left o*4
And 5 Right o*2
Rtfd-Hiilj dole Left I*3
s o’ij HEREFORD 13
By Conisby-HoCpitd * Right 1 *2
By Holmer’s-Ch- Left I*3
Between Brundle s Oak, and a
Cottage \ o’i
By pipe- Ch. I Furl. Right c ’7
By Morton upon Lugg, ibid, i’i
By Marden-Q\i. Right i’i
By Wellington-Ch . Left ©"3
Alcend Dmmore- Hill 5 Furl. i’y
„ , M. F,
Defcend 7 Furl. ibid.
By Hope~Ch. 2 Furl. Right I*6
And Hampton-Court, ibid. o*4
Bridge over Lugg flv. oi
Wijarton o’ 4
Evington o*7
Bridge over cArrow flv. ©’2
Blower- de • luce ■ Inn $ Left 1 *j,
3 fceominfter vulgo Lem-
fter o’i
Crofs Lugg flv. at the End.
Lyfion
By Orleton 3 Furl. Right 3*6
And the Maiden-head- Inn,L. ©’3
By Richard*s Caftle 4 F -ibid. 10
By a Well j Left o’ 4
By Moor- Houle 5 Right 1 ’3
By Overton , ibid. o*6
Hitchrbarn , ibid. o’2
And CW/rcA-Orcha rd, o’ 5
Stone* br. over Temd flv. o*3
Enter Shropshire, ibid.
75*43 Ludlow o’i
PA RT 11. CP. 107]
m
Crofs Carve flv. ar the End.
By Stanton-Lacy-ChAB. Rt. 2’7
And Bromfdd 7. F. Left o*s
A Foot-br. & Rivulet, ibid.
Between the Crown- Inn $ Left
And Onrbury 2 Furl. Right I*s
Wgod-bridge over Ony flv. 2* 1
By Stonl^ Park &. Caftle o*3
Over a Rivulet to
Newton o*3
By Hanford Chap. Right.
And the Lyon~lim , ;W. o*s
Wigmore bridge o*s
By l*tyMrc]W-Ch. Right o‘s
And a Wood * Left o’s
Little Stretton 3*s
Great Hills on both fldes.
S> 1 ’o] C hurch-Stretton i ’3
By Sir G. Norton a Houle, Left
iAll Stretton 1 *3
Ltborwood 2*2
Crofs Quenny flv. ibid .
By Sir Corbet*a Houle, Right I*6
. _ M. F>
Over a Rivulet 1 , 3
Deddington - o’x
By Staptetor-Ck* near Left I*l
Enter Pulef Common 2*6
Cro fsMele&v. i’ 5
By 4F. Left o’i
10 4 5J Shrewsbury x’t
Bj Battlefield 4 Furl. Left 3*7
And Hadnal-QB&y. ibid . l’6
Over the Heath*
By dffon-Rynol, near Left 2’y
Lte-bridge over Roddon flv. 2*2
By Lee-Ch. Left o'r
Enter Pre«-Heath s’y
And part of Frees 2’2
By Pnw.Lodge 3F. Right 2*2
125 ’2} Whiteehurch 2*7
Crinfley -bridge & Brook 15
Enter Che/hire, ibid.
The Bell-Inn, dofe Right i’y
Afcend fW/wHill o*2
By Majfon- Houle, Left o*3
And Birch- Hcufe, o’y
By Coffir- Hill, Right o’i
Between a Houle and Wind-
mill 07
By Right
And the o*3
AWay-Poft, near Right 21
By Hum-Hill, ibid . o’*
And Pattemw-Hill, ibid. o*2
By near Left i’6
Over Vmley-Gvetn o*3
Plume of Feat hers-Inn 6*2
Thauley- Oak, dole Left o’*
By Hanley- Ch. Right I’o
Over Mtlten-Grcen-
Golborn-bridge 8c Brook o’6
Enter Hattm-Be ath o*s
A Bridge Be Rivulet o’y
HatfavHeath ends o>
By 4 Furl. Left i’z
Cro (s Routen m M oor
By Glafs-Houle-Inn, Left I*3
Road from London fills in l’i
The Suburbs of
*45>J Weft-CHESTHR 02
The


The Road from BRISTOL to EXETER [P. 109.]
Miles, F.
From BRISTOL-High-Crofs.
Over the Bridge? bear Right.
Thro* Red-Cliff-freer .
Crofs a Brook out of the Sub-
urbs i 9 o
Vedm infer o’4
Bfport 1
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. 1 ’i
By Dundry- Ch. on theTop,R.o*4
A Deft. 6c Afc. of 4 F. each o*3
By Wmford 3 Furl. Left o*4
Deftend again 4 Furl. o’ 5
Bijhops-Chue at the Bottom o*4
Aftent of near 4 Furl. 12
Crofs a (mall Brook 2'o
By W. Hartry- Ch. IM. Left I*2
Afcend a Hill of 7 Furl, o*4
A Deftent of 3 Furl. o*7
Over Mendip-Dowm
Thro* the Lead-Mines 2*l
A Defcent pf 12 Furl. 2*o
iS’43 WELLS I*s
Stone-br. 6c Brook at the end.
Another Brdok by a Gallows ?
Right o’ 7
By fomc Cottages o*s
£WV*y-Stone-br. 6c Brook o’*
Cranley-Stone-hv. §c Rivulet o’2
Foljham , by an Elm? Right I*2
A Stone-br. 6c Rivulet o*2
Along a Caufeway
Between Sedge- Moor * Left, and
M. F.
Cranwell- Moor 5 Right.,
Hartley-St. Bridge & River o*6
An Afcent of 4 Furl. o*s
By the Ter-Hill $ Left.
24*2] Glaftenbury 0 6
Roads part at the End 5 bear
Right o’6
.A Defcent of 3 Furl. 0 2
Bumbaley Stone-bridge & Brook
o’ 4
Nort hover y ibid.
Pampas Stone-br. & Brook oT
6 treat o*3
By R. 095o 9 5
Walton i’l
Thro* another Village 24
Gremton o*4
Middle fey 3*7
By Mhdre Ch. SF. Left o*2
And St. Michael's Burrow-Ch.
ibid . 2’ 1
Crofs Parret flv. o*2
Lying alias Lyng . I*7
Several Houfes on both fidcs I*4
Durfon o*7
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o*4
A (mall Village i c 2
By Monkftm* Ch. 2F. Right o*4
By Bar-Pool, ibid. 1 3
By the Alms-Houfts dofe R. iT
47 <0 J Taunton o*3
A Defcent of 2 Furl. I*3
M. W
Ramwell 2*o
Defcent of 2 Furl, at the End.
Crofs a Rivulet 0 6
Blacky Lion-Inn $ dofe Left o'6
By Buckland-C h. IF. ibid,
Chejfm o 6
A Ddc of 2 Furl, at the Ena.
54*2] Wellington I*l
Defcend 2 Furl. i'o
Another Defcent of 3 Furl. I*3
Enter L)evonJhire o‘7
Wntball o*i
A Descent of 2 Furl. o'6
BurUfcomb-Ch . Right 2*l
A Deftent of 3 Furl. o‘l
Welland 3*7
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o‘6
Five Bridges a Village o*3
66‘6] Columpton alias Cole-
hampton i‘i
Over a Brook aftepd 3 Furl. o*7
A Defcent of 4 Furl. I*2
Aftend again 1 Furl.
Bradinch alias Bradmuch o's
A Deftent of 3 Furl. o*7
A final! Afcent and Defcent.
Crofs CoLumb. fiv,' I*4
Kelleton i‘o
By Broadclif- Ch. Left o ( 6
A Fend a Hill of 3 Furl, 2*o
A Defcent of 4 Furl. o‘7
7 8< 2l EXETER i‘£
The Rood from BRISTOL to WORCESTER.
[P. 110.]
, Miles, F.
From BRISTOL through
Cajtle-G ate and Laufird’s-Gste.
Roads divide 5 bear Left o*7
Some Houfes on both Sides i*i
Scone* br. 2 Arches over Proem
Bv. o *5
Afcend 3 Burk ibid*
Stapleton .. -o*3
By Stoke- Houle 2 Bud. Left i‘o
PhmboroHgh i*3
Miles, F;
Stone-br. 3 Arch. 6c Brook o*2
Roads divide $ bear Left o*2
Wmterton l‘o
Over a Common.
By Prampton-Ch. 2 F. Left I*o
l*4
By an Elm ? dofe Lefc
And Tale-Ch. 3 F. Right I*3
Rangeworth c*2
'£ Scone-br. 3 Arch 5c Brook x‘gf
S
• . } / , Miles, F.
CroF another Pdvulet i*d
f , * c
CrumhalL i 1 5
An A (cent of Furl. o 5
By hrtworth Park j Lefc
A Dtftenrof 4. Furl. \ 2
Wood-bridge and River in a,
Bor ro in '• i'i
A Fu] hn g • Mill, ibid. Rjg h t
Afcend through a Wood
Some Houles on both lides {*£
* i «-i 4 - 3
jiWiWyn »


M. F.
Tortworth i *0
Afcend a Hill of r Mile o s 2
Stinchtotnb- bottom a Vill. o*s
By Nibley- Park $ Right
Through a Wood i‘g
By a Beacon 5 Left ibid.
A Defcent of 4 Furl.
22*2.1 Durfley °*s
A Defcent of 3 F. ©*3
Cam " 0 4
A Wood-br. & Rivulet, ibid.
Cambridge , a Vill. 3* 2
A Wood-br. 6c Brook o*7
Wood-br. over Stroud flv. C 4
By Eaftingten 4 Furl. Right
Wijitmifter °*s
Put ley I*©
Parkin o *5
M. F.
A Stone-br. 6c Brook o*4
By Hardwick- Ch. IM. Left o*s
Qjiodgley-G rcen, a Village I*2
An Elm- Tree 5 dofe Right o*4
A Wood-br. 6c Brook ©‘3
A Stone-br. 6c Rivulet I*s
The Suburbs of
36*i] GLOCESTER o*l
Kingjholm , I*3
Over a Stone-br. & Brook to
Longford o*4
Two other Stone-br. 6c Rivulets.
Twigrvorth i‘o
Bv Bifhops- Norton 3 F. Right I*6
A Wood-br. 6c Rivulet o*s
By Lye 2 Furl. Left ©‘3
Over a Common.
'! . Ml F*
By Tredington-C h. 1 Furl, R. 3*3
By a great Houfe, ibid . o*s
Stone-br. over Swihate flv. o*4
46*5] Tewksbury o*2
2 Stone-br. over flv. o*s
Another Stone-br. 6c Brook 2*4
Enter Wircefterjhtre, ibid.
Riple alias Rippel o*7
By Vpton 5 Furl. Left 2*l
L. Coventry's Houfe $ hear ibid. I*s
Severn ft oke o*2
Kemfey 3*3
Wood-br. 6c Brook, iW.
Crofs a Rivulet I*2
The Suburbs of
61*3] WORCESTER 2*l
The Road from BRISTOL to WEYMOUTH in
Com. Dorset. [Pag. 112.]
Miles, F.
From BRISTOL-High-Crofs
Over the Bridge, and through
Redcliff- Street.
Grots a Brook, and leave the
Suburbs I *Q
Be drain (I er 0 4
Bifport 1 6
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. i‘i
By Dundry- Ch. on Top; R. °*4
A Defcent 6c Afc.of 4 Reach ©‘3
By bp in ford I Furl. Left °*4
A Defc* of 4 Furl. 0 5
c
Bifhops-°‘4
An Aicent of 4 Furl. 12
Over a (mail Brock 2 ft
By W. Hartrey Ch- Left 1 2
Afcend a Hill of 7 Furl.
A Defcent of 3 Furl. °*7
By the Lead-Mines 2* 1
A Defcent of 12 Furl. 2*o
184] WELLs . I*s
Stone-br. 6c Brook at the End.
Another Riv. by the Gallows;
Right o*7
By ferae Cottages cf>
br. & Brook o*4
CViV/Ay-Srone-br. 6c Riv. oT
Pe'fham, by an Elm, Right 1 2
A Stone-br. & Rivulet © l 2
Over a Caufeway 5 between
iV^dgv'-Moor and Cranwell-tAoo r. j
Hartley- Stone-br, and River o*6 i
Miles, F.
An A feem of 4 Furl. o* 5
By the Tor , a fteep Hill 5 Left
24 2] Glaftenbury g*6
Roads part at ihe End $ bear
Right ©‘6
A Defc. of above 3 Furl. ©‘2
Bumbaley-Stone-hw 6c Brook o*s
Nort hover.
Turn pal's Stone-br. 6c Riv* ©*i
Street o*3
Roads divide, ibid, bear Left,
And at the End turn again L.o‘4
By a Windmill 2 Furl. Left.
Over two Email Afcents,
And a Defcent of 5 Furl, at I*3
Cempton-Dundo l‘i
By the Beacon 6 Furl. Right,
Littleton I*4
Afcend 2 Furl. ibid.
A Defcent 6c Afcent of 3 Furl*
each o*s
Somerton o*6
By a Windmill j Right 2*l
Long-Sutton °‘7
Crofs Tcoiel flv. to
Longlode I*2
Thro’.a Village of 2 Furl. i*s
Mar tod\ 07
Bower adjryning i‘o
Hamden- Hill I Mile Left
By Norton as far, ibid. I*7
By S. Pother ton l Mile Right ©‘4
Miles* F.
And Chijfelbcrough 3 Furl. Left o*4
Weft- Chinoek o' 7
/frw-bridge and Brook o*s
By Meryot $ Right °'s
An Afcent of 4 Furl. ©*3
Defcend as much o*7
467] Crookhorn ©‘s
Crofs P arret flv, I*3
Enter Dorfetjhire ©*s
S out h~P arret ©'6
Afcend'a Hill of 11 Furl. Co
The long Alh-Treej dole L, j‘7
By Crofs-Comb- Ch. ibid, \ % 2
Efqj Penny % Park ; Right ©‘3
By the 5 Sifters, i, e, Trees ©‘3
A Defcent of 4- Furl. 4*4
Maiden-Newton o'6
By Cearn 7 Furl. Left
Crokeway o\
62*2 ] Frampton ©'6
Cro fsFrcom flv. at the End.
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. c‘6
A Defc. 6c Ale. of 7 Furl. 2*o
Stepleton l‘/
Afcend 5 Furl, ibid .
Defcend 2 Furl. o‘6
An Afcent of 3 Furl. o*4
A Defcenc of 4 Furl. ©‘6
By Frier iVaddon j near Rt. o*7
Several Houle* on both fides ® 4 3
Melcomb-Regis 5*6
74 0} Weymouth
Jht


The Rod from CAMBRIDGE to COVENTRY. [P.ll4]
Mile?, F.
From CAMBRIDGE, leave
The forward Way at the End
Left, and bear Right.
Thro J common Fields on both
fides.
An Afcent of 3 Furl. 2 1
Between Morebarns-Houfe 9 and
Cott orc-Church.
Hedges on both fides I*7
By Madingley-Ch» 8c H all j Right
°>
By Hardrvich*C\\, Left M
By Burn- Ch. I Mile, ibid . 2 O
Over Burnley*s Common.
By Caxton 4 Furl. Left* 2 6
Crof?Londo»-Roadto Torl^Scc, o’l
By JSsxnwf/;-Ch* 4F. Right i’i
Elfiey ' ' y o*6
By a Windmill j near Left o*6
And Croxton- Ch. I F. o f 6
Enter Huntingdonshire o 5
By (fWd 1 Furl. Left o’6
And Wentringham Houfe 5 near
ibid, & 6
17-0] St. Neots s’o
Srone-br. over Owfe flv. o*4
Enter Bedfordshire, ibid.
CroGLowdcw-Road to Torfe&c.t’o
By mftonrCh. 3F. Right i’s
Re-enter Huntingdonshire o ? i
Common Fields on both fides.
A Stone-br. & Brook 2*2
Gre-tf Stoughton o 1
Crofs another Brook o’6
Between St ought on~Hd\\ and
Church o*i
Meadows on both fides.
By Little Stoughton 5 Left I*2
Enter Bedfordshire i’o
PortenhiU , a Village ©'4
Over a (mall Afcent,
Re-enter Huntingdonshire i*3
By SvoinShedd' Ch. 4 F# Right 0 3
Miles, F.
An Afcent of 2 Fur!. o*3
A Decent of 3 Furl. o ? 4
Bedfordfhire at the bottom.
By Milchbourn Ch 3 F. Left o*4
A Defcent of 2 Furl. i*3
By Teldhtg-Ch. & Hall j Rc. 01
And Newton- Ch 3F. Left o*7
Afcend 2 Furl, to
Northamptonshire 02
By a Windmill ,* Left
A Defcent of 3 Furl. i’o
By Chefton 5 Furl. Right o*2
And Rnfhdorvn IM. Left o*2
34*2] Higham-Ferrers on Nine
flv. i‘i
Roads part at the End $ Right
Over a (mall Afc. & Defc. 2, o
By an End of i Right
Crofs Nine flv. I 3
By Wellingborow 12 F. Right
And a Watermill 1 Left o*3
Over an Afcent or two o*3
By Wdhy> Ch. SF. Right
And Dorrington 2F. Left l’i
A Defc. Sc Afc. of 2 F. each 2’o
By Echen-Ch- Sc World's-End-Inn
j 1 •
1 1
1 Several fmall Afc. Sc Def.
By 2 F. Left I*2
Afcend a Hill of 2 Furl. o’4
By iVeftcnliaW Sc Ch. Left 056o 5 6
Alfb m Hall Sc Church
ibid. 1 o
By a Windmillj Right
4P*oJ Northampton o*2
By Kings Thorp~Ch. Right I 4
And Ddf/mgfo»-Ch. 2 F .ibid. o’ 5
By 5 Furl. Left 0 3
A Defcent of z Furl, o*4
Heath on both fides.
A Defc. Sc Afc, of 2 F. each o’ 7
Malfime x ’o
By Mthorp- Park & Houfe 5 R.i i
. Miles, F*
Afcend a final! Hill o'7
Betw. Holmby-Hmk 1
Right, and S' 0 * 1
Bring'on-Qh. 3F. Left * \
A Defcent of 2 Furl. o*2
By a Beacon & Windmill 1 M,
Right 02
Common Fields on both fidey.
An Afcentof 2 Furl. 12
By Long Buckby. Ch. & Hall 3 near
Right i’ o
Crofs a Brook o*4.
An Afcentof 3 Furl. o*3
Wutfird
By the Park 3 Left.
A fmall Afcent O *S
Crofs the LcndorrKoad 8(? ,
Wat ling-ftreet- Way j°
Witford~Gap - Houle 3 * 6/d.
Common Fields on both Tides,
Kilsby 1
Crofs a Brook 13
Enter Warwickjhire , ibid.
Over a finall Afcent.
Hlmorten - 0 7 y
69 , 03 Rugby 2 J x
By NewbUd 7 Furl. Right T 3
And a Farn>Houfe 5 F. Left o*3
& Long Lawford #
Right T 7
A Delcent of 2 Fud. o’{
Stone-br. over fiv, I*3
Bredfordy ibid.
Incloiures on both fldes.
Over a Heath 2*2
By Comb- Park j clofe Right o’*
And Btngley 2 F. tbid . i’i
Stone-hr. over 6W flv.
An Afcent of 2 Furl. o*i
1 "o
Over a Caufe-Way to
The Suburbs of
Bo’o] COVENTRY 04
The Road from CARLISLE in Com. Cumbr to BARWICK
in Com. Northumbr. [Pag. 115.]
Miles, F.
From CARLISLE thro*
Hillard or Scotch Gate
Grofs Eden flv.
By Stanix or I F<
M- F.
Right I*o
$ dofe Left 1
By New-Tvwn 2 F. ibid . b’6
The Way thence generally open,
S *
M. p;
Garrjftcn y near Left o'?
Inclofed Way for 6 F. i'x
By Weil * Lever,ton 7F. Lefc o*7,
And 4. F, Rt. I*s
Croii


Mile?, F.
CroG Leven alias Line flv, o*i
By fbme Houfes $ Right 10
Erackpeth alias Brafenhtll iT
An Afcent of 2 Furl. o’6
By the Skirts of other Hills.
Nether-Hurfl Afcent of 3 F. Pj
By Kings field 3 Furl. Left 3 '6
And Lethel j clofe ibid, o' $
By Sipnegarth I F. Right l 3 y
Crofs Kirfycp fiv. o’y
Enter Scotland, ibid.
By Vill. 3 F. Rt. o’6
Over Ltddale fiv. I*6
By Cnft!e:on-Ktrk 4 F, Left 22
Cajiletcn , a Village o*7
By Dunleybire- Houfe 2 F.L. I*3
RepaG Liddale flv. 4*o
Over feveral ffnall Afc. 6c Defc.
. . Miles,F.
By Houfe 3 F. Right B’s
The Way like the former.
46*43 Jedborough . B*x
Cvoihjed fiv. at the End.
Cralm or Crelm y clofe Right 3*4
Crofs a Brook j 5 o
By Sachford 3 F. Right i’i
Enter Trividale c ’y
Might on or Hilton i*y
Part of Kelfo 22
Ferry over Tweed fiv. to
$7 °D Kelfo alias KaiKo oT
By SharpitUw IF. Left o*7
And Sprsufton or Proyflon I FurL
Right i’i
Repafs the Tweed I*4
Kydam alias Redding clofe
P.
Crofs Reddingiurt\ fiv, o ’j
Re-enter England & Ntrthtmbey -
Und t ibid.
Carrhoom alias o*s
By VVark^ Cattle IF. left i’o
Cornhill alias Cornwell 2*4
By Heaton y Furl. Right iT
Between TiUmouth ScTilli/ley-HaW
l'6
Bridge over Till flv. o’y
Wtfdl} alofe Left, ibid .
By Grindon $ F. Right l*f
And 7 horn ton 4F. ibid . 4*2
By LmgWdgc-Houfe 3 F. Left o’6
Onf* I*7
CroG Tweed fly, 2*o
Bo’l] Barwick oT
The Road from CHESTER to CARDIFF in Glamor-
ganshire. [P.117.]
Miles, F.
From Weft-Chester
Crofs Dee flv . over the Bridge.
Leave the Suburbs at I*3
Pulford of 4 FurL 3*5
Enrer Fdntfhtre at the End.
R'JJet ’ I*o
Mtrfnrd I *3
Crols Tagidog fiv, 0 5
Denbighfhtre, ibid.
By Gm/&rd-Ch. 6c a Pond } Rt.
o*2
By s Left I*l
And ibid, o'6
IC2] Wrexam iT
Preftcn>bv. 6c Guentro fiv. o*7
By a Houfe 5 Right o’y
Stone-br. over l*3
Risabcn 2*4
Crofs Chriftioneth fiv. at the End.
Tr/.flnatree l’2
New-bridge over JQee fiv. I*2
A Smith’s Shop * near Left
By Sir Tho, Middleton a Hall 5 Rt.
x’s
An Afc. 6c Defc of 2 F. each o*4
Roads part on the top * bear L.
By Chin fa Ch. 3 R Left ' j’i
Crols Keriog fi t/, o*3
Enter Shnpfhire, ibid.
Three Afc. Sc 1 Defc. 2 F. each
Eclat tn 2*2
.T wo other Afeenrs o’y
Miles, R
CroQ Ojfas'Dirch i’o
Re-enter Denbtghfhire , ibid.
Over a Def. 6c Afc. of 4 F. each
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. i’y
Defcend again as far
Crofs Ksnlet flv . in the bpttom
Another Afc. 6c Def of 3 F. each
LlarfyUn 2/1
A Delcent of 3 Furl. o*3
Crofs a Brook o’y
Over anorh. Brook to aVilf. o y 6
Afc. Sc Defc. of 3 F. each o*3
By LUngcdvom Ch. IF. Rt. I'3
Crofs T avot flv. o*3
Enter Montgorneryfhire, ibid.
An Afcent of 3 Furl. r’i
A Defcent of 1 Mile o*3
Over 2 other Defcents.
LUnvellmg 3'©
Afcem/a Hill of 4 Furl. Jt’3
Another Afc. 6c Defc. I*2
Evan ap Wei], Right 2’o
By Afywf-Houle half a F. L. o’4
Pont mat her avale hr.
Ovev Vurnrvay fiv. I*s
By a Church $ clofe Left o’x
An Afcent of 3 Furl. o*6
Roads divide * bear Left • o*3
Llavgunme-Ch. near Right i’x
A Defcent of 3 Furl. oT
Defcend agjin 4 FurL iT
Llamair oy
i. 4 ‘ '
Miles, F.
Several fmall Afc. 6c Descent*.
A Defcent of y Furl. 3*4
Crofs Rue flv, in the bottom
Afcend thence near 4 FurL
Over Bechanflv, 2*X
By Tregunnon- Ch. IF. Left o*4.
Over forae (mall Hills
A Defcent of y Furl.
Over a Brook in the bottom
Afcend again $ Furl.
Crofs Severn fiv. to
61*3] New-Town or Trenevith
3'3
Afcend Clay'Hill of 4 Furl. i*t
Anoth. Afc. 6c Defc. of 4 F. each
Afcend again as much.
A Beacon on the Top 5 clofe
Right
A Defcent of 5 Furl. 3*3
Delcend again as much i’?
Afcend a Hill of 2 Furl. i'6
Defcend thence 4 FurL
7 J ’o3 Llanbeder-Vuntieth o*7
PA RT 11. IP. 119]
Afcend 3 F. & defcend as much.
Some Houfes on both fides x’6
Roads parr, ibid* bear Left
Llanbtfler J *4
Several Accents & Defcents.
JUandcvcy


Miles, F.
LUnderty 3 , 3
Crofs It hen flv* *, 3
Alfb Clow dock, flv. 1 f °
Defeend a Hill of S Furl. 10
LUnbeder~Vaur 0 5
Crofs Dulas flv. at the End.
Way indirect over a Common.
Repafs Uhon flv. 5 4
Defeend a Hill of 5 Furl. 1 2
The Way ftill Hilly 6c Woody.
A Defcent of 6 Furl. 2 ’6
By LUnelway- Houfe * near L. o 6
Wood-br. over Jfye flv. to
91*3] Bea Ith or Beale o*4
Enter Breckpockfhire 5 ibid.
And Afcend 4 Furl.
A Defcent of 5 Furl. To
By Llanthewy-Comb-Ch. Rt. Ti
Afcend a Hill of 8 Furl. I*2
By Capet- Cuncks~Ch. clofe L. o’y
Over a fmall Defcent 6c Afcent.
Afcend again above i* F. 2*l
Another Defcent of 12 F. 2’4
M. F.
By a Wood j Left i’6
Llanihangle-Vechan- Church, and
Some Houfes 5 clofe Left o*4
Crofs Hewthy flv. o*2
Thro* a great Wood.
Defeend to LUndivilog 2*l
107*0] Brecknock 2*3
Crofs Hondy 6c ibid.
A fteep Afcent of 6 Furl. i’o
Over two final! Defcents
And Tavy flv. 2*5
Afcend Bullavan-Mountaiin,
Above 2 M. high o*s
Ac the Top defeend 6 Furl.
And re-pa fs the Tavy 4 3 * 1
A Ridge of Hills on both fides.
To a fmall Afcent 3*2.
Defc. by Captl TeVecban-Churchi
Right O's
Crofs a Brook o*3
An Afcent of 5 Furl. °*3
Another Rivulet o*s
Ponftutketh’hr* over Tavy o*3
. .... m.f:
Enter Glamor&mfhire 5 ibid.
An Afcent of 4 Furl. ©’2
Thro* a Village
By JVfork/JrCaftle Ruins 5 Right.
Crofs Tavy again in a bottom To
And another Rivulet o ’6
Afcend thence 5 Furl.
Afcend again as much To
Come to a Defcent of 6 Furl. I*3
Crofs a Brook in the bottom.
And afcend a Hill of 1 Mile.
Some Houfes on both (ides 4*2
An Afcent of xo Furl. To
Over 2 other final! Afcents,
And a Defcent of 7 Furl. 4V
Crofs a Rivulet or two.
By Carfilly- Cable 2F. Left 2*3
Afcend a Hill of 5 Furl. o*3
And defeend thence 3 Furl.
Another Defcent of io Furl. I*2
By the Iron-Mines, ibid.
And Tavy flv. for 3M. Rt. 2*6
145*3] Cardiff 3*o
The Road from DARTMOUTH in Devonshire to Min-
head in Somersetshire. [Pag. 120.]
Miles, F.
From Dartmouth
Ferry over Dert flv.
To a Village at ©’4
Cropland- Houfe 5 clofe Left I*4
A Defcent of 5 Furl. 2*x
B| Cherfion* Ch. 2F. Right o’y
And Wayton- Houfe j 2 F. JL. I*2
A fmall Defcent 26
Afcend 2 F. 6c Defeend 4F. o*s
Marldon-Ch. on the Defc. Left.
Come 1 *4
Crofs 3 or 4 Rivulets.
By abbot's KefwelL j near L. 3 >o
Over a (mail Afc. 6c 2 Def.
By Olber-C h. 2 Furl. Right f*3
*5*53 Newton-Bulhel ©'3
Crofs Leman flv. ibid .
A fmall Eminence 6c Defcent.
By 3F. Left o*7
Crofs Tmg flv. ©’6
By King i-Staynton- Ch. F. Rt.
And Tingrace 4 FurL Left o*2
Tom the Trumpeter s $ 'clofe R. o*6
And the Red-Lyon-Inn $ Left o*2
Afcend a Hill of 6 F. /W.
Over 7 (mail Afc. 6c Defcents.
A Defcent of 5 Furl. " 4 *6
Afcend thence 4 F.
M. F.
Defeend Madlon-YiiW of 7F. I*3
Kenford on Ken flv. 2*l
A.Village in a Defcent x’o
By Falmouth-Houih 3 F. Left
Attington I*s
The Suburbs of
30*2] EXETER ©’7
Over a Brook Afcend Stoa\- HiII
of 5 Furl. 2*s^
Some Houfes on a Defcent of
1 Mile i’i
Stone-br. Arch 6c Brook o*7
Stone-br. 9 Arches on Columb,
flv. o’x
Stoke o*2
By Brarntfoyd-Cb. Right o*3
Revo o’y
Over a fmall Afcent.
Silverton 2*2
of *2 Furl.
ibid .
Defeend thence 8 Furl. 2*4
Burn Brook & Mill at the bottom
Some Houfes 5 clofe Right x’6
Enter Long Caufe-Way To
Over an Afc 6c Defc. 3 F* each.
End of the Caufe-Way I*o
45*5] Tevervon or Twcrton o*s
* V •
M. Fo
An Afcent of 5 F. & Defcent of
7 Furl. i’o
Over 3 feveral Defcents.
5 3’°] Bathampton vulgo Baun-
ton 43
A fin aII Defcent of 2 Furl. I’o
Murbach 1 ’ 2
Roads divide, ib. bear Right o'i
A D:fcent of 3 Furl. o’*
Gilberts t dole Right o’>
Afcend thence 7 Fuyl.
Ent»r Somerfttjhire on the Too-
on a Brook & ftcep Defc.
f
1 5
Another Brook 6c Wood -hr.ibid*
Thence over Brnmnam-Hi]l9.
Crofs a Rivulet 3*l
By Emmpt on-Regis I M. Rt. o*2
Pafture on both Tides.
A Defcent of 4 Furl. 3*6
By Cutcomb^ Ch. pF. Left I’2
And the Lime*Kilns j near ibid,
05
A Defcent of 11 Furl. o*7
Embercum or Timbercomb o*7
Cow bridge 6c Br. at the bottom.
A/cend thence 7 Furl*
70*6] Minhcad 3’o


The Road from St, DAVIDS in Com, Pembroke to HOLY-
WELL in Com. Flint. [Pag. 122.]
Miles, F.
From St. D A V I D 3 to
Gorid Bridge & Brook I*6
By Gcrid- Chap, iF. Left °^ 2
Some Houles on both lides 1
An Alcaic of 7 Furl. 1 7
A (mall Defcenc I *3
Another Defcent of 6 F. ° 4
Afcehd again 4F. 12
Defcend thence 3 F.
Merth alias Morthry I o
Several (mall A(c* 6c Defccnts.
1 6 9 0] Fifcard 6*o
Crofs Groynflv• at the End
And Two A (cents.
Defcend 7 F. 1 7
A Prolped to the Sea ; Left 4/1
Over s or 6 other Ale. 6c DeCc.
22*53 Newport o’s
Crofs Novern Hv. I*2
By Egbis~Noivith*C h. 3F.
Velindree I *
Over 2 fimall Afcents.
Defcend a Hill of 1 M. 2*4
Afcend thence 5 Furl.
Another Delcent of 12 Furl. 3’ 0
By Sc. Vogmcli's j near Lett o’y
Grots Tivy Hv. to
33*3 J Cardigan *’o
And Card-gan-Jhlre.
Over 3 (mail Dedents.
ADdcent of 4 F. S *
Roads divide 5 bear Left o*4
Over a Brook A>cend 4F* & 3
Roads united again I*2
By Bl&inport 2 F. Left ° 3
An Afcent of 3 Fu l.
Over 6 or 7 o her Afc. 6c Defc.
By the 4 Burroughs , 6 6
Over (tveral ocher Hills, &c.
A Defcentof 1 Mile s’6
UArch " 12
The \Va> Bill continues Hilly.
Some Houles 6: a Brook i*s
By Ik venny rp-Chap. near Ler c
An A(c. of 3 F. & Dele, of 5 p.
A Bridge over <Aaron Hv. I’i
Tregaron- , ibid. .
Roads divide tb . bear Right 1 3
o’l
Crols jiv. ibid,
An Ale. of 6 F. 6c Defc. of 8 F.
A Brook at the Bovtom.
Molmarnore 2 7
syUanfanfraid~Q% r .F.Righto^
Miles, F.
Llanrufled on Weray fly, 2’3
By a grearßoufe, clofeßight o’y
Afcend a Hill of 6 F. o’g
hyUanylar- Ch. 4F. Right i’o
By 2 Stones on a Hill 5 Left 04
Two Defcents of 4F. each 2'2
Crofs Ift with 0? Waft with fly, I*3
By Llanachairn~Ch, Left o*4
Over Ridda'e flv. in a Bottom I*3
Llanbadern Vtmr o 3
By Mberifiwith 4 F. Left.
an Afcent dc 2 Ddcencs.
Crofs Salk flv. ?’$
By Ruddy-Pens- Houfe 5 Right I’4
Over Lerry flv, ibid.
By Liam bangle Caftle-Quaker j
Left o*4
A Defcent of 4 Furl. o*7
Defcend again 2 Furl.
78 V] Talabont on Cletter flv. o’2
Part ir f [ P. 1240
By the Silver- Mines $ Left
And aßidge of Mouncainsjßight.
A Defcent of 4 Furl. 0 6
By Sir K. Pm/s-Park j dole
Left ... 07
Crofs Ktnver flv. 2*7
Llanibangle ibid .
By a Silver-Mill> near Left.
Over flv. in a Bottom °’7
Garrickj near Left ©’s
Crofs Lcvenant flv. 07
Enter Montgomery-{hire ; ibid.
O er feveral Afcems & Defcents.
89’o] Mahunleh fltas Machenleh
3 *5
Crofs Dorvy fly- o’6
Alto Dalnas flv, o 6
Roads part * bear Right.
Mbberfuddon 2 2.
Crofs Kerygflv. at the End.
Between Doxvy flv. Right.
A continuedßidgc ofMountainsj
Left
Ltnn coring o 6
By JVf/tt/jax/crw-Houfe ; Left 14
Afccnd 6 F. & Defcend 2 F. o’s
By 2F» Right iT
Mb envoy do I ’4
her angel A 2
Crofs Mngel flv. ibid,
And enter Merioneth-fhire .
Mdloyd alias Maynlloyd 4 F K'2*i
Miles, F.
Dinas Mouthy I ’5
Over Garifl flv. o*2
Alio feveralAfcents andDefcents.
And 2 or 3 Rivulets.
Llan am* Mouthy 2*l
Re-paft the Dovoy x’6
Over a Rivulet o*i
Afcend Bullagrois-Mount of 2 F.
And Defcend 7 Furl.
Way Level by Mountain?s Right
And Dovoy flv. Left
P ont ravan - vaughan • Bridge.
Over a Brook in a Bottom 6 *s
Mountains Bill Right, & Deeflv .
Left
Dee flu. falls into Llyn Tigidd.
Or Pern hI e- Meer- Lake of
Ridge of Mountains ends 1 5 0
LUngovoer alias Llamver °*4
The Lake ends 23
Croft Dee flv. ibid.
iso’s] Bala . o y
Crofs T rovoarin flv. o' 3
Llanvater alias Llanvor o 6
Over Tavur flv. o’6
Afcend a Mountain of 11 F, 1 ’3
Alcend again 7 F. and Defcend
3 Furl, 2 2
Another Defeni of 6 Furl. 1 7
Pont • Mairthree- bridge.
Over (jirwO'flv. l*o
Enter Denbigh Jhire $ ibid.
Croft ive?j flv. I*3
Re enter Merioneth-jhire.
BettUi o c r
Come again to Denbigh (hire i‘s
Several Afcems and Defccnts.
By Clecan- Ch. \ M. Left 4*l
Defcend a Hill of 7 Furl, i ‘3
Thro* a Wood i‘i
A Defcent of 5 Furl. o*6
Lalnvareg i‘o
140Y)] Ruthyn on Cluydflv. o‘o
Some Houles on both tides 2*2
The Way indirect,
by LUnrviven-Ch. Left 4*®
Afcend a Mountain of 2 Miles, ib.
Enter Flint •jhire on the Top.
And Defcend 11 Furl.
By Skyvtcg-Ch- IM. Right A*o
ind Caerwis 4 F. Left I*3
By the Lead-Mines $ ibid.
Defcend 4 Furl. 3*s
15 64] Holyy/dl p‘4


The Road from EXETER. to Continu'd
to Ilsarcomb and Torrington in Devon-shire. [F. 126.]
Miles, F.
Prato EXETER
Over Two Brooks.
And another Rivulet x’°
Crofs Ex. flv. o\
Touch upon Credy flv. *’o
Over a Rivulet o’?
Syer- Newton on a Brook 056o 5 6
Crofs 4 other Rivulets.
Houfe 5 clofe Left I*3
7*3] Credition vulgo Kerton I’s
Over a fmall Afcent & Defcent.
By Sandford 4 Furl. Right i’6
Crofs 2 Rivulets o*s
Afcend a Hill of $ Furl. o’s
New-Bmdmg on the Top ©’s
Defcend Furl.
By the Beacon 1 Furl. Right.
A Defcent of 4 Furl I ’6
Some Houfes on both hides o’s
Afcend 5 F. 6c Defcend 3 F. o’x
Over a fmall Afcent and Defcent.
And 2 Branches of Taw flv.
By a Beacon * clofe Right 5*3
Chawley °*3
A Defcent of 4 Furl I*2
Afcend thence 2 F. over a Brook.
Chimleigh or Chumleigh
Another Brook in a Bottom I*2
Afcend thence 4 Furl.
By Obmg/w-Houfe* clofe Left2 5 y
And New Tlace 5 Right o*3
Over an eafle Defcent.
W.F.
Afcend a Hill of 7 Furl.
Chidingford I*6
By Wortley 3 Furl. Left l’6
Crofs a Brook o’ 3
Beatford-HouCe 3 clofe Left.
A Defcent of 4 Fur!- o’i
Pafs another Rivulet o 's
By Chetelhampton- Ch. 1 Furl.
Right o*6
Over 2 Brooks o*4
Bathing 4/2
Ronfeti 1 ’2
Newport o’3
Crofs a Rivulet at the End.
38*2] Barnftable i’o
O/er 2 Brooks o's
PzAow o*2
Bradford on a Brook o*4
Afcend a Hill of 6 Furl. o’ 3
Trickworthy 2 i
Defcend thence 3 Furl.
An Afcent of 6 Fur!. o*l
By an Alms-Houfe * doftßight2 ’2
And Bittaden 4 Furl, ibid.
By Weft down 6 Furl. Left o*4
And Stoford $ near o*s
Afcend thence 5 Furl.
A Defcent of 5 Furl. 2*2
48*7] Ufa rcomb llfracomb
07
The Continuation to Torrlngtoiu
From ILFARCOmB
Crofs a Brook x’o
Afcend thence $ Furl.
Pflfs 2 other Brooks 2*o
Alfo a fm aII A (cent 8c Defcent.
Stracum in 3 Bottom 2*o
Crofs a Rivulet 5 ibid.
Afcend thence 3 Furl.
A Defcent of 6 Furl. i’o
Ham c*s
Ford 07
Afcend’thence 3 Furl & Defcend
2 Fud.
t
By Smton- Court 5 near Right i s x
And Verlida 1 Furl, Left.
St. .^mVChap, clofe Right 2*6
Ferry of X M. over Taw flv. o’j
Some Houfts on both ficies I’2
By Watterton 2 Furl. Left o' 5 2
Northam I *3
Crofs feveral Rivulets I s *
I6’6] Bediford on Bythcford fhh
I*7
Stone-br. over Towrtdge flv. ibid.
An Afcent of 2 Furl. o*7
Afcend another Hill of 5 Furl. I*o
A Deft. Sc Afc.of 3F. each X’7
Over feveral other Aft. 6c Deft.
And Tome Rivulets
By Wart 6 Furl Right I*4.
AndHanvood- ft l y o
23yj Torrington o*7
The Road from EXETER, to TRURO Cornwall.
[Pag. 128.]
Miles, F.
From EXETER to
The Weft-Gate
Stone-br. over Ex. flv. ibid, to
St. Tnomas's Suburbs o’ 5
Crofs a Brook in a bottom I*3
p£?co»-Houfess clofe Right
Over Lmgdown~He ath
Lowgdom-End-Village
A Defcent of 5 Furl. 04
Creek °n 2 Rivulets o’)
Crofs Tar vance- brook 1 ’2
Another Brook in a bottom o*7
Miles, F.
Reddy j clofe left, |W.
Dmsford on a Rivulet 6’2
A Defcent of 3 Furl Co
Afcend a Woody Hill of 6F. x’6
Another (mail Afc Sc 2 Dele. 1 ’4
Defcend again 6 Furl. I*3
Chegford in a Defcent s’o
Crols a Brook at the bottom o’3
Afcend thence 4 Furl.
By Heath-S cone 5 dole Right 5 ? 5
Crofs Turn-about-Brook i 53
Mcrry-pir-Jhne 3 deft Left c*2
Miles, F-
Merry pit-Houfe; Right o ’s
Pod br. 3 Arch. & Brook o’s
Hills ©ri both ftdes
Stone-br. over Chdrrey- brook i f S
By Crokham Tor 3 Furl.Righc I*o
Scone-br. over Dart fiv. §’7
Crofs another Rivulet
A Water-Mill Sc Rivulet J y s
JETy Roundle-Stono, Right c’j
fetone-br.&Brook in aßorcomo’s
Afcend thence 3 Furl.
By Mirtyvil-Houfcs 3 Left o a
Croft


M. F,
Crofs another Brook Sc Defcend
4 Furl. o’7
A Water-Mill 6c Rivulet 2*2
Stone-br.s Arches on Tavyfiv.2’3
33*0 Taviftock o’i
Stone-br.2 Arches 6c Brook i'y
thence 7 Furl.
Defending about 6 Furl.
Stone-br. 6 Arches on Tamer flv,
1 ’6
Enter Cornwall, ibid,
Denfon , clofe Right o*7
Over Henjharv Downs.
A Defcent of 6 Furl. 3*2
Defcend again 2 Furl. 2 ’o
Stone-br. 3 Arches 6c Brook o*2
Afcend thence near 1 Mile
By St. Ives-C h. 2 Furl. Right 2’o
A Defcent of 3 Furl o’6
Combrow on the Bottom
Crofs Ctmbrow- Water o*s
Afcend thence 4 Furl.
M Miles, F.
a*err) meet o*4
Over a Rivulet 1 ' 0
And a fmall Afcent.
Liskard or Liskerd cfy
Over 2 Rivulets.
A Water-Mill 6c fmall River i’s
An Afcent of 4 Furl. o*3
Crofs 2 or 3 other Rivulets.
By the Eaftern-T op- Houfe 2*3
And Middle-Top- Houfe o*s
By 1 M. Left o*3
And the Weftern- Top-Houfc o’6
A Defcent of 7 Furl, o’i
By Leftormy- Caftle 5 F. Right i’i
mjeot o*7
57 Liftwithiel ibid. o*s
Stone-br. 9 Arch, on Foy flv.ibid .
An Afcent of 5 Furl. i‘4
Over a Brook i‘o
Stone.br. 3 Arches St Rivulet
o*2
' : MF*
St. Blais Q « 2
Crofs feveral other Waters,
By 1 M. Right 3*4
Tregcrrick, i ‘ 0
Oyer 5 or 6 Brooks, drc.
Attend a Hill of 1 Mile i*o
Pelbooth q* i
De fend from the Top 7 Furl.
Tin-Pics on each fide.
7 I< 3lGrampond or Grampont4 c 2
Stone-br. over tfv. ibid,
Sow
Vrobus
A Defcentof 4Furl. 04
By a W acet-Mill & Brook. o*4
Trefillon
%^^«-K’^<?»>Wood>Right3 < 6
AnAttent of 2 Furl. i‘o
A Defcent of 3 Furl. 1 ‘f
79*03 Truro o*4
The Road from GLOUCESTER to COVENTRY.
[Pag. 130.]
M. F.
f From GLOUCESTER :
Leaye the Suburbs i’o
Through Arable Land
A Stone-br. over a Brook I*3
By ChurfdorrC h. 6F. Right 0 6
Another Stone-br. 6c Brook ©’7
Over a Wooden- br.6c Brook I’o
Al(b a Stone-br. 6c Rivulet ‘2*3
Bedlam-Houits o ’5
By bwmdon 7 Furl. Left o*3
S>’o] Cheltenham o’ 5
In the Town, bear Left
Crofs a Rivulet i*3
Fr eft bury 05
Afcend a Hill of near 1 M./i 0
By a Beacon 4 Furl. Left I*o
And Pofthp 1 Furl. Right I*4
A Defcefcc of 4 Furl, ibid.
Over a Rivulet I *3
I 6’i] Winchcomb 02
Another Rivulet at the End
Way moft part Arable.
Jri«U\ Crete * 2*4
JJldbtuftb, •
Mo'F.
Stanrvay o’J
O er 2 or 3 Brook?.
An Afcent of & Furl. l*o
By Lidcomh- Wood ibid. Right
A Defcent of 5 Furl. i’o
Smwflnll on an A(cent o*6
Over Broadway’ Downs.
Crof. the Road from London to
Worcester 2’ 4
Defcend a Hill of 4 Furl. l*s
Wcffwgton at the Bottom o*4
Crofs a Bro6k to
3 Campden o’s
An Alcent of 3 Furl/at the End
Pa ft ure on both Sides.
Over a Rivulet
Micklefon 1.0
Some Houtts on a Rivulet
By \Vnmeton-Ch, 6 F. Right l’o
And Clifford } clott ibid. 3*o
Scone bridge 3 Arch, over Stour
tlv. o*3
Enter ibid.
And part of Stretford upon Avon
Jiv> ft
, . M.K
A Stone-bridge of 13 Great and
6 Small Arches ibid .
The Way moft part open.
Over 2 Rivulets.
By a Dire&ion-Poft, dofe Right
3*l
And Clcpton-Vark IM. ibid . o*6
Crofs a Brook 2 *Jf
Long-bridge a. Village o*6
Over another Brook o*6
47*0 Warwick o*3
Roads part at the End, bear L.
v Avonfiv . 4 or 5 M. on the R.
Crofs a Rivulet 2*6
Roads divide 5 bea,r Right I*4
Turn again to the Left o‘s
By Stonely-Ch. 3F. Ri£ht I*s
A Water-mill and Brook i*o
By £*gginton~Ch. ibid. I Mile
Left.
Pafs a Rivulet o*7
Stiviehal Vujgo Stichel o' 7
580] COVENTRY Cjf
m


The Road from GLOCESTER to MONTGOMERY
in North-Wales. [Pag. 131.]
/ Miles, F.
. /From GLOCESTER
Crpls Severn flv. and xAlney Ille.
Afto a Stone-br. 7 Arches arid
Brook to
Ot/er I ’o
Some Houfes and a Mill 1 *0
By Hinam-C h. 4F. Right o*3
A Wooden-br. and Brook 2*3
Thro* Bird- Wood o’*
Over H«»r/e>-Heath*
Huntley II
Roads part at the End $ bear L.
Croft a Rivulet in a Bottom, i’i
The Church, ibid, near Right.
Afcend thence 2 Furl.
Durley-Croil o 7
Over leveral Rivulet*.
Lea. Line s'o
Lea on a Brook and Alcent o*4
Enter Herefordshire o’ 5
By W'fc/ioH-Ch. 1 Furl. Left i’6
Over a Rivulet or two 1 ’2
150] Roft o’s
Stone-br. 6 Arches over Wye flv .
Wilton o’7
Peter ft one I*s
Over Pitchers Common
By SellekpHeniUnd- Ch. 5 Furl.
Right I*3
Harod's End I*l
Harwood I*3
By a Pond at the End $ Left
Murcia Birch . 1 ’3
M. R
By a Common $ Right
And Dew- Ch. 1 Furl. Left 2’y
The Suburbs of
2y’y] HEREFORD 24
Scone br.B Arches on Wye flv, d’x
Leave the City o’y
Croft a Rivulet 9*l
By Holmer* CH. y F. Right o’6
Thro* a linall Village 2’6
Over leveral Riv. and by lome
Houfes
Stone* br. and Brook 3 5 2
By King’s Peon Ch. 7 F. Left o’6
Thro' Knapper s Green.
By Berley- Ch. 2 Furl. Right o’y
Strntford-Stont*bv. & Brook 1 ’4
41*2] Pembridge 2*3
Stone-br. 7 Arches on yyirrow flv .
at the End.
Wood-br. over a Brook «*6
The Way indired
By Shirley Ch . 4 F. Right 2 *4-
Comb I*4
Wood-br. over Wadels flv, at
the End.
Enter Radnorshire , ibid.
Over a Common.
Preftain J ’6
Leave the Town o’6
Wood-br. over Lugg flv. o'f
By Bulbrock-Ho'dih } dole Left 1 ’o
Horton o’6
A Riv. & Woody Ale. of 5 F. o’ 3
, . M F,
Another Afceric of 3 Furl To
Delcend thence as much.
Croft a Rivulet in the bottom o’y
5 2*2] Knighton 052o 5 2
CvoisTemd flv. at the End to
Shropshire o’ 3
Afcend a Hill of 6 Furl. 04
Over 2 Rivulets.
A Delcenr of 2 Furl. .2*6
Croft a Brook at the bottom o’2
The Rrfe and Crown- Inn,r£.'Right
Alcendihence i Mile.
Defccnd near as much i’-J
Ciunn 1 9 6
Stone br. 4 Arch, an o?jk&v. ih.
Over a Brook o’y
An Afcent of 3 Furl. o’y
Blyfin 5 dole Right
And an Oik 5 cl oihibid* o*3
Croft a Riv. slcend 6 Fur!, o'y
By BifhopVCsftle i M. Rc. o*4
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o’y
Bifliop’s Mot-Hill5 clofe R. i* 1
Enter ibid.
Over a Riv. delcend 2 Furl. o*2
Another Ddcentof 3 Furl. i’o
Croft leveral Brooks, &c.
jßy Cherftod^ Ch. IM. Right I*6
ißy Lord Herbert's Park 5 dole
ibid, 2'z
70 t] Montgomery 05
The Road from HEREFORD to LEICESTER;
[P.133.]
Mile?, F.
From HEREFORD
Through By ft ere-G ate.
Leave the Suburbs at o’ 5
Stone-br. 3 Arch, over Lugg flv.
I’2
By Lugvoardine- Ch. ibid, 6 Furl.
Right.
Stone-br. and Rivulet o*7
Several Houles > raoft Left o’6
By Wethingtm-Vsu 6 Furl. ibid,
ShedptaU x ’4
|ton's-br. oVef £m<{m» fly-. i'f
M. F.
The Lower Ingkton , ibid.
By feme llraggling Houles.
Wood-br. and Rivulet 2’y
Another Wood-br. over Broom
flv. o'l
Aft£nd a Hill of 6 Furl. o’3
l*6
Delcend thence s Furl and
Croft a Rivul. at the bottom o*7
Another (mail Brook I*3
Enter WmefterShire, ibid.
... m: f.‘
Over 2 frnall Delcems, by
Houlef.
Pals a Brook in a bottom I*s
6 F. Right,
, and Elq> Sand 3 Houle J Furl,
Left o 3
Thro’a Wood, ibid.
And by a Park? Right
Over a Rivuiec i P <5
Sinton o’*
Bramsford _ I*4
BrmnsfordAY .-br.tin fcriid ftv.f’t
t


Miles, F.
Crofs k Brook i*3
Sc. Johns, Suburbs of o*7
24 0] WORCESTER o*4
Croft Severn fiv. fhid.
Leave Forefereet Suburbs o*4
Stone-br. §c (mail Rrver °’s
Straggling Houfes on both fides.
Fennal-G reen, a Village 2*l
By Henlip-Houfe 3 F. Right o*2
Part of Marten o*4
30*4] Droitwich vulgo Durr
wich 2*o
Wood-br. over Salwark flv. o*7
r Upton or Henhrooi\ I*3
By the Church 1 Furl. Left o*7
Kepals the Salv?arp °*2
By Grafton-Vavk ,* Left I*l
Stone-br. over Salvo arp flv. o*7
56 0] Bromfgrove o*l
Crofs the Salvparp aga in, ibid.
And a Brook i*°
Bar cote ©*6
Alchurch 3 * 2
Over sArnvo fiv* ©‘3
And another Brook ©*4
WitlTO I*2
Over Wuho- Heath,
M. F.
And a Brook 2*2
Enter Warrvuifhlre, ibid.
Through Dickons and Shirley-
Heaths.
»
Crofs a Brook 3*5
*Solihull vulgo SHlil o*6
By a Wind-mill j ftcaf Right o*s
Over a Rivulet i*6
By a Copfe j Right ibid*
Hampton on the Hill I*s
Pals Blith flv. o*7
And another (mall River o*2
Meriden i*2
Several fmall Ale. and Defcents.
c Aufiey or Mlejly 3*7
Over a Rivulet or two
And a Brook i*i
Spmgate* br. on Sherborn fiv* o*7
62V] COVENTRY o*6
Forkshull V 3
Croft Sow fiv . at the End.
By a Grove; Right o*7
And Bulkington IM. Left 2*2
Sheldon $ clofe Right o*6
Over Arable, and a Brook' 2*o
Woolvey 046o 4 6
Croft a Brook at the End,
And enter Wbolvey* Warren.
By 2 Windmills * Right
Crofs Wat ling-ftree> Way I* 2
Smockington o‘r
Enter Leieeflerjhire , ibid.
By Froulfrvorth 7 F. Right, and
6 F. Left 2*o
Sharnford on fly. o* 1
By a Windmill * near Left <>‘4
And Sapcoat 3 Furl, ibid . o c J
Pafture, or Fenny-Ground.
A Water-mill, dole Right i*t
By Croft 3 Furl. Left ©‘6
Srone-br. over a Rivulet o*4
Stone-br. 1 Ardi. on a Brook o*2
Another Stone-bridge s Arches,
& Brook i*a
By Narborow 1 Furl. Right o*4
And a Windmill I Furl. L. o*2
By Whetjion 9 Furl. Right o*2
Open Way thro’ Pafture i‘o
Stone-br. & Rivulet i‘o
By Elfin 3 FurL Right o*x
Scone*br. 4 Arch, on Sour fiv* to
86 4] Leiccfter 2*3
The Road from HUNTINGDON to IPSWIGH in
Sussolk. [Pag. 135.J
Miles, F.
from HUNTINGDON
Croft Oivfe fly. 10
Ci dmanchtjier °* 2
Turn fhorr Left thid.
And leave the Town i‘o
The Way Open, Arabic, &c.
Hemingsftrd-^ALbot 2 o
Fleming plrd-Grey o 6
sror.c-hr over the Onfe to
s*4j Sr. Ives I*4
Open, Arable, or Corn* Lands.
By Holywell 1 Furl. Right 2*4
Kfedenworth o i
By Overt 7 Furl. Right I*3
And a large Common, ibid .
Far Jon age End 1 *0
Between Erith-C h. 1 Furl Right,
and a Windmill, Left o*4 1
By Fenny-Ground * Right
Frith l*o
Raft the firft Cur or Drain o*6 j
Al(o the fccond Drain 02
Enter Cambridgefhirc , ibid. j
Along ErdiCmfcmy. d
( Miles, F.
| Over Su'ton Fen.
| Crofs a Brook s*o
Afcend Ward Hill of 3 Furl ibid*
Si*! ten o*4
By 2 Windmills» Left o*7
ThiO ftraight and open Way.
By Wircham 3 Furl. Left o*7
V/uitWcrth alias Wnu ford o*6
Open Arable on both lides.
Wvi d ford I*s
By fevcral Windmills 5 Ft. 16
22*7] ELY o*4
Draw-br. over Oivfe fly, at the
End i‘i
The Fen Right, & Common Left
Part of Stantney on a Brook o'j
The Hall and Chappel 3 FurL
Left ' o*s
(
Dulhridge over a Drain 1 o
Fenny Ground on both Tides.
soham 2*o
By Soham-Mzcx j Right
Over a Brook I*l
And epejv Arable Lands*
j Miles, F.
IBy Wicken $ Furl. Right o'?
I Fordham br. and Brook I*7
Enter Suffolk, ibid.
By Fordham-Ch. 7 Furl. Left o*i
j And Freckenham 1 M ,ibid. I*2
By Ch.pnam-Ch* and Hall 9 Furl.
Right o*2
Crofs a Brook o*4
Redlmfe Inn 3 Furl. Left I*s
Over Grange- Water o‘l
|By Kennet 7 Furl Right o*l
i Over a Warren* and
Sheep-Downs for many Miles.
By Kenftrd 1 M. Right I*4
Atcend a Hill of 3 Furl. I* l
By Can eh am 9 Furl. Left
And a Clofe near Right o*3
A Defcent of 3 Furl. Q< 3
Barrorv-b r. and Brook ° 3
Afcend thence as much
By Ruby s Furl. Left f *4
And Saxham 6 Furl. Right o*l
By Saxham-HA\ f ibid* °*4
Over u barren
By


Miles, F. 1
By Wejiley 7 Furl. Right o*4
Open, Arable, or Corn-Lands.
A Great Barn * elofe Right o*4
By the Spittle* dofe ibtd. o‘s
46*1] Sc. Edmund’s-Bury o*4
Through Rufly G ate and Eaft-
Gite, tbtd.
By Elden-Viood * Right X 3
Corn-Lands, or open Arable.
By Bert on 7 Furl. Left °*7
By Rufhbrook^H all IM. Right o*s
And a Houfeon a Common
By Ktugham- Ch. 2 Furl. ibid. o*6
And Rougham* Place 2 Furl.L. o*3
Beighron-RuiU 0
M. F.
By Brighton, ibid. 5 Furl. Left
Croft a Brook at the End.
By 3 Furl. Left *‘3
And the Church S Furl, ibid o*2
Horte-br. over Wulpit- water o*6
By 2 Windmills 3 Right -1
Wulpit o*2
An Afcentof 3 Fud. I*4
A Warren on the Hill
By LLy/cy-Park * Right o*3
Hayley- N ew- ftreet 1 ‘ 1
By Hayley 7 Furl. Left o*4
59 5I Scow-Market i*S
Croft Gaping or Orwell flv . o*s
Comesjord o c 2
M. F.
By Weft. Greeting Hall * Left o*3
And the Church 2 Furl ibid. o*2
Over ZW/£)-bndge?, ibid,
62’$] Needham °*4
Roads part in the Town 5 Right
By Codaam-ftzncon * Left 1 $
Codcnhain or Codnam 0 % 6
Barham 1 3
Cleydon-br, and Brook
Cleydon °*3
By the Hall 2 Furl. Right o*4
A Houle or 2 on both (ides x s x
Thro’ a Lane and Indolures.
The Bar-Gare in
71*2] Ipfwich 2<l
The Road from IPSWICH in Sussolk, to NORWICH,
thence to Cromer on the Sea-Coast in Norfolk. [Pag. 137.]
Miles, F.
From IPSWICH
Thro’ Par-Gate, a ftraight Road.
By a Row of Trees* Left i*S ■
(ome Houfes, ibid, 1* 3
gy 2F. ibid, o*7
Clay don a Village o*4
By 2F. Right o*s
A Smith’s Shop } elofe L* 2, q<6
And a Wood 5 near Right }
By a Ridge ©f Hills for 7F iv. o‘6
And Codenha w-Beacon, ibid, i*o
A Root*br. and Brook o*2
ByC odenham or Codnam- Ch. 3 F.
Left o*i
By a Copfe Right }
And a Smith% Shop* dote >o*l
j
Cro(s a Brook o*4
Enter the Woods & Pye-Road o*4
Some Houles on both (ides.
By Dear-bought-HouCe 4 Furl.
Left o*6
And S F. Rt. o*2
Over a Brook, ibid.
By Ear?s-Stonehazn $ F. Left °*3
The Pye-Inn * dofe'&id.
Roads divide ibid, bear Right.
By Little-Stoneham 5 F. Left.
The Way ftraight,& very Woody
Two org Houles on both (idess'y
py Mendlelham XM. Left °*s
Thro ait o‘6
The Church & Hall * Left.
7hwait~Rvtet o*6
£)j4een s-Head- Inn 5 dole J
Right > o*3
And (ome Woods* Left %
i . • • > ■ : " *
Miles, F.
Over a Brook 1 ©‘4
Leave the Pye-Road, ibid.
By Stake~F\\. IF. Right o*2
And the Hall I Furl, ibid . o*s
White-Horfe,„dired:ing 4 Ways
o‘i
By a Windmill 5 Left o*3
Woods on both (ides,
jfax/cy-ftreet I*2
The Church 2. Furl. Right o*3
By a Common * Right
And Taxleyßeacoti 1 F. ibid, o*s
A Smith's Shop* dele Left
Inclofures on both (ides.
A Common, Right * & Warren,
Left l‘o
Croft Waveney flv, to
And Schole alias Ofmondlion o*4
Croft the R. from Bury to Farm,
By Billingford 9 Furl. Right I*3
Between DickUbamwC h. end
Hall 1 6
Thro* a Wood.
By TitJhal~Mary- Ch. 4F. Left i*3
Over a Common of 1 M.
Croft a Brook J *o
Thro’ another Wood.
Over another Brook x< 4
By TulUm-Ch' 6F. Right ©‘3
Thro* a third Wood.
Long-Stratton J ‘7
Thro’ a (mall Village x* 1
Stratton Srone-br. over Wentfir
flv . o*s
Tasboro Q 3
A (mall Deftent i*i
Rc-pals the Went far on
T 2
*
M. F.
Neivtcfr Stone br. o*3
A Watermill, tout. Right.
Newton a Vilhge o’*i
The Church 3 Furl. Left.
By Srverfthorp 2 Fud ibid, I*7
And Dunfton 4 Furl., Right o 5
Heath-Ground on both lides.
Some frnall A (cents & De(cents.
By 7 Furl, Right o*6
Hartford- bridges 1 ‘ X
By Eaton I M. Right I*o
Roads From London fal U in I*2
Crots Tare ftv* ibid, to
St Stephens Gate in
43*2] NORWICH o*l
Thro* St. sAuguftint s Gate.
Heath ffcill on both (ides.
By a Windmill $ near Right I*2
And Hayham 5 F. Left o*4
A Great Stone * near Right 05
By F- #/d. o*3
Sc. Faith’s: The Church 4 Furl.
Left I*3
S t. Faith’s-New'on, elofeßt. I*4
By a Coppicey ibid. 0 5
Crots a Brook o*4
BySmtffw-Houle 1 F. Rt. ? ,
And the Ch. 9 Furl, ibid, 5 0 7
A Pond j near Left o*2
A Brick-bridge over a Brook o*2
Thro’a Village o*4
Leave the Heath, ibid.
By Hemmgham 5 near Right o*7
Mafisam o*7
Over a Rivulet or two.
| Profpeft to the Sea Fall ward 1 *2
Roads divide 1 bear Left o 's


. , n Miles, F.
SS 7 J o*2
Thro’ a Village o*s
A Brook and Gats o*2
higworrh br. on Bure flv. o*3
A Water-Mill 5 dole Left o*4
Kord< parr, ibid, bear Right.
By bfgmrth~ Ch. 1 Furl Left o*3
Miles, F,
And Erpingham-Ch. 2 F. ibid. o*6
Thro’ open Arable Grounds.
A Smith’s Shop 5 clofe Left o*7
By Suffidd-Ch. $ Furl Right o*3
And Gunten m Hall 1 M. ibid, o*2
By Thor (.-Mar tb ? t
And Hanvporth-CvoCs, Lefts 1
Miles, F.
Routon o*7
Heath-Ground on both fides.
North Reps n € 3
Some Houles j dole Left i‘r
Delcend a Hill of 5 Furl. o*2
] Cromer o*7
The Road from KING's-LYN in Norsolk, to Harwich
in Essex. [Pag. 159.]
Miles, F.
From RING’S-LYN
Marker Place, thro* S. Gate.
On a Cau(e-Way.
i*S
Inclolures on both (idcF.
By Runtcn~Ch• IF. Right o*7
And Middleton- Hail 2 F.Lefc I*3
Middleton , a Village o*3
By an Old Cafile $ Left o*3
La ft Wnuh o 4
Thro’ Common or Failure.
A Stone*br. ex, Brock 2*o
B fluey o‘l
Over two Brook*.
Open Way thro’ Arable Lands.
By Nerbcro-C h. 4F. Right 2*o
Enter a Common, ibid .
Long-br. over a River I*2
Ntrford o*2
Arable Lands on both fides.
An Ale. Sc Dele, of 3 F. each I*2
Afcend again as much i'o
146] Swaffha-m i*6
Over 3 (mall Delcenrs I*4
By City Ch. 1 M> Right o*4
An Alcent of 3 Furl. x*i
By Great Kirfv.gbam 7 F. I. l‘l
And H Iboro- Ch. 2 Furl. /W. i*6
By Hilboro- Hall 1 Furl. o*4
Thro* Failure-Grounds.
By Bedney I M. Left o*s
And Langfcrth Ch. 3F.Righto*s
Crols a Branch or Bv. o*3
By Langfcrth-HaU, ibid. Right
Stanford on a Rivulet i*o
By Tcfts-Ch. 6 Furl. Right
And a Ridge of Hills, ibid. I*7
By droxicn-p aik, ibid , I*3
Miles, F. 1
Croxtcn, a Village I*s
The High Trees at the End > Rr.
By Lylverfion-C h. 7F. Left o*4
clays Lodge 2 Furl. ibid. o*6
31*33 Thetford o*3
Turn fhort $ Left in the Town.
Crols Little Owfe flv. ibid .
A Great Stone * clofe Right I f 6
Over a Brook o*s
By Burnham 1 Furl Left o*s
And a pond $ near Right o*3
Arable on both liefts
By Eufton Ch« & Hall * M L I*2
Betw .Hmniton 2 Furl.Kighr ? ,
And Froyfion $ Furl. Left 2 2
kkswcrth-Tljorp or Ever-Therp l*o
By Eufion-Ch. 2F. Right o‘i
A Water Mill & Brook * Rt. To
And lome Houles , Left o*2
41*0] Ickfworth or lx worth o*3
By Fackenham* Ch. I M. Right x'o
And the Hall 4 Furl, ibid . 04
Part of Stow-Langtoft o*3
The Church 5 Furl. Left o*4
By Lit low- Houle 2 F. Right o*4
And A>£o»-Ch. 5 Furl. Left i‘i
By TofUikr Hall 3F. Right o 3
And the Church 4F. ibid. o*2
By Wulpit 7 Furl. Right ? ,
And an Alms- H. near Leh 5 1 0
By EmfwelhCh. I Furl. ibia. o*i
Some Houles on both fides o*4
W'etherden o ‘7
Hayley-Newjireet 5 Right o*s
Road to Bury falls in, ibid .
Way lome what Woody*
51*7] Stow-Market 2*7
M.F;
Over Ormll flv. to
Comesftrd ' i‘i
A Houle & Grove, near Rt. i*o
By Weft*fr«erm-Hall & Church $
I. eft o*2
Bodiey- br. over the Ormll to
Needham o*6
By Codnam- Beacon I M. Left I*7
Codenham or Codnam o*s
Barham I*3
Cleydon- br. & Brook o'6
Cleydon .
Road to Norwich fall? in, ibid, L.
By Cleydon- Hall 2 Furl Right o*3
A Houle or 2 on both fides i*&
Thro’ a Copfe.
63*53 Ipfwich 2*o
From Ornhill , ibid, thro 5 King's-
fireet.
&0%-br. on G/ppc or Orwell flvJ
Suburbs l‘o
Crols the River to Bone-b r. I*o
By 5 Furl. Right o*7
A Houfe or 1 on both Tides o*4,
By a Turret 2 Furl. Left o*6
Straggling Houles on both fides.
By Chempton 6 Furl. Left 2*6
And a Gravel-Pit * near ibid. o*3
By 2 Furl. Rt. I*4
And Park, ibid . o*3
A Smith’s Shop 5 dole Left o‘i
Part of Shot ley i ( q
By the Church $ Furl. L. ? ,
And the Beacon j near R. X 0 *
The Ferry Houle o*r
Thence over Stour Bv. to
76*0] Harwich I*4
Ths


The Road from KING's-LYN to NORWICH, Continued
to Yarmouth in Norfolk. [Pag. 141.]
/- Miles, F.
From KING’s LYN Mt-Place
Thro’ the Eaft Gate
jtfW//VAlms-H.clo(eßight i‘i
Gay wood °S
Enter a large Heath °'7
By Bawfey 6 furl. 0 7
Betw. 2 Lodges 3 F. diftant o*4
By Wtlken $ furl Right 2 £ c 2
And Lefiat- Chap. 2. F.Left 3
Over a great Common
By Grimflon* Ch. 2 furl. Left I*2
A bridge and brook °*2
Gayton o*2
Another Part of it o*3
By Gayton-Thorpy F. Right o 7
An afcent of 2 furl. 2’i
Sheep-Downs on both (ides.
By a great Houfe 1 F. Right I’l
Heath on both Tides i*j
By Kuffam 6 furl. Right [o*4
And the Lodges 3 furl, ibid, o’s
A fmall ACcent', o’ 2
The Way continues*Heatby.
By Newton 1 M- Right o’i
\Vdi-Lexham~Ch. 3, furl, ibid o *s
And Great Lexham-Ch. 3 furl.
Left i\3
By Durham 6 F. Right o*3
Part of Lycham o*4
Lucheham alias Lycham o 2
By a Wind-Mill 4 furl. Right o’4
A Foot-br. and Brook I*o
Parc of MiUham o*3
The Town it (elf o*3
Some Houfes; near Left 1 }
By Stanfield 2 furl ibid, ©’3
The Hall 5 furl ibid .« o*3
Mites, F. I
And Brifley 5 furl, ibid, o’2 1
Over a Common
By 1 4 1
A SmithVShop; dole Right o*6
By Elmham $ fori. Left o’i
A Br. Water-Mill and Brook i’i
Billing ford o’6
By 2 furl. Left o’s
And furl. ibid, o’i
A SmithVShop; clofe ibid, o’3
Open Way ©n both (ides.
Spurham-C orner I 5 I
A (mall Village 2 o
Leonard s-br. and Brook o 3
By Tyej-Hall 2 furl. Right ® 2
Marton °*7
Re-paft the Rivulet ©’4
Jlttlebndge 02
Afeend a Hill of 3 furl. I
By Taverham 2 furl. Left I *2
Heath-Ground on both (ides.
Drayton 06
AfmallA/cent °7
By Drayton-Lodge 2 f. Right o 3
And Helfden above 1 M. ib. o*2
Wide Heath on both fidts.
By a Stone-Croft 5 Left I*3
And Haybam IM. Right ©’4
Betw. a Houfe near Right 2 0 »
And a Wind-Mills F. Lefts ,
Thro* StSMartin s-Gate
41*4] NORWICH o's
A (mall Village 2 r
Croft Went far flv • to
Trowfe 0 5
By Btxley 9 furl. Right o’ 7
M. F.
And Kirby- Hall and Church 7
furl, ibid . o*7
A Smith’s-Shop; dofe ibid, o*7
By Carlttcn 5 furl. Left i’o
Some Houles & a Fall-Gate i’r
A Common on the Right.
By Hellmgton 3 furl- ibid, l'o
And vdjhby 2 furl Left o’ 3
Thurfton I*s
Inctoforcs on both (ides.
By Chedgrave-Ch . near Right 2*7
Croft a Brook o*2
> clofe Left o'z
By Hock[tngham~Ch . 2 f. Left l*t
And Norton- Beacon 2f. Right I 2
Between the Church 1 and
a Houfe Left* o*2
Thurljion o’4
I By Thorp 2 furl. Right I’4
Hadsko o’s
London-Rodd falls in ; ibid. Right
Over HadsfaDam, to Suffolk
Fenny-Ground on both lides.
1 St ,Olaves 2'2
1 Crofs a Brook ©’7
1 Eritten-ftreet o' 1
1 By a Wind-mill 2 furl. Left o’y
Over a Common
IBy Belfin- Chap* 2 furl. Left l*l
I Heath-Grounds ibid,
I By Bradweli 2 furl, ibid . 1 5 0
Between 2 Wind-Mills o’s
Garlflon o*3
Little Tar mouth I* 5
Croft Ttre flv. to the 1 ’o
County of and
169 43 Great Yarmouth o*l
MONMOUTH to LLANBEDER
Cardigan-shire, South-Wales. [Pag. 143.]
Miles, F.
From MOtfMOUTH
Croft Monnow flv. o*4
Rockfield on a Rivulet I> 7
By an Oak Right o's
Llangaddock, on a Brook I*l
A Defeent of 4 furl. o*3
Wood-br. 6c Brook on the Bor.
Afcend thtnee 3 fork
By Llanihangle-Eflraglewis
1 M. Left
Over 3 Wood-br. & Brook o' 3
Some Houles *, dole Left o 9 y
Landilo Crnjfeny l’i
Croft a Brook ; ibid .
A Deftent of 3 furl. 2*o
Stone-br. over Trothy flv. o’s
Uanvapley o' 1
Over a Brook at the End.
Roads divide j bear Right 6*%
By Llanthewerytherch-Ch,Ltfi o’6
A Defc. 6c Afc. of 3f- each 03
Another (mall Afcent
Defcend Kevenbedagor~ldil\S£*i'6
Fatter- Givyn- Stone-bridge
Over Kenvey or Geveny Br. to
15’6] Abeigaveny
Pali


Milci, F*
Fafs between 2 Hills o*7
Stene br. over Kebby-hr, o*6
hlanvoenarth o’3
A Stone-br. & Brook i ? 2
Some Houfcs on both fides o*4
O'ols a Rivulet o ’4*
Enter Brecknockshire 5 2W.
Llangrenay v o*2
Wood br. over Granayflv. ibid .
2i’oJ Crecov/ell on i’4
A Brook at the End.
Tret own- Houles I 6
Wood-br. and Brook o’2
By an Oaki dole Right i’o
And LUnthangle-Tcombdy-ChuTch
5 furl, ibid . o*3
Brolch on an Afcent of 3 furl. I*3
Over 2 Email Defcents.
Liar fanfraid I 6
tafiro i’i
Over a Rivulet o'6
Llanhamich 07
Crols a Rivulet or two.
, , my M.' F.
33 6j 3*4
Stone-br. 7 Arclies over
at the End.
Stone-br. 4 Arches & Rivulet 12
Llanfpetheid j
Over 3 Rivulets at the End.
Some Houles on both lidffs 2 V
Over 5 Imall Rivers.
Stone-br. 5 Arches over
Redbrue 0
By Devinok* Ch. p furl Left.
W ood-br, over the Vsk 1 I*l
Repafs the 4th time I*2
Trecaftle ; Thence
Afcend Flugh-Cafi I e-WiW of 1 M.
Padure or Heath on both lides.
Enter Carmarthen-fhire 3*5
A Defcent of 4 furl. Thenae o 2
Over a Brook, Afcend 3 furl.
Heath-Ground on both lides.
A Defcent of 7 furl- 3*l
Over Gwdd'gfiv, at the Bottom.
52*5] Llanimdofry I*2
M. F.
Crofs on Bawddm.fi. ibid .
Alfo Toivy )2t/. 3c Brook o’6
By LUndigad-Ch . near Left* iW.
Roads divide $ /W. bear Right. .
An Afcent of 6 furl. o 2
Heath on both Tides.
A Defcent of 1 Mile I*2
Afcend thence 5 furl. I*l.
Over Two Rivulets.
Heath dill on both lides.
A deep Defcent of it F, I*4
By Kayo-Ck. near Right i*6
Crofs 2 or 3 Rivulets.
P infant j’ 2
Over a Brook
A deep Hill of 2 tn; t’j
Heath, or Pa dure on both fide?.
A Defcent of above 2M. 3*o
A Wood* br# & Brook
Stone-br. 3 Arches onTivyflv. o*i
Enter Cardigan-Jhire 5 ibid ,
Crols a Rivulet o*l
68*3] Llanbede'r o’j
The Rood from NOTTINGHAM to GRIMSBY in Lin-
coln-shire, [Pag. 145.]
Miles, F.
From NOTTINGHAM m
An Afcent of 3 furl. °* 7
By a Beacon 2 furl. Left.
A Defcent of 4 furl. i'o
Charlton at the Bottom o*4
A Stone-br. 8c Brook o’6
By fcveral Hills 1 dole Left o*7
Barton Gocfe 1 1
Trent jiv, dofe Right near 7 M.
By t Shelford-Ch. 4F. Right o*4
Open Way thro* Meadows.
By the Lord Stanhops} 1 Furl
Right I’2
Hmtfpil-hv. & Bro®k o’l
Bttweenßridgford-Ch.dofe O
Right
And Gunthorp 5 near Left V
Wcod-br.over Der beck, fiv. I*s
ILrningham-F erry-Houie j near
Left •
And Roeton-Ch. near Right o*2
By a Grove cf Trees $ o*2
A Wood hr. & Rivulet i*i
Bleasby- Ferry over Trent fiv. o’l
Trm on the Left about 5 M.
An Afcent of 3 furl. i*4
‘ c’3
Miles, F.
By Rorclefton-Ch. 6f. Left o*6
And Thorp 6 f. Right o*6
By Farindm I £ left o*2
And Hawten 4 £ Right o'*
Marham'Wood-br. onSnite fiv,
t*i
17’©] Nowarkjvpon Trent o\
Afcend 2 f. and Defcend 1 f. r 5
By Wmthetp Ch. 2f. Left 6*Z
And a Wind-mill If. ibid . o’ s
Enter Ltnccln-fhtre I’o
A frrufeil Afcent t’s
Over a Common
By a Wood 1 dole Left I*7
4 f. ibid, I *7
4f. Righti’i
Over a Moor.
A great Stone j dole Right o*7
And Boulton-Ch. near ibid . I’4
Stene-br. over Witham fiv, to
Brace-bridge a Village q*2
By 2 Pods j near Right.
Road from London falls in 0 6
G<?4t-br. on Witham fiv, }co
30*4] LINCOLN ‘ o’l
Over a large Heath.
Crols a Rivulet
By Netilbam 2 f. Right o*3
Walton 2,*0
By Dunham Houfc I M.Right °’s
Tne Way Open Arable $ Left#
And cneiofcd , Right
Ryland i dole ibid. o’F
A Wood* hr. & Brook 22
By Sharford-Bzik & HalljLefto*2
And the Church 2f« ibid, o*4
By LiJJlngton-Ch. 2f. Right 152l 5 2
A Cople 5 near Left.
And Foldmgwwtb 3f. ibid. o*3
Way thro* Arable and Failure.
By Middle- Knifing 7 £ Left 2*4
Crofc Mnkham fiv, to
Market*Railing x’6
O/er a Moor
By Hamiinun Hill If. Left I*4
Crols a Brook to
Tevelby * X*S
Afcend 2 furl, at the End.
And enter the Woulcfc*
A Ddc. of 5 fu. & A(c. of 6 foil.
o’6
By Rimond in the Mire t M. Right
I*3
A Defcent of 6 f. 11
/>j ibejioic 5 2
Crols


Miles, F.
Crofs a Rivulet at the End
And Aftend tfcnce 7 Furl.
Over Arable Lands • x’o
And Heath-Grounds 1 ’o
§y Croxby Ch. SF. Left ©3
A Defcent of 6 Furl. o' 3
Churganby 0 4
Miles F.
Aftend thence 3 Furl.
Another (mall Deft. 8c Aftenr.
Deftend a Hill of 7 F. 1 ’7
Ravendale vulgo Ramdale ©’7
Aftend thenae 3 F. 8c
Leave the Woulds o’ 5
A Defcent of 5 F. ibid.
Miles, F,
w Asbyy dofe Right o*s
Briggefley on a Brook o’2
Arable Lands on both fides.
Waltham I*s
Starth 2*o
66' sl Grimsby I*4
The Road from OXFORD to BRISTOL. [Pag. 147.]
Miles, F.
From OXFORD, by
Cairfax thro* South- Gate.
Over way.
Stone-br. 2 Arche on Thames
fly, l V
Enter Bark;{hire ? ibid.
By I!Jley*Ch. 5 F. Left o’l
And Hinksey 2 F. Right o*4
Road? divide ? bear Right o’2
Thro’ Bagley Wood o*2
Furze & Fern on both fides o’y
A Houfe ? clofe Right o*4
Thro* Arable Lands.
Croft a Rivulet o*s
A fmall Village I*3
Road from London falls in I*3
A Houfe or two on both fides o*4
Ptfeld o*7
Kingflon-Baptift i’o
A Houfe? Left and Rivulet x’x
By an Afh-Tree ? Left T’3
Arable on both fidcw.
By Buckland-Ch . SF. Right 2*o
And fome Houfes? ibid, i’s
A fmall Afcent I*o
Farindon on a Defcent l‘o
Way dill thro 5 Arable Lands.
M. F.
By Cogg/hull 1 M. Left 2*4
Colefell J ’3
Over a Brook at the End
Enter Wilt-Jhire o*3
Croft a Rivulet to Efthorp *’2
23’4THighworth on an 'ft . o*4
B y Hannington-Ch. 4. f. Right 2*l
And Bury* Blnnfdor-Ch. 2 f\ib, l*o
Several Houles j Left o*7
Stone* br. 2 Arch, on Ray fly. 2*o
Roads divide? bear Left i*o
Thro* Purton*Green
Several Houfes on both Tides
Pur ton I*2
A fmall Defcent I*l
Over Purton Common
A Wood-br. and Brook x‘i
Enter Braddon-F oreb. I'o
Padure on both fides 2*2
Thro* Guerfden*Green o'G
Guerfden-yi llage I*4
Wood-br. & Riv. at the End.
Anoth. Wood-br. & Brook #.o*4
Milbor n-Gveen a Village o*2
A final! Defcent **2
Stone-br. over Mtton fly. o*4
42*0] Malmsbury o*4
M. F*
Wood br. & Brook at the End.
Foxley on a Rivulet 2*6
A Park ? dote Right at the End.
Arable Grounds on both fides.
By Sherfton-Ch. 3. f. Right 3*l
Luchlngtm } *2
Enter Glocefler/hire I*7
A Village part of Tormarton o*6
Over Ter mart on- Warren
Arable and Pafture-Groiinds
By a Stone-Wall ibid. Right 2'4
AndTormarton-Town near ib, o*4
A Defcent of 5 furl. 2*5
Hintcn o* 2
Croft a Brook o*7
Some Houfes on a Brook o*7
Fulcher alias Buckle Ch. o*3
Straggling Houfes on both fide#*
By the Coal-Pits 5 ibid . Right 2*2
Manger'field . g*2
Enter R’wg/nW-Foreft o*6
Croft a Brook by a Pond Left *‘l
By Stapleton 1 f. Right I*7
Roads divide ? bear Left o < s
Road from London falls in at
The Suburbs of
670] BRISTOL 13
The Road from OXFORD to CAMBRIDGE. [Pag. 148.]
Miles, F.
From OXFORD, by Cairfax,
Through rhe North-Gate.
Leave the City at o*s
Common Fields on both Sides.
Enter a Lane o*7
By a Common 5 Left J< 6
And Loufe-Hall, clofe ibid. I*l
A draggling Village o*2
Gosford- Stone-bridge on Charwdl
> fi’V. 02'
Marflrland on both §ides.
M.F.
By l Mile? Right l‘x
Crofs the Road from London to
Glocefter o*s
By Weft on-Green ? Left
Between Weflm-Ch, ibid, and the
Park ? Right I*7
Wendlebury I*s
Common Fields on both Sides.
Crofs a Brook I*o
By a Windmill % furl. Left o*7
Roads divide > turn Right
Miles, F.
12*7] Burcefter vuigo Blfleter 0 i
Roads part again ? bear R, o*6
By a Windmill * neaa Left o* 5
And Casfieid-Hovtc 2 f. ibid . o'6
Stret ton* Dudley I*2
Croft the Road from London to
Banbury o'r
A Water-milldole Left I*7
Enter Buckingham-Jhire o*2
By Nevpton-Purfel 5 furl. Left a* <s
And Chiik&gpd 3 furl* Right o*3
Entejp-


M.F.
Enter Tmgewtcl^ Woods ©’s
A Common on both Sides I*o
By Tmgewick:Ch . 2f. Left o’ 3
And a Pond 3 furl. Right o S
Gaynat o $
By R alley ibid, 5 furl. Left.
And a Windmill 2 furl, ibid, I’o
Stone-br. over Owfe flv.
24*3] Buckingham o’6
Owfe Hv. Right above 5 M.
By Borrow 5 furl. Right, and
Maids Norton 7 furl. Left i’i
By a Windmill 5 near Left o’4
And a Warermill 1 furl. R. ©*2
By Fcfcot 2 furl. Left o*s
Over Sheep Downs.
Crofs a Brook 1 ’o
By Leckhamjled ibid. 3 f. Left.
And 77 jffrnton-Ch. 3f. Right o*s
Enter Northamptonshire 0 ’3
A Watermill j near Right i’o
And Beckhampton-Ch. 2. f, ib, o’*
Rep if* the Owfe o’6
And re-enter Buckingham Shire ib.
A Watermill 5 near Left o J 2
Common Fieldsonboth Sides.
By Pa/JingharrSCh. 2f* Left o’s
And Calverton-Ch, 2 f. Right o*4
Crofs the Road from London to
, Che(ier o’6
By Wulvertvn-Ch. 4f. Left I’o
A Dcfcent of 2 furl. o’y
Stanton'ht, and Brook o'2
M. F.
By Haverjham Ch, 2 t. Left o*3
and Church ibid, o’s
A frnall Defcent o’y
Roads divide j bear Left o*2
By Great Linford ibid. 2- f. R.
And Little [jnford 4 f. L. o*3
38*3] Newport-Tamel l’i
Over a Stone-bridge o’y
By Moulfi'Ch. 4 furl. Right, and
Lathbury 2 f Left o*2
Another Stone-bridge o’j
Common Fields on both Sides.
By ChichieyCh. 2 furl. Right i’o
Enter a Lane o*7
Thro’common Fields again l*o
By Hard mere 4 furl Left o’ 4
l softwood x’l
Enter Bedford {hire 0 6
Way ftill thro* common Fields.
Stagfdo?i l’y
A fmall Stone-br.& Brook o*4
Another Stone-br. & Rivulet i*o
Crofs the Owfe again o*s
By Brumham-Ch, ibid, 2 f. Left.
Biddenham-Ch, 4 furl. Right o* I
Fordend- Houfe 3 furl, ibid, o*7
And a Windmill 2 furl* Left o’i
si‘3J Bedford i’i
A (mail Village I*s
Fmlecb *Barns * clofe Left o*s
Cardington- Croft 03
By the Church 2 furl. Right o’i
And Cuphull Ch* 4 furl, r&rf, i’i
By Willington-Varii $ Left o’ 3
TheOhurch and Hall near ibid,
Gmmon Fields on both Sides.
Morehanger 23
By Flunham 7 furl. Left o*s
Gatford~Stone-bv. and Brook o*6
By « Sands 1 furL Right ©’4
Roads divide 5 bear Left I*o
By Ever don- Ch. 4 f Left x’4*
Enter Cambridge-{hire o*s
By Woodbury-Houfe 3 f. Left o*s
And Gamlinghay-Pavk ibid, o*2
Gamlinghay-\ illage I*2
Common Fields on both Sides.
By Hatley 6 furL Right 2*2
And Little Granfden sf. L. o’t
By a Copfe 5 near Right o*6
Stow 1 dole Left I*4
Crofs the Road from London to
Tor &c. o # 7
By Wood* houfe o*6
By Kingjhn-Ch. 3 furl. Right
And Cavocote $ Left 13
T(fts on a Brook 1 ’i
Comberton I*2
A Windmill * near Left 1 9 6
And Cotton I M. ibid. o*4
Pafture-ground on bothSidesi’d
O ver a fmall Bridge o $
Road from London falls in o*s
79*53 Cambridge o*3
The Roadfrom OXFORD to CHICHESTER. [P. 150.]
Miles, F.
From OXFORD, by
Cairfax- Crofs, thro* South-Gate.
CrofV Thames ftv. to I 4*
Marty-Land on both Sides.
Between a Watermill clofe R.
And Ilftey Ch. 5 furl- Left o’l
By S. Hinkscy-Q\\. 2f. Right o*4
Molds divide $ bear Left o’2-
Afcend thence 2 furl.
And enter B igfey- Wood o*4
A fmall Dele, and Afe. ibid*
inclofures on both Sides 2*o
By Norhet-Ch. 1 furl. Right o’ S
And Radiy 1 M. Left o*4
6’3l Abingron o*3
A Bridge on Oci\ fiv. at the End.
Over Ktnljland Marihes
By Culium 9 furl. Left l
L>rayton*Day~Ch, 4. f. Right
Miles, F.
And Sutton 4 furl. Left o 1
Common Fields on both Sides.
A friiall Stone-br. and Brook l*o
Mifton o’ l
Afccnd a Hill of 3 furl. o’s
Enter Milton • Lan& I’o
By Harwell- Ch. Sf. Left o*7
Great Corn-fields on bothfldes.
By 6 f. Left 16
And a Beacon 7f. Right o’*
Over White-Horfe Vale.
Afcend a Hill of 3 L o’ 7
Defcend as much o*s
17*0] Eaft-llfley i’i
An ealie Afcent of 2 f, i’o
Bidden x*4
Sheep-Downs on both Sides*
A Copfe j near Left
By CUvely Ch* 2 f Right I*2
Miles, F.
And dryers-Court 3f. Left o*4
Woody Grounds on both Sides.
By Hurlington- Houfe 3f. L. I*6
Between Shaw-Wood * Left, &
a Copfe o’s
By £>ow*>zgfon-Caftle 2f. K. o’ 5
Roads part j bear Right oi
By Shaw-Ch; 5 f. Left o’S
26 olNewbury on Rennet fiv*o2
Over Broad-Green.
Inclofures on both Sides 2' 9
Heath on both Sides 1 *1
Little Knight*br, on Auhorn flv.
0 3
Great Knight*br, , o*2
Enter Ham Shirt ibid*
Over Kmgfdeer- Heath.
By Benham-Court i f. Right t 9 S
And SpttcrjKh. If, ibid. 03
A


M.F.
A Houfe or 2on both fides o*7
dVll King's-Cleer o’s
AfinallDtfcent
Afcend Pettuw* Hill o 3
By Willoughby- Lodge 4 Furl. Rt.
o*3
By Wolverton*Qh* Furl.Lefco'y
Over 2 fmall Afcents.
By Tiwgcfr'Houfe 9 F. Right 2*3
And Wooton* Ch. )M. ibid. o*3
A Wood, ibid, dole Right.
By Rooks-Down j Right.
And Park TVzW-Warden j Left
HolyGhoft Chappel clofe ib. 3\
4 2'3] Bafingftoke o’i
Roads divide 1 bear Left i’x
Harwood- Hall 5 clofe Right o*7
By Wenfted~Ch. near ibid. i’s
And Harcote-Ch. clofe Left I*2
A ftraggling village o’ 5
By Wejton- Ch. 7 Furl. Left o’s
M.F.
Keep the middle of 3 Roads t’o
Over
By a Grove of Trees $ Right 2*7
And Endley's Oakj near Left o*s
53V] Alton * o*4
Chawton I*4
Sir Rich. Knight's $ near Left o*4
Farringdon*Stteet i y o
Nevptcn Wood j clofe Right I’o
Eaft near Left, and
Rutherfield-Vark $ Right Vo
By Colmere Chi* 3 Furl. Left °*J
And a Grove of Trees, ibid. I’s
Straggling Houfes on both Tides.
2*5
7 Furl Left I*7
65*6] Peterdicld 06
Over a Barren Heath.
The Heath-Houfe j clofe R. i'o
Stone-bridge and Rivulet o*7
Enter Sujfcx, ibid.
M. FJ
Afcend S. Richard s Hill 1 4
An Ale & Defc, of 3 F. each I'2
By H*rf/»e-Cb; 4 Furl Le f c o>2 0 > 2
And the Hills 4 Furl ibid, o’ 4
North M?rden~ Ch. clofe Right,
and a Wood* Left I*4
A Defcent of 2 Furl o*s
By a Ridge of Hills for 2 M. k.
And Chi Igrove-Houfe j near L. 1 ’0
Enter a Lane 2* it
Creivfaall-Ho ufe } cloflb Right o*4
By Binderton- Houfe 3 F. Left o*s
And Middk*L<ti//J«rCh. I FurL
ibid, 1 ? 0
Betw* Weft*£«w«i 6 F - Righr,
And Eaft-Z-rtT/awf-Ch. 6 F. L.o’4.
Rairmare ijtoule.j cb(S Left o’?
Road from London Fills in o'jT
Alms Houfes j dole ! eft o’*
80*5] CHICHESTER c ’4
The Road from OXFORD to COVENTRY, conti-
nued to Derby. [P. 152.]
Miles, F* ]
From OXFORD, by i
Cairfax-QtaCsy thro* the North*
Gate.
Leave the City o*4
Roads divide, ibid, bear Right.
Arable Lands on both fides.
By Waiver cote- Ch. 6 Furl. Rt. *’s
K idlington- Grecn a Village 2'7
The Church 7 Furl Right.
Roads part again * bear Rt. I'2
Croft the Road from London to
Worcefier 0 2*3
Way ftill thro’ Arable,
By TuskfayCh. 6 Fail. Right 3*6
Roun/ham»Clu 6 Furl, ibid, 0 3
Steeple 6 Furl ibid* o ! 2
And Dunfio 3 Furl. Left I*s
Defcend above 4 Furl. 0 3
Stone br. 2 Arch. & Brook
Over a Rivulet afcend 2 Furl. o*3
16*3] Dedin&ton o’2
Defcend a Hill of $ Furl. i'o
Scoiie bridge and Brook at the
Bottom o*s
Croft a Rivulet o*4
Stone br. and Brook to
dderbury l’s
VP eeping*Crofs i '5
By Bodies Ch. ibid. 2 Furl Left
22’?] Banbary f
Miles, F.
Roads part at the End 1 Right
Common Fields and Pafture.
A Brook and (mall Stone-br. I*4
A Lane and Hedge on both fides
°*s
By Little Brought on-C h. 1 Furl
Right o’4
Great Broughton-C h. 2 Furl ib 04
And HanvoelL- Ch. 7F. Left o’ 4
Between CnpdryQh. 6 F. Right,
And Hanrveil- Hall 7 F, I. o*2
By Sotes-well-Ch. 4F. Left *’4
And itfo//mgro?j-Ch. 2 F. z'Hd. o’2
Enter Warwick fair r y ibid.
Common Fields on both fides.
ByCUydun 5 Furl Right I*l
And Farmborow $ Furl. Left o’s
A Lane and Hedges on both
fides o’3
Common Fields on both fides **o
A Defcent of 3 Furl o*3
By Wurmleighton- Ch. S F. R. 1 o
Thro* Pafture Grounds.
By a Farm-Houfe 2 F. Right o' 5
And Water-Gall Huule 3 Furl.
Left o’/
A final! Defcent o’2
Between 2 Farms at the Bottom
A Lane and Hedges on both
fide* i*o
V.
, ■ m. f:
Q *
Common Fields on boih fides;
36*5] vSoutham Vr
A Defcent of 4 Furl j’6
Croft a Brook 2 ’o
Long Icchmgton o'2
By £. Lemingtm 7F. Right o’s
And a Farm -Houle 6 F. Left o’ 5
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o*4
tiderfim Q 'y
Stone-br. and Brook at the End.
Prince: horp j *&
Crofs the Road from Perk to
Bnftol) ibid,
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl. o*7
Over Dtuifm orc~ He a: h,
By Rw^-Ch ; 9F. Right 2*4
Winfitrd Scone br. on w4i,o/z fiv.o’tf
Wind Id o*4.
Stone br. on Hv. at the End.
By Wciriey Hall 1 Furl. Left o’6
s o'sj COVENTRY I’g
B / 1 Furl Right 2*4
Scone br. a*id Ihook to
Lifford 02
A Houle 01 2 by an Ojk, R. 1 l t
Bedwin'h, dole ibid . jS
Griffey 1L
Crols a Brook in a Bottom o 5
o ’4
ScuiiC


Miles, F,
Stone* br. and Brook to
sfc*2 3 Nun Eaton o*4
By Bar-Pool and a Windmill I’o
A Delcent of 3 Furl. o*7
Over two Rivulets 1 7 7
Mane eft er o’ 2
62*53 Arherftoii o*4
Stone br. 8 Arch. oruAnkerftv.o 7
Enter Leiceftetjhite, ibid.
By liatcl’ff-Cuiey J Furl. R r o’i
Shfpey o*6
By Orton 5 Fail. Left , o’i
And Siberjlone 4 Fur]. Right o*s
M. F. I
Troycrofs \ T o
A Wood 1 dole Left o*6
Between Oopflull-Fla\\ 2 F Right,
And Hogs*Norton-Ck. s F. L. i’o
Snarefton 1 *o
Crols a Brook o*s
Pafturp & Moorilh Ground o*3
By Mejham Gh- 2F. Left l*t
73*73 Alhby de la Zouch 2*6
Crols three Brooks, ibid,
Cales ad joy rung * Left
Arable Lands on both lidcs.
Enter Derbyjhire 1 *5
Miles, Fj
By near Left 01
Dclcend Piftern- Hill i’o
Over fbme Brooks, &c.
By Ttchnel-Ch* 3 Furl. Left 2*4
Two Stone Bridges over Trent
flv. 2*o
S war kft on o*s
By Barrow upon Trent 2 F. Left
o*2
Stone br. 3 Arch & Brook o*6
Over Synfold- Moor.
A Houle or 2on both Hdcs 2*5
86*43 Derby i’i
The Road from OXFORD to SALISBURY, and
thence to Pool in Dorsetlsire. [Pag. 154.]
Miles, F. 1
From OXFORD by
Can fax thro* the South Gate.
Over ninety Caufeway.
And a Branch of Thamet flv. I*4
Enter Bert (hire, ibid.
By Hinksey. Ch 2F. Right o’y
Road* divide j bear Right o’i
Over 4 (mail A (cents.
And a Delcent of 2 Furl. I*4
Roods' part again * bear Left i’o
6*7] Fbington 2,’ I
In the Town * bear Right.
Roads part at the end, turn Left.
Crols ibid.
hy Sutton 7 furl, I*3
Drayton o’6
By Culium l M. ibid.
St event cn I'7
Over 3 hnall A (cent?,
A Dele. & A •jf 2 Furl. 2*3
By Harwell Ch. ibid. 6 Furl. Left
And Welt •Hcndred 10 F. K. o*4
Alcend a Hill of 4 fml. I*4
Some other iinall Ale. and Dele.
By Farnvorctigh- Ch. IF. left 3’2
Over 3 (’mall Delants o*3
By a Windmill IF. Right 2*2
Oieat She frdon a Brook 2*5
Hoads divide ibid, bear left,
And (eon after Right again °*2
An Afctnc of 2 furl o*3
A Wood $ dole Right o*2
A Delcent of 2 iurl. Tx
Miles, F.
Several Houles; dole left.
Charnham- Street 2*7
LoHf/on-Road to Brifiol ibid. left.
Crols Kennet flv. to
•29’d H un g erford o f 3 1
Md\.Goddard s Houle* near K. 2*2 I
And SBaborn- Ch. near left I*s I
Enter Wdtjhire o*s I
Over 5 or 6 /.(cents & Dele
Thro*-a Wood 5*41
Several (mall Alcenrs and Dele.
By Collingbcrn-Ch. 0 furl. R. I*s I
And Lttxgijhail IM. Left i‘i
A Descent of 2 furl. o*4 l
Novth-Tudworth i*o
Enter Hamfhire o*7
Somh-Tudworth o*3 I
By Shipton-Ch. 1 furl, left 1 4 3 |
Kc-enter Wdtjhire . o*4
An Atcent and Delcent of 2 F.
each I*s
Another Alcentand Delcent of
2 F. each i*o
Delccnd a Hill of 3 furl. 3*l
By Wmtcrborn-Ch. SF. left I*4
Bird I*s
By $ rightJord'Ch. 4 E right 2*l
57*4] Salisbury o*i
By tijhtrton ibid, near right.
And Harnham- Ch* 4 F. right
o‘6
Croft flv. o j
! l ß} 1 Mile* kft' o*s
Miles, F,
Hummington-btldge and Brook
Hummington~\ \Wagt o*l
Over Part of Salisbury -Plain.
Between Tweed- Farm, dole
Right * and Blacky • Warren-
Lodges,near left 4 •**
A Windmill % dofe Right x‘o
7 ipprt o*2
Enter Dorfet(hire I*3
Some Houles on both (ides I*3
The Lady tiooper\ 9 ibid . near
left.
70*0] Cranborn o*7
By Tonfime- Ch. 6 furl, left 2*o
And Win from St. Giles 5 furl. Kv
o*3
By Chabury Houle $ near left 3*5
And Hint on-Marten-C\\. 3 furl,
ihid. ° o* 7
1 A/hton-Farm 1 dole i‘o
By Stanbndge- Chappel, near ib.
o*3
And Wtlsford- Court 5 near Rt.
i*°
Crols a Branch of Stour At. x*i
80 6] W inborn-Minfter o*3
on Stour flv. x‘i
I Over Catjford- Lawns.
IBy a Windmill 5 dole left 4*o
I And Hukjord- Houle * near zW.
Crofsaßr(6k o' 3
87’5] Pool
The


The Road from PRESTAIN to CARMARTHEN. [P.156.]
Miles, F.
From PRESTAIN-Town-Hall.
Roads divide $ bear Left o*3
Croft a Rivulet °‘i
Defcerd a Hill of 7 F. °*s
BeggerVbufli $ Right o*7
Kinertm I *4
Some Houfes on a Rivulet or
two °y
New~Radnor I<o
Crofs Sewergß-Brook o*6
And two other Rivulets.
Afcend a Hill of 1 M. i*o
IdanihanS'le-nant- near
Left o*2
And a Pond near, ibid , o*4
A Defcent of 9 fori. o*2
Over a Brook Sc Afcent a*3
A Wood-br. 6c Brook o*6
Another Brook o*2
Mans- Inn $ clofe left J *i
Thence pafs 2 Rivulets.
Thro* Pafture-Grounds.
LUnelvaugh 2 3
Breckpockjhire,
15*5) Bealth alias Bealt o*s
\Vood*br. on Vervar flv. o*6
Cavenabeth I*2
Straggling Houfes on both fide*
o*4
Croft a Rivulet i*7
Uanavar o 6
Lonteridgky- br. 5c Brook i*a
A Defcent of 3 F. i*c
Miles, F.
O ver 4 Brooks M. Lloyd's $ Rt.
l*o
Afcend a Hill of 9 F. o*s
Paft a Rivulet 3*o
Pafture 5c Furze on both fide?.
Ludlow-vaugh~HouU: $ clofe Rt«
x‘i
Enter C<tr?narthenjhire , ibid.
Defccnd a Hill of 12 F. i*i
Some Houfes on both lides I*s
By a Park 1 Left 0 7
And Llanbrain-HouCc j clofe Rr.
©*4
Some Houfes on a Brook o*7
Wood-br. on Brane Bv. o*s
LUnverabryn I*o
34*61 Llanimdofry o*3
Roads divide; bear left o*2
Croft Tewy Bv. ibid .
LUndingad* Ch. near left ibid.
Over a Brook o*7
Several Houfes, moft on the Rt.
Pafs a Brook 5c Rivulet.
Touch upon the Torvy 5 left I*3
A Brook & tome Houfes 5 Right
I*6
A Wood-br. 5c Brook I*2
Mas-Gocdwrn-lnn $ clofe left o*s
Crofs Dulat Bv. o*x
vAbermarlos* Houfe j near Right
o*l
Some Houfes & a Brook, ibid,
Afcend thence 4 fori. o‘i
M. F.
C<tven~Glcflen 016o l 6
A Defcem of 3 fori. I*3
Covcen-Gathbury 1 ‘o
Wood br. on Part of Dulas flv*
Graft a Brook
An Afc. of 5 F.& Defc. of 2 F.o*6
Vare- Lloyd on a Brook I‘2
Some Houfes & a Rivulet o‘6
Rue-B.addor o*4
Wood-br. on DuUs flv. ibid,
Afcend thence by feme Houfes.
Some Houfei & an Oak * Rt. I*4
<Abergli’jJhy- Hou(e 5 near left o*2
Fa ft a Brook *‘2
A Wood-br 5c Brook o*3
Some Houfes on borh-fides o*l
Another Wood-br. £1 Brook o*2
Over a Paved Caufe-way,
An Inn j dole Right o*<S
Some Hiufes on both Tides I‘o
Wood-br. rn Cathy Bv. o‘i
Paft a Rivulet 2*5
By a Ridge of Hills for 1
2 M. Right V
And Joroy flv. left J
The White-Will * dote ibid . o*4
I *4
Wood-br. on Guilty flv • o*2
Stone-br, 4 Arches on another
Branch o*x
By iome Houfes on both fidcs.
60*4] Carmarthen o*s
The Road from SALISBURY to CAMPDEN in Glocester-
shire. [Pag. 157.]
M. F.
From SALISBURY* Council-
Houfc.
Leave the City o*4
And enter the Plain.
By Part of Old Sarum $ Rt. I*2
Thro' Arable & Pafture-Lands.
Several Crofs-ways on both lides.
Ever ley 4*o
Way thro' Open Arable-Land.
By Falfe-Stone 1 near Left 2*2
Burbich 3*o
Enter 2*2
Fair-bough* Tree§ clofe Right X*2
Several Houles 1 clofe Left. 1
Miles, F.
Leave the Forcft ; I*4
A Dtfcent of 2 Furl. o*2
27*0] Marlborough o*6
Wood br. on Kennet flv, ibid.
Roads part at the End $ bearßt.
Ogbow'Majfty 2*4
Ogborn St. near L. I*l
Ogbom St. George o'^
Arable Lands on both fides.
Cbiffeldon* Ch. 4F. Left I*4
Enter a Lane o*3
By Badbury 2 F. Right o*l
Liddington 4 F. ibid • o*3
V *
M. F.
And fVanborough TO F. ibid, <*y
Over Parr of the Common i‘q
And a Rivulet o*r
Marfham 1 x
Way moft part Open to
Highrconh 3*3
Dtrfeend thence 3 Furl.
Arable Lands on both lides.
Enter a Lane o*2
Inglcjham c *6
Stonc-br. 5c Rivulet o'j
Enter Berkshire, ibid.
Rivulet o*4
St c John* s


Sr. Johns Store*br. on Thames
fly. o’7
Enter Glscefterfhire * ibid.
4^B’7J Lechlade o ? 4
Woad-br. on Lech flv. to
Little Farrindon $ dole Right l’3
Re-enter Barkfliirs j ibid.
Come to Osfordfmre l*i
Over Fanngdon Common.
Fitk[n o 5
Thro’ open Arable 5c Failure.
And the Seven Downs i’s
Enter Bradwelb-G rove I *o
A Defcent of 4 f. P*7
A Vili. 5c Brook $ clofe Left o’6
M. F.
By Sipat Elm* Tree $ ibid.
5 7 4 3 Burford i’2
Roads divide $ at the end bear
Left o*4
Stone-br. on Wtndrufh fiv. ibid .
Arable lands on both Tides
By Barrington Ch, 6f. Left l’°
A Srone * dote Left o'2
Over Black? Heath, /
By Fifeld-t h, 7f. Right I*6
And EdburyCo. 7. f. ibid. I’7
By Wjicote-Zh. 4f. Right l’i
6 f. Left o*2
And the Beacon 2f. iW. o*2
A Descent of 4 f. o*4
Miles, P>
By Iccomb-Ch, ibid, 7 f, R,
A Rend a Hill of 9 t i‘o
67*4] Stow on the Would I*4
By Lower Srcetl-C h. 2 f. Left o’l
And Vpper Swell Ch- 4 f. ibid, o*7
A Houle * dole Left o*4
Way generally open.
Lcngborough- Ch. 2f. Right 2 $
A Windmill* dole ibid. o*2
A Hedge and Stone-wall 5 R. 2*5
By Blockley- Ch. IM. ibid, ©'4
Over Broadway- Downs.
A Conduit j dole Right *’6
Wefjington o*2
75*53 Campden o’a
The Road from TIN MOUTH Northumberland
CARLISLE in Cumberland. [Pag. 159.]
Mile?, F.
From TINMOU TH §
Stone-br. and Brook o 6
By Windmill j l eft ibid,
ArA Shield's- Ch. near Right o'S
Chilhngton * clok Left OS
Onr ton * dole Right o 4
Defcend thence 3 f t
A dele, and afc. of 3 f eadi
By VtkpwelUHall If. Left * S
Biker} clofe Left „ 1 ?
A dele, of 6 furl, ahd afc. or 4 f.
o’x
A Stone-br and Brock to
*Vfeiurn
S’6] Nswcaftle upon Tine 07
A Conduit 5 dele Right 1 3
Afcend thence 4- furb
A dele- & afc- of IM. each I’7
Be Denton-Hall * near Right ©’4
JPlgfhail 1 °
Deicend thence 1 M.
AewUrn 1 1
A Wood br, & Brcok * ibid*
Tne flu. Left for 3 M.
By R:g/3r».»'Ch. 2f. Left 1
A Wood-bp. and Brook 05
IK Ham on a Valley 1 7
Stone-br. 6c Brook in a Pott. 1 0
By 2 Watermills ibid. Left
And Vnidor* Cattle near ibid , o*7
Ouingham o 3
A Stone-br, and Brc, at the end.
Afcend a Kill of 9 f- i‘*
Ovihgton o 2
A Dtfc & Aft.of 4f. each I*s
By A’ewm-Ch. *M. Right o*7
Miles, F.
Crofs a Rivulet in a Bottom o*3
Afcend thence a Hill of 6 furl* to
A Defcent of 7 furl. i r 6
Gcrebridge alias Cerbridge o*4
A Watermill * clofe Right o*6
By Sandy on a Hill 2 f. ibid. o*4
Bettric\ 02
xAnwick^ Grange * clofe R. o*6
*Anwic\ on the Hill near ib. o*2
Over a Woodbr, 6c Brook 1 4 0
And line fly, a link farther.
S lC 3] Hexam 0^
Afcend thence aHdl of 12 furl.
Enter a Moor 2*o
I>efc. 2f & afcend 5 furl I*7
Dcfctnd again 1 M. o*2
leave the Moor o*4
Crofs a Rivulet in aCo pie o*4
By a Watermill clofe Right? t
A nd Hatton, near ibid, y 2
By Hadm- Ch 2f. ibid. o*4
H*don~\’i\Uge o‘l
‘A Bridge on South-Bv.
Afcend a H U of .5 furl. I*s
Sapweod dole Right o*6
A dele, of 4 * f. & afe, of 1 f. o*2
Other fixidli ale. anddefc.
Crofs 2 Rivulets
A Dcfcent of 5 furl. I*7
Mellts o*4
A Watermill and Rivulet o*2
Stow-Houfe I*l
Paft a Rivulet o*2
By V/ocdhtU 3 furl. Left o*4
And the footofa Hillf Right
Crofs 2 Rivulet * *• 06
Mile?, F.
Milriche o 1
Several fmall afc. and defeentt.
By a Village $ near Left o*7
Haltvoefel o*6
Over two Rivulet*
Redbath 2*o
Hole Houfe 1 clofe Left o*4
Enter a Wood o*4
sk«^7?/4>-Cattle * near Right o*6
Gosmholt , near ibid, o*s
Tofn74/-Caftle, ibid. o*4
Long- Buyer- Cattle o‘l
And Fur ley o*3
By Belton * near Right o*2
Crook,} clofe ibid. o‘s
CvoG Poltrofe flu, o't
Enter Cumberland , ibid.
Afcend th 'nee 5 far!.
Touch on the Pr&s Wall * L. o*7
Dearington * clofe Right o*7
Crofs a Rivulet in a Copie o*4
Chappie Bourn o*3
Over a Rivulet t*2
And federal Defcents.
Enter a jidoor 2*o
A Wood br. & Brook in a Bot-
tom I**
Milton * dole Right ibid.
Roads part ibid, bear Right.
A Defcent of 1 M. I*6
A Park ibid, clofe Right
A Bridge and Brook o*s
Over 3 other Rivukts.
Corbey 2*6
Stone-br. on Eden flv# at the end
Warwick on a Hill 0% 6
Bglim*


Aft h
Eglionbury] near Right i’o
Paft a Rivulet o*4
Waelborough* Hall a Village o*2
KF.
Arable Lands on both fides.
Crols Vet ter elflv. I*2
London-Road falls in 1 Left o*4
Rot^er-Street-Suburbs
68’6] CARLISLE ©’2
The Road from WELSHPOOL Montgomery-shire, to
CARNARVAN in Nort-Wales. [Pag. 161.]
Aft F.
From WELSHPOOL, by
Pcwn-Caftle near Left j and
Over a fmail Alcent
Alcend GolvoayMounuin 2* o
Pa ft Lleding flv, 1 *6
Dollarthin o *6
Thence over * (mail Alcents
The Way open on both lides
Alcend thro* Inclofures 2 f 2
Pinfold Houle, dole left o *6
Croft a Rivulet o 4 i
Llanvaire o*3
Alcend DerretfaTege- Hill i 4 o
A Bridge, Mill and Brook o*s
Over two or three Rivulets.
By Ld. Herbert's Park, Right 3*6
Canns-Office ; dole Left I‘s
A Bridge and Brook o*2
Roads part ibid, bear Left
By Llangodvoan-C h. 2ft Left o*3
A Bridge and Rivulet o*7
The Ways meet again i 4 o
Garthpibo Ch. near ibid,
Croft a River I*4
H.rvelhervs-Houfe} dofe Left o*4
Ale. Biitfadgedwel-Moumain o*2
Nantedegodth- br. and Brook I*s
Enter Merioneth /hire} ibid.
By leveral Woods and Hill?.
Digodh- Houles 2*l
The Way Pill Woody.
A Riv. 6c Watermill Right I*3
By Maltrvith-H r d\l 2ft Left o*3
A/. F.
Pontrusk-hv. o*ev Dovyfiv. i*6
Dinas m Mvrvthy ©‘s
Thro 4 open way between Hills
A Houle or two 5 dole Right 3*2
A Bridge and Rivulet 3 *3
Some Houles on both ftdes o' 1
A (mail dele, to X>m/a/er/>h+ll i‘o
By Clum- Houfe 2 furl. Right i 4 o
36*0] Dolgeth.on 'Avon flv. o*s
Ale. 2 furl, at the End
Dellacihrvgrid* hall, near R. o*7
LUnyltyd on a Brook, o*4
Mafgarna o*s
Left *
A Bridge and Rivulet I*7
Betw. Rocks on both lides i*o
The Way Woody
Stone-br. Brook & Mill, R. o*6
Over leveral ale. & dele. 2 Riv.
And larapont-hridgc to
Llandura 6*2
Pa ft a Rivulet i*i
By LUnenthfwin-Ch. ib . 4, ft L.
And lome ftraggling Houles.
Stone* Arch on Llanbeder flv. 2*2
LUnbeder~C h. near Right
A Bridge, Rivulet & Houle o*7
By Llanvaier^C h. If. Right o*6
54*0] Harley Harlech I*l
By the Gallows 2ft Left o*7
Thro* a Village mo ft Right o*4
By Uanihangle*ytrath-C\\ . 3 furl
fteft i*7
if. F.
Enter the Sands o*3
Croft a Brook o ‘y (
And a fmail Afcent I‘yi
Thro* a Village o‘4:
Come upon the Sands again
Pals a Rivulet to
Camarvan-flnre o*4.
A ridge of high Rocks 5 Right
Leave the Sands i € S
Penmorvay ©*/
Some Rocks on the Right
Crofs two Brooks x's
By Clenunay ~Houfe 3 f. Right o'z
Over a Bridge and Brook to
Dalbenmer 1*1:
Several Rocks ft ill Right
Betw, Tygran-HouCes I*s*
Croft a Brook \'j
By Bodichen ibid. 1 f. Left
Alcend thence a great Hill
And lome other fmail ones
A Houle j dole Left 3*2
By Llanllaveney-Ch. 2. f. L. o*4
Pals Lleveney flv. o*4
Between a Houle Right & Grove
Left 3*o
By Uarmnda- Ch. If. Left I*4
Dtnas • Houle, nea r iHft o*4.
Pont-newged on Garway flv. o*4
A Imall Afc. and 2 Dele. i 4 t
Croft Saint flv. i c 2
By Ihe Gallows, ibid. Left
I 82/0] Carnarvan o f 2
The Road from YORK to LANCASTER. [Pag. 163.]
JVf. F.
From YORK
Roads part at the end j be?r R.
By 2 Windmills $ near Left I*2
And a Houle or two 5 dole
ibid, o 4
Between a Windmill near - }
Right >i*o
And Knapton 4 f. Left
AftF.
By Pcpletcn 4 f, o‘x
A Rivulet by a blew Stone
Right > i'o
And Overtcn I M. ibid,
By Hefiovo 4 ft Left i c o
Afc»-AftwS£<w-Chap. & Hall 7 f.
x*2
And MwrMonkton 6 f. Left o‘i
M. F.
Over a Rivulet o*7
By Woolflrap-Ha II 3ft Left I*l
Skjj>-h r. on Nyd flv. o*2
By Hamer ton sft Left l‘l
And Green Hamerton 4 ft Right
o*4
Thence by a Moor * Left.
Roids dividk 5 bear Left o*s
Pafi


M.F,
Pals a Rivulet I*s
By Hcpperton 4 f. Left
lAlierton o*3
London-Road falls in ibid .
FUskby I*4
By Goulsburgb-C h. 4f. Left o*s
Crofs a Rivulet I*2
I ?’6l Knaresburgh vulgo Knaf-
brougb I *2
Nyd flv. near left, for 8 Miles.
By Sksoton I*7
AKb Afyd-Ch. and Hall 4 f. ib. 1 9 6
Some Lime* Pits on both fides.o’s
Killinghali* br. & Brook 5 ibid.
22*6] Ripley o 9 6
Dark Hail at the End * Right
By Clynet a Village 2 f. ibid,
Hamfivorth-hr» on Nyd flv. o*3
Hempjihveate or Hamfveorth o 2
By Grafes-Platn Moor * Left
And feveral Hpufes on both Tides
Over Keskin-tAoor 3*3
Two long Pofts j near Right o’*
Crofs a Rivulet o*7
Over 2 final! Afcents.
By Foyfton 2 f. Left. ? .»
And Swinfley- Hall 3 f. ibid, j
Pafs Wajhburn fiv. o*6
By 1 i&d.
near Left;
Way ftill over Heskjn- Moor.
By a Pole? near Left 3*2
A Rivulet & Cottage 5 Right o'2
Scmer-Scales o'j
Crofs a Brook o*4
Hejfel o’ 3
By Derrifton 2 f. Left o’ 3
Starry 3 f. Right o’l
And fbme Alms-Houfes 3 near
ilnd, 02
M. F.
Beulton ©’s
By ifo*#9/fcy-Hall § ibid, 2 furl.
Pals IfW/flv. at the End.
And fbme other Rivulets.
By Haughtm 3 f. Right 2*o
Skybeden I*s
Haugh- Park 1 dole R. for * M.
44*63 Skipton In Craven i’y
An Afcent of x f. & Defcent of
2 furl. o*s
Afcend again 3 furl. & Defcend
as much o's
Sturton in the Bottom o*4
Tholby o*3
By Elflon-Cragg Hill If. R. 2*o
A Stone-br. & Brook ©’3
PaG a Rivulet o*3
Gargrave-Ch» near Left o*4
An Afcent of 4 furL ft Defc* of
8 furl. o*3
Cqgifton 12
Stone-br. over firefly. ibid . o’*
A finall Afc. and Defc. t'3
HellifieldrPele l'6
A Chap. & £ Alms-Houfes x’4
A Stone br. and Brook to
Long Prefion o*6
Enter a Moor o*s
Afcend a Hill of $ furl, ft De-
fcend 4 furl. o*4
Leave the Moor I*2
6o'i] Settle o*3
Crofs a Rivulet at the End.
A Stone br. over Kibble Rv, to
o'6
Pafs a Brook near the End.
Afcend a Hill of 4 ft & Defcend
as much i’i
A Village near left 1 '3
By Lakeland- Hall If. Left o*s
M. F
TekeUnd n tztlbid.
And 3 furl. Right i'z
A Stone* br. & Brook o’i
A finall Afcent & Defcent.
CUpham
A Stone-br. <sc Brook at the End.
Over a Rivulet Afcend 3 f. o* 3
Greenby or Greenltf $ dole Right
l’o
Enter a Moor o*2
And Lanca/hire 6*o
Defcend thence 1 furl.
Wennington o*2
A Stone-br. & Brook.
Tatham ©’3
Betw. Tatham-Ch , & Hall 3 f. o*s
A Wood-br. & Rivulet j f'6id»
Thro* Lord Morleyh Park o*4
78*4} Hornby I*4
Stonc-br. on Weaning flv. ib , o*4
Far I ton 1 ’©
Chauton ©n an Afcent ©'4
Over 2 Rivulets To
Part of Caton o*4
Defcend thence 4 furl. o’i
Between the Church and fbire
Houfes * Right o*4
Stone-br. on
Another part of Caton 096o 9 6
Over a Rivulet by a Wood •
Left o’y
Leave the Wood, over a Brook
04
An Afcent of 4 f. & Defcent of
2 furl. ©’4
A Park 1 ibid . Right
Boik a Village 1 clofe Right I’o
SS’sJ Lancaftar 24
The Road from YOKK to WEST-CHESTER with a Branch
from Manchester to Derby. [Pag. 164.]
Miles, F.
From YORK
Roads parr the End * bear Left,
Windmills on bosh fides i’i
The Gallows* near Left o*3
JRtng- Houfes o*2
By Knapton I M. Right I*s
Ccpenthorp 4 f. Left
A Windmill 1 near Right 03
And o*4 (ham 5 f. ibid. 01
By a Windmill 1 f. Right
Miles,
And Bilhrcugh 4 f. ©’j
Srset- Houfes o* 1
Tadcaftet B’i
Crofs Wharf flv.it the End o*4
Roads divide 5 bear Right o*4
By Newton 5 f. Right o*3
And Bramham 1 near ibid. 2*6
By Tome Woods 5 Right
And § Left
Wwor : 36
Miles, F*
By I(td Hall 4f. Left ibid•
Over 2 Rivulets & Win- Moor,
By Red Hall 4f. Right ’ V$
St croft
The Coal Pits ? near Right i*t
And the Wmte-Horfe Inn $ tb, i’a
i *©
Defcend Wbrril- Hill *.
Leeds on flv, ©’4
By tfmlet-Hall 3ft Left Vi
And


Miles, F.
And HMeck alias Hunjlet 4 furl.
Right o*4
Bsefton-C hap. & Hall, near ibid.
Cheruhill I ’©
Morley* Ch & Hall} near Left o*7
By Gilderfcn 4 f. Right o’2
And the Quakers Sepulture o* 3
Brmcltff o*l
Defccnd Holdenclough- Hill o*4
By feme Cole-Pits $ near R. o*7
And 9 f. o*2
Bur ft ail o 5
Gumerfel s dole Left o 5 5
By Little Gftjnerfd 4f. ibid • o’ 3
And Low# Leverfage IM. ifod. o*6
Het on-Green a Village o*l
Over Herchtt- Moor.
Some Houfcs on a Ddcent a *2
o*s
Bnghtirft- br. on Calder flv. o’y
By Toothill 4 f. Left o*s
do feibid.' o*2
Defcend EaUnd-Edge o*6
Ealand vulgo 7*//c». I’®
Greetland hr. Brook and Vill. i's
By /*md-Hou(e 5 near L* ***
And Bradlej-lloaCc 1 M, o’a
Over a Moor.
By Barfand 9 f. Left o’4
And Sorby 6 f. Right o*4
Defcend Barfand-Barik.
Riponden o’ *
The Way very Hilly.
7&n*?»-Hall * near Left I*7
And Batting s-Inn 5 clofe ib. o*s
A Cottage and Rivulet © J 2
Alcend Blackftme-Edge o’4
Enter Lancashire on the Top I*o
Deftend thence 14 furl.
Over Windy- 2*6
LittleboroHgh ©’3
By Colderman & Staring’- Houfes 5
Right o*s
Defcend Farr ale Head Hill ©’4
Wardle*Houfe} near Right o’l
Betw. Hafled-Houfe * near O
ibid . Sc
Howard- Hall 2 f. Left \
JOwiv-br. & Brook *’©'3
Studfhaw j dole Left o*2
SWr-Houfe zW. 3*2
Hawer-Houfe, near Right o’i
.Between Btdvomh Sc Waddlevportb
Houfe o’ 2
Rochdale o*4
Gold-Lane- Houle j near Left o*7
And Caftletcn- Hall 3 f, o’6
iSitffoTj'br. 6c Brook o*l
Over Caftleften* Moor.
M. F,
Smithifordf dote Right l’l
Crofs a Brook at the End.
By Stanr tidy-Route sf. R. o’y
Hopway~Ha\\ 5 ft ibid, o' $
And Hebert 2 ft ibid. 03
Middleton qj
Irkjlv . near Left for 7 Miles.
By Ockington-Houte $ f. Left o’ 5
A Watermill & Rivulet o*l
By BUckley- Chap. S ft Left 2*3
Rent on 01
Chetham-Oreen i’6
By Smcdley 5 f. Left o’2.
And Collyhu/ft-Ha\\ 4 f, ibid. I’o
Defcend over /2v. to
67*1] Manchefter o*4
CroG Ir well flv . near the End,
o’3
Houles $ near Left o*7
Pendleton Green-Village o*4
Roads part $ ibid, bear Left.
Pendleton o*S
Brewers-Lane o' s
Eccles I* 1
Irvcell Sc Merfey flv. near Left
for 14 Miles.
By MMy-Ha\\ 2 £ Right o*3
Barton $ f* *V
Barun-Hdll * near ibid. o’s
Benclows 4 f. Left o’s
And Flixton $ f. ibid, o’6
Brio , a Birch-Tree $ Right o’6
A Bridge and Rivulet o’s
By Cbat-Mcfs j Right.
ErlowGtten c/$
Caddijhed 1 1
Hollm-Gvetn i’i
By Raxon t f Left |*2
Over a Brook.
Fifileton-Gvttn i’r
By Mafcrats 3 F* Left o’l
And Opt fin-Mofs $ Left o*2
A Pond 1 dole Right o’s
By Onfon 2 ft o*3
Over 2 Rivulets.
By Birch-Hall 2 £ Right o*7
Church’ftreet o*7
Sg’oJ Warrington o’4
PART 11. CP. 1663
A Stone-br. on Merfey flv,
to Chefhire .
Roads bear Right I*2
Lower Walton o’s
By Grapnoet ibid .4 f. Left*
A Stonc-br. Brook at the End.
By Hall 1 £ Left o’i
Higher Walun o*6
CroG feww-Brookr o’2
Mile*, F.
Betw. Wdm a Village
6 ft Left t #
And Holly*Hedge Houfe 5 V ° 2
dole Bight
By Moor 4 f. Right o*6
Over ThurJhaugh m bvook o*3
By Kegmck $ ibid* 4 f. Right*
Daretbury o’?
By Norton 5 £ Right o*3
Stockham o*3
By Haulton Cattle 6 ft Right I*o
Saracen* srHead Inn , dole ibid. o*4
And Houfe 5 furl,
ibid, o*4
Sutton o‘j
By ~4Jhton~Ha\\ s ibid . 4 furl.
A Bridge on Wever flv. o c $
95*4! Frodfham or Frodd(Jl:amo ( s
The Cattle 5 dole L. o‘s
Nethertvn o'l
By God j* Croft Houfe 2f. R. o*s
Wood houfe s 3 f. Left o*2
And Muiney 3 ft iHd. o*s
Betw. Heljhey 2f. Right ?
And the Tor or Hill $ Left >
Hapsfird-br . and Brook J*o
Dmham m the Mount y dofc R,
I*l
Between Wmble-Ttaford 1
5 ft Right > I*4
And Aferky-Hall 3 f. L.
Trsford o*2
A Bridge 6c Brook at the End.
By Plemftow 7 ft Left o‘*
Pickton 6 ft Right o*7
Mickle-Traford 4 ft Left o*3
And Hoa?£
Over HeHeath.
By Newton $ ft Right o f 7
And Hall 5 dofe ifoVL o*4
io6*ol Weft-CHESTER g*2
The Road between Manchefier
and Derby,
From MANCHESTER:
Over a River Atcend Bank m Top*
Hill o*2
Bridge on Medlock flv',
H*rdwtch-Green a Village o*s
By idncots- Hall 3 ft Left o*4
Grimlovo o 4
Over 4 Rivulets.
By S lead-Hall 2 ft R. i‘o
And Gorun- Chap. 1 M.Lefi; o'y
BUkesbr‘vol{ G 4
Heaton 0 $
A(cend o'4
6’oJ Stocporc alias Stopfcrd c*3 v
CVoIS


Mile?,F.
Croft Merfley flv. to Chtfhire 5 ibid,
Svcetmami near Left i 4
Miles-EnflU all* near ibid, o’s 0 ’5
Brewtrs-Grcen * near ibid, c*y
Eore I £ ibid. o> 2
And Bullocks-Smithy Inn * clofe
ibid 02
Hejjc!-Grave ©’7
By a Wood * clofe Right ©’6
Fnier Ho-Lane o’s
By Lirae Hall 5 f. Right o' 1
Difiey- Dean o’ 5
An lan clofe Right o*2
A fcer.d Long- fide H i 11 1 *©
By Erdly Hall 5 f. Left i’o
Wreicy-Lane- Head 5 near ibid, o\
.A Stone hr- on Goyrc flv. ©’7
Enter De, by {hire * ibid.
By Tax ha It 5 fu-l Right- o’ 3
And Shavocrcfs * near ibid. o'6
Afcend a Hill of 2 furl. o’s
„ M. F.
By fevcral Rocks I*o
By Rax*‘o/2-We 11 x furl. Right I*3
Buxton a Village ©’7
By Tuxal Hall * 7 f. Right
And Fairfield-Ch. 7 f. Left o’6
Over a fraall Afcent o’ 5
By a Village 4 f. Left o*s
Chelmerton 1 M. *W, 2*3
FUg*Hokfes 3 f. ; #iVL I’4
And Hurdlow 3 f. Right ©’2
Crofs Lathliel ©’y
by ibid. & f. Left.
And a long Wall ,• clofe R. I*o
Over a fmall Afcent 3*o
Pikeham'inn j clofe Right x’y
Peer’s-L.n 3 dole ibid, x’x
Over 2 final! Aftents.
A Defcent of 2 f. 2*o
Braffington 04
By Car ft on 1 M. Left I*4
Afcend Oagnaflcn-Wmn-Bo’ 7
, m. f:
Hgnafton a Village o*2
Crofs a Rivulet o'6
And 3 ffnall Aftents.
Fy Holland 2 f. Right I*3
iVa/d-Tatei clofe Left o*3
By Vpper Biggin j ibid. 3 f.
Neither Biggin ibid . 2 f. o’ 3
And Ttcrndich 2 f. ibid . Right I’o
By HolUnd-ward Common.
And Muggmgton Ch. 4 f. ibid, i’4
Weft on- Vnderwood I ’4
Over a Rivulet I*4
By Mircafton IM. Right o’4
Kedlefton o*4
A Watermill 8r Riv, at the End,
A Park 5 clofe Left o*4
By Quarndcn- Chap. 2 f. Left i’o
Between Madqvorth 1 f. Right.
And Alaftry 7 f. Left
By Nan Green j Left
ss’o3 Derby I*2
The Roads from CARMARTHEN to CARDIGAN, from
Cardigan to Llanbeder, and from Llaabeder to Aberist-
with in Cardigan-fhire. [Pag. 168.]
Miles, F.
From CARMARTHEN:
Roads part at the End ** bear
Right
Afcend a Hill of 4 furl. o*4
Dm 2 Brooks in the Bottom 0 6
Afcend thence 5 futl.
Way open thro’ Arable Lands.
An Afcent of 2 £ and Deft. of 3
full. i’i
Raft a River in the Bottom o’y
By LUnelhvith- Ch. 2f. Left o*4
Afcend 4 furl. ibid.
Come to a Defcent of 7ft i*S
Croft a Brook in the Bottom o*7
Afcend thence 6 furl.
Furze & Fern on both fides 2*o
Thence the Way very Hilly.
Crofs a Brook 2’©
Thro’ Heathy 6c Bof gy Grounds
And over another Brook 1 v 2
By a Long Stone, clofe Left is
Enter Pembrokffhire $ ibid.
Krlivah Ktllreaden iT
A Defcent of i© furl. To
Over a Brook in the Bottom.
Ve'.mdra 1 *3
Afcend thence 7 furl.
Arable on both fides*
M. F.
A Defcent of 4 furl. 15
Over $ Brooks & Rivulets
The Way ftill thro’ Arable.
BrideL 5 ’o
Roads divide $ ibid, bear Right.
And fhon part again* turn Lefr.
A Great Hill* clofe Left, for 2
Miles o>r 0 > r
Thro’ Failure & Marik Grounds.
A Defcent of 2 furl.
Croft Ttvy flv. to
25*6] Cardigan o’2
The Road from Cardigan to
LUcnbeder .
From CARDIGAN;
Ttvy flv. dole R, for I M.
Pa ft a Brook j’©
By Tenner ait-Ch. I furl. R, o*2
Some Houles on borh fides o’6
The Way thro* Arabic Lands.
A Defcent of 4furl. 04
Crofs ri Brook in the bottom 6’4
Afcend thence 4 furl.
Some Hoatca on a Brook I*6
Over 5 Rivulets
A Defcent of 3 furl. o’6
And 3 Brook 3’*
Miles, E.
Ponterodin * clofe Right o’s
kmy-Brook in a Bottom o*s
Tredrair o*4
Afcend a Hill of 5 f. o’i
Arable Lands on both Tides.
A Dele, of 4f. and Brook 2*4
Afcend thence 7 £ o*4
Another Defc. of 4 furl. 2*o
A Mill on Dettor flv. o*4
Aft. thence 3 f. & Defc. as much
Over a Riv, afcend again 6 £ o*7
Tomer-David * dole Left I*l
Croft a Brook o’4
Red Owen * clofe Left o’l
Stone* br. on Dettor flu . ibid.
Paftuie-Grounds on both fides.
Defcend a Hill of 7 £ 2*7
4 f. Right i’o
Over two Brooks o*4
A Houfe * clofe Right I*4
By Lannnnen-Ch . 2 £ Left I*o
Crofs a Brook o’t
Another Brook 8c Rivulet oft
By a Stone * near Right o’*
Pa (lure ftill on both fides.
O ver a Rivulet and Brook o'6
27’Si Landbedgr o*s


Miles, F.
The Road from LUnbeder to
Abenfiwith.
From LLANBEDERj Market-
Place.
Roads divide 5 bear Left.
By Sir Francis Lloyd*% IF. R. o*3
AForeft near Left o’ 3
And a Route 5 dofe R, o*2
Roads part again 1 Keep L. o‘7
An Aicent of 5 £ ©’4
Over a Brook
M.F.
Defcend from the Top near 2
Miles o’s
Pafture-Ground on the Right
LUnleir 3*o
Wood- br. on fly, o 6
Trevilan o r Vliindra o’ 1
Alcend a Kill of 11 furl. lo
Defcend from the Top 9f. I’2
Some Houles on a Brook I*7
Heath and Monrifh on both Tides
Over teveral Rivulets.
A Houle or 3 on a Rivulet
Pals Werray- Brook IS
By UanruftedCh, 2f. Left o’2
And El<|; Herbert's dote ibid, o’t
Alcend thence a Hill of 2 Miles
By LUnyler- Ch- 2f. Right x’s
Heatlv Ground on both Sides, j
Deteend a Hill of f. I*4
Over a River at the Bottom 2*3
A ndWuftwith flv, i’o
Strne-br. § Arch, on five’s
Aberiflwith o’*
The Roads from CHELMSFORD in Effex,ta So Edmunds-
Bury in Sussolk, and Sassron-Walden in Essex. [P. 170.]
Miles, F
From CHELMSFORD
Rosds part at the End 1 beer
Right
A Branch of Chelmer flv . near R.
fpr above 4 Miles.
By tirumfield-Ch. near Left 2*6
And Little Waltham 3f. R. I # 2
Crols the laid Branch of Chelmer
o*2
Roads divide ibid, bear Right
By aCople, near Right I*4
Over a Brook o*s
By Little Leigh’s, near Left o*2
And Great Leigh 9 s 7f.R. j o’l
Crols a Rivulet ibid .
dole Right o*3
Through a Wood 07
Pals another Rivulet 2 ’2
10*6} Brain try o* 4
Through Rocking- ftreet *6i<i
Crols flv. l # o
Through lome Woods 2*2
16*5} Halfted on Coin flv. 2*5
Boys-Had, dole Right o*7
Through a Village *4
By a Wood, dofe Right o*3
And another Copfe, Left 2T
Over B»/wer-Green
By a third Wood, Left I*o
And ßulmer* Ch. 2 f.Left 04
A Deteent of 3 furl, o’2.
Baliington-ft. reec ©3
. Crols Stour flv. to
25*1} Sudbury o*4
Enter Suffolk ibid.
M. F.
Afcend by a Windmill, R. o-6
Ofo/taft-Park near ibid. o'6
Some Homes on both lides 13
A Common on the Left
Between Gr. Wallingfield & fail
Right j and 4 f. Left
o*4
A Windmill near Right, and
lome Houles, dole Left P-’j
By Little WalLingfield 4f R. 01
And a Pound 5 dote Left
3 1 ’5 3 Lavenham or Levenham
t
1 3
Pals a Kiv dec > 0 7
Woods on both fide* o*4
Over another Rivukc 1 0
Some Houles and a Smith’s Shop
06
A Stream rannii g Southwards
o*2
By Cochfield m Ch. 3 furl. Riglit.cSj
And FeljhawCh I M. o 7
By Houle 2 £ Left o’y
Bredfeld ° 7 s
A Smith’s Shop and lome Houles
o> 3
By a Chappel without a Stee± le
5 f. Left. .
Monk* Brad field 7 £ Right, and
an old Priory 2F. Left o’6
By Little Waltham 2f. R. i*i
Some Houles on both Tides o*3
By Gr. Waltham* Ch. 9 £ L. 04
And a Windmil 2 f. Right 04
By another Windmill 4 £
Eddery Wood I Mile Right, and
Nmvton-Ch. 6 Furl. Left o*4.
South-Gate o‘t
Bury or St. Edmunds*
Bury: o'l
The Road from Chelmsford to
Saffron m Walden»
From CHELMSFORD
Roads part at the End 5 bear R.
By Bmmfield*Qh. near Left 2*6
And Little WaUham*Q\\.3 f.R.x‘2
Crols a Branch ot Chelmer flvio'i
Roads parted, bear Left.
Over a Rivulet 6*2
Between Langley*s-l&aXl near R.
And Gr. Waltham near Left 6 4.
A iitrle Park 5 dole Right I*6
And Black Chappd, dole ibid .
■ ' ■ *'*]
Croft a Brook near a Houle x‘2
And 3 other Rivulets.
i 2 Dunmow* i*7
By Gr. Eaftin- Ch* and Hall near
Left if©
Over a Rivulet o*4
A Houle, dofe Left 1 6
7V3] Tfoxted i*s-
- a Houle 6 furl* Left 2 5
Thro’ a Wood, by a WindirdU
24
27T] SaLftonAYaldsn *
«
X
The


The Roads from CHELMSFORD to MALDON and R a .
leigh in Essex : And to Gravesend in Kent, with a Branch
from CANTERBURY to Dover. [Pag. 172 .]
M. F.
From CHELMSFORD
Crod Chelmer flv,
Mulfham, and the Hall, Right
Rods part, bear Left I*3
Great Baddoxv o‘l
By Sandovon* Ch. 3 Furl. Rt. i*x
Croli a Rivulet / o*s
% Danbkfj-Riti. and Place 5 Rc.
o‘ l
Danbury- Village on an Afccnc
©7
Over Daub ary-Common.
Bo? fid I*2
By vfoodkam-Wuter- Ch 4 F. Left
i*x
And the Place 1 Fur!, ibid. o*l
9' 4] Maldon 2*3
The Ro3d to Raleigh.
From CHELMSFORD
Thro’ Mculfiam.
Roads divide, bear Right I*3
Great Baddovo o‘i
Hoads part again, ibid, bear
Right.
Grots a Rivulet o'y
A CoppLe, dole Right I*7
By Eafl 'BMnngfidd 5 Furl. Left
1
South-Hatmlngfield-Ch 5 F.R. o*6
And RaitentUn- Ch. 2 F .ibid. x*6
Rattles br. on Crouch hv. i‘x
By Rawreih-Ch. 2 Furl. Right o*6
Ai d a Coppice 5 dole Left o‘<>
2 2 ’7] Raleigh 2 0
M.F.
The Road to Gravefeud.
From CHELMSFORD
Over Chelmer flv. & Mculfam:
Keep the forward Way. '
Lord F nx> : Walter V Alms- Houfes,
Right • o*6
By Mwljham- Hail 1 F. Left o*2
Roads divide, bear Left o*l
Bax field-viouit , dole Right x‘x
And a W indmill , dole ibid. o*6
By 0 a lia way - Common, ibid .
And thro* a Wood o*x
Stvcl^ Common on the Left.
village 2*3^
By ftW-Houfe IF. Right I*4
83] Billeiicay I*3
By Great Burped 2F. Left I*6
bridge 2nd Brook ©*7
By Little Burped, ib. 6 F. Right.
A Windmill 5 near Left I*4
And a Copfe , dole ibid , o*4
Afcend 4 Furl o*4
By the Beacon on the Top, Left
And the Church 2 ?. Right o*6
Descend thence £ Furl.
1 6*o] Horndon on the Hill I*6
Crols Haw- Ford 2 ‘5
A Windmill, near Right o*4
A /rnili Del cent x*o
By U Lit Tilbury Ch. 2 F. L. °*X
Over the AAir/h to
Tilbury- Fort I*s-
- over thence to
2*4] Gravednd o*6
M. F.
The Branch to Sandwich , Deal,
and Dover.
From Canterbury
Enter a Wood 2 f x
Thro* a \ ill. on Beaksbwn (lv. I*s
Gamlin-R reet 1 r 2
Roads part ibid, bear Left
Crols a Rivulet I*2
Wingham on a Brook o*i
M/h x 3‘o
A great Houle 5 near Right i*i
By 2 Windmills 2F, iW# I*4.
12*1] Sandwich o*i
A Bridge over a Brook I*3
By a Beacon, near Left x‘2
And a Hou(e or 2 on both fides
o*3
Sandown-Ca&k 4 near Left I*3
1 7*33 Deal o'y
The Road from Deal to Dover*
From DEAL
By the Caftle, near Left o*2
And lfSc/#fer*Caft!e ibid, i‘i
Walmer m \ illage o*r
The Church 2 Fur*. Right.
Joy Ring file * Furl. ibid. I*4
And Sc. Margaret % 2 F. Left l‘o
Bei\r. a Church 3F. ? ,
And a Windmill 2 F. Left 5 1 °
The Way thence dired to
B*l] Dover 3*l
The Road from EXETER to DORCHESTER ; And from
P lamouth to Dartmouth in Devonshire. [P. 174.]
_ Miles. F.
From EXETER t 0
ilevitree .<
.... ... JO
Crols a Rivulet o ‘^
l\ (mall A Stent & DcCent g‘,
El ihcfS-Clyjton Cl fiv i‘_,
*4 St. MwpClyfi 3 F, Right o*4
■ . Mile?, F.
Over 3 Rivulets, and
By draggling Houles on both
iidcs.
* Imall Alcent 6c 2 Defcenrs 4*4
Newton-Popler y ij
Crols sAatff dv» Q 'j
M.F i
And another Rivu.'ec i*o
Sidfird I *o
An Alcent of 2 Furl. o*4.
By a Houle , dole Right o*&
A Ddccnc of 2 Furl.
By Seaton I Mile Right o^2
Cultyfrd


M. F.
Cullyford on a Brook 02
By Axmcuth ib I M* Right
A Scuttom-Boufe tb.± F. 0 3
Crofs 3 Branches of Ax flv. 1
And two fmall Aftents
A Defcent of 4 Furl 4 6
Crofs a Rivulet to Dsrfetjhtre Sc
27’6j Lime, or Lime Rogis © 6
The Sea near Right for 6 Miles
Shaderfin 2
Steymar- br. and Pivulet <>%
By Stanton Gabriel-Ch
And a Houfe or 2 on a Riv. °‘4
p 1
By Sinsborow- Ch. 3 F* Left
37*0] Bridport I < °
Ellington- br. Sc Brook ©‘3
By Waldiclr Ch. i Furl Rt* 0 6
Long Lether 1 Furl Left o*3
lAskatham i Furl Left 2*3
Lytton- Ch. I M. Right x S
M.F.
And To«g-SfWg* Ch. 1 M .ib. I*4
Thro* a village 3*©
5 1’5*] Dorchefter 4*5
The Road to Dartmouth .
From PLYMOUTH
An Aft- & Deft of 2 Furl. I*o
A Houte or 2on a Brook o*s
Afcend thence I F. Sc deft. 2 F.
Bulck}and~Craltree I*3
Feme-br Sc Brook at the End.
By Suntrum, ibid. * M* Right*
Plimton t dole ibid . 2 o
Burrowton Houfe $ near Left o*x
And Fiimftock > near Right o‘t
A f.tail Defcent and Aftent o‘i
*
Brixfw 1 0
Efird on a Brook o‘s
Talmtan br. on Talm flv. I*s
Over a Rivulet ° 7
M.F.
By <Adfnm- Houfc 5 near Right
°7
And 5 F. Left o*7
A little Bridge Sc B 00k ©'4
Aftetid thence 3 Furl.
14’©] Mod bury I*3
By Shtlftone Houfc 1 M. Left o 7
And Tt*rncomb~floMie t ibtd.
A Houfe or 2 on both (ides x‘i
Part of i‘o
Thro’a Wood o*s
Gary br. «>|4
Over a Riv. afcend 3 F. ©*4
MerleyC h. ne r Right I‘7
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o*4
Over two fmall Brooks.
Holrvell G< )
A (rend thence 3 Furl.
Thence a winding Road.
A Defcent of 5 Furl.
25>‘6]Ddrtmouth in a bottom o*3
The Road from FERRYBRIDGE to BOROUGHBRIDGE
And Bernard -Castle,in Com. Durham, with the Branch
from Ferrybridge to Wakesield. [Pag. 176.]
M. F. I
From FERRYBRIDGE
Stone-br. over sAre flv.
By FerryFarnton- Ch 2 Furl. Left
\An flv. near ibid . for 2 Miles-
Brotherton 0 4
Over a Common. t
Farnborn *3
Afcend a Hill of 5 Furl. 27
By Led/lwi’Hall I Furl. Left o* 6
And a Beacon i Furl .ibtd. o 4
A Common on the Right. #
A Defcent of 4 Furl ° 3
Over a Riv. to Michelfield ® 4
On an Aftent of 4 Furl.
Thence between fome HilU.
A Defcent of 5 Furl.
jg’o3 Aberford or Abyforth 6 5
Aftcnd thence 4 Furl, to
hramum'Mooii*
A Defcent of 5 Furl & Aftent
of 5 FUrl. 3 0
Deftcnd a'gain 4 Furl* c
Eramum I 1
Over Oiffcrd-Moor.
By a Wood j dole Right 2 >
17*5] Werherby 11
A Sconc-br. on flfr/or Wbxf fiv*
MR 1
SoutfyDigktwCh. near Left i*6
Over another Moor.
A Stone-br. on Myd, flv. I*7
Wexford 0 1
Enter another Moor, ibid .
Paft a Rivulet °*s
By an Inn $ clofe Right i*6
Leave the Moor, ibid. '
And 5 dole ibid i*i
By a Hcufe 1 dole ibii- **3
And a Common 1 Left i*t>
A Defcent of 3 Furl. o*7
30V] Boroughbridge 1 x
A Water-Mill j near Left o*3
And Stone-br. on Tour fiv. ibid.
The River left for feme
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. ° # 4
Kirby on the Hill at the Top o 4
Roads part at the End s bear
Left.
Arable Lands on both Tides.
Hevoir\ on a Rivufec 2 S
Wood-br on Tour flv*
36*0] Rippon 1 $
Stone-br* of 1 Furl on Tour fiv.
' © 7
An A (cent of 2 Fud • 2
Wi ! 15
M. F.
A Stone-br. ft Brook o*4.
Norton^ Hall } near Left I*l
PPaffc o‘}
AWond-br & Brook at the End.
Middleton f near Left I*a
White-Lion* lnn > clofe iM. °*6
Enter Lemyng- Lane, ibid.
By Kmthtnton 2 Furl. Left o*s
And Eickhal 3 Furl. Right o‘<*
A Stone-br. ft Rivulet o *6
By Burnifion 4 Furl. Left o*7
And ;he Bell-inn j dole Rr. o*s
Lemyug 2*2
A Scone*br. & Brook at the End.
A Common on the Left.
Fen cote 2 6
A Wood br. Sc Brook.
Catt crick 4* 2
CaturicL- Stone-br. on Swail flv.
;*4
That Riv. near Left for 4 Miles*.
Brunton upon Svpail ©'s
A Srone-br. Brook & Mill 0 4
Sandbec clofe Right l‘o
And a Great Hjuft f near L. °*7
Over a (mall Aftent.
A S one-bndge on £*>4*7 flv. ro
6? o] Richmond 0 7
Aftcud


M.F.
Afcend thence 4 Furl
A Defcent of 6 Furl I*2
Thence over a Riv. afcend 5 F.
o> 6
The Way fomevvhat Woody.
Some other A re. Defc. 6c Riv.
By Weften f clofe Right 2*3
And Kavenvcorth-CaftXt 3 Furl.
Kirkby on the Hill o’i
Pefcend thence $ Furl
Carles * clofe left i’o
A Brook and Wood-br# o*7
Over 4 other Rivulets o’6
Great abridge 2' $
M.F.
Pafs 2 Bridges & Brooks, ibid .
By Rotfgbby | clofe Right o’6
Berw. a Water-Mill 1 Furl Right
And Egleftonby j near Left o*4
lefi flv. clofe Right 1 M. 6c half
7 s'2] Bernard-Caftle 2*l
The Branch to Wakefield ,
From FERRYBRIDGE
Over Arable Lands to
2*o] Ponrfrad: vulgo Pomjret 2’o
Over a Common 2’6
Enter a Lane I*2
M F
A Wind Mill $ clofe Left i’t
Thro* Arable on both fides o ’y
By Vharn field IM. Right o*3
Horfi-Race-End a Vill. dole Left
Enter Green-Heath-Moor f ibid,
Defcend thence 6 Furl.
A Stone-br. 6c Brook in a Bot-
tom o*6
By Sandal 5 Furl. Left o*4
A Stone-br. on Colder flv. to
1 To] Wakefield o*s
The Roads from KENDAL in Westmoreland to COCK-
ER MOUTH : And from Egrimond to CARLISLE in
Cumberland. [Pag. 178.]
Miles, F.
From KENDAL
Afcend a Hill of 3 Furl, a Com-
mon 5 Lefr.
By a Houle* near Right I*3
And Barn-fide a Vill* dole ibid .
i ’2
An Afcent of 3 Furl. & Defcent
of 6 Furl ©’2
A Common on the Left.
Croft a Rivulet 2’o
Alfb a Stone br. 6c Brook.
Stanlay
Caftan j dofl* Right 171l 7 1
Chappel on the luges * near ib. ©’s
Stone br. 6c Brook at the End.
By Grafs-Gate 3 Furl. Right o’s
And Broad Tate o’i
Over a Riv. afcend a Hill of 3
Furl o’i
pefcend thence 3 Furl
By a Wood j near Left I*3
Wnanderrntre a Village oh;
Pefcend thence St. Cat kern s
Brow-Hill
A Stone-br. Mill 6c Brook o*4
IVmandermere- Lake * near Left.
Over two Rivulets o 3
A Stone-br. 6c Brook 1 2
Pa ft a Rivulet o’2
By a Wood, ibid, near Right.
Thro 5 a village o’y
Wmandermsre-L'dke ends, ibid.
*3*°] Amblehcle ©’3
1 hro > Ridaie- Park o'y
A Ridge ot Hill* tor 10 Mikf *
Miles, F.
Right 04
Ridale a Village o*2
By the Hall, ibid. 2 Furl. Right,
And a Copfe* r.eßvtbid. o*3
Over a Stone-br. 6c Brook, aft
cend 3 Furl. o’6
Defcend thence 5 Furl.
Grefmere- Ch. near Left I*2
A Stone-br. 6c Brook o’i
Croft s Rivulet ©'4
A Stone-br. Brook 6c a Smith’s
Shop 3*3
Afcend thence 1 Mile.
By Grefmere Hill ,* near Lefr.
Over a Srone-br. 6c Brook I*6
Fnter Cumberland , ibid.
Dmmail-Rajft -Stones j clofe Left.
And a Ridge of Hills, »W. for
7 Miles.
Pafs 5 Rivulets ©’4
fl>tevj-Chap. near Right o's
And the Village* near Left ©'7
By Wyburn- Water of 2M. o’i
7 nurlfpct f clofe Right 2*o
Over 2 Rivulets © $
A S cne-br, 6c Brook
Smathod s br.on Jhurlmirc fiv,l*o
Another Stone-br. 6c Brook i’j
Afcend a Hill of 4 Furl. 11
c **ft o’6
Can her’f t on a Defcent ©*6
2 9 ’4] Kei’wick © 5
Wood-br on Tijttvlmire fiv. ibid.
Great Hills * near Right for 7 M.
A StoithVShop * clofe ibid, o'y
M.F.
Over I Rivulet?.
By Crofthwate Ch. near Left o*s
And Milbeck^ Hall; near Rr. o*7
A Ridge of Hills 6c Darwen fiv.
near Right for 6 Furl. o*3
Little Croft hwate - I’j
Part of Baftngthwate $ near L. o 3 4
Another Part of it; near ib . i
And the Chap, near Right o'f
A Wood-br. on Brook ©’s
By Birt hut-Wood 4 Furl Fight
Coleheck 3 Furl ibid. o’x
And lArmanthwate 2 F ibid , o’j
A Wood-br. on Darwen flv. o*3
Lawbercus c ’g
Law field o *y
Afcend a Hill of IM. ibid . I’2
Crofs a Rivulet 3’©
A Moor on the Left.
4 5 *43 Cockermouth Vi
The Road to Carhjle *
From EGRIMOND, by
C/wf-Hill* near Left i*#
Croft 2 Rivulets.
Cleater 06
Over feveral Riv. & fmall
And by the Fells ,- Right.
near ibid, 4V
By Lawp/tf/s-Hall 3 Furl. 16. o*2
An Accent of 3 Furl. i’o
Dcfcend thence 2 Furl 6c afcend
3 furl o’3
By


Miles. F.
By a Lake* ibid . Right.
Eglesfield 3 Furl, ibid. I*©
And lEridgham 3 Furl* Left i*°
Coker flv. Right for 4 Miles.
Over 2 Rivulets I*4
By a Water mill 2 Furl. Right
• *[*
14*0] Cockermouth 0 7
Pa ft a Rivulet °*s
An Afcent of z Furl. **s
Another Aftent of 2 Furl, and
Defcent of $ Furl. x*3
Croft a Rivulet I‘4
Aftend thence 7 Furl & Defcend
as much
Rowland or Bodel I*4
M.F. ]
Overgdte ; near Right o*7
Strutland~Gmvd 5 near ibid, o*2
Court Und-G uard $ clofe Left o*l
By Law ood- Nock j Right o*3
A Riv,& Inn j near ibid . o‘i
A Stone-br. Mill and Brook o*3
j near Left o* 1
Whitehall $ near ibid* 0 6
Thurrmlgate ; near ibid . o*l
Afcend a Hill of 6 F. o*2
Several fmall Aft. 6c Defcents,
Rtf/nw 5 near Right 2*4
A Stone-br. over Fine flv. ibid.
By Crowjhill 5 near Right o*2
Gromhill $ near Left o*6
The Red-Dial $ near Right o*3
. „ M.F.
Ruins of Old Curjlilei near Left
o*s
And Smer 1 F. Right o*2
Over a fmall,Deft. 6c Riv. i‘ Q
Afcend therifcc 4 F. 6c deft. 3 F.
Deftend again a Hill of 6F. I*s
By War fide 5 o*3
A Stone br. on Wample flv. o*4
By Croft on ft F. Left o*2
Turbin 6c Hm Efill $ near ib . o*2
Thur esby jfelgo F earsby o* 3
By Left I*2
And V Village 2F. A. 2*2
Straight V 4y over a Moor to
CARLISLE I*s
The Road from LONDON to POOL in Dordetdhire, with
the Branches from Pool to Lemington and from South-
ampton, to Winchester. [Pag. 182.]
Miles, F.
From LONDON to
59*7] Alrcsford in Hamjhire (as
in the 6Wfo*w]tfo«.Road )
Servers* br. & Brook i‘o
Magdalen- Houfe 1 near Right s*©
A Defccnt of 2 Furl o*s
The Suburbs of
66*6] WINCHESTER ©2
An Afcent of 2 Furl. I*o
Pit a Village I*s
Some draggling Houfes I*7
Hurjley x‘©
By the Lodge 2F. Right I*2
Enfield X*6
By a Pond 5 clofe Right I*4
78*4] Rumfey
Stone-br. onTeft flv. at the End.
Afcend a Hill of 2 Furl. i*o
Roads divide 5 bear Left o*2
Some Houfes 5 clofe Right x‘o
Ckx* br. Brook & Village X‘2
Enter New-For eft 2 6
Ragged-Row - y clofe Right ©‘2
Caftle-Malwood on a Hill *^3
By Mwfted 4 Furl. Left ©*7
Defcend a Hill of 5 Furl. I c i
An Afcent of 3 Furl x*°
Miles F.
Thro* a Wood, afcend again 3
Furl. i*i
By a Crofs $ near Left 3*l
Leave NewEoreft I*2
Bemor 5 dole Left o*s
963] Ring wood i*o
Croft 2 Rivulets at the End.
A Defcent of 2 Furl. 2*l
Palmer's- br. on von flv. 2*3
By Prefton- Ch. SF. Right 2*2
Loog~Ham o*4
Enter Dorfeijhire o*4
Ham- br. 6c Brook, ibid,
Knafttn ©* 5
Thro’a Village i‘o
Hiclfcrd-Eouie $ near Right 4*l
110*4] pool o*4
From POOL
Roads part at the End $ bear
Right.
By a Windmill IF. Right i‘i
A fmall Afcent 6c Dcfcent i‘o
Another Defcent of 3F. 2*4
Croft a Brook to Hamfhtre o*4
An Afcent of 2 Furl I*3
tferd 2*o
M. F.
10*2] Chrift*Church i*6
Redfird-hr, on *Avon flv. ibid.
Thro* a Village of 3 Furl ©‘7
Croft a Rivulet o*7
Somerftrd on a Brook 2*6
Mtlto7l o*4.
Several Houfes on both fldes x‘7
Over a Kivulet o*6
Evilton 2* I
Effordy on a Kivulet 2*4
5 dole Right o*7
Over a Brook 5 *£*</•
21'6] Lerrington e'3
The Branch to Windefter.
From SOUTHAMPTON
It chin flv. near Right, for 2 M.
And a Great Houfe; clofe Left
6*l
An Afcent of 5 Furl. o*2
The Way winding about.
A Village & Rivulet I*4
An Afcent of 2 Furl. o*4.
Otterborn in a Botsom i‘q
St .Cnjjes I*2
11*4] WINCHESTER o‘s
The


The Road from SHREWSBURY and CHESTER to
HOLYWELL in Flintshire. [Pag. 182.]
Miles, F.
From SHREWSBURY
Roads divide 3 W&r Left °^4
Eater a Common 0 4
By Battlefield-C h. 4F. R*ght I*4
•Eiwraw-Chap. 2 F. ibtd f o 6
And Efq» Ireland's 1 t o*2
A Ridge of Hills on the
Over Harmon- Commqy
Prinhiil- Wood j near LV/t
Afcend of J F.
By Newton l. Right o >
And Middle 5 near L. e>’6
Bur let on ' 1
A Houfe or 2on botfißries, c’s
somc other Houfes X 54
G 4
By Cnoi-Meer, ibid. 3 F. Right.
Another and Houle $ near
* >
Left 17
By Ly-Meer $ I F. ibid. o’s ;
Ontly- Park j dole Right o s 4 j
And Birch Hall zF. Left o’i j
f'Jfmeer a Village 1 1
The Meer. near Right.
By Crench-Ch. I F. Left
And Diddlejton-Gxcenh Rt. o*4
Qttney X 5
By the Church 5 near Right
A Bridge over Dee fiv. I*6
Enter Denbighjhtre . ibid.
By the Lion-Inn IF. Right I*3
PM Cafioger- br. 6c Brook 0 6
Bjwr- proud- br. 6c Rivulet 1 ’©
Miles, F.
Aiarkwell-Qh. near Right o*3
Gk*#* br or fly. 2*l
28*4! Wrexham o’i
By Sianty 4 F. Right o*4
JP. ace-Coch 5 F* ibid. ©’4
The Crifpm-lnn 5 near Left o’tf
Aid the Furlorg*s End $ near
Right 2 *o
| A Ridge of Hills * Left for 4
‘ Miles o'2
Pont-Kenuthyen- br. on Tagidog flv.
°4
Enter Flintshire, ibid.
Queen-Hpe I*3
Betw. the Church 2 F. Right, 6c
I F, Left o’?
By Sir Trever's 3 F. Left t's
A Farm-Houfe I F. Right o’6
Leefwoed-Hoafe I F. Left
Pcneret-hebU- Houle 1 F. Rt. I*©
Mr. \Vinn,s Houle 1 F. Left o*2
And a Bowling- near Rt.
c.’6
Mould o'2
By the Church, near Right o*4
And a Lead-Furnace 2 F. tb. oT
Cctfid-hr. over fiv. ©'2
By a Water-mill, near Right oT
Groyfanna- Houfe S Furl, ttnd . I*o
P arch-Bucan-Hills, near /L/d. o*2
And Pryn J Callm~& iggry- Houfe,
ibid. © 3
Thence overß^rw'Tf-Common.
Miles, F.
A Houfe or 2on both fides I*3
A Ridge of cV'ountains, Left for
7 Miles o*3
By a Windmill 3 Furl. Right o*2
A Craggy Kock 6c Windmill,
near Right 27
And Mr. Moften's I Furl, ib* i*i
Between Beny-Pulle-HouCc, near
Left „ ©*7
And Derxvin ■ Hilbert* Tree, Right
t * p
o r
5 H o !ywell i’2
The Branch horn CHESTER.
Croft Deg flv ibid-
An Arm of the Sea, near Right.
Defcend a Hill of 5 Furl. i'o
Crofs a Rivulet or two i ’o
Another fmal! River 3*o
A Dire&ion-Poft, dole left o*3
By a Caßle, 1 Furl, ibid. o*s
Hamden*Ch. near ibid . o’6
The Star-Chamber AleHoufe, ib,
o'6
And a Windmill, near ibid .
Flint 4*3
Pals a Rivulet o' 5
SomeHoufes by the Coal-Pits z'o
Over a Riv, bear Left I*s
GreenJjeld-BouOi, dole Left 01
i 7 S 3 Holywell o*s
The Road from WHITBY in Yorkshire, to DURHAM,
Continu'd to Tinmouth in Com . Northumberland. [P.184.]
Miles, F.
From WHITBY
Enter CleaveUnd, anti leave the
Town ©’4
Bc?w. the Sea-fhore, dofe Right,
And a Ridge of Hills for 12 F.
Left _ I ‘3
A Houil. or two on a Kiv, dole,
ilbtd, i *4
Afcend thence 7 FuJ.
LyU x*i
Enter a Moor ©‘4
Afcend a Hill oi 1 Mile.
A Hcacoi on the Trp* Kc. o*7
Miles, F.
Defcend thence * Mlk-
Another Ale. of 5 F. 6c Ddc, of
p Furl. : 2*7
Croft a Kiv* at the Bottom.
Aicend again 3 F. and Defcend
a? muen 3 6
Another Rivulet at the Bottom.
Skatttvgdam 1 3
Over a Riv. Afcend 6 F. o' 6
Ddcend cher.ee 10 Furl o' 6
Afcend again 6 F. over s Hiv.i # 3
B) Prebcrgh-HiW, ne'ar Left © 6
Over Jgveral other Agents,,
M. F.
Leave the Moor 3*2
An Allom Mine on a fmall Ale.
I*2
Over a Brook at the Bottom ©'3
Croft another Brook to
21*6] Gisburgh alias Gisborough
1 3
By 'Rofeberry-Topping-H\W 7 Furl.
Left l‘l .
Sir W Chalnew's 2 F, Right OJ4
And V}Jhar H* 11 £ F. ibid.
Pats a Rivulet, ibid ,
An


M.F, I
An A tec. of 7 F • & Dete. of 4 F
°[3 I
By Hamlington* Hills * Right I*l |
Maubnrn- Routes $ dote Left o*2
And a Wind-mill 5 near Right! ’2 I
Mar ton * ° 4 I
Croft a Rivulet * ibid .
Enter Pafture Grounds o*6
A Wood-br. & Brook i’ a I
Another Wood-br. Sc Brook o’ 5
Leave the Pafture o’&
Ferry over Tees Jiv. ibid.
The BiUiop: ick of Durham.
54*0 Stockton o’ 5
Roads divide 1 bear Right 04 j
-Stone-br. be Br©uk I’o j
Norton a Village I o
A Stone-br, 3c Brook I*4
A Deteent of 2 F. o*s
A Wood-br. Brook & Mill *
Left o*3
By Grindon * near Bight o*3
A Wood 1 dote o’y
And Chap, near ibid. 0 6
Thro* Open Arabic Lands,
Layton *'S
By a Wind-Mill * near Right i’i
Sedgfield i 9 o
A Deteent of 2 F. i'6
A Stone br. on kern Jiv, o*2
Continued Ate. Sc Dete* far
M. F.
7 Miles.
A Stone br. & Brook 2*4
By Coxweli-Hd\\ ibid, 3.F. Right.
Another Stone-br. & Brook i’i
Sunderland* Routes; dote Right
•
07
A Stone-br. Brook &
Right <M
S 4'2] Skinkley 2*2
By Heughwek-HaW 3 F. Left o*2
A Scone-br. on Wear Jiv, o*4
By Old Durham 3F. Right o'*
An Ateenc and Detecnc of 2 F |
each
To the Suburbs o*3
And repals the Wear.
To the City of
564] DURHAM o’ s
The Continuation t© Tinmouth:
j From DURHAM:
I leave the Suburbs i’o
I A Houte or 2 dote Left 1 1
And a Wind-Mill* near Right!’o
Kaynton * near ibid, 1 1
Alcend thence 3 F.
Eaft-fUyrwtf dole Right i’o
Defcend thence 4 Furl.
A Stone-br. 3c Brook at the
Bottom °\
M. F.
Helton q 6
Croft a Rivulet at the End
An Afc & Ddc, of 3 F. each*
F. Left 07
Betw. Harrington
1 3
By a Wind ©’4
An Alc.o ; t.bdc. of SF. i’o
Rarncs aV la t C 1 neat Lett To
Twoiii| &ocks tbid.s F. Right.
• &‘Brook 0 5
wr* i 02
deihnd o’s
FI Wear Jiv. ibid, f
M ioutb ® 7
3* dole Ltffc'** ' *’ £
P ®s
born-p ~F. Right o’ s
CU)4 0 o
Cor >or open Arable.
Hart on 1 dole Right 2 ? r
Wejion ; dote o’6
| Sout hrShealds I’3
I Ferry over fiv. ibid, to
i North Shealds o’ i
Crols a Rivulet o’S
The Fort & and Light-Route j
near Righc # o *
By a Wind-Mill j dote Ltfc °’i
22’2]Tinmouth o’2
The Roads from YORK to WHITBY and SCARBO-
ROUGH in Yorkshire. [Pag. 186.]
"Miles, F.
From YORK, part
A Stone-br. on FofsJiv.
Thro* a Common, and
By 2 Wind- Milk 1 dofc Right! ’2
A Wood- br. over the Fofs I’s
Stockton on the Moor I*7
Enter the Moor o’s
Leave Stotkton-bAoo?, and pals
thro* a Lane 3*5
Enter another Moor i’<|
Spitde-Stone- br. 8c Brook I*4
Leave the Moor, Hid,
Croft a Rivulet o’2
Alcend a Hill of 7 F. ©V
A Beacon on the cop, dote Left.
Wait well} dole ibid. i’o
A Dete.of near 3 Fu. I. 12
A Stone br and Brook o*3
Ateend thence 6 Furl
Miles, F.
Some other (mail Afc. & Dele, to
15/0] New Malron V 3*6
Ld. £tt#/*VHoulc 1 dole R. o’j
Old Maltcn o*6
HmeHonfie a Village s’o
/&«$-Wood-br. over Ryefiv. e’4.
Meadow Grounds on both lades.
Enter Pickering- Common 2*4
Arable Lands on both lides l’o
28*2] Pickering i’y
Over a Common I*l
Ateend ibid, near 1 M.
By Tar worth, near Lt ft T 2
Another afcenc of iM. i’o
Enter Thornton- Common *o*6
A deteenc of above 13 furl o’*
By Loiklon 2 F. Left. I*s
Over a Imall ale. & defeent o*s
Afcend again 7 furl. o’*
Miles, F.
Several Hills on borh hdes.
S other gate in a bottom $ Rights'®
Pals a Brook o’+
Aland a Hill or r ? furl and o l 1
Deteend thence 1 M.
Over a Rivulet, ateend again 12
furl. 2\
Mocrilh Ground on both Tides
A ddcent of above 1 M. 2’2
And a Rivulet at the bottom i l i
Aland another Hill or 7F. o‘i
Way ft ill thio’ Moorilh Grounds
A delcent ot 5 £ulI« 15
Snetcn 1 2
Croft to
Knjh worth 1 c i
49*63 Whitby or Whiteby x‘6
I hi


M. F.
If he Sea thorough- Road.
From NEW-MALTON 190
In the middle of the-Town 5
bear Right. 4
A Stone br. on A v Marfr'fly. ibid.
Norton RT^T
#y Old . ..rLeft 1 2
Over 2 " i*i
Scack/ethorp, dole o’y
The Woulds-y near Ki| l3 M.
Crofs a Rivulet • <-lfe o*7
Kalltngton 4' x’o*°’4
By Thorp* Bsjfet-Chap. o’>
WintringbwQh. 6 ik: \'>
i 7 i '
Miles, F.
And Shanefton, near Left ©’4
Croft two Rivulets, ibid .
Knapton f do tie Left ©*4
Eaft- Hafleton or Haflerton 5 0
By a Warren on the Left o*4
Pafs a Rivulet o*3
Arable Lands on both tides.
Sherhorn o*7
A Water mill and Brook o*4*
Bmvlton, near Right I*3;
G art on ©’3
Over a Rivulet o*4
A Houle $ near Left o'4
And Willorby- Ch. near ibid, o*7
Miles, P*
Staxtm 3
By FUxton 4 F. Eight o*4
Leave theWculds or HighHilij.
ibid.
Mrtle Hdr/W-Stone-Bridge i’o
Great Harford-Smm e-Bridge o’r
Sem eve or Sea more j*|
Arable Lands on both tides.
A Defcent of 2 Furl. j’s
Croft a Rivulet at the Bottom.
Byard’s Water-Lake* dole K. 04
Between Co me Defcentson both
tides ,j f 0
42’6] Scarborough i'o
FINIS.
BOOK S Erinted for William Bray, Sold John
Morphew, near Stationers-Hall, and James Wood-
ward, in Scalding-Alley, near Stocks-Market.
HP H E Works of the mod Illuftrious ' and Pious Armand de Bour-
bon, Prince of Cmti: With an Account of his Life. Contain-
ing, I. The Duties of the Great. 11. Memoirs concerning the Obli-
gations of aGovernour of a Province. 111. Memoirs concerning the
Government of the Prince of Conti’s Houfe. IV. His laft Will.
V* A Treadle againft Plays and Shews. VI. A Second Treatife
againit Flays and Shews. VII. Decrees of the Councils con-
cerning Plays and Publick Shews. VIII. The Sentiments of the
Fatners, relating to Plays and Publick Shews. Colkaedby the
liince. The Opinion of St . Francis de Sales concerning Balls,
Plays, Games, &c. With Remarks upon it. X. A Difcourfe of airi-
lylll Perfection, Written to a Per Ton of great Note, by the Arch-
bdhop of Cam bray, and never before Publilh’d. Octavo.
1 7 lJ ? AV i?. io this Book is prefix’d the Effigies of the Prince of
Lonti, finely Engraven j which are to be fold feparate, on an ex-
ceeding fine Paper. '
Tht Liieko: Or, Single Combat. From Antiquity deriv’d into
this Kingdom of England. With feveral Kinds and Ceremonious
forms thereof, from good Authority deferib’d. By the Learned
Mr. r>elaen. Printed in the Year i6io, and now Re-printed. Bvo.
London ijii.. Idem, A few Copies upon large Paper.
Terra Aujhahslncognita: Or, A New Southern Difcovery , Con-
taining a Fifth Part of the World. Lately found out by Peter Fer-
dinand De Ojur , a Spanifij Captain. Printed in the Year 1617. and
now Re-printed, Bvo. London , 1711. Idem* A few Copies on large
'Paper.








